C3779A R223591 99895416 152885
Le Chemin Abregé. Or, A Compendious METHOD for the Attaining of Sciences in a Short Time. Together with the Statutes of the ACADEMY Founded by the Cardinall of RICHELIEU. Englished by R. G. Gent. LONDON Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Princes Armes in St Pauls Church-yard. .
To the Worshipfull JOHN SELDEN, Esquier. SIR, I Have often desired an Op∣portunity to testifie both to your self, and the World, how much I honour your transcendent Learning. This Peece comming to my hands to translate, I pit ch'd upon your self to beg your patronage for it. Some perhaps may urge, it deserves not your Acceptance: the greater then will your Candour appear in desen∣ding
at from the overhasty censure of rash Criticks. It was a Speech made to the famous Cardinall Ri∣chelieu, who is acknowledged by all to have been the grand Politick States man, either of his own, or pre∣cedent times. But neither this, nor the Cardinals good Approbation of it, are the onely causes of my Dedi∣cation. This, Sir, is an excellent Founda∣tion for a beautifull Structure. It Containes an exact Method for the trayning up of youth in all manner of Sciences, and in so short a time as no former Age afforded the like: and I am confident this our Present cannot choose but approve of. But to take a∣way all Scrupulous doubts, from the common Reader, whether our Author hath set down the right way to atcheive this so laudable an Enterprise, I ap∣peale to your Judicious Approbation. If You think my labour well bestowed, I shall think my felf happy: if not, I
must fry to your Courteous Clement assuring my selfe of your pardon for my bold Intrusion, which I hope you will look upon as only my Ambition to deerve the Title of Sir Your most humble Servant, Robert Gentilis.
TO THE MOST NOBLE, and most Excellent Mr. PETER EISSINGH, Magistrate of the Cittie of Groninghe, and Overseer of the Academie: Mr Osebrandt John Ren∣gers, Commissarie for the managing of the affaires of Omland, and overseer of the Academie. Mr Jodocus Heinsius Syndicus, and Councellor of Omland, and Overseer of the Academie. SIRS, THis discourse which will seem Pa∣radoxicall both to the learned and unlearned, doth not promise it self to be so perswasive to the rea∣ders, as to draw them all to side with the Author in his opinion. Himself had no such pretence; which caused him, after he had once put it to the press, to call it in again. I had al∣so
suppressed it, had not some persons of worth desired to see it, which hath caused mee to publish it. Yet the Reader may find herein, what were the thoughts and intentions; of one of the greatest Politicians of our age. Those who wonder, why Socrates, Platoe's, and Aristotles Schooles, yeeld no more Epa∣minonda's, Xenophons, nor Alexanders, shall here find satisfaction. These great men made Sci∣ences, as it were, naturall to them, and caused them to grow up with them, giving them the Principles thereof in their infancy, Whereas now, the flower of mans youth is imployed in learning of the Precepts of obsolet Lan∣guages; and after he hath gotten this vocall knowledge, when he comes to any reall, he meets with some unskillfull and shufling teachers, who either through ignorance, or out of meer malice, obscure Arts and Scien∣ces, under rude and improper termes, cloa∣thing them, as I may say, with raggs and tat∣ters. Blame me not then, gentlemen, if I pre∣sent you this treatise: there being none, or but very few extant upon such a Subject. Your affections to learning, and knowledge of it hath perswaded me, that such births as these ought to have approbation, or disacceptance from such as you are. I know there are many things in it, at which weak understandings may stumble. They will say, that the Au∣thor seeks with unexampled boldness, to un∣dervalue ancient Languages, to gain more tye and auctority to his own native tongue. But those who shall consider, that all Nati∣ons
may apply that which is here particular∣ly spoken of the French, aswell to their own mother tongue, will soone acquit him of that imputation. You must moreover observe that he doth not absolutely disswade any from the study of those he calls Obsolet Langua∣ges, but onely restraines it within the bounds of a publick utility: He approves of learning of those Languages, so we do it as the Greeks did the Aegiptiack, & the Arabians the Greek, namely to appropriate to their own Lan∣guage such Sciences as were first conceived and written in the other. It were absurd to say, that we cannot in our Languages doe the like; For reason speaks all Languages, and through the necessity of expressing ones self, all Nations (were they never so barbarous) did, & do dayly find out termes & words suf∣ficient to express their thoughts. Is mans un∣derstanding become so confined, and barren, that it cannot more dress and trimm up Sci∣ences after its own fashion? No indeed, it is as vigorous now as it was in former ages, but more servile. It is become like those de∣generous and slowthfull painters, who dare not adventure to see forth any thing of their own invention; But will rather bee stiled poor coppiers of others draughts, then by some Masterpecce of their owne, shew that they understand the secret and order of de∣signing. And are content to bestow the ut∣termost of their art, and spend their times in refreshing some old images, and renewing with some quaint colours, the pourtraiture
of a Judith and Holofernes. It is no wonder therefore, if our modern Languages be so poor, seeing we bestow all the care we should have of them, upon the beautifying and refining of the antient ones, whose very Antiquity o∣therwise is a manifest proof of their defect and barrennesse. For as those who spake them, had seen fewer things then we, so they needed fewer words to express them: and living in the first ages of the world, they could not frame names for such things as have been dis∣covered but of late dayes. So that we may there find the mistake of those Criticks, who through a curious stupidity, will forsake Pis∣tolets of weight for light Medalls. As for those who imagine, that treating of Sciences in vulgar tongues, will derogate from their Majesty, I beleive they have as little ground for it, as those who should conceive that the value of Gold is diminished by those who digg it out of the entralls of the earth, to refine it, and make it serve for commerce. Finally Gentlemen, those who shall know how to distinguish the Authors reasons, from the praises which he attributes to the person to whom he speaks; that is to say, can discern the matter from the accidents, the substance from the colours, and the words of truth from those of insinuation, shal find that it would be very advantagious for every country, to have such Sciences, as concerne Policy, taught in their mother tongue. And let such as are of a contrary opinion, look upon this Treatise, as a triall of wit, and read it onely to pass the
time. My onely desire is, to shew you that my duty and affection caused me to dedicate it to you all joyntly; desiring not to be known by any other name, then of Your most humble and obedient Servant.
To the Reader. COurteous Reader, This speech was made in the presence of one of the ablest Politicians of our age. Wherefore wonder not at the sublime titles which our author gives him. I might have left them out, but I held it not fit to alter any thing, either in the matter or forme of this Trea∣tise. There is a second speech, which I shall also present you with, if I perceive you accept of this. I have in the mean time imitated the An∣tient Priests, who were wont to burn a little of the hair of the beast, which they intended to offer, to make an essay by the smoak therof, whether the offering would be accepted or no. Reade, and judge favourably. Vale.
The First Speech made in the presence of The Late Cardinall of RICHELIEV. SIR, WHen the French Academie was first established by your Eminency for the reforming and refining of our Lan∣guage, those who are versed in Historie, did presage the imminent glory of this Monarchie: having often read and observed, that Monarchies, and Common-wealths never flourished more then when the Native Language first was risen to its full perfection; as the corruption thereof was alwaies a certain forerunner of the ruine of Nations, and decay of Em∣pires. The regulating of words doth insensiblie produce in all places a conformity of Lan∣guage, which is the strongest bond that
may be, to conjoyne the various affecti∣ons of people under one government, and keepe them in a perfect correspondencie, wherein consists the happinesse and prospe∣rity of all States▪ uniting them in a true understanding of each other, wherein con∣sists the happinesse and prosperity of States. Wherfore they who first founded Cities for humane societie, and all the wise Politi∣tians who succeeded them, tooke as much care for the beautifying and refining their Language, as for any other either Sacred or Civill businesse, namely Fundamentall Lawes, Mysteries of Religion, or the most holy Ceremonies. The greatest Divines affirme, that the first Language after the Creation was eve∣ry way accomplisht & compleat, as well in its entire structure, as invention, and ex∣pression. Because our first father who had an infused knowledge of all things, gave them their names according to their speci∣ficall vertue and propertie. By this meanes did he communicate his knowledge to his posterity, making it easie for them to grow up to understanding, onely by learning to speake; being without any other precepts instructed in all manner of knowledge. This language was of such efficacie, that every word was as a whole Science, which truly declared the Essence and Nature of
every thing: whereby man, who naturally desires to know, found his desires fulfilled, and satisfied without any difficulty. Hee began to Philosophate, and learne how to live well, even from his birth and infancy. The intention of this first man, who was framed by the immediate hand of God, was to make this language invaria∣ble, and universall, and (for the benefit of his posterity) the character & lively spring of all those rare lights, which God of his goodnesse had infused in him. All succeed∣ing languages have been most confused, barren, and imperfect; by reason that men being become incapable of communicati∣on, yea & even of society, through the con∣fusion of languages, did almost lose the use of discourse, and lived for a time like savages and vagabonds. It was a horrible disorder amongst mankind, and a terrible curse upon the builders of Babel. But as soone as men began a little to as∣sociate, & reunite themselves, every one in his own family invented names for such common things as were most neceslarie for mans ordinary use, and then (as it is now adayes in new discovered countries) there were as many Idioms as Common∣alties. Atlength (through succession of tims) men beginning to rallie and gather toge∣ther, and lay the foundations of a civill
life, all these particular Languages ceased, and they agreed upon one common Lan∣guage for the mutuall understanding of people. True it is, that there remaines no monu∣ments amongst us in these times of those Languages which were in those primitive Empires of the world, Assyrians, Egyptians, and Persians, unlesse it be upon some Pyra∣mides and Medalls, of which the worth and signification is not known in our dayes. But the Chaldean and Egyptian Priests and Magitians, who taught all manner of Sciences in their mother tongue, witness sufficiently, that they had carefully refined it: seeing that the first (after the confusion of Languages) invented suffici∣cient tearmes, not onely for ordinary dis∣course and commerce, but also for the sublimest speculative Sciences, Mysteries of Religion, and in a word for all manner of secret things, which came not to the knowledge of vulgar people. The and ent Gaules, though they were so much addicted to warre, that because they would not bee troubled with any other thing, they left the judging of Law suits, the governing of Politicke business and all other peaceable affaires to be ma∣naged by their wives; And had a funda∣mentall law amongst themselves to set
forth every seventy yeares, two hundred thousand choyce fighting men in the field, and send them away out of their owne Kingdome to conquer some other country. Yet so carefull were they of maintayning and refining their native language, that the Bards and Semnotheans, who were their Poets, have been thought to exceede the Greek and Latine ones: And it is no small honour to this country, that we read even in Roman Histories, how that Statius Cecilius, a Gaule, was Schoolemaster to En∣nius, the ancientest of their Poets, and that the said Cecilius together with Valerius Cato, another Gaule, were the first that brought Poetrie to Rome. And in those dayes the ordinary employmēts of Noble mens chil∣dren were to make verses, and learne all manner of sciences in their own mother tongue. And the Greekes doe not onely confesse they had their characters and let∣lers of their Alphabet from the Gaules; but even Aristotle himselfe (as Laertius reports) freely confesses that they borrowed their Philosophie of our Druids and Semnotheans; whereby we may know, that our forefa∣thers were as skilfull in Sciences, as they were practised in well speaking: and that they are not without reason esteemed to have been the Authors of Physicall and Morall Philosophie, Geometrie, and other
learning, which had its originall amongst them, and was from thence spread abroad into other countries. For although Philo∣sophie be naturall to all men, and hath suc∣cessively flourished in many parts of the world; yet one may in some manner say, that ours is its native countrie, and that it is more proper and naturall to this Nati∣on then to any other; seeing that when it was utterly extinguished in Egypt, Greece, and Arabia, yet it remaieed still in this country, in despight of all the revolutions and changes of State, which usually alter and turne every thing upside downe. As soone as the Grecians had attained to any domination, they used their best en∣deavours both to refine and perfect their Language, and also to make it extend to the neighbouring provinces: its originall atfirst was in that little countrie, which was called Hellas; and afterwards it pas∣sed over into the Kingdomes of Epirus and Macedonia the Islands of the Aegean Sea, Candie, Corfu, Egypt, Rhodes, Natolia, Pon∣tus Euxinus, Trebizond, to the very mouth of Danubius, Thrace, Sicily, and all the sou∣therne coast of Italie, to the very confines of France, which extend from the Rhosne to Genoa; it being certaine that Mar∣seilles was once a Colonie of the Phoceans. Their Annalls testifie that the Areopagus
had the charge of refining the Language; & the Areopagites did oftentimes meet for the setting of the genuine meaning & true pro∣nunciation of a letter, or anaccent: & to it must be attributed the glorie of preserving this language the structure of which is so admirable in all its parts, that it hath ser∣ved for a Modell & Idea to the Latine, & other Languages that have beene since. And when the Greekes were divided into severall States, that division occasioned as many severall Dialects, as there were Common-wealths, whereof each one strove who should most polish & beauti∣fy its own manner of speaking: As if they would have noted the difference of their Soveraigneties by some diversity of Lan∣guage: So that now reading those Au∣thours whose works are yet extant a∣mongst us, we can hardly judge which of them hath most refined his Dialect. The Roman Senate (the wisest, and most venerable assemblie of the world) judge∣ing it to be no lesse advantageous for their Republick to amplifie their Language, then to extend their frontiers, had resolved to make it as universall as their domination. For the effecting of which glorious de∣signe, they sent out Colonies into all parts, and gave the greatest cities of those coun∣tries which they had conquered the privi∣ledge
of Roman freedom to oblige them to speake their language, without which they might not be capeable of bearing any Office in the common-wealth. They also made decrees, that no forraigne businesse, suites, and Embassies should be discussed in the Senate, but in Latine, their Provin∣ciall lawes should bee written in it, and their Prators and Governors of conquered Provinces should give judgement in no other Language. It was a policie religi∣ously observed by the Roman Magistrates, never to give any Audience to any strange Language, denying that privildge even to the Greeke, though it were famous and celebrated amongst them. They also set up publike Grammer Schooles, to instruct and bring up youth in the Latine tongue in all cities of their Dominions. These were the meanes by which these great Po∣lititians spread their language throughout the world, and taught Africk, Spaine, France, Italie, Germanie, Valachia, England, and divers other Northern Regions to speake Latine, untill the dissipation of that Empire. They had not (I must confesse) the like successe towards the East, because the Greek, which by reason of Sciences, was there in its luster, did that way stay the course of the Latine tongue. No sooner did the Arabians be∣gin
to build their greatnesse upon the ruines of the Roman Empire, but they presently began likewise to refine, extend, and am∣plifie their I anguage, and having subdd a great part of Asia, Africa and Europe, they brought it into divers Eastern, Southerne, and westerne countries, and made it spread as far, or farther then any other, that we have yet knowne The Turkes, though they be enemies of Sciences, having banisht them out of E∣gypt, Greece, and Arabia, doe notwith∣standing intrude their Language into all the countries which they conquer, causing the people to make use of it in their milita∣rie offaire;, and all publike acts and in∣struments. And though the Arabick tongue be the beautifullest, and richest of any Nationall Language now extant, and be yet used in Egypt for an Interpreter of their Religion, and Alcoran: yet doe they inslave the Inhabitants to the rigor of this law, to destroy it utterly by degrees, and bring in the Turkish Speech in stead of it. The Spaniards likewise, whose domini∣ons are hard to be preserved, the parts ther∣of being so farre distant one from the other, had no sooner laid the foundations of their Vniversal monarchie, but they indeavored
to the uttermost of their power, to spread their Language, not onely in those coun∣tries which they had gotten in Africk & Eu∣rope, but have extended it even into Ame∣rica. So that Peru, which is also called the Golden Castile, though above fifteene hun∣dred leagues distant from Spaine, speakes now no longer its own, but hath been con∣strained as well as the rest to imbrace the conquerers language. Philip King of Spaine forced the Moores of Granada to change their habit and speech, for no other reason, but onely to keepe so many different and severall Nations in perfect union and con∣cord, by a conformity in all things. Finally the French tongue onely hath had the ill fortune to remaine for a long season deformed, rough, and irregular, though the Nation hath alwaies been po∣tent and glorious; not through any bar∣rennesse or defect in the French Genius, for both the Greekes and Romans have al∣waies given pregnant testimonies of their eloquence; but the beginning of this dis∣order began in Iulius Caesars time, who ha∣ving conquered the Gaules (the better to subject them to the Romish yoake) extir∣pated the ancient Gaules banished our Dru∣ides, who were the onely depositories of our Lawes, Religion, and Sciences, that he might finde so much the lesse resistance
to the introduction of Roman Customes. Afterwards the Northerne nations, name∣ly Franconians, Gothes, Hunns, Vandalls, and others, going in quest of a milder mate, and more fruitfull countries, made seve∣rall inrodes into this, came and inhabited part of it, whence proceeded the mixture, and confusion which we may this day ob∣serve in it. For on that side of France which is next to Germany and the Netherlands, it received many harsh words, of a difficult and hard pronunciation; towards Spaine and Italy, it retained many Latine words. And afterwards being divided into seve∣rall states, each people contained them∣selves within the bounds of their owne precincts, which hindred the free com∣merce one with another: and this separa∣tion framed as many severall Dialects ∣mongst them, as there were Principai∣ties. The hatred which the Romans bare the Gaules, by reason of their valout, and the frequent victories they had gotten of them, was so excessive and inveterate, that rans∣acking and pillaging the whole countrie, they suppressed all the bookes, writings, and records of the Semnotheans, Bards, and Druides. And the Emperour Tiberis, ut∣terly to extingish the name of Gaules, interdicted the Priests to sacrifice, and un∣der
a false pretence of Magick, and in∣chantments, wherewith he accused them, he drove them all out of the country. Anto∣ninus the Emperour was no lesse an enemy to them, though hee tooke a farr milder and more politick way to ruine them. For considering that the best way to make our forefathers forget what things had been done before, was to annihilate and abolish their native Language, hee did not onely command them to learne the Latine, and to pleade therein, & to make those Hymnes which they sung in their sacrifices, in that language; but forbad them likewise to treate of any matters with the Emperors by meanes of any interpreter; saying it was a thing misbeseeming Roman greatnesse, to be spoken to by a subjects Language. Yet neither these, nor the succeeding Emperours could utterly abolish the Gaules Lan∣guage: And notwithstanding all these violent courses, some Colledges which the Bards had erected in divers cities, name∣ly at Treves, Autun, Besanson, Tolous, Mar∣seilles, and Lyons, stood many yeares after. But as soone as they had shaken off the Roman yoake, and the French Monar∣chie was reestablished, they began againe to take some care of their native Language, and Poetrie began to be in repute amongst them, so farre that even Kings and Prin∣ces
ordinarily addicted themselves there∣unto. Chilperick the grand child of Clovis the Grand would ad unto the French Alphabet some Greeke letters, which he thought we should want in our Orthographie, enjoy∣ning all Schoole-masters within his King∣dome to make use of them in writing of French. Charlemaine writ in verse the most memorable acts of his ancestors, and himselfe composed a French Grammer. Philip the renowned, and diverse others of our Kings and Princes did also beautifie our native Language. But the Latin had ta∣ken such deepe root, that it alwaies pre∣vailed, and hindered our Language from comming to its full perfection. Lewis the Eleventh was the first that ef∣fectually employed his power and au∣thority in the restauration and reestablish∣ment of our native Language. For having reunited divers Provinces to the Crown, to make the Language also conformable, he caused divers dispatches, which untill that time had been framed in corrupt Latine, to be afterwards written in French. And by this meanes this great King gave againe some lustre and subsistence to our Lan∣guage, so that to him we may attribute the glory of having him, in some sort, the Foun∣der of it seeing that by this his ordinance it began by little and little to be regulated,
and come againe to some perfection, untill the raigne of Francis, who seconding his predecessors Royall intentions, comman∣ded all pleadings to be in the Vulgar tongue, and judgements to be given there∣in, which had before been done in Latin. This great Prince also caused manie anci∣ent Authours to be translated into French, and granted severall priviledges and pre∣rogative, to Historians, Poets, and Ora∣tors of his time. Our Language went on increasing un∣der Henry the second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third, and Henry the Great. For in their dayes a rose many rare and sublime understandings who pricked forward by a noble emulation and desire of beautify∣ing the French tongue, invented many new words, and writ severall admirable workes: the chiefe whereof were Amiet, Ronsard, Baif, Du Bellay, Iodellus, and di∣vers others, who having written all much about one time, might be said to have brought our Language to a most high point of perfection. But doe what these great Princes could, they hardly freed it from its Parbarismes, it was so confused and in∣termingled with corrupt Latine, and di∣verse other tongues. His Majesty hath found out the true, and hitherto concealed way, to regulate it in all its parts, and re∣duce
it to a perfect accomplishment, by the good advice & known wisedome of your Eminency, in founding the French Acade∣mie, and filling it with men of eminent and refined learning, the choise wits of the Kingdome, who discreetly omit and cut off unprofitable and superfluous words, wisely adding whatsoever is wanting in our Language for the happy expressing of our thoughts, banishing all those Gothick termes which were crept in amongst us by the communion we had with those Nor∣therne nations, preserving and establish∣ing in their roome such as wee had bor∣rowed from politer and more civilized people; so that our speech is daily beautifi∣ed, our Authors write more without fault, our Lawyers grow more eloquent, expres∣sing themselves in rhetoricall and fluent phrases, our Provinces are purged of their severall Dialects, which hindered their commerce, being hardly able to under∣stand one another without interprerers. Give me leave to tell your Eminency that for the perfecting of this great work, nothing was so necessary as the setling of an Academie in this Kingdome, in which both the native and forraigne gentry might learne Sciences in our mother tongue. This being an infallible meanes to reforme the Language even in the remotest Provinces,
and reduce the whole nation to an unifor∣mity of speech and Dialect, to make our Language famous in strange countries, causing all the subjects of this Kingdome to observe the rules and precepts of the A∣cademy. For Sir, we reade in Histories that there be foure principall waies, to bring languages to a full perfection, amplifie, and immortalize them. The first is by Armes, when the conque∣rer binds the vanquished to speake his Language, either by planting colonies in it; or by causing all publick acts and Dis∣patces to be set downe and framed in that speech which they intend to bring in. The greatest marke of Soveraintie is to force conquered nations to alter their Idiom: and the last King of the antient Hetrurians, yeilded to all conditions which the victo∣rious Romans would impose upon him, but onely to that of admitting the Latine tongue within his dominions. This was the meanes by which the Romans made a great part of the world speake Latine, the Goths and Arabians introduced their lan∣guage within the bounds of the Roman Empire, and whereby the Turkes have so far extended their speech. And this way is reserved for your Eminency to advance, by making our armies victorious, and en∣larging the bounds of our Monarchie.
The second meanes is, translation of writers, whereby we change and trans∣form into our own Language, the rare in∣ventions, and rich conceipts of other Na∣tions; making them speak such an idiom as they never understood. For which cause Ptolomie King of Egypt filled up that fa∣mous Librarie with seven hundred thou∣sand Manuscripts, the greatest part wher∣of were translated out of other Tongues into Greek, and bought at so high a rate the version of the Septuagint. By meanes of translation also did Aristotle write those exquisite Politicks (whereof some fragments onely remain to us) having the severall sorts of Governments of all Na∣tions of the World brought unto him in writing; Alexander having sent Ambassa∣dors every where, on purpose to extract the best out of each Countries Lawes, to have a perpect Politie framed thereby, which should be inviolably observed within all his Dominions. The Romans, following this great Mo∣narch's example, sent some of the suffici∣entest men of their Common-wealth into Greece, to translate the best of the Grecian Lawes, out of which extracts, they fram'd their Law of the twelve Tables, called Lex duodecim tabularum, which was after∣ward the spring and foundation of all the
Roman Lawes. And at their returne from Athens, their ordinary employment was, to translate into Latine the most remarka∣ble things which they found written in the Greek tongue. And amongst the rest Cice∣ro (as zealous in the beautifying of his native language, as of the maintaining of his Countries liberty) invented such ex∣quisite termes for Morall Philosophy, tha all his works which are extant therein, are as so many of his Masterpeeces. Some, to much affected to the Greek tongue, would have diverted him from his intentions; but he rejecting their counsell, went happily on in his design, &, had he not been prevented by a violent death, was resolved to trans∣late the whole course of Philosophie out of Greek into Latine, as he promiseth in his second Book de Divinatione, and o∣ther several places. His death was one o the greatest misfortunes that ever befell, not onely the Common-wealth of Rome, but since that allso, all the States of Christ∣endome; For since that great man, neve durst any undertake so great a work, and consequently the Latine tongue hath wanted the pure termes of arts and scien∣ces For though Boetius, upon the decaying of the Latine tongue, did attempt to translate the course of Philosophie, it was neither followed, nor taught. And those
translators as have undertaken any such thing since the first foundation of our Uni∣versities, finding no proper Philosophicall termes in any Latine Authors, were con∣strained to frame new ones, so improper, barbarous, and remote from that primitive elegancie, that they would scarce have been understood by the antient Ro∣mans. The Arabians used the same meanes, and there are even in these daies extant diverse Greek Authors, yea, even some books of Aristotle translated into the Arabick tongue, which are not to be had, neither in their own Originall, nor yet in Latine; which bookes the Estates of the united Provin∣ces, great lovers and promoters of learn∣ing, are now causing to be translated out of Arabick into Latine. And this meanes belongs properly to those who are of the French Academie; it is a commendable kind of work, which may be performed in a study at conve∣nient houres. And seeing they are so per∣fectly skilled in forreign Languages, that they can prudently thereby regulate, and enrich ours; we do hope and expect from this honorable company, faithfull transla∣tions of the best books antiquity hath left us; which they may perform as a recreati∣on in their vacant houres, to solace them∣selves
after their serious employ∣ments in producing and inventing new and elegant words and expressions. The third meanes is Grammar, by which we learn to decline and conjugate, read, and pronounce in all places, in one manner. And for this end, Aristotle, Pla∣to, Aristophanes, Apollodorus, Aristarchus, Chrysippus, Cicero, Caesar, Varro, Quintilian, Donatus, Priscian, Charlemaine, and many o∣ther great persons of both Nations have written so carefully thereof. The Roman did for that end erect two and twenty pub∣lick schooles in Rome, and many more in their severall Provinces, to instruct their children, and bring them up in an uniform pronunciation. Though they had not in those daies any Colledges founded for Sciences, but Greek teachers onely made use of in private houses, to teach them Sci∣ences in the Greek language. And if Francis the first had well be thought himself, and first endeavoured to have an uniformity of language in all his Dominions, and had to that end founded French Grammer-sch ooles in severall Cities of his Kingdome; he had saved much of that vast expence which he was a in erecting of so many Colledges for the Hebrew, Greek, Arabian, & Latine tongues and there had not been at this time so ma∣ny
severall sorts of speeches, in this King∣dom, but all would have spoken after one manner. But the most certain, and powerfull meanes to regulate Languages, and make them lasting and universal, is to make them interpreters of Sciences, which are no sooner brought into a Nationall Lan∣guage, but they grace it with all necessary ornaments, and make it every way com∣pleat. By their meanes, the Egyptian, Greek, and Arabian tongues have obtained so much credit in the world; and learned Na∣tions have made all the Earth speake their particular and Mother Languages. Their workes have crossed the Seas, and when they have been banished out of their Na∣tive Country, they have found courteous entertainment amongst forreign Nations. The authority of Sciences hath given the Eastern Languages their passe to travell in∣to our parts. Conquerors can extend their Languages no further then the bounds of their Conquests, nor can they make them last there any longer then their own pow∣er. Translators and Grammarians have also in some manner their bounds. Scien∣ces onely enjoy the priviledge and prero∣gative of making anguages immortall, and extending them beyond the bounds of those Kingdomes in which they had their
origine: So that when they are dead in their own naturall Country where they were first spoken, they survive amongst other Nations, or at least find an honorable tomb in the memory of the learned'st and wisest men. Want of this last meanes, hath been the cause that our French tongue hath remain∣ed barren and unpolisht, without rule and order within the Kingdom, restrained with∣in it, and for a long time unknown to strangers. It wants not all dispositions re∣quired for the perfecting of it, if it were but well followed; for questionlesse all Lan∣guages are of themselves equally able to expresse their thoughts: and if any one hath a prerogative above the other, it must be attributed onely to the labour and in∣dustry of the most excellent men of each Nation. When Homer and Demosthenes, Cicero, and Virgil, Boccace and Petrarch, Grenada and Lopezde Vega, Amiot and Ron∣sard, framed a design to write in their own Languages, they were then but in their in∣fancie, and yet these famous Persons brought them almost to the height of their accomplishment. Whence we may inferre, that those famous and stately Languages, which antiquity hath so much admired, were in their beginning weak and abject; they have in time been brought to per∣fection
by the care and industry of wise and learned men, who have laboured to find out as many names, as there were things, wherein consists the essence and perfection of Languages; whereas hitherto we have servilely bestowed our times and studies to the refining and restoring of Forreign and obsolet Languages, unfortunately neglect∣ing our own. Whence it proceeds, that we have not found needfull and fitting words and terms to expresse our selves; and, to our shame and ignominie, wee can not name many things in French, for which we have names both in Greek and Latine; whereas other Nations, that have not known those forreign and obsolet Lan∣guages, or at least have made no use of them in discourse, have found out moralls enough of their own, to expresse their thoughts and Knowledges. As soone as children become rationall, and have attained to such an age that they can speake well and correct those childish utterances which they had gotten from nurses in stead of making them eloquent in their language, they teach them Greeke and Latine▪ contemning the French; so that when they forsake the Colleges, wherein they have spent the prime of their youth, they seeme to be strangers in their owne countrie, and retaine the ill tones,
and unsavory pronunciations of their se∣verall provinces, which afterwards they can never leave, so that after fifteene or twenty yeares study, they speake like the vulgar and common sort of people, and ne∣ver become eloquent in the French tongue, whatsoe ver profession they follow. The selfe same thing is the reason why it is impossible for us to become truely lear∣ned, because that to be right Philosophers we must of necessity doe as they did in an∣cient times, namely, make use of a popular usuall and nationall mother tougue. For though the names wch we learne even from the breast, be not more significant then the other, yet because that long custome hath made them familiar unto us, and as it were naturall, the Ideas or images of the names, and of the things insinuating themselves into us joyntly at one time, the former through the eares, and the latter through the eyes, and are joyned and inseparablie vnited in our memory, and knit together by so perfect a sympathy and strict cove∣nant, that it is impossible to thinke upon the one without remembring the other; and whilst the love of these two Ideas is reci∣procall, and they are faithfull to each o∣ther, they ingender knowledge and polite speech in our mindes; but if either of them violates the I awes of this sacred union,
& suffers it self to be transported to illegal Objects; they produce nothing but barba∣rism & confusion. Now this mis-under∣standing happeneth chiefly two waies, either when ye understanding abandoning the consideration of faire and solid truth, seeks only after frivolous & chimericall things; or when it addicts it self to strange languages which are but servants; & con∣temns his mother tongue which is his true spouse, and imitates Polygamie which is fa∣miliar to some Nations where Concubines are preferred before the Lawfull Wife. Which cannot chuse but be very prejudi∣ciall to discourse, because that on the one side, the images of those things which are not, can engender in our minds nothing but false & spuirous notions, such as blind men have of colours, of which they know on∣ly the name: & on the other side, the idea of one only thing comming to unite it self in the memory to the Ideas and images of so many strange & differing words, alters, & confounds not only the species of the mo∣ther tongue, but also breeds so great a con∣fusion in the species of other languages, that in stead of stirring up the Image of a Spa∣nish word, and uttering of it, oftentimes it stirrs up and utters some Italian or French words: & thence it comes that those who have learn'd many languages, cannot chuse sōtimes but confound & mix thē together. The Ideas of things, and of names, have
been freely bestowed upon us at one time, the former by nature, and the latter by our nurses, to make us capable of discourse and communication; but be cause the Ide∣as of names commonly make not so deepe an impression in us, as the Ideas of things; we ought to practise them care∣fully from our tender age, and strengthen them in such sort by frequent repetition; that the memorie may not labour more in preserving and uttering them, then it doth in conceiving the Ideas of things; otherwise we shall never obtain in the facul∣ty of well speaking, but shall still be troubled with conceiving, and not have power to bring forth; which is one of the greatest disasters and troubles that can be∣fall our mindes. And to make it appear, that we may longer and easier remember the species of things then the names of them, we find by experience, that every man is oftentimes troubled to remember some names which he hath almost daily uttered, and yet shall not easily forget the species of a thing which he hath once or twice attentively marked and observed. Finally experience teacheth us, that he tongue and the thought doe alwaies re∣tain somewhat of the quality of the cli∣mate: Which is the cause that a Greek, or Italian thought, that hath alwaies even
from its infancy been brought up and nourished with its own Country lan∣guage, as with a sister; hath more relation and conformity to, and with it, then with any other, and that a Science which con∣sists all in word and thought, is never naturall, nor can enter or take any deep root in the spirit, unlesse it be taught in the mother tongue. That is the reason, why when we speak French, our words come from us easilie, and a polite phrase is utte∣red by us as sudainly as a well conceived thought; whereas in a Greek or Latin dis∣course, wee must continually attend to the choice of terms, studying upon every word we utter, which turmoiles our mind, and hinders it from employing it selfe with full liberty in the indagation of a truth; which is also the cause that we do not easilie forget our Mother tongue; whereas strange languages are as soone blotted out of our memories, as we give over the use of them; and the professors thereof no sooner discontinue the practise, but they lose that habit which they had obtained with so much labour, and diffi∣cultie. Ever fince the Creation of the World, untill about the time of Charles the great, all the Nations of the Earth, Gaules, E∣gystians, Persians, and Grecians taught Sci∣ences
in Nationall and Mother tongues, and if they did borrow any help of for∣raigne Languages, they were such as were still in use, and had their course among the learned, who were consulted with as so many Oracles; and besides, it was but only untill such time that their owne Lan∣guage was brought to perfection, and they had invented termes enough for Sci∣ences. But this great Bruce, being chosen King of the Romans, absolute in a great part of Europe, and considering that the Language was extreamly corrupted in the Roman Empire, through the incursi∣ons of the Barbarians, and espcially in these Western parts; so that it was almost impossible to regulate it, and in it to teach Sciences (which he savoured as much as any Monarch in the World) he judged it more expedient at that time to reestablish the Latin tongue every where, and re∣store it to its purenesse, then to refine and bring in use that Latin which was usuall in his time. To this end he set up Vniver∣sities, caused all Pleas, and acts to be plea∣ded and set down in Latin. Questionlesse nis intentions were commendable, and Noble; yet they had no prosperous suc∣cesse: For he suppressed a certaine mixt Language, which was then popular, and might easily have been made perfect and
compleat; and yet did not revive the an∣tient Roman tongue which was quite dead and extinguished. Which occasioned a mighty disorder, because that out of the corruption of one Language, there were three framed, which in a small time grew so different one from another, that they could not be understood, but onely by those who particularly professed them. For then the French, Spanish, and Italian Grammarians studied nothing but the pure∣nesse of the Roman Language, Philoso∣phers the grosse vulgar and new invented Latin, and the common people wanting rules and instructions touching the mixt Language, from those who could speake well in it, could not of themselves turne the barbarous forraigne words into La∣tin, which of it selfe is difficult enough; and were forced to fly for reliefe to thy Substantive and auxiliarie Verbes. And by this meanes were framed in France, Ita∣ly, and Spain a kind of bastard Langua∣ges, which are nothing but a kind of cor∣rupt Latin. Philosophie is very naturall to man; and rarest wits have in all ages been curious in the search of truth; which we might more clearly have perceived by their works, had they not been lost by the corruption of Languages, deluges, firings, warrs, and transmigrations
of Nations. Philosophie is the worthiest Object of our admiration, and one of the rarest presents Heaven hath bestowed upon us; by its meanes we are raised, and elevated to the knowledge of divine things, we peretrate into the secrets of na∣ture; wee regulate our manner of living, and entertaine humane society; and yet now it is made odious unto us, thorow the difficulty of those Languages which are instrumentall to her, and the barba∣rism of new invented termes. The light of mens understandings seemes to be dark∣ned, and yet certainly reason doth not de∣generate. All ages produce gallant men, and most acute wits, who ought to be more learned then those who lived in for∣mer times, having this advantage, to have the use of all their inventions, and time daily disclosing some new experiment. Is it not a great ease unto us in these daies to have Euclide's Elements so carefully set forth, Aristotles Philosophy so solidly esta∣blished, Hippocrates his Maximes so judi∣ciously ordered, & so many other rare and excellent workes, which lost, could never have been made good again? How comes it then, that we are not as learned as they were in those daves, and have not in these latter Ages such men as Hippocrates, Aristotle, Euclide, Archimedes, Diophantus,
Tullie, Plutarch, and Seneca? What is the reason that Philosophie still degenerates, and that so many studious braines who watch continually, and burn of a desire to learn, can not so much as adde one degree of perfection to Philoso∣phie, nor yet exquisitely tread those paths in which they formerly walked? Questi∣onless it is, because we do not as those dis∣creet and well advised people did, who brought their Children directly to learne Sciences when they were but seven or eight yeares of age, and never put them to fruitlesse studies of unused and strange Languages. They reasoned fluently without any trouble; whereas now with∣in these seven or eight hundred yeares, we employ the flower of our age, in which wee might make most proficiencie in our studies, towards obtaining of Sciences in a kind of apprentice-ship, in seeking to re∣store those obsolete Languages; setting more by a few Grammaticall observati∣ons, and Etymologies of words, then Mathematicall Demonstrations, or Max∣ims of Philosophie. Yet questionlesse we see this apprentice∣ship which we are tied to in atta ining of these abolished Languages, is bevond comparison more tedious and hard, then all morall and natural Sciences.
How watchfull, studious, and turmoiled must we be before we can attain, not one∣ly to the polite speaking, but even to a rough understanding of the Greek or Latin tongue? Our minds, and all the faculties of our soules, suffer a thousand torments in the compassing of it; in so much that a free spirit, and a Noble Genius, can hardly captivate it self to so many rudiments of Grammer, so many particles and frivolous observations; it dashes and dulls it self, and in the end shakes off this cumbersome yoak, and by that meanes it happens oftentimes to the great dammage of the publick good, that the French Nobilitie, endowed with most rare naturall faculties, being not able to subject it self to such an intricate study, conceives a mortall hatred against all manner of learning, which of it selfe is a thing so rare, and to which they have so great a naturall inclination. This is the reason that Northern Nati∣ons, who have but a meane and dull spi∣rit, do more willingly apply themselves to the learning of Languages, employ their whole time therein, and are not tired with this bondage and servitude; whereas the Southern, abhorring so fruit∣lesse a labour, unworthy of a high and lofty mind, addict themselves wholly
to Sciences, and meditation. Trismegistus, who is accounted to have been the founder of Sciences, a great King, Priest, and Philosopher, made so little esteem of the Greek tongue, in re∣spect of the Egyptian, that he was even afraid least those rare workes which he had compiled concerning all Divine and humane Sciences, should be translated in∣to that Language. The Grecians, having learned from the Egyptians to cherish and refine their own Language, did so con∣temn all others, that they called them Bar∣barians. And thereupon Plutarch cared not for learning of the Latin tongue; though it was in his time most flourishing, and he lived in Traian's Court, where it was most purely spoken, and that he had undertaken the writing of the Roman History. Saint Augustine, the honour of Africk, and of the Church, who easilie could comprehend and penetrate into any thing; complaines in diverse places, and especi∣ally in his Confessions, of the difficulty he found in learning the Greek tongue by precepts; and averreth that it cannot be inculcated into the memory, without rough threatnings, and severe correct ons, which dulls the courage of a childe, and distracts his Sences. He saith that also he
found more distast then pleasure in the rea∣ding of Homer himself, though it was so ful of varieties, and recreative and pleasant fictions: and that contrariwise he lear∣ned the Latin tongue in sporting among women and children, though it was no more naturall to him then the Greek, because he was sent to learn it in a City of Africk, which was a Roman Colonie, and where they ordinarilse did speake Latin. We have in these daies farre greater oc∣casion to complain; they put us in prison, and torment us in Colledges for the space often or twelve yeares, to learne Preterits, Supines, Syntaxes, Heteroclites, and A∣nomala, which, one may in truth say, are but the excrements, and impurities of an irregular, and imperfect Language. For in Saint Augustines daies, there was yet some pretence and colour for the learning of Latin and Greek, which was nationall and popular in a great part of the East; but now why should we in vaine trouble our selves to revive obsolet Languages, which serve no longer for any commerce? The learnedst amongst the Grecians, in former times, were wont to blame the Grammarians, who bestowed so much time in teaching the Grammer, and the Mother tongue, to the prejudice of Sciences; But
what would they say, I pray you, if they saw now the disorders of our schoole? would they not have farre greater occs∣sion to complain of the length of the bondage we endure in learning of strange languages; which robbs us of the best time we have to attain to learning? All Languages ought to be learned by pract∣ice, and not by precepts: and wee finde by experience, that the Dutch, and Swit∣zers, which come to dwell in France a∣mongst us, cause their Language to con∣tinue in their own private families, and their children are brought up in it with∣out violence or precepts. Nations frame e∣very day amongst themselves new spee∣ches naturally; and as it were unawares: and yet these numberless Greek and Latin teachers cannot in seven or eight hundred yeares make these Languages familiar in any Colledge, nor bring youth to speake them naturally: But yet wee neede not marvell, if Languages follow the order of Generations, of which we never see the beginning, nor ending; and as we can not raise them up again to their spring and origine, so it is impossible to hinder them from descending, and wearing away. The Egyptians reproved the Grecians, who came to studie amongst them, say∣ing,
they remaine in continuall infancie all their life time, without Knowledge or discourse: because they did not profit by their instructions, and could not all under one, learne a forraign Language, though it were usuall both in the Masters and the Schollers mouthes, and apprehend the Mysteries of their Doctrines. But as soone as the Grecians began to learne and teach Philosophie in their own proper and natu∣rall tongue, they soon went beyond the Egyptians, who were their masters, in all manner of learning: and afterward be∣gan to contemn all other Languages, holding the Romans, Spaniards, and Car∣thaginians for barbarous Nations, because they had not Sciences in their own pro∣per Idioms. Whereas if they had still learned Philosophie in the Chaldean and Egyptian Languages, they had continued in their infancy for ever. By this meanes, all those Nations which studied Philosophie in their own mother tongue, became betimes solid in learning, and eloquent, and have left behind them solid and eloquent workes. Galen study∣ing in his own tongue, happily attained to perfection, and was both a Mathema∣tician, a Philosopher, and a Physician in fifteen or sixteen yeares, as well as di∣verse others of his time: and contrariwise
those Nations which taught, and do teach in obsolet Languages, never taste the sweet of Sciences, the very entrance thereinto seeming to them craggy and ine acceslible: and if at last they attaine∣thereunto, it is with infinite labour; and although they be learned, yet are they barbarous in their manners, actions, and words. How many learned men are there amongst us that cannot speak French, and when they should come to the chaire to read, or the barre to plead, they wonder they must again the second time learne their Grammar; which is al∣most impossible for them to doe, because their memory faileth them, and they have gotten such a continuall habit of their evill Provinciall accent, and termes which are notusuall in Court, nor will passe in gentile companies. For the same was the reason, why, whilest they plea∣ded and preached in Latin here in France, the pulpets, and brres swarmed with grosse, ignorant, and barbarous persons; But as soon as they began to speak French, we have had such rare Preachers and fa∣mous Advocates, that the French elo∣quence, which may yet be stiled to be but in its infancie, may contest either with Greek or Latin. Advocates indeed had more reason
then any others, to retaine, and preserve the use of the Latin tongue, because most of our Lawes are derived from it; the Ro∣man Law was compiled in it in exquisite termes, and it hath been so carefully po∣lished and refined by the Roman Senate, both in civill and criminall matters, that one may say, it was the first and perfect∣est schoole of eloquence that ever was; and that the Greek, which hath so many other excellencies, is in this point inferiour to it, and hath been forced in matters of Law to borrow many Latin words, and cloth them in a Greek habit. Yer they were the first, who thorow a generous desire to serve their Country, and honour their Nation, did cast off the Latin, our Language being indebted to them for its politenesse and elegancie; and I admire that this their rare example, seconded with such a happy successe, hath not obliged Philosophers, Mathemicians, and Phy∣sicians to forsake their barbarous termes, and remnants of Latin, to joyn with the Lawyers in the compleating of their own mother tongue. Man is born for Sciences, whereof he hath the seed within himself; and to the end that he may discourse in his infancie, and lose no time, nature, as soone as hee comes out of his cradle, gratifies him
with meanes neceslary for him to become learned, causing him to suck and draw his own native tongue together with his nur∣ses milke, when he is not yet capable of a∣ny thing else, that he may enter into his Philosophie, as soon as he hath the very first degree of reason. And that our com∣mon mother Nature hath not destinated us to learn languages, we may perceive by this, that the older we grow, the more un∣fit we are for the attaining of them; and a man who is come to a perfect and mature age, shall labour more to at∣tain one Language, then a child in lear∣ning three or four severall ones. Besides, Sciences trouble not the mind as Langua∣ges doe; and the more a man learneh, the apter he is to learn; Sciences having such a relation to one another, and being so linked together, that they lend mutu∣all assistance to one another; they are sisters which live in perfect unitie, without any misunderstanding, finding a joint ha∣bitation in our mind, as it were in their fathers house, which conceiving every where objects of the same kind, needs but one Image to comprehend all those things which are of the same nature. Wheras the Memorie, by reason of the diversity of Languages, is saine to burthen itself with an infinite number of specificall nomina∣tions,
which trouble one another, and make a horrible confusion in that facul∣tie. And furthermore we find by experi∣ence, that those who have many Lan∣guages, are never so fitting for sublime meditations, and deep discourses: and that to be a sound Philosopher, it is better to speak but one, and have the understan∣ding at libertie, and free from the great in∣tricacie of strange words. The Egyptian, Greek, and Arabian Philo∣sophers, considering that Nature, repleat both with goodnesse, and wisdom, did bring up children all at once to the Know∣ledge both of names, and things, and that she did suggest unto u words, according as she inspired us with thoughts; did also at the same time respect as well the one as the other, and were equally carefull of instructing children in well speaking, and in doctrine; As soon as the light of reason began to appear, they sowed into the memory as in a fruitful soil, the seeds and principles of Knowledge, which served for a guide and conduct of their life; so that good and wholsome Maxims taking deep root in the understanding, did in pro∣cesse of time fructifie, and increase there: whereby former ages brought forth such men as posterity admired, and whose very names were honoured and respected.
But now, in stead of bestowing our ten∣der age in things which might edifie youth, we cast it into the briars of Gram∣mar, and such trublesome difficulties, as dull the acutenesse of the understan∣ding: they oppresse the memory with the troublesome studie of obsolet Languages, the Knowledge of which is many times fruitlesse, and to no purpose especially for such as doe not make a profession of wri∣ting or speaking Greek and Latine. That time might be employed farre better in the refining of our own Language, and the search of truth: and questionlesse the French, who are endowed with singu∣lar and rare naturall gifts, would quickly become, as they were in the Druides times, the most learned and eloquent in the World, and Philosophie would once a∣gain flourish amongst us. Is it not a shame, that through neglect of our owne language, we should speak many things in Greek and Latin which wee might as well expresse in our mother tongue? Is not this a making our selves strangers in our own Country, and never behold learning but in borrowed robes? One might object, that children are not capable of Sciences, and that studying of them is too serious and important an employment for them. Yet experience
teacheth us the cōtrary; & Aristotle himself in his Politicks saith, that children are cap∣able of learning Philosophie at seven or eight yeares of age, because they begin then to be capable of reason, their imagi∣nation is vivid, and hot, their Me∣morie tender, and apt to receive any good impression: and it is farr easier for them to apprehend Reasons, whereof they have the principles within themselves then the Rudiments of Grammer, which are fruitless blossoms, and to which they have no naturall disposition. This error hath by little and little crept into the minds of men, because they have not considered that there are two sorts of Sciences, namely of Invention, and Dis∣cipline. As for the first, children indeed are not capable of them, and even a∣mongst men none can attaine thereunto, unlesse they be sublimed wits, and spirits fitted to invent new things: they are en∣deasours of an extraordinary Genius, or a continual study of 20. or 30. years, accom∣panied with long and profound meditati∣ons, and solitarie reflections, which at last discover unto us some particular lights. And such wits deserve even to be admi∣red; they are the honour of mankind, and raise it up to a kinde of divinity. As for the Sciences of Discipline, or disposition,
they are not of the same nature: all such as have any memory, even women and chil∣dren are capable thereof; they are but re∣iterations of what hath been said before, which may be easily apprehended, when they are explained and expounded; yet are they seeds of the high Science of Inven∣tion, when they are sown in a fruitfull, sublimed, and extraordinary understan∣ding. Therefore even the Northerne dull Nations are capable of knowing, and ap∣prehending what hath beene written and experimented by others, because they have good memories, which in some manner supplie their default of Invention. And the Southerne people being more Ingeni∣ous, having sought out the truth in Ancient writers, are fitter through their acutenesse to discover new inventions. Wherein we may admire divine providence, which having made all men rationall, guides them severall waies to one end, giving the one a more lively judgment, and the others a more happie memorie. Why should then that time, which is ordained for sciences, be so ill employed in an apprentiship to learne grammatical observations and precepts, far harder and more difficult then the language it self? why should we spend ten or twelve yeares in studying Greek and Latine, to make use of thē afterwards but one year or
two in the studie of Philosophie? Is it not an uniust and insufferable thing, to con∣sume the most pretious time of our life, and most fitting to learne sciences, namely from seven or eight, to eighten or twenty yeares of age, in learning of the grammer & some bookes of humanitie, with intollerable trouble and labour, then, when youths begin to incline to dissolutenesse, and des∣bauches, gaming, hunting, and travelling, they are put to Logick, in which they must againe begin to learne a new kind of La∣tine, so barbarous and obscure, that it seems to have been invented, onely to make Sci∣ences odious, and distastfull. And by this means, in stead of prolonging the Gen∣tries time of studying, they are forced ab∣ruply to cut it off; their imployments cal∣ling them to state affaires, so that what they have not learned at fifteen or sixteen yeares of age, they must be ignorant of all the dayes of their lives, to the great dam∣mage and prejudice of the state. And thus through the difficulty & tedi∣ousnesse of learning Greek & Latine, our great ones are frustrate of their rudiments of Philosophie, which is one of the greatest mishaps that can befall a State. For there are but very few that can attain to the fight of the lustre of Sciences thorough so much mist and darkenesse: sublime & most sub∣tile
understandings onely can comprehend all things, without any intricacy or confu∣sion. And it is a miraculous thing how a perfect knowledge of languages, joyned with deep learning (which ordinarily make a man pensive, solitarie, and most fit∣ting for a private life) can consist in your Eminency, together with such clearenesse of spirit, grave carriage, majestick and bewitching entertainement, which doth charme and captivate mens hearts unto you; and the knowledge of all these things, hath furnished and fittingly disposed you to become the most absolute States-man that ever was in France. So that in you sir is verified that Maxime which Aristotle sets down, namely, that Policie is the mi∣stris and Queen of all other Arts and Sci∣ences; because she it is that regulates their functions, and applies them to the good of the publick. And now France findes by experience, to its honour and glory, that Kingdomes never flourish and prosper better, then when prudent and learned men sit at the sterne of publick affaires. I must notwithstanding confesse that ma∣ny wise and understanding people, have studied in forraigne Languages, some have travelled into Egypt, to Marseilles, Greece, and other countries famous for ex∣cellent and learned professors; which have
lived and taught in them: but they were then naticnall Languages, and needfull for the learning of Sciences, and usefull in the chiefest ports in the world, into which one could not travaile without them: And they were so farre from being difficult and hard to learne, that one could not almost avoyd nor shun the learning of them through daily conversation with the men, women and children of that country. But why do we now adaies without any neces∣sity so much seeke after I anguages, that lie buried in Libraries as in their Sepulchers? Let us stirre up their ashes as long as wee will, we shall never revive them: the frag∣ments and relicks which are left of them, are but so many shadowes, and defaced monuments. And sometimes we turmoile our selves about them all our life time, and yet cannot attaine to the true Genius and pronunciation of them; in which, as the Greek oratour saith, consists the spirit and soule of a language. Is not this I pray a kind of husbanding another mans land, letting our owne lie fallow? The Greekes did in former ages see the Aegyptians Language and Philosophie fall to decay, and the Arabians, the Greekes; and yet those politick nations never went about to support, or re-establish them: Yea contrariwise they sought all meanes,
utterly to abolish and suppresse them, to bring their own mother tongue into credit. Considering that it was no lesse disgrace for them to bee governed by forraigne tongues, then by forraigne armes and powers. Some testie Critick, or absurd Polititian will peradventure say, that it is not fitting to lay open the mysteries of a Science, nor make them common. And that a Science is the more majestick and venerable, when it is obscure and hidden from the common sort of people. And therefore Aegyptians set down their Philosophie in Hieroglyphicks; the first Greekes, and the antient Gauls in obscure verses! But this was an error, which great Aristotle both opposed, and reformed. For where∣as Pythagoras reduced all Sciences to num∣bers, and treated of all things as an Arith∣metician; Plato reasoned of all naturall things as a Geometrician; Anaxagoras as an Astonomer, & every sect in some Enig∣maticall and extravagant manner: This divine Genius of Nature spoke of every thing without any mixture, and in its own purity, physical matters as a Physick, of Po∣licie, as a Politician, of Logick as a Logi∣cian, of Metaphysicks as a Divine, and so laid open the whole course of Philosophy, dispersing those shadowes and Chimeras
made it obscure, and darke. And indeed we ought to take the shortest, and neerest way we can find, to conduct us to Scien∣ces; for if we linger, or goe astray never so little, wee shall never come to an end of this brave journey, there are so many things to be known in this world. The volume which Nature gives us to reade o∣ver is so large, shenath so many secrets hid∣den in her breast, that we are so farre from attaining to the knowledge of all things, that the rarest and most understanding men and witts have averred, that all that we know is nothing, in comparison of things which are unknowne to us: and it may truely be said, that the termes of Sci∣ences and Arts are so particular, and pe∣culiar, and alien from an ordinarie Lan∣guage, that they cannot be understood in any kind of speech, but onely by such as professe the said Arts, and Sciences. Fi∣nally, men are borne for knowledge, and it is a notable wrong done to them, to take away the means, and make the way there∣unto hard and difficult. The Schooles (as they were in former times in Aegypt Greece, and Arabia) ought to be open to all the world. In those dayes children had fini∣nished their studie of Mathematicks, and Philosophy at fourteene or fifteene years, before they were of age to undertake that
profession whereunto they were destinated for the residue of their life; which made them more capable and fitting for pub∣lick employments. For all the parts of philosophy and Mathematicks are appi∣able to the necessity of living, and well-fare of Commonwealths. Logick cleares and strengthens discourse, giving a method and rule unto it. Morall Philosophie governes and mitigates our passions, makes us good fathers of families, and good Citizens. Physick gives us the Prin∣ciples, and disposeth us to be good Physi∣tians: The Mathematicks fit us for af∣faires belonging either to war or peace, either in Mechanick or Liberall Arts, which are the grounds, and maintainers of Societies: But after we have consumed all our youthfull dayes in learning of Greek and Latine, all this labour and watchfulnesse stands us in no stead, but onely to reade some Greeke and Latine Authors, which is but an unprofitable curiosity for the party, and casts us into a kind of dronishnesse, and disables us from doing any thing else; so that those who have so spent their time, are not capable of any profession, and are but unprofitable Citizens, which can contribute nothing to the good of a Common-wealth, nor or∣nament of a State.
So that many men who are not apt to learne Languages, or have not time to im∣ploy themselves therein, are frustrate of the fruites of Sciences, who might other∣wise become great persons; if the said Sci∣ences were taught in the vulgar or mother tongue; Whereof we have notable and famous examples in Simon of Athens, Po∣lemon, and Protagoras, who comming by chance into the Schooles of Socrates, Arist∣henes, and Xenocrates were so feelingly touched, and powerfully edified by their Doctrine, that they presently resolved to forsake those sordid trades in which they had spent the greatest part of their lives, and reforming their behaviours, addicted themselves wholy to Philosophie and ver∣tue. If Philosophie had no other interpreter but the Latine tongue, we should indeed adheare, and apply our selves to that, nei∣ther could we any way avoyd the lear∣ning of it, seeing that without it we could not attaine to hilosophie. But all I an∣guages are fitting for it, and subservient to it: And though it be contrarie to the com∣mon opinion, we may say and a verr, that the Latine is extremely defective in that particular; because it appeares, that in its most flourishing time, the termes for Sci∣ences were not known in Rome, and those
which were invented since, savour not of the Genius of pure Latine, and could not outlive a life lesse Language. The Latine as well as other Languages hath been subject to mixture and corrup∣tion, and hath not long remained in one state, as divers learned Authours have written. We may observe in it five seve∣rall Idiomes, or kindes of Language. Namely, the first, and Ancient; the La∣tine, the Roman, the Mixt, and the Ba∣stard. The Ancient, which the first and primitive people of Italie used, wherein some obsolet verses were extant in Varroes time, though hardly understood, flourished under Ianus and Saturne. The Latin, which the Latins used, was spoken under the raignes of the Tuscan Kings, and in that Language were written the Decemvires ta∣bles, the holy and sacred lawes, and the publique Edicts. The Roman, which setes downe the Roman Histories, and the Civill Law, began immediately after the Kings were expelled, and was refined by the Poets, Plautus, Nevius, Pacuvius, En∣nius, Virgil, Ovid. and Horace; amongst Oratours and Historiographers, by Cato, Hortensius, Cicero, Caesar, Salust, and Livie. The Mixt began with the increase of the Empire, and was in Esteeme under the Empercurs, who admitting divers nations
to the right of being Roman Citizens, & to citie honours, were thereby constrained to admit also of a mixture of feverall barba∣rous words; by which meanes the Ro∣man vertue began to degenerate, and by little and little, with its liberty, lost the purity of its Language. Finally, the Ba∣stard, and Spurious Latine which hath la∣sted from the dissipation of the Empire to this time, every day receding more and more from its primitive purenesse, at last was divided into the Italian, Spanish, French, and severall other tongues. As for the last, and the three first, those who are well read in Histories know they never had the termes of Sciences, the fourth onely, namely the Mixt had that priviledge towards its declining, and it was not long a nationall Language, nor had not age or time enough to be brought to the height of its perfections. And now Latin is made use of but only in some parts of Europe where it is so subjest to the cor∣rupt pronuciation of severall Nations, that a French man can hardly understand a Germans Latine, nor an Italian an Irish mans, &c. And besides the Latine tongue is now so defective, that we can hardly expresse our selves in it, the tearmes of all Arts and Sciences being so farre altered, hat they have no relation to the Language
as was in former times. And lastly, the knowledge of severall tongues is no way availeable to Philosophie, and if a man could speake all manner of Languages, he would be never the more rationall for that, nor more fitting to learn Sciences, then he that hath no more but his owne mother tongue. It were much to be wished for the satis∣faction of men, the concord of Nations, & the communicating of thoughts, that there were but one language in the world; then were it easie to travail into farr countries, there would be great facility in commerce, and the whole world would be as it were but one state. But since so much happi∣nesse is not to be hoped for, we are at least bound to refine our owne language, and make it uniforme throughout our whole Kingdome; Which if we doe, and fit it so, that we may teach Sciences in it, it will grow in as great repute as other Langua∣ges were, and forraigne Nations will come to us, as they formerly did into Greece and Aegypt to learne Sciences. It may be objected that the Latine hath a kinde of prerogative above other lan∣guages, which it holdeth by a publick and universall right, that former ages did with such a religious reverence, worship and observe the use of it, and some moderne
writers, as Mirandula, Erasmus, Fernelius, Cardanus, Scaliger, Ramus, Alciat, Cuiacius, Molineus, & Crassot, have left us many accu∣rates writing therin, of all which we should lose the benefit, and reading, if we had no other language but French. But if we con∣sider on the other side, that by meanes of translation we may appropiate unto our selves any Authours workes, and that as soone as we have refined and polished our native tongue, we may translate any either ancient or moderne; this objection will be of no great weight. There may againe be objected, that the structure of the Greeke & Latine tongues is more regular, and they may furnish us with larger meanes of expressing our thoughts. But though it be farre from us to lay any imputation or blame upon those noble Languages, yet we may lawfully say, that their excellencie consists but in artificiall beauties, and that their orna∣ments are more necessary for Poets and Orators, then for Philosophers, who will have the perfection of Languages to consist in having proper names for all known things; with which expressi∣ons our tongue is very well furnished, and if it be wanting in any thing, it hath been our Ancestors fault, who have con∣temned their mother tongue; which de∣fault
we must now amend by our owne care. And why are Plato, Aristotle, Plu∣tarch, Tullie, and Senecaes workes in such great esteeme, and credit? it is not for their elegancie, which is but an Axcessorie, but because they have beene good Philoso∣phers, and have had perfect knowledge of vertue and Sciences. It is therefore, that Li∣braries are filled with their workes, & all solid spirits desire to reade them; & not for their Eloquence, & Rethoricall fluency. Languages indeed have divers kindes of perfections, some excell in abundancie of words to expresse their thoughts. And those Nations which have the greatest knowledge of Divine and Naturall things, and of Arts and Sciences, have also a more rich and abounding Language. And therein the first and imposed Language was most excellent, it having a proper name for every mine ral, or mixt, that was in the world. Some againe excell in the framing of parts of speeche, when the Nownes, and Verbs are well composed, and the Tenses and Cases have their just terminations, which make the beauty and variety of phrases, and is a most rare ornament to a Language, and therein the Greek & Latine are much to be commen∣ded. And some againe excell in sweetnesse of words, pleasantnesse & facility of pro∣nunciation.
For the number of termes, it is true that there are some wanting in the French, for want of refining and polishing of it, and because in stead of inventing names in our owne mother tongue, for such things as we are newly come to the knowledge of, we have improperly taken them out of the Greeke and Latine, whereby they are not popular, nor intelligible. But if Sci∣ences were once brought in and taught amongst us in our owne mother tongue, that defect would soon be suppli∣ed and amended; seeing our Alphabet well known and regulated, is questionlesse more large, and enriched with nine or ten letters, and fifteene or sixteen diphthonges more then the Greeke, Latine, Italian, or many more, as we shall make it largely appeare in our Grammer; wherein we will propose the meanes of shortning our French Orthographie, and make it wholie conformable to the pronunciation which will make the reading thereof much more easie, as well for strangers as our owne Countrimen. As for the structure and frame of it, we must confesse that it hath this defect com∣mon with other Languages, which decline their Nounes by Articles, and conjugate their Verbes with the help and assistance of the Substantive and Auxiliarie Verbe,
namely to speak in meeter often, and want variety of terminations: and this is the point wherein we must chiefly labour in the reformation of our language, it being impossible for it otherwise to be perfect, & in all points compleate: which those great Poets who lived in Charles the ninth, and Henry the thirds time held to be absolutely necessary. And though it be not so curi∣ously regulated, yet it doth not so much disquiet and trouble the mind by the trans∣posing of words, as artificiall languages doe but contrariwise in imitation of na∣turall ones, it expresseth things in the same orders as they come into the minde, and is more proper & easie for Philosophie; nei∣ther hath it so many Heteroclites, & irregu∣lar words, as the Greeke and atine have. As for the sweetnesse and facility of it, strangers themselves will confesse, and certaine it is, that it goeth beyond any o∣ther language therein: and that for two reasons. The first is because it makes an excellent conjunction of betters, and com∣position of words, terminating them al∣ternatively in Vowels, Consonants, and sometimes Diphthonges whereas the Ita∣lian words end for the most part in Vow∣els, as the Dutch doe in Consonants; which makes a kinde of unpleasing sound through a too frequent reieration. The
second reason is, because the Tones there∣of are more uniforme, and doe not fall and rise excessively, as they doe in some other Languages, men seeming to sing when they speake them, and having such different accents, that it forceth one to writh his mouth and face in pronouncing them. There are also proud and boasting langua∣ges, as the Spanish, which boasts it selfe to be the Language of the Gods; Soft and effeminate, as the Italian, which is termed to be womens language; Rough and fierce, as the Northerne, therefore by some ter∣med the language of Devills. But the French hath none of these faults, it is more upright and uniform in its pronunciation, & therefore is called the language of men, as being most proper for discourse, being calme and without agitation. And yet further to take notice of the ex∣cellency and worth of our Language, we may note that there are divers sorts of ut∣terances in the world. Some Nations seeme to draw their speech out of the very bottom of their breasts and throates, as the Hebrew, Dutch and Tuscan, Italian: Others out of the palate, and the nose, as the Italian, and Spaniard. Others speake betweene the teeth, as the English, Irish, Danes and others. The French only speak through the lipps, as the most proper organ,
and instrument: Which is the cause they speake quicker, and expresse their thoughts more diligently: and this great volubi∣litie proceeds from the facultie of apply∣ing the tongue to the lipps, and joyning it with a pleasing kind of harmonie, and so the words follow the thoughts and Imaginations so close, that strangers take occasion thereupon to accuse the French of lightnesse; whereas it is a great advantage, and as it were a peculiar gift of our nati∣on, a property of our climat, which makes our entertainement more pleasing, our mind more ready at hand, and our dis∣course more cleare. And if our speech seem harsh to some strangers, it is by rea∣son of the writing, which is not agreeable to the pronunciation. But the reformati∣on of that is daily endeavored by regula∣ting our Alphabet, and by giving unto e∣very letter its true and particular character. But it may be said unto me, what art thou, that after so many ages, wouldest restore the Aegyptian, Greeke, and Arabian me∣thod, which hath been so long banished out of the world, or rather buried in the tombe of oblivion? who giveth thee now leave to controule a custome approved of by the common consent of all Nations, for so many ages? thinkest thou to be on∣ly quick-sighted, and that all those learned
men, who were enlightened by the light of Sciences, were stricken with a spirit of blindnesse, and did not know which way to teach them? Couldest thou not consi∣der that Sciences being immutable, requi∣red a language no way subject to changes, and that nationall tongues which change almost every age are not so proportinable to their soliditie as those ancient Langua∣ges, which being no more popular, are not subject to any alteration? If thou hast li∣ved thus long, and never did'st reflect nor looke upon the inconstancy of popular and nationall languages, behold I will shew thee some authenticall, and evident proofs thereof. Aegypt in the time of its Kings, which were called Pharaohs, had a certain peculiar & particular language, as may appeare by some manuscripts extant even in our days, which are no way to be understood: now the Arabick hath succeeded in its place, yet we have not retained one word of that ancient Idiome which is reported to have been very large and copious, and more proper then the Greek itselfe, to treate both of divine and humane Sciences. In Pa∣lestine and Ierusalem in former times they spake Syriack, and now the Arabick is there nationall. Greece so renowned for her Language, is now constrained to speake
Turkish. The coast of Barbarie, which in former times spake the Phaenician tongue, speakes now the Moors language. Gaule which had a dominion vast and powerfull enough to maintaine it selfe against its enemies, being thorow its owne divisions at last conquered by the Romans, hath changed its language three or foure times, in lesse then sixteene or seventeene hun∣dred yeares, and that which we have at this day, is composed of the Celtick, Roman, Franconian and Gothick tongues, and is quite different from the ancient; which Plinie who was a Gaule borne, and spake the Language most perfectly, did extoll to the skies. Finally, the Polonians, Vandalls, Bulgarians, Croatians, Dalmatians, Russians, Bohemians, Lituanians, Moscovites, and Sci∣onians, who in former times knew no o∣ther but the Teutonick or German tongue, now together with divers other Nations, speake nothing but the Sclavonian. And the Germans confesse that the Language which themselves now speake, is quite different from that which they spake for∣merly. We might easily name divers o∣ther Nations; and were it possible to have a register of all the Languages, we should therein finde how they art subject to a perpetuall revolution; and that those words which compose them, dying in one
countrie, and reviving in another, differ in nothing but in the exchange of the mea∣ning, and that there are not in nature ge∣nerations and corruptions more worthy of admiration, and lesse admired. To answer all these objections distinct∣ly, they seeming to be somewhat hard to resolve, I will first say, that there can be no valuable instance made against the exam∣ple of Trismegistus, Aristotle, Tullie, Avi∣cen, and the generall custome of those lear∣ned men of former times, who had more understanding then we, who never made use but onely of nationall languages, in which, though they be subject to change, the truth of morall and nationall things remaines perpetually. Of what colour soever they painted Diana which was in Chio, made of white marble, the next day they would find her againe in her naturall whitenesse, which painting could not co∣ver, nor art corrupt. And if this prescrip∣tion seemes an inviolable law to these pro∣tectors of Languages, and a ground suffi∣cient to make us forsake the method which was read in ancient times; I would faine know of them whether any prescription can run against the love which we are bound to beare to truth, our countrie, and our mother tongue? and we might also conclude from thence, that old errors be∣cause
they have been allowed of for a long time, are no errors, which in understand∣ing mens judgement are notwithstanding the most pernicious. Custome then can not be a sufficient defence against these great and learned men: neither must the proceedings of these last ages, prevaile a∣gainst the Method used in antient times. They are but Waves beating against Rocks; truth will alwaies prevaile: and though wee be growne old and inveterate in errors and disorders, yet are we not to be excused therefore, if we persist there∣in. Let us rather confesse wee have foolishly gone astray, and acknowledge that the onely meanes to bring us againe into the right way of wisdom, is, to imi∣tate those who in Ancient times preferred Popular, and Nationall Languages before any obsolet and strange tongues. Secondly, we do not deny but Natio∣nall, and Mother tongues are subject to mixture and corruption: many learned men have observed it, and there are too many examples to prove it. But we deny that an obsolet Language can better pre∣serve the Doctrine and Learning of our forefathers then a National. For the Lan∣guages doe not cause Sciences to live, they are but the shadowes and figures thereof; but it is the Science which makes the Lan∣guage
to live; and though it have equall dominion over them all she hath it farre more absolute over the Nation, then over them which are out of date. For proofe whereof, if our Ancestors, who have written so many treaties concerning the firmnesse of Sciences, and inconstancie of Languages, had thought it fitting to study in obsolet Languages, they might have done it as well as wee, seeing the Egyptian tongue was in the time of the Gre∣cians, and the Greek under the Arabians was not mentioned, nor found but onely in Books. But these great men knew too well that they could not bring in so pernicious, and ridiculous a custome, without en∣compassing Sciences with thousands of difficulties, and frustrating many men, who could not learn strange Languages, of the hope of attaining to the Knowledge of them Wherefore rejecting all other Languages, as unprofitable waies, and extravagant meanes, they most judici∣ously brought thir youth directly to the Knowledge of Sciences by the abbrevi∣ate way of their mother tongue. But fully to satisfie the objection of those who say, that popular and naturall Languages are too variable to deserve the honor of being interpreters of Scien∣ces, and expositers of mens best thoughts;
We affirm that they are more constant, and lesse subject to change then the obso∣let. For though they seem be to exempted and free from alteration, and incapable of increase or diminution, because they are not subject to the mutable will of men, but are continually taught by the same rules; yet ought we not to attribute unto them a perpetuall lastingnesse; seeing that the power of a Conqueror, that hates learning, may on a suddain annihilate those languages, as the Turk hath done in all his Dominions. And all things rightly considered, no Monarch can ex∣empt those remainders of antient Lan∣guages which wee have from the juris∣diction of time, nor protect them against some inevitable chances, the least of which may absolutely destroy them. The first Language which had so many prerogatives above others, gives us a faire example of this truch; the first inhabi∣ters of the World had imprinted it, not upon paper, as we do now, but upon most solid and hard columnes, that they might make it live for ever, and transmit the memory thereof to posterity: Yet for all that, it vanished away by little and little, and that faire monument hath been so little regarded, that there remaines not
now any signe thereof. We may likewise alleage to this purpose, that the Jewish Language was wholly extinguished du∣ring the Captivity. It was the Organ whereby the will of God was set downe, and the antient Law was written in it: Esdras, and the Doctors had preserved the understanding of it: yet at last they let it perish, judging it more convenient to translate the sacred History in the mo∣ther tongue, then to bind the people to the re-establishment, and the learned to the preservation of a Language newly lost. Finally the Roman Annals make faith that the antient Roman Language, of which the Priests onely had preserved the know∣ledge, hath been subject to the like over∣throw: the Libraries were full of it, the Sibylles verses, the Hymnes and Canti∣cles were written in it, the Roman Senate had professed and declared it self to be the preserver of it, and yet all this could not keep it from a totall ruine. Moreover, although the nationall lan∣guages be subject to the innovation of some words; yet experience sheweth us, that those which have had any extent, or merit, either by being polished by poli∣tick Nations, who knew how to bring them to perfection, at home by the means of Sciences, and abroad by way of armes
in defending themselves, have not been so subject to perish; and will outlast ma∣ny ages before they be quite abolished. Witness the Greek, which remained en∣tire for above two thousand yeares, and would have lasted longer, if the Turkish domination had not cut off the course of so many years, which it might yet have lived. It is certain that the Romans strove with all their might to abolish the language of the Gaules, whom they had subdued; yet their design could not fully come to pass, and we have to this day some of it in this Kingdom, which hath no communion nor part with the Latin, which evidently shewes that it was never there: nor the vulgar and mother tongue never suppres∣sed. Whereby we may inferre that popular Languages, which are so hardly suppres∣sed, may be continued farre better and ea∣silier then those forgotten ones which can not be preserved without much difficultie; and that they are more proper to serve for instruments to Sciences. Nationall Lan∣guages likewise decay by degrees, and are abolished by succession oftimes. But those obsolete ones, which have no more being but onely in Libraries, and subsist onely by art, may perish and comesist nought in an instant. And if the Romans,
who were so carefull in universalising their language, had found none to oppose them but onely Obsolet tongues, and books; they would have abolished the me∣mory of them in an instant, and would not have found so much opposition in bring∣ing in the Latin tongue into all the Pro∣vinces which were subject to their Empire. Moreover have we not great cause to to doubt, whether the Latin tongue which hath been extinguished these six or seven hundred years, and hath lasted to our times onely by the meanes of Colledges and universities, will last so long as the Greek, the Gaule, and many other. Those who come in after ages, will know the Success thereof better than wee. As for the present, to come to understand why popular, and nationall Languages are more lasting, and fitting to teach Sciences in then the obsolet, we ought to observe that in every Language there are two sorts of words. Some are familiar and vulgar, which serve for common discourse the o∣ther proper, pecular and effectuall onely for Traes and arts. The first depend upon the people, which hath power to alter the names of such things as it hath use of to entertain society, the latter are within the Philosophers jurisdiction, who have power to give names to all things, especi∣ally
to Arts and Sciences. The first are sub∣ject to change, and do not last alwaies; partly because they signifie nothing but singular, contingent, and casuall objects; partly because they are subject to the fan∣cies of a light, and inconstant multitude: but that alteration that is, so small, that there wilscarce be a hundred of those com∣mon words altered in a hundred years. It is not so in those words which belong to Arts and trades, it is in a manner impossi∣ble to alter them; and after they are once in use, the common people have no power over them, they are kept in by a mysteri∣ous way, they are of so good a temper, and such solid matter, that they stand firm and immoveable, whilest other names are tos∣sed and turned upside down, by the gid∣dy-headed Rabble. The reason why they are so firme and constant is because they are applied to sig∣nifie firme and constant things, such as the mater als & instruments of Arts are; it is not caste to change them and put others in stead of them. And if artists, who are the disposers of them, and to communicate & teach them to their apprentices with the same fidelity as they received them of their master, should assume so much li∣berty to themselves as to innovate and alterthem, and bring in new according
to their own fancies, naming one and the same thing which belongs to their trade, in one countrie by one name, and in another otherwise, they would not within a short time understand one another, nor maintain that correspondency and bro∣therhood which is amongst them. Therefore they are much mis-informed concerning the nature of things, who would have Sciences taught in obsolet and forgotten Languages, to give them as it were innumerable termes. They doe not consider that the terms of Arts and Sciences may easily be perpetuated in all Languages, so they be polished and refin∣ed: Wherefore we are both of one opinion in this; that we ought to teach Sciences in firm and durable tongues, but we af∣firm that Nationall Languages are more durable then the obsolet ones; and that for diverse reasons. First, because the termes of Arts and Sciences are no sooner invented, and ap∣proved of in a speech, but they of them∣selves doe preserve themselves therein, e∣ven as the termes of a trade without any trouble or labour: and if there should be any paines required therein, they might without comparison befarre more ea∣filier learned & preserved in a Nationall & popular Language, then in an obsolet one.
The second reason is, because suppose the Language of the Country were subject to some change, one may hinder them from changing with it, by forbidding any new ones to be brought in, and so they re∣maining as they were, may be still apply∣ed to the various changes of other popu∣lar words. By which meanes all scholasti∣call termes have remained in their first be∣ing, for these five or six last ages, though the rest of the Latin tongue have varied much since that time, as we may see by those au∣thors that have written in those ages. The third is, that all anguages being preserved by the industry of men, it will be farre easier to keep a small portion of a National language from perishing, then to revive a whol language which is quite out of date and forgotten. For youth may ea∣sily and in a small time be instructed in the termes of that profession, which it meanes to follow; they being but few in number, and not the hundreth part of the words of a full and compleat Language: so that they may be learned with small paines, and as it were insensibly, before one think of it; And learning their own Countrie Language naturally, they shall be exempted from the tediousness and difficulty of learning the Latin tongue, wherein they spend ten or twelve yeares
of their best time, to make them capable of understanding three or four hundred barbarous words, which have been fra∣med in the Universities within six or sea∣ven hundred yeares, by ignerant persons who never knew the Latin tongue in its purity. Yet they have been so industrious and fortunate in their proceedings, that they have brought these words into so much credit and estimation, that it hath been commonly thought they could not be expressed in any other anguage, and that they had a particular energie and vertue to signifie those things. But, in truth there is no such matter; for if you come to ex∣amine them necrly, you will find they sig∣nifie nothing at all, they are not polite, and cannot be translated, nor yet understood in any language, if the phrase and Syn∣taxis of them be not mended; it being most certain that the atin Philosophers speech is not less ridiculous and barbarous in their own Language, then it is in ours. And if any esteem them politer and more significant then ours, it is because they have been so long accustomed to them, that they cannot easily find the defaults and disorderliness of them. But such as are well versed in the Ge∣nius of Languages, know, that the version of a perfect discourse, hath a great deal of
grace, and Elegancy in all Countries; and contrariwise a thing il penned in one Lau∣guage, is nonsence, and absurd in all other. Whereby wee may inferre, that the diffi∣culty in translating of these termes pro∣ceedes not from any particular merit in them, or from the imperfection of other Languages, but from their owne defect and evill construction. For proof and try∣all whereof, if you translate them into the Greek or Arabick, which admit of none, but proper and usuall termes in their Philosophy; you shall find presently that your translation will be no more intelli∣gible, or better composed, then if it had been in Spanish, Italian, or any other vul∣gar and Nationall Language. And this is the reason why those who have studyed Philosophy in Latin, understand it not in their own Language, and dare not speak of it before men of their own Nation, for fear of making themselves ridiculous; whereas those who have learned it in an Elegant and refined Nationall Language of their own, can easily expresse them∣selves in any other Language which they can understand and speak. This is the chief argument which the pro∣tectors of these obsolet Lauguages make use of against us, and which they igno∣rantly borrow from the lastingnesse of
them, never regarding the facility and ea∣sinesse, which is the onely absolutely ne∣cessary condition required for the per∣fection of a Language which is made in∣strumentall for the attaining of Scien∣ences. And as the mother tongue is most casie; so questionlesse it is the best fitted and proportioned to mens spirits, and most conformable to the intentions of nature, which destining us to some end, furnisheth us with most easie and pleasing meanes to attain thereunto, according as it selfe is most Noble, and excellent. I would wilingly ask our Antagonists, whi∣ther they would not hold it a most ridicu∣lous thing in Artists, if they should introduce a custome amongst themselves to speak of their Art only in a strange and unknown Language, putting their Ap∣prentices to the task of bestowing ten or twelve yeares study in learning of a hard and troublesome tongue, onely to make them capable of Understanding one hun∣dred or two strange termes of their calling and Vocation. And if they answer, that the termes of Sciences, Arts, and Trades, will take up halfe the words of a Language, and that therefore they are not so easie to be learn∣ed. We reply again, that no man ought, or need, to learne them all, but that every
one is onely bound to possesse himselfe of those which necessarily belong to his own profession. And again, suppose that even these termes should alter and be subject to changes as well as the rest of a Lan∣guage, yet that argues not that we should teach Sciences in any other but the Mother Tongue. Seeing translation may easily, and faithfully make an antient Lan∣guage Moderne: And that it is beyond comparison more easie, to translate our forefathers Language into our own, then in those forlorne and forraign ones. As for the translation of forraign Lan∣guages, all learned Nations, Jewes, Greeks, Romans, and Arabians, have used it. And though it be somewhat hard to turne so many Antient workes into our mother tongue, yet we may truly say, that it is no∣thing in comparison of the trouble and care which so many thousands of brave spirits have undergone in the tedious compassing of those forgotten Languages. And wee have already naturalized, and taught to speak French, the most excellent and rarest Authors that writ in former ages, so that if we continue labouring in translations with the same fervencie as we have beun since the French Academy was erected; within these thirty years wee
shall not have any thing left to translate, but shall in our owne Mother tongue possess the Riches of all other Langua∣ges. Finally it would not be very difficult to invent a more generall, more constant, and more easie instrument, then that of forlorn tongues, which should represent things by Characters, which youth might learn with a great deal more ease then the words of an abolished Language, neither would they any way hinder the Mother tongue: and those who had learned those Characters, seeing some cer∣tain markes, would withall conceive the minds of others, and might presently by other Characters disclose their own. So that those who should be well versed in this secret, would understand one another without being understood; and without speaking, would converse with one ano∣ther, every one in his own Language; which would questionlesse be a most pleasant kind of recreation. As for exam∣ple, if a Frenchman writes in the presence of an Italian, or a German, 1640 the other presently reads and understands, and can expresse in his own Language what those Characters signifie. This would indeed be a rare art, and so much the more to be admired, because it would in many pla∣ces
represent the same thing, neither would the Characters change, though the Lan∣guages did. There might also use be made of these Characters onely, for the termes of Arts and Sciences, to the end the memo∣ry might not be overburthened with the excessive number, and in all other things make use of the Nationall speech. But neither is this invention as proper as the mother tongue, and though it have been formerly used by learned men, yet is it not worth the reviving, because it would be accompanied with many difficulties, which ought as much as may be to be a∣voided for the good and ease of learners. I question not but that Sciences are very at∣tractive, & every one naturally desires to attain them; but yet they wil be sought af∣ter but by very few, if the way vnto them be not made easie and pleasant. We are inventing every day new Methods, to shorten and levell the way which guides us thereunto, and yet it is every day more and more encumbred, and difficulties in∣crease continually. We shall never have any famous men spring up amongst us, what art soever wee use, unlesse wee teach in our owne Nationall Lan∣guage. Finally it is certaine, that Sciences can not be preserved by any immutable thing,
but onely by the Species, which alwaies possessing the Understanding in the same manner, oblige it to conceive all things in the same fashion. Nature uses no other Language to speak to all men, and to in∣struct them in the Knowledge of the truth. Thence it comes that they apprehend an Elephant, an Eagle, a Dolphin, all af∣ter the same manner, and they every where produce the same imaginations and Phantasmaes; in the use, and perfect con∣nexion whereof consists all manner of dis∣course. The Species, and the word, have this common to them, that they both re∣present the truth, but this is the difference between them, that the Species being a naturall, and immutable signe, must of necessity be the same in all places: and the word being an arbitrary and transitorie mark, must be different every where; so that we may truly say, that the species or notion which represents all things to the mind of man, is the onely Language which did never change, and will alwaies be common to all men; because the Ob∣jects which present them to our sences, are not changeable, and make themselves to be knowne every where after the same manner: whereas Characters, Gestures, and words depending meerly upon our will, are every where different. Wee ap∣prehend
the objects, not beause they are Greek, Latin, Dutch, &c. but because they have a relation to our notion, and signifie that which is in our minds. Which is the reason that though the Languages of Nations be various, yet they cause no di∣versitie in the notions of the mind: That which the French calls Pierre, the German Steen, the Latin Lapis, the Greeke , and the English Stone, is but one meer notion, although these names be different; seeing they represent but one and the self same thing to the understandings of all these Nations. Therefore all things well considered, there is no readier way can be made to Sciences, then by the naturall and mother tongue; and if ours finds it self wanting of some traines to explaine the subtilities of Sciences, we may easily supply that want by inventing names therefore by the help of the Professors of the French Aca∣demy, and other learned men; to the end that they may pass through their appro∣bation, and that nothing may be inno∣vated without good advice. And our French tongue hath herein this advantage, that in reference to Sciences, it is not yet engaged in any evil or barbarous termes, introduced by any long custome, which it would be more difficult to abolish, then
to invent new. Aristotle himselfe, though he disallowed of many Greek termes be∣longing to Philosophy, durst not under∣take to reform them, fearing to seeem an Innovator of antiquity, and to make him∣selfe odious to those of his owne times: So that Philosophy hath alwaies beene mixed with improper and ambiguous termes. But wee having now free liberty, and learned men good store amongst us, may very well Naturalize Sciences in our own Country, inventing proper termes for them, and laying aside all such as might make Philosophy ambiguous, barbarous, and unpleasant. And to this end we shall cut off all Po∣lyonymies and Equivocalls which con∣found the mind, and intangle and trouble Arts and Sciences. For Philosophy will ever be plain, so long as one thought may have diverse names, and whilst wee strive to speak Equivocally in Philosophy: it were much more to the purpose, to finde out some one that would strike out al those Equivocall words out of the Grammer. When an opinion is introduced, autho∣rized and rooted through prescription of time, it hath a marvellous power over our minds: which makes us so preoccupated and prepossessed with the excellency of antient Languages; Those who have not
attained to them, admire them because they doe not understand them, and be∣cause there is so much difficulty in the learning of them: and those who have Knowledge in them, being interested in the preservation of them, set forth their praises, but will by no means discover the defects of them; and wilfully maintaine that they are more effectuall, and signifi∣cant then the moderne, the very Gates that open the way to Sciences, and the onely means to attaine them; notwith∣standing if we may speak the truth freely, we may easily make it appear, that they are all of equall value, and have no pre∣rogative one above the other. For all words that can be imagined are of like nature, having the same finall, and the same efficient cause, the same matter, and the same forme. They have the same finall cause, namely to expresse our thoughts; The same, efficient cause, procee∣ding from the power of the man which produceth them: The same, matter, name∣ly Letters and Dipthonges: And finally they have the same forme, being made different onely in termination, and the last letter, which is as it were the seale and character, which hath the power of making up their essence, as the last unit makes up that of numbers. All the vertue
& energie, they have from the authoritie of men, wch can give no advantage to the one more then to the other; For it is but a meer Being of Reason, proceeding out of an ab∣solute hazard and occurrencie. For indeed there is, nor can be but one way of speaking in the whole world, the difference is but onely in characters, and gestures, and we attribute to severall impositi∣ons the name of difference of Languages. Languages proceed not from without, as some are of opinion, who imagine that ei∣ther they were divinely inspired, or came to us by tradition: but we have the ori∣ginall or root of them in ourselves; and if we be ignorant of the causes of he pro∣duction of them, it is because they are too common, and are every day subject to our senses. Common and continuall cust∣ome deceaves us, and are the cause that we perceive not the mouth to be the one∣ly Matrix and Alphabet, and as it were a large case out of which all words doe issue, and into which are put, and as it were distributed by the Author of Nature, all the severall letters, as into a little box, from whence every man like to a Printer takes them out when he pleases, composes them and maketh up languages. And God having endowed him with manifold perfections above all other creatures, hath
given him nothing which is more ad∣vantagious to him then speech, seeing thereby he is made capable of knowing and loving him his maker, lives in Soci∣ety, and attaines Wisdom: Wherefore he would have those parts wherein the voice of man is framed, filled up with so many wonders, to make us the better ap∣prehended the worth of them, and with∣all bind us to an acknowledgement of so rare a benefit. But it is not sufficient to know that these parts do with such celeritie mixe the letters, and frame words out of them, which we make use of in familiar com∣munication; but we must also note that each part hath its particular functions, and proper motions, yet differing amongst themselves: and every man pronouncing a letter, may know and marke the Or∣gan which frameth it, and gives it its be∣ing, and what part concurres most to the production of it, whether it be the lips, the palate, or the tongue, that hath most operation in it. And that which is most of all to be admited is, that all these or∣gans are so well regulated, and observe so r an order amongst themselves, that they can not incroach nor usurp upon the rights of one another, their power being so well limitted, that they can just∣ly
to frame so many letters and no more, then a man can make severall and diffe∣rent motions and doublings in his mouth. Which shewes sufficiently all Languages to be of equall worth, and that if there be any difference betweene them, it pro∣ceeds not from the words, which are all of the same matter in all Languages, but rather from the Pronunciation, which depending upon the Climates, is more milde and pleasant in those Countries, where the peoples Organs are most clear and best composed; and contrariwise is more harsh and dissonant in those where they are more grossely and rudely framed. And this talent is the more considerable, being as it were destin'd to some Nations, and doth not vary though the ranguages alter, and change by succession of time. The faculty wee have of framing words in infinitum is the richest treasure belongs to man, it is a continually flowing and running fountaine, which can never be dried up. Wherefore it is a folly to complain of the barrennesse of a I an∣guage, it is our faults if wee do not enrich it, if wee will but apply our endeavours to it. And an ingen ous Arithmetician in coupling of letters and joyning of sylla∣bles, might give an admirable structure to all the parts of speech, and frame a ra∣rer,
and more regular Language then yet there is. For the combination of letters is a well that can never be drawn dry, out of which one may frame, as out of ma∣teria prima, words enough, for an infinite number of Languages, all different a∣mongst themselves; so that in so greate a number of speeches as are spoken in the whole World, men do not hit upon the imposition of the same names. Whence it appeares that the diversity of Languages proceedes from the plura∣lity of words, and the liberty of Framing them; and not from the difference of Cli∣mates. Because we being all indifferent, and having no more aptitude the one then the other to expresse the signification of things, the will would alwaies remaine in suspence, and would never resolve up∣on any Election; if the inclination which it hath to declare its thoughts, did not oblige it to take names by chance, and im∣pose them at adventure. Which thing would evidently appear, if a company of little Children were kept up in severall houses in one Plaine, who would questi∣onlesse make as many severall Langua∣ges as severall companies which were shut together. For as concerning that which is spoken of an infant, which was bred up in solitude, and apart, and could pronounce
but this word Bec, it was a most grosse ignorance in those who imagined to have a certain proofe and evident testimony thereby, of which was the most ancient and naturall Language; seeing the child was brought up solitary and alone, in which case fooles and madmen onely will lye talking and discoursing with themselves: Outward speech being a thing necessary onely to impart our thoughts to others, and not to speak to our selves, who understand our own thoughts with∣out expressing them outwardly. They should therefore to finde out the effect of so rare a curiositie, have put a great num∣ber of children, rather then one, or two, together. Whereupon wee must observe, that if Nature seem to have done man great prejudice, and much hindred the communication of Nations, by giving them absolute power to make so many Languages: She hath also given him power and meanes to obviate that incon∣venience, making him politick, where by he might find, that to make up most per∣fect Societies and Common-wealths happy, he should carefully suppresse all particular Languages, to bring in ge∣nerall and common speeches amongst all Nations. Now this great variety proceeds from
two Originall causes, Namely the in∣differency and infinitenesse of words; They are indifferent, because Naturally they signifie nothing, and are equally pro∣per to signifie any thing. They are almost infinite, because there results an infinite number, not onely of words, but also of Languages out of the conjunction and copulation of letters and syllables; where∣of one alone may signifie all things one after another, even as well as one onely thing may receive all manner of names successively according as men shall be willing to apply them unto it. The number of letters which are day∣ly used, is not yet well known, nor regu∣lated. Men seeme to have been very care∣lesse in not ordering a matter of such im∣portance; for if they had well examined the nature of the Alphabet, they might have had it a great deal more full and co∣pious. But howsoever as it is, we have twentie, or two and twentie letters which are now in use. And is it not a thing wor∣thy to be admired, to see so many Lan∣guages built upon so small a foundation? and by the copulation and transposition of so few letters, so great a number of words made, to which men unawares ac∣customing themselves, have framed so many particular Languages: From
whence wee must necessarily conclude, that all of them proceeding from one beginning, they are essentially equall, and cannot any way differ, but onely in the quantity of termes whereof they are com∣posed. Wherefore all men have equall Power and Right to give names to such things, as yet have none: especially Phi∣losophers, to whom it belongs to invent names, to represent things rightly, and set them in a due course: they have full power to set downe termes for Sciences, and Arts, to make themselves intell gi∣ble, and communicate their learning to others. Wee may likewise in imitation of the Greekes and Romans, borrow of our neighbour Languages some termes which may be wanting in our own; for although for a time they passe for strangers, yet af∣ter some few years, they are naturalized, and conform themselves so well to the tone of the Nation, that there is no diffe∣rence to be found in them. The Romans did not alwaies strive to translate into atin all Greek words, as Rhetorick, Musick, Arithmetick, Geometrie, Astro∣logie, Philosophie, Chirurgerie, and most of the names of Sciences, and Arts of Fi∣gures, of Herbes, of Diseases, and many other things: They have been content
to adopt them, and admit them into their community; Knowing that all words, both Greek and other, are of common right, and belong to all Nations equally who desire to make use of them; and that all anguages lend & borrow words, to, and from each other continually. For though it be not manifestly known that the Greekes borrowed the termes of Sci∣ences from other Nations, yet it is credi∣ble that they brought them with them out of Egypt, where they went to study: and that the Egyptians likewise borrowed them from some other more ancient Na∣tion, which might invent them when they first invented Philosophie. And if this de∣pendencie be odious, to free our selves from it, wee need but alter the Etymolo∣gie, imitating learned Varro therein, who being ashamed that so many Latin words should descend from the Greek, for the honour of his Nation, derived them from other severall Languages of Italie. When one doth not indeed understand the sig∣nification of a strange word, he may have recourse to the Originall; but when it is once come into custome, it is no more needfull, the meanest artist knowing the signification thereof as well as the great∣est Doctor. As for example, the common people do not know that the words Chi∣rurgerie,
Apoplexie, and Prophesie are Greek words; and yet they understand as well what they meane, as he that hath studied the Greek Grammer twenty yeares. Finally Pilots have found out termes enough for Sea affaires, Architects, for Architecture, and so have all other Artists for their severall Arts. And is it not a shame, that Philosophers have not in so many ages found a way in France to invent necessarie words for our French Philoso∣phie? It is certaine that when Gunnes, Print∣ing, and other new Arts were first inven∣ted, the Authors thereof had no proper termes for them, and yet now we have a∣bundance. And when King Francis the first commanded all to plead in the Mo∣ther tongue, the people which belonged to the Courts of Justice were at first asto∣nished at it; and some did even despaire of going forward in their profession: Yet we see how in a short time they have found out as many termes as ever the Greeke or Roman law had; and would to God they had not invented so many. Likewise about a bundred yeares since, all Poetrie lay as it were dead in French, and especially Comick Poems were so
barren and dull, that none did scarce dare to shew themselves upon the Stage. Yet by little and little they have been so adorned and beautified, especially now of late daies they have, thorow your Eminencies beneficence, so increa∣sed in Elegancie and Politenesse, that the Theaters Eccho with acclamations and applauses. If our Language were now as barren and imperfect as heretofore it hath beene, I must confesse our enterprise would at first be somewhat hard and difficult. But it is now enriched, and hath abundancie of words to explaine our thoughts. They now can reade publick Lectures of Phi∣losophie and Mathematicks in the mo∣ther tongue, and Divines can unfold the deepe mysteries of Divinity there∣in, and make them intelligible even to the plainest and dullest understand∣ings. But against all these reasons they will peradventure alleadge, that those who study Philosophy in French, never came to be absolute Philosophers. But that is not through the defect of the Language, or of Philosophy it self but rather through want of method. Those who learne it in Latin privately, profit not a whit more: The reason is because that those mas∣ters
which teach privately in chambers, endeavour nothing but onely to please and content their auditors; reading lect∣ures full of cavills, and ostentation, no way tending to solid instruction. This schooling is but a kind of pastime; even as in Comedies, where the Actor seeks onely to tickle the itching eares of the hearers to draw on more company, and so encrease his gaine. A Science requires Method and Discipline; it is not enough to be a hearer, he must also excrcise him∣self in what he heares, and reduce the pre∣cepts into practise, by disputat ons, repiti∣tions, and conferences. Thus are the Spirits heated, and chafed, whereby doctrine is the deeplier imprinted in our memories. Sciences are like Arts; to be∣come a good Artist, it is not sufficient to frequent the Shopps of the most expert artists, unlesse we set our hands to work likewise. How many men doe wee see daily, who have assiduously and with good attention heard fâmous prea∣chers for the space of twenty or thirty yeares, and yet are not so well versed in Divinity as a Scholler of the Sorbonne, who hath heard lectures there but a year, by reason that the Professors in that reverend Society, are Methodicall per∣sons, who after their rare expositions, care∣fully
exercise their auditors in disputation, both in the Schooles privately, and also in other publick Acts. And now that his Majesty hath by his establishment as it were naturalized Philosophy, and made it in a manner popular & methodicall, we must hope that within a short time, youth will besolidely learned, through the care of a regular discipline. For it is true both in Schoole and State business, that it is not sufficient to propound good Maximes, unlesse they be well maintained and punctually observed, through the rules of a good government. Now Sir, as for these two last meanes (which are of most moment) namely to teach the Grammer and Discipline, the Professors of the Academy cannot imploy themselves about it; they have higher matters to look after, and have not leisure to instruct youth. In those works which proceed from them, the rules of Po∣lite writing are indeed very punctually observed, but those works come not to every ones hands, some few students, and refined court Spirits onely make use of them and profit thereby. How many Gentlemen are there in the country, who neuer hear of them and if they should, yet are not capable of such high reflections? They never came out of their fathers hou∣ses,
but only to practise their exercises, or to go to the wars, at their return from whence it is too late for them to be instructed. They are not well prepared for the rea∣ding of such books with any profit; which makes them all their life time to use the British, Norman, or Gascoigne Dialect: Which many times keeps them from comming to the Court, retired at their homes in idlenesse, where they bestow their times in nothing but hunting and husbandry. Whereas their parents might in time send them to the City of Richelieu, where for a small charge, and in a little time they might be taught Sciences, Lan∣guages and Exercises altogether, whilst they are yet young enough, and may ea∣sily forget the ill accent of their own country Language, and without Labour accustome themselves to a better Pro∣nunciation, to choice and pureness of ex∣pressions. So that returning afterwards into their own countrie, though the Language be there extreamely corrupt, they will speak good French all their life time. Their companions and Tenants will follow their example, men alwaies natu∣rally inclining to novelties, especially when they are according to reason, and judiciously invented. So shall we make way throughout the
whole Kingdome for those Maximes which the Professors of the Academy shall set downe; and your Eminencie shall have the glory of being the restorer both of your Native Countrie, and Language. The Chancellor of the Hospitall, judge∣ing that design, which now your Eminen∣cie hath approved of, would be very pro∣fitable, and usefull to this Nation, had an intent to erect certain French Colledges in Paris, where Sciences should be taught in our mother Tongue, which he judged to be fitting therefore, even in those daies. This famous man perceiving the abuse and error of former ages, could not en∣dure to see the French Nation, which had founded so many brave Schooles, and maintained so many professers to teach the Hebrew, Arabick, Greek & Latin tongus, neglect to build one for their own. Since his time the Cardinall du Perron, infla∣med with the like zeale did againe attempt that glorious designe, and sought all meanes possible to bring it to pass. And last of all Monsieur de Fresne Canage, wil∣ling by his example to animate us to teach Sciences in French, writ an Organon in our Language to that pur∣pose, fraught with so much learning & elo∣quence, that we may boldly say he hath not only equalled, but even exceeded the most
excellentest Greek and Latin Authors. But the compleating of this great work was reserved for your Eminency to accom∣plish; and seems to have been deferred hi∣therto, onely that you might have the full glory of establishing a business of so great importance. This Sir will be the first fruit which the institution of your Academy in the City of Richelieu, will bring forth, namely the regulating and refining the Language in all the Povinces of this Kingdome, which will be very advantagious for the glory of it. And your Eminency will be pleased to let me tell you, that there will other solid benefits accruew thereby. Gen∣tlemen will no more spend their youth∣full time in unprofitable toyes, they will directly learn such things as are necessary to direct & guide them through the whole course of their life, the mutuall duties of Society, their Princes service, the love of their Native Country, and their due acknowledgement to your Emi∣nencie. It is a great abuse to mixe Nobili∣ty with persons of base extraction, and to bring them up after the same man∣ner▪ for besides that it takes sordide and base inclinations, unworthy its birth, and such imployments as it may
one day hope for, it also receaveth such instructions as are not fitting for it, and overburthens its mind uselessely all the remainder of their lives. True it is, that if parents did predesti∣nate their children to be Churchmen, Lawyers, Physitians, or to live continu∣ally within the precinct of a Library, then it is fitting to have them to know the secrets of the Greek and Latin tongue, the Origine and Etymologie of words, and make them famous Criticks; because the Fathers of the Church, the Civill Law, and the Authors of Physick are written in those Languages, and are not yet tran∣slated into French. But in a gentleman that meanes to wear a sword by his side, these things are needlesse; and the knowledge of these Languages, would make him ne∣ver the fitter for his countries service. Why doe Parents neglect to send their children to colledges, and let them lye at home till they be of age to learn Exercises, in the meane time their youth is spent in idlenesse, their memory and un∣derstanding growes weak through want of employment, & become as it were lan∣guishing faculties? Others will not send them to the Academies, as well by reason of the excessive charge, as also because they are not there instructed in learning. They
learn indeed to ride, dance, and fence, which makes their bodies active, and their joints supple: but though these qua∣lities add some grace to the body, yet can they not make a compleat Gentleman; contrariwise they make him rash and bold, if they be not accompanied with perfections of the mind. But if they were taught in the vulgar, and mother tongue, Vertue, the duties of an honest man, and all those things which belong both to peace and warr together with their exer∣cises, they would profitably employ each moment of their youth, become at once active and learned, and be fit for counsell, execution, and all manner of employment whatsoever. This is the order which your Emi∣nency observes in his house, you cause your Pages to be equally bred up in arts and Exercises, according to their age and capacity; making choice of the best ma∣sters and tutors that can be had in every profession. Your house being thus orde∣red is a Seminary of honor and vertue, and there come more compleat gentle∣men out of your service, then out of all the Colledges & Academies of this King∣dome. These are young plants which grow up for your Glory, you engrave your benefits upon the bark of hose ten∣der
plants, and the character which you imprint thereon increase with time, to your honor, and the good of the state: and France acknowledges, amongst ma∣ny other benefits, that you dayly store it with most vertuous and compleat Nobi∣lity. Your Eminency (who knoweth better then any one, that he education of youth is the ground and foundation both of a publick and private life, upon which de∣pends the happinesse of families, and the greatnesse of Empires) erects publick Academies, and payes severall great pen∣sions in colledges for children, who ha∣ving rare naturall parts, want means to give them education, charitably easing the Parents poverty, and the Orphans mi∣sery, bestowing means upon them, where∣by they may become capable of serving the State, every one according to his Ge∣nius and profession. Thus Sr. your Emi∣nency doth dayly free the French Nobi∣lity from the yoak of poverty and igno∣rance, the two greatest wants that are in∣cident to man: but though your liberal∣ity this way be very profitable, yet it is in a manner particular, extending but to a certain number of gentlemen. Now by this establishment it will become univer∣sall, all the youth of the Kingdome may
partake of it; and those who live not in the age wherein they may profit by your example, will be instructed through your care and bounty. The Nobility for a cer∣tain honors you, and frequents your court, more through duty, and inclination, then for any particular interest. And Sir give me leave to tell you, that by this foundation you will most powerfully win all their hearts to your service. The Parents, whose greatest care is for the good bringing up of their children, will bless your designe, and you shall be an occasion of joy in all families, which were often wont to their great grief to see those who should be their glory and chief stay, prove ignorant, rude, and gross, (I will not say brutish) all their life time. We may both in Court and Country find Dancers, Fencers, and the like enow; But men capable of negotia∣tions, managing of affairs of moment, knowing the humors of nations and how to take the best advantages thereupon of such men, I say there is but a very small number to be had any where: which causeth your Eminency to be so much oppressed with business, being your self forced to have a vigilant eye, and assisting hand every where, both within and with∣ot the Kingdom and to bear the burthen of the whole state, having none to ease or assist you.
Strangers have long expected this esta∣blishment, especially the Northern nati∣ons, who are so desirous to learn the French tongue, that they have set up schooles for the attaining to it, in their own coun∣tryes; yet with very small profit, because that those which teach it, are not perfect masters of it themselves; and besides, to to learne a language compleatly, it is ab∣solutely required to abide for a time in that country where it is naturally spoken by men, women, and children. Many therefore come over into France, where they receive again but little satisfaction; for having private and particular masters, they spend peradventure some part of the day in studying of French, and the rest of their time they are amongst their coun∣try men, in whose company they speak nothing but their own countrie language: whereas if they did dayly meet in assem∣blies of French Gentlemen, keeping com∣pany with them, and continually hearing the Professors of Sciences, and Masters of Exercises, they would easily attain the true countrie accent and pronunciation, and return home well contented and sa∣tisfied. Have not they just cause of com∣plaint against us, if we neglect a thing of such great moment, and which would be so profitable to us?
As soone as the newes of this esta∣blishment shall be divulged, we shall so∣dainly have a mighty concourse of all the Northerne Nobility: and the great men of those Countries will be glad to have such an occasion to bring up their Chil∣dren in the company of the flower of the French Youth, to gaine amongst them that activenesse, and civility which is in a manner naturall to them, learning with∣all Sciences, Languages, and Exercises. And on the other side the French without any travaile, by thus frequenting with strangers, shall learne the manners, cust∣omes and dispositions of other Nations. By this meanes shall strangers taste the mildnesse of our Climate, and see the statelinesse of our Government, our Lan∣guage shall flourish in all the Northerne parts, where it is already in so much cre∣dit, that it is ordinarily spoken in the Em∣perors, the Kings of Poland, Sweden, and Denmarkes Courts, in the Swissers Coun∣try, and in Holland; so that it is a kind of ignominie to a Courtier, to have no Knowledge of the French tongue. And so will the Eccho of your praises sound eve∣ry where, and your Citty grow famous thorow out the Universe. Your Citty of Richelieu Sir stands in a most wholsome aire, fruitfull and plea∣sant
Country and a most delightfull sci∣tuation. As for the wholsomnesse of the aire, there are (besides experience) se∣verall pregnant reasons for it. First the soile being dry, and sandy, the subterra∣neall vapours cannot lurke nor lie hid∣den there to corrupt themselves, & exha∣ling easily, finding free passage thorow the pores of the Earth, they can not de∣generate into malignant exhalations, as might infect the lower region of the aire. Secondly, the City stands open and ex∣posed to the most wholsome windes, namely the North wind, which hath its free passage by the plaine of Champigny; and on the East side likewise, there be∣ing no let to hinder it from receiving the benigne influences of the Sunne. And con∣trariwise it is close sheltered from those windes and aires which ordinarily bring contagious diseases and mortalities a∣mongst us; being defended from the Southern wind by a thick and high wood, and from the aire of the Sea by a great hill which is Westward. The fruitfullnesse and goodnesse of the soile appeares by the woods the trees ne∣ver growing up to that height in a bad ground, and likewise by the Corn and Vines which grow plentifully upon the Counter scarfes of the ditches: Briefly in
all Tueaine, which is esteemed to be the Garden of France, there are not rarer Gardens, nor producing better fruits. As for the superficies of the Earth, it is cove∣red with a great quantity of Simples of surpassing virtue, and the inside is reple∣nished with various Mines of Sulphur, Bitume, Vitrioll, and Iron, and the very Castle and town ditches were full of Mi∣nerall Springs, which could not be pre∣served because they lay too low. Now these Mineralls, and Simples can not chuse but fill the aire with wholesome va∣pours and spirits, which continually ex∣hale from them, and purifie and free it from corruption. The Scituation is nei∣ther high nor low, in a plaine Country, a most temperate Climate, watered by the Mable, a small River running by Ri∣chelieu, well woodded with lofty Trees, which are certaine evidences of the anti∣quity of the house, tapistred with Mea∣dowes, with small hills rising amidst them, from which one may of all sides discover the horizon, by which our view is pleasantly bounded by an equall distance from the Towne; there growing Vines upon the said hills that produce most excellent Wine. Now seeing the aire of its owne Nature is alike in all places, and that the goodnesse or malignity of it
proceeds from the celestiall influences, the soile, the Scituation, and the windes, which fill it with good or ill vapouts; which wee breathing amidst, are the chiefe cause of our good, or bad constitu∣tions: Seeing I say all these circumstan∣ces concurre so favourably, it would be absurd to say that the aire is not milde and benigne in that City and places ad∣joyning, and it was questionlesse thorow the concurrences of so many rare quali∣ties, that this Country brought forth the most powerfull Genius, and sublimed Spirit, that ever was Known in France. And though your Eminencie was con∣strained to give the water its course tho∣row certain channels; that was not by reason of its deadnesse or moorishnesse; there being no marshes or standing pools in that County, but it was to draine the water out of some ponds which formerly encompassed an old ruinated Castle. The City was indeed at first incom∣modated by certain wells, whose waters communicating of the quality and taste of some Mines, were not fitting for common use; But your Eminencie considering that the goodnesse of waters was one of the chiefest things that belonged to a mans health, and therefore the Romans in their encamping would alwaies make
choice of such places as had wholesome waters in them: You Sir have caused spring waters to be brought from with∣out by Pipes and Conduits, both into the Towne and Castle, which preserve the Inhabitants in perfect health. Wee must confesse that at the first, when they began to work there, the digging up of the ground did much incommodate the workmen, who lying many times upon the ground, attracted the moisture there∣of: and the very buildings, when they were new, caused diseases amongst their first inhabitants. But such discommodi∣ties as these are likely in all places▪ And have wee not in our daies seen, when they first built upon the Church Marishes, they were hardly habitable, and many of those who dwelt there first dyed, and now there is not a braver place about Paris? it is the habitation of an infinite number of Ladies of quality, who are alwaies excee∣ding carefull of preserving their healths. And now likewise in Richelieu people of all ages, and sexes, live in such perfect health, that though the Town be full of people of all trades, yet no Physicians have as yet habited themselves there see∣ing no employment there for their pro∣fession. If any false reports have passed thereof
in former times, wee must impute it to the malice and omulation of the neigh∣bourning townes, which envying this cittyes greatnesse and glory, have bin the Authors and raisers of them: and false rumors have this common with rivers, that the further they run, the more they increase: so these calumnies have been spread far into remote countries, and to the Court it self, where it hath been reported, that the country was contagious, and in a manner inhabitable: and some officers of this city have also caused this suspition to increase, who having land and businesses elsewhere, to have a pretence to absent themselves from home, where by their places they were bound to reside, have seconded those slanderous reports: which things have heretofore hindred many from comming to settle their abode amongst us, and have been no small hindrance to our affairs. But Sir, since your Academy hath been setled in this your citty, the professors thereof have so stoutly opposed this error, upon seve∣rall occasions, that people are now un∣deceived, and those false rumors being to cease, truth appearing dayly to the con∣trary. Finally if the Scituation of the citty of Richeieu be advantagious the structure and sabrick thereof is also most admira∣ble.
Can there be a more stately and mag∣nificent sight, then such a row of houses, or rather Palaces, as are all uniformely built in that long and spacious street which leades from the Royal place, (where our Academy stands) to the Cardinall place, where you have built that Stately Church, which is a magnificent and au∣thenticall monument of your piety? Can there be any statelier or compleater buil∣ding, then the Castle, with its Courts, Park, Channels, Gardens, and other De∣pendencies belonging to it? Were ever so many rare and excellent peeces of work∣manship, all manner of Arts seen toge∣ther, especially for Tapistry, Sculpture, and Painting? Your Gallery, wherein are drawn to the life the battells won, victo∣ries obtained, and cityes conquered by his Majesty? So that Greece Italy, and all other places of the world, which are re∣nowned for their industry and curiosity, seem to have been spolyed of their most precious ornaments to adorn the place of your birth. But I will not undertake par∣ticularly to describe all the rarities of this place; they would fill up a volume. I will therfore be content o say onely thus much, that they come hither already from all parts, as they did in former times to the Oracles, to behold those rare Antiquities
which were admired throughout the world. Wee may therefore truly say, that Ri∣chelieu is a most fitting and convenient place to settle your Academy in. First be∣cause the inhabitants themselves speak as pure French, as can be spoken in any part of France; which is a great advantage, seeing the design could hardly take es∣fect in a place where ill Language were spoken. Secondly, the Countrie round about it abounds with all manner of commoditie, it is situated at equall dis∣stance, from the Rivers of Loire, and Vienna, which are the best nurses France hath: and likewise from the havens of Brittanny, and Poitou, from whence may be had all manner of things conducing to mans life: it stands in a place of repose, retired from turmoil, and negotiations of traffick, selected as it were a purpose for men seriously and quietly to apply them∣selves wholly to Discipline and Exer∣cises. Thirdly it stands almost in the mid∣dle and center of all France, amidst those Provinces where the worst French is spo∣ken; Low Brittanny, the lower Poitou, Pe∣rigord, Limosin, Auvergne, Gascoigne, and other Countries there about, from whence they may the more conveniently send their
youths to amend and correct their de∣fects, and learne the true accent and pro∣nunciation of the French. Fourthly, it is near the River Loyre, upon the bankes whereof all strangers de∣light to be, for the most part in Orleans, Bloys, Tours, Saumur, Angiers, Nantes, and all those Cities by which that faire River runnes. And finally besides all these ad∣vantages of Scituation, your Eminence when you please may endow it with such franchises and immunities as you shall think fit, & as other Princes and eminent men have done, who have founded Ci∣tes and Universities. But because this word Academie is now of late most improperly appropria∣ted to the Gymnastick, and to the in∣structing of youth in the Art of riding, by such as know not the property of termes: whereby that Lustre of this foundation might be eclipsed, and strangers caused to imagine the Academies of Richelieu to be like other Academies, appointed one∣ly for the compleating the carriage of the body, and adorning the outward behavi∣our: Wee have thought it fitting in this place to make known, that the art of ri∣ding is but one particular thing taught in our Academie which being set up by the name of a Royall Colledge, is, to speake
properly, a true Vniversity of Sciences, whereunto your Eminencie hath thought good to adde as accessory, and depend∣ing thereon, the Art of managing of hor∣ses, and other Exercises of the body; to leave unto posterity, in the place where you were born, a compleat and perfect Modell for education of Gentry and No∣bility, and to reform the disorders which were crept into other Colledges and A∣cademies of this Kingdome, where these two sorts of perfections are taught seve∣rally, against the Maximes of all the Politicians as have been in former ages: who were all of opinion, that the Mind, and Body, of man the two essentiall parts of our being, ought to be exercised, and instructed both at one time. Because that even as the Exercise of the Body, without that of the Mind, breeds a kind of Cruelty, and Insolencie in us; even so the Exercise of the Minde, without that of the Body, causeth a kind of Nice∣nesse and stupidity. Wherefore your Emi∣nencie, who knowes better then any, how much it concernes the state, to have its Nobles throwly possessed, and qualified with rare qualities both of body and mind; hath most prudently ordered, that of those eight Professors, whereof this Academy chiefly censists, six should be
for Sciences, and the other two for Exer∣cises. To this we may adde, that Univer∣sities both in antient and Moderne times have alwaies been, and still are called by the name of Academies; witnesse those of Alexandria, Athens, Paris, Alcala, and ma∣ny other. Thus your Eminencie in reuniting the Exercises of the body to those of the mind, procures this advantage to your Acade∣mie, that it being a Nurserie for Sciences, which ordinarily attract a concourse of youth from all parts, there will never be any want of Schollers for the Exercises of the body, as Fencing, Dancing, Riding, and the like, whereby the teachers there∣of being in continuall employment, this Academie will not be subject to those failings, as others, which are not kept up by Sciences, and one day have store of Schollars, and the next day are without any. And finally I know that this City, by reason of its name, and eminent qualities of the founder, is already famous through∣out all this Kingdome, and amongst for∣rain Nations also. So that if your Emi∣nencie continue your favour towards this design, your Academie wil cause this to be one of the most populous and flourishing Cities of Europe; not lesse renouned then
other Cities, which our Kings have ho∣nored with the Professions of Divinitie, Canon and Civill Law, Physick and Arts; and equall to either Marseilles, or Alexandria, or any other ancient Cities of Greece, with all theiry ceums and Porti∣coes. There are severall waies to make Ci∣ties populous, and adorned, namely Commerce, Jurisdictions, Franchises and immunities, Trades, and Handy∣crafts. But the most noble way of ampli∣fying and renouning of them, is by means of Sciences, which were the cause that Memphis in Egypt, Athens in Greece, Na∣ples in Italie, and Paris in France, have grown up to such magnificence, that they have drawn all Nations of the world to come and behold them with admira∣tion. FINIS.
STATUTES AND ORDINANCES For the Government Of the Academie, or Royall Colledge, founded by Order from the King, in the Gity of Ri∣chelieu: Under the protection of the Dukes of Richelieu. THE Royal Academie, establish∣ed in the City of Richelieu, shall be governed by a Director, or Supervisor. The Supervisor shall take the Oath of Allegeance to the King, before the Duke of Richelieu. The Supervisor shal appoint men to supply the pla∣es as shall fall void, either by death or otherwise,
who after they have been there a year or two, shall be presented to the King by the Supervisor, to re∣ceive their letters Patents, if the Professors find them worthie thereof. And during their said time of Regency or Probation, they shall enjoy the same Rights and Emoluments, as other Professors doe. The Supervisor shall not depose or displace any Professor, without the generall consent of all the rest. The Supervisor shall provide schoolmasters and Officers for the said Academy, who shall have reasonable and sufficient wages assigned them. The Supervisor shall have power to settle School∣masters and School mistresses: to whom he shall prescribe a Method, to teach the children of the city to read and write well. The supervisor shall have power to call and break off all assemblies, as shall be to deliberate upon affairs touching the commonalty, wherein all things shall be decided by Plurality of voices. The Dean, or Ancientest Professor, shall supply the supervisors place in his absence, and performe his office. The Academy shall be provided with moveables and utensiles, at the common charge of the Pro∣fessors; and if any of them chance to dy, or leave his place, the part and portion which he shall have in the common goods, shall be kept for him or his heires, according to the estimation as shall be made thereof by the said Professors. The Incomes which shall be received of the Scholars, shall be laid in Common, and divided
equally between the Supervisor, Professors, Horse∣rider, and Master of Defence: The Supervisor having first deducted the twen∣tieth part thereof for other Masters wages, offi∣cers, Servants, and other charges needfull for the maintenance of the Academy. The Professors, as near as possible may be, shall of themselves supply all the classes one after ano∣ther, and shall successively teach all the Sciences. The Professors, to perfect themselves every day more and more in the Sciences, shall dayly conferre one hour in the day concerning their studies; and what the one knoweth not, the other shall be ob∣liged to teach him. The Professors of Sciences shall take their pla∣ces in all assemblies after the Supervisor, according to the order and time of their reception, and after them the Querry, or Horse rider, and Fence ma∣ster. The Professors shall in their turnes every sun∣day cause publick disputations to be held. The Professors, according to the antient custome of the Ʋniversity of Paris, shall not dictate any writings in the classis for Sciences: every one shall have his book printed, and by that meanes, the time which should be spent in writing, shall be more profitably employed in repetitions, and disputations. The Professors shall not use any books in tea∣ching of Sciences and Languages, unlesse they have been first examined and approved of by the whole company. The Professors shall carefully teach their schol∣lars, and cause them often to rehearse the Defini∣tions,
Divisions, Theoremes, and Propositions of Sciences and Arts. The Professors shall finish their course of Phi∣losophy in six years, teaching the Sciences, Arts, and Humanity in six dislinct Classes, as follow∣eth. Namely In the sixt Glassis they shall teach Grammar, the Card in Plane, Chronologie, and Geneologie. In the fifth, History, Mythology, Poesie, and Rhetorick. In the fourth, Logick and Morall Philosophy, Namely Monasticall, Oeconomicall, and Politicall. In the third, the Elements of Geometry, and Arithmetick, together with the practice of both of them, and Musick. In the second, Naturall Philosophy in generall, and particular, with Physiologie, and Pathologie, and Metaphysicks. In the first, the Mechanicks, the Opticks, &c. Astrologie, Geography, and the Gnomonicks. The same Professors, who in the morning taught Sciences, shall in the afternoon teach Languages, in order as followeth. Namely, In the sixt Classis they shall teach the Rudiments, Colloquies, Cato & Onomasia, or Nomenclature, conformable to things as well natural as artificial. In the fifth, Grammar, writing of Epistles, the Curious Method, and Commenius. In the fourth, the Quantities, Terence, Ho∣race, Quintus Curtius, and the Poets. In the third, the Figures, Tullies Offices, Vir∣gil,
Caesars Commentaries, and Orators. In the second, the Principles of the Greeke tongue, and the preheminence which it hath a∣bove other languages. In the first, the Origine and Genius of the Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish and French tongues, the conformity and difference that is be∣tween them. The Querry, or Horse-master, Fence-mastor, and other inferior Masters shall teach their seve∣ral Exercises every day at a certain houre, but the Schollers divided into several companies, shall come to learn but once in two daies, according to such order as shall be appointed them. On Festivalls and Holidaies, the Querry or horserider shall appoint running at the ring, and at the Quintune; and the Fence master shall cause his Scholars to Exercise on those daies publickly, and sometimes fight at Barriers. The Scholars shall be bred up in the feare of God, and their due allegeance and obedience to their King. The Scholars shall joyntly learn Sci∣ences, Languages, and Exercises, at such houres as shall be set down by the Supervisor, who shall also have power to dispense with any of them up∣on lawful occasion. Every week there shall be one play day appoint∣ed for all the Scholars. The Classes shall alwaies open the next day af∣ter Saint Luke's day, and the Vacations shall be∣gin the first day of September. The last fifteen daies of August, they shall publickly dispute upon general positions in all Sci∣ences,
according to the Orders of the six Classes. And every Professor shall in his turne be a Mo∣derator in those disputations, concerning such things as he hath taught all the yeare; and all the other Masters shall cause their Scholars publickly to do Exercises in their several professions. And to encourage the Scholars to the studying of Sciences, and learning of Exercises, they shall have certain prizes, or rewards distributed a∣mongst them, according to their merits, by the Professors. FINIS.
