h2905 e200_45 99859465 157583
A Learned SPEECH Made by the Right Worshipfull Sir John Hotham, A Member of the House of Commons, At a meeting of severall Knights and Gentlemen in the said County, on the 33. of May. 1642. Wherein is manifested the manifold Reasons why the Subject being commanded by the Parliament; ought not to diso∣bey, but to venture life and estate in the maintenance and performance thereof, VVith a Remarkeable Passage con∣cerning the Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England, and many other persons of Note. LONDON, Pri
A Learned Speech made by that much honored and renowned Gentleman, Sir John Hotham, a Member of the ho∣nourable House of Commons. ON the 23 day of this in∣stant moneth, Sir John Hotham sūmoned some particular Knights and Gentlemen to Hull, to advise with him con∣cerning the present e∣state of the Towne in regard his Majesty was so highly incens'd against him, likewise the Major, Aldermen, and all other men of good Ranke and Quality were at that time assembled to whom Sir John Hotham (after an affable salutation to all) began to addresse himselfe to speake, which being observed a generall silence covered all the place, each
man with attentive admiration catcht eve∣ry syllable as soone as it vttered, fearing the aire delight with that Candor should snatch them up and rob them or their onely hap∣pinesse, since twas a comfort to all Loyall Subjects to heare and learne their duties from him that had given an ample Testi∣mony, how well he knew his owne. The substance of his Oration as neere as could be gathered, is set downe in this ensuing Treatise. My Loving Friends, You may perhaps expect that I intend to make a large Narration with intent to cleare your doubts and make my Actions to His Maiesty seeme (as they are) faire, Legall and Loyall. But it is not my intention, nor will J wast so much time in that businesse, but leave it to the end, not doubting but when my Actions shall define their wished event, that the end shall crowne the bad that is past with a more full renowne. The Scope
of my words at this time shall be confined to these two heads, which indeed are twins not to be separated. The first is an encouragement to gaine perfect Honour from your Soveraigne. Let Loyalty be the rule of all your acti∣ons, if you intend to be truely Honourable, for honour no grounded on Loyalty, is like Friendship without Love, lost in a mo∣ment, and oft times growes the greatest E∣nemy, so the greatest Title, the vastest Wealth the greatest Wisdome, if not guided by Vertue, and so imployed, proves ruine to the inioyer; Next, let your Loyalty take its limit from Law, otherwise, in doing things seemingly good, the end may prove dangerous, and your Loyaltie prove worse then disloyalty; Therefore the next thing that J insist upon, is Obedience to the Par∣liament, that pious and Iudicious Councell whom you in particular, and all the King∣dome in generall, have chosen as fit men to discusse and examine all causes that have dependency on his Majesties safety, and
the Kingdomes security: Now to disallow of what is by them thought covenient both for his Majestie and the Kingdomes securi∣ty, is to condemne your selves of folly, that you have chosen men in whom you can∣not confide, but I presume (though there be many that these words may and doe con∣cerne in this Kingdome) that there is no one here that would not lay downe his life for the defence of his Maiestie and the Par∣liament, neither are there any, I suppose, that need this motive to Obedience to the Honourable Houses of Parliament, their owne safeties depending on the happy issue of their religious Councels. Onely my aime is to give you one gene∣rall reason and apparent Testimony, why the Subiect being Commanded by the Par∣liament ought not to disobey their Com∣mands, though by the King commanded the Contrary. Because the Parliament being called and established by the Authority of the King and consent of the Kingdome, has power to
Command and effect all things that are a∣greeable to Law, tending to the preserva∣tion of his Maiesties Peace and welfare, and the generall good of the Subiect, they being by King and People, intrusted with that waighty and great charge, and if they should fore-see an imminent danger threaten his Maiesties Person, or the generall good, and should not take speedy care to prevent it, they should make a violation of that Faith and Trust reposed in them, so on the con∣trary part, if they, foreseeing a darger, by their Councels and Commands endeavour to prevent it, and the Persons by them com∣manded falsifie their trust, they are trai∣tors both to their Royll Soveraigne, and destroyers of the Kingdome, This is the truth, & this is my glory, that God has so farre enabled me to undergoe so great a taske, and this is my hope that all of you will manifest your Loyalties to his Maiesty and Obedience to the Parliament. Many other matters J have to tell you concerning an Information of the Lord Keepers having let the Parliament. FINIS.
