H3819 E313_7 99861207 113335
To the Right Honourable, the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. RIght Honourable, I have ever thought it the duty of us Ministers to debate matters of doctrine, which is jus divinum, amongst our selves, so as that wee might all agree in the things that should be taught among the people; which blessing of unity, would certainly in a great measure be granted to us of God, if we were set in such a station that we might use the means (which were Schools of Divinity:) were we set into Classes, and from our youth kept in the exercise of Divinity disputation, before we were swaied with ambitious ends, truth would in a great measure appeare to us, which is now hid: truth is but one, the Gospell is the Gospell of peace: it is our ignorance of truth and of the Gospell, that maketh us at such distance in opinions: now there is no such meanes in all the world to acquire knowledge, as disputation: therefore is that art which hath truth for its end, studied, and gotten in Schooles of Disputation: I meane Logick, Rhetoricke is ornatus, the beau∣ty or ornament of speech. Now though persons of greatest quality doe usually weare the richest garments, yet garments of greatest value may be borrowed, and put upon the poorest slave and vilest begger: the falsest and least probable matter is capable of curious ornament of words, where it is a matter of the great∣est skill in the world to find out the truth, among these colours of Rhetoricke: and those things that ought not to be taught, will most forcibly draw disciples after their teachers. At this time, ye may heere the Pulpits filled with eager and earnest perswasi∣ons to accept of the government of Christ, set up in the word of God, without any argument out of Gods word, to proove that Christ set up any such government as they aime at. If any argument can be produced, it is fit we all should know it: and if so the word of God, and the authority of Christ, must
not be bounded by any authority on earth; no power among the sonnes of men may limit the Holy One of Israell. If Christ hath set officers in his Church, Kings and Nobles and Senators must stoop to them: this intermixing of the Parliament authority, with divine, is but dawbing, if it be any other then an acknowledgement of duty of submission, if Christ hath set up any government in his Church to be executed by Church officers. As for giving leave to execute discipline, as to preach the word, that is but a fraud; you may indeed, nay you ought to re∣ceive the word of God not for your selves alone, but for the whole Nation, as being the Representative Body thereof: you may require a Covenant over all the Kingdome to wait on the means not by pieces and parcells, but the whole word which ought to have a free passage, not by plurality of votes, but by an unanimous consent of the Preachers. That the word ought to be so preached, is plaine by these ar∣guments. First, Christ gave a Commission to preach the Gospell unto his disciples, which was to last unto the end of the world, in which there was no Quorum, duobus tribus vel pluribus vestrum, by which they might not preach but by an universall consent. If any shall object, that the Apostles walked by an higher prin∣ciple even by the ducture of an infallible spirit. I answer, first the Commission was penned in words that must last to the end of the world by which we must walke. 2. The infallibility of the Spirit by which the Apostles wal∣ked, did imply an impossibility of dissent. 3. Though the Apostles did know that it was impossible for them to disagree in their doctrine, yet St. Paul went up by the Spirit to communicate his doctrine to other of the Apostles James and Peter, lest in regard of the people he had run in vain; hee knew the unity of the Preachers would prevaile much a∣mong the people. Gal. 2.2. 2. Secondly, St. Paul wrote to Timothy to charge those that taught any other doctrine that they should not, whereby it ap∣peareth that he had a care that no other doctrine might be taught but one. 1 Tim. 1.3. 3. Christ promised his presence among two or three that are
gathered together in his name, he promised nothing to the ma∣jor part of such an assembly: this gathering together cannot bee understood of a locall, but a gathering by the Spirit into an uni∣ty of minde and judgement: Christs promises attend on the per∣formance of our duties, when we doe our duties we may ex∣pect a blessing. St. Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. besee∣cheth them by the name of our Lord Jesus, that they all speake the same thing, that there be no divisions among them, but that they bee perfectly joyned together in the same minde, and the same judgement; where you see he urgeth them by the name, by the reverence and honour that they beare to the name of Christ, that they be of one minde: those that are gathered together in the name of Christ are of one minde; I doe not say, that all those to the number of two or three that are of one minde are gathered in the name of Christ: nay the gathering in the name is diffe∣renced from other ambitious and hereticall gatherings, cumulo accidentium, whereof this being of one minde is one; such a ga∣thering together is worthy the presence of Christ, seldome can many agree in one judgement that Christ doth not unite in any thing that tendeth to the glory of God. Ob. Some may say that it is impossible that men should be all of one minde so much division is found among us. Resp. I answer, that this unity hath not beene sought after, means have not been used for the obtaining it: all things have been carried by vote, and the dissenting party kept under by censure, accompained with fire and sword under Antichristian Tyranny: the truth was kept under by the vote of the ambitious, and Schooles wholly, neglected, or used only more imperato; questions not stated by Scripture, but the Scripture overswayed by humane authority. I confesse I conceive it necessary for Classes and Assemblies to meet, but their businesse is only about matters of their Com∣mission, about preaching the word, to communicate their do∣ctrine, and by dispute to finde out the truth: their disputes ought to end in a brotherly accord, as in Act. 15. much disputing, but all ended in accord, no putting to the vote. Votes have too great an influence upon the will to decide matters of doctrine by them: men may vote what they have an
interest to dispose of, I may vote my estate and liberty, but will∣worship is unlawfull: I meane the matters that are essentiall to Gods worship which are matters of duty, as for circumstantialls of time and place (except the Sabbath) which are matters of li∣berty; in these things the Commonwealth may vote, and the Mi∣nisters must by the duty of their place preach the Gospell when and where they can get any to heare in season and out of season; & this is your Christian liberty that in matters of liberty, ye make rules and laws to your selves, not crossing the ends that you are tyed to in duty: but if Assemblies of Ministers might make Canons, and bind men to obedience under penalty of excommunication; what were this other then to Lord it over the flocke? or what were this, if not teaching for doctrines the precepts of men? but this is endeavoured to be amended by intermixing of Lay-elders what ground they have for that, will, I hope, appear if the whole matter come into just concertation by dint of argument. In the mean time, if the State thinke fit to suffer the Assembly to vote what they doe is but humane, one good reason is better then many votes in matters of doctrine, and matters of govern∣ment, it wholy belongeth to the Civill Magistrate, this should be rightly considered on; what is Christs cannot bee remitted to you if by him placed in other hands; if he hath set up government in the Church, it must be far above all government in a Christi∣an Commonwealth: and it were sacriledge of the highest na∣ture for you to restraine Christs officers by any power; if you put the matter to vote in the Assembly, they will hereafter tell you of it in both ears. But if ye desire to know the truth, by that time Schooles of Divinity be up but halfe the time the Assembly have sat, ye shall finde more the present condition of things, require your present action. You may, you ought to covenant for the whole Kingdome, for time, place, and maintenance of Gods worship: you have (as the great Sanhedrim of the Kingdome) power to judge of false worship: you may make use of the sword to drive out Idolatry and will worship, and accordingly may require all men in the Kingdome, to come to the severall Parish Churches of their a∣bode, and require such as you receive for the Preachers of truth, to send able men to supply the places, and that without any re∣gard
to the allowance and disallowance of the people. I know these be the great questions of the times, and high time it is the truth were knowne concerning them. It is time some course were taken to bring men to Church, which Independent principles make scruple, whether the Ma∣gistrate ought to doe, unlesse they like their Minister: but upon this ground, let the Minister be who he will, the Drunkard will like the Alehouse better then the Church: and this liberty that men take to absent themselves from their Parish Churches, give men opportunity to meet and rayse tumults, plots, seditions; and how dangerous these things may speedily be, if not prevented, let wise men judge. Oh that this Honourable Court would ha∣sten to set up Classes consisting only of Ministers, whose worke should be only to preach the word, and weekly meet in Schools of Divinity, where they might not spend their times in exami∣ning of Whores and Knaves, ye may take another course with them: but let them dispute, and nurse up yong Scholers, who being first made artists in the Universities, they may be acquain∣ted with, and not lay hands rashly upon a testimony, and so send them out to places that want: and as for government, you know sure, that to come to Church is a duty neglect, a sin and punish∣able; and what else the Ministers know censurable, you know as well as they, and you ought to punish: but having first set down the sin and punishment, not at the discretion of the Minister and his two Elders, which yet ought to be according to the Presby∣terian principles. Only for matter of knowledge, that of all things principally belongeth to the care of the Minister: and I could wish before this Assembly were dissolved, a cleere and full Catechisme were agreed on, short and pithy, that might be required of all commu∣nicants in the Kingdome, old and yong, high and low, and all compelled to it by your authority, that so the same thing might be taught throughout the whole Kingdome. As for Independents and Anabaptists, let them be admitted, nay condemned to spend their times in Schooles, and not per∣mitted to seduce the people, that so at last all things may be car∣ried with strength of argument, and unanimous consent of the whole Clergy, which would soone come amongst them, if they
did not relie on their parties and drawing disciples, and deciding matters by votes. Againe, votes are of no other use, but to gather parties, and ought no where to be used but by those that have power of the sword, to compell the dissenting parties, and therefore are penal∣ties to terrifie and keepe under the dissenting part annexed to such lawes as passe by vote. I pray God it be not in the minde of some of our times to get parties, and put the carrying on their ends by the determination of the sword. A learned and pious Mi∣nistery doe not desire to carry all by vote, but a lazie, ambitious, proud Clergie: an industrious, learned, wait with patience on them that are contrary minded for the day of Gods visitation, in the meane time use all means: the proud man will take no paines to use means but vote him downe, away with him to the divell; it is fault enough to crosse them, such as stand in their waies are fooles and knaves not fit to be heard or consulted with; let it be considered whether parties in Generall Councells, have not made parties for the sword: I am a stranger to the State whe∣ther they doe not make parties among Lords and Commons, if they doe not, I pray God they may not, I know it is very farre from the duties of their places that ought to be peace-makers. Learning is low, and pride is high among the Clergy, I speake not this with reference to what any mans particular diligence hath made him; yet I dare say, every honest man will confesse, had all the Kingdome beene exercised in Schooles of Divinity since the Reformation, where ipse dixit had been the word of God, a great difference would have been in Ministers from what they are. I know men use to say, Learning is not so needfull as holines: I answer, it is not an holy thing for a Minister not to use all means to be learned; holinesse and learning will doe well together. But an holy Minister ought not administer the Sacrament to a wicked person: I confesse there was a time in my youth that I thought so, and being pressed to doe it, did use all means to make them as knowing as I could, which I conceive still to bee my duty, but not able sufficiently to satisfie my selfe in point of manner: I found Ʋrsine and others, say, that if I were carefull to present notorious offenders to them that had power, I had
done my duty, yet still me thought I was not clean handed, if the duty lay upon me to examine and try the due preparation of the receiver. But upon further consideration, I found the Minister charged only with preaching and baptizing, which being performed with such zeal and diligence as is needfull, is abundantly a suffi∣cient imployment. Objection: ought not the Minister to have regard to the ho∣linesse of his flocke? may all come without respect, though ne∣ver so wicked and unholy, and be partaker of Sacraments? R. I answer, they may not, it is a very great and dangerous sin if they come without repentance, faith and charity, wherein the Minister must instruct his people publiquely and privately, and that with answerable zeale to the ignorance and stubborn∣nesse of the people; he must preach the duty of the Magistrate to him: first, to make lawes that may compell all men to a reve∣rent attendance on the means if he be a Christian Magistrate, if he be not a Christian Magistrate, he must endeavour his conver∣sion: when wholesome and holy laws are made, he must instantly call upon that Magistrate that is put in trust to punish sin, that he put wholesome lawes in execution to put sin to shame; that as sin is a work of darknesse, so no man may presume to commit it in the sight of the Sun: if this were done, what scandall could be given to the Church if any should be found guilty before and after receiving Sacraments, the Law may appoint that a double punishment, as being a double offence? in some cases restraine him of his liberty to come to Sacraments as the Law shall bee a∣greed on: in the meane time, let the Minister plye both the Ma∣gistrate and offender with the mighty operative word of God, private Christians using their private interest to reclaim the sin∣ner. If this be not the way of God, I am mistaken, if any further power can be proved out of Gods word to be in the hand of the Minister, I shall be content to use it: In the mean time, let no man that hath voted himselfe high, or hath gotten a great opini∣on among men, despise arguments that come from an obscurer person: I conceive the Minister may use, nay must, any sharp∣nesse the word useth against sin, and then betake himselfe to his prayers to God to make his doctrine fruitfull: what more is in
the duty of his place, I know not, unlesse using of means to make him able to doe that: if this be not a meanes to shame and cud∣gell sin to corners, I know not what can. But suppose the Ma∣gistrate doth not doe his duty, then let the Minister bend the po∣wer of the word upon him, and no doubt if Ministers could agree in their doctrine, much would be the power of the word: We see the Magistrate come and sit before us, and wee hope with∣out an Idoll in their hearts. Oh that the Lord would put a word in due season into the mouth of his Ministers, that might bee the word of peace unto them! Oh that Ministers, would lay downe the rigor of their opini∣ons in point of Discipline, and set themselves to attend on the meanes to increase their knowledge, and to acquaint themselves with one anothers studies in an industrious way, that they would unbend their thought of government a while, and thinke on waies to get knowledge; I am not worthy to censure others, I know my owne defects, and doe complaine of the times and want of means to know more: I wish that all men of skill would examine what Logick may be found in many of those Rethori∣call Sermons which the world so much run after, how well the Divinity of many of them is taught that are so finely worded; how right they hit the argument of their text, which if they misse, they preach themselves and not Christ, their own minds and not the minde of God: nay let men of piety examine whether Mr. Gillespie, though a man of excellent parts, proved his reformation by his Ecclesiasticall discipline out of the words of his text, whe∣ther that refiners fire and fullers sope doth not point at another and a nearer operation upon the soules and spirits of men by the bloud of Christ, then his Reformation that he so eagerly presseth, and then see whether we want not Schooles; if men of his parts want them, Sanctius, hoc vero Christi doctrina facit: and citeth Jer. 23.29. to prove the purgation by doctrine and operation of the word, Is not my word an hammer: And Clement Alexandirnus, . Theodoret, divina gratia, tanquā herba peceatorum sordes luit. Let it be further examined whether the choice of a similitude for a text which is but illustrative, & draw what men fancie out of the similitude, and passing by the argumentative part, be to preach
the minde of God, or mens owne fancie, whether this Rethori∣call liberty do fill all the world with such diversities of opinions. Ornament of words call weake judgement to admiration, but incumber the truth, if not imbezell and steale it quite away, whereas strength of argument doth inform the judgement; men talke much of having their affections wrought upon; these can∣not be wrought upon to salvation, but by the still voice of the Spirit: I deny not, but fine words and smooth cadencies of sentences, may worke naturally upon the affections, but the ef∣fect of it is but as the blade that sprang up in stony ground, such Religion unto which men are led by the eloquence of the Preacher when it shall bee charged with greater triall then na∣ture will beare, their affection that were led with naturall de∣light will sinke under the disquietnesse of nature: I condemne not Rethoricke, but suspect it and wish it may bee well cemen∣ted with judgement, and not used to such that have no skill to deceive themselves, and them that heare them; let the Parlia∣ment set us to our worke, punish us for our idlenesse, and afford such incouragement by publique laws that men of choisest parts may be induced to the worke of the Ministery: those that would perswade you that publique provision ought not to be made for preaching the Gospell by tythes or otherwise, would make all Nations, heathen and Idolaters, not to have any publique inte∣rest in the Gospell; those would have the State alwaies to stand at defiance with Religion. The Lord grant Assemblies, Parliaments to be at one among themselves, and one with another. Those therefore that cannot agree among themselves cannot be said to bring the Gospell; those that allow diversities of opinions, and claim a liberty to preach what they list: I wish that the Parlia∣ment would set up but one learned School of Divinty, and con∣demn the principall patrons of that Independent opinion into those Schooles, where they should do exercise among others, I make no question they would be soon converted or confounded, and left without any word to say in defence of that groundlesse doctrine. I had good hope that they would have agreed in the Assembly, after two years dispute; I could have been content with small faults if piety and peace might have been settled. I hope there be witnesses enough that I set them not at odds, I shall en∣deavour to make them friends, if reason will doe it. Your servant, W. Hussey.
To the Right VVorshipfull Sir Thomas Walsingham, Knight. Right Worshipfull, I Am bold to Dedicate the first fruits of my Labours in this kinde unto your view and patronage, unto whom I know the intention is not unwelcome, as ayming at the conjun∣ction of the State and Ministers of the Word in peace and unity, that hitherto have beene kept at distance by these dividing principles, arising from a twofold distinct government, which being agreed on to be but one (and I hope to make appeare they ought not to bee divers) would for ever silence those implacable differences that have long time beene betweene them, and remaine a hard matter to reconcile at this time. Sir, I have ever observed your aime to be at peace, and justice to keepe of violence and oppression from all men, so farre as your trust and imployment (which hath beene great, in and for your Country) would inable you; I aime at the same ends, both to make the Parliament and Ministers all agree, and all ayme at Gods glory, and the Countries safety, wherein I know no man would more rejoyce then your selfe. I confesse the first sound of this my opinion out of the mouth of Master Coleman, was very un∣welcome to our brethren, and I look for no better entertaynment. I have some incouragement, that a man so eminent is gone before me, and doe hope that upon some pause they may receive better satisfactions, and that at they were forwards but Bishops might bee plucked up root and branch, so they will at last be  to plucke up this root of their
spirituall censure, upon which the state and ambition of the Bishops was first planted, I shall not desire to engage you in defence of the cause; but if any good come by it to the Kingdome, that you should enjoy the benefit: unto whose happinesse here, and eternall, my duty doth en∣gage mee to bostow my selfe, and all the abilities God hath given mee. Yours in the Lord, VVIL. HUSSEY.
To the Reverend Commissioner of Scotland, Mr. George Gillespie. SIR, The eminencie of your imployment, and my obscurity, may make the congresse between us seem unequall: my calling is the same with yours: my education hath been the education of a Scholler, though with lesse proficiencie then I could wish: you professe candor in attending to, and answering arguments: It may be some of my arguments may seeme weake unto you, I feare they may some of them be weaker then I could wish: I confesse I cannot urge an argu∣ment as it ought to be urged, the want of Divinity Schools hath been the cause of it: joyne with me in your petition for Divinity Schools, then you and I shall know better how to handle an ar∣gument at 7 years end then now we doe, if we live so long: In the mean time, if you shew me the weaknesse of my argument, I shall not endeavour to maintain it against light of truth, no not so far as any strain of wit will bear me; if your answers shew any thing I did not consider of, I will acknowledge it: hee that knoweth nothing of an argument is too ignorant to be a Mini∣ster, he that will not submit to an argument out of Gods word & principles of nature, is to proud to be a Minister; unity among our selves would be an happy thing, and an indissoluble amity between us and the Gentry were of great concernment: in these times, we have need of them, and they of us, let us endeavour to make use of our friends, and not make them our foes; I perswade not any man to depart from truth to please men; but let us not wrestle with our friends for that which is not, while our enemies destroy us; thogh our judgemēts differ, yet let us dispute as friends and agree as soon as may be. If any bitternes come from me I shal be sorry and amend it; if any from you, I have been bred under Bishops, I have been used to it, and can the better beare it, I shall overcome it with goodnes, if I can prevail with my corruptions to give way: The Lord grant that we may speak the same thing, that there be no divisions among us, that we be perfectly joyned in the same mind, and the same judgement: let there be no dis∣sention among us, we are brethren.
You say we have leave from the Civill Magistrate to preach the Gospell: that was a Canterburian tenet to put doctrine and discipline into the same condition, and hold all under him, but we preach the word with all authority from Christ derived to us by those of our brethren that were in commission before us: Magistrates may drive away false teachers, but not the Preachers of the Gospell, but at their uttermost perills. Let us stand to our commission, and attend on reading, exhor∣tation and doctrine, and we may obtaine from the Magistrates in a fair way as a testimony of their love, honour and obedience to Christ, more honour, more maintenance, and sin will be more shamed, discountenanced and punished; Ordinances kept more pure in your sense then ever you shall be able to procure by your scaring, affrighting censure of excommunication. What will your censure doe? it will shame a few whores and knaves; a great matter to shame them, the law of Nature shameth: a boy in the streets can doe as much. But if your cen∣sure work upon hereticks, or men differing from you in opinion; can you fetch in Antinomians, Anabaptists, Independents, if ye could send out Sathan and fetch them in, or by delivering them to Sathan, reclaime them, some reverence might be given to the censure? sure in the day of our Lord, there will be as good a re∣turne of the word preached, as of the censure. But all this is nothing, if Christ hath set up any such governe∣ment, prove that, I yeeld: My desire is, that you would draw your arguments from the words of Scripture, and not from the interpretation, that you or any Authors shall put upon them, nor counter argue my arguments, without giving answers; in an∣swering arguments you have liberty to interpret Scriptures as you please, so as your interpretation will stand out against all ar∣guments that shall be brought against it: the strength of argu∣ments is in mediums consisting of termes and words of Scripture: where divine authority is pleaded, keep rules, and truth will soo∣ner be found. Your loving Brother, Will. Hussey.
THe replies Mr. Gillespie touching this point in con∣troversie are publique. That which is personal in them (as a great part is) hath already, and shall presently further be cleared. The argumentative part was purposely referred hither, which calmely and mildly, without any personall reflections is pro∣secuted. A like candor and ingenuity is requested from all, that omit∣ting accidentall slips (for such possibly in acursory reading may be e∣ver looked) they would addresse themselves to the maine, and clearly confute these assertions, or by Scripturall arguments confirme the con∣trary positions; for if otherwise, and as heretofore, the argument be for∣saken, and personall charges of Covenant-breaking-dissenting from the Assembly, not dissenting in the Assembly, and such like, be taken up: It is here declared before hand, all such replications shall be estee∣med by us a Nihil Respondes: In the meane space, read and judge, having no other by as upon thy heart, but that of the Prophet, an ingage∣ment to follow truth and peace. Th. Coleman. Errata. Pag. 3. line 21. read mutation. p. 7. l. 3. r. these. p. 12. l. 14. adde to. l. 34. r. sew.
A Plea for Christian Magistracie. MAster Gillespie seemeth in his Sermon to be much offended at Mr. Coleman: and telleth the Lords, the ignorant and scan∣dalous must be kept from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and with a flood of words, layeth on them as a very great sin if they doe it not by adding discipline to this Doctrine that is already taught in the Directory, That scandalous and ignorant ought not to receive the Sacrament, and therefore the Minister in the name of Christ must warne such that they pre∣sume not to come: That the power of discipline may be added to the power of Doctrine: For my part I thinke it very derogatory to the word of God, and the commission of Christ, to think that any censure of man, should bee of more power and efficacy then the word of God: The authority of the Word is divine, the operation of it is mighty, the effect of it is perfection, it wor∣keth upon the conscience, and if the word be able to make the man of God perfect, then nothing is wanting to him. Perfectum cui nihil deest: and it is a wonder how that conscience should be wrought upon by humane authority, with whom divine cannot prevaile; his arguments are, the scandalous perfons have profaned the Lords Table, and the Church of God shall be disabled to keep
themselves pure, if discipline be not set up to keep the scanda∣lous from the Lords Table, implying that wicked men by com∣ming to the Sacrament do pollute the Sacrament, and pollute the holy; which he doth not prove, but some others doe endeavour to doe out of 1 Sam. 2.17. because the sinfull carriage of Elies sonnes caused men to abhor the offering of the Lord: but note the reason that the offering became abominable, was because they offered not the sacrifice according to the command of God, they would not have sodden flesh, but raw; if the doctrine of the Sacrament be corrupted, if it be celebrated under one kinde, if water be mingled with wine, if transubstantiation be taught, or if adoration of the elements, this is to pollute the Ordinance: and therefore Eph. 5.11. S. Paul doth command not to have felow∣ship with the unfruitfull works of darknes, not workers of dark∣nesse: I may not goe to Masse with the Papist, nor run with the ungodly unto the same excesse of riot, I may not be drunk with the drunkard, nor sweare with the swearer, but if these come and heare, or receive Sacraments with the beleevers they pol∣lute not the Sacrament to them, he that beleeveth eateth of this bread of life, Joh. 6.33. and this shall be made good to the be∣leever, though there were but one in the world; and this Beza himselfe is inforced to confesse in his tract against Erastus, his words are, Bonis manere bona Sacramenta etiamsi qui mali aà eadem accedunt ab sit ut inficiemur: The Sacraments remain effectuall to the good, though evill men come to them, farre be it from us to deny it. So that the Sacrament remaineth holy to the beleever, and they are pure notwithstanding the unpreparednesse of the wicked: Let a man examin himselfe, and so let him eat, 1 Cor. 11.28. But the Author would fix guilt of sin upon the Minister, if any come and receive that is scandalous: a necessity is laid upon us, and woe be to us if we doe it: this he proveth not presently, but after many rethoricall passages to the Lords, which deserve no answer: he citeth the Story, and noteth the sin of Ely, 1 Sam. 3.13. in that he restrained not his sonnes, and thereupon telleth us out of Thomas Aquinas, that we may consent to other mens sinnes; first directly counselling or approving. Secondly, indirectly by not hindring when we can; but note; when we can must re∣ceive this limitation, that is, when of duty we ought and can;
otherwise a man should be compelled to forsake his owne cal∣ling, and watch him that he suspected to be a thiefe, or a drun∣kard, and get company and seize on them; and imprison them to keepe them from offending, but this were to deny a free-man his liberty, and become a transgressour; all that is said to this point is, That if it were the duty of the Minister and Elder to hinder a scandalous sinner from the Sacrament, he were guilty of his sin if he let him come: when that is proved, it will re∣quire some further answer; in the meane time, what is said is fal∣lacious. But then a particular application against Mr. Coleman: he will neither be active nor passive in establishing sin censuring government: I dare promise for him that if any means be used for the suppres∣sing sinne, he shall endeavour the furtherance thereof; and if the State thinke fit to trust him, hee will bee as faithfull as he that pleadeth most stoutly for the Jus Divinum of Presby∣teriall government; but here be high words, great offence and scandall is given; and the Author is confident every other godly Mi∣nister will say, Let my tongue cleave to the roofe of my mouth before I say the like. Mr. Coleman scapeth very hardly being called knave, and in a rethoricall imitation of persons cursed for his paines, let his tongue cleave, and in the beginning of his Tract, every mans hand is against Mr. Coleman, and his against every man; the world is made beleeve a Monster is come abroad, if it be for his opinion only that all godly Ministers will leave him they must leave others, whom Mr. Gillespie will not deny the estimation of godly Ministers in their times. I shall be bold to name them be∣cause Mr. Coleman shall not stand alone to be gazed at in these malitious times: they are Bullenger, Gualter, Musculus, Zuinglius, Aretius, Erastus. Bullenger and Gualter, in their letters to Era∣stus testifie as much, but because those letters were put forth by some favourer of Erastus, and therefore may seem to be without credit, I shall be bold to cite what Beza in his Preface to his Tract against Erastus, concerning Bullenger, and Gualter doth confesse, of whom he saith: I doe not at all deny the opi∣nion of those famous men, as also of Wolfgangus Musculus, Minime tamen nego maximes illos viros ut & Dominum Wolfgangum Musculū ex∣istimasse excommunicationem penes Presbyterium fuisse & ad exclusionem usque à Coena Domini Presbyteros ideo fu∣isse progressos. Quod Chri∣stianum tunc Magistratum non haberet Ecclesiacujus au∣thoritate capitalia judicia exercerenter (quod si Corinthi factum fuisset nulla fuisset o∣pus Pauli de illo, Sathanae tradendo denuntiatione) tum alii,  levioribus offendi∣culis peccantes citra exclusio∣nem à coena satis coerceren∣tur: quod cum utrumque prastare Christianus Magi∣stratus, nunc possit ac debeat carere nunc posse Christianas ecclesias hae disciplinae severi∣tate. to bee thus, excommunication is in the
power of Presbytery, and that the Presbyters did proceed even to suspension from the Lords Supper, because the Church at that time had no Christian Magistrate by whose authority capitall censures might be exercised (which if it had been used, there had been no need of Pauls delivery of the man to Sathan) and also other disorderly men transgressing in smaller mat∣ters, might well enough be restrai∣ned without suspension from the Sacrament: both which, because the Christian Magistrate now may and ought to doe, The Christian Churches may wel be without this sharpe discipline; thus much he confesseth, Sed it a ut neque Scriptu∣rae locos novis & ad hanc suam sen∣tentiam accommodatis interpretatio∣nibus applicarent. But so, as that they did not wrest Scripture texts with interpretations new, and fitted to their opinion whereby it appeareth that these mens opinions were, that the words of S. Paul 1 Cor. 5 were a denunciation of the sentence of excommuni∣cation, but occasionall and particular; no universall precept, nor imitable by us, Nisi rebus omnimodo sic stantibus, but in the like condition, and this is enough to dash all contentions about the sentence of excommunication, this makes all further dispute meerly speculative, we have a Christian Civill Magistrate though the present differences have taken away much of our comfort we might enjoy in them, and these disputes render them of lesse use to us, and us to them; whatsoever they shall speake concer∣ning the sentence of excommunication upon the severall places of Scripture, if they may stand with these words here acknowled∣ged by Beza, let these men without more contention stand on Mr Colemans part, if otherwise they must be understood upon after
thoughts to be bent about by Erastus his arguments, as Beza fur∣ther confesseth, Illos aliquantum in excommunicationis usu & Presbyterii authoritate, non quod ista per se damnarent, sed quod co∣rum abusum vererentur, ad Erasti sententiam de flexisse. That they did incline to the opinion of Erastus in the use of excommunica∣tion and authority of the Presbytery, not because they simply condemned them, but because they feared their abuse. You see these men did fear the abuse, and though Beza will not acknow∣ledge Erastus reason to be of any weight, yet with reason, or without he confesseth (take him in the mildest sense) that they bent or leaned a little toward Erastus; at least so far that in their Churches where they had to do they would not trust the Geneva discipline; Beza himselfe citeth these words out of an Epistle which he acknowledgeth to be Bullengers to Erastus, Neque putes nos ita esse dementes, ut hic omnia ad rigerem Genevensis Ecclesiae exigere, aut revocare velimus. Neither doe thou thinke us to bee so mad that we would reduce all things to, and exact them ac∣cording to the strict discipline of Geneva: and this not in Bul∣lingers owne name, but of the Tigurine Churches. I hope these men shall have Mr. Colemans favour, every other godly Minister will say, &c. I shall say nothing to Mr. Gillespies Preamble. He excepteth against Mr. Colemans first rule, and seemeth to oppose a contrary rule, whereas indeed Mr. Colemans as little as may be, and his as much as may be, are both one: Mr. Colemans meaning is, that no more should be established then what was in the word, and his meaning is as much should be established as is in the word of God: this being doubtlesse both your meanings, yee need not fall out about that, greater difference will arise. For my part, I thinke Mr. Gillespie understandeth Mr. Coleman aright, that he thinketh that no Church censures in the hand of Church officers are found in the word of God: but I am nor or his minde, ex supposito that they are jure divine, and in the word of God, that he, or any Minister ought to be satisfied with any thing the Parliament can doe, untill they have received it as the word of God, if it be jut divinum, it ought to be asserted, not by many, but by all. As for Mr. Gillespies exception against Mr. Colemans word bias, & asserting they came biased for the truth, that is petitio prin∣cipii,
and deserves no answer. The second rule: let precepts, held out as divine institutions, have cleare Scriptures: that is the rule, a∣gainst which Mr. Gillespie would not adventure to say any thing: a phrase upon the by; a thing named; are too weake grounds &c. when men may probably conclude different wayes. Mr. Coleman doeth not deny that which by necessary consequence is drawn from Scrip∣ture, to be a divine truth, but ambiguous Scriptures, decided by a vote, if truth, (for they may possibly be errors) are but huma∣no jure; let it be prooved, that the major part of an Assembly have an infallible gift of finding out ambiguous truth, and putting the stampe of divine authority upon their determinations. For my part, I wish much fearching the Scriptures were put in practice, which cannot be done but in Schooles of Divinity: men trust more to the opinion of piety, they can purchase by their Oratory, their places of trust, their votes in assemblies, then the strength of argument, but of that heereafter. He finds these words, let the Scriptures speake expresly, in Mr. Colemans second rule, not so, it was out of his rule; he explaneth his rule sufficiently, to take into it necessary consequences: and for ought I know, the word expresly, if extended, after a Rhetoricall liberty, to signifie plain∣ly, apparently, may include what is apparently in praemissis, though in a most criticall sense, that may not be sayd to be expresse, that is not found in terminis: but grant, that the word had beene too strait to put into the rule, he put it not in there; but by way of amplification, if expresse in Scripture, all must bow, he sayth not till then, how necessarily soever it may be collected out of the Scripture, they shall not bow. He reprehendeth Mr. Coleman for supercilious passing over in a Sermon, 1. Cor. 5. Mat. 18. without answering the arguments of the Learned, upon those places: and in a tract of purpose, ci∣teth none of those learned arguments: for my part, I say with Mr. Coleman, and if such learned arguments, such plenty, it behoved Mr. Gillespie to have cited them; Mr. Coleman might have taken more paines, then he should have thankes, in finding out ten or twenty arguments, and yet be told at last, that he had concealed the weightiest, he had confuted the arguments in urging them: you ought to have the urging your owne arguments your selves, and you can demand no more, but answers for your arguments
when you bring them. I am of Mr. Colemans minde, that one good argument to prove a Church censure, or officer, either from the Scriptures, or elsewhere, would doe me more good, then all I have ever seene. If Mr. Gillespie will affoord us any that be good, I shall returne him thankes for the benefits I re∣ceive, or otherwise, in a brotherly way, return such answers as his arguments shall require. In the meane time he confuteth Mr. Colemans ignorance, that he doth not finde any coordinate go∣vernments, but he meaneth supreame; hee doeth not meane the coordinate government of an Admirall and Generall, both under a superiour: parents and masters, all governed by superiours, and no way coordinate: the masters government superiour to the fa∣thers, in his owne house: as for the master and captaine in a ship, the one he sayth, governeth the mariners, the other the sol∣diers: and so the King of France and Spain are coordinate over their severall subjects. He sayth the Minister is punishable by the Law of the Land: heere is the difficulty: if the Minister and Elder have power gi∣ven of Christ, to censure all Christians, and they use this power, according as Christ hath committed it to them; what is the ma∣gistrate above these officers? and can he make lawes to bound and limit the lawes of Christ? or if they have power to binde, may the magistrate loose? if they use this power, may the Chri∣stian magistrate punish them? this were to allow Christ a very meane kingdome; that his owne subjects should controll him: but you will say, if he commit any thing worthy confiscation of goods, or life, or liberty, the magistrate may inflict it upon him; but if he attempt to doe it unjustly, he is ungodly, and the Mini∣ster and Elders will excommunicate him, and their coordination maketh them their owne judges. As soone as the magistrate shall but distast any of their actions, presently he is ungodly, and send him to Satan, and then what party the eloquence of the Clergy may find against the magistrate, if he should go about to restrain them, let wise men judge. It is the thing it self he speaketh against it is true: but he com∣meth to the third rule, and Mr. Coleman saith, Lay no more burden of government then Christ hath laid upon them, which is none at all: and his reason is, because they have other work to do, and
such as will take up the whole man; to this argument Mr. Gil∣lespie maketh no answer at all, though Saint Paul useth the very selfe same argument, to discharge the Preachers from oversight of the poore, Act. 6.2. God forbid we should leave the care of the word of God, and serve at tables; though the government of the Church, and examination of crimes, both in private con∣gregations, and in the classes, must either be sleighted, or it must take up ten times as much time, as the care of the poore; and if government doth belong to them, the care of the poore must likewise belong to them: but he telleth us, neither the Minister can keep himselfe, nor the Ordinances pure without Ecclesiasti∣call government, and proveth it not: he excludeth Elders from go∣vernment, he told you before he found no institution, of the El∣der a Church officer: you should have proved the institution, The Elder that ruleth well is worthy of double honour, 1 Tim. 5.17. proveth not institution of an officer in the Church, which ap∣peareth by this reason: the word Elder is either prima, or secunda notio; if prima notio, then yee must be content with his owne naturall signification, and in that sense it is apparently ta∣ken in the 1 and 2 verses of the same Chapter, where he oppo∣seth the elder to the younger, and reckoneth elder women and younger women; so that if the elder men be officers, I know not why the elder women should not be officers likewise: but if this elder be secunda notio, or vox artis or scientiae Theologicae, ye must finde out his definition in the Scripture, how should man know what genius and species were in Logick? what perpendi∣culum, centrum, diameter, were in Mathematicks without their definitions? if therefore an Elder must signifie an officer, hee must have definition in Theologie that must be demonstrative in Scripture: the word Rule is too generall if it be not referred to knowne principles of nature, as a Father, a Master, a Civill Magistrate; the first is a governour by nature, the second by pri∣vate contract, 3 by publicke consent of the people: and such ye make the Church officer, for ought I know, arising out of the consent of the people; and such governours were called Elders of the Tribes, and our Parliament men and governours are such Elders arising out of the publicke consent of the people; yea Kings and all Civill governours arise out of the same principle
of publique consent: which power doth still remaine in man∣kinde, to make choice of their company, and to erect private ar∣biters at pleasure, to determine the differences that arise amongst them, with consent; remaining still sponsable to publique Laws, if they should call one another to account, as 1 Cor. 6. where Saint Paul blameth them, for going to Law, and willeth them to set up a wise man to judge their differences, and that in Civill, not in Ecclesiasticall matters, which is a difference no man un∣derstandeth: I challenge the Assembly; nay, all the World, to bound causas Ecclesiasticas à civilibus: for my part I have ga∣zed on that distinction this 30 yeares, and never finde any thing of plaine dealing in it, but non-sense, and fraud, the only diffe∣rence that I could finde, that the proceeding of the Civill Ma∣gistrate did pretend to be legall and regular; the Ecclesiasticall as far as they durst, to be illegall, irregular and arbitrary, all the go∣vernment is in the officers that bind, and loose whom they list. I dare not leave this, lest I should be challenged for not dealing reverently with Scripture; binding and loosing must have a sense; I say, binding and loosing is meant by preaching of the Gospell, which none yet durst deny to be one of the keyes: and the other let him prove that can: though these keyes were never given to any of the Apostles, but to Peter; and he opened the doore of Gods Church to the Gentiles, which was never shut since, but shall stand open day and night continually, Esay 60.11. There∣fore thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought. And may not these exhortations be still seasonable? have fa∣miliarity and keepe company with none but good, and such as ye may be ered by: and doe not goe to Law one with ano∣ther, but er your differences to some honest, wise men, to de∣termine; and that without setting up any new government; an arbitrator is no magistrate: but such as by force can put his judgements in execution, he only is a magistrate. Mr. Coleman sayth, Church government distinct from civill, maketh an irre∣concilable difference betweene the Minister and the Magistrate, as two governments must needs do. Mr. Gillespie supposeth two governments must needs be, and then chideth with the argu∣ment,
and with Mr. Coleman; but letteth it alone without an an∣swer. But Mr. Gillespie falleth upon an argument against govern∣ment, committed to Ministers taken from feare of ambition, and here he spendeth many words, about the words which Mr. Cole∣man alludeth only unto; which I will not trouble my Reader withall: that Mr. Coleman in plaine tearmes aimeth at is; ambi∣tion is to be feared in Ministers, and sheweth what great con∣testation hath been for this censure of the Church, that some have preferred it before all acts of piety; and have ambitiously endea∣voured, that all should passe through their fingers; and that this censure hath plunged the world in blood this many hundred years. Mr. Gillespies answer to the matter of ambition, is only by involving the Civill Magistrate in the same danger of ambi∣tion: Now is this a good argument, government is necessary, but he that is imployed therein hath great temptations to ambition, therefore the Ministers of the word must be ensnared in the like temptation? that they may both contest one with another, and so imbroile the world in bloud, as the Popes have done, or else both joyne together to enthrall the people, as the Bishops in the Courts of Princes? and not rather in regard that government doth naturally lift up the heart of man, and therefore Ministers have the name of servants, and Lordship, and Dominion over the slocke denied them in Scripture, to keep them from the like temptation, that they may the more freely from God warn them that are in authority, that they take heed of that temptation: I am confident if this Assembly had stooke close to their commis∣sion, which they received from Christ, which was to preach the Gospell, and spent themselves wholly in matters of doctrine, and told the Lords of the duty of their place, to doe justice in Parlia∣ment without respect of persons, and put the Commons in mind of all their wholesome Ordinances, that they looke to carefull performance of them, without turning their thoughts after go∣vernment; the Reformation had gone on much faster, and more comfortable then it hath. Mr. Coleman saith, That Church government hath disquieted all the world in the hand of the Pope, and his Clergy, in the hand of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Mr. Gillespie telleth him, That these
stories are not a little beside the warke: he should have told what hurt is had done in France, in Holland, in Scotland, in Reformed Churches. I answer, it was the same censure that raised the Pope so high, but it grew not to that height in one age: a young Lion will not bite; and you boast that your Churches are according to Primitive times; well what they will come to, after times will see: we are beholding to the Presbytery for throwing downe the Bishops, if they cast away their ambition with them, and take Mr. Colemans advice, and set up Schooles of Divinity, and move the Parliament for due encouragement; you shall then ap∣peare to be men seeking the things of Christ, and not your own: but of this more by and by. A word or two about that place, 1 Tim. 5.17. the Elder that ruleth well, is worthy double honour: from hence two sorts of Elders are proved, an Elder that ruleth well, & he that laboureth in word & doctrine: here two Elders are mentioned; but the diffe∣rence whether officiall or personall, is very doubtfull; one office may comprehend both these duties, and the comparison may lye in their personall excellencies, one may excell in the governing part of the office, and the other person in the doctrinall part; one may heare the causes and differences of his brethren well, and yet be but a dull preacher: another may preach excellent well, and yet be an unpatient and peevish judge: or not to counte∣nance your Ecclesiasticall government so farre: the Scripture hath these effects, it is profitable for doctrine, reproofe, cor∣rection, instruction; one Ministers excellencie may lye in la∣bouring in doctrine and instruction, and this may be his that laboured in word and doctrine: he that reproveth and corre∣cteth may be said to rule, and then there is no place for your Lay-elders: but if this place doe set up your Lay-elder, and the dif∣ference is in two distinct offices, that here is an Elder that doth governe, and doth not preach; then preaching and governing be the differences, and differences be convertable with their subjects: so that if one doe governe, and not preach; the other must preach and not governe: and this agreeth plainly with the 1 Pet. 5.3. not as governing the flock, , nique ut dominautes, not as Lords: for my part I know not how Lordship and government doth differ one from another, dominus
and dominari,  and , be denominatives: he that go∣verneth is a Lord, and he that is a Lord governeth: to imagine that ambition and pride, injury and oppression, or any such vice, did necessarily belong to a Lord, is very injurious unto the very title and honour of a Lord. That more reckoning hath been made of this dominion, then acts of piety: to this Mr. Gillespie seemeth to adhere, that all the rest is worth nothing without this: further occasion will be given to speake of these things. Mr. Coleman doth desire doctrine, and wisheth the Civill Ma∣gistrate to take Government: Doctrine is committed to the Mi∣nisters of the word, by Commission from Christ, Mat. 28. and that Commission is to last to the end of the world: this Mr. Cole∣man had reason to challenge as due from Christ, not the Church: but to the Ministers of the word, the Church hath no where po∣wer to preach the Gospell, but the Apostles and their successors unto the end of the world: and therefore, as before he had im∣plied, that the preaching of the Gospel would take up the whole man, especially in our time: our knowledge of the Scriptures is to be acquired by ordinary means, tongues for the language, ex∣ercise and art for the argument, that the word might be preached in the demonstration, and argument of the Scripture, and not in the enticing words of mens wisdome: well might Mr. Cole∣man call for Schools of Divinity, that there might be unity found among the Preachers of the Gospell; nothing more conducing to unity, then the continuall exercise in Schooles: the very people complaine, women, and such as are well minded: why do not you Ministers meet, and dispute it out among your selves, one teacheth one thing, and another another thing, and we are much troubled and disquieted by it: there is use of Schooles, or otherwise it would never be set up in Universities: Paul dis∣puted daily in the Schoole of one Tyrannus: Mr. Coleman tel∣leth the Parliament that this would advance Religion, more in sewer years, then since the Reformation. Mr. Gillespie cannot but confesse, that this would bee a means to make a learned Clergie, but it seemeth more good will come by discipline, than by all that: and to let us know that learning and maintenance may be without purity of Religion, he instanceth in the Jesuits:
it is true, when men have their judgements forestled by cor∣rupt education, and they employed, as the Popes vassals to bee serviceable to his, and their owne ambitious ends, they have all their learning and endeavours poysoned: but yet it may be said for the Jesuits, that we have our Comments from them, and our books are very mean, and not savouring of that industry which theirs doe; if we had taken the same course to maintaine the truth, that they have to maintaine their errors, their mouths had long ere this been stopped, and the world had beene as full of good books in defence of truth, as now it is with their poysoned labours: but they shail rise up in judgement against us in the day of the Lord. Had learning flourished amongst us as it might have done, such heresies and divisions as we now languish under, had never appeared amongst us: our Sermons had not beene so full of words and empty of argument as now they are: all men vent∣ing their owne private opinions, scarce two men found that state any Question in Divinity alike, all because Ministers are not ac∣quainted with one anothers arguments and opinions, untill they vent them among the people, 1. Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speake two or three, and let the other judge: where ye see the Prophets must vent their opinions, first among the Prophets, and not among the people: what they preach among the peo∣ple, ought to be digested among themselves, by argument from the word, not carried by vote; where major pars spe vincat me∣liorem: for Christ Jesus gave his Commission to all the eleven jointly, and their successors, unto the end of the world; and ther∣fore though they were guided by an infallible spirit, yet Gal. 2.2. Paul came up by the spirit to Jerusalem, with Barnabas and Ti∣tus, and communicated the Gospell that he preached among the Gentiles, lest he had run in vaine: much more are we bound to use all meanes to preserve the unity of the spirit: nay, wee have no authority to preach, without the approbation of all that are in the commission, by authority of Christ: if any shall object that it is unpossible Ministers at this day are of so many mindes, I an∣swer, it is a judgement fallen upon us, for that we have not used the meanes, nor doe know one anothers minde, and every man taketh upon him to make himselfe a Prophet, and be judge of his
owne gifts; or which is worse, make the people judge, and give them power to make or choose their Pastor: from which principle, the Independents build all their Indepency: yet the Presbyters many, nay for ought I can learne, upon debate in the Assembly, the Independents have gained, that the people have right to choose their Minister: I am sure Mr. Herle for want of skill, and Theologicall disputations, hath granted it them: and then no reason can deny them Independent Church governe∣ment, if any such thing be as Church government: as long as there be no Schooles, nor men, and matters, are not ripened there, the granting of a false principle is not very dangerous: few men can finde the fallacy; a Rhetoricall Sermon, and an Assembly vote will mend all; but a false principle is most rea∣dy to seduce the most discussive and knowing people. I am confident this one principle hath made all men of parts, and honesty, Independents, that are so; and were I satisfied that the people might elect their Minister, I should be Independent my selfe, though as I now stand affected, I thinke it the most de∣structive opinion, both to humane society, and sound religion; most contrary to the doctrine of the Gospell, the mind and au∣thority of Christ, as was ever broached since the Sun shone: as I am confident, if Schooles of Divinity were set up over all the Kingdome, in the Classes, and nothing but doctrine medled with, or such things as are in Scripture handled in a School way, would be made appeare unto the greatest defendents of that o∣pinion; they would finde their quaint epithets, and fine figures, their apt similitudes and dainty allusions, would make no syllo∣gismes: your plausible Preachers, that fill the world with these stirres, cannot endure the Schools; they wil tel you that Schools will spoile Preachers, best Schoolemen, worst Preachers: Schooles will fill the world with controversies and fallacies: they will tell you of Jesuits and Papists, and what not, to keepe off Schooles. But truth is, nothing but ignorance bringeth in diver∣sities of opinions, and men may be very near and plausible Prea∣chers, yet very ignorant: and his opnion and applause he hath gotten with the people, maketh him bold to vent some new opi∣nion, and then defend it who can, for he cannot: he can preach it, and Print something for it, but for a concluding argument, he knoweth not what to make of any such thing.
As for those arguments against Schooles, that many School∣men are bad Preachers, it is fallacia accidentis, non causa pro cau∣sa: so few men have skill of argument, so little used in preaching, that the Schooleman will not take paines to preach: I mind such few men as are noted for famous Schoolemen, whereas if all men were both exercised in Schooles and Pulpits, Controver∣sies would be silenced, and Pulpits filled, with such strength of argument out of Scripture, that tradesmen would keepe their shops, and coblers their stalles, and not adventure to get up into the Pulpit: whereas now they see that the using of allusions, and phrasing Scriptures, no otherwise then men may doe with na∣turall wit, and a little diligence will performe, and this hath cau∣sed them to turne Preachers: and if they should be silensed by force, they would thinke themselves wronged; but call them to their exercise, they will leave of themselves, and fall to their old imployments. But Mr. Gillespie is very zealous for keeping ordinances pure, though he hath not, nor ever will be able to proove, that any man by his sinne, can pollute the Sacrament to any other, but himselfe. But if they might, cannot men of any ordinary educa∣tion, if honest, be competent judges of such offences? but the Minister must be called from his Study to examine Drunkards, and Whores, and such notorious offences as these, as if none were fit to meddle with such matters but he. He adviseth the Par∣liament to give Christ his due; I hope they will be commanded that, but what that is, he cannot, or will not proove; we must content our selves with a little sauce of Rhetoricke; Abraham said Gen. 14.23. That I will not take from a threed to ashe latchet, and that I will not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldst say, I have made Abraham rich. But no Logicke to prove government to be established by Christ in the Church different from civill. The argument of the covenant is too low to be thought on in this Discourse: we are now in an higher region, then the words of the covenant; we are about Gods word, we hope there is no∣thing in the covenant contrary to Gods word; if there be, that must be thought on in another consideration: we may not leave enquiring into the word of God, for feare of the oath: this were a point equall to the highest of Popish tyranny.
The fourth rule, A Christian Magistrate is a Governour in the Church. Mr. Gillespie denieth not this. I know not if the Chri∣stian Magistrate governeth in the Church, what use there should be of any Governour beside him. I thought that the Church ha∣ving no officers in it, but such as Christ had set up, had ele∣cted elders, by the appointment of Jesus Christ: and that by your opinion Christ had beene the King of the Church, and had set up his kingdome, and set officers in his Church, and those had been officers in the Church, which Christ had appointed in it, and none other: if the Church be Christs Kingdome, surely such as governe in it, must receive commission from him, under the same apprehension, as he is King, which is as he is Mediator: their commission to governe in the Church, must be in this forme: Christ the Mediator, King of his Church, doth appoint Kings, and civill Magistrates to governe under him, or otherwise they cannot governe in the Church, if the Church be the Kingdome of Christ, for it cannot be imagined, that Christs Kingdome is ca∣pable of any mixture, as humane governments are; if Christ be a King, he hath Lawes, not out of the consent of the people, but he can and doth dare leges, unto which all the world is subject, Rom. 2.16. Judge all the world according to my Gospel. 2. Thes. 7.8. Jesus Christ shall come with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendring vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Gospell is the Gos∣pell of Christ, and the law by which Christ will judge all the world: if all the world be under the law of Christ, then the King∣dome of Christ must needs reach over all the world. 2. Christ at his resurrection declared mightily to be the Son of God, Rom. 14. Act. 2.36. Let the house of Israel confesse, that God hath made the same Jesus, whom yee have crucified, both Lord and Christ. Mr. Gillespie confesseth, That this day have I begotten thee, in the 2 Psalm is to be understood of the stating him in his King∣dome, which he prooveth out of Act. 13.33. If so, see, in the 2. Psal. 8. Aske of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for thy possessi∣on. Where ye see, God giveth unto Christ, all the earth for his inheritance: and further commandeth Kings to serve him: and
therefore is called under the appellation of the Lambe, tha can agree to Christ but only as a Mediator, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and in 1 Tim. 6.15. our Lord Jesus Christ is said to bee the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; Jesus Christ be names that agree to him only Mediator. 3. The Kingdome of Christ is as ample as his Prophesie; but the Prophesie of Christ is extended to all Nations, as may ap∣peare by the Commission, Goe teach all Nations: the doctrine which they must teach commands: now commands have al∣waies power and authority annexed to compell obedience; or otherwise they are but vaine commands, verball, and frustrate. 4. No calling can admit the appellation of pious, and godly which is not under Christ; and this is that enrichment of which St. Paul speaketh of 1 Cor. 1.5. where hee telleth them they were enriched in all things in Christ, and v.30. Christ is said to be made unto us wisdome, righteousnesse, sanctification, and redemption: no holinesse without Christ; all our holinesse doth consist in our obedience to Christ: if therefore Kings may bee called holy, if their offices may be accounted holy offices, or not sinfull, they must be held off, and under Christ, without whom they cannot be pleasing to God, Ps. 72.11. All Kings shall fall downe before him, all Nations shall doe him service: upon which Calvin hath these words, In ecclesia & grege Christi esse regibus locum ques hic David non exarmat gladio, nec diademate spo∣liat, ut admittat in ecclesiam: sed cum sua dignitate venturos esse dicit, ut se coram Christo prosternant: Kings have place in the Church and flocke of Christ, whom David here doth neither disarme of their sword, nor spoile of their crowne to admit them into the Church: but saith that they shall come with their dignity, and cast themselves downe before Christ. 5. That office which Christ hath declared to be of God, and bounded and limited in his Gospell, that office is held under Christ as mediator; but the Civill Magistrate is so, Rom. 13.4. he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath on them that doe evill; thus far Christ hath to doe with the Civill Magi∣strate, to declare the minde of God concerning him, and to com∣mand every soule to be subject to him; here is as much, and more from Christ, then Mr. Gillespie will ever finde out for his Church
officers for all the Scripture of the New Testament came from the Propheticall office of Christ; and he was promised at the gi∣ving of the Law, Deut. 18.15. and thus Peter Act. 3. and Stephen Acts 7. preached: and John 4.25. the woman of Samaria knew that the Messia should teach all things: what Paul preached was in the name of Christ, for he was a vessell to carry the name of Christ before the Gentiles, and Kings, Acts 9.15. if Kings are not beholding to Christ for their offices, they are for the obe∣dience of their subjects, without which the office of a Civill Ma∣gistrate is little worth. 6. The Civill Magistrates office, and Christs office, both Kingdoms over the same subjects: either the office of the Media∣tors Kingdome is superiors inferior, or coordinate, I leave to any Christian to determine; but it may be it will be answered that the Civill Magistrate and Christ are conversant about divers kindes of objects, though they be the same persons that are un∣der Christ, and the King; yet it is in divers considerations, to divers ends, and by divers means, for the ends, Christs ends and the Kings ends are both one, 1 Tim. 2.2. that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honesty, as for divers means that the officers of the Church use when that censure or Church government which is talked of, is proved out of 1 Cor. 5. Mat. 18. or any place of Scripture, it shall be answered God willing. I passe by Mr. Gillespies businesse of the little ewe lambe, that he would have kept, I say let the ewe lambe alone. It argues no∣thing, and therefore I answer nothing: But Mr. Coleman can finde no other government instituted, but Civill, and this is laid to him as a great carelessenesse, that sought no better into the Scriptures then so: Mr. Gillespie hath found in many places the institution of the Church officers, he findes that more subjection and obe∣dience is commanded as due, not only to civill, but spirituall go∣vernours, to those that are over us in the Lord, 1 Thess. 5.12. Mr. Gillespie seeth more then the text yeeldeth, here is no men∣tion made of obedience at all, here is know them, and esteeme them highly: but there is , which is translated over you: but Passor telleth us that , with a genitive case signifieth pracedo, and then it signifieth no more but them that
goe before you, either by doctrine or example, here is no∣thing of institution: whatsoever this person that is to be belo∣ved, he is supposed, not instituted in this place, the subject is supposed, not handled in any science: love and honour is due to the Preacher of the Word, who is said to goe before them they teach: but what is this to government? Heb. 13.7. Remember them that rule over you, there is , which is ducum, them that lead you, here is not obedience, nor subjection, but remem∣ber, and imitate their faith: yea but in the 17 verse, there is o∣bey and rule over you, but that is (as before) them that lead you, the word is , which is no more but be perswaded: I deny not but it is often translated obey, but it commeth from , which is persuadeo to perswade. Passor telleth us, it is verbum forense, a word whereby the advocates perswade the Judges; I hope ye will not say when an advocate by pleading Law, doth perswade the Iudges, that the Iudges doe obey the advo∣cate: but let the word stand as it is translated (yet when it is so rigorously wrought upon, it cannot be enforced, interpretation belongeth not to the disputant) Obey: yet is it not alway cor∣rellative to the command of a superiour: obedience is some∣times founded on the authority of the superior, sometimes on the good and benefit of him that doth obey, without any colour or claime of superiority or government: so the patient obeyeth the Physitian, so that master that imployeth a cunning work∣man, must be ruled by his workman; yet neither the one, nor the other claime government over his patient or workmaster: and upon this ground the Holy Ghost requireth obedience here, not by an argument from the authority of him that leadeth them, but from the benefit that commeth to themselves, for that is unpro∣fitable for you, Rom. 12.8. The argument that Mr. Gillespie draweth hence is not out of the place, but the interpretation of the place, and therefore nothing in confutation of Mr. Coleman; for he did not say he found no institution in Gualter and Bullen∣ger, but in Scripture, though Gualter and Bullenger are for Mr. Coleman, as Beza confesseth, whatsoever they say upon the place, Mr. Gillespie should prove institution of Church government out of Scripture, the disputant may not interpret that is the answe∣rers part, as before.
Mr. Coleman saith, Christ hath placed Magistrates in his Church, for which he citeth 1 Cor. 12.28. Eph. 1.3 last verses, to prove all government given to Christ, and Christ as Mediator: I have proved this a truth: though I have left out those argu∣ments that Mr. Gillespie doth confute in answer to Mr. Coleman, because I shall have occasion to speake in his just vindicati∣on of them. Having recited Mr. Colemans words, he argueth against them ab incommodo, He cannot upon these grounds assert the authority of either Heathen or Christian Magistrate. For the Heathen Magi∣strate, I say let Baall plead for himselfe: but it will be easier for Mr. Coleman to prove the Heathen Magistrate unlawfull, then for Mr. Gillespie to vindicate him. First, it is sin for a man to be an Heathen, and such for which Christ will come, rendring vengeance in flaming fire, because they doe not know God, nor obey the Gospell of Jesus Christ, 2. Thess. 1.8. If any man shall say that Heathen doe know God, let Christ confute him: No man knoweth the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveale him, Matt. 11.27. And for his government, if sin be lawfull, it is lawfull: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Rom. 14.23. If yee speake of jus humanum, and usurpation in humane estimation: this is out of the question. But I wonder a Christian should doubt, whether it be the duty of all men to be Christians, and that it is sinne in them that are not, which yet it were not, if it were lawfull for them to enjoy their Heathen condition. Joh. 16.9. The Holy Ghost when he is come, will convince the world of sin, because they beleeve not in me, sayth our Saviour: Quod malum in so non potest esse modaliter bonum: That which is evill in it selfe, cannot be circumstantially good. If to be a Heathen be sin, to governe as a Heathen cannot be good. Next, is a blow given to a Christian Magistrate, because the brother must proove a Deputyship, or Vicegerentship by com∣mission from Christ; I conceive he hath commission from Christ to be Gods instrument to punish the evill doer, and doe good to him that doth well: againe, hath any Magistrate commission to be Christian, or may they be Christians, and not obey Christ? I conceive the Prophets are good Expositors of the condition of
Christs Kingdome. Ps. 72.11. All Kings shall fall downe be∣fore him, all Nations shall serve him. Esay 60.12. That Nation and Kingdome that will not serve thee shall perish. But I follow Mr. Gillespie, God and Nature hath made Magi∣strates, and given them great authority, but of Christ, as mediator, they have it not. There is the affirmation; see the proofe. Church officers, sayth Mr. Gillespie, have their power from Christ, as mediator, and they are to manage their offices under, and for Christ. And this he proveth, for that they doe the duties of their offices, in the name of our Lord Iesus Christ. And the duties of Church officers he citeth, fowre: 1. come together: 2. Preach: 3. baptize: 4. excom∣municate: and all these are done in the name of Jesus, but the Magi∣strate is not to performe any part of his duty in the name of Jesus. And for all these he bringeth places of Scripture, to proove the affir∣mative, which I shall endevour to examine according to lawes of disputation. The first is, in his name we meet together, Matt. 18.20. We, sayth Mr. Gillespie, meet: and urgeth it to proove the institution of Church officers; he maketh short worke of it, but weake, no ar∣gument. The Text sayth, when two or three are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst: It sayth not they are Church offi∣cers, neither doth it say, none shall gather together in my name, but Church officers, or I am in the midst of none but Church offi∣cers. Well, I excuse Mr. Coleman, if he see no institution of the Church officers out of that place, and I hope so will all men, e∣ven Mr. Gillespie himselfe, upon due consideration. 2. In his name we doe preach; that is out of the question: of other governments, I find no institution, sayth Mr. Coleman: he spea∣keth not of the commission to preach, and therefore let that go. 3. In his name we baptize, Act. 2.38. be baptized in the name of Iesus, Act. 19.5. These places he citeth, to proove we baptize in the name of Iesus, as mediator, as exclusively to Father, and Holy Ghost, (leaving out the words of the commission Matt. 28. baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) for so the state of his question doth require; for he distinguisheth acutely, and accurately, betweene Christ as Mediator, and second person in Trinity, in all this argument: and so abuseth these places to proove, that we must baptize in the name of Christ, exclusive to
the other persons of the Trinity, which is contrary to the words of the commission, and the practise of all Churches: but this is quite out of Mr. Gillespies businesse, which is to proove other go∣vernment instituted besides civill. 4. In his name we excommunicate; this is to the purpose: proove that Mr. Gillespie 1. Cor. 5.5. to deliver such a one to Satan: he maketh great haste, no more adoe, but we excommunicate: heere is no argument; deliver to Sathan is not to excommuni∣cate, at least they be different termes; which rules of disputation will not allow. But grant that it were excommunication, and that Paul did excommunicate, as in plaine termes he did deliver to Sathan Hymineus and Alexander, 1 Tim. 1.20. so in this place being well viewed it will appeare, that St. Paul saith, I have de∣creed in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Sathan. The decree was Pauls, and not the Corinthians, though it might possible have been an act of the Corinthians, yet no way appertaining unto you, I mean under the notion of a Church, and yet officers of the Church is a terme somewhat more remote; and yet still far∣thest of all from institution: for grant Paul had in termes said, let the Elders of the Church excommunicate, yet he had not instituted, but supposed an institution, this might have proved an esse, not the institution nisi remote. Thus have I examined his argument by rule. Give us Schooles of divinity, that wee may no more be troubled with such arguments. But let us further examine what these mediums (or some of them) will yeeld being closer put: Mr. Gillespie doth appropriate the meeting in the name of Christ, to the officers of the Church, and that is his medium to prove their institution from Christ, as Mediator: we must come for the clearing of this point, to con∣sider what it is to doe a thing in the name of Christ: it is true, much use is made of this comming together in the name of Christ, in the argument of generall Counsells; but this priviledge of comming together in the name of Christ appropriate to Bi∣shops in a generall Councell, our Learned will not allow. Mr. Whittaker, Quis ferat cos sic loquentes, dum quae communiae sunt omnibus Christianis ad paucos restringunt, who can endure them to speake so while they restraine those things to a few, that be∣long
to all Christians? where you see he will not endure these two or three to be understood of Church officers, but of any Christi∣ans. But let us see what he saith, it is to be gathered in the name of Christ: he saith, To bee gathered in Christs name, In Christi nomine congregari due significat: Primum eos qui con∣veniunt esse veros & sinceres Dei cultores, & sanae Religionis professores, quam non aliunde nisi Scripturae didiscerunt, nam qui alio modo Deum colunt quam quo ille coli vult, quantumvis max∣insi praesules fuerint in ecclesia, non tamen in Christi nomine con∣gregantur: secundum ut eo animo conveniant, ut Christi mandato per omnia obediant, ut que eas se∣cum affectiones afferant, ea studia eas voluntates, quae pios Christi ministres deceant ut nihil propter Dei gloriam quaerant, aut sibi proponant, ut veritatem ex Scripturis inquirant, inventam aliis commendent, non ut suum regnum stabiliant, &c. signifieth two things: 1. That those that come toge∣ther are true and sincere wor∣shippers of God, and profes∣sors of the true Religion, which they have not learned elsewhere but from Scripture: For who so worship God any other way then as he will bee worshipped, though they bee great Prelates in the Church, yet are not gathered together in Christs name. 2. That they come together with that mind, that they may obey the com∣mand of Christ, that they bring with them those affecti∣ons, those desires, those inten∣tions, which become godly Ministers of Christ. That they seeke or propound nothing to themselves besides Gods glory, that they search for truth in Scri∣pture, and having fonnd it, commend it to others, not for the e∣stablishing of their owne Kingdome. Thus far I hope ye will agree that others besides Church offi∣cers, may be qualified to meet in the name of Christ: first, that they may be the true worshippers of God, that they may learne to worship God according to his will out of the Scriptures, they may have good affections to obey Christ, they may seeke Gods glory, and not the setting up their owne Kingdome: I hope the Parliament is so gathered, and Christ is amongst them. Bishop Mourton saith, to bee duly gathered in the name of Christ, is with sincere hearts to invocate him, and to subscribe to
his revealed truth; this may bee done by others beside Church officers; and I hope our Parliament doth so. But see cleerely out of the Scripture, that a thing may be sayd to be done in the name of Christ, or of God, when men doe any thing in confidence that God will assist us: so Psal. 20.5. In the name of our God will we set up our banners, in confidence God will assist us: thus I hope the Parliament, and other Christians may undertake the businesse in the name of Christ, in confidence of Christs assistance, as mediator, for whose sake the worke they are employed about, shall be acceptable to God. Secondly, in the name of Christ, a thing is sayd to bee done, that is done in the authority, roome, and place of Christ, as if Christ should doe it himselfe: and thus officers of the Church, Mr. Gillespie would have act, under Christ, and none but they. And this, if granted, will not proove a Church government, seeing a man may preach in the name of Christ, and yet not governe in the name of Christ; for preaching is the worke of Christ as well as government. But as mediator, Christ hath given no such power and com∣mission to the Magistrate: and this hee prooveth, because Christ hath none to give, as Mediator he would not judge, therfore he had no civill power, Luke 12.14. To this so farre as the argu∣ment: it doth not follow that because Christ was not a judge, a∣ctu exercito, therefore the originall right of government was not in him: and this objection may be answered thus; Christ did not say, he was not a judge, but who made me a judge? how doest thou know that I am a judge? and thus Christ in the time of his humiliation did often hide the manifestation of his power: and as for Joh. 18.36. My kingdome is not of this world, I know not how it argueth more for Church government then for civill: as if those governments that should be executed by Church offi∣cers should favour lesse of the world then the civill government: but he falleth to an admiration, as if the thing were unpossible, that the power which Christ hath received of his father, should be derived to the civill Magistrate, but no reason to shew the wonder. He confesseth that Christ as he is eternall God, doth with the Fa∣ther and Holy Ghost, reigne over the Kingdomes of the earth: he that
is the mediator, being God, hath of God all power in heaven and earth, and this power was given, Matt. 28.18. both by eternall generation, and declaration at his resurrection. These be phrases that doe asto∣nish me, that any thing should be given to Christ, as God, if gi∣ven it had beene robbery to have taken without leave; but any thing should be given him that should concerne his Godhead at the time of his resurrection, is more monstrous: but let be, if this place bee understood of the power that Christ hath as second Person in Trinity, and not as Mediator, then he had no authority as Mediator to send his Apostles: for by this authority, hee sent forth his, Apostles to preach the Gospell; and if that were not the authority that was given him as Mediator, than ye have lost your commission, which ye so much boast of, and had not so much as the right to preach under Christ as Mediator: All au∣thority is given me in heaven and earth, goe yee therefore and preach: from this authority here spoken of, i the authority to preach the Gospell; now it is most cleare that he had authority to preach the Gospell as Mediator, as I have formerly proved. Mr. Gillespie saith, That hee that is the Mediator being God, hath power to subdue his Churches enemies but as Mediator, hee hath no other Kingdome, but his Church, as God and as Media∣tor, those be termes strangely opposed the Mediator cannot be conceived but as God and man; and that Kingdome which be∣longeth to the second Person in Trinity, cannot be said to be gi∣ven to Christs, but is the Kingdome of God, because opera Trini∣tat ad extra sunt indivisae: but the Kingdome of Christ is admi∣nistred by him, whilst he is at the right hand of the Father by the power of his Godhead: Christ the Mediator doth many things as God, which could not be performed by man, and many things performed by the humane nature, which were not agreeable to the divine: it became us to have a Mediator perfect God, and perfect man, and accordingly in the state of humiliation Christ, did work as God and man, he wrought his miracles, healed dis∣eases, commanded windes and sea, and did manifest his divine power by knowing the hearts of men, and now in the state of glory: shall he have one Kingdome as Mediator, and another as God? as Mediator is used in an ambiguous sense, let it be spo∣ken plaine, as Mediator hee worketh as God and as man▪ both
which actions are actions of his person, per communication ∣matu, Mediator is not a third nature, either he doth what Mr. Gillespie entendeth as God, or as man, the natures are not con∣founded, hee doth nothing as Mediator, which he doth not as God, or as man, or as man assisted by God in more then an or∣dinary manner; shall the Mediator be spoyled of his Godhead to set up a supposed Kingdome in the Church, different from the civill? He that is the Mediator being God, hath power to subdue his, and his Churches enemies, and to make his foes his footstoole; but as Mediator he is only the Churches King, head and governour: why doth Mr. Gillespie shuffle thus? why doth hee not speake plainly, and make his oppositions cleare, ad idem? and say, as Mediator he hath no such power, as Mediator he is God, but it seemeth God without power to subdue his enemies. But when he had affirmed that Christ is King, head and go∣vernour of his Church only (where is couched fallacia plurium interrogationum, the word head in a more peculiar sense, may bee ascribed to the Church, then King, and governour) he proveth that it is so, by branding those that deny it with Phoinianisme; but if that be erronious, here Deodate upon Ezek. 1.26 speaking of the likenesse of a man, saith it was the Son of God, head of the Church, and King of the universe: and Rom. 10.12. by his death and resurrection, hath gotten him a title to be Lord over all men. And Calvin upon the Eph. 1.20. Sedere fecit in dextrae; dextra non locum, sed potestatem significat; quam pater Christo con∣tulit, ut ejus nomine Coeli, & terrae imperium administret; he made him sit on his right hand, right hand doth not signifie place but power, which the Father bestowed on Christ, that in his name he might rule heaven and earth: and after, Cum dextrae Dei coe∣lum, & terr impleat, sequitur regnum Christi ubique diffusum, for as much as the right hand of God doth fill heaven and earth, it followes that the Kingdome of Christ is spread all over. If there∣fore Christ as mediator sitteth at the right hand of God, his Kingdome as mediator is extended over heaven and earth. Again, all mankind lost not only dominion, but all right to the use of the creatures, and Christ as mediator is made heire of all things. Heb. 1.2. where the state of Christs mediation, his Pro∣pheticall, Priestly, and Kingly office, are at large set out, his hu∣miliation
to a lower condition then the condition of Angels by death: and after is exalted: and in the chap. 2.8. thou hast put all things in subjection under his feet, in that hee put all things under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. I hope no man dare say, that he was made lower then the Angells as the second person in Trinity: now if hee had spoken of Christ as mediator, that in that respect he had been humbled, and exalted in another respect, to wit, as the second Person in Trinity, all things had been put under him, the antythesis had not beene ad idem. Againe God is said to put all things under him, whereby it is implied that all things were not under him, before they were put under him, but as the second Person in Trinity; so nothing could be said to be put under him, because they were in that re∣spect alwaies under him: And lastly, nothing is excepted from this subjection, 1 Cor. 15.28. the Son also himselfe shall be sub∣ject to him that put all things under him, so Christ hath domini∣on over all things, they are put under his feet in such a condition, in such a consideration, as he himselfe is subject to God, but in the consideration that Christ is the second person of Trinity, so he is not inferiour to God the Father, therefore he hath not all things put under his feet as second Person in Trinity. Phil. 2.8.9.10. being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himselfe, and became obedient to death, even the death of the crosse; wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name, that in the name of Iesus every knee should bow; you see he that was in the forme of a servant, was exalted under that description, and so high that every knee should bow to him: but as second Person in Trinity, hee was not found in the forme of a servant, but as mediator, so he was God in the forme of a servant. But Mr. Gillespie hath a distinction between, dignity, power, and kingdome, but proveth only a posse, that such a distinction is conceiveable, and may be found in earthly Kings, but a posse ad esse in Christ, non valet consequentia: but here I further note that Mr. Gillespie in the close of his brotherly examination, when hee commeth to apply this his distinction to the mediator; he saith, as mediator he exerciseth acts of divine power, and omnipotencie over all creatures in the behalfe, and for the good of his Church, and restrai∣neth
or diverteth, or destroyeth all his Churches enemies, notwith∣standing in the 43 page, he denieth any such working to belong to Christ as mediator; but as God, whereby yee may see how weake these grounds are; and how small a matter it is for a Rhe∣torician to forget himselfe in the following of an argument. There remaineth now that something bee said in vindication of Mr. Coleman from the charge of mis-application of two Scri∣ptures. The first is the 1 Cor. 12.28. hee citeth to prove civill govern∣ments in the Church; unto which Mr. Gillespie saith, first if by go∣vernments in that plate, Civill Magistrates were understood, yet that place saith not, that Christ hath placed them, then à foreiori, you disclaime by that means any government in this place as officers under Christ. I thought Mr. Gillespie: would not have let goe the hold he hath under Christ, for his Church governments from this place so easie: Mr. Coleman need not trouble him false about proving that they were put in the Church under Christ: I hope if in the Church they will be content to be Christs Vicars, or else if Mr. Coleman will be ruled by me, so as Mr. Gillespie will not urge this for constitution of Church governments, hee shall let it goe. God hath placed governments in his Church, and if they be meant civill governments, hee hath gotten thus much, that civill governours are in the Church by Gods appointment; and then I hope Mr. Gillespie will not deny the roome that God hath given them in the Church, upon this ground that God hath nothing to doe to place them there, they should have come in by Christ. Hee brings an argument out of Calvin, because the Apostle spake of such governments as the Church had at that time, but the Church had no civill Christian Magistrates at that time; on∣ly the major of that argument wanteth proofe, that the Apostle speaketh of such officers as were in the Church in his time only: that cannot be proved; I shall urge some few arguments to the contrary: the word  will not enforce is, seeing that word will signifie proposuit or decre, as well as posuit, he hath appoin∣ted: and that may take in, not onely such officers, the present state of the Church did affoord, but also hose as should hear cas∣ter, by Gods appointment, come to the Church: and this is plain
that in sundry places the word doth so signifie, as Joh. 15.16. I have ordained you, that you shall goe and bring forth fruit, Act. 19.21. Paul purposed, both made by  and , yet both are referred to time to come: and then that which you translate pla∣ced, may be rendred, he hath appointed to his Church the exe∣cution referred to the providence of God, when he shalbe plea∣sed to affoord his Church the enjoyment of these severall en∣dowments and gifts: for it is plaine, there is in that catalogue, some such as the Church shall not alwayes have; and why not some also, which at that time the Church had not? This cannot be a catalogue of such officers as are at all times necessary to the Church; for then Apostles, might not be mentioned; because the Church is, and long time hath beene without them, as work∣ers of miracles. 2. At that time there were workers of miracles, which did supply the defect of civill Magistrates, which is to workt upon naturalls, to induce men to attend upon the means, Act. 8.6. And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing, and seeing the miracles which he did. Thus much a nationall covenant, and civill Magistrate, may require of the people, that they will attend upon the meanes, out of naturall principles, Deum esse, & : in the maner of which worship, so farre as concerneth the externall education: from youth, and tradition, instruction of parents, and humane lawes, are the foundations and the bounds of nationall and pub∣lique worship: and upon this ground the Israelites were com∣manded to reach their children the Law of God; and God en∣tred into covenant with the father, for the child, as with Abra∣ham: and the same obligation lieth upon Christian parents to in∣struct their children, Eph. 6.4. And you fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the urture and admonition of the Lord. Which yet they might not, if the doctrine of the Go∣spell might not be received of the father, for the son, and the fa∣ther might not require of his son the forme of doctrine. Saint Paul calleth the doctrine of the Gospell, Rom. 6.7. a forme: God be thanked ye have obeyed the forme of doctrine, that was delivered unto you, 2. Tim. 1.13. Hold fast the so me of sound words which thou hast heard of me: this is called fides quō
crdimus, and this may be the obligation of humans society: and God, and Christ, and Scripture, may be agreed on by naturall men, even as Idolaters set up their worship; yet if the Scripture be received for the rule, there is a sound forme of words, and he that heareth and beleaveth, and obayeth from the heart, shall be saved, though the Magistrate and Minister should drive on to po∣litique and ambitious ends, yet the beleever shall bee saved; and this is the assistance and helpe the Church can have from a civill Magistrate: and how great a mercy is this to Gods people when all incouragement shall be given to the preaching of the Gospel? when the lust and riot of a people shall be restrayned by the civil Magistrate: men that refuse to heare the word punished in their persons and estates, and thereby for feare of the Magistrate bee brought to the meanes, God must judge of the successe, as like∣wise give it. Compare this with the contrary motions of autho∣rity, by fire and sword to suppresse the Gospel, and then see whe∣ther this be not indeed helps to the Church, which though those times wanted, yet God appointed that after ages should have; and in the meane time did cause men to attend to the meanes by miracles. I have proved that the people were inclined to hear∣ken to doctrine by miracles, which moveth naturall men to flock together to see strange things: if a mount chancke come and tell people be both medicines of strange operations, to cure and kill, to wound and heale, how will people flocks together to heare and see some strange thing? est natura heminum novimtis avids: I have likewise shewed you that people may and ought to re∣ceive God, and Christ; and Scripture, by publique consent: and whatsoever it received by publique consent is an act of humane law, and to be acted by the civill Magistrate. Now God doth not worke miracles, but to supply defect of naturall meanes, when they are wanting: Christ cured, when Physitians could not: maketh wine of water when they had no wine: provided Manna, when they were in the wildernes, and wanted provision, which coased when they enjoyed the provi∣sion of the Land. When the Gospell was first, and nations were not converted, then miracles were necessary to cause attention: but after, when nations were converted, which Christ sent out his Disciples to doe, with all speed, then there will be no use of
miracles: attention and use of meanes may be agreed upon, the effect of them every man is concerned to looke to for his owne salvation: and happy are we if we can enjoy the meanes with∣out Inquisitions, and faggots, and bloud. And to looke nearer into the Text, to see that this was but an appointment, and not a present execution: lye have not heere a continued catalogue, but ye have these interruptions, , then , then , all these might be present, and liable to view: then ye have , and to that ye have annexed miracles: they lasted somewhat longer then the Apostles and Prophets: and last ye have , and these may be ordinary gift: healing, if distinguished from miracles, is an ordinary gift: so are divers tongues; and there remayneth no more but helps, governments, and what these helps are, Calvin confesseth he cannot tell: hee thinketh they were some officers the Church hath lost: men are mightily troubled for want of officers, but being put both in one case without any conjunction copulative, why they may not belong both to one thing, and this  may not have some influ∣ence upon the times and after age; seeing this catalogue is super∣additum ecclesia, and the gifts mentioned, not limited by their ends, but onely noted as different gifts, to note that all have not the like qualifications: but in Eph. 4.11. there when the Apostle setteth downe officers, as meanes to the ends which in actions and moralls have a great influence upon the nature of the thing: he leaveth out helps and governments, and reckoneth only fowr: Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Teachers; all but Teach∣ers imployed about the word it selfe, the foundation, penmen of the word, no more left to us but the Teacher, and he alone with the helpe of the labours, of the Apostles, Prophets, and Evan∣gelists; for without them they can doe nothing: yet there this poore teacher is left alone to perfect the Saints, to performe the worke of the Ministry, to edifie the body of Christ: heere is nei∣ther helpe, nor government, yet all these things done without them. Besides in that very place where S. Paul by an induction doth demonstrate that God hath appointed diversities of gifts, rec∣koneth all the rest, and skippeth over helpes, governments, and leaveth them wholly out, which of necessity he must doe where
he was in his induction to deale with their experience, if none such were to be found at that time, they might tell him you aske us whether all be helps and governments, we see no such thing; we are so far from thinking all governments, that we finde none at all, but why otherwise they should be left out I know not see∣ing they did cleerest set forth the difference that one member hath from another (especially to naturall men) which was S. Pauls argument, and therefore I thinke there were none then. He hath two other arguments to shew the mis-application of this text, but are trifles not worth answer. The first is the catalogue of Church officers. The Magistrate is behinde the Minister. Next he citeth Eph. 1.21, 22, 23. to prove that all govern∣ment is given to Christ, and to him as mediator, and Christ as head of these, is given to the Church: Mr. Gillespie saith this place maketh more against him then for him; something for him by your confession, is the Scripture contrary to it selfe, in the same place pro and con, The Apostle saith not that Christ is gi∣ven to the Church a head of all principalities and powers: The brother saith so, and in so saying, he maketh Christ a head to those that are not his body. 1 Is This a very nice exception, the text saith plainly that the power of God shewed it self in Christ; 1 in raising him from the dead. 2 In setting him at the right hand of God, which Calvin expoundeth to signifie the power which the Father be∣stowed upon Christ: and further saith that these words of the 21 vere far above principality is an exegesis, explaining the right hand of God, the words are, hee set him at his owne right hand far above principalities, &c. but in 22, he gave him to bee head over all things to his Church; he saith not head over principali∣ties, but all things; here is great cause of exception, here is farre above principalities, but not head; here is head of all things, but not principalities: may not hee that is farre above be called the chiefe or head; or may not he that is head of all things, bee well called head of Principalities: it is true, disputations doe require men to keep close to termes; but in Col. 2.10. ye have the very words, head of all principalities and powers; the brother is to blame for saying so: why may not the brother speake, as St. Paul speaketh; but it seemeth the Commissioner will confute St. Paul
inso saying, hee shall make Christ head of them that are not his body. Well the Commissioner will not have Christ head of any but his body, then I trust he is not head of your Presbytery, for then he must be head of many that are not of his body; for howsoever men may by rules of charity have the estimation of members of Christ, yet certainly Christ is head of none but his elect; no vi∣sible Church can challenge the priviledge of being the members of Christ, every faithfull man may, but the visible Church can∣not; I desire this may be proved, that unbeleevers and hypocrites are members of Christ. If in the visible Church if Christ be con∣sidered as head of the Church, which doth by his mediation con∣vey the graces of justification and sanctification upon the faith∣full; so the visible Church is not the body of Christ, as having many members that have no life of grace, nor any such growth as is mentioned, Eph. 4.15. in that argument, that government that Christ hath over the faithfull, is truly spirituall, and not of this world, and of this Kingdome he hath indeed no officers, but his Spirit; all these members have immediate union with Christ by faith. As for applying that distinction of the exaltation of Christ in respect of honour and dignity; but not his Kingly office to the interpretation of this text, that Christ is in more honour then any creature; but he executeth his Kingly office as mediator over the Church only; and the Apostle saith only he is far above them: he saith not he is head or King of them. I hope the Com∣missioner will have the Holy Ghost speake sense, and make the comparison to bee made in all these things that he is preferred in, he sitteth nearer the right hand of God, then any principality: you will allow that Christ is here spoken of as mediator, as rai∣sed from the dead, and set at the right hand of God the Father: See what the Apostle saith; he saith, he is above principality, in principality; power, in power; might, in might; dominion, in dominion; power and might are  and , the first is right, the other is power to maintaine that right; thus the words must bee understood if the comparison bee artificiall, and a due comparison. I hope you cannot deny that all these in any ac∣ception, are under the right hand of God, and there Christ as mediator sitteth, and is nearer the right hand of God; in all these respects, he is above them, but not head: but if this had been to
be understood above in dignity only, that is in estimation: only this must have beene limited to estimation with God, for wee all know that he hath no such estimation among many names on earth, which yet hee is above even in their owne greatnesse, whensoever he is pleased to make use of that right hand of God, where he is set. For that his illustration as he called it, it is rather an aberra∣tion from the matter in hand, then any thing toward the mani∣festation of it; our excellencies, dignities and powers are so de∣rivative, and in estimation only, that they yeeld us no govern∣ment at all; no man can so far exceed another as to obtaine go∣vernment by his excellencie, without some law or consent of others to bestow it; this is nothing to the interpreter of the place: if all this had no more but expressed the dignity of Christ; what need all this accumulation of words, when all might have been expressed in this word, Hee is far above all dignities? for though here is a preferring of Christ before rights, and powers, and dominions, yet hee hath none of all these but dignities, and these are all in this world, and that which is to come: if yee un∣derstand the word World as many doe to make roome for the Church, he hath no dignity there neither: so all this majesty of words commeth to nothing in this world, and in the end of the world he layeth downe all to his Father. But volens, nolens, at last the Commissioner must come to it, Christ is head of princi∣palities: in the place before cited, Col. 2.10. but that is in another sense, not as he is mediator, but only as he is God: and the A∣postles meaning is nothing but this, that Christ is true God, doth he not meane also that he is true Christ, as well as that he is true God? and if Christ, doth he not meane that he is mediator? but the Commissioner saith, that in that place the Apostle sheweth is true God; doth that follow that speaketh not of Christ as me∣diator, because he speaketh of him as true God: is not Christ true God as mediator? he teacheth the Collossians not to worship Angells, because servants: but may they not worship Christ as Mediator? yes doubtlesse they may. Now it is plaine that hee speaketh of Christ as mediator, as may clearly appear both in the 9 verse and beginning of 10 verse, in him dwelleth the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily; that in Christ the mediator yee are com∣pleat
in him, that is as mediator: the text saith, that he is head of principality and power, that proveth that Christ is God, saith Mr. Gillespie, God not mediator? that is no consequence; yee ought not to worship Angells, who are but creatures, because ye are compleat in him that is God; and in him that is better then Angells, and is head over them, therefore not as mediator, but as second Person in Trinity? I see no consequence in this col∣lection. But it is plainly interpreted in the Colloss. 1.15.16.17. how Christ is head of principality and power: It is plaine in that place the A∣postle speaketh of Christ in whom we have redemption through his bloud; that is, as mediator, the image of the invisible God: that is, we have the knowledge of God made knowne to us in him, Joh. 1.18. that is as mediator, if by communication of pro∣perties the creation were attributed to Christ as God; is it there∣fore denied to him as mediator? well let the Commissioner, acute Philosophari do Deo, and say as God and not as mediator, he did create the world, and together with other things did cre∣ate principalities and powers: well, if it be not the office of the mediator to create the world: shall it not therefore bee in the compasse of the mediators office to governe any thing that was created? now here is a new distinction between the person and office of Christ, what kinde of division shall this bee? shall this be a lawfull distribution of Christs actions? some personall, some officiall, those things that prove Christ to be God, doe by no meanes belong to the office of Christ: he saith all this is to bee understood not of his governing and Kingly office, but to prove that he is true God: I formerly shewed that what doth belong to the second Person in Trinity, together with Father, and Holy Ghost, and is denied to belong to God man, doth in no sense belong to Christ: the person of Christ is God and man, no consideration of Christ but as God man; nothing can be said of Christ as second Person in Trinity in opposition to mediator, but in opposition to man, there may, as before. But here something hath the shew of an argument, that Christ hath two Kingdomes, one as God, other as Mediator, and that is taken from the continuation; hee hath a Kingdome that he shall lay downe unto God his Father: there is another that he shall
retaine together with God the Father, the first, he hath over the Church only; the second, over all the world: here is something said, but doth it appeare that the Kingdome that hee shall lay downe to God his Father is not over all the world? The laying open of this businesse will solve the whole knot, and lay the va∣nity thereof to the view of all the world. Christ hath a Kingdome which he will lay downe to God his Father, which Kingdom is also called eternall, 2 Pet. 1.11. which is understood of the Kingdome of grace; for he said, they should make their calling and election sure; then they should never fall, for so an entrance shall be made into the everlasting Kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Jesus: in this Kingdom he is sovereigne Lord, to none but those unto whom he is also a Saviour: now the word Kingdome is taken divers waies, sometimes for the subjects of the Kingdome, and in that sense, those that are the elect of God shall evermore be made subject to the government of Christ; sometime for the manner of administration, and so Christ in the day of judgement shall lay downe all the office of mediatorship; and that government by which now, and in the last day, not the Church only, but all the world shall be judged, Rom. 2.16. God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, and this is called the Kingdome of Christ, because by his media∣tion hath obtained from the Father that he shall not judge any man according to rigor, but as they are in, or out of Christ, all deferring of judgement from the wicked, is in and for Christ, which otherwise the justice of God would not allow; all the admission of us into the presence of God, is by the humanity of Christ, all conveying of grace to us is by Christ, he is to us wis∣dome, righteousnesse, sanctification, redemption: but when he hath overcome all his enemies, and presented all his elect to God his Father, and judged all that are out of him to eternall con∣demnation; then shall all that dispensation of justice cease, which is therefore called the Kingdome of Christ because by his Gospell all shall be judged, and by him, and for him, all that reigne for ever with God, shall be presented to him. Now this is not so to be understood, as saith Calvin, as if God the Father were idle while Christ reigned: that Majesty which God bestowed on Christ, was not convenient for bare man, but
in the nature that he was humbled he was exalted by the Father, and he gave him a name before whom every knee should bow, Phil. 2.9.10. in the government of the world, he is as it were the Vicar of his Father; it cannot be that the Father should be idle, while he is imployed, seeing he is the wisdome of the Father, and of the same essence with him; but the Scripture doth tell us, that Christ hath the government of heaven and earth instead of the Father, that wee should not thinke of any other Lord and go∣vernour but him, that we should looke for salvation only in him; we acknowledge God to bee governour but in the face of the man Christ: but then when Christ shall give up the Kingdome which he hath received, he shall not spoyle himself of his King∣dome, but transferre it from his humane nature, to his divine; because wee shall then have accesse to God, whither our infir∣mity will not now permit us to come; then the vaile being re∣moved we shall see God reigning in glory, without the media∣tion of the manhood of Christ. Now it is true, none are in pace Domini Regis, but the Church, nor all them neither, if ye speake of the visible Church: but shall not men be judged by Christ, for not knowing God, and for dis∣obedience to the Gospell? it is plaine, z. Thess. they shall; and the theeves, and disobedient transgressours, are under govern∣ment, aswell as more legall, and better subjects. But grant, that the Kingdome of Christ were in, and over his Church only, which will never bee prooved, nor dare I ever grant, but rethoricè, yet what is this for your different govern∣ment, from the civill? Christs Kingdome is administred in dextra Dei; and you sayd Mr. Coleman must proove if the civill Magi∣strate will be but King under Christ his deputation, may not the like be required of you, Mr. Gillespie? I pray proove any com∣mission issuing out from the Kingly office of Christ: Christ had three offices, his Priestly office finished in offering himselfe: his Kingly office we read how it came to him, sitting at the right hand of his Father, but any commission for any man to governe under him in that Kingdome, we read none: Tanta Majestas non convenit Christo homini, sayth Calvin upon 1. Cor. 15. And there∣fore, if the kingdome be such, as man cannot enjoy, it is such, as man cannot execute: and when Christ sayd, His kingdome was not of this world, be sayth, he had other maner of creatures then
men: he could procure many Angels, though one were enough to vindicate that kingdome. It is plaine Christ did delegate officers, to execute his prophe∣ticall office, and granted a commission to his Apostles to last to the end of the world; but his Kingly office he executeth, by the right hand of his Father, where he sitteth at the right hand of the Majesty on high: his prophesie he executed himselfe on earth, as a man, and when he left the earth, deputed officers to execute that office in his absence, till he returne to judge in the last day: obedience is due as well to a Prophet, as to a King, nay Kings themselves ought to obay the voyce of Prophets. Our Saviour telleth the Disciples sent but to the lost sheepe of the house of Is∣rael, Matth. 10. That he that despiseth them, despiseth him: if he will beare it, let us content our selves. Paul was an elect ves∣sel to carry the name of Christ before Kings, accordingly he doth in the name of Christ direct Kings, to doe their offices, as the in∣struments of God, and commandeth their subjects to obey them: the very word instrument doth implie, that they are in the hand of God, and therefore though instrumenta animalia, nay rationa∣lia, and so capable of an instruction, yet if they worke not ac∣cording to the minde of God, the right hand of God will rule them where Christ also sitteth in majesty. If Christ had three offices, let us take heed how we confound them: the office of his prophesie, is to teach: hee that will not heare the voyce of that Prophet, shall die the death: but the pas∣sing that sentence of death belongeth to another office, namely the Kingly office, for which Christ hath appointed an assize, which is called the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1.8. that ye may be blameles in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: all trans∣gressors are every where bound over, to answer their offences before Christ at his comming: but summons is the act of the Pro∣pheticall office of Christ committed unto us his Ministers: now what reason is it that we preach the necessity of their appeare∣ance to answer all their sinnes, infidelity, impenitency, before Christ, that we should without any commission of Oyer and De∣terminer, take upon us to censure these that the Gospell summon∣eth before the time come? Or if we grant further, that Christ hath granted the execution
of his Kingly office, to his Church, what is that to the Ministers? That is nothing to the Ministers, their worke is not dominion, but by the prophesie, and teaching to helpe sayth, which the ho∣ly Ghost hath separated, 2. Cor. 1.24. not that we have domini∣on of your faith, but are helpers of your joy. Let any man prove that a Minister hath any more to doe from Christ, then to teach and baptize, which of necessity you must if you imploy him jure divino, about government. God forbid wee should leave the word of God, and serve at Tables: the Bishops heeretofore did except counsell tables, and you must except consistory tables: or certainly, whether they have tables or no, your consistory im∣ployment: for there is as much impediment in that, as in other imployments to preaching the word. If then I say, this dominion be derived from Christ, though you must make as hard shifts to proove it, as the Pope to derive his authority from Peter: why should those that are the Ministers intermeddle? why should wee endevour to perswade men to make use of this sentence of excommunication, to set the people of God one against another? me thinkes our ayme should be to preach unity. St. Paul did every where preach this unity: and in the same Epistle wherein, upon occasion, he preacheth this ex∣communication, as you will have it, hee beginneth his Epistle with an exhortation to unity, among the people, and among the teachers, 1. Cor. 1.10.13. Now I beseech you brethren by the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye all speake the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joyned toge∣ther in the same minde, and in the same judgement. For ought I see, heere is nothing preached that may binde up the breaches, but as though nothing were intended but division, excommunication is the only subject: let us preach unity, a good while, that so they may get footing, to excommunicate heereafter, if any such thing doe appeare out of the word of God. If meanes were made for this unity first, when we can all agree about excommunication, we may have piety and peace in the injoiment of it: but blessed be God, now they be the same persons, the same qualifications requisite to acting in Church and common wealth: why should the same man in the field electing a Knight of the Shire, be divi∣ded against himselfe, as a Church man, and common wealths
man? why should this man choosing a Knight, act, by other principles then in chusing an elder? should he make choice of an holy man to be an elder, a wicked man for the Parliament? how much better were it for all men, to comfort themselves in this, that they doe injoy this Christian liberty, that nothing is layd up∣on them but by their owne consent (so as the consent of any hu∣mane society can be procured) we are as free in our estates, as in our consciences? and thus Christian liberty is to be understood: you are free, 1. Pet. 2.16. is not so to bee understood, that they ought not to subject themselves to the necessary rules of humane society, that Christians might make covenants of subjection, as in the election of a member of the Parliament, and then breake that covenant by Christian liberty, or to imagine your selves not borne under the lawes of your Country, because Christians. Thus far you are free by Christian liberty to obey parents in the Lord only: when your naturall parents, or parents of your country commands any thing against God, you are the Lords freee-men, God is above them. Blessed be Almighty God, our Magistrates professe it is their duty to be guided by the word of God; and happy are we that we have such Magistrates: let not us have our liberty as a cloak of malice; why should a Commonwealth bee denied the appella∣tion and priviledge of a Church? did Christ principally aime at Nations, and put their names only into the Commission? Teach all Nations, under that word comprehending all men, and refuse any Nation the admittance into the covenant of the Church: what must words of a Commission admit of a Rhetoricall sense, and have no literall truth, some of all Nations, not the represen∣tative body of a Nation? But if the Parliament will give mee leave and such encouragement that I may make it my worke, I shall endeavour to make appeare the great mistake, the name and nature of the Church. But now at last, Mr. Gillespie hath gotten ground, and adven∣tureth more boldly upon these words, before they made more a∣gainst him, then for him: now not one word in the text for him, before there was something for him, and something against him; now not one word for him. Verse the 21 affordeth this argument against him: The honor
and dignity that Christ there speaketh of, hath place not only in this world, but that which is to come: but the government that is given to Christ as Mediator, shall not continue in the world to come: therefore the government given to Christ as he is Me∣diator cannot be meant in that place: This is ignoratio Elenchi, a plaine and obvious fallacie, here is government given to Christ in this world, and that which is to come; that which belongeth to him in reference to the world to come, belongeth not to him as Mediator, therefore that government that is given to him in reference to this world, is not given to him as Mediator; seeing the words doe yeeld this argument, I am glad they yeeld no better. I have already shewed the sense of Christ laying down his Kingdome to God his Father. Verse 22. He hath put all things under his feet; that is, saith Zanchius, all things but his Church which is his body; and why must the Church bee excepted? Mr. Gillespie could see that all things yet were not put under in Heb. 2.8. the latter part of the verse, but could not see the words immediately going before, he hath left nothing that is not put under him: but the Church is not under Christ, then Christ doth not governe his Church: he hath so troubled the sense of these words, that truly I cannot under∣stand what he meaneth: he citeth 1 Cor. 15.25. he must reigne till he hath put all his enemies under his feet; and in Act. 2.34.35. Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thy foes thy footstool. Now, saith Mr. Gillespie, When Christ bath put downe all rule, and all authority, and power, and put all his enemies under his feet: then he shall cease to reigne as Mediator, but till that bee done, hee shall reigne as Mediator: so that it can never bee proved, that the meaning of these words, hee hath put all things under his feet, is that, all government is given to Christ as Mediator. Here is great strug∣ling to finde out a Kingdome for Christ, as Mediator over the Church only: and this putting all things under his feet, must signifie Christs Kingdome, after the Mediators Kingdome is gi∣ven up to the Father; because as soone as Christ hath put all things under his feet he reigneth as Mediator no longer. For answer to this argument, I say, that untill he hath put all his enemies under his feet in 1 Cor. 15.25. and he that hath put all things under, 27. have not the same antecedent; the former, hee is God man, the Mediator: the latter, is God the Father; in the for∣mer
the subject of this subjection is his enemies; this latter, all things: the former is an actuall putting them under; this latter, as Mr. Gillespie doth allow out of Jerome, is but in decree: put un∣der his feet in the former, is finall destruction of death, a putting downe of all rule, authority and power, a confusion and destruction of all his enemies: in the latter, God put Christs enemies, under his feet; but under the common condition of all things, friends and foes are put under the govern∣ment of Christ by God his Father; here he is set above princi∣palities, but letteth them alone in their inferior condition; there he putteth them downe, here they are under him, but there hee keth them quite away; here he receiveth the government of the Mediator, there he finisheth it: here God putteth all things under Christ, Church and all, whatsoever Zanchius saith to the contrary: there Christ, according to the power that is heere given him, putteth his enemies only under his feet: heere God giveth the right in recompence of his suffering, as Phil. 2. where∣fore God hath exalted him, &c. There hee executeth his wrath upon his enemies: in the meane time he governeth as mediator, and keepeth off the destruction from the wicked, and confirm∣eth his people, that they may be blamelesse in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. The next words furnish Mr. Gillespie with another argument against Mr. Coleman: gave him to bee head over all things to his Church. I know not how Mr. Gillespie doth finde out his argu∣ments; the words stand for Mr. Coleman still: the gift is given to his Church, or for the helpe and benefit of his Church: but hee was given to be head over all: he is head over none, sayth Mr. Gil∣lespie, but his Church. Is this to argue out of Scripture, or rather to deny, and outface the Scripture? the Scripture, sayth he, is o∣ver all, for the good and benefit of his Church: what good can he doe his Church, by an empty dignity, without any governe∣ment or authority? but if he that hath power over all things bee given to his Church, this is a gift indeed full of comfort to his Church, that he that is head in respect of influence and life, is head of all things, or at least over them in government. The last verse doth further confirme what I say, sayth Mr. Gillespie, for the Apostle continuing his speech sayth, which is his body, the fulnes
of him that filleth all in all: he calleth the Church Christs fulnes, in re∣ference to his headship: That seemeth tolerably to come from the Text: but see the fallacy comming after: that which maketh him compleat, so far as he is head or King: how commeth this word King in heere? Having his Church fully gathered, he hath his compleat Kingdome, his perfect body. Then as soone as he hath got∣ten his Kingdome, he presently layeth downe; such a Kingdome scarce worth the name of a Kingdome, that exceedeth not the bounds of his owne body, and continueth no longer then he hath got the crowne; for Christs body not compleat till the last day. This is very great liberty, that Mr. Gillespie taketh in arguing more then poetica licentia, to put in King, when it is not in the Text, whence he will ground his argument: Doth not Christ, as me∣diator, fill heaven and earth? sure as mediator he is God, what is he God as mediator, without the properties of God; I never heard of such argumentation: but in the question of transubstan∣tiation, there is accidens, sine subjecto, and subjectum, fine acciden∣tibus propriis: heere is Deus sine Deo: as for his , and , glory, power, and kingdome: glory, not derived from a Kingdome, I know none; a kingdome, without power and glory, a nominall empty thing; kingdome, power and glory, is nothing but a compleat Kingdome. Hee telleth us, that Christ as Mediator executeth acts of divine power over all creatures in behalfe of his Church, if he hath right to doe it then he is King, I thinke: I desire Mr. Gillespie to give us some descri∣ptions of the termes of his division, of kingdome, power and glory; and see how by Scripture he can prove how they do agree or not, to Christ as Mediator, under his description; and see fur∣ther how these termes may serve for interpreting of Scripture, and setting up of his opinion. But Mr. Gillespie is very angry with this opinion, that Christ as Mediator is King of Kings, and all doe governe under him, and ought to governe for him, I won∣der he is so much offended, sure it is not because he would not have Christ have so much power; nay he is afraid that Ministers shall be deprived of some part of the office that Christ hath com∣mitted to them: by my consent if Mr. Gillespie can prove that any part of government was given to the Ministers, by Christ; no man shall question Christs title; and I hope our Magistrates will not take any thing from us, Christ hath given us: I wish that
men would looke impartially upon the word of God, and see how it can be proved that Christ hath given any government to Ministers immediately, or whether any to the Church: to give all disputants and godly men opportunity to deale clearly in these points, I wish these points might be decided among our selves in a candid dispute, rather then to fill the world with our diffe∣rences. Let these be the questions. 1. Whether Christ gave any more government to Ministers then is contained in preaching and baptizing? Neg. 2. Whether hee gave any government to the Church at all? Neg. 3. Whether Ministers have any right to those priviledges that are given to the Church more then another Christian? Neg. 4. Whether a Commonwealth professing the Gospell bee a visible Church? Aff. 5. Whether any member of such a Commonwealth rightly ordered where he hath his consent to making of Civill Lawes, may hold himselfe free from such Lawes in matters of consci∣ence? Neg. 6. Whether Ministers have commission from Christ to preach? Aff. 7. Whether the people have any power to choose their Mi∣nisters? Neg. These things being candidly discussed, and we being all of one minde in them, I hope peace may be expected amongst all the members of the Kingdome, Which God grant. FINIS.
