N555 669.f.11[21] 99869269 162672
A new Ballad, called a Review of the Rebellion, in three parts. To the tune of, VVhen the King injoyes his Rights againe. BRitaines awake from your six yeares dreame, And listen to this deare-bought theame; Which shewes how you fast a sléep were lullde, And by what Magicks spells so gullde. Then give attentive eare, To what I make appeare, In that which I shall here for your sakes relate For now you have in print (And you may believe me in't) The Historie of your present State. When Charles first call'd this Parliament, He did it with a full intent, Our grievances for to remove, And to settle us in Peace, and Love: What e're we did desire, Or justly could require, He granted: t'was but Aske and Have: And yet (woe, and alas) It's now so brought to passe, That the frée-borne is become a Slave. For of late the treacherous Scots, and Wee, On a Nationall Covenant did agree, And bound our selves by solemne Oath, Ne're after to kéepe faith, and troath, And well may we sweare, They're our Brethren deare, For th'have cost us many a thousand pound: And for all that we have got, But this advantage from the Scot, We are turn'd Rebellious, and Round. All Players, and Play-houses are o're throwne, That now the Two Houses may Act alone, Of which each Member with so much art, Playes ye King, ye Lord, Knave, or Fooles part, The Pope, or Parafite, The Turke, or Iesuite, That could one but get in by Stealth, There he might plotted see, And act the Tragdie, Of this poore Church and Common-wealth. In all the Ecclesiastique Storie, Who e're sawe such a Directorie, As ours? which leaves us wholly in the lurch, Whilst they séeme to constitute a Church, The Lords Prayer, and the Créed, And (that which all should read) The ten Commandements are out quite: It séeme our Synod would, Not that our people should, Pray, practise, or believe aright. Religion once so purely taught, And Protestant, now's set at naught, Most of our old Clergy Martyrs be, For loving God and their Loyaltie: And new in-lighted Sects, Have now found out such Texts, As none of the Fathers e're could cleare, Yet these the Brethren round, By the Spirit so expound, That it would doe ones heart good to heare. Those that were once Birds of the night, Now in the Sun-shine take their flight, And such as scarce durst shew their face, Are now the onely Babes of Grace: Lay-levites are allow'd, To vent in every crow'd, Such stuffe as the pure Assembly mold, And so it be but new, Yet the Round-head cryes 'tis true, Because it contradicts the old, Gods due, the Churches rights, and lands, Are ingross'd by sacrilegious hands, The City-Atheist will never rest, Till th'alter-coale have fir'd their Nest: They will have store of gold, Though for it must be sold, Their God, their King, their Church, & Nation, All these they never prise, Because they count them lyes, As they do their Saviour and Saluation. The once renowned Common-Law, Is made by Votes not worth a straw, And Ordinances in its roome, Give Loyall hearts their deadly doome: A sad thing for to thinke, We're at destructions brincke, Because rul'd by Legislative power, And therefore now, if ever, This Kingdome may assever, That this of darkenesse is the hower. Our Liberty which cost so deare, In lesse then yet full seven yeare, Is lost, for which such Worthies died, And Tyrants now, at will, us ride, Our persons, and our purse, Are now under such a curse, As never yet this Land befell: Of which I am afraid▪ E're long it will be said, That it cannot be much worse in Hell. The second part, To the same Tune. THe propertie of our Estates, Is spoyl'd by arbitrarie rates, And no man holds life, goods, or lands, Frée from the lust of their commands: The State (if't stand in néed) Will force us for to bléed, So long as any one drope is left, All must goe for the Caus, Though quite against the lawes Of God, and Man, we are berest. Then what have you gain'd by all these warres, But shame, and beggerie, and scarres? In all your Zeale (O peeuish Elues) Whom have you conquer'd but your selues? You itch against the King, The Bishop, and the Ring, (For which now stands so ingag'd the Nation) Hath brought you to this passe, That you are ridden like an Asse, Behold your blessed Reformation! They've taken away th' Ecclesiastique Courts, And given th' Apprentices dayes for sports, Some of which that adventured out for the cause, They make fréemen, & their Masters Jack-dawes, Whom they vote as the traind Band, Every day by them to stand, That the Houses may securely sit, Whilst that they do reward, The Wittalls that them guard, With the blessing of Issachar, to teach them wit. Thus while you thought all to ingrosse, You must sit downe by wéeping crosse, For your Lawes, Religion, Libertie, Reputation, Peace, and Propertie: Which you might still have had, But that you fell starke mad, And the father now to his sonne may tell, How th' Parliament, and the Scot, Shar'd betweene them all wee'd got, And so the glory did depart from our Jsarel. What Christian heart next doth not ake, To sée the poore Irish laid at th' Stake? For their lives and lands, the Ordinance saith May be bought fr summs on the publick faith. And some men are so wise, To thinke them lawfull prise, Because they're voted Rebells by our State, But were it not a sinne? Yet they divide the skinne, Of the Beare, among them e're they have't. Our People (who were once so mad, To be all of the Tribe of Gad, Whose idolatry nothing could content, But this everlasting Parliament; And a posture of warre,) Shall find they're gon so farre, That now they cannot well come off, And when they have wasted all, On the Crowne, and Churches fall, They'l be rewarded with a Scoffe. How many Feares, and Iealousies, And Plots (abhominable lies) Have fill'd our Pulpits, and our Braines, Onely to cheate us into Chaines? Which never will be broke, But onely by a stroke, Given to th' Ring-leaders of the faction, Without it we may straine Our wits yet all vaine, For nought can doe us good but Action. Committes sit, in most great Townes, To awe both the Gentry, and the Clownes, They kéepe the peace in every Sheire, By ferretting the Cavalier: Yea these men are so just, In discharging of thir trust, Impos'd upon them by the State: That none shall dare to quatch, Though for lying at the catch, They deserue both of God and Men the hate. He whom the warres leaves worth a grote, Shall be Delinquent made by Vote, Are we not like to be bravely reform'd, Who are sure to be so throughly worm'd? Quarterings, Excize, and Taxe, Expect, untill the Axe, And Halter claime by Law their due: Till then 'tis hard to show, The ready way to know A Rebell, from a Subject true. The Army which was once so fear'd, Most gallant men have now appear'd, By standing for Law, and Libertie, And continuance of the Monarchie: And as they fought to bring, To th' Parliament the King, For settling of an happy Peace: So still (though some men kick) To their principles they stick, To purchase his, their owne, and our release, The third part, of the Previlidges of the two Houses of Parliament. TO hate all good, and hugge all evill, In an Angels shape to out-act the Devill, With all kinds of basenesse to comply, And make the whole Realme a Monopoly: To laugh at conscience, And be quite void of sence, Now Church and State they've in peices rent, To breake all kind of trust, And to do nothing that is just, Are some priviledges of this Parliament. And to abuse the King by Protestation, Remonstrances, and Declarations. To leavy armes against him, and pull downe, All the fairest Flowers of his Crowne, To seize on his Ships, and Ports, His Revenue, and his Forts, And to revile his Queene, and Progenie: To counterfeict his Seale, And his Letters to reveall, And to kéepe him Prisoner at Holdenby. And to continance tumults, publish fictions, Vote, and Order contradictions, To set up an Idoll, nam'd the Cause, And make all bowe to't in spight of th' Lawes: The conscience to inforce, And go on without remorse, And (that which yet is worse) to apostatize From God, and all that's good, And to shed innocent blood, And to stope their eares against our cryes. And (as the Members decay) to pack new electi∣ons, And to give to whom they list Protections, To roote out Episopacy, and to ordaine A Fast, to palliate the same: And an Humilation, To busie the Nation, Whilst they the Bishops-Lands do sell▪ Which so men will but buy, They'l give security, Vnto them that there is no Hell. And the Learned Clergy to disgrace, The conscientious to displace, And in their roomes for to aduance, Schisme, Sedition, and Ignorance, Informers to reward, Without any regard, To th' persons whom they falsely peach, And to promise them good pay, So that enough they'l say, To bring th ill-affected within their reach. And to question the Persons in the Trinitie, And to make the sence of the House, Divinitie, To roote our Reverence, and declare, That Barnes as good as Churches are: The truth to persecute, And to make good Ministers mute, And to kéep halfe our Churches without preach∣ing, And (to a voide controules, Though it starves the peoples Soules) To suffer none but Round-head Teaching. And the two Vniversities to infect, And Sacramentalis to neglect, All workes of Piety to pull downe, With the Monuments of great renowne: And Hospitalls to rob, And makes us all sigh and sob, And worse, if worse they could invent: And to vote all sence, and reason, That's against them to be Treason, Are Priviledges of this Parliament. And so are—but I conclude my Song, For Truth (though short) e're séemes too long, If now you would know what remedie, There may for all these mischiefes be? Then must King Charles alone, Be set upon his Throne, For which let's joyne in one, with might, and maine, For the times will never mend, Till the Parliament do end, And the King injoyes his right againe. FINIS.
