P1706 E1364_2 99863219 115408
GOOD WORK FOR A GOOD MAGISTRATE. OR, A short Cut to great quiet. BY Honest, homely plain English Hints given from Scripture▪ Reason, and Experience, for the regulating of most Cases in this Com∣mon-wealth. Concerning Religion; Mercie; Justice. By H. P. PROV. 14. 34. Righteousness exalteth a Nation; but sin is a Reproach to anie People. LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard Printer to the Council of State. 1651.
To the Supreme Power, and all true Patriots under them. Right Honorable! FEaring this little-no∣thing—Pocket—Pam∣phlet might com to your view by som o∣ther hand, it was thought need∣ful to prevent prejudice, by assu∣ring your Honors, they are the scriblings of two friends divided by places, to satisfie each other about som practicable pieces of
several kindes, especially looking at Religion; The Poor; Justice; Law; Navie; Merchandise; Which now are the breeders of manie thoughts amongst Eng∣lish men. And truly as hee is foo∣lish, that would dare to pre∣scribe to your wisdoms; so is hee unfaithful, that would keep a mite from your treasure. These are the chatterings of your ignorant and ruder servants, who onely beg pardon of all sorts for
their wishing thus, even that all the work of the Nation may bee carried on faithfully, and with the least charge: facile est inventis addere. Everie head here may pro∣cure a volume. And it is desired, that no man of anie profession would despise these small things, or the daie of them; but seriously attend them to enlargment and practice: for doubtless, an honest heart and a quick head will soon enliven all these. Your Honors know you are the Remainders of much win∣nowing: You know as your travels have been great and dan∣gerous,
so verie successful: you know to whom you are indebt∣ed: this good wee have alreadie under you, that men may bee as good as they can, but not so bad as they would. You may bee assured the highest Libertie Eng∣land gape's for is an open daie once in a year or two to choos a well∣charactered Representative, who may tread in your steps of faith∣fulness and truth; which work (they saie) you are en∣gaged in, and is neer perfecting. It is humbly conceived, Repub∣licks sow the seed of their ru∣ine in faction: which wise men saie cannot bee cured but by fre∣quent
elections, and cleer and plain dealings betwixt men in place, according to Mat. 18. And then who can saie a Go∣vernment of so manie praiers and tears should perish? when after-ages shall read written on your doors, and practis'd by you and your successors: Haec Domus odit, amat, punit, con∣servat, honorat, Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos. This Hous hate's sin, love's peace, and vice corrects, Maintein's just Laws, and honest men protect's.
Then which nothing is more heartily wished by Your Honors H. P. Junii 7. 1651.
For my dear friend J. T. My good friend! You must excuse mee, if I join my thoughts with yours, and further give waie to op∣portunitie pressing the pub∣lishing our heartie short breathings af∣ter the good of the Common-wealth, rais'd and preserv'd even to miracle. Bee not discouraged to continue your contri∣butions. I know wee now desire onely to laie this rough work before better heads and hands: and bee assured this Nati∣on is not barren altogether of self-deny∣ing spirits, and ingeuous Patriots: and though Holland seem to get the start of Us, yet wee may so follow, as to stand
at length upon their shoulders, and so see further. Our present transactions make us look like Martha, wee hope our great end will appear to bee Marie's, One thing necessaie. Bear with us till the North and South have blown peace∣ably and sweetly upon our Garden, and then call for the ripe fruits. For all pre∣sent differences tie up your judgment a while, and know that God reigneth, let the earth rejoice: Doubtless mer∣cie and truth will follow the Saints now deeply engaged. Live and love Yours H. P. Junii 7. 1651.
GOOD WORK FOR A GOOD MAGISTRATE. THe waies, and means ordained of God, to bring anie Nation to, and pre∣serv them in as happie a condition as this world can afford, Isa. 54. 17. are by I. True Religion maintained and advanced by the Magistrate, and walked in by the people. Deut. 4. 5, 6. 6-17, 18, 19. 7-12, 13, 14. 8. 18, Josh. 1. 8. Psal. 119. 1, 2.
II. True Mercie towards the Poor practised, and advanced both by Magistrates and People. Deut. 15. 7. Mat. 5. 7. Prov. 14. 31. Prov. 20. 28. III. True Justice, and Righteous∣ness amongst both Magistrates, and People, and towards other Nations. Deut. 16. 18, 19, 20. v. Prov. 16. 12. Not that here is intended a large discours upon these heads, with which manie Books might bee filled; but onely to give som hints of som things, the Magistrates may see pra∣ctised to advance these ends; to satis∣fie a friends desire.
I. To advance true Religion. FOr the Advancement of Religion, it will bee expedient to shew how the Universities may bee made useful that waie, as beeing the foundation, upon which the other is built. Though it may bee disputed why illustrious Schools, or Colleges should not bee separated in other parts of this Land, and not all confin'd to Cambridg and Oxford, and these so neer, as in Yorkshire, Cornwal, and Wales, &c. yet becaus the regulating of these wee have, may reach those thoughts hereafter, it is conceived, for present, fit to pitch upon that work onely. And becaus the frame of these two
seem's verie rotten, and much shaken, doubtless the Cure must bee in the foundation; though it bee offensive to som, reverencing too much the ashes of their founders, who (under the notion of Christ) served Anti-Christ by works of that kinde. The true Regulating of these Col∣leges therefore will bee the returning them to the service of Christ indeed. Though in the Gospel wee have no footsteps at all for such conjunction of men in anie place; yet doubtless they may have their use; and Learn∣ing will prove oil to the wheel in manie works. I suppose it will not bee hard to per∣swade men to take leav of those or∣naments (or rags rather) the monu∣ments of Idolatrie, viz. gown, caps, Matriculations, with the manie cere∣monies about Commencements; but let Sholars live as other men for ap∣parel, &c.
Colleges properlie are the meeting of men for the hearing Lectures, and improving their parts, not wals to contein monastick dones; and so lose the ends of other mens bounties, as of their own precious time. There need no volumes, nor tedi∣ous rules of ordering the waie of Col∣leges, or studies, if wee agree once upon the End. Two things therfore wee pro∣pound: I. That the End bee Christian and Noble. II. That the means bee adequate. I. For the End, it is generally agreed, that it should bee the preparing and sitting younger people for som service, in reference to their Countries; not for studying to determine in studying; especially in tendencie to spiritual or civil good; commonly called Mini∣strie, and Magistracie: with which terms I know not why anie should quarrel.
II. Then the Means need to lead that way, and to bee suitable and cer∣tain, if possible. For present this is offred; viz. That supposing there bee sixteen such Houses in Cambridg, eight may bee laid apart wholly, and onely for those intended for the Mi∣nistrie: To carrie this on 1. That, as the Jesuits for wits, so wee, for godliness, chuse all such youth in anie place, or condition where wee finde them at plough or trade, which are godlie and tractable, and send them thither to studie Logick, and tongues, and such to have their maintenance there out of Scholar∣ships, &c. 2. For whom six Tutors are to bee appointed in each College, and have 200 l per annum wholly to attend that work; and the Senior of these six to bee president first, and the rest in order for the carrying on that work.
3. And all the rest of the Fellow∣ships and Scholarships revenue laid up in a stock, to maintein these young Preachers, when sent out, till they bee setled in the Countrey: and the Tutors of these Colleges shall give testimonie for them so sent out; or els not to bee received: and so if you need ten or twentie preachers at anie time, you may have them and recruit again, as the Regiment in London doth now. 4. And having such materials, eve∣rie College may have in it a Church of Christ; and so eight Churches; and more may bee in the Town, which may spread over all the Na∣tion. 5. That they bee taught and ex∣ampled by their Tutors in the shortest waie, for doubtless these godlie Stu∣dents will get more in moneths, then others in years; their own conscience beeing an alarum to them: And
hence with submission it is offred, that Tutors would let them know what parts of man they must deal withal in preaching, viz. 1. The memorie: therefore Me∣thod must bee had. 2. The Judgment: ergò cleer∣ing of difficulties of all kindes. 3. The Will: which the doctrinal part applied may convince home. And therefore they do well, that in their preaching, and publick read∣ing the Scripture, First analize the chapter; Secondly, cleer all difficulties in it where ever it lie's; and thirdly, draw som conclusions from the analy∣sis, which must needs bee the mar∣row of the Scripture. Wee are bold to conclude, these three things will make a good Preacher in reference to means (the help of the spirit sup∣posed)▪
1. Sound Judgment in the Scrip∣tures; which must bee got by prayer and dailie reading. Manie commen∣tators will not do much good; the the last are best; for Polemicks your Jesuites will serv for water-bearers: Amsius, and som such short writers are best, &c. 2. A gift of Application, and bring∣ing that to your heart which wee know; here all those rational helps of speech will do well; here Christ's reaching by similitudes would bee minded, which are properly the foolishness of preaching, and som have found do most good. 3. Dexteritie in case of Conscience: in which particular the miserie of this nation ought to bee bewailed, who were wont to bee fruitful in cases. Perkins and Ames have don a little that way, but not much. What want of converting Preachers there is, who see's not? and that high opinion of
illiterate men's doing so much good is a mistake, if generally observed. And when they are thus fitted, they may bee sent out when there is need, and mainteined by the College∣stock, till provided for in the Coun∣trey, where they may gather Churches in the Countie. All well qualified for the work may join at first; and after, as the blessing of God appear's, lesser Churches in several places may arise, and Communion held amongst them all, according to that waie of New-England, set forth by Hooker and Cotton. Their maintenance may bee of tithes, or rather from somthing an∣swerable at two shillings, one shilling, or eighteen pence upon a pound-rent: which stock may bee put into three gentlemen's hands, chosen yearly for that purpose, and thence allow to these Preachers, according to their places, conditions, and families: and out of
this stock thirtie pound per annum to the widow, during widowhood, when anie die's; out of this stock the poor may have help; yea good summes may bee borrowed by the State in anie exigent upon good securitie. And thus the State paie's them, and thus they have dependance upon the State. Two of the ablest of these, may one day in a week, at the Countie-Town, answer all controversies, ac∣cording to a Rule after prescribed. And for the other eight Colleges, they may have in each six Tutors, to whom, all Gentlemen that would learn anie other Arts or Science whatso∣ever may resort, and there may you have whatever anie out-Landish Aca∣demie can teach: from thence, if anie will applie themselves to the Mini∣strie, they may com to the other Colleges. And the stock also of these Colleges
so preserved, that by that means they may send som to travel abroad, and bee more furnished for the States ser∣vice, as the Hungarians and other people do. To all this I would add, that ma∣nie of your Gentrie, Lawyers, and Physitians might do well to applie themselves, beeing godlie, and quali∣fied, as manie are. Or why might not som of the nu∣merous Gentrie in their Countrey, studie, and either preach for nothing; or give Physick gratis, or advise in matters of Law freely? The sins of Sodom creep upon us: and whilest our Souldiers are whetting their swords for the next battel, how manie are whetting their knives for the next feast? oh! why should anie make Recreation a trade? The great Turk teacheth better do∣ctrine, who must bee skill'd in som handicraft: and most forrein Princes are Merchants.
After the foundation is well laid in the Universitie, the building thereup∣on may bee thus framed. 1. Let certain able, fit, godlie, and learned men bee maintained that, not beeing tied by office to anie particu∣lar charge, or flock, may, both in pub∣lick and private, take all lawful advan∣tages, and opportunities to preach, and dispute for true Religion, travel∣ling continually to that end, and per∣swading all men, to forsake the waies of sin and error, and to retein and profess the truth, and walk therein. Acts 8. 4. Acts 17. 2. and ch. 19. v. 6. to 10. Acts 13. 3. and 14, 15, 16. v. 1 Cor. 14. 1. 2. And som one or more setled in everie great Town; that at certain set times, and places, weekly, may offer to dispute anie point with anie man, in publick hearing of all that pleas to com; and som to bee appointed Mo∣derators, and one or two appointed
by the Magistrates to fine, or mulct ei∣ther partie, that shall reproch, cen∣sure, or use anie unseemlie language, contrarie to humanitie, love, Religi∣on, &c. The advancement of Reli∣gion hereby would bee almost incre∣dible. Acts▪ 28. 16. to 31. v. 3. To countenance, and take into special protection all the Churches of Christ, who hold but so much funda∣mental truth, as denominate's them such, in spirituals to leav them whol∣ly free; but not to suffer anie brother uncivilly (though it bee about spiritu∣all Controversies) to abuse another, either in word or deed, in private or publick, against which certain penal∣ties may bee made; so shall the Churches have peace, and bee daily multiplied. Isa. 49. 23.
4. To caus to bee brought into a Method and printed, those plain Rules in God's word, which hee hath ordained, to preserv, and increas love and peace amongst Churches, and Christians, which Rules are so plain and express, that hardly can anie con∣tention break into a Church, if the Elders do but practise them them∣selvs, and see the Members do the like; if but the Rules to order men's words onely were but well observed, 'tis strange, what peace and love there might bee. Psal. 119. 5. to 16. v. &c. and 27. 32. 46. 52. 5. Let everie Church at their en∣tring into that Estate (or after) petiti∣on the Magistrate for protection, &c. and at the same time also deliver up to the same Magistrate a book of the Ar∣ticles of their Faith: and wherein they differ from others, and promise the
Magistrate also publickly, to walk peaceably together therein▪ That so, if, after that, anie Brother fall from the Profession of all, or anie of those Articles, and yet will neither leav that Church, nor suffer them to meet in peace, but still go on to di∣sturb them (for such there are,) and is uncivil, through a pervers zeal, let him bee punished in som sort by the Magistrate, according to his offence, and the Church to excommunicate him if they finde caus, &c. 6. To provide maintenance for Ministers, and learned men in all Lan∣guages, and learning what can bee, especially, for Churches that are poor, &c. about which much might bee said, &c. 7. If the Magistrate see caus, to ex∣hort, and stir up the Churches to keep close to their own Principles, and to bee more zealous, both in word and deed, &c. Isa. 49. 23.
8. To advance such to all places of power, honor, and wealth, who are purest in their Profession, and pra∣ctise of true Religion, both towards God and man. Prov. 4. 8. 21. and v. 21. 1 Sam. 2. 30. Numb. 27. 20. After the love and honor of God, hee chargeth us to love and help our Neighbor, the Magistrate especially, is charged with the weak, as the wi∣dows, fathertheless, the poor, and the helpless, &c. of which part of God's will the Magistrate is to have a special care; to accomplish which, a general rule must bee, that the poor may have their commodities taken off at a mar∣kettable price; els they will rather beg, or steal then work. To which pur∣pose the Council of Trade should bee the Merchant for the State, and in all Counties to have a stock readie, to buy at usuall rate the commoditie of
the Laborer; so as hee may live com∣fortably, and then the rule following may bee attended. Isa. 1. 17. Job 29. 12, 13. 1. Let all vagabonds and idle per∣sons, and such as make a trade of begging, that are able to do anie kinde of work, bee restrained, set to work, or punished. Psal. 109. 10. Ezek. 16. 49. 2 Thes. 3. 10. 2. Let such provision bee made, that all may bee set to work that are able, and willing; that all excuse for beg∣ing or stealing bee prevented, which is not so hard to bee don. 1 Thess 4. 11. 2▪3 10. 1 Tim. 5. 8. 3. All lame and blinde that are healthful, may bee set to som work, and the sick, and unable kept in Hospi∣tals; and it is the Magistrates dutie to see it performed, out of love to huma∣nitie,
and maintenance cannot bee wanting if full indeavor bee used therein. Amsterdam is far advanced herein. 1 Tim. 5. 8. Judg. 16. 21. 4. Let truly poor Families and per∣sons bee made partakers of the pub∣lick Alms, either of the Churches of which they are, or houses in which they dwel; Amsterdam doth much this waie, but this work might bee much more advanced: and the Lord would delight in such, and do them good. Exod. 22. 22, 23. v. Prov. 14. 21. and 31. v. Prov. 19. 17. and 29. 7. ch. 28. 27. and 22. 9. 5. Let in everie town a Lom∣bard (or bank of lending) bee ap∣pointed, where the poor, that have no friends, or will not make their need known, and such as on a sudden are fallen into som strait, may have
monie upon their paune upon a rea∣sonable Interest; A Lombard well re∣gulated, would bee a worke of much mercie; and the monies of orphans might bee imploied in this waie to maintein the fatherless, and increas their stock, so would good bee don both waies. And herein lie's the wis∣dom of the Magistrates, to do a publick good, and yet not hinder, yea oft increas the publick stock of the Common-wealth; manie such things are don in the Low-Countries. Luk. 19. 23. 6. To give freedom of dwelling, Trading, and protection [mercie also] to all strangers; to make little or no difference, as the Lord of old com∣manded his People, and promised to bless them for it, and this will inrich a Nation mightily, as wee see in Hol∣land, aud not hurt anie Natives, as envious Persons think, and can by good Reasons bee proved. Levit. 19. 33, 34. Deut. 10. 19. Exod. 23. 9. and 22-21.
7. A special relief to poor people, and great good unto all sorts is the coining of farthings, and half far∣things, and other small monie, 'tis in∣credible the good and convenience of it; and all former inconveniences as easily prevented: for which end, all money less then sixpences mixed with so much Copper or brass; that from one pennie to four pence, all may bee as big as sixpences, and the farthings or half farthings must bee made so big, that they may have their value in cop∣per, so will they not bee made by o∣thers, when the profit is small, nor peo∣ple lose them when they are made so big; but special care must bee had, that so much copper and small monie bee not made, as would bee a burthen to anie. Mat. 10. 29. Mar. 12. 42. 8. A Chamber, or Court to keep secure, and advance the estates of fa∣therless
Children, &c. is of great use and relief for Orphans; the Laws and Orders about it are manie, and all must tend to the securitie and increas of the estates of such Children; as their Parents for the better securitie have by testament, betrusted the pub∣lick with; or as it is in Holland, where the estates of all that die without wills, are seized by the deputies of that Court, and the nearest or best friends of the Children ordered to manage the estate of the children: yet so as they may do nothing without consent of the Lords; and what is don at last, is all upon good securitie, for safetie and increas of the estate, which beeing managed by true Justice and mercie, is of great use to the fatherless, and of great use to the Common-wealth, as might bee manie waies proved. Ezek. 22. 7. Deut. 10. 18. Isa. 1. 17. Jer. 5. 28. 9. And som cours must needs bee ta∣ken,
that poor men especially, may not bee for small debts clapt up in prison, and thereby they and their fa∣milies undon in a short time, becaus hee is not able to put in Bail; yea, how manie a Merchant undon presently, that was in a thriving waie, and stran∣gers also oft undon upon meer pre∣tences; and great is this oppression. Prov. 21. 13. Mat. 18. 30. to 33. v. 10. Wherefore, let no houskeeper that hath dwelt in that place a year, or a year and a quarter, bee liable to bee arrested till after sentence, and executi∣on bee out against his goods; and if no goods can bee found, then the creditor may have power to laie the debtor in prison, if hee think hee hath concealed his goods, and have anie friends that will releas him, provided the Credi∣tor must allow him six pence a daie, or less, so long as hee keep's him there: and though this may bee abused,
yet cannot bee so hurtful as the other. Prov. 14. 31. 11. Another relief to poor and strangers is, that no stranger (that is not a Town-dweller) after arrest may bee carried to prison; nor anie sute begun till parties appear before the Peace-makers, appointed in everie Town for that purpose, to see if they can end the controversie, and per∣swade them to peace and love; if not, let the debtor put in securitie to an∣swer the debt, if possible hee can: if not, let him bee forced to put into the hands of the Peace-makers (or others) twentie shillings, fiftie shillings, five pounds, ten pound, or one hundred pounds, as the man is of abilitie, and the debt in greatness, on condition to have his libertie presently in that Town, but not to go out of Town, till sentence bee given one waie or other, upon forfeiture to the poor of
that summ deposited in the Peace∣makers hands, if hee go out of Town before the debts bee paid, and the Creditor to take som other opportu∣nitie, to sue the debtor in the Town where the debtor dwel's, or to ar∣rest him another time, in the same Town, and then not so to bee trusted again. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Mat. 5. 9. 12. Great cruelties are committed in Prisons, by great charges for fees, chambers, and dear victuals, and by stinking and unwholsom rooms; all which in Mercie and love to humani∣tie ought to bee prevented. Psal. 107. 10. Mat. 18. 30. Prov. 14. 31. 13. Som cours also must bee taken, that widows and under aged, and per∣sons of small parts and education, may not bee over-reached, as oft they are by agreements, and under-writ∣ing of bills, for which are divers Re∣medies. Isa. 10. 2. Exod. 22. 22. Ezek. 22. 7.
14. That none bee prest to serv the State as Souldiers, by sea or Land, against their wills, (the evils of which are great and manie) unless in som verie great exigent; and no State shall need to do it, if they manage State-affairs well; keep a rich, publick stock, and pay well, you shall never want men; and should not they bee just and pay well that are to administer Justice to all others? Isa. 5. 7. Prov. 14. 31. 15. Needs must there bee set up in everie Town a hous, to receiv and bring up to all manner of Trades, the Orphans of such, as die without anie estate (or if they have so little, that none of their Kinred or acquaint∣ance will take upon them, to bring up the Children) who beeing left to beg, or perish, &c. the civil Fathers of the * fatherless are to take charge of them; young babes to bee nurst up, and after learned to read, write, &c.
and when big enough, to bee set to work, to learn somthing to live by; and if the stock will bear it, to have ten or twentie pounds to set up a trade for themselvs, beeing big enough; or when they marrie out of the Wees∣hous, as manie do in Holland. The or∣ders for to regulate this hous are manie. * Deut. 10. 18. Jeremie 5. 28. And for means to maintein it, everie able Citizen, at first, will give ten, twentie, one hundred pounds, or more, beeing put on it by the Magi∣strates and Ministers, and more will daily bee given by divers waies, and especially by Testament when men die, if all bee right carried. III. Justice. VVHere there is true Religion and Mercie, no doubt but there will bee good Justice; yea, Justice is more necessarie to the immediate sub∣sistence of a Common-wealth then the
two former; for manie Common-wealths subsist without true Religion▪ and much Mercie; but without Ju∣stice, no Common-wealth can long subsist; and it is, of the three, the most immediate and proper work of the Magistrate's office, Rom. 12. 1.to see true Justice executed. Here wee take leav to pro∣pose a short Model for the Law, upon which Justice hang's, and which hath cost so much trou∣ble and expens. 1. REgisters to bee setled in everie Parish, kept everie year by two men chosen to that work; and all Lands and houses entred into that book distinctly; and the Copie there∣of transferred to the Countie-Town▪ in case of fire, &c. and in these books all alienations &c. entred; and
none authentick but such, that so none might bee mistaken in premorgages, or anie other waie; whereby everie one may cleerly bee satisfied, in what hee hath, or can claim as his own. 2. That all papers for all contracts, for monie or Lands, buying or selling by anie writing, have a small Seal of the States on the top of it (for which three pence or six pence paid to the State, for which a Model is readie: such papers will bee of great use for men's securitie that deal; and an insensible incom to the State. 3. That in everie Countie, everie hundred yearly choos three men to bee Peace-makers, or friend-makers for that year, to hear and determine all common-controversies between man and man; from whom they may not appeal; and the danger cannot bee much by these often elections; for certainly, the happiness in Govern∣ment will never lie upon Laws, but
men; all good men carrying good Laws in their bosom: and therefore Venice, and other States have founded their welfare in Elections; To which Characters and qualifications must necessarilie bee given out by the su∣preme power: and the ballating▪ box never used but upon exigents, it be∣ing a Lot, and was wont to bee a part of Worship; it beeing used in Scripture, onely in two cases; Civilly, in the dividing Lands and inheri∣tances; Divinely, in the chois of Mat∣thias for an Apostle. And the Rule is, Where Providence doth no waie appear in the use of other means, then the Lot take's place. But never do wee read of a Lusorie Lot, made common by Cards and Dice, and urged by a grave Preacher in a dispute, betwixt him and learned Ames. To add a word more. In the chois of a Parlament▪man, if a
thousand meet to choos, let these choos an hundred out of that number to choos for them, and the rest de∣part; the one hundred then out of themselves choos twentie, to choos one for that service: and these upon oath to bee faithful; if among these, two bee in competition, then to ballating. No man to have a voice that hath been an enemie ten years. 4. all entails may bee cut off for ever, and men have libertie to bestow what they have to whom they pleas, the eldest having a double portion. What mischiefs have com'n upon fa∣milies by greatning the eldest, and abasing the rest, let Englishmen judg; yea, the high waies and gallows can witness, and forrein plantations can testifie. And if Daughters were inge∣nuous, and would work, they ought to have equal portions with sons. It is an unpleasing spectacle to see in the Cities so manie men, fit for nobler
things, to sell those wares, which were properly the imploiment of wo∣men, and their daughters. I wish a serious remedie hereunto: and that men should not blush to bee sitting in shops, yea, the choice Gentrie of the Nation, I much wonder. 5. For a Bodie of Laws, I know none but such as should bee the result of sound reason, nor do I know anie such reason, but what the God of wisdom hath appointed. Therefore the Moral Law (that short Law cal∣led ten words) is doubtles best; to which Moses's judicials added, with So∣lomon's Rules and experiments, will bee compleat. I wish our Lawyers would urge these for Law; and not those obso∣lete presidents, which will hardly prov, or make a Sea man's suit to fit our oc∣casions. Necessitie isthe mother, and ill manners together, of the best Laws. I am fully satisfied with what the Supreme power shall give out daily;
yea, though they daily alter somthing, if for the good of the whole. If anie Lawyer bee continued, let them bee allowed, and paid by the State, and plead for justice, even for justice sake. Why should expenses in Law bee thus bottomless? yea, such, as would maintein an Armie, and the fountain and issues thereof gene∣rally malice, and rancor. Why are not the Fees of Physitians stinted? and then help commanded upon a known price? I know they cannot suffer by it. 6. Wills and Testaments may bee acknowledged by the next two Ju∣stices, before whom they may bee proved without anie charge; and then entred into the former Register of the Parish, or a Book kept in everie Parish to that purpose. 7. This beeing don, it is verie advi∣sable to burn all the old Records; yea, even those in the Tower, the Mo∣numents of tyrannie.
8. No Lawyer to plead at anie Committee. 9. And for Arrests, that summons may bee left at men's houses; and not such a nest of bailiefs mainteined, even an Armie of Caterpillers; the worst of men imploied that waie. 10. None to distrein for taxes, or other debts; but the debtor's outward door taken away, and carried to the Town hous, and as manie other new doors as are set in the place. The shame and danger hereof will urge sud∣den payment. Rules for Justice. 1. None can bee free of great in∣justice, who by persecution for Reli∣gion take awaie libertie of conscience from anie: whose Principles or pra∣ctises are not dangerous to the Go∣vernment, Peace, Proprietie, and good of the Common-wealth; if they otherwise live but civilly. For as God himself: so his Vicegerent
the Magistrate must caus his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall both upon good and bad. Isa. 59. ch. 11. to 15. v. Acts 5. 34. to 39. v. Acts 9. 4, 5. 2. And can it bee just to punish anie by lothsom prisons, before a hearing whether they bee guiltie or no: how manie innocent persons have suffered this waie, and how manie have lost their lives by sicknesses got there; put in for small faults which are cry∣ing sins, and must needs bee amended. Jer. 39. 6. 9. Joh. 7. 51. Gen. 40. 15. 3. Long laying in prison before sentence; or delaies in Justice is great crueltie to manie, and it mightily provoke's the Lord, as Isaiah saith: and certainly it may bee remedied, if there were compassion enough to prisoners. Prov. 21. 3. Gen. 40. 15. Prov. 21. 7. Isa. 59. 14. 15. 4. Delaies in sutes in civil things, prove's great injustice, yea, an un∣just Judgment would not bee so ill to
manie, as are long delaie's before sen∣tence; And som bodie must one daie answer for peoples great loss of time, and ruine to som, onely by delaies. Jerem. 5. 28. Prov. 29. 4. Chap. 21. 7. Ch. 21. 3. 5. To attain to pure Justice is a verie great blessing of God, both to Governors and governed: Where∣fore let a Committee bee ordained, one, or more to receiv requests, and advise from everie particular Town and Countie; how true Justice may best bee obtained, how all damages and hurts may best bee prevented, and all sutes bee best hindered, but when begun, and committed: how soonest and best ended, and remedied. Isa. 61. 8. Prov. 21. 3. Prov. 2. 2. 3. Eccle. 1. 13. 6. And above all Laws whatever can bee thought of, no waie so good to attain good and speedie Justice, as to put into all places of Judicature,
men that fear God, and are lovers of Justice, precise in their promises and performances; for there are godlie men not verie just nor wise, and on the other side, there are Turks and Infidels verie just men, and abhor bribes, or to break their words, &c. Exod. 18. 21. Prov. 29. 2. Isa. 32. 6. Prov. 20. 8. Prov. 21. 15. 7. Things must bee so ordered, that no man (nor Court of men alwaies) alwaies bee above Justice, or so powerful, but that hee may bee called to account, before a Court of Justice, and there censured if hee de∣serv it; for if anie bee, the evils of it will bee verie great in time, as might bee well proved. Deut. 16. 19. 2 Chro. 25. 17. Isa. 10. 1, 2. 8. Let no person, Citie, Court, or anie kinde of men have anie Privilege, that may bring dammage or hurt to the Common-wealth, or to anie par∣ticular men; for this is to establish in∣justice
by a Law, and great wrong is don to the Common-wealth by Pri∣vileges given to particular men, and companies (and oft under pretence of doing good to the Common-wealth) as might easily bee proved: and therefore men take such pains, make such suits, and give such gifts, for to have such privileges, out of self-love. Isa. 59. 8. Prov. 21. 7. 9. For Civil Controversies, let there bee in everie Town, and place, (or Ward) appointed two or more Peace-makers; who may hear the differences between man and man, before anie may go to Law, and if it bee possible, let them end it: and fit men for such business, will end most controversies, and spare the Magi∣strate a great labor, and the Commo∣naltie, great trouble, and charge, and onely by perswading; yet these must bee well regulated, they must hear no man in private alone; and manie
the like. Psal. 34. 14. Matt. 5. 9. Prov. 12. 20. 10. That Justice may be neer to all men, let there bee in everie Citie, town, and hundred, appointed five, or seven able fit men, to determine all Controversies for Debts, and strifes; and anie three of them present, to have power to give sentence; and well regulated with other Laws; in weightie cases they may advise with learned men, both Advocates, and Di∣vines, but the power to determine to bee in them; as in Holland. Exod. 18. 21, 22, 23. Deut. 1. 15. and 17. v. Deut. 16. 18. 11. Let no appeals bee from these men (five or seven) that are yearly new chosen) but in verie weightie Matters; first, let there bee once in a moneth, or at som set times, a Court for appeals; of all these seven men (not one to bee wanting upon a cer∣tain pecuniarie mulct) for revision of
the sentence of such as finde them∣selvs aggrieved at a former sentence, by three or four of these men, and if his case bee found bad by them all, let him paie three, five, or ten per¦cent, to the charges of the Court, for his presumption: and if hee will yet appeal to a higher Court, let him first laie down the summe hee is condemn∣ed in, into the Towns hands: which the demander may take out upon good securitie; And lastly, let there bee no appeal, out of that Countie or shire, in which the partie dwell's; for manie weightie Reasons; and that, if the summe bee but above such or such a value, as the Towns are in which the sentence is given: for if men bee willing to give a just sentence, few cases are so difficult, but they may finde the right; and if they doubt, they can take two or three daies time for consideration, praier to God, and advise with other men, &c. Exod. 8. 22, 23. Deut. 1. 17.
Much might bee said for proof, and orders here-abouts, if it would not bee too tedious. 12. Besides the constant, set good men at first spoken of; there are ma∣nie good men must bee made use of, as occasion serve's; as manie contro∣versies about the goodness of Com∣modities cannot bee ended presently by the Judges, till good men that have skill in such commodities, do view the same, and value things, &c. and if then they cannot make the par∣ties agree, to make their report to the Judges, how they finde things, and they to give sentence according∣ly; so for accounts, not possible to end mens differences justly, till ac∣counts bee well looked over, and both parties are heard in private by good men, and divers the like: so that the Judges must know manie honest, able men's skill in such and such things, unto whom they may pre∣sently
refer each controversie, ac∣cording to the nature of it, whereby they shall decide things more justly, and eas themselvs of a verie great burden: with better content to both parties, that have the difference. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Mat. 5. 9. 13. Let everie man plead his own caus, and if hee think's his adversa∣rie too strong, or himself too weak, hee shall have libertie to take a friend, or Neighbor to plead for him, whom hee judge's able; But not to let anie Advocates, Attornies, Scriveners, nor anie for salaries to plead for anie man, for manie weightie Reasons, unless the difference bee about a great summe, as sixtie, eightie, one hundred pounds or more; then to ad∣mit Lawyers to plead, if one, or both parties desire it; yet so, that after they have don, the parties themselvs may have libertie to speak, if one or both desire the same. Acts 23. 1. 35. ver. Acts 24. 10.
14. Let all mens Testimonies bee taken by notarial writings under oath: or in the writing to offer an oath: if desired to verifie what is therein at∣tested, (yet so, that parties may bee sent for, and examined by word of mouth, each apart, if anie fraud bee doubted in the testimonie) which will prevent incredible loss, trouble, and vexation to manie. Ier. 36. 4. 15. Let all Judges, Advocates, At∣tornies, Scriveners, Sergeants, Jai∣lors, and all whatever belong ro Courts of Justice, have their pay, or salaries out of som publick stock of the Common▪wealth; and to defraie all charges herein; let everie one that is condemned in his sute, or that sue's, and implead's another unjustly, or doth another wrong, and thereby forceth another to sue for his right, paie one, two, three, &c. per Cent. for a mulct or fine, to this publick stock, and let them that sue, or wrong another
most basely, and apparently unjustly, and out of plain deceit, and wrong paie half, or the whole sum that hee would have deteined another of: the half whereof give to him that was wronged, or sued unjustly, and the other half to this publick stock, so shall men fear to wrong, and sue an∣other unjustly, and prevent abundance of suites, and quarrels, and prevent charges to him that is, or might bee wronged; and the unwillingness of these Offices to do their office, when they have nothing of them that set them awork, may bee prevented by other means. Exod. 21. 24, 25. 16. In greater Cities (especially in London) where fall's manie differences, there must bee so manie Courts of Justice, that all suites may bee ended in a week, or if there bee too manie writings to peruse, and difficulties to hear; then to bee put to good men to peruse, and hear them, and they
for to bring in their report, how they finde things, if they cannot com∣primise it; and all ordinarie suites to bee ended at the first hearing, or next daie at a second hearing; if som pa∣per, or circumstance of proof bee wanting, in the same Citie may bee two or three Courts of the same kinde: onely one for a greater, another for alesser summe. Ex. 18. 18. 22. Besides, there may bee one two, or three Courts for Sea matters, at Lon∣don; if one bee not enough to end all things quickly; one for quarrels; one for monies, and one for agree∣ments in writing, in which fall anie differences; another there may bee for quarrels, between Masters and men, Mistresses and maids, &c. and other Courts there may bee, if there bee need: and better the Judges sit, though they somtimes have little or nothing to do, then hundreds dai∣ly wait on them, and know not
when they shall bee heard, &c. 17. Let not one man have power of anie Iudgment alone, by anie means; for besides, one is more capable to bee bribed then manie, that are changed yearly (onely one in a Court, staie's on for the year af∣ter, and hee to bee the first president for that year:) one man cannot think of all things needful at that time, so well as manie men can do; and oft divers men, or one amongst them finde's a deceit better, and sooner then one man alone can do. Deut. 1. 16. Prov. 21. 14. Iosh. 20. 4. Deut. 21. 2. 18. Let order bee taken, that no man may bee put in prison, and have his libertie taken away for debt, be∣fore sentence bee past, and that hee bee condemned: and when anie bee put in prison, let their caus bee heard, and presently determined; and if they bee in debt, and cannot pay
their debts, nor anie friends for them; then let them bee set to work, that in time hee may paie his debts, or if possible som part of it; for that is just, and will make others take heed how they com into debt; and do much other good. Ezra 7. 26. 19. All living men are so partial, that I doubt, there is not one alive hath so much grace, or truth, that at all times would impartially give sen∣tence; and though som would not take monie, or presents, directly and by compact; yet manie will take som kindness, at lest indirectly, espe∣cially, from friends or kinred; and though som would abhor all this, especially for the most part, yet are there anie living men, that dwell in houses of clay, and see through flesh, that would not at som times bee par∣tial to their neer friends and acquain∣tance, and give such a sentence for them, as they would not do, if it were
for an enemie, &c. Rom. 3. 10, 11, 12. Wherefore, it is of verie great con∣cernment, that som cours bee taken, to prevent, as much as can possible bee, all partialitie; for which manie things might bee don, and manie brave orders made, if men were wil∣ling to do all that might bee. Exod. 23. 8. Deut. 16. 19. Prov. 15. 27. Great punishments on them that take gifts, * or pervert Judgments upon anie pretence, is one good means, and manie other helps there are. Prov. 17. 8. 23. Deut. 17. 4. 29. 4. 20. Sore punishment against fals witnesses; is of great conducement to Iustice, and few men there are that fear an oath, indeed much less a lie, or fals Testimonie, when it may ad∣vantage themselvs, or friends; and most men in words, do abhor a fals oath; yet verie few in a temptation, that make true conscience of it: but
finde a thousand waies to absolv themselvs, and blinde their own consciences, that they may not think themselvs forsworn, or to have born fals witness: wherefore against the subtletie and deceitfulness of man's heart, in this and the former article especially, all diligence of the depth of wisdom must bee set on work, by means whereof, good Laws, and or∣der, and right antidotes may bee found to prevent all the mischief of these evils. Exod. 20. 16. Prov. 19. 5. 9. Prov. 6. 19. Prov. 21. 8. And where anie doubt is, each of the witnesses must bee examined alone, in a room apart; by which means great discoveries of untruth will bee found out, to wonderment. Acts 12. 19. Ezra 10. 16. Acts 25. 26. Luke 23. 14. 21. Let som able men bee appoint∣ed (but so as they bee not known to bee such) continually to ride up and
down, and bee present at Courts of Iudicature, somtimes in one town and Countie, somtimes in ano∣ther; and when they finde anie Court to do apparent injustice, let them dis∣cover it to the State, for them to take a cours, that such Judges may bee punished, as they finde each in that Court to have been guiltie thereof; so shall all Courts of Justice fear to do wrong, lest som of these men bee there present to disclose their injustice. Ier. 8. 6. and 23. 18. Yea doubtless, it would bee of ad∣mirable use, to have either Sheriffs, or som other, to give an account of the obedience given to all Acts of Parlament, yea, to see them obeied in the Counties.
For Justice in Criminal Causes. 1. LEt the same men in everie town, and Countie, that have the Judgment in Civil, have the Judg∣ment in Criminal Causes; but in Countrie towns and places, where are no men of much judgment, let them not have the power of life and death in their hands, but onely som other corporal punishments; yet 'tis strange to see in the Low Countries, how their Bores, or men in Countrie towns, that in manie places have pow∣er of life and death, will do better justice then learned men in other Countries. Ioshua 20. 4. Numb. 35. 24. Deut. 21. 2. Deut. 1. 16. 2. Next daie (or two) after anie are com or brought into prison, let
them bee examined, that if anie bee unjustlie imprisoned, hee may bee forthwith set at libertie; and for such as are guiltie, let them bee tried, and sentence pronounced, and executed as as often as possible may bee, that Iu∣stice may bee speedily exercised to the terror of evil doers; and it will save much charge to the Common-wealth, not to keep long in prison. Deut. 1. 16. Prov. 21. 7. 3. Let no Malefactors against the light of Nature, and civil societie, escape unpunished, but bee justly and speedily punished, not in prisons be∣fore hand, by cold, heat, stink, fa∣mine, or anie other wale; but out of humanitie, let them bee comfortably provided for, till sentence bee given▪ and then let Justice take place; Tha all Murtherers, Theeves, Whore▪ mongers, Adulterers, fals-witness▪ bearers, evil-speakers, deceivers▪ Bankrupts, Drunkards, roiotors
Traitors, Blasphemers, and all manner of evil doers may bee duly punished, rather inclining to mercie then crueltie, and alwaies with a merciful heart. Deut. 35. 31, 32. Prov. 12. 18. 4. Let no man or Court have pow∣er to pardon anie offenders; for mer∣cie to one offender is crueltie unto ma∣nie innocent persons; for if one get's pardon, one hundred will hope for the like; and it increaseth offenders, and wrong's the Common-wealth, and tend's onely to the unjust great∣ness of him, or them that have that power, and by God never command∣ed. Deut. 35. 31, 32, 33. 5. Let no difference bee made be∣tween Iews, or Gentiles, bond or free, stranger or Natives, in either Criminal, or Civil things: for so hath God commanded, and by this means shall the Governors bee true fathers of humanitie; And it will mightily
populate, and inrich the Common-wealth, when the oppressed in anie other Countrie know where to go dwell, under so just Government, with freedom from oppression. Deut. 1. 16, 17. Prov. 24. 23. Prov. 20. 8. 6. That the children nor heirs of Malefactors bee punished, or disin∣herited for the misdeeds of their Pa∣rents, becaus the Lord hath so com∣manded, and the punishment of chil∣dren for their Parents faults in former times, hath been used chiefly by Ty∣rants, who, to secure * themselvs the better against treasons, and hurt to themselvs, set such sore punishments to deterr all from hurting them, which should not have needed, had they lived justly. * If the Father forfeit his estate, do it, but let his small chil∣dren have their portions out of it, if they have no waie approved their father's evil. Ezek. 18. 20. Deut. 24. 16. 2 Kings 14. 6.
7. And I believ it can never bee shewed out of anie Historie, either Divine, or humane, that ever God changed or put down that Govern∣ment, or brought so general a plague as war, &c. upon a Nation, to de∣stroie half, or a quarter of the Inha∣bitants, so long as, but anie reaso∣nable measure of Justice Prov. 16. 12.was found amongst them; how much then will hee bless that Nation, and Govern∣ment, with all manner of blessings, both spiritual and temporal, where with good Justice, both true Religi∣on and Mercie are advanced? And most certainly, Prov. 16. 12.that Government 1 Sam. 15. 11. 23. 1 King. 2. 4. 1 King. 3 9. that followeth these principal Rules of God's word, shall never bee changed whilst they continue so do∣ing, Prov. 16. 12.and that Nation shall alwayes continue most happie 1 Sam. 15. 11. 23. 1 King. 2. 4. 1 King. 3 9. who are so governed; for the Lord will not fail of his good word, nor is his arm shortned.
* Deut. 11. 22. to 25. and the whole ch. † Deut. 28. 2. to 13. and the whole chap. It is verie adviseable, that since Eng∣land breed's so manie thieves, and hanging thereupon is so common and cheap, and yet little reformation, that two Gallies may bee built to row from Gravesend to Queenborow, and where els they may, (accord∣ing to weather) and put theeves on these two years, seven, ten, or during their life; certainly this will help more then the Gallows, and more conformable it is to God's will; and since the root of manie mischiefs is base swinish drunkenness, and the cure hereof never reached by all the Laws alreadie made; there is but one main Cure propounded, Viz. That it bee inacted through the Nation, that none drink to another, directly, or indirectly, upon the for∣feiture of twelve pence, whereof
six pence to the informer, and six pence to the poor; which, though it seem ridiculous, will prove the like∣liest waie of prevention; the practice beeing of men ingrammatical, and pra∣ctised in no Countries, but among our neighbors in Germanie, &c. ANd becaus Justice cannot bee executed without Power, therefore God hath given the Sword into the Magistrate's hand to maintein the Good, and punish evil doers; wherefore the Militia must bee alwayes well looked to, and provided for. Rom. 13. 1. 4 2 Chro. 8. 3. 6. 2 Chro. 25. 5. & 9. ch. 25. v. and 32. 5, 6. 1. By putting into all offices, both in Garrison and field, godlie and tru∣stie men, the State may relie on. Exod. 18. 21. 2 King. 22. 7. 2. To have all Store-houses bee neer at hand, and well provided of
all sorts of Ammunition, and con∣stantly well drest and looked to, both in peace, and in time of war especially. 2 Chro. 8. 6. 2 Chro. 11, 12. Ezek. 27. 11. 4. *To put the Sword into no pri∣vate Souldier's hand, that is uncivil; much less into the hands of lewd per∣sons, who love no Justice. * They will destroie victuals in plentie, cannot fast in want, sooner fall sick, and weaken the Armie: mutinie soon∣er, and fail and faint in the time of battail. 5. Let all Militarie persons, both Souldiers, and Officers, bee truly and justly paid, whatever is promised them; for they that are to maintein Justice, must bee first just themselvs, and keep Souldiers from injustice, which cannot bee without due paie∣ment; for by good paiment you may have chois of Souldiers; and may keep them in good discipline, and
may bee so justly ordered, that they will bee no burthen, but profit to the places where they are. Levit. 19. 13. Mai. 3. 5. Exod. 2. 9. Luke 3. 14. 6. Do justly in advancing such to Offices in the Armie and Garrisons, as are deserving men, and have long∣est, and faithfully served the State, and not to put in friends that never were souldiers, or other men for mo∣ney, or other self-ends, whereby manie are discontented, and the Ar∣mie made less serviceable, and the State thereby weakned: when the souldiers see them in power so unjust. 2 Sam. 23. 8, 9, &c. Psal▪ 125. 4. 7. Let all roiotous, and deboist souldiers bee turned out of service; for such are plagues to provoke God to wrath, they will brag much, and when it come's to fighting, do little; when an Armie is in plentie, they will devour abundance, and the sooner
bring the whole to want; and when want com's they are the less able to bear it; but will sooner grow sick, infect others, die themselvs, and weaken the whole. Neither can rio∣ters fast when need is, so long as tem∣perate men. Prov. 23. 20. Prov. 28. 7. 1 Pet. 4. 4. 2 Pet. 2, 13. Isa. 28. 1. 8. Lastly that all Commissions and Orders pass in the militarie chan∣nel, and all Souldiers to give an ac∣count to the General, and the Gene∣ral to the State, no interfearing with them and the civil Government, the English Souldierie being the most un∣paralel'd men in the world. ANd becaus the Militia cannot bee maintained without money; Therefore hath God commanded, that Tribute shall bee paid to them that bear the sword of Justice; and things must bee so ordered, that the
Common-wealth may have a verie rich stock, or revenue at least, to defray all charges plentifully, without which they cannot be just. Luke 2. 1. 2. Rom. 13. 6. 2 Chro. 10. 4. 18. 2. The charges of the whole common-wealth, must bee duly known, and all unnecessarie charges cut off, and then a proportionable tax laid accordingly, plentifully to defray all those charges; so as no man must paie more currantly, nor buy all things cheaper then the Common-wealth; for they must bee an example of truth in what they promise; and Justice in performance to the whole Common-wealth, how will the Lord then bless them? Levit. 19. Mal. 3. 5. 3. Special care must bee had, that men fearing God and hating covetous∣ness, may bee chosen and trusted with the stock of the Common-wealth; and yet so regulated, that if any prove fals, they may do little hurt. Exod. 18. 21. 2 King. 22. 7. 2 King. 12. 15.
4. The Charge of the Common∣wealth may bee made much less by lessening the state of Officers, both ci∣vil and militarie, by land and sea, which is nourished in a Kinglie Go∣vernment, to maintain their Port and Grandure: But in a Common wealth, who desire wealth indeed, this statelie Port is wholly needless, as hath most eminently been seen in the Low Countries, where 'tis strange to see (though now 'tis ten times greater then in the heat of their wars against the King of Spain) how small state, the States themselvs hold: Lords of the Admiraltie, Burgomasters of the greatest Cities, not one of an hundred have so much as a man or serjeant to wait on them in the streets, yet do the highest acts of Power, with asmuch vigor as the King of Spain himself. Prov. 16. 32. 5. Let as many offices of the Com∣mon-wealth
(as can bee) bee served by men of qualitie, who will do it freely without any charge or salaries; of which you need not doubt of chois; for how manie thousands are in Eng∣land, men that have enough to live on, and nothing to imploie their able parts in; who gladly, som out of love of humanitie and the common good, others, but that they might bee well imploied, som out of love of Autori∣tie, and honor, &c. would gladly serv the Common-wealth; yea, and would petition ten for one office, (if it were but brought into custom, as it was under the Romane Common-wealth-government*) and what a mass of monie might bee saved by this means, and the Common-wealth more honored by beeing sued to to bee served? and yet all offices better served then now by needie men, that desire still more to inrich themselvs, and whose hearts saie not yet, I have
enough, as manie men do, that live on what they have. * And should not Christians serv the Common-wealth freely, as well as the Romanes? Nehemiah 5. 15. to 18. Prov. 21. 15. 6. As manie officers about cu∣stom, excise, Clerks, Treasurers, Committees, Towns, freeedoms, Of∣ficers of Companies, and manie the like might bee discharged, as would alone maintein a great Armie, if all customs, Excise, and a hundred other waies of gathering monie were put down, and instead thereof, all men throughout the whole Common-wealth, that are able to paie anie thing * taxed once in a year, what each shall give, each according to his rents, estate, trade, and handicraft, and a place appointed in each town, and Citie, where everie one shall themselvs bring the money they are taxed at, with how few Officers and little charge might this bee don,
and how easie would it bee for men to paie, when they should have all things so cheap without custom, Ex∣cise, or charge of thousands of Offi∣cers; how would men bee inabled hereby to paie their taxes by the mul∣titude of Trade that would flow in, if all Customs, &c. were free. Luke 2. 1, 2. 2 Kings 23. 25. 2 Chro. 24. 9. Deut. 16. 17. 7. This tax to paie the whole charge of the Common-wealth (both the charge of the State, and all the charges of each town and Citie) may bee ordered to bee paid at once, or at three, or four several times everie year; or rebate set for them that bring it in before the time limited, proportiona∣ble to the time; and manie other means may bee used, to caus people to paie willingly; or the tax may bee laid much less, and the rest taxed up∣on Burials, weddings, and feastings, or the like, and people forbidden
by a Law, not to make such great weddings, burials, Christnings, &c. and instead thereof, to give but the half so much to the State. 'Tis strange, what abundance of monie might bee gathered by this means, and yet people have never the less, seeing now they spend twice so much, in such things as bee wholly useless, and do but hurt and trouble them∣selvs, so to spend their monie. 8. Great would the advantages bee, both to the State, and particular towns, to have a rich publick stock; as a well monied man that is prudent, by God's blessing get's up above all his Neighbors; so would it bee with a rich State, through God's blessing beeing well managed; I could bee large herein: first, the State might bee just, and paie all justly, and presently, upon which a blessing is promised. Secondly, all things might bee bought for readie monie, the advantage
whereof is verie great. Thirdly, you are readie to lend to anie Neigh∣bor▪Nation, and take strong holds for securitie, which is oft of great con∣cernment. Fourthly, you are readie not onely to defend, but to offend anie Nation that wrong's you, or assist anie Nation oppressed, by which oft whole Provinces are gained, and in general all happiness attend's this State; for as Christ saith to him that hath (using it well) shall bee given, and this riches is your strong tower. 9. Tis as easie for anie State to get a rich stock, and Revenue, as for anie private man that hath a good trade, to gather monie, if hee will bee thriftie and diligent; but as no man can grow rich that will bee gallant, and costly at first; So Kings, Princes, and States that will bee thriftie, and diligent, may gather monie like dust, and make silver like the stones of the street, and that in twentie, thirtie, or
fiftie years time; for think not but it must have a time, and may as easily spend all again, as wee see in Solomon, or bee alwayes poor, and in straits, as all States almost are, and know not how to get out of debt, when 'tis meerly their own faults, as may most evidently bee proved. And no peo∣ple, (when a State is setled) will bee 2 Chro. 10. 4.unwilling to paie anie taxations, when they but see, or conceiv that 'tis well used, and improved; but if States will go upon profuse charges, when they are poor, and keep thievs that steal the publick stock continu∣ally, no marvel if people bee unwil∣ling, &c. Prov. 10. 4. 15. Prov. 12. 24. Prov. 21▪ 5. 10. If this waie of gathering mo∣nie with most eas, and least charge cannot bee brought about, without disturbance of the Common-wealth; There are manie waies to gather more monie by Excise and Custom, then
now on foot, and with less grievance to the Common wealth. It is wished that all that use Coaches should paie fifteen pound, or twentie pound yearly to the State. And so for Hackney▪men, according to discretion. And to give all incou∣ragement to Weavers and others, to make all the manufactures of silk in England, and to treat with som Wea∣vers, and merchants, for the setting up of Looms, and other inventions in England, for getting of the manufa∣cture here, and that countenance by the Magistrates may bee given to the undertakers of what Nation soever, provided they bee bound to set onely our English poor awork, and bring over into England but a certain num∣ber, not exceeeding a hundred, to teach our Nation the manufactures aforesaid: this beeing don, would imploie manie thousands of our poor, and get this Nation a rich manufa∣cture,
and serv the exportation of our treasure, which ought now carefully to bee looked after, the like ought to bee don for the advancement of mak∣ing all sort of linnen cloth. That whereas great quantitie of Gold, and Silver is wasted in this Na∣tion, in the making Gold and Silver∣lace and thred, and the vanitie and ex∣cess thereof is grown so great, that an Act may bee made for the putting of it totally down, that none bee permitted to wear it (or expose it to sale under a certain penaltie) or if it bee allowed to bee worn, then onely for persons of qualitie, and that an Excise of at least six pence the ounce bee laid on all the Silver Wyer (and strict order taken, that none of the currant coins of the Nation bee melted down for the making of that manufacture, of Gold and Silver-Thred, or Wyer) and that all the workers, both men and women may bee tyed to such just
Rules, as all the former abuses pra∣ctised in this Trade, may bee prevent∣ed in the making of that manufacture (and restrained onely to persons of qualitie, to bee allowed to wear Gold or Silver-lace;) By this means ma∣nie people will have their monie in their purses, to supplie their necessarie occasions, which they vainly laie out on their backs, to the great waste of their private fortunes, and dammage of the Common wealth: for in all well regulated Common-wealths, the extravagancies of Coin, and profuse people ought to bee restrained by the Magistrates. That all forrein Laces, such as are made beyond Seas, either in silk or thred, bee debarred to bee imported into this Nation, upon the forfeiture of ten times the value the Laces shall bee apprised at: and if you will allow Laces to bee worn here, then let our own poor have the benefit of making Lace here, and not forreiners.
To advise all waies and means for the bringing in of Gold and Sil∣ver into this Common-wealth, and to inquire, and finde out what waies and designs have been practised to obstruct the Mint and transport your Treasure, and to prevent it carefully for the future, and to give all incourage∣ment to Merchants to bring monies into the Nation; to do this effectual∣ly, would bee a great advantage to the Common-wealth, and require's a diligent prosecution and inquirie af∣ter; to prevent the great abuses in clipped English money, to pass a Law it may all bee cut in pieces, and none to expose it in paiement; but as Bullion to bee new coined upon strict penalties, against anie person that shall offend in the premises; for the Common-wealth is verie much co∣zened by clipped monie.
NOw as a man cannot bee account∣ed verie religious, who is slothful: nor can shew much Mercie without plentie of means to do it withal; nor will bee just to others, who is not just to himself, and Familie, by diligence to do his utmost indeavor; in som honest calling; So the Magistrate in his place is bound to use, and see that all diligence bee used, to make happie the Common-wealth. Pr. 18. 9. Prov. 21. 25. Prov. 10. 4. Which hee shall do. I. By the advancement of Learn∣ing. Isa. 29. 11. II. By the improvement of Na∣ture. Deut. 11. 10. III. By the incouragement of Arts. 2 Chro. 24. 11, 12. IV. By the increas of Merchan∣dise. Ezek▪ 27. 33.
I. FOr the Advancement of Learn∣ing, Lord Verulam hath Bacon's Advancement of Learning.pro∣pounded manie excellent things, and more may bee added by other learned men; for doubtless, Learning will mightily improve all other things, if so regulated, as self might bee less, and the publick more intended. Eccles. 7. 12. Prov. 24. 6. 1 Kings 4. 30, 31. and 10. Ch. 8. Acts 7. 22. Dan. 1. 17. Prov. 1. 5. 7. John 7. 15. Job. 22. 2. Prov. 12. 18. Prov. 15. 7. Prov. 21, 22. Prov. 22. 17. Two books wee want in England; viz. First another Martyrologie, con∣tinued from Queen Marie's time to the death of the late King. Secondly, the Experiments Ministers and others have in several cases of Conversion,
and other cases of Desertion, with the quieting of souls, and means there∣unto, with a probatum est, the names of the parties concealed: which if eve∣rie able Christian would write, and keep by him, and print, how might Satan's Methods bee discovered, and manie souls comforted? II. FIrst for the Improvement of Na∣ture, Lord Verulam hath also manie excellent, and learned Problemes, ex∣periments, and speculations, and more in that kinde may bee added, and brought to act by other learned men, by the incouragement, and help of the publick stock, in times of Peace, when war is ended. Prov. 13. 23. Deut. 9. 10. Bacon's natural Hi∣storie. 2. But of all things, I thinke there is nothing conduceth so much to the
profit of all, as cutting of Rivers, where none are, and making them deeper that are too shallow, both within, and without Towns, and from one town to another; as wee see in the Low-Countries, who have as the Lord Verulam saith, the richest mines above ground in the world: meaning their Rivers. For in a Countrie like Eng∣land, the third or fourth part of all the Grain sown in the whole Land, is spent upon beasts for carriage, &c. which by Rivers might bee spared: and might by a joint hand, and good order bee made more easily then is thought of. Gen. 13. 10. Isa. 30. 25. and 32. 2. and 23. 3. Psal. 107. 35. 3. Som Privileges may bee pro∣mised, and made sure to such, to be injoied for life, or so manie years, whosoever shall finde anie new in∣vention, for improvement of nature in anie kinde; bee it in manuring of ground, making it better, and find∣ing
anie instruments, to till the ground mith more eas, or less charge or the like. Ioshua 15. 16. 2 Sam. 5. 8. Prov. 10. 4. 4. Much may bee don about im∣provement of Commons; making of som waters land, and gaining of ground out of the Sea, as is to bee seen in the Low-Countries, to their great inrichment, and admiration of other Nations. Gen. 26. 12. Psal. 107. 37. Deut. 11. 10. 5. A rich publick stock in everie Town, and Citie may hereby bee laid out in improvement of Nature, to the great profit of the Revenue of the Town, and yet greatly to the common good, of which manie ex∣amples might bee produced. Eccles. 10. 19. Prov. 22. 7. Eccles. 7. 12. 6. Daies of publick praier to God, to bless the fruits of the earth, and of publick thanks-giving for his blessing thereupon, is a special means for im∣provement
of Nature ordained by himself, and will bee blessed by him, if rightly kept, and then are special fruits of faith. Deut. 16. 10. 11. Prov. 10. 22. Deut. 26. 10. 11. Zech. 8. 10. 12. III. FOr Incouragement of Arts and Ma∣nufactures, great care must bee taken, becaus it imploie's hundred thousands, who live upon it, and also is a chief ground for Merchandise, and manie chief setters of people on work, do also much inrich themselvs, to the great good of the Common-wealth. Gen. 4. 20, 21, 22. 1 Chro. 29. 5. 2 Chro. 24, 11. 12. 1. For finding of new Arts, or for bettering of the old, by instruments, easiness, or the like, great riches, ho∣nors, or Privileges would bee pro∣pounded,
and assured, or the State to choos two men, and the inventer two; and if they agree not themselvs to choos an Umpire, to determine the reward of the inventer, and the same liberally to bee rewarded according∣ly: the same whereof would set all the wits of the world on work, to ad∣vance your Common-wealth, to the greatest happiness that ever the world yet saw. Eccles. 9. 10. 2 Sam. 5. 8. 15 Ioshua 16, 17. 2. All means to buy Materials at the cheapest prises, must in a special manner bee indeavored; and amongst other means a chief will bee, to suffer all Commodities, from all parts of the world to bee brought in free with∣out Custom; and if they cannot make price to their mindes, that they may transport them freely out again, at all times. 1 Kings 5. 6. 9, 10. 3. That all possible care must bee taken, for cheapest transportation of
goods, within the Land, from place to place, both by water and by Land; 'Also such order about laborers, boats, Carts, and all things there∣upon depending; 'Also such order about workmen, and victual, &c. as may best conduce thereunto, about which much may bee said, too large for this place. Eccles. 9, 10. 1 King. 5. 9. 4. That no Artist, or handie-labor∣er, that gain's not thereby ten or twentie pound a year (or so much as shall bee thought fit, according to the cheapness of the place hee live▪s in) if a batchelor, or thirtie, or for∣tie pounds a year if hee bee married: and five or ten pounds a year for each childe hee hath besides, shall give anie kinde of taxation to the Com∣mon-wealth, &c. Prov. 14. 31. Nehem. 5. 18. 5. That all Companies of Artists, or trades▪men, give Freedom for all
that will (and are capable thereof) to set up, or bee free of that Trade, without paying anie thing for free∣dom, either of the Citie or Compa∣nie: for why should anie thing for common good bee so lock't up, in∣closed, or paid for? this freedom would bee found true Freedom, if it were but in use, however it may seem at present. Prov. 22. 16. 6. What if once in a year all of each trade (at several times) meet to∣gether; and hee that could do best, or most of anie Trade, to have som kinde of prise, or honor that year, &c. Eccles. 9. 10. 7. Publick daies of praier, that God would pour out his Spirit (as of grace especially, so) of sciences and Arts upon his people, &c. Eccles. 9. 11.
IV. FOr Increas of Merchandise, and Merchants, and helps for dispatch of their affairs; manie things may bee don by the Magistrate, and ought in a special manner to bee looked upon, as a special means to inrich anie Na∣tion. Isa. 23. 8. Ezek. 27. 33. 34. 1. To preserv the Common-wealth at peace, at home especially, and abroad also, as much as possible can bee, with all Nations; is a chief means to increas Merchants, and Mer∣chandise▪ And therefore to meddle verie little with other States, but trust in God, who seldom order's his peo∣ple to that work; nor to keep anie Leger-Ambassadors from other Na∣tions. Levit. 26. 6. 1 Kings 4. 24, 25. Ezek. 26. 11, 12. Zech. 8. 10.
2. To have special care to keep the Soveraintie of the Sea, by numerous and able men of war, well furnished with all things; and Mariners, Vo∣lontiers, and well paid; and good order for constant convoies, for all places, that Merchants may bee kept from losses; to accomplish which, manie things are to bee don. This short regulating of the present Navie may incourage others to add their thoughts. Dan. 11. 30. 40. Ezek. 26. 15. 18. The brief Regulating of the present Navie, which now cost's five or 600000 l. yearly. The work consist's either in the Governing, or the Executive part. I. For the Governing thereof. 1. A Committee of Admiraltie con∣sisting
of five or seven verie able men, should alwaies sit neer the Council of State, with sufficient Secretaries: and these men (if need) may have competent salaries. 2. These to bee able to give satisfa∣ction for all marine affairs whatsoëver at all times: these to have in them the Court of Admiraltie also; which may easily bee don; if the Law of Mer∣chants were in force, who, by six men yearly chosen, may end the usual con∣troversies among Seamen and Mer∣chants. The Admiraltie Court (as now it stand's) beeing verie offensive. 3. In this Committee, the Admi∣rals of the Sea, to sit, when they return home, as Assistants.
II▪ The Executive part consist's either in building the Ship, or employing it, when built: to which end 1. Laie by all the Docks at Chat∣tam, Detford, &c. whence neer one thousand mouths are daily fed upon the State, besides Officers, &c. 2. That the Ship bee built in a Merchant waie, at anie Dock the Carpenter will, and so built per tun as can bee agreed by the said Committee, and paiement upon deliverie; for wee finde the verie carriage of the State's own timber is dearer then timber can bee bought elswhere. 3. That for the performance of Co∣venants the Committee have a Check, or Overseer upon the ship, whilst building.
4. That som Act bee made for the preservation of timber through the Common-wealth, there beeing much spoil made continually. 5. That the offer of New-Eng∣land may bee entertained, who ten∣der the building of what Ships, or Frigats are desired, and to bring them into the Thames, and there their va∣lue impartially judg'd: who likewise may furnish iron guns, masts, &c. For the Sailing of the SHIP. 1. That an able fit Captain bee chosen, and the Ship commended to his care, whilst hee is worthie. 2. That the said Captain bee in constant paie.
3. That hee rig, man, victual, and take the whole care of the ship himself, with a Muster-Master upon everie ship, or Squadron. 4. That the Captain's accounts bee given up to the Committee aforesaid, as often as they pleas. 5. That upon anie miscarriage of his, hee bee made verie exemplarie. 6. Seamen to bee paid everie six moneths, in the several places, where they com in to winter. 7. That Ships bee as well kept at other places as at Chattam. By which you save the charge of Commissioners, Victuallers, Pursers, Stewards, Docks, &c. By which means you need not press men; everie Captain knowing how
to get his own gang: and certainly hee that is trusted with a ship worth 10000 l. may well bee trusted with all the rest: hee know's his Officers and men, whereby hee may give a better account then now, when the ship is man'd by strangers; and then a Cap∣tain chosen for six moneths, not know∣ing the men hee is to join with in his work, nor to see them more when hee leav's them. 3 Special care must bee had to se∣cure Merchants, and their goods on Land as well as by Sea, from danger by fire, by water, by Souldiers, In∣justice of Courts, or anie other waie: the means for these ends are plain. Ezek, 26. 10. 12. 4 To take of all incumbrance from
Merchandise, as Custom, Excise, Pasports, &c. by all which Mer∣chants are extremely troubled, vexed, and hindered; and if men might ship, and unship their goods at all times, and in all places; and that without anie toll or Custom, how would it increas trade? how would all the world make England their packhous, as now they do the Low-Countries, where small Customs are paid: much more would it bee here, if no Custom were paid▪ besides the great riches to your Inhabitants, by factorage, packhouses, Porters and all trades would feel the benefit there∣of, to the marvellous increas of the Common wealth, &c. 1 King. 12. 4. 5 To increas shipping and Marriners for the cheap transporting of Mer∣chandise: for which divers things would bee don; 'tis strange that in the Low Countries, though they
have neither wood, Iron, hemp, &c. of their own, but must fetch all things to make ships (by ships) from other Countries, yet that they will transport Merchandise at a cheaper rate then anie other Nation, and have got to this height in the midst of a most costlie, dangerous war. Ezek. 27. 3. 9. Ezek. 27. 25. 27. 6 To take such a cours which may bee easily don, if there bee a will there∣to; as all differences, debts, and quarrels amongst Merchants and Marriners about shipping, fraits, &c. may bee both speedily and justly ended, and without anie charge to him that hath the just caus; and a mulct upon him that doth or seek's to do wrong to his Neighbour. Let for∣reiners and all strangers, Jew, and heathen, have full as just, speedie and cheap Justice as anie, so shall all Na∣tions tell what the Lord hath don
for you; how will Riches flow in? 1 Cor. 6▪ 1. 5. 7 But one of the greatest things in the world, to increas Merchandise, is to have monie cheap at interest, as in the Low-Countries, where at three 3▪ and four per cent. a year, anie Merchant, or anie other that hath credit, may take up as much monie as is incredible, upon his bare, private obligation, without anie Notarie or witness, which is of such concern∣ment for the State it self, and all sorts of people therein as is incredible: and can bee effected as well in England, as anie where, for 'tis the meer fruits of Justice and Righteousness, and a secure State; by reason wherof all Nations in wars, or troubles, or in securitie, make over their treasures to that Countrie, where there is lest fear to lose it; which bring's treasures from all parts, and they at length beeing wearie to
have it still, give it out at interest at the best price they can get, which at last so manie will do, that monie com's to bee so cheap as you have heard, and make's Merchants of other parts also send their goods to that Countrie, to lie still for a better market; when their loss is so little as three or four per cent. for a whole year, which also bring in great riches. Ezek. 27. 12. to 27. v. 8 Upon which secure, and good state of things, a bank may bee set up, as at Amsterdam, where lie's a great deal of the Merchants, (and other) trea∣sure; for 'tis in vain to set up a bank, if Merchants think not their monie would bee as secure there as in their own hands or surer. Luk. 19. 23. 1. The advantage of this bank is ve∣rie great to the Citie, who stand's for securitie, and whose Deputies (three of them, yearly two chosen)
are trusted with the whole stock of the bank, which they keep in sellers, made with plaster of Paris, and iron doors with three locks; the advan∣tage to the town, Laws and orders thereof would bee too large here to rehears. 2. The advantage to the State is also great at som strait, where they may orderly bor∣row Eccles. 9. 10. The advantage by letting out monie is great, also selling and minting of mo∣nie.a great summe at low interest, giving good securitie for it: but if the State use anie force, though but once, and necessitate, or force the bank to lend, then is the bank spoiled for twentie years, or an age, as the case may stand. 3. The advantage to merchants The advantage by lying one hundred years, and alwayes keeping the best kinde of monie, is unspeakeable in a manner.is great, especially to great ones, to have all
their monie receiv'd, and paid for no∣thing, and most paid by bills, with∣out stirring anie monie, onely set from one man's account to another's. 9 For saving of time, and that Mer∣chants may keep a man the less, and that the Bank may also receiv, and paie their monie the easier; there must also bee minted or coined so manie hundred thousand pounds in five shil∣ling peeces, as that all great summes may bee received, and paid in great monie, the commoditie whereof is great to Merchants, though there were no bank. Ephes. 5. 17. Eccles. 9. 10. 10 Tis also a thing of great concern∣ment to make currant, at a true value the monie of other Countries, by a wise Government whereof, suitable to the exchange, and other considerations, the riches of other Countries may
by an unsensible subtletie bee drawn into yours, as in the Low-Countries. Gen. 23. 16. Luke 20. 24. 11 And great care is to bee taken about the Mint, and fals Coiners, and not to mint too much or too little monie of one kinde; for Merchants, and all Inhabitants are accommodated, or dis∣accommodated greatly hereby. Prov. 30. 8. 12 A common weigh-hous (two or three in great Cities) with four or eight se∣veral great and small ballances, in eve∣rie weigh-hous regulated with brave and just orders, is of very great use to Merchants; the seller to deliver his goods into the ballance, and the buyer to receiv it as soon as 'tis weighed, the laborers about it to bee sworn, and well ordered, and other things here about would bee too large. Levit. 19. 36. Prov. 11. 1.
13 Let there bee as manie sworn Bro∣kers (who may not buy or sell anie thing for themselvs) as will desire the office for accommodations of Mer∣chants regulated with good Laws, and to bee put out of office upon anie fals dealing between man and man, and a rate set what they may take for brokerage of each commoditie, &c. let them have the office gratis, and let them have Officers to decide all Controversies between two Brokers, that concern's their office, and to maintein their own poor, if you will amongst themselvs,  Levit. 19. 13. Gen. 29. 15. 14 If a Court were ed to assure all Merchants goods, from Pirates, and Enemies, and fully to paie for what ever is lost that waie (yet everie man to bee left free, whether hee will in∣sure or no) yea if the same Court did
also insure against dangers by storms, or what is otherwise lost at Sea also; I conceiv the State, or Citie that stood the venture for so much in the hun∣dred might make great profit thereby, and also further, and incourage Mer∣chants to venture, of which much might bee said. Acts 27. 10. and 38. 40. 2 Chro. 20. 37. 15 A verie great plague and hinderance of Merchants are Bankrupts; and cer∣tainly Merchandise would bee much increased; if the fear of Bankrupts were but in part remedied, which might bee by good Laws well exe∣cuted; as that, whosoever trust anie one man, with all, or more then hee is worth; or venture so much in one or divers ships upon the Sea, or laie so much in one hous, and loos it by fire, and by anie of these means turn Bankrupt, shall bee so and so punished. 2 Kings 4. 1. and 7. v.
16 That they that know, (or may know if they pleas) they are behinde hand, and yet buy wares, or borrow monies of other men, (under pretence of hope to get before hand again) and yet plaie Bankrupts, bee also more punished then the former, especially, if upon examination it doth appear, they knew they must plaie Bankrupts, when they bought those wares, or bor∣rowed that monie; for then they dif∣fer not from thievs, onely in cir∣cumstance, and to bee the more pu∣nished, if when they had nothing, yet they wer costly in apparel, and other expenses, and knew they spent of other men's, &c. Mat. 18. 25. and 30. v. 17 That they, who under pretence of able men, under color of Merchan∣dise, get other men's goods into their hands, and yet, when they need
not, bankrupt themselvs on purpose to deceiv others, and inrich them∣selvs, bee sorely punished, as verie great thievs. Luke 16. 1. 18 That no Bankrupt may ever after com into anie office, or bear anie Rule in Church or State, &c. Mat. 25. 21. 23. and 28. 29. v. 19 That if the Bankrupt bee taken, and no friends will paie his debts, let him and his bee set to work as a thief, and what they can earn, over besides their own poor living, to bee given to the Creditors. 2 Kings 4. 1. Mat. 18. 25. 34. These, or the like penalties well limited, and ordered, and executed, would prevent thousands of Bank∣rupts, which are like Cankers to the Common-wealth. And what with great and little Bankrupts, it is abun∣dance
that plaie Bankrupt everie year. No week passeth without som Bankrupt in great Cities, and som week divers; and one Bankrupt doth more hurt then twentie thievs that are put to death, or sorely punished for it.
BUt for London in particular, these things following would bee re∣formed, for the increas, eas, pleasure, and benefit of Merchants, and all other Inhabitants besides, and above manie of the former things, that Lon∣don want's. 1. For landing of goods, &c. that a brave large Key bee made into the Thames, from London Bridg to Wap∣pin, or lower, and above the Bridg also, that ships may lie there safe all the waie, to lade and unlade their goods with roomth and pleasure, and with much less charge then now; and there may bee Pack-houses and Sel∣lers made all along by the Keie, to the great eas and accommodation of Merchants, and of great pleasure to Merchants, Marriners, and all sorts of people, to have such a large brave
Keye, of fortie or fiftie foot broad to walk upon, and dispatch their affairs at pleasure; and all this may bee don without charge to anie. Ezek. 27. 25. and 2. 27. 2. That Thames-street, for a mile or two long, bee made as broad, or broader then anie street in London; large, fair, and the houses light and pleasant; the street to bee paved with ch flat four-square stones, as in Holland, and high in the middest with the gutters on both sides, and bricks on both sides next the houses, as in Holland; the profit, pleasure, and eas to the whole Inhabitants would bee verie great. The difficultie seem's to bee in pulling down, and new building of houses, or removing them on screws, as at Amsterdam: But things may bee so ordered, as the profit to bee made, by convenient building; and the value, houses, and ground will bee at, by bettering the
street and the Key, will fully coun∣tervail the charge of all this whole work; though it should bee six, eight or ten years in doing, it might bee made one of the bravest places in the world, where one thousand or two thousand ships may lie with safetie all weathers &c. Nehem. 7. 4. 3. The next thing som remedie must bee found for, is the Passage up hill from Thames-street to Lon∣don; for which Thames-street, it may bee, will permit to bee heightned a foot or two all along, which will much eas the passage upward; and besides, right against anie street that goe's into the Citie, Thames-street may bee heightned six or eight foot, like a bridg; and Thames-street on each side for a hundred foot or more, to go sloping downward by an easie descent; and beeing against that place of ascent into the Citie rais'd eight
foot, the ascent into the Citie will also fall easie by a small ascent; and if anie inconvenience should bee found in this, there are other inventions to remedie this great inconvenience for transportation of goods, &c. which is of good concernment, besides the delight and cleanliness of this manner of accommodation. 4. But I would have no Carts used in the wole Citie; for they are verie uneasie to lade, and unlade goods, and besides, do so pester the streets, as Merchants, and others cannot pass the streets for quick dispatch of their affairs, to their great hurt and loss, of half a quarter of an hour, and thereby an opportunitie is oft great loss to manie. Now for remedie▪ let sleads bee onely used as at Amsterdam, that can draw an half, and a whole tun weight, as the hors is in strength: and besides the slead men alone ordinarily, can
lade and unlade his slead, without other help, unless for verie heavie things hee desire's to lend a hand of one or other that stand's by; tis a neat waie, and of quick dispatch, &c. Som cours must also bee taken to lessen the number of Coaches, which too much pester the streets, and hin∣der men in passing too and fro: which may easily bee don. 5. Next wee com up into the Ci∣tie, where wee see most beastly dur∣tie streets, the hurt of which is so great, as is strange; and what a world of work is daily made by the durt and wet, in rotting of shoes and stockins, womens coats, fouling of houses, making clean of shoes, clothes, &c. as is strange and not possible for Merchants to live cleanly, and neat∣ly, as in Holland without cleaner streets; which may in a verie great measure bee helped by paving the streets, with brave slate four-square
stones, the streets highest in the mid∣dest, gutters on each side next the houses, as in Holland, and bricks on each side next the houses, easie and clean for people to walk on, which, besides the great pleasure to all, would ten times paie the charge in saving shoes, stockins, &c. from wet and rotting, besides, all houses might bee kept more cleanly, and Merchants live more neatly, &c. 6. All wooden houses in London must down; and not anie part bee of wood, onely windows and doors, as fast as they rot away: no repara∣tions, or verie little to bee permitted, and no new houses to bee built, but with brick or stone, to prevent fire, for securitie of Merchants and others; and it would make Merchants of other Countries the more willing to trust their goods in your Citie, when there is less danger of fire. 7. Also divers means must bee used
for prevention of fire, more water must bee provided at hand by Pumps, bored into the ground fiftie, or one hundred foot, if water may bee so had by orders of Clappermen, go∣ing about all night, as in Holland: then a Captain, and officers of fire in everie Ward, to set good orders about quenching fire, also leather Buckets in everie hous, and in all pub∣lick places, and leathers at hand in everie ward alwaies readie, and di∣vers the like things are need∣ful. 8. As fast as the Citie is paved with new brave stones, to take the old stones and pave the high waies, everie waie out of the Citie, and to make the high waies so round and high in the midst, that they may bee clean Winter and Sommer, and to use all means, that all high waies may bee well mended and kept, which will bee great delight to Mer∣chants
and other Inbabitants, &c. 9. Also a large Keie may bee made on Southwark side, all along the lanes, and Rivers cut out of the Thames with Keies on both sides; and Pack-houses built, where all cours commodities, as Pitch, Tar, Iron, Milstones, wood of all sorts, as Masts, Timber, Planks, Deals, spars, Clapboards, and manie others Com∣modities may bee brought, and there bee kept at small charge; and landed out of the Ships, at the doors of the the Pack houses, as at Rotterdam, and other places, to the great accommo∣dation of Merchants, and furtherance of merchandise; and if these plain, and just Rules of God's word were observed; there would bee no need of anie deceitful, base, and Machevi∣lian courses, to keep a Common-wealth, in peace and obedience, as may bee seen in the Low-Countries, where no people have more libertie
then they, nor paie such great taxati∣ons, nor so little state anie where used to preserv Autoritie; and yet the people of so manie Nations, and Re∣ligions live in the greatest peace, and plentie of the world, meerly by good Justice, Mercie and Religion, and yet manie things com short, of what they ought; and might bee.
Postscript. Refer these to their proper places. Concerning PRINTING, which well used is a great ho∣nor, and benefit to the Com∣mon-wealth These things would bee considered. 1. THat PRINTING bee look't upon as a Mysterie, not as a common Trade for everie ig∣norant man to take up; but to bee
ordered by the State, as the Mint is for Coin. 2. That Printing-houses bee reduced to a certain number: as here∣tofore they have been: for the mul∣tiplying of them is a wrong to the Publick, and oftentimes the ruine of private men. 3. That all Popish and offensive Books, Libels, and loos Pamphlets may bee suppressed. 4. That no Books printed origi∣nally in England, may bee imported from beyond Seas into this Common∣wealth: other States will not suffer it: and wee finde by experience that neither Autor, nor Printer, nor book∣seller can bee incouraged, when the
Book, assoon as it is out here, shall bee printed beyond Sea, where they have paper and printing at a cheaper rate, and hither imported, oftentimes to the ruine of the undertakers of a good work here. 5. That the right of everie man's Copie may bee preserved. Much wrong hath been don this waie by invading one another's right, in these licentious times. 6. That all Books fit for publick view may bee licensed, and nothing printed which shall not first bee al∣lowed by som judicious men, in everie facultie, appointed by the State for that purpose. This would bee a means to suppress manie idle, and
noxious dscourses; and a good war∣rant to the undertakers of solid and profitable Books.
THat all Females from ten to sixtie might bee enjoined to spin, and have made into linnen cloath one pound of flax everie moneth, and registred in the Parish, where made; and returned again to the owners, with incouragement to poor maids that do best. This would by computation, emploie two or three hundred thousand poor: for which a Model is readie. The business of the Fens need's great incouragement to this end for Flax. That since the foundation of Fa∣milies, Villages, Towns; Cities, and
Common-wealths spring from Mar∣riage, and the business meerly ci∣vil, that the respective Magistrates in everie place might not onely do that work, which Preachers, quâ Preachers, have not to do with; but also look to the qualifications of those that join in that estate: and that two or three such Magistrates together may hear, and determine matters tending to Divorce: for all which much is wanting in this Nation, and whole Families perishing upon that account; and several sins increased. A Post set up in everie Parish, or at the Church door a Paper stuck up of the Paie's names to bee married, and there to stick three weeks or a moneth.
That where fees of Physitians are stated, a cours may bee taken for reducing that work to sont certain Rule. That Bedlam may bee minded, the Armie diseased, and Hospitals. That superfluities may be supprest; as Coaches, and guilding Coaches: to which purpose those that will ride in them may paie five or ten pounds per annum to the State: the like for Gold and Silver-lace, and Bone-lace from beyond Seas.
