p2775 e857_8 e842_10 99865738 168186
THE Holy Scriptures Clearing it self of Scandals: OR, AN ANSWER To a BOOK written by Richard Farnworth, who is commonly called a QUAKER, bearing this Title, Truth cleared of Scandals. In this ANSWER, You have the substance of a Dispute at Harliston in Staffordshire, between Richard Farnworth and the Author, in the yeer 1654. Written by Tho. Pollard, a member of the Church of Christ, gathered in, and about, Leichfield. Prov. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seemeth just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. Whereunto is added, Certain Considerations and Queries concerning those people called Quakers; with desire of an Answer. As also, a POSTSCRIPT, Manifesting their folly in pretending a necessity of using the terms Thee and Thou to a single person. By Henry Haggar, a servant of Jesus Christ, and of the Congregations of his Saints. Printed at London, by J. C. for R. Moone, at the seven Stars in Paul's Church-yard, neer the great North-door, 1655.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, THe LORD hath been pleased to bring us into the World in such an Age, that if we throughly weigh our Mercies, they have been, and are, very great. Surely we may say in this Nation, That we are prtakers of such Blessings and high Favours, that the Generations past have not enjoyed  If we call to minde the dayes past, what Su∣perstition
instead of a pure Worship, our eyes beheld; and what Tyranny was then exercised, in forcing Men's Consciences to such a Worship, that was so exceeding con∣trary to the Word of GOD. O that we were so sensible, as we should, who it is that hath wrought such a deliverance for us: surely we may say, This is the LORD's doing. O that every Soul that partakes of this Mercy, by being delivered from such Tyranny; that, I say, this godly resoluti∣on were in us, as was in the Prophet Da∣vid, Psalm 71.6. My praise shall be con∣tinually of thee. And, Psalm 145.2. E∣very day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever. O, I say, if we consider how many snares have been laid to insnare poor Creatures with; but we may say, Hitherto hath the LORD been with us, and hath broken the snares, and set us at liberty: yet, my dear Friends, the great Enemy of our salvation will be work∣ing; and if he cannot carry on his designe by Instruments that are openly profane, or in a superstitious habit, he can present
himself in a shew of glory, and pretend high things: and surely that day is now come upon the earth, that Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 11. of a subtil people, that was endea∣vouring to beguile the Corinthians, as the serpent beguiled Eve, and from what? minde, the simplicity that is in Christ; but, saith Paul, vers. 13. For such are false Apo∣stles, deceitful workers, transforming them∣selves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan himself is tranformed in∣to an Angel of light, therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers also, be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their work. But as Paul saith to the Churches of Galatia, so I say to you, chap. 1.8. Though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Go∣spel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed: and John saith in his 2 Epist. 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed. O, I say, with the Pro∣phet, If any speak not according to the
Scripture, it is, because they have no light in them. And, Reader, whosoever thou art that perusest this small Treatise, labour for an im∣partial Spirit; & if any thing be to thy satis∣faction herein, let GOD alone be glorified. I have desired plainness of Speech, and to speak the words of Scripture to answer him, whom thou wilt finde is an opposer of the Truth, as it is in JESUS; and the LORD give thee understanding. Farewel. Thine, in the work of the Lord, to my poor power, Tho. Pollard.
The Method observed in this BOOK: is, as followeth: 1. YOu have the unsoundness of Richard Farnworth's judgement laid down, in six Particulars, as he at the meeting stood by to make good; and these I desire the Reader to observe. 2. You have an Answer to those things he charges me with, in his Book; where the Reader may see, that this poor man is full of lyes, that instead of being free from sin, he too much takes delight in it. 3. You have that Scripture answered that they so dwell on, against that Ordi∣nance of Water-baptism, 1 Cor. 1.17. 4. To make their folly manifest, you have that Cavil answered, about the term Thee and Thou to single person; Which, say they, is a sin to use any other; but by the Scripture in all ages, you will, as it is plain, finde it to be no such thing, as is proved.
5. You have a discovery of the Church of Christ, how it cometh to Mount Sion, Heb. 12.22. And what perfection I own, and how attained. 6. You have, what he saith in his Book he owns, proved to be lyes, and not accord∣ing to Truth. 7. You have his folly manifested, and the holy Scripture counselling you to shun the way of such men. 8. Some Queries propounded; with a desire of an Answer. And, Reader, for your better satisfaction you have the testimony of three faithful Witnesses, that these six things Farnworth did utter; and also what is laid down in his Book, that I here say he speaketh falsly of me, they are my witnesses: and upon what ground I then spoke, you have it laid down and witnessed: and for all the rest of the company there, was out of Gospel-order. Lawrence Spooner, Ʋrsula Spooner, Richard Clewly.
The Holy Scripture clearing it self of SCANDALS. FIrst, you have in this Book the unsoundness of Richard Farnworth's Judgement in fix Particulars laid down, which being weighed will discover that those Principles in his Book, that he saith, He holds, are not really according to the Rules of Truth owned by him, but laid down on purpose to deceive. First, Richard Farnworth said, He was a man wholly free from sin, and not subject to any one temptation. Now, dear Friends, let us first make search into the Scri∣pture, to see if any of the Lord's people have so boasted of themselves, to be in such a condition, while they carried about with them an earthly Tabernacle. And first we will take notice of Job; for it's clear, that he had more ground to have boasted of perfection then any of these men, if we minde what the Lord said of him unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, how there is none like him in all the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and escheweth evil? Job 2.3. Yet though the Lord had so said of him, let us see what Job saith of himself,
read Job 9.20. If I justifie my self, my own mouth shall condemn me: If I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. And, Job 42.5. I have heard of thee by the hear∣ing of the ear: but now my eyes see thee. Wherefore I abhorre my self, and repent in dust and ashes. From whence it is plain, That Job did see imperfection in himself, and re∣pented of it: but if Job had been wholly perfect, then there was no need of repentance: for to abhorre that which is good, and to repent of that, must needs be wick∣edness. Secondly, See what the Lord saith of David, Acts 13.22. I have found David a man after my own heart. And yet we never finde this man boasting of perfection; but goes humbly to the Lord, and earnestly begs of him, Psal. 19.12, 13. Lord, keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me: so shall I be innocent from the great offence. And see Psal. 18.1. How the Lord is his rock, his fortress, his God in whom he will trust. And ver. 29. For by thee have I run through a troop, and by my God I have leaped over a wall. And vers. 30. As for God, his way is perfect, the word of the Lord is tried: he is a buckler to all them that trust in him. This whole Psalm, David speaks out much of the Lords goodness to him; but I do not finde one word of boasting. Thirdly, See what the Lord saith of Paul to Ananias, Acts 9.15. He is a chosen vessel to bear my name; and I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake. Yet see what Paul saith of himself, Rom. 7.18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, there dwels no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I finde not. For vers. 21. When I would do good, evil is present with me. And saith Paul, 1 Tim. 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. By all which we may see, that Paul hath not a word of such boasting, but rather cryes out against the fleshly part, how it attends him, and oft-times keeps him from doing that which he would.
Fourthly, we will see what is said of John, who was an eminent Apostle, who is called that Disciple whom Jesus loved; and the Scripture saith, He lay in Christ's bosome, John 13.2,. yet we finde that he and Peter, Acts 3.12, to 17. said unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or, why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk? No, he tells them, It is the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; the God of our fathers hath glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye de∣livered up. His Name, saith Peter, through faith in his Name, hath made this man strong: not any thing in them, it's plain, doth he set up; but saith, It was the man's believing in Jesus, that prevailed with Jesus, who gave him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all. And in Chap. 4.29. they pray to the Lord for strength, that they may speak his word with boldness. By all which it's plain, That they had no depen∣dance on themselves, by their looking to the Lord, the Rock of their strength, and their Deliverer in their trouble. And further, see what John saith in his 1 Epist. 1.8. If we say, We have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. Minde, It is such a deceit, that they that say so, the Truth is not in them. And James saith, Chap. 3.2. In many things we offend all. And now, dear Friends, we see what the Scripture saith of these men, how high in the Lord's favour they were; yet we do not finde, that any of these holy men of God, did so justifie themselves as this man. Now consider Reader, and the Lord give thee under∣standing. If these men, Job, David, Paul, and John, whose whole work it was, as I may say, to keep close to the Com∣mandments of God, to see how humbly they walked with God, and how sweetly the Lord appeared to them in this their heavenly progress, as the Scripture is full of Witnesses, and that they did not boast of perfection. This then we may learn, that for these men in our days, who boast of perfection, and say, they are free from sin; and yet make it their whole work, to turn away poor souls
from the Truth, I mean, the holy Scripture, and Ordi∣nances: that it's pride in them; for they presume above what is written, as to call the Scripture carnal, and a dead Letter, and say, It will never bring a man to the know∣ledge of God. Now, that these are proud and presump∣tuous, and self-willed, see what Paul saith of the Scripture, 2 Tim. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived: but to keep thee from these, (saith he) continue thou in the things thou hast learned, and hast been assured of; knowing of whom thou hast learned them, and that from a child thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. And he further saith, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is pro∣fitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly fur∣nished unto all good works. By all which it's plain, That these men are of another mind then the Apostle Paul, for he vindicates the Scripture and Ordinances in all his E∣pistles: then, I say, it is wickedness in these men to speak against the Scripture and Ordinances, as they do; calling it a dead Letter, and carnal; and say, That all that is gotten from the Scripture, is but brain-knowledge. Now, dear Friends, may we not see plainly how they strike at Jesus Christ in his Ordinances, which do so lively represent him, and which he hath born witness to himself, and confirmed it to us, to be a sure Word of Prophesie, by many Signs, and Wonders, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost? And further, dear Friends, let us not forget how won∣derfully the Lord hath preserved this Word from the rage of Enemies, not onely in the Generations past, but our days have spoken out much to us. If we look back to those days of profanation, & wicked toleration, when nothing but super∣stition had countenance, and many for conscience-sake were sore oppressed: now for us to consider what we then did see, instead of pure Ordinances, and to take notice of what we now, through mercy, injoy; we may say, the Lord hath
wrought for us wonderfully: which being laid to heart, it may encourage us to follow the holy Commandments of Christ Jesus, though we be reproached and called Phari∣sees by these men, for observing the Primitive Patern: for do but try them by their Works, and you will finde, that they carry on a design for Satan, as it appears by the words of one Foster to me at Coulton in Staffordshire, who said, It was all one to them if all Bibles were burnt; as many of the Lord's people can witness. But O you Saints of God! minde the progress of the Lords people, how they followed after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meek∣ness, as Paul exhorts, 1 Tim. 6.11, 12. Again, let us consider how patient Job was under the hand of the Lord, saying, The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord. And he is brought in by the Apostle, James 5.10. Take, my brethren, the Prophets for an example of suffering affliction, and of patience: and how they are accounted happy that endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy to all them that wait patiently on him. And so we finde David an excellent patern for obedience: he made hast and delayed not to keep God's Commandments, Psalm 119.60. O(saith Da∣vid) how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day. Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser then my ene∣mies; yea, I have more understanding then my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understand more then the ancient, because I have kept thy precepts. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I may keep thy word. Thus, dear Friends, mind David and these men, and you will finde they as far differ as light and darkness; and if David had so much wisdom in this way of keeping God's Command∣ments, and Ordinances of Christ Jesus, are proud men and fools, because they consent not to the wholsome words of Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to godli∣ness: he is proud, or a fool, as saith the margin, 1 Tim. 6.3, 4.
O what will these scorners do, when the Lord comes from Heaven with his Saints to render vengeance on all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel? minde that, and you may easily see, that all them that deride the Word and Ordinances of Christ, under what term and title so∣ever called, whether Quakers, Ranters or other Re∣proachers of God, his Son, his Saints, his Ordinances, and trample the Blood of Christ under their feet, and do de∣spight to the Spirit of Grace, and sadden the hearts of his dear Ones, and cause the Truth of God to be evill spoken of: O to such I say, it had been better for them that they had never known the way of Truth, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto them: but it is happened unto them according to the true Proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, as saith the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.21, 22. But O ye Saints, and spiritual Christians, who are troubled to hear the Truth of Christ abused by such men; See what Paul's counsel is, 2 Thess. 1.7. To you who are troubled, rest with us; abide in the doctrine of Christ, quit you like men, be strong in the Lord, labour to be stedfast, unmove∣able, alwayes abounding in the work of the Lord; for you know your labour is not in vain in the Lord. Rom. 1.15, 58. The Lord hath promised to you such a reward, that all these evil-speakers cannot rob you of. And seeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation on them that trouble you, be incouraged to run the race that is set before you. Follow the holy Commandments, and the pattern of the Apostles, as they followed Christ, you may be born up above all the discouragements you meet with, by such as speak evil of the holy Scripture and Ordinances, which you own as a Rule to walk by; for whatever is done against any of the Lord's people, that are found doing his Commandments, Jesus Christ will take all that is done against them, as done to himself, as you may see in that Acts 9. by the words Christ said to Saul: for you are dear in his sight, and are
continually before him, and his delight is with you, his heart is towards you; there shall be no want to them that fear him: Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his command∣ments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter into the gates through the city. But O Farnworth, and those with thee, that so impudent∣ly boast of perfection, and judge all to be in darkness, that throw not away the rule of Truth, as you do; O call to mind your self-conceitedness. Had you ever such ground of boasting as Job, David, Paul, and John? The Lord never said so of you, or any that ever went your way, as he saith of these men, that you were after his heart, as David; or his chosen, as Paul; or his beloved Disciple, as John; or such a one, for doing that which was good, and hating that which was evil, as Job, that the Lord saith, There was none like him in all the Land of Uz Yet we do not finde any of these men thus justifie themselves, as you do; and they never judged so rashly of others, as you do of all men that are not of your minde, calling them carnal, and saying that they are devils, as I can shew under some of your hands: sure∣ly you are coming on apace to them that say they are God; but your glorying is not good; for you glory in appearance, having a kinde of voluntary humility; but this will not stand you in stead, because you go about to set up your selves and not the Lord; your own way, and not his way: and therefore you are the greater Hypocrites. And see what Iob saith of all such, Iob 8.13. The hypocrites hope shall perish. And Job 20.5. The joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment. And Solomon saith, Prov. 11.9. An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour. And do not you with your de∣luding tongues, and out-side holiness, throwing dirt in the face of Truth; and as much as in you lies, destroying all men by your Doctrine, which had its rise from Hell and darkness, and now raigns in the children of disobedience, such as you, who minde nothing less, then the holy Com∣mandments and Ordinances, as they were delivered to the Saints, and committed to faithful men, and are of great use to all the Lord's people; which word discovers all your
wayes to be from Hell and darkness, as in the following discourse it will be manifest, that your Opinions are hatch'd in Hell, and never came from above, Whence, Iames saith, every good and perfect gift comes: and then it will plainly appear, that all that follow you are in the error, and are under a great delusion, to take your bare word for what you affirm, yea, though it cross the Scripture never so much▪ But O consider, ye poor deluded ones, first, The heart of man is deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9. Secondly, He that trusteth his own heart, is a fool, Prov. 28.26. The second thing that this Farnworth affirmed, That when Paul spoke those words in the seventh of the Romans, where he cries out of a body of death, and of the warfare he had in himself, he said, That Paul was not converted. To which I answered, O man, minde thy error! what Paul, a Messenger of the Gospel, and so eminent an Apostle of Christ, and unconverted? Here let us try by the Scripture whether it be so or no: first, see Acts 9.5, 6. When the Voice from Heaven, which Voice was Christ, that said to him, Saul, Saul, why perse∣cutest thou me? He trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what wouldst thou have me to do? The Lord sent him to Ananias: and when he had manifested his Faith in Christ, by his obe∣dience to Christ, he straightway preached Christ, in the Sy∣nagogues, to be the Son of God. And further, see vers. 27. of this ninth Chapter, where it was made plain to the A∣postles. And he was with them, coming in, and going out at Ierusalem: and he spake boldly in the Name of Iesus Christ, and disputed against the Grecians. And this whole Chapter makes it evident both in what he did and suffered, that he was converted. And further, see Rom. 1.1. Paul a servant of Iesus Christ; then sure converted, else no fit Servant for so great a work; and not onely so, but, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God. And pray you minde who called him to this great work, not himself, but the Holy Ghost, Acts 13.2. The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Bar∣nabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. By
which it is plain, he was converted before, as I at that time told thee. Then thou wouldst turn it, and didst say that he spake of his condition before conversion in that Rom. 7. And this is as false as the other, if the words be weighed, vers. 22. to 25. For I delight in the law of God after the inward man. Pray you minde; at that time he did see a law in his members warring a∣gainst the law of his minde. Nay further, if all this had been before conversion, then how could he have said as he saith vers. 25. that with his minde he served the Law of God? for it is evident that his minde before conversion was onely to persecute the Church and people of God. And here we will bring his own words to witness, 1 Cor. 15.9. I (saith Paul) am the least of the Apostles not worthy to be called an Apostle: minde the reason, Because I persecuted the Church of God. By all which we may plainly see how contrary to the Scripture, and unfound, this opinion is. There∣fore take heed, poor souls, of following men any further then they follow Christ, and keep his way. And you deluded ones, that speak against the holy Scripture in the whole, it is no wonder that you make such tearing it in pieces as you do. And though you use the Scripture so frequent in your writing, it is out of sub∣tilty to ensnare souls, as that great deceiver did to Christ, Mat. 4.6. But one word to the Lords people. Take Scripture-argu∣ments to fight against Deceivers: and for your progress in the Lords way, take Jeremiah's counsel, Chap. 6.16. Stand ye in the way, and see, and ask for the old paths: where is the good way? and walk therein. And then minde the promise: Ye shall finde rest for your souls. And how we may find the way of the Lord, read Isai. 8.20. To the law, and to the te∣stimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is be∣cause there is no light in them. Compared with Gal. 1.8, 9. The Third thing, Farnworth affirmed, that where John spake those words, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves; he said, John did not here speak of himself; but
the people to whom he spake these words were unconver∣ted. In answer to this, minde the Apostles words, 1 Iob. 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, that we declare unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us; and truely our fel∣lowship is with the Father and the Son. And, These things we write unto you, that your joy may be full: and this was joy to them: Chap. 3.2. Now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And in Chap. 2.24, 25. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning: if that shall abide in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father: and this is the promise he hath promised us, even eternal life. And John saith, vers. 21 of this chap. 2. I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it. By all which it is plain they were built on the foundation, for else it had been absurd for the Apostle to have exhorted them to abide in Christ and his commandments, if not converted; for then the exhortation was of no use; and beside, it is very im∣proper to advise any man to keep that which he never had. Again, 2. The Apostle doth here press them to persevere, and to go on, and to walk in the light; then they must know it be∣fore. 3. I do not finde any Epistle written to any but to the Saints; as Rom. 1.7.1 Cor 2.2 Cor. 2. By all which it is plain, To the Saints at Rome, To the Church at Corinth, To the Saints at Ephesus, To the Church at Galatia, Saints at Philippi, Saints at Colosse Saints at Thessalonica. 4. The Apostle put himself in: If WE say WE have no sin, WE deceive our selves. Here he puts himself one of the num∣ber. Not that I go about, as Farnworth falsly saith, to plead a con∣tinuance in sin: for I do own, that believers, as they are in Christ, are justified from sin, and God is satisfied with his Son, as Isaiah saith; he looked on the travel of his soul and was satis∣fied. But that which I say, is this, That believers do see some de∣fect
in themselves, in their outward man, as they carry about with them an earthly tabernacle: but through grace, they over∣come all defects by degrees. And we will see what the Scripture faith from the mouth of other godly witnesses. See Solomon, 1 King. 8.46. There is (saith he) no man that sinneth not: with Prov. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? With Eccl. 7.20. Saith the wise Preacher, There is not a just man upon earth, that doth good, and sinneth not. Now then, I say with the Apostle, Let God and his Word be true, and all men lyers. And I do appeal to every godly soul, for to witness this, who are sensible of flesh and self appearing in them at one time or other. But dear Saints, look up to the Lord for strength, and let us be sure, if we would conquer, to fight with spiritual weapons: and let us take heed of such an opini∣on, that will be judge himself in his own cause, and will not be tried by the Scripture, accounting it dead and carnal, and of no use to bring men to Christ. As when I asked Farnworth how he would witness the truth of what he affirmed, in that he deni∣ed the Scripture; he laid his hand on his heart, and said, I witness this. Now minde this delusion, as I said before what Jeremiah saith, Chap. 17.9. 1. The heart of man is deceit∣ful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? 2. He that trusteth in his own heart, is a fool, Prov. 28.26. And now dear friends, let us take counsel of the Lord, to try the spirits whether they be of God: for many false prophets are gone out into the world, 1 Joh. 4.1. And vers. 6. We are of God: he that knoweth God, heareth us; and he that is not of God, heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. From whence we may honestly argue, that if they, and they onely, be the friends of God, that walk in obedience to the commands of God; then they must needs be enemies that oppose. But the first is clear, Joh. 15.14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you with Joh. 14.23. If any man love me he will keep my words; and my Father will love him. And 1 Joh. 5.2▪ 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his com∣mandments
are not grievous. And further, dear friends, let us embrace that advice that Peter gives, 2 Epist. 3.17, 18. Beware lest you being led a∣way with the errour of the wicked, fall from your own sted∣fastness. And to prevent you from falling, his counsel is. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savi∣our Jesus Christ. Now is the hour of temptation: for if these be not wicked errours, I know not what is: I mean these which are laid down to your view, which Farnworth did stand by to vindicate, if his own testimony may stand. O then, what need have all the Lords people to be upon their watch, now Satan by his instruments is sifting poor souls out of the Truth, if he can! It is high time to look to our foundation, that we be built on the Rock Christ, that you be firmly knit to him, and made one with him; and then the gates of hell shall not prevail against you. And you strong Christians, help the weak Lambs of Jesus Christ, that they may grow in that good way of Christs com∣mandments, that the Saints of old have walked in. O be stir∣ring up one another by way of remembrance of the good path of Christ, which discovers fully all the by-paths of iniquity. Oh, I say, let there not be a want of care among you in your several Societies, to watch over one another, lest any be entangled by these seducing spirits, and overcome, I say, by these that throw aside all the Laws and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, as they were delivered to the Saints, and ought now by us to be obser∣ved: for you know what the Scripture saith of them that turn from the way of Truth; It had been better for them that they had never known it, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them. 2 Pet. 2.20▪ 21. O then, I say to all you that are employed in the Lords work, whether by Office or Gift, that are faithful Stewards, diligent in feeding the flock of Christ; remember what the Lord saith to such: When the chief Shepherd shall appear. ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. And saith Daniel▪ Chap. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. And if these men be so forward in pulling down the Ordinan∣ces of Christ, you have greater encouragement to follow Christ in his way. 1. You have his own presence promised (Matth. 2820.) in the work. 2. See your reward after the work, Joh. 10.27, 28. Fourthly, Farnworth affirmed that Christ had not a visible Church in the world; and scornfully said to me. What, a Church in the world! I answered, Yea, in the world though not of the world, but gathered out of the world. And 1. See what Paul saith, 1 Cor. 1.2. Ʋnto the Church of God which is at Corinth, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in every place call on the Name of Jesus Christ. Reader, pray you minde, this must needs be a visible Church: 1. Because this Epistle is directed to a visible place, Corinth. 2. It is as clear, that here were men, and that under this ge∣neral term brethren; vers. 10. I beseech you brethren by our Lord Jesus, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no division among you, but that you be perfectly joyned to∣gether in the same minde, and in the same judgment. 3. Paul makes mention of housholds, vers. 11. the house of Cloe; and Stephanas, vers. 16. 4. He speaks of persons by name, as Crispus and Gaius, and others. By all which it is clear, this poor man is much beside the Rule of Truth. Again, see what Paul saith unto the Churches of Galatia; Chap. 1.1. Ʋnto the Churches of Galatia. And mind Rom. 16.1. Commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a ser∣vant of the Church at Cenchrea. Minde how full the Scri∣pture is to prove this thing, and makes manifest the blindness of this mans understanding, that will thus oppose the Truth that is so full of wintnesses. And how doth the holy Ghost write to the seven Churches in Asia? And how, I pray you Farnworth, will you answer
that place in Acts 8. when Steven was stoned, and the Church at Jerusalem all scattered? 1. This must needs be a visible company, because they were visibly scattered. 2. They were at Jerusalem, which was a visible place, the Scripture is full for. 3. See whither they were scattered; some into Judea, and some into Samaria. And Saul he made havock of the Church, vers. 3: But here we may see your subtilty and cunning craftiness whereby you lie in wait to deceive: for if you can bring poor souls to this, That God hath not a visible Church in the world, then you may easily perswade them to throw aside all the visible Rule of Scripture, and so make all Doctrine and Church-Disci∣pline of none effect: and thus you would put out the eyes of poor souls, and then bring them to see with your eyes; and then your words they may quickly learn, which are onely thus, to say they must hearken to a light within: but, if the light in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness? And here thy darkness doth appear, in denying a visible Church, which is so plainly proved. But Reader, by these men, the Rule of tryal to try the Spirits withal, is thrown away, and become of no use to these men, ex∣cept it be for advantage. But dear souls, consider, first, that the heart is deceitful; and he that trusteth to it, is a fool. And then to have no other judge in thy own case but thy self, (as this is their principle) how doth it open a door to loosness? And many poor souls have been so far misled as to say, That which men call sin doth as highly ho∣nour God, as that which men call prayer or holy performances: I say, these things I have heard uttered by mouth, and have seen in print: and if this be not sad and dangerous, I know no∣thing. But to you of the Church of Christ that are by these men cal∣led Pharisees and outward Jews, and branded with reproach; see what Peter saith, 1 Pet. 2.20, If when ye do well and suffer for it ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God: for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffer∣ed for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. And in Chap. 4. vers. 14. he saith, If ye be reproached
for the Name of Christ, happie are ye: for the Spirit of glo∣ry and of God resteth upon you. On their part he is evil spo∣ken of, but on your part he is glorified. And further, friends, let us call to minde how sweetly the Lord hath appeared to us in the use of Ordinances; and then I hope you will take heed of entertaining such an opinion, that is so wicked as to overthrow all the Ordinances of Christ that be∣long to his Church. O but labour for oneness of spirit, and you will be terrible to all your enemies as an army with banners. Fifthly, Farnworth affirmed, that all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended and gave the Spirit. But, dear friends, let us not take the thing for granted, upon his bare word, because he saith so; but let us be like the Bere∣ans, search the Scripture, to see if the thing be so. And first, we will minde the commission, and the time when Christ gave it; and that is clear it was after his resurrection, as the last chapter of Matthew witnesseth at large. If so, then it must be that this commission was given when Christ entered into his Kingly office; and this his own words make good: for now saith Christ, All power is given into my hands in heaven and in earth: go ye therefore and teach all nations, and baptize them. And the continuance of these Ordinances is plain, in the last verse: Lo (saith Christ) I am with you alway, to the end of the world. Now this is to me so strong an argument, that surely it will make a gracious heart tremble to deny it. 2. If this be true that Farnworth affirms, then see how short a time Ordinances were to be of use in the world. Read Acts 1.1. The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began to do and teach, until the day he was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost had given com∣mandment unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, to whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by many infalli∣ble proofs, being seen of them fourty days. Pray ye minde: it seems then by this mans judgement, that Ordinances were to be of use but fourty days: which is very corrupt. And further, then the end of the world should have been, if this he saith be
true, when Christ ascended: two great absurdities; 1. To  that Ordinances were of use but fourty days. 2. Then it must follow also, that at Christs ascension should be the end of the world: and so all the promises of the Spirit had been nothing worth. But minde, dear friends, what Christ saith to his Apostles: Tarry at Ierusalem, and go not out thence, till ye have re∣ceived power from on high: and when the holy Ghost is come upon you, ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Ierusalem, and in all Iudea, and in Samaria, and in all the uttermost parts of the earth; Acts 1. at large. By all which it is plain, if the Scripture may be heard to speak for it self, that the Apostles were not so fully fitted for that great work, to preach the Gospel to every creature, until Christ ascended & gave the Spirit. Read Acts 2.3, 4, 5. And Christ told them (Ioh. 14, 26.) the Fa∣ther he would send the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost: and this is his work; He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Then minde; If it be the work of this Spirit of Truth that cometh from the Father and the Son, to bring to their re∣membrance what Christ before spake to them; then it is plain, that the commission is one part of what Christ spake to them before his ascension. Yea, there is much wrapt up in it, that the Spirit was to inmind the Apostles of; and not them onely, but all those now, that carry on the same work, by the same rule, for one and the same end; namely, To glorifie God, to be useful to his Church, and to all men. Now we will see how the minde of Christ was when he was gone to heaven; and we shall finde he was of the same minde to maintain Ordinances, as well as when he was on the earth: and for this, see a plain text of Scripture, Acts 9.6. And the Lord said unto Saul, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. And as the Lord sent him in∣to the citie, minde the end the Lord had, in sending Ananias, who told him as he had received from Christ, what Saul must do: and this was one thing that Ananias told him, as it is plain, Acts 22.14, 15, 16. first, that he was chosen of the Lord, that he should know his will, and see that Just One, and
should hear the voice of his mouth: for (saith he) thou shalt be his witness to all men, of what thou hast seen and heard. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. By which it is plain, that Christ was of the same minde to maintain Ordinances in his Church, after his ascension, as before. But when I instanced these Scriptures, Farnworth said, that this was not Water-baptism that Paul was baptized with, but the Baptism of the Spirit; as many can witness. But I think no sober man will be of this mans judgement: for, 1. Consider, if it were the baptism of the Spirit, it were too high for Ananias, as he was a disciple, to carry on: and with∣out question, we should have found Ananias answering Paul, as Iohn confesseth in another place; I indeed baptize with water; but there is one coming after me, he shall baptize with the holy Ghost. 2. It would be very absurd to give that to men, that is Christs proper and peculiar right. But it is no wonder to finde these men thus dealing with Christ himself, that will thus wickedly speak against his Ordinances. But then he asked me whether my baptism washed away sin. I told him I could prove that Water-baptism was an Ordinance of Christ, being administred on right subjects, which are men and women when they believe; and yeelding obedience to it as a command of Christ, I had the answer of a good conscience; and this no man can have, but by the washing away of sin: for obedience and godliness hath the promise of this life, and of that which is to come: for, blessed are they that do his command∣ments. But I do not affirm that any man can have salvation by vertue of his obedience; but this I say, that the obedient, and they onely, are within the promises; and it will be assuredly per∣formed to them: for, faithful is he that promiseth, and he will perform it. O then, dear Saints, to you that prize the holy command∣ments of Christ, and yet live in the use of them, though these men so speak against them; I shall give you another Scripture, to shew Christs care of his Church, that it may be well ordered
according to his minde, and how long Ordinances are to stand: beside that of the commission, that shews to the end of the world; this in Ephes. 4, 8. which plainly holdeth out the insti∣tution of it: When he ascended up on high, he gave some A∣postles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers. And let us minde the end Christ had in so doing; which is, for the perfecting of the Saints: by which it ap∣pears, that Christ did well know that the Church would stand in need of help from him. Ah Saints! see his care of you: prize it then. Secondly, that the work of the Ministery might be carried on in the Church and world, for the inlarging of his kingdom. Thirdly, that the body might be edified. Now Christ having thus carefully provided for his Church, and for all men, that the Gospel might be preached to every crea∣ture; then he tells us how long Ordinances shall stand, vers.13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith. Then it is plain, that Ordinances are yet of force: for those who are beloved for the Fathers sake, the Lord hath said he must bring in. The Lord hasten the day of their coming in, that the Gentiles fulness may be compleated. Secondly, the Church shall be brought to a perfect man, unto the stature of the fulness of Christ. But yet we see much incompleatness: but O that we were more look∣ing for this day. Fourthly, we may see another end Christ had, vers.14. That we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro with every winde of doctrine: by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive. If we well weigh these words, we may see that Christ did well know, so many hundred yeers ago, what would come to pass in the last times. And sure now is the time: for we see men risen up, pretending high attainments, not in a superstitious habit, but in a shew of glory, and filled with feigned words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple; and thus they lie in wait to deceive: when they cannot work downright at once with a man, then they will work by degrees: as first, to benum or deaden his affection to Ordinances, and put him out of love with something that the Church lives in the practise of; as breaking of bread, calling it carnal: and when they have drawn
away his affection, then they endeavour to stifle him in his judg∣ment, and so ensnare him. I speak what I know in this thing. But you dear Saints, that are faithful to the principles of Truth, labour to embrace that Exhortation, and to walk worthy of that commendation that Paul speaks of, 1 Cor. 11.1, 2. In the first verse you have the Exhortation, in these words: Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. The commen∣dation is in these words: Now I praise you brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I de∣livered them unto you. And if this be well pleasing in the sight of God, that we keep his Ordinances as they were deliver∣ed by his servants, and they had this authority from above, and his presence with them in the work; then it is plain, that these men who thus set themselves to overthrow the Ordinances of Christ, as they were once delivered, are the deceivers. For they that will deny a visible Church, that the Scripture is so full to wit∣ness; and will say, that all Ordinances ceased when Christ as∣cended: then Paul was too blame to commend the Church at Corinth for keeping that which Christ had put an end to at his ascention, if what Farnworth sayes be true. Again, it is plain, that Paul was a Persecutor at Christ's ascention: then minde, it must be that Christ did shew to Paul this, That he was wor∣thy of commendation that did keep the Ordinances; and if what Paul spake were by the Spirit of God, as without all question he did, then it must follow, that these have a spirit of delusion coming from hell and darkness, that spits out such venome against the Ordinances of Christ Jesus, that is so fully confirmed to us by so strong an Obligation of his own making. I will be with you: minde, if the Lord Jesus will be with them that obey him, then surely satan will be & is with them that go contrary to the com∣mands of Christ. And minde Rom. 6.16. To whom ye yeild your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are; whether of sin unto death, or obedience unto righteousness. And I am sure it is well for every soul that is found faithful to the death, for they shall receive a crown of life that fadeth not away, which God the righteous Judge will give to all those that long and look for his appearing. O then they are the only happy men and women that are faithful in obedience to every command of Christ.
The sixth thing, Farnworth affirmed, That the Scripture was not of any use to any man▪ till he was brought into the con∣dition of them that writ the Scriptures. Then it must follow, that the Scripture is onely in use for men in Christ, and not to bring them to Christ; for, saith the Apo∣stle, Holy men of God, spake as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Then minde, 1. The absurdity will be this, that the Scripture is not of use to make men holy; but useful onely to holy men, because holy. 2. Then this must follow, that the Scripture is not of use to teach or shew men the way to Christ; but to them that are taught or brought to him without it. 3. To destroy preaching upon this ground, namely, to convince and convert souls to Christ, must needs destroy Faith also: for saith the Apostle, Rom. 10. Faith cometh by hearing; and if by it, then not without it, minde that: so then to take away the cause, the effect will cease. And it is plain by the Scripture, that the Gospels preaching, is the cause of mens believing; for saith Paul, vers. 14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? O then Reader, minde, how far this Opinion will plunge a poor soul, whose condition is such, that he cannot please God without Faith, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossi∣ble, minde, to please God. And in Rom. 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: so then, to deny the Ordinance of preaching, by which Faith comes, must needs tend to destroy Faith, and then please God who can. But let us weigh the design of these men a little: if they can once bring a poor soul into this condition to disown the Scripture when he most stands in need of it; that is to say, to bring him to Christ, and to shew him how he ought walk so as to please God: I say, if once the poor creature be brought into such a condition, then he knows he can easily keep him from prising it at all. But let us see how this crosses the end of God's sending his Son into the World: John saith, chap. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his onely begotten Son into the world that whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but have ever∣lasting life. Again, Luke 1. witnesses, that Christ was sent of the
Father, to be a light to them that sit in darkness, and are in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way of peace. And how should we know this great love of the Father, much less believe it, without the Gospels preaching? Again, Christ saith, He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repen∣tance; and, he came to seek and to save that which was lost. By all which it is plain, that the end of the Gospels preaching to every creature, was not because every creature did believe this, but that they might hear and believe. Again, if those three thou∣sand, Act. 2. were converted by the Gospel, then not without it; and them of Samaria by the Gospel, then not any other way, Act. 8. and the believing Thessalonians were called by the Go∣spel; and so were all the Churches called to be Saints, how I pray you, if not by the Gospels preaching? Nay, how should we poor sinners of the Gentiles have known of a door of hope open to us, but by the preaching of the Gospel? nay should we have known of a Christ that died at Jerusalem, but by the Scripture? or, how should we know sin to be sin, and righteousness to be righteousness, but by the Scripture? Again, see what Paul saith, 2 Tim. 3.2 last vers. All Scri∣pture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for do∣ctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteous∣ness: minde, not that man is perfect; but, that he may be perfect, and thereby throughly furnished unto all good works. By all which it is plain, that the Scripture is of greater use then these men will have it. And Christ saith, The words that I have spoken the same shall judge you at the last day: and this word shall not return void, but shall be to all that entertain it a savour of life unto life, but to them that put it from them, and say it is useless, it will be a savour of death unto death. But to you who are through Grace members of the Church of Christ, who were once sinners of the Gentiles, and without God in the world, but are now made nigh by the blood of his Son, as Paul witnesses, Ephes. 2.11. It is good for us, that we have often in our meditations, the great use that the Scripture hath been to us, in helping us to know what sin is, that so we may avoid it; and it also hath shew∣ed what righteousness is, that we may be in love with it. And
I pray you let your former experiences of what good we have re∣ceived by the word and Ordinances, not to be forgotten. And further, we finde and are made sensible through Grace, that the Scripture is and hath been a sweet and perfect Rule for us to walk by, and we thereby have been led and guided into the way of Truth and Peace. And we know that all those that are found faithful in obeying the commands of Christ, and continue therein, they shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not a∣way. And therefore let us alwayes look unto the Law and to the Testimony, and imbrace that sweet counsel, for the tryal of all doctrines; for saith the Prophet, if any speak not according to this, minde, when they come from hell and darkness, for saith he, they have no light in them, Isa. 8.20. O! then all those that go about to destroy this Rule, they are so in darkness, that as the Scripture saith, They know not at what they stumble, or whither they go, John 12.35. And though these men say, That they are the onely men that know God, and love God, yet if we see what John saith, it will be found otherwise, 1 Epist. 2.3, 4, 5. Hereby, saith John to the Church, we do know, that we do know him, minde, if we keep his commandments; and he that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, what follows? he is a liar; and minde, such a liar, that the truth is not in him. And he that saith, He abideth in him, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked. Now this was Christ's walk, to do the will of him that sent him, then these men go not Christ's way, but their own, and walk by the imaginations of their own heart, rather then by the holy Commandments of Christ Jesus. And also see who they are that love God, John 14.23, 24. and see who they are that are related to Christ, Matth. 12.50. He that doth the will of my Father, the same Man or Woman, is Christ's Brother and Sister. And now having given you his Principles, as he then at the meeting in Harliston did stand by to maintain, which before the close you have them weighed, which those Principles he saith he ownes in his Book, and see how they stand together.
But now in the second place, I come to answer to those false slanders he charges me with in his Book. First, he saith, That I came on purpose to that meeting to cavil, and oppose the Truth. To which I answer, That the ground of my coming with o∣ther Friends, was to oppose all doctrines whatsoever, that was not warranted by the Word of God; and in so doing, I have one greater with me and for me, then all you that so maliciously speak against me. But O Farnworth! take heed of boasting so of perfection, until you shew better fruit; and when you come to cease lying, I shall hope some better things of thee. Now the substance of thy discourse before I questioned thee, was, That you did witness you were free from sin, and in the possession of the second Covenant. Then did I bring in those words of John, and told you, That if it were so with you, then you had attained higher, I said, then that eminent Apo∣stle John had. And therefore thou dealest wickedly, to say, I brought it in to plead a continuance in sin: surely, that light which thou sayest is in thee, is darkness, else thou wouldst not have spoken thus falsly: but having treated on this before, I pass it by. Again, I said▪ Where was your proof, that you was in this condition? Then he laid his hand on his heart, and said, I witness this. Then I said to the people, That to trust his own bare testimony without Scripture, we should leave the word of God and trust the word of a man, and so bring our selves under that curse, Jer. 17.5. Cursed be he that trusteth in man. And also said, as Jeremiah saith in that 17 chap. The heart is deceitful. And therefore it was good for us to try our own and others by the Scripture. Read Prov. 28.26. Then thou, Farnworth saidst, I told thee of a Church in the world. Answ. Yea, Christ had a Church in the world, though not of the world; but gathered out of the world: and for the ga∣thering of it, did not the holy Ghost say, Act. 13.2. Separate
me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them. And I am sure, that Paul makes this good by many Scriptures, that he was a Planter of a visible Church. But thou sayest in thy book, That the Officers and Overseers of the Church of Christ were invisible: and why? because made by the holy Ghost which is invisible. And here the Reader may plainly see thy folly; for as I have already proved a visible Church, so I will prove visible Officers; as, what was Paul and Barnabas, but visible men? else their e∣nemies could not have persecuted them. And read Acts 6.2. Then the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them. By which it is plain, this Church were made up of a vi∣sible company. And the Apostle said unto them, Look you out among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost. And the saying pleased the multitude, and they chose Ste∣phen with others, who are said to be full of the holy Ghost. So that it is a clear Truth, That visible men were here found in this Church made visible Officers. But Farnworth, take heed of scorning so clear a Truth. But one thing Reader, I pray you observe; if it be so as Farn∣worth saith, That the Officers of the Church of Christ be invisi∣ble, then by his own grant he is none, because he is a visible man. And here is his folly made manifest. And also he denying a vi∣sible Church, you may as plainly see from whence he is sent, and whose errand he goes on: not of Christ's errand, for then his work would he do; but it is plain he is of his Father the Devil, who was a lyar from the beginning, else he would never say, that Christ had not a visible Church; and say, all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended; and, that the Scripture would never bring a man to the knowledge of God; and say, that all Ordinances contained in the Scripture are carnal. Again, Farnworth saith in his Book, That I said the Letter and the Spirit was inseparable. I do not so wonder of his taking boldness to lye of me, that dare so impudently lye of Christ, and of his Word and Ordi∣nances as he hath done.
But to answer to this, thou chargest me with this, I then said unto thee, as I now say, That the Word and Spirtt were one or inseparable, and this, I said, I will prove by the word of God, 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. And further, when I said this, then thou Farnwarth pulledst out thy Bible, and not before, and laid it on the ground, and saidst to the people, If that be Spirit and Life, it would rise it self. I told thee at that time, That what was contained in that book, which it declared of, and held out to us, was Spirit and Life. And here Reader, take not my words, but the words of Christ, John 6.63. The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life; minde, that which Christ spake they are, and compare this with Job. 12.48. The words, saith Christ, that I have spoken, minde that, the same shall judge you at the last day: which word is established in heaven, and written for our learning, and is a perfect rule for us to walk by: and see what Paul saith, Rom. 15.4. For whatever were written ofore time were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And minde what Paul said to the Church, Act. 20.32. at his departure, Now, brethren I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to make you wise to salvation, and to build you up, & to give you an inheritance among them that are sancti∣fied. And Paul commends Timothy, that from a childe he had known the holy Scripture; and, which is very observable, Paul presseth Timothy to continue in the things he had learned, 2 Tim. 3.13, 14, 15, 16. For, saith he, evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. And Farnworth, it seems you have not learned to distinguish between Law and Gospel; for I demand of thee, where any of the words of Christ or his Apostles are called Letter: see what Paul saith, 2 Cor. 3.6. Our sufficiency is of God, who hath made us able Ministers of the New Testament; not of the letter that killeth, but of the spirit that giveth life. Now I am sure if Paul & the other Apostles were alive, you would call them Pharisees, and outward Jews, Ministers of the Letter, and call Christ a Water-mar outside-washer, as you call me; for I am sure, that they that carry on this work, they have their rules
from Christ, and they are the onely wise men. And this I say, That for Baby-sprinklers, and Tythe-takers, and Parish-men, we own no such thing; and therefore let them runne in your number and ranke, as men refusing and rejecting the holy Com∣mandments and Ordinances of Christ as you do; onely this I believe, that many of them do what they do ignorantly: but I fear you do wilfully speak against Truth. But O you Scorners, how long will you delight in your scorn∣ing, to call the Holy Scripture a dead Letter and carnal, as you do? But to all of you that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, of what ranke soever you be, or by what name so ever called, see your portion, Rom. 2.8. Tribulati∣on and anguish upon every soul of man that is contentious, and doth not obey the truth. And see what Paul saith, 2 Thes 1.9. where he speaks of some men that shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: and minde who they are, vers. 8. Them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. O then, what will you do, that speak reproach∣fully against the Gospel of Christ? But let me tell you, it is not all your sayings, that can put off or defer the Lord's coming: and at that time shall the wicked be turned into hell, and all the people that forget God, Psal. 9.17. with Psal. 11.6. Then thou Farnworth saidst, I called the Bible a History. Now let the Reader minde how this hangeth together: first, he said, I set up the Letter, and made it one with the Spirit: and now saith, I call it a History. Now, Reader, I will declare what I spake, when I proved what I said all along by Scripture. He said unto me, That is Letter, and that I had nothing to do with it, being ignorant of the mystery. Then I said, What will you call this? a History? yet this I say, That if there be a mystery in the Scripture, then there must be a History, wherein it is kept, which doth declare of it: read, Ephes. 5.31, 32. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one
flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and his Church. Compare this with Col. 1.21. And you who were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minde, by wicked works, yet now he hath reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and unblamable, and unreproveable in his sight, vers. 22. Whereof I am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God, vers. 23. Even the mystery, which hath been hid from ages and from gene∣rations, but now is made manifest to his Saints; to whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory, vers. 26, 27. Again, God manifest in flesh is a mystery, 1 Tim. 3.16. and the bringing in of the Gentiles into the Church, to be of Christ's body is called a mystery: read Ephes. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. and the word declares it. Dear Friends, minde the design of these men, that do not one∣ly destroy the Ordinances of Christ, but Gospel-Order also; as God is a God of order in all the Churches of the Saints, and we finde, that Christ came into all his Offices when he was on earth, in an orderly way, 1 John 5.6. This is he that came by water and bood, even Jesus Christ; not by water onely, but by water and blood: and it is the Spirit that beareth witness. Now this must needs be the coming of Christ into his Offices: for we know, that his coming into the world was as a man, and born of a Virgin; but his coming into his Offices by water and blood is witnessed by the Spirit. And first, we will see how Christ came into his Prophetical Office; and that is plain, he came by Water: and the Spirit bears witness to it, see Matth. 3.13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan, to John, to be baptized of him. And there you may further minde, when John said, I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me? Jesus answered and said, Suf∣fer it to be so now, for it becometh us: minde, not he onely, but us; that is to say, all that will be followers of him. What is it that becomes us to do? To fulfil all righteousness. Then
he suffered him. And see how the Spirit witnesses this orderly coming of Christ into his Prophetical Office, v. 16. And when he was baptized, he straight way went up out of the water; minde that, no Font nor Bason, for that could not contain him, as is well known: And to the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him. And further, see how the Father commend∣eth this righteous act, in these words, Thou art my well-beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. Here the Lord so fully de∣clares him to be his Son in whom he is well-pleased, as is not de∣clared in the Scripture that ever he said so before; though I grant that he were his beloved Son before, though not so declared unto us, till this obedience to this Ordinance. And see Matth. 4.17. From that time Jesus began preach, and to say, Repent, for the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. See Christs second Office, that is his Priestly Office, and that he came into by his Blood, Heb. 9.11. Christ is become an high Priest for ever of good things to come, not by the blood of o∣thers, but by his own blood, vers. 12. and this the Holy Ghost signified, v. 8. And read Heb. 10.14, 15. By one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified: whereof the holy Ghost is witness to us. And his third Office, namely, his Kingly Office, he came into at his Resurrection, Matth. 28.18. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. And by vertue of this Authority, he sends out his Apostles to teach all Nations, baptizing them. But you Farnworth, and all those with you, that go about to destroy order, that will not come into the Prophetical Office as Christ came into his, I dare be bold to say, you are no Mini∣sters of Christ, but of Antichrist; for you are self-called, and not by the Church of Christ; and speak visions of your own heart, instead of the wholesome words of Christ. Surely, you would call Christ and his Apostles Water-men and outside-Washers, if they were now on earth. But you say, You have the bap∣tism of the Spirit, and therefore the other is nothing to you. Methinks you should grant that Christ had more of the Spirit's baptism then ever you had; and yet we finde it kept him not from
Water-baptism: but he layes a necessity of it, Suffer it to be so now, for it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. And we see Peter speaking to Cornelius and his houshold, whom the Spirit was fallen upon, as on the Apostles at the beginning, Act. 11.15. yet this did not hinder them from Water-baptism, but rather fitted them for it: for saith Peter, Act. 10.47. Can any man for bid water, minde, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized. Without question, if Peter were now alive, you would say he were an Hypocrite, and one that rested in the Letter; but indeed you shew your selves to be no Messengers of Christ; no, not qualified as the Priests un∣der the Law; for they were such as could have compassion of the ignorant, and of them that are out of the way; but where is your pity and tenderness towards any that are not so black-mouth'd as you, to rail against the Scripture and Ordinances, as you do? O poor Creatures! this I say of you, That ye be objects of pity, and not of punishment: for I believe, That Christ will never account such worty to suffer for him, that so deal with him, and his Ordinances and Saints, as you do. And now to that other slander you cast upon me in your book, saying, That I said▪ Christ had not judgement committed to him while he was upon earth. But here you have spoken as falsly as you have in the other: but this I said, That Jesus Christ at his first coming came not speedily to execute judgement upon all that did not receive him: for I say, It is clear to me by his own words, that his first coming was rather to save the world; & for this, see Christs own words, John 12.46, 47. I am come a light into the wold, that whosoever believeth on me shall not abide in darkness: and if any man hear my words, and believe not, minde what follows, I judge him not; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. And Christ
saith, I came to seek and to save that which was lost, Matth. 18.11. And, To open the blinde eyes, and to bring prisoners from the prison, and them that are in darkness out of the pri∣son-house, Isa. 42.7. And for this end, that is to say, his own glory, and for the good of poor Creatures, did he send his Son into the world: read John 3.16, 17. For God so loved the world, that he gave his onely begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life: for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved. And having thus found out by the Scripture the end of God's sending his Son into the world, and of Christ's coming; and it is plain, that neither Father nor Son did or doth take delight in the death of poor sinners, but rather, that they repent and live. But to say, That Christ had not judgement committed to him while he was upon earth; this I did not say: for I say, That Christ had all power in Heaven and Earth committed to him. But as I have said, so I say again, He came in an orderly way, and, as I may say, was willing to stay the good pleasure of his Father, and did not take the power of judgement into his hands so as to execute it, till it pleased the Father to give it to him, Mat. 28. Now all power is given; minde, it came by gift, and that from the Father, Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him, that is to say, his Son, should all fulness dwell. Now this I say, That in reference to his God-head, he was equal with the Father: but as he took upon him our flesh, he humbled himself, and became obedient to the will of his Father. And he himself saith, I came not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work, John 4.3, 4. And now having found out God's great love to us in sending his Son, and for what end Jesus Christ came into the world▪ that they through him might be saved; and that he did not go about to judge or condemn to Hell immediately them that re∣fused him; but prayed for his worst enemies, Luk. 23. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And how full of pity was Christ for Jerusalem, that did not pity themselves;
see at large Mat. 23.37. his bemoaning of them; and Luk. 19.41. you shall finde Christ weeping over them, or for them, and saying O that thou hadst known in this thy day the things be∣longing to thy peace! but now they are hid from thy eyes. But what will become of all those that slight his first coming; wherein there is held out so much love to poor creatures? O, I say, His second coming will be terrible to all those that refuse to own him for their Prophet and King, to teach them and to rule over them. But O Farnworth, what will all you do, that make it your work to draw away poor souls from the Word and Ordinances of Christ? I say, What will you do at that day when he cometh to render vengeance on all that obey not his Gospel? let me tell you, It is not your saying, That you are past the eternal judge∣ment, that will serve your turn: I am sure, that when the books come to be open, & every man to receive according to the works done in his own body, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, and receive accordingly; Your justifying your selves now, will not stand you then in any stead. And if you would cast your eyes upon these words of Christ now in time, you might see a∣bundance of pride, folly and ignorance in your selves, in trusting your own Testimony: read John 5.32, 33. If I bear wit∣ness of my self, my witness is not true; there is another that beareth witness of me; and I know, that the witness which witnesseth of me is true. Now Reader minde, first, The pride of these men, that will thus boast of perfection upon their own word, without any Scri∣pture-witness. Secondly, See their folly, in slighting all godly examples; for so it is, that such precious words of Christ, so pure a pattern, is by this their Principle disregarded. And so in the third place is their ignorance made manifest, and darkness discovered, that they will presume above what is writ∣ten, and so follow their own imaginations, and refuse such pre∣cious counsel as Jesus Christ hath left for us in the Scripture of Truth. O then it is plain, that these men are of that number that hearken to lying vanities, and so forsake their own mer∣cies.
But dear Friends, let us see what the Scripture saith; and if we be there enjoyned to follow godly patterns, we shall do well in hearkening to it, rather then to these men that speak thus a∣gainst examples: read 1 Pet. 2.21. where Christ leaves us an example, that we should follow his steps, who is a blessed pat∣tern of patience unto us. Again, see Phil. 3.17. Brethren be fol∣lowers of me, and mark them which walk so as you have us for an ensample. And see how Paul commends the Thessalo∣nians, 1 Epist. 1.7. saying, That they were ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia. And in his 2 Epist. 3. see how the Apostle carried themselves, labouring night and day, that they might not be chargeable: and see the reason, that the Church might observe this their good example, and follow them therein. Again, poor Creature, consider, how thou judgest all men by these terms, of dippers, sprinklers and water-baptizers, to be all of them in one nature, persecutors of Christ. First, see thy folly in ranking all those that follow the holy Com∣mandments of Christ, with these sprinklers that have not any word of Christ for their rule and practice, which thou knowest we own not. Secondly, see thy ignorance in judging all, without making a∣ny difference: for here thou must needs judge very many that thou didst never know or hear of, and so art guilty of this sin, in speaking evil of them that thou knowest not. And thirdly, thou givest all men to understand, that thou ownest not the word of God for thy rule, in condemning all that follow the Ordinances as they were delivered by Christ e∣qually with those that observe traditions of men in the worship of God, as Pope, Prelate, and other sprinklers do. And again, thou sayest Where did any of us water-baptizers cast out devils, and drink any deadly thing, and it not hurt us? And where did we shake the room when we assembled? And where did we give the Holy Ghost? All such unlearned questions as these, I shall answer in a few
words, thus: These things at the first, namely Miracles, were for the confirmation of the Gospel; and so we may see the Law was at the first confirmed by Miracles: read Exod. 20.18. with Heb. 12.18, to the 22. so we finde Baptism was con∣firmed by Miracles, Mat. 3.16, 17. with Luke 3.21, 22. and so was Prayer, Preaching, and Laying on of Hands, at the first, confirmed to us by Miracles: and that it was for this end, to con∣firm the Gospel, read Heb. 2.3, 4. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him? God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will. And this is such satisfacti∣on to us, that it is the word of God, that we need not look for a new confirmation of it; but we have recourse to all the Com∣mandments and Ordinances of Christ as they are written; and read Mark 16.17, 18, 19, 20. and you will finde, those signs were onely to confirm the word. But it lies upon you, Farn∣worth, and all those that go about to destroy the holy Scripture and Ordinances thereof: I say, it lies upon you to shew us such a confirmation of that which you bring, and then we may come to give more credit to your words. But for many of these Questions, I do not look upon them worth answering. But one word to you of the Church of Christ: I pray you let us minde what Israel did in the dayes of Hezekiah: when li∣berty was proclaimed by the King, that the Passeover should be kept at Jerusalem; we finde that the people did not look for a new confirmation, but they had a care to keep it in such sort as it was written. And we finde, that by reason of wicked Kings that was before, the practise of it was lost, in such sort as it is written, from the dayes of Solomon to the reign of Hezekiah, there was many yeers: during the reign of about fourteen Kings, was, I say, this practise lost, as it is witnessed 2 Chron. 30.5. compared with vers. 26. yet we finde notwithstanding, what they had ob∣served in the dayes of Tyranny; yet I say when liberty was pro∣claimed, they had then a care to keep it in such sort as it was writ∣ten, without looking for a new confirmation, it being before con∣firmed
unto them. And see how this their practise pleased the Lord, vers. 27. Their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to Heaven. O! may not we in these dayes, learn much from these words? have not we lived in the dayes past under Tyrants, and by their means the Ordinances of Christ as they were practised by him and his Apostles, I say, by reason of former Tyranny, it hath not been of a long time observed in such sort as Christ hath commanded; but now hath the Lord brought us to a day of liberty, and that by establishment. O then in the first place, let us give the Lord praise, who hath dealt so bountifully with us, as to set us at liberty from so great Oppressors. Secondly, Let us learn to keep the Commandments and Ordi∣nances of Christ according to his appointment. Thirdly, Let us be sure that we fight against false worships with spiritual weapons, and no other wayes. Fourthly, Take heed of setting up your selves or your own practices in the worshiping of God, to infringe the liberties of o∣thers; and for thy help herein, minde that sweet counsel of Christ Mat. 7.12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. Fifthly, Labour to walk humbly before God, and thankfully to God continually, speaking well of his Name: it is the onely way to enjoy greater mercies from him. We of this Nation have as great if not greater▪ cause of returning praise to the Lord, then Israel had. O that we could in the fear of the Lord weigh our mercies with those spoken of by David, Ps. 107. And we may say, that what the Lord then did for Israel, he hath now done for England. I desire the Reader to weigh those words well, and we may plainly see that it is our duty to praise him for his good∣ness, and declare his wonderful works done in our dayes to the sons of men. O that we were wise to observe the dealings of God, and his mercies bestowed upon us in this generation! Sixthly, You that profess to know God and Christ, of what ranke or imployment soever ye be, labour to be of a peaceable spirit, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men; for let me tell you, if any be otherwayes minded in thirsting after blood,
such, I say, will be very unfit to follow Christ at his coming, who is the prince of peace. And I pray you minde what Paul saith, Tit. 3.1, 2. Put them in minde to be subject to principali∣ties and powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing meekness to all men. And again, consider what Paul saith, Rom. 13. When Rulers are for the punishing of evil doers and for the praise of them that do well, then ought every one professing Christ to be subject, not onely for wrath, but also con∣science sake. O what cause of rejoycing have the Lords people to see how time after time there is a generation of men laying out themselves to deprive the Lord's people of this liberty, that we at this day enjoy! Consider how the Lord hath found out instru∣ments all along to be as a wall between you and them. O praise the Lord for such instruments. Now in the next place, I shall give an Answer briefly to that saying of Paul, Christ sent me not to baptise but to preach, 1 Cor. 1.17. I answer briefly, first, It is clear that Paul was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, as is undeniable; if so, then he was as much con∣cerned in the commission, Mat. 28. 19. as any other: then minde those words, and you will finde preaching and baptizing joyned together, And, Paul commanded to preach the whole counsel of God: and this was one part of God's counsel, that believers should be baptized, as read Acts 10.47, 48. Secondly, If Paul was fit to be imployed in the greater, then I am sure this lesser is required. But he was imployed in the greater, that is to say, to preach the Gospel; then Baptisme, which is the lesser, is required of him, I say, by vertue of the commission, Mat. 28.19. Thirdly, Minde the reason why Paul speaks these words, Christ sent me not to baptise, but to preach; because these Corinthians were so ready to set up men, as you may see 1 Epist. 12.13. Paul tells them, Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or, were ye baptized in the Name of Paul? And
this was the reason why Paul thanks God he baptized no more of them, Lest any should say, That I had baptized in my own name. Fourthly, If the words be honestly interpreted, they will hold out thus much, that preaching to the dark world that lieth in wickedness, is the great work; and so, such men as Paul fit to be imployed in it: and to baptize, that might be carried on with any other Disciple that did accompany Paul in this great work. Fifthly, If you minde the Greek Notes on the Margin of Can's Bibles, it is thus read, verse 14. I thank God that ye were baptized. And this is then plain, That Paul was com∣manded that it should be preached and practised, and this is all the reason why Paul thanks God that he did it not, lest any should say I did it in my own name. In the sixth place, consider that Text, Mat. 15.24. I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And he com∣mands his Disciples, Mat. 10. Into any City of the Samari∣tans enter not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Now, I say, as the Jews were Christs own and he came of that stock, he came first and chiefly to turn them from their iniquity, as Paul's work was firstly and chiefly to preach the Gospel, it being the great work; and that Christ was first sent first to the Jews, as Paul was sent first to preach, is plain, Acts 3.25, 26. that they might be blessed: Ʋnto you first, God having raised up his Son, sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his iniquity. But Christ is a light to the Gentiles, though not there spoke of; for John saith, God so loved the world, minde, that he sent his Son to them; and so was Paul by ver∣tue of Christ's Commission sent to baptize as well as preach: and you may as well say from that Text, That Christ was not sent to any but to the house of Israel, as to say, Paul was not sent to baptize: for if you say, Paul saith so himself, who did well know his work, and how far his commission extended, so may the same be said, and more, of Christ. And now man stop thy mouth for shame, and cease to cavil with Scripture.
And whereas these men accuse us for not using the term Thee and Thou to every man: and they say, That it is a sin to use any other term to a single person. To which I answer, first, as to the term, I could my self freely own it, as it is a proper speech to a single person: but for to say it is sin, without any breach of a Law, I cannot believe it; for I will rather believe the words of Paul, then any of these men: read Rom. 4.15. Where there is no Law, there is no transgres∣sion. But it may be said, If we have any example, may not that binde us? Answ. If in all ages we finde the Lord's people using this term, and they onely, then it is granted, that we erre in this thing. And for our clearer understanding herein, we will make search in∣to the Scripture; and if there we finde the worst of men as fre∣quent in using of it, as the best of men, then the example is not binding. Before the flood, read Gen. 4.14. where Cain thoued God in these words, Thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth. After the Law was given, there we finde in Numb. 16.13, 14. they whom the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up, they used this term to Moses. And so read Saul and the Witch, 1 Sam. 28, 11, 12, 13 with Dan. 3. where the Caldeans the enemies of God's people, used this term as well as God's people: so read Matth. 4.6. the devil Thoued Christ; so persecutors used this term, Acts 26.24, 25. where Festus said, Paul, thou art beside thy self, much learning doth make thee mad: so read Mat. 8.29, where the devil said to Christ, Art thou come to torment us before the time? By all which I gather, That this term was generally used by all sorts of men without offence, as the term You and Ye to a single person, without offence is nationally practised amongst us; but though these men censure us & all men that go not their way, yet let us take Paul's advice, I Cor. 10.32. Give none offence neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. But if we consider the way of these men, we may say as Mat∣thew
witnesseth, chap. 23.24. They strain at a gnat, and swal∣low a camel. And if it should be granted that this should be, yet it will be much like the Scribes and Pharisees, ver. 23. of this Chap. in their observing those small things, as the paying of Mint, and Rue, and Annis; but they omitted the great things, as Judgement, Mercy and Faith. And we will make search into thy wayes, and you will be found a Pharisee in all these; for as they spake against the doctrine of Christ, and what was then practised by him and his Saints, so do you now judge us for fol∣lowing the holy Commandments of Christ; and as they Phari∣sees then judged all that went not their way, so do you, cal∣ling all men dead and carnal, and in the Serpents nature, under what form soever that differs from you. Secondly, As to Mercy, you will be found not like those Priests spoken of Heb. 5.1, 2. for they were such as could have compas∣sion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way: but where is this compassion amongst you towards them that go not your way? for you make it your work to turn men from the Truth, as it is recorded, and so are Pharisee-like, and without Mercy towards them that differ from you, as these were. Thirdly, As to Faith, The Pharisees they were enemies to the Gospels preaching by which Faith comes, Rom. 10.14, 15. and they looked for justification by the Law, as you do now by fol∣lowing the imaginations of an evil heart; & as they spake against the Ordinances of Christ then, so do you now. And why? I say, There is an evil heart in you, because I say many of you are now through unbelief departed from the pure way of the Lord, which evil heart the Church is advised to take heed of, Heb. 3.12. Or more briefly thus: The Pharisees they boasted more of themselves then any other people, as you may see in Luke 18.10, 11, 12. and all along in Christ's progress they were his great Enemies; and by their resting in the Law, and speaking a∣gainst the Gospel, it is clear, they were corrupted in their judge∣ment. And so are these men boasting of perfection more then any o∣ther people, as this Book declares, and in their whole progress they make it their whole work to overthrow the rule of Scrip∣ture
and all the Ordinances thereof, as they are recorded, and as Christ hath commanded us to observe to the end of the World, and so set up themselves and their own fancyes, as the Pharisees did. Secondly, As to Mercy, this was far from the Pharisees: read John 9.22. This they agreed of, that if any man did confess Christ, he should be put of the out Synagogue; implying, that such men were not fit to be communicated with; by which it is evident, that all mercy and pity to such as forsaked them to fol∣low Christ, was turned into hatred. And is not your mercy and pity turned into hatred towards all men that go not your way, but declare against it as they commanded, your mercy is turned into bitterness as appears by your words calling men devils, and Saints deceivers, and the Church of Christ Antichrist, and the Gospel Letter, and the Ordinances carnal; and so by your words we may easily see what your hearts be full of; instead of mercy, malice; instead of pity, persecution; I mean, with the tongue, which is a weapon that strikes deep; and such hands I shall suspect, if they had power, because I cannot but see the heart filled with malice, by the filth that proceeds from their mouth: for see what Matthew witnesses, chap. 12.33, to the 38. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things; but an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. And if this be not evil, to say the Scripture is of no use to bring men to Christ; and, that Christ hath not a visible Church in the World; and, that all Ordi∣nances ceased when Christ ascended: I say, it is evident, this poor man is such an Enemy to himself in so speaking against the Truth, that mercy and good fruit is I fear far from him. Thirdly, As to Faith, the Pharisees must needs be far from it, because they were such enemies to the Gospels preaching, by which Faith comes: and that they were so, read Matth. 12.24. Mark 8.31. Acts 4.18. and by their putting the Gospel far from them, they were in such a sad condition, that Paul saith, They were broken off: and how? through unbelief: minde, and read Rom. 11.20. And thus by putting away the Gospels preaching, they were without faith; and so all they did in the worship of God was nothing worth.
So you in denying that the Gospel should be preached or heard to this end that men may believe in Christ; I mean, the word of the holy Scripture, you your selves must needs be Phari∣see-like, far from Faith; and so like them also in this, in hindring others as much as possibly you can. Now as Faith in Christ is manifest in obedience to Christ, so ought all men to take the Scri∣pture for their rule in Faith and Obedience, and to observe what Christ hath in his word of Truth commanded. Then thou, Farnworth, and all the rest that speak against the words of Christ as they are recorded: are Pharisee-like without faith also. And to that Scripture, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. where the Author tells the Church of the Hebrews, They are come to mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, and to the heavenly Jerusalem, &c. I say, the Church of Christ are so come to mount Sion, as the Church of the Jews was come to Mount Sinai. Now let us minde what the Lord said to Moses, Exod. 19.2. And the Lord called to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel, Ye have seen what I did unto the Aegyptians, and how I bore you on eagles wings, and brought you unto my self: now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then see what the Lord promised unto them, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people; for all the earth is mine: and ye shall be unto me a kingdom of Priests & an holy Nati∣on. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the chil∣dren of Israel. And compare this with Deut. 4. at large: but minde vers. 2. Ye shall not add to word which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it; but keep the commandments of the Lord your God as I command you. And minde two great encouragements. The first is from vers. 7. What people is there that have God so nigh unto them, as he is to us, if we walk in obedience to him? Secondly, he tells them, That all this Law is righteous which he set before them, that so they, might be in love with it. And you may see in chap 5, and 6. how fully Moses holds out the Law to them; and they that were found abiding in it, and walk∣ing by the rules thereof, all those priviledges and promises afore∣mentioned
they had an interest in: but those that turned aside from the holy Commandments, as the Lord had commanded by his servant Moses, they, I say, were deprived of all those privi∣ledges and promises there spoken of; for with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wil∣derness. and read Psal. 106. and 1 Cor. 10.5, to the 13. So, I say, to the best of my understanding is the Church of Christ come to Mount Sion, and it is clear, that Christ is King there by the Father's appointment, Psal. 2. Isaiah 9. Rev. 15.3. And when Christ came into his Kingly Office, he gave out Ordinances for his Church to continue in; and to such as are found doing his Commandments, and continue therein, they, I say, and only they, are within the pale of all those priviledges & pro∣mises that the Scripture bears witness to, and declares of. Now see Acts 3.23. That soul that will not bear Jesus Christ, that soul shall be cut off. And this is the winde of the Father, That his Son we should hear in all things. And see what Christ layes upon his Church, Mat. 28.20. by way of duty, That they are to observe all things whatsoever I have com∣manded you. And they that come up to him in obedience, they, I say, have an interest in all those priviledges; and my Reasons are these: Reas. 1. Grounded on vers. 25. having before held out the Promises; Now (saith be) see that ye refuse not him that speaketh: and then see how the holy Ghost in mindes the Church what sad judgements befell them that refused him that spake on earth, which words relate to the Law given by Moses: much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: for John saith, The Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.17. Reas. 2. Grounded on vers. 28. We receiving a King∣dom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace, that we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. But now the Question between Farnworth and my self, was Whether he was in the possession of these priviledges he sa he was?
But Reader consider, I pray you weigh the words a little with what he hath before affirmed, and you will finde he lyes, and speaks not the Truth. First, it is clear, That these promises are to a visible Church, as the Law was given to a visible Church▪ then he denying a vi∣sible Church, he cannot have any right to these promises as he is a visible man. Secondly, If these Hebrews had been in the possession of these things, that is to say, the new Jerusalem, then for the holy Ghost to have warned them to take heed of refusing him that spake from heaven, had been in vain. Thirdly, Then they needed not that exhortation, To hold fast Grace, as the Margin reads it; vers. 28. That we may serve God acceptably; for that were fully done already if in the pos∣session of it. Fourthly, The Scripture saith, All lyars are without; then they are not possessed of this enjoyment: and that Farnworth is a lyar, is plain, else he would never say, That all Ordinances ceased when Christ ascended; and, That Christ hath not a visi∣ble Church: and see what lyars shall be possessed of, Rev. 21.8. They shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone for ever, which is the second death. Fifthly, If they, and onely they are blessed, that do his Com∣mandments, and they shall have right to the Tree Life, then there is nothing but Curses, Woes and Misery to all them that make it their work to keep poor souls out of these promises, by perswading them to a slight esteem of the Ordinances of Christ. And here is the pride of these men discovered, that will boast of priviledges before they have any right to them. In the next place, I shall speak a word of perfection. And this I say, That I own a perfection in Christ to be attainable in this life, thus: that is to say, by believing in Christ, and obedi∣ence to Christ: add this James tells us, That Abraham's faith wrought with his works: & by works was faith made perfect. And Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: and he was called the friend of God, Jam. 2.22, 23. Now I say, this faith that worketh by love, perswad∣eth
that soul wherein it is, to yield obedience to Christ; and God the Father is fully satisfied with his Son in the behalf of such a one. Now I say, that such a one may slip through infirmity or neglect of duty to God: but see what Iohn saith to such, 1 Ep. 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to for give us our sins, & to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And this is by Iesus Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a propitiati-through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Iesus. And truly Reader, for my part, I know no way to attain per∣fection, but by believing in Christ, and yeilding obedience to Christ; and this I own: the Gospels preaching doth fully hold out the great love of the Father in giving his Son to die for us; which Gospel being preached, is the means of faith, and is a per∣fect rule for all to walk by. But for a perfection in glory to be attained on this side the Grave, this I utterly disown. As also what Farnworth said to me at Harliston, That the resurrecti∣on and eternal judgement was then past in him; I own not but disown; for I believe the resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust, as Paul saith, Act. 24.15. And now Reader, you having a view of these men, that their principles are very unsound: and why? I say, these men, because what Farnworth then affirmed, others of his company stood by to maintain. And in a few words, I shall give you briefly what one Daniel Bott a brother in the Gospel, resident at a Town neer Tamworth in Warwickshire, who was once deluded by them, but now through mercy is brought back, to the joy of his heart, and rejoycing of the Lord's people; and this I received from his own moth, That the said Farnworth and others did press him to lay aside the form of Scripture, and he would (they said) have visions and revelations immediately. Now consider, Reader, whither would they plunge a poor soul, if they can once bring him to slight that form of sound words, and that form of doctrine which was delivered unto us?
And further, he saith to me, That he heard one George Fox say these words: I am that eternal Spirit that gave forth the Scripture: and he told me, He did believe, that Fox did think when he spake this, that there was none present but these of his own judgement. And I assure the Reader this, that I cannot gather that the said Daniel doth speak any thing out of malice; for I judge the man, to the best of my under∣standing, one truely fearing God, and one that can say much of their delusions, and that they are false Prophers, by their endea∣vouring to turn him from consenting to the wholesome words of Christ, and that doctrine which is according to godliness. Now Reader, if thou dost throughly consider what is before laid down, that this Farnworth did stand by to maintain, you may plainly see what spirit this poor man is possessed with; and if it be the work of the Spirit of Truth, to lead his into all Truth, then this man is led by an evil Spirit; and this appears in its o∣peration; and by the evil fruit it brings forth, you may see what the Tree is. And this is evil to say, That all that is gotten from the Scripture, is but brain-knowledge, and a great deal of such-like stuffe he is filled with. If any man make search into them by questioning them, else let them alone in their road of speaking, and they will present a fair gloss before you. This I have experi∣ence of. And now Reader to his principles, that he saith in the begin∣ning of his book he owns, as worship in the Spirit he owns he saith. Ans. To this, if the way of worship that Jesus Christ hath com∣manded, and hath promised to be present with them that so wor∣ship him to the end of the world, be spiritual worship, which worship is plainly laid down in the Scripture; then all that refuse to take the words of the Gospel for their rule and direction in the worship of God, as thou Farnworth dost say falsely, that say you own the worship in the Spirit, but by your denying the rules you are Pharisee-like, that say and do not.
Secondly, Thou sayest, Thou ownest the Church of Christ. Answ. But here thou lyest, in thy saying Christ hath not a visible Church, and so thou shuttest thy self out both of Church and Ministery of Christ by thy own grant, as being a visible man. Thirdly, Thou sayest, The teachings of Christ thou ownest. And here thou speakest a lye also, as is evident by thy calling the Ordinances carnal, which Christ taught his Disciples, Mat. 28. Mark 16. Fourthly, Thou sayest, Thou ownest the baptism of Christ. Answ. But here thou lyest also; for believers to be baptized is by Christ's Commandment, and he gave himself and example to us herein; and this thou callest an image and idol. Fifthly, Thou sayest, Prayer in the Spirit thou ownest. And Reader minde, for this man to pray for himself, &c is perfect and freed from all acts of sin, and past the eternal judgment, as he saith; then I say, by this we may see, that prayer is useless as to him∣self; and for his prayer for me, I do not desire it, neither do I beleive it is his judgment to pray for others, by his wicked censuring all men that go not his way. But this I further say, That by his fruit he brings forth it is made evident, that he is a stranger to the Spirit of Truth; for this Spirit it leads into Truth, then it doth not lead out of the Truth; & I demand of thee Farnworth where ever the Spirit of Truth did or doth contradict the written word. But to ask thee such a Question, who art, as it is evident, possest with a Spirit of error, I do not look for satisfaction from thee. And now Saints, you having briefly a discovery of this man's fol∣ly, let us labour to take Solomon's counsel, Prov. 23.4. Cease from thy own wisdom: with Prov. 3.1. My son, forget not my law, but let thy heart keep my commandments. Vers. 5.
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy own understanding. It is high time for the Lords people to be continually upon their watch, now Satan is thus transforming himself like an Angel of light, that we be not overtaken with his devices; but this I hope, dear friends, you well know, that it becometh the Lord's people to speak the things which become sound doctrine, that so we may stop the mouthes of all our adversaries: for now is that day come that Paul speaks of, 1 Tim. 4.3 For the time will come when they will not endure wholesome or sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teach∣ers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from hearing the truth, then minde what such come to, they shall be turned unto fables. And it is the Apostles counsel to the Hebrews, chap. 3.1 2. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God: and for your direction herein, minde vers. 13. But exhort one another dayly, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceit fulness of sin. For, vers. 14. we are made partakers of Christ: How? if (saith the Apostle) we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end. For as it is plainly laid down in this Chapter. That the unbelieving Israelites came short of temporal Cana∣an; so without question will it be with all those now, that turn back from the holy Commandments delivered unto them: For the just shall live: How? by faith; but if any man draws back: What follows? my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Heb. 10.38. And he that once puts his hand to the Lord's plow and looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of God. And it is worth the observing, how Paul tells the Romans, chap. 1. 16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto salvation: to whom? to every one that believeth: minde that, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith; to faith, and (saith Paul) as many as walk according to this rule, peace be unto them. And let us minde Paul's counsel, Rom. 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and things where with one may edifie another. And as Paul advises the Church,
Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any vertue, & it there be any praise, think on these things: those things you have both learned and received and heard, and seen in me, do and the God of peace shall be with you. And as Paul said to the Church at his departure, Act. 20.32. so I say to you, Brethren, I com∣mend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. And to thou Farnworth, and the rest that walk up and down and live idly without a calling, if you would observe the Scri∣pture for your rule, you would see what Paul saith, 2 Thess. 3.10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not work he should not eat. O see thy folly in going about to deceive, which thou art not called to by God nor man according to the rule: and what would be the condition of all people in our Nation, if this were generally pra∣ctised?
Certain CONSIDERATIONS and QUERIES. Dear Brother in the Lord, OUr neer relation that we have one to another in the bonds of the Gospel, doth engage me to manifest my unfeigned love unto Christ and unto thee, in answering thy desires in propounding some Queries, by which we may ex∣amine and try the Spirits of these men, who say they are Jews and are not, that so they may be found liars, and their falshood and folly may be made manifest, and all that yet fear the Lord may be∣ware of giving heed to their cunning-devised fables, lest they be led away with the error of the wicked, and so fall from their own stedfastness: and to that end, my desire is, that they will consider their cunning craftiness, wherewith they lie in wait to deceive, by handling the word of God deceitfully; sometimes denying it to be of any authority at all, and sometimes confessing it to be in∣deed a declaration of the minde of God, but nothing compa∣rable to that light which is within them; yet other times they will make use of it for their own ends, that so they may (as Paul saith) by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. And therefore, that their snares may be broken, and poor souls delivered; I shall commit certain things in the first place to their considerations, who desire to escape the error of the wicked, and to attain to the resurrection of the just, by patient continuing in well doing, waiting for the appear∣ance of Christ. Consid. 1. The words of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. that
such are false Apostles, deceitful workers transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; (and no marvel) for the Devil him∣self is transformed into an Angel of light, therefore it is no great thing, if his Ministers be transformed into the Ministers of righ∣teousness, whose end shall be according to their works. And that this is so, Consid. 2. That all the false Prophets that came to deceive, did alwayes preach their lyes in the Name of the Lord; saying, Thus saith the Lord, when the Lord had not spoken: and thus they covered their deceits over with the Name of the Lord, and by that means led people away from the word of God, to walk after the imaginations of their own hearts, or light within them, and to despise the word of the Lord, even as these people do: see Jer. 23.16, 17. Consid. 3. That this is also the work of deceivers now un∣der the Gospel, to prophesie in the Name of Christ, yea, and to do wonderful works in his Name, and yet Christ bids them de∣part from him, for they were workers of iniquity, and he knew them not: see Matth. 7.22, 23. Consid. 4. That all those that teach in the Name of Christ, are commanded to preach the word of God and Christ, even the holy Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto salvati∣on; and if any man teach otherwise, and consent not to whole∣some words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness, is he proud, or a fool, knowing nothing: see 1 Tim. 6.3, 4.2 Tim. 3.15, 16, 17. ch. 4. 1, 2 3. Consid. 5. That when Paul left the Church in a dangerous condition, because of deceivers that he knew would come after his departure, he did not commit them to the light within them, to be guided by that, but unto God, and to the word of his grace, saying, That was able to build them up, and to give them an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified: see Acts 20.32. Consid. 6. That when Christ had to deal with those that boasted of the light within them▪ He answered, that if the light within them were darkness, how great was that darkness? from whence we may observe, that those that pretend to walk by
the light within them, were in the greatest darkness, according to the words of Christ: see Mat. 6.22, 23. Consid. 7. That God hath sent forth his Light and Truth in∣to the World, to lead and guide men to his holy Hill, and to his Tabernacles; and that the Light which he hath sent forth is his Word and Commandments: Thy word is a lampe to my feet, and a light to my path. Psal. 119.105. And the command∣ment is a lampe, and the law is light, and reproofs is the way of life, Prov. 6.23. by all which it is clear, that the light which is in a man, is not able to lead a man to happiness; but the Word and Commandment of the Lord is able to save our souls if we receive it with meekness, James 1.21. Consid. 8. That the Commandments of the Lord are pure en∣lightning the eyes; and the entrance of his words give light and understanding to the simple, Psal. 19.8. Psal. 119.130. there∣fore let us, To the law and to the testimony; and if any man speak not according to that, it is, because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. Consid. 9. That none of the true Prophets of the Lord that ever came after God had given forth his Law and Testimonyes by Moses, did ever open their mouthes against it, to undervalue it, or turn peoples hearts away from it, to despise it, and to walk after the imaginations of their own hearts and light within them, as these people now, do. Consid. 10. That it was the eminent work and evident mark of the false Prophets so to do; for which cause the curse came upon them, and all the people that followed their pernicious wayes. Consid. 11. That all those Teachers now, that come after God hath given forth the Gospel of Grace and Peace by Jesus Christ, and do labour to turn peoples hearts from the pure Com∣mandments thereof, by despising and undervaluing it, by calling it ink and paper, and a dead letter, are false Apostles and deceit∣ful workers, although transformed into Ministers of righteous∣ness, as the Devil himself is transformed into an Angel of light; which the Apostle Paul, Gal. 1.8, 6. saith, Are ac∣cursed.
Consid. 12. That all those Teachers that come from Christ, which contend earnestly for the Faith once dlivered to the Saints, and do preach the wholesome words of our Lord and Sa∣viour, and labour to perswade people to hear his sayings and do them▪ and to walk in all his holy Commandments and Ordi∣nances; they are that true and faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, the children of God, and the seed of the woman that the Dra∣gon was wroth with, and made war against, because they keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17. Now I shall propound certain Que∣ries, with a desire of an Answer. 1. WHether the Light that is in any man, if it be of God, doth not lead him to his Law and Testi∣mony, and not from it as some affirm? See Isa. 8.20. 2. Whether these men that despise and undervalue the holy Scriptures (preferring the Light that is within them∣selves, above and before the Scriptures,) whether, I say, we may not justly conclude, that their Light within them is darkness, and then, how great is that darkness? for if they speak not according to this word, it is, because there is no Light in them? see Matth. 6.23. compared with Isa. 8.20. 3. What true Light, which is of God, is there in any man, that the holy Scriptures doth not speak, and declare according to Psa. 119.130. The entrance of thy words giveth light, and giveth understanding to the sim∣ple? see also vers. 105. with Psal. 19.8. Prov. 6.23.
4. What doth that Light that is in any man teach him that is good, more then the holy Scriptures teacheth him? see Psal. 110.96. I have seen an end of all perfecti∣on; but thy commandment is exceeding broad. Now if an end of all perfection, then an end of that Light that these men pretend to have in them; but no end of Gods precepts, for they are exceeding broad. 5. What evil doth that Light, which is in any man, re∣prove and forbid him to do, that the holy Scriptures doth not reprove and forbid? according to 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. It is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correcti∣on, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, and throughly furnished unto good works. 6. Whether was there not a greater Light in the Lord Christ, then ever was in any man else, or ever shall be? ac∣cording to these Scriptures, John 1.9. chap. 8.12. 7. Whether did he not declare it, and make it manifest to the sons of men, both by his words and actions, more then ever any man else could do? according to these Scrip∣tures, Joh. 12.49, 50. Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so speak I: and, as the Father gave me commandment, even so do I, chap. 14.31. Again, All things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you, chap. 15.15. 8. Whether did not the Apostles of the Lord declare and testifie the same things to others, that they heard, and saw, and learned of him? according to these Scriptures, 1 John 1.3. That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life: That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you: and
Acts 20.27. Paul saith, He had not shunned to de∣clare unto them all the counsell of God. 9. Whether we came to know any of these things that Christ or his Disciples did, or, whether we can know them, but by the holy Scriptures: or, how can we know, that ei∣ther Christ or his Disciples were ever in the world, but by the holy Scriptures? consider and judge. If these things be so, 10. Then whether is there not a greater light shining to us in the face of Jesus Christ, through the New Testa∣ment, which he hath sealed with his own blood, then we can possibly expect to come from the heart or brain of any man now living or to live untill Christ himself shall again ap∣pear? 11. If a greater light now shineth through Christ by the New Testament then ever hath, or by men or Angels can shine to the sons of men; then whether is it not folly and madness for any man now to refuse this light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, to walk by the light and dictates of his own heart, which is deceitful and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9. even as a man should light a candle to walk by, when the sun shineth in his full strength. 12. Whether may we not now, according to Paul's di∣rections, Gal. 1.8, 9. account all men or Angels accursed, that refuse the light of the glorious Gospel thus shining unto us, and chusing rather to walk by another, that is to say, by the light within them? Lastly, if the spirit of truth, when it cometh into a soul, shall lead him into all truth; then whether may we not safely conclude, that they have none of the spirit of God, which err from the truth of the Gospel as it was once delivered to the Saints, and under value those words of Christ, which him∣self (who had the spirit without measure) said, They are
spirit and they are life: and if they were not so to any man, it was because they believed not, John 6.63, 64. For how can we know, that the dead shall rise and come to judgemens, but by the holy Scriptures of Truth? This much by Henry Haggar, a Ser∣vant of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the Congregations of his Saints: with a desire of an Answer by any who will, or can. POSTSCRIPT. ALthough there is much spoken in the former part of the Book in an∣swer to the vain conceit & impudedent
practise of these foolish men, in using the term Thee and Thou to all single persons whatsoever, by which they break the Commandment of the Lord, which is, That we give no offence to Jew, nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God: Therefore I thought it fit to put down these following lines, to make their folly manifest. First, They affirm, that the word Thee and Thou is onely proper to a single person, and none else; in which they belye the Scriptures, and deceive themselves and others, as appeareth, thus: Deut. 25.17, 18. Remember what Amalek did unto Thee, how he met Thee by the way, and smote the hind∣most of Thee, when Thou wast faint and weary, &c. Thus you see plainly the word Thee & Thou, is as well pro∣per to thousands, as to a single person: see also 27.9, 10. Secondly, That the word
or term You was used by Christ, and that to a single person, is evident, Luk. 22.31. where Christ saith, Simon, Simon, be∣hold, Satan hath desired to have You, that he might sift You as wheat; but I have prayed for Thee, that Thy faith fail not. Here we see, that the Lord Christ used the word You, as well as the word Thee, to a single person: by all which it is evident, that it is no sin, nor yet an improper speech, and therefore the people of God may and ought to use it upon occasion: and they which do af∣firm it to be a sin, do blasphemously con∣clude, that Christ was a sinner. And thus is their folly made manifest. Henry Haggar. FINIS.
