Q175 669.f.11[32] 99869300 162682
Queres to be considered of on the Kings much wished and hoped for arrivall towards the City of LONDON. Quaere 1. VVHether his Majesties presence be not as much desired by the Commons, as his absence by some great ones? and whether he will not be as ac∣ceptable to the one, as raine to the thirsty ground, and to the other as the sentence of death to the malefactor. Quaere 2. Whether we ought not to give thanks to God and that in solemne manner, for carrying his Majestie on, in so much health of body and cheerfulnesse of minde du∣ring this unnaturall war, he having such ample cause to be impaired in both? Quaere 3. Whether or no, the Kings Majesty be any wayes to be constrained to new Oathes, and involve himselfe in new Covenants, since he protesteth to keep his Coronation Oath, the very basis of our desire? Quaere 4. Whether the desires of the Army, are to be looked up∣on onely with a glance, and whether their motions can bee waved by any without an apparent danger to the whole Kingdome. Quaere 5. Whether or no, if a second Civill War should be set on foot, the most weakest eye would not discerne that selfe-ends, the love of honour and gold, were the prima∣ry and immediate cause that incited the opposers of the Armies just desires to take the field againe? Quaere 6. Whether the Committees or Excize-men are not now so well fledg'd with borrowed feathers that they need not feare to flie abroad, and whether the Commons will not fire their nest. Quere 7. Whether the hearts of the Sectaries do not beat thick∣er then they were wont, fearing when the King cometh to them, their ring-leaders will depart from them, and that Tubs shall not be filled as before? Quere 8. Whether Britannicus doth not repent, that hee made Hue and Cry after the King, and that whereas before hee spelt his name false, whether he wisheth not he had not spelt it at all, and whether he invoketh not Neptune to beare him safely to some forraigne Land? Quere 9. Whether Lillie and Booker will not alter the course of the starres, and at the Kings arrivall prognosticate his af∣ter-tranquillity, and force the malevolent Planets to meet in conjunction for his good, and make predictions more mild then before? Quere 10. Whether some Divines will not alter the Orisons at the Kings arrivall, mention his name more frequently: whe∣ther for his sake they will not remember the Queen also: whether they will sing placebo in hope of preferment or not, and whether they will not be willing to become Prebends, Deans and Officialls, as ever before? Quere 11. Whether as the state of things are at present, the Bi∣shops government extirpated, and the Scotch forme of Presbytery opening a wider gap for tyrannie then before, Independency be not more to be tolerated, in ard that then all parties may have content; those that will admit of none but the old externall forme, and those whose con∣sciences are not yet satisfied? Quere 12. Whether the Sonnes of Ignorance do not despaire, that Learning shall againe bee respected, and that the Muses sonnes shall once more rejoyce, and that at the Kings arri∣vall the Comick Sock and Tragick Buskin shall againe be worne? Quere 13. Whether there will not be a strict inquirie made after the carriage of things formerly effected, whether many will not want a satisfactory answer, and whether some will not bee inforced to make restitution of extorted gold? Quere 14. Whether the King will not desire the Society of his Queene, and whether by God or mans Law he ought to be with-held from her? Quere 15. Whether our Tradesmen at the Kings arrivall will not feare to exercise their talent in preaching, and whether they wil not chuse rather to be Auditors then Instructors? Quaere 16. Whether some do not feare that there will be a setled Government, and that at the Kings arrivall, a conformi∣tie will be pressed on all men, and that Schismes and fa∣ctions shall be supprest. Quaere 17. Whether some illiterate or envious persons will not grudge at these few Quaeres, and whether the Quaerist cares or no? FINIS. Printed in the Yeere 1647.
