S1230 E372_16 99896088 154069
THE DESIRES Of the States of SCOTLAND To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND: CONCERNING, His Majesties advancing from Newcastle to∣wards the City of London, with their deserting of the Garrisons of Newcastle and Tinmouth, and Major Gen: Skippon to take pos∣session of them. Likewise the proceedings of the Parliaments Com∣missioners at Newcastle, And his Majesties Pro∣positions to the Scots Lords, about his de∣parture from thence. Printed for E, A, January 28!
A TRVE RELATION OF The Proceedings of the Parliaments Commissioners at Newcastle. THE great Argument which holds the Kingdom in Disputation & Suspence, is, the disposall of his Majesties person (great Brittains Soveraign) a thing (indeed) of great concernment; yet all must be referred to the most wise and serious consideration of the great Councels of both Kingdomes; whose
gallant concurrence, and mutuall amity, will (no doubt) in a short time, settle and esta∣blish the Subjects of both Nations, in a most firme and glorious peace. For no Coles of Wrath can be kindled within the hearts of the English and Scot∣tish Commissioners (although many great Ones have indeavoured to stirre up the Em∣bers) but go on with alacrity, for the dis∣charging of that great trust, committed to their charge, by the Estates of both King∣domes. For upon the two and twentieth day of this instant moneth of January, the Parlia∣ments Commissioners arrived safe at New∣castle, being entertained with much joy and tryumph, and the Scottish Commissioners have expressed themselves gallantly unto them, shewing their great forwardnesse, to comply with them, and expedite the busi∣nesse, for which they came about, being resol∣ved, not to adhere (in the least) to any par∣ticular that shal prove prejudiciall to either Kingdoms; and therefore, doe freely assent and concur with them, that his Majesty shal come to Holmby house, or any other place
that the Parliament of England shall make choice of, and there continue untill he shall subscribe unto the Propositions. And it is likewise declared from the Par∣liament of Scotland, that they desire there may be a Committee of both Kingdoms con∣stantly to attend his Majesty, to use their ut∣most endeavours for perswading of his Maj. to passe the Propositions, and to advance the union betwixt both Kingdoms. Further in∣timating their desires, that those who shall be employed on the businesse of State from that Kingdom may have due accesse unto his Majesty, after their resigning of Him up to the Parliament of England; desiring also, Brotherly assistance against all foes domestic or forraign, and particularly, against those barbarous Rebels now in their Kingdome. The Scottish Forces are (almost) upon a martch with their bag and baggage, some of their Carriages being drawn out of Newca∣stle, and their great Ordnance dismounted and ready to be shipt for Scotland. The Earle of Stamford is appointed to see all things fairly carryed, and the articles
faithfully maintained, upon the Scots delive∣ry of the Northern Garisons. Major General Skippon is to place a suf∣ficient strength in the Garrisons of Newca∣stle and Tinmouth, and to remaine Gover∣nour. The King is expected Southwards dayly, & divers of the Scottish Nobility and Gentry (is thought will accompany him. But his Maiesty is somwhat perplexed a∣bout the resigning up of Newcastle, pro∣pounding to the Nobility of Scotland, as fol∣loweth: IT is a received opinion by many, that ingagements, acts or promises of a restrained person, are neither valid nor obli∣gatory; How true or false this is, I wil not dispute; but I am sure, if I am not free, I am not fit to answer your or any Pro∣positions: Wherefore you should first resolve me in what state I stand (as in relation to freedom) before I can give you any other answer (the reason of this my question, the Gover∣nour can best resolve you) But if you object the losse of time and urgency of it; certainly in one respect it presses none so much as my self, which makes me also think it necessary, that I be not to seek what to do when this Garison shal be sur∣rendred up, to demand of you, in case I go into Scotland, if I shal be there with honour, freedom, and safety, or how? Be∣ing ready to give you a farther and more particular answer, how soon you shal have resolved these two Queres. The Scots Commissioners Answer te his Majesties Quaeres Ian. 14. 1. To the first, in what state you stand, as in relation ro freedom, the Parliaments of both your Kingdoms have gi∣ven
such orders and directions as they have thought fittest for the good and safety of your Majesty and the Kingdoms, to the General and Governour. 2. To your Majesties second Quaere, of your going into Scotland, we shal humbly desire, that we may not be now put to give any Answer; but if your Majesty shal either deny or delay your assent to the Propositions, we are in that case to represent to your Majesty the Resolutions of the Parliament of England. His Maiesties Reply. I know very wel, that the Gen. and Governour have recei∣ved orders concerning me; but the question is, into what state those Orders put me in (as relating to freedome) To which you have either power to answer, or not; if you have, then answer me: otherwise send to those who can: And so to my second quere. The great Politician Doctor Hudson were brought to the Parliament house, and called in before the Com∣mons, who examined him whether he had beene with the King (since his escape at Newcastle▪ which he con∣fessed, And it was further demanded of him, whether he wrote to Major Generall Laughorn, and whether it were not to perswade him to decline the Parliament, which he also acknowledged: The house proceeded further in examination of him, which was too long to be inserted in this sheet, but when that was done, they came to this result, that hee was charged with treason, and it was ordered that the said Mr. Hudson shall bee sent forth with to the Tower of London, there to re∣main close prisoner, and that none shall speake with him but in the presence of his Keeper. Letters were presented to the House of Commons coming from beyond Sea, which tell of strange sto∣ries, how true wee know not, but the relation comes from a good hand.
One is a letter from Poland, speaking plainly that the great Assembly or Parliament of that Kingdome have put their King under restraint for raising of for¦ces without their consent. That they told him freely in open Parliament, he had forfeited his Crown, and that all his subjects are thereby discharged of their Allegeance, and are not to be further subject to his commands, That they have commanded the Kings Seal not to be any longer used and raised a Guard of twelve hundred to attend the King, and keep the Kingdom in Peace. One cause of the difference between the King of Po∣land and his subjects, is said to be, his endeavor to con∣tinue a warre contrary to the advice of the States and Councel of that Kingdom, and against the mind of the Lord Marshall. We shall now conclude with what we have last from the North from whence is our greatest expectation of Newes as affaires stand. The money is gone from York, Northalerton is 22 miles beyond, where the first hundred thousand pound is paid, Our Commissioners are come to Newcastle, and faire congratulations be∣tween the Commissioners of Scotland and them, and some Conference. They also apply themselves to his Majesty, who seemes to be hardly perswaded to come to Holmby house: what wil follow, few dayes will evidence: but our Commissioners being newly come thither, it could now produce little, ex∣cept what is before. FINIS.
