S1727 99899465 153566
A PROCLAMATION, Containing His MAjESTIES Grace and Favour to His Subjects  his His Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND. C R HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, to our Lo∣vits, Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers, Prsevants, Messengers at Ams, Our Sheriffs hat part conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting: Fo  much, as the affection which We have to this Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, makes Us readily to embrace ll occasions, whereby We may witness Our zeal to do all things which may be for the advantage and ease of ur good Subjects; And We being informed by Our right trusty and intirely beloved Cousin and Counsell the Duke of Lauderdale, Our Commissio∣ner, of some things which have been, and still are troublesome a burdensome to Our good Subjects of this Our Kingdom: We have thought fit as an Act of Our Royal Bountie, by Our Royal Authority, with advice of Our Privy Council, to Declare Our Royal Pleasure, for the ease and satisfaction of Our good Sub∣jects in manner following. First, We, with advice foresaid, Do hereby Statute and Enact, and accordingly do freey and absolutely discharge to Our Subjects all Rests of Assessments, Monethly maintenance, Loan and Tax, Levies, Out-reiks of Hor and Foot, Excise, tenth and twenty enny: And generally all Impositions whatsoever due, or imposed upon this Our Kingdom,  any time before Our happy Restauration; excepting all sums of money already payed, or bonds given for money (which by Assignaons may be conveyed through several hands) and all these Particulars above-mentioned, We, with Advice foresaid, do now discharge, notwithstanding of any Commission grated to Sir John Weymes of Bogie, or any others for collecting them, or any of them. We, in like manner, with Advice foresaid, Discharge all rests of the Taxation ordinary and extraordinary, granted to Our Royal Fa∣ther of blessed memory, by the Parliament in the year of GOD, 1633. Comprehendg therein the Taxation of two of ten  An∣nual-rents, excepting all sums of money already payed, or bonds granted preceeding the date hereof; And excepting all sums of money due by any person, lyable for the relief of those who have made payment or gven Bond. But in regard the Duke and Dutchess of Hmiltoun, have a right to the Rests of the said Taxat untill they be  of cert sums of money acclaimed, as yet reng to  by Us, conform to a Contract past betwixt  Duke of Hamiltoun, and a Commission granted by Us o William now Duke of Hamiltoun: We do Declare, that We  satisfie the  the said Duke after count and reckoning of his intromission with the said ; Th  Grace and Favour intended hereby to Our good Subjects may be made effectual, and entire to them; But prejudice in the mtime, to the Duke of Hamiltoun, of hi right and execution thereupon, ay and untill he be satisfied of what shal be found due to him,  court and reckoning of his intromission with the said Taxation. We do likewise, with advice foresaid, freely and absolutely discharge all such parts of the annue of einds as were due to Us before our happy Restauration: And do suspend the charging for, the receiving or paying of any Annuity due  Our Restauration, ay and until the Earl of Lowdon make account (to any VVe shall appoint for that effect) of what he o his Father  received of the saids Annuities: To the end We may then declare Our further pleasure, excepting alwayes from this all sums of mone  payed, or for which Bond is given upon that Account, preceeding the date hereof: And this, notwithstanding of any  granted by Us  to the Earl of Lowdon, for collecting of the saids Annuities. We do also, with advice foresaid, freely and absolutely discharge all Fynes imposed by Ou First Parliament of this Our Kingdom, excep∣ting such as are already payed, or such for which there is bond already given. It is alwayes hereby declared, That all moneys received by Collectors or Sub collectors from their several Entries in all or any of these particulars,  discharge, or others entrusted for uplifting thereof, are eby excepted: And the saids Collectors, Sub-collectors, and others foresaid declared accomptable for the same, to any who have or shal have Our Commission for that effect. And last, We for a further proof of Our affection to Our good Subjects of this Our Kingdom; Do, th advice foresaid, freely and ab∣solutely grant ageneral pardon and discharge of all arbitrary and pecunial pains incurred by any of Our Subjects, before the date hereof through the contraveening of any Laws, penal Statutes, or publick Acts whatsoever; except such pecunial pains as are already inflicted  Our Privy Council, or any other competent Judicatory, for  of money payed: And excepting all Sentences of  imprisonment or , Declaring alwayes, this ardon is not to be extended to any who were guilty of the Rebeli in the Year 1666. and are not admitted to the benefit of our mpnity, not to such as are guilty of  Crimes. And We having given, as said is, so full proof of Our bounty and goodness  bjects, a of Our full pardon of all arbitra∣ry and pecunial pains, extending even to these against Conventicles, withdrawing ances, disorderly Baptisms and Marriages, We do expect, that this Our unparalelled grace and goodness will oblige all Our good Subjects  to express their due sense of and thankfulness for the same, by a more careful observance and due obedience to Our Laws, from which nothing is to be derogate hereby as to their due observance in time coming. And to the end, That Our Royal clemency and bount to O good Subjects, may be for their full security made known to them; Our Will is, and We charge you straitly and command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen; ye passe to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and the Market Crosses of all the other Royal Burroughs of this Our Kingdom, and other places needful And thereat, in Our Name and authority, with all due Solemnities, by open Proclamation, make publication of the Premisses. The which to do We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full power by these Our Lette, delivering them by you duely execute and indorsed again to the Bearer. Given under Our Signet at Holy-rood-house the twenty fourth day of March, 1674. And of Our Reign the twenty sixth year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. Gibson, C. S• Concilii. God save the King. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excllent MAjESTY. Anno Dom. 1674.
