S2781 E333_5 99861407 159644
SEVERAL LETTERS To the Honoble William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. Concerning The Gallant Proceedings of Sir Tho. Fairfax Army in the WEST. VIZ. The SURRENDERING up of EXETER On this present MONDAY: The taking of 80 prisoners, with the Works and Line about Pendennis Castle by Col. Hamond; the taking of 60 Prisoners of the Mount, which is the greater part of that Garrison; And the probability of the Delivery up of BARNSTABLE. Also very good News from IRELAND. APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons, to be forthwith printed and published. London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. April 13. 1646.
To the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons. SIR, I Suppose you did think before this to have received News of the Surrender of Exe∣ter, considering the time since the Treaty began: I cannot say two hours hath been lost since the first entrance upon the same. The Commissioners having sate two nights together, besides the several dayes in debating the businesse with the other Commissioners, hoping to have compleated the Articles; but such were the Devices of some of the Enemies part, in ordering of their Articles, and putting many needlesse Quaeres, especially concern∣ing the Church and Cathedral, that it necessitated a con∣sumption of time; and when any were in a manner con∣cluded, some further satisfaction was to be given, con∣cerning some things they stood upon, which I shall for∣bear to mention till the Articles themselves come up unto you; I onely observe this, That the giving so large Conditions to Ashby de la Zouch, begot an expectation, nay, an assurance in those in Exeter to obtain the same, which hath been the principal cause in the prolonging of this Treaty, that it came no sooner to maturity, which now is perfected: The Conditions are Honorable, yet no other then becomes a Souldier to grant, and which the place (considering the consequence in the timely Sur∣render thereof) might expect or hope for; This being as it were the closing of our businesse in the West, will
set the Army wholly at liberty, to attend the more pub∣like Affairs of the Kingdom in the other parts of it, which are yet annoyed by the Enemy: For Barnstable, we have assurance it will not dispute it with us; and if they should, the Town being already quitted, the Forces raised in this County, are sufficient to reduce that Castle and Fort, and so not ingage the leaving of any part of this Army. I have staid this Messenger these four days, being unwilling he should come till the Treaty was fi∣nished. Two Forts are this day to be delivered into the Generals hands, and four persons of quality for Hosta∣ges besides, for the Surrender of the Town on Monday next: The Articles are many and long, and alterations have been made, so that I shall not presume to mention any thing of them until they come up. The Fort of Ilford-Come was gained by Storm the other day. Colonel Sheffield commanded a party which were led on by Lieu∣tenant Colonel Harris. The Governour and all his men are Prisoners; some slain. I take my leave, and rest. April 9. 1646. Cullomb John. Your humble Servant. To the Honorable William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Ho∣norable House of COMMONS. SIR, I Writ to you this morning, that it was agreed unto by the Commissioners of the Treaty, to deliver Exeter on Monday; and in assurance thereof, to give four per∣sons of quality as hostages, and to surrender two Forts. This Agreement was compleated this Afternoon, by de∣livering up the Fort and Hostages, and the Exeter Com∣missioners came in person to see the General signe the Articles, as ours did go to Sir John Berkley to see him
signe them: There is very good correspondency; they depend much on our Faith in performing Articles, which I dare say will be punctually observed. The Ge∣neral had no sooner setled this, but he removed late this Evening to Tiverton, to be early to morrow at Barnstable, when the Summons goes in; and I hope, before Mon∣day that he return to Exeter, to have an assurande of Surrender of Barnstable, if not actually done by then. Thus much I thought fit further to certifie you by this expresse, for your better satisfaction in our proceedings: Having no more to trouble you withal, I take my leave and rest Your most humble and faithful Servant, J. R. April 9. 1646. past 12. at night, Tiverton. This Messenger was in Exeter with our Commission∣ers, and can further inform you: He promises me to be at the House on Saturday before you rise; his speed will deserve your favour. I doubt not in my next, to assure you of Barnstable by what I perceive. On this day seven night the whole Army is to march East: Orders are out accordingly. AT Market-Jew neer the Mount, we took of the Mount men 60 prisoners, being the greater part of the Garrison; also a Captain in Pendennis came off with 80 men more. We understand in Pendennis they have nothing but Salt-Beef tainted, and cannot subsist long; and little quantity of Bread; and their Wine almost spent. We hope well shortly of both those places. Colonel Hamond writes as much. Tiverton, April 10. Two in the Morning. J. R.
To my Honored Friend Edmond Pride∣aux Esquire. SIR, SInce my last from Bodman, I have spent two days with Col. Hamond at the Leaguer of Pendennis Castle; he hath almost perfected the Line from point to point, so that 'twill be a very difficult thing for any of them to stir abroad without our consents: The last night there came Lieutenant Colonel Chapman, Captain Rives, and about fifty two men from them; we had an intimation of their coming before, which had we been certain of it, might have endangerd the Castle. They are all discontented, and jealous one of another, so that I beleeve the carry∣ing of that Castle will be no long work. I had one to day with me from Master Godolphin of Silly; he begins to look upon my self: I, sent the Gentleman to Colonel Hamond, being unwilling to deal in any of these busi∣nesses; tis probable somewhat may come of it: the like intimations there is from the Mount. The disbanding of the Army here, and the late defeat given Ashley, are most excellent convincing arguments. Your faithful Servant, Anth. Nicol. Truro this 4 of April. 1646.
To the Honorrble William Lenthal Esq Speaker to the Ho∣norable House of Commons. Honorable Sir, I Have often imbolden to trouble you with some lines from me, as of Cardiff, &c. But now here arriving one Captain Bruie from Ireland yesterday, I could not be silent, but make known the News: We have from those parts, blessed be our good God, it is good, Capt. Robert Moulton Admiral of the Irish Sea, with ten sail more set sail March 1. from Kingsail with Eight hundred Soul∣diers, and sailed Westward: And it is credibly reported, that he hath fallen on Dingel de-Couch, where at first had some opposition, but at last took it, and found it very rich; but it not being Tenable, they Plundered it, set fire on it, and sailed toward Limbrick, and hath taken a Castle, Mount Raccie, and Lord Tumount, who is now on board the Ships: And our Forces are Fortifying the said Castle; and since their being on Land there, they have taken One hundred and twenty Horse: Limbrick Merchant would very willingly have Surrendred the said Town unto them, but was prevented. The Lord Broghill hath sent Three hundred Horse from Munsler to joyn with them; God in mercy prosper them, for the Enemy hath sent Castle Haven with some Forces that way. Captain Plunckets Ship hath taken a small Man of War, with six Guns of Barnstble, and a small Frenchman laden with Wines, &c. bound for Galloway. The contrary winds hinders me with the twenty sail of Merchant men, and Colonel Jephsons Five hundred Horse going for Ireland; we are all ready to set sail the first wind; and had we but another Fleet, and two or Three thousand men to fall on Dublin or that parts, there
is great probability of gaining that City, and doing much on Ireland this Summer. The Lord prosper the work, saith he that is, and so shall remain, Your Honours humble Servant, John Crouther. Kingroad, 9 April, 1646. THe Wachford Men of War have taken one Captain Iohnson of Plymouth, and one Capt. Paige of London, both Pirat men of War: We want Ships on Irish Coasts. Idem. J. C. FINIS.
