S4943 E123_7 99859830 156150
Christophilos. The true CHRISTIAN SVBIECT Decyphered in a Sermon preached at Saint Pauls London, on the seventh of August, Anno 1642. By Benjamin Spencer, Minister of St. Thomas Parish in Southwarke. Iudicium regis est ultimum judicium, ultra quod causa pertransire non porest. Aug. Cont. Parm. Lib. 1. Potestas principis juris est, non injuriae, & cum ipse sit Author juris non debet inde injuriarum naset occasio, unde jura nascuntur. Bract. MAT. 24.15. Let him that readeth understand. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Paybody, dwelling in Pater-Noster Row, in Queens Head Court. 1642.
To the Right Honourable EARLE OF MANCHESTER, Lord Privie Seale, B. S. wisheth all present and future happinesse of Grace and Glory. Right Honourable, I Thinke my selfe happy as Saint Paul said to King Agrippa, that I have occa∣sion given mee to plead before one, who is red in all Customes and que∣stions, that so those which speake evill of the Sermon may bee ashamed by your justification of it, to whom I make bold to dedicate it. Not that by your greatnesse it should be defended, if it give just offence, but by your worthinesse pro∣tected from unjust calumnies of suspition, of which the world is now so full that Jealousie hath given faith her pasport and she is gon. Be∣ing
therefore fallen into these dregges of time wherein wee can hardly draw off cleare Wine without racking some new opinions, which are so toothsome. I thought good to try if I could but helpe to settle those muddie Lees by expounding some Texts of love, peace and obedience. But my good meaning hath been so much mistaken, and my words wrested, yea threatned, yet not by either wisedome or greatnesse that I am for∣ced to present this Sermon to your L rdships cen∣sure First, and next to the view of the world. To the world for my vindication to your Honour for expression of my duty in which I shall ever rest Your Lordships truly devoted Servant, Benjamin Spencer.
To the Considerable READER. Gentle Reader; IF thou knewest how much this Sermon hath beene abused by evill Tongues, and how I have beene urged to print it before it was scandalized, but especially since, that it might vindicate it selfe, thou wilt cleare mee from any audacious daring of the times or vaine glory to bee seene in print. Pardon mee onely in taking the Text, and I feare no censure for the Sermon, because it is not Conscious of time serving by taking part with any save plaine Truth, which all good men aff ct though she have an austere countenance, to whose commands for my part I have ever devoted my selfe, and shall be glad to die in thy service, if thou wilt in hers, To which good purpose that God would assist us with his grace, I pray, and rest thine in Jesus Christ, Ben. Spencer.
A Sermon Preached at St. Pauls on the seventh of Aug. 1642. PROV. 24.21, 22, 23. 21. My Sonne feare God and the King, and med∣dle not with those that are given to change. 22. For their destruction comes suddenly and who knoweth the ruine of them both? 23. These things belong to the wise. THis Booke and Ecclesiastes are Salomons re∣tractations, or his second thoughts, and therefore the more worthy, to be thought of We may say of him as it was of Origen, ubi male nemo pejor, ubi bene nemo melior, In his error no man was worse) but where hee did well no man could mend it. I may call it one of Salomons Gardens richly enameled with flowers of all sorts, some to make a posie for the moralist, as rules of Ethicks, or morall Phi∣losophy, others for the house-holder, as rules of Oeco∣nomie;
some for Governours, and people, which wee call politicks, of which, this is one: My sin stare God and the King, &c. In this Garden you seldome finde many flowers upon on stalke; many verses upon one subject. Here is two, and a bud; two verses and an halfe all yeelding a rare seed, goodly leaves, and a fragrant sent unto all whose Noses are not stopt, or their mamillary processe corrupted. I meane whose understandings are cleare, and their affections cleane. In this verse behold a praecept and an inducement to per∣forme it.Division. The praecept is like the Commandements of God both Affirmative,Praecept. and Negative. The affirmative part is feare God and the King,Affirmat. where∣in wee may see whom we are to feare, God and the King, severally, Secondly, God and the King conjunctly. Thirdly, God frist, then the King orderly. The Negative part is,Negative. and meddle not with those that are given to change. Wherein we see, First the duty imolicite not to be given to changing, Secondly, not to meddle with those that are given to it. If medling be forbidden then changing much more. If the lesse then the greater. The inducement to performed is is,Inducement Loving coun∣sell. Wholesome. first because it is loving counsell, it comes from a Father Secondly, it is wholesome Counsell it prevents destruction and ruine both which else will come, and that first, suddenly, and secondly, inscrutably, ere we knower her from whence it comes, or how long it shall continue, for who knoweth the  of either, viz. of them who norther feare God, nor the King Thirdly,Wise. Because it is wise counsell such as wise men
both give and take though fooles will not receive instru∣ction. These things belong to the wise: which words though some translations set by themselves in relation to what comes after, writing it thus like a title. (These are also the sayings of the wise,) yet because it may justly draw all that followeth into a just suspition of being the sentences of some old Rabbins and doubtfull Authors, I take it rather to have relation to the Counsell, Feare God and the King these things, or duties belongs to the wise. The pracept is feare God and the King,Praecept. which being severed we are taught to feare God, and feare the King. First, For the feare of God,Feare God. It is a duty which leads us to wisedome, The feare of God is the beginning of wisedome, and in vaine doe men seeke wisedome, who doe not first learne to feare God, even as they doe labour in vaine in the quest of vertues, si aliunde eas sperandas putent quam a domino virtutum, if they seeke it any where but of God. Wee need not make an observation here which is made to our hand that God must be feared. But I would it were done as sure as wee beleeve it should bee done, and then men would not have so many vaine hopes; for all true hope is grounded upon the true feare of God. But the fault is some feare not God at all,Some feare not God at all. as those that aske with Pharaoh, who is the Lord, till they come to some great exigent as the Persian Cavaleers, who were wont to say in their Cuppes, there was no God. But when the Grecians had them in chace, and they came to the river Strymon, they then prayed to God the yee might hold till they got over. Secondly, Others feare God ignorantly as Children are afraid to goe in the darke,2. Ignorant feare. they know not aright the God of their fathers and therefore as some worship him wrong by doing aliquid magis, though not majus somwhat
more, though nothing greater than God requires: so others are afraid to worship him right by that inanis timer deorum also of which Cicero speakes a vaine feare of God, like the idle servant who said hee knew his master was an hard man and would exact account of every dort, and there∣fore he for feare of loosing any, hid it in a Napkin and so lost all the gaine he might have made; so this ignorant feare makes some too superstitious in maintaining Ceremo∣nies that are nocent and others too scrupulous in gaine say∣ing Ceremonies that are innocent. Of both which Saint Paul warneth us, Colos. 2.8.20, 21. Some have the feare of diffidence,3. Feare of dif∣fidence. that God cannot or will not save as Israel said, can God give meate to his people? this feare makes them to value Christ at too low a rate by selling the price of the Redemption under the price of the Redeemer, as Iudas did, who thought the price of Redemption could nor buy out the sin by which he set so small a price on the Redeemer. Some have only the feare which is begotten by the spi∣rit of bondage,4. Feare of the Spirit of bon∣dage Psalme. by which they feare only God for his judg∣ments, but they never thinke, there is mercy with thee, ther∣fore thou shalt be feared; but they looke only upon one at∣tribute of God (viz.) his Justice which preventing them of the faith of affiance they reject also the faith of adhe∣rence, which is as good though not so strong, Psalme 42.11. Some againe feare God onely with neglect of those whom hee bids them to feare also,5. Feare of God single. and so separates that which God hath coupled. But as to feare God is wise∣dome, so to depart from such evill is understanding, saith Iob 28.28. Therfore the precept saith also,Feare the King. feare the King, To shew us there is duty belongs to men as well as to God. Give
to Caesar that which is Caesars, and to God that which is Gods, feare God, for his owne sake, feare the King for Gods sake. I might say for your owne sakes, for hee that resisteth the power, resisteth the Ordinance of God and receives to himselfe damnation. So that as God must have his feare, so the King must have his. And as Gods feare must bee partly for his judgement, though it be better for his goodnesse,Rom. 15.5. so wee must feare the King, not onely for wrath, but also for con∣science. Yet his wrath is not to be slighted, for Salomon saith, It is like the roaring of a Lion,Amos 3.8. Prov. 20.2. And shall the Lion reare, and shall not the beasts of the forrest tremble? but as David said of God so may it be said of Kings, when terras Astraea reliquit, Justice hath left the world and those dog dayes are come of whom Saint Paul speaks,Psalme 90.11. Romans 13. 2 Tim. 3.1. who then regards the power of his wrath? Yet he is , the revenger of wrath though,) not of his own,) nor in his owne wrath must hee take revenge, yet he beareth not the sword in vaine. And therefore it is an happy thing when people so beare themselves towards Kings as ever to keep in them a , a parentall affection and not rowse up the  wrath, which is seldome raised that ever it will be layed againe without satisfaction, ex∣cept in those milde Princes, who like heavenly natures had rather conquer their subjects, ferendo by bearing, than feriendo by smiting. Object. What if men live not under a King? Answ. Then they must feare him or them that are Vice Regum in place of Kings. The true feare of a King due from his subjects,Wherein con∣sisteth the feare of a King. Eccles. 10.20. consist∣eth, First, in having a reverene conceit of him, as Eccl. 10.20. Curse not, or disrespect not the King in thy privy Chamber, not in the privatest chamber which is thy heart, though
hee be evill, or hath done thee some evill as Saul did to David. For as God smote the Bethshemites to the number of 50000. for looking into the Arke with too narrow and curious eyes: so will he those that prye into Princes with the eye of envie or curiosity. The Bethshemites thought because it had been among the Philistins in captivity,Euscherius they might play with it as many suppose they may with au∣thority in the evening or declining of it: when the Lion grew weake saith the fable, every beast did beard him, yea the very Asse kicked him. When David was in di∣stresse. Nabal the foole, cryeth who is David? and Shemei opens too wide upon him, and Sheba bloweth the Trum∣pet crying, we have no part in the sonne of Iesse. Secondly, therefore the feare of the King consists in reverend speeches of him, as Saint Cyprian notes well upon Christs speech to him that smote him before the High Priest. Hee did not rayle at the High Priest for keeping such bad officers, but docens sacerdotalem honorem servari oportere, contra pontificem nihil dixit sed innocentiam suam tantummode purgavit, he did only defend his owne inno∣cency shewing that authority ought not to bee rayled at but indeed ought rather to bee preserved like Sanctuaries, which as they are not to be violated,Psalme 89.51. so neither is the foot∣steps of Gods Annointed to be slandered.Jude 13. Christians must not bee like the Sea which by every little winde swelleth into raging Waves which foame out their own shame by casting up myre and dirt, Isaiah 57.20. Thirdly, the feare of a King consists in Obedience when hee commands us that which is good. Doe well and thou shalt have praise of the same,Romans 13 3. saith Saint Paul. Fourthly, It consists in patience if he commands thee evill, to suffer rather: but beware of resisting the power, for fiat voluntas tua: (thy will be done) extends to suffer∣ing
as well as doing, for, hereunto you are called (saith Saint Peter,) to bee subject to the froward as to the gentle.1 Peter 3.21. Let no man mistake, there is great difference in patience, there is a patience without sense, such as is in things insen∣sible, as Fields which suffer themselves to bee overflow∣ed by waters, because they want sense and power to stop the inundation. So there is a patience with sense, as the patience of the Asse who feeleth his wrongs but wanteth reason to redresse them. Then there is the patience groun∣ded upon reason of men knit together in a body poli∣ticke, who are taught by reason patience in some wrongs, least the body bee disjoynted upon any pettie occasi∣ons and government utterly dissolved upon small gree∣vances. Lastly, There is the Christian patience begot by the precept and patterne of Christ Iesus who left us an exam∣ple,1 Peter 3. that we should follow his steps. This patience is to bee used especially when Christi∣an Religion is assaulted of which patience is both the badge and proofe. Patience therefore must be used to shew our reverence unto Kings. Not but that the powers may be reverenced and yet the goods of the Subject may bee by them de∣fended by Law from rapine and their persons by Legall powers from illegall violence. For herein the power is not resisted but the exuberancy and overflowing of the power is stopped and turned into his true Current: For example wee resist not the current of a River when wee stop the aestuation of it from drowning our Lands and Houses, but wee labour to keepe it in his Channell,Romans 13. for as the River is ordained for our benefit, so is the power for our good.
But indeed the power by our impatience is resisted when just obedience is refused, the just authority infring∣ed, or the person indued with authority is assailed or vio∣lated. Wee see then there is a feare severally and properly belongs to God and the King.God and the King conjunct∣ly. Now conjunctly, for God hath joyned the King in Commission with himselfe and that so close as nothing comes betweene but a con∣junction copulative, no power of the Pope nor any other for Non habet parem super terram,. Optat. Com. Tari. lib. 3. 1 Pet. 2.13. for hee is next and im∣mediately under God, Super imperatorem non est nisi, qui fecit imperatorem, and therefore saith Saint Peter, submit your selfe, to the King as to the supreame, Namely when there is a King: but if there be none then unto those that rule Vice Regis in the place of Kings, and so unto Gover∣nours as to those that are sent of him or them. And these are well joyned together; for wee are apt to doe our duty by halfes as either to feare God and contemne the Magistrate and so become religious Rebels, or else to feare the King and neglect God, and so make the Prince an Idoll, but joyned together they must bee, and that without any interposition. Colimus imperatorem ut homi∣nem a deo secundum & solo deo minorem.Tert. ad Scap. Yet distinguish them we may, separate them we may not. Iulians Soul∣diers would not sacrifice with the Emperour, and yet would fight for him, disjoyned they may not bee, God hath given them to us both together, to observe as the two tables of the Law, thereby teaching us to avoyd Heresie and faction either of which will observe one ta∣ble with a damage to the other: Heresie with faire shews of good workes to men, cover the injuries it doth to GODS Truth. So Faction and Hypocrisie by a shew of Holinesse to GOD cloakes the wrong it doth unto
men. Therefore seperate neither least you spoyle both. Wee see therefore that the feare of God and the King must go together, not that hereby we make Kings equall with God, nor attribute to them indefinite power much lesse infinite power as some flatterers have to the Pope who make him beleeve hee is infallible in knowledge and Almighty in his power. Nor do we marry Minerva to our Kings, as the Athenians offered to Anthony, as if there were no wisdome but in his breast. Nor doe wee make them Gods as the Grecians did Alexander, but wee teach people to obey them by the word, though they rule not alwayes by the word; for the neglect of their duty will not excuse the neglect of ours. For though they indeed, that rule well are worthy of double honour,1 Tim. 5 17. yet wee cannot deny to any our single duty of feare and reve∣rence. This therefore may serve to consute the Anabaptists who will know no Magistrate,Anabaptists condemned. but seperate the reverence of Magistrates from the feare of God, and so Ecclipses the glory of Kings, and the duty of Subjects, by inter∣posing pretences of Christian Liberty against their au∣thority, and so turne it into libertinisme even to the sub∣jugating of Princes if they can finde power enough to doe it,Anno 1533. as you may read in the History of Thomas Munt. zerus, Iohn Laydon, and Cniperdoling, all which made in∣surrections against Governours, though themselves liked well to rule as powerfully, and as proudly, and tyranni∣cally as the Turke himselfe. But this Text will not allow to feare God, and contemne the King, nor feare God, and affright the King, but commands us to feare GOD and feare the King. Least as saith Optatus,Optatus. Dum Do∣natus super imperatorem se extollit non veretur cum qui post Deum.
So the Papist his Doctrine is here condemned which boasteth of his Catholicke faith,Papists con∣demned. but teacheth not true Christian feare. The Pope it seemes hath absolved them from it, and the Papists ghostly Father comforted them against it, as Mortimer did King Edward the seconds keepers, with this sentence, Nolite occidere reges timere bo∣num est. It is good to doe say they, what I feare to name. There be others who say they abhor the Papists,Seditious Se∣ctaries con∣demned. and can as ill endure the Anabaptists, and yet have involved themselves in their opinions of not fearing Kings as well as they, witnesse those dangerous positions written in the time of Queene Elizabeth,Mart. in Libel. 3. pag. 28. which for my part I adhorre to mention, though some doe not to preach and practise them,Dr. B. Dange∣rous positions. by which opinions as they are tyed together like Sampsons Foxes by the Tayles, so there is a firebrand be∣tweene them which is able to set an whole kingdome in a combustion. Of such as these one may say as Saint Paul said to Titus, there be many unruly men, vaine talkers and deceivers, who doe subvert whole houses, speaking things they ought not,Tit. 1.10.11. whose mouthes must be stopped, least they sub∣vert whole kingdomes. But now as we must feare God and the King,3. Orderly: Feare God first and then the King. so wee must feare God first, and then the King: the feare of God will teach us so to doe, and not feare the King the lesse for that, but the more and the better. The first must bee the grand worke of the last, piety the foundation of fidelity. Obedience to God, produceth allegiance to Kings. God must bee first and chiefly served, Kings in him and for him. In him because my obedience active must bee go∣verned by his precepts. For him, because my obedience passive must be regulated by his example, and sulcepted for his sake, who suffered himselfe not only to bee bapti∣zed
with death, by wicked Pilate. He that observes not this order will confound his service by disorderly feare, and give the feare which he oweth God, to the King, and so bem a Sycophant, or give the feare which he oweth his King, to God only, and so become seditious under a colour of being religious, for wee must feare God first, and principally, and then the King. For the King must bee served in relation to God for hee hath set them as Gods, and by him Kings Raigne:Psal. 82.7. Prov 8.15. yet they be but earthen gods, and yet gods they are, and every earthen picture must not expect to be such a vessell of honour, least the bramble exalting himselfe to bee a King, a fire come out of the Cedar and consume the bramble and a fire come out of the bramble, and consume the Cedar,Judge 9.15, 20. which commonly comes to passe when, solvuntur cingula Regum & legum, Reverence to Kings and Obedience to Laws are loosened from the loynes of Royalty and Loy∣alty also. The summe of all is this.Ephes. 6.2. Feare God, and keepe his Commandements, that is the whole duty of man: and one of his Commandements is to obey the King, and Honour Him: As appeareth in Commandement the fifth, which is the first Commandement with promise. Therefore feare God and the King, and blesse God wee live under such a Prince as will give us leave first to feare God, and then him. Againe, so feare as that you love, for feare hath painefulnesse, timor edium spirat,Tert. the spirit of feare profits not where the spirit of love is not. Feare God so as it may direct us to the right feare of the King. And feare the King in some measure as ye feare God; He that feares God is loath to forsake him, so we must feare our Kings, as bee loath to desert them. Let not this sentence be writ upon our signe posts for a memorandum, and wee for∣get it.
Feare God and honour the King. LEast a voyce cryeth out of the timber, and another answers it out of the wall,Hab. .11. and proclaime our sinne. But con∣sider every King is either Gods golden Scepter, or his Iron rod, by which hee breakes in peeces many a vessell of clay. Let us as farre as Gods Word injoy noth, sub∣mit our selves to both, and not strive to wring Gods rod out of his hand, least we acquire to our selves the more stripes. Therefore meddle not with those that are given to change. This is the Negative part of the praecept, meddle not, which,Negative part. First, Shewes that true feare is of a restraining nature and breeds a Systole or a drawing backe of the breath,Psalm. 119.131 as if afraid to put the hand or the tongue to evill. Say not as Saint Aug. warneth, quid miht & regi, what have I to doe with the King,Aug. Super. Jo. unlesse you will say also, Quid miht & possessioni, What have I to doe to possesse the goods I have. Secondly, It sheweth the full extent of Obedience which proceeds from true feare, namely as it keepes us from medling with change so with those that are gi∣ven to it. 3. Thirdly, It shewes us as the feare of God will make us cautious how we change our God, or our Religion, so a true feare of the King, will make us take heed how we change or desire to change our Governours. So that as this part hath relation to the feare of God, it warnes us we should not meddle with those that are irreligions; As it hath relation to the King, so it warneth not to meddle with
those that are seditious. And therefore as it is most lau∣dable for a State to root out superstition; So is it not lesse commendable to oppose Rebellion. Wee are warned therefore here, not to meddle with change nor changers. Not to be given to it our selves, nor meddle with those that are given to it. First, Not to meddle with it. Meddling is to make a meddle or mingling. So that in medling with change is understood a mingling of things to make them alter from their proper state and being, as in making of colours di∣verse colours are mixed or medled together, and from thence comes a change, so man being a creature by nature affecting Novelty is apt to meddle with change though it bee from better to worse, and this is rooted in him ever since the first change he made in Paradise. From hence it is that every nw forme appearing to us, We first meddle with it in our phantasie, and before judgement can de∣termine we suffer it to mingle with our affections: From whence followeth a desire or a being given to change. But considering what ill successe Adam had in changing, it is good to be advised. Seldom any change is made but it costs much trouble, though it be for the better as sicke bodies to be made well. Yet to recover health is worth trouble, and against such change the wise man speakes not, but against the affectation of it as against people who are given to take physicke more for fashion than neces∣sity or for wantonnesse than want, and so sometime stirre humours, to the bodies ruine. To avoyd this humour of change we must looke back againe, feare God and the King, that will keepe downe the the humour. Then looke on the danger of changing. First, Of changing God. Goe to the Isles of Chittim.
See hath any Nation changed his God, or his Religion, and shall we ours for popery or any other which may corrupt the Protestant?Ier. 2.10, 11. God forbid. Againe, for changing Kings consider if men affect to change for none, see the misery of such a state, Iudges 17.6. There was no King in Israel,Judg. 17.6. where Micah brings in Idoles. So Iudges 18.1. There was no King, and then Dan went a robbing.Judg. 18.1. So Iudges 19.1. There was no King, and then the Levites wife was ravished,Judg. 19.1. and afterwards they tooke the daughters of Shiloh by force. Againe if men affect changing for others, as Samuel for Saul, it brought great trouble, God gave that King in his wrath, and yet as bad as hee was David durst not meddle to make a change though for his own advantage, for saith he to Abishai who can stretch forth his hand against Gods anointed and be guiltlesse?1 Sam. 26.9. For had he suffered it, he had but taught away to destroy himselfe another time.2 Sam. 3.1. Nay if Sauls House be changed for David (the farre bet∣ter choice) yet much bloud it cost,Luke 19.14. and therefore meddle not with it without meere necessity enforce, but remem∣ber those that said in the Gospell, Nolumus hunc regnare; and therefore as wee would not meddle with changing, so not with changers, or with those that are given to it. Those that meddle some calls homines duplicantes, doub∣ling men,Medlers. Kab. Saom. who fold one thing within another, speake one thing and meane another; men of a dark light saith others, who are twilight men, they doe things by halfe lights, that is, their actions are of a mixed colour, not per∣fect white, not perfect blacke; their actions are like Lin∣sey Woolsey, zeale and malice, knowledge and ignorance carnall policy and piety, so they make a medley or a con∣fusion.
Therefore Ne commiscearis, ne confundaris,Numb. 16.26. be not mix∣ed least you be confounded, as Moses said, Numbers 16.26. Seperate your selves from these men, least you bee consumed in their sinnes. For as the simple people that followed Absalom fell in the wood of Ephraim,2 Sam. 18.8. so male-contented persons by being given to change, bring them∣selves into an intricate wood, out of which they cannot extricate themselves. The people with whom wee are not to meddle are men who are apt to change,Changers. like the Moone, and in their mindes, and like the tide they love to carry all things in their owne current. The word in the Hebrew is Shonim, which some translate travellers, or plodders, that plod o and journey in sinne: that travaile or take much paines, as men in a journey, and walke on in the counsell of the ungodly, though mercy hath often passed by them, yet they iterate, and itinerate in mis∣chiefe.Psalme 1. Others read it for detractors. Meddle not with men that have slanderous tongues, such as Shemei and Nabal, who laid too hard charges upon David, so Corah upon Moses and Aaron, that they tooke too much upon them,Numb. 16.3. but that fault was their owne, for Moses and Aaron had their just calling to it, but so had not they. Envie had laced them so straight, that they could admit of no governe∣ment but their owne. Others reade it seditious. Meddle not with the sedi∣tious such as was Absalom,2 Sam. 15.3, 4. who bewitched the people with a faire tongue, saying there is none deputed to doe you justice, but if I were in place, all should be well or the like and thus with words of vanity, he beguiles the hearts of the simple, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. Others reade it changeable men, or men of various dispositions. It may be men that like a balance are apt to
turne with a graine or like a Weather Cocke with the Winde, who love to Ring the Changes, because they are more delightfull for variety, but not so easie nor so orderly. All these senses may be understood here for the word is of a large signification especially considering that all mens travayling in detraction and sedition, is but for a change, and shewes men of changeable dispositions. For first men revolve in their mindes some discontent, and then resolve every one in the secret of his owne private heart. First, To detract, for after bigge swollen thoughts come vaine reports, like Fame who succeeded the Giants, which breeds as bad effects, as open Warre. For these reports bite deep, the word here comes of (Shen) a tooth, and David said that his Enemies teeth were speares and arrowes,Psal. 57.4. and their tongues a sharpe sword. Vnto such be∣longs this caution.Galat 5.15. If you bite one another take heed least you be consumed one of another. Secondly, They proceed to sedition, after Shemei comes Sheba alwayes. Sedition followeth detraction at the heeles, which is nothing else but a departing from the tracts of true reason, Law, Custome or Religion, with a violent motion toward some change affected, as wee see oftentimes in Israel, who poore soules complained often of their Governours, when they were not straitned in them,2 Cor. 6.10. but (aswere the Corinthians) in their owne bowels like children who sometimes complaine their Cloathes are too strait when their bellies are too full, to them be∣longs that lesson.Ephes. 4 14. Be no longer children tossed to and fro with every winde of doctrine. Thus we see what changing is. I think we have no rea∣son to meddle with it. And if we have any mind to avoyd it.
First, neither detract your selfe, nor give an eare to de∣traction. For the one hath diabolum in oe, the other in aure. One hath an evill spirit in his tongue, and the other in his eares, if hee heare it with delight. The one was Shemei his sinne, the other was Sauls. Secondly, Animate no man to sedition as Sheba did who blew the Trumper saying, Wee have no part in David. Thirdly, Nor be no man to further it as did Achitophel with his counsell. Fourthly, Nor be no assister in it as Ioab was to Adoni∣ah, and Abiathar the Priest by his prayers, when David was weake. Fifthly, Nor harbour any whom you know so, to bee as did the Citie Abell. Sixthly, Nor furnish them as Sichem did Abimelech a∣gainst the house of Gideon. Therefore as Daniel said to Nebuchidnezzar,Daniel. 4.27. Loving Coun∣sell. so say I to all of what condition soever. Let this counsell bee to thee acceptable, that if it be possible, it may be a lengthe∣ning of thy tranquillity. And well may this counsell be taken. First, because it is loving counsell, it comes from a Fa∣ther, and therefore we may conceive it good, for seldome or ever you found any father to give evill counsell to his Child, though he be bad himselfe. For nature rejoyceth in the prosperity of posterity. Dives in Hell would have his brethren forewarned of that place of torment, to which himselfe was damned: Though some Fathers have lesse charity than Dives or lesse wit at least, who care not to educate their children in true wisedome, not knowing that their Children being damned with them will bee a meanes to increase their owne infernall sorrowes, King
Lewis the Eleventh of France is much to be wondred at therefore who brought up his sonne Charles at Ambois without litterature as Guicciardine reports, hee hardly knew the formes of Letters, but only le him learne this sentence in Latine, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare. This was Councell more like machtavill, then a King, to teach his sonne to bee a dissembler. A good Fathers councell speaks better things to children. They are called in Latine Patres a pate faciendo, from opening their hearts to Children, or a patrando for doing much for them, or a patiendo, from bearing much with them, such a Father is God above all. Such an one for counsell is Salomon, and every good Minister by the word of exhortation. If comming then from a Father, receive it as children, for if from God a Father so good, and Salomon a King so wise,Arist. Consentaneum est ex melioribus ortos esse meliores, we should bee the better being advised by the best Parents: and as wee please our selves in supposing God to bee our Father in giving us this Counsell, so let him be pleased in us by shewing our selves his sons, and ready to take this counsell. But if this prevaile not, yet consider it is wholesome counsell like preventing physick which may be as an An∣tidote against destruction,Inducement. for hee saith as an inducement not to meddle with change, their destruction shall come suddenly. Wherein we will consider, First, The certainty of the judgment, it shall come. Secondly, The manner of it destruction and ruine. Thirdly, The quicknesse or unexpectednes of it, (sud∣denly, it comes sudden. Fourthly, The inexplicablenesse of it, who knowes it. First,Certainty. Of the certainty, it shall come.
Judgement hath feete of Wooll but hands of iron.Psalme 50. God saith Psalme 50. I winked and thou thoughtest I was like thy selfe, but I will set before thee in order the things that thou hast done, for sure our God will come and not keepe silence. He bends his bow and makes it ready.Psalme 7.12. Hee loves to wait that he may be gracious to us, and forbeare that hee may have mercy upon us, although mans sinnes are such as that the very Poet could say, — Non sinunt Iovem ponere fulmina.Hor. So then if the sinner turne not, hee will whet his sword. He is yet but whetting, I would wee would take counsell and meet him by repentance, while he is a farre off,Luke 14.32. Greg. in Evang. and crave conditions of peace, Ne justitiam destrictiorem in ju∣dicio exigit, quanto longiorem ante judicium patientiam provo∣cavit, least judgement be the larger by how much it stay∣eth the longer. Oh save God a labour,Aug. peccatum puniatur a te ne tu pro illo puniaris. Punish thy sinne least thou bee punished for it, Et peccatum tuum judicem te habeat, non pa∣tronum, be not a Patron to thy sinne, but a judge, and then I hope, Nay I am sure this destruction will not come, or if it do, we shall laugh at destruction when it comes.Job. 5.22. For when the Net shall be spread upon all, yet some fish shall bee but transported out of these muddy waters, into the sweet streames of Paradise, and some birds to sing among the quire of Angels. For though it is certaine, come it will, yet as God is loath it should come, Hosea 11.8.Hosea 11.8. How shall I give thee up Oh Ephraim, how shall I deliver thee up Oh Israel, how shall I make thee like Admah, how shall I set thee like Zeboijm? my heart is turned within mee, my repentings are kindled together: Yet his resolves are certaine, being pressed under as a Cart is pressed with sheaves, so that we must put him to the Quaere what could,Jsaiah 5.4. I have done more than I have done to my Vineyard? and Oh my people what have
I done to thee,Micah 5. or wherein have I wearied thee; testifie against me? So I know in that day he will distinguish betweene the precious and the vile though it bee to others a destru∣ction and a ruine. The manner of this judgement is such.Mnner. Destruction implyeth some violence: as if such as feare not God and the King should not die a naturall death, which indeed is never called destruction but a dissolution rather; for vio∣lence doth destroy before the time, and destruction is a kind of pulling down, not repaire again or to build, but to lye waste like old Troy, which became, Corpus sine nomine, a body without a name, Nay not so much: for destruction extendeth to all manner of being, so that a man shall not say this was Iezabel,2 Kings 9.37. except to their infamy; for destructi∣on pulls downe house, body, name and fame. And therefore most justly is this judgement called a ruine,Ruine. because such men, pereunt funditus, they perish as it were by the mothers curse, which rootes out the foun∣dation. So that such men like old ruinated houses shall drop in peeces,Jsaiah 24.1. as faire houses wanting inhabitants doe, which for sin they must want, saith the Prophet, though it may be some think as Cicero saith, Piscinas suas fore sal∣vas amissâ Republicâ,Cicero ad Attic. that though the Common-wealth be ruined, their houses shall stand. But let them not deceive themselves for the sword of destruction knoweth no dif∣ference, as that Commander said in 88. betweene an English Papist, and an English Protestant when things are once in confusion. But the worst of all is, this shall come suddenly. It shall rise suddenly,Suddenly. as the Hebrew word sheweth () which signifieth a vapour as well as destruction shewing, First, That it shall rise like a vapour suddenly ere one be a ware of it: So,
Secondly, As a vapour riseth from that upon which it falleth, and so doth destruction fall upon those that hath framed it, as yee comes of water, and to water it turneth: they fall into the pit they have digged, and the mischief falleth upon their owne pate, which they have imagined. Thirdly, Againe a vapour is extracted by the heate of the Sun, so is their destruction by the wrath of God, and the anger of the King. Fourthly, And as a vapour vanisheth suddenly, so shall they in their destruction, their I age shall vanish out of the Citie, I looked for him saith David,Psalm 37.36. but his place could no where be found. Well then being it comes upon a sudden like a Theife in the night, and so man knoweth not his time,Eccles. 9.12. but like a bird taken in the snare, and or a fish in the not so is man in the evill day when it falls suddenly upon them. For as men riding in a mist, when it is gone finde themselves sometimes where they would not: so those that walke in the Clouds of obscurity,2 King. 6.26. as they thinke no man descries them, so neither doe they descry their owne danger till it discover it selfe suddenly. Therefore what manner of men ought we to be in all godly conversation and honesty, since it comes suddenly, and therefore they cannot escape, for God will shoote at them, who obey not his precepts,Psalme 64.7. with a swift arrow sud∣denly, that they shall be wounded. But yet if this were all, we might hope of some end of it, but the wise man will put us in no hope of that, for hee saith it is inscrutable, who knoweth the ruine of them both. Where wee see, First, that neither can exempt himselfe from destruction. Neither he that feareth not God, nor he that feareth not the King, nor he that feareth neither God nor the King, they that are medlers against lawfull
authority or he that medleth or mixeth with them, both are threatned here.Prov. 11.21. Though hand joyne in hand, yet not one shall goe unpunished. So secondly, we see the punishment is inscrutable, and as farre as I know eternall. First, Inscrutable in his beginning not comming with a loe here! or a loe there! but as in the Church, men doe and shall arise from amongst our selves speaking perverse things,Acts 20 30. so even from among those that feare neither God nor King, may arise some, whose hearts God may so turne, as they may bee a meanes to bring ruine upon the rest. Secondly, Inscrutable in the manner, for who know∣eth what kinde it shall be. Baiazet little thought of the Iron Cage in which Tamberlaine carried him, who inten∣ded so to carry Tamberlin. Nor Perillus thought not that he should have roared first in his brazen Bull. Thirdly, Wee know not how long it may last, for it may reach so farre as I know even to hell, for who knows whe it will end?1 Sam. 10 26. Isaiah. 30 33. We know that Tophet is ordained of old, yea for evill Kings it is prepared, and I believe not leffe for evill subjects if they be such Tophets, such fooles to bee led aside,Deut. 1.1. or such Achitophels such kinsmen to fooles, as that they neither feare God,Romans 13. nor the King, for Saint Paul tells us that such receive to themselves damnation. If we would avoyd the penalty, then avoyd the finne, otherwise it will fall upon us. Upon them that feares neither God nor King, which is meere Atheisme, and Li∣bertisme mixed together, or God without the King which is to make a shew of godlinesse, and deny the power of it,2 Tim. 3.5. to keepe a forme of piety in the first Table, and de∣face it in the second. Or that feare the King without God, which is to love the praise of man, more than the praise of God. Or that feare God before the King, which is
meere flattery, if not Idolatry,Prov. 28.21. and such men will trans∣gresse for a piece of bread. Therefore let us avoyd all these, and feare GOD, not without the King. For if GOD said Amen to Davids Curse on the Mountaines of Gilboa as Saint Ambrose observes,Amb. in Lib. off. Aruerunt montes maledicto prophetico, after Sauls death upon them, they dried away, and the grasse did not thrive there, how much more will the imprecations of good men take ef∣fect upon those who regard not these precept. It cost Absolom the hanging, and Achitophell an halter of his own purchasing Ioab his life, after hee had taken sanctuary. Abiathar his Priest-hood. The Citie of Abell a seige, and it might have proved a sacking, if there had not been one woman in it wiser than all the men. Sheba his head, and Sichem an utter ruine even to the sowing of salt upon it to season all posterity. Coreh and his company such a ruine, as who knoweth, how farre it went, even to the lowest pit so farre as we know. Besides all this it is wise counsell.Wise Counsell For it is spoken to the wise, It is such as wise men useth to give and take. Of which wee may say as the Angell said in the Revela∣tion. Here is wisedome. Let him that readeth it consider.Rivel. 13.18. It is not spoken to fooles, whom if we bray in a Morter, yet will not be the wiser. But to those that either are wise and judicative, and this may make wiser, or those that are wise optative, in wish seekers for wisedome. Or those that thinke themselves wise, and are onely wise supposative, and are the great active braines, and stirring spirits, and by that meanes would be thought wise. Let none of these refuse this honest counsell, this holy advice. Nor those that are the stickling malignant spi∣rits, who thinke themselves wiser than King, Parliament,
or the whole State bside, let not them refuse it, but let them remember to be subject not only to the King, but to those that are sent of him: For in them, they are subject to him. If they be or would be wise. let them not strive to divide the body from he head, and make the State like the Serpent called Amph soena, who had an head at either end,Rom. 14.19. which by diversity of attraction bred distraction, and so broke the body a sunder in the middest. And let us all study in the feare of God, the thing which belongs to peace, that there be no breaking in nor leading out, nor no complaining in our streets.Psalme 144.14. I speake as to wise men, judge you what I sa saith Paul. And here the only wise God, and the wisest King speaks though the weakest preacher. Cape tu quod suum for wisedome, quod tuum for duty, re∣mitte quod meum, for infirmity sake, or in charity at least. And let us all pray for the King, to God, and for all that are in authority, That God would give the King his judgements and his Righteousn sse to the Kings Son, that whensoever we looke how he reigneth wee may remem∣ber also by whom hee reigneth. In whose strength, Let the King rejoyce O Lord,Psalme 21.2. Pro. 20.28. and make him exceeding glad of thy salvation. Mercy and truth, preserve the King, and let his Throne, be established by mercy, that by his mckenesse and vertue, and the wisdme of his great Councell, the Par∣liament meeting together thy people may bee comforted and thy inheritance blessed in this world, with the Truth of the Gospell in peace, and obtaine at lst those heaven∣ly places appointed for them i Iesus Christ, to whom to∣gether with the father and the Holy Spirit three persons and one only true God be given all honour and glory for ever. Amen. FINIS.
ERRATA. In the Epistle Dediatory, Red for read. PAge 5. line 25. leave out him or, p. 10. l. 31. after baptized, read (with water by Saint Iohn Baptist but also) page 11. l. 10. read pitcher for picture. p. 15. l. 10. leave out and, p. 19. leave out must, p. 22. line 31. read (that feare the King afore God) page 23. line 24. reade Indicative.
