S5191A 43078162 151752
A LETTER to the Loyal APPRENTICES In and about LONDON and WESTMINSTER, for Their making of a Noble, Extraordinary, Rejoycing PROSSESSION, on Monday the Eleventh of April, 1698. being His Majesties Cor∣ronation Day, in Congratulation of His Majestys safe Returne Home; and for the Honourable, Firm, and Lasting PEACE. Written by Captain Anthony Stampe. 31. Dec. 1697. Gentlemen, IT'S out of my kind Respects I have made bold, in this general Letter to you all, who, though you now live under Obedience to your Respective Ma∣sters, till your Several Terms of Years are expir'd, yet may in time come to be the Great Body of this his Majesties Emperial City, as well as those you now Serve: Therefore are you very Considerable in your Selves, and equally concerned in Publick Rejoycings with those that are Freemen. Now, That you may not be thought deficient in your Loyalty, nor insensible of the Blessings of Peace, and the Benefits from thence to be received in a Free-Trade, which in a small time will accrew to your own Profit, and Enjoyment; if I may be deemed Worthy to Advice you, my Counsel to you should be, for your bring∣ing up of the Rear of all the Congratulations of the Kingdom, being an Honour∣able Post, in the Second degree of Dignity; especially if in some way of Rejoyc∣ing distingushed from others, and proper for you, it would certainly gain you a lasting Reputation that Time shall not wear out▪ To that good end, I have invented, and drawn a Scheme of a most Magnificent, Triumphant, Congratulatory, Rejoycing Procession of Britannia and Four other Ladies that represents his Maj∣esties Kingdoms: The whole of it will be so fine and rare, that it is not to be parallel'd. I have designed that this Noble Procession shall be made by you, on Monday the 11th of April, being his Majesties Coronation Day; as the only fit and most proper time for you to make your Rejoycings in: Because by that time all the remaining Con∣gratulations will be presented, and all things relating to make the same Graceful; will be got ready. To gratify your Curiosity, I am willing to give you an abstract of the intended Pro∣cession: For if I should give you the Scheme at large, it would take up some Sheets of Paper to Set down in Order all the perticulars thereof: The Heads of the most Material parts of it are as followth, which may Suffice at present. There will be above Four Hundred Wind and String Instruments of Musick; at least Twelve Thousand Flambeauxs, a great Number of Footmen, Pages, and Pages of Honour, all in Orange Liverrys: Fifty Banners, bore up, if not more, according to the Num∣ber of Divisions: Every Division to contain about two Hundred; and the Di∣visions you are to go in, are to be Distinguished by your Habits one from ano∣ther, by your being in several Ranks and Qualitys: For the Meaner sort of you, re to go in the foremost Divisions, they carrying their own Flambeauxs; and the etter sort of you are to go in the latter Divisions, with others to attend you with Flambeauxs: The whole Procession is to be all in White, (Saving the La∣dyes, Pages and Footmen) denoting Innocency and Peace in your Innoffencive Mirth; Singing all the way you go a new proper Song, to be made purposely for the Occasion; and the Musick playing all the way the same Tune. There will be five Champions in Armor, to go before their Respective Ladys: Bri∣tannia mighty Richly Attired, siting in an Open, Stately, Triumphal Chariot, to be drawn by Eight white Horses, Lead by Sixteen Grooms; and the other La∣dies in very Rich Apparel, siting in Four Distinct, Beautiful, Open Chariots, differing one from another, each of them to be Drawn by six white Horses, and Lead by Twelve Grooms, to each Set of Horses, in Liverry as before, and all the Chariots to be drawn without Coachmen or Postilians. There is to be Morris-Dancers and Anticks, with other strange Raritys. The Procession is to proceed thro' the Street, in regularly Order, from Algate to the Cathedral-Church of St. Pauls, so as to be there about Three of the Clock in the afternoon, to heare the Divine Service for that day, with a Congratulary Sermon to be Preached; and at the close thereof, Anthams also to be Sung before you, made Purpuse∣ly for the late Blessings received; when all this is ended, you are then to proceed
on to his Majesties Royal Palace-gate of White-Hall, or to Chairing-Cross, or St. James's Square, as you shall be directed. And when it begins to be duskish, then you are to light all your Fambeauxes, and not before, because they may the better hold out till all things are acted and done: For, at one of those places is to be erected a most Glori∣ous Throne, Illuminated all over, without and within, with an inumerable Number of Lights, & them within infinitely Multiplyed; where his Majesties Royal Heroick Ver∣tues are wrote in Capital Letters, with his Majesties Cyphers and Crownes, to be seen and Read, all in Glory; with the Sun also. When the Ladies Descend out of their Chariots, they are to Ascend the Throne, and to take their Places according to their Qualitys: The four Ladies are to sit under Britannia all in State; where the Ultimate Cerimony is to be performed on a large Stage, placed before the Throne. Gentlemen, The performance of this will be a grateful acknowledgment of the Dutiful Obedience you Justly owe unto his Majesties High and Princely Merits: And will let the World see, that you Seriously consider, and Thankfully own what his Majesty has done for his Subjects, and the great Blessing to this Nation in ge∣neral, and this Honourable City of London in particular, as in the following Instances. First, 'Twas Divine Providence that brought his Majesty over to us, to be our deliver from the then Impeding Slavery & Popery; and restore our Liberties & Properties. Secondly, By his Majesties Protecting us in our Religion; and his being, not only the Deffender of the Ptotestant Faith at Home, but a Broad also. Thirdly, For his Majesties Quelling of Scotland: And Reducing of Ireland, that might else have proved an utter Ruin to England: And the Fight fought by him at the Boyne, never to be forgotten. Fourthly, For the Miraculus Preservation of his Majesties Royal Person against Treasonable Practices, that were designed, both a Broad and at Home, to take away his most Sacred Life, purposely to Involue his Kingdoms into Confusion and Blood. Fifthly, For his Majesties frequent Crossing the Seas, whereby he kept a de∣structive War out of his Kingdoms. Sixthly, For his Majesties Safe Return Home with Glory, from the final end of this Dangerous War. Seventhly, For his Majesties Personal Valour and Prudent Conduct did force his Potent Enemy to Seek, and Yeild to an Honourable, Firm, and Lasting Peace, which his Majesty hath purchas'd with the often Hazards of his most Precious Life. If all these Valuable Considerations shall, as I suppose they will, press home up∣on you, so as to make the said Procession, it will Visible Demonstrate to the World the Joy, Zeal, and Affection you Stedfastly have, and bear to his Majesties Royal Person and Government; and it will, besides, be a great Honour to your City, and for your Selves, it will erect you an everlasting living Monument of Fame. Gentlemen, My Request is, That such of you as shall approve of this Laudable de∣sign of mine, will, with what convenient Speed you can, be pleased to repare to the Marine Coffee-House in Birching-Lane, near Cornhill, on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Fridays, from two of the Clock in the Afternoon, where Attendance shall be given, not only to shew the Scheme of the said Procession, which I have Drawn at large, but Likewise to Sign an Instrument to Impower me to Petition his Majesty, on your Behalfes, for his Royal Leave, whereby you may make the said Proces∣sion accordingly; and if you are Remote from thence, and your occasions cannot permit you to come thither, then I desire you, with those others you meet withal, that are Apprentices in any other part of the Town, to draw up such a pa∣per amongest your Selves, and sign it, to Impower me, as aforesaid, and send it by the Penny Post to the said Coffee-House for me, and as soon as I have Obtain∣ed Leave for your making the said Procession, I will give you Notice thereof in Print, and likewise what is further Requisit to be done, in Order to raise a Fund to Compleat the said design; and the Money so raised, to be disposed of, for the use aforesaid, by such Persons as shall be appointed by you. The more you are in Number, to make this Procession Prodigious, will make the Charge thereof both Light and Ease to you all. I am Your most Humble Servant Anthony Stampe The 31st of December, 1697. ONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers-Hall, 1697.
