T3054 E296_32 99861021 158675
A TRUE RELATION OF The taking of Sherborn-Castle. WITH Six hundred Prisoners, One thousand Arms, and great store of other Provisions. Sent in two Letters, The one, To the Right Honourable, WILLIAM LENTHALL Speaker of the House of Commons. And the other, To Edmund Prideaux and Dennis Bond, Esqs Members of the said House. COmmanded to be forthwith printed by the Hono∣rable, William Lenthall, Speaker of the House of COMMONS. Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons. Aug. 18. 1645.
A Copy of a Letter sent to the Honorable VVilliam Lenthall, Speaker of the House of Commons. SIR, SInce this Army came out into the Field, God hath done great things by it; I have been an eye-witnesse of them all; but in my judgement, this of Sherborn Castle (if God deliver it into our hands) as I hope he will within few hours, is not the least; which, by the Valour of our Commanders and Souldiers, in fourteen dayes time we gained ground of the Enemy by our approaches, and made Galleries close to the wall, Bridges over the Moats, and drive a Mine to the Foundation of the Wall, where they met with a Rock which lost us a
dayes time: Things being in this forwardnesse, Wednesday the 13. of August, the Country was Commanded to bring in Ladders to Scale the Walls and Out-works: The whole Cannon and Demy-Cannon were planted within twen∣ty yards of the Wall that night, (as on other nights) the Enemy had great lights of Torches Links, &c. on the end of the Pikes, to see if they could discover our Mine, or Works, and how our men stood, the better to shoot at them, and threw over fired Faggots, which (the first time they did it) fired our Bridge, but our Souldiers instantly quenched it, and saved the Bridge; our Souldiers and theirs discourse all night, throw stones each at other; our men tell lack Cab, that Prince Rupert is turned Sutler, and hath nothing left but strong drink to comfort him. Thurs∣day the 14. of August, about eleven of the Clock, our great Guns began to Batter the Wall be∣tween the two lesser Towers, and beat down one of the Towers, and before six at night made a Breach that twelve a breast might enter; But it was not held fit to fall on immediately; but the Generall (whose Person hath been too much hazarded in this businesse) sent in a
Drum with a third Summons to Surrender the Castle, that if we be put to Storm, they be left inexcuseable within. And a gap is opened in the Wall, for Sir Lewis Dives with some honour to come out, if he will, if he refuse, you will finde (so full of Revenge are our Soldiers against the Cabs in the Castle) that they will spare the life of none if they be put to Storm, and much ado we shall have to save them if it be Surren∣dred. The Drum is detained who was to re∣turn presently; the Lady Dives sends not to come out, though the Generall sent twice to of∣fer it, she may desire it too late; we being in much want of Canon and Demy-Canon Bul∣lets, were inforced to invite the Souldiers to leap off the Gallery, and go under the Wall and fetch back those Bullets that fell down, promi∣sing them six pence for every Canon Bullet, and four pence for lesser; and this day, though the Enemy pelted them with stones, they brought back about two hundred Canon, Demy-Ca∣non and Culve in shot, and had their reward duly paid them, and deservedly. I desire you to lose no time, but hasten down great shot, and all things necessary for Sieges to
some Port Town, that they may be sent for as need is. Sherborn, August 14. twelve at night. Since the writing hereof, about two of the Clock this morning, Sir Lewis sent out a Drum with this Message in writing: SIR, I Must acknowledge the advantage you have of me, by being Master of my walls, and that you may not think me obstinate without reason, I have sent this Drum unto you; to let you know, that if I may have such conditions from you, as is fit for a Soul∣dier and a Gentleman with honour to ac∣cept
of, I shall surrender this Castle into your hands: otherwise, I shall esteem it a far greater happinesse to bury my bones in it, and the same Resolution have all those that are with me. And give me leave to adde this, that your victory will be Crowned with more honour by granting it, then you will gain glo∣ry by the winning it with the losse of so much blood as it will cost, Sherborn Castle Aug. 15. 1645. I am your servant, Lewis Dives. What answer will be returned, I know not, I conceive if they have Quarter for their lives, it will be all that will be granted them; for some time this day the businesse will be decided by Conditions or a Storm; but to have Honorable Conditions is too late to aske. Sherborn this 15. of Aug. 1645. 3. in the morning.
To his Honoured Friends, Edm: Prideaux, and Dennis Bond, Esqs these present. Honoured Sirs, YOu may be assured Sherborn Castle is Surrendred upon mercy for their lives; few men slain by the violence of the Souldier, and as few left unstript, the Souldiers Plunder merrily: This is a place of great consequence, the Lord be praised we have taken it; our Souldiers fight valiantly, In hast I rest Your most humble servant, Jo: Bingham. Sherborn Castle Aug. 15. 1645. There were taken six hundred priso∣ners, a thousand Arms, with a great deal of provisions, and other houshold-stuffe. FINIS.
