W2114 E413_1 99863966 116184
SECVNDA PARS, De COMPARATIS COMPARANDIS: Seu Justificationis Regis CAROLI, comparatè, contra Parliamentum. Or the second part of Things compared, &c. Wherein (according to the Authors promise in his first part of this subject) is at large declared, the egregious in∣justice and oppression, arbytrarie and violent acts and practises, and the palpable violation of the Laws and Li∣berties of this Nation, by certain unfaithful, wicked men in this present Parliament, contrary to their Covenant and Protestation, the end of their ele∣ction, and the Trust by their Countries repo∣sed in them. And whatsoever is not here accomplished, shall (God willing) be fulfilled in the next. AMON WILBEE. Isaiah 1. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of Thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the Fatherless, neither doth the cause of the Widdow come before them. Vertimur in Gyro. Parve nec invideo, sine me liber ibis in Ʋrbem: Hei mihi quod Domino, non licet ire tuo. Printed at OXFORD, 1647.
FRiends and fellow-Commoners of England, ye may remember that in my first part of this subject, called Prima pars de comparatis comparandis, seu Iustifica∣tionis Regis Caroli comparate contra Parliamentum, Page 27. of that book, I promised (by Gods help) first to shew you how the King had made us amends, so far as lay in him, for the oppressions and abuses we had suffered by his evil instru∣ments: the which I then did, as ye may there read. Then, 2. To manifest unto you certain particular actions of injustice, fraud, oppression, and violence, of treason, breach of trust, and the usual abberrations and violation of our Laws and Liberties, &c. by certain members of both Houses of Parliament, and through the influence of an evil party there. The chief, Authors and Actors whereof, I then gave you in that my first part 1 and now purpose (God willing) to prosecute in this my second. Of which prepo∣sterous and illegitimate actions, I have already given you some testimonies and examples in my first part, and that my Treatise of Plain Truth without fear or flattery: and do now determine here to dilate and further exemplifie. This second part I know hath been long expected: And truly hopes and expectation of a plenary redress by publick and im∣partial justice according to the Representations and Declarations of the Army, hath principally with-held my pen until this time, from publishing what I then promised. But finding that justice is still driven backward, and that truth cannot yet enter, by reason that the wicked are yet in power, yea and that some of her pro∣fessed champions seek still to keep her out of dores: I could not (notwithsTanding the late new thundering Ordinance) but accor∣ding to my engagement to my Countrey, adventure my self once again within the list, to fulfil my word. That in horrour of the evil acts I shall declare, the whole Land may yet at length as one man (vis unita fortior) stir up themselves to have justice im∣partially executed, upon the great and mighty, aswel as the small
and mean, and that the eminent Actors and Obstructers thereof, who stand still as great mountains and Oaks in the way, may be removed and hewn down, for untill this be done, there neither will nor can be any firm peace established, or true judgement executed in the Land. And now for the further manifestation of Acts of injustice, The sham∣full iniu∣stice, disho∣nesty, and oppression of Mr. Ro∣ger Hill. fraud, oppression and violence &c. I will instance you an exam∣ple of Mr Roger Hill, a Member of the House of Commons, and Chair-man of the Committee for Sequestrations at Haberdashers Hall in London. After Lieut. Collonel Penfound Corey, Captain Henry Thornton, and others, had been long in that hard and pe∣rilous service at Lyme; they left the Garison and came to London, with other Commanders, Major Shepherd, Capt. Iames Small∣peece, and one Capt. William Pease, to get some of their Arrears toward their subsistance. And being in exigency and distresse, they Petitioned the Parliament for payment of some of their pay, who commended them to the Committee of Haberdashers Hall, where they obtained an Order that they should have the Moiety, or one half part, of all such Papists and Delinquents estates as they should discover, or procure to be discovered, toward the payment of their Arrears. Hereupon they agreed with Cap. Pease, an Inhabitant in Town, that he should disburse 20. pounds to fol∣low the businesse, for payment whereof, they gave Mr Pease a bond of 40. pounds. Then did Mr Broughton of the Crowne Office, discover unto them a judgement of 460. pounds recovered in the Kings bench, against Iohn Fortescue Esquire, and Kathrine his wife, for her recusancy; which discovery, they made known to the aforesaid Committee, who liked well of it, and willed them to bring them a Copy of the Judgement, and there should be a Sequestration made of it: wbereupon they desired the Com∣mittee to commend them to some Councel, and they directed them to wait on this Mr Hill the Chair-man, who undertooke and promised to assist them with directions and advice: and the next morning they went to him to his Chamber in the Temple, and offered him a Fee, which he refused, Note and compare this, with what fol∣lows. saying, I cannot take a Fee, for I am one of the Judges in the case. (And I wish that other his brethren in the House, that sit as Judges, did not use it.) The next day the Gentlemen carryed a copy of the Judgement to the
Committee, who presently made a Sequestration of it: but now Observe. observe the hypocricie of this pretendingly conscientious Mr Hill, who even now would not accept a Fee, because he was a Judge in the case. On the next day morn, (being Thursday) he took a Fee of Mr Fortescue, against whom the Judgement was signed, and Sequestration made for his wifes recusancie, and mo∣ved for him at the Kings Bench barre, falsly suggesting, that the Judgement was surreptitiously and illegally gotten, and thereup∣on it was ordered by the Court, that the Gentlemen should shew the Legallity of the Judgement, the which they did by Mr Re∣corder Glyn, Mr Bradshaw, and Mr Rich, (to their no small charge) and this shamelesse Mr Hill, Mr Maynard, Mr Har∣vey, and more, were entertained by Fortescue, to argue the case against them: (thus doe these kinde of Caterpillers, like Tinkers make work one for another, deviseing nothing but to consume men by contention, for their own accursed gain) but the Judgement was confirmed, and then the Gentlemen re∣pared againe to the Committee, who confirmed the Seque∣stration: and upon the seizing of one Master Fortescues hou∣ses in Lincolns Inn fields, by vertue of the same, they found a letter written by Master Bailes the Councel, to Master For∣tescue, giving him advertisement, that if hee was Seque∣stered at Haberdashers Hall, hee was remedilesse; but if hee could get the businesse put to common Law, he would tire out the Captains) an advice and resolution I confesse sutable to a man of his Conscience and Vocation) for which Mr Fortescue upon the back of the Letter returned him thanks for having such a care of his businesse, but told him, he need not trouble himselfe about it: Note this. for his very good friend Mr. Hill had undertaken, that nothing should be done in Haberdashers Hall (which ac∣cordingly proved true) for the businesse was through Hills in∣direct and injust means and practises, put by that Committee to the Committee for the Revenue, and by them to the Exchequer; where it now lies. The poor Gentlemen spent in the prosecuti∣on hereof above 100. pounds, and at last were utterly dis-ap∣pointed and defeated by the injustice, oppression, and false deal∣ing of the same Hill, (who pretended at first to be their friend, and so great justice, as not to take a Fee, because a Judge in the
case.) Thus ye see ye people of England, that instead of assisting these well-deserving gentlemen, (who had adventured their dearest blood for the Parliament and the publique) to part of their Pay to buy them bread; he most injustly (contrary to his Oath, Trust, and Duty of his place,) protected a Papist and De∣linquent, brought the distressed gentlemen into an expensive vex∣atious suit of Law, & a labyrinth of trouble, even to some of their undoing. For Captain Thornton and Captain Smallpeece were afterwards (for want of these monies) both sued by Pease, for the twenty pounds he disbursed in the businesse for them, and were laid up in Prison, upon execution for it, (to wit) Mr Thornton in the Fleet, and Mr Smallpeece in the Marshalseas. Nor is it to bee doubted but he that proved himselfe so notoriously dishonest and injust in this thing, hath been likewise in many o∣thers. Mr Henry Pelham of Grayes Inne, a Member of the House of The sini∣ster & un∣iust practi∣ses of Mr Pelham. Commons, and one of the Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations, one of the Judges in cases of Appeal upon Se∣questrations, and sometimes Chair-man in absence of Mr Samn∣el Brown, another of the same stamp, did usually for Fees (or ra∣ther Bribes) advise and assist Delinquents in geting off their Se∣questrations: He drew their Petitions, and countenanced their Causes, for his own private Lucre and advantage, taking of some twenty, some forty shillings, of some fifty, of some three pound, of some more for Fees: Are these things just and meet, actions be∣coming the Trustees of a Kingdom, men, called Senatours, Par∣liament men, Judges of the supreme Court of England? I am cer∣tain that by the Law of the Land, no Judge of any other Court, is in any cause or case, to receive Fee or reward, or to give coun∣cel assistance, or advice; much lesse then sure, (a minore ad ma∣jus) ought the Judges of the supreme Court of the Kingdome which prescribes Lawes to, and Judges of all other Courts, to do any such thing. Yet so transcendently injust is the whole Tribe of the covetuous contentious Lawyers in the House of Com∣mons, and every where, wheresoever any of them are in the Committees. They are the only men indeed that increase our burthens, and strengthen our cords of bondage, to inrich them∣selves and raise their own families, whose ill-gotten estates and
contracted greatnesse, (like the cankered wealth and glory of the Citizens and Clergy) may be observed seldome to continue (I am sure not in their splendour) unto the third heir. And here give me leave to deviate a little more in commendation of the Parliaments of Scotland, A wise provision. which admit of no professed Law∣yer to be a member of Parliament: but certain most judicious in their Lawes and customes, are chosen and appointed by the Par∣liament, to give their attendance in a by roome, as our Judges and Masters of Chancery do in the house of Peers; to whom in any point of Law or Custom, which is difficult, the Parliament repairs to (or calls for) for solution: but no Lawyer there hath either interest in voting, or Law-making. For it must needs be conceived that a bitter tree can yeeld nothing but bitter fruit. And it is the nature of the Salamander to love and live in the fire, the which, that it may never dy or be extinguisht, is his de∣sire: and I would to God hat the same firie nature and disposition, was not in this turbulent and Peace-troubling generation: I could wish therefore that we should rather imitate our brethren in this and some other points of their civil customs, then become their Apes in erecting their inslaving Presbyterian Kirk govern∣ment over our Consciences. But to returne to Mr Pelham and the rest of his brethren in the house of Commons; who sit as Judges, and yet will receive Fees, and be Lawyers and pleaders in the same cases. As no man can serve two Masters, so these men cannot be honest and discharge their trust as Judges and servants to the Kingdom, and neverthelesse become servants and mercina∣ries in the same cases, for money and reward to delinquents and offenders. No it is impossible: but thus hath the Kingdom been cosened and abused, the Enemies thereof and trespassers and trans∣gressors protected and emboldened, the great and mighty though most guilty for reward, have escaped unpunished, whereas the mean and poor man who hath not been able to give a Fee or gra∣tifie, though much lesse guilty, and more innocent; hath been grownd and crusht to peeces. To the Committee for the reliefe of Glocester, where Mr Pu∣ry, Strange deceitfull dealing by the Com∣mitte for Glocester. was Chair-man, there were certain Trunks of Sr Iohn Saltan∣stalls a Delinquent, then with the King at Oxford, discovered to be in the house of one Mr Wheeler a Parliament man (the which
Mr Wheeler if he had been true to his trust, ought himselfe to have discovered) in which Trunks amongst many other things of va∣lue, there was found a bond made from one Mr Say of Kent, Mr Sands, and Mr Sands, of 1000. l. penaltie, for the payment of five hundred pounds, which had been so many years due, as that the debt and interest thereupon accrued, amounted to above nine hundered pounds: Mr Say was a responsible man, and well able to pay: but Mr Iohn Stephens one of this Committee, and a Member of the House of Commons, was indebted to this Master Say, fifty pounds, so that the Committee compoun∣ded this debt with Say, for fifty pounds onely that ever was taken notice of, and how the rest was disposed or determined of, is yet unknown. Say had a Release from the Bond, the which is a bar in Law to both the Sandses. by which means, neither the com∣mon wealth nor the Owner of the debt had any benefit of it, but were both defrauded. And yet the seizure was made for the use of the publique, and at that time was the Garison of Glocester di∣stressed for want of monies: but I have ever observed that this kinde of men did ever prefer their own ends, were they never so unreasonable and unjust, before the necessities of the publique, were they never so great and urgent, propounding alway the ur∣gency of the publique necessities, principally to get the Countries monies to fill their own purses. There have been too many such examples as this, to the dolefull defrauding of the publique, and destroying of the subject. Here in this perticular there was no lesse then eight hundred pounds swallowed at once, for (as I re∣member) by the Ordinance no Committee hath power to com∣pound for any debt; and I am not so stupid, nor is my faith so weak, as to beleeve a Parliament man so charitable to any, or so farre out of love with mony as to remit eight hundred pounds where it is to be had. I could tell you of such another peece of justice done through the means of Serjeant Wylde, upon the Sequestration of ten thou∣sand pounds of the Lord Byrons, in Sr Iohn Stonyers hands; but I will not here be too tedious, and therefore I will referre it to an∣other Here fol∣lows Mr Miles Corhet his iniu∣stice and breach of trust. time and place. There was one Thomas Auger a Cannonier of the Kings ap∣prehended in London, and brought before the Committee for Ex∣aminations,
whereof Mr Corbett was then Chair-man; where it was proved that Auger had confessed he had once kindled a fire in London, which took not effect as he expected, and that hee said He hoped before such a time, to kindle a greater fire, and more effectual, in the City. Neverthelesse Mr Corbett dischar∣ged him, contrary to the duty of his place, the trust reposed in him and the Covenant. Whereas the Lords and Commons by three severall Declara∣tions, Miles Corbet his iniustice double dealing and ob∣struction of Iu∣stice. the first on Ian. 21. 1642. the second on April 18. 1643. the third on May 30. 1643. upon his Majesties Proclamations for removing the Termes to Oxford, doe amongst other things Declare and Order that no Iudgement, Decree, Order or Pro∣ceedings whatsoever, which should be given, made, or had, by or in, any of the Kings Courts so removed out of their usual places (the usuall place for keeping whereof was at Westminster,) should binde any person that should or might be concerned therein, with∣out his own voluntary consent, and that they the said Lords and Commons, would by the authority of both Houses of Parliament protect and keep indempnified all Iudges, Officers and other persons, from any dammage or inconvenience that should or might happen to them for yeelding obedience to the said Ordinance. Notwithstanding all which severall Ordinances, One Sr Ste∣phen Scott plantiff in an unjust and false bill exhibited by him, in Chancery, against one Georger Morgan, to which Mr Morgan put in a plea and Demurrer which was never over-ruled; went afterwards to Oxford, and obtained an Order from the Lord Lit∣tleton, then Lord Keeper, for decreeing the matter against Mor∣gan, and it was accordingly done, to the value of two thousand pounds: and the decree afterwards injustly sealed at Westminster by Mr Prideaux his iniustice: but of him more at large in another place. Mr Prideaux, without hearing the matter or merrits of the cause: upon which unjust decree, so illegally and unjustly obtain∣ed and sealed, Mr Morgan now lyeth prisoner in the Fleet. Which Order so obtained by Scott at Oxford, for passing the Decree, con∣trary to the aforesaid Ordinances, Mr Morgan shewed to Mr Cor∣bett, and petitioned the Committee for Examinations severall times, (Corbett being Chair-man) for Justice and Redresse ac∣cording to the said Ordinances, that he might be kpt indempni∣fied, and Scott punished for his contempt of the Parliaments au∣thority,
and for his Delinquency: Note this noto∣rious violation of our liberties. But Mr Corbett would not so much as suffer his Petition to be read or proceeded upon, nor yeeld him any reliefe therein: yea his man said that his Master commanded him to burn it. So that ye may observe, here was For there is Iu∣stitta punient, & iustitia resuruens: so a contrario. double injustice (besides willfull obstruction in the way of Justice) first in not punishing the Delinquent and Couremner of the Parliaments Ordinances. 2ly In not protecting and keeping indempnified the injured and obedient, according to the Ordinances: yet this Miscreant agravated the transgressions of o∣thers that had gone to Oxford about their Law businesse, and was most austere and severe against them: yea it will be proved that Scott Mark I pray. confessed Corbet gave him leave to go to Oxford; and it is more then probable, because he was so indulgent to him, and would not admit of any complaint against him. Now is not this a brave Parliament man? More I could say concerning this man, but I have many things concerning many to denote, of large cir∣cumstance and eminent consequence, therefore I will now thus pretermit this man and this matter, and come to others of like nature. Sr Thomas Walsingham Knight, one of the corrupt Members Sr Thomas Walsin∣ghams abomina∣ble iniustice, vio∣lence, and op∣pression practi∣sed against Mr Ramsey, violating all law and equi∣ty. of the House of Commons, having injustly and illegally got a great estate of one Mr Robert Ramseys into his hands, hath by vi∣olence and indirect practises to prevent his recovery of it, kept Mr Ramsey prisoner in the Fleet, and elsewhere, above these eleven years, by vertue of a false Decree, indirectly obtained against him by default, in the Court of Exchequer, when Mr Ramsey was sick in his bed, and in danger of death; and that there was no Coun∣cel then there to speak or plead for him: Nor was hee or any Councel for him ever heard therein. The suit beeing for some profits of Lands pretended to bee escheated for want of an heir, which said lands were devised by a Will proved by sufficient witnesses, and charged with severall Annuities for 40. l. years, or severall lifes, if they so long lived: and the said Anmities were heretofore accordingly paid by Mr Ramsey, according to the de∣vice and Tenour of the Will, and intent of the Testarour, and a Decree obtained for the confirmation of them in Chancery; which Devise (as it was proved in the high Court of Chancery) should and ought to have been conveyed by the said heir unto Mr
Ramsey: But Sr Thomas Walsingham, during the suit, contrary to the Statute, bought the said Lands in reversion (being so char∣ged as aforesaid) of him who was heir at Law, and hath ever since kept them in possession, and received the whole profits thereof to his own use: (which profits were and ought to have been paid to∣ward the satisfying of the said Annuities.) Hereupon Mr Ramsey procured a hearing of the businesse before a Committee of the House of Peers, viz. the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Say and Seal, Lord Brook, Lord Roberts, the Bishop of Durham, and the then Bishop of Lincoln, which Lords seemed then very zealous for the glory of God and relief of the oppressed. But quantum mutati ab illis. Who after hearing of Councel on both sides, their Lordships were fully satisfyed of the justness of Mr Ramseys cause: whereupon Mr Ramseys Council moved for his dammage and Reparations, and they thereupon tooke three dayes to consider of it, at the end of which Mr Ramsey attended without Councel (be∣ing so advised by his Councel, because he conceived it needlesse, and the cause to be past doubt, except only in point of Dammage and reparation) at which time nor one of the said Lords which were of the said Committee did then meet, but only the Bishop of Lincoln, who was then in a little private roome beyond the Lords house, with the Earl of Bristol, the Earl of Dover, the Earl of Bath, the Earl of Lyndsey, and the Bishop of Exon, who were all meer strangers to Mr Ramseys cause: before whom when Mr Ramsey was called in, albeit there was no report then made in the cause, nor Vote in the House thereupon, or Declaration of the said Committee of Lords therein, the which there ought to have been before any further or small Order in the same. The Bishop of Lincoln instead of relieving Mr Ramsey with damage and Re∣paration (as by the Committee of Lords which heard his cause was ineded) did then by his owne extrajudiciall Order, re∣command Mr Ramsey again prisoner to the Fleet, and ordered the said false Decree to stand good untill Mr Ramsey should re∣verse it by course of Law, the which Mr Ramsey hath never since been able to do, by reason of the power and wicked combination of Walsingham, with the Warden of the prison, who hath injust∣ly and contrary to Law, denyed Mr Ramsey liberty to go forth to prosecute his businesse: and although Mr Ramsey hath since
the aforesaid Order caused Sr Tho. Walsingham to be served with a processe to appear, and filed a bill of review against him, in the Court of Exchequer, to the end hee might reverse his injust De∣cree, yet cannot Mr Ramsey proceed any further therein against him without license from the House of Commons, because he is priviledged as a member thereof, who hath since by his power and indirect practice removed the said cause from before the Lords to the House of Commons (conceiving himself the better a∣ble to shelter himself there: A pure age, and a pure Parliament, when the supreme Court for Justice is made the sanctuary of inju∣stice and injust persons) and there endevoured at the Committee for Examinations to have had the Note here the vi∣olence and impu∣dence of this Par∣liament man. Decree taken as it was, and not to be heard upon the merrits of the cause; and then as wicked∣ly and injustly, without any cause, he pressed for a Sequestration of Mr Ramseys office in the Court of Wards, for satisfying the said Decree: and neverthelesse he had at that instant 900. l. of Rents of Mr Ramseys in his hands, which he had received with∣out any right or colour for the said Lands: and the whole sum of mony so injustly Decreed against Mr Ramsey was onely 552. l. 14. s. and therefore his demand of having Mr Ramses Office sequestered to satisfie his Decree, was so much the more unrea∣sonable, and injust, and as unreasonable, conscientiouslesse, and injust, (for that he hath neer double, as you see the sum mention∣ed in the decree, in his hands of Mr Ramseys) is his keeping of Mr Ramsey under pretence of satisfying the decree so long and close a prisoner as he hath been; yet so palpable and grosse hath been the oppression and injustice of this wicked Parliament man; (and I wish he hath no fellows, but I fear it may generally be spo∣ken of them, as the Fox said sometime by his Cubs, If there be one good, there is never a bad.) And note I pray that it hath ever been the study and endeavour of the Deceiver and Oppressour, not on∣ly to rob and spoil a man of his goods and estate, but utterly to disable and destroy him whom he hath injured and undon, that so the party oppressed nor his children may ever be able, for his cru∣elty and injustice to question him, an accursed practise too famili∣arly and frequently used in these pernicious times, wherein for the most part every man is become Homini Lupus, and that there is no love of Truth or Justice. And although Mr Ramsey
hath endevoured by all means possible to obtain an hearing, hee never could; being alway obstructed & prevented by the power, cunning, and indirect courses and contrivances of Sr Thomas Wal∣singham: Nay, such hath been the unparelled malice violence and injustice of this man Sr Thomas against Mr Ramsey, that after Mr Ramsey was removed from the Fleet to the Kings Bench, by the knavery and means of the Warden of the Fleet and his man Revet, (that Revett the Clark Fox and wolf who hath devoured more harmlesse Sheep then his skin and life are worth) he procured of Sr William Middleton (then Marshall of that prison) liberty to goe abroad, the which Sr Thomas Walsingham taking notice of caused him to be arrested and carried again to prison, and there without any just cause, or lawfull authority, to be by the Warden of the Fleet, kept close prisoner in his chamber for two years space together, during which close imprisonment, and by means whereof Mr Ramsey had his Letters of Administration, by vertue of which (and some certain Deeds, he had beene for 12. yeers then past possessed of lands to the value of 700. l. per annum (appertaining to the same estate Walsingham hath now of his in his hands) surreptitiously vacated in the Court of Delicates, and new ones granted to others strangely, for want of liberty to go to Councel and to the Court to answer Allegations, and so he hath ever since been dispossed of the said 700. l. a yeere, and had it injustly detained from him: whereas Mr Ramsey had before answered sive severall Bills for the same in Chancery, and four in the Prerogative Court and prevail∣ed in them all, against the same persons pretenders: who before now for want of these Letters of Administration, (which till now they could never obtain) had not the least ground or colour of ti∣tle or claim to found or commence any suit at equity or Law up∣on. But having now thus indirectly obtained Mr Ramseys Let∣ters of Administration to be rovoked after his 12. yeers, continued Administration and Possession of the said Lands, and themselves to be admitted Administrators: they immediately by vertue and colour of their surrepted Administratourship, exhibited a Bill in Chancery against Mr Ramsey concerning the same 700. l. per an∣num land, which Bill Mr Ramsey by reason of his close impri∣sonment, could never answer, nor be so much as admitted to have sit Councel come to him to take his answer; for want whereof
(contrary to all Law, as appears 15. H. 6. ch. 4. justice and equity) the Bill was taken Pro confesso, and decreed against him to his ir∣repairable dammage: notwithstanding he had (as abovesaid) an∣swered five severall Bills before in Chancery, for the same Lands, and been Victor in all: By vertue of which last unjust Decree, Mr Ramsey had also some of his Trunks violently taken out of his Lodging, carried away by strangers and broken open, he knoweth not by whom, nor where they be, nor what he lost: and others of his Trunks in another place, were under pretence of an Order to search for writings (which were falsly sworn to be there, by a seditious woman who followed the cause, and had a share in the profit) all of them opened and searched: all which fore-menti∣oned notorious detriment and destruction hapning to Mr Ramsey (in the revocation of the Letters of Administration, and obtain∣ing of the said last unjust Decree, for want of an answer, taking a∣way of his Trunks, carrying them away by force, and rifling them, to the value of 700. l. yeer land, besides what they had in the Trunks) by Sr Thomas Walsinghams unjust, illegall, barba∣rous and inhumane close imprisonment, and his confederacy and conspiracy, with the Warden of the Fleet and Revett his Clark, ought in conscience, Law, and reason, to be repaired and satisfy∣ed, by the said Sr Thomas, the Warden, and Revett, or one of them: forasmuch as they have all combined to destroy him, as will more manifestly appear in convenient time. Yet here nei∣ther ceased the prosecution of injustice by this unreasonable man Walsingham, against Mr Ramsey, nor his sufferings by reason thereof: For after all this, this restlesse Imp Walsingham cunning∣ly imployed one Like cause like means, and like prosecutor like instrument. Ballard, a notorious person, eminent for re∣presenting (as I am informed) in his own person five severall wit∣nesses, in five severall disguizes, by five severall Names, in one and the self same cause in Star-chamber) to treat with Mr Ramsey and compound the difference with him; the which because Mr Rams. refused, Note still the mans violence, & presumption, continuation and aggravations of iniustice: yer hee is not alone, for the land swarmes with the like ver∣ Ballard threatned him, and said he would repent it when it was too late, and that he should see within two daies: and ac∣cordingly the next morning, by a warrant indirectly obtained by Sr Thomas Walsingham (and as unjustly by Corbet granted) Mr Ramsey was plundered (or in old English Robbed) of all the mo∣ny he had to maintain himself and children in prison; since which
he findeth that he had then taken from him in Gold and Silver, about 190. l. and what besides he knoweth not; of which he could never recover one penny, nor had one farthing restored to this day. Concerning which illegall Arbitrarie Order, and Act upon it, Iniustice upon in iustice. Mr Ramsey could never obtain a hearing, though he sought it earnestly. At last Mr Ramsey coming unexpectedly before the Committee for Examinations, concerning Sr Thomas his iniust Decree, at such time as the Committee was not composed and packt to Sr Thomas his minde: he was by Sr Thomas his subtilety put Observation they iuggle. off unto another day, that he might in the interim sit the Committee for his purpose (as by the sequel appears) For when Mr Ramsey appeared again before the same Committee, Mr Whi∣takers (a Bird of the same feather) who was then Chair-man, in∣stead of hearing Mr Ramseys cause, and doing him justice, asked him why hee did not satisfie that Decree? Mr Ramsey desired a day to be heard upon the merrit of the cause, with Councel, and then hee should understand the cause, why hee would not perform the Decree: See what a con∣currance here is between these 2. iniust persons Walsingham and Whitakers. The which Whitakers refused, and abso∣lutely refused to hear Mr Ramseys Councels therein; saying hee would take the cause as he found it. But least Mr Whetakers should make a false report upon it to the House (as he did in the businesse against Sr Iohn Lenthall and others) Mr Ramsey left with him. Petition to be delivered to the House, with exceptions in writing against the said Decree, desi∣ring that he would deliver them when hee made his report upon the same, if hee made any: all which Mr Whitakers promised faithfully to do: yet Mr Ramsey doubting his performance (as he had just cause) procured Mr. Gimston another member of the House of Commons, to take a petition of his besides with him, to the House dayly, to bee presented if any report was made: but in a long time there was nothing done: wherefore Mr Ramsey addressed himself to a special Committee appointed by the House of Commons to hear grievances, in whom Mr. Ramsey did See how one knave assists ano∣ther to destroy the innocent and pervart Iustice. conceive the power of the House did reside, and there by his Councel moved for relief, and the 7. of November was appointed for a day of hearing: But Sr Thomas Walsingham did that very day in the fore-noon, when as the cause was to have been heard in the afternoon, Notorious fals∣hood and iniu∣stice. procured a report to be made of it for him, by
Mr Whitakers in the House of Commons, unknown to Mr Ram∣sey: and then Mr Whitakers most vilely and wickedly contrary to his promise (but if oaths and Covenants will not binde men, what will?) concealed and suppressed Mr Ramseys petition, and exceptions, purposely to perplex and precepitate the cause: by which means Sr Thomas Walsingham The House abu∣sed into Iniustice, by Mr Whitakers false report. Is he not therefore pu∣nishable? obtained an Order of the House for satisfying the said Decree; yet was not Mr Ramsey so much as called thereunto, or heard therein; and thus also was his hearing before the Committee of Grievances, (which should have been that day in the afternoon) utterly prevented and made frustrate: But this miscreant Sr St Tho. insatiable∣nesse in his op∣pressive & iniust wayes. Thomas being not yet satisfyed with rapine, nor glutted with injustice and oppression, thirsted for Mr Ramseys office of Clark of the Liveries in the Court of Wards, as Ahab did after Naboths Vineyard, thinking (as it seems) Mr Ramsey had yet too much left to live on; and having hitherto failed in getting the Office sequestered, and wanting a device and Agent to accomplish it, as Naboth did, the Devil helps him to one, and who more ready to obey illegall commands, and ex∣ecute injustice, then extorting Goalers? so he combines and con∣trives with Mr Hopkins now Warden of the Fleet, for keeping Mr Ramsey again close prisoner, alledging he had better have gi∣ven the Warden 200. l. then that he should have given Mr Ram∣sey that one dayes liberty to go abroad. (And is it not horrid that a man must not only be injustly cast into prison, but cruelly im∣prisoned within a prison, and contrary to all Law of God, Nature, and Nations, and all rule of equity and conscience, be restrained from going abroad to see to his estate, and seeke for redresse? O how long shall these Harpeys, these House Tyrants, these Men∣destroying Goalers, be suffered thus to transgresse the Lawes of the Land, to the ruine and destruction of the Free-born subjects, upon illegall Orders or Warrants, and upon great mens private words and commands; and which is worse (as they do dayly) to Witnesse Mr Ereze and Mr Ro∣bins, who are now both kept close meerly for the Warden and Re∣vets pleasure. satisfie their own wicked and injust wills and humours?) This cruel and illegall act being thus effected, and Mr Ramsey (to plea∣sure Sr Thomas) kept up close by the Warden, without any legall (though he so pretended) Warrant or Authoritie. Note I beseech you. Sr Thomas moves the Court of Wards before the Lord Say and Seal, then Master there, and the Atturny, for a Sequestration of Mr Ramseys
office, because he did not attend it; and yet he had so contrived that Mr Rams. neither could or should awend it: a damnable combinati∣on and project: Vpon which motion and impious falsly pretended allegation (even as Ziba wickedly did to David against Mephibe∣sheth (Mr Ramsey was dispossessed of his Office, and disseized of his Freehold by Arbitrary power and grearnes, without any Bil, Information, or Indictment preferred against him, tryall or con∣viction of him, according to the Law and Custom of the Land, contrary to the Great Charter of England, and Petition of Right, and the Liberty and priviledge of every Free born English man: and then was the Office conferred upon one Mr Young one of the Clarks of the Office, who did answer the profits thereof to St Thomas. And now all ye friends and Free men of England, if this Sr Thomas Walsingham and the others before named, and such as these, be meet and sit persons to be intrusted by us, with our Lawes, Lives, and Estates, and Liberties, and all that is neer and deer to us, as to our outward being and to sit as Parliament men, and to be Judges over us and all that is ours: Do ye judge? Ac∣count for their injustice and breach of Trust; and hence for∣ward be more wise and judicious in your elections, and chuse not Vipers instead of Pellicans. And now if any suspect the truth of all this Torrent of Oppression, violence and injustice of this wor∣thy Member (as they are usually called) of the House of Commons, Sr Th. Wals. Mr Rams, is ready and will when-soever called upon his Corporall Oath, yea by sufficient Testimony, upon perill of his life, prove and justifie it, and much more also of like nature. One Mrs White, wife of Mr Ioha White, sometime Secretary to Another instance of Sr Tho. Walsin∣gham his arbitra∣ry and iniust acti∣ons. the Earl of Dorset, who came home upon the Articles at Oxford, and was admitted to his Composiion, beeing lawfully possessed of her own house in Eltham Park in Kent, upon which her hus∣band had expended many hundred pounds: This Sr Thomas af∣ter he had by indirect practises got her husband into prison, (his trade as ye have heard with M. Rams.) on the 18. of Feb. last, came with the High Sheriffe of the County, the high Constable and o∣thers, and by force broke open Mr. Whites Chamber dores upon her, and told her, that if she would not go out of her House, they would turn her out, and did bid some in his company carry her out. She good Gentlewoman, both told and shewed them by
what authority she was there, conceiving that that in reason would have satisfyed them: Notwithstanding they nailed up her dores upon her, so that none with her could go out, or any come in, un∣to her, and gave strickt Order and command that neither she nor any with her, should have any Good Christian usage, & wel-be∣fitting one that is chosen a Patri∣ot of his Coun∣trey. meat, drink, or fireing, and left a guard of 6. men, armed with Swords and Muskets (which were releived every 12. or 24. hours) to watch night and day, and see his inhumane and heathenish commands fulfilled, endeavouring thereby to starve her out or her possession: (which of them would be at half, yea any charge or trouble, yea or improve their autho∣rity according to their duty, to restore a man oppressed, or by force expelled, to his own?) which injust commands were by his Buf∣fens so stricktly and exactly performed, that for 28. dayes shee could not prevail Was not this more barbarous, then congruous to Law, or Iu∣stice? for one cup of cold water, nor so much fire as would light a candle. After these 28. dayes were ended, shee was permitted to receive any thing up to her by a rope, and some∣times by a Ladder: but finding that some persons of honour and quality came to see her, the Ladder was taken away: and now finding they could not prevail by extremity; upon the 24. of May last, they used down-right blowes, and about ten men with swords and other weapons, (by Sr Thomas his own Order yee may be sure, for mauy of them were his own servants) broke o∣pen the dores, which they had before nailed up, and by force of Arms, and with much insolence, barbarously dragged Mrs White and those which were with her, out of her House, and exposed her to the wide world. Now if force and arms in such cases, without any just Right to a mans estate, or Legal processe awarded, bee a Parliament mans means and method to maintain the Law of the Land, and the pro∣priety and Liberty of the Subject (as they have protested and de∣clared) my desires shall be to live rather under a Patroone in Turkey, then under the power of those called (though falsly) Pa∣trons of my Countrey; or to inhabit amongst the rude Savages, who have neither the knowledge of God, nor form of Law or rule of Government, rather then to abide under the power of an English Parliament, the which in its own pure and primitive con∣stitution, is most admirable and Honourable, but through the cor∣ruption and accursed deprivation thereof, by those dregs of hu∣mane-kinde, is now become most odible and counterrptible. And
I pray you observe, that all this mans Law and Justice, is close im∣prisonment, violence, cruelty, oppression and force, and all by reason of his power, as a Parliament man: O degenerate man! to pervert so sacrid a power and constitution: such a Senatour as he hath made himself eminent by injustice, would bee made emi∣nently exemplary by Justice. Fiat Iusticia ruat Coelum. I could cite you such another peece of Justice, executed by the Col. and Captain Purefoy, and Mr Allen. Purefoyes in point of another mans possession in the County of Warwick: and the like of Mr Allen a Parliament man, and a pretending Independant, against one Mr Stephenson here in Lon∣don; whom Mr Allen hath injustly shut up prisoner in the Fleet, and by force contrary to Law driven out of his possession. What∣soever he professeth, I will maintain and justifie, he hath falcifyed his trust to the publique, and willfully done acts illegally, uncon∣scionable and unjust, to the violation of the Lawes and destructi∣on (so far forth as in him lies) of our liberties and proprieties: contrary to the end of his election, the Covenant and protestation. And truly with sorrow of heart I speak it (because truth and true Godlinesse, and all such as are of an upright heart, suffer by it:) Many of late time, because the people called Independents have had a general repute of religious and honest, have professed them∣selves the same, and seemed to affect and adhere to that party, whereby they have gained themselves good credit and esteem, but their hearts were never upright and sincere, nor ever had they any love of truth or justice in them only by this means they have interessed themselves in good mens opinions, and obtained pla∣ces and imployments of profit and power, received monies, ad∣vanced their own ends and designes, and taken occasion thereby the more colourably and securely to act the highest Treasons, in∣justice, oppression and villany: I know what I say, and whereof I affirm; and do but wait the time when God will unmark them: some of these are already discryed and discoved, and their cunning craftinesse in their workings: the rest I am certain cannot long ly hid, for the time is at hand, that will try and sift them even as bran: These are wolves in sheeps cloathing, they look lambs, speak like Innocents, walk like Foxes, but act works of darknesse like the devil: they dig deep to hide their Councels from the Lord, and they say no eyes sees us; but God will drive their Councels head∣long, and reveal their works wrought in the dark to the sight of all
men, before the Sun at Noon: Alas, the bed is too short to stretch themselves on, and the covering is too narrow to cover them; and what will they doe in the end, whether will they flee to hide their shame? Pardon this digression, it is that these Mummers may know they walk not without notice and obser∣vation; and some become the more wary and wise by a caution; though the Fool hardneth himself and goeth on to destruction. But as for the two last Presidents of Mr Purefoy and Mr Al∣len, I will deferre to explicate and expaciate them till my third part come (which God willing shall not be long:) For such a multiplicity of odious and abominable presidents and practises, I have to recite and exhibite to the Kingdoms view, that they may know where and upon whom to challenge Justice, and to be∣ware of the persons for time to come, that this my second part will not comprehend halfe; and to extend it in Volume above that which is meet, and every mans purchase, I conceive it not so expedient: for I would not onely have it published in Gath, but declared in Askelon: and not that I glory in blazoning any mans private or personall infirmities; God forbid, farre, O ever farre bee it from mee: But these are publique cases, which require redresse, perpetrated against the publique, by men sent and intrusted by the publique, and that for their weal, not for their own, and for their preservation, not for their destru∣ction; and therefore (I hope it cannot but be by all conceived) both requisite and just, that the publique, or parties trusting should have information of the abuses and injuries done them by their trustees, that they may apply themselves to means for the removing those pests, and easing themselves of their sufferings: And how can a Master call his servant to an accompt, or re∣claime him, if hee know not his errours? and how soone and unavoidably may an unfaithfull servant, by his se∣cret wicked wayes, bring his Master unto ruine, if his Master have not timous notice of it? and according to the old Romane rule, Non scipioni, sed Senatui, Non Senatui, sed Reipublicae Respondenda: Et ergo Rei publicae necesse ostendenda sunt. But deare Countrey men and Friends, I beseech you, before wee goe any further, observe this with me; To wit, how easie a
thing it is, and as usuall it hath been, and still is; the more miser∣able hath been, and still is the condition of this Free-born Nati∣on) for a man rich in purse, and great in power and place, to de∣fraud, rob, and wrong another of his monies, lands, and possessi∣ons, and then if the party grieved do, or that hee may not question the fact, nor take course for his own) to cast him by injustice and violence into prison, and destroy both him, and his posterity after him: And truly friends, till this monstrous evil be by impartiall Justice removed, the mean and poor man of this Kingdom lives but at the mercy of his Lord and Land-lord, of the rich and man of power, although the beggar of this Land be as free born, as the King on his Throne: and the Law (which is his birth-right) be as open for him in any case whatsoever, as for the greatest and highest Peer. The veritie of this misery hath been too well ex∣perimented, to the ruine of millions of men and their families in this wofull Land. Cease not therefore now Countrey-men, till ye have obtained a free current of Justice, and that the good old Lawes of the Land may be truly and justly executed, without re∣spect of persons. And nothing but the establishment of this (to wit, of true justice and judgement can secure you and your poste∣rities in your persons, estates, lives, and liberties: As Faith, that Cardinall Vertue is in the Government Spirituall, so is this pri∣mary Civil vertue of Justice, in the Regiment temporall; it di∣rects all things to a right end, it makes all publique Acts accept∣able, it quells swelling humors, qualifies distempers, subjects the proud, encourages the humble, and safely carries on the ship of a State or Common wealth, not only by  rocks of Cjvil dissenti∣ons and discontents, whence arise rebellions and wars: but also by all dyrts and sands of corruption, and ill manners which use to gather, to the endangering of a State in the calmes and smooth waters of peace and plenty: and to make the paralel be∣tween these two eminent vertus, as they stand in their seve∣rall Spheares, a little more obvious: As Faith subdues King∣doms, so doth Justice in subjecting all his Majesties subjects to a sweet harmony of Legall obedience: Faith stops the mouth of Lions; so doth Justice, it restrains all Ravenous and devour∣ing Rulers; (viz.) injust Judges, Justices, and other corrupt Officers and Ministers of State, and all Extortioners and Oppres∣sours of the poor; all which sort of Creatures are in a State
or Common wealth, as so many devouring lyons and ravenons bears, Pro. 28. 15. Faith quenches the violence of fire, so doth Justice, is quencheth the fires of Insurrections, Deadly fewds and revenge, (the fruits of malice) which are often kindled be∣tween families, and among the people; by Faith the weake are made strong, wax valiant in fight, and turne to flight the Armies of the Aliens: So by Justice the poor and mean become strong, and grow couragious and valiant, for so much as by this vertue, they live without fear of the rich, cruel and great man, and whole Armies of Alients are also put to flight by it, (to wit) all reign∣ing, rageing mischeefs, insolencies, and outrages of men are ex∣pelled and banished: in a word, By Iudgement the Land is esta∣blished, It is not my saying, but Gods, pro. 29. 4. Wherefore good Friends and Fellow Commoners rest not, spare no paines, grudge not at cost, nor neglect any opportunity, but improve and imploy all your powers and interests, without wearinesse, untill the King, Parliament and Army do accord and agree, to make up unto you this soveraigne balme, this only curing medicine of all our publique maladies, the chief Citadel and Fortresse against all incursions and invasions of violence, oppression and injustice. And then are we happy, yea thrice happy, and the remembrance of that Sea of blood, masse of Treasure, and Hell (as I may say) of sufferings, which we have lost, expended, and sustained, under the notion of acquiring this Celestial Gemme, but as yet have not at∣tained to it, will be but as a dream to us, yea as nothing, in respect of this unvalueable vertue of Peace-securing, Judgement, and Justice, by which we shall felicitate our selves and the generati∣ons after us: I have the more degressed to shew the excellency and necessity of establishing true Justice and Judgement amongst us; because otherwise without this, whatsoever our Grandees and wise men (that would or should be) tell us or pretend to us, all their propounding and proposing, hawking and halting, Iame and blinde doing and dealing, will prove but as broken reeds in our sides, and they Physitians of no value. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. And so I will return again to my Subject in hand. A notorious peece of Iniu∣stice, done com∣trary to the Law and his Oath, by Mr Glyn Recor∣der of London. Take one president or two more of high Injustice done by Mr Glyn Recorder of London, one of the 11. accused Members, and others Parliament men, (though never good Common-wealths-men:)
The case follows thus (viz.) one Thomas Scrivener sometime Trumpeter to Capt. Wingate, a Member of the House of Commons, when he went first forth with the Earl of Essex to Worcester, who after the Cap. was there taken in fight, by P. Ru∣pert, and carried captive to Shrewsbury, continued in the Troop, under one Thomas Evans, a Baker in Long Acre: Captain Win∣gates then Livetenant (since if I mistake not, made a Captain un∣der Sr Sam. Luke, and afterwards served under Major Generall Massey, in the West, and marched with him from Worcester to a place called Haselow not far from Eresham, and there the Troop quartered: where he received orders from his Lievet. Evans to sound a march to another place: the which Scrivener the Trum∣peter did: and when the Troop was horsed and ready, hee had command given to sound a march, and did, in obedience to his command: But the Lievetenant Evans having a designe at that instant (as himself afterwards confest) to destowre the Consta∣bles daughter of the Town, and perceiving the Troope was mar∣ched so far before, that he could not stay to accomplish his impi∣ous purpose without danger; He was enforced to decline his sil∣thy designe, and to hasten away after the Troope: the which he overtaking about two miles off, presently in a fury rode up to the other Trumpeter, and struck him, swearing God damne me, I could finde in my heart to pistoll you: but fell with much more violence upon Tho. Scrivenor, and give him many great and sore blows with his thick Cane about his head and called him Rogue, and Base Rogue; saying, Who gave you command to march? The Trumpeter answered, The Cornet: whereunto the Lievtenant replyed, How durst you march without my command? and so the Troope marched on to Evesham, where they quartered that night: and where (to be brief) the Trumpeters head exceed∣ingly swelled, and hee fell presently blinde, by reason of those blows Evans had given him: and after hee had lain under the hands of three Chirurgions, by the space of ten dayes, or therea∣bouts, Here is plain murde. See the Statute 1. Iac. 8. he dyed of the same blows, his brains (as I have beene told) purging afterwards out of his nose. After this, the Trumpeters wife (poor widdow) brought Evans before a Councel of War, when the Earl of Essex lay at Windsee, where she fully proved the murder by good and sufficient witnesses, as appears by the depo∣sitions then taken, and here Printed to the view of the world, that
all men may see the extream injustice of this Recorder Glyn; and judge if such a Magistrate deserve not hanging. Depositions taken before the Councel of War. Christopher San∣ders Iur. 1. Christopher Sanders sworn, doth affirm that hee was with Thomas Scrivener the Trumpeter some five dayes or thereabouts before he dyed, and heard him say, that Lievtenant Evans was the cause of his death, if he could not be recovered of those blowes he received by the said Evans, upon the march from Haselow to Evesham. 2. And further that he heard the Lievtenant say, that the cause Note I pray. he was so offended at the aforesaid Trumpeter, was for leading the Troop onwards on the march: Evans as he said, having an op∣pertunity to be naught with a Constables daughter in Haselow, which he had not before from his coming out of London, till that time. 3. And further that Lieut. Evans being at supper at Captain Biggs his house, boasted what an opportunity he had at Haselow: and being asked by Mrs Biggs, what satisfaction he could have gi∣ven the Lasse, if she had proved with childe? he replyed, that if it was a Girle, he would give it 100. l. if a boy, he would take it home, and make a Baker of him. 1. Iohn Burliman sworn, John Burliman Iur. saith That in Haselow in the Con∣stables yard, he heard Henry Dalden, Captain Wingates Cornet, give the word of Command to the Trumpeters to sound a march: and so they did, and the Troop did presently advance, and the Lievtenant staid behind to dine. 2. That after the Troop had marched some two miles, or thereabouts, the Lievtenant overtook them, and rode up to the surviving Trumpeter, and struck him, swearing God damne him, he could finde in his heart to pistoll him: and fell upon the de∣ceased Trumpeter, and struck him divers blows with a Cane, calling him Rogue, and base Rogue; demanding of him, who gave him command to march? who answered that the Cornet did command him so to do. And the Leivt. Evans replyed, How durst he march without his Command? 3. The Corner did at that present affirm that hee had Com∣mand from the Lievt. to march away with the Troop: but the Lievt. not denying that, swore, How durst those Rogues (mean∣ing the Trumpeters) advance without him?
4. That the deceased Trumpeter came to Evesham that night. and the Lievetenant asked him how he did? and he answered him, the worse for him; for he thought he had given him his death: The Lievt asked him, if he would make Oath of that? the Trum∣peter replyed, that if he could not be recovered of those blowes, he would affirm that he was the cause of his death. 5. And further that the Lievr. had a bigg Cane in his hand, with a brasse ring on the end of it, with which he struck Scrivener the Trumpeter a principle blow, under the list of the ear, which presently swelled, and of which he was forced to keep the Cham∣ber ten dayes or thereabouts, and then dyed in Evesham. 6. And further this Deponant saith, That hee visiting of him, some three dayes before his death, he heard Scrivener the Trum∣peter say, that he should never recover it; and that Lievt. Evans had killed him. And he saith further, that he was present at the time when the said Lievt. Evans struck the said Trumpeter the said blow under the list of the ear. And hee further saith that some four dayes after, when the said Lievt. came to see the said Trumpeter, who lay a bed very ill in Evesham. The said Lievt. asked this Deponent, how the said Trumpeter could possibly come by such a blow and this Deponent replyed, that the Trum∣peter turning his head might take a blow that way: whereupon the Lievt. replyed, I am heartily sorry for it. Vpon which Scri∣vener the Trumpeter said, That will make no satisfaction to my poor wife and childe. A dolefull story. This is a true coppy of the Depositions, and the matter wilbe (if cause require) proved by many more witnesses personally. Notwithstanding which manifest proof: by the means of Sr Philip Stapleton deceased, and some others, (after they had wea∣ried our the poor widdow with long attendance for a tryall, till all her mony was spent so that she was forced to return to London: while she was away, Evans was cleared by the Councel of War: but the widdow not ceasing to prosecute, and importuning the Earl incessantly for Justice, He at length referred her to the Com∣mon Law, and turned Evans out of his Command. Whereupon after a long time, and much trouble and abuses passed and sustained by her, by reason of her poverty and disability; and Evans his po∣teney and refuge in the Army, who was now gotten to serve un∣der Major Generall Massey. She after his coming home out of the
West, upon the disbanding of Major Generall Masseys Brigade, procured first Justice Edwards (a Member of the House of Com∣mons) his Warrant to apprehend him; and having thereby sei∣zd him, she charged him (before the said Justice) with killing her husband, and desired to have him committed, to the end shee might prosecute the Law upon him: But Justice Edwards did not only talk with the murderer in private (which he ought not to have done) but openly denyed the poor widdow Justice, and said plainly, Here is manifest violation both of Law and Iustice, by Mr Edwards that he would commit the malefactour, and did accord∣ingly free him: and she the day following meeting Mr Edwards in Westminster Hall, importuned him for Justice: whereupon he thus answered Woman thou wouldst have Justice, and there is none. A true saying, (but an impudent one, and ill becoming a Parliament-man and a publick Magistrate, whose place it is to do Justice, and to redresse injustice) to the shame of him and all such be it spoken. Neverthelesse in confidence of better redresse by Mr Glyn the Recorder of London, this poore oppressed widdow went unto him, and obtained his Warrant, by vertue whereof, she re-appre∣hended Evans: and Mr Glyn being not in the way when he was first taken, the widdow had him before Sr Robert Pye the Elder, who would not meddle in it, because he was taken upon the Re∣corders Warrant, but referred it to him: But before the Recorder could be spoke with, the murderer Evans, and Mr Recorders Clark (who is said to be as good Trim Tram. as his Master) according to that of Solomon, Prov. 29. 12. If a Ruler hearken to lyes, all the servants are wicked,) had private communication together a long time in a Taverne (at the Gallowse had beene fitter) and the Clark in this time promised Evans to doe him all the good hee could, (I am confident not without a bribe) and afterwards when Evans was brought before the Recorder, and charged by the wid∣dow with killing her husband, desiring earnestly to have him committed, that she might prosecute the Law upon him; the Re∣corder would not Mr Recorders manifest violati∣on of law and Iu∣stice. commit him, but turning himself to Evans the murderer, said to him openly, I discharge you: and used many sharp and taunting speeches to the poore afflicted and op∣pressed widdow, as if she had been the offender, to the murder∣ers great incouragement, and her unspeakable discomfort: and she affirming that she was a Free-born Subject, and did onely de∣sire
the benefit of the Law, and the liberty of the Subject: The Recorder replyed, Can we expect that such men will establish our Laws and Liber∣ties, that will not abide to heare of them? No. what dost thou talk to me of the benefit of the Law, and liberty of the Subject, thou peevish woman? Do I hinder thee? the Kings Bench is open, thou maiest indict him. Here note, that the Recorder confesses she might justly take her course at Law against Evans, and yet would not do her Justice to commit him to safe custody, that hee might bee forth coming to answer the Law: Yea many other strange dis-heartning speeches the Recorder used, very incongruous both to the person and place of a Minister of Justice: and so wrath and violent was this good member against the poor woman (because like the Gospel-wid∣dow) she importuned for Justice (though he was not so just as the Judge whom that poor widdow importuned) that he smote off her hat in disdain, and said, You had best question mee too. And truly I think she hath good cause so to doe. But how impudent and presumptuous are these sort of men, that they will not onely audatiously dare to do palpable injustice, but to dare the persons wronged by them to question them for so doing? It is more then time they were chastised. Thus this Murderer Evans went a∣way acquitted, and the poor widdow was left remidilesse, and o∣pen to his rage and malice: For hereupon, hee bloudy wretch, grew so insolent, that hee threatned and also endeavoured to lay her up in prison, under a pretence shee had slandered him. And since (as I have heard) he listed himself for the City, and was to have been a principall Commander under Major General Massey, in the Cities late intended desparate expedition against the Army. Now by the Law of the land, if a Murderer or Thief be brought Observe I pray. before a Justice of Peace, and changed, and hee refuse to commit him, being thereunto required: The Justice makes the felony his own, and becomes an accessary in the highest degree. See Stam∣fords Pleas upon the Crown, lib. . ch. 45. fol. 41. 42. 43. Fitz-Herbets. Coro. Placit, fol. 195. Bracton tract de Coro. lib. 3. Justice Long at the beginning of this Parliament was prosecu∣ted in this very case, for acquitting one Carnaby, who was brought before him and required to be committed by him, for act∣ing a murder. This being the law of the land, what then I pray do these two good Justices demerit? Indeed such Judges and Ju∣stices do (as I conceive) more worthyly deserve death then com∣mon Malefactors, for by corrupting Justice, and justifying the No∣cent,
they cause all manner of wickednes to abound, and encou∣rage evil persons to persistan their pernicious destructive courses, to the robbing, spoiling, and murdering of many of the Kings people. This Recorder Glyn, within these twelve moneths, committed one Mr Shaw, a Citizen of note, from the Sessions house, to New∣gate, not admitting him Another violati∣on of Law and Iustice by M Glyn. to put in bail, upon pretence bee was a Common Drunkard: because he had upon just cause sued one of his good Masters, that honest man (that should be) Sr Iohn Wola∣ston, to an outlawrye. But the more to aggravate this cardinall peece of injustice and violation of the law, by these two Magistrates; I pray you observe with me what is contained in the Oath of a Justice of Peace, when he is made and sworn to the administration of his Office: a∣mongst other heads contained in the Oath, this ensuing is the first and principall, and the form is thus, (viz.) You shall swear, that as a Iustice of the Peace, &c. In all Articles in the Kings Com∣mission to you directed, you shall do equal right to the poore and the rich, after your But they now commonly use their power and cunning, to op∣presse the poore, though innocent, and to acquit the rich, though ne∣ver so wicked. cunning wit and power, and after the Lawes and Customs of the Land, and Statutes thereof made: and you shall not be of Councel of any quarrell (or controversie) hanging before you &c. That you take nothing for doing your Office, but of the King, and the accustomed fees appointed by the Statutes &c. with much more not so needfull here to insert. But you by thus much plainly see, that all partiallity and bribery, is by the Oath exclu∣ded, and by the Justice abjured: and amongst the Articles in the Kings Commission, directed to Justices, this is a principall one, (viz.) ad inquirendum de omnimodis felonis, venificijs &c. to en∣quire (not only of all, but) of all manner of Fellonies, (whereof Homicide is the highest) Witchcrafts, Sorceries, &c. and to in∣dict thm &c. (not acquit them:) so that whether these two Ju∣stices have kept their Oath, and faithfully discharged the duty of their place, I referre to all men, and query whether they bee not worthy to be expunged their Commission, and to suffer exempla∣rily for violation thereof, and of the Law in so high and hainous a manner, in a matter of so high and hainous a nature. I never heard that his Majesty ever tollerated any such act of injustice in the worst of his dayes: He would acquit no Murder∣er, or pardon any willfull bloodshed, or murder: Nor do we hear
that ever the worst of his publique Ministers, durst (while he was in power) so transcendantly transgresse the Law, and their Du∣ty, in an act of this nature, in such a horrid manner. Nay, I will tell you (as I have received it from right trusty persons) of a spe∣ciall peece of Justice and mercy of his, during these late unhappy warres, with his own Garisons, of Justice upon the offender, of Justice and mercy both toward the poor widdow, whose husband lost his life, as the widdow Scriveners did) by his owne Com∣mander. There was a poor man, by calling (as I have heard) a Broom∣man, A remarkable peece of Iustice, done by the King in the behalf of a poor widdow. one of the Kings common souldiers, who standing Centi∣nell in a Garison of the Kings; did according to his charge and duty bid a Collonell of the Kings (at his coming into the Gari∣son) Scand: The Collonel it seems, being proud and stately, took it ill and in scorn, and would have passed without giving an account, according to the manner of war: the which the Soul∣dier refused, and stourly opposed, answering the Collonells im∣perious termes with as peremptor) speeches: Hereupon the Co∣lonell forthwith killed the souldier upon the place. Of which his poor wife having notice, addressed her selfe to the King, then at Oxford, for redresse: And being a poor dispised woman, with∣out friends, means or habit, with scarce a shot to her foot; the King at her first appearing and complaint gave her 10. pounds, and Prince Rupert 5. pounds, for her reliefe. And his Majesty caused the Colonell, notwithstanding his place and power, to be apprehended, and imprisoned, and tryed: and had he not beene a man eminent, and made great friends, hee had beene executed. Howsoever his Majesty enjoyned him to give the poor widdow a thousand pounds in satisfaction, to maintain her, before hee could be discharged; and she accordingly received it here in London: By means whereof, she advanced her fortime, and obtained ano∣ther husband within a short time following. GO ye O Parliament, who have declared so much for Justice, and do for this poor widdow of yours, likewise; but ye are not so good as to allow her bread. And now let all men judge, if here in this case was not more justice, and sence of the subjects grie∣vance manifested from the King, ten ever was yet manifested to the Kingdom from the Parliament? And thus ye see my paralell is still verified.
will only give you one example more of injustice, transgres∣sion Sr Peter Temples good payment. of Law, dishonesty and violence committed by Sr Peter Temple, another vile Member of the Parliament: and so acqui∣esce for this Tract, and this time. This Sr Peter Temple having run into a Corn Chandlers debt in Covent Garden, for Oats and beans for his Horses, to the sum of 20. pounds; the man having come to him often for his money: Sr Peter at last, appointed him to come such a day, and he would pay him, and truly so hee did to the purpose: for the Chandler coming according to his appointment, Sr Peters Coachman carryed his Master up word: who gave command that he should come up: and the Chandler accordingly went up, expecting his mony, but was cozened as the Dog was, which thought he had been called in to breakfast, but it was to be hanged; for so soon as he was come up, Sr Peter ask∣ed him if he would be paid? and the Chandler told him, he was come to that purpose: whereupon Sr Peter and his Coach-man fell upon him, and Breach of peace. so grievously beat him, as that hee kept his bed three or four moneths: and when Sr Peter had so done, hee told him, that should be his payment, and that he was a Rogue to ask mony of a Parliament man. It seems Parliament men are law∣lesse, and by their places exempt from payment of their debts: But if these be Parliament priviledges, Give me the Royall Prero∣gative: for King Iames (as I have heard) obeyed an arrest, and paid the debt. And to this action of Sr Peter Temples, answers that of Mr Nicholls, who having long time owed a Gentleman ten pounds, and being told by the Gentleman that hee would sue him for it: he asked the Gentleman if he did not know what he was, was he not a Parliament man? As if he was therefore privi∣ledged to pay nothing, but cozen every man. And if this bee the Justice of a Parliament man, and his keeping the Law of the Land; it is better for a Commoner to trust a Jew, or a Turk, then any of them. How can these men expect such exact obedience to their illegal Orders and Ordinances, when they themselves will yeeld none to the known Lawes of the Realme? and indeed did they make more conscience of obeying, they would have more conscience in commanding: according to the old rule, Qui nescit parerenescit bene imperare. I had purposed to have proceeded higher; but I see that then
this volumne would too much swell, for these are but mole-hills, to those mountains, I intend to make bare: and (through the power of Heaven) although they have barracadoed themselves by all possible means, and by subtilty got the Army to become their Screan. I will in my third part make an onslet on some of the tallest among them, Aquila non capit muscas: why should the little theeves suffer, while the great ones secure and defend each others? FINIS. Errata. Page 3. line 19. read, one of. p 3. l. 32. for 40. l. r. 40. years. p. 9. l. 31, for intneded r. intended. p. 16. l. 38, for deprivation, r. depravation. p. 17. l. 5. for hath, r. having. l. 32. for discoved, r. discovered. p. 27. l. 29. for dyrts, r. Syrts. p. 21. in the note, for murde, r. murder.
TEN SEVERALL ORDERS TO Be put in execution by the Lord Major and Aldermen of London, for the price and sale of Meale, Flesh, Butter, and other Commodities; and to prevent Disorders in the Markets: with the penalties to be inflicted upon every person or persons, which shall not obey the same. ALSO, The coming in of twenty thousand Quarters of Como and Graine. And a List of the particulars thereof, as it is entred at the Custome House. And care is also taken, that every one may buy at the cheapest rate, and that there be no regrating or fore∣stalling the Markets. NOVEMBER, 5. 1647. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbot. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, dwelling neere Cripple-Gate, 1647.
Ten severall ORDERS OF THE Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, for regulating the price of Meale, and other Commodities. THE generall dearth which of late hath beene on all sorts of commodities, both rich and poor are very sensible of, especially on the price of corn & chiefly of that which makes bread (the staffe of man life) which hath not only afflicted the needy but oc∣casioned sunday queries from whence the cause should arise in the richest there appearing little visible cause for the same, the earth yielding a plentifull increase in all parts, and to excuse the matter some are pleased to aive their opinions, 1. That the store of the Kingdom in the time of the late warre is exhausted, 2ly. That the quartering of the Army neere this populous City was an emnent cause thereof, And thirdly the great a∣buse of regrating and forestalling the markets was not of the least; which was chiefly done by those which would fain have woven themselves into a neerer Cor∣poration who not only sorestalled the market and keep
backe the Countrey people for comming in, but set up meale shops in every corner (a new trade out of the standing of two Apprentishipps) which being lately taken into consideration by the present Lord Major and Court of Aldermen they found apparent abuse thereby and therefore thought good to order that no meale shopps should be kept in the City of London and Liberties thereof after the third day of this instant No∣vember and no meale should be sold but in open mar∣ket the market dayes on forfeiture of such penalties as are inflicted on regraters and forestallers by severall good and wholsome lawes and statutes in that case pro∣vided. There be also severall orders for the market ordered by the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen to bee ob∣served. The Lawes or orders of the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen to be observed in every market with∣in the City of London. FIrst in all the markets of this City no victuall shall be sold but by the price set by the Mayor of the City. Secondly No man shall forestall any victuall com∣ming to the market as for to buy in any Iune or other privy place, or yet comming to the market, whether it be found in the hands of the buyer or of the seller, under pain of forfeiture of the same, and no Inholder shall suffer any thing to be sold in his house upon pain of forty shillings. Thirdly No man shall regrate any victuall which is in the market, or buy any victuall to Ingrate in the
market, so that the Commons can or may have any part of of such victuall, as in speciall such as be known for Hucksters or other people occupying their living by such victuall as they would so ingrosse under paine of such victuall so regrated, provided alwayes that any steward for any noble feast may buy or in grate such victuall as is convenient ior the same feast. Fourthly No butter shall be sold but according to the time of the yeare allowed. Fifthly No Poulterers shall deceivably occupie the marke to sell any stale victuall or such as the Poul∣ters of this City, for to stand in strange cloathing so to do under Pain of forty shillings and forfeiture of such victuall. 6ly No Hucksters shall stand or sit in the market but in Lower places and ends of the market to the intent they may be perfectly knowne and the stranger market∣people have the preheminence of the market under pain of three shillings foure pence, if the Hucksters disobey the same. Seventhly No unwholsome or stale victuall shall be sold under paine of forty shillings foure pence and for∣feiture of the same victuall. Eightly No Butcher or his servant shall use to drive any oxe or oxen a trot in the streets, but peaceably, and if any oxe happen to be let go, when he is prepared to slaughter, the Butcher shall forfeit two shillings be∣sides recompence, if any person be hurt thereby. Ninthly No Butcher shall sell any Measell Hog, or unwholsome flesh under pain of ten pounds. Tenthly No Butcher shall sell any old stale victuall, that is to say, about the slaughter of three dayes in the winter and two in the Summer under pain of ten pound.
No victules of the City shall give any rude or un∣fittiug language or make any clamour upon any man or woman in the, open market for cheapning of vi∣ctuall under pain of three shillings foure pence. Memorandum, that every offence, found in this City It is accustomed that the office, a free man finding it, which is called Primm Iuventor, hath halfe the penalty by the grace of the Court. Having here given you the good orders of the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen for the well ordering of victvall that the prises of Commodities may not be inhumane nor the City and Country abused, It will not be a misse in the next place to give you a briefe account of the great penalty of wheat Rice, Barley, Mault, Oates, Beanes and pease was brought into the City by water of late in doing whearof for better satisfaction I shall in the next place communicate to you a perfect List of all such corne ond Graine as hath beene entred in the custome house of London from the first of October last to the thirtieth of the same as followeth. Entred in the Customes Book of Entries. Of Wheat 1587 quarters. Of Rice. 6845, quar∣ters. Of Barley 965 quarters. Of Mault, 1048
quarters. Of Oates 2275 quarters. Of Beanes and pease 1435 quarters, which in all amounts to 14175 quarters. In which may likewise take notice that it is not the usuall course to certifie the whole quantity of the Lading at the first entry for sometimes neere a fourth part more is brought in for a post entry vvhich together with what hath beene brought in since it thought can∣not amount to lesse the twenty thousand quarters (in a matter of a moneth or five weekes) at the least which with the remain∣der that is expected and comes in dayly, with the care and well ordering thereof by the Governours of this City (who daily com∣municate to the poore out of the store laid every Companies the price of corne will pro∣bably be abated of which theat begins to ap∣peare some earnest of our hopes though not so nauch informed might be for we have heard some affirme that wheat may be afforded at this time as in the bushell cheaper then it could within this fortnight.
A perfect List or Note of all such Corn and Grayne, as have been entred in the Custome-house of Lon∣don. From the first of October last to the 30. of the same. Wheat—1587 quarters. Rye—6845 quarters. Barley—0965 quarters. Mault—1048 quarters. Oates—2295 quarters. Beanes and Pease—1435 quarters. In the whole—14175 FINIS.
