C5595 L.R.305.a.7.[1] R227661 99887454 190401
The Council-General of the Indian and African Company's Petition to His Majesty. May it please Your Majesty, WE Your Majesty's most dutiful Subjects, the Council-General of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies, do do in all Humble Duty beg leave to lay before Your Majesty the present Condition of our Affairs. Your Majesty from an earnest desire of the Flourishing of your Ancient King∣dom, having been graciously pleased by the 32 Act of the 4th. Session, and by the 8th. Act of the 5th. Session of this Current Parliament, and Your Majesty's Let∣ters Patent under the Great Seal of this Kingdom following thereupon, to Autho∣rize the Settling of Plantations and Colonies in Asia, Africa, or America, by the Natives of this Kingdom, and such Others as should joyn with them, as in the said Acts of Parliament, and Letters Patent, is more particularly express'd. We and our Constituents, Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects did, upon the Faith and Encouragement of the said Acts and Letters Patent, enter into a Socie∣ty, Erect a Company of Trade, and with Great Charge, and after many Difficulties, settled a Plantation on the North-side of the Isthmus of Darien, a Place precisely in the Terms of the said Acts of Parliament and Letters Patent. And being Sensible, That as our Company had its Birth from Your Majesty's most Gracious Favour, so it could not subsist but by your Royal Protection. We did therefore, in all humble Manner, Petition Your Majesty's High Commis∣sioner and the Estates of Parliament, Assembled the 19th. of July 1698. Upon which, The Estates of Parliament did, with great Unanimity Address Your Majesty, That you would in your Royal Wisdom be pleased, to take such Measures as might effectually Vindicat the undoubted Rights and Priviledges of the said Com∣pany, and support the Credit and Interest thereof. That Session of Parliament ending, before any Return could be had from Your Majesty; Reports have been spread by the Enemies of our Settlement, as if our Company had not Your Majesty's Protection: And as an Evidence thereof, That Proclamations have been Issued out in Your Majesty's Name, by your Gover∣nours in all the American Plantations, not only to Deprive our said Company and Colony of the friendly Assistance that might Reasonably have been expected from our Neighbour-Nation; But also, strictly forbidding all Your Majesty's Subjects, or Others within these Plantations, to enter into any Traffick or Commerce with the said Colony, and that no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatso∣ever, should be Transported or Carried to them, either in their own Vessels, or any o∣ther Ship or Vessel for their Use, and that under the outmost Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, mentioned in the said Proclamations. Which Proceedings we have but too much Reason to believe, have been of Fatal Consequence to our Company and Colony, and consequently to the Inte∣rest of all Your Majesty's good Subjects in this, Kingdom. And we being fully Perswaded, that nothing could be so Conducible for the Support of our said Com∣pany and Colony in our present Circumstances, as some special Testimonies and Evidences of your Royal Protection.
We do therefore in all Humility and Earnestness, beg of Your Majesty's Father∣ly Care of our said Company in particular, and of the Nation in General, That our Majesty would be graciously pleased, to take off the Force and Effect of ese Proclamations, which have been so Prejudicial to us, and to signify your oyal Pleasure to the Governours of these your Plantations, that We may be sup∣lyed in the Common and Ordinary way of Commerce. As also, That Your Majesty may allow your Parliament to Meet at the Day appointed in November next, or as soon as possibly can be, that Your Majesty may have the Advice and Assistance of the Great Council of this Nation, in such a Weighty and General Concern, which we hope God will Bless with an Happy Issue to His Glory, the Honour of your Majesty, the Credit of your Parliament, the Interest of the Nation, and the Good of our Company and Colony. Sign'd at Edinburgh the 19th. Day of October 1699. In Name, Presence, and by Order of the said Council-General, by May it please Your MAJESTY, Your Majesty's most Faithful, most Dutiful, most Humble, and most Obedient Subject and Servant BELHAVEN I. P. C. G. To which His Majesty was pleas'd to give the follow∣ing Answer. WILLIAM r. RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, we Greet you Well. Your Petition has been presented to Us by Our Secretaries, and we do very much regret the loss which that our Ancient Kingdom and the Company has lately sustained: We will upon all Occasions, Protect and Encourage the Trade of the Nation: And we will also take Care, that the Subjects of that our Kingdom, shall have the same freedom of Trade and Commerce with our English Plantations as ever they had formerly. Our Current Parliament is Adjourn'd to the 5th. Day of March next, and we will Order that the Parliament shall Meet when we judge that the Good of the Nation does require it. And so We bid you heartily Farewell. Given at our Court at Kensingtoun the 2d. day of November 1699. and of our Reign the 11th. Year. By His Majesty's Command, SEAFIELD. To our Right Trusty and Well-beloved, the Council-General of the Company of our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, Trad∣ing to Africa and the Indies.
