D777A 190.g.13[318] R233154 99882477 194121
THE DECLARATION OF Thomas Lord FAIRFAX, AND The Chief of the Gentlemen and Free-holders in the County of YORK. With their LETTER to the Lord General MONCK. WEe being deeply sensible of the Grevious pressures, under which We by the extream danger whereunto We are exposed at this time, through the violent alteration of Government, and mutation and interruption of Parliaments, having no Representative to expresse or remedy our Grievances, have thought it meet ac∣cording to the example of other Countries, to Declare and Desire, That the Parliament begun November 3, 1640. be yet continued, the Members that were secluded in 48, be forthwith Restored to the Exercise of their Trust, that right may be done to their Persons, the Parliament and People that have chosen them. If otherwise, That a Parliament may be presently called, without the imposing Oaths or Engagements, the greatest prejudice to Civil or Christian Liberty: or requiring any Qualifications saving what by Law are already established. And until this, or the one of these be done, We cannot hold Our selves obliged to pay the Taxes that are, or shall be imposed, We not enjoying the Fun∣damental Rights of the Nation, to consent to our own Lawes by equal Representatives. To the LORD Generall MONCK, My Lord. VVEe find Our selves constrain'd by writing to supply the omission of acquainting your Lordship with Our thoughts and desire, when you passed through Our County, which we had then done, if upon so short notice, we could have met for a mutual understanding. Your Lordship will find in the enclosed Decla∣ration the sum of Our apprehensions; We thought it not necessary to multiply perticulars, but leave all other things to a duly Constituted Parliament: neither have we been Solicitors to multiply Subscripsions, trusting more to the weight of Our Proposals then the number of Subscribers; Yet We may safely affirm this to be the sense of the genera∣lity of the County, as your Lordship sees it is of others. We have only to add, Our earnest desires to your Lord∣ship, that you will be pleased to further the accomplishment of what we have presented with such seasonable speed, as that the fear of Friends and the hopes of Enemies may be prevented. Thomas Fairfax. Barrington Bourcher, H. Sheriff. Charles Wigfield. Thomas Wharton. Francis Boynton. William Cholmly. Thomas Harrison. John Dawn. John Hotham. Roger Langley. Thomas Slingsby. Thomas Rumington. Henry Cholmly. M. Robinson. John Gibson. William Fairfax. James Noyser. Thomas Hublethwait. Thomas Hutton. Gustavus Boynton. Thomas Yerburie. William Adams. William Dawson. William Dalton. Bryan Laton. Richard Chinly. Thomas Lovel. Walter Bethel. Robert Winfield. John Pearson. William Rooksby. John Dawson. Robert Bell. Henry Bethel. John Richards. John Mucklewhaite. Robert VVithy. Fran. Diffield. Nicholas Bethel. Richard Levet. VValter Lacock. Thomas Crookland. VVilliam VVoodyeare. Iohn Legate. Iohn VVatson. Henry Fairfax. George Harwood. Richard Redman. Many other Noble Persons Subscribed, but could not be presently read, their Names being their own Hands. LONDON, Printed for John Johnson, 1659.
