11458 99838509 2890
TVVO TREATISES WRITTEN AGAINST THE PAPISTES, THE ONE BEING AN answere of the Christian Protestant to the proud challenge of a Popish Catholicke: THE OTHER. A CONFVTATION OF THE POPISH CHVRCHES doctrine touching Purgatory & prayers for the dead: by William Fulke Doctor in diuinitie. Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollie dwelling in the Blacke friers. 1577.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER: WILLIAM FVLKE WISHETH GRACE AND PEACE from God the father, and from our Lord Iesus Christ. THE great bragges that vvere made by diuers Papistes of this treatise of Purgatory that it vvas vnansvver∣able, vvere so vntollerable, that cer∣teine of my godly friendes vvere moued thereby, to sende the booke to me, desiring me to shape an aunsvvere vnto it. But vvhen I had readde it ouer, and founde therein in deed much nevv ray∣ling, yet nothing else but the olde fonde kinde of reasoning, I vvas altogether vnvvilling to deale vvith it, both because there hath bene so much already vvritten of that argument, and for that I thought, that our contrymen vvere novv, as vvel by reading of that vvhich hath ben vvrit∣ten before, as also by continuall preaching against that absurde doctrine, sufficiently dissvvaded from that blaspemous heresie of Purgatory. But vvhē this excuse, or any other that I could bring, vvoulde not satisfie there ernest desier, vvho im∣portunatly
still vrged me to take the matter in hand, & that I had once againe perused the trea∣tise, I began to thinke othervvise of the vvhole case, then I did before. I considered that many there vvere, vvhich perhaps had not seene, and many also that vvoulde not reade, such bookes as haue bene vvritten in times past of this question, & that some also vvere so simple, that they could not discerne this nevv disguised defence of the Catholike churches doctrine, from the olde drousie dreame of popish Purgatory. VVherefore if any one of these, or any other that shall voutsalfe to reade this ansvvere, might therby either be con∣firmed in trueth, or reclaymed from error: I began to thinke it vvere sufficient cause for me to take the paines, and the paines so taken to be vvel be∣stovved. Againe vvhen I remembred the spight∣full rayling, and the most disdainefull arrogance of Allen him selfe, together vvith the presump∣tuous boasting, and vaine confidence, that some of his friends haue in his vvriting: I cōfesse it kind∣led that smal zeale of godlines that is in me, both to meinteine the common hope of Christians, a∣gainst the insolent assaultes of so malicious and proud an aduersary, and also to discouer the infir∣mitie & feeblenesse of that fortres, vvhich these vvillfully blinde Papistes do vaunt to be inuinci∣ble.
In vvhich doinge I haue vsed great breui∣tie, not onely by a naturall inclination, vvherby I loue to be short, in any thing that I vvright: but also because my friendes vrged me, to dispatch it vvith so great expedition. And yet in this short∣nesse, I trust I haue not omitted any thing, that hath any shadovv of reason or shevv of matter in it, but that I haue sufficiently discharged it: as the diligent and attentiue reader, I hope vvill confesse no lesse. Hovv be it neither my hast in finishing, nor my friendes diligence in soliciting, vvas so great, but the slacknesse and vntovvard∣nesse of some Printers vvas much more. For vvhere as it vvas ended & authorized almost tvvo yeares a goe, yet it hath stayed hetherto, vn∣till a godly and learned brother, vvho vvas once purposed to haue aunsvvered the same him selfe, and colde full vvell and substantially haue acqui∣ted him selfe there in, if other busines had not hindred him, moued of godly zeale, hath novv at the last vndertaken the printing thereof, and brought it to this passe as you see. I hearde of late also of a third man, vvhich had learnedly begon the aunsvvering of this booke, hovv so euer he vvas letted from accomplishing the same. But hovv so euer Satan hath hether to hindred the setting abroade of this aunsvvere, yet God hath
novv at the length brought it forth: I doubte not but to his glorie and the confusion of Satan in his membres the Papistes. I haue thought good also to ioygne vnto this vvorke, an other short treatise that hath lyen by me these eight or nine yeares, vvritten at the re∣quest of a godly and learned friende of mine, in aunsvvere to a proude challenge of the Papist a∣gainst the Protestāt vvhich though at the first & many yeares after, I determined not to publish, supposing the same challenge to haue ben priuate, or in fevv mens handes, yet novv of late, that I haue seen it in diuerse godly Gentlemens handes, to vvhome it hath bene deliuered by Papistes, be like to peruert them, and of vvhome also I haue bene desired to ansvvere it, & am further credi∣bly informed, that the same is in printe, & estee∣med of many ignorant Papistes to be so vnaun∣svverable, that although it be protested by Gētle∣men of great vvorshippe and credit, that they haue seene the aunsvvere thereof in vvriting, yet they vvill not beleue, that any man dare set his penne to the paper, once to attempt the mat∣ter. I haue thought beste to putte it in printe as it vvas vvritten at the first. Nothing doub∣ting by Gods helpe, but I shalbe able to stande to that defence if the challenger vvill proceede to
meinteine his challenge any longer. That I haue copled it vvith the aunsvvere vnto M. Allens booke, is because I doe greatly suspect, that he vvas the authour thereof, for the similitude of the stiles and of the stomakes in both, at the least I trust I doe him no vvronge, to suppose him to be so stout a champion. And thus I committe the Christian rea∣der to the direction of Gods spirite vvho voutsalfe to lead thee into all truth for Christes sake. Amen. The faultes of this impression are thus to be amended: The first figure signifieth the page, the second the line. In the aunswere of a true Christian, &c. Pag. 3. line 35. Lithuania reade Lithūanda. 5.3. vvriting r. vvritinges. 10.10. the scripture, reade the booke of scripture. 13.17. then, reade thou. and line 19. you, reade thou. 15. line the laste. Tiberius. reade Liberius. 19.4. you, reade the. and line 10. Ca. line. 58. reade Carolines. 8. and line 19. Mercamas, r. Marranias. 20.9. fauour, reade honor. 23.26. the prince, reade the printers. 24.1. put out and. 25.9 not for his, r. for his. 29.10. vnitie of minde, r. vnitie of faith & minde. 30.3. in the places aboue re∣hearsed. in diuerse places of his epistles, a lib. 3. e∣pist. 14. and 15.16. &c. 41.30. Rhenes, r. Rhemes. 49.5. the the, r. that the. & the 12. r. & the Catho. &c. 52.13. in Brytish, reade in the Brytish. 63.14. about the articles, r. about the chiefest articles. 64.20. put out (that hilde.) and the 24. here, rea. sore. 67.21. vvhich can not, rea. vvhich you can not. 68.4. in a name, reade in a manner. 69.4. prorsus opinemur, r. prorsus non opinemur. and 34. vniuersally, r. vniuer∣salitie. and 36. vvhich you do, r. vvhich you do not. 70.17. proponēda, r. praepo∣nēda. & 22. in a. r. in the. & 24. vvhen. r. vvhē the. 71.20. vvhere, rea. vvere, and the 22. to, reade in. 78.26. that you avv a ba∣stard church, r. that you be∣ing a bastard church haue. 87.34. Commentualls, rea. Conuentualles. 91.32. that he. rea. then he. 92.30. cultiued, r. cōtinued. 97.1. your, reade youres. 99.13. there, rea. therefore. & 14. vinci, reade vincè
In the aunswere of a true Christian, &c. pag. 14. li. 6 for that, r. thē. 22.21. conseites, r. conserues. 23.19. they made a cushiō, reade they made mariage a chushion. 25.37. fast, reade facte. 26.37. canche, rea. couche. 30.35. greatest, rea. great. 31.1. reade instrumentes for the defence. 46.33. for, reade farre. 47.30. sinnes, reade sinner. 9.19. praedicate, rea. prae∣iudicate. 64.37. fauteles, r. fruictles. 87.6. heauie, reade hearie. 89.2. as, reade or. 92.6. bitter, reade better. 95.31. paltinge, r. peltinge. 102.15. r. liklihodes nūbred. 121.29. conuenientes, reade conuenienter. 127.13. r. to death, & a sinne not &c. & li. 28.10. rea. to. 139.34. vnrecōcyled, reade that are reconciled. 143.2 you. reade her. 151.27. & hath, rea. hauing. 156.5. can not, reade can stande. &c. 205.29. to his brother, rea. to his brethren. 210.14. faste, reade facte. 24.31. reade & forsakers. 232.38. sorovving, r. saying 238.10. clame, r. exclame. 248.1. an, reade any. 249.23. praie, reade praied. 255.19. Tecta, reade Tecla. 259.37. toti, reade hi. 262.7. after vvritinges make a ful poinct, & l. 10. Troianus, reade Traianus. & 14. Barlaū, r. Barlaam. & 16. Ephraim, r. Ephreem 265.27. and 29. Rhenamus, reade Rhenanus. 268.36. knavv, rea. knaue. 277.17. shoulde seme, reade as it shoulde seme. 283.2. Capth, r. Chapter. 284.30. after decree, reade concerning that vvhich vvas not &c. 286.31. put out he. 299.19. had, reade hath. 295.11. xemia, rea. xenia. 307.8. mistrusted, reade misconstrued. 316.2. you vvil, r. you vvil not. & 23. then, rea. thou. 334.19. criall, reade triall. 335.31. put out, in. 347.1. same, reade sunne & right, reade light. 350.6. r. & deceiueth &c. 361.16. vnto, reade in. 361.29. profatam, rea. pro∣foctam. 364.31. vve before, reade before vve. 378.17. vindicemus, reade iudicemus. and line 37. either, reade other. 373.11. stringe, r. springe. 374.10. Consilio Meleuita∣no, r. Cōcilio Mileuitano. 382.19. Commō, r. Cannon. 386.31. degree, r. pedigree. 391.25. thou, reade there. 396.1. God, reade man. 397.24. hidden, r. sudden. 399.15. as for vvitnesse, reade for vvitnesses. 406.6. the matter, reade thy matter. 409.32. make a full poincte after in deed. and line 22. put out the full poincte a∣fter describeth. 435.16. sparte, r. sponte. and line. 29. superstition, reade supposition. 441.34. parleis, rea. paruis. 443.2. vvhen, rea. vvhere. & 31. li. aliquid, r. aliquod. 447.2. strife, reade stripe. 455.33. named, r. varied. & li. 34. shall, rea. should.
AN ANSVVER OF A TRVE CHRISTIAN TO A COVNTER∣FAIT CATHOLIKE. The proposition of the Aduersarie. CHrist did commit at his departure hence, the testimony of that truth, for which he died, and the conuersion of the Nations to the beleefe in him, to the true church of God, which then stoode principally, and almost onely in the per∣sons of the Apostles and a fewe more, that by their preachings, and those afterward of their calling, the Christian religion might be planted in all Nations, be∣ginning at Ierusalem, and so proceeding to the coastes and corners of the earth. AN ANSVVERE TO THE PROPOSITION. I Graunt that our Sauiour Christ, at his de∣parture hence, commaunded his Apostles as principal members of his Church, though not the greatest part of it, to preach the do∣ctrine which he confirmed by his death vn∣to all nations, beginning at Ierusalem, and so forth according to his saying: Goe therefore and teach all Na∣tions baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: Teaching them to obserue all thinges what so euer I haue commaunded you. Matth. 28. Whereuppon I cha∣lenge the Papist that if he be able to proue that the doctrine of poperie is all that trueth, and nothing but that trueth, for
which Christ dyed, and which he commaunded the Apo∣stles to teach, I will acknowledge the popish church to be the Church of Christ. The first article conteyneth 3. demandes. 1 First I aske of the protestant what Church that was, which conuerted all these cuntries that be now Christian, to the faith of Christ? IF you meane by Christians, true Christians, and by the faith of Christ, the true faith of Christ, I answere: only the true Church of Christ, hath had the worde of God and sacraments, as meanes which God vseth, to subdue al na∣tions vnto the obedience of the faith, as was the primitiue Church of the Apostles, which hath continued vnto this daye by succession, not of personnes, and places, but of faith and truth, wherefore if the Papist can proue, that we holde not the same faith and trueth, vnto which the Apostles con∣uerted the nations, we refuse to be called the Church or Congregation of Christ. But if by Christians and Christian faith, you meane all them that professe the name of Christ, in the whole worlde, I aunswere, that the true Church of Christ, did not conuert them all, for in Aethiopia, there are yet people, conuerted by the false apostles, which taught circumcision, and obser∣uation of the lawe, in which heresie they continue vnto this day, and it is manifest by all histories, that the nations of the Alanes, Gothes, and Vandales, were first conuerted by the Arrians. 2 And let him shew vnto me, that euer his Church conuerted any people, or lande in the earth, from Idolatrie, or Gen∣tility, or Iudaisme, to the true Religion of Christ, or that this his fayth was taught to any Nation in steede of true Christianity. WE are members of that Church, which conuerted all landes in the earth that are conuerted, from Ido∣latry,
Gentility, Iudaisme, or heresie, to the true Religion of Christ, and we affirme that the Apostles taught none other faith in steede of true Christiantie, but that which we hold, as we are readie to proue by the worde of God: And at this daye the most parte of Europe, is conuerted from Idolatrie, heresie, and Antichristianitie, vnto the same true faith, that we mainteine, as in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Ger∣many, Denmarke, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, by publike au∣thoritie, in Spaigne, and Italie, a great numbre vnder perse∣cution and tyrannie. Also of the Iewes, no small numbre are conuerted to our religion, since the rising vp of the Gospell in our dayes. 3 Or any Church, but the common Catholike Church to haue don that, and I recant. BEcause you meane by the common Catholike, not the true Catholike, but the popish church: First I denie that euer the popish church conuerted any people, to the true faith. Secondly, I denie that the popish church hath conuerted all nations, to the profession of Christ: For, it is shewed before, that the false Apostles, and Arians, con∣uerted some nations to the profession of Christes name, but yet to false religion, And it is also manifest by histories, that the Grecians, whome the papistes counte no parte of their church, but schismatikes, conuerted the Moscouites first of all, vnto the profession of the name of Christ, which yet con∣tinue in their religion, being neither the true faith, nor yet popish religion. As for the popish church, as it is certeine, that it hath peruerted and corrupted all partes of the La∣tine, or Westerne Church, with Idolatry and false religion, so it shalbe harde for the papistes to proue, that it hath con∣uerted any Nation from Gentility to the popish religion, ex∣cept some partes of Germanie, and them by force of armes, rather than by preaching, and reaching, as appeareth by the conuersion of Liuonia, Anno Domini 1200. of Prussia, Anno Domini 1254. and of Lithuania, Anno Domini 1386. wherefore I conclude that seeing I haue shewed that our Church, hol∣ding
the true doctrine of the Apostles, is that which conuer∣ted all nations to true religion, and that the popish church, hath not conuerted any people to true religion, nor all peo∣ple to the profession of the name of Christ, this chalenger, whosoeuer he be, do the recant. The second article conteyneth 4. demandes. 1 I aske of him what Church it was, which hath induced the Christian people through the whole worlde, to geue most humble credit in all points, to the holy bookes of the Byble? I Aunswere, it was the Church of Christ, and not the Po∣pish church, which hath commended the bookes of holy Scripture, to be beleued of all true Christians where so∣euer they be, although it be the office of the holy Ghost, to open the hartes of men, and to forme them that they may beleue the scripture to be true, like as it is the office of the scripture or worde of God, to trie and examine, whether it be the spirite of God that perswadeth vs to beleue any thing, so the spirite beareth witnesse to the worde and the worde to the spirite. As for the popish church it coulde not induce the Christian people to geue credit to the scripture in all pointes, because she is contrarie to the scripture in many pointes: and euen in the cheefest pointes of Christian Reli∣gion, namely in pointes concerning the glorie of God, and the saluation of mankinde, geuing the glory of God to dead men, and dumbe Images, and denying the mercy of God, pourchased by the onely sacrifice of Christes death, to be the onely cause of mans saluation. Finally seeing it is manifest by the aunswere to the first article, that the popish church did not conuerte all nations, to the profession of the Christian faith, it is euident thereby, that the popish church did not induce all them, that are called Christians, to geue credit to the bookes of the holy Bible, as this chalenger woulde haue it to be thought. 2 VVhat Church hath had the discerning & seuering of them from other writinges of all sortes?
THe Church of Christ, hath not an absolute authority to allow or refuse bookes of the scripture, but a iudg∣ment to discerne true writinge from counterfaicts, & the word of God, of infallible verity, from ye writing of men, which might erre, & this iudgement she hath, not of her selfe, but of the holy Ghost: as for the popish Church, it can not be said to haue this iudgemēt of discerning the scri∣pture of God from other writings, not only because she is so blind that she can not discerne betwene ye Canonical bookes of the scripture, from the Apocrypha writings, as appereth by receauing the bookes of the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus, &c. to be of equall authoritie with ye bookes of the Law, Psalmes, &c. but also because she is so presumptuous, as to compel men to beleue, that Customes, and traditions, writinges of doctors, decrees of Popes, and Councells, are equall with the authoritie of God his worde, yea are of force, to alter and change the lawe of God, and the institution of Christ, set forth vnto vs in ye scripture. And although she boast that she receaueth all the bookes of scripture, yet this proueth no more that she is the Church of Christ, than was the churches of the Arrians, Donatistes, Nouatians, Euthychans, & other heretikes, which receiued the Bible, as well as the Popish church. 3 VVhat Church hath had the custodie of them, and most safe∣ly hath preserued them, for the necessary vse of God his people, and from the corruption of aduersaries, as well of Iewes, as heretikes of all sortes? THe prouidence of God, hath alwayes preserued the Scripture, both from the violence of tyrants, & from the falshoode of heretikes, and hath neuer suffred the true Church, to be destitute of the necessarie vse thereof. But the popish church, hath not kept the scripture for the necessary vse of the people, which hath so kept it in an vnknowen tongue, that the people coulde haue no vse, much lesse the necessary vse thereof: wherefore if this be a note of the Catholike Church, to kepe the worde of God
for the necessarie vse of God his people, it is plaine that the popish church is not the Catholike Church, which hath kept the scripture so, that God his people coulde haue no vse thereof. And if the only custodie of the scripture from corruption of heretikes, be a sure note of the Church, why is not the Greeke Church, the Catholike Church, which vnto this day hath kept the scripture as safely as the popish church? why are not other Estern Churches of Asia, which neuer acknow∣ledged the Pope, or popish religion, true Churches, which likewise haue preserued the scripture, as we haue seen of late, that the newe Testament is printed in the Syrian tongue, at themperours charges, for the encrease of Christian faith a∣mong them. And finally, why are not the Iewes, the Catho∣like Church, which haue kept the old Testament in Hebrue, more faithfully than euer the Papistes. And because they boast of safe preseruing of the scriptures, all men, that are learned in the tongues can testifie, in how corrupt a Latin translation they haue kept the scriptures, both of the olde and of the new Testament. 4 And let the Protestant declare to me, that their Congrega∣tion hath had from time to time, or euer had right herein, or any other Church, sauing the Catholike Church, and I recant. OVr Congregation, which is the body of Christ, hath euer had, both right and possession of the inestima∣ble treasure of the word of Christ her heade: as ap∣peareth by this, that our Church and Congrega∣tion beleueth nothing but that she learneth in it, acknowled∣geth that all thinges profitable to saluation, are sufficiently conteined in it, and finally in all thinges submitteth her selfe to the iudgemēt of it. But the popish church, which beleueth many thinges contrarie to the scripture, teacheth many thinges beside the scripture, necessary to saluation, and re∣fuseth to haue her faith, doctrine, and ceremonies, to be iudged by the scripture, neither hath, neither euer had, any
right to the scripture, though she haue neuer so many bookes of them in possession. Wherefore these thinges considered, this chalenger doth recant. The third article conteyneth 5. demandes. 1 Shew me why our common knowen Church, did not as well corrupt the text of the Testament, as the true religion conteyned in the same? THere may be diuers good reasons shewed, why your Church, commonly knowen to be the church of Antichrist, did not as well corrupt the text of the Testament, as the true religion conteined therein. First, because she coulde not, the copies thereof being so many, by the prouidence of God dispersed throughout the worlde. Secondly, because she thought it not so needefull, hauing other meanes to worke her deuilish deuise: For, al∣though she coulde not corrupt the scripture, yet it made the lesse matter, because she founde meanes to diminish, and controll the authority therof by aduancing decrees of men, Popes, and Councells, to be equall or of greater authoritie than the scripture. Thirdly, because she woulde be lesse in feare, to be reproued by the scripture, she prouided that the knowledge thereof, shoulde be hidden from the vnlearned people by a strange tongue, and from the learned, by the te∣dious mazes of questions, deuised by her Canonistes, and Sententiaries. Fourthly, because she submitted all interpre∣tation of the scripture, to her owne iudgement, and there∣fore woulde not be controlled by the iudgement thereof, but woulde alwayes expound it, as it liked her best. As ap∣peareth by Ockam, and Duns, who though they confesse, that transubstantiation, seemeth to them, contrary to the scrip∣ture, and reason, yet they beleued it, because of the autho∣ritie of the church, and for none other cause. These are the reasons, why the Romish church did not, as well corrupt the text of the Testamēt, as the true Religion. And yet how cor∣rupt that Latine translation is, which they woulde needes
thrust vpō vs, is sufficiently knowen to all learned men, euen in such texts, as are the most coulerable places for the de∣fence of Popish doctrine. I will geue one example for all: They alleage the text 1. Cor. 10. Qui stat, videat ne cadat. He that standeth, let him take heede he fall not, against the cer∣tainetie of faith, whereas the Greeke hath, not he that stan∣deth, but, he that thinketh he standeth, let him take heede he fall not: Thus the popish church cannot altogether ex∣cuse her selfe, from corrupting of the text of the Testament, whether it was of fraude, or of ignorance, or of negligence, the Lorde knoweth. 2 Shew me why, she kept not so safely, and faithfully, the true sense of God his word, as she preserued the word it selfe? BEcause it was against her owne estimation, and profit, which are the chiefe endes for which popish Prelates mainteyne popish religion. Take away the Popes pre∣rogatiue, which is contrary to the sense of God his word, downe goe Cardinalls, Legates, Prothonotaries: downe goeth all the Court of Rome, take away workes of superero∣gation, which are contrary to the Scripture, downe goe Ab∣beys, Priories and Chantries. Take away the sacrifice of the Masse, & Purgatory, which are contrary to the word of God, downe goeth the estimation, and gaynes of all the popish clergie: And this is the cause, why the popish church kept not so safely, and faithfully, the true sense of God his word, as she preserued the word it selfe, although she preserued not the word it self, in such safetie as becommed the Church of Christ. 3 Shew me why, we should beleue the Papistes, as you terme them, for the word it self, and rather you Protestants thā them, for the meaning of the word. WE doe not chalenge credit to our selues, in any poynt, so presumptuously as the Papistes, that men must beleue it because we affirme it. But because we proue it to be true, by the worde of
God. And therefore for the meaning of the word, you should beleue vs rather than them, because our groundes & proues are better then theirs, or else we require not to be beleued better than they. 4 Shew me why, you beleued our Church, telling you this to be God his booke, & will not credit her, auouching this to be the true and vndoubted sense of the same booke? IF we had no better ground to perswade vs, of the autho∣ritie of God his booke, than ye testimony of your Church, you may be sure we would not beleue it. But because we haue most stedfast assurance of God his spirite, for the au∣thority of that booke, with the testimony of the true Church in all ages. If you say it is God his booke, we beleue you not, because you say so, but because we know it to be true. But if you bring out a false sense, we beleue you not, because we know it to be false, & are able to proue by the word of God, that it is contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost. To be plaine with you, we geue as much credit to your Church, as to the deuill. When the deuill sayth: it is written: He shall giue his angells charge ouer thee, and with their handes they shall hold thee vp that thou dash not thy foote against a stone. We be∣leue that this is the worde of God. But when he auoucheth this to be ye meaning of it, that we may cast downe our selues from a Church steeple, without daunger, we doe not beleue him, because we know this sense is contrary to an other Scri∣pture, which sayth: Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. So when you say these wordes are the Scripture of God: This is my body: We beleue it, because we knowe it to be true. But when you say this is the meaning of these wordes. This bread is turned into my naturall bodye, we beleue you not, because it is contrary to all places of Scripture, which proue the trueth of Christ his humanitie or naturall body. Thus I shewe you why we beleue you, if you say the Scripture is God his word, namely because we know it to be true, & why we beleue you not, saying this is the meaning of it, that is, because we knowe by the word of God that it is false.
5 Last of all, Shew me why, you beleued the olde known church, affirming this to be the word of God, and will not beleue her, affirming Luther to be an heretike, shew me good rea∣son or Scripture for these thinges, and I recant. IF you meane by the olde Church the primitiue Church, whose testimony of the word of God we allow & beleue, I deny that the primitiue Church did affirme Luther to be an heretike, or the doctrine that he taught, which we hold,, to be heresie, but I am able to proue, that the primitiue Church, from which you haue receiued the Scripture, affir∣meth your doctrine to be heresie, & your Church ye Church of Antichrist. But if by ye old knowne Church, you meane the Church of old, knowne to be the Church of Antichrist, which is the po∣pish church,, we beleue the deuill if he speake the trueth, and we beleue not an Angell comming from heauen, if he bring any other Gospel, than S. Paule deliuered to the Galathians. Therefore when your church affirmeth Luther to be an he∣retike, seeing we know that Luther did not obstinately, and malitiously erre, in any article of faith, concerning the sub∣stance of religion, we doe not beleue her: and specially be∣cause she is a partiall witnesse against him, whome God vsed to discouer, so much of her wickednesse, to her great hin∣drance, there is no credit to be geuen vnto her, when she goeth about to deface him, by sclaunderous names, and false accusations. Thus I haue shewed these thinges that you re∣quire, both by good reason, and also by scripture: Therefore if I may beleue you, you recant. The fourth article conteyneth 3. demandes. 1 I demand, what Church hath mightely gonne through, borne downe, and fully vanquished, all heresies in times past, aswell against the blessed Trinitie, as other Articles of our religion?
I Aunswere, the true Catholike Church, hath alwayes re∣sisted all false opinions, contrary to the worde of God, as her duty was, and fought against them with the sworde of the spirite, which is the worde of God, and by the aide of God obteyned the victorie, and triumphed ouer them. So did Paule ouercome the Iewes Act. 18. So did the fathers of the primitiue Church, from time to time, confute heresies, by the scriptures, and declare in their writinges, that by them they are to be confuted, for examples sake of a great num∣ber, I will alleage a few. Hylarius, writing of the blessed Tri∣nitie against heretikes Lib. 4. sayeth: Cessent ita{que} propriae ho∣minum opiniones, ne{que} se vltrà Diuinam constitutionem, humanae iudicia extendant: Sequamur ergo aduersus irreligiosas, & im∣pias de Deo institutiones, ipsas illas diuinorūm dictorum authori∣tates, & vnumquod{que} eorum ipso de quo quaeritur auctore tracta∣bimus. Wherefore let opinions propre to men geue place, and let not mens iudgements stretche them selues further than God his constitution. Therefore against these vnreli∣gious and vngodly opinions of God, let vs follow the very authority of God his sayings, and handle euery one of them, by the aide of him, about whome the question is: Thus Hy∣larius, woulde haue heresies against the Trinitie, to be con∣futed, not by mens iudgement, but by God his word. Basilius magnus, very often testifieth, that he woulde haue all good thinges, proued by the scripture, and all euill thinges confu∣ted by the same, In his moralles Dist. 26. Euery worde or deede, must be confirmed by the testimonie of holy Scrip∣ture, for the perswasion of good men, and the confusion of wicked men: And in his treatise of Faith: we know, that we must now, and alwayes, auoide euery voice or opinion, that is differing from the doctrine of our Lorde. And in his short definitions to the first interrogation: whether it be lawefull or profitable for a man to permit vnto him selfe, to do or say any thinge, which he thinketh to be good, without the te∣stimonie of the holy Scripture? he aunswereth: forasmuch as our Sauiour Christ sayeth: that the holy Ghost shall not speake of him selfe, what madnes is it, that any man shoulde presume to beleue any thing, without the authoritie of God
his worde. By these, and many other places, it is manifest, that Basilius, woulde haue heresies and false opinions, con∣futed by the holy Scriptures. Chrysostome, vpon Luke cap. 16. sayeth, that the ignorance of the scriptures, hath bred heresies, and brought in corrupt life, yea it hath turned all things vpsidown, by which it ap∣peareth, by what meanes he would haue heresies kept away, namely by knowledge of the scriptures. It were to long to reherse all the places of S. Augustine, by which his minde ap∣peareth, that he would haue the Church, sought onely in the scriptures, and heretikes confuted, onely by the scriptures, to whose onely authoritie in many places, he professeth that he him selfe will be bounde, as Epist. 19. ad Hieronymum. Epist. 48. Vincentio. Epist. 111. Fortunatiano. Epist. 112. to Paulina, con∣tra Faustum. lib. 11. cap. 5. Contra Cresconium Grammaticum, lib. 2. cap. 31. & 32. de Baptismo contra Donatistas lib. 2. cap. 2. De meritis & remissione peccatorum, contra Pelagianos lib. 3. cap. 7. De naturae & gratia cap. 61. De gratia Christi contra Pelagium cap. 43. De nuptijs & concupiscentia lib. 2. c. 29. In these places, S. Augustine preferreth the authority of the Canonicall scrip∣ture, before all writinges of Catholike Doctors, of Byshops, of Councells, before all customes, and traditions. But that he would haue the true Church sought onely in the scriptures, it is manifest, by these places, first in his 48. Epistle to Vin∣centius. Nos autem ideo certi sumus, neminem se a communione omnium gentium iustè separare potuisse, quia non quis quam no∣strum in iustitia sua, sed in scripturis Diuines quaerit Ecclesiam. speaking of the Donatistes, he sayeth. We are suer, that no man could iustly separate him selfe from the communion of all Nations, because none of vs seeketh the Church in his owne righteousnesse, but in the holy Scriptures. So if the Papistes woulde not presume of their owne righteousnesse, but seeke the Church of Christ in the scriptures, they would not separate them selues from the communion of Christes Church, now by God his grace inlarged farther than the Popish church. Also in his booke De vnitate Ecclesiae. cap. 2. he hath these wordes. Inter nos autem & Donatistas quaestio est, vbi sit Ecclesa. Quid ergo facturi sumus? in verbis nostris
am quaesituri, an in verbis capitis sui Domini nostri Iesu Christi puto quod in illius potius verbis eam quaerere debemus, qui ve∣ritas est, & optimè nouit corpus suum. The question is betwene vs, and the Donatistes, where the Church shoulde be, what shall we doe then? shall we seeke her in our owne wordes, or in the wordes of her heade our Lorde Iesus Christ? I thinke we ought rather to seeke her in his words which is ye Truth, and best knoweth his owne body. So the question is at this daye, betwen the Papistes and vs, where the church is, let vs seeke in God his worde, there we shall easily finde her. To the same intent, he speaketh in the third, fiueth, and six∣tenth Chapters of the same treatise. Furthermore, that he woulde haue heretikes confuted onely by the scriptures, he sheweth likewise in many places of his workes: for wri∣ting against Maximinus the Arian, lib. 3. cap. 14. a place com∣monly and often cited, he sayeth: but nowe, neither must I preiudicially bring forthe the Councell of Nice, nor then the Councell of Arimine, for neither am I bounden to the authoritie of the one, nor you of ye other, but let matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason, contend by au∣thoritie of the scriptures, not proper to any, but indfferent witnesses to both partes. If Augustine would not oppresse the Arrians, by the authoritie of the Nicene Councell, which was the first, and the best generall Councell, that euer was, but only by the scriptures, how much lesse woulde he charge them with other authorities, that the Papistes alleage, beside the authoritie of holy scriptures. And in his booke De Vni∣ate Ecclesiae against the Donatistes the 16. chapter: Sed vtril ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum scripturarum Canonicis libris oftendant, quia nec nos &c. But whether they holde the church or no: let them shew none other wise, but by the ca∣nonicall bookes of holy Scripture, for we our selues doe not say, that men ought to beleue vs, that we are in the Church, because we holde that Church which Optatus of Mileuitum, or Ambrose of Millayn, or innumerable other Byshops of our communion, haue commended to vs, or because it is set forth by the Councels of our felowe byshops, or because so many myracles of hearing requests, or healinges, are don in
the holy places, which our fellowship doth frequent in the whole worlde, so that the bodies of Martyrs, which were hidden so many yeares (which thinge if they will aske they may heare of many) were reuealed vnto Ambrose, and that at the same bodies, one that had bene many yeares blinde, very well knowen in the citie of Millayn, receyued his eyes, and eye sight, either because this man dreamed, or that man was rauished in the spirite, and hearde a voice, that he should not ioyne himselfe to Donatus, or that he shoulde departe from the faction of Donatu: for when soeuer such thinges are don in the Catholike Church, they are to be allowed, because they are don in the Catholike church▪ but the church it selfe is not therfore proued to be Catholike, because these thinges are done in it. By this Augustine declareth first that heretikes must be confuted, onely by the scriptures, and se∣condly that neither Councells, succession of byshops, vni∣uersality, miracles, visions, dreames, nor reuelations, are the notes to trie the Catholike church, but onely the scriptures. Moreouer in his booke De Pastoribus cap. 14. Quaerit infirmus Ecclesiam &c. A weake person seeketh the Church, he wan∣dreth and seeketh the church▪ what sayest you? The church is of Donatus side. Enquire for the shepheards voice, Reade me this out of some Prophet, reade me this out of some Psalme, rehearse me it out of the lawe, rehearse it out of the Gospell, rehearse it out of the Apostle, out of them do I re∣hearse the Church dispersed ouer all the worlde. And a litle after: Tu accusas non Euangelium &c. Thou accusest, not the Gospell, thou accusest not the Prophet, not the Apostle of whome this voyce speaketh to me I beleue him other I be∣leue not. But thou wilt bring forth decrees, I will also bring forth decrees, shoulde I beleue thine? beleue thou mine like∣wise. I beleue not thine, neither do thou beleue mine, then let mens writings be layd away and let Gods worde sounde be∣twen vs: bring me one place of scripture for Donatus side &c. These places maye sufficiently declare by what meanes this doctor thought the Church shoulde ouerthrowe heresies, namely by the worde of God onely, which thing also Leo, the first byshop of Rome, in his Epist. 10. ad Fabianum contra
Eutychen plainely confesseth saying: Sed in hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cum ad cognoscendam veritatem &c. But those men fal into this foly, which when they are hindred by any doubt to knowe the trueth, haue not recourse to the voyces of the Prophets, not to the writings of the Apostles, not to the au∣thoritie of the Gospell, but to them selues. And therefore they become, maisters of error, because they haue not bene schollers of trueth. Of the same iudgement was the whole Councell of Constantinople the sixt, as appeare Actione 18. Si igitur omnes simpliciter &c. Therefore if all men from the beginning woulde haue simply and without subtiltie taken vpon them the preaching of the Gospell, and haue bene con∣tent with the constitutions of the Apostles, suerly matters shoulde haue bene well, and in good case, neither shoulde painefull contention, haue bene exercised against the au∣thors of heresies, nor against the fauorers of priests. Here the Councell confesseth, that the heretikes and schismatikes grow so fast, because they were not beaten downe, by prea∣ching of the Gospell and authority of the scriptures. Thus I haue declared by example, and authority of these Fathers, that the true Church of Christ, hath conuicted all heretikes, onely by the scripture. 2 And what Church it was, that hath alwayes stande still, and stedfast, whilest all other Congregations, as well of Ar∣rians, as Anabaptistes, Aerians, Nouatians, Vigilan∣tians, Iouinians, and the rest haue decaied. THe true Church of Christ, hath alwayes stoode sted∣fast, and vnseparable, from Christ her heade, when all heretikes haue bene, and shal be confounded. But the true Church hath not alwaies florished in word∣ly peace and tranquilitie: for vntill the tyme of Constantine the great, which was Anno Dom. 339. the Church had small rest from cruell persecution in most places: and soone after a∣gaine vnder the Emperors Constantius, Constans, and Valens, it was greatly infected with the heresie of Arius, what time also Tiberius Bishop of Rome, was infected with the same heresie.
After that when Iulianus the Apostata, was Emperor, the tem∣ples of Idolls were opened, and gentilitie againe restored, so that the Church suffered great detriment. To be short, when the barbarous Goathes, Vandales, Alanes, and other Idola∣trous or heretical nations destroyed the Empire, the Church of God suffered a great Ecclipse. But when Mahomet, in the East, & Antichrist the Pope, in the West, seduced the world with most detestable heresie, then was fulfilled that which was reuealed to S. Iohn in the 12. of the Apocalyps, the woman clothed with the Sonne, which you your self confesse to be the Church, was so persecuted by the Dragon, that she fled into the wildernes, there to remaine a long season. Where she hath not decayed, but ben always preserued, vntil God should reueale Antichrist, and bring her againe into open light, which (his holy name be praysed) is now brought to passe in our dayes, to our inestimable comfort, and his euerlasting glory. 3 And if it can be proued that either the Protestants Church or any other Church but ours, hath mightely ouerthrowne these foresayd sectes, and other of all sortes, I recant. IT hath bene already proued sufficiently, that the true Catholike Church which is ledde onely, by the worde of God, as a most infallible rule, hath ouerthrowne heresies of all sortes. But the popish church which refuseth the on∣ly weapon, by which heresies are cut downe, to be sufficient for that purpose, neuer was nor shall be strong enough to en∣counter with heretikes, therefore she practiseth to vanquish those whom she counteth for heretikes, not by authoritie of the Scriptures, but by fire and sworde, and cruell warre, as appeareth by her dealing with the Waldenses, Albigenses, Bohemians, and in our dayes with the true Christians. But where her power of fire and sword could not preuayle, there hath she not ouerthrowne such as she condemneth for he∣retikes, namely the Grecians church, & all other churches of Asia, and Aphrica, which vnto this day will not acknow∣ledge her doctrine to be Catholike, nor her authoritie to be lawefull. Wherefore seeing the Popish church neither
hath confuted those that are heretikes in deed, nor subdued those whom she counteth to be heretikes, if you be a good as your worde, you recant. The fiueth article conteyneth 3. demandes. 1 Againe, what Church is that, which hath exercised by Christes appointement, Discipline, vpon offendors in all degrees? ONely the Church of Christ, by Christes appointe∣ment, hath exercised true discipline vpon offen∣dors, Although by meanes of persecution, she could not alwayes practise the same as she would. 2 And for that purpose, hath continually executed lawes and Canons Ecclesiasticall, with Excommunication, Degrada∣tion, suspension, and such like. THe Church of Christ only, hath had lawful authority to exercise discipline: but as it is said before, she hath not continually practised the same, because she could not, being hindered by persecution, and dispersion. Concerning excommunication, she hath practised it accor∣ding to the word of God, and against such offendors, as the scripture iudgeth worthy of that seuere punishment: As for degradation, and suspension, it may be doubted what you meane by them: If you vnderstand by degradation, that such persons as the Church hath tried vnmeet, either for doctrine or manners, to execute the office of preaching, and mini∣string the sacraments, she hath displaced and reiected from that charge: she hath also practised drgradation: And if you meane by suspension, that when the accusation of a mans doctrine or life was vncerteine, that she hath willed him to cease from executing his office, vntill his cause were tried either good or euill, she hath also vsed suspension: but if by degradation and suspension, you meane those foolish and wicked ceremonies, which the popish church now vseth and so termeth, I deny that euer the true Church of Christ had to do with such degradations and suspensions.
3 Proue me this geere to procede from Protestants, or from any other Church than the Catholike, and I recant. IT is proued before, that true discipline belongeth to the true Church, wherof we are a part, which Church is suffi∣ciently proued to be the spouse of Christ, because she is ruled in all thinges by his onely voice: And therefore all congregations of heretikes, which departe from the true worde of God, though they take vpon them, to exercise dis∣cipline, by excommunication or otherwise, it is not to be re∣garded, and lest of all the Popish church, where remaineth nothing of discipline and excommunication, but the very names: for what call you popish discipline? is not that it which they vse in Lent, whisking men on the heades, and women on the handes, with white roddes which they them selues call discipline? Or is it the seuere punishment that they vse against offendors by excommunication, suspension, interdighting &c. First, it is manifest they haue no excom∣munication by Christes appointment, for neither it is exe∣cuted by the persons appointed by Gods worde, nor against such offendors only as God his word appointeth: for wher∣as our Sauiour Christ appointeth the order of that discipline, to the Congregation of such as are wise, godly, and carefull of mens health, which first shal labor by fatherly admonition and wholesome exhortation, to bring the offendors to re∣pentance, whome if they refuse to heare, they are to be re∣puted for hethens and publicanes, the Pope contrariwise re∣ferreth the same to profane and vnreligious officers, which are more desirous to gaine the fees of absolution, than by bringing the party to repentance, to saue him from excom∣munication. Moreouer whereas by Gods worde, excommu∣nication is the last and most greuous punishment, that the Church can enioyne against any, of whom there is any hope of saluation, and therefore ought not to be practised but for haynous offences, the Popish church maketh it serue for euery trifling matter, yea for pettie debts and all, then com∣meth in interdightings & suspensions of places, as churches
and townes, yea whole realmes, for one mans faulte: what likelinesse hath this vnto the discipline of Christes church set forth in the scriptures, and practised by the fathers? with what face can you Papistes affirme, they haue discipline, in their Church, whē all penaunces for most horrible offences, may be bought out for money, and an open market thereof set vp at Rome, with the prices rated, what men must pay for euery thing that they buye: as absolution for him that hath killed his father, or mother, brother, sister, or wife Turones 4. Ducat. 1. Ca. line. 5.8. For an heretike before he haue abiu∣red 36. Turones. and 9. ducates. For a witche 6. Turones. 2. ducates. For a priest that is a Sodomite, or hath lyen with brute beastes 36. Turones. 9. ducates. For a nonne that hath bene a common whore both within and without her Abby, with dispensation that she may be able to receiue any digni∣tie, in her order, yea to be Abbesse, 36. Turones. 9. ducates. And so for all other offences, with dispensations, inhibitions, rehabilities, licences, relaxations, commutations, confir∣mation, perinde Valeres Marcamas and the deuill and all for money: wherefore except you be to impudent, to acknow∣ledge this to be Christian discipline, be as good as your pro∣mise, and recant. The sixth article conteyneth 3. demandes. 1 Againe from what Church, did all the solemne ceremonies, and obseruations, all festiuall dayes, all fastes, all distin∣ctions, and varieties of seruice, by diuersities of seasons, and times of the yeare, (proceede.) FIrst you must vnderstande, that we detest and abhorre all your beggarly ceremonies, which you counte holy and solemne obseruations: for we know, that God is not to be worshipped with such thinges but that the true worshippers must worship him in spirit & veritie Iohn 4. And seeing we know God, or rather are knowen of him, we will not regarde the weake and beggarly elementes, be∣cause they are destitute of God his worde, which onely i
able to geue them strength and estimation? as for your festi∣uities, in the honour of creatures, we doe likewise abhorre them▪ we honour the Sainctes as S. Augustine sayeth for imi∣tation, but we do not worship them for Religion. De vera Re∣ligione cap. 55. Where he also saith. Quare honoramus eos cha∣ritate, non seruitute. We honor them with loue, and not with seruice. And as he doth often affirme, that it is Idolatry to builde churches in the honour of Sainctes, so is it as great Idolatry, to institute festiuall dayes, in the fauour of the same Sainctes. As for the festiuall dayes that were vsed in the pri∣mitiue Church, although they might haue bene omitted, without any hurt of Christian Religion, yet were they not kept in the honour of creatures, as they are of the Papistes, but only for the memorie of the Martyrs, and other Saincts, that their good life might be followed. Your fastes are also abhominable: for they are nothing else but abstinence from meates, created of God to be receiued with thankesgeuing, which S. Paule affirmeth to be the doctrine of Diuells 1. Tim. 4. Also your distinctions and varieties of seruice, because they consiste most of blasphemous prayers to dead Sainctes, and sometimes to damned spirites, with foolish lessons, re∣sponses, versicles, &c. Lewde lies and vncertaine tales, which you reade and sing, as God his seruice, they are all abhomi∣nable. In vaine do they worship me, saith our Sauiour Christ, teaching for doctrine the preceptes of men. Math. 15. Also it was decreed in the Councell of Laodicea, the 59. chapter, that nothing should be song or reade in the Church, but the Canonicall bookes of holy Scripture: wherefore if you de∣mande whence your ceremonies, festiuall dayes, fastes, and varieties of seruice did proceede? I aunswere plainely, out of the bottomles pit of hell. 2 From whence did all thinges, yet indifferently for most part, obserued, and allowed, on both sides, from whence did they proceede? IF you had vttered what thinges you meane, that are so indifferently allowed on both sides, we might better haue aunswered: but seeing you haue not, we must coniecture
what you meane: if you meane any thinge that is allowed without controuersie on both sides, it did either proceede from the scripture of God, or from the primitiue Church or else it a thing meerely indifferent, but if it haue no grounde in holy Scripture, nor example of the primitiue Church, nor iudged meerely indifferent, it not indifferently obserued for the most parte, nor yet allowed on both sides. 2 And if it can be proued, that the Protestants Congregation, or any other Church, but ours, hath instituted and ordered all these, or any of these, for the comelinesse and honour of God his house, I recant. I Haue aunswered before, that the Protestants Congre∣gation, geueth you leaue to bragge, that you are the in∣uentors of all these Idolatrous superstitions, & false wor∣shipping of God, and yet because you offer so liberally to recant, if it can be proued that any Church but yours, hath instituted and ordered all these thinges, you shall heare what can be saide. First, your great doctor Durande, plainely affirmeth that many of your ceremonies, and solemnities, had not their first institution of your church, but were taken of the Iewes or Gentiles: And it may easily be proued, that many of your ceremonies, were instituted of heretikes, as your holy water which you say you vse to put men in minde of their baptisme, was deriued of ye heretikes called Heme∣robaptistae, which were, baptized euery daye, Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 17. Of the Ossenes, you tooke the great estima∣tion of water, salt, oyle, breade, &c. and vse to sweare by them, as they did. Epiph. contra Ossenes 19. Of the same here∣tikes, you receiued the superstition of reliques, for they vsed to take the spittle, and other filth from the bodies of Marthys, and Marthana, which were of the seede of Elxai, that is, great Sainctes with them, and vsed them to cure diseases, as Eras∣mus witnesseth, at Canterbury were kept the clowtes, that Thomas Becket did occupy to wipe of his sweate,In peregrina∣tione Religi∣onis ergo. and to blow his nose on, which were kissed as holy reliques, and thought also to be holsom for sicke folkes: of the same heretikes you
learned to commande the people to pray, in an vnknowene tongue, as Elxai, the great Pope of those heretikes sayde: Nemo quaerat interpretationem, sed solum in oratione haec dicat. Let no man seeke the interpretation, but onely saye these wordes in his prayer. Which wordes were in a strange tong, either the Hebrue, or the Arabike. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. hae∣res. 19. Likewise the Marcosians when they baptized, vsed to speake certaine Hebrue wordes, that the ignorant people might maruell the more at them, as you doe in Baptisme Ephata, &c. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haer. 34. To make the Images of Christ, and of the Apostles, and to sense them, you learned of the heretikes called Gnostici, and Carpocratiae, Epip. lib. 1. Tom. 2. in the preface Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 27. and Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 23. Of the Valentinians, you learned to haue in price the signe of the crosse, and to abuse the places of scrip∣ture for the same superstitious vse: as, God forbidde that I shoulde reioice but in the crosse of Christ, &c. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 1. Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haeres. 31. Of the Heracleo∣nites, you learned to annoynte men at the point of death, with oyle, and balme, and to cast water vpon dead men, with inuocations. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haeres. 36. Of the Cayanes, you learned to call vpon Angels. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. haeres. 38. Of the Marcionistes, you learned to giue women leaue to baptize. Ep. lib. 1. Tom. Haer. 42. George, Bishop of Alexandria, inuented beares to carry deade corpses, charging all men to vse them for his owne aduantage, as doe you Papistes your bearing clothes & other toyes for funerall pompes. Ep. lib. 3. Tom. 1. Haer. 76. Of the Colliridianes, you learned to make i∣mages of the virgine Marie, & worship them & her, with of∣fering of candells, &c. as they did of cakes, &c. Ep. lib. 3. Haer. 79. Of the Messalians or Martirians, you learned to shaue your beardes and to let your lockes grow long. Ep. lib. 3. Haer. 80. Of the Pharizees, you receaued your superstitious mas∣king garments, which you call amictus dalmaticus, and pallia, as witnesseth Epiphanius, in his epistle to Acacius, and Paulus. Last of all what say you to the ceremonies, festiuities, fastes, and solemnities, vsed in the Greeke Church, and in the other Oriental Churches, if they be sufficient to make their church
Catholke, why doe you count them heretikes, and Schis∣matikes? if they be not sufficient, why doe you reason of the instiution of the like, to proue your Church Catholike? You see that proued which you desired, play the honest man ther∣fore, and recant. The 7. article conteineth 3. demaundes. 1 Further I aske them, what Church that is, which hath brought forth out of her wombe, so many noble personages, of Mar∣tyrs, Confessors, Doctors, Virgines, and holy Sainctes, of all sortes, all which both they and we doe outwardly professe, by the continuance of the Callendare, which yet is vsed euery where, to be Sainctes in heauen. FVrther I aunswere you, that all true Sainctes, whether they were Patriarches, Prophets, Apostles, Euāgelistes, Martyrs, Confessors, Doctors, Scholars, Virgins, wiues, widowes, married, or vnmarried, are all children of that Church, in whose fellowship we reioyce to be, and are our deare brethren and sistern begotten in Iesu Christ by the go∣spell, and we all hold of one head Iesus Christ, as members of his mysticall body. We all beleue to be receaued into that glory that they are, by the onely meane that they were, that is by the mercie of God in Christ Iesus. But as for the conti∣nuance of the Callendar, we haue litle respect vnto it, yea no regard at all, to vse it either as a recorde, or as a register of those whom we acknowledge to be Sainctes in heauen. Let the Prince make you aunswere, for the continuance of such callēders, for we haue not to do with them. Neuerthelesse be∣cause you speake of a Callendar, that is vsed euery where, you declare that you haue small experience in Callendars, for euery cuntry hath them diuers in most dayes, except holy dayes, and in some cuntry Callendars, such dayes are festi∣uall to those Saincts, that haue not their names in Callendars of other cuntries, yea it may be doubted whether they haue their names in the booke of life. If you sawe a Bohemians Callendar, perhaps if you shoulde see Iohn Hus, and Ierom
of Prage, which your church condemned for heretikes, and haue as solemne feastes, in the Callender as Peter and Paule, wherefore we acknowledge those to be Sainctes in deede, not whose names are continued in the Callendars of men, but are written in the booke of life of the Lambe, that was slaine from the beginning of the worlde. Apoc. 13. 2 And if it can be proued by any man of the Protestancy, that these were either, of the Protestants Congregation, or beleefe when they were aliue. IT is sufficiently proued against you, of the Papistrie, that all they, whome we acknowledge to be Sainctes in hea∣uen, are members of the same mysticall bodie of Christ, that we are, and hold the onely foundation that we hold, which is Iesus Christ, and although some of them, builded straw and stubble vpon the same foundation, yet the Lorde hath not imputed it vnto them. But wheras the Patriarches, Prophetes, and Apostles were cheefe lightes and pillers of the church of Christ, the daye is yet to come, and euer shal∣be, that all you of the Papistrie, shalbe able to charge vs with one pointe of our faith, contrary to the doctrine of the Pa∣triarches, Prophetes, and Apostles. 3 Or canonized and allowed for Sainctes by the Protestantes Church, when they were deade, or by any other Church, then I recant. OVr Church doth take all them that shew the fruicts of a liuely faith, to be Sainctes, while they be aliue, as well as after their death, and we say with Dauid: All my delight is in the Sainctes, that are in the earth Psal. 16. and with S. Paule: VVe labour to comprehend with all Sainctes, what is the length, breadth, depth, and heigth, and to know the loue of Christ. Ephes. 3. Finally the scripture teacheth vs, to call all them that are sanctified in the bloude of Christ, and called to the felowship of the Gospell, holy and Sainctes of God. 1. Cor. 1. Ephes. 1. &c. Wherefore, your Popish church
doth great iniury to the Sainctes of God, first, because she doth not so accompt them while they liue, and secondly, be∣cause she referreth the canonization of them only to ye Pope, who not for their holy life, maketh them Sainctes, but for the holy honger of golde, as appeare by Pope Iuly 2. who woulde not canonize king Henry the sixt, at the request of king Henry the seuenth, vnder an vnreasonable summe of money. If that summe of money had bene paide, he shoulde haue bene a sainct, though he had not deserued, not for his vertue. And because that summe of money was not paide, he might not be canonized, although his godlinesse neuer so much deserued. Againe of what force your Canonization is to be esteemed, we may learne by a fact of Pope Boniface the 8. who condemned, digged vp, and burned the bodie of Hermannus in Ferraria, 30. yeares after his buriall, who had bene worshipped for a sainct aboue 20. yeares before, as wit∣nesseth Platina and other. Gregorie the seuenth canonized Pope Liberius, which was an Arrian, as S. Hieronym testifieth, Moreouer if I shoulde likewise demande of you, what Pope canonized Peter, Paule, and the rest of the Apostles, yea most of the Martyrs of the primitiue Church, you shall neuer be able to shew me either what Pope did it, or that any Pope did it: For seeing none may canonize but the Pope in your church, and you can not proue that the Pope hath canoni∣zed the Apostles and cheefe Martyrs, you can not proue that your church hath canonized the Apostles and principall Martyrs. But it is manifest that your canonization is taken from the heathen Senate of Rome, which chalenged autho∣rity to make Gods, whome they them selues thought best. And if I shoulde rippe vp the most parte of those Sainctes, which haue bene canonically canonized by the Pope, it were an easie matter to finde them heretikes, traitors, Necro∣mancers, Whoremongers, and whores, as you may reade in Bales Votaries aboundantly, beleuing his reporte no farther than he alleageth his Author, where you maye finde it. Wherefore it were wisedome for you, not to depend vpon the Pope his Canonization, but vpon God his approbation, and to recante.
The 8. article conteyneth 3. demandes. 1 And because Christ as S Paule sayeth, hath established in his Church some Apostles, some Prechers, some Teachers, and Doctors euen vntill his comming againe, I aske the Protestant, what Church that is, which is able to shew & proue, the continuance and vse of the saide functions euer sence Christes time by plaine accompt of orderly Succession. I Aunswere the Papist, that Christ hath geuen to his Church some Apostles, some Prophetes, some Euangelistes, some Pa∣stors, and Teachers. Ephes. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. And we are able to shew & proue, that we continue in that vnitie of faith and knowledge of the Sonne of God, for which ende such offices were ordeyned. But whereas you require, that we should shew you the continuance of those functions by or∣derly succession from Christes his time vntill our dayes, you declare how small skill you haue in vnderstanding the scrip∣tures, for the offices of Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophetes, were not appoincted to continue alwayes in the Church, but for a time, vntill the Gospell had taken roote in the worlde. Moreouer, whereas you requier an orderly succession, accor∣ding to persons, or places, you are neuer able to proue, that any such thing was promised to the Church, that we should shew you the performance thereof in our Church. Other∣wise we doubt not, but God hath alway stirred vp some faith∣full teachers, that haue instructed his Church in the neces∣sarie poinctes of Christian Religion. Although the worlde and the church of Antichrist did not alwayes see them. 2 And is able to name you by the histories of all ages, the notable personnes of all the forsaide states, in their go∣uernment and ministerie. AGaine I answere you, that you are not able to name, me any text of scripture, by which you can proue, that al these offices must haue perpetual cōtinuance
in ye church of Christ, nor yet that any of them should kepe an ordinarie succession of place or persons: But contrari∣wise, seeing it was prophecied that the church should flie in∣to the wildernes, that is, be driuen out of the sight and know∣ledge of the wicked, and be so narrowly persecuted of the Romish Antichrist for a longe season, it were a token our church were not the true church, if we could name such no∣table persons as you speake of, in all ages florishing in their gouernment and ministerie. And it is a good argument, that the Popish church is not the church of Christe, because it was neuer hidden sence it first sprang vp, in so much that you can name all the notable persons in all ages in their gouern∣ment, and ministerie, and especially the succession of Popes, you can reherse in order vpon your fingers, in which bead∣roole, neuerthelesse you must name many tyrants, many traytors, one whore, many whoremongers, many Sodomites, many murtherers, many poysenors, many sorcerers, and Ne∣cromancers, and from Boniface the third, all blasphemous heretikes, and Antichristes. But our church, which hath not had so many registers, chroniclers, and remembrancers hath perhaps fewer, but yet honester men to name: we can name Peter, Paule, Mathew, Iohn, &c. Marke, Luke, Timothe, A∣gabus, Epaphras, &c. Iustinus, Irenaeus, Cyprianus, Athanasius, Hylarius, Ambrosius, Augustinus, &c. Gyldas, Bertramus, Mar∣silius de Padua. Ioan. de Ganduno, Bruno Andagauensis VVick∣leue, Iohn Hus, Hierome of Prage, &c. With the first, namely Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophets, we consent wholly in all pointes of doctrine, with the rest, in the cheefe and most substantiall articles of faith, alwayes agreeing with any man, so farre as he agreeth with the worde of God. 3 And if he can proue vnto me, that their Church hath neuer lacked the same appointed officers, or that any Church or Congregatiō but ours hath kept that charge, thē I recant. FOr some of those officers I haue twise aunswered be∣fore, that they were not ordeined, to continue alwaies, with the church, wherefore they are not to be exacted
of vs, but such officers as are necessary for the conseruati∣on of God his people in the vnitie of faith and the know∣ledge of Christ, our Church hath neuer lacked, although in time of the great defection and Apostasie whereof S. Paule doth prophesie 2. Thess. 2. there were but few, as there were but fewe members of Christ his Church notwithstanding that through iniurie of the time, the remembraunce of all their names is not come vnto vs. And although we could re∣hearse in order as many successions in our Church as the pa∣pistes boast of in theirs, yet were that nothing to proue it to be the Church of Christ, which must be tried onely by the Scriptures, as S. Augustine sayth in his booke de vnitate Eccle∣siae, against the Donatistes cap. 16. Sed vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam te∣neant, non nisi diuinarum Scripturarum canonicis libris ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credere oportere quod Eccle∣sia sumus, quia ipsam quam tenemus commendauit Mileuitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alij innumerabiles no∣strae communionis Episcopi, &c. But whether they holde the Church or no, let them shew none otherwise, but by the ca∣nonicall bookes of holy Scripture, for we our selues doe not therefore say that men must beleeue vs that we are in the Church because we hold the same Churche, which Optatus of Mileuitum hath commended, or Ambrose of Millayn, or in∣numerable Bishops of our communion. Euen so we require at the Papistes handes that shewe them selues to holde the Church not by succession of Bishops, or rehearsing of their names, but onely by the Scriptures: for although we did re∣hearse innumerable names of Bishops in orderly succession on our side we would not require men to beleue vs, but one∣ly because we proue the doctrine of our Church by the au∣thoritie of the Scriptures. But as for the popish church, ney∣ther hath nor euer had any of those officers which S. Paule speaketh of, for Apostles, Euangelistes, and Prophets, she can chalenge by no reason, seing she refuseth to be tried by their doctrine vttered in their writings, in steede of pastors & tea∣chers she hath wolues, dūme dogges, or false prophets, which either teach not at all, or else teach the doctrine of deuills & the dreames of men. And further I would desire none other
place in all the Scripture, to ouerthrow the popish Hierar∣chie (which is the greatest glory of their Church) then this place of Paule, Ephes. 4. he speaketh of Apostles, Euangelists, Prophets, Pastors and teachers. But where are Popes, Cardi∣nalls, popish archbishops, Bishops, Preestes, Deacōs, Subdea∣cons, Exorcistes, Cantors, Acolyts, Ostiares, Monkes, Friars, Chanōs, Nunnes, &c. Wherfore I cōclude that all these po∣pish orders are no offices in the Church of Christ. And espe∣cially, seeing the Apostle both in this place Eph. 4. and 1. Cor. 12. by these offices proueth the vnitie of minde, he acknow∣ledgeth no Pope as one supreme head in earth, which might be very profitable (as the Papists say) to mainteine this vnity: for if there had bene any such office appoynted of God, S. Paule in no wise woulde haue omitted it, especially when it made so notably for the confirmation of his purpose, which was vnitie. To conclude if it be sufficient, or any thing worth, to rehearse the names of them that haue orderly succeded in all ages in the bishops sees, in an outwarde face of the Church, the Greeke Church is able to name as many as the Latine Church, and in as orderly succession. Wherefore if you be as ready to performe as to promise, you recant. The nynth article may be deuided into nyne demaundes. 1 And for the necessary vse and execution of the foresayd of∣fices, they must further be asked, what Sacramentes the Protestants ministred for the space of a thousand yeares togither, in which they confesse their congregations to haue bene neare or else wholy hidden. THey ministred those Sacramentes which Christ did institute, namely the Sacrament of baptisme, and the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, at such times as the cruell tyrannie of you Papistes did not hinder them, to come togither for such purposes. 2 VVhat correction they kept and discipline for offenders.
THey did vse such discipline as was vsed in S. Cypri∣ans time, when persecution hindered not the free course of it. As he doth often complaine in the pla∣ces aboue rehearsed. They did admonish secretly, before witnesses, and when persecution stayed them not, they did also excommunicate. 3 To whome they did preach their Fayth. TO such as woulde geue them hearing, as VVickleue to the Englishmen: Iohn Hus to the Bohemians: VValdo to the Frenchmen, and so of the rest. 4 How did they reproue heresies? THey reproued heresies, by the worde of God, and pa∣tient sufferinge of your tyrannie: the one you may reade in their workes, that are yet extant of VVick∣leue, Bertrame, Hus, &c. The other in histories of your owne writers. 5 VVhere did their principall Pastors sit in Iudgement? I Might aske you where the Apostles did sit in iudgement and you are neuer able to shew me, for I reade as one sayth: that they stoode often to be Iudged, but I neuer reade that they sat in iudgement vpon others: And so I aunswere of the principall Pastors of our Church, especially in time of persecution. 6 VVhere did they gather as in Councells to try the trueth of doubtfull matters? AS God gaue them respight, from your tyrannie, they had conference one with an other: and as for doubtes, they tried them by the worde of God, and not by number of voyces, as you do in your coun∣cells, as for the places where they met, is nothing at all ma∣teriall, at Prage, at Lyons, at Merindol, &c.
7 How might Christian men, iustly offended with some of their brethern, haue sought out your officers or Congregation, to make complainct of him? YOu are void of all reason that in a persecuted church, will require all thinges to be so formall and orderly, as in time of peace and quietnes, I could choke you with putting like cases of your Church. If a number of Papistes be carried prisoners into Barbarie, or Turkey, what Sacraments, what discipline, what Iudgement haue they a∣mong them, if one be offended with his brother how shall he come to your offices, or to your Church to complaine. In such cases where the ordinary authoritie of the Church is hindred by persecution, or otherwise, the rule of S. Paule. 1. Cor. 5. may serue and ought to be obserued: If any that is cal∣led a brother be a fornicator, or couetous, or an Idolater, or a ray∣ler, or a drunkard, or an extorcioner with such one eate not. So that if a Christian be iustly offended with his brother, he ought to absteine from his company. And if he may haue ordinary au∣thoritie, he may complaine further. 8 Or how if it had liked any man to haue ben baptized of them, or to haue receiued the communion of them, or to haue bene married of them, or to haue ioyned them selues in Fayth and Religion to them, how might I say that secret, contemptible, and vnknowne company, be founde in this case? HE must haue sought them out as well as he could, & if he had bene perswaded, that they onely ministred the Sacraments, & Ecclesiasticall rites, sincerely, ac∣cording to the word of God, it were no great mat∣ter for him to find them, seing he knew by whom he was so perswaded, and of them might also be informed where he should haue them. I maruell you are not ashamed to demaūd these questions, as though it were materiall to discusse, whe∣ther of vs hath the Church, to haue the Church so manifest,
that euery man may see it. Doe you not remember how ma∣ny schismes haue bene euen in the popish church, more thē twenty, and sometime two Popes at once, sometime three, & sometime fower, which of them should a simple Papist take for head of the Church, especially in the 22. schisme, which lasted 39. yeares: one Pope sitting at Rome, an other at A∣uinion, either hauing his court, either hauing and making Cardinals, either cursing other. Or in the 23. schisme, when the question was of one of the highest pointes in all popery, and is not yet throughly decided among them: Whether the Pope be aboue the Councell, or the Councell aboue the Pope. In the time of these schismes how might a man haue founde out, which was the true Church, which was Christes vicare in earth, which had the right Sacraments and Sacra∣mentalls, to which Popes court should he appeale, where did the principall Pastors sit in iudgement, &c. How should coun∣cells be gathered, which Pope shoulde confirme their actes, &c, When you are able to aunswere these questions, for your owne church; then you may better require them of ours. As for that secrete, contemptible, and vnknowne company of our Church, in the sight of the world, was neuerthelesse ma∣nifest, glorious, and knowen to our Sauiour Christ, and the liuely members of his body. 9 If therefore you can shew me, that any man euer sought Iu∣stice or knowledge of trueth, sacrament, or faith, or any helpe of Saluation at the Protestants secret and close con∣gregation, or any other where, but of Gods knowen Catho∣like Church, I recant. ALthough it be to litle purpose to aunswere this de∣mande, because it is no reason to say, these thinges hath not bene, because chronicles make no mention of them: yet that all men maye see, how farre you ouershoot your selfe, I wil partely satisfie your request. Charles the great sought knowledge of the trueth of the sacrament of Bertramus. Iohn, Duke of Lancaster, and diuers other noble men were instructed in our Religion by VVickleue. The land
of Bohemia, was conuerted by Iohn Hus, and Hieronym of Prage, and sought the sacraments of them. Finally, you al∣wayes forget the Greeke church, which you do not accompt parte of the Catholike church, and yet you can not deny but men haue sought Iustice, sacramentes, faith, &c. of it. There∣fore if a man might trust you vpon your worde, you recant. The 10. article conteyneth in effect but 2. demandes. 1 Moreouer I aske whether for all these many hundreth of yeares or euer els before there was any temporall Prince or Potentate, that offered to be vnder God a minister of Iustice and an executor of Christian lawes in the right of your Congregation, that euer maintained by lawes Ciuill or other, your Faith and Congregation, and I recant. BEfore ye general defection, it is an easy matter, to name you the Emperours and Princes which both offered, to be ministers of Iustice in the right of our church, and also mainteyned our faith and Congregation, by Ciuill lawes, as Constantine the greate, Iouinianus, Valentinia∣nus, Theodosius, Archadius, Honorius, Marcianus, Iustinianus, Mauricius, and diuers other. But when the kinges of the earth had committed fornication with the great whore of Babylon (as the holy Ghost foresheweth Apoc. 17. and 18.) it is no pre∣iudice to our cause if we can not shew, any of them that haue mainteined our Religion. Yet because you make so gentle an offer vpon the triall of such a matter, which is of small force either to the hurt of our cause or the maintenance of yours, I will let you vnderstande what I haue reade for this purpose. Not doubting but other which haue reade much more, and seene more auncient histories than I, can shew you a great deale more. I passe ouer as to well knowen, how many of the Grecian Emperors resisted the setting vp of I∣mages, in so much that in the Greeke church to this daye they can abide none in their temples, likewise I passe ouer Charles the great, who wrote a booke against Images, which
is in printe, who also declared, that he liked not the heresie of the reall presence and transubstantiation, which in his time was in forging, in that he called Bertrame, to declare his minde of that matter, as appeareth by his booke, which is also in printe. I will not rehearse those princes, that contra∣ry to the Popes lawes, defended their priestes, that were ma∣ried: For although these and such like defended some parte of the trueth, which we holde against you, yet lest you should obiect, it was but in some one or two pointes, I passe them ouer with silence. But VVickleue, I wene, you will not deny, but he was of our Church and Religion. And I reade that king Edward the third, both in his Parliament holden Anno Domini, 1371. and at other times with diuers other noble men defended his cause: in so much that so long as he liued, all the popish byshops, coulde do him no harme, yet did he openly inueigh against the Pope, calling him Antichrist, and all popish doctrine without any couller or dissimulatiō both in the vniuersitie of Oxeford, where he was reader, and also in his sermons abroade, as appeareth by his bookes and En∣glish homilies, which yet are cōmon to be seene, wt vnlesse he had bene supported, and maintained by the kinge and other potentates, coulde neuer haue continued so long as he did. Further, haue you not hearde of Zisca, and Procopius, two mighty Capitaines, which defended the Bohemians from the tyrannie both of the Emperour, the Pope, and almost all the Princes of Germanie? For what cause did Paule the se∣cond Anno Domini, 1466. condemne George, a noble and a worthy Prince, king of Bohemia for an heretike? and depri∣ued him of his kingdome? was it not for defending the Pro∣testantes in his dominion? Thus you see that some Princes and Potentates haue not onely offered but haue in deed, ta∣ken in hand to defend our church, which you thought vnable to be shewed, wherfore I chalenge your promise, you must recante. The 11. article is so confuse that it is harde to bring it into any certeine num∣bre of demandes.
1 Againe I requier of the Protestants to declare by good hi∣stories, or by reasonable likelihoode when the true church, as they compt theirs, decayed? I Answer, euen in the Apostles time, there arose many he∣resies which did not a litle trouble the Church, but im∣mediatly after the Apostles time, while the fathers of the church were earnestly occupied, in resisting of horrible heresies, by the craft of Satan, some errors and abuses crept into the true Church of Christ, which at the first because they were small, and men occupied in greater matters, were either not espied, or not regarded: as may be knowen by the wri∣tinges of Iustinus Martyr, and Irenaeus, two of the most aun∣cient writers, sence the Apostles time. Iustinus, was in this er∣ror, that he thought that the Angells lusted after women and therefore were turned into Deuills. It seemeth also, that the Church in his time, was in some error, about second ma∣riages and diuorcements. Irenaeus, affirmeth, that our Sauiour Christ liued here 50. yeares, which he sayeth was receyued of them that heard it, euen of the Apostles mouthes. Also both he and Papias, which was before him and was the disci∣ple of S. Iohn: are charged by S. Ieronym, in Catalogo Script. Eccl. to haue held this error, that Christ should raigne a thou∣sand yeares after the Resurrection here in the flesh, whereby it is manifest, seeing these auncient fathers, and pillers of the Church were thus stayned with errors, that the Church in their time, could not be free from the same. And so it is eui∣dent, that the true Church decayed immediatly after the A∣postles times. 2 VVhat yeare the Religion of the Papistes came in and pre∣uayled? ALthough many abuses and corruptions were entred into the church of Christ immediatly after the Apo∣stles time, which the deuill planted as a preparatiue for his eldest sonne Antichrist. Yet we may well say,
that the religion of the Papists came in, and preuailed, that yeare in which the Pope first obteyned his Antichristian ex∣altation, which was in the yeare of our Lord 607. when Boni∣face the third, for a great summe of mony, obteyned of Pho∣cas, the trayterous murtherer, and adulterous Emperour, that the Bishop of Rome should be called and counted, the head of all the Church. Since that time, that deuilish heresie hath alwayes increased in error, vntill the yeare of our Lord 1414. in which the Councell of Constance decreed, to robbe the people of the Sacrament of Christ his blood. From this time it hath againe decaied, being mightely subdued by the bright beames of the Gospell, shining in the world, and at the length shall be vtterly destroyed. 3 VVhether all their true Church was so soundly sleeping, that none could preach against it as it first entred. 1. Thess. 2. Math. 24.WHen the cōming of Antichrist was in all power of lying signes, and wonders, in so much (that if it were possible) the very elect should be decei∣ued, and a general departing from the faith was foreshewed, and the Church to be driuen into the wildernes, what maruell were it? if none of our Church could preach against it, as it first entred: yet because you speake of the first entring of popish religion, which dependeth chiefly vpon the Popes authoritie, you shall heare, that when it first began to aduaunce it selfe, there wanted not some, either to preach or write against it. When Victor, bishop of Rome about the yeare of our Lord 200. passed the bondes of his authoritie, in ex∣communicating of all the Churches of Asia, many bishops withstoode him, and especially Irenaeus, bishop of Lyons, and Policrates of Ephesus, as witnesseth Eusebius, libro 5. cap. 25. Eccle. S. Cyprian, also reproueth Cornelius, bishop of Rome, for that he was moued by threatning of heretikes to receiue their letters, & did not send them backe into Africa, to their own bishop lib. 1. Ep. 3. Also when Stephanus, bishop of Rome, was bold to communicate with Basilides, and Martialis, two Spaniards, that were iustly excommunicated and deposed by
ye bishops of their owne prouince, & sought to restore them: Cyprian and his felow bishops of Aphrica, being required to giue their aduise, gaue counsell, that in no wise they shoulde be receiued, not a litle blaming Stephanus, that beinge far of, and ignorant of their cause; he would take vpon him, to de∣fend such wicked men. lib. 1. Ep. 4. Likewise when the same Stephanus, threatned excommunication to Helenus and Fir∣milianus, and almost all the Churches of Asia, because they thought that such as were baptized by heretikes, shoulde be baptized againe: he was misliked by Dionysius of Alexandria, and diuers other godly bishops, as appeareth by his Epistle wrytten to Xystus. Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 5. Cyprian also reproueth him very sharply, for the same opinion, accusing him of pre∣sumption and contumacy Epi. ad Pompeium, and in his epistle to Quintinus, he sayth plainly, that Peter himselfe was not so arrogant, nor so presumptuous that he would say he held the primacy, & that other men should obey him as his inferiors. When Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Caelestinus, bishops of Rome all on a row, chalenged prerogatiue ouer the bishops in Aphrica, by forginge a false Canon of the Nicene Coun∣cel, they were withstoode by all the bishops of Aphrica, who decreed, that none vnder paine of excommunicatiō, should appeale to any bishop, beyond the sea. Concil. Aphrican. cap. 92. and that the bishop of the chiefe see, should not be called prince of priestes, or highest priest, but onely bishop of the chiefe see. Conc. Aph. cap. 6. When Celestinus byshop of Rome dealt hardly with the Nouatians, Socrates testifieth, he could doe not good with them, because they enuied his ambition, saying that the bishoprike of Rome, like as of Alexandria, was long before growen beyonde the bondes of priesthood, into foreine lordship. Lib. 7. cap. 11. By these examples it is plaine, that although the mysterie of iniquitie, beganne to worke in Victor, Cornelius, Stephanus, Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus, yet it was reproued, by some godly men: as Irenaeus, Polycrates, Dionysius Alexan∣drinus, Cyprianus, the Councell of Aphrica, and Socrates the Historiographer.
4 VVhether all nations sodenly and in one yeare were moued to the doctrine of the Papistes, no one man of all their true Church neither preaching, teaching, writing, nor attemp∣ting any thing against it, or making mention of it. WHen the scripture telleth vs, that the mysterie of iniquitie, preparing for the generall defe∣ction, and reuelation of Antichrist, wrought euen in S. Paules time 2. Thess. 2. it is foly to aske, whether sodenly and in one yere all Religion was cor∣rupted. And yet all nations neuer consented to the doctrine of the Papistes, for as it hath bene often saide, the Greeke church, and other Orientall churches, hath neuer receiued the Popish religion, in many cheefe pointes, and especially, in acknowledging the Popes authoritie: what preaching, teaching, and writing hath bene against it, is shewed before, and shalbe more declared hereafter. 5 VVhether sodenly all bookes of seruice were altered? NO forsoothe, but by litle and litle, in the Latine Church: as for the Greeke & Orientall Churches, neuer receyued nor vsed your Latine seruice bookes. 6 VVhether in a moment, the Masse was saide in steede of other Apostolike Communion? WHen Durande, your owne doctor, sheweth what Pope sewed on euery patche, that be∣longeth to your Masse, it were foly for vs to say: it came in sodenly, and impudencie in you, to affirme that it came whole from the Apostles, which was so long a framing in so many peeces. 7 VVhether men beganne sodenly to praye for the soules de∣parted?
FIrst it is manifest, that men had no warrāt out of God his worde to pray for the dead: and it can not be pro∣ued for 200, yeares after Christ, by any credible au∣thor, that it was vsed in the Church: wherefore it is certeine, that it was first planted by the deuill, as were other abuses: And because it hath a pretence of Charitie, decey∣ued simple men the sooner. Yet did it not so preuaile, in the primitiue Church, that they durst define, what profit the soules receyued thereby: for Chrysostome in his 3. Homelie, vpon the first Chapter of the Epist. to the Philippians, sayeth: Procuremus eis aliquid auxilij, modici quidem, attamen iuuemus eos. Let vs procure them some helpe, small helpe truely, but yet let vs helpe them. Likewise, Augustine in the 9. booke and 13. Chapter of his confessions, where he prayeth for his father and mother, declareth how vncertaine he was of that matter, one while he feareth the danger of euery soule that dieth in Adam: An other while he beleueth, that they neede not his prayer, yet he desireth God to accept the same, and moue other men to remember them in their prayers: Thus it is necessary that they wander, which leane vnto mens tra∣ditions without the worde of God. 8 Sodenly required the helpe of Sainctes in heauen? WHether sodenly or by litle and litle, men were brought to such superstition, that they requi∣red helpe of Sainctes, it maketh litle matter, seeing it is contrary to the worde of God, and the example of the primitiue Church, for 200. yeares after Christ. Yet it is to be thought, that it grew vp, as other er∣rors, by litle and litle. And S. Augustine in his booke, De cura pro mortuis agenda, wearieth him selfe, and in the ende can define nothing, in certeine, how ye Sainctes in heauen should heare the prayers of men, on earth. Such doubtfulnesse they fall into, that leaue the word of God, and leaue to traditions. 9 Sodenly the tongue of common prayers altered?
FIrst ye Greeke church, & other churches both in Asia, & Aethiopia, neuer receiued the Latine tongue: but to this day continue in their vulgare tongue. The We∣sterne Church, for the most parte all spake and vnder∣stoode Latine, as the sea coast of Aphrica, Italye, Fraunce, Spayne, Britayne: as for Germany, was lately conuerted to the faith. Then seeing they spake Latine, and had their com∣mon prayer in Latine: The tongue of their common prayer was not altered, but their speach was altered from the tongue of their common prayer: and this was not sodainely, for it was more than twelue hundred yeares after Christ before it wa taken for a Catholike doctrine, that common prayer should be vsed in latine. S. Augustine preached in latine & all the people vnderstoode him, and that they might the better vnderstand him, he doth vse such phrases and termes which were not pure latine, but commonly vsed of the people as Ossum, and Foenerare, &c. But soone after his time, when the Gothes, and Vandalles, oueranne the Empire, the latine tongue which before was not pure among the people, began daily to be more corrupted, and yet remained after a sort la∣tine, vntill the yeare of our Lorde 768. when Charles the great began to rigne in France, and long after: for within the time of his reigne, which was 47. yeares, a Councell was hol∣den at Turon, in France, what yeare it is not certeyne, but it is probable, that in the latter ende of his empire, in which it was decreed, that euery bishop, should haue certeine homi∣lies. Et easdem quisque apertè studeat transferre in rusticam Ro∣manam linguam aut Theotiscam; quo facilius cuncti possint intelli∣gere quae dicuntur. Turon. 3. cap. 17. And that euery one studye to translate them plainly, into the rusticall Romane tongue or into the Theotisce tongue, that all men may more easily vnderstand what is sayd. By this Canon, it is euident, that at this time, the people vnderstood the Latine tongue, though it were very rude and rustical. And where the Canon prescri∣beth the same homilies to be translated either into the rude latine tongue, or into the Theotisce tongue. Although this word Theotisca, seeme to be corrupted, yet it is most certeine
that they meant Dutch tongue, for as much as Carolus mag∣nus, had a great part of Germanie vnder his dominion, and the Germanes, as neuer throughly subdued by the Ro∣manes, neuer throughly receiued the latine tongue. Yet it is manifest, that they vnderstoode their common prayer in the latine tongue, though not perfectly, because the Ca∣non sayth: Quo facilius &c. That all men may more easely vnderstand, signifying that they vnderstood the pure latine tongue though hardely and not perfectly. About the yeare of our Lorde 813. the knowledge of the latine tongue, be∣ganne more and more to weare awaye, from amongest the common people, which when the bishops perceiued, they decreed in the Councell of Magunce, cap. 25. that euery Son∣daye, and holy daye, there shoulde be a sermon in such sorte, that the common people might vnderstand it: and in the 45. Canon. they decreed, that euery Christian, shoulde learne the Creede, and the Lorde his prayer, Et qui aliter non potue∣rit, vel in sua lingua hoc discat, that is, And he that can not, yet let him learne it in his owne tongue. Whereby they de∣clare, that they desier to reteine the latine tongue still, but rather than the people shoulde be ignorant, they commande them to learne their prayers and beleefe in their mother tongue. Also by the 43. Canon, wherein they iudge that no preeste can saye Masse alone, it appeareth that the people commonly vnderstood the latine seruice: for they aske how he shoulde saye: Dominus vobiscum, and admonish the peo∣ple to lifte vp their heartes, and diuers like sayinges, where there is none by him but him selfe. Nowe if the people vn∣derstoode not these sayinges, it were all one, whether they were present or absent. Also in the Councell of Rhenes, hol∣den in Fraunce about the same time, the like decree was made cap. 15. that bishops studie to preache sermons, and homelies of the holy fathers so that all men maye vnder∣stand, according to the property of their tongue. Finally in the Councell of Laterane holden vnder Pope Innocent the third, Anno Dom. 1215. in which Councell transubstantiation was first established, the 9. chapter, it was plainely decreed that forasmuch as within one citie and diocesse people of
diuers languages be mingled together, hauing vnder one Faith, diuers rites, and maners, we streightly commande, that the bishops of such cities and diocesses, prouide able men, which according to the diuersitie of their rites, and lan∣guages, celebrate vnto them, the diuine seruice, and mini∣ster the sacramentes, instructing them both by worde and example. Hereby it appeareth, that when the latine tongue, was either almost, or altogether growen out of the common peoples vnderstandings, order was taken that common pray∣ers should be sayed and sacramentes ministred in the mother tongue of euery nation. But the bishops which shoulde haue seene it put in execution, either negligently omitted it, or willingly refused to doe it, because it was more for their pro∣fit to kepe the people in blinde ignorance. So thus I haue shewed, that sodenly the tongue of common prayer, was not altered. 10 Tell me what yeare of our Lorde, vnder what Emperour, vn∣der what Pope, by whome these thinges were wrought, vpon what occasion, this marueillous mutation was made? WHo can tell the originall of euery blind custome and peuish tradition, of euery olde error and foolish fashion it is sufficient to shew, that these thinges haue no grounde in the scripture of God, they were not taught by Christ and his Apostles, nor receiued in the church that followed immediatly after them, and then we are bolde to say, with Tertullian: This preiudice there is against all heresies, how soeuer they came vp or when soeuer they sprange vp, That is true that was first, and that is false, that is latter, therefore from the beginning it was not vsed to praye for the deade nor to the deade, from the beginning common prayer was not in an vnknowen tongue. Wherefore prayer for the deade and to the deade, with prayer in a strange tongue are false, when soeuer they beganne, or how long soeuer they continued. 11 VVho preached against it, what historie maketh mention
of it, who of all your Pastors preached against it, was God his Church so voide of the spirit of Trueth, and strength, that euen then when it most florished, it had none that durst open against uch corruption of religion, as it entred in, and when it might soone haue bene repressed? BEfore you demande what yeare the religion of the Pa∣pistes came, in and whether it came in sodenly: and as though we shoulde aunswere that it came in sodaine∣ly, you demande, who preached against it &c. This is to fight with your owne shadowe: for we say not that it came in sodainely, but that it entred by small degrees at the first and therefore was lesse espied by the true Pastors, especially being earnestly occupied against great heresies, and open aduersaries, that sought to beate downe the cheefe founda∣tions of Christian faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees, Arrians, Sabellians, and such like monsters. So when Satan had gotten in one foote, by such craftie pollitie, he neuer rested, vntill he had thrust in his whole bodie, with the power of Antichrist. 12 If it coulde not, shew me then what yeare of the Lorde this mutation was made, and who of all the true preachers did with stand this doctrine? SO often as you demande one thinge, so often must I aunswere after one sorte, this mutation was not all in one yeare, nor in one hundreth yeares, nor in one thousand of yeares, for transubstantiation no small ar∣ticle of your religion, was not decreed vntill the yeare of God 1215. what preachers haue withstoode your doctrine at diuers times are declared before in the aunswere to the 8. Article 2. demande. 13 Or note the name of him that euer first preached any article of our doctrine: and if we note you not by their names, euery one of your Capitaines, and the seuerall errors that they tought and the time, and the yeare when they arose
against the former receyued trueth and the Councells in which they were orderly condemned if I, saye this can be done of your side towarde vs, or if we doe it not for im∣proofe of your Church and religion, I recant. I Haue noted in the answere to the 6. article 3. demande, the names of diuers heretikes, that first preached diuers articles of your religion, and further I note vnto you Pe∣lagius, and Coelestius, which tought that free will without grace coulde doe somewhat towardes eternall saluation, and that grace was geuen according to merite, which article you teach also with culler of a distinction De congruo & condigno, which is a meere cauill: for God is as much bounde vnto congruitie, as to dignitie or worthinesse, and as he can doe nothing against worthinesse, no more can he doe any thing against congruitie, which is a kinde of Equitie. And whereas you bragge, to note vnto vs euery one of our Capitaines &c. except you note vnto vs the Patriarches, Prophets, Apostles, Euangelistes, and Christ himselfe, you shall neuer be able to performe that you promise, for we teache nothing but the eternall trueth of God, wherefore we refuse not to be coun∣ted heretikes, if you can proue, that we holde any one arti∣cle of faith, contrarie to the scripture: you may perchaunce note the names of them, that preaching the trueth of our doctrine, against your receyued errors, were accounted of the world for heretikes, but you must proue that their opinions are contrarie to the worde of God, or els all your labour is in vaine: we confesse also, that some articles of our doctrine, were taught by heretikes, as there was neuer no heresie, which had not many thinges common with true Religion, but yet in those poinctes they were no heretikes, neither did they erre. Yea but you will saye, they were condemned for those opinions, as erroneous. I will not dissemble, that which you thinke the greatest matter. Aerius tought, that prayer for the deade was vnprofitable, as witnesseth both Epiphanius, and Augustinus, which they compte for an error, but neither of them both, reproueth it by the scripture. Wherefore, if Aerius had not bene an Arrian, this opinion coulde not haue
made him an heretike. Also he tought that fasting dayes are not to be obserued, if he espied the superstition of fasting dayes and reproued it, that was no error at all. But if Aerius was an heretike, for denying prayer for the deade to be pro∣fitable, why were the Heracleonites, accused of heresie, be∣cause they buried their deade with inuocations Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 3. Haeres. 36. Augustine, also by authoritie of Philaster chargeth the same Aerius, with abstinence from flesh, if this be an heresie, then be all Papistes heretikes, which compte abstinence from flesh an holy fast. Againe you will bring in Iouiniane, which affirmed that virginitie was no better than mariage, which if it be well vnderstoode, is no error at all: for although virginitie in some cases and respectes, and for some persons is better than mariage: yet is it not simply, that is in all respectes and cases, and for all persons better than matrimonie. And if he tought further that such as coulde not conteine, though they had vowed Virginitie, shoulde neuerthelesse be maried, this was the doctrine of S. Paule: It is better to marry than to burne. And Epiphanius was of the same iudgement, although he compte it an offence to marrie after their vowe, yet he sayeth: It is better to marry then to burne. Melius est itaque vnum peccatum ha∣bere, & non plura, &c. It is better to haue one offence, ra∣ther then many. It is better for him that is fallen from his course, openly to take a wife according to the lawe, and to repent longe time that vowe of his virginitie, and so a∣gaine be brought into the Church, as one that hath done a∣misse, as one that is fallen and broken, and hauing neede to be bound: rather then to be wounded daily, with priuy darts of that wickednes, which ye deuill putteth into him. So know∣eth the Church to preach, these are the medicines of hea∣ling. Ep. lib. 2. Haer. 61. this medicine the popish church wil not acknowledge, but will separate them from their wiues, as they did in Queene Maries times. S. Ieronym also, who was a most bitter enemy vnto Iouinian, plainly affirmeth, that ra∣ther then they which haue professed virginitie, shoulde liue incontinently, they ought to marrie. Sanctum Virginum propo∣situm & coelestis angelorúmque familiae gloriam, quarundam non
bene se agentium nomen infamat. Quibus aperte dicendum est, vt aut nubant, si se non possunt continere, aut contineant, si nolunt nu∣bere. Epi. ad Demetriadem. That is: The name of certeine vir∣gines, which behaue them selues not well, doth blemish the holy purpose of virginitie, and glory of the heauenly and an∣gelike family. To whom must be plainly sayd that either they should marry, if they can not conteyne, or else conteyne if they will not marry. Note well this saying of S. Ieronym, the great aduancer of virginitie, and dispraiser of mariage. More∣ouer if Iouinian taught that fasting, abstinence from certeyne meates, and other bodily exercise of them selues profit litle, his doctrine agreeth with S. Paul. 1. Tim. 4. but if he taught (as he is charged) that such thinges profited nothing at all, we agree not with him in that opinion. Last of all Vigilantius, shall be brought in, who wrote against inuocation of Saincts, superstition of reliques, and other ceremonies, him Ieronym reproueth or rather rayleth on him: for his reasons are no∣thing worth that he hath against him, therefore howsoeuer Ieronym estemed him in his rage, if he had none other opi∣nions contrary to the truth: we doubt not to acknowledge Vigilantius (as many godly and learned Bishops of his tyme did) for a true preacher and reprehender of that superstition whereunto Ieronym was to much addict, although he doe somewhat qualifie the matter. If any man thinke his reasons to be effectuall, let him make this one, that he vseth, and thereby iudge the rest, he sayth of the Martyrs: Sequuntur ag∣num, &c. They follow the lambe whether soeuer he goeth. If the lambe be euery where, therfore they which are with the lambe, are to be thought to be euery where. Beside this euill consequence, consider what perilous assertions these be: that the lambe is euery where, & that ye martyrs are euery where, this is to destroy the humanitie of Christ, and to giue diuini∣tie vnto the Martyrs: for Christ concerning his humanitie, according to which, he is called a Lambe, is not euery where, but in one place alone, as S. Augustine sayth Ep. ad Dardanum 57. Secundum hanc formam non est putandus vbi{que} diffusus, that is: According to this forme it is not to be thought, that he is diffused euery where. Againe no creature is euery where, in
more places than one, at one time. Wherefore to say that the soules of Martyrs, be euery where, is to deny them to be cre∣atures and so make them gods. I doubt not but S. Ieronym if he had quietly considered these absurdities, would haue re∣uoked them as erroneous and hereticall: but while he rather followed affection, then iudgement, you may see how he was deceaued. Thus seeing we haue noted to you the names of diuerse heretikes, which first preached certeyne articles of your doctrine, and you are not able to name any, which prea∣ched any article of our doctrine, but the same was consonant to the Scripture. If you were as ready to performe, as you are to promise, you should recant. 14 And for that purpose because the gouernment of the By∣shop of Rome is most misliked of them, and yet most noto∣riously knowne by euery historie, let them name the Pope that first brake of the course of his forefathers beleefe, & regiment in any article of fayth or necessary Christian v∣sage, and I recant. I Haue named before Victor, which was the first that went about to vsurpe authoritie ouer other Churches. Also I haue named Boniface, the third, which was the first that chalenged to be vniuersall bishop: For Gregorie the great sayeth: Nemo meorum decessorum hoc prophano vocabulo vti voluit, That is: None of my predecessors woulde vse this prophane worde. The same Gregorie, as Hulderichus, bishop of Auspourge doth testifie, was ye first that compelled priests to liue vnmaried, which afterwarde when he saw the incon∣uenience, he reuoked. Thus hauing named diuers Popes that first brake the course of their fathers faith, and regiment &c. and more coulde rehearse but for auoyding prolixitie, I cha∣lenge your promise that you must recant. The 12. article hath 3. demandes. 1 Item I aske what kinde and order of seruice, or common prayer, what waye of ministring of the sacraments your
Church had: before Papistry (as you call it) did pre∣uaile in the worlde? IVstinus Martyr, in his second Apollogie to the Emperour, declareth plainely what order of seruice and ministration of sacramentes our Church had before Papistry preuay∣led. On the daye called Sonday (sayth he) there is a mee∣ting together of all them that dwell in the Citie or in the countrie, and the monumentes of the Apostles, or the wri∣tinges of the Prophetes are reade vntill it be thought suffi∣cient, when the reader hath made an ende, he that is our ouerseer (or cheefe minister) maketh a sermon of admoni∣tion and exhortation to follow those good thinges that are reade. After this we all stande vp together and make our prayers, and as we haue saide before, when our prayers are ended, there is brought forth bread and wine & water, and the cheefe minister, doth likewise with all his might yelde pray∣ers and thankesgeuing, and the people aunswereth Amen. Then is made distribution to euery one and receyuing of those thinges for which thankes was geuen, and to them that be absent, it is sent by the deacons. Such as are riche and willing doe geue almes what they will, &c. By this one autho∣ritie, it may be seene though other might be brought, what order of seruice and ministration of sacraments our Church vsed before Papistry gat the vpper hande. 2 Shew one booke of Communion or what els you list that was in English, or lacked prayer for the departed, or inuocation of Sainctes in heauen, or that wanted oblation, or sacrifice, or that charged a number to receyue, or els that the preest coulde not consecrate nor say Masse, himselfe, or shew any note in a Communion booke, that the people shoulde take the sacrament for plaine breade, or that they should geue no honor to it, shew this booke or any leafe or line of this booke. IT may trouble a wise man to aunswere all the questions that a foole can propounde: you requier to see a booke of Communion in English, or that lacked &c. When it is
confessed, that the English nation receiued their religion first from Rome, at such time as Religion there was verie corrupt, what marueill is it, if we can not shewe you such a Communion booke as you require, but we can easily shew you out of the scripture, the the Communion ought to be ministred in the vulgare tongue, that prayer for the deade and to the deade ought not to be vsed, that the sacrament ought not to be turned into a sacrifice, that there ought to be a communiō of many receauers and not a priuate masse, that the substance of the bread is not changed, that the ele∣mentes of the sacrament are not to be honored: these I say we can proue out of the worde of God, the Catholike wri∣ters of the olde Church. And though perchaunce, it wilbe harde to finde a communion booke in English, yet haue I founde you a canon of the Laterane Councell, that it ought to haue bene translated into English, yet are there founde diuers monumentes of Antiquitie, as Prayers, Psalmes, and Homilies, &c. in the olde English or Saxons tongue, in which the reall presence, transubstantiation, and other poinctes of Popish doctrine are plainly confuted. There may be shewed you also Bybles both the olde Testament and New in the English tongue of diuers translations, in olde written hande. Also great bookes of English homilies inueighing directly against the Pope and all Popish doctrine in olde English written hande, with diuers other small treatises and pam∣phlets of like matters, if these woulde do you any good, you might haue the sight of them, when you please. 3 Or any Church or Congregation that euer had any Authen∣ticall seruice but ours, and I recant. THe Church of the Brytannes before Augustine came in, with Romish seruice, had they not trow you Au∣thenticall seruice? which continued in the faith of Christ euen from the Apostles time. The Grecians also & Orientall churches, haue they not vnto this day, their Authenticall seruice? which is not yours? If you can not de∣ny this, you should recant.
The 13. article hath 2. demaundes. 1 Furthermore I requier to know what shoulde be the cause that the Protestants them selues, doe receiue all Byshops, Priestes, Deacons, and other officers spirituall of all sortes of our Catholike church, and doe admit them as men law∣fully and sufficiently ordered, both to preach, minister sa∣craments, and to exercise spirituall iurisdiction no lesse, but rather more, than if they were of their owne ordering, where we of the Catholike church, doe not acknowledge any man of their calling to be any whit more fitte for any spirituall function than other lay men. ALthough all godly men wishe more seueritie of dis∣cipline to be vsed, in receyuing them that come out of heresies to serue in the Church, than is common∣ly practised in England: yet you are highlie decey∣ued, if you thinke we esteeme your offices of Bishops, priests, deacōs, any better than the state of lay men, but farre worse: for we iudge them to be nothing els but Antichristianitie, heresie, and blasphemie. And therefore we receiue none of them to minister in our church, except they forsweare your religion: And so their admission is not an allowing of your ordering, but a new calling vnto the ministerie. 2 Therefore vpon this presumption that they doe not onely admit our ministring of sacraments, but also the lawfull ordering of the ministers for the same, if they can shew me why our church hauing by their owne consent and ap∣prouing lawfull priestes and bishops should not be the true church, I recant. YOu presume to much as I saide before to thinke that we receiue your orderinge to be lawfull or your mi∣nistring of sacraments to be pure. And if you gather, that we admitte your ministration of sacraments be∣cause we doe not rebaptize them that were baptized by you,
we maye likewise gather that you admit our ministration of sacraments, because you doe not rebaptize them that are baptized of vs, nor marrie againe those that are married in our Church: wheras you compt mariage to be a sacrament, so that our accepting of your doings doth no more allow your church, than your accepting of our doinges, doth allow our Church. And as touching the sacrament of Baptisme, be∣cause you reteyne the Institution, in baptizing in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost: and in asmuch as the sacraments take not their effect of the minister, but of God, we receiue it: as of other heretikes which likewise re∣teine the Institution. Wherefore there is no cause why you shoulde thinke we allow yours to be the true Church there∣by: So that there is good cause why you shoulde recant. The 14. article hath 5. demandes. 1 Also I demande what furniture or commodity in seruing God the Christianity of any age, or any part of Christen∣dome had euer by your Congregations? THe seruice of God hath small neede of furniture in outwarde thinges: for God being a spirite, is not wor∣shipped with outward pompe but with spirituall and inwarde reuerence. And as for other furniture that is necessary, was decreed to the Church by the Emperour Constantine and his successors, that were of our Church, be∣fore the reuelatiō of Antichrist. Notwithstāding the Church was in better case, before such furniture was graunted, than it was since. Therefore it is a small reason to chalenge the Church of Christ by outwarde furniture. 2 VVhat Churches did you builde for your assemblies and seruice? OVr assemblies were kept in secret places, long time after Christes Ascension, in most cuntries, that were subiect to the Romane empire. Wherefore the buil∣ding
of materiall churches proueth nothing at all the buil∣ders to be members of the mystical Church, that is the body of Christ. Howbeit in such realmes and cuntries where the faith of Christ, was receiued by publike authoritie, as in this lande of Brytaine, there were churches builded as our Chro∣nicles declare. And when Constantinus had geuen peace to the Church: he also builded Oratories and great Synagoges called Basilicas, for our assemblies and seruice. 3 VVhat Bishoprickes for the gouernment of the Church did you finde? AS the church continued longe without materiall churches, so also without large possessions, for the lyuing of bishops, yet in Brytish Church our histo∣ries make mention that the possessions and places of the Pagane Flamines, and Archiflamines were conuerted to the vse of Ecclesiastical bishops and archbishops, so soon as Lucius, the king receiued the faith. Also the same histories do testifie, that when Augustine came into Britayn, there were still 7. bishops and one archbishop among the Britaines. And in the Romane Empier Constantinus, and other Christian Emperors appointed great possessions for the mainteyning of the ministers of the Church. 4 VVhat Vniuersities, Schooles, or Colledges, did you euer erect? THe Church of God hath alwayes had schooles, or Vniuersities for the mainteinance of godly learning. For the first Colledges of monkes in solitary places, were nothing els, but Colledges of studentes, that were after, as occasion serued, taken to serue in the Church, as appereth by Chrysostome in his booke De Sacerdotio, where he sheweth yt Basilius, who was a Monke with him, was taken by violence and made a minister of the church, as he him selfe was afterwarde. Also in the bishops house was a col∣ledge of studentes: and our histories testifie, that at Bangor, in Wales was a great Vniuersitie of learned men. Also of late
dayes, you may heare that diuerse Vniuersities, Scholes, and Colleges are erected by Protestants, in Germanie, and other contries that haue receiued the gospel: As at Wittemberge, Geneua, Zuriche, Conigsperge in Prussia, &c. 5 Name one Church, not builded in all fashions, as well for the making of the chancells, the forme of the aultars, the vse of the chalices, the signification of the vestiments, as also for the speciall intent of the builders thereof. Name one of them in the whole Church of Christ, either erected for your Faith, Church, & seruice, or not prepared, in all sorts for catholike practises: Proue vnto me that any of all those thinges were euer prouided for any other seruice and Religion then ours, or that they be monuments of a∣ny other Fayth and Church then the common Catholike, and I recant. HEre are many wordes to litle purpose. What if it were graunted that all churches that now remaine were builded by Papistes, and for popish vses, what had you wonne thereby. The same chalenge might the Idolaters haue made to the Apostles: Shew vs a temple in all the worlde that was not builded by Idolaters, and to mainteyne Idolatrie? Certeinly they could shew none when the Temple of Ierusalem was destroyed. But for all your bragges, we are able to shewe that such Churches as were builded by true Christians were not builded to such ende as yours are: for they were all builded in the honour of God, and the most of yours in the honour of creatures: for wher∣as you haue one Church in the honour of Christ, you haue neare a thousand in the honour of Sainctes: For Basilius ma∣gnus in his 141. epistle proueth ye holy Ghost to be God be∣cause he hath a Temple. For Omne Templum Dei Templum est. Euery temple is the temple of God. Also Didymus, in his booke De spiritu sancto, which S. Ieronym translateth, vseth the same reason and to the same purpose. S. Augustine in the same matter is very plentifull: as in his booke De vera Religione cap. 55. speaking of the Sainctes he sayth: Quare honoramus e∣os
charitate non seruitute, nec eis templa construimus, &c. Wher∣fore we honour them with loue and not with seruice, neither doe we build temples vnto them: for they wil not be so ho∣nored of vs because they know that we our selues when we are good, are the temples of the highest. In this saying beside his iudgement for building of temples, note that he will not haue Sainctes to be honored with seruice, which he calleth seruitus, and is the same that dulia is, contrary to the Papistes which will worship them with seruice called dulia, or seruitus. Also in his 174. epistle to Pascentius, he sayth, the holy Ghost could not haue our bodies to be tēples except he were God, And in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium, cap. 56. he sayth: howe should he not be God which hath a temple? Also in the 8. booke cap. 27. De ciuitate Dei. Nec tamen nos ijsdem martyribus templa, &c. he sayeth: Christians builde no temples vnto Martyrs which were to make them gods. And in the 22, booke cap. 10. De ciuitate Dei. Nos autem Martyribus nostris non templa sicut dijs, sed memorias sicut hominibus mortuis, quorum apud Deum vi∣uunt spiritus fabricamus. Nec ibi erigimus altaria in quibus sacri∣ficemus martyribus, sed vni Deo & martyrum & nostro sacrifici∣um immolamus: ad quòd sacrificium sicut homines Dei, qui mun∣dum in eius confessione vicerunt, suo loco & ordine nominantur, non tamen à sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur, Deo quippe non i∣psis sacrificat quamuis in memoria sacrificet eorum, quia Dei sa∣cerdos est non illorum. Ipsum verò sacrificium corpus est Christi quod non offertur ipsis quia hoc sunt & ipsi. that is: We truely do not build temples to our martyrs as vnto gods, but memories as vnto dead men whose soules liue with God. Neither doe we there set vp aultars in which we should sacrifice vnto the martyrs, but to God onely which is God both of the martyrs and of vs, doe we offer sacrifice: at which sacrifice they are named in their place and order, as men of God which haue ouercome the world in his confession: yet are they not cal∣led vpon by the Priest that doth sacrifice, for he offereth sa∣crifice to God and not to them although he doe sacrifice in their memorie, because he is the Priest of God and not of them, and the sacrifice is the body of Christ which is not of∣fered vnto them because they them selues are the same. Here
also beside building of churches, note that no sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs, but prayer is a sacrifice, therefore it ought to be offered onely to God. Secondly, that Martyrs were not called vpon in tyme of the sacrifice but onely na∣med for remembrance. Thirdly, that Altares were not buil∣ded in the honor of Martyrs or other Sainctes as they be in Popish churches: as our Ladies altar. S. Peters altar. S. Lau∣rences altar &c. Fourthly, that the bodie of Christ, which he sayeth was the sacrifice that was offered, was not the naturall body of Christ but his mysticall bodie, because he sayeth the Martyrs and it are all one, whereby it is manifest, that he meaneth the sacrifice of thankes giuing offered to God for the redemption of his church by the death of Christ. Wher∣fore if this one place were well wayed, it will interpret and aunswere all places of the auncient doctors, where mention is made of sacrificing the body of Christ at the time of the communion. But to returne to building of churches the same Augustine, contra Maximinum Arrianum. Lib. Titul. 11. hath these wordes: Nunc si templum alicui sancto angelo ex∣cellentissimo de lignis & lapidibus faceremus, anathematizar emin a veritate Christi, & ab Ecclesia Dei, quoniam creaturae exhibe∣remus eam seruitutem quae vni tantum debetur Deo? Si ergo sa∣crilegi essemus faciendo templum cuicun{que} creaturae, quomodo non est Deus verus cui non templum facimus, sed nos ipsi templum su∣mus? that is: If we shoulde builde a temple of wodde and stones to any holy and most excellent Angel, shoulde we not be accursed from the Trueth of Christ and from the Church of God, because we should shew that seruice vnto a creature which is due onely vnto God? Therefore if we shoulde be sacrileges by making a temple to any creature, how is he not true God to whome we doe not make a temple, but we our selues are a temple. If this be true, how be not the Papistes accursed from the Trueth of Christ, and from the Church of God which builde and vpholde churches to Angells, as S. Michaels, S. Gabriels, &c? So that to builde churches as Papistes doe, is church robbing or sacrilege. Furthermore whereas you will vs to name one church whose chancell is not builded in all fashions to serue poperie. First it is mani∣fest
that the first Churches which were builded for Chri∣stians had not the same fashion of chancels and other partes that most churches haue in Englande, for that purpose reade the Panegyricall oration made before Paulinus byshop of Tyrus. Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 4. In which is described the fashion of that church builded in that citie farre vnlike the moste parte of churches at this day in all partes, and specially in the chācel which was in the middest of that church, a place com∣passed in with grates or wodden latesses called Cancelli, wher∣of this worde chancel is deriued, and the aultar stoode in the middest of it wherof some similitude remaineth yet in olde Cathedrall churches. Contrariwise your chancells in most churches be at the East ende and the aulter hard at the wall, there was also but one alter in that church, but you in euery church must haue many, it is certaine also in their church the Ministers and Deacons stoode rounde about the table or alter, but so they can not about your aultars except some of them stande on the toppe of the wall or in the windowe. Moreouer if you marke the most parte of olde churches in Englande you shall plainely see, that the chancells are but additions builded sence the churches, of likelihoode by the parsons that disdained to haue their place in the middest of the people as the olde manner was. Also you may see some churches builded rounde: as at London the Temple, and an¦other is at Cambridge of ye same fashiō. And some churches haue the steple at the Est ende, very vnhandsomely for pla∣cing of the roode lofte. Againe many churches haue crosse Isles in which the people can not see the chancell, nor the high aultar, which argueth that there was no vse of such chancells when they were builded: For such churches as are latelie erected haue the chancell and church all of one buil∣ding, and are made of such fashion that men maye see the highe aultar in euery parte of them: Beside this, in the O∣rientall church, as their ceremonies are diuers from yours, so no doubt the fashion of their temples differeth from yours. As for chalices, the church in the beginning was cōtent with wodden cuppes, and then came Zepherinus and brought in the vse of glasses. Acacius Amidenus is commended for selling
the golden and siluer vessels of the church, to redeme cap∣tiues. Socrat. lib. 7. cap. 21. S. Ambrose also Offic. lib. 2. cap. 8. sayth the church hath golde, not to kepe it but to be bestowed for necessarie vses, for which it is lawfull to breake, melt, and sel, euen the holyest vessells of all. But of your church it is true that one said of olde time: ye had wodden chalices, and gol∣den priestes but now you haue golden chalices, and wodden priestes: your vestimentes are of as good stuffe as your cha∣lices. The olde church knew none such, but as your owne Authors write: when they wente to celebrate they changed the affection of their minde rather than the garmentes of their body: as Antoninus witnesseth of Fulgentius. Howbeit we are content that your church by her gorgeous garments as well as by other thinges shoulde declare it selfe to be that woman which is described to be clothed in purple, golde, perles, and such like ornamentes Apoc. 17. Finally wheras you will vs to name one church that for the speciall intent of the builders, was not prepared in all sortes for Popish practises: Although I could name many, yet for examples sake, I name Pantheon, a church in Rome, prepared by the speciall and onely intent of the builders fo Cybelle, the great mother of the gods and for all false gods of the heathen, which now is called the church of Mary and Alhalowes. Then this church with many other in Rome, and other places, being monu∣ments of the faith and religion of the Paganes and not of yours, except yours and theirs be all one, as they are very like, you are bounde by your promise to recant. The 15. article conteyneth in effect 3. demandes. 1 Againe name any one company of men in the Christen world that in all articles of Faith, be in one meaning and belefe. IT is an easie matter to name diuers companies agreeing in one meaning & beliefe: as the church of the Grecians, the church of the Aethiopians, the church of the Chal∣deans, Moscouites, &c. But especially the whole company
of Protestantes in Europe doe agree in all necessary articles of true faith, by which we are iustified. 2 Or in thinges where they doubt, be contented to submit their seuerall meaninge to the iudgement of their Superiours. THe Greeke church in doubtes will be ruled by the Patriarch of Constantinople, and so will the rest of the Orientall churches by their cheefe Patriarches and bishops. And the Protestants in Europe will also be ruled by their Superiours, so farre as their superiors are ruled by Gods his worde. 3 And to that communion and companie wherof they be, name any companie of men agreeing and thus humbly affected in Christes Religion, sauing the blessed fellowship and members of the Catholike communion, and I recant. TO the communion and company of the Grecians, I name the Moscouites and Russians agreeing in Reli∣gion, and so humbly affected, and these are not of the fellowship, that you call the Catholike commu∣nion: Among the Protestants, to the church of Saxonie, I name the church of Dennemarcke, or to the church of Hel∣etia, the church of France, or to the church of England the church of Scotlande, but so, that none of these allow any consent or submission, but to the Truth, which must be tried onely by God his worde. And seeing none of these are of the Popish communiō, if your promise be any thing worth, you must recant. The 16. article conteyneth one demande, and one chalenge. Furthermore name any one man that is confessed on both sides by the iudgement of the world, to be holy and learned, & a member of the true Church, in what age soeuer you list sence Christes time, and proue him to haue bene in all ar∣ticles of Faith of the Protestants meaninge.
SEeing you geue so large scope, I will name S. Paule, who I thinke is cōfessed on both sides to be holy and learned, and a member of the true Church, whome I can proue by his writinges, that in all articles of faith, he taught the same, which we beleeue. And for triall of this, because it woulde requier a whole volume, if I shoulde proue euery particular article, wherein we dissent from you Papistes: If you will name an article, wherein we agree not with S. Paule, If I be not able to proue that we agree with him in the meaninge thereof, I will reuoke that article and agree with you therein. Yea if I bring not the aduersaries them selues to acknowledge in the ende him to be wholy against their doctrine in di∣uers of articles of great importance, and therefore that he coulde not be of their church, I recant. YOu shall neuer bring vs, neither in the beginning, nor in the end to acknowledge that S. Paule is against vs in any article of our Faith, but we agree wholy with him. Neuerthelesse I know what you meane, & will not be afraide to vtter. Forasmuch as immediatly after the Apostles time, corruption entred into the Church, which was hardly kept out, while they liued: as we maye learne by the Epistle to the Corinthians, you thinke that we dare not depende vpon any one mans iudgement: and therein you are not deceiued: for we must depende onely vppon Gods worde. But where you saye there is none but he dissenteth from vs in diuers articles of great importance, you saye vn∣truely: for you are not able to proue that Iustinus Martyr, or Irenaeus, two of the most ancient authenticall writers, that the Church next vnto the Apostles had, are against vs, in any point of doctrine wherein we differ from you? Yet are there certaine errors in them, which neither you, nor we allow, as is touched before in the answere to the 11. article 1. deman. But they are both wholly against you in diuers articles of your doctrine, and namely in transubstantiatiō, which is one of the greatest articles of Poperie: as Irenaeus, in the 34. cap.
of his 4. booke Contra haereses: Quemadmodum enim qui est a terra panis &c.. Euen as the breade▪ which is of the earth after it hath receyued the inuocation of God, is not now common breade, but the Eucharistie, or (breade of thankes geuing) consisting of two thinges earthly & heauenly, so our bodies receyuing the Eucharistie, are not now corruptible, hauing hope of resurrection. Here you see plainely, that Irenaeus af∣firmeth the sacrament, after consecration to consist of the earthly substance of breade: which maye better be vnder∣stoode, when we know that he reasoneth against such here∣tikes as denied the world to be made by God, saying that he woulde neuer haue made so great a mysterie of bread, which is a creature of the world, if the worlde had not bene made by him. Iustinus, in his second Apologie to the Emperour.  &c. We doe not receiue these thinges as common breade and a common cuppe but euen as Iesus Christ our Sauiour was incarnate by the worde of God and tooke vpon him flesh and bloude for our saluation: So we are taught that this meate for which thankes is geuen by the worde of prayer from him of which our fleshe and bloude are nourished by transmutation, is the fleshe and bloude of Iesus that was incarnate. Here, he plainely affirmeth that the substance of the Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of our bodies. Therfore it remaineth still after the consecra∣tion. The other writers of later yeares, as they haue some er∣rors which neither you nor we doe allow in them, so we are not afraid to confesse that they haue some corruption, wher∣by you may seeme to haue colour of defence for inuocation of Sainctes, prayer for the dead, and diuerse superstitious and superfluous ceremonies, yet not so addict to these, nor ioy∣ned with such absurdities as yours are. But for the chiefe pointes of Christian Religion, and the foundation of our faith, that is, for the honour of God, the offices of Christ, Re∣demption, Iustification, Satisfaction, the fruites of Christ his passion, Grace, faith, workes, authoritie of God his word, au∣thoritie of the Pope, reall presence, transubstantiation, Com∣munion in both kindes, Images, &c. the most approued wri∣ters Tertullian, Cyprian, Origen, Epiphanius, Hilarius, Chrysosto∣mus,
Ieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, &c. are vtterly against you, and therfore can not be of your church. But for as much as they hold the foundation, that is Christ, though they haue diuerse errors & superstitions, they were doubtles, the mem∣bers of the true Church of Christ, which because you are not able to disproue, reason would you should recant. The 17. Article conteyneth 5. demandes. 1 I aske of them whether the Lutherans, Zuinglians, Illirians, Caluenistes, Confessionistes, Swenkefeldians, Anabaptistes and such like, be all of one Church? BEcause you would make simple men beleue, that there be so many diuerse sectes of Protestantes, as you haue giuen them names, I will first discusse these sectes, and afterwarde aunswere your question. Lutherans, you meane them that follow Luthers opinion of the Sacrament. Zuinglians, follow Caluines iudgement of the same. Confessi∣onistes, them that exhibited their confession at Auspurge, which were both the Lutherans and Zuinglians, so these 3, names may be contracted into two: Lutherans and Zuingli∣ans. As for Illyrians, if you call them of Flaccius Illyricus, they be Lutherans, in opinion of the Sacrament, and differ onely in ceremonies, which can not diuide them from the faith. Caluine, and they that be of his iudgement, agree plainly with Zuinglius, so that of fiue names, there remaine but two sortes differing in opinion, whereunto you ioyne the Swenkefeldi∣ans and Anabaptistes. Now to your question, these be not all of one Church, for ye Swenkefeldians & Anabaptists be dete∣stable heretiks, but ye Lutherans & Zuingliās (as it pleaseth you to cal thē) are of one true church, although they differ in one opinion, cōcerning ye Sacramēt, for although the one affirme a real presence, ye other deny it, yet they both cōsent in this, that ye body of Christ, is receiued spiritually, not corporally, with the hart, and not with the mouth. Wherfore, this dissen∣tion is not so great (though there be error on the one side) but that they may be both of the Church of Christ, as well as S. Cyprian, the Martyr, and all the Bishops of Africa, and a
great many of Asia, differing with Stephanus, bishop of Rome, and the rest of his opinion in rebaptizing such as were bapti∣zed by heretiks. 2 And if either they can proue vnto me, that these, being of such diuersitie in faith and religion make one Church. WE haue alwaies abhorred the heresies of the A∣nabaptistes, Libertines, Swenkefeldians, Daui∣dians, Seruitians, and all such. But that Luther & Zuinglius, may be both of one Church, differing onely in one opinion of the Sacrament, is declared before. 3 Or that each of their sects may giue saluation to their folow∣ers, being so disagreable, one with an other in high points of our Religion. SAluation is the gift of God, and not in the power of a∣ny company, or sect of men: but this we affirme, that out of that Church, whereof we count Luther, and Zuin∣glius, notwithstanding their diuerse opinions (which is but in one matter of the Sacrament) to be members, there is no saluation. 4 Or that I should beleue all these rather then the Catholike Church, or one of these more then another, all making such a bold chalenge of the truth and Gospell. NO man requireth you to beleue all these, but the true Catholike Church onely. Neither doe we re∣quite you to beleue any one company of men, more then an other: but to beleue the trueth before fal∣shood. Now, which of them hath the truth, that they all brag of, you must search in the word of truth, desiring the spirite of truth that you may vnderstand and beleue the truth, and so without doubt, you shall come to the knowledge of the truth, and of the Church of God, which is the piller and stay of truth.
5 Let the Protestants of all these kindes put their heades toge∣ther, and shew me a reason of these thinges, and with all, let them among them selues agree, to what sorte of these sectes they woulde haue me, and I will recant. SVch is your impudencie in this matter, as in all other, that you woulde make men beleue that the Anaba∣ptistes, Swenkefeldians, Libertins, and other abhomi∣nable heretikes, be Protestantes: But it is well that you can make none but fooles thinke so: as for the Protestantes, they neede take no great deliberation to aunswere your de∣mandes but you had more neede to laye your heades toge∣ther to reconcile the Thomistes, Albertistes, Ockamistes, Scotistes, Reales, and Nominalls, which be all sectes of Pa∣pistes, and especially your Canonistes, and diuines, about the articles of your religion, that is: whether the Pope be aboue the Councell, or the Councel aboue the Pope. Whether the Pope may erre and not the Councell, or whether the Coun∣cell maye erre and not the Pope. These two: the Popes de∣termination and the Councells determination, being the rules of trueth in your religion and not agreed vpon: how can any trueth be certeine in your Church? As for Luther, and Zuinglius, they agree vpon one rule of trueth, that is the worde of God, and differ onely for the applying or laying of this rule, & yet but in one matter & that not the greatest. But you Papists, some holding of the Pope, and some of the Councell, as rules of truth, can haue no ground nor certain∣ty thereof. Therefore if you woulde haue me, or any man, to be of your belefe. First determine how I shal know when I am in a right beleefe: one sayeth, if the councell alloweth it, an other sayeth if the Pope alloweth, what shall I doe, when one of these is against an other? yea when one Pope is a∣gainst an other, and one councell against an other, shall I thinke that trueth changeth so often as they change. More∣ouer when one Pope graunteth, that the councell is aboue the Pope and that the Pope maye erre. Likewise one coun∣cell graunteth, that the Pope is aboue the councell and that
the councell may erre, as it hath bene within the 200. yeares, the councells of Constance and Basill, determined that the councell was aboue the Pope and that the Pope maye erre. Contrariwise, the councell of Ferraria, and Florence, deter∣mined that the Pope was aboue the councell and that the councell might erre. Martinus 5. the Pope chosen by the councell of Constance, was of the same iudgement that the councell: But Eugenius 4. that gathered the councell of Fer∣raria, and Florence against the councell of Basill, was of the contrarie iudgement. Nowe I woulde saye he were a wittie fellow, that coulde reconcile this geare together. For, if he be a Canonist that holdeth this opinion: that the Pope can not erre, whē the Pope him self graunteth that he may erre, which waye shall he turne him selfe? For, if this proposition be true: the Pope can not erre, then this is true also, that the Pope may erre: for if he can not erre he can not erre in saying so: And if the Pope erred in saying, he coulde erre where he can not erre, then this proposition is false, the Pope can not erre, so one proposition shalbe both true and false, which is impossible. Likewise if he holde that hilde that the councell can not erre, and the councell it selfe confesseth it that it may erre. Gentle maister N. reconcile me these together, which concerne a case that hath bene in practise and still is, in the Papistrie, and maye here trouble a mans conscience that woulde beleue your church, and if he haue any wit, restraine him for euer comming into your church: If you can not vn∣tie this knot nor winde your selfe out of this maze, vnlesse you will be still obstinate, it were wisedome for you to recant. The 18. article hath but one demande. I demande whether they were euer of the true Catholike church, which either tooke to them selues newe names of religion according to the calling of any secte maister, or liked not so well the name of Catholike or Christian as of their se∣uerall teachers, as to be called of Arius, Arians, or of Caluine, Caluinistes, or of Luther, Lutheranes, or Pro∣testants &c. if any man therefore can proue vnto me that
men which haue chosen to themselues to declare their di∣uersitie of faith, from the common knowen Catholike church such newe names, shoulde be of the Catholike church, I recant. I Aunswere that they which can not be content with the name of Christians, but chose vnto them selues newe names after the calling of their secte maisters: as Arrians, Pelagians, Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Benedictines, Gil∣bertines, Augustinians, Scotistes, Thomistes, Albertistes, &c. are none of the Catholike church: But the true Christians which desier most of all to be so called, and compting it a most honorable name without chosing any other name, be of the Catholike church, although in reproch, they be cal∣led of you Caluinistes, and Lutherans. As for the name of Protestants, came first of them that made protestatiō against the decree of Spires in Germanie, and from that time hath bene attributed to the professors of the Gospell: which name they doe not so much delight in, as you doe in the name of Papistes. Therefore, if nothing els do let you but the name▪ there is no cause why you shoulde not recant. The 19. article hath but one demande. Againe, if these, which by the common calling and iudgement of Christian people, be named and commonly taken for heretikes, haue not in all ages proued them selues in the ende to be heretikes in deede, notwithstanding their cra∣king of Gods worde, and therefore that the Protestants being so taken and called, proue not so in deede, I recant. THose that by true Christians, haue bene called and counted for heretikes, haue proued so in deede, and therefore the Papistes, being called and counted he∣retikes of true Christians, without doubt, are here∣tikes in deede. But it hath not bene alwayes true, that they, which of the people commonly called Christians, were cal∣led and taken for heretikes, proued so in deede. For the true
Christians of the Arrian people, that were called Christian people, were called and taken for heretikes, and in reproch, were called Homousians, and Athanasians, yet they proued and were in deede, true Christians and no heretikes. So the true Christians at this day, being of the Papistes, which after a sorte, are named Christians: called heretikes, and in re∣proch Protestants, and Caluinistes, in that their faith agreeth with the worde of God, proue them selues in deede, to be true Christians, & no heretikes. Therefore you haue bound your selfe to recant. The 20. article hath 3. demandes. 1 Likewise, if any man can proue vnto me, that either those be not true Christians, which by the consent of nations, and by olde prescription of so manye yeares as be sith their conuersion, be and euer hath bene called Catholikes. YOu your selues, will not accompt the Grecians for true Christians, and yet by consent of nations, and prescription of as many yeares as you can prescribe, they be, and euer haue bene called Catholikes, if you say: they, are not called by you, I aunswere: no more are you so called by thē. And sence the time that you departed from them, as great a portion of the worlde, and as many nations, haue called them Catholikes, as you are able to shewe on your side. Therfore either you must compte them true Chri∣stians, or els you must graunt that they, which haue ben long called Catholikes, are not alwayes true Christians. 2 Or that those can be any true members, or children of the Catholike church, which do mislike and mistrust so farre∣forth these holy names, as wel of Church, as Catholike that they haue turned thē into Congregations, and Gospellers, and Protestants, and such like. HE is a foolish sophister, that reasoneth from names to things, as you doe most vainely and childishly: we mislike the names of Church, & Catholike, because
we do sometimes vse these names: Congregation, and Gos∣pellers or Protestantes, and therefore be no true members of the Catholike church: we neither mislike nor mistrust those names as you sclaunder vs, neither doe we boast and trust onely in these names, without the thinges them selues, as you doe, and as your forefathers the wicked Iewes, crying: the Temple of the Lorde, the Temple of the Lorde, the Tem∣ple of the Lorde: when they had nothing lesse than the Tem∣ple of the Lord, but rather a denne of theues: So, you crie, the Catholike church, the Catholike church, the Catholike church, when you haue nothing in deede but the synagoge of Sathan. But because you make so much of these two names, Church, and Catholike, let vs see what great mysteries are conteined in them. This worde, Church, commeth of the Greeke worde Kyriaka, in Latine Dominica, in English, the Lorde his house: for so were they wonte, in olde time to call their temples, or oratories, so that this worde, church, pro∣prely signifieth a materiall temple, and can not signifie the fellowship and communion of Christian people, but by a figure. Therefore if we other whiles vse this worde, Con∣gregation, which can not denie, but it is the English worde of this Greeke name Ecclesia, that the Scripture vseth, and si∣gnifieth without figure ye same thing that this word, Church, doth by a figure, you may be ashamed, if you were not impu∣dent, to finde any fault with vs for so doinge. Likewise this worde, Catholike, commeth of the Greeke worde, and signi∣fieth Vniuersall, or ouer all, which worde the common peo∣ple doth not vnderstande. Therefore we expounde it plain∣ly and saye: that the Catholike Church, is the Congrega∣tion of Christ, dispersed ouer all the worlde. What reasona∣ble man can reprehende this doinge, and not rather your folly, which thinke it inoughe, if the people can prate like parates: Catholike, Catholike, and vnderstande not what Catholike meaneth. Thus, as we doe not refuse these wordes: Catholike, and Church, because they are com∣monly receiued, so doe we interprete them, by Vniuersall, and Congregation, because they are not else, commonly vnderstanded.
3 If therefore any thing can proue our true Church better than the honorable name of Catholike, or more condemne them to be out of Christes church thā that not only the Christiā worlde geueth it not to them, but they in a name, do refuse the same them selues, then do I recant. HEre you bewraye your selfe euidently, and acknow∣ledge, that we doe not sclaunder you, when we say: you boast onely of the Catholike church: For you declare plainely, that you haue no better argument then the very name of the Catholike Church, to proue, that you be the Catholike Church: if this be the best argument, all the rest is litle worth. For if the onely name of an honest man, is enough to proue an honest man, many a knaue may proue him selfe an honest man, and if the very name of lear∣ning, make a learned man, many an asse may proue him selfe to be a learned man, or if ye name of a good Christian, proue a man to be a good Christian, euery hypocrite may proue him selfe a good Christian. Likewise if you haue no grea∣ter argument, that can more condemne vs, then that we are not called the Catholike Church, then can you no more con∣demne vs, then Christ and his Apostles, that were not one∣ly, not called the true Church, but also were called heretikes & deceiuers by the people of the Iewes, which were as right∣ly called God his people, as they that giue you the name of Catholike Church, are called the Christian world. It is well you haue nothing better to proue your Church, then the ho∣norable name of Catholike, nor any thing more to condēne our Church, then that we are not called Catholike, and yet we haue as many nations, and more then you haue, that by publike authoritie, call vs Catholikes, and you heretikes, al∣though you most shamefully sclaunder vs, that we doe refuse the name being offered vnto vs. Seeing you boast so much of the name, Catholike, you shall heare what some of the old writers iudged thereof. Chrysostome, in an homelie, that he writeth of Adam, and Eue, in the later ende hath these words, after he hath tolde them that he hath no neede to repeate
such depe questions, as those men haue handled which haue fought against heretikes: Satis sufficere credimus quicquid se∣cūdum praedictas regulas Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt pror∣sus opinemur Catholicum, quod apparuerit praefixis sententijs esse contrarium, that is, we beleue that what so euer the Apostles haue taught vs according to the foresayd rules is sufficient, in so much that in no wise, we thinke that to be Catholike which shall appeare to be contrary to the sentences before determined. By this you may see that Chrysostome thought it not sufficient to haue the name of Catholike, for he iudged nothing to be Catholike in deede, that was contrary to the rule groūded in the writings of the Apostles. Wherfore how so euer you boast of the honorable name of Catholike, ex∣cept you can proue that your opinions agree with the Scrip∣ture, they are not Catholike in deede, by Chrysostomes iudge∣ment. S. Augustine also, in his booke de Genese ad literam im∣perfecto cap. 1. speaking of the Catholike faith, sayth: This is an article thereof, that we should beleue. Constitutam ab eo matrem Ecclesiam quae Catholica dicitur, ex eo quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, & in nullo claudicat & per totum orbem diffusa est. That he hath appoynted a mother Church, which is called Catholike, of this, because it is vniuersally perfect, & halteth in nothing, and is dispersed ouer all the worlde. S. Augustine here, is not content that the Church be onely called Catho∣like, but sheweth when it is that, which it is called, and there∣fore the popish Church, not being vniuersally perfect, as most Papists will confesse, that many thinges in their church haue neede of reformation, & halting in many thinges from the truth of God his worde, neither yet being dispersed ouer all the world but conteyned in a corner of Europa, is not by S. Augustines rule the Catholike Church. Furthermore S. Au∣gustine, cōtra Epistolam Fundamēti cap. 4. against the Manichees plainely declareth, how farre forth, not onely the name of Catholike, but also how farre vniuersally, consent, succession, antiquitie, are to be allowed: Vt ergo hanc omittam sapientiam, &c. Therefore to omitte this wisedom which you do beleue to be in the Catholike Church, there be many other things which may hold me most righteously in her bosome. The cō∣sent
of people and nations holdeth me, the authoritie be∣gun with miracles, nourished with hope, encreased with cha∣ritie, confirmed by antiquitie, doth hold me. The succession of Priestes from the very seate of Peter the Apostle, vnto whom our Lord after his resurrection, committed his sheepe to be fedde euen vnto this present bishopricke, doth hold me. Last of all that very name of Catholike doth hold me, which name, not without a cause, this Church alone hath so obtey∣ned, among so many heresies, that wheras all heretiks would be called Catholikes, yet when a stranger shall aske: where men meete at the Catholike Church, none of the heretikes dare shew him, either their principall temple or house. All this, you will say maketh exceeding much for vs: yea, but heare that which followeth: Apud vos autem, vbi nihil horum est quod me inuitet ac teneat, sola personat veritatis pollicitatio: quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur, vt in dubium venire non possit: proponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus in Catholica te∣neor, that is: But among you where there is none of these thinges, that may prouoke or holde me, there soundeth the onely promise of truth, which if it be shewed so manifest that it can not come in doubt, is to be preferred before all those thinges, by which I am holden in a Catholike Church. By this you may plainly see, that though consent, antiquitie, suc∣cession, and the name of Catholike, be good confirmation, when they are ioyned with the truth, yet when a truth is se∣uered from them,, it is more to be regarded then they all: & it is truth that maketh Catholike, to be estemed, and not Ca∣tholike, that giueth authoritie to truth: Wherefore, seeing it were better to proue your Church, to be Catholike, then to boast, that it is so called, & to disproue our Church so to be, then to say: it is not so called: The best way for you, is to re∣cant. The 21. article conteyneth but one demande. 1 Moreouer, I aske of the Protestants: whether in that time, in which they holde the true church to haue bene hidden or lost: the people that learned this article of their Creede
(I beleue the Catholike church) was bounde to goe from that church which they sawe, and taught them both the article, and all other thinges touching their faith and by which they were Christened, and receyued all other sacra∣ments, and commodities of saluation, whether they were bounde, I say, to beleue this vnknowen and close Congre∣gation, which they coulde neuer come vnto, nor by which they euer receiued; or coulde receiue any benefit, and so forsake that church by whom and in whom, they receiued both their faith and sacraments: Shew me therefore that the Christian men of these dayes, were charged to be∣leeue any other church than that, which taught them the article of the church, and baptized them, and I recant. THis demande, is like a drunken mans dreame, hauing neither heade nor foote: whether they shoulde be∣leue the church was lost: whether they shoulde be∣leue the church that was vnknowen to them, &c. But if your demande haue any sense in it: This is my aunswere. The church was neuer lost, but hidden from the eyes of the worlde: Therefore, if the people that where taught that ar∣ticle: To beleue the Catholike church, and were baptized to your church, vnderstood that this church, was not the Ca∣tholike church, which was so commonly called, but that God had a secret Congregation, which was in deed, the true Catholike church, they were bound to forsake your church, and to beleue the secret Congregation: for if a man had ben baptized of the Arrians and being brought vp by them, had learned that article, to beleue the Catholike church, which the Arrians would expound to be them selues, if afterward, by God his helpe, this man vnderstood, that the church of the Arrians, was not the catholike church, as he was taught it was, but that Athanasius, and a few other, that were bani∣shed and persecuted, were the true Catholike church: he was bounde to leaue the Arrians, commonly called the church, and to ioyne him selfe with the secret, banished, hidde, and persecuted church of Christ. But as for your Po∣pish church, in that time of blindenesse and error taught not
the people that article, nor any other but kept them backe from the knowledge, as well of that article, as of all other thinges that were necessary to their saluation: for you taught them nothing els, but to pronounce, and that full il fauoredly, like popingeys, certeine latine wordes, which they vnder∣stoode no more than stockes or stones. So that the people had no instruction of you, no not of the name of God, in many places but that they receiued by vncertaine talke of their parentes, as it were from hande to hande: for how many thousand parishes are there in Englande, that within these 60. yeares woulde declare, that they neuer hearde ser∣mon in their life. As for that they hearde of their seruice, they learned as much of it, as of the ringing of their belles, which was a sounde without vnderstanding. Therefore you may be ashamed to speake of teaching the people, their be∣lefe and all thinges necessary for saluation, when you haue counted it heresie to learne their creede in English, or to reade the scripture in English, in which is conteined all thing necessary to be knowen for euerlasting saluation. Finally be∣cause you requier me to shew you that the Christian people of those dayes, were bounde to beleue any other church than that, which taught them the article of the church and baptised them, I trow I will so shew it you, that for both your eares, you dare not deny it: how saye you? The Christian people of the Greeke church, which were taught by the Greeke church, that article of the church, and by the same Greeke church were baptised, whether ought they to beleue any other church but the Greeke church? If you say no: then you acknowledge the Greeke church to be the true church which denieth the Popes authoritie, if you saye yea: Then you are welcome home, you recant. The 22. article, although it be very confuse, yet it conteyneth in effect 3. demandes. 1 I aske also whether any man for the space of that 1000. yeres, of blindenes could be saued, out of that secrete and small Church, which they say was the true Church, if they aun∣swer
me, there might be some saued, with our Sacraments, and in the Communion or fellowship of the Papistes out of the Protestants Church, then there was a way to heauen, out of Gods Church: if they say that none could be saued by our Sacraments out of their close Church, then all men yong and old perished for those yeares without any hope of mercy, because they could not vnite them selues, and be incorporate to that company and Congregation, whereof they neuer neither hearde, nor coulde by any meanes sur∣mise. Therefore let any man aliue proue vnto me that ei∣ther any man could out of the true Church be saued. NO man aliue that knoweth what the true Church meaneth, will say, that any man can be saued out of the true Church, for he that is not a member of the body of Christ, cā by no meanes receiue any benefit of Christ to his saluation. Therefore how long so euer the true Church were hidden, whether it were a thousand yeres (as you beare men in hand that we should say) or two thou∣sand yeares it is not materiall, this is certeyne, that out of this Church, none could be saued, and though you count it smal, as in deede in respect of the world, it is but a small flocke, and fewe are elected, and fewe finde the streit gate of life. Luke 12. Matth. 7. & 20. yet is the number of it greater, then mans eye commonly can discerne. As when Elias thought that he only had bene left alone of the true Church: God answered, that he had yet reserued 7000. that neuer bowed their knee to Ba∣al. 1. Reg. 19. And as Esay declareth when the people shoulde be almost all destroyed, yet a remnant should be saued, which though it seemed to be small, yet it should ouerflow and fill all the world with righteousnes, Esa. 10. and though it shal be like a gathering of grapes when vintage is ended, or the sha∣king of an oliue tree when men thinke they haue left nohing vppon it, yet there be two or three in the toppe amonge the boughes, & foure or fiue vnder the leaues in the highest brā∣ches. Esay. 17. & 24. 2 Or that any other company could be knowne for the true and onely Church but our common Catholike societie.
THe true Catholike Church was neuer so secrete or hidden but it might be knowne of all those that had eyes to see it, whose hartes were lightened with the spirite of God and were enstructed by the worde of God, that they might vnderstande the trueth, and knowe the spouse of Christ from the common strompet of Antichrist. 3 Or that all men were damned for a thousand yeares togither because they coulde not finde, nor surmise of any other Church, then that which practiseth all holy functions, which Christ left for our saluation in the world, and I re∣cant. WE take not vpon vs to medle with God his iudg∣ments, whom he condemneth, & for what cau∣ses, further then the word of God teacheth vs, namely that as many as haue not beleued in the onely sonne of God, are condemned for their vnbeliefe, o∣ther secret causes we remit to his secrete counsell and know∣ledge. And wheras you say that the popish church practiseth all holy functions that Christ left for the saluation of his Church, it is most false: for first you doe not preach remissi∣on of sinnes in the bloode of Christ onely, for either you preach not all, or else you preach remission of sinnes in any thing, rather then the onely merites of Christ, as in mens owne merites, workes of supererogation, pardons, masses, beggarly ceremonies, as holy water, auriculer confession &c. Secondly, you minister not the Sacraments purely according to Christ his institution, but either corrupt and defile them with mans traditiōs, as you do Baptisme, or else cleane chaūge the vse of them, as in the Lordes Supper, which you make a Sacrifice, an idoll, a Priestes breakfast, and defraude the peo∣ple of the one halfe of the sacrament, as though you were wi∣ser then he, that instituted it in both kindes. Thirdly, disci∣pline you haue conuerted into tyranny and couetousnes, re∣teyning nothing but the name of it alone: Wherefore seeing you exercise no holy function after Christ his institution, but cleane contrary to the same, and doe obstinately defend the
filthy whore of babylon against the cleare light of the Go∣spell, & the true spouse of Christ, ye shall be damned except you recant. The 23. article conteyneth 2. demandes. 1 Againe shew me any Church, or imagin if you can by good reason, a church of Christ in which there is no gathering together for preaching, no spirite of prophesying, no rodde of correction, no order of ministring nor any spirituall functiō that can be named, proue me that there should be a true Church for a thousand yeares together, and lacked all these thinges. YOu would faine haue a great nombre of Articles and therefore you bring in one matter often times in di∣uers phrase of words, that it might seeme a new mat∣ter when it hath bene vttered twise or thrise before: as this Article is conteined before in the 5.8. and 9. Articles, where you shall finde it more largely aunswered. But let vs see, what this strange demande requireth, we must shew him a church, or els imagine by good reason a church of Christ without preaching, ministring, and discipline for a thousand yeares together. Although we will not graunt that it hath so longe continued without these exercises, yet because you geue vs leaue to imagine, we can imagine that it may as well continue without publike preaching, ministring, and discipline for a thousand yeares, as it did for three hundred yeares be∣fore Constantine. But you will say there was preaching mini∣string, and correcting, though it were not knowen to the ty∣rantes and persecutors, so say I vnto you, for that thousand yeres there was gathering together for preaching, ministring, and correcting, though the Pope and his persecuting Pre∣lates coulde not alwayes see it, nor come to the knowledge of it: for if they had once intelligence of it they smarted for it, as is knowen by the stories of the Waldenses, Bohemians, &c. Furthermore continuall exercise of preaching, ministring of sacramentes, and executing of discipline, are notes of a
quiet and peaceable Congregation, not of a dispersed, perse∣cuted, and disquieted Church. How often doth S. Cyprian cō∣plaine, that the brethren could not be gathered togither for executing of discipline, whereby it is certeyne, that likewise they coulde not be gathered togither for other exercises. Therefore the intermission of these exercises in a persecuted Church, doth not proue the same to be no true Church: But where so euer there be two or three gathered togither in the name of Christ, there is he in the middest of them. But whereas you require the spirite of prophesie (except you meane the gift of interpreting the Scriptures) the Church in the most quiet and flourishing state, may want the spirite of shewing things to come, as well as the giftes of tongues, hea∣ling, &c. 2 And withall, that there was an other vntrue Church which for those many dayes onely practised to the saluation of many, all these offices: and geue me a good reason why this Church, that alwayes hath had these thinges should be a false Church, and the other that wanted them, to be a true Church, and I recant. WE vtterly denye, that beside the true Church, there was an vntrue church, that practised those offices to the saluation of any man: for once a∣gaine I tell you, you haue neither the preaching of the word, nor ministring of Sacraments, nor execution of discipline, according to the truth of God his institution, but either altogither changed, or else greatly corrupted. And whereas you say, that the popish church onely hath practised these offices: I aske you againe whether the Greeke Church be a parte of your Church, and whether the Papistes in Eng∣land be a part of your Church. The Grecians you will say, are not: but the English Papistes are. Then haue I founde out by your owne iudgement, the Church of the Grecians, practising these offices being an vntrue church, & the church of ye English Papistes not practising the same, yet graunted of you to be a true Church. Therfore you are bound to recant.
The 24. article conteyneth 10. demandes. 1 Moreouer let any man shew how that Church can be the pil∣ler of truth, which durst not for a thousand yeares clayme either preaching of Gods word or ministring of Sacramēts or shew her selfe against falshood or superstition. AS the number of your articles doth draw to an ende, so your matter is farre spent, and therefore to make vppe your number, you must repete one thing twise. This demaund is conteined before in the 11. and 12. articles, where also it is fully aunswered. Notwithstanding, seeing it commeth againe it shal be briefly aunswered in this place. The Church is not called the piller of truth, because it should stand alwayes in the sight of the world: for then the defection, which S. Paule speaketh of, could not haue come, neither should the Church flie into the wildernes, as was declared to S. Iohn: But it is called the piller of truth, because that where so euer the Church is, either visible or inuisible, there is the truth. So though the Church were hidde a cer∣teyne time in the wildernes, yet there was trueth with the Church. You seeme to be a good Arithmetrician: for no number soundeth in your mouth but a thousand. Neuerthe∣lesse how long so euer it was, the piller of truth decayed not, And as God gaue his spirite, diuers times was bold to cha∣lenge preaching and ministring of the Sacraments, yea, and so boldly, that it cost many of the chalengers their liues. As Berengarius, Bruno, Marsilus de Pandua, Ioannes de Gaudano, Io∣annes VVickleffe, VValdo, Ioannes Hus, Ieronymus de Praga, &c. Thus it is manifest that the Church hath diuers tymes chalenged her right, and withstood falshood. 2 Let any man shew that all giftes of the spirite, and functions of the holy Ghost haue bene taken from her, a thousand yeares togither, and onely practised to the peoples vse by an aduouterous Church.
THere is no man can shew this: for it is a false lye, that all giftes of the spirite, & function of the holy Ghost were either taken from the true Church, or giuen to the adulterous church. And this hath bene shewed more then once or twise before. 3 Let it be declared, how the gates of hell haue not preuailed, or Christes promise and warrant for her, not bene voyd & frustrate, if a bastard Church exercising idolatry, as they say, hath spoyled the true Church of all holy actions, and the whole gouernment, and the whole name of Christiani∣tie, almost euer since Christes tyme. THe Deuill hath bent all his force and ordinance, he hath armed all the power of darkenesse, he stirred vp yrantes, heretikes, Popes, Saracenes, and Turkes to destroye the Church, the dragon, that olde serpent Satanas, the Deuill, stoode before the woman to deuoure her childe, he persecuted her into the wildernesse, he cast out of his mouthe, a great riuer to cary her awaie, he made warre with the rest of her seede that keepe the commaunde∣mentes of God. Apoc. 12. but yet in despight of the deuill, the Pope, and all her enemies, she is to this day preserued, and shalbe to the worldes end: Therefore the gates of Hell, haue not preuailed against her, nor the promise of Christ hath failed. And whereas you say, that your bastard church hath spoiled her of all holy actions, gouernment, and Christian name, it is a most impudent lye, as it is true, that you sawe a bastard church vsurped her holy name, counterfaicted her holy actions, and turned her gouernment into tyrannie. 4 Let me see therefore howe the onely dearling and spouse of Christ shoulde be neglected of him so long. SHe hath not bene neglected of him, but felt his con∣tinuall aide, he hath geuen her safe deliuerance of her childe, & taken it vp from the crueltie of the Dragon, he hath prouided her a place in the wildernesse, he
hath made warre with the Dragon for her sake, and driuen him out of heauen, he hath geuen her Eagles wings to flie into the wildernesse, he hath caused the earth, to swallow vp the water that shoulde haue caried her awaie, he hath geuen the remnant of her seede, Victorie ouer the Dragon. Finally, his mercifull protection and louing care ouer her, hath neuer more notably appeared than that against so many daungers and enemies all this while he hath preserued her, vntill such time as he hath thought good, now to bring her out of her secret place in the wildernesse, into the open sight of the worlde againe. 5 Let the aduersarie shew that the Church shoulde euer by superstition and falshood commit adultery or be deuorc from him. THe true church, consisting of God his elect, and the liuely members of the bodie of Christ, shall neuer commit such adultery that she shalbe diuorced from him. But the visible church, by Idolatrie and super∣stition may separate her selfe from Christ, and be refused of him, as God speaketh by Esay to the church of Ierusalem cap. 1. How is the faithfull Citie become an harlot? It was full of iudgement, and iustice lodged therein, but now they are murtherers. Thy siluer is become drosse, and thy wine is mixed with water. Thy Princes are rebellious and compa∣nions of theeues &c. euen so maye he say to the church of Rome: how is that faithfull church become an harlot, true Faith and Religion haue dwelled in her, but now Idolatrie and superstition: thy siluer is turned into drosse, and thy wine is mixed with water, thou hast nothing pure and vncorrup∣ted, thy Princes be rebellious Antichristes &c. Thus I haue shewed that the visible church, may become an adulteresse, and be deuorced from Christ. 6 Or that Christ should euer want his spouse in earth. THis hath bene often aunswered before, Christ hath neuer wanted his spouse in earth, though the blinde world can not alwayes see her, or when they see her,
will not acknowledge her to be his spouse, but persecute her, as if she were an adulteresse. 7 Or that he shoulde be a heade either without a bodie. THese are but one thing in diuers phrases, as he hath neuer wanted his spouse in earth, so hath he neuer bene an heade without a bodie, and seeing these wordes in this sence are relatiues (for Christ is called a heade in respect of the Church which is his body, and the Church is called a bodie, in respect of Christ that is her heade) I aunswere you by a rule of the Logicians: No man knoweth a relatiue, except he know the correlatiue thereof, Therefore, though Christ had a bodie in earth, yet coulde it be knowen of none, but such as knewe Christ the heade of that bodie. Of whome, when the Papistes were ignorant, specially when they appointed an other heade in earth, it is no marueill, if they could not see the bodie of Christ, though he haue neuer bene without it. 8 Or such an vnknowne and small bodie. THis hath bene answered immediatly before, it suffi∣ceth that it be knowne to Christ the head. As he sayeth: My sheepe heare my voyce and I know them. Iohn 10. And to them that be of the members of the same body. As for the rest, it is not necessary that they should alwayes see it, which will neuer acknowledge it. Neither is it so smal, as it is thought of, it is dispersed in many places ouer all the worlde, and yet fewe in comparison of the malignant church, whose number is as the sand of the sea, &c. Apoc. 20. 9 Or that Christes only kingdom should become so cōtemptible. NOthing else is to be looked for of the worlde, but hatred and contempt, as Christ him selfe sayth: You shall be hated of all men for my names sake. Matth. 10. & S. Paule biddeth vs looke on our calling, not ma∣ny
wise men, according to the flesh, not many mighty men, & not many noble men: but God hath chosen the foolish thinges of this world to confound the wise, and the weake of this worlde to confounde the stronge. 1. Cor. 1. And what hath the true church to boast in but in the Crosse of Christ. Gal. 6. than the which, nothing is more shamefull, contem∣ptible or reprochefull to the wisedome of this worlde: what knowledge or preaching hath the true church but Iesus Christ crucified, which to the Iewes is an offence and to the Greekes foolishnesse, but to them that be called, both Iewes and Greekes it is the power and wisedome of God to euer∣lasting saluation. 1. Cor. 1. Rom. 1. So that as the church in the sight of God and his Sainctes is most glorious and honora∣ble, so in the sight of the worlde it hath alwayes bene most base and contemptible. 10 Or that his spouse in earth shoulde euer lacke the singular prerogatiues of Gods spirite, shewe me these thinges, and I recant. THis also hath ben declared before in the second de∣mande of this Article. There be certeine singular prerogatiues, which are not continually with God his Church: as the gift of tongues, the gift of pro∣phesie, the gift of healinges &c. but there be other preroga∣tiues of God his spirit, that are necessary for the saluation of God his elect, as the gift of vnderstanding, the gift of Faith, the spirit of adoption, &c. and these the spoue of Christ hath neuer wanted. Wherefore if you wilbe partaker of those benefits which are receiued in the church of Christ, you must forsake your Romish religion, and recant. The 25. article hath 2. demandes. 1 Shew me that the Church, which ought to be a Christian mans staye, in all troubles and tempestes of doctrine might become so hidde or so close that no man coulde finde her.
THe reader must not be offended with me for any te∣dious repetition of mine aunsweres, seeing you geue the occasion, by propounding your demandes so often. This demande hath a false principle: that the church ought to be a Christian mans onely staie in all trou∣bles and tempestes of doctrine: for when soeuer any such tempestes doe arise, there is as great question and doubt of the Church, as there is controuersie of the doctrine: for as euery heretike chalengeth vnto him selfe the trueth of opi∣nions, so also doth he chalenge the possession of the church, so that the church is alwayes in as great question as the do∣ctrine. And then is it to be sought out and tried onely by the scriptures, as we haue declared at large in the aunswere to the 4. Article, 2. demande. Secondly whereas you demande: whether she coulde be so hidde or close that no man coulde finde her, because I haue aunswered to this demande fower or fiue times already, I will now aunswere in one worde: Al∣though she was bidden and close from the worlde, yet was she knowen to them that were her children. 2 Or so harteles that she coulde succour no man nor instruct any man in his doubt of conscience or distresse of Faith, proue me that there maye be such a decay of Gods spirite, trueth, and Church, and I recant. THe Church hath neuer bene afraide to do her office towardes her children and true members, in tea∣ching, xhorting, comforting, confirming, &c. nei∣ther hath the spirite of God failed to leade her into all trueth, and Christ hath bene with her euer more, and shalbe to the worldes end. But that the spirite of God, truth, and the Church of Christ, shoulde departe from the greatest numbre of the worlde, is proued by S. Paule, 2. Thess. 2. and by the Reuelation of S. Iohn. Apoc. 12. Therfore if the spirite of trueth did leade you, you shoulde recant. The 26. article conteyneth in effect but 3. demandes.
1 Shew me againe whether any man of yeares may be saued, except he beleue the Catholike Church? THere is no man of what age or yeares soeuer he be that can be saued, except he be a member of the Ca∣tholike church. But how necessary it is to beleue the Catholike church, it is very doubtfull, as you de∣mande, and as the conclusion of this article seemeth to re∣quire. If you meane that it is necessary to beleue the Catho∣like church, that is to say, that God hath an holy vniuersall Congregation, I graunt it is necessary to beleue. But I vtter∣ly deny that ye Romish church is that holy Catholike church. But if you meane (as it seemeth) and as the rest of the Pa∣pistes doe interprete that article, I beleue the Catholike church, that is: I beleue, what soeuer the church doth allow, to be true: I deny that it is necessary to saluation, that a Christian man should so beleue the Catholike church, both because the church may erre, & also because something may be commonly receiued of the church, which is not materiall to saluation. And that this is a false interpretation of this ar∣ticle of our Creede, I beleue the Catholike church, that is: I beleue what so euer she doth set forth or maintaine, to be true, appeareth manifestly by the wordes them selues: For who euer was so ignorant in the Latine tongue, to thinke that Credere Ecclesiam, and Credere Ecclesiae, were all one in signification. In deede if the wordes were: Credo Ecclesiae Ca∣tholicae, in the datiue case, this interpretation might take place, but when it is in the accusatiue case, Credo Ecclesiam Catholicam, A boy that woulde conster it otherwise than thus: I beleue that there is a Catholike church, were worthy to haue a doosen stripes for his labour. Moreouer this common distinction of Credere in Deum, that is: to put our trust in God. Credere Deum, that is: to beleue that there is a God, and Cre∣dere Deo, that is: to geue credit to God, that he speaketh the trueth, plainely ouerthroweth this foolish and false inter∣pretation: For we say not: Credo in Ecclesiam, that is: I put my whole trust in the Church, for that were blasphemie,
against God, in whome only we must beleue, neither do we say: Credo Ecclesiae, that is: I geue credit to the Church, as though she shoulde alwaies speake the trueth: But we saye and confesse against all heretikes and scismatikes: Credo Ec∣clesiam &c. that is: I beleue, that there is one Holy, Catho∣like, and Apostolike church, whereof I am a member &c. Finally, when the articles following, are spoken in one con∣text and phrase, it can not be chosen, but that they must haue one kinde of interpretation Communionem Sanctorum, Remissionem peccatorum, Carnis resurrectionem, that is: I beleue the Communion of Sainctes, the forgeuenesse of sinnes, the Resurrection of the body, &c. whereof the interpretation must needes be this: I beleue that there is a Communion of Sainctes, that there is forgiuenesse of sinnes, &c. Euen so I beleue, that there is a Catholike Church, which is an article of our crede, necessary to be beleued of euery Christian man, but to beleue all and euery thing that the Catholike church, by commō consent doth maintaine, is no article of our Faith, and therefore not necessary to saluation. 2 And that is it which hath in the face of all the worlde pra∣ctised preachng: the conuersion of nations to the obe∣dience of the Gospell: that hath alwaies had the mini∣string of sacraments, the hearing of matters in controuer∣sie, power Iudiciarie in Ecclesiasticall causes, the orderly succession of Byshops, vniformitie in solemne ceremonies, vnity in faith, that hath in her selfe all holy functions of the spirite, as working of miracles, remission of sinnes, the true sence and interpretation of Gods word that is bewti∣fied by the diuersitie of states, commended by Christ in the Gospell, as with Virgines, with Martyrs, with Confessors, and the rest. BEcause these colewortes haue bene sodden twise or thryse already, they are not worthy to be shewed in se∣uerall dishes, but euen as they are here mingled all to∣gither in an hochpotte. Of these notes that you make proper to the Catholike Church (as it hath bene declared before) some are not alwaies necessary in ye catholike church:
As open preaching in the face of the world, open ministring of Sacraments and execution of discipline, these are not to be required in a persecuted Church. Some were proper for a time, and then ceased, as working of miracles, and diuers o∣ther functions of the spirite. Some are neuer necessary in the Church, as succession of Bishops, vniformitie in ceremonies, &c. But of all these notes, there is not one that is proper to the Church of Rome: for she hath not alwaies practised o∣pen preaching, and neuer preached the worde of truth, she hath conuerted but few nations to her Religion, from Genti∣litie, and them rather by warre, than by preaching: she neuer had sence she first arose, the ministring of sacraments accor∣ding to Christ his institutiō, she hath hard matters in contro∣uersie, not for furtherance of Iustice, but for loue of money. Her iudiciarie power, may be dispensed withall for money. She hath had no orderly succession of Bishops, except an hore be an orderly Bishop of the Church of Rome: And except so many schismes as they write of, be orderly successions: she hath not vniformitie in all ceremonies, for diuerse nations, and diuerse Churches in these nations haue diuers ceremo∣nies, as Sarum, Yorke, Bangor, &c. in England: she hath not v∣nitie in faith: for it is not yet determined, of one of the greatest articles of Popish faith, whether the Pope be aboue the church: she hath no holy functions of God his spirite, but prophane vsages of mens inuentions: she hath no true miracles, but the power of Antichrist in lying signes and wonders. She hath nothing lesse then the true sense of God his worde, which submitteth the same to her owne corrupt and changeable iudgement. She is not bewtified with estates commended in Scripture, as Apostles, Euangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, but with Popes, Cardinalls, Monkes, Chanons, Fryers, &c. In steede of virgines, she hath filthy strumpets, her Nunnes, or else such foolish virgines as bring no oyle in their lampes: she hath no Martyrs, but obstinate traytors, as Becket, Fisher, More, &c. she hath no confessors of trueth, though she haue ten thousand mainteyners of fal∣shood and lyes: Wherfore if these be the notes of ye Catho∣like Church, ye Church of Rome can in no wise be that same.
3 Proue vnto me that this is not the true Church, or that we be not bound to obey this Church and no other in all contro∣uersies, and doubtes raysed either by the difficultie of the Scripture, or by the vayne contention & pride of heresie, and I recant. I Haue proued, euen immediatly before that not one of those notes, which you count to be markes of the true Church, is proper to your Church. And therefore it is not the truth, neither ought it to be obeyed in any thing. And as for doubtes that arise by difficultie of Scripture, or conten∣tion of heresie, must be resolued and determined, as it is a∣bundantly declared before, onely by the Scriptures: for the hard places of the Scripture must be opened by easie places, and heretikes must be confuted, by the Scriptures: for there is neuer heresie, but there is as great doubt of the Church, as of the matter in question, onely the Scripture is the stay of a Christian mans conscience, which I woulde wish that you would truely embrace and recant. The 27. article conteyneth 5. demandes. 1 Moreouer let any man proue vnto me, that the true & onely Church of God, may at any time be voyd of God his spi∣rite. THe true and onely Church of Christ, can neuer be voyd of God his spirite, and yet she may erre from the truth, and be deceiued, in some thinges, euen as there is no true Christian man that is voyd of God his spirite, for he that hath not the spirite of Christ, is none of his. Rom. 8. yet may euery true Christian erre, and be decea∣ued in some things, according to the saying of the Scripture, euery man is a lyar. Wherefore the whole Church militant consisting of men, which are all lyars, may erre all togither, as euery part thereof, although neither the whole Church nor any true member thereof be voyd of God his spirite.
2 Or falsely interprete any sentence of holy Scripture. THis gentle offer must needes be taken, I will proue vnto you, that the church of Rome, hath falsely in∣terpreted diuers sentences of scripture, and there∣fore by that which she hath done, it cannot be doub∣ted but that she may do it. S. Augustine was in this error, that he thought Infantes must receiue the sacrament of the body and bloude of Christ, vnder paine of damnation, and was deceiued by false interpretation of this scripture: Except ye eate the fleshe of the Sonne of man and drinke his bloude &c. Ioan. 6. This error and false interpretation, he affirmeth to be common to all the Westerne church, & to Pope Innocent him selfe. Contra duas epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium lib. 2. cap. 4. & cōtra Iulianum lib. 1. cap. 2. Furthermore the second Coun∣cell of Nice, how many textes of scripture doth it falsely in∣terprete, which it were to tedious to repete, yet for exam∣ples sake I will reherse some of them. God made man to his owne image Gen. 1. therefore we must haue images in the church. No man lighteth a candle and setteth it vnder a bu∣shell Math. 5. therefore images must be set vpon the altars. As we haue heard, so we haue seene in the City of our God, Psal. 48. that is: God must not be knowen by onely hearing of his worde, but also by sight of images. If these be not true interpretations I reporte me to you. Beside these, I will bring you a sentence of holy Scripture, not onely falsely interpre∣ted in sence, but also falsified in wordes, and concerning not a small matter, but euen one of the cheefe articles of our Faith. It is written in the 10. chapter of the Gospell after S. Iohn the 29. verse . My Father which gaue thē vnto me (speaking of his sheep) is greater than all. This sentence, hath the Councell of La∣terane, holden vnder Pope Innocent the 3. where were pre∣sent 70. Metropolitanes, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbates, and 800. Priors commentualles in all 1300. Prelats, falsified in wordes, after this maner, Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus, that is: That which the Father hath geuen me, is greater than all.
This sentence they alleage, to proue that God the Father begetting his Sonne from euerlasting, gaue his owne sub∣stance vnto him, the wordes be in the 2. Canon. Pater enim ab aeterno filium generando, suam substantiam ei dedit, iuxta quod ipse testatur: Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus. At dici non potest, quod partem suae substantiae illi dederit, & partem re∣tinuerit ipse sibi, cum substantia Patris indiuisibilis sit &c. that is to say: For the Father, begetting his sonne, from euerlasting, gaue him his owne substance, according as he himselfe wit∣nesseth: that which the Father gaue me, is greater than all. But it can not be said, that he gaue him part of his substance, and kept parte vnto him selfe, when as the substance of the Father is indiuisible &c. Goe your wayes now and perswade vs, that your church can not interprete any sentence of the scripture, falsely, when the Laterane Councell, which is your represented church hath thus both falsefied, and falsely in∣terpreted, this scripture. Perswade men, that they may safely leane to the interpretation of your church, when among a thousand and three hundred Prelates, gathered canonically in a Councell, not one was founde that coulde espie such grosse abusing of the worde of God, but let it passe in a Ca∣non, vnder the name of the whole Councell. Perswade men, that in all controuersies, & condemning of errors, they must be ruled by the determination of your Church, When the Fathers of the Laterane Councell, can not confute the error of Ioachim Abbot, concerning the Diuinitie of Christ, but by falsefying and false interpreting of scripture. These few ex∣amples of an infinite numbre, I haue set forth, because they are sufficient, both to satisfie your chalenge, and to perswade the simple, that the church of Rome may falsely interprete the scripture, which you woulde beare them in hande were impossible. 3 Or induce any error among the people. THe true and onely church of God, is so guided by God his spirite and directd by his worde that she can not induce any damnable error to continue. Yet,
as it is declared before, she hath no such priuilege graunted, but that she may be deceiued, in some thinges: for her know∣ledge is vnperfect, and her prophecying is vnperfect. 1. Cor. 13. And it is true that S. Augustine sayeth: euen the whole church is taught to saye: Forgeue vs our trespasses. And if generall Councells be the church represented (as you Papistes doe teache) S. Augustine plainely affirmeth that they may erre: De Baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 2. cap. 2. Quis autem nesciat sanctam scripturam Canonicam tam veteris quam noui Testamen∣ti &c. And who knoweth not, that the holy Canonicall scri∣pture, as well of the olde, as of the newe Testament, is con∣teined within her certeine boundes: and that it is so prefer∣red, before all later writinges of byshops, that of it, no man may in any wise doubt, or dispute, whether it be true, or whe∣ther it be right, what so euer is knowen to be written therin: and that the writings of bishops, which haue bene written, or are now in writinge, maye be reprehended, if they haue gonne astraie, any thing from the trueth, both by the saying that is perhaps more wise, of any man, that is more skilfull in that matter, and by the more graue authoritie and wisedom of other better learned bishops, and also by Councells: and that euen those Councells which are gathered in euery re∣gion or prouince, ought to geue place without all doubt, to the authoritie of the generall Councells, which are gathered out of all the Christian worlde: and that euen the very ge∣nerall Councells, may often be amended, the former by the later, when as by any triall of thinges, that is opened, which before was shut, and that is knowen which before was hid∣den, without any swelling of wicked pride, without any stub∣bernesse of arrogance, without any contention of peuishe enuie: with holy Humility, with Catholike peace, with Chri∣stian charity. Thus farre, S. Augustine, which cleerely affir∣meth, that generall Councells may often erre, which maye often be amended, but that the authority of God his worde, is to be preferred before the writinges of all Doctors, and Decrees of all Councells, and that it onely can not erre. The Councell of Carthage the 3. ca. 23. determined, that all pray∣ers at the altar, shoulde be directed onely to the Father, and
not to the Sonne, or the holy Ghost, whether this be an er∣ror to define that it is vnlawfull to pray to God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost, let euery man iudge. But you will except, that this was a prouinciall Synode, and not a gene∣rall Councell. But I aunswere you, it hath the authoritie of a generall Councell, because it was confirmed in the sixt ge∣nerall Councell holden at Constantinople in Trullo. And as for the Popish church, that it maye erre, what neede we better proofe than the prayer, which it maketh, after the ending of euery generall Councell, Precamur scilicet vt igno∣rantiae parcas & errori indulgeas, that is we praye truely that thou wouldest spare our ignorance & pardō our error. And againe, Et quia conscientia remordente tabescimus, ne aut igno∣rantia, nos traxerit in errorom, aut praeceps forsitan voluntas im∣pulerit a Iustitia declinare, ob hoc te poscimus, te rogamus, vt si quid offensionis in hac Concilij celebritate attraximus, condonare, & remissibile facere digneris. that is: And because we are gre∣ued with remorce of conscience, lest either ignorance haue drawen vs into error, or perhaps rash will hath driuen vs to decline from Iustice, therefore we praye thee, we beseech thee, that if we haue drawen vnto vs any offence in the cele∣bration of this Councell, thou wouldest vouche safe to par∣don, and to make it remissible &c. If it be impossible for the generall Councell to erre, what neede they pray to God to pardon their error, and when their owne conscience con∣demneth them and compelleth them to confesse, and that before God, that they may erre, what impudence is it in any man, to contend that they can not erre? Furthermore the second Councell of Nice, determined that Angels, and sou∣les of men had bodies, were visible, and circumscriptible, and therefore might be painted, and this it affirmeth to be the iudgement of the Catholike church, Con. Nice. 2. Actione 5. If this be not to induce an error, to make men beleue that Angells and spirites haue bodies visible and circumscripti∣ble, there was neuer anye error sence the worlde beganne. Finally, when they say the Pope can not erre, they acknow∣ledge that such generall Councells as condemned Popes, for heretikes, did erre, as the sixt generall Councell of Con∣stantinople
in Trullo, which condemned and accursed Pope Honorius for an heretike, Actione 13. Euen as Pope Leo, the 2. did also, as appeareth in his epistle, to the Emperour Con∣stantine. Also the Councell of Constance did erre, which condemned Pope Iohn the 23. for denying the immortality of the soule, and the resurrection of the body. Session. 11. which Councell, Pope Iohn him selfe affirmed to be most holy, and that it coulde not erre. Session. 12. And the Coun∣cell of Basile did erre, which deposed Pope Eugenius, the 4. Session. 34. the same Councell being confirmed by Pope Ni∣colas the 5. Session 43. If you say: these two last Councells did not erre, in condemning and deposing these Popes: Then the great generall, and OEcumenicall Councell of Ferra∣ria, and Florence, did erre, in disallowing the determination of these Councells. Thus it is manifest that the Romish church, which they them selues confesse, to be represented in a generall Councell, may erre, which hath so often erred. And if it may erre, and be deceiued it selfe, what man is he, that neede to doubt: Whether it maye induce any error a∣mong the people. 4 Or approue any vnprofitable or hurtefull vsage among Christians. IF the church had not approued many vnprofitable and hurtefull vsages, among the people in S. Augustines time, what neede had he to complaine, that many of God his cōmaundemēts, were litle regarded, & mans presumptions so highely esteemed, Sed hoc nimis doleo &c. But herewith∣all I am to much greued, that many thinges which in God his booke are most holsomly commanded are lesse regar∣ded, and all thinges are so full of so many presumptions, that he is more greuousely reproued, which in his vtas hath tou∣ched the earth, with his bare foote, that he that hath buried his minde in dronkennesse. Therefore if it be an vnprofita∣ble and hurtefull vsage, to preferre mans traditions before God his commaundementes, the Church in S. Augustines time approued an vnprofitable and hurtefull vsage. Further∣more,
if the Church can not approue an vnprofitable or hurtefull vsage, wherefore are so many ceremonies, as were approued in S. Augustines and S. Ambroses times, abrogated and disanulled, either because they were vnprofitable, or else hurtful. Last of all, what superstitious vsages, doth the church of Rome still approue? euen such as the wiser sort of Papistes are ashamed of. 5 Or that she suffereth any man, damnably abusing her religi∣on, without open reprehension thereof, proue any of these thinges, and I recant. THe true Church of Christ, in such places as she is, suf∣fereth no man damnably abusing her Religion, with out open eprehension, as in the dayes of VValdo, VVickleffe, Husse, &c. whereof sufficient mention is made before, but because she is not in all places at all times, many men, yea whole nations, may damnably erre, and not be reprehended of her, As all the Mahometistes, which oc∣cupie the greatest part of the world, who doth, or hath al∣waies openly reprehended them. And the Romish Church, can well enough abide, ye true Religion of Christ, to be dam∣nably abused, not onely without reprehension, but also with allowing: For when the Friars, Dominicanes, & Franciscans, had forged a newe Gospell, out of the doctrine of Ioahimus, and the visions of Cyril, which they called the Gospell of the holy Ghost, the Gospell that should endure hereafter, the e∣uerlasting Gospell: which diuilish gospell they affirmed to be so much more perfect, then the Gospell of Christ: as the Sunne is more perfect then the Moone, & a kernell of a nut, before the shell: yet did not the Church of Rome, once re∣prehend it. So that it was cultiued 55, yeares, and at length set forth to be openly expounded in the Vniuersitie of Paris, Anno Dom. 1255. without open reprehension of any, but such as were counted heretikes for their labour, As Gulielmus de S. Amore, Gerardus Sagurellus, &c. And finally, when the mat∣ter was brought before the Pope, Anno Dom. 1256. by Guliel∣mus de S. Amore, and other sent from the Vniuersitie of Pa∣ris,
the Pope and the Cardinalls, tooke oder that it shoulde be priuily burned, and not openly reprehended, for shaming their orders. Mathaeus Paris. Whereby it is clearely proued, that the Romish Church hath suffered wicked men, damna∣bly to abuse Religion, without open or priuie reprehension for the space of 55. yeares, and at length without open repre∣hension, when there was no remedie but it must needes be reprehended, wherefore if there be any grace in you, you will recant. The 28. article conteyneth 3. demandes. 1 If vnitie in Faith, austeritie of life, sharpe discipline, great penance, much fasting, large almes, godly deuotion, obedi∣ence to higher powers, grauitie and constancie in all cases, be not the signes of the true Church. IF you aske of true Faith, repentance, discipline, &c. these might be signes of the true Church, but if you meane v∣nitie in any faith, &c, as it seemeth by your wordes, the Mahometistes and Turkes, are the true Church, for they haue vnitie in their faith, austeritie of life, sharpe discipline, fasting, almes, deuotion, obedience, grauitie, Constance, &c. as much, or rather more then the popish church. 2 Or be not more in our Church then in their Congregation, I recant. YOu haue not vnitie in true faith: for you knowe not what it meaneth, but are vtter enemies vnto it, and in your owne principles, there is no vnitie, whether the Pope or the Councell be superior, &c. you may, as all hypocrites, pretende austeritie of life, when you are most lux∣urious riotors, as the world knoweth: your discipline is not so sharpe, but money wil make it blunt: you haue great penance but no true repentance, you haue much abstinence from meates, which is the doctrine of diuills, but you fast as litle as other men: your almes are large but without faith, and there∣fore
sinne: your deuotion is blinde, and not godly, but like her mother Ignorance: you are disobedient to Christian Ma∣gistrates, submitting your selues to Antichrist: your grauitie and constancie in all cases, is better commended of your self, then knowne of other men: Wherefore being voyde euen of these, which you make the signes of the true Church, you are none of the true Church, except you recant. 3 But if discorde in religion, licentiousnes in lyuing, contempt of Discipline, reiecting of penance, lothesomnesse of fa∣sting, lacke of zeale and deuotion, disobedience to Magi∣strates, sacriledge, apostacie, breach of vowes, vnlaw∣full lustes, wantonnesse in all life and maners, if these thinges, I say, agree not better to the Protestants, than the Catholikes, or if these be not the plaine signes and fructes of a false church, and doctrine, I recant. WE acknowledge that in the outward face of our church, be many hypocrites, chargeable with these crimes that you speake of, and we yelde our selues guiltie before God of greuous of∣fences, that our life is not aunswerable vnto our doctrine: Neuerthelesse we doubt not, but God for Christ his sake, will haue mercy vpon vs. But if in life and conuersation we be compared with you Papistes, euen the cheefest of your church, as Popes, Cardinalls, Byshoppes, Monkes, &c. We dare approue our life to be honester both before God and men. You shall neuer be able to charge vs with such ryot, whoredome, adulterie, incest, sodomitry, bestiality, mur∣ther, poysoning, necromancie, apostasie, blasphemie, &c. as both the worlde seeth to ouerflowe in your Prelates at this daye, and we are able to bring forth of your owne Cronicles and Hystories, to haue ben committed in times past: where∣fore, for very shame, leaue of this comparison. We meinteine no stewes, neither of males nor females, we set forth no bookes in commendation of Sodomitry, we exact no tribute of Courisans, to kepe open bawdrie, we priuiledge no writinges that teache men to committe vylanie, worthy of a
thousand deathes. Therefore be not so impudent, to charge vs with these crimes aboue the Papistes, but rather forsake that filthie whore, the mother of all fornication, and recant. The 29. article conteyneth 8. demandes. 1 Let any Protestant in the worlde, proue vnto me, that their church coulde rightly be called Catholike, which was so particular, that no man aliue coulde name a place where any such church was. WHy might not our Church, when it was most hidden, be as rightly called Catholike, as the Church of the Apostles, when it was so parti∣cular, that it was cōteined in the narrow bondes of Iury: for it is not called Catholike, because it shoulde be euery where, for that it neuer was nor shalbe: But because that where so euer it be, in partes, it is one body of Christ. The Popish church is not in euery parte of the worlde: For Mahomets sect is in the greatest parte. Many cuntries are I∣dolaters and the most parte of them that professe the name of Christ, are not in the felowship of the Popish church: And whereas you saye: that no man aliue coulde name the place where it was, you make an impudent lye: For although it were vnknowen, to the Papistes, and enemies thereof, yet was it knowen to the true members therof. It was in Italie, whē Marsilius of Padua, preached: in France, when VValdo prea∣ched at Lyons, and there about. In England, when VVickliffe taught: in Bohemia, when Iohn Hus, and Ieronyme of Prage did florishe. 2 Or that it might be called holy, which neuer had Baptisme, or other sacramentes, to sanctifie any of her followers withall. IT had the spirite of God to sanctifie the true members of it, and it had sacramentes to testifie the same: Also did not the Bohemians baptise: Were not pauperes de Lug∣duno
baptised? &c. But if you count their Baptisme no Ba∣ptisme, why did you not rebaptize in Queene Maries time, all those that were baptized by our Church in King Edwards time? 3 Or that it should be one, which as soone as it grew vp in the world, was diuided into so many sundry sectes. NOne of vs will graunt you, that our Church began first to grow, when it was last brought to light, and knowledge of the world: for it hath continued e∣uen since Christ. But if there arose, or were renew∣ed many heresies, with it, that is no new matter, but an olde practise of the deuill. For as soone as the Church of Christ beganne to grow vp after his ascension, euen in the Apostles time, there were many sectes and heresies, As the Iewes that mainteyned the lawe, they that denyed the Resurrection a∣mong the Corinthians Hymenaeus and Philetus, Simon Ma∣gus, Cerinthus, Ebion, Marcion, Basilides, Valentinus, Carpocrates, &c. So that there were many more heresies, at the first prea∣ching of the Gospell, in, and immediatly after, the Apostles time, then at the last restoring of the publike preaching ther∣of vnto the worlde in our dayes: And yet the Apostolike Church was one Church, and so is ours at this day one and the same. 4 Or that it might be called Apostolike, which could neuer coūt by orderly succssion from any Apostle, or Apostolike man. YOu are neuer able to answere the arguments that are brought to proue that Peter was neuer Bishoppe at Rome. And then where is all your braggs of Aposto∣like sea, and succession, &c. But be it that Peter was there, except you proue succession of doctrine and faith as wel as succession of men, your successiō is not worth a straw. And our Church, which holdeth all the doctrine of the A∣postles, and none other but the doctrine of the Apostles, shall be truely called, and founde, the Apostolike Church,
when your with all her succession of Antichristes whore, whoremongers, heretikes, Sodomites, blasphemers, coniu∣rers, &c. shabe Apostaticall, rather than Apostolicall. 5 Or the secret, base, contemptible, defaced, and disordered Congregation, was euer of that maiestie, that it might re∣quire the obedience of all Nations. HOw base, and contemptible soeuer it be, in the eyes of the wicked despisers of it: yet did it not only require, but also subdue all nations to the obe∣dience of the Faith, so many as were euer subdued, in the dayes of the first Christian Emperors, and before. And sence, when it was most defaced by the tyrannie of Anti∣christ, it was of such maiestie, that it both required and ob∣teined the obedience of the realme of Bohemia, and in pro∣cesse of time, hath obteined the obedience of almost all the nations of Europe. If the churche of Rome reteine the like maiestie, why doth it not now, requier the like obedience of all nations, both Christians and Turkes. you will saye: It requireth, but it can not obteine. Euen so, I aunswere of our Church, it hath alwayes bene worthy to requier: but it hath not pleased God, that it shoulde alwaies obteine. 6 Or that it was euer able to gather generall Councels. THe foure best generall Councells were gathered by our Church, and the Emperors, that were defenders of the same, and not by the byshops of Rome. Nei∣ther were they Presidentes in them, as it is manifest, that other men were Authors of the Canons, or distinctions: As of the Nicene, Alexander Bishop of Constantinople of the Constantinopolitane. Nectarius byshop of the Ephesine. Cyrillus byshop of Alexandria of the Chalcedonense. Ana∣tolius of Constantinople &c. and in other generall Coun∣cells where the bishop of Rome was president, I aunswere as Iohn Patriarche of Antioche did, in the Councell of Basile, his presidence was: Honoraria ad beneplacitum Concilij eis data:
non authoritatiua, nisi ex concessione aut permissione habente vim concessionis aut ex tolerantia, that is: For honor sake graunted to them so long as it shoulde please the Councell, and not of authority but either by graunt or permission being of the force of a graunt or els of sufferance. And I conclude as he doth, the Pope was neuer President either of honor, or of authority, but by the graunt or permission of the Councell. And how is the Popish church able to gather general Coun∣cells at this daye? who will come at her calling? Except a few Spaniardes, and a ioly company of buckram bishops of Italie? generall Councells of all the worlde, can neuer be gathered, but either whē there is a Monarchie, or els (which is not to be looked for) that all the Princes of the worlde, will consent together. 7 Or exercise Discipline. BEcause this demande hath bene aunswered so often before, I will saye the lesse nowe. The free course of discipline, in time of persecution may be hindred: As it was in S. Cyprians time, when the members of the Church be dispersed: but the power of discipline, hath al∣wayes remained, and when occasion serued, bene executed: As the Bohemians, excommunicated the Adamites, and the ciuill Magistrates punished them by the sworde. 8 Or that these names, proper by scripture and Doctors of the true Church, coulde be euer chalenged, by any right to their saide Congregation. AS many of these names as are proper to the Church by scripture, or Doctors agreeing, with scripture, haue bene alwayes iustly chalenged of right to per∣teine to our Church and Congregation. I meane these: 1 Corpus Christi.
OVr Church doth rightly chalenge, to be the body of Christ, which acknowledgeth Christ to be her only head, Sauiour, Redeemer, Priest, King, Inter∣cessor. &c. The Popishe church can not chalenge this name, because she doth not acknowledge Christ to be theese only and wholly. 2 Sponsa Christi. THe spouse of Christ, heareth the voice of Christ, and is ruled thereby, so doth our Church, therefore she is spouse of Christ. But the Romish church goeth a whoringe after her owne inuentions, committeth grosse idolatry, and will in no wise be ruled only by the voice of Christ, there she is not the spouse of Christ. 3 Vencidilecta Christo. HOwe tenderly Christ loueth his Church, the true members thereof, which haue receiued the first frutes of his spirit, do better vnderstand in hart thā can be expressed with words, & howe he abhorreth the whore of Babylon the Romishe Synagoge, the Scripture doth plentifully declare. 4 Columba speciosa. OVr Church, expressing the simplicitie of a fayer doue, may iustly chalenge this name: But the Ba∣bylonicall Strompet your church, in crafte and sub∣tilitie, is more like a foxe than a doue. 5 Domus Dei. THe true Church, in which we are, is the house or fa∣milie of God, which he gouerneth by his stewardes, the sincere preachers of his word. The popish church is the Synagoge of Satan, where the preaching of God his word is despised, and the word it selfe, made subiect to mens determinations and authorities.
6 Columna veritatis. SAinct Paule by this title doth admonish Pastors, and Preachers, how great a burthen and charge they su∣steyne, that the truth of the Gospell can not be conti∣nued in the world, but by their ministerie in ye church of God, which is the piller and stay of truth, this their duety true preachers considering, are diligent in their calling to set forth the Gospell and to preach the truth. But the popish church, which is not the vpholder, and mainteyner, but the ouerthrower & oppressor of the truth, compelling it to giue place to falshood and error, can by no equitie chalenge this name, to be called the piller and stay of truth, but rather of falshood and lyes. 7 Ciuitas Dei. OVr Church is the citie of God, builded vpon the foundations of the Patriarkes, Prophets, and Apo∣stles, Iesus Christ being the head corner stone: ru∣led by the lawes of God onely, reteyning that forme of regiment and common wealth, that Christ him selfe hath prescribed. The Church of Antichrist, is founded vppon se∣uen hilles, Apoc. 17. vpon the traditions, dreames, phantasies, and deuises of men, refuseth to be ruled onely by the lawes of God, hath cleane altered and changed the forme of regi∣ment prescribed by God, & set vp an other, full of Antichri∣stian pride, crueltie, and tyrannie. Therefore in no wise may be called the citie of God, But Babylon the mother of for∣nication, Sodoma and Egypt, where our Lord is daily crucifi∣ed in his members. 8 Ciuitas supra montem posita. THis saying of our Sauiour Christ in the 5. of Mathew, is not properly meant of the Church, but of the A∣postles & their successors the ministers of ye Church,
euen as these sayinges: You are the salte of the earth, you are the light of the worlde, A citie builded vppon an hill can not be hidden, neither is a candle lighted to be set vnder a bushell. By which wordes, he teacheth them aboue all other men, to looke diligently to their life and conuersation: for as they excell in place and dignitie, so the eyes of all men are set vp∣pon them. As a citie builded vppon an hill, must needes be seene of all them that come neare it, so they being placed in so high an office and dignitie shall be noted and marked a∣boue all other men. As a candle is not lighted but to be set on a candlesticke & to giue light vnto all them that come in∣to the house, euen so a Minister and Preacher of God his word is not ordeyned for any other ende but that he should shine before men in true doctrine and good maners. Hereby it appeareth how fondly some Papists would seeme to proue out of this place that the Church must alwayes be visible, when the wordes are not applyed to the Church, but to the ministers thereof, I know some of the doctors expound this place otherwise, but the context of the wordes doth plainely confute their error. 9 Hortus conclusus. AS a gardē or orchard walled in or inclosed with hed∣ges, is more estemed of the owner, thē great broad fieldes, and the trees and flowers that growe therein are preserued and kept more safely, then such as are wilde and grow abroad, right so the Church of Christ seue∣red from the rest of ye world, though it be small in compasse, yet is it more estemed of him then all the world beside. But the Church of Rome, which will not be enclosed with the walls or hedges of God his word, but wandreth at large after her owne inuentions, can not be called the inclosed garden of Christ. 10 Fons signatus, THe true Church of Christ is also compared to a spring or founteine, which is shutte in or sealed vppe from the prophane waters of worldly vanities, mi∣nistring
the water of life to all the children of God. But as for the popish church, which ishueth out of the bottomles lake, is a stincking puddle of all false doctrine and heresie, whereof the whore beareth a cupp full. Apoc. 17. out of which all nations haue dronk, Apoc. 18. So farre is it, that she should be a well, sealed vp by Christ. 11 Sponsa Agni. THe description of the Spouse of the Lambe, set forth in S. Iohns Reuelation, doth in all pointes most aptly agree vnto our holy Church and congregation. But the popish church, which is not content to be clothed in that white shining silke, which is the Iustificatiō of Saincts made white in the blood of the Lambe, but with the filthy ragges of mans righteousnes, Esay 64. is no Spouse of Christ, but the darling of the deuill. 12 Mulier amicta Sole. NO place in all the scripture doth more plainely set forth the estate of our Church than this 12. of the Apocalyps. She is clothed with the sunne of righte∣ousnesse Iesus Christ, which is her bewtie. She trea∣deth vnder her feete, the Moone of mutabilitie, changea∣blenesse, and inconstancie, she is crowned with 12. starres, which is the doctrine of the 12. Apostles, the worde of God. She is alwaies fruitefull, and persecuted by the deuill and his members, but yet by Christ defended, protected, and proui∣ded for in all daungers and aduersities. But the church of Rome, is that whore of Babylon clothed in purple and scar∣let, golde, precious stones, and perles, described Apoc. 17. sitting vpon the beast with seuen heades, which are the se∣uen hilles, and is the great cytie that had dominion ouer the kinges of the earth. 13 Habitatio fratrum in vnum.
ALthough this saying be not proper nor peculiar vnto the Church onely, but common to euery societie and fellowship of men that continue in godly vnity, yet doth it most aptly agree vnto our Church, which holdeth one vnity of doctrine, faith, and religion of Christ. But the Popish church how so euer it bragge of vnity, be∣cause their agreement is not in verity, can not be that coha∣bitation of brethren, which the Psalmist doth so highely commende. 14 Mons Dei mons pinguis. THe hill which Dauid so extolleth Psal. 68. is the mount Zyon, which though it be small, yet it excel∣leth the high and frutefull hill of Basan, because God had chosen it to place his tabernacle therupon: euen so the church of Christ, though it surmount not ouer king∣domes in worldly dignities and commodities, yet to such as Dauid was, the litle hill of Zyon is more worth, than all the seuen hilles of Rome. 15 Sacra anchora. IN all the Scripture the Church is not compared to an holy Anchore, but in the sixt to the Hebrues Fayth in God his promises, is compared vnto a sure & stedfast An∣chore of our soules, vpon which Faith seeing our Church is builded we may truely say that in our Church only is this sure anchore, which the popish church doth so much despise that she counted it heresie for vs to flie vnto Fayth, tanquam ad sacram anchoram, that is: As to our only sure refuge. 16 Vinea Domini. THe Vineyard of the Lorde is of his owne plantinge, dressed & tilled by such husbandmen, as he hath pla∣ced in it, which will yeelde him frute in time conue∣nient. This agreeth aptly vnto our Church, which al∣loweth
no plant, but such as is planted by our heauenly Fa∣ther. This Vineyarde cā not the popish church be compted, which plucketh vppe the vines planted by God, and in the steede of them setteth thornes and thistles after the deuises of men. 17 Terra viuentium. THe land of the lyuing in scripture signifieth this pre∣sent life, as: I trusted to see the goodnesse of the Lorde in the lande of the lyuing. that is: Although I was neare death, yet I beleued that God woulde preserue me in this life Psal. 27. And vnto Doeg, he sayeth: Psal. 52. God shall destroy thy roote out of the lande of the lyuing. that is: Out of this life. Also Ezechias, in his psalme. Esay. 38. I shall not see the Lorde, euen the Lorde in the lande of the lyuing. that is: I shall no more praise God in his temple here in this life. And when you shall bring forth a place of scripture where it is proprely applied vnto the church, it shalbe an easie matter to proue that we onely are the liuely members of Christ, which abide in his body receuing all benefites of life from him which is our heade: And easie it wilbe to proue that you are the lande of the deade men, which are strangers from the life of God Ephes. 4. which are aliue in this worlde and not deade vnto Christ. 18 Regina in vestitu de aurato circundata varietatibus. ALthough this saying alleaged out of the 45. Psalme, be figuratiuely ment of the church, as it is literaly spoken of Pharaos doughter whom Solomon maried: yet being alleaged not after the trueth of the Hebrue but after the error of the olde translation, I will not interprete it contrarie to my conscience (as S. Ieronym ayeth) accor∣ding to that corrupt version but according to the trueth of the text, which is: The Queene in a garment of golde of Ophir, As for compassing with varieties, it is not in the text. By this figure the spirituall magnificence of the church of Christ ga∣thered
of the Gentiles is set forth vnto vs, and therefore let not the Papistes dreame that material golde is the ornament of Christ his spouse, but as it is before sayed, of the whore of Babylon. 19 Ecclesia magna. 20 Populus grauis. DAuid in the 35. Psalme promiseth that he will geue thankes vnto God after his deliuerance, in a great companie and solemne assemblie of people, such as was wont to come together at the holy meetings in the Sanctuarie. This is the true and the simple meaning of this text. And it were to violent an interpretation to inforce it to be a prophesie of the church of Christ, although it be true that the church is a great congregation and a mighty people, yet remembring therewith that in comparizon of all the worlde it is as Christ him selfe calleth it: A litle Flocke. 21 Archa Noe. IN the Arch of Noe, as S. Peter testifieth 1. Pet. 3. but a fewe, namely 8. soules were saued in the water, euen as many as were obedient vnto the voice of God, the whole worlde beside were drowned. Wherefore how fewe so∣euer we be: As the Papistes say we are not many, so long as we obey the voice of God, we doubt not but we shalbe sa∣ued in the Arch. And the Papistes with all their vniuersality and multitude, despising the lawe of God, shall perishe with the wicked worlde. 22 Tabernaculum altissimi. THe old Tabernaecle was a figure of the true Church, and we know that none shall dwell therein but such as be described in the Psal. 15. Therefore let the Papistes bragge as long as they list of the Tabernacle of the highest, yet shall they not dwell there, neither shall
they rest in his holy hill, because they be not indued with such vertues, springing of true, and a liuely faith: As in that Psalme be set forth. 23 Ager & area Dei. THe church is the feelde and flower of God, in his feelde he soweth none but good seede, & the chaffe shalbe purged from his flower. The Papistes are some of these tares, whome the enuious man hath sowed while men were a sleepe, and the chaffe, which after it be purged from the corne together with the tares shalbe burned in the vnquencheable fire. 24 Mater fidelium. IErusalem that is from aboue is free, which is the mother of vs all, which embrace Iesus Christ as our onely Rede∣mer from the bondage and curse of the lawe. As for that steppe mother of Rome which bringeth men into captiuitie through ceremonies and traditions of men: Be∣getteth vnto bondage as Agar did, and is become the mo∣ther, not of the faithfull, but of abhominable fornication Apocalip. 17. 25 Nutrix Christianorum. THe church of Christ is the Nurse of Christiās, which bringeth them vp and feedeth them first with milke, and afterwarde with stronger meates according as they are able to receue it 1. Cor. 3. Heb. 6. But Rome, which feedeth her babes with poyson of mans traditions in steede of the milke of God his word, & will rather see them famish than they shoulde taste of God his worde, maye well be a nurse of Antichristians, but neuer did good vnto Chri∣stians. 26 Ecclesia orthodoxa.
TRue opinions are confirmed out of the worde of trueth, wherefore our church which holdeth no do∣ctrine, but such as is tried by the worde of truth most truly may be called the true beleuing church. Con∣trarywise, the Popish church which so manifestly dissenteth from the worde of trueth that she dare not be iudged there∣by, but most blasphemously submitteth the same to her cor∣rupt and false iudgement, maye iustly be called a false belee∣uing church. 27 Vna, Sancta, Catholica. 28 Apostolica. THis hath bene often proued before: And namely in the first, second, third, and fourth demandes of this last Article. 29 Vxor de latere Christi sicut Eua de latere Adam. AS S. Augustine sayeth: The church of Christ is taken out of his side: as Eue was out of Adams side, which so long as she obeyeth the voice of her usbande, is not deceiued by the serpēt: But if she be absent from him, that she be not instructed by him, she is deceiued by heretikes Augusti. De Genes. contra Manichaeos libro. 2. cap. 24. & 26. by which place of Augustine it is proued that the Church may erre, if she be not ruled by the worde of God. 30 Domus Pacis. THe church may be called the house of Peace, because there is in it Peace and agreement in the cheefest Articles of the Faith, or because in it is taught vs the Peace and reconciliation wrought by Christ, where∣by we knowing that we are iustified by faith, haue peace with God. Rom. 5. But neither of these Peaces are in the church of Rome: for there is dissention in doctrine and their doctrine dissenteth from the truth: as for the peace of conscience is al∣together
vnknowen vnto Papistes, euen as the iustification of Faith, by which onely it is obteined. 31 Domus Refugij. THe house of Refuge or defence may also be applied to the Church, out of which is no saluation: And in whose bosome it becōmeth euery man to rest, which shall looke for the refuge and defence of God. But God forbidde that any man should seeke for refuge or helpe at your church, which must be ouerthrowen with such vio∣lence as a great mylstone that is cast into the Sea, and shalbe founde no more Apoc. 18. 32 Domus Veritatis. AS our church is the piller and staie of trueth, so is she also the house of Trueth, which knoweth nothing but him that is the Trueth it selfe Iesus Christ and his most holy Scripture: In which this trueth is sig∣ned and testified. But your Synagoge is the house of lyes, where beside mens doctrines and traditions which are no∣thing but lyes, there be also leaden legendes of lyes, Promp∣tuaries of lyes, Festiuals of lyes, and other infinite bookes of lyes. 33 Societas Sanctorum. HOw shoulde not our Church be the societie and fellowship of Sainctes, which is sanctified and pur∣ged by the bloode of Christ, which hath receiued the spirite of sanctification, by which we crie: Abba, Father, which is guided and gouerned by the most sacred and holy worde of God. And how can the Popish church be the fellowship of Sainctes, when she refuseth the sanctifica∣tion of Christ his one oblation and sacrifice, as sufficient to make them perfect, which scorneth at the spirite of sancti∣fication, which can abide any thing, rather than to be dire∣cted
onely by God his holy worde: Finally which acknow∣ledgeth no sainctes, but such as the most vnholy Pope, for money doth canonize and make sainctes. Proue vnto me therefore that these excellent and propre callinges, can agree to any disordered companie or Con∣gregation, or to any vnknowen society of men: but onely to the true Church of Christ spred throughout the whole worlde by Christes his promise, and by vertue of his spirit, continued in truth and grace from falshood sence Christes time, and I recant. AS many of these excellent names, as in the worde of God, or the doctors agreeing with the worde of God, are propre or perteyning to the true Church of Christ, so many haue I proued to be propre and perteyning to our most holy and well ordered Congregatiō. And moreouer that they can in no wise be rightly applied to that most abhominable, Idolatrous, and disordered Sy∣nagoge of Rome, which is vtterly departed from the faith, geuing heede to spirites of error, and doctrines of deuills, being so liuely painted forth and euen pointed forth by the scripture to be that Antichristian church, whereof the holy Ghost prophesieth, that no man, except he will wilfully be blinde, can be ignorant thereof, so that if you be not starke blinde, and geuen vp into a reprobate sence, when you con∣sider these thinges you will recant. Let any man therefore aliue answer directly and plainly with∣out colour or fraude of wordes and vnprofitable digressi∣ons to the foresayd or any of the foresayd demandes, and I shall willingly leaue the knowne Church & playne way of Saluation, and wander in the woodes to seeke after them, and their congregation. IF you had not added this conclusion, we might haue con∣ceaued some hope, that vpon further instruction in such matters as troubled your conscience you would haue ben
contented to be reformed after God his worde, and good counsell. But now you declare that you are so obstinatly bent that what so euer be proued against you, you will not receiue it as truth but yeld vnto it perforce. As for me, Although I know there are very many which with more learning and e∣loquence coulde haue aunswered your demandes, yet being such as they are, I submitte my selfe to the iudgement of all them, that be learned and godly minded, whether I haue not directly and plainely, without colour or fraude of wordes, & without all digression aunswered the same, so that I doubt not, but as many as are tractable, and stayed vpon these doubtes onely, may be fully perswaded by these not very long and yet sufficient Answers. THE ENDE.
1 A DEFENSE AND DECLARA∣TION OF THE CATHOLIKE Churches doctrine, touching Purgatory, and prayers for the soules departed. By VVILLIAM ALLEN Maister of Arte and student in Diuinitie. 1 AN OVERTHROW AND CONFVTATION OF THE POPISH Churches doctrine, touching Purgatory, and prayers for the deade. By W. FVLKE Doctor in Diuinitie. 2 Mortuo ne prohibeas gratiam: Eccle. 7. Hinder not the departed of grace and fauour. 2 Such liberalitie as by any meanes may extende vnto them, in burying their bodies, honoring there me∣morie, helping there posteritie. TO THE READER. 3 A Friend of mine, very studious of the truth and zelous of Gods house, one that lear∣ned to beleue first, and then sought to vn∣derstand afterward (which I take to be the naturall order of a christian schoole, where faith must in most matters direct reason, and leade the way to vnderstanding) asked of me, as of one whome he hartely loued, and knew to be studious in such matters by my trade of life, vpon what groundes the Churches doctrine, and the Christian peoples faith of Purgatory, and prayers for the departed, stoode. I aunswered him then presently, as I could, and shortly after (as his further request was) in writing, somewhat more at large. The which my doing though it was both rude and
short, yet he so measured it, either by loue, as it commonly hap∣peth, or else by a singular facilitie, whereby he misliketh nothing that is meant well, that he made it common to many moe then I would my selfe. For though I was well contented, that the simple people or any other should take profite or pleasure by my paine, yet onsidering the matter to be full of difficultie, and to reah to Gods iudgements in the world to come, I called to my minde the saying of Nebridius,August. Epi. 23. who (as S. Augustine reporteth of him with whom he was very familiar,) being much studious and in∣quisitiue of the secret pontes of our faith, would be excedingly offended, to heare a man aske of a matter of importaunce, a briefe declaration: his saying was, that he loued not a short an∣swere to a long question. VVhereby, I was me thought in a ma∣ner admonished, that my treatise though it satisfied my friend, and displeased not other, yet could not, written both hastely and briefly, serue so long and large a matter. I did feare with all, to enter, in this my lacke of yeares, iudgement, and knowledge, into the search of such secretes as I knw, by that light vowe that I made of the matter before, the orderly proceeding in the cause would driue me vnto: I did learne of auncient Irenaeus, that such doctrine nd mysteries may be safely had, and without all feare of errour,Libr 3. Cap. 43. taught by holy Priestes and Bishops, Qui cum episcopatus successione, charisma veritatis certum, scun∣dum placitum patis accepeunt. VVho haue receaued with thir ordinary succession in their pastorall seat, the gracious gift of vnderstanding the truth. And these are they (sayth he in the same place) which may without all daunger to them selues and their hearers, expound vnto vs the holy Scrip∣tures. Other men doubtles (which this miserable age of ours se∣eth not, that measureth all thinges by a fond flourish of lear∣ning, whereof et there was neuer lesse store) can not, nor must not be so bold, though their giftes were many moe, & study muh longer then mine. And to confesse the truth in deede, I was som∣what loth (such was my foolish feare then) to fall in hand with that matter, which being well and to the bottom ripped, I percea∣ued, of all other causes in the world, most to touch the very sore of heresie, and therefore might to me procure the hatred of such, whose loue otherwise I could be content, either to keepe or
winne. Besides that, I saw the contention of the contrary part, se∣king to make some answere to such thinges as might in this cause most greeue their mindes, or marre their matter, shoulde driue me from that course of study, which otherwise in quietnesse I would most gladly keepe, to serue truth and defende my cause, which once of freedom and good will taken in hand, must after∣ward of duety and necessitie be vpholden. Notwithstanding all these thinges, good reader, which might most iustly hold me back, yet now my friendes request, the case and condition of this pre∣sent time, and my duety towards my mother the Church, may of good reason, and must of necessitie chaunge my former intent, & remoue my priuate study to the benefite of the common cause. Therfore being at length by iust occasion wholy minded to serue as well as I could that way, I thought good these late months, to make a more full declaration of that thing, which at my sayde friendes request, I had so briefly touched before. That as then when he first had it of me, it onely serued him for his owne con∣tentation, the pleasuring of his singular and secret friendes, and the helpe of some simple whome he knew deceyued by ouer light looking on so graue matters, so nowe (good Christian reader) I trust it may helpe in common, not onely such as haue been caried a way by the guile of heresie, but other that are much subiect to the daungerous flattery of this present time: with whome, pleasure euer ioyned to the protestantes doctrine, often more preuaileth, then the preachers persuasion. Be bolde to charge any of our aduersaries, make he neuer so great accompt of him selfe, with the force of trueth heere expresly proued both by ar∣gument and authoritie: if it holde him not, he shall (I am sure) brast out with impudencie, and not lose him selfe by reason, iust dealing, or honestie. And if it be proued to touch with safetie the poison it selfe, let no man doubt to vse it for a preseruatiue, in this common infection of our time and countrie. For it were no reason, any man shoulde practise with the poore people priuy∣ly, in such thinges as he were not hable to mainteine before their pilloures and preachers openly. And for that hatered which I may procure to my selfe by mine owne trauell, it shall not much moue me: for I shall either be partaker thereof, as a common praise in these euill dayes to most good men: or els if I be not
worthy so much, I will learne to beare it as some parte of punish∣ment & satisfaction for my sinnes. I may not bye frendship with flatterie, nor mannes loue with forsaking Gods trueth. Of such thinges then I will not make much reckening: but my principall care is, that in writing or wading in so deepe matters, I keepe the streight line of the Churches truth, which, in the exceding rash∣nesse of these darke dayes, a man may quickely lose. And there∣fore to make sure, I humbly submit my selfe, to the iudgement of such our maisters in faith and religion, as by Gods calling are made the lawefull Pastors of our soules. Of whome I had rather learne my selfe, then teach other: if either they had occasion and opportunitie to speake, or I might of reason and duetie in these miserable times holde my peace. Farewell gentle Reader, and if I pleasure thee by my paines, let me for Christes sake be partaker of thy prayers. At Antwerp the Second of May. 1565. 3 WHether this occasion of your writing were true, or only pretendid, it is all one to our purpose. But where you com∣mende your freinde, for that he learned to beleeue first, and sought to vnder∣stand afterwarde, which you take to be the natural order of a Christian schoole, if you had shewed where you learned that methode, his cōmendation should haue been the greater, and your iudgement the weightier. For we learne by Saint Paule, a contrary order, namely first to heare the worde of God preached and expounded, and then to beleeue it. Rom. 10. For God by the riches of his grace, hath abounded towardes vs, in all wisedome and vnderstanding, and hath opened vnto vs, the mysterie of his will, according to his good pleasure, so that after we hearde the worde of trueth, the Gospell of our saluation, we haue thereby beleeued, and so are sealed with the holy Spirite of promise, laboring and praying, that those which
haue receaued the first grace of knowledge, and vnderstan∣ding, may daily more and more, increase in the same, that they may be full filled with knowledge of Gods will, in all wisedom & spirituall vnderstanding. Col. 1. And as for that blinde faith, which must be thrust vppon mens consciences, to be accepted before they see what grounde it hath, we leaue it, as meete for sect masters and heretikes, and in no wise to be admitted by the Disciples of Christ, who calleth all men to heare him, and vnderstand him. Matt. 15. Mar. 7. But faith (say you) in most matters must direct reason. But I say, reason in all matters must be subiect to faith. For the naturall man with all his reason, neither doth, nor can per∣ceaue the things of the spirite of God, for the eye hath not seene, nor the eare hath hearde, neither haue entred into the heart of man, the thinges that God hath prepared for them that loue him, but God hath reueiled them to vs by his spirite. 1. Corinth. 2. And this is the thing that deceiueth you (Maister Allen) which more like a maister of prophane artes, then a good student of holy Diuinitie, can put no difference betwene carnall reason, and spirituall vnderstan∣ding. For that knowledge and vnderstanding of Gods holy mysteries, conteined in his word, whereuppon our faith is grounded, we haue, not by light of naturall reason, but by reuelation and opening of Gods spirite. But omitting this matter, as touched by the way, with two other pages fol∣lowing, as containing nothing materiall to be aunswered, I will come to the third leafe and second face, where you promise an orderly proceeding in the matter you take in hand. Which order of yours, if you had not professed your selfe to obserue, men might haue taken your hochpot, to be such as your matter would bring forth, & that the trea∣ty of Purgatory should be like the troublesome state ther∣of: but when you are not content, to haue your methode counted to be of the nature of your matter, but you will needes make boast of an orderly proceeding, in so disor∣dered a cause, you must not be offended if your confusion in steade of order, be sometime discouered. Howbeit the want of order were a small fault, if the
matter were pregnant and certaine. But what assurance shall other men haue of your doctrine? when you your selfe affirme, and haue learned (as you say out of Irenaeus) that such doctrine and mysteries, may not be safely had at such a mans hand as you are, but onely of holy Priestes and Byshops, which with the succession of their office, haue re∣ceiued a sure and certaine gift of truth according to the pleasure of their father. It is the duety, not onely of a good teacher, but euen of a good Christian, to say with the Psal∣mist: I haue beleued, and therefore I haue spoken. If you beleue not these matters, why haue you vttered them▪ f you beleue them, then be bold to shew vs your grounds, out of the word of God. For other perswasion, then uch as is grounded vppon the hearing of Gods worde will ne∣uer of Christians, be counted for true beliefe, so long as the 10. chapter to the Romanes remaineth in the Canon of the Bible. But I knowe your meaning: you affect the prayse of humilitie and modestie. For wauering and vncertain∣tie in faith among Papistes is counted modstie, but this modesty is soone forgotten, and this boldnesse nowe vtter∣ly refused, in the next leafe ollowing, is not onely resu¦med by your selfe, but also enioyned to others. Be bolde (& blush not you might say, though you should for shame) to charge any of our aduersaes, &c. A sodaine chaunge he that euen now, neither can nor must be bolde, although he hd many more giftes then he hath, and studied much longer then he hath done, to expounde the holy Scrip∣ture, without daunger to him selfe, and his hearers, be∣cause he hath not the certaine gifte of truth, with ordinary succession: by and by is growne to such a full perswasion of truth, expressely proued by argument and authoitie, that men must be bold vppon his warrant, to charge all his aduersaries, either to be helde thereby, or else with no ho∣nesty to escape his handes. A man would maruaile, to be∣holde this speedy alteration, if he did not vnderstand the true difference, betwene the certaine faith of a Christian, and the obstinate blindenesse of an hereticke. For when he compareth his opinion with the authority of Gods word
where vpon true faith is builded, he will not, he can not, he must not be bolde, to vnderstand the scriptures, he wanteth that certaine gifte of truth: but when he remembreth that he can not deceiue others, nor retaine the glory of con∣stancy him selfe, by doubtfulnesse and vncertainty: then he aunteth & braggeth, of the force of his feeble arguments, and vnsufficient auhoritie. But concerning the place of Irenaeus, by him alleged, I must admonish the reader, that his meaning was not, that euery one that succedeth in a Byshoppes seate, hath as necessarily annexed to his see, that certaine gifte of veritie, wherby, he may expound the Scrip∣ture without error, as (maister Allen perhaps woulde insi∣nuate) But that some in the first age of the Church, as they succeded the holy Byshoppes and elders that were ordai∣ned by the Apostles, in place and office, so also it pleased God their father, that they shoulde succede in the like gifts and namely in that excellent gifte of interpretation of the Scriptures, which was but extraordinarie, and for a season. For if it had been an ordinarie thing, that euery Byshop by succession, shoulde receiue that gifte, there shoulde neuer haue been any heretike Byshops, as there haue been many: and againe, that prerogatiue, which Maister Allen him selfe will affirme, to be peculiar to the Byshop of Rome, shoulde be made common to euery other blinde Byshop, where so eer he sat, which were a great absurditie in popery it selfe. And as for the gift of the interpretation of scriptures, God gueth it still though not in such full measure, nor cōmon∣ly without ordinary meanes allowed in the Scripture, as reading, comparing, praying, neuer the lesse, with as full persuasion in matters concerning Gods honour & our sal∣uation by his holy Spirite, as euer he did bestowe the same in any age. And as for the helpes of learning requisite for the same, as knowledge of the tongues and rationall scien∣ces, there was neuer greater stoe in the church of Christ, son Christ his time: ye if we shall iudge by the writings and stories of all ages (vnlesse we will be as impudent as maister Allen) we must say, there was neuer so great store of lear∣ning in any age, as (Gods holy name be praised) there is now
in these our dayes, in menne professing Christian religion: with what conscience can maister Allen affirme? that there was neuer lesse store of learning then in this age, when euen in remembraunce of men that are aliue, there was a great deale lesse store then is nowe, but in their fathers and grandfathers time, there was almost nothing but rudenesse and barbarousnesse, euen with the same conscience, that soone after he affirmeth that pleasure is euer ioyned to the Protestants doctrine, which more preuaileth then the prea∣chers perswasion. If you had meant Master Allen that peace of God which passeth all vnderstanding, which they tast of, that by the Protestants doctrine haue learned that they are iustified by faith. Phil. 4. Rom. 5. and to that perpetual ioy in the holy Ghost, whereunto we are exhorted by the Apo∣stle. Phil. 4. wherein the kingdom of God consisteth. Rom. 14. we willingly would haue consented, that such pleasure is alwayes ioyned to the Protestants doctrine: but seeing it is more like, you speake of carnall pleasures, I must say thus much to confound your blasphemous tongue, and to dashe out your slaunderous writing: let the worlde witnesse that heareth our doctrine, and God iudge that seeth our hearts, whether carnall pleasures be ioyned to our teaching, which daily preach with all vehemency and earnestnes, vnfained repentaunce, mortification, deniall of our selues, bearing of the crosse, hatred of this world, amendment of life, holines and righteousnes, and that vnder paine of euerlasting dam∣nation. And whether pleasure more then the godly perswa∣sion of the preachers, preuaileth to winne professors of our doctrine, if it be not so clearly seene in this Church of Eng∣land, by the meanes of the great peace and tranquilitie, we haue through Gods singular goodnes, vnder the happy go∣uernment of our Soueraigne Lady enioyed these many yeares: looke to those Churches of God in Fraunce, and the lowe countryes of Germany, which within these twen∣ty yeares haue bene for the most part planted, growne vp, & flourished altogither vnder the heauy crosse and most sharp persecution, what carnall pleasure hath allured them? what worldly voluptuousnes hath and doth still intise them, in so
great multitudes to embrace this doctrine? whereof if they tast neuer so smal, they see present daunger of death or losse of all their goods with banishment. Surely, this is the Lords doing, and it is marueilous in our eyes. But to conclude: this man, if he can not haue loue and praise for his valiant enter∣prise, yet by patient bearing of hatred and reproch, he ma∣keth full account of satisfaction for his sinnes. O miserable conscience of the Papistes, which haue no peace with god through faith in his infinite mercy, but seeke to satisfie the streightnes of his eternall iustice, by such beggerly shiftes as these, which also he is so vncertaine whether they wil serue his turne, that he feareth lest he lose al his labour, if he hap∣pen to lose the streight line of the Churches truth, which in these darke daies, a man may quickly lose. What say you M. Allen? is it so hard a matter to keepe the streight line of the Churches truth in these darke dayes? Why? Where is the citie builded vpon an hill that can not be hidden? Where is that visible and knowne Church which can not erre? If that which was wont to be the only rule of truth among Papists faile you, try an other rule of the Protestants, and as Augu∣stine exhorteth you, search the word of God in the holy Scriptures, and then vndoubtedly you shall finde the truth and the Church also, that is the piller of truth, though the dayes be neuer so darke, or your eyes neuer so dymme: if with like humilitie you would submit your self to the iudg∣ment therof, as you pretend to doe to the ministers and pa∣stors of your faith and religion. The Lorde if it be his will, open your eyes, that you may see the truth, and geue you grace when you see it, that you striue not against it, to your owne destruction.
THE PREFACE, VVHERE∣IN BE NOTED TWO SORTES OF HE∣retikes: thone pretending vertue, thother openly pro∣fessing vice. And that our time is more troubled by this second sort. With a briefe note of the Authors principall intent in this Treatise. 1 ALthough heresie and all willfull blindnesse of mannes minde, be vndoubtedly a iust plage of God for sinne, and therefore is commonly ioyned with euill life both in the people and preachers thereof, as the historie of all ages, and sondry examples of the Scriptures may plainely proue: yet by the gyle and crafty conueiaunce of our common enimie the deuil,The deuils crafte in promoting errour. falsehod is often so cloked in shadow and shape of trueth, and the maisters thereof make such show of vertue and godly life, that you would thinke it had no affinitie with vice, nor ori∣gine of mannes misbehauiour at all. So did he couer the wicked heresies of Manicheus,Hiero. in 7. cap. Osee. Marcion, Tatianus, and the like, with a fained flourish of continency and chastity: so did he ouercast thenimie of Gods grace Pelagius, with thapparance of all grauity,Augustin. epist. 120. constancy, and humility: and so hath he alwayes, where craft was requisite to his intent, made shew of a simple sheepe in the cruell carkase of a wily woulfe. This good condition S. Paule noted in him, in these wordes: Ipse enim Satanas ransfigurat se in Angelum lucis.2. Cor. 11. For Satanas his owne person shapeth him selfe into an Angell of light. And that his scholars play the like part, our master Christ of singular loue gaue his flocke this wach∣word,Matth. 7. for a speciall prouiso: Attendite à falsis prophetis qui veniunt ad vos in vestimentis ouium, intrinsecùs autem sunt lupi rapaces. Take heede of false prophetes that come in sheepes vesture, but within be rauening wolues. He sawe (that seeth all things) that the outward face of fained holinesse might easily cary away the simple: he detected the serpentes subteltie, that none might iustly pleade ignorance, in a case so common: and withall for thenstruction of the faithfull, he gaue false∣hoode
and her fortherers this marke for euer, that conuey they neuer so cleane or close, yet their vnseemely workes should euer detect their fained faith. But all this notwithstanding, if we deeply weye the whole course of thinges, we shal finde that this counterfaiting of vertue and show of pietie, is not the perpetuall intent of the deuils de∣uise: but rather a needefull shift in forthering his practise, there onely where faith and vertue be not vtterly extinguished, then the full ende of any one of all his endeuoures. For this may we assuredly finde to be the scope & pricke of al his cursed trauel, to set sinne and her followers in such freedome,The deuils marke and thexteame and of heresie. that they neade not (as often els) for their protection the cloke of vertue, nor habite of honestie: but that they may boldly encounter with the good and godly, and in open ostentation of their mischiefe, ouer runne all trueth and religion. VVherefore as he often cloketh subtell heresies in honest life, and vertues weede, so when he by likelihoodes conceyueth hope of better successe, and forther ad∣uentures, he thē openeth a common schoole of sinne and wicked∣nesse, where mischiefe may with out colour or crafte be boldely mainteined. This open schoole of iniquity, and doctrine of sinne,Hieron sup. 13. Ezech. he once busely erected in the gentilitie, by the infamous philo∣sopher Epicurus and his adherents: teaching to the singular of∣fense of honestie, pleasure and voluptuousnesse to be thonely ende of all our life and endeuours. The which pleasaunt sect, though it euer sence hath had some promotours, yet the very shade of fained vertue, and worldely wisedome of those dayes, with ease bare downe that enterprise. This broade practise was yet further attempted euen in Christes church: first by Eunomius,Eunomius. who doubted not in the face of the world, to auouch that none could perish (were his workes neuer so wicked) that would be of his faith. And then by Iouini∣anus,Iouinianus. who taught the contempt of Christian fastes, matched ma∣riage with holy maidenhood, and afterward to the great wonder of all the Church, perswaded certaine religious women in Rome, to forsake their first faith, & mary to their damnation. For which plaine supporting of vndoubted wickednesse,Cont. Ioui libr. 2. S. Hierome calleth them often, Christian Epicures, boulsterers of sinne, & doctors of ust and lecherie. Neuerthelesse the force of Gods grace, which
was great in the spring of our religion, (the sinne of the worlde not yet ripe for such open show of licētious life) speedely repres∣sed that wicked attempt.Ad quod vult de hae∣resi. 82. For as S. Augustine declareth, it was so cleare a falshoode, that it neuer grew to deceiue any one of all the Cleargy. But not long after, with much mor aduantage the like practise was assayed by Mahomet, the deuills onely dear∣ling: by whome numbers of wiues togither, often diuorcies, and perpetuall change for nouelty, was permitted. By which doctrine of lust and libertie, the floure of Christiandom (alas for pity) was caried away. At which time though our faith & Christes church were brought to a small roome, and very great straights, yet by Gods grace, good order, and necessary discipline, this schoole of lust hath bene reasonably till our dayes kept vnder: and the gra∣uitie of Christian maners (as the time serued) orderly vpholden. TO THE PREFACE. 1 IF you had not promised and professed an orderly proceding in this cause, we woulde neuer haue enquired, whether good order would require, that an heretike should haue bene first defined, before he were diuided. And especially in this controuersie, where either partie chargeth other with heresie, it had been conuenient, that the right defini∣tion or description of an heretike had bene first set downe, that men might thereby haue learned who is iustly to be burdened with that crime. For an heretike is he, that in the Church, obstinatly mainteineth an opinion, that is contra∣ry to the doctrine of God, cōteined in the holy Scriptures, which if any of vs can be proued to doe, then let vs not be spared, but condemned for heretiks. But if iust proofe ther∣of can not be brought against vs, but contrarywise we be able to shew manifest euidēce, that our aduersaries doctrine is cleane contrary to the Scriptures of God, then let the name of heretikes be applied to them, to whome the defi∣nition doth agree, with further punishment due to calum∣niators, that slaunder other men in that whereof they are guilty them selues. Nowe to the matter of this Preface,
which as the argumēt declareth, consisteth of three partes, wherof the first is, that there be two sorts of heretiks, ye one pretēding vertue, the other opēly professing vice. This part is shewed in three leaues following. In ye substāce of which point I will no differ with you, yet something will I note in your handling thereof, as occasion moueth me. First you affirme that heresie and all willfull blindnesse is vn∣doubtedly a iust plague of God for sinne, I mislike not your affirmation, but I maruaile how you can affirme this, and be a good Catholike: when we cannot say halfe so much, but we are charged by you, to make God ye author of sinne. But such is the force of trueth, that oftentimes the enimies thereof them selues, when they speake without contention cannot auoyed a true confession. God therefore, as this Pa∣pist can not now deny, punisheth sinne with sinne, not as an euil author, but as a rightuous iudge. Proceding further you say that Christ hath geuen all heretikes this marke, that there vnsemely works should euer detect their fained faith: wherein, you speake not onely contrary to the trueth, but euen to your owne affirmation before. For our Sauiour Christ hath apoynted false prophetes to be knowne by their fruites, which is there false doctrine contrary to Gods worde, cloked with the sheepe skinnes of fained holinesse and vertue, which though it be many times discouered, yet is it many times so closely conueyed, that it clearly esca∣peth the iudgement of all men. Who was euer hable to chardge that damnable heretike Pelagius with any noto∣rious crime or wicked behauiour in his outwarde life and conuersation? you your selfe confesse, that there appeared in him nothing, but grauity, constancy, and humility. If his doctrine had not bene found contrary to the word of God, he shoulde neuer haue bene tried to be a faulse prophete by his workes. Such are many of his scholers the free will men of our time, whose opinion, if it were not manifestly repugnant to the authoritie of the holy Scriptures, there manners are vnreprouable in the iudgemēt of mortall men. The like may be said of Iouinian (who if he were so great an heretike, as you make him) yet he himselfe as you shew
after out of Augustine, offended not in that, which he per∣swaded others to doe. Your last example of heretiks open∣ly professing vice, is of Mahomet, by whose licentious do∣ctrine, you affirme that your faith & Christes Church, were brought to a small roome & very great streights. If this be true tha you affirme, that the Catholike Church must be otherwise estemed, and by other notes then you are wont to describe it: or else, your Church by your owne assertion can not be counted Catholike. For if Christes Church be brought to a small roome and great streights, where is vni∣uersality, Consent of all nations, multitude of people, &c. that you are wont to talke of? But by your discipline the schoole of lust hath bene reasonably, till our dayes, kept vnder, & the grauitie of Christian maners as the time ser∣ued, orderly vpholden. You doe well to qualifie your asse∣ueration with those termes, reasonably, orderly, and as the time serued. For otherwise the whole Christian worlde should be witnesse against you, and yet to shew, with what reason, order, or opportunitie, the schoole of lust hath bene shut vp before our time, or yet is. Wher your doctrine most preuaileth, let the filthy stewes and brothel houses, opened in euery citie, yea and at your mother citie of Rome, most licentiously of all other, not onely by your gouernours per∣mitted, but also by your doctors defended, let them I say, beare sufficient witnesse against you. 2 But now once againe in our cursed dayes, the great flowe of sinne turning Gods mercy from vs, with exceding prouocation of his heauy indignation towards the wicked, hath made our ad∣uersary much mre bold, and long practise of mischiefe, a great deale more skilful.Genes. 3. The serpent passed all other creatures in sub∣telty at the beginning, but now in cruelty he farre passeth him selfe.The Deuill taketh bet∣ter hold in our time, then he did before. The downefall that he hath in a fewe yeares rage driuen man vnto, by thopen supporting of sinfull liuing, it is sure very wofull to remember, and an exceding hearts greefe to consider. Looke backe at the Christian Epicures whom I now named, & view the men of like endeuour in al ages: compare their attempts to ours, their doctrine to ours, the whole race of their proceedings
to ours: And if we match them not in all pointes, and passe them in most, (I except the wicked Mahomet, and God graunt I may so doe long: though they had out of his holy schoole, their often diuorcis and new mariages in their wiues life,) excepting him therefore, if ours passe not in open practise of mischiefe and sup∣portation of sinne, all the residue, miscredit me for euer. This is euident to all men, that thinges once counted detestable before God, abhorred of the priestes, straunge to the Christian people, pu∣nishable by the lawes of all Princes, be now in case to maintaine them selues, to geue vertue a checke mate, and without all co∣lour to beare downe both right and religion.Behold the liberty of sinne. Thus doth sacri∣ledge boldly beare out it selfe, and ouerreacheth the promoters of Gods honour: so doth incest encounter with lawfull mariage, the vnordered Apostates shoulder the ordinary successours of the Apostles: Fasting hath wonne the field of fasting: & cham∣bering almost banished chastity. It was surely a wonderfull fetch of our busy aduersary, when he so ioyned heresy and euill life togither, that either might be a singular garde to thother: & both togither, easily be the plage of all good order. And now the matter brought to such tearmes, and so euident an ishue for the cleare gaine of sinne here nedeth no Caueat for the fruites of the doctrine, as in other cloked here∣sies before, and continually in case of deceit is requisite (for no man can be deceiued here, but he that willingly & wittingly list perish.) Hauing no excuse reasonable, why he should followe or credite the publike professours of plaine impietie: vnlest this may be accompted cause sufficient of his light credit, that they tearme the foresaid offences and others the like not by their accustomed callings, but by some honester name of vertue.Note. VVhich thing ra∣ther sheweth their folly, thē excuseth their malice. For they must here be asked, by what right they chaunge the names of things, that can not alter their natures. VVho authorised thē to call that extirpation of superstition, which our fathers called sacriledge? Or that blinde deuotion, which our holy elders named true reli∣gion? How can they for sinne and shame honour that with the name of holy mariage, that S. Ambrose termeth adultery:Amb ad Virg. lapsá Cap. 5. August. de bono vid. 20.8. S. Augustin worse then adultery: & they with al the residue of the doctors, horrible incest? But because they can shew no warrant, I
must charge them for their labour with Gods curse, pronounced vpon all such by the Prophets wordes, thus as followeth, Vae qui dicitis malum bonum,Esay. 5. & bonum malum, ponentes tenebras lucem, & lucem tenebras. VVo to you that call euill good, and good euill: making darkenes light, and the light darkenes. But (as I sayd) in such open show of wickednes, and all vnlikelihood of their assertions, there can none doubtles ioyne with them, ex∣cept they be allured by present pleasure,Sinne dri∣ueth men to the do∣ctrine of this time. or driuen headlong by the heauy lode of sinne. For as I thinke, they doe not follow these sect maisters, as scholars moued by any probabilitie of their tea∣chers perswasion, but rather ioyne vnto them as fitte fellowes of their lustes, and good companions for their owne conditions. O∣stendisti tales discipulos (sayth S. Hierom to Iouinian) non fecisti.Lib. 2. Thou hast but opened to the world who be thy followers, and not procured them thy selfe to be thy scholars. Yea S. Paule affirmeth by such louers of lustes (whom he calleth Voluptatum amatores) that they should geue ouer the true teachers,2. ad Tim. Cap. 4. & pro∣uide or make masters for their owne tooth. Ad sua desideria coaceruabunt sibi magistros. Sinne therfore as it semeth, hath ingendred and framed her selfe this new faith, for the garde and safety of her person: And the vngodly procured for their owne diet maisters of perdition, ready both by life and doctrine, to fur∣ther the lustes of licentious persons, to serue the itching eares of new fangled folkes, & so to set them in all securitie, with wordes of peace and pleasure. Call to your memories the first entraunce of this misery, and you shall finde how they had certaine persons in admiration (as the Apostle sayth) for their owne aduantage.Iudas in E∣pist. Can. Since which time, these preachers haue by obseruation raised vp a perfect schoole of flatterie, and brought the detestable excusing of most horrible sinnes, vnto a formall arte. It is long sith the Poete fayned that Gnato would haue bene the author of a sect,In Eunuch. and haue had some scholars to beare his name: Here he might haue had for his turne, but that the Epicure hath preuented him. The Prophet Ezechiel termeth this pernicious flattery in matters of such im∣portance, the boulstering of wickednes. And geueth a heauy bles∣sing from Almighty God, to all boulsterers in these words. Vae his qui consuunt puluillos sub omni cubito manus, & faciunt
ceruicalia sub capite vniuersae aetatis, ad capiendas animas. VVo be to all them that sowe cushens vnder the elbow of euery arme, and boulster vp the heades of all ages, meaning to catch their soules. And surely if this curse tooke euer hold of any (as it could not proceede from Gods mouth in vaine) it must needes fal streight down vpon these men, that wholy bend them selues thus to vphold iniquity, and to set sinne soft. To such as made no store of good works, they cast only faith vnder their elbow to leane vp∣on. To such as were burdened with promise of chastity, they made mariage a cushen for their ease. For such as cast an eye vppon Church goodes, they borowed a pillowe of Iudas:Ioan. 12. Quare non vaenijt trecentis denarijs, & datum est egenis? VVhy is not this made money of and geuen to the poore? And so in all pointes they artificially follow mans fantasie, nourish the humour of the vngodly, and preach peace with pleasure, Commit what you lift, omit what you list, your preachers shall praise it in their wordes, and practise it in their workes. For looke how they teach, and so doe they liue: farre passing the Epicure,2. De fin. who (as Cicero sayth) in talke praised pleasure, but in all his life, was full curteous and honest. And much exceding Iouinianus,Vbi supra haere. 28. who as Augustine re∣porteth of him, being a Monke, maintained the mariage of vota∣ries, but yet for diuerse inconueniences, him selfe for all that would not be maried. But ours being once in Bishops roome, or of that disordered new ministerie ere they be well warmed in their benefices, as in all other licentious life they wil lead the daunce, so they must out of hand, for the most part, as though it were an∣nexum ordini, as schole men terme it, haue a wife with necessa∣ry cherishing to that state belonging. And good reason it is, that these delicate doctors hauing euer in readines pillowes for their friendes ease, should want whole coutches for their owne. But it were to long a matter for me at this present, purposing an other thing,Hovv this svveete he∣resie first be¦gan. fully to declare how sinne in all pointes hath achiued such libertie, by the vnhappy yoking her selfe vnto heresie. Onely this may be noted briefly for that point: that generally in the beginning of their endeuours, they remoued with speede out of their wayes, as especiall impediments and stumbling stockes, all those meanes which Christ commaunded, or the Church prescri∣bed, or our fathers followed for thabating of sinnes dominion:
that the world might well vnderstand, they meant the extolling of all vice, and to make the way for sinne and wickednesse. First that soueraigne remedy of mans misdeedes, that graue iudge∣ment left by Christ to his Church, for the weale of vs all, that power which the Sonne of man hath in earth to remit sinnes, the true court of mans conscience, the very word of reconcilement, and the borde of refuge after shipwracke, which is the Sacra∣ment of penaunce, they haue to the vnspeakeable gaine of sinne vnworthely remoued. The subduing of mans pride by due obe∣dience to his spirituall pastors, and humble honouring of the guides of Gods Church, fitly for their purpose haue they lowsed. Fasting, which is the bridle of carnall concupiscence, & torment of all fleshly lustes, for sinnes sake they haue set at such liberty, that it is almost lost. And what hauoke in all other spirituall ex∣ercise is made for these mens free passage to hell, we se it: all the posteritie shall feele it: and the very workers shall be weary of the way of wickednesse, when they shall lacke grace and space to repent them. But I can not now stand vpon these pointes: Mea∣ning at this time, onely to ouerthrow an other like ground of this detestable schoole, which hath no lesse auaunced sinne then the other, and dishonoured God much more: which hath perniciou∣sly deceiued not onely open heretikes, but also much weakened the deuotion of some that otherwise were Catholikes: The harme whereof pertaineth not onely to most men that be aliue, but also to many that be deade. That is the abolishing of penaunce, dis∣crediting of purgatory, and abandoning of satisfaction for our offences committed. All which, being nothing else but a kinde of soft handeling, and sweete cherishing of sinne, hath wrought such vaine securitie in mens mindes, that few haue any feele or feare of Gods iudgements: fewe consider the deepe wound that sinne maketh in mans soule: and most men abhorre the remedies requisite for so grieuous a sore. VVhen I looke backe at the floure & spring of Christs church, and see sinne counted so burdenous, and Gods dreadfull punish∣ment for the same so earnestly feared of all men, that no salue could be so sore, no penaunce so painefull, but they would both haue suffered and desired it, to haue bene fully free from the same: and withall consider the extreame dolour of heart, which
al men then expressed by often teares, by humble acknowledging of their misliuing to Gods ministers in earth, & exceding pain∣full penaunce, by long fasting, daungerous peregrinations,A profita∣ble compa∣ring of the time past vvith our present dayes. conti∣nuall praiers, large almes, so sharply enioyned, so meekely recei∣ued, and so duely fulfilled: and then returning againe to our time and state, where I may and must needes behold the pitifull wast of Christian workes, the maruelous shake of all good maners, and more then an image of meere paganisme, as in which we finde no face nor shadow of Christianity, no nor any steppe almost of our faithfull fathers pathes: then doe I well perceaue, the i∣shue and ende of the last ground of this wasting heresie, to be no∣thing else but a canker of true deuotion, an enemy to spirituall exercise, a security and quiet rest in sinne, and briefly, a safegard and presumptuous warrant, from the iudgement of Gods mighty arme, which reacheth ouer thoffences of the whole world. Euill we were before by other pointes of this deceitfull doctrine, but by this last part we are vtterly lost. For as truely S. Hierom writeth by their predecessors: Hoc profecit doctrina istorum,Vide supra. vt pec∣catum ne poenitentiam quidem habeat. This hath this do∣ctrine of theirs wonne and wrought, that of sinne there is no way of repentaunce: euen so may we much more complaine of this pernicious falshood, that directly without all colour, hath rased vp both the remedies of sinne, and boldly discharged vs of Gods iudgement and all penaulty for the same: that as before by fal∣shood and flattery we were led into the sweete schoole of sinne, so now by thabbandoning of penaunce and purgatory, in vaine hope and security we might needes for euer remaine therein. 2 You haue vndertaken to proue that our time is trou∣bled with heretikes openly professing vice, by whom if you would meane the Anabaptistes and Libertines of our time, we would not striue with you: but seeing you are not ashamed to accuse thereof the true worshippers of God & professors of his Gospel, I must plainly tel you, that you are a blasphemer of God & a sclaunderer of his Saincts. But let vs consider your profes, and so we shall best bewray your blaspheming. First you wil men to looke back to ye christian Epicures, whom before you named, from which nūber you
except the wicked Mahomet, as though he also were a Chri∣stian Epicure, & we (say you) our doctrine, attempts & the whole race of our proceedings compared with them, shall not only match them in all points, but passe them in most. If your meaning were as your wordes sound, I would easily agree with you, when you name your selfe and your fellow Papists. But because I know, whatsoeuer you speake here of your selues, you vnderstand of vs that are your aduersaries, I must proue that which you sayd to be true, & that which you meaned to be false. For to leaue your generall tayling, not meete to be aunswered: I will come to your particuler crimes which are sacriledge, incest, apostasie feasting and chambering. Then who are gilty of sacriledge? but they that robbe God of his honour, and geue it to stockes and stones? who are rather to be charged with incest then they which beside their abominable filthy life, allowed dispensa∣tion for such persons to marry, as the lawe of God and na∣ture abhorreth? and where is apostacie to be found, if it be not in them which are cleane departed from the faith of Christ, attending to spirites of errour and doctrines of de∣uills, forbidding to marry and commaunding to abstaine from meates which God hath created to be receaued with thankes geuing. 1. Tim. 4. and as for feasting, where is it more gluttonous, then among the greatest professors of fasting? Euen their Carthusian fastes, and their good fri∣day fastes, among the wealthy of that sect, compared with the sobre diet of Christians, is voluptuous banqueting. And concerning chambering, if the world were not to to full of examples of their filthy lechery, which professe wiuelesse chastitie: yea if their brutish lust were not broken out of the secrete chambers into the open stewes, I would spend more time to proue it. Then let all men indifferently iudge who hath not matched, but also ouerpassed the Epicurean heretikes of the former ages. There is yet an other crime contained in his former exception, and that is, that we fol∣lowe Mahomet, in allowing often diuorses and mariages in mens wiues life. We allowe no diuorses, but such as Christ alloweth for adulterie, and we wish that adulte∣rers
were punished as God commaunded in his lawe, and then the other question of mariages were soone aunswe∣red. But howsoeuer the adulteresse liueth after diuorsment, she is no more the wife of him from whom she was diuor∣sed. But farre many more causes of diuorsement doth the Popes canon law deuise, and if mariage after diuorsement be vnlawfull, why is it dispensed with all by the Pope? But to returne to our former accusations, which are so egerly followed, that before any one peece of proofe is brought against vs, they are sayd to be so manifest, that we haue not so much as any reasonable excuse to hide them, but onely to terme vice by the name of vertue. And then we must be examined by what right we chaunge the names of thinges that can not alter their natures. Stay a while your examina∣tion M. Allen, this is no orderly proceding. Good order would require, that you shoulde first proue vs gilty of the crimes, and then to take away our excuses. Howebeit, I blame you not if you leaue of the proofe of those thinges, which would sooner reproue your selues, then conuict your aduersaries. And yet that you may see howe cleare a conscience we haue in these crimes obiected, I will not re∣fuse to answere your interrogatories, although by no law∣full and orderly proceding I can be compelled thereto. In primis, who authorised you to call that extirpation of su∣perstition, which our fathers called sacriledge. To this I answere, I care not what your fathers called or counted sa∣criledge. But God our heauenly father commaunded vs to breake, burne and destroy, all your idols, and to deface al the monuments of them. Deut. 12. And all the godly Pa∣triarkes and fathers, both before Christes comming and since, haue geuen vs example of obedience vnto this com∣maundement, and the obseruation thereof they haue ter∣med the extirpation of superstition and idolatry. Or that blinde deuotion which our holy Elders named true religi∣on? we learned of our Sauiour Christ and his Apostles to condemne that for blinde deuotion which is not groun∣ded vpon certaine knowledge of Gods word, you worship you know not what, saith Christ to the Samaritane. Iohn. 4.
S. Paule chargeth the obstinate Iewes, with zeale without knowledge. Rom. 10. How can they for sinne and shame honour that with the name of holy mariage that S. Ambrose termeth ad∣uoultry, S. Augustine worse then aduoultery, and they with al the residue of doctours horrible incest. The holy Ghost hath taught vs to call mariage honorable in all men, and the bed vndefiled, whatsoeuer any man hath sayd to the contrary. And yet diuers godly men of the auncient fathers, as Hie∣ronym and Epiphanius allow mariage in them that can not conteine, although they haue vowed virginitie, euen as the spirite of God also hath spoken by S. Paule. Because it is better to marry then to burne. Epipha. lib. 2. Haere. 61. Hie∣ron. Epi. ad Demetriaden. And now that I haue aunswered your questions: I must be bolde to demaunde the same of you, what authoritie you haue to chaunge the names of thinges when you can not alter their nature? Who taught you to call that religion, which holy Scripture calleth Ido∣latry, or that true deuotion, which God calleth vaine wor∣shipping, where learned you to call a gluttonous feast of fish, a religious fasting? or a sumptuous banket of wine, spices, fruites and deintie conseites, a streight and holy ab∣stinence? with what face or conscience can you call that o∣uerflowing lust of your popish vnmaried Cleargie, a pure and vndefiled chastitie? Finally, where learned you but of the Deuill him selfe to commaund abstinence from meates and mariage, for religions sake? to some men at all times, and to all men at some times? If for these and an hundred such, you can shew no better warrant, then the termes of your fathers, the practise of your elders, or the authoritie of mortall men, the curse of God pronounced by Esay, a∣gainst them that call euill good, or good euill, must needes be turned ouer vnto you. But to goe on with this orderly proceding, whereby we are first accused and then by and by condemned, without euer being conuicted, or once put to the triall. Next of all, lest men should maruell howe so manifest impietie could so mightely preuaile, they are told that it is onely present pleasure, and similitude of maners that ioyneth so many vnto vs. And for proofe hereof, men must call to remembraunce the first entrance of this mise∣ry
how these preachers haue had certaine persons in ad∣miration for their owne aduantage. We refuse not the triall, but let men on Gods name call to remembraunce howe our doctrine beganne to be restored in these last dayes. I pray you what priuate aduantage could they by any likelyhood be supposed to seeke, which incurred ma∣nifest daunger of their liues by the least suspition of their profession? or what persons could they haue in admirati∣on, when all Princes & great personages were their grea∣test persecutors? but they wanne them by flattery, and sewed them cushians vnder their elbowes, and laid pillowes vnder their heades. This is in deede a sore accusation, but where is the proofe? Forsoth to such as made no store of good workes, they cast onely faith vnder their elbowe to leane vppon. O impudent blasphemer, which of vs euer taught that such a faith as is not liuely, & fruitefull of good workes, did euer profite any man but to the increase of his damnation? To such as were burdened with promise of chasti∣ty, they made a cushen for their ease. To such as had rashly vo∣wed that which they could not possibly performe, not we but S. Paule sayth, if they can not containe let them marry, for it is better to marry then to burne. S. Ieronym otherwise an vnmeasurable aduancer of virginitie, & dispraiser of ma∣riage Ep. ad Dem. speaketh of virgins, that professed chastity and liued vnpurely, &c. apertè dicendum est, vt aut nubant si se non possunt continere, aut contineant si nolunt nubere. It must be plainly sayd vnto them, that either they should marry if they can not containe, or els containe if they will not mar∣ry. Epiphanius lib. 2. haer. 61. calleth mariage for such men not a cushen for their ease, but an holsome medicine against their disease and the wound of burning, and that sayth he, was the doctrine of the Church in his time. To such as cast an eye vpon Church goods, they borowed a pillow of Iudas, why was not this solde and giuen to the poore? If euer any man hearde this text alleged by any preacher for such pur∣pose, let that man be counted such one as M. Allen ter∣meth him, if no man were heard euer to speake after that maner, let M. Allen be taken for a man of such truth, as
he sheweth him selfe to be. But it is a small thing to breake the bondes of modestie in a fewe poyntes, if a man striue not to passe impudencie it selfe in shamelesse lying. Commit what you list, omit what you list, your preachers shall prayse it in their wordes, and practise it in their workes. Sauing that vaine glorious affecters of painted eloquence, be sometime so carefull of their wordes, that they forget their matter. I would haue thought that the father of lies him selfe the continuall accuser of Gods Sainctes, would haue feared for euer losse of his credite, to haue vttered so vnseemely a sclaunder of vs. But I suppose that this disciple of his more regarding how finely, then howe truely he in∣ueyeth against his aduersaries, had such pleasure in allusion of these termes commit and omit, praise and practise, words and workes, that he respected not what sense they made, so they were handsomly matched togither. Well, howsoeuer our workes shalbe found when they shall be openly iudged before him that best doth know them, I am sure they shall not proue worse then the popish cleargy, and if they shall be examined by mans iudgement, me thinke they should be very vnequall Iudges, before whom we should not be able to approue our innocency, in comparison of our aduersa∣ries doings. But that in wordes we praise all maner of sinne, whether it be in committing that which God forbiddeth, or in omitting that which God commaundeth, If that I say can be proued against vs, then let our enemy pursue our soule and take it, yea let him tread our life downe to the earth and lay our honour in the dust. But to returne to our works, what example is brought out to confirme the same? Not the particular faultes of some of our profession, that might beare some colour of confirmation lest for the infir∣mitie of euery one of our side he might be requited with the enormities of an hundreth of his owne sect, but that he chuseth which is common to most of our preachers, & not to be found in any one of theirs. This no doubt must be some great offence to iustifie so heinous an accusation. In deede a great mote in the Papistes eyes, that is the mariage of our ministers. Blessed be God, that although some singu∣lar
persons may be accused of notorious crimes, yet our whole state can not be charged by this instrument of Sa∣than with no greater fault, then the allowance of Gods owne institution. And yet see howe this rowling rhetorici∣an scoffeth with the schole mens terme of Annexum ordini. Be like S. Paule taketh mariage to be so annexed to the or∣der of an ecclesiasticall minister, that he neuer describeth the perfect paterne of a Bishop or Deacon, but one of the first pointes is, that he be the husband of one wife. But I pray you M. Allen though you can not away with the ma∣riage of vowed Priestes: are you also angry with the ma∣trimony of our new disordered ministers (as it pleaseth you to call them) which neuer tooke your order, nor medled with any vowes? you were wont to account them for mere lay men, and will you not allow the mariage of lay men at least wise to be lawfull, if you can not with the Apostle call it honorable? Is that which the Apostle counteth hono∣rable, of you called licentious life? and which the spirite of God nameth an vndefiled bed, dare you terme it contemp∣tibly a couch for delicate persons ease? What haue you here to cloke your open blasphemy, for your wordes are not of the abuse, but of the state of mariage it selfe. You procede with like modesty to affirme that we haue remo∣ued all those meanes that might serue for the abating of sinnes dominion, and which are they? For soth the Sacra∣ment of penaunce, fasting, and the opinion of purgatory. To the first we answere that we know no Sacrament of pe∣naunce instituted by Christ, but the doctrine of repentance defaced by the false and deuilish perswasions of auriculer confession, superstitious satisfaction, and popish absolution we haue faithfully restored, according as the same is taught in the holy Scriptures of God. And those other we haue remoued as being not onely contrary to the doctrine of Gods word, but also as most pernicious pillowes and bla∣sphemous boulsters of all sinne and securitie. For what feare or conscience could be of sinne intended or committed, where this perswasion tooke place, that, the fast once re∣hearsed in the eare of a priest, and a fewe wordes by him
pronounced after a sory satisfaction of a pelting penance according to the Priestes pleasure, was a full and sufficient discharge both before God and the world. And as for the power and authoritie of pardoning or reteining sinnes, that our Sauiour Christ hath committed to his ministers, is not taken away by vs, but truly declared to be the iudgement of God and not the absolute authority of man. But how bla∣sphemously the Papists chalenge vnto them selues this au∣thority, let it appeare by this that M. Allen calleth it, that power which the sonne of man hath in earth to forgiue sinnes, by which words our Sauiour Christ challengeth vn∣to him self, that which is proper vnto his diuinitie, although he were humbled in the shape of a seruaunt vppon earth, namely an absolute authority to forgiue sinnes, which none hath in heauen or in earth but only God. And as to the re∣mouing of fasting, if that be fasting which they call fasting, namely the eating of fish, it hath not bene diminished but increased in our time, and as for true fasting and abstinence in deede, it hath bene publikely commaunded & obserued as occasion was offered, and priuate fasting with the right vse thereof is still commended in our doctrine, & men ex∣horted vnto it. Onely the abuses, superstition and deuilish doctrine set forth by the papistes is remoued, if it be litle practised, it is because among many professors there are but few followers of the Gospel. But looke vpon the persecuted congregations and you shall see often publike fasting, the priuate exercise the Lord knoweth, and hath commaunded to be couered rather then opened. Nowe must we come to ye opinion of purgatory, which in deede togither with masse of Scala coeli, we haue vtterly remoued and digged vp euen from the very foundations, howsoeuer M. Allen gathering togither the old rude rubbish, & tempering it with new & fine cement, would labour to build it vp againe. And euen as I sayd of popish confession and satisfaction, so say I of purgatory, we abhorre the opinion therof, not only as bla∣sphemous against the bloud of Christ which purgeth vs from al our sinnes, but also as a very canch of careles secu∣ritie, which Sathan hath deuised to aduaunce the dominion
of sinne. For where as the feare of euerlasting torments of hell fire is the right terrour to bridle iniquitie, as that which is due for sinnes and wickednes, & yet restraineth not the vngodly from their abominable life, what restraint shall there be when the eternall paines are chaunged into tem∣porall, & the temporall paines may be redemed by so small a price as popish satisfactions may be bought for? which re∣demption if it be neglected in mens life, yet it may be per∣formed by their friendes after their death. M. Allen sayth fewe of vs consider the deepe wound that sinne maketh in mans soule. But we may iustly say to the Papistes that they neither consider the depth of the wound, nor the perfecti∣on of the medicine. For we consider the wound of sinne to be as deepe, as the deepest pitt in hell, which will not be filled vp with the slabbersawce of mens merits and satisfa∣ctions, but onely with the bloud of the onely sonne of god, which is so soueraigne a salue for this so desperate a sore, that of them that were the children of wrath and deade in sinnes, it quickneth them, rayseth them to life, and placeth them in heauen with Christ. Ephes. 2. And as for that pain∣full penaunce, that M. Allen complaineth to be so negle∣cted in our tyme, he chargeth vs vniustly with the cause thereof. For within tyme of mans memory, before the light of the Gospell did shine openly, we saw no such pain∣full penaunce commonly, but v. ladyes psalters, v. pater nosters, v. pence to v. poore men in remembraunce of the v. woundes, v. fry dayes fast and such like. And as for pil∣grimage, it was but a pastime for such as loued to roue a∣bout the cuntryes. The hardest penaunce was to pay so deare for the paultry of Monkes merites, and Fryers fa∣bles, Popes pardons, and such like. Et hinc illae lachrymae. This maketh the bitter complaint, that this marchaundise will no more be bought, but this is the iudgement of God vpon the great whore of Babylon. 3 Considering therefore the great spread of contagion that this vntrue doctrine hath wrought both to the euerlasting mise∣rie of heretikes them selues, and also to the greuous punishment
that almighty God of iust iudgement may take vpon vs (that by his great mercy be yet Catholikes) because we liue in wanton welth, with out iust care or cogitation of our life past: Neither doing any worthy fructes of penaunce, nor yet endeuouring to make a mendes and recompense by satisfying for our sinnes, be∣fore of mercy so pardned that to our damnation they can not now any more be imputed, but yet for answering in summe parte of Gods iustice, and perfect purging of the same sinnefull life past, out of all doubte sharpely punishable: for these thinges I say, and for the stirring vp of the feare of God in my selfe,VVhy this treatise vvas taken in hand. the helpe of the simple, the defense of the trueth, and thabating of this great rage of sinne and heresie, I thought good to geue warning (moued therevnto by my frende also) to all such as be not them selues able to searche out the trueth of these matters, of that temporall or transitory punishment which God of iustice hath ordained in the other worlde, for such as woulde not iudge them selues, and preuent his heauy hand whiles they here liued: our forefathers (more then a thousand yeare since) called it Pur∣gatory. The truth and certaine doctrine whereof, I trust through Gods goodnesse so clearely to proue, that the aduersary (be he neuer so great with the Deuill) shall neuer be able to make any likely excuse of his infidelitie.The matter of the first booke.The argu∣ment of the second booke. And that so done, I shall both o∣pen and proue the meanes which the Church of God hath euer profitably vsed for the reliefe of her children from the same pu∣nishment, to the soueraigne good, and comfortable for the faith∣full soules departed. And here I hartely pray thee gentle Reader, whosoeuer thou be, that shall finde iust occasion vndoubtedly to beleue this arti∣cle of necessary doctrine, euer constantly set forth by the grauest authoritie that may be in earth, that, as thou faithfully beleues it, so thou perpetually in respect of the day of that dreadfull visi∣tation, study with feare and trembling to worke thy saluation. Let that be for euer the difference betwixt the vnfruitefull faith of an heretike, and the profitable beliefe of the true Catholike Chri∣stian: that this may worke assured penaunce to perpetuall sal∣uation, and his vaine presumption to euerlasting damnation. And though the matter which I haue taken in hand, be nothing fitte for the diet of such delicate men as haue bene brought vp vn∣der
the pleasant preaching of our dayes, yet perchaunce, change of diet with the sharpnesse of this eager sawse, were, if they could beare it, much more agreable to their weake stomackes.Cyp. Epist. 3. lib. 5. Trueth was euer bitter, and faulshood flattering. For thone by present paine procureth perpetuall wealth, thother through deceitfull sweetenes worketh euerlasting woe. But as for these pleasure preachers them selues, because I feare me they haue indented with death, and shaked hands with hell, whatsoeuer may be sayd in this case, they will yet spurne with the wordes of the wicked.Isai. 28. Flagellum inundans cum tran∣sierit not veniet super nos: quia posuimus mendacium spem nostram, & mendacio protecti sumus. Tush, the common scourge when it passeth ouer shall not touch vs, for we haue made lying our succour, and by lying are we garded. Yet when the light of the Apostolike tradition shall dase their eyes, and the force of Gods truth beare downe their boldnes, their owne blacke affli∣cted conscience, by inward acknowledging that truth which they openly withstand, shall so horribly torment their mindes, that de∣nying Purgatory they shall thinke them selues a liue in hell. But gentle Readers pray for them with teares, that God of his migh∣ty grace would strike their flesh with his feare.Prayer is thonely re∣medy a∣gainst vvil∣full blind∣nes. And if my poore paine with the prayers of vs all, could turne any one of them all from the way of wickednesse, it would recompense doubtlesse some of our sinnes, and cour a number of my misdeedes. And euer whilest we liue let vs praise God that in this time of temptation he hath not suffered vs to fall, as our sinnes haue deserued, into the misery of these forsakers. To whom if I speake sometimes in this treatise more sharply then my custome or nature requireth, the zeale of truth and iust indignation towards heresie, with the example of our forefathers, must be my excuse and warrant. I wil be as plain for the vnlearneds sakes as I may, & the matter suf∣fer. And therfore now at the first I will open the very ground, as neare as I can, of so necessary an article: that the ignorance of any one peece may not darken the whole cause. Desiring the stu∣dious to reade the whole discourse, because euery peculiar pointe so ioyntly dependeth of the residewe, that the knowledge of one, orderly geueth light to all the other. And so the whole togither I rust shall reasonably satisfie his desire.
3 Here (as I take it) in the second face of the 18. leafe, be∣ginneth the 3. matter promised in the argument, namely a briefe note of the authors intent, &c. The chiefe considera∣tion (as I gather) is for that men endeuour not to make a∣mendes and recompence, by satisfying for their sinnes, and therefore for answering some part of Gods iustice, and per∣fect purging of the same sinnefull life past, there remay∣neth sharpe punishment after this lyfe. I will commit to Christ, to be reuēged, the horrible iniury done to his death and bloud shedding, which if it be not a full aunswering of Gods iustice, and a perfect purging of all our sinnefull life, in vaine shall we seeke it else where. But I will reason with M. Allen in his owne principles. What say you Sir? remay∣neth there some part of Gods iustice to be aunswered by suffering? Surely, if the passion of Christ will not serue, that was the immaculate lambe of God, it were straunge that the suffering of a sinnefull man should satisfie the same. And if suffering of the party that hath sinned be necessa∣rily required, for aunswering some part of Gods iustice, howe can the same suffering be mitigated by masses, par∣dons, merites, &c. or cleane taken away by a pardon of Iu∣bely, à poena, & culpa? Againe, howe can the merites of an other, abate his punishment, which must suffer him selfe to aunswere Gods iustice? If the iustice of God be not aun∣swered by the offering of Christ, how is it aunswered, when any mans suffering is by any of your meanes mollified or taken away? But it sufficeth you that your forefathers, more then a thousand yeares agoe, called that place of sufferance, purgatory. But I pray you what is it called in the Scripture? either of the olde testament or the newe, or in the first and second hundreth yeares after Christ? Diuerse errours be older then a thousand yeares, but age can neuer make fal∣shoode to be truth, and therefore I waye not your proude bragges worth a strawe. I am one of the least of Gods mini∣sters, and not worthy, in respect of my greatest infirmities, of the lowest place in his Church, yet by his grace and the authoritie of his holy word, I shall be able to ouerthrowe, both this and all other babylonicall bulwarkes, that are cast
vp by Sathan and all his instruments. For the defence of popish heresie, against the tuth of God. And neither the myst of mens inuentions, which you call the light of apo∣stolike tradition, shall be able to darken the truth of the Gospell, nor the errours of mortall men, which you terme the force of Gods trueth, shall beare downe thauthoritie of Gods holy spirite. And as for the torment of conscience, by inward acknowedlging of the truth openly withstan∣ded, it is not like you could so liuely describe it, if you had not experience of it in your selfe. Our consciences (most humble and harty thankes we yeald to the infinite mercy of God) are washed white and purged from all blacknes, by the precious bloud of Christ, which is the propitiation for our sinnes, that cleaue vnto him by true & liuely faith: and open iudgement shall one day shew, that all obstinate Papistes, which seeke to establish their owne iustice, shal be voyde of the iustice of God, & while they wrastle to come out of purgatory, they take the high way to fall headlong into hell. God lighten the eyes of them that are blinde of simplicitie, and confound all such as sinne of malicious wic∣kednes. The excuse of your sharpe speach, perhaps might seeme probable, if you did not vse intollerable sclaunde∣ring and rayling, which neither by zeale of trueth, nor ex∣ample of godly fathers, can well be shadowed, much lesse warranted. THAT OFTEN AFTER OVR SINNES BEFOR GIVEN BY THE sacrament of penaunce, there remaineth some due of temporall punishment, for the satisfying of Gods iustice, & some recompence of the offences past. CAP. I. 1 AS it is most true,Ephes. 1. Heb. 9. and the very grounde of all Christian comfort, that Christes death hath payed duely and sufficiently for the sinnes of all the world, by that aboundant price of re∣demption payed vppon the Crosse:August. En∣che. cap. 65. So it is of
like credit to all faithfull, that no man was euer partaker of this singular benefite, but in the knotte and vnitie of his body misticall, which is the Church. To the members where∣of, the streames of his holy bloud and beames of his grace, for the remission of sinne & sanctification, be orderly, through the bles∣sed Sacraments as condethes of Gods mercy, conueyde. All which Sacraments, though they be instituted and vsed as meanes to de∣riue Christes benefites,Marke the ground of the cause. and bestow his grace of redemption vppon the worthy receiuers: yet like effect or force, is not by the mea∣ning of their first author and institutor, emploied vpon all recei∣uers, nor giuen to all the Sacraments. That may well appeare, if we marke the exceding aboundant mercy, that is powred vpon al men at their first incorporation and entraunce into the houshold of the faithfull, by Baptisme: In which Sacrament, the merites of our masters death be so fully and largely caried downe for the remission of sinne, that were the life before neuer so loden with most horrible offences, that in this misery man may commit, yet the offender is not onely pardoned of the same, but also perfectly acquieted for euer, of all paine or punishment (other then the common miseries of mankind) which his proper offences before committed by any meanes might deserue. And no lesse free nowe then the childe after baptisme, which onely originall sinne brought thither. So sayth S. Ambrose by these wordes: Gratia Dei in Baptismate non quaerit gemitum,Super vnde. ca. ad Rom. aut planctum, aut opus aliquod, nisi solum ex corde professionem. The grace of God in Baptisme requireth neither sorow nor mourning, nor any other worke, but onely an hearty profession of thy faith. VVhereby he meaneth, that after our sinnes be once thus freely wiped away in our first regeneration, there is no charge of pu∣nishment or penaunce for farther reliefe of the same. But now a man that is so freely discharged of all euill life and sinne committed before he came into the family, if he fall into relapse,Note. & defile the temple of God, then (as Gods mercy alwaies passeth manns malice) euen in this case also, he hath orday∣ned meanes to repaire mans fall againe. That is, by the Sacra∣ment of penaunce which therefore,In cap. 3. I∣sai. S. Hierome termeth the se∣cond table, or refuge after shipwracke: as a meanes that may bring man to the porte of saluation, though lightly not without
present dammage and daunger. In which blessed Sacrament, though Gods grace haue mighty force for mans recouery, and worketh aboundantly both remission of sinnes, and the discharge of eternall punishment due by iust iudgement to the offender, yet Christ him selfe (the author of this Sacrament as the rest) meant not to communicate such efficacie or force to this, as to baptisme,The force of Christes death is not so largely applyed vn∣to vs in the Sacrament of penaūce as in Bap∣tisme. for the vtter acquieting of all paine by sinnefull life deserued. For as in Baptisme, where man is perfectly renewed, it was seme∣ly to set thoffender at his first entraunce on cleare ground, and make him free for all thinges done abrode: so it excedingly set∣teth forth Gods iustice, and nothing impareth his mercy, to vse (as in all common welthes by nature and Gods prescription is practised) with grace discipline, with iustice clemency, with fa∣uour correction, and with loue, due chastisement of such sinnes, as haue by the houshold children bene committed. Nowe therefore, if after thy free admission to this family of Christ, thou doe greeuously offend, remission may then be had a∣gaine: but not commonly without sharpe discipline, seeing the father of this our holy houshold punisheth where he loueth,Ad Heb. 12. and chastiseth euery childe whom he receiueth. VVhose iustice in pu∣nishment of sinne, not onely the wicked, but also the good must much feare. VVhereof S. Augustine warneth vs thus: Deus (sayth he) nec iusto parcit, nec iniusto:Lib. 22. cō∣tra Faustū cap. 20. illum flagellando vt filium, istum puniendo vt impium. God spareth neither the iust, nor vniust: chastising thone as his childe, punishing the o∣ther as a wicked person. A childe then of this houshold continuing in fauour, though he can not euerlastingly perish with the impenitent sinners, yet he must (being not by some especial prerogatiue pardoned) beare the rodde of his fathers discipline. And gladly say with the pro∣phet. In flagella paratus sum. I am ready for the roddes. And whatsoeuer these wantons, that are runne out of this house,Psal. 37. for their owne ease or other mennes flattery shal forge, let vs con∣tinue in perpetuall cogitation of our sinnes forgeuen: and by all meanes possible recompence our negligences past. Let vs not think but God hath somewhat to say to vs, euen for our offences pardo∣ned: being thus warned by is owne mouth.Apoc. 2.4. Sed habeo aduer∣sum te pauca, quòd charitatem tuam primam reliquisti: Me∣mor
esto itaque vnde excideris, & age poenitētiam, & pri∣ma opera fac. But somewhat I haue against thee, because thou art fallen from thy first loue. Remembre therefore from whence thou fell, do penaunce, and beginne thy former workes againe. And the consideration of this diuersitie betwixt remission had by baptisme, and after relapse by the sacrament of penaunce, moued Damascen to call this second remedie,De orth. fi∣de lib. 4. ca. 9. Baptismum vere labo∣riosum, quod per poenitentiam & lachrymas perficitur. A kinde of Baptisme full of trauell, by penaunce and teares to be wroght. In which God so pardoneth sinnes, that both the offence it selfe, and the euerlasting paine due for the same being wholy by Christes death & merites wyped away, there may yet remaine the debt of temporal punishmēt on our parte to be discharged, as well for some satisfactiō of Gods iustice, against the eternal ordre wherof we vnworthely offended,In Ench. cap. 65. as for to aunswere the Church of her right (as S. Austine saith) in which only al sinnes be forgeuē Mary when occasion of satisfying for our offensies in this life is neglected, or lacke of time, by reason of longe continuance and late repentaunce, suffereth not due recompense in our life, which is the time of mercie, then certes the hand of God shall be much more heuie, and the punishment more greuous. And this is with out doubt to be looked for, that the debt due for sinne, must either here by paine or pardon be discharged, or els to our greater grief after our departure required. CAP. I. 1 ALthough the argument of this chapter be but one, yet I thought it good to di∣uide the answere into two partes. The former part containeth his propositi∣on, the latter his confirmation. And first concerning the sufficiency of Christes redemption, there is nothing can be spoken so magnifical∣ly, but that the worthines thereof passeth and excedeth it. I will therefore agree with you in that you say of the com∣fort, sufficiency and aboundant pce of the death of Christ, and I would you would alwayes agre with your selfe in the
constant confession of the same truth, I receaue also that which you affirme, that the benefit of his death, extendeth also to the members of his mystical body. But in that which you make to be the onely meane, whereby the same is conueyed and applyed vnto vs, I can not but dissent from your iudgement. For the meane on Gods behalfe, by which we are made partakers of the fruites of Christes passion, and so grafted into his body, is his holy spirite of promise, which is the earnest and assuraunce of our inheritaunce, who worketh in vs fayth, as the onely meane by which the righteousnes of Christ is applyed vnto vs. Eph. 1. And as for the Sacraments, which you seeme to make the onely condittes of Gods mercy, we are taught in the holy Scrip∣tures, that they are the seales of Gods promises geuen for the confirmation of our fayth, as was circumcision to A∣braham, when he was iustified before through faith, Rom. 4. You will vs in the margent, to marke the grounde of your cause, which is in deede a good admonition. For seeing the grounde of your cause leaneth vpon your one∣ly affirmation, and is contrary to thautority of Gods word, iniurious to the spirite of God, and neglecting the fayth of Christ, what so euer you buyld thereuppon, must needes be like the foundation. But howe shoulde your free will be maintayned? if Gods spirite had any place, that distri∣buteth to euery one according to the good pleasure of his owne will. 1. Cor. 12. And how should the Sacrament geue grace of the worke wrought? if fayth were requisite in them that receiue them. Of like authority it is, which you say, that like effect is not geuen to all the Sacramentes. Surely all the Sacramentes of Christes institution, haue lyke effect in Gods elect. But let vs heare your difference. By baptisme all sinne committed before, and the punish∣ment thereof, is clearely forgeuen, by the Sacrament of penaunce, though the sinne be forgiuen, yet there remay∣neth a temporal punishment. When the Pope geueth a ge∣neral pardon à poena & culpa, doth he not it by ye sacrament of penaunce? if he do it by yt sacrament, then are temporall paines also remitted therby. Thus one falshod ouerthroweth
an other. But Christ you say the author of this sacrament, meant not to communicate such efficacie o this, as to Ba∣ptisme. Here are two assertions, first of the author, then of the force of this Sacrament, but neither of both able to be proued by the word of God. Neuerthelesse here is brought in that which is thought to be the piller, not onely of pur∣gatory, but also of all other popish satisfactions: namely the chastisement and correction, that God ministreth to his children, whose sinnes he hath pardoned, which is not a sa∣tisfaction for the sinnes past, but a warning for the time to come, and is neuer accompted in scripture, for an answering of Gods iustice, but a token of his mercy, being not the punishment of a iudge, but the chastisement of the father to the amendement of his childe that suffereth, and for an admonition of other, that they likewise offend not. Heb: 12. And after this manner, are also those places to be vnder∣stood, where God is sayd to punish the offences of his chil∣dren. But whereas M. Allen allegeth the saying of Christ vnto the Angell of the Church of Ephesus, Apoc. 2. But I haue somewhat against thee, &c. to proue that God hath somewhat to say for our offences pardoned, I maruell whe∣ther he were sleeping or waking when he wrote it, for there the pastor and Church is charged, for their offence which is not to be pardoned, except they repent, & if they repent to be clearly remitted. But , or, age poenitentiam, with M. Allen, is doe penaunce, & doing of penaunce, with him soundeth to make satisfaction. He professeth in one place his ignoraunce in the Greeke tongue: but if he would but acknowledge what poenitere in Latine signifieth to be sory, he neede not to haue occupied him selfe in alleging that place. But proceding a litle further, he maketh two causes why the debt of temporall punishment remaineth to be discharged by vs. One for some satisfaction of Gods iustice, as though the satisfaction of Christ were imperfect. An other to answere the Church of her right (as S. Augu∣stine sayth). In deede the olde discipline of the Church, re∣quired that open offenders, should not onely repent pri∣uatly before God, but also shew open signes of harty re∣pentaunce
for satisfying the Church, by whom they were to be receaued as before their repentaunce they were cast out. And in this sense, satisfaction is often vsed by the aun∣cient fathers, and not to fulfill the righteousnes of God, ei∣ther by doing or suffering of any thing. Seeing therefore that God iustice is throughly satisfied by Christes suffe∣ring, there remayneth no satisfaction to be supplyed by men. For the afflictions of the faithfull, are te matter of their patience and conformitie with Christ their head, the punishments that are inflicted vpon them, are the correcti∣ons of mercy, not the satisfactions of iustice. There remai∣neth therefore no temporall punishment for satisfying of Gods iustice in our life, and much lesse after our death. 2 And this to be the graue doctrine and constant faith of the fathers I must first declare: both for that it shall firmly esta∣blish our whole matter, and clearely open the case of controuersie betwixt vs and the forsaken company. VVho would so gladly liue at ease in their onely faith, that they list nether satisfie for their sinnes, nor procure Gods mercy by well working. In this case then let vs seeke the ordre of Gods iustice, by the diligent considera∣tion of some notable persnages, of whome we may haue by the plaine Scripture euident testimonie both of the remission of their sinnes, and their penaunce and punishment after they were re∣conciled againe. Our first father Adam,Adam that first did fal, and vvas first pardo∣ned▪ did yet abide the scourge for his sinnes. in whome we may beholde almost the whole course of Gods iudgement, and through whome both sinne and all punishment due for sinne entred into the world, I thinke he had the first benefite by Christes death for the remission of his disobedience: or at the least (because I woulde not auouch an vncertain thing) this I am sure, that by Christ he was raised vp to Gods fauour againe. Of whome we finde it thus written in the booke of wisdome. Haec illum qui primus formatus est pater orbis terrarum, cum solus esset creatus, custodiuit:Cap. 10. & eduxit illum a delicto suo. This (saith he, meaning by Christ vnder the name of wisedom) safely preserued him that was first formed of God, the father of the world, when he was created all alone: and raysed him out of his sinne again. The which disobedience (with
what other sinne so euer was thereunto in him ioyned) though it was thus clearly pardoned, yet the punishment thereof, both he felt long after in his owne person, and it lieth vpon his posterity till this day. For which sinne he him selfe began to doe penaunce (as Irenaeus saith) euen in paradise:Lib. . ca. 33 and then God practised iudgement vpon him (as Augustine noteth) first by his disinhe∣ritaunce, then by painfull trauell inioyned, by the vnaptnesse of the earth to serue his turne, by rebellion of the inferiour crea∣tures, by the troublesom motions of his owne affections, & briefly in all pointes by a lothsom life and a dreadfull death. Yea and that his punishment ceased not in this world by his death, but many hundreth yeares after remained as further condemnation of his disobedience, I shall more conueniently anone declare. Now seeking further to haue cleare and open euidence in this case, we can not wish more proofe then may be had by the straung working and dispensation of God, in the manifold affaires of that sanctified people, and chosen nation of the Israelites. In which peoples perpetuall protection, a man might finde a perfect platte of mercy and iudgement. So often they fall, so sodenly they rise: so grieuously they offend, such mercy they finde, that it is mar∣uelous to consider. Of this elect family therefore thus God spea∣keth.Psal. 88. Si autem dereliquerint filij eius legem meam, & in iu∣dicijs meis non ambulauerint, visitabo in virga iniquitates eorum, & in verberibus peccata eorum: misericordiam au∣tem meam non dispergam ab eo, neque nocebo in veritate mea. If his children reiect my lawe, and walke not in my iudge∣ments, with rodde will I visit their wickednes, and in stripes their sinnes: yet will I not take my mercy from him (or them, as it is also redde) nor harme him in my truth.Gods peo∣ple first par¦doned, vvas then fter punished. Exod. 32. This people, at their first passage out of Egypt committing horrible idolatry, was pardoned thereof at the instance of Moises: yet so saith our Lord God vn∣to him: Ego autem in die vltionis, visitabo & hoc peccatum eorum: But yet in the day of reuengement, I will visit this their offence also. The same people offending greuously again by mur∣mure and mistrust of Gods carefull prouidence towards them, at their Gouernours humble sute were expresly forgiuen in these wordes.Numer. 14. Dimisi iuxta verbum tuum. I haue pardoned them ac∣cording to thy word. But after their assured warraunt for the full
remission of the fault, & the eternall paine due to that greeuous sinne, behold yet their punishment temporall for the same. Atta∣men omnes homines qui viderunt maiestatem, &c. For all that (saith our Lord) euery one that hath seene my maiesty, and the wonders which I wrought in Egypt, & in the wildernes, & yet hath notwithstanding tempted me tenne times, shall not beholde the land for which I bound my selfe by oth to their forefathers. But passing the peoples sinne Moises and Aron them selfe, in many pointes minister aboundant profe of this matter. VVho both dying in perfect fauour of God, yet for their mistrust were di∣scharged of guiding Gods people, or entring them selfe into the land so hartely desired, and so long loked for before,Num. 20. Of these two the Prophet sayth thus:Psal. 98. Custodiebant testimonia eius & praeceptum quod dedit illis. Deus tu propitius fuisti eis, & vlciscens, in omnes adinuentiones eorum. They obserued his testimonies, and the charge that he gaue vnto them. Lord God thou wast mercifull vnto them, and sharply reuenged their owne inuentions. The like ordinaunce of Gods iustice in punishment of such as he highly fauoured, may appeare in Samson, in Hely,sudic. 16. 1. Reg. 3. & all other notorious personages in the whole Scripture. But the heartely beloued of God King Dauids example so beareth downe our aduersaries, that I can not wel omit it, though I now long to be nearer my matter. This Prophet had an expresse pardon, with a plaine prouiso that he should notwithstanding beare the heauy hand of God, for the punishment of his former sinne. Once for taking pride in the multitude and numbring of his people, God, though he pardoned him, yet by the prophet,2. Reg. vlt. God gaue him leaue to chuse of thre named scourges, which he would: to whom he answered. Coarctor nimis: sed melius est incide∣re in manus Domini, multae enim sunt misericordiae eius. I am sore vrged: but better it is to fall into Gods handes, for his mercyes be exceding many. And so according to his election, he had many thousandes of his people perished by Gods plague. Of whose case, S. Gregory sayth maruelous much in these fewe wordes. Deus delictum delet, sed inultum non deserit: peccato non parcitur, quia sine vindicta non laxatur.Lib. 9. in Iob. cap. 82. God wypeth away mannes offence, but he leaueth it not vnpunished: sinne is not spared, because it is not without reuenge relea∣sed.
But before this, he had a full warrant of remission of his horrible murder and adultery, by the Prophet Nathan, saying vnto him thus after his repentaunce.2. Reg. 12. Dominus quoque tran∣stulit peccatum tuum, nonmori eris: veruntamen quoniam blasphemare fecisti inimicos nomen Domini propter ver∣bum hoc, filius qui natus est tibi morte morietur. Our Lord hath remoued thy sinne: neuerthelesse, because thou hast made thenimies blaspheme our Lordes name by this worde, thy sonne which is borne vnto thee shall dye the death. Of which matter S. Augustine by occasion talking against Faustus, asketh what maner of pardon it was,Lib. 23. cap. 67. that the Prophet brought from God vn∣to Dauid. And he answereth thus. Ad quam rem nisi ad sem∣piternam salutem? neque enim praetermissa est in illo, se∣cundum Dei comminationem, flagelli paterni disciplina. To what ende else (had he his pardon) but to euerlasting-salua∣tion? For he scaped not the scourge of his fathers discipline, ac∣cording as the threatning of God before did portend. All the for∣sad examples then being so euident, they must needes conclude this assuredly, that after our offences be remitted, there common∣ly yet remaineth some paine and right debt, to be discharged by the offenders punishment, before he receiue the ample benefite of eternall saluation. 2 Now commeth in the colourable confirmation of this false proposition, and that by examples of the holy Scripture, which must therefore more diligently be wayed, because they are so seldom alleged. But first he must rayle a crash at the forsaken Protestantes, which would so gladly liue at ease in their onely faith, that they list neither to sa∣tisfie for their sinnes, nor to procure Gods mercy with good workes. Doubtles (M. Allen) they list not by seeking to iu∣stifie them selues, procure to be forsaken of God. But you Papistes are they, that seeke to iustifie your selues, like the olde pharisees, and boast of your prayers, fastings and sa∣tisfactions, but God knoweth what you are within. As for our onely faith shall stand before God, when your infide∣lity shall condemne you, and the fruites of our onely faith shall appeare to Gods glory, when the vayne bragge of
your meritorius workes shalbe discouered to your eternall shame. But to come to your examples, I must admonish the Reader, that neither your wit, memory, diligence, nor lear∣ning, deserueth any commendations, for alleging them that haue so often before bene abused, by all them that of your side haue defended your cause, of whom you are but a translator or borower, not an author or obseruer your self. And therefore I might iustly referre the Reader to the learned and godly aunswers of so many, as haue impugned this heresie before, but because euery man either can not or will not seeke further then this booke, I will briefly aun∣swere euery example, as it is an easy matter to doe, they are so vnfitly applyed to the purpose for which they are alle∣ged. The first example is of our first parent Adam, whose sinne though it were pardoned through Christ, yet he and all his posterity feeleth the punishment thereof. An argu∣ment very farre fetched to maintayne the paynes of purga∣tory. The miseries of this life in that they be common to the godly, with the wicked, they sufficiently declare, that they are no satisfaction for sinne, but a demonstration of our miserable condition to humble vs, & make vs desirous of restitution by Christ. And although they were enioyned by the curse of God against sinne, yet to those that are de∣liuered from the curse of God by the blessed seede Iesus, they also are conuerted into blessings. Hereof the godly reioyse in afflictions, knowing that afflictions worke pati∣ence, patience worketh trial, triall hope, and hope confoun∣deth not, yea by them we are made conformable vnto Christ, that suffering with him we may raigne with him. Rom. 5. & 8. As for that which Adam suffered after his death, when you haue declared it, then will I also confute it. Next followeth the examples of the Israelites which often fell, were punished and rose againe. The former example was not so farre of in tyme, as this is in matter, for that example although it were impertinent, yet it had some similitude with the cause, for that Adam was pardoned, and yet bare some part of punishmēt. But here are brought in the whole people, among whom many were wicked, and commonly
more hypocrites then true Israelites, and yet the very text alleged out of the 88. Psalme, declareth that the godly chil∣dren which were punished, were chastised in mercy, and not condemned by iustice. And as for the saying of God. Exod. 32. that notwithstanding he had pardoned the Israe∣lites, yet he would visit their sinne in the day of vengeance, litle helpeth the matter. For the pardon was generall to the whole people, that he would not destroy them from being a nation, as appeareth in the 14. verse of that chap∣ter, but not perticular to euery one, that he would remitte their sinne & take them into his fauour, as appeareth verse 33. where he sayth, that who so euer had sinned he would put him out of his booke. The same answere serueth for the like text. Num. 14. But Moises & Aaron are examples of this matter most manifest. I answere to the punishment of Moises & Aaron, as to the punishment of all other faithfull persons, they were not to satisfie the iustice of God, but to declare his mercy in admonishing them, and others by their examples, how odious sinne is vnto him, and yet euen the chastisement of God is a benefite vnto his children, not onely because it is a signe of his fatherly loue toward them, but also because he conuerteth it alwaies vnto their reward and profit. As in the example of Moises and Aaron, it was a fatherly rodde to discharge them of guiding Gods people, and entring into the lande of promise: but in the meane time it was a great benefite that they were dischar∣ged of a heauy and troublesome burden, and entred soo∣ner into that land of eternall life, whereof the other was but a signe and shadow. And therefore the Psalmist sayth iustly of them, that God was mercifull vnto them, in reuen∣ging their inuentions. But because S. Augustines words may be of more credit with you, he sayth of the death of Moi∣ses & Aaron, that they were signa futurorum non supplicia in∣dignationis Dei. Signes of things to come not punishments of Gods displeasure. Quaestion. Num. lib. 4. Quest. 53. But the example of King Dauid is counted a great and speciall bul∣warke of this cause, which notwithstanding is answered e∣uen as the rest. Dauid the child of God, was beaten with
the mercifull rodde of Gods fatherly correction, and set as an example to Gods children of all ages, to shew how God abhorreth murder and adultery. And although the payne were bitter for the tyme, as all chastisment is, yet no doubt but he receaued great profite thereby. Heb. 12. And as for the plague for numbring the people, it fell vpon them for their own sinnes, as the text is playne. The saying of Gre∣gory, that God leaueth no sinne vnpunished, which is par∣doned: if it be vnderstood that all the sinnes of the faith∣full are punished in Christ, which became sinne for vs, it is most true. But if he meane that God punisheth all sinnes that he pardoneth in the partyes them selues, it is contra∣ry to the manifest worde of God, and infinite examples of the Scripture. The Publicane, the prodigall childe, the debters, all clearely remitted, doe playnly proue that God freely forgiueth, iustifieth, rewardeth the penitent sin∣ners, without exacting any punishment of them for aun∣swering of the debt, satisfying for the sinnes, abusing his fatherly clemency. Luke 7. & 15. & 18. Finally for auouch∣ing myne aunswer, I would wish no better authority of the auncient fathers, then euen that which M. Allen him selfe allegeth out of Augustine contra Faustum, lib. 23. cap. 67. that the punishment of Dauid, was flagelli paterni disciplina, the chastisement of Gods fatherly scourge, as he doth most playnly declare the same in his booke de peccatorum meritis ac remissione, lib. 2. cap. 33. and for a flatt conclusion contra∣dictory to M. Allens assertion, I will vse the very wordes of Chrysostome in the 8. Hom. vppon the Epistle to the Rom. Vbi venia ibi nulla erit poena. Where there is forgeuenes, there is no punishment.
The double and doubtfull shiftes of our aduersaries pressed by this conclusion, are remoued: and it is proued against one sort, that these foresayde scourges vvere in deede punish∣ments for sinnes remitted. And agaynst thother sect, that this transitory payne hath often endured in the next life. CAP. II. 1 ANd the weight of this foresayd grounde, hath euer pressed the aduersaries of truth so sore, that beholding as it were a farre of, what inconuenience this might import, they euer busily endeuored to stay the be∣ginning of their likely ouerthrow. But yet (as it was and will be for euer noted in false teachers) they seeke diuerse escapes, so disagreable, that one hindereth an other, and neither of them helpes their owne cause. One sorte not so impu∣dent, but a great deale more foolish then their fellowes, agree by force of the places named and euidence of the examples, that there is punishment to be suffered, and some temporall paine re∣mane at to be discharged in this world, after remission of sinne, but for the next after this life (so fearde they be of purgatory) they will haue none at all.Melanch. Thother secte maisters fearing what might follow on that graunt, in no case will confesse, that there is any payne due for sinne, in this world or the next, after the fault be once remitted. For Caluine capitaine of this latter bād,Caluinus. saw well, that if any debt or recompense remaine to be dischar∣ged by the offender after his reconcilement, it must needes ise by proportion, weight, continuance, number, and quantity of the faultes committed before. VVhereby it must of necessity be indu∣ced, that because euery man can not haue time, either for the hugenesse of his sinnes past, or his late repentaunce, or his care∣lesse negligence, to repay all in his life, that there is all, or some part aunswerable in the next world to come. And therefore bold∣ly and impudently, as in case of this necessity, he aduentureth to deny with shame, that any of all these painfull miseries be as pu∣nishments for the sinnes of the sufferers: but certaine fatherly checkes, exercises of patience and vertue, rather then afflictions enioyned for sinnes. VVhich vaine shift hath no bearing by rea∣son, or text of Scripture: but onely is vpholden by the exercised audacity of the author.
CAP. II. 1 IF M. Allens titles of his chapters were as sufficient reasons, as they be bolde affirmations, there were no man able to stand against him. But I can well compare them to the arguments of those vayne fables that were wont to be printed in english of Beuis of Hampton, Guy of VVarwick, & such like, where the arguments shew how such a Knight ouercame such a Gyant, how such a sorcerer wrought such a miracle, which are tould as confidently as though they were true, and yet there is no man of meane witte so ig∣noraunt, but he knoweth them to be fayned fantasies. Euen so with M. Allen, to affirme is to proue, to deny is to con∣fute, briefly in his titles, and at large in his chapters. But if he would as he pretendeth, haue remoued all those rea∣sons, that we bring against his false conclusion, or any of them all, he must haue proued, that Christ hath not satisfi∣ed the iustice of God perfectly by his death and suffering, that God doth not freely forgeue vs our sinnes, that he is stil an angry Iudge against them that put their trust in him. He must haue proued against Ezechiel, that what tyme so euer a man doth truely repent, the Lord doth not put all his sinnes out of his remembraunce, against Dauid, that he hath not remoued our sinnes from vs as farre as the East is from the West. Against S. Iohn, that if any man sinne after Baptisme, Iesus Christ is not our aduocate with the father, and propitiation for our sinnes. If he could say any thing against these reasons & authorities, with an hundred more of the same sort, he were worthy to be heard. But because that is to hard a matter for him to take in hand, without all shame or shew of truth most impudently, he fayneth a con∣trariety betwene Melanthon and Caluine, but not once no∣ting by one letter where the same is to be found in any of their workes, lest their manifest wordes out of the same places being brought against him, should reproue his
shamelesse lying. Melancthon he saith, acknowledgeth some temporal payne after remission of sinnes, to be discharged in this life, but not in the life to come. Caluin wil haue none at all. O brasen face and yron forhead: doth Caluine deny thafflictions of this life? or Melancthon affirme that they are suffered for satisfaction of our sinnes. Doth Melancthon deny the passion of Christ to be a perfect aunswering of the iustice of God? or Caluine affirme, thereby to be taken away the mercyfull correction of God? Would God that all that professe the religion of Christ agreed in all pointes as truely, as they doe in this. But admitte that M. Melan∣cthon or any man beside, should graunt, that the sufferinges of the godly in this life, are some parte of satisfying vnto the iustice of God, what were purgatory promoted there∣by? Forsoth then of necessitie it must be induced, that some parte of these sufferinges are aunswerable in the next worlde to come, what necessitie call you this? euen such as he suffereth, which being bounde hande and foote with a strawe, can not steare to helpe him selfe. But lette vs see this adamantine chayne of Maister Allens necessity. If a∣ny punishment remayne, it must needes ryse by proporti∣on, weyght, continuaunce, number and quantity, which if it be not all discharged in this lyfe, then it is to be aun∣swered in the lyfe to come. By proportion Maister Allen? What proportion? Arithmeticall or Geometricall? If it be by arithmeticall proportion, then so many thousandes of sinnes, whereof euery one deserueth one death, must be punished by so many thousand deathes. If by geometricall proportion, then so many offences committed against that infinite maiesty, can not be aunswered, but by infinite and eternal punishment, and which way so euer you take it, by weight, number, time or measure, it is euident, that while you seeke for purgatory, you haue founde out hell. For o∣therwise saith the spirite of God, in the person of the faith∣full, He hath not dealt with vs according to our sinnes, neither rewarded vs after our iniquities, Psal. 103. But as heauen is a∣boue the earth, so great is his mercy, as a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lorde compassion on them that feare
him. This is an other maner of proportion M. Allen, then you Papists can skill of, which thinke such a necessity to be of this conclusion, that if any sinnes be punished in this life, they must be punished after this life also. For if no∣thing but iustice be sought against sinnes, then followeth nothing but eternal damnation, if mercy may moderat the matter, what necessity is in this consequence? some sinnes are sometime punished in this life, ergo in the life to come. Thus I haue reasoned, supposing that any man had graun∣ted, that the iustice of God must be satisfied with our suffe∣rings in this life: for I my selfe had rather see the Pope at the deuill, then I would affirme the sufferings of Christ to be vnsufficient to aunswere perfectly the iustice of God. But behold christian reader the blasphemy of these popish ser∣pents, first they will seeme in wordes throughly to acknow∣ledge the benefite of Christes passion, lest that euery man yt heareth them speak, should spit at them. When they haue thus obtained audience, then they will gather in them sel∣ues, & begin in some part to diminish the perfection ther∣of, & so proceede vntill they haue in deede, though not in wordes cleane excluded Christ and all his merits, whereof thou hast a plaine example in this hipocrite, who in the be∣ginning of his first chapter, confesseth liberally the effect of Christes death▪ afterward restraineth the force thereof, to sinnes committed before baptisme, then bringeth in pu∣nishment, for aunswering the iustice of God in this life, af∣terward extendeth the same vnto the life to come, & last of all, estemeth the punishment by proportion, weight, conti∣nuance, number & quantity of the faults committed: which of necessity thrusteth backe againe the sinnes into eternall torments. And what then becommeth of the propitiation for our sinnes purchased vnto vs by the bloud of the sonne of God? 2 S. Paule in playne words writeth:Ad Rom. 6. Vide Augu. super illud psal. 50. in peccatis cō¦cpit me mater ma. Corpus mortuum est propter peccatum, & stipendium peccati mors est. The body is dead because of sinne, and death is the reward of sinne. And so of Dauid: because thou hast slayne Vrias, Non recedet gladius
de domo tua, saith the Scripture: The sword shall not depart thy house. And againe, because thou hast made the enemies bla∣spheme my name, thy child shall dye. And of the people of I∣sraell: Visitabo & hoc peccatum eorum. I will visite this sinne of theirs also. Yet in this light of Scripture, whereas the punish∣ment is named, so it is expresly mentioned that sinne is the pro∣per cause thereof, the aduersary seeketh a blinde mist, to dase the simplicity of the reader, and to maintaine errour. It helpeth our cause exceding much,In Psal. 50. that the very shew of an argument, driues them to such vnseemely shiftes. S. Augustines wordes shall for me sufficiently refute this errour, Veritatem dilexisti, impuni∣ta peccata eorum etiam quibus ignoscis, non reliquisti. (He speaketh to God in the Prophets person). Thou loues righteous∣nes, & hast not left vnpunished, no not the sinnes of them whom thou louest.August. lib. 2. de pecca∣to mer. cap. 33. Notwithstanding, this is very true: that all these af∣flictions though they come of sinne, ad for the rewarde of mans offences, yet God of mercy turneth them to the exercise of ver∣tue, and benefite of such as shalbe saued. But it is one thing to dispute of what cause they come, and an other to reason of the wisedom of God in the vse of the same. VVho, as the said Augu∣stine witnesseth, is so mighty in his prouident gouernaunce, that he is able to turne, euen the very sinnes them selues, to the bene∣fite of such as by grace and mercy shalbe raised vp to saluation. And much more is he ready to frame the punishment which he him selfe of iustice worketh for correction of sinners, to the sal∣uation of the elect. 2 This peace should proue that the fatherly rodde of Gods mercy, is a sword of his iustice to punish those sinnes that are remitted. But what maner of proues bringeth he. S. Paule (he sayth) in plaine wordes writeth, the body is deade because of sinne, and death is the reward of sinne. In deede S. Paule writeth so, but is the mercy of God turned therfore into iustice, or his rodde into a sworde? or he from a mer∣cifull father into an angry iudge? to omit howe vnfitly he ioyneth these 2. places togither, whose sense is so farre dif∣fering, for in the former saying: Rom. 8. he speaketh of the relicks of sinne, that are not altogither abolished in them
that are regenerate: in the latter Rom. 6. he sheweth that they which serue sinne, deserue eternall damnation: what is this to the proofe of his conclusion? but his purpose was onely to make some shewe of variety of places: for by and by he returneth to the places alleged, and aunswe∣red before, of Dauid, and of the people of Israell, where∣unto he adioyneth the saying of Augustine, that God lea∣ueth not the sinnes of them vnpunished, whome he hath pardoned. One aunswere serueth al, if there were ten times as much of this sort. That God punisheth not to satisfie his iustice, but to shew his mercy toward his children, to bring them to repentaunce, to humble them, to make them be∣ware of the like sinnes, to admonish others by their exam∣ple, but in no wise that they should make a mendes by due punishment, for that which by transgression was commit∣ted, which aunswere howsoeuer he would seeme to eleuate by wordes, yet he bringeth no matter against it, but euen the places by him selfe alleged in the chapter before, which either all or almost all, doe plainly confirme it, as is before noted, and none of them all confute it. 3 But now the other sorte which be more curteise,The confu∣tation of the second opinion. and con∣fesse that in this world the iust may suffer of reason for his sinnes already remitted, but not in the next life, as their doctrine is very vntrue, so it geueth great licēse and liberty to euill liuer, and is the very mother of presumption. For if man were suere to be discharged at his departure hense of all paine for his sinnes, then certes were it madnesse, to trauell in this life further for his offensies, then he must of necessitie. Yea more, it maketh the case of greuous sinners till the houre of their death (so that they then at last repent) much better, then of small offenders conuer∣ted longe before. For these must be punished in their life, the other can not be punished (as these suppose) after their death. VVhat a vaine absurdity is this, that the prophet offending once or twise in all his time, shoulde suffer so heuie iudgement: and the party which abideth in wickednesse till the ende of his life, when sinne rather leaueth him, then he sinne, must because of his late conuersion, without paine be caried at ease to heauen? This
is not doubtlesse semely to Gods iustice and ordinaunce, whose wayes be truth and vprightnesse.Homil. 11. in Leuit. Est apud iudicem iustum poenae moderatio, non solum pro qualitate, sed etiam pro quantitate. To a iust iudge there must be consideration had of punishment, both for the quality & quantity (so saith Origine.) And the holy Scripture thus. Quantum glorificauit se, & in delitijs fuit: tantum date illi tormentum & luctum. Looke how high she exalted her selfe, and how delicatly she liued: and geue her so much woe and torment againe. It is spoken as of Ba∣bylon in the reuelations of Saint Iohn.Cap. 16. And because this toucheth our matter, and the very point thereof: I will stand with the aduersarie the longer. Here then I aske him, why God taketh punishment in this worlde, for sinne already remitted? His aunswere must needes be, for the reuenge and hatered of sinne, and satisfying of iustice. Nowe then doth God practise iudgement and iustice no where but in this worlde? Or if it be not here aunswered, because of lacke of space, or late reconciliation of the offender, shall our lorde of necessitie be for∣ced to remitte the debte, and release his sentence of iustice for lacke of meanes to punish in an other worlde? No no, Gods hāde is not abbridged by the termes of this life. Late repentaunce can be a benefit to no man: God forbid it shoulde. Especially seing punishment and iudgement for sinne (as many learned do sup∣pose, and as reason with scripture beareth) properly apperteineth not to this worlde, but by a speciall grace, and singular benefite, which God of pity graunteth to such as he loueth, that they may here preuent his anger: which else in the next life should be found more greeuous, where properly is the reward of sinne, and iudgement kept ordinarily for the same. As it is playne mercy & grace, when man may take punishment of him selfe (as S. Paule sayeth) and be his owne correctour,1. Cor. 11. to auoyde the iudgement of God. And thereof the next life is termed commonly dies Domi∣ni: where there is no place for our working, but sufferance alone: where the accompt of mans life must be straitly required, and the sinnes euen of the iust, not otherwise amended, sharpely visited. Therefore if Melanthon graunt that the righteous and recon∣ciled persons,Euseb. Emis. homil. de di uersis viti. may iustly beare the scourge of God, for satisfying for their sinnes before pardoned, in this world, where, though pu∣nishment
be exercised for wickednesse properly, yet at the least not so ordinarily as in the next, wher God hath layd vp the great store of rewarde, as wel for the good as the badde: he must needes by force of reason acknowledge, that the world to come is no lesse (if it be not more) appoynted of our Lord for iust iudgeing of our faultes forgiuen, then the time of this present life, whereas many an euill liuer escapeth all punishment so diuerse of great vertue suffer full greeuous torments. Excellently well sayd S. Augu∣stine: Multa mala hic videntur ignosci,Ench. ca. 6. & nullis supplicijs vindicari: sed eorum poenae reseruantur in posterum &c: much euill may seeme here to be pardoned, and without all pu∣nishment released: but the payne for such thinges is reserued til the world to come. 3 He ascribeth more curtesie to the other sort whose opinion is of his owne framing, but yet they please him not altogither, because their doctrine geueth licence to euill li∣uers. For if a man were sure to be discharged at his death for all payne for his sinne, then it were madnes to trauaile further for his offences in this life, then he must needes. M. Allen speaketh here according to his owne affection, & the sence of all Papistes, which will take no paynes to please God, but onely for their profite: they will not bestow one halfe peny for the loue of God, nor suffer a fillippe for the glory of God, but for the satisfaction of their sinnes, and increase of their merittes. And therefore that which is the chiefe cause, that doth and ought to moue, and the princi∣pall ende for which all godly men are moued to seeke to please God by good workes, namely the loue of God, and the glory of God, the Papistes thinke to preuaile with no man, because they are voyd of it them selues. But may not a man now iustly enforce, that the opinion of purgatory & satisfactions of sinnes after this life, is the very doctrine of licentiousnes, to maintayne wicked men in their presump∣tuousnes? For what hast will they make to amendement & newnes of life, when they haue hope of release after their death? The other absurdity riseth of deuilish enuy, that God shoulde be more liberall to them that repent, at the
houre of death, then to them that were but small offenders, conuerted long before. And therefore (M. Allen) I wil aun∣swere you, as the housholder aunswered those murmurers, which grudged that they which wrought but an houre were made equall in reward with those, that had borne the bur∣then & heat of the day. Is thy eye euil, because God is good? is it not lawfull for him to doe what he will with his owne? Matth. 20. But this is that which alway deceiueth the papi∣stes, because they measure the reward by iustice and not by mercy. I thinke M. Allen is angry with Christ, that he did not send the penitent theefe into purgatory, but euen that day promised to be with him in paradise. For Origen is alle∣ged to proue, that a iust Iudge must haue consideration of punishment, both for quality and quantity. He neuer thin∣keth of Chist all this while, who was striken for our sinnes and wounded for our iniquities, in whose punishment God had regard of such quality and quantity as his iustice requi∣red. Es. 53. For the chastisement of our peace was layd vpon him. but we say with the prophet: Lord if thou looke straightly to our sinnes, who were able to abide it, but with thee there is mercy & therefore thou shalt be feared. Psa. 130. But for a stronger proofe, there is alleged a place out of Apoc. 18. looke howe high Babylon did exalt her self, & how delicatly she liued, geue her so much woe & torment againe. Now I promise you, I will say M. Allen is a cunning Logitian, if he can draw a good ar∣gument out of this place to proue that God punisheth his children to satisfy his iustice. The whorish church of Rome is iustly condemned to eternal torments, for her pride & vo∣luptuousnes, there ore Gods children are punished to aun∣swere the iustice of God. The people of God are commaū∣ded to reward Babylon according to her wickednes, and to spare her no more then she sared them in her tyrannye. What pertaineth this to ye afflictions of Gods Saincts? But because this matter toucheth the point, he will tary longer with his aduersary, & demaund why God taketh punishmēt in this world for sinne already remitted. And then he will cōpel him to answere for satisfying of his iustice, which if it be not performed in this life, it must be in the life to come.
This is a fine kinde of reasoning, M. Allen, that you will en∣force your aduersary both to aunswere you, & also to aun∣swere what you list, & then you are good enough for him. Is this the logicke of Louayne? Nay you haue a finer reason then this, punishment & iudgement for sinne properly ap∣pertayneth not to this worlde, but to the next life. Then would I grossely inferre, therfore the temporal paines that the godly suffer in this world, be not properly punishments for sinne. But it is of mercy and grace that they suffer in this life, that I graunt, but not to satisfie for their sinnes. Of which matter you doe vntruely call Saynct Paule to wit∣nes. 1. Cor. 11. as whē he is hearde to speake him selfe, it will appeare manifestly: If we would iudge our selues (sayth he) we should not be iudged, but when we are iudged, we are cha∣stised of the Lorde, because we shoulde not be condemned with the worlde. Here is chastisement to amendement, or obstinacy to condemnation, but neuer a word sounding to∣ward purgatory, here is a manifest difference, betwene the iudgement which God exerciseth towards his children, which is chastismēt to auoyd damnation, & that iudgement by the which the impenitent world is condemned. But in the next life (you say) there is no place for our working but suf∣ferance alone, &c. what then shal other mens workes auaile, when our owne will not serue? and yet it is a matter not so fully agreed vpon among you papistes, whether a man may merite in purgatory. But to take your owne affirmation and not to charge you with dissention of other men (because you dissent so much from your selfe) who so weigheth the grounde of your first booke, must needes confesse that it o∣uerturneth your second booke, & if the matter of your se∣cond booke be true, then is the ground of your first booke false. For the ground of purgatory you would make the iu∣stice of God, which requireth punishment for sinnes com∣mitted in this life: but how can that stand? if God accept ye worke of other men to release them, that should suffer by his iustice: if these workes wil answere the matter, thē there is no such necessity of purgatory to satisfie his iustice. So that one of your bookes is a prety confutatiō of the other.
As for the saying of Augustine helpeth you nothing at all, onely he sheweth that God punisheth not all sinnes in this world, because many are reserued to eternall torments. But howe vncertaine his iudgement was concerning purgatory in that Enchiridion ad Laurentium, he him selfe most plainly declareth. Tale aliquid etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est: & vtrum ita sit quaeri potest. It is not incredible, that such a thing may be after this life, and whether it be so or no it may be doubted, and either it may be found, or else it may be hidde, that some faithfull should passe through a certaine purgatory fier, &c. cap. 69. By which wordes it ap∣peareth that Sathan was but then laying his foundations of purgatory, & had not yet finished this worke by a great deale, and that this was not so graue a doctrine, nor so con∣stant a fayth of the fathers, as M. Allen boasteth of in the former cap. Fol. 25. 4 But let vs steppe a foote further, and yet so much nearer the matter: and note well whether we may finde any case, where the payment for sinnes remitted, passeth the bondes of this life, and so required in the next, that by playne dealing and orderly proceeding,Marke vvell that God punisheth in the next life, the sinnes of the iust. we may the better instruct the simple, confound the aduersary and make truth stand vpon it selfe. Consider then with me that our first father pardoned of his sinne, as I proued before, was punished for the same, & with him all the iust of those dayes, not onely in the time of this present mortall life, but many hundreth yeares after their departure. For whose deliuery, the Catholike church holdeth and our Crede tea∣cheth also, that our Maister Christ descended downe into hell. And that no man here be deceaued, he must vnderstand, that it was no smal punishment to be banished so many worldes togither from the land of the lyuing, and to lacke the ioyfull fruition of heauens blisse:August. En∣chi. cap. 112. which of it selfe, but that it was not eternall, had bene more then all temporall paynes that may be suffered. And this to be one of those miseries which our first fathers disobedi∣ence wrought, and so to be payne for sinne, I thinke euery wise man will confesse. Yea it was the greatest dominion of sinne that could be for the ouerthrow of which, Christ him selfe vouchsafed
to enter into the land of darkenes. It is called of the Prophet, la∣cus sine aqua: a lake without water: And of the Apostle,Zach. 9. 1. Pet. 3. Car∣cer, a prison. VVhere the fathers be also named, vincti tui, thyne that were bounde. VVhereby we must vnderstand that Christ had a flocke imprisoned and bound, for the debt of sinne in an other worlde. But that we may make inuincible proofe, that this their captiuity was a iust inioyned plage and penalty for sinne, we must report what we finde in auncient Irenaeus of this matter. And he affirmeth that Adam was iudged and condemned for his wilfull fall, till Christes comming, in these wordes.Lib. 3. ca. 33. Necesse fuit Domi∣num ad perditam ouem venientem & tandem despositio∣nis recapitulationem facientem, & suum plasma requiren∣tem, illum ipsum hominem saluare, qui factus fuerat secun∣dum imaginem & similitudinem eius, id est Adam: implen∣tem tempora eius condemnationis, quae facta fuerat prop∣ter inobedientiam. And straight after. Solutus est condem∣nationis vinculis, qui captiuus ductus fuerat homo, thus I english it: It was necessary that our Lorde comming to the lost sheepe, & making a recapitulation of his appoynted ordinaunce, and vew of his owne handeworke, should also saue the same man which was formed after his owne image and likenesse: I meane Adam, then fulfilling the time of that condemnation which was for his disobedience appoynted, and so the man ledde into capti∣uity was released of the bondes of his condemnation. Eusebius Emissenus yet more expresly helpeth our cause,Homil. 1. de festo Pasch. as followeth. Confestim igitur aeterna nox inferorum, Christo descendente, resplenduit: siluit stridor ille lugentium, & Cathenarum disrupta ceciderunt vincula damnatorum Out of hand at Christes comming into hell, that eternall darkenesse shined bright: the gnashing of the mourners ceased, and the brosten bandes of condemned persons, fell from them. Here loe many one, by the iudgement of this holy writer, were loused from much misery by Christes descending downe. VVhere, to our pur∣pose we must especially be aduertised, that all the iust in those in∣feriour parts were not in like felicity with our father Abraham, or other of such perfect holinesse: (although he also suffered the common lacke, in long looking for translation to ioy) for some there were of meaner vertue, & yet in the fauour of God, which
suffered personall paine for purging & recompense of their sinnes committed in this life:Some vvere released of payne, at Christes des¦cen. of whome this Author semeth to meane. And as S. Augustine supposeth, the scripture must needes import such a like thing: vndoubtedly teaching that Christ was not onely in the place of rest, where Abraham and other in his harbour were, but also in places of tormēt, which could not touch his holy person:Act. 2. Quem Deus suscitauit solutis doloibus in∣ferni: VVhome God raised vp againe after he had loosed hell paines. Thus saith this holy Author. Quia euidentia testimo∣nia & infernum commemorant & dolores, nulla causa oc∣currit,Epist. 99. cur illò credatur venisse Saluator, nisi vt ab eius do∣loribus saluos faceret: sed vtrum omnes quos in eis inue∣nit, an quosdam quos illo beneficio dignos iudicauit, adhuc requiro: fuisse tamen eum apud inferos, & in eorum dolo∣ribus constitutis hoc beneficium praestitisse non dubito: By∣cause (saith he) euident testimonies make mention both of Hell and paines, I see not why we shoulde beleue that our Sauiour came thether, but to discharge some of the paines thereof: mary whether he loosed all, or summe whome he thought worthy of that benefite, that woulde I learne. For I am out of doubt he was in hell, and bestowed that gracious benefite vpon some that were in paines. Thus farre spake Augustine. Let no man here take occasiō to thinke that this father ment of any release of the dam∣ned in the inferious hell: for that errour he euer detested, & wri∣teth earnestly against Origine for the same.De fide & operibus cap 16. Cap. 33. Then it must needs be, that he spake of some which were in paine and torment, and yet worthy to receiue mercy. (so he termeth their estate both here, and in the xij. Booke of the literall exposition on the Gene∣sis, where he hath the same wordes with more large proofe of the conclusion) which neither agreeth with the state of Abrahams rest, nor yet with the forsaken soules. And the name of hell is now commonly taken for any one of the inferiour partes, where God practiseth iudgemēt for sinne euerlastingly or temporally: though (as Augustine saith) it cā not be found in plaine scripture, that Abrahams happy resting place should be termed Hell, or Infernū. But I neede not seeke further in the depe mistery of Christes affaires in the inferiour partes. For as I am not ashamed to be ig∣noraūt vpō whom he bestowed the grace of deliuery, so with Au∣gustine,
or rather with Gods Church, I dare beleue, that he loo∣sed somme, vpon whome he exercised iudgement before. And further may boldely auouche, that as there were certaine at his comming downe, not vnworthy after long paines tolerated to be released in his presens, so there be yet some, which by mercy and meanes of Gods Church be released daily. Not of that sorte which died out of Gods fauour: Quibus clausa est ianua mi∣sericordiae, & omnis spes interclusa salutis:Bernard se de s. Nico∣lao. Vpon whome the doore of mercy, and the hope of helthe be closed and shut vp for euer, but of the iust departed in faith and pietie, and yet not ful∣ly purged of all corruption of iniquitie. 4 This man hath hitherto raked in purgatory, nowe he will steppe a foote further into hell, and all to finde a case where sinnes remitted are punished after this life, and then he will returne againe into purgatory. For this purpose we must consider with him, that Adam and all the iust of those dayes, were punished for their sinnes forgiuen, not onely in this life, but many hundreth yeares after their de∣parture. For whose deliuery the Catholike Church (he sayth) holdeth & our creed teacheth, that Christ descended into hell. First marke how he agreeth with him selfe, & after how he cauilleth with the holy Scripture of God. Here he sayth that Abraham and all the iust were punished in hell, afterward in the next leafe, he saith that all the iust in those inferiour partes were not in like felicity with our father Abraham, or other of such perfect holinesse, and in the next leafe after that, he affirmeth out of Augustine, that Abra∣hams happy resting place can not be found in Scripture, to be termed hell. But that the fathers of the olde lawe before Christ, were not in hell, although they were not, nor yet are in perfect blessednesse, God prouiding a better thing for vs, that they without vs shoulde not be made perfect. Heb. 11. It is to be proued with manifest argumentes and authorityes out of holy Scriptures. For seeing they all beleeued in Christ, they had euerlasting lyfe, and en∣tred not into condemnation, but passed from death to lyfe. Ioan 5. And to what ende was Christ called the
lambe, that was slayne from the beginning of the worlde, but that the benefite of his passion, extendeth vnto the godly of all ages alike? Esay speaking of thè righteous that are departed out of this life, sayth that there is peace, and that they shall rest in their beddes, Esay 57. like as he affir∣meth that Tophoth, which is Gehinnom or hell, is prepared of olde for the wicked, Es. 30. So that felicity and rest was the portion of the godly fathers of the olde time after their death: and hell was prepared but for the wicked and vn∣godly. The same doth our Sauiour Christ teach in the hi∣story of Lazarus and the rich man. Luke 16. where the soule of Lazarus was caried by Angels not downe to hell, but vp into Abrahams bosome, from which hell is manifestly deui∣ded, when it is sayd that the rich man being in hell in tor∣ments, lifted vp his eyes and saw Lazarus a farre of: which wordes doe plainly confute, that drousy dreame of the Pa∣pistes concerning limbus patrum, which they say is but an edge and border of hell. But Christ maketh hell one place, and Abrahams bosome an other, and not that onely, but the one farre from the other, yea a great distaunce betwene the one and the other, therfore no edge nor border of hell, but a place of comfort, an high place: for the rich man loketh vp, and seeth a farre of Lazarus in the bosome of Abraham, who was a true childe of Abraham by fayth, for fayth ma∣keth children vnto Abraham. Rom. 4. And euen as faith was imputed to Abraham, so is it to all that be his children by fayth as well as it was to Abraham, if righteousnes belon∣geth to Abrahams children, the reward of righteousnes al∣so pertayneth vnto them, therefore Abrahams bosome was open to receiue all the children of Abraham, euen as the bosome of God was ready to receiue Abraham, because he was his sonne through fayth. And now to confute your vaine reasons which eyther be manifest wrestinges of the holy Scripture, or else are builded vpon the authority of mortall men. First you allege that the place into which Christ descended, was called a lake without water, in which the godly fathers were. Zachary 9. but this is so euident an abusing of the word of God, that he which doth only reade
that verse of Zachary in the originall tongue, must needes confesse, that those wordes haue an other sense, for God there contineweth his speaking to Ierusalem, or the daugh∣ter of Syon: saying, he hath deliuered her prisoners by the bloud of her couenant, from the lake without water, that is from miserable and desperate captiuity, where appeared no comfort. For the pronoune thou, is of the feminine gen∣der, wherefore it is most cleare that this is not spoken of Christ but of the Church of Christ. As for the common translation, which turneth the feminine gender into the masculine, & the first person into the second with manifest deprauation of the sense, is not to be admitted in this case. Nowe that prison which you bring out of 1. Pet. 3. is the prison of the damned soules, into which S. Peter doth not say that Christ descended, but that he came in the daies of Noe by his spirite, and preached to those that were then disobedient, and therefore are their spirites now in perpe∣tuall prison and torment. And this is the true and naturall sense of S. Peters wordes, which by meanes of that predi∣cate errour, rather then of any great obscurity in them, hath bene diuersly wrested by expositors. The wordes of Irenae∣us may be well vnderstoode of Christes comming downe from heauen to saue mankind, which deserued iust condem∣nation for sinne, rather then of his descending into hel, and the name of Adam seemeth to be taken in these wordes, rather for a noune common then for a proper name. He hath wordes towards the latter ende of the fift booke that sound more like to this matter, where he sayth: Cum enim Dominus in medio vmbrae mortis abierit, vbi animae mortuorum erant, post deinde corporaliter resurrexit, & post resurrectionem assumptus est, manifestum est, quia & discipulorum eius, propte quos & haec operatus est Dominus, animae abibunt in inuisibi∣lem locum, definitum eis à Deo, & ibi vsque ad resurrectionem commorabuntur. Seing the Lord went in the middest of the shadow of death, where the soules of the dead were, and af∣terward arose corporally, and then was taken vp: it is ma∣nifest, that the soules of his disciples for whom the Lorde wrought these thinges, shall goe into an inuisible place, ap∣poynted
for them by God, and there shall tarry vntill the resurrection. Neuertheles out of these wordes can nothing be necessarily enforced, but that the soule of Christ, when he was deade, was in the place of the godly that were deade before him, which no man denyeth. If you vrge that he was in the middest of the shadow of death, I aunswere, that is a phrase of the Scripture, signifying that he was verely dead, and that death had him in possession, after which ma∣ner of speach S. Peter sayth, that God raysed him agayne, loosing the sorrowes of death, and you your selfe count it a blasphemy to say, that he suffered any torments in hell af∣ter his death, and Irenaeus him selfe affirmeth, that it was such a place as all his disciples shall rest in vntill the time of the generall resurrection, which plainly ouerthroweth your fantasy. Eusebius Emissenus helpeth you as litle as Irenaeus, for he speaketh rhetorically, of the glorious victory that Christ obtained against hel, & the power of darkenes, by his death and passion, and descending into hell, whose words if you would expounde grammatically, you will make a mad sense of them, & he shalbe smally beholding vnto you. But it is plaine enough, except it be to him that wil seeke con∣firmation of errors, out of that which is truely spoken, that he meaneth that the effect and power of Christes death, mightely vanquished the power of hell & eternal damnati∣on, not which it had actually ouer the godly, but which by the iustice of God, it should haue had, if his sacrifice had not purchased mercie. And therfore he saieth, Aeterna nox the euerlasting night, which adiectiue is referred also to the gnashing & cheines of the damned. For it was eternall not temporall damnation, from which they were deliuered by Christes death. And therfore that fond shift, which M. Al∣len imagineth, which he saith may seeme like to be the au∣thors meaning, is not worth a straw, as being enforced and brought to the wordes by him, not expressed in them, by Eusebius. But when these wil not helpe, the supposal of S. Augustine is set downe, which because it is but the authori∣ty of a man, & him not constant with him selfe alwayes, it is not of sufficient weight, to beare downe the testimony al∣leged
out of Gods word. The same man contra Felicianum ad Optatum cap. 15. writeth these words. Si igitur mortuo cor∣pore, ad paeradisum anima mox vocatur, quenquam ne adhuc tam impium credimus, qui dicere audeat, quoniam anima saluatoris nostri, triduo illo corporeae mortis apud inferos custodiae mancipi∣tur. If therefore the body being dead, the soule is immedi∣atly called to paradise, beleue we yet that there is any man so vngodly, that he dare say, that our Sauiours soule, in that 3. daies of his bodily death, was committed to prison in hel, &c. In these words, he semeth vtterly to deny, that he came in that prison of hel. You wil say he denieth that he tarried there so long, but not that he came not there at all. But then marke this reason, if the soules of good mē immediatly are called to paradise, much more was Christes soule immedi∣atly receiued into paradise, who committed the same into his fathers handes. 5 Let the enemies of Gods trueth come now, and denie if they cā for shame, that Gods iustice for sinnes remitted, reacheth not sometimes to the places of punishment in the next life: let them with purgatory rase vp the fathers resting place so plainely set forth by scripture, beleued of the whole Church, and al∣wayes taught by the holy fathers. Yea let them that will haue no place for sinners, finde with blasphemie, hell like torments for Gods owne Sonne, with the damned spirites. My hearte surely will scarse serue me to report it, and yet cursed Caluine was not afearde to write it: and with arrogant vauntes against the blessed fathers, to auouch the same. That miserable forsaken man sawe, that the onely graunt of the olde fathers punishment by the lacke of euerlasting ioye, might of force driue him to ac∣knowledge, that God sometimes exerciseth his iustice vpon those which he loueth, in the next life: and so consequently that Purgatory paynes might be inferred therevppon, therefore he fell headelong to this horrible blasphemye,Caluines blasphemy vppon the article of Christes de∣scention. that Christ went not to loose any from the paynes of the next life: but to be pu∣nished in hell with the deadely damned him selfe, for to a∣mend the lacke of his passion vppon the Crosse. O our cursed tyme, O corrupt conditions: this beast writeth thus agaynst our
blessed Sauiours death, and against the sufficiency of the abun∣dant price of our redemption: and yet he liueth in mans memo∣ry, yea his bookes be greedely redd, redde? Nay by such as would be counted the chiefe of the cleargy, and beare Byshops names, they are commaunded to be redde:The here∣tikes priui∣ly set forth by bookes that vvhich they dare not openly preach. and the very booke wherein this & all other detestable doctrine is vttered, especially by their authority commended to the simple Curats study: that they might there learne closely in deuilish bookes, such wicked heresies as the preachers them selues dare not yet in the light of the world vtter nor maintaine. But other be not so farre fallen, therefore they must of reason confesse, that God by iust correction, hath before Christes com∣ming visited in the next world many hundred yeares togither, the sinnes of those whome he dearly loued. Although not onely in all that time, the soules of the holy Patriarches felt the lacke of the aboundant fruition of the Maiesty, but also for sinne they both then in rest,Excepting some that by peculiar prerogatiue haue alrea∣dy receiued their bo∣dies. and now in vnspeakeable felicity, want till this day the encrease of ioy and blesse, that by the receauing of their bodyes yet lying in dust, they are vndoubtedly sure of. Therfore it is ouer much presumption to limit the maiesty of God in the gouernment of his owne creatures, to the borders of our short life, and almost it toucheth his very prouidence with iniury, to say that he letteth him scape without punishment for his sinnes, that repented not till the houre of death: as for whom he hath no scourge in the next life, as he had here, if death had not pre∣uented his purpose. These childish cogitations can not stand with the righteousnes of his will, that for the first sinne committed, doth not onely punish many euerlastingly of the forsaken sorte, but also for the same, punisheth both his best beloued in earth, and for a time abateth the felicity of the blessed Sainctes in hea∣uen. But I will not stray after these men. My matter is so fruite∣full that I may not roue. And though the sectes of these dayes haue so infected euery braunch of our christian faith, that a man can not well ouerpasse them what so euer he taketh in hand, yet I will not medle with them no further, then shall concerne the quicke of our cause, and the necessary light of our matter. 5 Now this lusty gallaunt as though he had fully re∣payred
and fortified the olde ruinous and battered towers of limbus patrum, with canuas paynted walls, he standeth vp∣on his bulwarke of browne paper, and cryeth defiaunce to all his enemies, and especially he vttereth his spite agaynst Caluine, as a notorious enemy of his cause & quarel. Whom because he is to young to encounter withall, by any witt, learning, reason, or truth, he spitteth out against him, most impudent sclaunders, raylings and lyes, in which faculty, he hath striued so much to shew him selfe eloquent, that not satisfying him selfe with the voyce of a man, he hath bor∣rowed the tongue of the Deuill him selfe, or at the least wise, for feare he should not lye throughly geuen ouer his shamelesse tongue to be wagged by the father of lyes. For what man with any shewe of humane reason would accuse Caluine to deny the sufficiency of the redemptiō of Christ, to affirme that Christ went downe into hell after his death to be punished there with the damned him selfe, for to a∣mend the lacke of his passion vpon the crosse? whose do∣ctrine God him selfe, the Angells, and all the world doth knowe and testifie, to be directly contrary to these sclaun∣ders. For who euer more constantly affirmed, or more sub∣stantially proued the sufficiency of our redemption, by Christes death? what asse so vnlearned, if he can but con∣ster Caluins latine, in his catechisme, institutions, or any part of his workes, where he entreateth of that article of Chri∣stes descense in to hell, may not plainly see, that he vtterly denieth his descending into hell, after his life, affirming the same to be vnderstood of the wrath of God, which he sustayned for our sinnes before his death, at that time espe∣cially when he that was God, complained that he was for∣saken of God, which mystery if M. Allen vnderstand not, it is no maruell, seeing he abridgeth so much the benefite of Christes redemption, as all papistes doe alwayes, and he specially in this his defence of purgatory, and yet he is not ashamed to say of Caluine: this beaste writeth against our blessed Sauiours death. If I did not moderate somwhat my corrupt affections, I could requite him the like repro∣ches, but this much I must needes say. Is Caluine a beast for
speaking the truth to the glory of Christes redemption, & Allen an honest man, for sclaundering him to the defacing of Gods honour? But because he would not be thought to haue spued oute all his poison against Caluine, he goul∣peth vp an other bowlefull of rayling and sclaundering a∣gainst our Bishoppes, who haue not onely suffered, but also commended Caluins bookes to be reade, and studied of the simple curates, affirming that they doe priuily set forth by books, that which they dare not openly preach. If eue∣ry man that can be a witnesse, that M. Allen lyeth in this matter, should pull one heare from his heade or bearde, they would leaue him neuer an heare of an honest man be∣hinde them. But that he maie returne to his gentle aduer∣saries, with whome is lesse daungerous dealing, there be some (he sayth) that graunt the punishment of the fathers, after their death, of whose liberall concession, he doubteth not but to patch vp his Purgatory. In which practise he is not vnlike a fonde fellowe, of whome I haue hearde men iest in Cambridge, who when he was, non plus, as they terme it, in disputation, and all his argument spent, that he had prouided: Now (sayth he) will I dispute of your concesses and graunts. So M. Allen for euery matter, when his owne reasons faile, hath the concessions of his aduersaries which if they will not franckly make, he wil forcibly compell them to say what he will haue them. Last of all he sayth, it is pre∣sumption, & such as toucheth the very prouidence of God, with iniury, to say, that he letteth any sinner scape vnpunished, which repented not vntill the houre of death, as for whome he hath no scourge in the next life as he had here, if death had not pre∣uented his purpose. But these he calleth childish cogitations, but he might well haue termed them deuilish imagina∣tions, which will controule the wisedome and mercie of God vnder his blinde reason and corrupt affections and not suffer God to shew mercy vpon whome he will shew mercy. Rom. 9. without his blaspemous and enuious mur∣muring. His promise made so pleasauntely, not to digresse from his fautlesse matter, how perfectely he performeth, we shall see afterwarde.
That the practise of Christes Church, in the courte of binding and loosing mans sinnes, doth liuely set forth the order of Gods iustice in the next life, and proue Purgatory. CAP. III. 1THis being then proued, that God him selfe hath oftē visited the sinnes of such as were very deare vnto him, let vs now diligently beholde the graue authority of loosing and binding sinnes, and the courte of mans con∣science which Christ woulde haue kept in earth by the Apostles and Pastours of our soules: where we neede not doubt but to finde the very resemblaunce of Gods disposition and ordinance, in punishing or pardoning offensies. For the honor and poure of this ecclesiasticall gouernement, is by especiall com∣mission so ample, that it conteineth not onely the preaching of the Gospell and ministerie of the Sacraments,Note. but that which is more neare to the might and maiestie of God, and onely apertei∣neth to him by proprietie of nature, the very exact iudgement of all our secret sinnes, with loosing and binding of the same. For as God the father gaue all iudgement to his onely Sonne,Ioan. 5. so he at his departure hense, to the honor of his spouse and necessarie gi∣ding of his people, did communicate the same in most ample ma∣ner (as S. Chrysostome sayth) to the Apostles and priestes for euer: that they practising in earth terrible iudgemēt vpon mans misdeedes, might fully represent vnto vs the very sentence of God in punishment of wickednesse in the worlde to come. The princes of the earth haue poure to binde too,Lib. de Sa∣cer. 3. but no further then the body, but this other (sayth he) reacheth to the soule it selfe, and practised here in the world beneth (which is a straunge case) hath force and effect in heauen aboue. The poure of all poten∣tates, vnder the maiestie of the blessed Trinitie, in heauen and earth, is extreme basenesse compared to this. By this graue authoritie therefore, the Pastors and Priestes imitating Gods iustice, haue exercised continually punishment, from the spring of Christian religion, downe till these dayes, vpon all sinners: perpetually enioyning for satisfying of Gods wrath,
penaunce and workes of correction, either before they would ab∣solue them, as the olde vsage was, or els after the release of their offensies, which now of late for graue causes hath bene more v∣sed. In which sentence of their iudgement we plainely see, that as there was euer accomp made amongest all the faithfull of paine due vnto sinne, though the very offense it selfe and the giltinesse (as you would say) thereof, were forgiuen before: so we may gather that it was euer enioyned by the priestes holy mi∣nisterie, after the qualitie and quantitie of the fault committed. VVhereupon they charged some maner offenders with certaine prayers onely, other with large almose, diuerse with long fasting, many with perilous peregrinations, some with suspending from the sacraments, and very greuous offenders, with curse and ex∣communication. Ex cōmuni∣cation hath the image of Gods iu∣stice in the vvorlde to come.VVhereby thou maiest not onely proue that there is paine to be suffred for thy sinnes, but also haue a very image of that mi∣serie which in the next life may faule, not onely to the damned for euer, but also to all other which neglected in this time of grace the fructes of penaunce, and workes of satisfaction for the aunswere of their liues past. This great correction of excommu∣nication and separation from the sacramentes, S. Paule termeth the rodde,Virgam. wherewith he often threatened offenders: yea and some times though it was with great sorow (the punishment was so extreme) he mightely in Gods steade occupied the same. As once against Himeneus and Alexander:1. ad Timo. Cap. 1. 1. Cor. 5. and an other time to∣wardes a Corinthian, vpon whome, being absent, he gaue sen∣tence of their deliuery vp to Satan: not to be vexed of him as Iob was for the increase of merite,In 1. ad Cor. cap. 5. (sayth Chrysostome) but in their flesh meruelously to be tormented for paiment for their greuous offensies: and as the Apostle writeth of the Corinthian, that his soule might be false in the day of our Lorde. CAP. III. 1 BEcause this man would shew him selfe mindeful of his promise hereafter, he is euen now wandered out of Purgatory into excommunication, which notwithstanding he counteth no digression at
all, because it doth set forth the order of Gods iustice in the next life, and proue Purgatory, which were neither so nor so, but that he hath a speciall grace, to make all thinges serue his purpose, though they be neuer so farre from it. Omnia ex omnibus, he can make what he liste of euery thing. We confesse the power of excommunica∣tion geuen by Christ vnto his Church, and the seueritie of the punishment thereof to be greater, then the swelling wordes of M. Allens eloquence can expresse: but where as he addeth, that it hath bene the perpetuall vsage of Gods church, for satisfying of Gods wrath, to enioyne penaunce and workes of correctiō, before they would absolue, which was the olde custome, or els after the release of their of∣fence which was the new fashion, he sheweth him selfe ig∣noraunte of the right vse and end of that auctoritie, which our Sauiour hath committed vnto his Church. For the chiefe ende of this discipline, is to bring the sinners to re∣pentaunce, which if it may be obtained by admonitiō, the sworde of excommunication must not be drawen out. As appereth plainely by Christes owne wordes Matth. 18. If priuate admonition, where the offence is not publike, may preuaile to winne our brother, there needeth no wit∣nesse to be called. If two or three may serue to admonish: ye matter neede not to be referred to the Churches know∣ledge: and he that heareth the Church, so that by the ad∣monition thereof he is brought to harty repentaunce, is not to be cut of from the Church, nor to be deliuered to Sathan, for how should the Church refuse him, whome God receiueth: But if he obstinatly contemne the gentle admonition of the Church, or as our Sauiour saieth, if he refuse to heare the Church, then let him be as an heathen or publicane. For afterwarde if being excommunicated: he shew harty tokens of repentaunce, without any further satisfaction, he is to be receiued againe, as appereth most manifestly, in the receiuing of that Corinthian which was excommunicated, of whose vnfeined repentaunce, when the Apostle had intelligence, he writeth againe to the Co∣rinthians of him saying. It is sufficient for that same man
that he was rebuked of many, but now you ought to for∣geue him and comforte him, that he should not be swal∣lowed vp with ouer much heuines. 2. Cor. 2. And as for the practise of the olde and puerer Church, by enioy∣ning of workes of repentaunce, was, that they might not be deceiued by conterfect repentaunce, in stead of true and earnest reformation, not to satisfie the wrath of God a∣gainst sinners (which is not satisfied, but by the bloude of Christ) but to satisfie and assure the Church (as much as man might iudge) of the vnfeined and hartie repentaunce of the offendour. For how so euer the olde writers vse the worde of satisfaction, somethinge vnproprely, yet their cleare affirmation of the onely satisfaction of Christes death, declareth what they vnderstoode, when they vsed that terme in an other sense. But this is not to be omitted, that M. Allen confesseth the Papistes, to haue left the olde vsage of the Church, which was first to set satisfactiō, and then to absolue, and now of late, to haue taken vp a con∣trary custome that is, first to absolue then to enioyne pe∣naunce. This practise therefore lacketh antiquitie, one of the chiefe pillers of Popery. But this he sayeth is for great causes, but what causes, he doth not expresse: it is sufficient that the Church can not erre, though they doe that which is contrary to the vsage of the auncient Church, without grounde of Scripture, and against the commaundement of Christ. How harde Cyprian was to absolue them, that were excommunicate, before they had shewed great fruites of repentaunce, and how carefull, that the Church should not be deceiued by them, that vpō counterfected penaūce, required absolution, appereth by many of his epistles, & in his Sermon De lapsis. But because we shall haue a more pro∣per place to speake of satisfaction in the next Chapter, we will now follow M. Allen in this matter of excōmunicatiō. 2 This punishment was euer by cutting of from the Chri∣stian societie, and often ioyned with torment of body or sicknesse. And sometimes with death. As in the excommunication of A∣nanias and Zaphiras:Act. 5. Note. VVhich Christes vicar S. Peter, to the
great terrour euen of the faithfull, grauely pronounced on them for retaining backe certaine Church goods, which by promesse they had before dedicated vnto God & the Apostles distributiō. This kinde of punishment of sinnes was euer counted so ter∣rible, that we finde it called of the olde fathers damnation:August. de Correp. & gra. cap. 15. as one that most resembles the paines of the worlde to come of all other. And if man coulde see with corporall eyes the miserie of the party so condemned in Gods church, his hearte woulde brast:Ita Grego. Nis. orat de Castigatio∣ne. and it woulde moue terrour of further damnation euen to the stubborne contemners of the Churches authoritie. The which censure of Gods priestes, though it was sometimes to the euer∣lasting woe of such offenders as neglected the benefite of that present paine, yet commonly it was but chastisement and louing correction of our deare mother, for their deliuerie from greater griefe in the life to come. 2 He sayth that excōmunication was oftentimes ioy∣ned with torment of bodie, and sickenesse, and sometimes with death. Of torment and sickenesse he bringeth no proofe, but of death in Ananias and Saphira. But where fin∣deth he, that they were excommunicated? I finde that they were punished with death for their hypocrisie and dissi∣mulation, but there is no worde, nor halfe worde, of their excommunication, and whereas you saye, it was for retei∣ning backe of certaine Church goods, S. Peter sayth, it was for: lying and tempting the holy Ghost: And those Church goods were not for vaine ostentation of golden copes, chalices, or such like superstitious vanities, but for the necessarie reliefe of the poore. Againe, I know in what sense you call S. Peter Christes vicar, well if the Pope be in the same office Peter was, why doth he not likewise punish those whome he taketh to be Church robbers, if he lacke the power (as I am sure he lacketh not the will) then hath he not the authoritie Peter had. And if Peter did this as Christes vicar, then is not he Christes vicar, that can not doe as Peter did. 3 And for this cause,Aug. Ench. cap. 65. as the example of all ages past may
sufficiently proue, were certeine times and ordinary termes of penaunce apointed, for iust satisfaction for euery offense: and by the holy Canons so limited, that no sinne wittingly might be re∣serued to Gods heauy reuenge in the ende of our short dayes. It were to long to reporte the rules and prescription of penaunce,Nicen. c. 12. Ancyr. c. 5. out of Nice Councell or Ancyre: or out of S. Cyprian, for their punishmēt that fell to Idolatry in the time of Decius and Dio∣cletianus: or out of Ambrose, the notable excommunication of Theodosius the Emperour. By all which and the like, in the histories of the Ecclesiasticall affaires, he that can not see what paine is due vnto sinne, euen after the remission thereof, I holde him both ignorant and malicious blinde. 3 That certeine times and ordinary termes were ap∣pointed, in which they that grieuousely offended, shoulde shew their repentaunce, the same was not for satisfaction for their sinnes, but for certaine demonstration of their re∣pētaunce, which thing appereth euen by the same canons of the Councels which you alledge, For when godly dis∣cipline beganne to decaie, whereof Cyprian complaineth often in his epistles, men that notoriously offended would sometime, by thretning and terrors, sometime, by refusing the censure of that church, by whome they were condem∣ned, sometime by flattering the constant Martyrs, and so deceiuing them, that they would become suters for them (at whose request the Church many times was intreated) would seeke to thrust them selues againe into the commu∣nion of the faithfull, before they had shewed sufficient tokens of sorrow, for so greuous faltes, of which enormy∣ties Cyprian much complaineth as one that was much tro∣bled with thē. as Lib. 1. Epist. 3. Lib. 3. Epist. 15. For remedy of which enormities, and for auoiding of all subtill practises, to restore discipline to the auncient seuerity, decrees were made by the aunciēt Councels, in which certaine times of triall were appointed, for offenders, to approue their re∣pentaunce, with regarde of the heynousnesse of their cry∣mes: but yet with such moderation, that they might be re∣ceiued before the time appointed, if they shewed sufficient
fruites of repentaunce, as appereth most plainely, in the 11. Canon of the Nicone Councell, where it is said: Ab omni∣bus vero illud praecipuè obseruetur, vt animus corum & fructus poenitentiae attendatur, &c. Let this be chiefely considered of all (that are excommunicated) that there minde and fruictes of repentaunce be considered, for they that with all feare, continuall teares, and good workes, shew their cō∣uersion, not only by wordes but in deed and in trueth. &c. With them the Byshop maie deale more gently, whereas those that thinke it is sufficient onely to enter into the Church, are charged in any wise to keepe the ordinary time. &c. Wherefore he that gathereth that paines are due to sinnes after remission of them, by example of them that remitted no sinnes, but after sufficient paines suffered for them, or amendes made for them, I holde him not onely malitious blinde, but beastly vnreasonable. 4 And if any man yet doubt why, or to what end the Church of Christ thus greuousely tormenteth her owne children, by so many meanes of heuy correction, whome she might by good au∣thoritie freely release of their sinnes, let him assuredly know, that she coulde not so satisfie Gods iustice alwayes, by whome she holdeth her authoritie to edifie and not to destroye: to bynd as well as to loose. Although such dolour for offensies committed, and so earnest zele may she sometimes finde in the offender, that her chiefe and principall pastors may by their soueraigne autho∣ritie, wholy discharge him of all paines to come. But els in the commō case of Christian men, this penaunce is for no other cause enioyned,Ibidem. but to saue them from the more greuous torment in the worlde following. In the which sense S. Augustine both speaketh him selfe, and proueth his meaning, by the Apostles wordes as followeth. Propterea de quibusdam temporalibus poenis,1. Cor. 11. quae in hac vita peccantibus irrogantur eis quorum peccata delentur, ne reseruentur in finem, ait Apostolus: si enim nosmetipsos iudicaremus, a domino nō iudicaremur. Cum iudicamur autem a domino corripimur, ne cum hoc mundo dmnemur. Therefore (sayth he) it is of certaine temporall afflictions which be laid vpon their neckes, that being
sinners haue their trespasses pardoned, lest they be called to an accompt for them at the latter ende, that the Apostle meaneth by, when he sayth: If we woulde iudge our selues, we shoulde not then be iudged of our Lord. And when we be iudged of our Lord, then are we chastened that we be not damned with the worlde. This onely carefull kindnesse of our mother therefore, that ne∣uer remitted sinne that was notorious in any age, but after sharp punishment, or earnest charge with some proportionall penaunce for the same, doth not onely geue vs a louing warning to beware and preuent that heuie correction of the worlde to come, which S. Paule calleth the iudgement of God, because it is a sentence of iustice: but also in her owne practise here in earth, of mercy, in pardoning: of iustice in punishment: she geueth vs a very cleare example of both the same to be vndoubtedly looked for at the handes of God him selfe, by whome in the kingdome of the Church, these both in his behalfe be profitably practised. For if there were no respect of the dredfull day in the ende of our life, nor any paine further due for sinnes remitted, in the next world, then were it cruell arrogancy in the ministers to charge men with penaunce, needlesse to the offender, and foly to the sufferer. But God forbid any shoulde be so malipert or misbeleuing, as to mis∣credit the doinges and doctrine of the Catholike Church, which by the authoritie she hath to binde sinnes, and the protection of the holy Ghost, hath vsed this rodde of correction to the pro∣fit of so many, and hurte of none, euer sence our maisters death and departure. 4 Marke here gentle reader, what an absolute power of remissiō of sinns, this Papist doth ascribe to the Church, that she might (he sayth) by good authority, freely release men of their sinnes, with out satisfying of Gods iustice, but that she will not, except in some case, where she findeth such dolour and zeale in the offender that her chiefe and principall Pastors, may by there soueraine authoritie, who∣ly discharge him of all paines to come. Marke here the soue∣raigne authoritie of the Pope not subiect, no not to the iu∣stice of God. For els how should the Popes pardons stand, or Christes merites be excluded? if the Pope had not power
to doe by his soueraigne authority, that Christ coulde not doe by his bitter passion, to discharge penitent sinners of all paines to come: you see therefore, that ye Popish church, is not as a wife subiect to Christ her spouse, to exercise on earth the authoritie of Christ in heauen, according to his will, but a presumptuous harlot, to claime soueraigne au∣thoritie in earth, wherevnto he is bounde, which is in hea∣uen. For otherwise, though the olde fathers, that were most earnest in maintaining the Churches authoritie, as Cyprian Sermo. de lapsis, speaking against thē which thought it was sufficient, if they were receiued by the ordinary au∣thoritie of the Church, although they were not truely pe∣nitent, writeth thus. Nemo se fallat, nemo decipiat. Solus do∣minus misereri potest. veniam peccatis quae in ipsum commissa sunt, solus potest ille largiri, qui peccata nostra portauit, qui pro nobis doluit, quem Deus tradidit pro peccatis nostris. Homo Deo esse non potest maior, nec remittere, aut donare indulgentia sua seruus potest, quod in dominum delicto grauiore commissum est, ne adhuc lapso, & hoc accedat ad crimen, si nesciat esse praedi∣ctum: Maledictus homo, qui spem habet in homine: Dominus orandus est, dominus nostra satisfactione placandus est, qui ne∣gantem negare se dixit. Let no man (sayth he) deceiue him selfe, let no man begile him selfe. It is onely the Lorde that can shew mercy. Onely he can graunt pardon to offenses that are cōmitted against him, who hath borne our sinnes. Who hath suffered sorrow for vs, whome God hath geuen for our sinnes. A man can not be greater, then God, nei∣ther can the seruaunt by his indulgence remit or forgeue that which by so great offence is committed against the Lorde, lest this offence also be added to him that is fallen away, if he know not that it is fore shewed. Cursed is that man that putteth his trust in man. The Lorde must be in∣treated, the Lorde must be pacified with our satisfaction which sayth he doth deny that man that denieth him. In these wordes, Cyprian not onely plainely denieth that ab∣solute & soueraigne authoritie of men, which M. Allen af∣firmeth, but also declareth, what he meaneth by satisfactiō of God. Namely that those which counterfected repen∣taunce,
and though, by some outwarde obseruations, to sa∣tisfie the Church, might know they had to doe with God, who was not pleased, but with inwarde and harty conuer∣sion, whose knowledge they must satisfie, with true repen∣taunce in deede, as they seeke to satisfie iudgement of the Church by externall signes and tokens thereof. But to re∣turne to the common case of Christian men, (for the Popes cases be out of the common case of christen men) M. Allen sayth penaunce (and by penaunce he still meaneth punish∣ment) is for no other cause enioined, but to saue them from more greeuous torment in the world following. In deede true repentaunce deliuereth men from eternall torments, but what is this to purgatory? euen as much as the saying of Augustine, by him alleged, where he sayth that God pu∣nisheth in this life with temporall paynes those, whose sins are pardoned, lest they should be reserued in finem, that is for euer, which is to be chastised by the Lord, lest we should be damned with the world, of which matter enough hath bene sayd already. To conclude this chapter (because the wordes following contayne nothing but a vayne repetition of that which he hath often sayd before) the censure of ex∣communication, with the power of binding and loosing, re∣mayneth still inuiolable to the Church, nowe the opinion of purgatory is ouerthrowne, as it did before the doctrine of purgatory euer came into the world. That the manyfolde vvorkes and fructes of penaunce, vvhich all godly men haue charged them selues vvith all, for their ovvne sinnes remitted, vvere in respect of Purgatory paines, and for the auoiding of Gods iudgement temporall as vvell as eternall in the next life.CAP. IIII. 1 THere be of the Epicures of our time, that seeing the vsuall practise of penaunce not onely by the Churches prescription, but also by mans owne voluntary acceptation,Melancth. open∣ly to tende towardes the trueth and proofe of Purgatory, haue boldely improued (not
withstanding the expresse counsell of the Apostle, where he wil∣leth vs to iudge our selues) all chastisement of our bodies, as vn∣naturall torments to the iniury of our owne person, and the ex∣cellencie of our nature. CAP. IIII. 1 THat a detestable error may be defended with a shamelesse lye, he beginneth this chapter with a deuilish sclaunder. He reporteth that Melancthon (but sheweth no place where, lest his impudent lye might be euidently reproued) doth boldely improue all chastisement of our bodies as vnnaturall tor∣ments, to the iniury of our person, and the excellencye of our natue, and in a maner he is as bold with S. Paule whose expresse counsayle, he sayth is, that men should chastise their bodyes, where he willeth to iudge them selues. As though it were all one, for men to iudge them selues, and to chastise their bodies. In deede else where S. Paule cōmaun∣deth, and by his example commendeth christian chastise∣ment of mens bodyes, by abstinence and fasting, and that not for feare of purgatory, but for daunger of eternal dam∣nation. This doe I (sayth he) for the Gospells sake, that I may be made partaker of it, and agayne I chastise my body and bring it in subiection, lest while I preach to others, I my selfe should become a castaway. 1. Cor. 9. So that all godly men did not chastise their bodyes in respect of the auoy∣ding of the temporall paynes of purgatory, as M. Allen af∣firmeth in the title of this chapter, but contrariwise all god∣ly men that followed S. Paules doctrine and example, had also the same respect that he had. But to returne to Melan∣cthon, it may be that in some place of his writinges, he im∣proueth the immoderate exercise of bodily chastisement, by which some haue killed them selues, some made them selues leapers, some made them selues vnable to execute the office of ecclesiasticall administration, whereunto they were called by God. But in these cases he hath S. Paule for his warraunt, who forbiddeth Timothe the drinking of wa∣ter,
and willeth him to vse a litle wine, because of his sto∣macke and his often infirmities, assuring him that such bo∣dily exercise profiteth but a litle. 1. Tim. 4. & 5. But that Me∣lancthon improueth all godly chastisement of mens bodies, and for godly purposes, it will neuer be proued vntill M. Allen haue brought purgatory with all men in as great cre∣dit as euer it was with any man. 2 Against these corruptors of Christian condicions & ver∣tuous life, though the examples of all faithful worshippers of God sence the worlde beganne, do clearely stande, yet the notable hi∣story of the Prophet Dauids repaire after his heuy faule because it hath an especiall warrant of his pardon, a plaine processe in penaunce, a goodly platte of due handeling the sores of our sinns after they be remitted, and conteineth a manifest feare of Pur∣gatory, shall best serue our turne. This Prophet then, though he was assured of his pardon, and afterwarde (as I saide before) by Gods owne hande punished, yet crieth out with abundant teares. Amplius laua me ab ini∣quitate mea,Psal. 50. & a peccatis meis munda me. More and more washe me from my iniquitie, and of my sinnes purge me cleane. Dauid offended (sayth S. Ambrose) as kinges commonly do,Cap. 4. apol. Dauid. but he did penaunce, he wept, he groned, as kinges lightly do not: he confessed his fault, he asked mercy, and throwing him selfe vpon the harde grounde, bewailed his misery, fasted, praide, and so protested his sorow, that he left the testimony of his confessiō to all the world to come. VVhat moued this blessed man, by Gods owne mouth pardoned of his sinnes, so to torment him selfe? That happy awe and deepe feare of Gods iudgement in the next world, which the cursed se∣curity of this sweete poisoned doctrine of our dayes hath now ta∣ken awaye, euen that necessary feare of the thinges that might faule vnto him in the next life, caussed this holy prince and pro∣phet so to vexe and molest him selfe. It was hell, it was Purga∣tory that this penitent did beholde: either of which he knew his sinnes did well deserue. S. Augustine shall beare me witnesse, in wordes worthy of all memory. Yea the Prophets owne wordes vt∣tered in a bitter prayer and a Psalme full of sorow, shall beare
me witnesse: thus sayth S. Augustine. Haec iste grauiora for∣midans, excepta vita ista in cuius malis plangit & gemit,In Psal. 37. ro∣gat & dicit: Domine ne in surore tuo arguas me, neque in ira tua corripias me: Non sum inter illos quibus dicturus es: ite in ignem aeternum qui praeparatus est diabolo & an∣gelis eius: Neque in ira tua emendes me, vt in hac vita me purges, & ralem me reddas cui emendatorio igne opus nō sit. This man, besides the miseries of this life in which he was when he thus houleth & wepeth, further maketh sute and sayth, O Lorde rebuke me not in thy furie, let me not be one of them to whome thou shalt saye, awaye from me in to fier perpetuall, which is prouided for the Deuill and his aungels. Neither yet correct me in thy wrath, but so purge me in my life time and wholy frame me, that at length I may haue no neede of the Amē∣ding fier. So farre speaketh this doctor. By whome we may learne that Dauid after sharpe punishment taken first at Gods hande, and then in the middest of many miseries of this mortall life, did yet before hande beholde the horrible iudgements in the next worlde: the one for the damned soules and spirites, the other for the amendement of such as God loued and shall be saued: in the earnest memoriall of which assured paines, and for the auoiding thereof, he so afflicted him selfe as is before saide. His heart was in heuines, his soule in sorow, his flesh in feare, and in his bones there was no rest before the face of his sinnes. Thinke you here a protestāt preacher with a mery mouth in Na∣thans steade, could haue driuen him from this course of penaūce, dissuaded him from the feare of Purgatory, eased him with only faith, & set him in securitie & perfect freedom from his offenses past? No no, Musica in luctu importuna narratio.Ecclesi. 22. Mirthe in mourning is euer out of season. Flagella & doctrina in omni tempore sapiētia. But roddes & discipline be alwayes wisedom. These delicate teachers had neuer roume but where sinne bare great rule. And it is no small licklyhood of Gods exceding wrath towardes vs in these daies, that such soft phisitiōs please vs in so dāgerous diseases. It was not the doctrine of this time that healed Nabuchodonosor: but this was his plaster.Daniel. 4. Peccata tua eleemosy nis redime, & iniquitates tuas misericordijs pauperū. Redeme thy sinns by almes, & thy iniquities, by mercy towards the poore.
It was exceding fasting and many sorowfull sobbes, that bare of Gods hande from the Niniuites, It was the painefull workes of penaunce that Iohn the Baptist first preached. This was Paules rule, that if we would punish or iudge our selues, then would not God iudge vs. In to whose handes it is a heuy case to faule. Horrendum est (sayth he) incidere in manus Dei viuentis.1 Cor. 11. Haeb. 10. In cant. 55. Sermo. For he shall call to accompt and reckoning (as S. Bernarde sup∣poseth) euen the very actes of the iuste, if they be not well and throughly iudged, and corrected to his handes: The vndoubted knowledge of which strait accompt, moued our forefathers to require such earnest afflictions of the people, for satisfying for their sinnes. 2 Now let vs heare what this bragger bringeth to proue that all godly men haue chastised their bodyes for feare of purgatory. First Dauid in the 51. Psalme, prayeth God to wash him throughly from his iniquitie, &c. ergo he was afrayd of purgatory. I might iustly refuse to aunswere this argument, lest I should deferre any thing vnto it. But let Ambrose aunswere by M. Allen him selfe alleged. He so protested his harty repentaunce, that he left a testimony thereof to all the world to come. But because S. Ambrose is alleged, ra∣ther for the glorie of his name, then for the helpe of his authoritie in this place S. Augustine is annexed to supplie that wanted in S. Ambrose. But that you maie see what pat∣ching this proctor of Purgatory vseth of the doctors sen∣tences, he allegeth not Augustine vpon the very wordes of the 51. Psalme, which make nothing for his purpose, but vpon an other Psalme, where the argument is nothing like. If Augustine coulde haue founde Purgatory out of Amplius laua me, he would haue vttered it there, where he expoun∣deth those wordes, whereby it appereth plainely that M. Allens argument standeth vpon his owne inuention, and not vpon Augustines authoritie. But yet Augustine speaketh of the amending fier in the place by him alledged. He doth so in deede: but I haue shewed before, and more will shew hereafter, that as Augustine had no ground of that fier, but in the cōmon error of his time, so sometimes he affirmeth
that it is a matter, that may be doubted of sometimes that there is no third place at all. And that he hath no grounde of Scripture in that place of the 38. Psalme, is euident, be∣cause Dauid prayeth that God will not punish him in his fury, nor in his wrath, for when so euer he punisheth in his fury and plagueth in his wrath, they must needes perish e∣ternally, he prayeth therefore, that that sicknes or other af∣fliction; which God hath layd vpon him, might be a merci∣full chastisement of a father, and not a iust punishment of a iudge. But whereas the vnpure mouth of this. Allen is once agayne opened in rayling against the godly preachers of our Church as flatterers of men in daungerous diseases, I would he might heare the children of thunder, inueying with mighty power of Gods spirite against sinne and wic∣kednes, and calling men to true & vnfayned repentaunce, peraduenture he might be moued to cease his sclaunde∣ring for shame of the worlde, if he did not forethinke him of his wickednes for feare of God. But Nabuchodonizer had a sore corrosiue playster applyed to him, that healed him, and that was almes & mercy toward the poore. He might haue alleged many examples, and none lesse fitte to shew what paynfull penaunce, (as he termeth it) was enioyned by godly prophets. For it was the easiest that could be en∣ioyned to so rich a prince, for so great offences, to be libe∣rall to the poore. Although Dauid in that place, cited by him, speaketh of no redemption of sinnes, as that corrupt & false translation which he followeth, doth seeme to talke of. But Daniel willed Nabuchodoniser to breake of thacco∣stomed course of his cruelty and tyranny, by almes and li∣berality. The Niniuites in deede by fasting and lamenting, but most of all by turning from their wicked wayes, shew∣ed their harty repentaunce: and Iohn Baptist requireth the fruites of repentaunce, and what godly preacher doth not so? but where did Nathan, Daniel, Ionas, Iohn Baptist speake one word of purgatory? or of satisfying the iustice of God for their sinnes by such meanes. 3 And here gentle reader geue me leaue, though I be the
longer, to geue thee a litle tast of the old doctors dealinges in the sinners case, that thou maist compare our late handeling of these matters, with their doinges: and so learne to loth these light mar∣chauntes, that in so greuous plages deale so tenderly with our sores. And yet I intend not so to roue, but that the very course of our talke wel noted, shal be the necessary inducing of that trueth which we now defende concerning Purgatory. Especially if it be considered, that in all prescription of penaunce by the antiquity, the paine of satisfying was euer limited by the variety of the offense. And then that the very cause of all paine enioyned, was for the auoyding of Gods iudgemēt in the life to come. First aun∣cient. Origen writeth thus. Beholde our mercifull Lorde ioyning alwaies clemencie with seueritie,Homil. 3. in lib. Iud. and weying the iust meane of our punishment in mercifull and rightuous balance. He geueth not the offenders ouer for euer: there∣fore consider how long thou hast strayed and continued in sinne, so long abase and humble thy selfe before God, and so satisfie him in Confession of penaunce. For if thou amende the matter and take punishment of thy selfe, then God is pitifull, & will remoue his reuengement from him, that by penaunce preuented his iudgement. Thus we see this father so to measure the paine and punishment of sinners, that he maketh his principall respect the auoyding of the sharpe sentence to come. S. Cyprian the blessed martyr, noteth certeine conuersies in his dayes, who thought they had much wronge to be further bur∣dened with penaunce for their fall, more thē the returne to God, againe he toucheth the maners of our time very neare, his words sounding thus: Before their sinnes fully purged, before the confession of their faulte made,Sermon de Lapis. before their consciencies by the priest and sacrifice be cleansed, before the ire and indignation of God be pacified and past, they thinke all is well and make boast thereof. But he instructeth them in the same place better, as followeth: Confesse your selues brethren whilest ye are in this life, and whilest the remission and sa∣tisfaction by the priestes apointement is acceptable. Let vs turne vnto God with all our hartes expressing the penaūce for our sinnes, by singular griefe and sorow: let vs call for
mercy, let vs prostrate our selues before God, let our heui∣nesse of hearte satisfie him, let vs with fasting weeping and howling, appeace his wrath. Whome, for that he is our louing father, we acknowledge to be mercifull: and yet be∣cause he beareth the maiestie of a iudge, he is for iustice much to be feared. To a deepe and a greuous wounde a long and sharpe sauluing must be accepted. Exceding ear∣nestly thou must pray: thou must passe ouer the remnaunt of thy time with lamentable complaintes, thou must for thy soft bedde take harde earth and ashes, and romble thy selfe in sackecloth, for the losse of Christes vesture refuse all apparell, after the receite of the Deuils food, chuese earnest fasting: and by diligent applying thy selfe to good workes and almes deedes, purge thy sinne and deliuer thy soule from death. 3 Here he asketh leaue of the Reader to be somwhat long in rehearsing the opinions of diuerse doctors, to con∣firme his former falshod, but he should rather haue asked leaue of the doctors them selues, to belye them so beastly, & to racke their sayings so violently farre from their pur∣pose and meanings. And to beginne with Origen, what doth he in that place by him alleged? but exhort men vnto harty and earnest repentaunce, by humbling them selues before God, and acknowledging their sinnes, which holy Scripture testifieth to be the way to preuent the wrath of God. And what his iudgement was concerning satisfaction for sinnes, he declareth sufficiently in his 3. booke vpon the Epist. to the Rom. cap. 3. where often times he repeateth, that a man is iustified before God by faith onely, affirming that in forgeuenes of sinnes, God respecteth no workes but faith onely, as he proueth by the parable that our Sauiour vsed vnto Simon the Pharise. Luke 7. and aunswereth also those obiections, which euen the Papistes at this day, make against vs for teaching that faith only doth iustifie vs in the sight of God. S. Cyprian (as I haue sufficiently shewed be∣fore) calleth such as had fallen in time of persecution from the profession of christianity, to harty repentaunce, and to
testifie the same, by submitting them selues humbly, vnto the discipline of the Church. But it is straunge to see, how vnconsideratly M. Allen allegeth his places, that oftentimes they conteine more playne matter against him, then appa∣rant profe by violent wrasting can be wrōg out from them. I maruaile M. Allen either seeth not him selfe, or thinketh that other men can not espye, that Cyprian exhorteth men to confession of their offences in this life, where onely sa∣tisfaction and remission made by the Priestes is acceptable vnto the Lord. If men can not satisfie, nor Priest remit, but whilest men are in this life, then farewell satisfaction for the dead and purgatory. Cap. 3. & 4. de poeuitē∣tiae medici∣na.4 So doth S. Augustine correct the error of such, as thinke the chaunge of life with out all cogitatiō or care of their offenses past, to be sufficient for mans perfect repaire and reconciliation to our Lorde againe. It is not sufficient (sayth he) to amende our maners and turne backe from, our midedes, vnlesse we satisfie before God for them which we haue already com∣mitted, by dolour of penaūce, by humble sighes & grones, & by ye sacrifice of a cōtrite harte working with almes dedes. And in this sense againe he vttoreth this comfortable rule. Sed neque de ipsis criminibus quamlibet magnis remitten∣dis in Ecclesia,Ench. 65. Dei desperanda est misericordia, agentibus poenitentiam secundum modum sui cuiusque peccati. But we may not despaire of Gods mercy for the remission of sinnes in the Church, be they neuer so greuoi▪ I meane to all such as will do penaunce according to the quātity of their fault. So S. Ambrose writing to a religious woman that had broken her vowe of cha∣stity (which in those dayes was reckened one ef the most deadly and greuous crimes that coulde be) warneth her thus. Grandi plagae alta & prolixa opus est medicina: grande scelus gran∣dem necessariam habet satisfactionem. A greuous hurt must haue a deepe & long sauluing, a heinous offense requireth mar∣uelous much satisfaction.This sinne is better boulstred novv a daies. Yea & as I take his words, he plainely admonisheth her, that she shall haue much a doe to satisfie fully for her sinne during her life: & therefore he seemeth to will her, not to looke for full remedy and release before she feele Gods
iudgement. VVhich he meaneth not by the generall day, but the particular accompt which followeth streight vpō mans death. But that I deceiue no man wittingly I wil report his owne wordes. In∣haere poenitētiae vsque ad extremum vitae,Cap. 8. ad virg. laps. nec tibi praesumas ab humano die posse veniā dari: quia decipit te qui hoc tibi polliceri voluerit: quae enim proprie in dominū peccasti, ab illo solo in die iudicij cōuenit expectare remediū. Cōtinue in penaunce to the last day thou hast to liue, and presume not ouer boldly of pardō to be obteined in mans day: for who so euer promi∣seth thee so, he deceiueth thee: for thou that hast offended direct∣ly against God him selfe, must at Gods hande onely in the day of iudgement trust of mercy. If he meane by the last Iudgemēt, then the author supposeth that such horrible incest shall be punished till the day of the general resurrectiō, in purgatory: for after that day as Augustin affirmeth, there shal be no more any of the elect in paine. He meaneth thē surely nothing els,De ciuitate Dei cap. 13. lib. 21. but that there cā be no penaunce aunswerable fully in this life to so greuous a crime, and that the Church ordinarely pardoneth not the sinnes, which be not by some proportion of paine and punishment recompensed. And this is ordinary, though by the supreme power giuen to Gods ministers for the gouernement of the Church, the offender may in this case or the like, if his competent dolour of hearte and zee so require, wholy be acquieted through the merites of Christes death, and the happy fellowship of sainctes, in the communion of the common body: where the lacke of one membre is abundantly supplied by the residue. Mary it is a arde matter to be so quali∣fied, that a man may not be vnworthy of so singular a grace and vnestimable benefit. Therefore this prerogatiue perteining not to very many, excepted, for the residue that by the ordinary Sa∣crament be raised vp from their fall, euery one must endeuour to do penaunce more or lesse, according to the quantity and circum∣stancies of the crime committed: so S. Augustine saide before, so doth S. Ambrose meane now, geuing this woman warning that her faulte was so horrible, that the penaunce done in this life coulde not properly and exactly make recompense therefore, and yet after punishment tolerated at Gods apointement in the next life, he doubteth not to assure her of pardon at the length, and release of all paine. Thus was sinne handeled in those dayes.
And why it was so painefully riped vp to the very bottome, you see. Compare our dayes and dealing to theirs, and thou shalt won∣der to see the diuersitie betwixt their maners, and ours: and to see the phisicions worke so diuersly, where the diseases be all one. 4 Now followeth the authority of S. Augustine, both right and counterfet, the counterfet Augustine, that writ the worke de poenitentia, &c. I vouchsafe not to aunswere, be∣cause I weigh not the authoritie, but detest the impuden∣cy of him that had patched vp such a peece a worke, to fa∣ther vpon S. Augustine, as no man of lesse learning then Au∣gustine was, would abide to goe vnder his owne name. The other place in his Enchiridion sufficiently expoundeth it selfe, that it speaketh of remission of sinnes in the Church, which according to the discipline of that tyme, required sa∣tisfaction according to the quantity and quality of the of∣fence. The wordes of S. Ambrose import none other thing, but that an heynous offence must be earnestly bewayled, if repentaunce be not counterfeted. And where as M. Allen is in a pecke of troubles, betwene that which he supposeth to be the opinion of Ambrose, and that which he allegeth out of Augustine, to proue that the paynes of purgatory shall not continue after the resurrection, it is not all worth the paynes he taketh about it. For that the sayd fallen virgine, shoulde not thinke she had bene penitent enough, if she obtayned absolution in the iudgement of men, he assu∣reth her as Cyprian in his sermon de lapsis, doth the fallen men of his tyme, that forgeuenes of sinnes is proper vnto God onely, and followeth not of necessity the sentence of men, but the sentence of men ought to follow the iudge∣ment of God. And those wordes, in die iudicij, about the meaning whereof, M. Allen vexeth him selfe, are to be vn∣derstoode by the opposite ab humano die, for thereby it is manifest, that the iudgement of God is set against ye iudge∣ment of men. And that is the phrase of the scripture which S. Ambrose followeth, as when S. Paule sayth of the Corin∣thian, that his soule may be salfe in the day of the Lord Ie∣sus Christ, he meaneth not that he should be punished in
purgatory, though he repent vnto ye generall day of iudge∣ment, but as S. Peter Act. 3. affirmeth, that our sinnes are forgeuen against the comming of Christ to iudgement, si∣gnifying that then the full fruite of forgeuenes of sinnes shall appeare, when we shall thereby be discharged in the iudgement of God. But what S. Ambrose thinketh of that kinde of satisfaction, whereof M. Allen speaketh, is playne by those wordes which he vttereth of Peter in his exposi∣tion of S. Luke lib. 10. cap. 2. Lachrymas eius lego, satisfactio∣nem non lego. I read of his teares, I read not of his satisfa∣ction. But vnto the other kinde of satisfaction, whereby the church is satisfied, our Sauiour Christ driueth Peter, when he causeth him to blot out the memory of his treble deni∣all, with a treble confession of his loue: As Augustine also acknowledgeth: but if purgatory be so necessary to satisfie Gods iustice by temporall paynes of sinners, according to the tyme, &c. and purgatory shall cease at the day of iudge∣ment, as you affirme out of Augustine, howe shall the same be satisfied in such as dye immediatly before the daye of iudgement, so that they haue not had tyme enough, there to be sufficiently purged, the like may be demaunded, of all them which in a moment shalbe chaunged from mortality to immortalitye, at the very comming of Iesus Christ to iudgement. These questions M. Allen wil trouble your head to aunswere and retayne your former principles, more then that whereof you make your doubt, and your determinati∣on as vncertayne as your doubt: whyle you are so cum∣bred, on the one side to vpholde purgatory, vppon colour of satisfying Gods iustice, on the other side, to maintayne the Popes pardon, without satisfying of Gods iustice, so that how so euer you satisfie your selfe in your owne fantasie, I promise you no reasonable man can be satisfied by your doubtfull disputations, and vnstedfast conclusions. 5 I might here well to my purpose repeate the singular prai∣ses, that S. Hierome gaue vnto noble Paula: who (as he wri∣teth of her) with fountaines of teares,In epitaph. Paulae. exceding lauish almes, & pitifull fasting, washed away such veniall and small offenses, as
other men woulde scarsely do much more greuous crimes. And to seeke for what ende this holy matrone vexed her selfe and tormented her body, it were in a maner needelesse▪ for being not gilty of any greuous sinnes, she coulde haue no great feare of hell paines: then it must needes be, that she tooke punishment of her selfe to preuent Gods temporal scourge in the life to come. She well cōsidered (for it was the doctrine of that holy time) that euery sinne be it neuer so small or common,Note. doth indebt the offender vnto God: and therefore the iustest person that liueth (excepting Christ, and for his honour his mother) as S. Augu∣stine sayth must confesse debte, and crie for pardon by our mai∣sters prayer: Dimitte nobis debita nostra: forgiue vs our debtes, the which, because they be debt, must either be pardoned by prayer, or paide by paine. And therefore being not here re∣mitted, or not satisfied by worthy punishmēt in this life, they must of iustice be purged after our departure, according to the numbre of them and the negligence of the offender. And this faith of Purgatory and respect of Gods iudgements to come, feared the holyest persons that euer were in Gods church. This droue many a blessed man to perpetuall penaunce: this brought Hierom him selfe into the wildernesse of Syria, there to lament the lapse of his fraile youth, euer in expectation of this call: Exi foras Hie∣ronime, Come out Hierom: this filled the desertes with many a noble Hermite, this raised vp the cloisters and all the holy houses of mourning and prayers in the whole worlde, and hath in all ages appeared both in the wordes and workes of all Christen people, as we shall better anone declare. 5. Here, because you haue no likely matter out of S. Ieronyme to serue your turne, yet to make a shewe of his name, you must repeat that, which is nothing like to your matter. Paula was penitent for her sinnes, with prayers, al∣mes, and fasting, and all for feare of purgatory. So sayth M. Allen. But Ieronyme sayth not so, M. Allen is here all the cre∣dit of the matter, beleue him as you list. But if any man had rather beleue Chrysostome speaking of such kind of workes, as M. Allen and his fellowes, count to be the chiefe workes of penaunce, whether they serue for satisfaction for our
sinnes vnto God, let him consider what he writeth, in his treatise de compunctione cordis, lib. 2. Non requirit Deus cilici∣orum pondus, neque concludi inter angustias cellulae, ne{que} in ob∣scuris antris & tencbrosis sedere iubet: hoc solum est quod ex∣poscatur à nobis, vt semper recordemur mala nostra, &c. God requireth not the burden of heauy garments, not to be shut vp with the streights of a litle cell, neither doth he com∣maund vs to sit in obscure and darke dungeons or dennes: this onely is that which is required of vs, that we should alwayes remember our euill life, &c. you see therefore by Chrysostoms iudgement, that neither the satisfaction of Gods righteousnes, nor any obedience of Gods commaunde∣ment, hath banished the Heremites, closed vp the Anacho∣rets, and cloyed the world with cloysterers, but the super∣stitious and slauish feare of purgatory, & the blasphemous presumptuous pride of mens merites. I passe ouer, as not proper to your matter, that for the honour of Christ, you except his mother, from confessing her selfe to be indebted to God, and not to be in the numbre of those, by whome the Lordes prayer is to be sayd. Such honor neither doth God allowe her, nor she arrogate vnto her selfe, but ac∣knowledgeth her owne basenesse, and ioyfully accepteth Gods saluation. It is greater honor to Christ, to be sauiour of his mother, then to haue such a mother, as had no neede of his saluation. He him selfe more then once, is reade to haue reproued her, wherein he had done her wrong, if she had committed no trespasse. Luke. 2. Iohn. 2. 6 But list you see how this doctrine of penaunce liked Cal∣uine? The shrew saw that by graunting of this satisfaction for sinne and the profitable vsage thereof in this life, that it might argue of necessitie the residue of some paines in the next if it were here omitted or not ended. And therefore I pray you see how substantially he aunswereth and how like him selfe, Parum∣me mouent (sayth he) quae in veterum scriptis de satis∣factione passim occurrunt, video enim eorum nonnullos,In institut. dicam simpliciter, omnes fere quorum libri extant, aut in hac parte lapsos esse, aut nimis aspere & dure loquutos.
I make small accompt of that which I often finde concerning Sa∣tisfaction in the auncient writers, for I perceiue diuers of them, shall I be plaine with you? in a maner euery one that euer wrote till this daye, in this point to haue bene fouly deceiued, or spo∣ken more roughly then they shoulde haue done. Is not this a fel∣low a lone? whether thinke you now our English bragger cra∣king all the doctors to be on his parte, or this man confessing plainely that they be all against him, and yet setting not a but∣ten by them all, whether thinke you is more arrogant? I am sure Caluine dealeth here more sincerely, and the other more deceit∣fully. If craking had bene a maisterie in sommer games as lying is, our man might haue wone of all the worlde, two games at a clappe. But there is no remedy he must yelde to the learned that haue opened his impudencie. Therefore I leaue him, and take the benefit of this his maisters confession for further confirmatiō of my cause, doubting nothing but that most wise men, seeing by the aduersaries graunt all learned fathers to be on our side, will accept it either as a full proofe, or no small presumption of that trueth which we defend. 6 But list you heare, how this presumptuousse pratler, can not conclude his chapter which he began with lying vpon Melancthon, but by slaundering of Caluine. He faineth that Caluine in the wordes by him rehersed, confesseth all the doctors to be against him, and yet setteth not a butten for them all. The best reproofe of this calumniation, shalbe to sende them that be desirous to know the trueth, vnto the whole discourse of Caluine, vpon satisfaction Insti. lib. 3. cap. 4 which who so list to doe, shall plainely see, whether Allen doth him not here open wrong. But because euery man either can not for the lacke of the booke, or will not for want of good affections towardes Caluine, take so much paines, as to peruse his owne writing. I will aunswere in a worde or two. After that Caluine hath most substantially proued, both by authority of holy Scripture, and also by consent of aun∣cient doctors, that their is no satisfaction vnto God for our sinnes, but onely the death of Christ, he cōmeth at length,
to speake of the worde of satisfaction, which sayth he, as it is often vsed in the olde writers, so sometime hardely, as improperly (that M. Allen calleth roughly) or if any of them haue erred about satisfaction, it were not reason, that their error shoulde preuaile against the open trueth. And cleerely to conuicte M. Allen, of a loude lye, where he sayth that Caluine confesseth all the doctors to be against him, his wordes follow immediatly after those rehersed by M. Allen: Sed non credam eos ipsos adeo fuisse rudes & imperitos, vt eo sensu illa scripserint, quo à nouis istis satisfactionariis legū∣tur. That is, how soeuer they haue either erred, or spoken vnproprely of satisfaction, yet I will not graunt, that the same men were so rude and ignoraunt, that they did wright those thinges, in that sense, in which they are read by these new satisfactionaries. Then doth he bring forth diuers testi∣monies both out of Chrysostome and Augustine to shew what their iudgement was of satisfaction agreable to the Scrip∣tures by which must be expounded, what so euer they haue vttered that seemeth either erroneus or at the lest vnpro∣prely spoken. As for that reuerend father M. Iewell whome this arrogant Louanist, calleth the English bragger, how well he hath answered his challendge, his owne learned la∣bors, do more cleerely testifie vnto the worlde, then that it can be blemished by this sycophants braynlesse babling. A briefe ioyning in reason and argument vpon the proued groundes, vvith the aduersaries, for the declaration of Purgatory. CAP. V. 1 HAving vndoubtedly wonne thus much both by euidēt testimony of holy writ, by the war∣raunt of all the learned fathers, by good rea∣son, and by the aduersaries owne confession, I will be bolde to bare the very iointes of the argument, that both the simple may acknow∣ledge my plaine dealing, and the Protestant haue his vauntage, if the reason stand not vpright. VVith out
colour or glose then thus I make my proofe. After the sinnes of man be pardoned, God oftentimes puni∣sheth the offender, the church punisheth him, and man punisheth him selfe, ergo there is some payne due after sinne be remitted.  Secondly this payne can not alwayes be discharged in this world, eyther for lacke of space after the remission, as it happeth in re∣pentaunce at the houre of death, or else when the party liueth in perpetuall welth without care or cogitation of any satisfaction,  therefore it must be aunswered in an other place. Thirdly the common infirmities and the dayly trespasses which abase and de∣file the workes euen of the vertuous, of their proper condition doe deserue payne for a tyme, as the mortall offence deserueth perpe∣tuall: Therefore as the mortall sinne, being not here pardoned, must of iustice haue the reward of euerlasting punishment: so it must needes followe, that the veniall fault not here forgeuen, should haue the reward which of nature it requireth: that is to say, temporall payne. And therefore not onely the wicked, but the very iust also must trauell to haue their daily infirmities and frailty of their corrupt natures forgiuen: crying without ceasing forgeue vs our debts: Quia non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis viuens. For no man aliue shalbe able to stand before the face of God in his owne iustice or righteousnes,Aug. Ench. cap. 71. and if these light sinnes should ne∣uer be imputed, then it were needelesse to cry for mercy or con∣fesse debt, as euery man doth be he neuer so passing holy. To be briefe, this debt of paine for sinne by any way remayning at the departure hence, must of iustice be aunswered: VVhich can not be without punishmēt in the next life, then there must be a place of iudgement for temporall and transitory paynes in the other world. The whole discourse made before hath geuen force e∣nough to euery part of the argument: the Scriptures doe proue it, the practise of the Church confirmeth it, all the doctors by our aduersaries graunt, agree vpon it. If they haue any thing to say, here I make them fayre play: the ground is open, the reasons laide naked before their face: remoue them as they can. Lette them deale simply if they meane truely, and not flourish as they vse, vppon a false ground, that in flowe of wordes they may couer errour, or in rase of their smoth talke ouerrunne truth.
And that euery man may perceiue that we haue not raised this doctrine vpon reason only or curiositie (although the graue authoritie of Gods Church might here in satisfie sober wittes) we will now by Gods helpe go nearer the matter, and directly make proofe of Purgatory by holy Scriptures: reciting such places of the olde and new Testament, as shall proue our cause, euen in that sense which the learnedst and godlyest fathers of all ages, by conference of places or other likelyhood, shall fynde and determine to be most true. Alleaging none els but such as they haue, in the flour of Christian faith, noted and peculiarely construed for that purpose which now is in question. That the ad∣uersaries of that doctrine, may rather striue with the said saincts and doctours, then with me, that will as they shall well perceiue do nothing, but truely reporte their wordes or meaninge. Or ra∣ther that such as haue erred in that case, by giuing ouer light credit to the troblesome teachers of these vnhappy dayes, maye, when they shall vnderstand the true meaning of the Scriptures, the constant doctrine of the Catholike Church, the wordes of all auncient writers, the determination of so many holy Councels, & the olde vsage of all nations by humble prayers obteine of God the light of vnderstanding the trueth, and the gifte of obedience to his will and worde. Or if there be any so sattled in this vn∣lickely sect, that he purposeth not to beleue the graue writers of olde times, nor receiue their expositions vpon such places as we shall recite, for that preiudice which he hath of this owne witte and vnderstanding, yet let him not maruell at my simplicity, that had rather geue credit to others then my selfe: Or that in this hote time of contention and partaking in religion, I do repose my selfe vnder the shadow of so many worthy writers, as anone shall giue euidence in my cause. CAP. V. 1 TRiumphing before the victorie, and that is more, before the encontry of hāde strokes, (for we come to ioyning but now) you will now win your spurs or els it shalbe a blacke daye with all
Protestantes. I will be as shorte in mine aunswere, as you are in your arguments. And that I may put on an armour of proofe, to beare of your terrible haileshot, your first ar∣gumēt hath neither good forme nor matter, no more hath your second, no more hath your third? If you or any for you, will prepare your selfe to geue a bitter charge, either I or some other, shalbe redy to shape you an other aun∣swere. But because here is nothing in this briefe ioyning, but which hath bene largly discharged before, in aunswere to your longe excursions, it were nedelesse to make such vaine repetition, as you doe, especially in your last shorte argument, in which space all the substaunce of your large booke might easily haue bene placed, only to fil vp a com∣petent length of the fift chapter, and with such a tedious inlarging of a superfluous matter, as a yong practiser of Rhetoricke would be ashamed to vse, in a fayned declama∣tion, much worse becomming an auncient master of arte, professing to trusse vp his arguments by Logicke, to make a perfect perswasion. As for the promisse of further proofe, both out of the Scriptures and out of the doctors that fol∣loweth after this gallant ioyning, and lusty challenge, shall haue no preiudice of my disabling of the meane to perform it vntill it appeare by playne conference of his arguments and myne aunswers, that his words are but winde, and his promisse but pratling. That Purgatory paines doth not onely serue Gods iustice for the punishement of sinne, but also cleanse and qualifie the soule of man defiled, for the more seemely entraunce into the holy places, vvith conferēce of certaine places of Scrip∣ture for that purpose. CAP. VI. 1 IF we well cōsider the wonderfull base con∣dition and state of mans nature corrupted by our first fathers disobedience, and more and more abased by continuall misery that sinne hath brought into our mortall life, we shall finde the worke of Gods wisedome in
the excellent repaire of this his creature, to be full of mercy, and full of maruell. But proceding somewhat further, and weying not onely his restoring, but also the passing great anauncement to the vnspeakable glory of the elect, there shall reason and all our cogitations vtterly faint and faile vs. The kingdome prepared is honored with the maiestie of the glorious Trinitie, with the humanitie of Christ our Sauiour, with the blessed Mary the vessell of his Incarnation, with the bewti∣full creatures and wholy vndefiled, of all the ordres of Angels. There can nothing doubtlesse present it selfe before the seate of Gods glory, nor stand in his sight, that hath any blemish of sinne, any spotte of corruption, any remnaunt of infirmity.VVhat pu∣ritie is requi¦red for the entrāce in∣to heauen. There may no creature matche with those perfect pure natures of spirituall substance in the happy seruice of the holy Trinity, that is not holy as they be, pure as they be, and wholy sanctified as they be. Nothing can ioyne with them in freedome of that heauenly city, in the ioyfull estate of that triumphant common welth, that is not purified to the point, and by the worke of Gods owne hande fully fined and perfected. This is the new City of Hierusalem, which the holy Apostle sawe by vision: Nec in eam intrabit aliquid coinquinatum. Nothing shall entre therein, that is defiled.Apoc. 21. It is the Church without spotte and wrinkle, it is the temple of God, it is the seate of the Lambe, and the lande of the lyuing. Nowe our kinde, notwithstanding our pitifull fall and singu∣lar frailetie, with exceding corruption and vnaptenesse both of body and soule, hath yet by Christ Iesus our Redeemer, the assu∣rance of this vnestimable benefit, and the fellowship of perpetual fruition with the Angels. To whome as we must be made equall in roume and glory, so we must in perfect cleannes be fully mat∣ched with them. For it were not agreable to Gods ordinary iu∣stice,Leuit. 21. who in this earthly sanctuary expressely forbiddeth the ob∣lations of the vncleane,Rupert. de diuini. offi. l. 6. cap. 36. that he shoulde in the celestiall soue∣raigne holy acknowledge any nature that were not pure and vn∣defiled: or make mans condicion not abettered, equall to the dignity of Angels that neuer were reproued: whereby vniustice might appeare in God, or confusion in the heauens common wealth, where onely all ordre is obserued. And though mans recouery after his fall be wroght by Christ.
and the perfect purgation of sinnes by the bloude of him that only was with out sinne, yet it was not conuenient, that the might of that mercy shoulde worke in this freedome of our willes, with out all peine of the party, or trauell of the offenders. VVhereof mān streight vpon his miserable downe fall (as S. Ambrose ex∣cellently well noteth) had warning by the fiery sworde holden at the entraunce of paradise:In Psa. 118. Serm. 20. therby putting him in remembraunce, that the returne to blesse so sone lost, shoulde be through fiere and sword hardely achieued againe. Therfore if any man thinke the onely forgiuenesse of our sinnes past, sufficient either for the recouery of our first degree, or the atteining of further dignity in the glory of the Sainctes, he seeth not at all what a deepe stroke sinne hath set in mans soule, what filth and feeblenesse it hath wroght in the body, what rule and dominion it beareth in this our mortality, what care all perfect men haue had, not only in the healing of the deepe wounde, but also in purging the reliques, and fall abbating the abundant matter thereof. And yet when mā hath with all his might wrastled with the poure of sinne, being in this estate, he can not be able to recouer the worthinesse of his creation, much lesse the passing honour and ende of his redemp∣tion. Let him washe and water his coutch with teares, let him weaken his body with fasting, and humble his hearte with sorow? Happely the fiery sworde shall not hinder his passage after his departure, yet till the separation of the body and the soule, full freedome from sinne or perfect purgation thereof (excepting the priuilege of certaine) can not be fully obteined. VVherein yet mercy at the ende hath the chiefe stroke, by which the soule that was the principall vessell of sinne, and no lesse abased then the body, shall out of hande in the perfectest sort, obteine the purity of Angels and fellowship with them for euer. CAP. VI. 1 ONce againe I pray you note this orderly proceding, looke when he maketh such a liberall promisse, as in the chapter go∣ing before, the performance shal not fol∣low by and by after, but by interlacing of
other matter, it shall be first out of minde, and then he may better keepe his credit, when he goeth about to performe it. Yere while he would in all the hast, make direct proofe by holy Scripture, of the doctrine of purgatory, but now as though purgatory were already proued, he will shewe for what vse it serueth, namely to clense and qualifie the soule of man, that it may be meete to enter into the holy places. And for this purpose, he sheweth at large, which might haue bene vttered in briefe, that the corruption of mans sinnefull nature is so great, and the perfection of dignitie, whereunto we are called so high, as man, except he be throughly purged, is no meete person to be partaker ther∣of. But lest he should be thought here to forget the perfect restitution by Christ, he confesseth the perfect purgation of our sinnes to be wrought by his blood, yet he sayth, it is not meete that the might of that mercy should worke in this freedom of our will, without all paine or trauell of the offenders. This is to geue with one hand, and to pull away with the other hand. But that this enemy of the crosse of Christ, shall not thus passe away with his reseruations and exceptions, that which he graunteth, we will take at the hand of God, and not of this vnpure blasphemer: who by his holy spirite teacheth vs that the blood of Christ doth purge vs from all our sinnes: & being washed by him we are throughly cleane. Iohn 13. So that although our sinnes were as redd as scarlet, they are made as white as snowe. Esay 1. Then being throughly purged, washed & clensed as white as snow, we are made capable of the heauenly inheritaunce and the fruition of eternall glory. And if any man had ra∣ther beleue an Angell, before M. Allen, an elder of the hea∣uenly consistory, sooner then a yong palting proctor of purgatory: Let him heare what is sayd to S. Iohn in his reue∣lation, 7. cap. whereby is declared by what priuilege, al the faithfull departed appeare in innocency before the throne of God. These are they (sayth the Angel) that came out of that great affliction, and haue washed their stoles and made them white in the bloud of the lambe: therefore they are in the pre∣sence of the throne of God, and serue him day and night, &c.
Mark here that they which came out of this great afflicti∣on, were not purged thereby, after M. Allens fantasy, but that they washed and made white their garments, in the bloud of the lambe, by whose righteousnes they being clo∣thed, may appeare in innocēcy before the throne of God. As for that which is cited out of Ambrose, of the fiery sword, is ment of the sorrow of repentaunce, and with no equity can be racked to the paynes of purgatory. 2 I maruell not now to see the Prophet seeke not only for the remission of his greuous sinnes, but to be better cleansed, to haue them wholy blotted out, to be made as white as snowe: beholding the purity that is requisite for a citizen of the celestiall Hierusa∣lem. And I note this the rather of the soule, because I see that the body also, before it can shake of the stroke and plague of sinne, must be driuen (by the common course) to dust and ele∣mentes, that being at the ende raised vp againe in the same sub∣stance, may yet wholy in condicion and quality be so straungely altered, that in honour and immortalitie it may euerlastingly ioyne with the soule againe. To the newnesse whereof, the very elements that before aunswered it in qualities of corruption,August. lib. 20. de ciuit. cap. 16. 1. Cor. 15. shal be perfectly by fire reformed, and serue in beauty and incorrup∣tion eternall. If sinne then be so reuenged and throughly tryed out of mans body, and all corruption out of these elements for the glory of that new and eternall kingdome, shall we doubte of Gods iustice in the perfect reuenge of sinne in the soule, or purifying that nature, which as it was most corrupted & was the very feate of sinne,Note. so namely apperteineth to the company of Angels and glory euerlasting? It were not otherwise agreable to Gods iustice surely, nor conuenient for the glorious estate to come: it were neither right, nor reason. He will then, where man neglecteth the day of mercy, sharply viset with torment, him selfe: and both purge and purifie the drosse of our impure natures defiled and stained by sinne, with iudgement and rightuousnesse. Abluet Dominus sordes filia∣rum Syon,Isaie. 4. & sanguinem Hierusalem, lauabit de medio eius, in spiritu iudicij, & spiritu ardoris. Our Lorde shall washe out the filthe of the daughters of Syon: and will cleanse bloude from
the middest of Hierusalem, in the spirite of iudgement, and the spirite of burning. But because we will not stande vpon coniec∣tures in so necessary a point, you shall see by what Scriptures the graue and learned fathers haue to my hand confirmed this bele∣ued trueth. And first I will recite those places which do set forth both the quality and condition of that punishment, which God taketh vpon man for sinne in the other worlde: and also did giue iust occasion to our forefathers of the name of Purgatory. 2 Consider what wholsome doctrine this student in Diuinitie gathereth out of the Scriptures of God. Dauid not content with remission of his sinnes, seeketh to be bet∣ter clensed, to haue them wholy blotted out, and to be made as white as snowe▪ but by what meanes M. Allen? or at whose handes? Dare you say that he prayeth God to clense him better by his owne suffering, then he was by Gods mercifull pardon? What was figured by the bunch of Isope, dypped in the lambes bloud, with which he desi∣reth to be sprinckled, assuring him selfe that therby he shall be washed whiter then snowe? Was it purgatory, or the aspertion of the bloud of Christ? O horrible blasphe∣mer, wilt thou neuer acknowledge the omnisufficiency of the benefite of mans redemption by the sonne of God? shal thy vayne gangling and iumbling of thy deuises with Gods decrees, obscure the glory of our Lord and Sauiour Christ his passion, who hath loued vs, and washed vs, from our sinnes by his bloud, and made vs Kings and Priestes in the sight of God, who hath geuen him selfe for his belo∣ued Church, that he might sanctifie it, and clense it, by the washing of water, through the word, that he might make it vnto him self a glorious church, not hauing spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame. What similitude hath this with Allens pratling of purenesse and patching in of purgatory? As for the place alleged out of Esay the 4. Because he dare not abide by it him selfe, but confesse that it is but a coniecture of his own, to draw it to purgatory which in deede is playnly spoken of the reformation of the Church in this life. I neede spend
no more tyme in aunswering it. 3 There be two textes of Scriptures to this purpose so like, that many of the doctors, for better conference in so weighty a case, haue ioyned them together to make their proofe full: and so will I do by their example. The first is in the thirde chapter of the prophet Malachie in these wordes.Malach 3. Ecce venit dicit Dominus exercituum, & quis poterit cogitare diem aduentus eius? Et quis stabit ad videndū eum? Ipse enim quasi ignis conans, & quasi herba fullonum: & sedebit contans & emūdans ar∣gētum, & purgabit filios Leui, & colabit eos quasi aurum & argentum, & erunt Domino offerentes sacrificia in iustitia. Et placebit Domino sacrificium Iuda & Hierusalem, &c. Beholde he commeth (sayth the Lorde of Hostes.) And who may abide the day of his cōming? VVho can stand & endure his sight▪ For he is like melting and casting fier, and as the washers herbe. And he shall sit casting and trying out siluer,Sope. and shall purge the children of Leui, & clense them as golde or siluer, And thē shal they offer sacrifice in righteousnesse: & the offerings of Iuda & Hierusalem, shall be acceptable vnto our Lorde. And thus farre spake the prophet. The second is this, taken out of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.Cap. 3. Secundum gratiam Dei quae data est mihi, vt sapiens architectus fundamētum posui, alius autē super∣aedificat. Vnusquisque autē videat quomodo superaedificet. Fundamētū enim aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod est positū: quod est Christus Iesus. Si quis autē superaedificat super fundamētum hoc, aurum, argētum, lapides preciosos, ligna, foenū, stipulam, vniuscuius{que} opus manifestū erit. dies enim Domini declarabit, quia in igne reuelabitur: & vnius∣cuius{que} opus quale sit, ignis probabit. Si cuius opus māserit quod superaedificauit, mercedē accipiet: si cuius opus arserit, detrimentū patietur: ipse autē saluus erit, sic tamē quasi per ignē. Thus in English: According to the grace of God geuen vn∣to me, as a discriete builder I haue laid the groundewarke: but an other buildeth theron. Let euery man be circumspect how he buildeth on it. For no fundatión can be laide, but Christ Iesus, which is already laide. If any man builde vpon this grounde∣warke, golde, siluer, preciouse stones, wodde, hay, or stooble, euery
mans worke shall be laide open. For the day of our Lorde will de∣clare it, because it shall appeare in fire. And that fire shall trie euery mans worke what it is: if any mans worke erected vpon that foundation do abide, he shall receiue rewarde, but if his worke burne, he shall susteine losse (or it shall susteine osse, meaning by the worke it selfe, as the texte well serueth also) but him selfe shall be saued notwithstanding, and that yet as through fire. These be S. Pauls wordes. Now as men studious of the trueth, carefull of our faith and saluation, and fully free from contention and partaking, let vs en∣tre into the search of the meaning of these two textes, with such plainnes & sincerity that I dare say the aduersaries, them selues shall not mislike our dealing.Plaine dea∣ling. VVe will follow all likelihoodes by comparing the scriptures together, and admit with all, the coun∣sell and iudgement of such our elders, as by their confession shall be taken for holy, learned, and wise. First the prophet and Apostle  both, make mention of purging & of purifying sinne, & corrup∣tion of mans impure or defiled workes: they both agree this clean∣sing  or trying out of the filthy drosse gathered by corruption of sinne, to be done by fier: they both throughly follow the similitude  of the fornace and goldesmith in fining his metalles, and trying out the drosse and base matter from the perfect finesse of more worthy substaunce: they both plainely vtter their meaninges of  such as shall afterwarde be saued, though it be with losse: geuing vs to vnderstande, that the parties so purged, shall be after their triall worthy to offer a pure sacrifice in holynesse & righteousnes: They both note this purgatiō to be wrought by the hand of God. All these must needes be confessed, euen of the cōtrary teachers: which things together, cōteine more probability for the proofe of our purpose, then they can for any other sense finde. But now tou∣ching the text neerer, and finding that this worke of mans amen∣ding shall be wrought in the next life, then it must nedes so in∣duce this sense, that no meaning may well be admitted, which euidently setteth not forth the trueth of Purgatory. And that this worke is not properly taken for any such trouble or vexation that may fall to man in this life, but for a very tor∣ment prepared for the next worlde, first the quality of the iudge∣ment, & meanes in the executiō of that sentence of God (which
is named to be done by fier) seemeth rather to import that, then any other vexation, the punishment of the worlde following al∣wayes  lightely so termed. Then man is in this purging onely a sufferer, which belongeth namely to the next worlde. But espe∣cially  that this sentence shal be executed in the day of our Lord, which properly signifieth either the day of our death, or the sen∣tence of God which streight followeth vpon death: or the last and generall iudgement. All the time of mans life wherein he fol∣loweth his freedome, is called Dies Hominis: the day of man, be∣cause as man in this life for the most parte serueth his owne will, so he often neglecteth Gods: but at his death, there beginneth Dies Domini: VVhere God executeth his ordinaunce and will vpon man. This triall then of mans misdeedes & impure workes, must either be at his death, or after his departure by one of the two iudgements. But if we note diligently the circumstances of the saide letter, it shall appeare vnto vs, that this purgation was  not ment to be onely at mans death: both because it shall be done by fire, which (as is saide) commonly noteth the torment of the  next life: and then S. Paule expressely warneth vs to take heede what we builde, in respect of the difference that may fall to such as builde fine workes, and other that erect vpon the founda∣tion, impure or mixte matter of corruption: but the paines of death being common to the best, as well as to the worst or in∣different, and no lesse greuous in it selfe to one then the other, can not be imported by the fire which shall bring losse to the  one sort, and not paine the other. Besides all this, that day which the Prophet speaketh of, shall be notorious in the sight of the worlde and very terrible to many: And Saint Paule plainely affirmeth, that in this iudgement there shall be made an open shewe of such workes as were hidde before from man, and not discerned by the iudgement of this worlde: which the priuate death of one man can not do.2. Cor. 5. And lightely the Apostle warning man of the sentence of God in the next life, admonisheth him that our deedes must be laide open before the iudgement seate of God so here, Dies domini declarabit, quia in igne reuelabi∣tur: the day of our Lord will open the matter, because it shall be  shewed in fire. Last of all, the Prophet nameth the time of this sharp triall, Diē aduētus domini: which is a proper calling of one
of the iudgements: either that which shall be generall at the last day, or els that which euery man must first abide straight after his departure, when he shall be called to the peculiar reckening for his owne actes. In either of which iudgements,Magis. l. 4. dist. 47. this purging and amending fire shall be founde. For as in that generall wast of the whole world by the fire of conflagration,2. Petri. cap. 3. which is called ignis praecedens faciem iudicis, because it awaiteth to fulfill Christes ordinance in the day of his second comming, as in that fier the whole man both body and soule may suffer losse & extreme paine for his punishment or purgation, and yet by that same fire be sa∣ued: euen so out of doubt at this particulare iudgement straight vpon euery mans death, the soule of the departed if it be not be∣fore free, must suffer paines and Purgation by the like vehement torment working onely vpon the soule, as the other shall do on the whole man. And the Prophets wordes now alleged, do meane principally of the purgation that shall be made of the faithfuls corrupted workes, by the fier of conflagration, in the second com∣ming of Christ: though his wordes well proue the other also, as S. Paule too, meaneth by them both. 3 Now I trow commeth the confirmation of purga∣tory out of the holy Scriptures, or else it wyll neuer come, when two textes are alleged at once. But although M. Al∣len hath rather craftily confounded, then faithfully compa∣red these two textes together, for all his protestation of plaine dealing: yet will I seuerally consider them, and shew both by the plaine circumstances of the places them selues, and also by the iudgement of the auncient doctors, that neither of them both appertaineth any whit to purgatory. First Malachy prophecieth plainly of the first comming of Christ, and of his fore runner Iohn Baptist, as the wordes going before, without all controuersy doe declare. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord whom ye seeke, shall spedely come to his temple, e∣uen the messenger of the couenaunt whom ye desire, beholde he shall come sayth the Lord of hostes, but who may abide the day of his comming, &c. witnesse of this is no lesse, then euen our Sauiour Christ him selfe, Luke the 7. alleging this saying of
the Prophet, for the comming of Iohn the Baptist. These wordes also, where it is sayd that the Lord shall come into his temple, doe sufficiently declare, that he describeth the office of Christ, in reforming the corrupt state of the Church at his first comming, and not in iudging the quicke and the dead at the last appearing. Finally the exact triall and pur∣ging that he speaketh of, is ye discouering of hypocrites by his doctrine, wherof also Iohn Baptist preacheth, that his fan is in his hand, and he shall purge his floore, &c. To conclude, that this may not be thought to be mine owne collection, it is the iudgement and interpretation of Ieronym vppon this very text Malachy the 3. in euery poynt: who with all his learning, coulde finde no purgatory fire spoken of in this cap. Now to the other place o Paule, that it can by no equity be drawen to purgatory for all M. Allens likelihoode numbring in the margent, it shall be manifest by as many euident arguments. First S. Paule speaketh not generally of all men, but of preachers onely that are buylders of Gods Church. Secondly he speaketh not of all their workes, but of their preaching or building onely. Thirdly he speaketh neuer a word of purging or making cleane of mens works, but of the triall of the worke of building which is doctrine. But what doctrine is tryed to be true or false, substantiall or superficiall by the fire of purgatory? Fourthly the workes are sayd that shall be tryed by fire, and not the persons. Fift∣ly the gold and siluer abideth, the strawe and stuble consu∣meth, through the fire of this triall, which is the iudge∣ment of God, and not the paynes of purgatory. And this is the iudgement of Ieronym vpon the place of Malachy, be∣fore rehearsed, where also he applyeth the text of Esay 4. before cited by M. Allen. fol. 59. The Lord (sayth he) is a con∣suming fire to burne vp our wodde, hay, and strawe. The other obseruations be also taken out of that auncient doctor whose commentary vppon the epistle to the Corinthians hath gone vnder the name of Ieronym and is annexed to his workes, sauing that by gold, siluer, wodde, straw, &c. he vnderstandeth the men them selues, and not their workes. But as for purgatory he findeth none by that text. S. Augu∣stine
also although otherwise, inclining to the errour of purgatory, yet he is cleare that this text proueth it not, nei∣ther ought to be expounded of it, and that he sheweth by many reasons, Enchirid. ad Laurentium cap. 68. where he af∣firmeth that by the fire is ment the triall of tribulation in this life, Chrysostom vpon the same text, vnderstandeth by the fire euerlasting punishment euen of him that shall be saued through fire without any mention of purgatory, ex∣cept it be in reprouing them that denied immortall punish∣mēt to be meant by this place. in 1. Cor. 3. Hom. 9. But if the place were to be considered absolutely, without regard of circumstances, as the Papistes doe when they expound it for purgatory, yet can not it aptly be framed thereto, be∣cause he sayth that euery mans worke, or the man him selfe if they will, shall passe through that fire, but they thē selues affirme, that perfect good men shall not come there at all, nor very wicked men, but onely men of a midle sort, but by tryall of this fire whereof S. Paule speaketh, good men shall receiue reward when their worke endure, therefore this is not the fire of purgatory. That there is a particulare iudgement and priuate accompt to be made at euery mans departure, of his seuerall actes and deedes, vvith certaine of the fathers mindes touching the textes of Scripture alleged before. CAP. VII. 1 ANd though such as shall liue at the com∣ming of the iudge in the later daye, shall then be purged of their corruption and base workes of infirmity, by the fire that shall a better and alter the impure nature of these corruptible elements, or otherwise according to Gods ordinaunce: yet the common sort of all men which in the meane time depart this worlde, must not tary for their purgation till that generall amending of all natures, no more then the very good, in whome after their baptisme no filthe of sinne is founde, or if any were, was wiped away by penaunce,
must awayt for their saluation: or the wicked tary for their iust iudgement to damnatiō.The parti∣cular iudge¦ment. But straight this sentēce either of iudge∣ment or mercy, must be pronounced: and therefore is called the particulare iudgement, by which the soule onely shall receiue welthe or woe, as at the day of the great accompt both body and soule must do. Of this seuerall triall the holy Apostle S. Paule sayth:Ad Hebr. 9. statutum est omnibus hominibus semel mori, post hoc iudicium: It is determined that euery man once must dye, and after that commeth iudgement. And an other Scripture more ex∣pressely thus: Facile est coram domino reddere vnicuique in die obitus sui,Eccles. 11. secundum vias suas. It is an easy matter before our Lorde, that euery man at the day of his death shoulde be re∣warded according to his life & wayes: Againe in the same place: Memor esto iudicij mei: sic enim erit & tuum, mihi heri, & tibi hodie. Haue in remembraunce my iudgement, for such shal thine owne be: yesterday was mine, today may be thine. And ther∣fore S. Ambrose sayth, that without delay the good poore man was caried to rest, and the wicked riche out of hand suffered tor∣ments. That euery man (sayth he) may feele before the day of iudgement,Super 5. ad Roman. what he must then looke for. And in an other place the same holy man writeth, that Iohn the beloued of Iesus is already gone to the paradise of euerlasting blesse, passing as few shall do,In Psal. 118. Ser. 20. the firie sworde at the entraunce of ioy without all stoppe or tariaunce: because the fire of loue in his life time had such force in him, that the amēding fier after his chaunge should take no holde of him at all, so sayth Ambrose. But of this priuate iudgement the Reuerend Bede hath a goodly sentēce in the fift of his historie.Cap. 14. Meminerimus facta & cogitationes nostras nō in ventū diffluere, sed ad examē summi Iudicis cūcta seruari, & siue per amicos Angelos in fine nobis ostendēda, siue per hostes. Let vs remēbre (saith he) that all our dedes & thoghtes shal abide, & not be caried away with the winde, but be reserued to the examination of the high Iudge:The soules be not in doubte of their damna¦tion or sal∣uation, till the day of iudgement & so shall be laide before our face at our ending, either by our good or aduersary Angels. By all which it is euident, that the soules sleepe not: (of which errour Luther was also noted) nor be reserued in doubt of their damnation, either perpetuall or temporall, till the latter day: but streight waye receiue as they deserued before in their
life, either welth or wofull paines. In this day of our Lorde then this Purgatory paines must be∣ginne, to all such as haue after their Baptisme, where they laide the foundation of Christes faith, builded the workes of lesser sinnes and imperfection, and not washed them a waye by pe∣naunce in their life, nor obteyned mercy for the same. The which trueth, the places of the Prophet and Apostle before al∣leaged with out all vnsemely wrething or wraesting do so plaine∣ly beare, that if ours were a sense neuer hearde of before, yet the onely comparing of the textes, and necessary circumstancies of the letter might rather driue vs to that meaning, then any other that they can euer alleage or proue. But now, as Catholikes euer do, keping the olde meaning and forging no newe, geuing no other sense then that which the persuasion of all Christian people both learned and simple hath driuen from the beginning of our faith downe to our dayes, and framing no other vnderstanding then that which we finde expressely in the learning and faith of our fathers both set forth and proued, who is so rude in iudge∣ment, or so entangled with any contrary opinion, that will not acknowledge the trueth and doctrine euery waye so compassed with proofe and all likelihoods? CAP. VII. 1 THat the iudgement of God beginneth at the death of euery man and so continueth vntil the full manifestation therof in the last day, is clea∣rer by the Scripture of God, then that it nee∣deth the confirmatiō of mans authoritie. But that Ambrose is alleged to proue, that euery man immediatly after his death, doth feele that he must looke for in the daye of iudgement, I meruaile to what purpose it is brought in, if it be not to ouerthrow purgatory. For if it be true, as it must needes be, no man feeleth paine after this life, but he that shall feele it eternally. And surely to the same effect he speaketh in his booke de bono mortis where he commen∣deth the death of the faithfull quia deteriorem statum non ef∣ficit, sed qualem in singulis inuenerit, talem iudicio fururo reser∣uat,
& quietè ipsis fouet, & praesentium inuidiae subducit, & fu∣turorum expectatione componit. Because (death) maketh not their state worse, but such as it findeth in euery man, such it reserueth into the iudgement to come, and quietly chie∣risheth them and both taketh them away from the enuy of things present, and setleth them in expectation of things to come. Thus sayth Ambrose plainely in this place, what soeuer he speaketh allegorically of the fiery sword in other places. VVell it is euident (you saie) that the soules departed sleepe not, of which error Luther also was noted. I neuer harde any man of credit note him therof, who is well knowne to haue bene of a cleane contrary iudgement: but I reade in the actes of the Councel of Constance, that Pope Iohn the 23 was condemned for denying the immortality of the soule, the resurrection of the deade and the life euerlasting. But if the soules sleepe not, then they be awake in purga∣tory, or if ye reason not so subtilly, you meane, that if they be at all in purgatory, they be there immediatly after their departure out of their bodyes. But how shall we proue, that they come there at all? Forsooth by the sayings of the Pro∣phet and of the Apostle before alleged, which are so plaine proofe and so euident to be vnderstoode, of them selues, that they nede none other interpretation. But how plaine it is, that they serue nothing to that purpose, I haue suffi∣ciently declared already: yet must we further follow the same matter, because here are brought in the authoritie of the doctors to agree with M. Allens glose. 2 But as reason is, and my promise was at the beginning. I will let the good Christian see the wordes of most notable aun∣cient writers, that he may reioyse his faith to be so surely groun∣ded. First then you shall perceiue that S. Augustine expoundeth the texte of the prophet Malachie before recited,Cap. 3. for purgatory paines euen as I saide. I am certaine he may much moue our ad∣uersaries, as one whome they chalenge to be patrone of some of their opinions: but how vniustly in all pointes, God knoweth, and in this matter especially you shall now perceiue. After the re∣hersall of the Prophets wordes and well weying of the matter, he
thus writeth. Ex ijs quae dicta sunt videtur euidentius appa∣rere,Lib. 20. de ciuit. dei. Cap. 25. in illo iudicio quasdam quorundam purgatorias poe∣nas futuras. Vbi enim dicitur. Quis substinebit diem introitus eius? aut quis ferre poterit vt aspiciat eum? quia ipse ingredi∣tur quasi ignis conflatorij, & quasi herba lauantium, & se∣debit conflans & emundans sicut argentum & aurum, & e∣mundabit filios Leui, & fundet eos sicut aurum & sicut ar∣gentum, quid aliud intelligendum est? dicit tale aliquid & Isaias: Lauabit dominus sordes filiorum & filiarum Syon, & sanguinem emundabit de medio eorum spiritu iudicij, & spiritu combustionis. Nisi sortè sic eos dicendum est emundari à sordibus, & eliquari quodammodo, cū ab eis mali per poe∣nale iudicium separantur, vt illorum segregatio atque dam∣natio purgatio sit istorum, quia sine talium de coetero com∣mixtione victuri sunt: sed cum dicit, & emundabit filios Leui, & fundet eos sicut aurum & argentum, & erunt domino offerentes hostias in iusticia, & placebit domino sacrificium Iuda & Hierusalem: Vtique ostendit eos ipsos qui emundabun∣tur, deinceps in sacrificijs iusticiae domino esse placituros: ac per hoc ipsi a sua iniustitia emundabuntur, in qua domi∣no hostiae displicebant. porrò in plena perfectaque iustitia ipsi erunt cum mundati fuerint: quid enim acceptius deo tales offerunt quàm seipsos? verum ista quaestio de Purga∣torijs poenis, vt diligentius pertractetur in tempus aliud dif∣ferenda est. thus in English. By the foresaide wordes in semeth very euident, that in the time of that iudgement there shall be certaine Purgatory paines for some sort of men. For when it is saide: Who can be able to susteine the day of his com∣ming? who can stand in his sight? because he shall sit trying out and purifying as it were golde and siluer, and entre in like the fier of the fornace, and as washers sope: he shall make cleane the sonnes of Leui & shall trie them as golde and siluer: VVhat other thing by all these wordes can be ment?Cap. 4. (but purgatory paines.) Namely seeing the prophet Esaie hath the like in these wordes. God shall washe a waye the filthe of the sonnes and daughters of Syon, and purge bloude from the middest of them, in the spirite of iudgement and fier. Except a man might conueniently say that they shall be washed
from filthe, and as you would say newe fourged, when the wicked by finall iudgement are seuered out of their company: that so their departure and damnation may be the purgation of the rest, because after that day they shall liue for euer without the com∣pany of the badde. But when the Prophet sayth more, that he will clense the children of Leuy, and purify them as golde and siluer, that they may offer their oblations in righteous∣nesse, and the sacrifice of Iuda and Hierusalem shall please our Lorde. He urely giueth vs to wit, that euen the same selfe men which shall be purged, must afterwarde offer to God the sa∣crifice of iustice, that being once thus amended of their vn∣righteousnesse, in which their offeringes could not be acceptable vnto God, may afterwarde in pure and perfect iustice offer them selues as a most pleasaunt hoste and oblation vnto our Lord. But this question of purgatory paines I will differ to a further treaty hereafter. All this hath S. Augustine: VVhereby we may both acknowledge his minde and the Prophets meaning: which accor∣ding to the grace geuen vnto him in the expounding of Scrip∣tures, he hath sought out by conference of that place with other the like out of Esay, by weying discretly the whole circumstance of the letter, & finally by comparing of the other meaning, which to some might haue bene reckened apte and mete for that place. In all which doing he was as farre from rashe iudgement, as our newe doctors be from good aduisement. But because he referreth vs to the further discussing of the same matter afterward, in the named worke: it shal be to our pur∣pose not a litle, to haue this dictors full minde & constant iudge∣ment therein. In the xxj. booke after much matter vttered, and very deepe discussing of the cause, he maketh this groūded Con∣clusion.Cap. 13. Temporales poenas alij in hac vita tantum, alij post mortem, alij nunc & nūc, veruntamē ante illud saeuerissimū, nouissimúm{que} iudiciū patiuntur. Non autem omnes veniūt in sempiternas poenas quae post illud iudiciū his sunt futu∣rae, qui post mortem sustinent temporales: nam quibusdam quod in isto nō remittitur, remitti in futuro saeculo, id est ne futuri saeculi aeterno supplicio puniātur, iam supra diximus. Temporall paines (that is to say punishment which shall haue an end) some men suffer in this life, some other after their death, &
other some, both now, & then: But all this before the day of iudge∣ment that is the greatest and last of all other iudgements:Temporall paines in the next life as vvell as in this. not all that be tēporally punished after their departure come into paines perpetuall which shall be after the generall daye: for we haue al∣ready declared, that there be certaine which haue remission in an other worlde, that is to say a pardon that they be not punished euerlastingly, that had not forgeuenesse in this. By these wordes we may be assured, that as in the next life there be paines ende∣lesse and perpetuall for the wicked, so in the same worlde after our ende here, there must needes be some transitory punishment and correction, for such of the meane sorte as shall afterwarde be saued. And againe he speaketh (as I take it) of the fier of Con∣flagration that shall in the latter day purge some that be meane, and wast other that be wicked, and sende them from that present punishment, to further eternall damnation. I will recite his owne wordes, that ye may perceiue the perpetuall constancy of this ex∣cellent mans minde in this matter. It shall also be a testimonie sufficient for the vnderstanding of S. Pauls wordes nowe before alleaged. Si aedificauerit super fundamentum, ligna, foenum,Serm. 3. in Psal. 103. stipulam, id est mores saeculares fundamento fidei suae super aedificauerit, tamē si in fundamento sit Christus, & primum locū ipse habeat in corde, & ei nihil omnino anteponatur, portētur & tales: Veniet caminus & incēdet ligna, foenū, sti∣pulam: ipse inquit saluus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem. Hoc aget caminos: alios in sinistram eparabit, alios in dexteram quodammodo eliquabit. If any man erect vpon the foundatiō woodde, hay, or straw, that is to say worldely affections vpon the groundewarke of his sayth: if yet Christ be in the foundation, and beare the greatest stroke in his harte, so that nothing be preferred before him, such may well be borne withall, for the fiery fornace shall come & burne the wood, hay, and stooble, & shall be saued, as the Apostle saith, though it be for all that through the fier, that fornace then shall parte some to the lift hande, and try forth other (if a man may so tearme it) to the right hande. 2 The first place is geuen vnto Augustine, because he is in a maner confessed to be a patrone of some of our opi∣nions, though he be not of all. This doctor in his 20 booke
de ciuitate dei, is saide to expound the texte of Melachy as M. Allen hath doen of the paines of purgatory. But reade the place with indifferent iudgement who so can and will, and he shall plainely perceiue, that Augustine speaketh not of M. Allens purgatory, which is said to be immediatly after mens death, but of certaine purging paines, which he sup∣poseth some shall suffer at the last daye of Gods generall iudgement, and yet he is so vncertaine of that exposition, that he doubteth whether this purging, whereof the Pro∣phet speaketh, may not be vnderstoode of that seperation, which shalbe of the godly from the wicked in that daye. Howbeit 21. booke cap. 13. of the same worke, he conclu∣deth very cleerely, that some suffer temporall paines after this life. This maye not be denyed: but how vnconstant Augustine was in his error, appereth by this, that sometime he doubteth whether there be any such matter, other whiles he seemeth plainely to deny all other receptacles of the soules departed beside heauen and hell. For both in his En∣chiridion ad Laurentium cap. 69. & de octo Dulcitij in quaestio∣nibus quaest. 1. he sayeth, that as it is not incredible, that such a matter may be after this life, so it may be doubted, whether it be so or no. Likewise in his booke de fide & ope∣ribus cap. 16. he hath these wordes speaking of that texte to S. Paule 1. Corinthians. 3. Siue ergo in hac vita tantum ho∣mines ista patiuntur, siue etiam post hanc vitam talia iudicia sub∣sequantur, non abhoret quantum arbitror a ratione veritatis, iste intellectus huius sententiae. Whether men suffer these things in this life only, or whether such iudgements follow after this life also: the vnderstanding of this sentence ab∣horreth not as I thinke, from the waye of trueth. Againe in Hypognost. contra Pelagianos lib. 5. he acknowledgeth the kingdom of heauen for to receiue the godly, and hell fire for the punishment of the wicked, but a third place sayth he we are altogither ignoraunt of, neither doe we finde it in the holy Scriptures. He writeth against the Pelagians, that imagined a third place, for the rest of infants, that were not baptised, but the same reason serueth as well against the popish purgatory, because we finde it not in the holy
Scriptures: to the like effect he writeth de verbis Apostoli ser∣mone 14. where he acknowledgeth the right hand and the left hand of God, that is the kingdom of heauen, and the paynes of hell: the midle place he vtterly denyeth, wherein infantes may be placed because there is no mention there∣of in the Gospell. But to returne to the third place, alleged by M. Allen, out of S. Augustine, ser. 3. Psal. 103. How would he haue vs to take it for a confirmation of his exposition of S. Paules wordes, touching the paines of purgatory, which are sayd to begin immediatly after this life, when he him selfe confesseth that it is to be vnderstoode of the vniuer∣sall conflagration of the world at the day of iudgement? Thus you see that here were great bragges made, that Au∣gustines authority maintained his interpretation of those 2. textes of Scripture, concerning popish purgatory, which he him selfe contendeth to beginne as soone as men are dead: When Augustine in both those places (as the playne circumstance of the place declareth the one, and the con∣fssion of M. Allen admitteth the other) speaketh of a kind of purging which he did thinke should not be, before the whole world were purged at once by fire. 3 And as S. Augustine taketh these base substances of wood, hay, or stuble, to signifie worldly affections and secular de∣sires: so S. Ambrose noteth by the same, vayne, curious, & vn∣profitable doctrines:In com. su∣per hunc lo cum. the drosse of which friuolous matter much corrupting the sinceritie of our faith, must be separated from the foundation, by the fire of the sayd fornace. For this is a generall doctrine without exception, that what so euer be vnderstanded by those light matters, whether it be a difformity in life or in do∣ctrine, that onely defileth and not vtterly destroyeth the fayth which is the foundation, nor wasteth the loue due vnto our Lord, what so euer (I say) that be, it must be tryed out by the spirite of iudgement and fire. Briefly then, thus S. Ambrose expounding the Apostles wordes. He shall be saued by fire, writeth,In commen tarijs super 3. c. 1. ad Cor. Osten∣dit illum saluum quidem futurum, sed poenam ignis passu∣rum, vt per ignem purgatus fiat saluus, & non sicut perfidi aeterno igne in perpetuum torqueatur. The Apostle declareth
that he shall be saued, and yet suffer the paynes of fire: that be∣ing purged by that fire, he may so be saued, and not as the vn∣faithfull, perpetually be tormented in euerlasting fire. 3 As he sayth litle out of Ambrose so it is soone aun∣swered: first it maketh litle for him, that Ambrose expoun∣deth the wodde, hay, and stuble, vayne curious and vnpro∣fitable doctrine, for that prouethe, that onely the worke of teachers shall passe the triall of this fire, which is the iudge∣ment of Gods spirite the true discerner of doctrines, but yet Ambrose expoundeth the fire to be a purging and a pu∣nishment. But whether it be in this life or after this life, you haue no ground out of this place of Ambrose, and therefore it finally auaileth your cause. And that Ambrose allowed no purging after this life, is playne enough by those wordes which he writeth vpon the 40. Psalme: For where the pro∣phet sayth he shall be made happy on earth: Ambrose in∣ferreth, Bene addidit in terra, quia nisi hic mundatus fuerit, ibi mundus esse non poterit. He hath well added on earth, for if he be not clensed here, he can not be clensed there. 4 This temporall torment of the next life S Hierom very fitly calleth, A iudgement of God ioyned with mercy, the continuance whereof, or other circumstances to serue mens curi∣ositie he dare not define, being contented out of doubt to beleue that certaine sinners be in greuous torments, and yet not with∣out hope of mercy these be that holy mans words in his commen∣taries vpon the Prophet Esai,Cap. vlr. & in primum Cap. Eze. in illud vi∣di quasi spe¦ciem electri talking by occasion, of the conti∣nuance of purgatory paynes. Quid nos solius Dei scientiae debemus relinquere, cuius non solum misericordiae sed & tormenta in pondere sunt: & nouit quem, quomodo, & quandiu debeat iudicare. Solumque dicamus quod humanae conuenit fragilitati, Domine ne in furore tuo arguas me, neque in ira tua corripias me: & sicut diaboli omniumque negatorum atque impiorum qui dixerunt in corde suo non est Deus, credimus aeterna tormenta, sic peccatorum atque impiorum, & tamen Christianorum, quorum opera in igne purganda sunt atque probanda, moderatam arbitramur &
mixtam clementiae sententiam iudicis. In English: VVe must commit this secrete to Gods wisedom and knowledge, whose not onely mercy, but iudgement and iust punishment be paised. For he right well knoweth whom, how, and what time he ought to pu∣nish. And let vs onely as it becommeth our frailty cry out: Lord in thy furious wrath argue me not, neither correct me in thy an∣ger: for as we beleue the eternall damnation and torment of the deuill with the forsaken sort and wicked, that sayd in their harte there is no God, so we suppose, that vpon sinners and euill men, being yet christen men, whose workes shall be both purged and tryed by fire, shalbe pronounced a moderate sentence mixed with mercy and clemency. Lo here, this worthy writer graunteth there be two sortes of punishments by fire, one of the damned spirites and wicked men eternall, and an other of certayne that in their life were sinners, & some wicked men too, who yet being in Chri∣stes Church and vsing the benefite of the blessed Sacraments, had their sinnes so forgeuen, that not purging their wicked life by sufficient penaunce in their dayes, they must of necessity en∣ter into the torment of transitory fire, there to be punished not in rage and rigor without pity, but in anger of fatherly correction ioyned with clemency and much mercy. 4 The last place is reserued for S. Ieronym, who see∣meth to geue a perfect testimony for M. Allens behoofe, if he be no further examined, then M. Allen rehearseth his wordes. but howe litle they make for him if they be duely discussed, except it be to proue Ieronym an Origenist, and so to discredite his testimony, I will stand to the iudgement of all reasonable Papistes, that will vouchsafe to weygh the matter with me, and not be wilfully deceiued. For first it is manifest, that Ieronym writing vpon these wordes of Esay, whose worme shal not dye nor the fire be extinguished, speaketh of the last iudgement in the ende of the world, and then rehearseth the arguments of them, that thought the pu∣nishment of that worme and fire shoulde be ended after long time, and great torments: which thing Ieronym sayth must be left to the onely knowledge of God, &c, whom he confesseth to be a mercifull iudge, and so it may be, that he
will release the eternall torments that wicked Christians haue deserued after the day of iudgement, but he defineth nothing. And as for M. Allens purgatory, which he defen∣deth to begin streight way after mens departure hence, he speaketh neuer a word. But rather of the purging fire of Gods iudgement, which some of the Origenistes did extend to the purifying and sauing of all Christians, were they ne∣uer so wicked, from whose opinion he seemeth not altogi∣ther to discent, though he doe not plainly allow it. And that he writeth vpon the first of Ezechiel, to which place M. Al∣len sendeth vs, he speaketh of the prouidence of God, which so gouerneth the afflictions of his Sainctes, that that which seemed to be a punishment is conuerted into a medicine. As children imagine that spirites and goblines be in euery darke corner: So M. Allen neuer readeth fire and torment, but by and by he dreameth of purgatory. Origen is alleged for our cause, vpon vvhose errour in a matter somevvhat appertayning to our purpose, S Augustins iudge∣ment is more largely sought: and therevvith it is declared by testimony of diuers holy authors, vvhat sinnes be chiefly purged in that temporall fire. CAP. VIII. 1 THese three noble learned men might right well sa∣tisfie our search, for the sense of the textes both of the Prophet and Apostle, and perswade any reaso∣nable man in the whole cause: yet for that there be ome that meane not to relent in their lewde opinions, for light proffers, I will store them with testimonies. Origenes, one of great antiquity, in many places of his works vnderstandeth both the sayd textes of Malachie and S. Paule in the like sorte: by whom we may well take a great taste of the time and Church where he liued, what men of wisedom & vertue then iudged of thinges, which now of fooles be contemned, and of he∣retikes condemned also.Homil. 12. But namely vpon the Prophet Ieremy in these wordes: Si post fundamentum Iesu Christi, non so∣lum in tuo corde aurum, argentum, & lapidem preciosum
superae dificaueris, verum & ligna, foenum, & stipulam, quid tibi vis fieri cum anima seiuncta fuerit a corpore? vtrum ne ingredi vis in sancta cum lignis tuis, & foeno, & stipula, vt polluas regnum Dei? an propter lignum, foe∣num, & stipulam, foris residere vis, & pro auro, argento, lapide precioso, nil mercedis accipere? sed neque hoc ae∣quum est. Quid ergo sequitur, nisi vt primum propter li∣gnum ignis tibi detur, qui consumat foenum, lignum, & sti∣pulam. &c. If vpon the foundation, which is Christ Iesus, thou do not onely builde golde, siluer, and preciouse stone, but also woodde, hay, and strawe, what doest thou looke for after thy death? wilt thou entre into the holy places with thy woodde, hay, and stooble, and defile the kingdome of God? or els for thy wood, hay, and straw, thou wilt abide forthe: and so liese the rewarde of thy golde, siluer, and preciouse stone? But that were no rea∣son: then there is no waye but one, first to receiue fire for to con∣sume and burne out thy woodde, hay, and stooble: and then afterwarde to receiue for thy better workes, the rewarde of sal∣uation. so sayth Origen. VVhose iudgement if any man mis∣trust in this point, because he erred in other, let him learne to miscredit only his or other mens singular opiniōs & priuate phā∣tasies, wherein they disagreed from the residue of the common body of Christ his Church,Basil. Cap. penult. de Spiritu san∣cto. & not contemne in any man the con∣firmation of the vniuersall sense, which he findeth in the vni∣forme doctrine of all other Christian Catholikes. In deede it was so euident, that this Purgatory fire of which the Apostle spea∣keth, shoulde be in the other life, that this learned man after∣warde, leauing the meaning which the holy Church had opened for the proofe of certeine transitory punishment in the next worlde for meaner offenders, would of his owne head go forwarde (which is the bane of many a goodly wit) and mainteine that all greuous crimes,Vincēt lyr. and most wicked maners might be purged by this fire after death, and the parties in time saued, so that they had faith for their foundation: whereby (as S. Augustine no∣teth of him) he made onely faith to saue the wicked,De fide & operibus Cap. 16. without re∣pentaunce or good workes.
CAP. VIII. 1 WHether M. Allen knew that his former wit∣nesses did not agree, or that he would geue a tast of his bountifull dealing in pressing vs with more testimonies then needed, he will nowe produce Origen, whom though he confesse to be infamouse for heresy, yet euē of his error, he wil not doubt but to grounde his purgatory. Origen will haue men passe through a fire, but to make it plaine that he meaneth not ye fier of Popish purgatory, we shal perceiue by other places of his writings, that he speaketh of such a fire, as all men be they neuer so iust, shall passe through, affirming that all mē haue neede of purifications after his life, ye Peter & Paule and such like in Num. Hom. 25. & in Psal. 36. Hom. 3. But all men passe not through the Popes purgatory. I passe ouer here the grosse allegory, that he maketh of the bloude of Deuils by which a man shalbe washed and purified in the kingdome of God, that being so purified and made cleane he may enter into the city of God. Num. Hom. 25. But how soeuer he doteth about passage through fier and purifica∣tions after this life, yet he affirmeth in an other place that the day of Christian mens death is the deposition of paine, whereby it appereth that either he was not constant with him selfe, or els that Origens purgatory was a painlesse pur∣gatory. His wordes are in Iob Lib. 3. Nam priores diem nati∣uitatis celebrabant, vnam vitam diligentes, & aliam post hanc non sperantes. Nunc vero nos non natiuitatis diem celebramus, cum sit dolorum atque tentationum introitus, sed mortis diem ce∣lebramus, vtpote omnium dolorum depositionem, atque omnium tentationum effugationem. The former men did celebrate, the daye of natiuity, as they that loued but one life, and hoped for none after this. But now we doe not celebrate the daye of Natiuitie, seeing it is the entrance of sorrowes and temptations, but we celebrate the daye of death, as that which is a deposition of all griefes, and an auoyding of all temptations.
2 Against which perniciouse error the said doctor often wri∣teth: and proueth that this place of S. Paule can not make for the deliuery of the wicked or greuous offenders in any case. And being somewhat vrged by the aduersaries arguments, or els be∣cause he woulde take all holde from them which they seemed to haue by that scripture he seeketh them out an other meaning, not contrary at all to the trueth of Purgatory: but yet farther of their purpose. Declaring that this fire might (as he saith there) signify some griefe of this worlde, for the abating of some inordi∣nate affectiōs that be found in many euen towards things other∣wise lawfull. Though he was very loth to auouch this as the vn∣douted meaning of that scripture, being pleaced with any other whereby they shoulde not be forced to deny the eternall damna∣tion of impenitent sinners: as in deede he neuer gaue this mea∣ning but where the Origenistes did vrge him, and in such places onely where he aunswereth to Origens arguments, for in other places where he was free from contention with the saide sects, he euer in expresse termes grounded the doctrine of Purgatory vpō the Apostles wordes. Yea euen in the same answere to the aduer∣sary he was so mindefull of Gods iustice in the world to come, and ferd lest he might geue any occasion of the contrary error to deny purgatory, that in the same talke with the Origenistes, he confes∣seth there might well be some griefe in the next life also, which might likewise purge and deliuer a man from the loue of transi∣tory thinges, wherwith the best sorte of men be in this our misery often very sore loden. Although in dede he doubted whether any such affection and loue of thinges deare vnto vs in this worlde, as of wife, kinred, acquaintance,Ench. Cap. 67. & 68. or such like might remaine in man after his departure hense, & so there in time to be lessened, and in fine vtterly remoued or worne away, by some griefe and sorow which in the next life might by the lacke of the said things, vexe and molest his minde. As we see it commonly fall in this present life, where mā by diuerse profitable troubles of this world, learneth to set light by thinges, which in ordre he might well loue: being for all that more merite to forsake them. And of this point S. Augustine hath these wordes in one place:Ench. Cap. 69. Tale ali∣quid fieri etiam post hanc vitam incredibile non est: & vtrum ita sit quaeri potest, some such thing may well be after this life,
and thereof question may be made. By which wordes, the here∣tikes of our time either of ignorance or of malice (which be euer yoked together in such men) haue borne the simple in hande,This cleark∣ly argumēt our English apologie vrgeth. that this holy doctour doubted of Purgatory. A litle holde will serue such wringers: because he doubted of it, they beleue, as they thinke by good authority, that with out doubt there is none at all. If S. Augustine had but saide, belike there is no such meane place in the life following: mary sir then they might haue picked more matter of their infidelity: & yet of that speach determining no certeinty, there had bene no great cause why they shoulde haue forsaken the iudgement of Gods Church. But now he so doubteth, that he findeth more cause to thinke there shoulde be one, then that any man might gather vpon his words, that there shoulde be none at all. No nor he neuer went so farre good reader, as to make any doubt of Purgatory paines, for pu∣nishment of sinnes committed in the worlde. For in all the same bookes where he hath the like saing, and almost in the very same places, he holdeth as a matter of faith, and to be beleued of all Christian men, that the prayers of the lieuing do release some of their paines in the next life. And he constantly as all other Ca∣tholikes euer did, confesseth that the sinnes or vncleane workes of the liuing not duely by penaunce wiped away in this worlde, must be mended after our death: although it be very doubtefull in deede, whether there be any worldely affections left in mans mind vntaken vp by death and resolution of the body and the soule, the care and remembraunce whereof, might be afterward by sorrow both purged and punished. And this to be his meaning, and that he termeth here purga∣tory, the griefe which a man hath in losing that which he loued in this mortall life, his owne wordes testifie in euery of those workes in which he keepeth this combate with Origenistes.Lib. 21. de Ciuit. 26. In one place thus: Quod sine illicienti amore non habuit, sine dolore vrente non perdet: & ex earum rerum amissione tan∣tum necesse est vt vrat dolor, quantum haeserat amor. That which by ticklinge loue was kept, can not be lost with out burning griefe. And looke how fast the loue of such thinges did cleane to mans minde, so farre must sorow burne. So in the like talke with the saide Origenistes,Cap. 16. in his booke de fide & operibus, he fol∣loweth
the same signification of Purgatory. Haec igitur (sayth he) quoniam affectu dilecta carnali non sine dolore amit∣tuntur, qui sic ea habent, in eorum amissione passi detrimē∣tum, per ignem quendam doloris perueniunt ad salutem: these thinges being by carnall affection loued, be not lightly lost without griefe, and therfore those that thus be affectionate, feele losse in parting from them: and so come to saluation through the fire of sorow. such a sadnesse the yonge man that demaunded of our maister the waye to heauen, conceiued straight,Matth. 19. when motion was onely made, of distribution of his goods. VVho being other∣wise in the state of saluation, and to be borne withall, because he was a iust man and lacked not the foundation of his faith, yet the very losse or leauing of his goods, was vnto him (if he continued in that affection) a wonderfull great torment, & as S. Augustine here calleth it, a kinde of purgatory: the which, perfect men, that esteme all the trashe of this worlde as durte and donge to winne Christ, feele not at all: whome the doctour supposeth therefore, to take no domage in the losse of thinges which they so litle loued. Now in euery place where this expositiō is founde (as I thinke it is neuer in all his workes, lightly, but in conference with the Origenistes) he alwayes addeth that the like fire of sorow may also correct the affections euen of the departed, but yet whether it be so or no, he counteth it a question of probable disputation, rather then any matter of faith, as it is in deede very doubtfull whether any such vnordinate affectiō may remaine vntaken vp after mans departure, which by griefe and sorow in the other worlde may be in time wholy consumed. And further he neuer doubted. For in that famous worke of the Citie of God,Cap. 24. lib. 21. with in two Chapters of that doubt made of this kind of purgation, which we now haue declared, he vttereth his faith with Gods Church, of that greate torment and iust punishment of sinnefull life, not sufficiently purged by penaunce in our time, which he calleth the Amending fire: and thus he sayth there. Tales etiam constat, ante iudicij diem per poenas temporales quas eo∣rum spiritus patiuntur purgatos, receptis corporibus ae∣terni ignis supplicijs non tradendos, &c. It is certaine (sayth he) Constat, (which is no worde of doubtefullnesse) that such men being purged by the temporall paines, which
their soules do suffer before the day of iudgement, shall not after they haue receiued their bodies againe, be committed to the tor∣ment of the euerlasting fire.Vide quaest. 8. ad Dulci∣tium. This he vttereth in the same place where he doubteth of the other kinde of purgation: as he con∣fesseth him selfe to be uncertaine of the whole exposition, refu∣sing none at all that were agreable to faith, and woulde not helpe the falsehood which he thē refuted. In his Enchir: where he dis∣puteth against the same error,Cap. 110. he so litle doubteth, that he calleth Purgatory damnatiō though not perpetuall, as that which might be both eased and vtterly remoued by the sacrifice & suffragies of the Church. And thus did that graue author withstād Origen then, whose followers were as it may be thought very busie and troublesome in those daies and long after. But yet his sure staffe against that error was this, and the most common defense of all Catholikes, that the temporall paines in the next worlde coulde neuer deli∣uer the great & greuous sinners that died with out repentaunce or remission of their sinnes, from euerlasting death: because that torment was prepared for the small offensies which we call ve∣niall sinnes: by which the holy Apostle ment, vnder the names of the base substances of woodde,Serm. 4. de sanctis. hay, and straw, as these wordes of much importaunce may well declare: There be diuerse (sayth he) that misconstruing these wordes of S. Paule before al∣leaged,De haeres. ad quod 43. by ouer vaine security & confidence deceiue them selues, beleuing that if they do builde capitall and greuous crimes vpon the foundation which is Christ, they shall be purged through fire, and them selues afterwarde escape to euerlasting life: but this vnderstanding, good brethern, must be corrected. For those that so flatter them selues, shameful∣ly do beguile them selues. For that fire which the Apostle speaketh of in these wordes: He shall be saued through fier, purgeth not mortall sinnes, but smaller offensies onely. 2 Now followeth a confuse and tedious discourse of Augustines iudgement, touching Origens error, but it may be reduced vnto these two pointes. First why Augustine woulde not interprete that place of Paule. 1. Cor. 3. of pur∣gatory: and secondly whether Augustine were in any doubt
at all of purgatory, betwene which two questions is be∣gotten a thirde conclusion, that purgatory serueth onely for veniall and light offences. To the first he seemeth to say, that Augustine refuseth to vnderstand that place of pur∣gatory, either because he colde not otherwise withstād the arguments of the Originests, or els because he woulde take all holde away from them, rather then that it was his con∣stant iudgement, because in other places, where he was free from contētion he euer groūded purgatory vpō that place. How honorable this aunswere is for Augustine, or how be∣neficiall for Allen, vsing Augustines authoritie, I referre to be iudged of all them that be wise and learned. To the se∣cond he sayth, that Augustine neuer doubted, whether there were any paines of purgatory after this life, but whether men after their death reteined any carnall affections. I will once againe reherse the wordes of Augustine, that all indif∣ferent, men may iudge, whether M. Allens aunswere may stande with his saying in a reasonable meaning. Tale ali∣quid etiam post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est: & vtrum ita sit quaeri potest. It is not vncredible, that some such thing is doen after this life, and whether it be or no, it may be enquired of, that is (sayth M. Allen) whether men haue any carnall affection to their wiues, children &c. after this life, it may be a question. But Augustine goeth further in the same place and sayth: Et aut inueniri aut latere, nonnullos fi∣deles, per ignem quendam purgatorium quanto magis minúsue, bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto tardius citiusque saluari. Non tamen tales de quibus dictum est, quod regnum Dei non posside∣bunt, nisi conuenientes poenitentibus eadem crimina remittan∣tur. And either it may be founde, or still be hidde, that some of the faithfull, by a certaine purgatory fire, by how much they haue more or lesse loued transitory Gods, by so much later or soner, are they saued, but yet not such, of whome it is saued, that they shall not possesse the kingdome of God, except the same crimes be forgeuen them being suf∣ficiently repentaunt for them. These wordes are so plaine against M. Allens new forged meaning, that I suppose he neuer reade them in Augustines owne bookes, but onely re∣ceiued
his notes of some elder Papists, that had spent more time in gathering them, but had not such audacity to vtter them as M. Allen, of which coniecture, there is no small likelyhoode sone after. I omitte his foolish supposition, if S. Augustine had but saied: belike there is no such meane place in the life following. &c. I haue already with out M. Allens suppositiō shewed, that Augustine some where sayd, he knew neither thirde place, nor meane place, nor none coulde finde in the holy Scriptures, nor Gospell of God. Neuer∣thelesse with much wrangling to defende the vncerteinety or vnconstancy of Augustines iudgement touching purga∣tory, we haue wonne so much, that purgatory serueth to purge none but very smal and light offences. But how longe shall we holde this? Scarse to the latter ende of this chap∣ter. For in the next capter, he findeth out a shifte to wring in heynous and deadly sinnes also. For els the release of small faultes, woulde not be halfe so gainefull. 3 To this purpose S. Hieroms wordes, or the reuerēd Bedes whether you wil, (for either of their graue authorities shall serue my turne) do wholy agree in the expositiō of this sentence,In Cap. 11. Prouerb. Mor∣tuo homine impio non erit vltra spes. A wicked man being once departed, is past recouery or hope. VVhere the author wri∣teth thus. Heu misere hoc pertransit Origenes, qui post vniuersale iudicium vitam credidit omnibus impijs dādam, Notandum autem quod etsi impijs post mottem spes veniae non sit, sunt tamen qui de leuioribus peccatis, cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt: post mortem possunt absolui. Origen passed ouer this text pitifully, that beleued all the wicked should haue at length life euerlasting, after the day a generall iudge∣ment. Yet this is to be noted, that although there be no hope of pardon for the wicked after their death, yet there be certaine which may be released of lighter trespasses, in the bonde of which they departed out of this worlde. And so doth Oecumenius a Greeke author, expounde S. Pauls wordes of veniall sinnes: for the purgation of which, he douteth not but that there is a fire of iudgement in the life to come.Super. 3. Cap. 1. ad Cor. Ipse autem saluabitur: quis? Qui aurum, argentum, lapides preciosos superae dificauerit:
cum enim dixisset de eo quod mercedem accipiet, nūc qua∣lem mercedem aperit: salutem scilicet. Saluabitur autem non sine dolore, vt par est saluari per ignem transeuntem, & adhaerentes sibi leues maculas purgātem. thus in English. By whome is it spoken when he sayth, he shall be saued? By him it is spoken that buildeth on the foundatiō, golde, siluer and pre∣ciouse stones. For when he had tolde vs that such shoulde haue a rewarde, nowe he openeth what that rewarde shoulde be: to wit, saluatiō. And yet he must not be saued without all paine, as there is no cause why he should, that must passe through fire, and there∣by be purged of the smaller spottes which sticke by him. In the same sense doth Theodoretus both expounde the wordes of the Apostle, and vtter his iudgement of Purgatory also:Super. ca. 3. Malach. and almost the rest of all the Latine or Greeke writers, which my purposed breuitie with plentifull proofe otherwise forceth me to leaue to the studious reader. 3 Next ensueth the authoritie of Ieronym or Bede, or perhaps, neither of them both, but yet of some olde writer, which holdeth, that from light sinnes, men may be absol∣ued after their death by paynes, prayers, almes, or masses. This was a writer for M. Allens tooth, but neither of anti∣quitie, nor credit sufficient to cary away this cause. The iudgement of Oecumenius and Theodoretus, though they were writers about that time, when corruption of do∣ctrine had greatly preuailed, yet are they not cleare for po∣pish purgatory, which the greeke Church although they pray for the dead, yet would neuer agree to acknowledge. 4 One place more I will onely adde out of Remigius, because he learnedly may knit vp the place, by ioyning both the Prophet and Apostles wordes together, vpon which we haue stand so longe.In 3. cap. Malach. Thus that good author writeth. Ipse enim quasi ignis conflans & peccators exurens, Ignis enim in conspectu eius arde∣bit & in circuitu eius tempestas valida. Hoc igne consumū∣tur lignum, foenum, stipula. Nec solum erit quasi ignis, sed etiam quasi herba fullonum, qua vestes nimium sordibus infectae lauantur. Porro his qui grauiter peccauerunt erit
ignis conflans & exurens: illis vero qui leuia peccata com∣miserunt erit herba fullonum. Hinc per Isaiam dicitur, si abluerit dominus. &c. Qui enim habent sordes leuium pec∣catorum spiritu iudicij purgantur: qui vero sanguinem ha∣bent, hoc est grauioribus peccatis infecti sunt, spiritu ardo∣ris exurentur & purgabuntur. Et sedebit conflans & emun∣dans argentum, & colabit eos quasi aurum & argentum, hoc est intellectum & colloquium: vt quicquid mixtum est stanno vel plumbo, camino domini exuratur: & quod pu∣rum aurum est & argentum remaneat. Et purgabit filios Le∣ui: In filijs Leui omnem sacerdotalem ordinē intelligimus, a quibus iudicium incipiet, quia scriptum est: tempus est vt iudicium incipiat a domo dei:1. Petri. 4. & alibi: à sanctuario meo in∣cipite. Si autem sacerdos flammis purgandus est & colan∣dus, quid de caeteris dicendum est, quos nullum commen∣dat priuilegium sanctitatis? These golden wordes haue this sense. He shall come as the goldesmithes fire, burning sinners. For in his sight a flame shall rise, and a mighty tempest rounde about him: by which fire, our woodde, hay, and stooble, shall be wasted and worne away. VVith that, he shall be like the clensers herbe, whereby garments very much stained be purged. To all those that haue greuously offended, he wil be a burning and mel∣ting fire: but to the light sinners, he shall be as the washers herbe. VVhich difference the prophet Esay noteth thus: If our Lorde wipe away the filthe of the daughters of Syon,Cap. 4. and bloude from the middest of Israel, in the spirite of iudge∣ment and fire. For such as haue onely the spottes of veniall sinnes, they may be amended by the spirite of iudgement, but men of bloude, to witte the more greuous offenders, must be tried by fire. And he shall sit casting and purifying siluer, and shall purge men as golde and siluer be purified: that is to say our thoughtes, understanding, and wordes, from impurity and vn∣cleannesse,I call stannū peuter, mo∣ued by the circumstāce of the let∣ter.1. Pet. 4. as from pewter and leade, by Gods fornace shall ex∣actly be purged: and nothing shall be left but as pure as golde and fine siluer. And he shal purge the sonnes of Leui: that is the ordre of priesthood, where this heuy iudgement shall first begin. For so it is writtē. Time is now, that iudgemēt begin at the house of God: and againe: Begin at my sanctuary. If the priest must
be purged and fined, what shall we deme of other, whome priui∣lege of holy ordre doth not commende or helpe? thus farre goeth the author in conference of diuerse scriptures. VVho, with the rest of al the holy fathers that compassed their senses within the vnity of Christes Church, hath founde by euident testimony of sundry scriptures, the paines of purgatory: which the busy heades of our time by vaine bragging of scriptures, in singular arrogan∣cy of their owne wittes, can neuer finde. 4 Last of all here is vaunt made of the testimony of Remigius, as though he were a new author, and perhaps M. Allen in his notes, founde him so, but it is nothing else but the saying of Ieronym almost word for word vppon 3. Ma∣lach, 3. which before we haue shewed sufficiently to be mēt of the iudgement that Christ should exercise by his do∣ctrine, at his first comming, and nothing at all pertayning to purgatory. And therefore these golden words (as you cal them M. Allen) haue a leaden exposition, when they be drawne from the preaching of the Gospell, to the maynte∣nance of purgatory. A further declaration of this pointe, for the better vnderstan∣ding of the doctours vvordes. VVherein it is opened hovv purgatory is ordeined for mortal sinnes: & hovv for smaller offences vvho are like to feele that griefe, & vvho not at all. CAP. IX. 1 ANd I thinke they now haue small aduan∣tage, by the exception of Origens testi∣mony: by occasion whereof, such light is founde for our cause, that we now by good∣ly authority haue both founde the placies alleaged plainely to proue purgatory, and also what sinnes it namely purgeth, and what men after their death may be amended thereby. That not onely the bare trueth, but some necessary circumstances to the studious of the trueth, haue bene here by iust occasion opened, and all errour wholy re∣moued. Except this point may somewhat stay the reader, that
heareth in some places the paines of Purgatory to be both a pu∣nishment for greuous sinnes, and a purgation of lighter tres∣passes with all: and yet that it now may appeare the contrary, by the minde of some learned authors, who expressely make that paine as a remedy onely for veniall sinnes, and not to apperteine at all to the capitall and deadely crimes that man often times doth commit: Therefore to be as plaine as may be necessary for the vnlearned, or any other that is godly curious in things much tending to the quiet rest of mans conscience, it is to be noted: that this ordinary iustice of God in the life following for the pur∣gation of the elect,A mortall sinne not re¦mitted in this life is not dischar∣ged by pur∣gatory. can not discharge any man of mortall sinne, which was not pardoned before in the Church militant vppon earth. And therefore what crime so euer deserueth damna∣tion, and was not in mans life remitted, it can not by purgatory paines be released in the next: because it deserueth death euer∣lasting, and staieth the offender from the kingdome of heauen for euer: no peine temporall in this worlde or the next but Christes passion alone, (the benefit whereof is not by the sufferers will, extended to any that sinneth vnto death) being able to satisfy for the same. As often then as thou hearest any Catholike man affirme pur∣gatory to punish or purge greuous and deadely offenses, be assu∣red his meaning of the temporall paine due vnto wicked men and their sinnes, after their bonde and debt of euerlasting death, with the very faulte it selfe, be in Gods Church remitted. For as S. Augustine sayth,A deadely sinne remit∣ted is in case of a ve∣niall sinne.De vera & falsa poeni∣ent. ca. 18. a mortall sinne forgeuen, is becomne a ve∣niall trespasse, and so deserueth no more paine then a veniall sinne, which by transitory punishment may be fully and perfite∣ly released: thus he sayth. Quaedam enim sunt peccata quae mortalia sunt, & in poenitentia fiunt venialia, non tamen statim sanata. There be sinnes (sayth he) which being dead∣ly of their owne nature, be yet by poenaunce made venial, though not alwayes straight healed. Then by this rule, what so euer is spoken of veniall sinnes or the purgation thereof: it is ment both by the small offensies which of their owne nature are veniall: and also of the greater, so that they be forgeuen in Gods Church before: whereby they are become veniall as the other, and deserue proportionaly as the other: and may be taken away
(as the same man affirmeth) either in this worlde or the next,Ench. ca. 71. by the same remedies as the other, though not alwayes so speedely. CAP. IX. 1 NO maruell but you must crowe like a cocke of the game, you haue obtayned such a noble vi∣ctory out of Origens errour, and specially you haue discouerd such a solemne secrete to the yong petits of popery, that onely veniall sinnes are clensed by purgatory, that they are much beholding to you. But lest your kitchen shoulde be colde if none but veniall sinnes should passe through the heate of purgatory, you haue found out a sutle shifte, howe to bring mortall sinnes also through ye same pykes of purgatory, for discharge of which you know men will bestow more cost, then for release of those, that with onely sprinckling of holy water, as you wott well, may be washed away. Therefore mortall sinnes must be remitted in this life, and then they may be purged in the fire of purgatory, as being now become in the case of veniall sinnes. O deepe mysteries reueiled out of the bot∣tomlesse pitt, which haue no grounde at all in the word of God, but are manifestly ouerthrowne thereby, euen from the foundations. For the foundation of this doctrine, is the distinction of veniall and mortall sinnes, whereas the word of God plainly determineth, that euery sinne is mortall and deserueth eternall death, seeme it neuer so small. Cursed is euery one that abideth not in all thinges that are written in the law to fulfill them. Deu. 27. The soule that sinneth shall dye. Eze. 18. The reward of sinne is death. Rom. 6. And as for that distin∣ction, which S. Iohn maketh of a sinne to death, a sinne not to death, hath nothing common with that of the papistes, for all sinne that by the mercy of God is pardonable, he calleth a sinne not vnto death, for which God is entreated that giueth life to them that haue so sinned. And that sinne he counteth vnto death, which is irremissible, as obstinate & wilful apostacy. Heb. 6. blasphemy against the holy ghost. Math. 12. &c. for which it is not lawfull io pray. Thus by
iudgement of Gods word, are all sinnes mortall which Pa∣pistes call veniall, and all that they count mortall, by Gods spirite are counted veniall. For by the iustice of God, all sinnes are mortall, but by his mercy, they are all pardona∣ble, except that sinne vnto death, whereof S. Iohn speaketh. 1. Ioan. 5. But to returne to M. Allens shift, and to examine whether it will satisfie the iudgement of those olde writers, which affirme that onely small and light offences are clen∣sed by the fire of purgatory. M. Allen sayth, mortall sinnes become veniall, by remission. The Scripture teacheth that sinnes forgeuen are not imputed at all. But M. Allens do∣ctrine is, that remission of sinnes doth not take sinnes a∣way but onely chaungeth their nature, from mortall to ve∣niall, yea he is not ashamed to vouch Augustine to warran∣ty, as though he should say, that a mortall sinne forgiuen, is become a veniall trespasse, &c. If all men were blinde, this fellow would play trimly with their noses, when he will be so bold with all men that can see: Augustines wordes as he citeth them in Latine are these. Quaedam enim sunt peccata quae mortalia sunt, & in poenitentia fiunt venialia, that is, there are some sinnes which are deadly of their owne nature, but by repentaunce they are made veniall. I haue translated them as he doth, sauing that he calleth poenitentia penaunce which I, to auoyd the ambiguitie of the english word, as it is taken by the Papistes, haue turned repentaunce. Nowe is it all one to say, that such sinnes as of their owne nature de∣serue death, may yet be pardoned to him that repenteth? which is the manifest meaning of Augustines wordes, and that which M. Allen fathereth vpon him, as though he said, a mortall sinne forgeuen is become a veniall trespasse? A∣gaine this doctors wordes are playne of light and small of∣fences, and not of heynous and great offences, that by par∣don are made litle offences. 2 VVell then, to close vp briefely, all this haue we founde by these scriptures alleaged: that being diuerse degrees of men, Purgatory apperteineth but to one sort. First not to such as lacke the faith of Christ, for they hauing no foundation are allready
iudged: neither to such as haue not builded vpon the foundatiō, but rather defaced it with workes of death and deuilish doctrine. For all these must like widdred branches be cast into the fire, not to be purged, but vtterly wasted. There be yet other that kepe their foundation faste, and worke there vpon both golde and sil∣uer, but yet abased and somewhat defiled by the mixture of o∣ther infirmities not sufficiently redressed in this life: these must of necessity by Gods ordinaunce, suffer the Purgation by fire: that their workes purified and amended by the sentence of his iuste iudgement, may at length by mercy and grace bring them to their desired ende. Now the perfect estate, which, hauing this groundewarcke, and building therevpon nothing for the most part, but the tried fine workes of heauenly doctrine and perfect charity, can not feare the fire, as in whome it shall finde no matter of waste. For if any drosse of seculare desires or worldly weakenesse, was in their frailty contracted, their fructefull penaunce in their life, washed that away by the force of Christes bloude, before the daye of our Lorde greate and fearefull, came vpon them:Naum. 1. In which case God will not punish twise for one faulte, nor entre into iudgement with such, as haue iudged them selues to his hande.1. Cor. 11. These therefore thus guarded by Gods grace, in whome onely they chalenge this Priuilege, can not feele any daunger, their workes (as S. Paule sayth) abiding the brounte of the fire, though they were in place of torment with the rest. For if such do passe the firie sworde, before they entre into the ioyes of hea∣uen, yet they shall euen there be so shadowed, that to them it can neither be any whit molestious, nor one moments staye from the reward of their pure golden workes, which by fire can not perish. For of such, we muste beleue with Gods Church, that they go straight to heauen vpon their departure, with out stay or pu∣nishment in the next life. Although Christ onely, of his owne force, being not subiecte to any spotte of sinne, did passe this fire: and entre into heauen, the eternall gates opening them selues vnto him as to the king of glory. VVho being before in the place of paines also, yet coulde not possibly be touched there∣by, as the Apostle sayth.Act. 2. And that is S. Ambrose his meaning (as I suppose) when he
saide. Vnus ille ignem hunc sentire non potuit. Christ onely was he, that coulde not feele this fire. He speaketh of the fire through which euen the good must passe, before they come to eternall ioy. VVhere he doubteth not to auouche, that many a man that thinkes him selfe golde, and is taken so to be of others too, shall yet there be proued full of drosse and impurity, long to be cleansed before his finall freedome and deliuery: and yet to be saued through fire. But for those that be in deede perfect men, as Iohn the belo∣ued of Iesus, and Peter with the rest, this holy doctour was so sure of Purgatory, that he thought these also to go through the same: and yet the fiery flame to haue geuen place as it did to the three children,Dan. 4. and as S. Augustine supposeth it shall do in the generall conflagration to the bodies of vertuous men, whē at the very same time it shall bothe waste the wicked, and purge the meane: the workes of one sorte withstanding the flame, the drosse of the other in a maner feeding the same. S. Ambrose therfore thus writeth of the holy Apostle. De morte Ioannis aliqui du∣bitarūt,Serm. 20. in Psal. 118. de transitu per ignem dubitare non possumus, quia in paradiso est, & à Christo non separatur: some doubt of Iohns death, but of his passage by the fire, because he is in ioy with Christ, we can not doubt. And of S. Peter he sayth. siue ille sit Petrus qui claues accepit regni coelorum,Psal. 65. oportet dicat transiuimus per ignem & aquam & induxisti nos in refrige∣rium. Yea if it be Peter him selfe to whome the keyes of heauen were committed, he must say: we passed by fire and water, and thou hast brought vs into the place of refreshing. But how so euer God worketh in this case with the perfite sort, this the Church beleueth, and so this doctour teacheth, and ther∣fore I dare be bolde to say it, that such neither suffer any paine, nor tariaunce by the waye. Though by nature, that fire or tor∣ment prepared for the amendment and punishing of sinne or the drosse thereof, might of force and right take holde there, where corruption of sinne by any meanes hath bene, that is not wholy purified before. Therefore the soule of our Sauiour, being altogether vnspotted, coulde not be subiect to any sufferance in the worlde to come, by any ordinaunce prepared for the punish∣ment of sinne: that fire hauing no further graunt by creation
and naturall property, but to waste there where sinne is founde to haue bene. Vpon other it woulde worke till all corruption were consumed, if mercy did not preuent both in purifying those sin∣gular elect vessels, and in repressing the nature of the flame pre∣pared, that it practise not iustice, where God hath abundantly shewed grace and mercy before. Albeit I do not say that the firie sworde is in the passage of euery soule towardes heauen, for that is Gods secret: and I will with S. Ambrose in the same place say: Quod legi praesumo,Ibidem. quod nō legi scientibus relinquo. That which I haue reade, in graue authority, that will I boldely auouch: that which I haue not reade, with feare and reuerence I commit to men of more know∣ledge. As with out exception I submit my selfe to the determi∣nation of Gods Church in all these pointes of misteries, which in this deepe matter course of taulke may driue me vnto. But now for the meaner sorte that with Christian faith and good workes haue yet some baser building of infirmity or lighter trespasses al∣so, those must needes be tried by the fire of iuste iudgement, in the worlde to come. And this is that which S. Augustine calleth so often the Amending fire. S. Ambrose the firy sworde,Vide Rupe¦tum in 3. cap. Genes. In Ser. de S. Nicolao. S Ber∣narde termeth it the place of expiatiō, In quo pater benignus examinat filios rubiginosos, sicut examinatur argentum: In which our mercifull father trieth his rusty children as siluer is tried. VVhih all these holy fathers with the rest, oftentimes do name by the commō calling of Purgatory. Reade all these place is named if thou hast occasion thy selfe, and there thou shalt finde to thy singular comforth, sufficient proofe of thy faith, great mo∣tion of godly life, with necessary feare of Gods iudgements. Thou shalt maruell at the ignorance of our time, that could euer doubt of so plaine a matter: thou shalt pity with all thy hearte the vn∣worthy deceiuing of the vnlearned, and haue large matter to withstand the deceiuer, and to helpe the simple home againe. 2 The rest of this chapter is so vainly consumed, in serching how the perfect men shall passe through purgato∣ry and feele it not, that it is not worth the aunswering, but onely to see how he is combred to reconcile the doctrine of the Papistes concerning purgatory, and the opinions of
the olde writers, touching them that passe through fire in∣to paradise. For their opinion (as we haue seene before) was that all men were they neuer so iust, passed through that fire, and were purified thereby. The Papistes affirme, that perfect iust men come not at all in their purgatory, as the M of the sentence teacheth lib. . dist. 21. M. Allen to re∣tayne the authority of the olde writers, holdeth that per∣fect iust mē passe through this purgatory, without sense of payne, or making any stay there, yea he doubteth not to affirme, that Christ him sele passed through the fire of pur∣gatory, though he could not feele the smart of it, because he was pure from sinne. Is not this holsome doctrine think you? to be so carefull to racke the fiery sworde, that Am∣brose speaketh of, vnto purgatory, that he is not ashamed to inuent a new article of our faith, that Christ descended in∣to purgatory. A place alleged for purgatory out of S. Matthevv, vvith cer∣tayne of the auncient fathers iudgements vpon the same. CAP. X. 1 ANd yet it shall be conueniēt, that I helpe the studious reader with further proofe out of the holy Scripture, that he may be fully established in his faith, and the ad∣uersary heretike wholy confounded in his misbelefe: If he list not rather (as I heartely pray to God that he may) geue ouer that vnnaturall plea, holden to long against the Catholike Church our mother. Geue eare then vnto the wordes of our Sauiour written in the Gospell of S. Matthew:Cap. 5. Esto consentiens aduersario tuo cito dum es in via cum eo: ne forte tradat te aduersarius iudici, & iudex tradat te ministro & in carcerem mittaris. Amen dico tibi non exies inde donec reddas nouissimū quadran∣tem.Lucae. 12. Be at agreement with thine aduersary speedely, whiles thou arte with him in the waye. Lest that aduersary deliuer thee vp to the iudge, & the iudge commit thee to an officer, by whome thou may be cast into prison: surely I say vnto thee, thou shalt not get
out, till thou haue discharged the vttermost farthing. Now being desirous of the trueth and true meaning of this letter, (for the vnderstanding maketh all) because there may arise by the darkenesse of that figuratiue speach some diuersity of sense, let vs indifferently wey euery worde, and with diligence examine the circumstances of the texte whereby any light may appeare. And first being admonished to agree with our aduer∣sary, we may right well know that he meaneth not by the commō enemie of our kinde,1. Petri. 5. that rometh about seeking whome he may deuour: for his cruell assaultes must onely by resistaunce be with∣stand. Neither the worde which the Euangelistes there vsed,. Litigator. seu actor. can properly signifie any malicious enemy, that by hatered of our per∣son is become our deadly foe, as those which be skillfull in the language is wherein they wrote, do confesse: But rather, as well the worde as the iust consideration of the place, driueth vs to ac∣knowledge that this our aduersary, here signifieth our brother, which hath iuste quarell against vs in iudgement, for that we woulde not geue eare vnto him sharply admonishing vs of our faultes, being therefore an aduersary to our viceis and fleshly cō∣uersation. In which sort, to vs that are flesh and bloude, and redy to euill from our youth, all be aduersaries that preach Christ, the amendement of licentious maners, repentaunce of our loth∣some life past,Vide Bern. ser. 85. super Cantic. or els vse against vs the rodde of correction and bodyly punishment, that our soules may be saued in the day of the appearing of our Lorde. To this kinde of aduersary, Christ councelleth and commaun∣deth vs, for our great good, to agree and consent whiles we be here in the way of this our pilgramage and transitory life: lest all these meanes which he wroght to reduce vs to the perfection of a Christian godly life, be as it were a witnesse of our contempt, & him selfe our accuser before the iudge, that shall so iustely re∣ward euery man according to his deedes: that is Christ him selfe,Act. 10. to whome the father hath geuen all iudgement. VVhose mini∣sters being Angels, either good or badde, for the execution of iustice vpon sinners, shall at his appointment cast vs into the pri∣son and dongion, there to be holden from life and liberty, till we haue paide the last farthing: the toleration of which bondes shall recompense the debtes, which by wel doing and much mourning,
in the way of this world, we refused to pay: as S. Augustine pith∣thely speaketh in these wordes.De libero Arb trio. lib. 3. cap. 15 Si non reddit faciendo iusti∣tiam, reddet patiendo miseriam: he that paieth not his debt by dooing that which is iust & right, he shall pay it by suffering mi∣sery. VVhich we trust the pitifull paines of that prison, through the only desertes and merites of Christ our Lorde and God, shall so discharge, that after the payment either pardoned or fully made, we may haue ioyfull accesse to his blessed presence. For the forme of speache vsed in like ordre of wordes by both the Euangelistes, doth vs plainely to vnderstande, that we may through Christ make full payment thereof. Ells he woulde not by likelihood haue saide, that we shoulde not scape forth till we had discharged▪ the vtmost farthing, but rather that seuere iudge would haue geuē charge, that the offender should be boūde hand and foutte, and cast into the darke doungion of euerlasting danation prepared for the deuill, and his angels: which is the second and euerlasting death.Carcer. Namel the worde of Imprison∣ment so well agreeing therevnto, that it may not well admit any other meaning, but a place of temporall torment. For a prison is a place of correction & chastisement of such as be on liue, in which as longe as life lasteth a man may be in hope of liberty, though his bondage for a time be neuer so vntollerable: but when sen∣tence of death is once pronounced in this worlde, or damnation in the next, then we may right well knowe Gods mercy to be shutte vp, and the party desperate of all recouery. Neither the name of Imprisonment in Scripture, is lightly taken for the place of euerlasting punishment, nor can by conferēce of the sun∣dry partes of this letter, haue here conueniently any such sense. CAP. X. 1 HEre according to M. Allens orderly proceding, is alleged for purgatory a place out of S. Mat∣thew, where Christ saith to him that neglecteth to reconcile him selfe to his aduersary, before he came to the iudge, that he shall be cast into prison from whence he shall not come, vntill he haue payed the vtter∣most farthing. The meaning of Christ is playne, that he
shall neuer come out no more, then that wicked seruaunt, which was cast in pryson vntill he shoulde pay the whole debt which was ten thousand talents. Matth. 18. But before we goe any further, let vs se how the doctrine of this chap∣ter agreeth with that we had in the chapter next before. Thee we were told, that purgatory serueth but for veniall sinnes, or else for such mortall sinnes as by forgeuenes in this life obtayned, are made veniall trespasses. But here not onely vices and fleshly conuersation, but also contempt of all that preach Christ and repentaunce of our lothsome life past, &c. are sayd to be the debt that must be dischar∣ged in purgatory to the vttermost farthing, then the which no vice is more mortall, nor farther from forgeuenes. For he that not only leadeth a lothsome life, but also contem∣neth all those meanes that Christ hath wrought to reduce him to the perfecton of a Christian godly life (I vse his owne wordes) how can he haue remission of his sinnes in this life, and yet M. Allen dare promise him, that the tole∣ration of bandes in the prison of purgatory, shall recom∣pence his debt, and bring him from thence into the bles∣sed presence of Christ. M. Allen hath the most passing fa∣culty of any that euer I heard, to build one thing in one leafe, and to ouerthrow it him selfe againe in the next. Ne∣uerthelesse I can not abide that he should promise a par∣don of that payment, which Christ sweareth shall be made vnto the vttermost farthing. For he that refuseth reconci∣liation or repentance in this life, must not looke for a par∣don after this life. Therefore if M. Allen will needes vnder∣stand this pryson for purgatory, I will be so bold vppon Christes oth and earnest asseueration to affirme, that he which is so imprisoned shall neither looke for mercy nor satisfaction by other mens payment, but by his owne suffe∣ring. But let vs see how he proueth, that this place is to be vnderstood of purgatory? First by likelihood that he should not haue sayd: he shall not escape vntill he hath payd the vttermost farthing, but rather, cast him into the darke dun∣geon of euerlasting damnation. M. Allen either can not, or will not see, that Christ here continueth an allegory of a
temporall iudgement, as Matt. 18. where he hath the same, Donec, as the same in like sense is often vsed else where. Se∣condly the name of imprisonment, will not well admitt (he sayth) any other meaning, but of a temporall torment, as though hell is not called a prison. 1. Peter. 3. And Apoc. 20. which is a place of euerlasting torments. Therefore here is no shew of matter but bigge wordes onely 2 And these notes well and diligently considered, may geue greate light to the alleaged wordes otherwise somewhat obscure, and therewith proue our matter too. They be not of my scanning onely, as for some parte thou shalt perceiue by these wordes of Rupert,Super. 5. ca. Matth. an excellent good author. Aduersarius eorum qui erant eiusmodi sermo fuit euangelij, & omnis praedicator euangelicae veritatis, potestatem habens non consentien∣tem sibi tradere iudici: & non solum iudici, verum etiam malo ministro, quemadmodum vnus eorum tradidt homi∣nem satanae. The aduersary of such men was the worde of the Gospell, and ech preacher of the trueth, who had poure to deliuer him that would not agree vnto him to the iudge: yea further then that, he had authority to commit him to an euill minister, as one of them gaue vp a man to Satan. Here we see what that aduersa∣ry is, to whome we must consent in this life: and withall, we haue an example in this iudgement of Gods ministers, how man may be committed in the next life to a tormenter, that may vexe him then at Gods prescription, as he doth now at the charge onely of his minister: then in fauour and mercy of the iudge, as it is now in loue and charity of the vicegerent, then for the atteining of heauens blesse, as it is nowe for the saluation of the person puni∣shed. Lib. 21. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 13. For the executiō of Gods sentence may be either by a good spirite, or our aduersary Angell, or by his will and worde onely, to whome all creatures serue and obey. In this sense Paulinus, who was S. Augustines peare, writeth that the holy Ghost and Gods worde, be mans aduersaries in earth: to whome if we applie our selues obediently in this world, our sorowe can not be long in the next life. But these be his owne wordes.Ad Aman∣dum epist 1. Neque septem dies luctus noster excedat, si consentiamus in huius vitae via, aduersario nostro, id est,
spiritui ac vei bo dei quod nobis peccātibus aduersatur, &c. Our griefe can not be much longer then seuen dayes (he mea∣neth it shall be a temporall paine, and not very long) if we con∣sent in the way of this life to our aduersary that is to witte, the spirite and worde of God. For they be our aduersaries when we sinne: because the holy Ghost chargeth the world with sinne, and the worde of God, if we obey not, will be our accuser and promo∣tour vp vnto the Iudge: who will haue an accompt of his talent, to the vttermost farthinge. Thus farre spake this Author: and in like sense many moe whome I neede not nowe name. Because there is such store of testimonies, that not onely in some part make for the opening of this scripture: but altogether for Purgatory. And one or two of them I will briefly recite: because I determi∣ned with my selfe, and bounde my selfe, for my discharge and the readers more safe warraunt, to bring no texte of scripture for the proofe of my purpose, except I might finde some holy wri∣ters of the antiquity that vsed the same directly in that sense: that if any mā would reprehēd my meaning, yet he should not be so bold with such as I cā name, & proue to be my authors therin. 2 In this part are two testimonies alleged, one of Ru∣pertus, an other of Paulinus, of which Rupertus affirmeth his exposition of the aduersary, but touching purgatory he sayth nothing. Paulinus interpreteth the aduersary some∣what otherwise, but he speaketh of them that doe agree with him in the way of this life, whose sorrow he sayth shal not exceede seuen dayes, but what sorrow they shall abide that contemne this agrement, he sayth nothing, but gene∣rally of the accompt of the vttermost farthing. I maruell whether M. Allen was awake when he alleged these two testimonies for purgatory, or whether he thought that all men should be asleep that should reade them. 3 But whome may I more safely alleage for the contentatiō of sober wittes, and repressing the aduersaries boldenesse, then the blessed martyr S. Cyprian? VVho in the forth booke of his Epistles, for the declaration that euery one which here is par∣doned of his sinnes, shall not straight be exalted to the glory of
sainctes and martyrs after their death, vseth very fitly (as he doth all other placies of scripture) the forsaide text, by these wordes.Epist. 2. Aliud est ad veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam perue∣nire: aliud, missum in carcerem non exire donec soluat no∣uissimum quadrantem, aliud statim fidei & virtutis accipere mercedem: aliud pro peccato longo dolore cruciari, & pur∣gari diu igne, aliud peccata omnia passione purgari: aliud denique pendere in die iudicij ad sententiam domini, aliud statim a domino coronari: In English: it is an other thing to stande at a pardon, then out of hande to atteine to glory: it is an other maner of matter to be cōmitted to prison, thense not to de∣part till the last farthing be discharged,See hovv fully he ex∣presseth both the vvorde and meaning of purgatory.He calleth the sentēce of God in the next life iudgement. & to receiue out of hand the rewarde of faith and vertue: It is one thing by greate sorow to be tormented for our sinnes, and by long fire amended & pur∣ged of the same, and an other to haue sufficiently purged them by martyrdom: in fine, it is not all one to hange on Gods sentence in the day of iudgement, and out of hande to be crowned of our Lorde. These wordes as you see, expressely proue our matter, open the meaning of the scripture whereon we nowe stoode, and do clearely set forth the ordre of Gods iustice in the next life. And they shall content the reader better, if he marke vpon what oc∣casion this blessed man spake these wordes. There were many in the persecutiō of that time, that for feare or worldly respectes, denied their faith, and offered to idols: who afterward, the storme of tyrannie somewhat being caulmed, confessed their faulte, and did penaunce for the same, by S. Cyprian & other good byshops prescriptiō, that then ruled the Church of those dayes. By whom, after due satisfaction made, they were admitted to the commu∣nion of the Christian company, & receite of the holy Sacraments againe. But all pastours not of like mercy of seuerity in the case, some were suspended from the vse of the Sacraments longer, and othersome by more clemency with speede pardoned againe. Now S. Cyprian, though he were very seuere in such a cause, (as in all his workes it doth well appeare) yet he was blamed by An∣tonianus & others, that he dealte ouer mekely with such as de∣nied their faith, in so speedy admission of them to the peace of Gods church, as they then termed that reconciliation: alleaging, that if such wordely wind wauerers might be admitted so soone
after, the open deniall of their faith, then there woulde none sted∣fastly stande to death, by confession of their belefe and their maisters name, any more: the refusers being in as good case as they, if pardon might so soone be procured. But S. Cyprians aun∣swere is this: that their admission can not withdrawe any mans zele from martyrdom, or confession of Christes name, seeing their reconciliation doth not set them on so cleare bord as martyrs be: VVho being tried by their bloud shal straight receiue the crowne of glory: VVhen the others standing but vpon pardon of their sinnes, and not discharged of due paines for the same, must into prison notwithstanding, till they haue paide their vttermost due∣ty: and by longe amending by fire, at the last come to that reward, which the martyrs atteined by sufferance at the first. And thus I thinke this holy Martyr meaneth.Markevvel. His wordes surely be singu∣lar and being well vnderstande, they conteine as much matter for our purpose, as can be possibly in so litle roume: besides the exposition of the texte wherein we yet do stande: But I will adde more, that all may be safe on euery side. 3 The place of Cyprian hath more couller, but yet not so cleere for purgatory as M. Allen would seem to make it. For first it is plaine by the wordes both going before and following after, that he speaketh of adulterers that are par∣doned in the Church, of whome some bishoppes that were Cyprian his predecessours had so harde a iudgement, that they did vtterly seclude them from reconciliation, and al∣lowed them no place of repentaunce, but Cyprian was not of that vnreasonable seueritie, for his Church did receiue them, although they compted them not equall with mar∣tyrs or continent persons. For it is one thing to be admit∣ted by pardon, as adulterers are, but yet with some note of ignominie, an other to come to glory, as martyrs and continent persones doe. It is one thing by denying of re∣conciliation to adulterers in this life, to driue them to that prison, from whence they shall not come till they haue payed the vttermost farthing, an other thing to compt them vnreconciled, like them that immediatly receiue the reward of there faith and vertue. It is one thing for a man
after he hath bene longe time vexed with sorowe for his sinnes, to be reformed as one that hath bene long purged in the fire, an other thing by suffering persecution to haue purged all his sinnes. Finally it is one thing to hange vpon the sentence of God in the daye of iudgement, as they seeme to do which being penitent for their heynous sinnes, yet are not absolued from them by the Church: An other thing to be assured of their crowne, which haue striued lawfully. And this I take to be the simple meaning of Cy∣prians words, agreeing with the circumstaunce of the place. But if they were otherwise ment by him, surely they can not but with carte ropes be drawene to the Popes purgato∣ry. For those that stande by pardon he excludeth from glory, and those that are reformed by sorrow and purged by fire, he suspendeth vntill the last daye, and then maketh them vncertaine of the sentence also: which can not stande with the Papistes opinion of purgatory: no more then that which he writeth in his treatise against Demetrianus to∣warde the ende. Quando isthinc excessum suerit, nullus iam locus poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur aut tenetur &c. When men are gone hence, there is no place of repentaunce, no effect of satisfaction: while we are here life is either lost or helde. And exhorting Demetrianus him selfe to repentaunce which had bene a wicked man and a persecutor of the Christians, he sayth to him: Tu sub ipso licet exitu, & vitae temporalis occasu, pro dilictis roges Deum, qui vnus & verus est, confessionem & fi∣dem agnitionis eius implores, venia confitenti datur, & creden∣ti indulgentia salutaris de diuina pietate conceditur, & ad im∣mortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur. If thou although it but a litle before the ende and decay of this temporall life shall pray to God for thy sinnes, which is the onely true God, If thou desire confession and faith of his knowledge, pardon is giuen to him that confesseth, and holsome forgeuenes of the goodnes of God is graunted to him that beleueth, and euen from the howre of death he passeth into immor∣talitie. By this appeareth what Cyprian his iudgement was of purgatory and the effect of satisfaction after this life.
4 Eusebius Emissenus,Homil. 3. de Epiphania. an author of great antiquity and much credit in the Church of God helpeth our cause by this no∣table discourse following. Hi vero qui temporalibus poenis digna gesserunt, ad quos sermo dei dirigitur, quod non exient inde donec reddant nouissimum quadrātem: per fluuium igneum de quo propheticus sermo commemorat,Dan. 7. & fluuius rapidus currebat ante cum, per vada feruentibus globis hor∣renda, transibunt. Quanta fuerit peccati materia, tanta erit pertranseundi mora, quantum accreuerit culpa, tantum sibi ex homine vindicabit flāmae rationabilis disciplina: & quā∣tum stulta iniquitas gessit, tantum sapiens poena deseuiet. Et quia sermo diuinus quodammodo aeneae ollae animam comparans:Ezech. 24. Pone ollam super prunas vacuam donec in∣calescat aes eius: illic periuria, irae malitiae, cupiditates, quae puritatem nobilis naturae infecerant, exudabunt: illic stan∣num vel plumbum diuersarum passionum, quae aurum diui∣nae imaginis adulterauerant, consumentur. Quae omnia hic ab anima separati per eleemosynas & lachrymas com∣pendij transactione poterāt. Ecce sic exigere habet ab ho∣mine rationem qui seipsum pro homine dedit, & confixus clauis, legem mortis fixit. Thus it is in our tongue. As for all such, vnto whome for their offenses our Lordes word is especially directed, that they shall not come out till they haue payed the vttermost farthing: Those must passe the fiery floode, by horrible fordes of skawlding waues: VVhereof the Prophet ma∣keth mention thus. And a firy streame ranne before his face. The space of passage shall be measured by the matter of sinne: according to the encrease of our offensies, the discreite discipline of that flame shall reuenge againe: and looke how farre in wic∣kednesse our foly did reach, so farre this punishment shall wisely waste. And like as Gods worde compareth mans soule to a bra∣sen potte, saying: Set the potte empty ouer the coles till the brasse thereof of waxe hote. So there thou shalt see periury, angre, malice, vnfructefull desires sweate out, which did infect the purity of mans noble nature: there the pewter and leade of di∣verse passions, which did abase the pure golde of Gods image, shall be consumed away. All which thinges might in our life time haue easely bene wiped away by almes and teares. Such a strait
accompt loe will he kepe with man,He alludeth to the place of the secōd chapter to the Colos∣sians of the obligation of death vvhich vvas against vs. that for mans sake gaue him selfe to death, and being throust through with nailes, hath faste∣ned the dominion of death also. So farre hath Emissenus spo∣ken: and his wordes be so weighty, that they haue bene counted worthy rehersall in solemne Sermns and Homilies of the Anti∣quity, to stirre vp their hearers to the necessary awe of Gods iudgements, with much prouocation of vertuous life. S. Augu∣stine hath the selfe same discourse, almost no word thereof chaun∣ged: VVith this addition: Ideo (fratres charissimi) conuer∣tamus nos ad meliora,Homil. 16. Tom. 10. dum in nostra potestate sunt reme∣dia: Therfore deare brethern let vs turne and amende by time, whilest the remedies be yet in our owne dealinge. And in an o∣ther place thus he toucheth the scripture alleaged: Apparebit Deus Deorum in Syon:In Psal. 103. sed quando? post peregrinationem finita via, si tamen post finitam viam, non iudici tradamur, vt iudex mittat in carcerem. The God of Gods in Syon shall appeare: but when? mary after our pilgramage be past, and the iourney ended. Excepte it s fall out, that after our iourney here, we be deliuered vp to the iudge, & so the iudge send vs to prison. To this place also S. Bernarde doth seetely, but yet feare∣fully allude in this exhortation:In vita Hū∣berti. Volat (sayth he) irreuocabile verbum, & dum creditis vos cauere poenam istam mini∣mam, incurritis multo ampliorem. Illud enim scitote quia post hanc vitam in locis purgabilibus, centupliciter quae fuerunt hic neglecta reddentur, vsque ad nouissimum qua∣drantem. Our worde, not possible to be called backe, flyeth farre: and whilest you seeke to auoyde a litle griefe here, you incurre much greater. For assure your selfe of this, that after this life, in places of purgation, all negligencies past must be re∣paide a hundreth foulde home againe, till the discharge of the last farthinge. 4 As for this authority of Eusebius which hath serued for a patch to peece vp so many homilies, of so many di∣uerse men as a Cuckowes song vttered in diuerse places, se∣meth neither to haue Eusebius nor Augustine, nor any other good author to be the father of it, but euen some cowled cuckowe, that hath left this egge in so many birdes nestes
to be hatched vnder their winges, and to be counted for one of their chickens, but that your voyce doth soone be∣wray it. And here a man may note a great peece of cunning in them that had the writing out of bookes, about those times when errours began to take strength, that not onely whole workes were falsly intitled to diuers good authours, but also patches inserted to their owne workes. And if any thing by them were once spoken, that sounded to the con∣firmation of those errors, that was thrust into diuers places of their writings, lest it should scarse be espied in one. And hereof it commeth, that such sayings in Augustine, Chryso∣stome and other, as seeme to allow prayer for the dead, be so often repeated in their writings, and especially in homi∣lies that were taken of their mouthes, by Scribes and No∣taries. But who so euer was the father of this sentence as he speaketh friendely for the paynes of purgatory, so he sheweth him self an vtter enemy to the release of the same. So doth that Augustine which addeth his exhortation to these wordes by him repeated. But the other Augustine, which writeth vpon the 103. Psalme sayth, that God shall appeare to them onely, which are not cast into prison when they be departed out of this life, therfore I muse wherefore those wordes are here brought in. For Augustine (as I will shew afterward) vnderstandeth that prison for hell and e∣ternal tormēts. Bernard although he be too yong to depose in this cause, yet he speaketh not so much to auouch the paynes of purgatory as to deny the remedy or remission of them: wherefore his testimony helpeth not purgatory so much one way, as it hindreth the Papistes gayne an other way. 5 Here now let our aduersaries in this bright shining trueth, blinde them selues: let them boldely bost, of their accusto∣med impudency, that the Catholickes haue no scriptures, nor apparence of scriptures: or if they stande with vs for the mea∣ning, let them shape with all their conueyaunce, any one shifte to aunswere these doctors words: Or if the vniforme consent of so many of the best learning, and greatest wisedom in the whole
Church, may haue no roome with them, let them shew whereupon their owne credits be growne so great, that without reason, likeli∣hood, or authority, men must needes beleue them. It is a straunge case, that what soeuer they auouch, it must be Gods word: what meaning so euer they make for maintenance of their wicked fo∣ly, it must be termed the true sense of Scripture: And the truth it selfe shewing all force, in the conference of diuers places of holy writte, in weight of reason, in the workes and writings of all antiquitie, shall be so lightly regarded. I would to God the people pitifully deceiued by such vayne flying talke, could beholde the vpright wayes of truth, or could learne by the playne dealing of our side, to require some groun∣ded proofe of these newe doctors deuises.The diffe∣rence be∣tvvixt the Catholikes dealing, & the aduer∣saryes. They may well perceiue if they haue any necessary care of those weighty matters tou∣ching our saluation so neare, that the Catholike neuer aduentu∣reth to bring any Scripture for his purpose, but he will be sure for his warrant, to haue the same so expounded by the auncient fathers of our faith: lest by his rashnesse he deceiue other, and father some falshood vpon the holy writers of Gods will: which were horrible sacrilege. But on the other side if a man might pose M. Caluin, or Flaccius, or such other of that light family, what doctor or Scripture they followed in the exposition of S. Iames his place, for the anoynting with holy oyle, when they were not a∣shamed to giue this sense of that Scripture:Iacob. 5. that it were good to call the elders of the people, that had some salue or oyntment me∣dicinable to ease the sicke mans sore: what woulde they say? I am sure such fellowes will not excuse them selues by ignorance, (for the arrogancy of that sort, had rather be counted either ma∣licious or presumptuous, then vnskilfull) but of passing boldnes all such must needes be noted, that dare shape such an exposition of Gods blessed word, which they neuer heard surmised of any wise man before. VVhat doctor did they or Luther follow, when they expounded S. Paules words of widowes mariage after vowes made,1. ad Tim. 5. which the text calleth breaking their first faith, to be ment by the promise of the Christian faith made in Baptisme? VVas not this a galant glose in this sense? she that breakes her faith of baptisme, shall be damned for mariage. Aske them where these prety scholes were first picked. Pose maister Iewell where
he had, that the Church of God might erre. You shall see them earnestly vrged in these matters, how litle they haue to say, and yet how fast they will tennesse one to an other in talke. But I will not make a reckoning of their vnseemely gloses: I woulde their followers would onely but aske them in all matters, from whēce they had such new meanings, which they falsly father on Gods word: that we might once hedge them within some com∣passe of reason, as we be contented with all our hearts, to charge our owne selues in euery matter that we handle, as partely they may conceaue by our discourse, and shall more clearely anone. 5 Here M. Allen like Thraso vpon the stage alone, must shew his veyne in foolish insultation, as though he had o∣uerthrowne a whole army of men, when he hath not killed a mouse: he lacketh but his Gnato to hold him vp with ait aio, negat nego. For we must be examined, and M. Caluine, & M. Iewell must be posed, as though men had nothing to say, but that which M. Allen will imagine they can say. For my part I will not refuse to satisfie his demaunde. He wil know and haue vs aposed, from whence we haue that new mea∣ning of our Sauiours wordes, that he which is cast into pri∣son for neglecting of reconciliation while he is in the way, is cast into hell, from whence he shall neuer come. As it is most playne by the very wordes of the text that our Sa∣uiour Christ speaketh of iudgement with all extremitie, & without all mercy, so this sense hath sufficient witnesse of antiquitie greater then that I thinke M. Allen dare except against them. First Chrysostome vppon this place of Matthew vnderstandeth the prison to be a temporall punishment of imprisonment in this life affirming that Christ doth not onely threaten torments of hell fire after this life, but also citation, iudgement and imprisonment. But that auncient doctor whose commentary of 54. homilies hath long gone vnder Chrysostomes name being by Erasmus iudgemēt as aū∣cient and well learned as he, hath these wordes vpon that place. Si autem quam diu in via huius vitae es, non feceris pacem cum aduersario quem laesisti, sed sic inimicantes per mor∣tem ieritis ante iudicem Christum, tradet te Christo, conuincens
te reum in iuditio eius, & iudex tradet ministro: id est Angelo poenarum crudeli, & ille mittet te in carcerem Gehennae. But if thou shal not haue made peace with thine aduersary whom thou hast offended, while thou art in the way of this life, but that you goe on in your contention by death before Christ the iudge, he shall deliuer thee to Christ conuicting thee to be gilty in his iudgement, and the iudge shall deli∣uer thee to the minister, that is to the cruell angell of tor∣ments, and he shall cast thee into the prison of hell fire. Augustine de sermone Domini in monte lib. 1. Non exeas inde donec soluas nouissimum quadrantem, semper non exiturum esse quia semper soluit nouissimum quadrantem, cum sempiternas poe∣nas terrenorum peccatorum luit. Thou shalt not come out vn∣till thou hast payd the vttermost farthing, he meaneth that he shall neuer come out, because he is alwayes paying the last farthing, while he suffereth euerlasting paynes for his sinnes committed on the earth. S. Ieronym sayth the sense of that place is manifest by that which goeth before and fol∣loweth, that the Lord exhorteth vs to peace and concord, while we are in this life, and reproueth them that seeke a∣ny other interpretations. Chromatius also an olde writer vp∣on this place of S. Matthew sayth: Tradi ministro, &c. id est praeposito tormentorum, vt missus in carcerem Gehennae, debitas peccati poenas absoluat. To be deliuered to the minister that is to the chiefe tormentor, that being cast into the prison of hell fire, he may pay the punishment due for his sinne: againe in the same place, à quo tradetur ministro, id est angelo tormentorum, mittendus in carcerem Gehennae. Vnde non dimit∣tetur, nisi etiam nouissimum quadrantem reddat, id est omnem poenam debiti etiam vsque ad nouissimum peccatum exsoluat. By the iudge he shal be dliuered to the minister, that is to the angell of torments to be cast into the prison of hell fire. From whence he shall not be let goe, except he pay euen the last farthing, that is, he shall pay all the punishment that is due vnto the last sinne. Nowe let M. Allen say, if he dare, that these witnesses lacke either age or credit, or else lette him say tongue thou diddest lye when he sayd our inter∣pretation of the Scripture was without all reason, likeli∣hood,
or authoritie. But now to the appositions a word or two, though out of the compasse of purgatory, but we must follow M. Allen whether so euer it pleaseth him to range. M. Allen what Flaccius or any such as he is hath sayd neither doe I know neither doe I regard, lette them aunswere for them selues: But whereas you charge M. Caluine to expounde the oyle whereof S Iames speaketh cap. 5. for a medicinable salue or oyntment, all rethoricke set aside, I say plainly you lye, for he vtterly reiecteth that exposition, Interpreting that place of the grace and gift of the healing, which then was vsed in the Church with the outward signe of oyle, as appeareth also Mark. 6. But as for them that interprete the first faith which those widdowes reiect, that after they waxe wanton against Christ, they will marry, &c. for the fayth of Baptisme and christianitye, they can not follow a better doctor, then S. Paule him selfe in the same chapter, where he sayth, that who so neglecteth to prouide for his owne familie, hath denyed the faith and is worse then an infidell? what faith is this? but the faith of Christianity, but yet he is more plaine in these wordes, where he calleth it the first faith, for what is the first faith, but the faith of Baptisme and Christianity, and as for M. Allens cauill, she that breaketh her faith of Baptisme, shalbe damned for mariage, is not worth a rush. For S. Paule sayth not, she shalbe damned for mariage, but because she hath reiected the first faith, that is such wanton young houswifes procede so farre, that at length they forsake widowhood, christianity and all. But if M. Allen were posed where he findeth this worde  in the Scripture, vsed for a vowe or promise made to God, perhaps he would aunswere he is no Graecian, then let him pose D. Hardinge, or some other with the same question, and with all let them shew how the first faith can be ex∣pounded for the last vowe, that a body hath made, if he haue made more then one. For the Papists holde that these women made one vowe in baptisme, an other of there widowhood. What so euer M. Iewell hath affirmed against the Papistes, he hath so substantially and learnedly defen∣ded,
that he neede not to haue any other man to aunswere for him. Therefore if it were not to choke M. Allen in his owne coller, I woulde trauaile no farther in this question. The Church you say can not erre, and that company is the Church, which hath the Pope for their head, if therefore it can be proued, that the Pope and all they that take his part, haue erred, it is sufficiently shewed, that the Church may erre. S. Augustine was in this error (as you will not de∣ny) that the Sacrament of the body and bloud of Christ was to be ministred vnto infants, but of the same opinion he affirmeth, that Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and all the Church in his tyme was, therefore the Pope and all the Church did erre. reade Augustine contra Iulianum lib. 1. cap. 2. where he sayth of Innocentius: Qui denique paruulos defini∣uit, nisi manducauerint carnem filij hominis vitam prorsus habe∣re non posse, which hath defined that infantes, except they eate the flesh of the sonne of man, can haue no life at all in them. And by eating the flesh of the sonne of mā, he mea∣neth eating the Sacramēt of his flesh and bloud, as it is eui∣dent to them that wil bestow the reading of Augustines dis∣course in that place. An aunsvvere to certayne obiections of the aduersaries, moued vpon the diuersitie of meanings vvhich they see geuen in the fathers vvritings, of the Scriptures before alleaged for pur∣gatory: and that this doctrine of the Church standeth not against the sufficiencie of Christes passion. CAP. XI. 1 BVt nowe the other side seeketh for some shiftes, and draweth backe in this extremity thus. That the places of the olde and new Testament,Obiect. now rather alleaged for my purpose and the proofe of purgatory, though they be thus expounded of the doctours, yet they may haue some other meaninge, and sometimes be construed otherwise by the fathers them selues. To which I aunswere, and freely confesse that they so may haue in deede:Aunsvvere. but the aduersary must take this with all, that the pillars of Christes Church woulde neuer haue geuen this sense amongest other, or rather before all other mea∣ninges
that probability or conferēce of scriptures did driue them vnto, had it conteined a plaine faulsehood, as the heretike sup∣poseth it doth. Yea had not the doctrine of Purgatory bene a knowne trueth in all ages, it should neuer by the graue iudgemēt of so many wise men, haue atteyned any colour of scripture. For though many meaninges be founde of most harde places in all the Bible, yet there is no sense geuen by any approued doctour, that in it selfe is false. And thinke you diuerse textes of the holy Scripture coulde haue caryed a false perswasion of Purgatory, downe from the Apostles dayes to our time, for true doctrine? Marke well, and you shall perceiue that the Church of Christ hath euer geuen roome to the diuersitie of mens wittes, the di∣uision of graces, and sondry giftes in exposition of most places of the whole testament: with this prouiso alwayes:Diuersity of sensies be allovved, so that none of them cō∣teine any falsehood in it selfe.The diligēt vvatch that the Church keepeth o∣uer the trueth. Epist. 110. that no man of singularity should father any falsehood or vntrueth vpon any texte: but otherwise, that euery man might abounde in his mea∣ning. Mary falsehood she neuer suffered one moment, to take holde or bearing of any scripture, vnreprehended. Ecclesia mul∣ta tolerat (sayth S. Augustine) & tamen quae sunt contra fidem vel bonam vitam, non probat, nectacet, nec facit. the Church beareth many thinges: yet such thinges as be hourt∣full to faith or good life, she neuer approueth, nor doth them her selfe, nor holdeth her peace, when she seeth them done by others. Thereof we haue a goodly example in our owne matter. So long as any conuenient meaning might be found out by the holy writers, of that place alleaged out of S. Paule for such as shoulde be saued through fire, she liked and allowed the same. Some pro∣ued that the elect must be saued by long sufferance, some said the tribulation of this life and world must trie mens faith & workes, some saide the greefe of minde in loosing that which they ouer much loued, was the burning fire of mans affections: some woulde haue the greuous vexation of departure out of this life, to be a purgatory paines: some construed the texte, of the fire of confla∣gration, that shall purge the workes of many in the latter day: finally they all agreed, that the temporall torment of the worlde to come is litterally noted, and especially meant by the fire which the Apostle speaketh of. All these so litle do disagree amongest
them selues, that not onely by diuerse men, but of one man they might well all be geuen. And being all in them selfe very true, the holy Church so liketh and alloweth them eche one, that yet by the common iudgement of all learned men, that meaning for Purgatory paines, she approueth as the most agreeable sense to the texte, and whole circumstance of the letter. But as soone as Origen went about to proue by the same scripture, that all wic∣ked men shoulde at length be saued after due purgation by fire: then this pillar of trueth seeing an open falsehood gathered by the scripture of Gods worde, coulde susteine no longer. She set vp against this errour her pastors, the graue fathers of our faith. who ceased not, as occasion serued, to geue men warning of the deceite intended: not onely still mainteining the doctrine of Purgatory. but also expressely condemning all the reprehenders thereof, as hereafter it shall be better declared: and so misliking no sense that in it selfe was true, the meaning of Purgatory yet, hath bene of all the learned counted so certaine, that in geuing any other likely exposition, that was euer added with all, as most con∣sonant to the will and wordes of the writers. So doth Theodo∣retus, so doth S. Augustine, and so in a maner did they all. And as the saide holy doctour saith (with whose wordes I am much delited, by cause he of all other maketh trueth stand most plainely vpon it selfe.12. Confess.) One texte of scripture may well haue so ma∣ny vnderstandings as may stand with trueth, and be not re∣pugnaunt to good life and maners. And he hedgeth the di∣uersity of mens wittes in the exposition of scripture, with in the double knot of loue, which is towards God and our brother: Who so euer (sayth he) taketh him selfe to vnderstand scripture or any parte thereof,De doctri. Christiana lib. 1. ca. 36. and in that meaning edifieth nothing at all the double loue, of God and our neighbour, he mis∣seth the true meaning thereof. But who so euer can finde out such a sense that may be commodious to the increase of charitie, although it were not directly intended by the writer, yet he is not harmefully deceiued, nor founde a lyar therein. so sayth he. Now as for our matter, I am well assured, there dare no man, though he were destitute of Gods grace, yet not for shame of him selfe, affirme that the doctrine of purgatory is hourtfull to vertuous life, the only miscredit whereof, hath vt∣terly
banished all good Christian condicions: or iniurious to the faith of Gods Church, which is not only agreable, but principally intended by the plaine letter of Gods worde, and consonant to all other meanings, that may be gathered by any such scripture as we haue alleaged there for: and to be short, receiued of so many fathers, so wise, and so well learned, as we haue named for that purpose, as a trueth most reasonable, most naturall, and most agreable to Gods iustice. VVell then, the misbeleuers can haue no shifte nor escape, by the chalenge of Gods word, or doctures, or diuersity of sensies: here is no holde for errour: all I trust be safe and sure on eue∣ry side. CAP. XI. 1 YOu shoulde breake your olde wonte, if you did not in this chapter ouerthrow something, that you haue builded in that which went next going before. He hath labored all this while to proue, that purgatory hath grounde in the Scriptures, now he cō∣fesseth franckely: that there hath bene no text of scrip∣ture by him alleaged to proue it, but it may haue an other meaninge, and is sometime other wise construed of the fa∣thers them selues. I will aske no more to proue that pur∣gatory hath no grounde in the worde of God, which is not an ambiguous oracle, that may be drawen euery way like a leaden rule, & hath but one true sence or meaning, which is the right meaning of the holy Ghost. For although di∣uerse men may geue diuerse interpretations of some ob∣scure and harde place, which all conteine no impiety or falshode, yet the spirite of God meaneth but one thing, and not what euery mans wit and iudgement will take it to be. True it is that so longe as the proportion of faith is kept, the Church beareth with them that geue wronge interpretations, but the spirite of God which is in his Church, alloweth not wronge interpretations for right. And where as M. Allen alloweth all the interpretatiōs that the fathers haue made of the text by him alleaged, as true,
so long as they affirmed no error, he may by the same rea∣son affirme, that contradictories are true, as in that saying of him that shall not come out vntill he haue payed the vttermost farthing: some haue expounded, that he shalbe alwayes punished, some that he shall not be alwayes pu∣nished. One sayth he shal neuer be released, an other saith, he shall be released at length, how is it possible that both these interpretations can be true? and yet both these in∣terpretations are founde in some writers. But his suerest shifte is, that the doctrine of purgatory, was a knowen trueth in all ages. But this is the whole matter in contro∣uersie. For how can it be taken for a knowen trueth in all ages, which hath none so suer grounde in any text of scri∣pture, that cā be wrested for it, but the same text may haue an other, and that a true interpretation. But of the anti∣quity of that error, we shall haue better occasion hereafter to discusse in the second booke, where this matter is of pur∣pose intreated of. In the meane time, we wil take that which is here graunted so liberaly, that there is no text of scrip∣ture alleaged for purgatory, but it may be otherwise truely interpreted, and not of purgatory, and that the fathers haue so done by M. Allens owne confession. 2 Their extreme and onely refuge is, that the paine of Christes passion,Obiection. and his sufficient payment for our sinnes, stan∣deth not with our satisfaction or penaunce in this life, nor with paine or purgatory in the next. O Lorde how farre may mans ma∣lice reach? that not contented to abuse their reason and the word of God in persuasion of errour, but are bolde to referre Christes blessed death also,Aunsvvere. to cloke together with falsehood, wanton and licentious liuing. Many vertuous persons haue bene prouoked by the medita∣tion of our Sauiours sorowes, to leaue the stattering welth of this worlde, and to charge them selues with perpetuall vexation of body: but that any did euer so rest vpon Christes passion, that in respect thereof, they might passe their dayes in idle welth of lust and liberty, that was (I trow) vnhearde of, before this sinne∣full sect. These fellowes argue thus: Christ hath paide the full
price of our sinnes, ergo we must do no penaunce, nor suffer any paine for them. But S. Paule thus: Christ by paine and pas∣siō is entred into the glory of his kingdome,Rom. 8. ergo if we looke to be his fellow heires, or partakers of his glory, we must suffer affliction with him, and ioyne with him in paines and passion. S. Peter also thus: Christ hath suffered, leauing you an exam∣ple that ye should follow his steppes,1. Petri. 2. therefore all his blessed life passed in paine must be a perpetuall sturring vp of toleration, & gladde suffering for his name againe.Matth. 3. Iohn our maisters mes∣senger prepared the way of Christes death and doctrine, by wor∣thy fructes of penaunce: and that was the beginning of Christes owne preaching,Matth. 4. therfore I dare be bolde to say these thinges are not abrogated by the teaching of the Gospel, nor voide by Christs passion: which onely maketh our workes and merites, to be of that value and acceptation, that all Catholike men counte them of: which els to the satisfying for sinne shoulde be nothing a∣uaileable, nor to the atteining of heauen any thing profitable. But it is foly to make ouer many wordes in a case so plaine, seeing the example of both God and good mens dealing, abun∣dantly proueth mans punishment either temporall or eternall, to stande well with the excellent value of our Sauiours death. For if paine for sinne, were iniurious to Christes death, then, the holy prophet Dauid that liued long in greuous penaunce, were iniurious to his Lordes death: then the Church were iniurious to her owne spouse his death, that chargeth all offenders with penaunce: then God him selfe were iniurious to his owne sonnes death, that sharply punisheth sinne forgeuen: then Christ him selfe were iniurious to his owne death, that both by his ex∣ample and holy preaching, did euer commend sharpe penaunce and paine. These delicat teachers of our time, that vnder pretence of preaching the Gospell, auouching the glory of God and the grace of our redemption, haue serued mens lustes, abandoned the olde austerity of Christian life, and rased out of the peoples hartes the feare of Gods iudgements, were foreseene by the holy Apostle Iudas: And he calleth them, Impios,Iudas in e∣pist. transferentes Domi∣ni nostri gratiam in luxuriam. VVicked men, turning the grace of our Lorde vnto wantonnesse and lust. Against whome
also S. Paule made this exception:Ad Gal. 5. that they shoulde not in any wise by the freedome of our redemption chalenge any liberty of the fleshe. Notwithstanding Christes passion then, we must not otherwise thinke, but to suffer for our owne sinnes: not as helping the in∣sufficiencie of his merites, but as making our selues apte to re∣ceiue that blessed benefit, which effectually worketh vpon no man, but by meanes: nor serueth any to saluation, but by obe∣dience of his will and worde.Ad Haebr. cap. 5. For if Christes death shoulde worke accordinge to the full force of it selfe, it woulde doubtlesse suppe vp all sinne, and all paine for sinne: it might wipe away death, both of this present life, and eternall: it woulde leaue neither Hell, Purgatory, nor paine: the price and worthinesse thereof being so aboundaunt, that it might, being not otherwise by the vnserchable will and wisedome of the sufferer limited, saue the whole worlde. But now ordinary wayes by Gods wisedome appoin∣ted for the bestowing of that excellent medicinable cuppe, (as S. Augustine termeth it) and condicions required in the parties beside,Articulo. 1. falso imp. Christes death doth not discharge vs of satisfaction for our sinnes, nor of any other good worke, whereby man may pro∣cure his owne saluation. 2 The sufficiency of Christes passion is compted a light argument to M. Allen, but the weight thereof shall not withstanding beae doune all the blasphemous doctrine of Popery. He sayth thereby we cloke falsehoode and li∣centious liuinge. The Lorde knoweth that he claunde∣reth vs. Then he will frame our argument therof as he list, but there in he doth vs too much wronge. But thus we rea∣son in deede: Christ hath payed the full price of our sinnes, therefore there is no parte of the price left to be payed by vs. Christ hath fully satisfied for our sinnes, therefore their remaineth no satisfaction for vs. Christ hath suffered for our iniquities, therefore we are healed by his stripes. And yet we neither exclude repentance, nor the true fructes thereof, which are good workes, but rather we establish them. For Christ hath payed the price of their sinnes, that repente and beleue in him, that follow his steppes, that
walke in his precepts, but neither our repentaunce, nor our fayth nor good workes deserue any thing, onely the death of Christ is all our merite, and the onely meane by which the same is applied vnto vs and we receiue it, is our fayth, thus the scripture teacheth, thus we beleeue. And as for that vaine amplification of M. Allen, that the full force of Christes death woulde suppe vp all sinne, death, hell, and paine, we may see there by how Sathan deludeth heretikes to extende the benefits of Christes death vppon a fonde supposition beyonde the limittes of his will, & not to allow the same to stretch so farre, as Gods determination hath apointd it. Christ hath satisfyed for our sinnes, yet we must make satisfaction our selues. Christ by his suffering is become a cause of saluation to all that beleiue in him, yet euery man by good workes must procure his owne sal∣uation. These are the enemies of the crosse of Christ, which glory in their owne shame whose ende is confusion. 3 And I am not a frayde to vse the word Satisfaction,The vvorde Satisfaction so abhorred of heretiks is common vvith the old fathers. with Cyprian, Ogen, Ambrose, Augustine, and the rest of that blessed fellowship: VVho right wel knew the valew of our redemp∣tion, and the force of that satisfaction which our Sauiour made vpon the Crosse. I dare well leaue these pety diuines and speake with the grand capitanes of our faith and religion. And I woulde to God I coulde as well in any part come after them, in example of Christian life: VVho not so much in worde, as in the course of all their conuersation, lefte vnto vs perfect paterns of great and greuous penaunce. Their longe watching and wailinge, their straunge, weyelde, and waste habitation, their rough appareling, their hard lying, their meruelous fasting, their perpetual praying, their extreme voluntary pouerty, and all this to preuent Gods iudgement in the worlde to come, for those small infirmities and offensies of their fraile life, may make our aduersaries ashamed of them selues, that neither will followe their blessed steppes, nor yet (which is the greatest signe of Gods anger towardes them that can be) like it, and allowe it in others. 3 Touching the worde of Satisfaction, vsed by the
olde writers, I haue shewed before, that they vsed it not in that sense, which the Papistes doe. And I confesse with M. Allen, that they not onely knew, but also haue expres∣sed the valewe, of our redemption by Christ in such words, as it is not possible, that the Popish satisfaction can not stand with them. Against the valew of which redemption, if they haue vttered any thing, by the worde of satisfaction or any thing els, we may lawfully reiect their auctoritie, not onely though they be doctors of the Church, but also if they were angels from heauen. There heartie bewayling of their sinnes, and fructes of true repentaunce, that they shewed, not to iustifie them selues thereby, but to humble them selues before God, and to cause their light to shine to his glorie, we praye God we may follow, not to set vp our righteousnesse, but to the prayse of his name. An euident and most certaine demonstration of the trueth of Purgatory: and the greuousnesse of the paines thereof, vt∣tered by the prayers and vvordes of the holy doctors, and by some extraordinary vvorkes of God beside. CAP. XII. 1 ANd we also, that by Gods grace and great mercy be Catholikes, must needs here con∣ceiue singular feare of Gods terrible iudg∣ments, which of iustice he must practise vpon our wickednesse, that liue nowe in pleasure and worldely welth after such a carelesse sorte, that men may iudge we haue no respect of the dredfull day, nor care of Purgatory, which in wordes we so ear∣nestly mainteine.For Christes sake, let all Catholikes here at∣tende. The deepe and perpetuall feare whereof, cau∣sed our elders not only to leade their life in such perpetual paine, but further forced them to breake out in bitter teares, and vtter most godly prayers, that they might escape the iudgement of God, exercised by the paines of Purgatory at the ende of our shorte and vncertaine life. Some of them I will recite, that our hartes may melte in the necessary foresight of that terrible time, and the heretikes be ashamed to deny that, which so constantly
in worde and worke they euer professed. For feare of this fire to come, holy S. Bernarde maketh this meditation. O vtinam magis nunc daret aliquis capiti meo aquas, & oculis meis fontem lachrymarum, fortè enim non reperiret ignis exurēs, quod interim fluēs lachryma diluis∣set. Oh woulde to God some man woulde nowe before hande pro∣uid for my heade abundaunce of waters, & to mine eyes a foun∣taine of teares: for so happely the burning fire shoulde take no hold, where ronning teares had cleansed before.Ser. 55. in Cantic. And thus againe the same blessed man debateth the matter with his owne con∣science. I tremble and shake, for feare of fawling into Gods handes: I woulde present my selfe before his face already iudged and not then of him to be iudged. Therefore I will make a reckening whiles I am here, of my good deedes and of my badde: my euill shall be corrected with better works, shall be wattered with teares, shall be punished by fasting, and amended by sharp discipline. Prouision must be made that I bring not thether cockel in steade of corne, or chaffe together with Wheate. I shall rippe vp to the very bottome all my wayes, and my whole studie, that he may finde no∣thing vntried, or not fully discussed to his handes:Naum. 1. And then I hope in his mercy, that he will not iudge for the same faultes, the second time In the like godly sense spake another, longe before his dayes: Beatus qui hic mala sua deflere,Emissaenus de poenitē∣tia Niniuit. qui hic debita sua festinat exoluere, & innocentiam quam iam non potest per baptis∣mum reparare, recuperare studeat per summum poeniten∣tiae fructum: ad tales merito ipse Dominus loquitur, non iu∣dicabo bis in idipsum. Happy is he that euer he was borne, that with speede bewaileth his sinnes, and in time dischargeth his debtes: that he may so endeuour to recouer by the fructes of pe∣naunce his innocency, which by baptisme he can neuer repaire againe: to such surely our Lorde sayth, that he will not call twise to accompte for one faulte. CAP. XII. AFter the exhortation to your fellow Papistes to stande in awe of purgatory, you bringe in the meditation of
Bernard for feare of the fire thereof. If you meane thereby to terrifie your fellow Papistes, it is somewhat, for you know he is a very late writer, and therefore his authoritie with vs is of small accompt in such cases, as he followeth the com∣mon errour of his time. I would both you & your fellowes not for feare of temporall paynes, but either for loue of God, or feare of eternall damnation, would leaue your bla∣sphemous heresies, contrary to God word, your sclaunde∣ring, persecuting, and murthering of Gods Sainctes, and re∣forming your life after the rule of Gods Gospel, would take hold of Christ by faith, to your eternall health, and so sor∣row for your sinnes, that you might reioyce alwayes, as the children of God doe. The saying of Emissenus proueth no feare of purgatory, but of Gods iudgement vnto condem∣nation preuented by repentaunce. 2 S. Ambrose sheweth his feare also of Purgatory by this prayer.Precat prae∣paratoria 2. ad mis. Quod si etiam in illo adhuc saeculo aliquid in me vindicandum reseruas, peto ne me potstati daemonum tra∣das, dum scelus meum Purgatoria poena detergis. O Lorde (sayth he) if thou reserue any whit in me to be reuenged in the next life, yet I humbly aske of thee, that thou geue me not vp to the power of wicked spirites, whiles thou wipes away my sinnes by the paine of Purgatory. Lo good reader the feare and fayth of our fathers: lo how olde this doctrine is, how auncient the worde is. But in an other place the same author expresseth his care and continuall cogitation of this iudgement to be practised in Purgatory, comparing thus S. Peter his state with his owne. Ille (sayth he of S. Peter) examinabitur vt argentum, ego examinabor vt plumbum,In Psal 118. Serm. 20. donec plumbum tabescat ardbo: si nihil argenti in me inuentum fuerit, heu me in vltima in∣ferni detrudar, aut vt stipula otus exurar: si quid in me in∣uentum fuerit auti vel argenti non per meos actus, sed per gratiam & misericordiam Christi, per ministerium sacer∣dotij, dicam fortasse ego: Etenim qui sperant in te, non cō∣fundentur. In English. He shall be tryed as siluer, but I must be searched and examined as leade: till the leade melt awaye, must I continually burne. And if then there be no siluer matter
founde, wo is me, I shall be throust downe to the neither partes of the deepe hell, or wholy waste away as strowe in fire. But if any golde or siluer be founde in me, not through my workes, but by grace and Christes mercy, and for my ministery and priesthood sake, I shall also once say: those that put their trust in thee, shall neuer be confounded. Alasse Ambrose was thou so carefull fr wasting away in thy purgation? what shall become of vs, where all is drosse, and no fine substance: so continuall sin∣ning, and so litle sauluing: where the dignity of priesthood, whereby thou conceiued such comfort is almost worne away? his feare was so harty, and his meditation of purgatory paines was so earnest, that he conceiueth a doubt in respect of his desertes, of wasting away, and further casting into damnation: though he knew right well, that man admitted to the temporall iudgement of the next world, could not euerlastingly perish, but because the paines of the one is so like the other, the griefe of thē both light∣ly occupieth mans minde at once: especially where mans case is doubtfull, and often deserueth the worse of the twayne. 2 That Ambrose that writ the preparatory to masse, might be afferd of purgatory, & of tormēting by deuils al∣so, as his words are. But Ambrose of Millayne wrate no such booke. It is sufficient for Papists, that euery vnlearned asse may intitle his fantasies to some auncient writer, and then they must be authenticall. But draffe is good enough for swine. As for that Ambrose that wrote vpon the 118. psalme, sheweth a feare of hell, if God should deale with him ac∣cording to his iustice, but by the grace and mercy of God, which is dispensed by his ministers, he recouereth him self being assured that all they that trust in him, shal not be con∣founded. M. Allen translateth per ministerium sacerdotij, for my ministery and priesthood sake, as though he ioyned his priesthood with the grace of Christ. I had rather referre it to the priesthood of Christ, but that I haue geuen the true meaning of his wordes before. 3 So S. Augustine likewise, after that he had vttered his feare of hell in the Prophet Dauids person, as I sayd once be∣fore,
streight he adioyneth his request vnto God, to saue him from Purgatory paynes, by the Prophets wordes also. I will recite his minde in English:In Psal. 37. O Lord amend me not in thy anger, but pourge me in this life, that I may escape the amending fire, which is prepared for such as shall be saued through fire. And why? but because they build vppon the foundation woode, hay, and strawe. men might build gold, siluer, and precious stones, and so escape both the fires, thone of eter∣nall punishment for the wicked, and the other, which shall correct them that must be saued through fire. But now be∣cause we reade that he surely shall be saued,Note here Christian reder, vvhe¦ther. S. Au∣gustine dou¦ted of pur∣gatory, as the lying & vnlearned aduersaries vvould make the simple peo∣ple beleue. De vera & falsa poeni∣ten. Cap. 18. therefore that fire is not much regarded. And yet let them be boulde of this, that though they be saued by fire, it shall yet be more fearse and greeuous, then any thing that man may susteine in this life, though both Martyrs and malefactours haue suffered straunge torments. Againe in an other place the same holy doctour vttereth the like saying: VVhich I will repeate al∣so, that the world may behold the vniust dealing of the contrary part, that in the booke of their excuse why they departed out of the Church (they call it their Apologie) be not ashamed to a∣uouch, that S. Augustine sometimes denyed, and sometimes dou∣ted of Purgatory. Thus he writeth then against such deceiuers, and for the defence of him selfe and the Churches faith. Sed si etiam sic conuersus euadat, vitam viuat & non moriatur, non tamē promittimus quod euadet omnem poenam. Nam prius purgandus est igne purgationis, qui in aliud saeculum distulit fructum conuersionis. Hic autem ignis etsi aeternus non sit, miro tamen modo est grauis, excellit enim omnem poenam quam vnquam passus est aliquis in hac vita. Nun∣quam enim in carne inuenta est tanta poena, licet mirabilia passi sunt Martyres, & multi nequiter iniqui tanta sustinue∣runt supplicia. Studeat ergo quilibet sic delicta corrigere, vt post mortem non oporteat talem poenam tolerare. If a sin∣ner (sayth he) by his conuersion escape death, and obtayne life, yet for all that I can not promise him, that he shall escape all paine or punishment. For he that differred the fruites of repen∣taunce till the next life, must be perfited in purgatory fire. And this fire, I tell you, though it be not euerlasting, yet it is passing
greeuous: for it doth fare exceede all payne, that man may suf∣fer in this life. Neuer griefe in this flesh could be so great as it, though Martyrs haue abiden straunge torments, and the worst sort of wicked men, exceeding great punishments. Therefore, let euery man so correct his owne faults, that after his death he may escape that pitifull payne. So farre S. Augustine: By whom we see not onely the truth of our Catholike doctrine liuely and ve∣hemently set forth, but to the great feare of vs all, the weight of Gods sentence, and the payne of that vntolerable punishment, a the Church of his time taught and beleued, to passe all mortall & transitory woe in the world. 3 Concerning Augustine we haue answered before, that as that errour of purgatory, was somewhat risely budded vp in his time, so he seemeth not alwaies to be cleare of it, al∣though in some places he is not so certaine of it, but that he affirmeth it may be enquired of, and peraduenture shall be found to be so, peraduenture it shall still remayne hidde or vnknowen. 4 VVhereof, it hath pleased almighty God sometimes,The paynes of purgato∣ry hath ben reueiled to many holy persons. to geue man a tast, by calling some one or other aboue the common rase of nature out of this mortall life, and speedy restoring him from the state of the departed, to the company of the liuing a∣gaine. VVhich worke though it be straunge in nature, thought vnlikely to misbeleuers, and contemned of such as would extin∣guish the spirite of God, yet it hath bene the vsuall practise,1 Thes. 5. since the beginning of our faith and religion, of the holy Ghost, so to trade mans frailey in faith & feare of Gods Iudgements. Some∣tymes, the liuing  in traunce or sudden chaunge by Gods om∣nipotency taken vp to the vewe as it were, of the vnspeakeable treasures of the prepared ioyes, or extreame calamities of the world to come, So was the Apostle S. Paule,2. Cor. 12. he could not tell howe him selfe, called to the beholding of Gods maiesty and mysteries vnspeakeable: So was S. Iohn in spirite caused often to behold,Apocal. 20. and presently in a maner to see, not onely the affayres of Gods Church till the worldes ende, but also the happy Seate of the Lambe, the eternall ioy of the elect, and the euerlasting lake of
the damned, with the infinite sorowe of all the forsaken sorte. And so haue many one sith that time, in the same spirite, had a present taste of all those iudgements, which by any meanes through the vnsercheable ordinaunce of God, be prepared for sinners. Sometimes also, by the same force of the Spirite, the departed haue appeared amongest the liue:Ecclesi. 4 6. 1. Reg. 28. as Samuel the prophet to king Saul, vttering thinges to come. Or if that were not Samuel him selfe, because that practise of vnlawefull artes may be thought not conuenient for the procuring of the Prophets owne persons apparition:Matth. 17. yet Moyses was in deede personnaly present with Christ in the Mounte, at his transfiguration. And as he at Christes cal came from the dead out of the bousom of Abraham, so did Elias at the same time come from Paradise (as S. Augustine af∣firmeth) and were both conuersaunt and in talke with Christ,Intercourse betvvixt the liue and dead, though it be not or∣dinary, yet it is not im∣possible. De cura pro mor. cap. 16 & in the sight of the Apostles at once: from whense they departed at Christes appointement, to their seuerall abode and rest againe. VVhereupon, the same holy doctour confesseth, that these rare & meruelous workes of God though they follow not the common or∣der of nature, yet they be neither impossible, nor vnpractised in Christes Church. Alij sunt (sayth he) limites humanarum re∣rum, alia diuinarum signa virtutum: alia sunt quae naturali∣ter, alia quae mirabiliter fiunt. The common course and limites of mans matters, be of one sorte: and the wonderous signes of Gods power and vertue, of an other: the workes that natural∣ly be wrought, are nothing like such thinges, as meruailously and miraculously be done. And as Christ in his owne person, made many extraordinary workes to beare testimony of his diuinity, so he woulde that the glory of God and faith in him, should take deepe roote and large encrease through out all nations, not onely by preaching and worde, but by workes also. which the same holy Ghost for the sal∣uation of the beloued flocke, disposeth by the eternall wisedome, where, when, with whome, and as he listeth. Mary as these be the most secret wayes and vnknowen steppes of Gods spirite, and therefore most humbly to be reuerenced of the faithfull: so because they are so farre from the rase of natu∣rall affaires, and much ouerreach flesh and bloude, they are often
of fooles contemned, and of the vnwise wisdome of worldlinges, as extreme madnesse improued. The expresse signes of Gods spirite, wrought by the Sauiour of the worlde in his owne person,Matth. 12. were with singular blasphemy, of the prowde Iewes referred to Beelzebub, The tokens and wonders wrought by his Apostles, were attributed to vnlawfull artes,VVicked men haue e∣uer resisted the holy Ghost. and misconstrued of most mis∣creants to false intentes. It was euer a speciall note of incredulity, to blaspheme these peculiar steppes of the spirite. S. Cyprian complaineth of such misbeleuers in his time: that woulde not agree to the trueth after especiall reuelations had of the same: VVhich kinde of men, he noteth in the latter ende of an epistle, by these wordes. Quanquam sciam, omnia ridicu∣la, & visiones ineptas quibusdam videri, sed vtique illis,Lib. 4. epist. 9. qui malunt contra sacerdotes credere, quam sacerdoti: Sed nihil mirum, quando de Ioseph fratres sui dixerunt, ecce somniator ille venit. Although (sayth he) I know right well howe litle accompte they make of visions, which they esteeme as mere trieftes: But yet it is such onely, that had rather be∣leeue against, then with Gods priestes. And no meruaill that is, seeing good Iosephs owne brethern saide by him in mockage. Lo yender comes the dreamer. So did they scoffe at him,Genes. 37. because he had more familiarity with the spirite of God, then the other had. 4 Now followeth a large and needelesse apologie of visions and reuelations, the doctrine of which is briefely and plainely set forth in the worde of God, what so euer is consonant to the word of God is to be receiued, that which is not agreable therewith, is to be detested, although not a man from purgatory, but an angell from heauen were the bringer of it. Then seeing the doctrine of purgatory is blas∣phemous against the merites of Christes death, though all those fables of visions that are fayned to defende it were true stories, yet are we nothing moued with them. I passe ouer the impudency of this man, which is not ashamed to compare so many thousand fables, or illusions of Sathan, as are reported to the maintaining of purgatory: to the re∣uelation of S. Paule and the Apocalypse of S. Iohn, or the
appering of Moses and Elias with Christ. They may be in deede a great nombre of them not vnlike to that spirite of Samuell which was raised by the witche, which as Augustine affirmeth, and M. Allen dare not simply deny, was the spi∣rite of the Deuill him selfe. 5 Now as the ioyes of heauen & Paradise, with the tormēt of sinners and other secrets of the next life, haue bin straungly represented to some one or other in all ages, by sundry meanes most expedient to our saluation, and most seemely to the wisedom and will of the worker, so certainely, no article was euer with more force of spirite, or more graue authority set forth sence the beginning of Christian religion, then this one of Purgatory. Ne∣uer nation was conuerted to the faith, but it had this trueth not only taught by worde, but by miracle also confirmed. And namely in that aboundant floode of faith, when it pleased God, almost at once to spreade his name amongest all these contryes, it was thought most necessary to his diuine wisedome, together with the true worship of his name, to plant in all faithfull mens heartes, the awe and necessary feare of that greeuous torment, for the re∣uenge and iust iudgement of wicked life. This greeuous payne was vttered by the very sufferers them selues. as we may see in the notable histories of Paschasius and Iustus,Cap. 24. l. 4. dialogorum reported by S. Gregories owne mouth. This greeuous punishment was agayne declared by Furseus: who, as the reuerent Bede reporteth, had the beholding of the eternall blesse the euerlasting miery,Cap. 13. li. 3. and the temporall payne of the next life. Drichelmus also, by the or∣dinaunce of God taken from amongst mortall men into the state of the next world,Lib. 5. ca. 13. after he had seene likewise, the terrible iudge∣ment of God practised euen vpon the elect, was restored to life a∣gaine in our owne nation, and was a witnesse worthy of all credit, of this same truth, not only by his word (wherof he was so sparing all his life time after, that he would not vtter this same mistery but with singular care and respect of the persons intent, that as∣ked him thereof) but namely by passing great penaunce, and in∣credible chastising of his body, which proceded of the sensible knowledge that he had of the paynes prepared. And being asked sometime (as holy Bede sayth) why he so tormented him selfe,
in the willing toleration of extreme heate, or contrary cold, both of frost and snow, he made aunswere simply and shortly, Frigidi∣ora ora ego vidi: austeriora ego vidi: Ah maisters I haue seene colder: I haue seene sharper. Meaning by the vnspeakeable paines of Purgatory. The whole history of his visions, with many the like,P. Beda. may be reade in the Ecclesiasticall history of our owne nation, written by as faithfull a witnesse, as euer was borne in our lande: of such vertue, that he woulde begile no man wil∣lingly, of so great wisedome, that he woulde report no tale nor triefle rashly: of such grace and learning, that he was well able to diserne a false fable and superstitious illusion, from a true and diuine reuelation. For as it were foly and mere vanity, to geue credit to euery spirite, so to condemne a spirite, or reuelation, or any worke of Gods finger approued by the Church of God,1. Cor. 12. in which there hath euer bene the gifte of discerning spirites, it is properly a sinne a∣gainst the holy Ghost. And because euery man hath not that gifte, as I woulde not counsell any man, ouer lightely to geue cre∣dit to euery priuat spirite and peculiar vision, because they may come of wicked intentes and sinister motions, so I thinke it were good, in feare, reuerence and humility, to commit the discerning of such thinges, to the spirite and iudgement of Gods Church. VVith the belefe of euery peculiar mans phantasie, we are not charged: with humble submission of our whole life and belefe, to the Church of Christ, there are we especially charged. And be∣cause there is nothing reported either in the workes of S. Gre∣gory, or in Bede, or in Damascen, or in any other the like, con∣cerning the paines either of the elect or the damned in the next life, but as much hath bene vttered before, by all the holy and learned fathers, in great agony of minde and feare of the saide iudgement, we may be the more bolde to thinke the best, or ra∣ther we are bounde to thinke the best of that spirite, which so conformably agreeth with the doctrine of the Church, and faith of all the fathers. There can no man say more of Purgatory nor more plainely,Damasce∣nus voat purgatoriū baptisma ignis. then S. Ambrose, being in a maner a frade him selfe, of wasting away in that horrible tormēt: none more effectually then S. Au∣gustine, that confesseth there is no earthely paine comparable
vnto it,Lib. 4. Cap. 10. de ortho fid.Ad Amandū epist. 1. none more fearefully then Eusebius Emissenus, who termeth it skaulding waues of fire: none more pithely then Pau∣linus, that calleth those places of iudgements, Ardentes tene∣bras burning darknesse. More peculiarly may the circumstances and condicion of that state by God be reueled, but the trueth thereof can not be more plainely declared, nor better proued. These babes feared no bugges I warraunt you: neither picked they Purgatory out of Scipio his dreame, but they had it out of Gods holy worde, and tradition of the holy Apostles, and by the very suggestion of the spirite of trueth. All which if it can not moue the misbeleuer, and stay the rashenesse of the simple decei∣ued sort, it shall be but lost labour to bring in any more, for the confirmation of that trueth, which all the holy doctours haue so fully both proued and declared to my hande. 5 The tales that you tell out of Gregory and Bede, may be hearde as they are tolde, and beleeued as they deserue, but that you make the opinion of purgatory such an article of faith, that no article with more force of the spirite, nor with more graue authority was set forth sence the begin∣ning of Christian religion (and yet neuer taught in the scripture) that is by no meanes to be borne with all. If Sa∣than hath labored to plante that error, which is most blas∣phemous against Christ, and occasion of most licentious wickednesse in all them that professe Christ and beleue it, if Sathan (I saye) hath bent all his force to plante such an error, by which his kingdome is so much aduaunsed, no wise man can maruell. Of like leuen it is that you affirme. That neuer nation was conuerted to the fayth but it had purga∣tory taught by worde and confirmed by miracle. O impudent affirmer. Of so many nations as S. Luke recordeth in the Actes of the Apostles to haue bene conuerted to the fayth name one, vnto which you can proue that purgatory was taught eyther by worde or miracle. But to be sure, you name all euen of the primitiue Church, when that aboun∣dant floude of faith was spred ouer all countries. But when the proofe commeth, you leape but 600. yeares from Christ, to Gregories dialogues, from which time I will not
deny but you may haue great store of such stuffe, as you haue miracles now in Flaunders of the honest woman of the olde Baylye in London, and such like. 6 But nowe for vs, that through Gods greate mercy be Ca∣tholikes, let vs, for Christes sake, so vse the benefit of this our ap∣proued faith, to the amendement of our owne liues, that where no argument will serue, nor authority of Scripture or doctour can conuerte the deceiued, yet the fructe of this doctrine shewed by good life and vertuous conuersatiō, may by Christes mercy moue them. Let the priest consider that this heuy iudgement must be∣ginne at the house of God, as S. Peter affirmeth, and so doth S. Ambrose proue it must do. In whome,Epist. 1. cap. 4. for the dignity of his ho∣norable ministery, as much more holynesse is requisite,Ambros. vbi supra. so a more straite reckening must be required. Let the Lay man learne, for the auoyding of greater daunger in the presence of the highe Iudge, willingly to submit him selfe to Gods holy ministers: VVho haue in most ample maner, a commission of executing Christes of∣fice in earth, both for pardoning and punishment of sinne: that suffering here in his Church, sentence and iuste iudgement for his offensies, he may the rather escape our fathers greuous cha∣stisement, in the life to come. Therefore I woulde exhorte earnestly the minister of God, that in geuing penaunce, he would measure the medecine by the maladie: aptly discerning the limitation of the punishment, by the quantity of the faulte: not vsing like lenity in closing vp of euery wounde. For they shall not be blamelesse surely, that do the worke of Gods iudgement committed to their discretion, negli∣gently: nor the simple soule that lookes to be set free from fur∣ther paine, can, by the acceptation of such vnquall remedies, auoide the scourge of iudgement prepared: except he him selfe voluntaryly receiue (as I woulde wishe all men shoulde) some further satisfaction, by the fructes of penaunce: that of his owne accorde he may helpe the enioyned penalty, and so by Gods grace turne away the great greefe to come. Excellently well,Epist. 2. and to our purpose saide S. Cyprian in the fourth booke of his epistles, talking of such offenders as were not charged with penaunce sufficiently, or otherwise negli∣gently
fulfilled the same, by these wordes. We shall not herein any thing be preiudiciall to Gods iudgement that is to come, that he may not allow and ratifie our sentence, if he finde the perfect penaunce of the party so require. But if the offender haue deluded vs by fayned accomplishing of his penaunce, then God who will not be deluded because he beholdeth the hearte of man, shall geue iudgement of such thinges as were hidde from vs. And so our Lorde will amende the sentence of his seruauntes. VVhere this doctour seemeth to allude to the accustomed name of Purgatory, which S. Augustine and other do often call the amending fire. Though it may well be, that he here calleth the contrary sentence of iudgement to eternall damnation vpon the impenitent sinner, whome the priest, because he coulde not discerne the fayned hy∣pocrasy of his externall dealing, from the inward sorow of hearte, pronounced to be absolued of his sinnes, it may stande (I say) that he termeth that contrary sentence of God, the correction or the amendement of the priestes iudgement. How so euer that be, it is a worke of singular grace and discretion, so to deale with the spirituall patient, that he haue no nede of the amending fire. 6 Here is an exhortation vnto Papistes, first to the priestes that they will shew the fructe of this doctrine in their conuersation. For my parte,  am perswaded if feare of eternall torments in Hell, that God threatneth by his scriptures, will not terrify them, the fayned paines of pur∣gatory which they can by their owne Masses and other like merits auoide, will not restraine them. The laye men are exhorted to submitte them selues to the priestes, who haue such an ample commission, that they may both pardon and punish sinne, euen as Christ him selfe did vpon earth. But what auayleth this submission? when the ignorant or ne∣gligent priest, that weigheth not the penaunce, in euen bal∣lance with the offence, doth not by his absolution or par∣donning take awaye one houres torments of purgatory as both M. Allen him selfe in effect confesseth, and the Maister of the sentence also teacheth: vnto whome M. Allen hath bene so good a scholler, that he hath borowed of him not
onely his iudgement, but in diuerse places his very wordes also he hath translated. Of the nature and condicion of Purgatory fire: the difference of their state that be in it, from the damned in Hell: vvith the conclusion of this booke. CAP. XIII. 1 IF any curious heade list of me demaunde, where or in what parte of the worlde this place of punishment is, or what nature that fire is of, that worketh by such vehement force vppon a spirituall substance: I will not by longe declaration thereof, feede his curiosity: because he may haue both the example and the like doubt of Hell it selfe, and many other workes of God moe. The learned may see that question at large debated in the bookes of the City of God, and in the literall exposition vpon the Genesis.Lib. 20. And yet after all searche that man can make, this must be the conclusion, with the author of those bookes: Quomodo intelli∣genda sit illa flamma inferni, ille sinus Abrahae,Libro. . cap. 5. illa lingua diuitis, illa sitis tormenti, illa stilla refrigerij, vix fortasse a mansuetè quaerentibus, à contentiose autem certantibus nunquam inuenitur: melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis. I am sure (sayth S. Augustine) the Riche man was in wonderfull feruent paine, and the Lazare in the rest of a pleasaunt abiding, but how or of what nature that Hell flame and fire is to be taken, or Abraham his bosom, or the glottens tongue, or the intollerable thurst in that torment, or the drop to quenche his heat. All these doubtes can scarsely be dissolued and satisfied, to the contentation of him that with humility maketh serche thereof. But to contentious and curious ianglers, they shall neuer be knowen. Therefore better it is to be in doubt of these secrets, then to stand in contentious reasoning of thinges vncer∣taine. So must we thinke also of Purgatory: that the paine there∣of, of what condicion so euer it be, or where so euer the ordinaūce of God hath placed it, is wonderfull horrible. And by force of operation, representeth the nature of our fire: and both by scrip∣tures
and doctors, is most termed by the name of fire, as Hell tor∣ment is. It worketh so vpon the soule of man, as the other did vpon the riche mans soule, and all other that be already in Hell, before the receyuing of their bodies into the same misery, at the generall day of Iudgement. And the sensible griefe may be as great of certaine, as in the other place of euerlasting damnation, as Cyrillus in vita Hieronymi doth declare.Cyrill. CAP. XIII. 1 THis is a very needelesse discourse, vnlesse it were to make vp a browen doosen of chapters, to en∣quire of the nature or condition of purgatory fire &c. and then to be able to determine no∣thing of it. If we shall geue credit to those visions, reuela∣tions, and apparitions, which M. Allen defended so pithily in the last Chapter before, there is no man knoweth his owne house, better thē we may know euery corner of pur∣gatory, the place, the length, the bredth, the depth, the fire, the water, the burning, the scalding, the broyling, the frying, the whipping, the hanging, &c. At the least wise, if M. Allen would haue taken so much foolish paynes, as to haue translated out of that worshipfull author which he ci∣teth, that which he hath written of the qualitie and con∣dition of the paynes of purgatory, he migh haue enlarged this chapter by two or three leaues. That beastly asse and shamelesse counterfector, that calleth him selfe Cyrillus (in the deuills name) Bishop of Ierusalem, writing to such an Augustine as he was a Cyrill, of the miracles of S. Ieronym, maketh a large discourse of the paynes of hell and purga∣tory, as he learned of Eusebius and of 3. deade men whom Ieronym caused to be restored to life after he had shewed them the paynes of purgatory and hell, and this to confute the errour of them that denyed purgatory, I would mar∣uell surely whether impudency in him that inuented that fable, and set it out vnder the name of Cyrillus were grea∣ter then in M. Allen that allegeth his name & authoritie as
antique & authentical, sauing that, that counterfecter play∣ed the foole in the night, but Allen bringeth him forth in the brode daye light. 2 But this is the greate misery, and the difference:The diuer∣sity of the dmneds case, and of such as be temporally punished in purgatory. that such as be in the iudgement of Hell paines, haue no hope of mercy, no passage from their infinite woe, no ende of torment, no release of paine, no expectation of saluation, no comforte by Christ: but endlesse desperation, hatered of vertue, wearinesse of their crea∣tion: sorowe of their owne being and persons: and, which is most vntollerable, perpetual blasphemy, & grisely cursing of Gods holy name. The other being vnder their mercifull fathers chastise∣ment in purgatory, suffer great paine, but in quiet peace of con∣science, in assured expectation and warraunt of their saluation, in loue of Gods iustice and iudgement, euen towardes them sel∣ues, in the vnity of the spirite of God, bearing testimony of them, that they be the children of the houshoulde, in perpetuall expe∣rience of mercy and grace, in daily hope of release, in perfect loue with out all sinne or daunger of sinning, in gladde concei∣uing the benefit of their redemption for the remission of their offenses past, and in worship and confession of Gods holy name, then and after for euer more. And this is the company of the inferiour partes, which boweth their knee, and reuerenceth the name of Iesus, (as the Apostle saith) when the other which be in the deepe hell (the Prophet bearing witnesse) can not prayse nor confesse his blessed name,Philip. 2. which they both detest & blaspheme, to their vnspeakable paine. There hath euer bene, sence the death of the first vertuous man till this houre, and so shall be till the day of latter iudgement, a company of elect and chosen people, that do honour God in the loughers partes: as till Christes descending to Hell, the fathers resting place in generall, and some that suffered for sinne further paine beside. And after, continually as before, the place of Pur∣gatory, to endure for the punishment of certaine, till the latter day, when all the elect shall reigne without griefe or peine, with Christ for euer more.Vide Greg. 4. dialo. 20. & Isiodo. de ordi. creat. And although, the place of this torment, and the nature ther∣of, be not certainely determined, nor knowen to any, but such as
God of his wisedome list reuele it vnto, yet it is with great proba∣bility and likelihood, thought of such learned men as deserue singular credit, that it is in the lower roumes, as sinus Abrahae, may appeare by scripture to haue bene, and separated from hell as it was: because all places of punishmēt after this life, be called of holy writers, conformably to scripture, Inferna. But with cu∣rious searche of these thinges, as we be not charged, so to beleue that iustice is there done vpon sinners, by much sorow and tor∣ment of their soules, by the authority of Gods worde and Church, we are of necessity induced. The care and consideration whereof, if it take deepe impression in our mindes, I am sure it shall worke exceding greate chaunge in our whole life and maners. 2 Here we are taught what the difference is betwene the paynes of hell and purgatory. This difference is not in quality nor quantity, but in respect of continuance, and of the persons. The one is eternall, the other temporall, they that are in one, are desperate and impatient, the other in hope and patience without sinne or daunger of sinning. Surely if those tales were true, that are told of them that are in purgatory, there appeared in some but smal patience. One that was promised by an Angell that he should tarry but 3. dayes in purgatory, after he had bene there but one day, told the Angell to his face, that he was no Angell but a deceiuer, affirming that he had bene there many yeares. A monke that dyed without absolution in the absence of the Abbot, after his death was absolued, and enioyned for penance to tarry in purgatory vntill his body were buried, whereat he cryed so horribly, that his voyce was heard all ouer the abbey, saying, O vnmercifull man, hast thou com∣maunded me to tarry so long in purgatory? A Bishop suspē∣ded a priest for saying euery day masse of requiem, but as the same Prelate went ouer a churchyard, the dead arose e∣uery man with such tooles as they occupied in their life, threatning him, that he should dye for it, he did not re∣store them their soule priest. Againe one that promised his brother to say masse for him immediatly after his death, made hast to performe his promise, as soone as the breath
was out of his hody: but when masse was done his brother appeared to him saying, O vnfaithfull brother, thou hast well deserued the curse of God for me, thou hast let me lye in torments these 20 yeares, and neither thou nor any of my brethren would vouchsafe to say one masse for me. If these and such like narrations, of which the popish homi∣lies and other writings are crammed full, were true reuela∣tions, there were small patience, mekenes, or loue, in some of the purgatory penitentionaries. Yet M. Allen sayth: these are the inferior partes, which boweth their knee and reuerenceth the name of Iesus, as the Apostle sayth Philip. 2. For those that be in the deepe hell, can not prayse nor confesse his blessed name as the Prophet sayth: Although that which Dauid sayth, be true of the damned spirites, yet he speaketh generally of all them that are deade, which can not prayse God in his Church as they doe that are aliue. But S. Paule to the Phi∣lip. speaketh not of any willing obedience, or ioyfull con∣fession of them that be in hell, but of that which is due to the maiestye of Christ, and enforced euen from his ene∣mies. For if none should bow to Christ but they that ho∣nour him willingly, and praise his holy name cherefully, this text should not be verified of so many 1000. Turkes, Iewes and Infidels, that now blaspheme his holy name, but in the day of iudgement, vnto which time the perfect ac∣complishment of this prophecy is referred, they with all the deuills in hell, shal be brought on their knees and acknow∣ledge that Iesus is the Lord to the glory of God and their eternal confusion. And euen now already S. Iames teacheth that the deuils doe tremble. But if onely the soules in pur∣gatory were ment by them that are vnder the earth, at the last day when Christ shall haue his chiefe glory, and purga∣tory as the Papistes confesse, shall be abolished, then there should be none in the infernall partes, that should bow vn∣to Iesus and acknowledge his glorious maiestie according to the prophecy of Esay which S. Paule expoundeth of the last iudgement. Rom. 14. And therefore although M. Allens affirmation of godly men to haue bene in the lower partes from the beginning of the world vnto the end of the same,
were true, as it is most false, yet it would not aunswere the verity of the prophecy, when at that time there shoulde be none, in which time the prophecy should chiefly be fulfil∣led, but of what forehead, or mouth doth this procede? that he affirmeth that Abrahams bosome may appeare by Scri∣pture to haue bene in the lower roomes, though separate from hell His reason seemeth to be, because all places of punishment after this life be in Scripture called Inferna, that is, hell or the lowest places. The Scripture teacheth that A∣brahams bosome was a place of comfort, separate from hel, not with a small border, like the popish limbus, but with an infinite distance  from whence the rich glutton looking vp saw Lazarus a farre of in blessed estate, when he him selfe was in torments. But hereof I haue spoken suffi∣ciently before. 3 Therefore I shall desire all Catholike readers, as they be∣leue this graue sentence of God to come, and feare the rodde of our fathers correction, that they preuent the same, by lowly sub∣mitting them selues vnto the chastisement of our kinde mother the Church. VVho with teares in this her contempt, yet besecheth the children of hir owne how shoulde, that they woulde rather willingly submit them selues to her meeke wande in this life, thē against their willes to the heuy scourge of their angry and iustly moued father, in the worlde to come. The penaunce which her ministers do charge vs with all, is of it selfe not greate, yet accep∣ted with humility and competent dolour of hearte in this time of grace, it may for the most parte, if it any thing be aunswerable to the faultes, or holpen by our owne zele, either wholy discharge vs, or much ease & abbridge the paine to come. Let vs not sticke to adde vnto the prescribed paine by the priest our pastour, some such fructes of repentaunce, as may more and more wash vs from our sinnes: let vs make frendes of wicked Mammon: Let vs re∣deme our sinnes,Luke. 11. Dan. 4. by almes and mercy towardes the poore: Let vs iudge our selues with earnest fasting, aboundaunce of vnfained teares, often watching and continuall praying, & then doubtlesse we shall not be iudged of our Lorde. Let vs detest this abomina∣ble flattering security, which this sinnefull schole so earnestly ex∣horteth
vs vnto: It is the deuill no doubt, that woulde haue man passe his time in pleasure, that he may be reserued to his euerla∣sting paine. A small remedy by mans freedome, in Gods grace here willingly accepted, may cleere acquitte vs of great griefe to come. Loue alone, and earnest zele of Gods house, in this multi∣tude of forsakers, I dare say shall couer a numbre of sinnes: and that which by nature is but duety, in this time of temptation I take it to be greate merit. Let vs be circumspect therefore, and worke whiles the day is here, for in the night of the next worlde, sinners can not helpe them selues, nor worke one moment towards their owne deliuery or release. 3 Once againe he desireth Catholikes not to doubt of this doctrine, but to preuent the paine appointed by their angry father, with patient receiuing the chastisment of their kinde mother, whose meke wande in this life, they were better to susteine, then the heauy scourge of their iustely moued father after this life. In this proper antithe∣sis, the kindnesse of the mother, is preferred before the an∣ger of the father: yea the mercy of the mother, is com∣mended aboue the iustice of the father. It appereth by this, that the Papistes vnderstand not what they say, when they call God father, who taketh vnto him that name, to de∣clare his mercy towarde vs and not his iustice, his loue and not his wrath, to rewarde vs, and not to punish vs, who though he chastise his children for a moment, yet doth he, not exact paines according to the measure of his iustice. As for that Prosopopaeia of the mother, opposing her to the fa∣ther, in worde is more rethoricall, then Christian in deede, and because it is vnfitte for the matter, it is more of garruli∣ty then of eloquence. The rest of the exhortations are such as we haue hearde before, to accept penaunce hum∣bly, to adde to the penaunce zeleously, to merite while time serueth diligently, &c. 4 And for the other sorte which haue bene deceiued by the Maremaides song, I shall humbly in our Sauiours blessed bloude beseeke them, to consider with zele and indifferency what hath
bene saide, and whereon it standeth. And if God him selfe hath in all ages chastised his best beloued people and dearest children, both here and in the next life, if the Church hath practised dis∣cipline, by his authority, vpon all obedient persons, if all ver∣tuous haue charged them selues with paine, if all learned fathers haue both preached and done penaunce, for the auoiding of paines hereafter prepared, if the worde of God expressely make for this, if all learned men with out exception beleued it and feared it, if it agree with good reason, if it setforth Gods iustice, if it duely aunswere to the hatered of sinne, if it raise the feare of God in mans hearte, if it be the bane of prowde presumption, if it be the mother of meekenesse, of obedience, of deuotion, and of all good Christian condicions, let it for Gods loue, I pray thee once againe, take place in thy harte, and driue out that rest and quiet∣nesse of sinne, which these delicate doctors, for thy present plea∣sure, vnder the colour of some honest name, haue deceitfully in∣duced thee vnto. 4 The conclusion hath an exhortation to those whome he termeth deceiued with the Maremaides songe, to con∣sider the weight of his arguments, whereof he maketh a short recapitulation. First if God haue punished his dearest children, not onely in this life, but also after this life, then let purgatory haue place againe: we are content, but vntill it may be proued out of the worde of God, that he hath punished his children after this life, we are not bounde by this argument. Secondly if the discipline of the Church, the exercise of the godly, the doctrine of all learned fathers that haue preached or done penaunce, hath bene for the auoiding of purgatory, then receiue purgatory againe. But if the ende of godly discipline, be either to heale the cu∣rable by repentaunce in this life, or to separat the vncura∣ble from infecting the sounde, if the fructes of repentaūce and good workes of the godly are to be referred, to the te∣stifying of their repentaunce, and their faith, and to the glorifying of God, if the doctrine of all the godly, that haue preached and done penaunce according to the worde of God, haue bene to the same endes, we may not yet geue
place to admit purgatory. Thirdly if the word of God make expressely for purgatory, we would not for our liues deny it, nor doubt of it, but if the word of God doe neither ex∣pressely nor by any probable collection allow, but manife∣stly condemne it, as blasphemous against the passion of Christ: then must we still not onely exclude it from our be∣liefe, but also abhorre it from our heart. Forthly if all lear∣ned men without exception, beleued and feared purgatory, we will also beleue it and feare it, but vntill that may be proued, or that any godly learned euer knew of it for 200. yeares after Christ, we must craue pardon of M. Allen at the least wise to suspend our iudgement. Fifthly if it agree with good reason, which agreeth with the word of God, it were reason we should receiue it, but we accōpt no reason good that is not consonant to the truth, and therefore if it can not be wonne by Scripture, we wil not yeld for any reason. Sixly if it set forth the iustice of God to aunswere the ha∣tred of sinne as God hath appoynted, we refuse it not, but if it be blasphemous both against the righteousnes of God and satisfaction for our sinnes aunswered in the sufferings of Christ, and against his vnspeakeable mercies, in proui∣ding such a wonderful meane of so perfect redemption, we defie it and the maintainers of it. Seuenthly, if it rayse the feare of God in mans heart, such as God alloweth, we must needes accept it, but if it rayse none but a slauish and that a vayne feare of torment, and diminisheth the loue of Gods goodnes and mercy, & excludeth the peace of conscience, there is no remedy but we must still reiect it. If it be the bane of proud presumption, we haue cause to thinke well of it: but if it be the prouocation of deuilish presumption, to ascribe more to our merits then to the mercy of God, we acknowledge that it procedeth from the prince of pride and presumption against God. If it were the mother of meekenes, obedience, deuotion and of all Christian condi∣tions, we were to blame if we would not entertaine it. But if it be the father of fables and false worship of God, the instrument of infidelitie, and sleepe of securitie, which are sworne enemies of all Christian religion, we leaue it to Pa∣pistes,
deluded with the errours of Antichrist, and nothing conuenient for the disciples and members of Christ, whose payne is their purgatory, whose suffering is their satisfacti∣on, whose merittes are their rewarde, which are vessels of Gods mercy ordeyned to the praise of his glory. 5 Aske once of thyne owne maisters: & if they be able to an∣swere to any parte of this which I haue proued, but by vnseeme∣ly wrasting of the Scripture, shamefull deniall of the doctours, or deceitfull colouring of nothing, in vayne words, without ground, matter or meaning, thou maist better beleue them, and miscredit me. But if thou finde they shall neuer be able to satisfie a reaso∣nable man in this case, then cast not thy self away willingly with them: but betime turne home to vs againe. I my selfe seeke no further credit at thy handes, but as a reporter of the antiquity: But the Scripture requireth thy obedience, the Church which can not be deceiued clameth thy consent, all the olde fathers would haue thee ioyne with them in their constant beliefe. If thou did once feele what grace and giftes were, In populo graui & Ec∣clesia magna, in the graue people and great Church, (as the pro∣phet termeth Gods house) or could conceiue the comfort that we poore wretchies receiue daily, by discipline and perfect remission of our sinnes, which can no where but in this house be profitably healed, thou wouldest forsake I am sure, al worldly welth & wan∣tons abrode, to ioyne with our Church againe. And that the name of the Church deceiue thee not: this is the true Church (sayth Lactantius) In qua est religio,Lib. 4. Cap. 30. de sap. confessio, & poenitentia, quae peccata & vulncra, quibus est subiecta imbecillitas carnis, salubriter curat. In which, deuotion, confession, and penaunce, whereby the woundes of mans frailty are profitably cured, be found. 5 Aske your owne conscience M. Allen whether you haue not miserably wrested the Scriptures your selfe. And lette all reasonable men aunswere whether such textes of Scriptures as you haue wrested out of the true sense, I haue not wrested out of your handes. And that not by shamefull denial of the Doctors, but euen by the testimony & expo∣sition
of the doctors them selues, with force of matter, ra∣ther, then flow of wordes, with plaine meaning rather then with deceitfull dealing. And whereas you boast your selfe to be a reporter of antiquity, you haue shewed your selfe to be a fauorer of forgery and a corrupter of antiquity. As for the gracious giftes, and conceit of comfort that you bragge of in your counterfeit Church of hypocrites and sclaunde∣rous Synagoges of Satan, how so euer you paynt it out, with glorious termes, we geue most humble & harty thāks to the infinite goodnes of God, which hath geuen his holy spirite into our hearts, with perfect assurance of his fauour euerlasting, and hath so furnished his seruaunts with such giftes as he hath thought sufficient for the setting forth of his praise in his Church vpon earth, that we neede not de∣sire any other giftes or comfort out of his family, but one∣ly the continuance and increase of the same, which we haue already in his owne house, vntill we shall be translated from this mortall and corruptible state, to the eternall and incorruptible glory, which is laid vp in heauen, for all them that wait for the appearing of the glorious God our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, to whom be all honour and dominion both now and euermore. Amen. THE ENDE OF THE FIRST BOOKE.
THE SECOND BOOKE INTREATING OF THE PRAIERS, and other ordinary reliefe, that the Church of Christ procureth for the soules departed. THE PREFACE OF THIS BOOKE, wherein the matter of the treatise, and the ordre of the Authors preceading, be briefely opened. 1 WE haue now taried very longe, in the consi∣deration of Gods iustice & mighty scourge, not onely for the euerlasting outcastes, but also for the exacte triall of the chosen chil∣drens wayes. The beholding whereof, must needes ingender some sorow and sadnesse of minde: and with all, as it commonly happeth in our frailety, a certaine bitter tediousnesse both in the writer, and the reader: though for my parte,2. Cor. 7. I will say with S. Paule, that it greeueth me neuer a whit, that I haue in my talke geuen you occasion of sad∣nesse: being assured, that this present greefe, may worke perfect penaunce to vndoubted saluation, But the wearinesse of that rough part, which might both by the weight of the matter, and also by my rude handeling, quicke∣ly arise to the studious reader, I shall in this booke wholy wipe away: not by art or pleasant fall of words, which in plaine dealing is not much requisite, but by the singular comfort of our cause. In the continuall course whereof, we shall ioy more and more at the beholding of Gods passing mercy in remission of sinnes, and mitigatio f the paines, which iustice enioyned. For now we must talke, how the fiery sword of Gods ire may be turned from his peo∣ple:Ambros. VVhich, as one of the fathers truely saide, beareth a great shewe of vengeaunce and iudgement, because it is named a firy sworde, but yet knowen withall, to be a tourning sworde, that is gladius versatilis,Rupert. in 3. cap. Genes. it shall geue great cause of comfort againe. O sapientes (sayth deuoute Dasmacene) ad vos loquor, scru∣tamini
& erudimini, quia plurimus est timor Dei domini omnium, sed multò amplior bonitas,In orat. pro defunctis. & formidabiles qui∣dem minae, incomparabilis autem clementia: & horrenda quidem supplicia, ineffabile autem miserationum suarum pelagus. Thus he speaketh of Purgatory, and mercy: O you of the wise sorte: to you do I speake, searche and learne, that the feare of God the Lorde of all thinges, is maruaillous much,A compari∣son of the mercy and iudgement of God, to∣vvardes the soules in Purgatory, & that mer∣cy is more. but his goodnesse farre ouerreacheth it: His threatning exceding ferefull, but his clemency vncomparable: the prepared punish∣mēts doubtlesse horrible, but the bottomlesse ea of his mercies is vnspeakable, so saide he. Therefore if our sinnes forgeuen were neuer so greuous, or our vicious life so farre wasted in idle welth, that space of fructefull penaunce, and opportunity of well wor∣king, by the nightes approching and our Lordes sodden calling, be taken away, (in which longe differring of our amendement, heuy and sore execution must needes for iustice sake be done) yet let vs not mistrust, but God measureth his iudgement with clemency, and hath ordeined meanes to procure mercy, and mi∣tigate that sentence, euen in the middest of that firy doungion: that the vessels of grace and the redemed flocke, may worthely sing both mercy & iudgement to our gracious God, who in his angre forgetteth not to haue compassion, neither withdraweth his pity in the middest of his ire.Psal. 76. For this imprisonment endureth no longer then our debtes be paide, this fire wasteth no further, then it findeth matter to consume, this disriet & wise flame (as some of the fathers before termed it) chastiseth no longer, then it hath cause to correct. Yea often before this fire by course of iustice can cease, God quencheth it with his sonnes bloude, recompen∣seth the residew by our maisters merittes, and accepteth the care∣full crie of our mother the Church, for hr children in paine. The memorie of Christes death, liuely and effectually setforth in the soueraigne misteries vppon the Altare in earth,The motiōs of Gods mercy, In releasing or mitigation of the paine of Purgato∣ry.Psal. 76. entereth vp to the presence of his seate, and procureth pardon in heauen aboue. the merites of all sainctes, the prayer of the faithfull, the workes of the charitable, both earnestly aske, and vndoubted∣ly finde mercye and grace at his hande. For of such the Pro∣phet Dauid asketh: Nunquid in aeternum proijciet Deus, aut continebit in ira sua misericordias suas? VVill God caste
them awaye for euer, or will he shutte vp his mercy, when he is angrie?Li. 1 de poe∣nit. cap. 1. No he will not: so sayth S. Ambrose: Deus quos proijcit non in aeternum proijcit: God casteth of many, whom he doth not euerlastingly for sake. Then let vs seeke the wayes of this so mercyfull a Lorde, that we may take singular comforte therein our selues, against the day of our accompt, and indeuour mercyfully to helpe our deare bre∣thern so afflicted: lest if we vse not compassion towardes them, we iustly receiue at Gods hande, for the rewarde of our vnmercy∣fulnesse, iudgement and iustice with out mercy. THE SECOND BOOKE TO THE PREFACE. 1 YOu haue taryed longer in consideratiō of Gods iustice, then is agreable to the matter of his mercy, which is the death of his only sonne our Lord and Sauiour Christ. And now you will mollyfie the hardnesse of that handling, with the sory comforte of your vnchristian cause. Wherin you haue more regarde to the heating of your owne harthe, then to the cooling of the selye soules, to kindle a good fire in your owne kitchen, then to quench the flambes of purgatory. But as I haue noted before, that you haue hetherto kept this order for the most parte, to plante one thinge in one chapter, and then to pull it vp by the rootes in the next, so you haue not forgotten your selfe in the diuision of your bookes. But that the latter shoulde be a sufficient confuta∣tion of the former, or else the former a manifest excluding of the latter. For if the iustice of God doth so necessarily require a punishment for sinnes remitted, that the same coulde not be satisfied, no not by that only sacrifice, which the sonne of God offered once for all, on the aulter of the crosse: it is a colde comforte that a carefull conscience can receiue, that the same shoulde be done by his merites, or your Masses, which was not done by the bloude of Christ
Yet now you will talke how the fiery sword maye be turned away, surely if the fiery and shaking sworde that was set to exclude man from Paradise, was not taken away by the death of Christ, when he opened Paradise, yea the king∣dome of heauen whereof Paradise was but a sacrament, vnto all beleuers, I meruaill how either the penitent these had passage into Paradise, or what engins you Papistes haue to turne it awaye, which he had not. The wordes of Da∣mascene if they were not applied (as you saye they are) to purgatory paines and remedies of the same, were true of Gods iustice and his mercy, but as his age is to young, so his authoritie is to light, to controll the trueth of the worde of God, or the practise of the first & purest Church, which knew no purgatory, nor prayers for the deade. But if our sinnes forgeuen were neuer so greuous, &c. what mad man woulde euer write thus? Euen such a one as might be al∣lowed to speake thus: if blacke were neuer so blacke be∣fore it were cleane taken away and perfect white placed in the steede, yet when white is white, it is white. But M. Allen wil not allowe that the coullor of our sinnes is cleane taken away and a contrary coullor of righteousnesse set vppon vs, but that sinnes forgeuen, be but halfe forgeuen, the gilte taken awaye, the punishment due for the gilte, still remayning. And this one halfe of forgeuenesse, is but graunted in wordes, and denied in deede. For if the gilte of our sinnes be cleane taken away from vs, and layed vpon the person of Christ, and the righteousnesse of Christ is communicated vnto vs, what is there lefte in vs that God of his goodnesse can hate or of his iustice can punish? So it is but for a fashion, that the papistes graunt any parte of our sinnes forgeuen, when they will haue vs make sa∣tisfaction for them our selues. But where as M. Allen is out of measure prodigall in promising releiffe and release of purgatory paines to them whose sinnes were neuer so gre∣uous, their vicious life wasted in idle wealth, the space of penaunce and opportunity of working neglected in time, preuented by sodaine death &c: rehersing so many meanes of mitigation, as sometime the bloude of Christ, the re∣sidew
of his merites, the crye of the mother Church, the memory of the Masse, the merites of all Sainctes, the pray∣ers of the faithfull and workes of the charitable: All this notwithstanding take heede you poore Papistes, that you geue no credit to these flattering wordes. For it is the opi∣nion of all the olde writers, that doe allowe any of these thinges, to profit men after their death, and concluded by the Maister of the Sentence, and aduouched by Allen him selfe afterwarde chapt. 7. that no man can receiue benefit after his departure, by any worke or will of the liuing, but he that in his life deserued the same, neither shal any thing worke vpon him more or lesse, but according to his owne deseruing in this life. Trust not therefore in these sophi∣sticall vanities, which are contrary one to an other, but im∣brace the vniforme & vndoubted doctrine of Gods word, which teacheth repentaunce, faith, iustification, and salua∣tion, not with curious questions to troble your braynes, but with perfect conclusions to quyet your conscience, not suf∣fering you to sleepe in securitie vpon hope of helpe after your death, but charging you to shew the force of mortifi∣cation and fruictes of fayth while you are aliue. Not puf∣fing vp your phantasie with pride of your owne merites, but teaching you to ascribe all prayse to Gods glorious grace, and infinite mercy. 2 The cruell aduersary of man kinde, as before he wrought his worst against Purgatory, so here he busely pricketh forwarde the schoole of Protestantes, to improue to their owne vtter dam∣nation, and the notable hinderaunce of our louing bretherns sal∣uation, all such meanes as God by scripture or other testimony. of his worde, hath reueled to be profitable for the abating of paine, or the release of the apointed punishment, in that place of temporall torment to come. Against which deceiuers, I meane by Gods helpe in this ordre to trauell. 2 The cruell aduersary of mankinde, and enuyor of Gods glory, inuented Purgatory to deface the merites of Christes death, and to blemish the onely meanes of mans,
eternall life, which when he coulde not with any seemely coullor establish, by the authority of the holy Scriptures, the onely testimony of his worde and will reueiled and confirmed by his holy Spirite, he hath inuented fayned fa∣bles and deuilish illusions to deceiue the mindes of them whome he had enclined vnto superstition, and not bene a∣shamed to match them in credit and estimation with the very worde of God it selfe. As appereth by this scribe of Sathan, which nameth the scriptures for a simple shew, but by and by addeth other testimonies of Gods worde, beside the scriptures inspired by God: whereby he maketh equi∣ualent, those false reuelations raised vp from Hell, with the inspiratiō of the holy Ghost which hath brought the truth from heauen. But now commeth in the order of this deuil∣lyshe horror. 3 First I will proue, that sinnes may be pardoned, or the debt and bonde thereof released, in the next worlde. 3 You shall neuer proue by authoritie of Gods word that sinnes not repented in this life, shalbe pardoned after this life, where there is no repentaunce profitable, nor yet any debt payed but by them that paye it eternally in per∣petuall torments. 4 Then I shall shewe what meanes the holy Scripture ap∣proueth,A briefe note of the contentes and princi∣pall pointes of this booke. or the example thereof awarraunteth to be proffitable for the soules departed. 4 When you can proue either by doctrine, or exam∣ple agreable to doctrine of the canonicall Scriptures, that any thing profiteth the soules departed that be not in happy state, we will beleue it. 5 I will open what the principall pillars, and in a maner the flowre of all the faithfull sorte in sundry agies, and almost in all Christian contryes, haue lefte in writinge for this pointe. 5 You are not able to bring one authenticall writer,
that within one 100 yeares and more after Christ, hath al∣lowed prayer for the dead, or any point of purgatory. 6 I will declare what they practised for their dearest frends priuately, and what the Churches of most notable Nations vsed for all deceased in Christes faith, in their publike seruice o∣penly: I shall proue vnto you, that the practise of suffrages and Sacrifice for the deade, isshued downe to vs from the A∣postles dayes. 6 You shall not proue that either in publicke or pri∣uate prayers, the deade were commended otherwise then by waye of thankes geuing for their departure, or that any suffrages or sacrifice was offered for them by the Apostles or their lawefull successors, or many yeares after the A∣postles times. 7 I shall pointe you to the first father of the contrary doc∣trine, and his principall abettours, in such troublesome times at such marchants were to be founde. Ye shall see them knowen amongest all the holy of their time by the name of heretikes. 7 You shall shew no heretike that denied your doc∣trine, but I will shew you other heretikes before him that allowed it. 8 You shall see their doctrine improued, and them selues condemned, by the graue iudgement of Councells, both Generall & prouinciall, for heretikes. If any of them all can say any thing, to the contrary of that, which we vpon so good groundes main∣teine, he shall be aunswered with no worse, then the very wordes of the holy auncient writers. Finally, if any other thinges be ne∣cessary beside, for the declaration of this matter to the simple, or for proofe against our aduersaries, they shall not be omitted: as occasiō, by course and fall of the matter, may be geuen. All which pointes being auouched and not proued, shall condemne me of arrogancy: But both auouched, and fully proued, they shall de∣serue any reasonable mans consent, and beare testimony of the
aduersaries impudency here, and witnesse of their contempte of Gods approued trueth, in the worlde to come. 8 How vayne your bragge is of generall counsels, it ap∣peareth by this, that with in fouretene hundreth yeares after Christ, you can finde none to serue your turne, vntill you come to the councells Florens and Trent, whereof the one was held in our grandfathers dayes, the other within these 20. yeares, your prouinciall councells shal be aunswe∣red by as good prouinciall councells as they are. And that which I haue to say in confutation of your heresie, shall be no worse then the very word of God it selfe, which is bet∣ter then ye consent of all the world against it. And although the custome of praying for the dead, be an auncient errour, so that fewe of the latter writers there are, but they shewe them selues to be infected therewith, yet hath it not such an vniuersall consent of all writers, but that I shall be able by Gods grace to shew that the most auncient and nearest to the Apostles tyme, receiued it not, and that they which of later time admitted it, had neither any ground out of the Scriptures to warrant their doing, nor any certainty of faith to assure their conscience, which when it is found in the ende, as it is now sayd in the beginning, your arrogant boasting and impudent lying togither with the falshoode of your opinions, shall be manifest to all men. That there be certaine sinnes, vvhich may be forgeuen in the next life, and that the deserued punishement for the same, may be eased, or vtterly released, before the extreme sen∣tence be to the vtmost executed. CAP. I. 1 ANd first, that sinnes may be pardoned in the next worlde, that were not in this life forgeuen, our Sauiours owne wordes do teach vs,Cap. 1. written in the Gospell of S. Mat∣thew thus: Ideò dico vobis: omne pec∣catum & blasphemia remittetur homi∣nibus, spiritus autem blasphemia non remittetur. Et quicū∣que
dixerit verbum contra filium hominis, remittetur ei: qui autem dixerit contra spiritum sanctum, non remittetur ei neque in hoc saeculo, neque in fuuro. I tell you, that all maner of sinne and blasphemy shall be forgeuen vnto men, but the blasphemy of the spirit, shall not be forgeuē. And who so euer shall speake against the sonne of man, it shall be forgeuen him: But if he speake against the holy Ghost, it shall neither be par∣doned in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come. The same thing in sense, hath Marke and Luke, affirming that such offense shall neuer be forgeuen.Cap. 3. Cap. 12. The which worde Neuer, S. Marke expres∣seth thus, in aeternū non habet remissionem, he shall not haue pardō (as you would say) in all eternity, by which he may plaine∣ly seeme, to reache further then the limites and borders of this worlde, for the remission of sinne. And this speach hath as much pith and proper force in it, as S. Matthewes, who expressely, di∣stinctly, and belike as Christ spake it, vttereth that sense of the eternity, which passeth the measure of worldely time, by these words: Neither in this world, nor yet in the world to come. And for that cause S. Marke sayth, Reus erit aeterni delicti, he shall be gilty of an eternall faulte, signifying that in some case a man might perhaps not speede of a pardon in this life, & yet may obteine it in the next: But for that horrible blasphemy, he in a maner dischargeth the offender of all hope of remission, either in this life, or in the next that is to come. VVhich forme of wordes can neither be founde in scripture, nor in mans common talke, to haue any place in such thinges as extend no further but to the transitory time of our life: for in those matters, it had bene v∣sually, and truely spoken, it shall neuer happen in this world. And therfore instructing vs, that sinnes, or the paine due vnto sinnes, may either be released in this worlde, or in the worlde to come, he followeth that phrase and forme of wordes, in which man might well conceiue the reache of remission and pardoning of sinnes, farre to passe the compasse of our time, and life. CAP. I. 1 YOu were as good to kindle a fire out of ye and snow, as to goe about to frame your fiery forge of purgatory out of this place. The meaning of our
Sauiour Christ is so playne, & his wordes so expresse, that no reasonable man can gather any errour out of them. For vndoubtedly the errour of purgatory was first inuented be∣fore this place was drawne vnto it. So is there no heresie so absurd, which Satan putteth into the head of wicked men, but it may finde some sound of wordes in so many bookes of the holy Scriptures, that by peruerse wit may be wrested vnto it. But the doctrine of Gods truth and all articles of our beliefe, are plainly taught in the Scripture, either by manifest words, or by necessary conclusion and argument, which by no subtilty of Satā or his instrumēts, may be auoi∣ded or deluded. And this is the difference betwene heresie and truth, when they both apeale to the authorities of the Scripture. Truth as she hath her foundation in the Scrip∣tures, and in them is learned, so hath she perpetuall confir∣mation in the same, and nothing contrary vnto her. But heresie as she is inuented in mans head, so she seeketh con∣firmation in the reason and authoritie of man, which be∣cause they haue not full credit with them that professe re∣ligion, without the authoritie of Gods word, at length whē it is fully shaped, in the shop of mans brayne, then it is brought to the Scripture, to see if it can finde any colour, by any phrase of wordes wrested from the meaning, or by any vayne collection, that hath no force of necessary con∣clusion, being content to haue but onely a colde claime vn∣to the authoritie of Scripture, although it haue the whole scope and purpose of the holy Ghost, yea often times also manifest wordes against it, which difference as it may be found in all heresies, so in none more notably, then in this errour of purgatory. Consider what textes of holy Scripture are alleged for it, and you shall see they can not bring one, out of which any necessary argument may be framed to proue their cause, or which hath not by learned interpre∣tors of the olde time bene otherwise expounded then of their cause. As in the text here alleged out of S. Matt. cap. 12. who so euer shall speake blasphemy against the holy ghost, it shall not be forgiuen him, neither in this world nor in the world to come. If the sense were not plaine of it selfe, that
he which so sinneth shall not obtayne forgeuenes in this life, nor be absolued in the last iudgement: yet the other Euangelistes doe plainly expound the meaning. S. Luke sayth simply, he shal not be forgiuen. S. Marke saith he hath no remission for euer, but is guilty of euerlasting iudge∣ment. Neuertheles behold what a wrangling M. Allen ma∣keth about the interpretation of these wordes. But I will offer him fayre play, he is an auncient maister of art, & since he writ this booke, he hath added tenne yeares to his study of diuinitie, in which space he might haue bene a doctour of the same faculty, let him with all the diuinitie that euer he studied, or with all the artes that euer he professed, make a true syllogisme in forme and matter, out of this authori∣ty, to proue that God forgiueth sinnes after this life, which are not remitted in this life, and I will confesse the doctrine of purgatory with him, which otherwise I would not doe to winne all the patrimony of S. Peter that the Pope clay∣meth in Italy: but vntill such tyme as we may obtayne a good argument, let vs consider such as we haue. He signifieth (sayth M. Allen) that a man in some case, might perhaps not speede of a pardon in this life, & yet may obtayne it in the next: when the matter goeth by perhaps, it is good to beware of after claps, why M. Allen, what sinnes are those of which a man may perhaps not speede of a pardon in this life, and yet obtayne it after this life? If they be truely repented in this life, we haue a warrant of Gods owne mouth without, your perhaps, that in the same hower they shall be remit∣ted. Ezech. 18. & 33. But if they be not repented, where is your warrant that euer they shall be remitted. But I aske a∣gaine, what sinnes are those that perhapps maye misse of a pardon in this life, and obteine it after this life? by all like∣lyhood they must be some great sinnes, that perhapps may not speede of a pardon here, and yet finde it afterwarde. There is no man would thinke otherwise, by these wordes, nor by the wordes of Christ, if he vnderstood them so, that some sinnes might be forgeuen after this life, but whē all commeth to all. The Maister of the Sentence and Gre∣gory before him, and M. Allen him selfe woulde alowe no
sinnes to be forgeuen after this life, but very small and light offences. How be it it is plaine, that these wordes (neither in the worlde to come) are added by waye of ampli∣fication: for it is the purpose of our Sauiour Christ, to set forth to the vttermost, the heynousnesse of blasphemy against the holy Ghost, so that if he had ment that any sinnes might be remitted after this life, that were not par∣doned after this life, he shoulde haue ment the greater and not the lesser, for lesse sinnes be soner pardoned and the pardon of greater more hardely obteined. But marke the equitie of M. Allen, the horrible blasphemer for all the ve∣hemency of Christes wordes, by M. Allens iudgement is but in a manner discharged of hope of remission, as though he were not simply and altogether excluded. And the light offender is turned ouer to purgatory, for his remission: yet M. Allen will stand vpon the forme & phrase of words, not knowing, that this worlde is taken for all the time that is vnto the ende thereof, and the worlde to come, not for the state or time of them that are departed vnto the iudgemēt, but for the time of eternitye after the ende of this worlde, or els the wordes of Christ in Matthew should not be equi∣ualent with the wordes in Marke, he shalbe guilty of euerla∣sting iudgement or condemnation, which the olde interpretor calleth eternall offence. The like forme or phrase of words is vsed by S. Paule to the Ephesians cap. 1. that Christ is exal∣ted aboue euery name that is named, not onely in this worlde but also in the worlde to come: by which wordes he meaneth the supreme and euerlasting kingdome of Christ, which exten∣deth vnto all eternitie. But if a contentious person like to the Valentiniane heretikes, or such like, woulde inuent monstruous names as those heretikes did, and proue by this place that there are names named in the worlde to come, that are not named in this worlde, shoulde he not haue as good grounde out of this place as the Papistes haue of the other? 2 But because we haue to do with fickle marchauntes, that will not sticke to brast boldely the bandes of euident scriptures,
as anone you shalt see, and therefore, will (as I thinke) litle be moued with reasonable and playne gathering out of the scrip∣tures: nor much esteeme this likelihood, as ouer small a proofe in so greate a doubte, therefore I will shew my warraunt for this construction, that thereby the studious reader may see, whome the aduersaries do so rashly contemne herein: and whome we haue as authors, in this meaning of Christes wordes now recited: that neither they may be beleued with out reason and proofe, nor we miscredited, after so good authority of the auncient writers, as neither they for shame, nor we of conscience can deny. S. Gre∣gory, whose authority I may boldely vse against them, because they mislike not his iudgement, when it may appeare to make for them, (as in deede it neuer doth) he doubted nothing to ga∣ther of this our Sauiours speach that sinnes might be forgeuen in the next worlde. And thus he writeth for that point. De quibus∣dam leuibus culpis,Lib. 4. dia∣log. cap. 19. esse ante iudicium purgatorius ignis cre∣dendus est, pro eo quod veritas dicit: Si quis in sancto Spi∣ritu blasphemiam dixerit, neque in hoc saeculo remittetur ei, ne∣que in futuro. In qua sententia datur intelligi, quasdam cul∣pas in hoc saeculo, quasdam in futuro posse relaxari: quod enim de vno negatur, consequens intellectus patet, quia de quibusdam conceditur, sed tamen, vt praedixi, hoc de paruis minimisque peccatis, fieri posse credendum est. For certaine small sinnes, that there is a purgatory fire before the daye of iudgement, we must needes beleue: because the trueth it selfe, vttered so much in these wordes: If any sinne against the holy Ghost, it shall not be remitted, neither in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come. By which sentence it is geuen vs to vn∣derstande, that, as some offensies be released in this worlde, so there may some other be remitted in the life following. For that which is denyed in one sorte, the meaning is plaine, that of some other kinde it must needes be graunted. But, as is saide before, this is onely to be taken of lighter offensies,Onely small offensies be remitted in the next life. thus farre spake S. Gregory: and proueth learnedly beside, by examples and sondry Scriptures through out the whole worke, our matter. If our ad∣uersaries woulde with desire to learne, as they commonly do to reprehend, reade but his discourse onely, they might quickely see their owne foly, and amende their misbelefe. They call him the
last good Pope, as he was in deede a blessed man: and by his au∣thority the perfect conuersion of our nation to Christes faith, was wrought. I woulde his holy workes deserued but as much credit now, with certaine forsakers, as his Legates then did, with all the vnfaithfull people of our countrie. But to go forwarde in our matter, we shall finde in S. Ber∣narde, the same wordes of our Sauiour alleaged for our purpose, thus:Serm 66. in Canti. Non credunt ignem Purgatorium restare post mor∣tem, sed statim animam solutam a corpore, vel ad requiem transire, vel ad damnationem: quaerant ergo ab eo, qui dixit quod dam peccatum esse, quod neque in hoc saeculo, ne∣que in futuro remittetur: cur hoc dixerit, si nulla maner in futuro remissio purgatione peccati? They beleue not (sayth he, by some heretiques of his owne time) that there is any pur∣gatory paines remaining after death, but they suppose that the soule straight vpon departure hense, goeth either to rest, or dam∣nation: let such fellowes aske therefore of him, that saide, a cer∣taine greuous crime coulde neither be forgeuen in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come, why he so saide, if there were no re∣mission nor purgation of sinnes, in the life following? thus said Bernarde, opening his graue iudgement both vpon the text, and our matter: whose authority, if any esteme lesse, because of his late writing, let him know, that the aduersaries haue none for their side so auncient by C C C. yeare, except they name the heretike Aërius, or such like, whose antiquitye maketh not so much for them, as his auncient condemnation for heresie in this poynt, ma∣keth against them. 2 M. Allen in his conscience knoweth, that he hath no grounde in the authority of Gods word, and therefore he flyeth to the authority of man. But that he might seeme to be driuen perforce to that where vnto he doth come most willingly, he pretendeth a fonde excuse, because he hath to doe with such fickle marchaunts, as wil not sticke to breake boldly the bands of euident Scriptures. But he knoweth in his conscience that he hath no authoritye of Scripture to charge vs, for if he thought we would breake the bonds of Gods word, he might well thinke, we would not be holden
by the authoritie of mens writing, and those of the latter sort, six hundreth yeares after Christ, the eldest. For Augu∣stine makeh as litle for them, as he doth against vs. Gregory and Bernarde, whereunto he addeth Bede, are of opinion that sinnes not remitted in this world, may be remitted in the world o come, but how hapneth it, that Chrysstome and Ieronym which both interpreted that place, could gather no such matter, although they otherwise allowed prayer for the dead? The reason must needes be, because the er∣rour of purgatory growing so much the stronger, as it was nerer to the full reuelation of Antichrist, Gregory and Bede sought not the true meaning of Christ in this Scripture, but the confirmation of their pausible error. M. Allen thin∣keth we must be sore pressed with the authoritie of Grego∣ry, because we mslike not his authority, where he inueigh∣eth against the supremacy of one Bishop aboue all other, or where so euer he agreeth with the truth. But he must be once againe admonished, that we are bound to no mannes authoritie, no longer then he followeth the authoritie of Gods word And therefore though Gregory were the last of all the Romish Bishops, in whom was any sparke of good∣nes, because Boniface his successor and so all the rest, by Gregoryes owne iudgement & prophecy were all Antichri∣stes: yet is not all that Gregory writte, of equall authoritie with the word of God, without authoritie whereof, we be∣leue not an Angell from heauen, as I haue often shewed, much lesse a Bishop of Rome. 3 But that in the mouth of two or three witnesses all trueth may appeare, and contrary falsehood vanish away: S. Augustine him selfe, gathered by this place now alleaged, euen then when he had no occasion geuen him, by the wrangling of any misbele∣uer, to wreast any scripture otherwise then the very wordes im∣ported, the trueth of remission of certaine faultes in the next life, in these wordes,Cap. 24. lib. 21. de ciuit. Facta resurrectione mortuorū, non deerunt, quibus, post poenas quas patiuntur spiritus mortuorum, im∣pertiatur misericordia, vt in ignem non mittantur aeternū, neque enim de quibusdam veraciter diceretur, quod non
eis remittetur neque in hoc saeculo neque in futuro, nisi es∣sent, quibus etsi non in isto, tamen remittetur in futuro. There shall be certaine at the time of resurrection also, who shal obteine mercy, after they haue suffered such paines as deade mens ghostes do abide, that they be not cast into the euerlasting fire: for els it coulde not in any true sense be spoken, that certaine shoulde neither haue pardon in this worlde, nor in the worlde to come, except there were some, that speeding not of pardon in this life, might yet haue remission in the next: so sayth he. Being, I warraunt you, so sadde witted and so farre from phantasies, that he would not grounde any assured doctrine, vpon euery light oc∣casion offered, or motion made: had not the very words and forme of phrase, approued it, and Gods Church liked it. Hauing then these graue fathers with others,Beda in 3. Cap. Marci. for our warraunt in the exposition of this place, we do take it for a sure grounde, that the paine of purgation in the next worlde may be remitted, that is to say, either made lesse, or els wholy released: before the due execution of Gods sentence be extremely done. For it is not ment,Sometimes Gods iustice is aunsvve∣red fully by the paine of the party. that the freedom which man may haue after full aunswere and payment of his sinnes, in that place of punishment temporall, shoulde be properly termed a remission, or pardon: For that is aunswerable to Gods iustice: and although there were no prayers or other wayes of helpe, yet the patient by toleration, in time, might, vnder the protection of Christes merites, make full satis∣faction, and so be discharged. who being a vessell of mercy, can not be damned. But when we say, that sinnes may be forgeuen in the next worlde, Gods Church (which is the mother of all be∣leuers) teacheth vs, that some parte, as well of the rigour and extremity of the paine, as of the time and continuance thereof (though God him selfe hath appointed that punishment) may yet be mercyfull released. 3 S. Augustine is much beholding to you, that you giue men to witte, that when he was wrangled withall by any misbeleuer, he had occasion to wrest the Scripture, other∣wise then the words imported, so you iudge of him, because he would not for your pleasure, expound the fire of tryall. 1. Cor. 3. For your fire of purgatory. But concerning this testi∣mony
of Augustine, it maketh not so much against vs, but it maketh as litle for you. For if you haue translated his words according to his meaning, (as you haue not according to his wordes) he vnderstandeth by this place remission of the paynes, and not of the sinnes, which helpeth you nothing to that which you haue taken in hand to proue, that sinnes are forgiuen after this life. And so he seemeth to say in the 13. chapter of the same booke. Non autem omnes veniunt in sempiternas poenas, quae post illud iudiciū his sunt futurae, qui post mortem sustinent temporales, nam quibusdam quod in isto non remittitur, remitti in futuro saeculo, id est ne futuri saeculi aeterno supplicio puniantur iam ante dixi. All they come not into e∣uerlasting paynes which after that iudgement shall be to them, that after death suffer temporall paynes, for I haue sayd already, that vnto some, that which is not remitted in this world, is remitted in the world to come, that is, that they should not be punished in the world to come. In these wordes he speaketh of release of paynes but not of forgiue∣nes of sinnes. But in the place by you alleged, if the words be truly translated according to the discourse of that chap∣ter, he affirmeth, that after the resurrection & those paynes which the spirites of the dead doe suffer, there shal be some vpon whom mercy shall be bestowed, so that they shall not be cast into eternall fire, &c. So that Augustine in this place, speaketh not of such sinnes as are remitted in purgatory, but of such persons as are forgiuen in the last iudgement, when purgatory is ended. Wherefore though Augustine er∣red in this place, yet he erred from your cause. And where∣as you affirme in the margent, that sometime Gods iustice is aunswered fully by the payne of the party: you are con∣trary to the rest of your family, for they hold that the gene∣rall prayers and sacrifices of your mother Church doe help them. Yea the maister of the sentence holdeth, that a poore man hauing equall merites with a rich man, though there be no special prayers, masses, fasting or almes done for him, is holpen as well by the common almes and prayers, as the rich man for whom speciall prayers and large almes are done. lib. 4. dist. 45. For otherwise the opinion of merites
could not stand. And vnlesse M. Allen thinke that all such masses and prayers in which the dead are generally com∣mended be vnprofitable, his proposition can not stand by his owne learning. That the faithfull soules in Purgatory being novv past the state of dseruing, and not in case to helpe them selues, may yet receiue benefit by the vvorkes of the lyuing, to vvhome they be perfectly knitte as fellovv membres of one body. CAP. II. 1 BVt now what meanes may be founde, to ease our bre∣thern departed, of their paine? or what wayes can be acceptable in the sight of God to procure mercy and grace, where the sufferers them selues, being out of the state of deseruing and place of well working, can not helpe them selues: nor by any motion of minde, atteine more mercy▪ then their life past did deserue? VVhere shall we then finde ease for them? surely no where els, but in the vnity and knotte of that holy fellowship, in which, the benefite of the heade perteyneth to all the membres: & euery good worke of any one membre, wōder∣fully redoūdeth to all the rest. This society is called in our Crede, communio Sanctorum, the communion of Sainctes, that is to say a blessed brotherhood vnder Christ the heade, by loue and re∣ligion so wroght and wrapped together, that what any one mem∣bre of this fast body hath, the other lacketh it not: what one wan∣teth, the other supplieth: when one smarteth,1. Cor. 12. all feeleth in a ma∣ner the like sorow: when one ioyeth, the other reioyseth withall. This happy society, is not impared by any distance of place,August. epi. 23. by di∣uersity of Gods giftes, by inequality of estates, nor by chaunge of life: so farre as the vnity of Gods spirit reacheth, so farre this fellowship extēdeth, this city is as large, as the benefit of Christes death taketh place. Yea within all the compasse of his kingdome, this fellowship is founde. The soules and sainctes in heauen,Idem tract. 32. in Ioan. the faithfull people in earth, the chosen children that suffer chastise∣ment in purgatory, are, by the perfect bonde of this vnity, as one abundeth, ready to serue the other, as one lacketh, to craue of the other. The soules happely promoted to the ioye of Christes
blessed kingdome,The christiā communiō and fellovv∣ship is ex¦pressed. in this vnitie and knotte of loue, perpetually praye for the doubtfull state, of their owne fellowes beneth: the carefull condition of the membres belowe, continually crieth for helpe at their handes in heauen aboue. Nowe the membres of Christes Church here yet trauelling in earth, they pray together, they faste together, they desire together, they deserue together. Christ our heade, in whose bloude this city and society standth, will haue no worke nor way of saluation, that is nt common to the whole body in generall, and peculierly proffitable, to supply the neede of euery parte thereof. He which instituted the blessed sacraments, will haue them in this vnity to worke in common, (as farre as the ende of eche of their institutions requireth) and out of it, to haue no force at all: he that maketh all our workes ac∣ceptable, though they be done of one, will haue them perteine to all: the holy sacrifice of the Church, by the will of the author, and the likenesse of the exemplar (as in deede being in an other ma∣ner, the very selfe same) is made so common, that it ioyneth the Sainctes and Angels in heauen, to the chosen and elect people, either in earth,The soules depated in pety are of our church & fellovv∣ship. or vnder the earth beneth. And that this holy consent of good workes, and mutuall agreement of prayer, to the continuall supplying of eche others lackes, doth also apperteine to the soules departed, no man that hath any sense of this happy community, can denie: for being membres of our common body, they must needes be partakers of the common vtilitie. CAP. II. 1 IF you aske me by what meanes they may be rele∣ued, whome the bloude of Christ hath not purged, from all their sinnes, suerly I must aunswere you plainely as I haue learned in the scripture, that there is no name geuen vnder heauen, by which they maye be helped, which are not helped by Christes death Act. 4. But you haue merites of men, to helpe the merites of Christ. O blasphemy! they that can not be iustified by their owne merites, by the vertue of them, shall healpe to iustifie other. But this is worthy to be noted, that they which are in purgatory, can not by any motion of minde, atteine
more mercy, then their life past deserued. Therefore faith either is not in them, or else pofitteth them nothing, for that is a notable motion of the minde. Then the merites of other men must profite with out faith or els they profitte them not all. But with out fayth it is not possible that they shoulde profit them, for as much as with out fayth it is not possible to please God, Heb. 13. therefore it is not possible that other mens workes aliue shoulde profit them that are dad. But we haue an other shift sought out to serue them, that is the communion of Saintes. What manner of com∣munion is that which is with out fayth? But because M. Allen bringeth in the communion of saintes. I must shew where in the same consisteth. The communion of saintes is considered either of the whole body of the church, or else of the Church militant here on earth. The communion of the whole body, is the participation of life and all other offices of life, that euery member and the whole body hath of the heade, as S. Paule teacheth plainely Ephes. 4. The communion of saintes here on earth, as it is a pate of the whole communion, so the whole Vertue commeth also from the heade, and the members haue but the ad∣ministration thereof, according to the measure and office of euery one. So that when we speake of the vniuersall Church, we beleue that all the elect of God are one my∣sticall body, that so liueth by Christ, that it is not possible for any one member thereof to perish: when we speake of the communication of the faythfull heare on earth, we meane the dispēsation of the grace and gifts of God, which as euery one hath receiued of God, so of charity he is boūd to imploye the same, to the profit of his fellowe members here on earth: what place is here to merit for them that are deade, when one can not merit for an other that is a∣liue, no not for him selfe, but euery man hath his worthy∣nesse of Christ: this is the doctrine of the scripture: the other participation of merittes is a mere deuise of men, hauing no foundation in the worde of God, so that M. Al∣len him selfe can not vouch so much as one text of scrip∣ture to warranty, where in he can haue any coullor for
such communion of merites. For that which S. Paule wri∣teth 1. Cor. 12. is manifestly vnderstood of the mutuall of∣fices of loue, whereby one member hath compassion with an other, & by no meanes teacheth either the estate of the deade, or the merittes of the liuing. Of like credit it is, that he so constantly affirmeth that the Saintes in heauen pray for their fellowes beneth, and that they belowe pray for the helpe of the Saintes aboue: moreouer that Christ our heade by whose bloude the society standeth, will haue no worke nor waye of saluation that is not common to the whole body in generall, and particularly profitable to supply the neede of any parte thereof. Here you see by a plaine distribution that M. Allen will haue other workes and wayes of saluation, beside the bloude of Christ. These things being onely affirmed and not proued by the autho∣rity of Scriptures, although I might confute at large by the same, yet it shall suffice to aunswere with that auncient father: That which hath no authority in the Scriptures, is as easily denied as it is affirmed. But it is a worlde to see what a compasse you fetch, to bringe in the Masse, for one of the speciall meanes. It was wont to be a sacrifice propitiatory both for the quicke and the deade, nowe you haue nicer termes for it. Now: it is the sacrifice of the Church. By whome instituted I pray you? which by the will of the author: if you make God the author, where haue you one sillable in the Scripture to declare his will? but that which followeth passeth: By the likenesse of the exemplar (as in deede being in an other manner the very selfe same.) What is this that I heare? doth the Masse aueyle because it is like the exem∣plar? if you meane the sacrifice of Christ his passion to be the examplar, the masse is as like it as an apple is like an oy∣ster, for all the apish pageantes that be played in it. We read in the Scriptures, that all the sacrifices of the olde lawe, with the tabernacle, were made conformable to the exem∣plar and paterne that was shewed vnto Moses which was Christ Exod. 25. Heb. 8. Act. 7. But that there shoulde be any more shadowes, or resemblaunces, when the bodye and substance it selfe is come, it is contrary to the whole scope
of the Epistle to the Hebrues. M. Allen hath a shift for that, saying it is the very selfe same in an other maner. But he is so deepe in diuinity, that he forgetteth his first principles of logike. For euery boye in Oxford can tell him, that those things which be like, can not be the same. If therefore the Masse be like the sacrifice of Christ, then is it not the sacrifice of Christ it selfe. Againe the exemplar and the example be proper relatiues, therfore if the sacrifice of Christ be the exemplar whereof the Masse is the example, the Masse can not be the sacrifice of Christ. Neither will it helpe, that he sayth, It is the selfe same in an other maner, so long as the same respect remaineth. But let him make of his Masse what he can, the Church of God instructed by Gods worde receiueth no more sacrifices propitiatory, but onely the sacrifice of Christ his death, which was offered by no other, but by him selfe, and that once for all. Seeing that by one oblation he hath made perfect for euer, those that are san∣ctified: Hebr. 10. 2 And so sayth S. Augustine in these words. Neque enim piorum animae mortuorum separantur ab ecclesia,Lib. 20. de ciuit. Cap. 9 quae & nunc est regnum Christi: alioquin nec ad altare dei fieret eorum memoria, in communione corporis Christi: for the soules of the faithfull deceased, be not seuered from the Church, which is already the kingdome of Christ, els there shoulde be no memory kepte for them at the altare, in the communion of the body of Christ. By the force of this vnity, what so euer is profitably practised in this worlde one for a nother, as prayer, almes, fasting, Sacri∣fice, the same thinkes may and ought, by the example of the Church, to be carefully and with out ceasing procured for the helpe of our frends, and Christian brethern departed. And Atha∣nasius that great pillar, he by a meruelous fit example setteth forth, how the soules in an other worlde, may haue the benefites of the Church or Christian people, deriued downe vnto them, and what sensible feele of release they haue,Quaest. ad Ant. 34. when we desire God for them. Quemadmodum cum in campo vinea vi∣rescit, & vinum in vase occlusum rebullit, ac propemodum
feruet: ita etiam entimus, quod peccatorum animae diui∣nis beneficijs incruentae Hostiae, & gratiarum actionis pro ipsis habitae, gaudeant: vt idem solus nouit & ordinat deus noster, qui in viuos & mortuos dominium exercet. As when the vine abrode in the fielde doth spring and waxe greene,The com∣munion ex∣pressed be∣tvvixt the liue and the dead, by the naturall a∣greement betvvixt the vine in the fielde & the vvine in the vessel. the wine salfely kept in barells at home, doth also worke in it selfe, and in a maner buyle: euen so, as we iudge, the soules of sinners, through the benefit of the vnbloudy host, and sacrifice of thankes gyuing done for them, may waxe ioyfull and gladde: as the same Lord and God onely knoweth how, and hath ordeyned: who exer∣cyseth his might, vpon the liue and the deade. See I pray you how he by the action of Gods Church in the holy Masse, in which the vnbloudy hoste and oblation is bestowed, hath founde some way, of carying downe the benefite of Christes passion, vpon the mem∣bres of his body beneth. And though some haue wickedly sought, vtterly to breake the band of peace betwixt them and vs, as they haue cursedly shaken thunity of the liuing amongest them selues, yet their mother Christs spuse, acknowledgeth her owne children still: she seeth by the spirit of God (whereby she seeth all trueth) the sorow of her dearest, so farre out of sight, but neuer out of minde, she in a maner feeleth a parte of her owne body in paine. And can not otherwise do, but by all possible meanes and appro∣ued wayes, assay Gods mercy for their deliuery. And this natu∣rall compassion of the Church, passeth through euery membre thereof, and ought to moue euery man, by the lawe of nature, to procure as much helpe as he may. And so much the more, do we owe this naturall duety vnto them, because they now can not helpe them selues, being out of the state of deseruing, and place of well working, onely abiding Gods mercy, in the sore sufferance of paines vntollerable. They them selues, as yet your brethern, and a portion of your body, re∣quire to be partakers of your benefites. They feele ease of euery prayer: your almes quensheth their heate, your fasting releaseth their paine: your sacrifice wipeth their sinnes and sores: so strong is the communion of sainctes, that, what so euer you do that is ac∣ceptable, it ishueth aboundantly downe to them. 2 When all authoritie out of Gods word fayleth you,
wherby you should proue that the soules departed receiue benefite by the merits of the liuing, you flie to the authori∣tie of men. And fist Augustine must proue that the godly departed are not separated from the Church, because me∣mory of them is made at the aultare. We nothing doubt, but that the soules of the godly departed, remaine still in the body of Christ which is his church, but we ground vp∣on better authoritie then the authoritie of Augustine, and vpon better proofe then the reason which he allegeth, or else we might not be so certayne of it as we are. And to the similitude of Athanasius which you note to be Quaest. ad Ant. 34. I aunswere that in the place by you no∣ted there is no such word nor any of his questions ad Anti∣ochum that I can find, where so euer you had it. Although that booke of questions is easily to be seene of all men and confessed of Nannus one of your owne side to be none of Athanasius doing: we say that first it must be proued that the soules departed receiue benefite by masses, and then we shall not striue for the maner how: but mans authoritie is to weake to carry away so weighty a matter. And therefore I will be as bold with you as Augustine was with the Dona∣tistes de pastoribus cap. 8. Auferantur chartae humanae sonent vo∣ces diuinae. Ede mihi vnam Scripturam pro parte Donati. Let mens papers be remoued & let the voices of God sound, shew me one Scripture for Donatus side, euen so M. Allen I will not sticke to vrge you when you leane wholy to the au∣thoritie of men. Away with mens writings, let Gods word be heard from you, shew me but one Scripture, to proue all that you haue sayd in this chapter of the merites of the li∣uing to profite the deade, 3 Onely he that is cutte of from this happy society, hath no compassion of them, nor feeleth not how they are knitt vnto vs, by loue and vnity of one heade, and one body. You shall heare his vnnaturall, and worse then heathen wordes: Dum mortuos a nostro contubernio subduxit dominus,Cal. Instit. nullum nobis cum illis reliquit commercium, ac ne illis quidem nobiscum. VVhen the Lorde hath taken the deade out of our company, he
hath dispatched vs of all intermedlyng with them, or they with vs. This man was borne to breake the bande of vnity, which he hated both in the liue and dead. By whose meanes it is now come to passe, that those which of reason might clame our aide, are vn∣naturally disapointed of all such remedies, whereby any comforte might to them arise. Such lacke of compassion is driuen into our heades, that we feele not the woe of our owne fellowes, our kinne, our brethern, and our owne membres. It is a thousand yeare and more, sith a holy father, not hauing halfe the cause that we nowe haue,Ad frat. in herem. 44. yet noted the peoples lacke of compassion towardes the de∣parted, in these wordes. They that lie in torment vntollerable, crie out for succour, and few there be, that make aunswere: they woefully call, but there is none to comfort them. O Brethern what a kinde of cruellty is this? O how much inhumanity is this? those that in their life time suffered much sorow for our sakes, now crie againe for our ayde, and we regarde them not. Lo how the sicke calles, and the phisitions are at hande: the hogge groneth, and the whole hearde groutleth with all: the poore asse falleth, and euery man helpes him vp in hast: but the faithfull alone calleth, in his greuous torments, and there is none that aunswereth. Lo our vnkindnesse (saith this doctor) and lo our lacke of com∣passion. But because all this forgetfullnesse, commeth by the wicked suggestion of these late deuilish opinions, which mainteine that the prayers of the liuing, or their workes, do not extende to the deade in Christ: therefore, for the destruction of this vnkind he∣resie, and planting in our heartes with the trueth, the feeling of our housholde fellowes sores, I shall proue that in all times, as well of nature, as the lawe and Gospell, the faithfull men haue euer ioyned in all their prayers and acceptable workes, the soules departed: as vnto whome, by right of their communion and fel∣lowship in faith, the reliefe of Gods grace and Christes merits do appertayne. Therefore, this once declared, let vs except them from no painefull worke of the liuing, nor charitable deede, nor good prayer, nor sacrifice, nor teares, no nor from the inward dolour nor loue of mans heart. Learne to know what it is to be in a common body, and thou shalt streight perceiue, that the least motion of thy mind, stirred by Gods grace, shall be caried to the reliefe of that
part which thou pitied, and most intended. 3 Here but that you haue a pleasure to spue out your pestilent poyson against that noble light of Gods Church M. Caluine, is nothing that neede any such exclamation which you make with open mouth, as though Caluine de∣nyed the communion of Saincts, which he doth most con∣stantly affirme euen in the same place out of which you haue rent those words that you so bite and teare with your venimous teeth. lib. 3. cap. 20. sect. 24. where he speaketh a∣gainst inuocation of Sainctes, who being in rest with God (he sayth) are not to be drawne by the prayers, vnto earthly cares of our necessities, which eyther they know not, or they can not helpe. For that office of charitie which the godly doe exercise in this life by praying one for an other, is grounded vpon the commaun∣dement of God and vpon his promise, which two thinges are the chiefe to be considered in prayer. But all these reasons concerne not the dead, whom whē the Lord hath remoued from our compa∣ny, he hath left vs no intermedling with them, nor them with vs, so farre as we can conceiue by any coniectures. These be Cal∣uins wordes by which he meaneth, that although the affe∣ction of charitie remaine in the deade, yet it is not shewed by looking to our earthly necessities, which they know are subiect to the prouidence of God. Moreouer they haue not (that we know by the Scripture) any commaundement or promise to cause them to pray for vs, neither haue we any to pray to them. And this is that intermedling which Cal∣uine denyeth to be betwene the deade & the liuing, name∣ly such as is betwene them that are liuing among them selues. As for the exhortation of him that wrote to his bro∣ther in the desert, what so euer he was or how long so euer it be since he wrote, because it hath not authoritie in the word of God, I weigh it as the words of a man, whose cre∣dite in diuine matters, is nothing without the word of God. VVhat the Church of God hath euer principally practised for the soules departed, by the vvarraūt of holy Scripture: vvith the defense of the Machabees holy history, against the heretikes of our time.
CAP. III. 1 BVt amongest so many meanes of helpe, these haue bene euer counted most soueraigne:Gregori. in epist. ad Bo∣nifac. Sacrifice, prayers, al∣mes, and by example of scripture most commended. Though fasting added vnto any of them, hath singu∣lar strength in this case, and euer was ioyned in all earnest sute, made to God for our selues or other. VVe can not better begin to shew the practise hereof, then at that scripture, which sufficient∣ly commendeth at once, all three: written in the second booke of Machabees in these wordes: Iudas hortabatur populum cō∣seruare se sine peccato,Cap. 12. sub oculis videntes quae facta sunt pro peccatis eorum qui postrati sunt. Et facta collatione, duodecim millia drachmas argenti misit Ierosolymam of∣ferri pro peccatis mortuorum sacrificium, bene & religiose de resurrectione cogitans: (nisi enim eos qui ceciderant re∣surrecturos speraret, superfluum videretur & vanum orare pro mortuis) & quia considerabat quod hi qui cum pietate dormitionem acceperant, optimam haberent repositam gratiam. Sancta ergo & salubris est cogitatio, pro defunctis exorare, vt a peccatis soluantur. The valiaunt man Iudas, exhorted the people to kepe them selues from sinne, hauing be∣fore their eyes, what was fallen for the offensies of them that were slaine. And a common gathering being made, he sent xij thou∣sand peces of siluer to Ierusalem, to offer for the sinnes of those that were departed, a Sacrifice: being well and religiously min∣ded, concerning the resurrection: for except he had suerly tru∣sted, that such as were slaine shoulde arise againe, it might haue bene counted vaine and superfluous to praye for the deade. But because he did well consider, that such as in piety receiued their sleepe, had grace and fauour laide vp for them, therefore it is a holy and proffitable meaning to praye for the deade, that they may be assoyled of their sinnes. So farre the Author of the hi∣storie speaketh: setting forth most euidently, the notable piety of Iudas in exhorting them to releue the departed, the like liberall almes of the people, the prayers there in the campe, and the sa∣crifice at Ierusalem celebrated for the same purpose. In all which
doing, the scripture much prayseth that worthy zele of Iudas, as a thing both profitable to the departed towardes the remission of their offensies, and no lesse agreeing to that his especiall hope of the resurrection to come: counting it a foly to pray for them, of whose resurrection we are not assured. VVherby, I can not tell whether a man may well gether, that such as deny the fellowship of the liue with the deade, or condemne prayers made for them, steadfastly beleue not the resurrection.Take heede And in deede if we note well, we shall finde that the prayers for the deade haue bene euer taken both as an argument to proue, and as a protestation of the faithfull, to shewe their minde and faith, concerning the resur∣rection. So did Epiphanius that holy father, make confession of the Churches faith for the resurrection, and immortality of the soule, by the praying for the departed, and ioyning them to the partaking of the workes of the liue.In heresi. Aerij. Hi qui decesserunt viuunt (sayth he) & non sunt nulli, sed sunt, & viuunt apud Deum, & spes est orantibus pro fratribus, velut qui in peregri∣natione sint. Those which be deceased do yet liue, and are not by their departure hense fallen to be nothing, but they haue their being, and yet do lyue before God: and there is great hope to their orators or beadsmen, praying for them: as for such that be in their pilgramage. So sayth Damascen,In oratione pro de funct. that by supplication for the soules, resurrectionis spes solidatur, the hope of resur∣rection is established. And therefore Dionysius the auncient in his misticall prayer and sarfice for the departed, declareth that there was a minister that did solemnely recite certaine places out of scripture, for to confirme the hope of resurrection.Ecclesiast. Hierrarch. Cap. 7. So that this practise of the faithfull hath not onely bene euer accompted a plaine trueth, but it hath bene a grounde and a principle to con∣firme the article of resurrection and immortality of the soule. And therefore the facte of Iudas, is with such commendation mentioned in the scripture. For in those dayes the heresie of the Saduces denying the resurrection and the life to come (as Iose∣phus writeth) began to take greate holde amongest the Iewes,Antiq. li. 1. Cap. 8. about byshop Ionathas his time: in which tiue of diuersity, that true beleuer thought to make plaine protestation of his faith, by his notable facte. And now I must needes be bolde to tell these enemies of our
communion, that in acknowledging them selues to haue nothing to do with the soules departed, they are at the next doore by, to denie the immortalitie, and to terme them deade soules as Vigi∣lantius did.Hiero con. vig. VVhome Gods Church very conformably to Christes calling and fittly for the protesting the common faith, nameth, Dormientes in signo pacis,Prayers for the depar∣ted agreeth to our faith of the resur¦rection and immortali∣tie. Those that sleepe in the signe of peace: and the named Scripture, for the same cause, calleth them men a sleepe in pietie. VVell, if their denial of prayers for the de∣ceased, grow so farre as the vtter impugning of Christian hope for the life euerlasting, and so with purgatory, take away hell and heauen togither, as the Sadduces did, (which God of his might turne from them) but if they doe, because there is such affinitie betwixt both their teachings: and this of theirs, may seeme al∣wayes to haue bene ioyned to that extreme falshoode of the o∣thers, then shall Gods Church still protest the faith of her chil∣dren, by prayers and practise for the deade, both by the example of the fathers in Christes Church vnder the Gospell, and by the fact of worthy Iudas in the lawe before. CAP. III. 1 WE haue all this while called for authoritie of the scripture, now we shall haue scrip∣ture I trowe, or else M. Allen shall misse of his purpose Sacrifice, almes, prayers, com∣mended by scripture, to be meanes to helpe the soules in purgatory. And the scripture is written. 2. Machab. 12. Pro¦thesauro carbones: we haue founde coles in the steed of treasure. Is this all the scripture we are like to haue? this hath bene aunswered of olde to be no holy nor canonicall scripture, and that by many reasons. First because it con∣teineth matter contrary to the vndoubted worde of God. I omit this matter in cōtrouersy in the 14. chap. the author of the booke commendeth one Razis for killing him selfe, which is contrary to the word of God. Wherefore M. Allen by authoritie of this booke, & the example of a good man Razis may as well conclude that it is lawfull for men to kill them selues, as by the example of Iudas, that men may of∣fer
sacrifice for the dead. Secondly the author of this booke declareth, that he abridgeth the fiue bookes of Iason the Cy∣renian, into this one, which is a manifest argument, that he was not the instrument of the holy Ghost. For the holy Ghost maketh no abridgements of others mens writings. A∣gaine the purpose of the author proueth that he was not directed by Gods spirite, for he confesseth that he tooke this matter in hande, that men might haue pleasure in it, which could not away with the tedious long stories of Ia∣son. But the spirite of God serueth not such vayne delight of men. Moreouer, he sheweth what labour and sweate it was to him, to make this abridgement, and to be short, he maketh a very prophane preface, ambitiously commending his trauell and shewing the difference betwene a story at large, and an abridgment: all which thinges sauour no∣thing of that spirite, by which the holy Scriptures of God were written, which as S. Peter sheweth, came not by priuate mens will and ordinance, but the holy men of God spake as they were inspired by the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1. where as all this pre∣face sheweth nothing, but a priuate motion & an humane purpose. And yet the man is to be commended for this, that he doth not boast of any more reuelation then he had, but in the end of this booke cōfesseth his infirmity & desi∣reth pardō, which is as farre from the maiesty of gods spirit, as it is agreeable to the weakenes of our deceiuable nature, which are apt to deceiue and be deceiued. If I haue wel done (sayth he) and as the story required, it is the thing I desired: but if I haue spoken slenderly and barely, it is that I could. For as it is hurtfull to drinke wine alone, and then agayne water, and as wine tempered with water is pleasant and delighteth the tast, so the setting out of the matter delighteth the eares of them that readeth the story, &c. Who is so voyd of the spirite of God, that can not see plainly that this man had neither the pur∣pose to write that which shoulde instruct, much lesse that should bind the consciences of men, neither the gift so to write as in writing he could not erre? But now to come to the text it selfe, first the greeke copy in this place is so man∣gled and corrupted that no good sense can be gathered of
the wordes, by which it appeareth, that the deuils limbes haue bene umbling with this booke, as they haue bene with the olde doctors in places where mention is of prayer for the deade. Secondly seeing this facte of Iudas, hath no commaundement in the law, in which not so much as one pinne of the tabernacle, was omitted, lest any thing might be left to the will of man, to deuise in the worship of God, it is so farre of, that it is to be drawne into example, that we may be bold to condemne it for sinne, & disobedience, you shall not doe (sayth the Lord) what seemeth good in your owne eyes, but that which I commaund you, that onely shall you doe, without adding any thinge to it or taking away any thing from it. But M. Allen thinketh he hath a sure post to leane vnto, because Iudas Machabaeus did by this fast testifie, his hope of the resurrection, as Iasons abridger sayth, and also that prayers for the deade, may be an argument to proue the faith that men haue of the resurrection. It is not vnlike that this reason preuayled much with the auncient fathers, as appeareth by their writings, for commonly it hath the best colour of any reason that they bring to allow prayers for the dead. But if it be weighed with good iudgement, it is of no force to proue, that prayers for the dead, are lawful. For as truth may be proued alwayes with true principles, so often tymes it may be concluded out of false affirmations. As for example, Idolatrie proueth that there is a God, but Idolatry is not therefore the true worship of God. Of the heresie of the Pharisies that helde Pythagoras opinion, of the passing of one soule into diuers bodies, may be conclu∣ded the immortalitie of the soule, but this doth not iustifie that errour of the Pharisies: by the heresy of Origines which taught that all men should be saued at length, not onely the immortalitie of the soule and the resurrection, but also the infinite mercy of God may be concluded, which all are true articles, yet was not the heresie of Origine true for all this, vnlesse M. Allen hath forgotten that olde sophisme which children can solute: who so euer sayth you are an asse, sayth you are a lyuing creature: but he that sayth you are a liuing creature sayth true: therefore who so euer sayth you are
an asse sayth true. And such for all the worlde is M. Allens reason: who so confesseth prayers for the deade confes∣seth that the deade doe liue and shall rise againe: but he that confesseth that the dead doe liue and shall rise againe doth not erre: therefore he that confesseth prayers for the deade doth not erre. 2 But now their aunswere must be here, that this booke by which I haue vrged them so farre, shall be no scripture. And this is the ishue of heresie lo.Heretikes deny scrip∣tures. These men that lightly writh & wreast Gods worde, from all true meaning to the maintenaunce of their matter, being further charged by euidence of the wordes, when other conuenient shifte can not be founde, they are driuen, to re∣fuse vtterly the sacred canonicall scripture of God: for notwith∣standing their perpetuall bragges of scripture, yet there can no scripture holde them, but they will either finde a fonde shifte to loose it, or els a shamefull stoutnes vtterly to brast and breake it. They first seeke by suttelty to vnfasten the bonde of Gods trueth, which is euery waye so enwrapped with the testimonies of holy Scripture, then as they can not worke by wiles, they boldely brast the bandes in sonder. Thus when for misconstruing of this plane assertion of the booke of Machabees, they can conuey no fit meaning, they are driuen to harde shiftes and vnsemely, to deny the whole booke to be scripture, and therefore in matters of que∣stion, of no authority. In which pointe, the authoritie of the Iewes moueth them more,In prol. mach.Though a∣gainst a levve or an heretike they coulde not proue any article of faith nei∣ther then nor novve, by them. Cap. 48. Cap. 47. Lib. 2. Cap. Cap. 36. in denying the bookes to be in the canon of Gods scripture, then the decree of the holy Church for the ap∣prouing of the same to be scripture. But S. Hierome, though he confesse the Iewes not to allowe them, yet is bolde to recken them amongest the bookes of the holy Histories: not measuring their authority by the canon of the Hebrues, but by the rule of Chri∣stian councells. The Canons of the Apostles will chalenge them from the Iewes and heretikes, to be scripture still: Innocentius the first, in his rehersall of diuine bookes, numbreth these of the histories of the Machabees also: the Councell of Carthage the third, authorisheth them, S. Augustine in his bookes. De do∣ctrina Christiana, numbring all canonicall scriptures, with the reste reciteth these also. Of which bookes in the xviij, of the Citie
of God, he thus further testifieth, Ab hoc tempore apud Iu∣daeos restituto templo, non reges sed principes fuerunt vs∣que ad Aristobulum: quorum supputatio temporum, non in scripturis sanctis quae Canonicae appellantur, sed in alijs inuenitur, in quibus sunt & Machabaeorū libri, quos non Iu∣daei, sed Ecclesia pro canonicis habet. From this time (he mea∣neth after the history of Esdras) there was no kinges, but chiefe gouernours, after the restitutiō & repaire of the temple, till Ari∣stobulus time: of all which time there is no Chronikle nor coūte, in the scriptures which be Canonicall, but in other that be ex∣tant, we finde that supplied: as in the bookes of Machabees: which bookes, although the Iewes do not, yet the Church of God counteth for canonicall scripture. But what shoulde we stande in this point: the whole Church of God and euery part or prouince thereof, euery learned doctour and vertuous Christian man, hath receiued and allowed them for scripture. the which constant and perpetuall iudgement of the Church of Christ, if any man refuse, let him be esteemed an Eth∣nike. Or because he defendeth the Iewes authority against the determination of Christes Churh, let him be at this time accomp∣ted for a Iewe. And yet I thinke he ouer shooteth them herein: for they confesse the history to be true, although not holy Scrip∣ture: neither haue they found any such errour of doctrine therein conteined, as he doth. And as for the auncient Christian writers, and famous do∣ctours, they alleage euen that place to proue the lawefull prayer for Christian soules departed, whereby these fellowes take occa∣sion to saie it is no scripture at all. As godly Damascenus, in these wordes. Scitis enim quid dicat scriptura, quomodo Iudas ille Machabaeus, in Syon, Ciuitate regis magni, vt cognouit populum sibi subiectum à Palestinis hostibus oc∣cisum, & scrutatione facta, inuenta idola in sinibus corum, statim pro vnoquoque eorum ad dominum qui ad miseri∣cordiam facilis & paratus est,In lib. pro defunct. munera propitiatoria obtu∣lit, sane ob summam religionem fraternamque charitatem, in hoc facinore, vt in omnibus alijs, a diuinissima scriptura & magnificus & admirabilis habebatur. You know (sayth he) what the scripture reporteth, how that worthy Iudas Machabeus
of Syon, the City of the great kinge, after he vnderstood certeine of his subiectes to haue bene slaine of the Palestines his ene∣mies, and search being made, had founde in their lappes, idols, straight wayes offered to God, who is much inclined to mercy, for euery of his souldiars so slaine, propitiatory oblations▪ who suerly, for that act, as proceding of wonderfull religion and bro∣therly loue, and in all other affaires, is of the holy writte estee∣med mighty and meruelous. Longe before this writer did S. Augustine vse the same booke and text of Machabees, to proue the prayers & sacrifice,De cura pro mort. agen∣da. for the departed in peace. In the booke of Machabees (sayth he) we reade that sacrifice was offered for the deade. But if it were in none of the olde scriptures reade at all, yet the authority of the vniuersall Church, which for this point is plaine, were of no small force, whereby it is prouided, that in the prayers, which be made at the altare by the priest, to our Lorde God, the comme∣moration of the deade shall haue their place. Thus by these aun∣cient authors, both the bookes be approued, the text it selfe, for which our aduersaries vnworthely denied the booke, alleaged for the same purpose, and the doctrine so sure, that if no scripture coulde be founde, it would beare out it selfe against all falsehood. But this doctor handleth Pelagius the heretique, denying the booke of VVisdome to be scripture, because there was a sentence out of the fourth Chapter thereof, brought against his wicked do∣ctrine, euen as he shoulde be: and as these wranglers in the like case must be. The place well marked, shal serue our turne when so euer we heare them so impudently reiect scriptures, because they impugne their heresies, which els shoulde be as good scriptures as any booke of the Bible, if they either woulde make with them or by any crafty colouring not plainely make against them. Thus he sayth. Nec ideo liber Sapientiae, qui tanta numerositate an∣norum legi meruit in ecclesia Christi, pati debet iniuriam,Augustines ansvvere to Pelagius, denying scripture for that it made agaīst his heresie. quoniam resistit eis qui pro meritis hominum falluntur: & rursus: omnibus hic liber tractatoribus anteponendus, quo∣niam sibi cum anteposuerunt etiam temporibus Apostolo∣rum proximi, egregij tractatores: qui eum testem adhiben∣tes, nihil se adhibere nisi diuinum testimonium crediderūt: in English thus. It is no reason that the booke of VVisdom, which
so many worldes together hath bene worthy the reading in the Church of Christ, shoulde nowe receiue such wrong at our handes, because it plainely resisteth these fellowes, that exalt mans me∣rites (aboue Gods grace.) And againe, this booke is of more authority then all the expositours in the worlde: for the noble writers hard by the Apostles time, did much preferre this booke before them selues, who alleaging the testimony of that scripture, doubted not, but they vsed thereby, the witnesse of Gods holy word. Euen so must we tell our maisters, that it were plaine wrong, to discredit the history of the Machabees, which hath bene in our Bible euer sith Christes time for holy Scripture, because it hath an euident testimonie against their false belefe, concerning the state of the soules departed: which booke, is not onely better to be beleued then all Caluins false gloses, but of more authority then all holy expositors. Out of which booke, both S. Augustine & others many, haue vsed proofe of their matters, as of the testi∣monie of Sacred and holy scripture. 2 I will not gaine saye, but who so denyeth the autho∣rity of the holy Scriptures, thereby bewrayeth him selfe to be an heretike as all Papistes doe, which I will proue after∣warde. But he that admitteth for scripture, that which is not proceded from the spirite of God, and thereby will a∣uouch for trueth, that which is contrary to the vndoubted worde of God, is no lesse heretike then he, for it is all one sinne, to adde to the worde of God and to take from it. But M. Allen pretending to proue the booke of Machabees canonicall by authority of the Church, when he can not by consent that it hath with the scriptures of God, begin∣neth with the authority of Hieronym. in prol. Mach. But what he meaneth thereby or what place he noteth I know not. But this I knowe, that in his Preface vpon the booke of kinges he doth not onely omit it in rehersall of the ca∣nonicall bookes, but also accompteth it plainely among the Apocryphall. Next he alleageth the canons of the A∣postles. Wise canons I promise you: as truely made by the Apostles, as the double canons that lie on the tower hyll of London. In which are rehersed 3. bookes of Machabees
two Epistles of Clemens for canonicall scripture, but the Apocalypse of S. Iohn hath no place at all, by which it may appeare, what Apostles they were, that made that canckred canon. Then followeth the prouinciall Councell of Car∣thage the third, which nameth the 2. bookes of the Macha∣bees amonge the canonicall scriptures euen as it doth the 5. bookes of Salomon, whereas the Church alloweth but 3. namely the Prouerbes, the preacher, and the Canticles: and although you shoulde numbre to these, the booke of Wisdome, yet can you make but 4. in all that we know of. Againe, in what sence they did call those bookes canoni∣call, appereth by Augustine, that was one of that Councell, namely that they maye be reade, so it be with iudgement. Contra 2. Gaudentij epistolam lib. 2. cap. 23. Et hanc qui∣dem scripturam quae appellatur Machabaeorum non habent Iudaei sicut legem & Prophetas, & Psalmos, quibus domi∣nus testimonium perhibet tanquam testibus suis dicens: o∣portet impleri omnia quae scripta sunt in lege, & prophetis, & in psalmis de me. Sed recepta est ab ecclesia non inuti∣liter, si sobriè legatur & audiatur. And this scripture of the Machabees, the Iewes compte not as the lawe and the prophetes and the Psalmes, to whome our Lorde geueth testimony as to his witnesses saying, it behoued that all thinges should be fulfilled, that were written of me, in the lawe, and in the Prophetes, and in the Psalmes. But it is receiued of the Church not vnprofitably, if it be soberly reade and harde. Here you see that Augustine howsoeuer he alloweth those bookes, yet he alloweth them not in full authority, with the lawe, Prophetes and Psalmes, nor with out condition of sobriety in the reader or hearer. But Hieronym sayth plainely the Church receiueth them not as canonicall scriptures: in his preface vpon the booke of Prouerbes: Sicut ergo Iudith & Tobiae, & Machabaeo∣rum libros, legit quidem ecclesia, sed eos inter canonicas scripturas non recipit: Sic & haec duo volumina legat ad aedificationem plaebis, non ad authoritatem ecclesiasti∣corum dogmatum confirmandam. Therefore euen as the Church readeth in deede the bookes of Iudith, Tobias, and Ma∣chabees, but yet receiueth them not among the canonicall scrip∣tures
so maye she reade these 2. bookes (videlicet Ecclesiasti∣cus and the booke of Wisdome falsely intitled to Salomon) for the edification of the people, but not to confirme the authori∣ty of ecclesiasticall opinions. Thus if Augustine doe simply al∣lowe these bookes, you haue Hieronym that doth simply refuse them. If Augustine saye the Church receiueth them for canonicall, Hieronym sayth the Church receiueth them not for canonicall. As for Damascene except you woulde stryue with numbre of witnesses I know not why you al∣leage him, being one to whose iudgement as but a late wri∣ter in comparison, you know we ascribe small credit. I might produce against him Athanasius or at leste wise one of el∣der time then Damascene vnder the name of Athanasius, but that I haue alleaged already is sufficient to represse that vaine and vnskilfull insultation, that you vse in so many wastfull wordes against vs, for refusing the authority of him, that abridged Iason the Cyrenians bookes, for cano∣nicall scriptures. 3 But our aduersary learned not this practise of Pelagius onely, for it is an older sore, and a common sicknesse to all deui∣sers of deuilish doctrine: as the skillfull in the Churchies affaires may acknowledge. For some there were, that otherwise coulde not vpholde heresy, but by the vtter deniall of all the olde Te∣stament: as Carpocrates, Ceuerus, Manicheus. But Marcion and Cerdon reiect all together:August. de haeresib. 24. haeres.Trtul. de praescrip. Iren. cap. 26 libr. 1. Euseb. ec∣cles. histor. lib. 4.De haeresi. ad quod vult deum 30. haeresi. sauyng Lukes Gospel. Now Ce∣rinthus, and Ebion, make counte of none of all the Euangelicall histories, but the Gospell of Matthewe. Cerinthus againe and Seuerus, woulde haue robbed the Church of the actes of the A∣postles. A sect called Alogiani, do refuse the Gospell of S. Iohn, with the Apocalypse Martine, illiricus, Caluine, and their com∣panions, that no man, being but an heretique, shoulde euer out pricke them, will shoulder with the proudest, and lifte out of our Bibles the bookes of Machabees, with S. Iames Epistle, and more when more nede requireth. The which Epistle, as also the Epistles of Iohn and Iudas, were once doubted of, not as contei∣ning any matter, wherof, the trueth was vncertaine, but as bookes not knowen to be of like force as canonicall scripture in the im∣pugning
of heresies, or confirming articles of belefe: as all workes be, till Gods Church haue published their authority, and decla∣red all thinges in them conteined to be of the same credit that the spirite of God is, and of Gospell like trueth.The Chur∣ches vse in confirmati∣on or pub∣lishing of the canoni∣call Scrip∣ture. And by that au∣thority of the Church what booke so euer be allowed, though it was not so taken before, yet now we must needes accept it, sicut vere est verbum Dei, as the very word of God. And so be these canonicall Epistles, and bookes of Machabees, as before is de∣clared. Here nowe euery man may learne, that it is a very daun∣gerous matter to geue lesse credit to any of these bookes, or wauer in any point of faith written in them, for such fellowes iudge∣ments, that nowe amongest them, haue lefte vs neither olde nor newe Testament. Such stubborne boldenesse, had these willfull men in mainteinaunce of mischeuous doctrine. VVhose open im∣pudencie, was counted handsome conueiaunce of their scholers and adherents, which were very many, notwithstanding the Ca∣tholike Christian men in all ages both meruailed, and lamented their blindnesse. And yet doubtlesse it is not much to be wonde∣red at, to see that man flatly forsake the scripture of God, who is not abashed, to refuse and condemne that sense and vnderstan∣ding of the Scripture, which the whole Church with all her lear∣ned men haue euer allowed, and counted most holy. VVell by the strength of this piller we haue chalenged and saued hitherto, for all the barking of bandogges, the Scripture of God, with the knowne meaning thereof. And so I trust we shall doe still, from the new aduersaries, by the assured promise of thassistance of Gods holy spirite, which shall leade vs not onely to the true canonicall Scriptures, with the sense of the same: but also guide vs in all truth, necessary for our saluation. Let euery man therefore here take heede, how he doubteth of the knowne and certayne sense, that the Church of Christ, by de∣cree of councell or consent of doctors, applyeth to any Scripture: least by mistrusting the sayd sense, he goe forward vnaduisedly from open deniall of the common, to found a priuate meaning of his owne: in the stubborne defense whereof,A necessary vvarning. when he shall against the truth malipertly stand, he goeth vnluckely forward, & at the end blasphemously reiecteth the blessed word, & sacred Scripture of God: as we haue proued the auncient enemies of truth, to haue
done: and as in these new sect maisters we may to our great do∣lour, see. Yet loe, euen these are they that in all ages, as Vincen∣tius sayth, flye in their talke and teaching, ouer the law, the pro∣phets, the Psalmes, the Gospell. That cry out of pottes & pulpits, nothing but Gods word, the booke of the Lorde, the testa∣ment of Iesus, Christ, Paule, scripture, as it may be supposed, and as in thende it is proued, to driue out of doores, Paule, Scri∣pture, Testament, and Christ too: and not to bring into the peoples heades or heartes, the feare and loue of God, the holsom precepts of Paules heauenly preaching, nor the true meaning of any Scri∣pture. VVho being vrged, will rather credit a minstrells ballat, then the Machabeis, or best booke in the Bible. But now you may see, that whiles these men thought to saue their credits, by miscrediting the Scripture, they haue wrought so wisely, that they haue lost their owne credits, both in this poynt, and in all other for euer. And as they hoped by deniall of Scrip∣ture, to cloke their errour, they haue wonne to them selues the property of an heretike, by open shew of their owne folly. 3 And euen as vaine & friuolous is this discourse that followeth to shew what bookes of scripture were in olde time refused, by what heretikes. But you thinke to match vs with them, for denying the Machabees, where vnto you adde the Epistle of S. Iames. If Martine and Illyricus haue some times doubted of that Epistle, they are not the first that doubted of it, Eusebius sayth plainely it is a coun∣terfect Epistle. lib. 2. cap. 23. And yet he was not accompted an heretike, I saye not this to excuse them that doubt of it, for I am perswaded they are more curious then wise in so doing, but whereas you ioine Caluine with them it is be∣cause you can not leaue to lye with out shame, while you are an instrument to defend diuelish errors with out shewe of trueth. For Caluine receiueth it, defendeth it, expoun∣deth it, and in all his writings allegeth it as canonical! scripture. Therefore if he were as ill as you compt him, yet it were shame to lye on the deuill. But we shall not nede to ake among the olde heresies to finde what bookes of ho∣ly Scripture you Papistes refuse, when it is an easy matter
to take your owne confessions and bolde assertions, by which it is manifest that you doe not as those heretikes which you name reiect some one or two bookes but the whole authority of all the canonicall scriptures. For when you affime that no booke of holy Scripture is canonicall, but so farre forth, as your Church will allow it, who seeth not that you doe abrogate all maiestie and authoritie from the word of God submitting it to the iudgements of men? Moreouer when you will not admit any sence of the scrip∣ture, but such as your Church wil allow, although the same be contrary to the plaine wordes thereof, what authority doe you leaue to the worde of God: which you make to be but a dead lettre vntil you geue it such a sence as it plea∣seth you. Finally where you make decrees of men either priuate or common, customes, traditions, vnwritten veri∣ties, in which is no certainety at all, not onely equiualent, but also oftentimes superior to the auctority of holy scrip∣tures, what certainety, credit or estimation doe you leaue to the scriptures of God aboue other writinges? nay all other writinges are in better case then the scriptures are with you. For other writings may be compted the workes of their authors, with out your censure the holy Scripture may not be compted the worde of God, except you list so to allow it: which may as well refuse that which is Gods worde in deede as you receiue and obtrude, that which is not the worde of God at all. Other writings haue such sence, as the authors haue expressed them selues in their workes, and maye be gathered by their wordes. The holy Scripture may not haue any allowed sence, approued to be the meaning of God the author thereof, by considera∣tion of the wordes, nor conference of one place with an other, but it must nedes haue such sence, as your Church will fayne vnto it. Finally other writinges are of credit ac∣cording to the authoritie of the writers: The holy Scrip∣tures with you, haue not credit according to the authoritie of God the author of them, but according to your deter∣mination, that maye conferre or perferre vnto them what you list, whereby it is manifest, that you Antichristian Pa∣pistes
receiue onely the names of the canonicall scrip∣tures, and the metaphysicall wordes abstract from all sence, but the authoritie, meaning and credit, you vtterly deny to be in them, submitting them altogether to your owne selues and your most corrupt & peruerse iudgement. The rest of your tedious rayling vnto the ende of the chapter, I know not why I should aunswere further, except it were to waste incke and paper. For the stocke of your fructlesse tree being digged vp by the rootes, the proude toppes and braue braunches therof must nedes fal downe and wi∣ther away with it. That the funeralls of the Patriarches, both in the lavve of na∣ture, and Moises, and Christ, had practise in them for the re∣liefe of the soules departed. CAP. IIII. 1 NOw therefore, I haue great hope to trust so much of all studious readers, for that loue which they beare vnto truth, that they will geue creditte to the manifest wordes of Scripture, which so plainly doe set forth, not onely the benefite that ari∣seth to the departed by prayers, but also witnesse, that there was practise at Ierusalem by oblation and sa∣crifice for the same purpose,Iudas fol∣lovved the order of the church, and not prescri¦bed to the Church any nevv sacri∣fice or ce∣remony. by order of their law. For otherwise, would that good knight so highly commended, neuer haue presu∣med to bring in, any superstitious new vsage contrary to the rule of that Church, neither would the Priestes at Ierusalem haue of∣fered for the dead without contradiction, vnder the gouernment of so good a bishop: neither would the Author of she booke, vp∣on so light a beginning haue praysed the fact: or otherwise made mention of it, then as of a new deuise of the same man. VVhom I doubt not therefore, rather to haue followed the continuall cu∣stome of the Church, then to haue inuented any newe vnknowne order of his owne. VVhich may well appeare at this day, by the ceremonies and sacrifices of the olde lawe, yet superstitiously obserued emongest
the dispersed Iewes: where, emongest other rites of their lawe,De vniuer∣sa iudeorū fide. recita∣tur a Grop∣pero in lib. de Eucha∣rist. they offer and make solemne supplication for the soules depar∣ted: as Antonius Margarita, a Iewe that forsooke his pro∣fession, and became Christian, witnesseth in a booke that he made of the faith of the Iewes. VVhere he reporteth out of their sacrifice, this prayer. Deus animarum fidelium recorde∣tur, & in paradisum cum Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, alijs∣que integerrimis sanctis collocet: that is: Lord remember the faithfull soules, and place them in paradise with Abraham, Isa∣ac, and Iacob, and other thy perfect Sainctes and holy men. And for that purpose they haue a memoriall booke, as he sayth, out of which the names of the departed are yerely recited. But we much neede not this report herein: for that may well appeare to haue bene vsed long before Iudas Machabaeus his dayes. For what other thing doth that long mourning, fasting, chari∣table releuing of the poore, and other common afflictions which men tooke vpon them, at the obites of their friendes and fathers, as well in the law of nature, as afterward continually in Moises time, what else can they meane but perpetual practise for the rest of their soules?Genes. 23. Looke how religiously Abraham celebrated the rites of his wiues funerall, which the Scripture calleth Officium funeris, the office of the Buriall, which he fulfilled by weeping and lamentation made ouer the corps. Neither can I thinke, that the office and iust funeralls stoode in mourning or sorowyng without praying, or other remedies of reliefe towardes the departed, seeing especially that office of mourning, by solemne dirigies, as we nowe tearme them, had place, time, and ordre, by rule appointed to be executed: yea and were not ended by many dayes together, nor at one time nother. As it appeareth that Ioseph and his brethern,Genes. 50. executed their fathers funeralls, first fourty dayes in Aegypte, and then in their owne country, celebrabant exequias saith the text, seuen dayes together. So the children of Israel celebrated Moyses obsequies,Deut. 34. with thirty dayes solemne mourning, in the downes of Moab. Not by that weeping which procedeth of priuate affection towardes a mans friende, for that can not be limited, nor yet prescribed by rule, as all these solemne dirigies were. But questionlesse this office conteined for the reliefe of the deceased, almes, prayer,
fastes, and teares: all which may well be termed mourning songes or weeping ouer the dead,Eccles. 22. for that time most cōuenient. Of which the wise man geueth this precept, Super mortuū plora, VVeepe ouer the departed. And that thou maiest well perceiue, these publike rites of so∣lemne dirigies, to perteine properly to the due helpe of those, for whome they be exercised, S. Ambrose doubteth not to affirme, that of those burialls in the lawe of nature,Super obit Theod. the necessary obser∣uation of our Christian dayes, monthes, and yeares mindes kepte for the deade, had their beginning: saying thus in his funerall sermon, made the fourtith daye solemnely kept, for the memory of the noble Emperour Theodosius, Eius Principis & proxime conclamauimus obitum, & nunc quadragesimum celebra∣mus, assistente sacris altaribus Honorio principe, quia sicut sanctus Ioseph, patri suo Iacob quadraginta diebus huma∣tionis officia detulit, ita & hic Theodosio patri iusta per∣soluit: & quia alij tertium & trigesimum, alij septimum & quadragesimum obseruare consueuerūt, quid doceat lectio consideremus: defuncto inquit Iacob praecepit Ioseph pueris sepultoribus vt sepelirēt eum, & repleti sunt ei qua∣draginta dies. Haec ergo sequenda solemnitas quam prescri∣bit lectio. Bonus itaque Ioseph, qui formam pio muneri de∣dit, &c. VVe kept of late the day of this noble kinges buriall, And now againe we celebrate his fourtith dayes mind, the prince Honorius his sonne assisting vs before the holy altares: for as holy Ioseph bestowed vpon his fathers funeral fourty dayes du∣tie, euen so doth this prince procure his fathers obsequies. And because some obserue the thirde day and the thirtith, other kepe customably the vij. and the fourtith, let vs looke vpon the text: which readeth thus: Iacob being departed, Ioseph commaun∣deth the prouisours of the sepulture, to bury him: and so they did, and made vp full fourty dayes in that obite, this solemnity then must we fellowe, prescribed by the scripture. Good was this Io∣seph, that first gaue vs the forme and fashion of so holy a fun∣ction. By these wordes we see the antiquity of our Christian diri∣gies, and diuersitie of dayes, as yet it is vsed in mounthes or twelue mounthes mindes, to haue ishued downe from S. Am∣brose time to ours, from the lawe of nature by the Patriarches
prescription, to his dayes:Geneua booke ap∣pointeth a still buriall. not by mourning and mumchaunse as the buriall of Geneuas booke appointeth, but at the holy altares these obites were kepte, as with deuoute prayers, and sacrifice. VVhereof in better place, I shall speake more anone. He al∣ludeth there also, to our dilexi: and other Psalmes which we yet singe in Gods Church, ouer the departed. CAP. IIII. 1 WHen you haue perforce as you phan∣tysie made a breatch in that strong walle that enuironed the canonicall scrip∣tures, and made a great seperation be∣tween them and all other writing, by thrusting in the abridgmēt of Iasons sto∣rie among them, now as though you had taken the citye, you make spoile and hauoke, with out all order or hone∣sty of all that liketh you within the compasse of holy writ and with out. Nowe burialls, mournings, almes, fasting, festing, building, times and seasons all are youres. But he that longeth to haue his splene or his gaule moued, let him reade these discourses following, if he list to laugh at foolish arguments let him come hether, if he wilbe angry with frowarde applications of the scripture here can he not wante occasion. And first he hopeth that all they that loue the trueth will fauor his cause, when they heare out of the scriptures, that sacrifice for the deade, was offered at Ierusalem by order of the lawe? By order of the lawe M. Allen? shew me one iote or title of the lawe to approue sa∣crifice for the deade. Et eris mihi magnus Apollo, & Phyllida solus habebis, and I will worshippe your wordes as an ora∣cle, and confesse that you onely haue the trueth. I know your aunswere: you haue no writing, but you haue good reasons, for so good a knight, so many priestes, so good a bishop, such an author woulde neuer haue allowed it, if it had not bene according to the lawe of God. Touching your authour we haue saide enough already, As for the good knight Iudas, was not so suer of falling, but Dauid a
better knight then he, transgressed the lawe of God, to carry the arke vpon a new chariotte, which shoulde haue bene borne vpon mens shoulders, 1. Chron. 13. wherein not onely Dauid, but so many Priestes, and Leuites, so good a bishop, and the whole generall councell of Israell did erre. Here was neither Zadocke, nor Abiather, nor Abinadab, nor Gad, nor Nathan or any other that made contradiction, vntill God him selfe shewed his displeasure by killing of Vzza But because M. Allen thinketh the bishop being so good a man, woulde neuer haue consented to it, if it had bene euill. I woulde aske of him, who was bishop or high priest then, that he was so good a bishop, and so worthy of his commendation. Suerly if he were a good man, he was much to blame to suffer any such thing to be done, in the temple of God, which was not appointed by the lawe of God. But if he were a wicked and an vngodly man, by M. Allens owne reason, it is not vnlike, but that he woulde for the gaine of 2000 drachmes of siluer, suffer such a super∣stitious newe vsage contrary to the lawe. Now because M. Allen sayeth he was so good a bishop, let him chose which it was of these 3. that satte on the seate of the high priest all the time that Iudas had any dignity amonge the people, namely Iason, Menclaus and Alcinus, let him take the beste of them (although it appeareth by the story that Menae∣laus the worst of them all three, was Byshop in that tyme) and he shall see, that no man euer (except he were willfully disposed to lye) would bestow such commendation vppon him as M. Allen doth, to call him so good a Bishop, and to defend the gouernment of so good a Bishop from suffering any superstitious vsage contrary to the law, when they were all three open transgressors forsakers of the law: And what the Priestes of that time were, let his owne author declare, 2. Mach. 4. The priestes were now no more diligēt about the ser∣uice of the aultar, but despised the temple, and regarded not the sacrifices, but made hast to be partakers of the wicked expenses at the play, after the casting of the stone. These were those re∣uerend Priestes of those dayes, not vnlike your hedge Prie∣stes of popery. And although Iudas did afterward make a
peece of reformation, after the horrible prophaning of the temple, and the lawes through cruell persecution, yet these Priestes were not therby sodenly chaunged into god∣ly men carefull for the sinceritie of Gods law: but were re∣dy like the reformed popish Priestes that we haue seene in our tyme, to doe what so euer the Prince hath commaun∣ded, & to be as ready againe to doe the contrary at an other Princes commaundement. In such a time, & vnder so wic∣ked a Priest, no maruell, if such corruption did enter. More∣ouer, the fact of Iudas fauoureth not the popish purgatory, where none but veniall and light sinnes are expiable, but those that were slayne, for whom the same offering was made, dyed in deadly sinne as appeareth by the story, they had vnder their coates Iewels, consecrated to Idolls, which was so heynous an offence that Iudas feared that they should haue bene all vtterly destroyed for their fault, and therefore it might seeme, that he caused the sacrifice to be offered not so much to pacifie God for them that were kil∣led, as to purge them selues of that pollution and propha∣nation, sauing that the author of the booke expoundeth that fact otherwise. And whereas M. Allen sayth, that pray∣er for the dead is yet vsed of the Iewes. They that haue as good cause to know their custome as he, affirmeth contra∣ry. He citeth Antonius Margarita turned from a Iewe to a Papiste which auoucheth the same. The rabbins in their writings, when they speake of any that is dead, they onely blesse his memory, and in the booke of their common prai∣ers, and ceremonies printed in the hebrew tongue there is no such forme of prayer to be found for the deade. But if a∣ny of them (as they doe in many ceremonies papizare) haue learned the superstition of the Papistes, it is not this alone that they haue contrary to the word of God. But lette vs come to the matter of this chapter, M. Allen asketh what o∣ther thing doth all the mourning, fasting, and other ceremonies of burying meane, but a practise for the rest of their soules? I aun∣swere with distinction, because his question is with confu∣sion: partly they meane, that those which did such thinges lamēted for the departure of so excellent men, partly they
ment to shew their hope of their resurrection, mourning & fasting were to expresse their sorrow, the other ceremonies were to declare that mens bodies should rise againe. As for almes I find not that it was vsed at burialls. But what meane you M. Allen (if you be not out of your wittes) to imagine prayer for the dead to be practised at those burialls? when in so many burialls as are rehearsed in the Scriptures, with all ceremonies vsed about them, neuer is there one word, nay not one sillable, to proue prayer for their soules. And yet as a man with a marble face, you are not ashamed to af∣firme, that rites, offices, diriges, obites, trentalls, &c. were practised by them, for the reliefe of the soules in purgato∣ry. It may be that much of your paultry, by fond imitation was taken of such doings to counterfet the examples of the Patriarkes: (but once againe I say) there is no mention in al the Scripture of prayer for he dead at any burial. Wher∣fore the authoritie of Ambrose helpeth you litle, who al∣though he commendeth Honorius for solemnising the fu∣neralls of Theodosius by the space of 40. dayes, after the ex∣ample of Ioseph, yet he sayth not, that prayer for the deade was taken by the example of Ioseph. But see M. Allen (if you can see any thing) whether blind affection carieth you, that you can not vnderstand the playne latine of Ambrose, or else will not translate it a right. Ambrose speaketh not of his fortieth dayes minde, but of the solemnitie of his funerall kept 40. dayes togither, as in the embalming of Iacobs body was by Ioseph. But to say the truth, how simple a reason this was, to take example of, for the time of solemnitie of fune∣ralls, it is playne by that place which Ambrose allegeth, where it is sayd that 40. dayes were bestowed, by the Phisi∣tions or Apothecaries in embalming the body of Iacob, to keepe it long from putrefaction. And how slenderly he re∣proueth them that kept 7. dayes funeralls, where if his rea∣son were good by example of Iosephs Poticaries to keepe 40. dayes, theirs were better by example of Ioseph him selfe to keepe 7. dayes. These be the groundes of such superstiti∣ons as crept into the Church, first by emulation of the Pa∣ganes, and after seeking for colourable confirmation in the
examples of the Patriarkes. For auoyding of all which in∣conueniences that haue risen and may rise, by ceremonies practised at burialls, the Church of Geneua very wisely & godly, vseth no more ceremonies in burying their deade, then are conuenient for the reuerent laying vp of the corps which is ordayned to ryse agayne with glory. Whose still buriall is better then your yelling and howling, and their mumming (if you will needes so terme it) more commen∣dable, then you masking. 2 But in the second booke of the Kinges▪ the example of the holy King Dauid is a playne proofe that they fasted also for the deceased. Apprehendens Dauid vestimenta sua, scidit:Cap. 1. om∣nesque viri qui cum eo erant: & planxerunt, & ieiunaue∣runt vsque ad vesperam super Saul & Ionathan filium eius,Fasting for the depar∣ted. & super populum, & super domum Israel, eo quod corru∣issent gladio. And Dauid taking holde of his garmentes tore them: and so did the men with him, and they howled, wept and fasted vpon Saul and Ionathas his sonne, with the residue of Gods people, that there were slaine. Now what other thing did Dauid here and his people, but that which Iudas Machabeus did afterwarde, for the like death of his souldiars? I trowe there was no fasting to be found ouer any maner a person, lyue or dead, for thy selue, or other, in the whole course of scripture, but it was to obteine mercy at Gods hande, towardes the partie for whome thou didest it. So did this same holy Prophet weepe, fast,2. Reg. 12. lye on the grounde, and change apparell, for his childe, which he begat of Vrias wife, when he lay at the point of death, stricken by Gods hande for the punishment of his fathers faulte. The which he did, as he protesteth him selfe, to turne the angry sentence of God if it might be, and recouer the childe againe. But as soone as the childe was gone, he brake of his longe fast, geuing his frendes to weete, that he tormented not him selfe so, of onely naturall com∣passion towardes the childe, or inordinate lous, as they thought, but to obteine his purpose by such bitter teares, and fasting, at Gods handes, for the childs recouery. Fasting then ouer any man, and such solemne mourning, is no∣thing els, but an effectuall asking of mercy, for whome so euer it
be done. As more plainely it is yet declared, in the buriall of Saul and Ionathas before said,1. Reg. 31. celebrated by the Galadites and Saules souldiars: VVhere, as the scripture sayth, after they had buried their bodies and bones, they fasted vij. dayes. Et ieiuna∣uerunt septem diebus. For no other cause, but thereby effe∣ctually to aske pardon of their offensies. There can I am sure be no reasonable occasion of their fasting alleaged of no man, but that which the honorable Bede testifieth for vs in these wordes. Recte & ad literam pro mortuis vt ad requiem peruenire valeant septem diebus ieiunatur, quia post sex huius mundi aetates, in quibus in carne laboramus, septima est in illo sae∣culo aetas requictionis animarum carne exutarum, in qua beatae tempus illud glorificum, quando resurgere merean∣tur expectant. Duely and according to the letter, they fasted (sayth he) for the departed, seuen dayes together, to obteine rest for them: because after the six ages of the worlde, in which we trauell in flesh, the seuenth age is looked for in that worlde, when the soules be loosed from their bodies, when the blessed and hap∣py sort, shall continually be in expectation of the glorious time, by receiuing their bodies in the resurrection againe. 2 As we haue had prayer for the dead, so now we shal haue fasting for the deade. In deede the wordes sounde more like such a matter then any thing that can be sayed of prayer for the deade. But the sence is euident, they fa∣sted not for them to redeme their soules, but they fasted, to declare their sorrow, because they were slaine with the sworde as it followeth in plaine wordes. And yet to make the matter more plaine, in the same Chapter followeth a large forme of lamētation made by Dauid for them, where if euer he had vsed prayer for the deade, he woulde haue vsed it: if not for his father in lawe Saule, yet at leste for his dearly beloued and sworne brother Ionathas. But no such thing came in his minde, as M. Allen foolishly fanty∣sieth of him. But M. Allen sayth this matter is more plainly proued, by the Galaadites, that fasted seuen dayes after the buriall of Saule and Ionathas, and he is suer, there can no reasonable cause be alleaged of their fasting, but onely
to aske pardon for their sinnes. I take this to be a more resonable cause, that they fasted and humbled them selues before God, because they did see the wrath of God against the whole people in the calamitie of the king & his sonne, whose contumelious hādling by the vncircumcised, stret∣ched to the dishonor of God. And this was cōmon among the Israelites in any great calamitie or daunger, or to shew their sorrow for prophanation of Gods glory. And any of these are more reasonable causes, then the superstitious surmise of Beda, with his curious conceit of the six ages of the worlde, where other make seuen and eight ages. 3 And that charitable reliefe of the poore, by open almes and doles, was also practised for the welth of the departed in the obittes of olde time, the scripture it selfe in the fourth chapter of Tobie maketh mention,Tobiae. 4. by report of that godly commaundemēt, that the good olde father gaue is sonne herein: Panem tuum cum esurientibus comede, & de vestimēis tuis nudos tege. Panem tuum & vinum tuum super sepulturam iusti consti∣tue, & noli ex eo manducare & bibere cum peccatoribus. Eate thy breade with the hongry and needy, and couer with thy clothes the naked. Set thy breade and wine vpon the sepulture of the vertuous & make not the sinnefull partaker therof, which wordes of exhortation can haue no other sense, but that, as be∣fore in the same place, he gaue his sonne in charge to bestow vp∣pon all men according to his hability, for that there was hope to all charitable almes giuers of Gods mercy, so now he warneth him to feede the poore, and breake his breade to such especially, as should come to the iustes and funeralls of the departed. He would neuer haue put him in minde to haue releeued the poore at bu∣rialls, but for some commodity that might arise to the party de∣ceased. for othewise his charity might haue proffeted the needy at other times as well as vpon mens departure. Some tooke foolish occasiō by this place, to set store of meate vpon the graue it selfe, where their father or freinde was buried, as though the dead had bene desirous of corporall foode.Ser. de cath. sancti Pet. Lir. super hūc locum. The which superstitious error S. Augustine earnestly improueth. Other some, made great feastes at the daye of their freindes
death. But the texte is plaine, it was the needy and good people that were at those solēne exequies, or other wise by their prayers might be profitably present in the dayes of memories holden for them: which practise was not prescribed as a newe thing to the yong Tobie,Tob. 12. but it was moued and praised vnto him, as a holy vsage of other burialls in those dayes, and alwayes before. Bona est oratio cum ieiunio & elecmosina: Prayer is profitable, sayth the holy Raphel, when it is ioyned with fasting and almes: and therefore as the fathers in their prayers for the dead, fasted, as we haue proued, so nowe I doubt not but almes shall crie for mercy at Gods hande for the soule departed, vpon whose sepul∣ture these thinges be charitably wroght. 3 What else? if we had not doles at burialls, proued by the example of the Patriarkes, all were marred. There∣fore Tobias must saye for doles. But first we haue shewed already, by authoritie of Hieronym, which is proofe suffi∣cient against the Papist, that the Church receiueth not this booke of Tobias for canonicall scripture. And secondly if we shoulde receiue it, yet here is nothing that helpeth M. Allens cause but his owne simple surmise. He sayth in dede the wordes can haue no other sence, yet all that he sayeth is not gospell, but what if the truer texte of Tobias hath other wordes? First in the Greeke there is no mention at all of wine, as is in the Latine nor of setting breade and wine vpon the graue of the vertuous, but the sence is this: As before he exhorted his sonne to feede the hongry with his owne breade, and to cloth the naked with his owne gar∣ments: so nowe he willeth him to spare the breade out of his owne mouth, to bury the righteous, as he him selfe had done chap. 1. (which is a cleere interpretation of this:) but to geue nothing at all to the vngodly, or to be liberall to the rightuous euen to their death and to see them bu∣ried honestly. As for the iustes and funeralls M. Allen drea∣meth that the poore came vnto, to receiue penny dole or soule breade, appeareth in the first and second Chapters how solemne they were, when poore Tobie was fayne to steale the bodyes and bury them priuily by night, yet vpon
that corrupt Latine texte (as it should seeme) wherevpon M. Allen buildeth, they vsed in Affrica to make sumptuous and dronken feastes, vpon the graues of men in the places of buriall, which they thought not onely to perteine to the honor of the martyrs, but also to be some comforte to the soules of the deade. This olde superstition Augustine reproueth epist. 64. Aurelio. But it is pretily renewed in the funerall feastes of the Papistes, as also the selling of oblations for the deade which he in the same place con∣demneth. 4 VVe haue a notable example in the Actes of the Apo∣stles, of the force of almes with prayers, which wroght life and procured mercy, euē in the next world. For the benefit of faithfull workes and holy prayers, will not be limited by the termes of this worlde: it will haue course doune so farre as the fellowship of this Christian societie reacheth: the deuill and all his abettours can not stoppe the rase thereof. The onely shew of certaine cotes, with the requeste of the pore widowes that wore them, made to Peter the Apostle, turned Tabitha to life againe after her departure:Act. 9. those garments geuen by her when she was a lieue, by the careful trauel of her almes folkes, procured reliefe in the worlde to come. They warmed the backes of widowes in earth (sayth Emisse∣nus) and the geuer had comforth of them being gone from the earth. It is good we shoulde all learne here,Sermo. de initio qua∣drage. that haue receiued benefite of any man in this liefe, with loue and carefullnesse, not onely in this present worlde, but most of all when our frend is de∣parted, to represent vnto God before his altare and holy mini∣sters, with sorowfull weeping & hearty prayer, the memory of such thinges as we haue receiued by way of almes or loue, at his hand: It shall be a soueraigne remedy for his infirmities, and the appro∣uedst way to procure Gods mercy that can be. The elders of the Iewes, making earnest supplication to our Sauiour, for the Centurions seruaunt lying in extremitie, vsed the memorie of that gentilmans charitable actes in their church, as the rediest waye to obteine grace and fauour at his handes. They cried out together: dignus est vt hoc illi praestes,Lucae. 7. diligit enim gentem nostram: & synagogam ipse aedificauit nobis.
Lorde be gratious vnto him, he is worthy that benefite: for he loueth our nation, and hath him selfe founded a Synagoge. And S Cyprian sayth notably, that good workes make a more effec∣tuall intercession then good wordes, he speaketh of the same Ta∣bitha as followeth. Circumsteterunt Petrum viduae flentes & rogantes,Ser. de elee∣mos. pallia, & tunicas, & omnia illa quae prius sum∣pserant indumenta monstrantes: nec pro defuncta suis vo∣cibus, sed ipsius operibus deprecantes: the widowes compas∣sed Peter round about, weeping and crauing, holding forth the clokes and cotes, and all their wiedes which they had giuen them before: not requesting for the good woman deceased so much by their wordes, as by her owne good workes. I pray God we be not ouer carelesse in offering to almighty God in these our dolefull dayes, the vnestimable benefites which we haue receiued of our forefathers, by the building of all our Collegies, our Oratories, Churchies, and chappelles. They were founded first, to procure Gods mercy, they were many yeares together in the mindes and memories of their beadsmen, represented before the face of God at his holy altare: they are now forgotten with most men, and offe∣red to God with teares almost of none. VVe should be much more diligent for our frends offensies doubtlesse, then the poore women were, onely for restore of there benefactors liefe againe. And the force of prayers and almes worketh rather mercy in remission of sinne, then fauour for calling to the life of this worlde any more. Therefore seeing we reade expressely, that prayers and almes haue bene proffitable to many, out of the state of our pre∣sent life, we can not deny but the workes of the vertuous passe by Gods prouidence to the soules separated from their bodyes, and worke grace and fauour as the case and condicion of the party requireth. 4 But when shall we make an end if we aunswere such arguments as these? The widdowes entreated Peter to re∣store Tabitha, and shewed such garments as she made whi∣lest she liued, therfore prayer and almes helpeth the soules in purgatory. At a word I say, here is no necessary nor pro∣bable consequence. But this is notable, that he allegeth the sorrowing of the vnbeleuing Iewes. He is worthy of this be∣nefite,
because he loueth our nation and hath builded vs a Sy∣nagoge. Belike he would haue men thinke this Synagoge was some chauntry, that he builded for the benefite of the soules in purgatory. 5 The soule of Lazarus whom our Sauiour reuiued, was 4. dayes in the place and state of the next world when Martha and Mary his sisters prayers, procured his restore to the land of the li∣uing again. VVhich wemen I am sure, were as earnest suters for the rest of his soule, as for recouery of his personage:Ioh. 11. they wished Christ had bene present in his sicknes, they were assured of his re∣surrection at the latter day, but being stinking ripe, they thought our maister would not presently call him vp at that turne: yet for his rest, we neede not to doubt, but they made sute with sighes & sorowfull teares, euery day. VVho by custom of their countrey, as I take it, kept solemne prayers for diuers dayes togither, in certaine seasons, at the sepulhre: as the coniecture of Maries friendes, which came to comfort her in heauines, may well declare vnto vs. For as she sdenly at her sisters call brake from them, they, know∣ing the vsage of that solemne weeping at the sepulchre of the de∣parted, sayd one to an other, quia vadit ad monumentum vt ploret ibi. she is surely gone to his graue, there to wepe. In which weeping, kept as it were by course, order, and tyme, if our aduer∣saries yet deny to haue bene vsed any prayers or wordes of re∣quest, then let them make proofe by Gods worde, that they vsed nothing but vnprofitable lamentation: which if it be immode∣rate, hath especiall mistrust of the resurrection, as S. Paule decla∣reth, but ioyned with prayers or almes, as before is proued,1. Thes. ca. 4 it hath the liuely hope, of the life of those that sleepe in peace. And that to be the true mourning for the dead, S. Chryso∣stome witnesseth with me, both often else, and namely, vppon the Epistle to the Philippians thus: Defleamus istos, iuuemus e∣os pro viribus, procuremus illis aliquid auxilij,Homil. 3. modici qui∣dem, attamen iuuemus eos. quomodo quaue ratione? pre∣cantes pro illis, adhortemur & alios vt orent pro eis, paupe∣ribusque indesinenter pro illis eleemosinas demus: habet res ista non nihil consolationis:4. Reg. 19. Audi quippe quid Deus dicat: protegam ciuitatem istam propter me, & propter
Dauid seruum meum. si memoria duntaxat iusti tantum va∣luit, quando & opera pro tali fiunt, quid non poterunt? Let vs mourne and weepe (sayth he) ouer the deade, and helpe them according to our abilitie: somwhat let vs succour them though it be neuer so small, yet let vs put to our helping handes. But howe and by what meanes? mary both our selues praying for them, and mouing others to doe the like: yea and with out ceasing let vs be∣stowe almes for them, this is somewhat confortable. For see I pray you what God sayth: I will defend this city for mine owne sake and for my seruaunt Dauids sake. Truely if the onely remem∣brance of a iust man might make so much with God, what may not charitable workes done for the same intent, obteyne at his hand? This was the mourning meete for the Christian burialls, as this noble father teacheth vs, and this & no other, was practised in the fathers funeralls in Christes time and before. As in an o∣ther place, this same doctor earnestly correcteth the vse of vaine mourning, or outragious costly and curious couering of the body buried. Cessemus quaeso ab hac insana diligentia, sed eam morientium curam habeamus,Homil. 84. in Ca. 20. Ian. quae & nobis & illis confe∣rat ad gloriam Dei. Largas pro his eleemosinas faciamus, mittamus eis pulcherrima viatica. Eleemosina mortuos sus∣citauit, quando circumsteterunt viduae ostendentes quae fe∣cerat ipsis Dorcas. Cum ergo moriendum sit, quisque funus sibi paret, persuadeatque vt indigentibus aliquid relinquat. Nam si reges haeredes scribentes, familiaribus partem re∣linquunt in puerorum cautionem, cum Christum cohaere∣dem filijs tuis dimittis, intellige, quantam tibi, & illis conci∣lias beneuolentiam. Haec sunt funera pulcherrima & rema∣nentibus, & abeuntibus proficiunt: & caetera. For Gods loue, sayth he, let vs leaue this vndiscrete and madde curiositie: and let vs so prouide for the departed, that we may both helpe them and our selues to the glory of God. Large almes must we geue for them, in so doing we shall sende vnto them, as you woulde say, a kinde of necessary foode and sustenaunce for their soules. This hath raised vp the deade, when the widowes stoode round about, making shewe of the garnements that Dorcas made for them. Therefore, seeing dye we must, it were not amisse, that euery man procured his owne funerall before hande, that is to say, by deter∣mination
to leaue somewhat to the poore & needy. For if mighty kinges making their heires, do bequeath somewhat to their fa∣miliars, for the salfe prouiso of their successours,As prayers doe protest the resurre∣ctiō, so vn∣ordinate mourning shevveth the lacke of beliefe therin. thou may well vnderstande, when thou makest Christ the copartener with thy children, thou procurest thereby his mercy, both to them, and thy selfe. And these be the right obittes, these shall be commo∣dious to the lyuing, and profitable to the deceased. Againe in an other place, he argueth that this vnordinate mourning can not stand with the steadfast belefe of resurrection of the departed, which the prayers of Gods Church, and the rites of Christian dirigies do planely protest, and proue: these be his wordes. Cur post mortem tuorum pauperes conuocas? cur presbyteros, vt pro eis velint orare obsecras?Homil. 32. in Cap. 9. Matth. non ignoro te responsurum, vt defunctus requiem adipiscatur, & vt propitium iudicem inueniat: his ergo de rebus flendum atque vlulandum arbitraris? Non vides quàm maximè ipsi repugnas? VVhy doest thou gather the poore people, to come to thy frendes buriall?In his time the priestes vvere desi∣red to pray for mennes soules. VVhy desirest thou the priestes to pray for their soules? Thy aunswere I am shure will be, that thou doest these thinges to prouide for his rest, and to obteine mercy and fa∣uour at his iudgies handes. VVell then go too, what cause hast thou to mourne or bewaile his case? doest thou not perceiue that thou art contrary to thy selfe, in thy owne facte? nowe all stu∣dious men may see, what force the charity and almes of faithfull people euer had, especially towardes the deade: how litle weeping auayleh, how vnlikely it is that the prescribed dayes of the olde funeralls in the lawe of nature or afterward, were spent in mour∣ning, with out wordes or workes for the departed: but namely how this holy fathers sentence and minde fully setteth fourth the meaning of Tobies precept, for setting his breade and drinke vpon the sepulchres, to be nothinge els but a calling together of the poore people, and feeding them for the benefite of the person departed: that not onely they by earnest prayer, but he by chari∣table workes, might together obteine rest and mercy for his soule. And here, the simple sorte, and such as be ignoraunt of the force of almes, or our fathers practise, for their yeares,A great de∣cay of ver∣tue in our time. being brought vp in this sinnefull age when vertue is defaced, and the workes of Christianitie scarse to be seene in a whole country: and where
they be much merueled at, as thinges rare, or contemned as vn∣profitable, or of the wicked condemned vtterly, as superstitious & vngodly: such good young men must looke backe a great way with me, to learne their dueties of the blessed times paste, that were wholy free from the contagion of this pestilent waste in reli∣gion: euen to those dayes, that our aduersaries confesse, to haue bene holy and vndefiled. 5 What a shameles man is this? to say the soule of La∣zarus was restored to his body, at the prayers of Martha & Mary his sisters, who as the Scripture is manifest, did not hope for any restitution before the generall resurrection. Yet we neede not doubt (sayth he) but they prayed dayly for his rest. How proueth he that? Forsoth Syr, when Mary went out sodenly to meete Christ, the Iewes sayd, vadit ad monumentum vt ploret. Alacke that M Allen could not put out that pl. and then it should be vt oret ibi. But in good sad∣nes, if the Iewes had thought that Mary had gone to pray at her brothers graue, they would not haue followed her to hinder her deuotions, but she went to wayle, and they fol∣lowed to comfort her & to forbid her M. Allen sayth, that immoderate mourning hath a speciall mistrust of the resur∣rection, as S. Paule declareth. 1. The. 4. But ioyned with prai∣ers and almes, it hath a liuely hope of those that sleepe in peace, if they sleepe in peace what neede haue they of our prayers? but will you see the ratte taken by his owne rum∣bling? The place of S. Paule 1. Thes. 4. is directly to reproue immoderate mourning for the dead, which is not meete for them that haue hope. But how hapneth it, that prayer, and almes be not there ioyned to moderate mourning? yea how hapneth it, that in so necessary a place S. Paule findeth no other comfort to moderate the mourning of the fayth∣full, but onely the quiet rest of them that are a sleepe in the Lord, and the hope of their glorious resurrection? Surely if S. Paule had bene of Chrysostomes minde he would haue prescribed other maner of comforts as Chrysostome doth. But where learned Chrysostome that prayers and almes had any comfort in them for the dead? Surely he allegeth Scri∣pture,
but he applyeth it madly, and yet he often applyeth it to the same purpose, belike it was the best he had for that purpose. God sayth vnto Ezechias, I will defend this citie for myne owne cause, and for Dauid my seruaunts sake. Alas good man what maner of reason is this? be it as he sayth, that the memory of Dauid being a righteous man, and not rather the trueth of Gods promise, made to Dauid, moued him to defend the cittie from the enemies: doth it therefore fol∣lowe that prayers and almes are auailable for the deade for whome we haue no scripture, no commaundement, pro∣mise, nor example to pray? Who if they be of the number of Gods elect, be in so happy estate as they can not be bet∣ter by our prayer, which supposeth them to be in misery. Hieronym vpon the 37. of Esay where the same sentence is repeted, referreth these wordes Propter Dauid &c. to the memory of Dauid being a vertuous man, wherby the Iewes were admonished, that not for their merite, but for his mercy sake and for their ancestors sake, God woulde pro∣tect them, but prayer for the deade he findeth not auaila∣ble by these wordes. The other place of Chrysostome al∣loweth rather almes that men geue before their death, or bequeath in their testment because it is a worke of their own, then that almes which other men geue for them. For if Dorcas was restored to life through her almes, it was through her owne almes, that she did giue when she was a liue, not for any almes that other did bestow for her when she was deade. The third place of Chrysostome sheweth, how hardly the people being once nsld in superstitiō, coulde be kepte in any moderation, no not in those times where there was great care, diligence and knowledge, in their pa∣stors: but soone after as these thinges decayed in the tea∣chers, so superstition daily increased: and where as you note in the margent, that priestes in that time were desired to praye for mens soules, I will proue afterwarde in a more proper place, that in the older time they were called toge∣ther at burialls for an other purpose. But such is the nature of mens deuises, that although at the first they seeme not altogether euill, yet in processe of time, they grow to more
and more inconueniens, vntill at the last they come to be altogether abominable. And therefore your collection (M. Allen) being all vpon false groundes is nothing to be regarded of olde or younge. But Sathan your suttill mai∣ster, hath taught your rather to appeale to the iudgement of the yonger sorte, who haue not knowen your horrible idolatrie and mischeiuous marchandise of mens soules, then to men of any riper yeares, which remember your my∣steries of iniquity, and are witnesses of your detestable do∣inges. And yet you do clame of the decay of vertue in our dayes, which whether it haue suffered a greater dimini∣shing then in the time of your blinde and blasphemous gouernment, let them that haue knowen both the times, consider diligently and iudge indifferently. Finally where as you affirme, that your aduersaries cōfesse, that the dayes of Chrysostome were holy and vndefiled, and woulde make young men & boyes beleue so, you must either bring forth your authors that so confesse, or else all men both young and olde must saye you are a shamelesse lyer: we confesse that in those dayes, the onely foundation Iesus Christ was taught, and the article of iustification by the onely mercy of God was preached: but yet we affirme that much straw, wodde, and other impure matter, was builded vpon the foundation, which was a preparation to the kingdome of Antichrist, which was not longe after to be reueiled. It may be a shame for you Papistes, to leaue and condemne for heresie, all that is true in those mens writings, and agreable to the scripture and to make such vaunt for a fewe supersti∣tious ceremonies, and vnsincere opinions, which yet if ey∣ther young or olde wil indifferently compare with your ab∣hominations of desolation, they shall easily perceiue that they differe as much from you, as we from them. Man may be relieued after his departure, either by the almes vvhich he gaue in his life time, or by that vvhich is proui∣ded by his testament to be geuen after his death, or els by that almes, vvhich other men do bestovv for his soules sake, of their ovvne goods.
CAP. V. 1 ANd we finde, the workes of mercy and charitie, to helpe the soule of man in this life, towardes remission of his sinnes, or els in the next worlde, for release of paine due vnto the same sinnes. All which may be donne two dayes▪ first,Iucae 11. & 16. by thine owne hands or appointment, liuing in this world, which is the best, perfectest, and surest meanes that may be: for that purgeth sinnes,Dan. 4.Ecc. 3.Tob. 12. procu∣reth mercy, maketh frendes in the day of dreade, cleanseth be∣forehand, staieth the soule from death, and lifteth it vp also to life euerlasting. Regarde not here the ianglers, that will crie out on thee, that mans workes must not presume so farre as to winne heauen, or to purge sinnes, lest they intermeddle with Christes worke of redem∣ption, and the office of onely faith: make no accompt of such corrupters of Christian conditions, liue well, and carefully followe these workes of mercy so expressely commaunded and cōmended in the scriptures, kepe thee within the householde of the faith∣full, and thy very good conuersation in operibus bonis,Iacob. 2. shall refute their vaine blastes, and improue their idle faith. Say but then vnto them by the words of S. Iames. Maister Protestaunt, let me haue a sight of your onely faith, with out good workes: and here lo, beholde mine and spare not, by my good workes. VVhat religion so euer you be of, I know not, but I woulde be of that re∣ligion, which the Apostle calleth, religionem mundam & im∣maculatam, The pure and vnspotted religion:Iacob 1. and that is (as he affirmeth) to viset the fatherlesse, and succoure widowes in their neede. And then tell them boldely, that the Church of God hath instructed thee, that all workes, whereby man may procure helpe to him selfe or other, be the workes of the faithfull, which haue receiued that force by the grace and fauour of God, and be through Christes bloude so wattered, tempered, and qualified, that they may deserue heauen and remission of sinne. Doubt not to tell them, that they haue no sight in this darke∣nesse of heresie, in the wayes of Gods wisedome: they haue no
feele nor tast of the force of his death: they see not howe grace prepareth mans workes: they can not reach in their infidelitie, how wonderfully his death worketh in the Sacraments: they can not attayne by any gesse, how the deedes of a poore wretch, may be so framed in the children of God, that, whereas of their owne nature they are not able to procure any mercy, yet they now shall be counted of Christ him selfe sitting in iudgement, worthy of blesse and life euerlasting. Bidde them come in, come in, & they shall feele with thee in simplicitie & obedience, that, which they could not, out of this society in the pride of contention, euer per∣ceiue, And if they will not so doe, let them perish alone. Turning then from them thether where we were, let vs practise mercy (as I sayd) in our owne time, in our helth, when it shall be much me∣ritorious, as proceeding not of necessitie, but of freedom and good will. And then after our departure, the representation of our cha∣ritable deedes, by such as receiued benefite thereby, shall excee∣dingly moue God to mercy: as we see it did sturre vp the com∣passion of his Apostle, in the fulfilling of so straunge a request. VVhereupon S. Cyprian sayth, that almes deliuereth often from both the second death,Serm. de E∣leemos. which is damnation: and the first, which is of the body. CAP. V. 1 NOw we shall see how many wayes almes prof∣fiteth mens soules. First almes giuen by a mans owne handes, is allowed for the best, but that my thinkes M. Allen shoulde kepe men out of your purgatory and not helpe them: when they be there. And here you will seeme, to be zealous in exhorting men to almes, and charge vs with iangling against it, because we affirme, that mens workes must not presume to winne hea∣uen, nor to purge sinnes, nor to medle with Christes worke of redemption, and the office of onely faith, which asserti∣ons you call corruptions of Christian cōditions. O blasphe∣mous barking of an horrible helhound. Doth the glory of Gods mercy and grace, the worke of Christes redemption and the office of onely faith hinder almes or corrupt good
conditions, who seeth not although it be a foolish thing to boast of our works, but that we are compelled by this sclaū∣derous tongue of yours, who seeth not more true almes which is giuen for Gods cause in one citie where the Go∣spell is preached, then in a whole cuntrey where popery is receiued? Neither doe we refuse the triall of S. Iames, with the proudest of the popish hypocrites that make most of their merites. And because you would be of that religion that S. Iames calleth holy and vndefiled, which is to visite the fatherlesse children and widowes in their affliction. If I should speake of singular persons, the triall were neither certayne nor possible, let vs therefore consider the whole states. Shew me M. Allen if thou canst for thy gutts, or name me any city in the world, where popery preuayleth, that hath made such prouision for the fatherlesse children and widowes and all other kind of poore, as is in the noble city of London and in diuers other cities and townes of this land, and by publike law appoynted to be throughout all the realme of England. I knowledge and confesse before the Lorde, that it is nothing in comparison of his mercy to∣wards vs, nor our duety towards him. But yet blessed be his holy name, that it is sufficient to iustifie our profession a∣gainst the Papistes, & if not to stoppe their malicious mou∣thes, yet to condemne their cancred conscience of obsti∣nate lying against the manifest light of truth. And whereas M. Allen will haue vs told, that the blood of Christ ma∣keth mens workes meritorious, we will not let to tell him, that ye church of Christ abhorreth that blasphemy, where∣by Christes blood is made not the only nor the principall, but an accessary and helping cause of remission of sinnes & eternall saluation, and will not doubt to tell him, & all such hypocrites as he is, that neither see, feele, tast, nor know the mystery of Christes redemption, or any thing that ishueth vnto vs thereof, which mingle merites of men, by what co∣lour or conueiance of wordes what so euer, with the infi∣nite and onely cause of our saluation the meere mercy of God. And whereas he biddeth vs come into his Church, we say to all them that are curable among them, as the spi∣rite
of God hath taught vs, come out of her my people, come out of her, lest ye be partakers of her plages and torments. But nowe at the last, he returneth to his matter of mercy, affirming that after mens departure, the representation of almes by such as receiued it shall moue God exceedingly to mercy. O vaine imagination, for which he hath neither Scripture, nor doctor, for neither the example of Peter and the say∣ing of Cyprian helpeth him one iote, because there is not the like comparison betwene man and God, nor betwene deliuerance from hel which is certayne, & purgatory which is the controuersie. 2 If thou yet chaunce to be negligent in the working of thine owne saluation when thou art in strength and helth: when ouer much carefulnesse of worldly welth hindereth the remem∣braunce of thy duety towardes God, for all that, helpe thy selfe at the least in thy latter ende: for though it had bene much better before, yet it is not euill nowe. I speake not for priestes aduaun∣tage, (God is my iudge) I am not of that roome my selfe, and will not condemne my soule for other. But I speake for pity of the deceiued people, for compassion of the soules that lacke the re∣liefe of so soueraigne a remedy, for mine owne helpe, and those that I so dearly loue, against the day of our accompt. I speake it, because I beleue it, and I beleue it, because I finde it practised of those men,O that vvas a happy time. and in those dayes, when true christianitie was yet feruent in Christes bloude, when the faith was vndefiled, and when workes and faith ranne together, in the rase of mans life, ioyntly without contention. Then floorished this doctrine: and thou shalt haue further tast of their vsage for mine owne dis∣charge: we can not occupy our penne better. S. Chrysostome thus instructed his flocke in this case. Si adhuc in hac vita con∣stitutus,Citatur à Dam. omnia quibus animae tuae prodesse poteras, bene dispensare neglexisti, & vel ad calcem vitae tuae tuis man∣dasti, vt tua tibi ipsi submittendo erogent, bonisque operi∣bus te adiuuent (eleemosinis dico & oblationibus) etiam hac ratione saluatorem conciliaueris: scribe in tabulis, & cum filijs cognatisque tuis haeredem nomina & dominum. Nulli autem viuentium propterea occasionem damus ne fa∣ciat
eleemosinas, differendo vsque ad mortem. If thou in thine owne time was ouer negligent in disposing thy goods for the proffit of thy soule, and yet at the very ende, doest at the last charge thy frendes or executors, that they will employ thy proper goods for the reliefe of thy selfe: and so helpe thee with good workes, that is to saye with almes and oblation: euen that way there is great hope thou maiest procure Gods fauour: write in thy will, that our Lorde may be named a fellowe heire with thy children and kinnesfolkes. Neuerthelesse, let no man take occa∣sion hereby, to be slacke in his life time, or to differe his almes & charitie till deathes approching. This was the preaching of that doctours dayes, this proceeded out of his golden mouth, and this sounded out of euery pulpit. And surely if you knew his life and qualities, you woulde not take him to be the priestes proctor: of whose dignity as he wrote much, so where he founde any vicious, he punished sore. But he was a true proctor of our soules. Chry∣sostome was no crauer perdye, nor Christ neither, though they warne vs to make frndes by Mammon for our owne saluation. They aske not much: they thrust out no inheretours: it was but a mite that wanne the poore widowe that prayse,Marci. 12. a cuppe of cold water, where more abilitie wanteth, shall winne heauen at thend.Matt. 10. This then is the benefite of almes giuen in the time of mans life, or otherwise by his appointment, of his owne goodes, after his departure: both which, procure mercie as well by the deede it selfe, as by the prayers of those to whome that charity apper∣teined. 2 This matter standeth vpon chaunce medly, for if thou chaunce (sayth he) to be negligent, &c. and more rightly then he termeth the buriall of Geneua it may be called a matter of mumchaunce, for he beginneth with a chaunce, but he hath neuer a title of scripture, nor any sufficient authority of a doctor, to proue that almes bequeathed in a mans te∣stament helpeth him out of purgatory. And yet as though he had some greate speake to make, he protesteth that he speaketh not for priestes aduantage, because he is not of that roome him selfe &c. but hereby you maye see what he coun∣teth almes, cheefely, that which is geuen vnto priestes, or
else what needeth he to make any such protestation. But he speaketh it because he beleueth it, he would fayne counter fect his speach like the Apostle, but an ape will be an ape, although he be clothed in purple. For the grounde of his belefe is not as the Apostles was, the worde of God Rom. 10. but the practise of men, which though they were neuer so good, yet they were such as might deceiue and be de∣ceiued. But to the matter, the florish of this doctrine was so great in those times which he commēdeth to be so hap∣py, that he can not finde one man that speaketh of it: but he is fayne to cite out of Damascene, that which Chryso∣stome shoulde saye. Which wordes proue no more, but that almes is better geuen at the last then not at all: of deli∣uerance from purgatory neuer a worde. There is one word oblationibus which perhaps M. Allen would draw to masses, for he translateth it oblation in the singular number, which in the Latine is the plurall numbre. His fetch is easy to finde, the Masse though it be sayed neuer so often, yet is it called of them but one oblation. But I inferre vppon his owne conscience, Chrysostomes worde is oblationibus obla∣tions, therefore he meaneth not Masses, but onely almes deedes which in scripture are called oblations or sacrifices where with God is pleased Heb. 13. But I will let this slight geare passe and goe to the rest. 3 Nowe there is an other way of reliefe by almes of other men, which for loue and pitie they bestow vpon the poore, that the soule hense departed, may through their charitie receiue com∣forte. And this conteineth a double worke of mercie, principally towardes the deceased, for whome it was geuen: and then to∣wardes the needy that receiued present benefit thereby: and it singularly redoundeth to the spirituall gaine both of the geuer, and the person for whose sake it is geuen. And this kinde of almes is it, which good Tobie did commende vnto his sonne, being so much more meritorious to the person that procureth it, then the other whiche we spake of before, because it is grounded not onely of loue towardes a mans owne proper per∣son,The perfe∣ctest kind of almes. but reacheth to the benefite of our neighbour, by the singu∣lar
gift of compassion, and tender loue that we beare euen to∣wardes them which can neither helpe vs, nor them selues. It is nothing els but a wing of prayer, and a token of earnest sute for the party on whome it is practised, which no man will vse for his neighbours good, that list not do it before in his owne behalfe. This effectuall supplication by wordes and workes together, is as straunge nowe a dayes in our country, either for the liuing or the departed, either in our owne lackes, or in other mens necessities, as it was common in olde time, and commended in the scripture. Bona est oratio cum ieiunio & eleemosina:Tob. 12. Prayer is soue∣raigne, ioyned with almes and fasting: the which being done ei∣ther for the liue or deade, is with speede by Angels ministery, ca∣ried into heauen. For I take it (and so the text excedingly bea∣reth) that the bitter prayers which the Angell so commended in that good father, and which had such good successe, was made in the funerals of the faithfull departed. Quando orabas cum lachrimis (sayth Raphael) & sepeliebas mortuos▪ &c. Ego obtuli orationem tuam Domino. Tobie: when thou with teares prayd and buried the deade, I offered vp thy prayers to our Lord God. he seemeth to tearme that, prayers with weeping, which in other placies of scripture is called, mourning ouer the deade. And weying the wordes with out affection, it must needes be graunted that the iuste funeralls had and required prayers with weeping, and that the Angels of God do speedely offer such ef∣fectuall requeste vp to the presens of the Maiesty, as well to the reliefe of the dead, as to the comfort of the procurer. But I would be lothe to descant vpon Gods worde for the beating out of any newe doctrine or deuised meaning, or to auouch a sense not knowen to the time of perfect spring in religion. Therefore to go surely to worke, I will looke about me for example of this good Tobies almes, and prayers for the poore departed soules, that we may learne withall, not onely to be beneficiall to our selues, but to our neighbours both a liue and deade. All the antiquitie here offer to take my part in so good and so knowen a quarell. I may haue as many as I will, and whome I will▪ such therefore I doe searche for, as be plainest for testimonie of open doles, and reliefe of the poore in the burials of Christian people. That not onely one mans assertion, but also the plaine practise of the Church of God
may beare downethe aduersaries boldnesse: and the more aun∣cient the better.Lib. 3. in Iob. Origene then shall helpe vs to the vsage of his time and Church. He writeth thus. Celebramus diem mortis, quia non moriuntur hi qui mori videntur. Celebramus ni∣mirum, religiosos cum sacerdotibus conuocantes, fideles vnà cum clero, inuitantes adhuc egenos & pauperes, pu∣pillos, & viduas saturantes, vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memo∣riam requiei defunctis animabus &c. VVe solemnly kepe the day of our frendes departure, because they be not deade which appeare vnto vs to dye. And this is our way of celebrating their funerals. VVe gather the religious men and priestes, the faith∣full people with the cleargy: we inuite also the poore, the needy, and the fatherlesse with the widowes: and we fill their bellies, that the memorial of their rest may be kept solemnly. But Tobies scholar may learne his duety yet better, of the Apostles owne scholar S. Clement: who once or twise hath these wordes in ef∣fect:In compēd. & epistola ad Iacob. fratrem do∣mini. To viset the sicke, to bury the deade, to kepe their obittes, to pray and geue almes for them is commendable: vpon whose wordes I will not now stand, because by and by, other occasion must driue me to repeate, for the worthynesse of the man and the weight of his testimonie, more plaine euidence of his Church and time. If thou here yet doubt how the prayer, worke, or sacrifice, of one mā a liue may helpe an other departed, remembre alwaies what I saide in the beginning, for the knot of our brotherhood and society in one body and vnder one heade: and thou shalt not wonder how one membre by compassion may helpe & relieue an other. And there with, for example, consider how the sacrifice of Iob and daily almes were auaylable for the misdeedes of his children,Iob. 1 & 2. and appeaced Gods wrath towardes his importunate freindes. And though his benefite went onely then amongest the liuing in this worlde, neither his children nor freindes at that time departed, yet the case of the liuing amōgest them selues dif∣fereth nothing herin, from the communion and fellowship which the departed in Christ hath with the liuing in earth. And there∣fore I bring the example of Iob amongest many like in scrip∣ture, for that S. Chrysostome fitly induceth the same, to proue the partaking of good workes to be common as well betwixt the liue and deade, as of the liuing among them selues. These be his
wordes in English. Let vs helpe our brethern departed,In 15. cap. 1. Cor. Ho∣mil. 14. keeping a memory of them: For if the oblation of Iob purged his chil∣dren, why doubtest thou of the solace that may arise by our offe∣ringes vnto such as be asleepe in Christ? seeing God is pleased with some, for other mens sakes. It was so knowen a trueth in that time, that they neuer put difference nor doubt, any more of the mutuall helpe of the liue towardes the deade, then they did for that benefite which in Christes Church one man may holde of an other. 3 Nowe commeth an other waye of releefe, by almes of other men, which being ioyned with prayers in our countrie, is as straunge as sometime it was common. He woulde make fooles beleue, that prayers and almes as they are in deede not so common as they should be, yet among vs are not at all. But omitting that sclaunder with the rest, almes for soules departed is neuer mentioned in the scrip∣ture. And although Tobies story be no canonicall scrip∣ture, yet it is not once mentioned, nor by any reasonable or sober man can be imagined there. But who can let M. Allen to dreame that Tobies prayer and almes were for the deade whome he buried? yet who can beare him when he bosteth, that all antiquitie doth offer to take his parte, and he may haue whome he will to testifie the same. This is a strange matter (M. Allen) that you maye haue your choyse of so many and will not vouchsafe to bring one that so doth write of Tobies prayer and almes. But you will say you meane generally of almes and prayers for the dead and thereof you haue store of auncient testimonies, and the more auncient the better. I will not deny but you haue much drosse and dragges of the latter sorte of doctors, and the later the fuller of drosse. But bring me any worde out of Iustinus martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, or any that did write with in one 100. yeares after Christ, that alloweth prayer or almes for the deade, and I will saye you are as good as your worde. But if neither you nor any Pa∣pist for you, be able to doe it out of these which I haue na∣med (which are the most aunciēt writers whose workes are
extant) nor out of an auncient or authenticall writer with in the compasse that I haue named, I may iustly say, that you will boast of more in a minute of an houre then you are able to performe all the dayes of your life. But you will come neare the time if you can not come to it. And Origen shall speake for you all that he can, or at least wise as much as you will giue him leaue to say. But if a man might be as bold to pose you (M. Allen) as you are to pose your betters: where had you this testimony of Origen, did you read it in his owne workes, or did you borrow it of some other mans collection? I know you will be ashamed to confesse the lat∣ter, but you may be more ashamed to acknowledge the for∣mer. For who soeuer allegeth this place of Origen, to proue prayers and almes to profite the deade, is a foule falsery of Origens meaning, & a beastly gelder of auncient authoritie though it be M. Allen him selfe. For this place of Origen as it maketh nothing in the world to proue that prayer, and almes profite the deade, but the cleane contrary, so doth it plainly declare to what ende those prayers, almes, and ob∣lations that were vsed in the primitiue Church were refer∣red and how in pocesse of time, superstitious and errone∣ous opinions grew of them. Wherefore that this may be e∣uident I will rehearse the whole testimony of Origen, which M. Allen hath so mischieuously mangled. Nam priores diem natiuitatis celebrabant vnam vitam diligentes, & aliam post hanc non sperantes. Nunc verò nos non natiuitatis diem celebra∣mus, cum sit dolorum atque tentationum introitus, sed mortis di∣em celebramus, vtpote omnium dolorum depositionem, atque om∣nium tentationum effugationem. Diem mortis celebramus quia non moriuntur hi qui mori videntur. Propterea & memorias sanctorum facimus, & parentum nostrorum vel amicorum in fide morientium deuotè memorias agimus, tam illorum refrigerio gau∣dentes quam etiam nobis piam consummationem in fide postulan∣tes. Sic itaque non diem natiuitatis celebramus quia in perpetuo viuent ij qui moriuntur. Celebramus nimirum religiosos cum sa∣cerdotibus conuocantes, fideles vnà cum clero inuitantes, adhuc egenos & pauperes, pupillos & viduas saturantes, vt fiat festiui∣tas nostra in memoriam requiei defunctis animabus quarum me∣moriam
celebramus, nobis autem efficiatur in odorem suauitatis in conspectu aeterni Dei. The former men did celebrate the daye of their natiuitie, louing but one life and not hoping for any other after this. But now we doe not celebrate the daye of natiuitie, seeing it is the entraunce of sorrowes and tentations, but we celebrate the day of death as that which is the putting a∣way of all sorrowes, and the escaping of all tentations. VVe cele∣brate the day of death, because they doe not dye that seeme to dye. Therefore also doe we make memories of the Sainctes and deuoutly keepe the memories of our parents or friendes dying in the faith, as much reioysing in their rest, as desiring for our selues also a godly finishing in faith. So therefore we doe not celebrate the day of natiuitie, because they which dye shall liue perpetual∣ly. And thus we celebrate it, calling togither the deuout men with the Priestes, the faithfull with the clergy, inuiting also the needy and poore, filling the fatherlesse and widdowes with foode. that our festiuitie or ioyfulnes may be done in remembraunce of the rest which is vnto the soules departed, whose memory we cele∣brate, & may be made vnto vs a sauour of sweetenes in the sight of the eternall God. By this place it is manifest that Origen & the east Church in his time acknowledged no purgatory paynes, because he confesseth death to be the ende of all sorrowes to the faithfull. Secondly that they pray not for their friendes soules, as being in torment, but that they re∣ioysed for them because they were in rest. Thirdly that the prayers which they vsed in the memories of the dead, were not for the deade, but for them selues which were aliue, that they might likewise dye in the fayth as their friendes had done before them. Fourthly, that the assembly of the cleargy and people, with the feeding of the poore, was not to pray for the deade, nor to merite for their soules, but to reioyse for the rest of the deade, and to be a sacrifice of thankesgiuing for them that were aliue. This one testimo∣ny of Origen shall testifie what the iudgement of the greeke Church was concerning purgatory & prayers for the dead from the Apostles time vnto his dayes. I wotte well super∣stition in the Latine Church was somewhat forwarder, in as much as there was the seate of Antichrist appoynted to
be set vp according to the reuelation of S. Iohn and the ex∣position of Irenaeus who iudged that Lateinos was the num∣ber of the beastes name spoken of Apoc. 13. By the way it may be noted, how M. Allen translateth religiosos the reli∣gious men, which worde might well be vsed, but that he would haue fooles to thinke, that there were Monkes, and fryers in that tyme, which were vsed to be called to burials, but it is playne that Origen calleth thē religious, whom by and by after he calleth faithfull. Moreouer, in the latter end where he libbeth of the conclusion of Origens wordes, he translateth: vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memoriam, &c. That the memoriall of their rest might be kept solemnly, yet when he hath clipped, shauen, pared, gelded, and falsifi∣ed all that he can, the dead be in rest, and not in purgatory, for whose sake he imagineth in Origens time they gaue al∣mes. But next followeth a worthy authoritie of Clement the Apostles owne scholer, and he forsooth in his Epistle to Iames the brother of our Lord, commendeth obites, pray∣er, and almes for the dead. But why doe ye not M. Allen re∣hearse his owne wordes as they are written in his Epistle? belike you are ashamed of his lousie latine, and thinke that all wise men would say you are madde, if you beleue that Clemens which liued in the Apostles time could write no better stile, thē the cobling counterfecter of those epistles. For shame away with such a durty doctor, as writeth to S. Iames to see there be no mise tordes murium stercora among the fragments of the Lordes portion, &c. Epist. 2. He was a beastly asse that writ such nasty stuffe, and thought to make the world beleue, that such a godly and learned father as Clemens was, would write so foolishly, so barbarously, so fil∣thily, so malapertly, of such bables as were not inuented 600, yeares after, to so holy and excellent an Apostle as S. Iames was: but the olde prouerbe must alwayes be true: Draffe is good enough for swine. But to put all out of doubt, the example of Iobes sacrifice and almes which were auai∣lable for his children, and friendes, sheweth that the almes of men aliue profite them that be deade, In deede I reade in the booke of Iobes sacrifice, and prayer, but I reade not
of almes giuen to merite for those that were liuing, much lesse for those that were deade. I doubt not but Iob gaue al∣mes liberally when tyme & occasion serued. But I say those places are vnfitly of M. Allen alleged to shew the force of almes, where no worde of almes is spoken. Howebeit he sheweth his reason afterward, why he allegeth this exam∣ple of Iob, because Chrysostome applyeth it to the same pur∣pose. I deny not but that Chrysostome doth as substantially alleage this example, for prayers to profitte the deade, as he doth the saying of God, that he will protect the cittie for Dauid his seruaunts sake, what shall we say. Those good men in that declining state of the Church, to superstition, being destitute of the cleere testimonies of scripture to maintaine these plausible errors, are driuen to such simple shiftes to vpholde them, as it is great pitty to see. It seemed to Chrysostome the best waye to staye the people from im∣moderate mourning, but he might haue vsed a better way, if he had comforted them as the Apostle teacheth. 1. Thess. 4. 1. Cor. 5. Otherwise when he iudged vprightly and ac∣cording to the scripture his wordes sounde cleane contrary to the opinion of purgatory and workes of other men to be meritorious for the deade, as in the very next Homilie being the 42. 1. Cor. Quapropter oro & obsecro vos, adeo{que} ad genua supplex procumbo &c. The wordes are long there∣fore I will rehearse them in English, and let M. Allen finde fault with my translation if he can: wherefore I praye and be∣sech you yea and I fall downe as an humble suter to your knees, while neuer so small a portion of your life remaineth be ruled by my sayinges, be ye conuerted, be ye amended into better, lest like vnto that richman when we are gone hense, we pouer forth teares which shall nothing profit there, and lament in vaine: for whether thou hast a father, or a sonne, or a freind, or any other whome so euer that putteth his trust in the Lorde, none of these shall deliuer thee being accused of thine owne workes. For such iudgement is exercised there, euery man is iudged of his owne deedes, neither is any man otherwise saued there. And these thinges I warne you of, not as he that woulde make you sadde, or bring you into desperation, but that being fedde with vaine and
vnprofitable hopes, trusting in this man or that man, we shoulde not neglect our owne vertue, for if we be slothfull and doe slacke the matter neither any iust man, nor Prophet, nor Apostle, shall helpe vs: but if we be diligent hauing helpe enough of our owne workes, we shall departe hense with great confidence, and enioye those good thinges that are layed vp for them that loue the Lord, which that we may all enioye let it be so through the grace and mercy of our Lorde Iesus Christ. Compare these wordes with the former, and marke here not onely the sounde of his wordes, but the weight of his reasons, where as in all other places that he holdeth the contrary, the wordes only fauo∣reth your cause, his reasons are either feeble or none at all. 4 But that I may serue not onely the turne of trueth, but with plainnesse also instruct the vnlearned, and with store satisfie the godly greedinesse of some, that list see more for the comforte of their conscience, I will report one notable place for the decla∣ration of charities force euen towardes the deceased,Ex Dama∣sceno pro defunctis. out of Gre∣gory Nissen of the Greeke church, and an other out of Atha∣nasius the greate: both directly touching the practise of good Tobie in compassion of the deade. Thus sayth Gregory. Di∣citur bene, quòd si qui hinc non praemissis bonis migraue∣rint, & postea à familiaribus neglecta oblatis reliquijs sar∣ciantur, imputari opus perinde ac ab eis factum fuerit, est enim & haec volūtas benignissimi Domini, vt creaturae quae ad salutem petuntur, sic petantur & distribuantur: & vt exo∣retur non solum quando quis pro salute propria est anxius, sed & quando pro proximo aliquid operatur: in English. It is very well saide, that if any depart this life, his goods by alme being not sent to God before him, and yet afterwarde the matter by his freindes in the offering vp the residue, be amended, that his freindes fact shall stande and be reputed as his owne worke. For so hath God of his mercy ordeined, that his creatures by vse whereof life and saluation may be obteined, shoulde so be pro∣cured, and in this ordre disposed, that man shoulde not onely ob∣teine his request in the carefull study of his owne saluation, but also when he wellworketh for his frende or neighbour. Psal. 24.Here may we well perceiue, that all the wayes of our Lorde be
mercy and trueth. And that he in a maner releeueth of his owne accorde our miseries, both here and in the next life, that there may be no damnation to such as be in Christ Iesus: for whose sakes he turneth these base creatures of mans seruice in this life, to the vse of his pardon and saluation in the life to come: he accepteth the good will and trauell of other, for the helpe of them which can not relieue them selues: And, which is the property of a most mercyfull father, where he loueth he will raise the hearte of some good intercessor, that by patronage and prayers of some lust Iob, his fury may cease by his owne procurement. But howe this mutuall worke of mercye is currant through the membres of our common body and howe being practised by one it serueth before God for an other, either in this life or the next, our holy father Athanasius by his authoritie might well be a proofe sufficient: but he is content to declare it vnto vs by an example: and such an example, that beside the matter, may fur∣ther put vs in remembraunce of the deuotion of our elders in an other point, which the studious reader may marke by the waye: thus then he sayth. Quod in pauperes collocatur beneficiū, omnis bonae retributionis est augmentum. Itaque pro de∣functo oblaturus eundem serues scopum, quem qui pro par∣uulo filio adhuc imbecillo & infante, interim dum puer ae∣grotat, affert ceram, oleum, & thimiama, in templum Do∣mini magna fide, & accēdit pueri nomine, neque enim puer hoc faceret, cum ignoret diuinae regenerationis constitu∣tiones. Sic cogitet etiam eum, qui in domino mortē obijt, & posse & offerre ceram, oleum, & caetera quae in redemptionē offerri solēt. The benefit bestowed vpon the poore is a soueraigne ground of Gods rewarding. And in thy oblations for the depar∣ted, haue alwaies the same intēt & scope that a father hath, pra∣ctising for the recouery of his sicke child, being yong & tender: VVho for his sick son bringeth into the Church of our Lord God, waxe, oyle, incense, and with deuotion and faith lighteth them in the boyes behalfe: for that the child him selfe, being wholy vn∣skillful f the ordinauncies of our Christianity, would neuer go a∣bout any such thinge: euen so must a man thinke of the deceased persons case, that he may & doth offer, (as in an other mās per∣son) waxe, oyle & such like, as cōmonly for redēptiō are offered.
VVith proofe of our matter in hande, here may be noted be∣side, the vsuall oblation of thinges apperteining to the maintei∣naunce of Church light,In Atha∣nasius his time can∣dels vvere light in churchies, for their sakes that vvere dead, sicke, or ab∣sent. and lampes: setting vp of tapers of singu∣lar deuotion for sicke persons, representing of our goods, and Gods creatures, from prophane vse of daily occupation, to Gods honour in the temple: the vndoubted hope that all faythfull people had, as well to procure fauour to them selues thereby, as mercy to other, for whose sakes they did it: and especially that in this mans age, that was so auncient, these tokens of loue and duety towardes our Lorde, and shew of their homage by such ex∣ternall actes, were taken as peculiar ordinauncies, and solemne constitutions of our Christianitie. These thinges (though the hedge of my cause forceth me to let them lightly passe) yet as I go by, I must needes beholde, as steppes of olde maners: with some mourning to say the trueth, and no litle sorow, in the contrary comparing of our corrupte conditions. The reader as he list, may perchaunce with more leasure, or at leaste with lesse iniury to other, weye the wonderfull waste that sinne and heresie hath wrought in our dayes of darknesse. And whē he considereth these thinges, that be now of most men counted meere madnesse, to haue bene liked, allowed, preached, auouched, sent out in solemne workes and writings to the vewe of the world, and the sight of all posterity, from the very heart & spring of the Christiā Church, by Athanasius the great,Athanas. authoritie onely,. vvill beare dovvn all heretiks in the vvorlde. O Lord what a mighty man in worde and worke do I nowe name: him do I name, whose memory is blessed in Gods Church, in whose lappe our weeryed mother once be∣fore, as she hath bene often, in a maner learned to take her rest from the forsaken children: whose only worde with out all proofe (though he neuer speaketh but with weight of reason) woulde beare ouer all these pety Protestantes put together: so said Tully comparing the Epicures with Plato and Aristotle: much more bouldly may I payse all heretiques in the worlde with this mans onely worde. Him therefore such a man, and so great a pillor of faith, when the Catholike shall see proue and allow, and practise those same thinges,The name onely of Christiani∣ty lefte in many. which our maisters of sectes can not abide, but most abhorre, and by him take a sure taste of his whole time, shal he not wounder with all wise men, at our downefall so deepe? shall he not meruaile vnder one name of Christianitie, that goeth
yet common to our dayes with those happy times past, to be such diuersitie of case and conditions, that the one vnder so glorious a name must be nothing else but a cloked paganisme? but yet I woulde not he shoulde occupie ouermuch his minde in this con∣sideration, till he see the whole ranke of Gods holy host, and all the blessed bande of Martyrs and Sainctes stande with vs for the full defense of trueth, and the common Church their mother and ours. 4 The laste parte of this Chapter hath a boysterous bragge of two great doctors authorities Gregory Nyssene, & Athanasius the great, but they stande both vppon either the credit or iudgement of Damascene, neither of which we esteeme so much, that we neede greatly regarde them. Counterfecting was so common in those dayes and be∣fore them, to maintaine such errors as coulde not be pro∣ued by scripture. For to passe ouer that which Tertullian writeth in his booke de Baptismo, of the priest of Asia, which was conuicted to haue fayned certaine writings of S. Paule to Tecta: was not the Nycene Councel the first and the best, corrupted with counterfect canons by the Byshoppes of Rome to maintaine their vsurped authoritie, in the dayes of S. Augustine? which was plainely espied and confuted in the Councell of Carthago. 6. cap. 4. & 7. And in the Africane Councell, were there not three faulse quaternions founde added to the 5. Councell of Constantinople? which was espied in the 6. Councell of Constantinople Act. 3. & 12. If men woulde be so bolde with generall Councells, thinke you that they woulde be afrayde of Gregorius or Athana∣sius writings? And what maner of a Sermon of Athanasius was that, which was reade in the 4. action of the 2. Nicene Councell? Of the image of Christ and the miracle done in Berytus, that when a Iewe strake the image, there issued out water and bloude: what a shamelesse lye is that which Pope Adrian in his epistle writeth, that Cōstantine was clen∣sed of a leprosie and baptised of Syluester at Rome, contrary to the Historie of Eusebius who liued in Constantines time and knew him? what faulsyfying of authorities is there to
proue the worshipping of images out of Gregorie Nissene, Basilius Magnus, Athanasius and Ambrosius, Chrysostome, Cyrill, and Hieronym, with diuerse other in that leude Coun∣cell? wherfore except you coulde alleage their sayings out of their owne workes, I will neuer trouble my selfe to aun∣swere them, although if they were there true authori∣ties, there is no cause why we shoulde beleeue either of them both, in an article of faith with out the authoritie of the word of God. Their time had diuerse errors & super∣stitious ceremonies which they being occupied in fighting against greater heresies that then sprang vp, of the Arians, Macedonians, and such like, either had no leasure to espie, or else made lesse accompt to reforme. Of certaine offeringes or publike almes presented to God for the deceased, in the time of the holy sacrifice, at mens bu∣rialles, and other customable dayes of their memories: and of the sundry mindes kepte in the primitiue Church for the departed. CAP. VI. 1 KEping our selues then from by matters, (if those be by, that are so neare) of relieuing the departed by the almes of the liuing there we lefte, and there must we borowe breefely a worde or two more. Because I thinke it very necessary to be knowen, that besides the priuate procuring of the deceased soules welth, and more then the com∣mon doles at the day of buriall, there was also an other kinde of almes not much differing in effect from the other, but in ordre and vsage not all one. VVhich, because it was solemnely presen∣ted to Gods minister before the holy altare, in the face of the whole faithfull assembly, harde at then try vnto the soueraigne sacrifice, was highly alwayes esteemed, and called an oblation for the departed, or an offeringe. And it was most practised at the mindes of the departed, and memoriall dayes, which were very many at the beginning of those happy times of our forefathers, the deuotion of the good Christians then very feruent: and be not nowe a dayes, as they faulsely affirme, increased by superstition,
but of late yeares, euen before this pitifull ouerthrow of vertue, by our negligence and lacke of deuotion much decayed.Deuotion much de∣caide some∣vvhat be∣fore this heresy be∣gan. There is now vsed onely, for the most part, but twelue monthes mindes, or monthes for the most: and that commonly but for the first yeare of their rest: and then afterward either cleane forgotten, or open∣ly not often remembred, I speake of the late better times. For now there is no blessing of mans memory at all. These often oblations in the sacrifice time for both the liue & dead, gaue name to that part of the Masse which is yet called the offertorie. wherof there was a signe of late, in the offering of some small peece of mony in the common funeralls, and at other times also of greater solemni∣tie. But in the primitiue Church it rose to such a summe, that both the Church was thereby mainteyned, and the poore singularly re∣lieued. And the name of the peoples oblation is often taken in this sense: although, because they ioyne by these meanes and o∣ther with the holy minister in the great and dreadfull oblation of Christes owne blessed person in the sacrifice, they be sayd some∣times, truely to offer: as it were by the Priestes ministery, whome with hart and affection they doe assist, and with whom they true∣ly communicate. they may offer I say, that sacrifice, in this sense for their friendes departed. But else commonly besides the blessed Sacrifice of the newe Testament, which was alwayes the chiefe meane of Gods mercy, to both quicke and deade, and in euery minde or memory for the soules principally procured, the offering of some part either of the deceaseds owne goods, or his louers, for the vpholding the ministery, was also made. Of which kind of par∣ticipating with the departed, we reade in the auncient councell named Bracharense thus:Can. 39. si quid ex collatione fidelium aut per festiuitates martyrum aut per commemorationem de∣functorum offertur, per aliquem clericorum fidliter depo∣natur: & constituto tempore semel aut bis in anno, inter omnes clericos diuidatur. If there be any offeringes by the con∣tribution of the faithfull, made either in the festiuall dayes of martyrs, or mindes and memorialls of the dead, let them be laide vp aside, in custody of one of the cleargie, that once or twise in the yeare as time shall serue, they may be truely parted emongest the reste. And because all times haue had certaine draw backes in religion, and hinderers of deuotion, the Councell kept at Vase of
greate antiquitie, excommunicateth all such as in any wise hin∣der the oblations for the departed. And in like case the fourth Councell holden at Carthage.Cap. 2. Thus runneth the decree of them both.Cap. 95. VVe doe curse and excommunicate all those, that by any meanes withdrawe or els staye from the Churches the oblations of the departed, as murderers of the poore. The decrees of both these notable assemblies, were thought worthy to be confirmed by the vj. generall Councell holden at Constantinople: then are our ministers in the ruffe of their newe communion, thrust out of the olde holy communion of sainctes, if either vniuersall or pro∣uinciall Synode can take holde of men so desperat, that neither care for mans curse, nor Gods blessinge. VVell murderers and manquillers they must be counted, their predecessors not halfe so euill, deserued no better name. CAP. VI. 1 IN the latter ende of the fift Chapter was promi∣sed a whole rancke of Gods holy host, & all the bles∣sed band of Martyrs and Sainctes to stand on their side. But this promise is no soner made then it is for∣gotten. The title in deede talketh of almes presented for the deceased in time of the holy sacrifice, but the treatise hath neuer a one that speaketh for it. But M. Allen him self who first speaketh of the decay of popish deuotion euen in popish tyme, & then telleth vs whence the offertory of the masse tooke the name, which he sayth was of such oblati∣ons, as were offered for the deade. But except his word be good payment, he bringeth nothing else for proofe. But if we shall rather beleue Iustinus Martyr, one of the most aun∣cient and authentical writers of the Church, whose workes remayne: the oblation that was made after the communi∣on was of almes for the reliefe of the poore. As appeareth in his second Apollogie vnto the Emperour for the Chri∣stians, where he describeth the whole order of their mee∣ting and what so euer was done, or sayd among them. As first the reading of the Scripture, the exhortation of the chiefe minister, the common prayer of the whole Church, the administration of the Lordes supper, and then sayth
he,  &c. They that are rich & such as wil, according as euery man shall thinke good geue what they will &c. by which it is manifest that in those first and purer dayes there was no mention at all of sacrifice for the dead, but onely oblation for the poore liuing. And as for the councell Bra∣charense which was helde 4. or 5. hundreth yeares after Iu∣stinus time, yet proueth nothing but the commemoration of the deade, and a collation of the faythfull but no oblati∣on for the deade. Neuerthelesse to help the matter be ad∣ded 2. other prouinciall councells, namely the councell of Vase, and the 4 of Carthage, which excommunicate all such as hinder in any wise, the oblations for the departed, and these decrees also are confirmed by the 6. generall councel holden at Constantinople. Therefore these ministers that be in the ruffe of their newe communion, must be thrust out of the olde communion with all a lye a. But whether is he worthy to be thrust, that regarding no communion either olde or new of any trueth, but his common vnion of lying and rayling together, hath falsyfied both the decrees of Vase and Carthage, what M. Allen? two Councells at one clappe falsyfied? and that not ignorantly but wittingly, not negligently but wilfully? and yet must you wipe your lippes as though it were not you, and rayle like a ruffian vpon our ministers in the ruffe of their newe communion, when you are not ashamed to faulsyfie the decrees of the olde com∣munion? Be not these the wordes of the Carthage Councell Ca. 95? Qui oblationes defunctorum aut negant ecclesiis aut cum difficultate reddunt tanquam egentium necatores excom∣municentur. They which either deny to the Churches, or els pay with difficulty the oblations of the deade, let them be excōmunicated as murtherers of the poore. Likewise the Coū∣cell of Vase. Ca. 2. Qui oblationes defunctorum retinent, & ecclesijs tradere demorantur, vt infideles ab ecclesia sunt abij∣ciendi, quia vsque ad exinanitionem fidei peruenire certum est hanc pietatis diuinae exacerbationem: quia & fideles de cor∣pore recedentes, votorum plenitudine, pauperes consolatu ali∣moniae & necessaria sustentatione fraudātur, toti ergo tales quasi egentium necatores nec credentes iuditium dei habendi sunt,
vnde & quidam patrum hoc scriptis suis inseruit congruēte sen∣tentia qua ait: Amico quicquam rapere furtum est, ecclesiam vero fraudare sacrilegium est. They which reteine, the oblations of the deade and make delay to deliuer them to the Churches, are to be cast out of the Church as infidels. For it is certaine that this prouoking to wrath of the mercy of God recheth euen to the vttermost denying of the faith. Because both the faithfull de∣parting from their bodye, are defrauded of the fullfilling of their desires, and the poore of the comfort of foode and necessary sustentation. They therefore that are such, are to be compted as murderers of the poore and such as beleiue not the iudgement of God, wherefore one of the fathers hath put this in his writinges, with agreable meaning whereby he saith. To take away any thing from a mans freind is thefte, but to defraude the Church is sacri∣ledge. What other thing can be gathered out of those de∣crees? but that those men are noted with censure, which keepe backe such thinges as men that are departed had bequethed, to the Churches, for the releefe of the poore, what is this to oblation or sacrifice for the deade: is it all one to speake of oblations of the deade and oblations for the deade? With M. Allen it is all one, for after he hath sayed, that the Councells do excommunicate all them that hinder the oblations for the departed, he addeth that the canons of the Councells runne thus, that they which with∣draw the oblations of the departed are excommunicated. But herein he declareth, that he is a manifest falsyfier, not of error but of purpose. 2 Damascene that blessed man, that suffered so much sor∣rowe for trueths defense, whose authority I must often vse in this treatise because he purposely stoode for this quarell against cer∣taine heretiques of his time. He therefore in the life of Iosaphat excedingly prayseth his passing loue towards his father departed.In vita Io∣saphat. VVho first with all godly deuotion, procured his exequies and di∣rigies on the day of his buriall, then commended his soule to God with seuen dayes solemne prayer and supplication at his sepul∣cher: and with a wonderfull liberall almes or oblation for the poore people, he finished vp the matter the viij. daye. But if you
can finde in you hearte to credit this good mans report, he will assure you of the vsage of his time. By which you shall perceiue, that it is a horrible slaūder that the wicked haue raised on Gods Church and ministers, which be not ashamed, to say and auouch in their open sermons and vaine libells, that these yearely, and so many monthes mindes, haue bene newely practised and deui∣sed against Gods worde, and the vsage of the primitiue Church. VVherein they shewe them selues exceding ignorant in the af∣faires of the Church, or els passing bolde and malitious, in will∣full deeiuing the simple. For our onely monthes and yeares obla∣tions, in Damascens dayes, as he often affirmeth, there were customably kept tricesimales, quadragesimales, anniuersariae memoriae: the thirtith, the fourtith, the yeares mindes: and portions apointed out, as he sayth, in testaments for the maintei∣naunce thereof. And all this commonly, besides the peculiar de∣uotion of some, towardes their singularly beloued. If thou list go yet vpwarde, thou shalt finde no lesse care for the helpe of the soules deceased: for S. Ambrose reporteth of his time: that otherwhiles the third & the thirtith, otherwhiles the seuenth & the fourtith minde dayes were religiously obserued:Super obit Theodos. yea and that (as he saith) by good authoritie, and auncient vsage of the Pa∣triarches both in the lawe of nature and Moyses, Cum frequē∣tibus oblationibus omnibus, with often and sundry oblations for the rest of the departed. This xxx. dayes memoriall, olde holy Ephreem in his testament and last will prouideth for him selfe,Iulio in∣terpr. after his departure. The seuenth day was also euer in the primi∣tiue Church with great religion obserued: because, as Beda saith, that hath the representation of the life to come. And S. Am∣brose practised it for his brother, for the like protestation and signe of the resurrection and rest perpetuall. Die septimo (sayth he) ad sepulchrum redimus,De fide re∣sur. qui dies symbolum est futurae quietis, the seuenth day we come together againe to my brothers sepulchre, because that day is a pledge of the rest to come. 2 That which can not be proued by the Councells, shalbe made cocke sure by the doctors, and Damascene that blessed man shall beginne the daunse: who as their fables write of hm, had his hande cutte of for crafty conueiance,
yet was it againe restored by miracle by the blessed vir∣gine, after it had bene nailed to the Church dores of a longe time. I haue often saide we deferre nothing to his authoritie, who was both in a corrupt time, and he him selfe a corrupter of religion by building vpon fables and authorities of men as maye be manifest to any that shall reade his writinges, which of the Papistes of meane iudge∣ment in these dayes is not ashamed of that fable which he reherseth in Serm. de defunctis? how Gregory shoulde praye and obteine pardon of God for the sinnes of Troianus an heathen Emperor that was in Hell 4. or 5. hundreth yeares before Gregory was bishop of Rome, so maye they be of the tale of Falconilla and all other like fables auouched by him in the historie of Barlaum and Iosaphat. But of memories of the dead and prayers for the deade also, we will not striue but that they were vsed before the times of Beda, Ephraim, and Ambrose, but with out warraunt of Gods worde or au∣thorities of scriptures, but such as is so pitifully wrested and drawen vnto them, as euery man may see, the holy Ghost neuer ment any such thinge as they gather of them. 3 Holde on vpwarde still, and Tertullian will witnesse with thee, that in that floure of Christes Church, with in lesse then CC. yeares of our maisters death, Oblationes fiebant annua die pro defunctis:De Cor. mi∣lit. That oblations and sacrifice were yearly made at the xij. monthes mindes of most men: he meaneth both by the sacrifice of the Church, and offeringes of the freindes of the de∣parted,In exhort. Castitat. as there also: Repete apud Deum pro cuius spiritu postules, pro qua oblationes annuas reddas: Call to thy re∣membraunce, for whose soule thou prayes, and in whose behalfe thou makes yearly offeringes: He speaketh of a freinde of his, that practised thus for his wiues departure. And in an other place he well declareth the duety of maried persons one towards an other, if God by death separate them in sonder. Pro anima eius orat,De mono∣gamia. & refrigerium interim postulat, & offert annuis diebus dormitionis eius, She prayeth for her husbandes soule, and obteineth in the meane space ease: and offereth euery yeare, at the mind day of his passing hense. And he letteth not to af∣firme,
that the maried couple that practise not thus, do not beleue the resurrection. Therefore he concludeth thus: Nunquid nihil erimus post mortem secundum aliquem Epicurum, & non secundum Christum? quòd si credimus mortuorum re∣surrectionem, vtique tenebimur, cum quibus resurre∣cturi sumus, rationem de altetutro reddituri: VVhat say you, shall we fall to nothing after our death, as the Epicure thin∣keth, and not rise againe as Christ teacheth? And if we beleue the resurrection of the deade, then doubtlesse we shall be bounde to make accompt one of an other, as we shall together rise againe. Beware here my maisters, once againe I must tell you,This heresy much ioy∣neth vvith the Saduces you are going towardes the deniall of the resurrection, so many as con∣demne the vsage of the Church in praying or offeringe for the deade. Tertullian sayth you be Epicures in this point, and so you be in all others.Psal. 13. I say you are past priuy muttering in your heartes that there is no God: for you are come to plaine Manducemus & bibamus: cras enim moriemur, Let vs eate and be mery,Cor. 1. ca. 15 we can not tell how longe we lieue. I say you must aunswere for parting the affection of man and wife, and the one must be coun∣table at the day of iudgement to an other, that they procured not the dueties of the deade by right of Gods holy Church, for their soules departed. Take heede therefore, you are warned. 3 Nay ho there M. Allen, no higher then Tertullian. And when we haue examined the testimonies of Tertullian in order as you haue brought them, you shall haue small aduantage out of him, yea your friendes shall thinke you had bene better to haue made no mention of him. For first I must tell you, that these three lines which are all that he hath written sounding that way, are found in three bookes which all were written by him, when he was an heretike, & separated from the catholike Church. And therefore it may well be, that all that he speaketh of prayers and obla∣tions for the deade, was onely in the conuenticles of the Montanistes, of which sect he was an earnest defender, rather then in the catholike Church. And this coniecture seemeth the more probable, because Cyprian which was afterward a catholike Bishop in the same city, where Tertullian some∣time
had liued, maketh no mention of prayers for the dead, but onely of sacrifice for the Martyrs which was none o∣ther but the sacrifice of thankesgiuing. lib. 4. Ep. 5. But admit that the Church of God in that time, vsed these supersti∣tious prayers and oblations for the deade, let vs consider vpon what ground they were vsed. The firs place M. Allen allegeth in this forme. Oblationes fiebant annua die pro defun∣ctis. But Tertullians wordes in libro de corona militis be these. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs annua die facimus. We make oblations for the dead, for our birthes on the yearly day. By which it is euident that M. Allen did not read these words him selfe, but receiued them of some other mans collection, or sound them in some booke of common pla∣ces. But to the matter: Tertullian him selfe shall say for me, that the same custome, with many other which he there rehearseth, hath no ground in the holy Scripture. Harum & aliarum eiusmodi disciplinarum, si leges expostules scripturarum, nullam inuenies, traditio tibi praetendetur autrix, consuetudo confirmatrix & fides obseruatrix. Of those and such like dis∣ciplines, if you require the lawes of the Scriptures, you shall finde none, tradition shall be pretended to you to be the author, Custome the confirmer, and faith the obseruer. It is good to take that which is so franckly giuen: and more is Tertullian to be commended, that confesseth the ground of his errour not to be taken out of the word of God, then they that labour to wret the Scriptures to find that which Tertullian confesseth is not to be found in them. I knowe the Papistes will aunswere that tradition is of as good cre∣dit as the Scripture, & is the word of God vnwritten, as well as the Scripture is the word of God written. But why then doe they not obserue all other things, that Tertullian in the same place affirmeth to be tradition, if tradition be the word of God, why doe they not giue to them that are new∣ly baptised a temper of milke and hony, and from the day of their baptisme forbid dayly washing all the weeke after? Why doe they not count it a wicked thinge to fast on the Sunday, or to pray and worship God on their knees? Why doe they not count it a wicked thinge to fast betwene Ea∣ster
& Whitsontide, or to pray on their knees all that time? Finally why doe not they crosse them selues in the fore∣head, at euery steppe they set forth, at comming in, at going out, at putting on of garmentes, at putting on of shoes, at washing, at the tables, at lighting of candles, at beddes, at stooles, and at all thinges, what so euer they doe? What aunswere can they here make, but that their Church may dispense as well with the word of God vnwritten, which they cal tradition, as she doth against the word of God con∣teyned in the holy Scriptures. So that alwayes what so euer they prate of antiquitie, customs, traditions, vnwritten ve∣rities, or the word of God vnwritten, the authority of their blasphemous church is aboue them all. Now to the second testimony alleged out of Tertullian. S. Ieronym shall testifie for vs, that this booke, as the other that followeth, was writ∣ten against the Church, so was also his booke de corona mi∣litis, when he was out of the Church, whereby it may ap∣peare, what good authorities they are, to proue the do∣ctrine of the Church. This booke de castitate, he wrote to diswade a friend of his, whose wife was dead, that he should not marry agayne, condemning second mariage for adulte∣ry, as Montanus his maister did, and laboureth to proue that he could not pray for his departed wiues soule, nor offer the yearely oblation, if he married an other. To the same purpose he reasoneth in his booke de Monogamia, where the wordes alleged by M Allen be so corrupted in all the coppyes, that Beatus Rhenamus confesseth that no sense could be made of them, and these wordes are the coniectu∣rall correction of Beatus Rhenamus. But let them be vn∣doubtedly the wordes of Tertullian, as they seeme to be. Here more manifestly then before he brocheth his here∣sie of condemning second mariages, for in that the wife prayeth for her husbands soule, and offereth, &c: he would proue that she is still married to him, and that she commit∣teth adultery if she take an other, directly contrary to the word of God. Rom. 7. & 1. Cor. 7. yet see either the ignorance or ye malice of this Allen, that allegeth those words of this writer, by which he condemneth them that allow second
mariage, as denyers of the resurrection, agaynst vs that de∣ny prayers for the deade to be lawfull by the word of God. And vseth the same reason and wordes to proue prayers for the dead to be allowable, that Tertullian vseth to proue second mariages to be damnable. For that accompt which Tertullian sayth men and women are bound vnto, one to an other, he meaneth of the promise of mariage once made betwene them, which M. Allen, like a wise yong man ex∣poundeth prayers & oblations for their soules. The words of Tertullian following immediatly where M. Allen lea∣ueth them, are these. Si autem in illo aeuo neque nubent neque nubentur, sed erunt aequales Angelis: non ideò, non tenebimur coniugibus defunctis, quia non erit restitutio coniugij. At quin eò magis tenebimur, quia in meliorem statum destinamur, resurre∣cturi in spirituale consortium, agnituri tam nosmet ipsos, quam nostros, &c. But if in that time, they shall neither marry, nor be married, but shall be equall to the Angells, we shall not therfore not be boūd to our wiues departed, because there shall not be a restitution of mariage, But so much the more we shall be bounde, because we are appoynted to a better state, as they that shall ryse agayne into a spirituall fellow∣ship, and shall know agayne as well our selues, as those that pertayne vnto vs. Wherefore M. Allen once againe I must tell you, that we woulde be sorrie to be so neere the deniall of the resurrection, by denying prayers for the deade, as you are towarde the heresy of the Montanistes, in vsing such reasons to defend praying and offering for the deade, as Tertullian a Montaniste vsed to mainteine his heresy, but I shall haue further occasion to retorne to Tertullian, when I shall proue that the opinion of purgatory came first fr heretikes. 4 But as neere as we be Christes time by Tertullians helpe, we will approch yet neerer, to the very Apostles age, and looke out some recorde of that time for oblations and distributions, with memorialls for the departed. And the further from you of the new sect we go, the more plaine destruction of your doctrine, and more manifest proofe of our olde deuotion shall we fiende, to your
open shame and the comfort of Catholikes. S. Clement there∣fore the Romane, one conuersaunt with the Apostles, and instru∣cted by them in his faith, a familiar of S. Paule, and promoted by S. Peter, a true pastor and a holy martyr, thus reporteth of the Apostles ordinaunce in our matter.Lib. 8. Cōst. Cap. 48. Peragatur dies mortuo∣rum in Psalmis, in lectionibus, atque orationibus, propter eum qui tertia die resurrexit: Item nonus in commemora∣tionem superstitum atque defunctorum. Etiam quadrage∣simus secūdum veterem formam, Moysen enim hoc modo luxit populus: nec non anniuersarium pro memoria ipsius, detúrque de illius facultatibus pauperibus, in commemora∣tionem ipsius. Thus in English. VVe will that the third day be obserued for the departed, in psalmes, lessons, and prayers, for his sake that rose the third day. And so the ix. day, for the vniting together in one memorie the departed with the liuing. In like maner the fourtith day must be kept according to the ordre vsed of olde: for so did, the people obserue the bewayling of Moyses. And with all these, the xij. monthes minde beside. VVhere for the memory of his departure, lt somwhat be distributed amongest the poore people. How say you now my maisters, is this Popish or Apostolike doctrine? was it inuented for priestes couetousnesse, or obserued as Christes ordinaunce? made we much of late of the litle we founde before, or of late lost for lacke of deuotion, that which we had so long before? Mercifull God who woulde thinke this geare were so auncient, & so litle set by. VVho would thinke the aduersaries. were so impudent and yet so much regarded. VVhat hearte thinke you they reade the auncient writers with all? Or with what conscience can they passe by so plaine practise of all the Christian worlde? Or with what face can they name either scripture or doctor? How dare they looke backe at any one steppe of antiquitie, all which be nothing els but a testimony of their wickednesse, and as you woulde say a pointing with finger at their horrible spoile of olde doctrine and deuotion? VVhat if one of their owne scholars seeing this light in our matter, shoulde aske of his maister: a lasse sir,The maister Protestant is posed, what if this be true that is proued so olde, and you chaunce to lie that are so late, where are we your scholars then? It is not aunswered, if you confort him with faire wordes, and tell him you follow the scripture. For he will charge
you againe straight, that these men had scripture, vnderstood scripture, alleaged scripture, both of the newe Testament and the olde, and referred their vsage some to Moyses & Aaron, other some to the fathers in the lawe of nature, and all to the Apostles of Christ. VVhere are you then? no more but this perdy, we vn∣derstand scripture perchaunce better then they, we haue the holy Ghost perchaunce and so had not the fathers: perchaunce that is no scripture, perchaunce this and this is not that doctors worke, because it makes against vs. I thinke he that woulde beleue your chauncing, that may haue such assuraunce of the trueth on the other side, he is worthy to be deceiued. 4 Not content with Tertullians testimony, you will clime higher, euen to Clemens the Apostles owne scholer, but you shalbe brought downe with shame enough. I will not here repeate the mise dounge, with the rotten breade in the boxe, and such baggage as I haue discouered be∣fore, of this carterly Clement, but because you are so full of posing M. Protestant, as though you were Iohannes ad oppo∣situm, I wil pose you M. Allen an other while, or any M. Pa∣piste of you all, that hath a forheade to mainteine this trumperie, for Clemen the auncient Bishoppes writing. Alas Syr, what if this be proued counterfect that you saye is so olde? and you with out peraduenture lye, that of late haue founde it so auncient, what grounde haue your schollers then? Tertullian hath discharged you of authority of the scripture already, how will you proue it then to be a tradi∣tion of the Apostles? your aunswere wilbe still, Clenens sayth it. But alacke Sir, whether is it more licke, that Eusebius and Hieronym, that lyued neerer to the time of S. Clement by twelue hundreth yeares, then you, shoulde know or here tell of his epistles and other writings better then you? But Eusebius and Hieronym neuer hearde of such writinges as were neuer seen in the Church 13. or 14. hundreth yeares after Clemens his death. Where shoulde you haue them then but of some counterfecting knawe, that coulde not otherwise maintaine his heresie to be old, but by falsyfying and counterfecting a newe, that which neuer was in the
olde writers heades. But to shew that your shamelesse Cle∣ment, daunceth bare and breechelesse, with out all honesty: I will yet pose you further, and bidde you call your wittes together to aunswere me. Whether had you rather graunt that so holy a Pope as Clemens was, did erre, or hat he was a false knaw that woulde father an error vppon so holy a mans name and credit? your Syr Clemens decreeth that the fortyeth day must be obserued for the departed, according to the olde forme because the people did so obserue the bewayling of Moses. But if the scripture affirme that the people bewayled Moses but 30. dayes Deut. 34. Then is your Clement a falsyfier of Gods worde, and his foolish de∣cree builded vppon his false grounde. How saye you now M. Allen is this Apostolike or apostotaticall? is this plaine dealing or Popish counterfecting? was Clemens in the Apo∣stles age so ignorant of the scripture? or was he an igno∣rant hypocrite that fayned this vnder the name of Clemens? Trueth seaketh not to be mainteined which lyes, fayth looketh not to be defended by falsehoode. The Church of Christ craueth no counterfected authoritie to establish her doctrine. Therefore it is neither trueth, nor fayth, nor the doctrine of the Church of Christ, that you mainteine, defend, and establish by lying, falsyfying and counterfec∣ting, but error, infidelity, and heresie, he therefore that will forsake the certainetie of Gods worde to builde vpon the traditions of men, for leuing the only pathe of trueth, hath a iust rewarde to fall into the pitte of error. 5 VVell, I will close vp this parte of our talke, for Tobies almes borde in the obittes of Christian men, with S. Augustines graue iudgement: who, as he is plaine for the benefite of obla∣tions in the memorialls of mens departures, in all placies, so here in a maner he ordereth the action thereof, for abusies that might thereon arise, in his epistle to Aurelius. The offeringes (sayth he) obserued for the soules departed, whereof there is no question but profet ariseth to them, let them not be ouer sumptuous vpon the mindes of the deceased, nor soulde away, but geuen with out grudge or disdaine to such as be
present, and woulde be partaker thereof: but if mony be offered, it may be distributed out of hande to the poore, and then shall not those dayes of their freindes memo∣rialles, be to their great griefe forsaken or destitute of com∣panie. And the ordre with honeste comelinesse shall be kept continually in the Church. So S. Clement him selfe teacheth all them that be called to such dayes of prayers for the departed, and to be partakers of those oblations or charitable re∣lieues, which were by some honest sober refreshing euen in the Church in those dayes obserued, whether they be of the laity or of the priestes, he geueth them this lesson. Qui ad memorias eorum vocamini, cum modestia & cum dei timore come∣dite, veluti valentes legatione fungi pro mortuis: cum sitis presbyteri & diaconi Christi, sobrij esse debetis & priua∣tim: & cum alijs, vt possitis intemperantes coercere: All you that are called to the funeralles of the departed, refresh your selues in measure and feare of God, that you may be worthy, to be as it were in commission of intreatie for the deade: and being priestes or deacons of Christ, you are bounde to be sobre euen at home: but abrode, for others example and discipline. 5 You had bene as good to haue left out the compa∣ring of Augustines oblations with Tobies almes borde, for that custome which most resembled your fantasie of Tobies almes borde Augustine condemneth where he alloweth ob∣lations for them that sleepe to profit some what. Sed quoniā istae in caemiterijs ebrietates & luxuriosa conuiuia, non solùm ho∣nores martyrum in carnali & imperita plebe credi solent, sed etiam solatia mortuorum, mihi videtur facilius illic dissuadei posse istam foeditatem ac turpitudinem, si & de scripturis prohi∣beatur, & oblationes pro spiritibus dormientium quas verè ali∣quid adiuuare credendum est super ipsas memorias non sunt sumptuosae &c. But because this dronkennesses, and riotous festes vsed in the Church yeardes of the carnall and vn∣skillfull people are wonte to be beleued not onely to be the honour of the martyrs, but also the comforte of the deade, my thinke it were more easy, that this filthynesse and beastlynesse may be there diswaded, if both it be for∣bidden
out of the scriptures, and that the oblations for the spirites of the deade, which truely we must beleue doth helpe somewhat, vpon the memories them selues be not sumptuous &c. But if Augustine had knowen the horrible abuses which grew afterwarde, by permission of these ob∣lations, he woulde as well haue prohibited them out of the scripture as that hethenish banquettinge in the Church yeardes in honor of the martyrs, as for comforte of deade mens soules. As for Clement that teacheth the preistes and deacones to be sober and moderate in eating, where they were bidden to buriall feastes, euen here also he sheweth him selfe in his owne colours. As though in the dayes of Clemens, when the Church was in great persecution, they had nothing els to doe, but to keepe sumptuous feastes at their burialls, where at the priestes, and deacons, were in daunger of glouttony & dronkennesse, as they were in the Popish church when Popery was in the pride, seldome temperate or sober, and lest of all at burialls, and monthes mindes &c. That the benefite of prayer and almes appertaineth not to such as dye in mortall sinne, though in the doubtefull case of mans beeing, the Church vseth to praye for all departed in Christes fayth. CAP. VII. 1 THus farre we now are broght, I trust with proofe and euidence enough, with reasonable cleere light for the good simple peoples instruction, and with full safety, from all the force our aduersaries can make against vs. The Patriarches example, the wordes of scripture, the practise of the Church, the naturall society betwixt the partes of Christes misticall body in this worlde, and his members in the next, and all our fathers faith haue wonne so much, that almes and offeringes in sundry memorialls and diuers obseruations of mindes and obittes, be singular and soueraigne, to procure Gods mercy for the pardon of the soules deceased. And nowe, lest any man take occasion of Gods mercy, which he seeth to be so ready
that it may be wone by other mens workes, to liue in contempt of vertuous exercise, and to passe the time of his owne life in care∣lesse negligence, presuming to purchesse fauour at Gods hande so mercyfull, by other mens merites, with out his owne deede or de∣serte, let that man be aduertised, quòd non habet partem in sermone isto, that he shall in that case haue no benefite by our talke: the mercy which we speake of, perteineth not vnto him: such idle drone beyes can take no fructe of other mens labours, neither quicke nor deade. For that membre which in this body was so vnprofitable to him self, it is no right nor reason he should haue any gaynes by other mens trauell. Therefore all these libe∣rall promisies of fauour and grace, to be procured by the workes of the liue towardes the departed, reach neither to the vnfaith∣full out of this house, nor to the impenitent who was but an vn∣profitable burden of the house.Lib. 8. con∣stit. 49. These thinges sayth Clement we meane of the godly, for if thou gaue all the welth of the world to the poore for the wicked sake, thou couldest not profite them a heare. For he that dyed in Gods displeasure, can not looke for more mercy then he deserued. Therefore S. Iohn the Apostle seemeth to abbridge our prayers,1. Epist. ca. 5 and the obteining of our peti∣tions, by borderinge them as with in certaines bondes after this sort. VVe know that God doth here vs what so euer we require, we be sure he will accomplish our requestes which we make vnto him. Therefore he that knoweth his brother to sinne being not a sinne to death, let him pray and life shall be geuen to him that sinneth not to death: there is a sinne to death, for such I do not will any man to praie. This place of the Apostle, seemeth to de∣clare the wonderfull force that the prayers of the faithfull haue, in procuring grace and remission for others, so that they be re∣thern, and passe hense with out the bonde of mortall sinne. And the letter well weyed, shall make exceding much to proue the prayers for departed in piety: as it in a maner forbiddeth all in∣tercession for such, as be knowen to passe in continuance of mor∣tall sinne. There is no crime so greuous that man may commit in the course of this life, but the Church vseth prayers customa∣bly therefore, and for her reuerence is often hearde. Therefore it may well be thought that the party must be deceased of whome such diuersity of desertes doth arise: for all that be a liue with out
exception, if they be brethern of our familie, must be prayde for. And so longe as they be in this worlde, and may repent,The church maye praye for any sin∣ner in this life, vvith hope of mercy. their sinne is not so vnto death, but life by prayers may be, and is com∣monly at Gods hande obeined. Then it may well be deduced, that the Aposle meaneth to incourage the faithfull to pray for such their brethren departed, as dyed without bonde of deadly sinne to their sight, in a maner warning them that for such their prayers shall be acceptably hearde. But for others continuing in sinne to death, he willeth not them to praye, nor can assure them they shall be hearde. So doth Dionysius, a man not very aun∣cient, but of a full spirite and good grace, expounde this text.Carth. VVhether he meaneth (sayth this father) by finall impenitence, or by any mortall sinne continued vnto death, it is sure & plaine a man must not praye for him that dieth in it. Then if we be ad∣monished not to pray for one sorte of departed, the case is cleare that we may, and are bounde, and shall be hearde for the other sorte that sinneth not vnto death. CAP. VII. 1 HItherto, but that you loue to tell your chic∣kens before they be hatched, you neede not greatly to boast of your winnings. But now you will shewe, that prayer and almes helpeth not them that dye in mortall sinne, and that beside your Cle∣ment, with whose cloutes you cloy your booke, you woulde fayne proue out of ye Epistle of S. Iohn cap. 5. For that which S. Iohn speaketh of the prayers that Christian men make for their brethren aliue, whom they see to sinne, but not vnto death, you would take if you could, for prayers to be made for them that are deade, but passed not hence in deadly sin▪ & that which he sayth of prayers not to be made for them that sinne not vnto death, you weene he ment of them that are known to passe hence in continuance of sinne. But you that dare not presume to make any interpretation without authoritie of the olde Martyrs, when all commeth to all, haue none to father your new exposition vppon, but Denys the charterhouse Monke, a yesterdayes bird. But seeing you
are not onely voyd of all auncient authoritie, but also haue all the olde writers against you, that euer interpreted or al∣leged this place, let vs see what is your reason. Forsooth the letter well weighed, maketh much for you, by the way it may be noted, that you call the word of God the letter, in that sense that S. Paule sayth the letter killeth, but I omitte that grosse contumely against the holy Scriptures, where S. Paule sayth the letter killeth, he meaneth not that the holy Scriptures killeth in which is contemed life, but that the law which onely commaundeth and giueth no power to fulfill it pronounceth sentence of death to them that breake it. But to follow your reason. There is no crime so greeuous, that man may commit in this life, but the Church prayeth for it & is often heard: therfore it may be thought that the party must be deceased of whom such diuersitie of deserts doth arise. I deny your antecedent: For the church of Christ, prayeth not for them that sinne against the holy Ghost, & our Sauiour Christ affirmeth that he which sin∣neth against the holy Ghost shall neuer be forgiuen, who so euer pray for him, and of such sayth S. Iohn, that there is a sinne vnto death, for which we ought not to pray. Samuell was not heard when he prayed for Saule, 1. Sam. 16. Ieremy is oftentimes forbidden to pray for the obstinate Iewes, Iere. 7.11. & 14. And the Lord testifieth, that if Noach, Daniell and Iob prayed for the wicked, they should not be heard. Ezec. 14. Therefore there be sinnes for which the Church ought not to pray, and though she should pray, yet she should not be heard, euen of men remayning in this life, your second reason (as I conceiue it) is, that so long as men are in his world, they may repent, & then sinne is not to death. Ther∣fore S. Iohn meaneth, that they that dyed without bond of deadly sinne are to be prayed for: your antecedent as before is false, for the Apostle to the Hebrewes the sixt chapter, sheweth that there be some which sinne so horribly in this life, that it is vnpossible for them to be renewed by repen∣taunce. So that your exposition being both voyd of autho∣ritie, and contrary to the manifest word of God, of none that is wise, or godly can be receiued. Beside this the whole
context of S. Iohns wordes doe plainly declare, that he spea∣keth of prayers for the brethern that are liuing, and not for them that are dead. But I am to blame to spende so many wordes in a matter so manifest. If the holy Ghost had euer allowed prayer for the dead, he would once at the lest haue vttered the same plainly, in holy canonicall Scriptures. But Tertullian, as wise a man as M. Allen, affirmeth (as we heard before) that prayer for the deade, hath no foundation in the Scriptures. 2 To this place also S. Augustine, disputing in his booke de ciuitate dei that praiers profiteth not all men departed, alludeth,Lib. 21. Cap. 24. or rather leaneth vnto it as a sure groūd against the Origenistes, that woulde haue Gods mercy by mans prayers obteined for the wicked soules deceased, after this sort. Si qui autem vsque ad mortem habebunt cor impoenitens, nec ex inimicis conuer∣tuntur in filios, numquid iam pro eis, id est pro talium de∣functorum spiritibus orat ecclesia? cur ita nisi quia iam in parte diaboli computantur, qui dum essent in corpore, non sunt translati in Christum? If there be any that till death con∣tinue in stubborne impenitency of hearte, and of enemies to Gods Church will not be made children, doeth the Church make in∣tercession for such, that is to say for the soules of them being de∣parted in that state? and why prayeth she not for them, but be∣cause they be nowe reckoned for the deuills lot being deade, that woulde not moue to Christes part when they were in their bodies? And this is the cause, that for such as in desperatiō destroy them selues: by any kind of wilfull or violent death, or in the stubborne maintenance of heresie, offer them selues to be extirpate: as well out of the society of mans life, as out of the cōmuniō of the Chri∣stian company, our holy mother the Church, who by her practise is the best construer of Gods worde, neuer vseth any meanes for their quiet rest. VVheron there is a holy decree of Councell in this sense, qui sibi ipsis quolibet modo culpabili inferunt mortem, nulla pro illis fiat commemoratio,Bracarens. Cap. 34. neque cum psal∣mis sepeliantur. All those that by any vnlawfull way procure their owne death, let no commemoration be had of them,Vide Timo. Alexand. respons. 14. nor be brought home with psalmes. The which hath ben both diligently
obserued euer amongest Christians, and for terrour of the wicked often by holy Canons renewed. VVherof there is no other cause but this: that such persons being at the ende cut of the common bodie, can receiue no vtility of that, where vnto they are not, nor now can not be ioyned. And as in that case where Gods Church hath plaine presumption of any persons euerlasting perishing, either by continuance in infidelitie out of her happy family, or by heresie, and separation of him selfe till the last ende, leaping out of her holy lappe where he once was before, or being and conti∣nuing, with some open euidence thereof, an vnprofitable mem∣bre, and a deade branche: as, I saye, in any plaine proofe of these thinges, the Church neuer practiseth for his rest, because she nei∣ther hath hope of getting any grace, nor meanes to conuey any benefite vnto such as be not in the limmes of life, so if our saide carefull mother doe bestow of her customable kindnesse, all her godly meanes vpon those whome she knoweth not otherwise but in finall piety and penitence to haue passed this life, and yet in deede before God (to whome onely all secrets of mans hearte be perfectly open) dyed as abiectes, and outcastes in sinne and im∣penitencie, she can not for all that, any whit helpe their estate so miserable, nor appeace Gods wrath towarde, them being now out of the time of deseruing. out of the Churchies lappe, effectually and finally separated from the chosen people, and out of the com∣paesse of grace and mercie. Much lesse any priuate mans prayer can be any thing at all beneficiall to his freinde, or other that dyed not in Gods fauour: whose payne can neither be finished, nor by any of these ordinary meanes, one moment released or lessened. Yet euery good faithfull person must imitate the dili∣gence of Gods Church herein, that ceaseth not both to off and pray for all sortes with in her limites, that be hense in any likely∣hood of repentaunce departed: who hadde rather they shoulde abounde to the needelesse, then at any time lacke for the reliefe of such, that might wante them. 2 All this discourse is needelesse, to proue that prayers profit, not the infidels, or the impenitent, against them that beleue that the soules of the faithfull & the repentant are where Christ is, as he prayeth Ioan. 17. Father I will that
those whome thou hast gyuen me where I am they also maye be with me, that they may see my glory. And euen so he sayeth to the theefe no perfect iuste man, but a sin∣ner repentant: This daye thou shalt be with me in Para∣dise Luke 23. And S. Paule desireth to be dissolued and to be with Christ Philip. 1. This is the fayth of the Church, of Christ, and these be the groundes of our fayth, voide of all doubtfulnesse, obscurity, sophistry and variable sentence of deceiuable men: builded vpō the certaine foundation of the eternall word of God: The authoritie of Augustine pro∣ueth that the Church prayed not in his time for the spirits of infidells. But the Councell Bracharense (as afterwarde I shall more plainely shewe) doth insinuate that no prayers were made at all, for the soules of the departed in their Church at their burialls, but onely a remembrance of them in prayers with thankesgeuing and singing of Psalmes. For purgatory shoulde seeme had not yet trauelled into spaine. But touching this assertion of M. Allen, that those which dye out of the fauour of God, as infidells and such like, are not to be prayed for, whose payne can neither be finished, nor one moment released, or lessened by any of these meanes: what saye you then to Gregory the first, byshop of Rome, which with his vehement prayer as your owne Da∣mascene and many others doe witnesse, deliuered the soule of Traianus the heathen Emperour from Hell: whereof there riseth a great controuersie among your doltish di∣uines, some affirming, that he was deliuered out of Hell in deede, some that he remaineth still in Hell, but not in the tormnts of Hell, in which opinion is Mathew monke of Westminster in his Flores historiarum Anno gratiae 605. How shall we beleue the booke of Conformities of S. Frances, who is there reported to haue deliuered not one but many soules out of Hell. If these be fables and lies M. Allen, they be forged in your owne shop, wheras purgatory & all such other rotten postes and pillers of your Church were recei∣ued. If these be true, that be set forth with so great authori∣tie, then were not you well aduised to publishe such prin∣ciples as be proued false by your owne patrons & proctors.
3 Therefore let no man withdrawe his almes, charity, or prayers, from any of the houshoulde of faith, vpon any light pre∣sumption yea or strong coniecture of any mans finall continuance in sinne or wickednesse: vpon whome in the last spirite of breath, as God maye haue mercy, so mans prayers then shall be both needefull, and exceding beneficiall vnto him. Onely with con∣science thou may, and must cease with Gods Church to practise the wayes of mercy vppon such as be not baptised, or otherwise after their baptisme, haue by leauing this holy communion of the faithfull,Heretikes not to be praide for after their death. iudged them selues vnworthy, and made their case vn∣apte by continuance therein, to receiue any benefite either of the Church, which of their owne accorde they haue forsaken, or of any membre thereof, wherevnto by faith and loue they are not ioyned. And so all heretikes shall be voide of this mercy and grace after their death, which did in their life so earnestly ab∣horre the same. Vpon all other where any hope may be had, if thou pray or procure the meanes of mercy, it shall at least be to thy selfe a singular helpe and gayne, though the partie for whome thou doest it, either neede it not, being already receiued into blesse, or els in perpetuall damnation of Hell, be helples for euer. Si preces pro mortuis facimus (sayth S. Chrysostome) si elec∣mosinas damus,Homil 21. in Cap. 9. Actuum. etsi ille indignus sit, nobis Deus placatior erit: If we pray for the deade, and bestowe almes for their sakes, if he be founde vnworthy, yet God will the rather be mercyfull to our selues. And sure it is, that who so euer be founde so gra∣cious, as with much compassion of the deceaseds misery, to pro∣cure with study and care Gods mercyfull pardon towardes them, that such a one especially shall finde grace and fauour at the time of neede, and be meruailous apt to receiue benefit by others procurement againe.VVho be most apte to receiue benefite by the prayers of the li∣uing. For as it is certaine, that no man can receiue benefite after his departure by any worke or will of the liuing, sauing such as in their life deserued the same, so must it needes be, that where these remedies be needefull and profitable, that yet more or lesse they shall worke vpon the party for his reliefe, according to the more or lesse deuotion and deseruing in this life. Therefore this trueth of mutuall participation of the deade with the liue, geueth no man occasion of idle rest or carelesse affection in his owne time and cause, when he may be assured to lacke the
reliefe of others, to whome in his liefe by well working he woulde not ioyne before. But I had rather ye hearde S. Augustine vttering expressely this meaning of mine, in his owne wordes.Enchir. cap. 110. It can not be denied (sayth he) but that the soules of the deceased be relieued, when the sacrifice of our redemer is offered for them, or almes bestowed in their behalfe in the Church. But in deede these are profitable to none, but to such as in their life deserued that those things after their departure might doe them good. For there is a state of life that is neither so perfect but it may well haue neede of these helpes after death, not yet so very euill, but such thinges may well suc∣cour them after their departure. Mary there is a kinde of conuersation so vertuous, that it requireth no such ayed, and an other kinde so wicked, that those which passed their former life therein, can haue after their passage no reliefe by such meanes: for by our merites in this life we do ob∣teine, that after our deaths we may either atteine to reme∣dy, or els be voide of all helpes. For it is a very vaine hope, that any man should presume to winne that at Gods hand after he be passed out of this worlde which when he was in the worlde, he neuer sought nor deserued. And a litle after thus he maketh all plaine: VVhen the sacrifice of the altar, or els any kinde of almes be offered for all men de∣parted being baptised, for the very good they are thankes giuing, for the indifferent that be not very euill, they are a mercyfull deliueraunce. For the wicked and very euill, all though they be no succour for them which be departed and deade, yet they are confortable for those that be aliue, And to such as receiue benefite thereby, either commeth full forgiuenesse, or els their iudgement and damnation is made thereby somewhat more tolerable. The which sen∣tence, almost in like wordes, for that it merueillously opened this matter, this author repeteth in the fourth question ad Dulcitiū, and els very often. VVhereby the faithfull man may learne both how much, and whome these remedies do relieue. And then that the Church in his dayes offered sacrifice for all those that were baptised, and in the faith thereof departed: both for that it was
vncertaine who had neede thereof, and also, because euen then when the parties were not, nor coulde not be partakers thereof, that Gods glory notwithstanding was excedingly set forth, and man comforted thereby. Therefore Gods Church in a true sense may be saide to offer sacrifice euen for the holy and blessed mar∣tyrs, who no doubt by sheeding of their bloude for Christes name, and defense of vnitie, be fully purged in this their death, and so perfectly released of all sinne & paine that might otherwise haue deserued punishment, and some expectation of Gods mercy in the life to come.Lib. 4. epist. 5. For so S. Cyprian and other of his Church offe∣red sacrifice, for Celerne, Laurence and Ignatius as he testi∣fieth him selfe: Sacrificia pro eis semper vt meministis offe∣rimus, quoties martyrum passiones & dies anniuersaria cō∣memoratione celebramus: For them we offer sacrifice, as often as we celebrate the yearly memories of martyrs. For which kinde of perfect men, sacrifice is thankes geuing vnto God for their glory and giftes of grace, and a kinde of intercession to them in our necessities.Tractat 84. in Ioannē. For which cause S. Augustine affirmeth, Quòd pro martyribus non oramus fed ipsi oran pro nobis: VVe pray not for martyrs, but they pray for vs. Nowe the sacrifice often celebrated for the wicked also, that be not knowen to the Church so to be, is not beneficiall to them neither, because their naughty life and death makes them vnapte to receiue comforth thereby: yet these holy appointed remedies are both comfortable and meritorious to the geuers and procurers, as blessinges which are not lost,Hovv pray∣er vvhich taketh no effect in the departed, is profitable to the pro∣curer. but turne againe to the bestowers. For the profit of other, or the onely will to relicue other, is a singular deserte and meanes of merite to a mans selfe. Full truely saide Damascene, that this carefull helpe & seruing of others mens lackes, is much like to the paine which one taketh in anoynting with a precious baulme an other mans body, which as he tempereth in his hande to bestowe vpon an other, it first redoundeth in verdure and vertue to him selfe, and then passeth by him, to the vse of his neighbour, for whome principally it was prepared. 3 These matters stand all vpon a false supposition, that any prayers are auailable for the deade, which when it can not be proued, it is in vayne to shewe who taketh profit by
them, who not, who more and who lesse, and what becom∣meth of those prayers that be offered for either them that neede no helpe, or that can not be helped. We learne out of Gods worde, that what so euer we doe pray for according to Gods will we shall obteyne. 1. Iohn. 5. therefore this one hat∣chet shall cut asunder all these knottes, prayers for the dead are not according to the will of God, and therfore they are not heard at al, for immediatly after death, as M. Allen him selfe confesseth, followeth iudgement, but prayers eyther neede not or boote not, when the party is eyther acquited or condemned by the sentence of the iudge, which as Au∣gustine sayth can not be indifferent betwene rewarde, & pu∣nishment. De libero arbitrio. lib. 3. cap. 23. 4 But notwithstanding this free procurement and liberall graunt of common helpes in the departeds case, euen there where it is vncertaine whether they take effect or no, the Church yet doth not onely absteine from sacrifice and request for such as doe openly appeare to sinne vnto death, as the Apostle sayth, but some times for punishment of certeine contemptes and disobedience in some persons, she forbeareth these meanes, euen there where she might proffet the departed, & peraduēture cleane discharge him of sinne and paine with all. VVhich she doth by merueillous graue authoritie, to the great terror of offenders. That by the greuous punishment of certaine, many might learne to be care∣full and wise. Greate is the authoritie of Gods ministers suerly, and heuy is their hand often vpon sinners, alwayes to edifie and neuer to de∣troie. VVhat a straunge force had Peters wordes,Act. 5. that droue owne to death for dissimulation man and wife, almost both at a lappe? what a horrible & dreadfull iudgement practised Paule,1. ad Tim. 1. 1. Cor. 5. n geuing vp some to Satan him selfe, for sinne? howe sharply id the primitiue Church execute iudgement vpon greuous of∣enders, whome some times after many yeares separation from the comfortable receiuing the sacraments, they woulde hardely ad∣mit at their last ende to the fellowship therof. But no where could the maiesty of Gods Church appeare with more terrour, then in this case: when she dischargeth certaine for their punishment,
of all common helpe by prayers, oblation, and sacrifice after their departure: though they otherwise dyed in the fauour of God, as I take it, & might be of the chosen company that shall be saued. And that punishment was nothing els but a keping of them in longer correction and paine for their sinne, vnder Gods scourge in the next worlde, for the admonishment of others in that case to beware, whiles she would not vse her ordinary meanes for their release. A notable example we haue thereof, out of a Councell holden in Affricke:Concilium Aphricanū. Epist. 9. the decree of which assemblie, S. Cyprian him selfe with a practise in the execution thereof, reporteth in the first booke of his epistles. VVhere he willeth that one Victor, who had made Geminus Faustinus being a priest against the ordre taken in the Councell of Aphrike, the executor of his te∣stament, shoulde therefore haue no prayers of the clergie, nor sa∣crifice after his departure saide or done for him. For in that time of greate persecution, such instant prayers, so often sacrifice, the scarsity of ministers, the peoples necessity required, that the priests shoulde perpetually, with out all exception of worldly affayers, serue the altar. But you shall heare this blessed Martyrs, or ra∣ther his wordes together with the Councells ordinaunce. Victor cum contra formam nuper in consilio a sacerdotibus daā, Geminum Faustinum presbyterum ausus sit actorē consti∣tuere, non est quò pro dormitione eius apud vos fiat obla∣tio, aut deprecatio nomine eius in ecclesia frequentetur, vt sacerdotum decretum, religiose & necessariò factum, ser∣uetur a nobis: simul & caeteris fratribus detur exemplum, ne quis sacerdotes & ministros dei altari eius & ecclesiae vacantes, ad seculares molestias deuocet. In English thus: Seeing Victor against the ordre taken of late in a holy Synode of priestes, hath made Geminus Faustinus the cheefe doe in the execution of his will and testament, let it be prouided that there be no oblation there with you for his reste, nor yet any prayers in his behalfe in the Church: that the decree of the priestes before sayde, maye be religiousely obserued and exe∣cuted by vs. That thereby all other our bretherne maye be∣ware by his example, howe they withdrawe suche as shoulde serue the authour, to entangle them selues with worldely af∣faires.
4 Now commeth a cumbersome case, that whereas he had affirmed before in the beginning of this capter, that there is no crime so greeuous that man may commit in the course of this life, but the Church vseth prayers accusto∣mably therefore, in which affirmation he includeth sinne against the holy Ghost also, nowe he findeth in Cyprian, a place, where prayers and sacrifice as he thinketh, were de∣nyed to him, which had committed but a small fault in it selfe, and such as Priestes doe now adayes commonly in∣curre, namely to be an executer of mens testamentes. But the matter seemeth to be farre otherwise then M. Allen doth take it. Cyprian in the 6. Epistle of his first booke, repor∣teth that there was a decree made in the assembly of the Church, before his tyme, that no brother departing out of this life, should name any of the clergy to be his executor, or ouerseer of his will. Ac si quis hoc fecisset non offerre∣tur pro eo, nec sacrificium pro dormitione eius celebraretur. Ne∣que enim ad altare Dei meretur nominari, in sacerdotum prece, qui ab altari sacerdotes & ministros suos Leuitas auocare volu∣it, & ideò, &c. And if any had done so, there should be no offering for him nor sacrifice for his falling a sleepe (so they called departing out of this life) should be celebrated. For he is not worthy to be named at the aultar of God in the prayer of the Priestes, which would call away his Priestes & ministers the Leuites from the aultar. And therefore seeing Victor, contrary to the forme giuen by the Priestes in coun∣cell was so bold to make Geminus Faustinus an elder his ex∣ecutor, there is no cause that oblation should be made a∣mong you for his falling a sleepe, or that any prayer in his name should be frequented in the Church, &c. By these wordes it appeareth first that Cyprian in these termes, sacri∣fice, Priest, aultar, alludeth to the sacrifices of thankesgiuing in the lawe, because he vseth also that name of Leuites by which he calleth Gods ministers. For as for the sacrifice propitiatory, was offered in the law, only by the high Priest once in the yeare. So that he meaneth no other oblation or sacrifice for the dead but the sacrifice of thankesgiuing, which was for their godly departure. And therefore he
calleth it not a sacrifice for their sinnes, but for their fal∣ling a sleepe. And by prayer he meaneth nor prayer for de∣liuery of the deade out of purgatory, but as Origen sayth for the faithfull liuing, to haue the like godly departure as he had that was fallen a sleepe. And therfore he sayth not, that such a one is not worthy to be praied for, but he is not worthy to be named in the prayer, which was made for them that remayned to ende their dayes happily, as such a one, or such a one whose names were recited in those me∣mories, had already fulfilled their course. For otherwise, what so euer M. Allen iangleth of the seueritie of the chur∣ches discipline, if they had thought the soules of the de∣parted to be in so great torments, and that prayer and sa∣crifices had bene such a necessary helpe for them, it had bene o much crueltie for one offence & that not so great, either to condemne a man to so horrible punishment, or to deny him vtterly all maner of helpe and comfort. The dis∣cipline of the Church when it is most seuere, is to bring to repentaunce them that are in life, not to rage against them that are deade which can not repent. Nor to reiect any man vtterly, but him that is certainly knowne to be vtterly forsaken of God. But this Geminius Victor of whom Cyprian thus writeth, was a good Christian, in somuch that Cyprian him selfe calleth him his brother. Geminius Victor frater no∣ster de saeculo excedens. Our brother Geminius Victor depar∣ting out of this world, &c. Wherfore if the punishment had extended to the torment of his soule, or the hinderance of reliefe vnto his soule being in tormentes, the Churche would not haue bene so rigorous against a faithful brother, for mayntenance of their owne decree, which was not ex∣presly forbidden by the word of God. Wherefore it may appeare that this punishment, was only a note of ignominy to Victor him selfe for his transgression at his departure, & especially an example for the rest of the brethren (as Cypri∣an sayth) that they cal not away the ministers of God from his seruice, to worldly affayres, lest they be likewise noted of infamy when they are deade. 5 And here nowe our aduersaries must be called vpon, and
asked howe they can away with this geare, whether this light of trueth be not ouer vehement for their bleared eyes?The here∣tikes called vpon to aunsvvere. owle light or moneshine I trow, or mirke midnight were more fit for their darke workes and doctrine, our waye is ouer much trodden for theeues. All this course of our cause, so agreeth with it selfe: so standeth with reason: so vpholden by scripture, so ordered in all pointes,The vvhole matter or∣dered to our handes. that Momus him selfe coulde practise no art, nor picke no qua∣relles here. For such we must praye: for those we must not praye: in this case the sacrifice of Gods Church relieueth the depar∣ted, in that case it is comfortable onely to the liuinge: some men neede helpe after their death, others helpe we neede, and not they ours: for open infidelles and heretikes prayers are not vsed, for all secret offendres, because their case is not knowen to the Church, of charity towardes her children, she openly prayeth: some she punisheth, some she pardoneth, for all she merueillous tenderly careth. This doctrine of trueth is purposely ordered by our elders, euery point is touched and tried to our handes. VVhat time of the day was it in Gods Church, saye trueth, and shame the deuill, when holy Cyprian wrote these thinges? when the Councell of Aphricke decreed these thinges? when Victor was punished by lacke of sacrifice and prayers at his departure? doeth your time of ignoraunce which you haue limited for your walke, reach vp so high in Gods house? but I will spare you to anone, your aunswere is not ready. 5 And here now our aduersary must occupy his goose quill, like the gooses trumpet to awake vs to aunswere him, as though we were a sleepe, or he so well appoynted to fight against vs, we must be asked howe we can away with this geare. Surely as the sunne is not obscured with the dust that a cocke casteth vp whē he scrapeth on the dung∣hill, no more is the sonne of righteousnes our onely ful re∣demption, or the light of his holy word darkned by all the myste of mennes deuises, which Allen or his complices can rayse out of the whole heape of superstition and errour, to deface the glory of his truth. The Lord is our light and salua∣tion, therefore we will not be a feard of purgatory. The word of the Lorde is a light vnto our steppes and a lanterne vnto our
feete, therefore we will not walke in the darkenes of mens traditions. Our workes and doctrine shall one daye be tryed before God, and therfore we make no accompt how we be iudged by mans daye, and lest of all by such a mans dome, as hath his tongue more ready to rayle and sclaun∣der, then his hearte instructed to discerne and iudge. your way is your owne way, and not the way of the Lorde, and because you take an other way vnto saluation, then the one∣ly right way Iesus Christ, therefore by his owne sentence, you are all theeues and murderers. But because you gather your forces together to shew the strength of your cause, I will also generally shew your feeblenesse, to the ouerthrow of your purpose. The course of your cause you say so a∣greeth with it selfe. What els? To proue that there is purga∣tory, you vrge the satisfying of Gods iustice so extremely, that beside the suffering of Christ and forgeuenes of sinnes, yet there must needes be a suffering of the party that offen∣ded. But when you will shew by what meanes this suffering maye be either mitigated or cleane taken away: you cleane take away the extremitie of Gods iustice which before you so earnestly maintained. O worthy agreemēt of your cause with it selfe. Beside the agreement with it selfe it so standeth with reason. Suerly howe reasonable so euer it seemeth to you, that the merites of men shoulde winne, that which the merites of Christ coulde not winne: that the suffering of men shoulde satisfie, for that which the suffering of Christ coulde not satisfie with the iustice of God, to them that haue there reason rightly reformed it seemeth altoge∣ther vnreasonable, (So vpholden with scripture.) Neuer once mentioned in scripture, and so confessed by Tertullian, one that leaned to some parte of your cause: (so he ordered in all pointes.) So patched together like a beggers cloke with so many peeses of so many colours, one patch out of Ter∣tullian, an other out of Augustine, an other out of Gregory, an other out of Damascene, many stolen out of the monkes cowle, and sayed to be geuen by Clemens, Athanasius, and such like, some rent awaye violently against the owners willes, as from Origen, Cyprian, the Councells of Vase, and
Carthage, and no small peeses out of drousy dreames, and mockadoe miracles, narrations, and relations &c. I pro∣mise you a goodly ordered cause. But of Cyprians time we must saye the trueth and shame the deuill, so we will and shame the Pope to, his eldest sonne. It was such time M. Allen, as Cyprian byshoppe of Carthage, thought him selfe equall with Cornelius and Stephanus byshoppes of Rome. 1. lib. epist. 1. cap. 4. de simplicitate praelatorum &c. It was such a time that Cyprian taught, that fayth onely doth profit to saluation, To. 2. ad Quirin. cap. 42. And that he beleeued not in God at all, which placeth not the trust of all his feli∣city in him onely. De duplici martyrio. Yea it was such time, that Cyprian woulde haue nothing doen in the celebration of the Lords Supper, and namly in ministring of the cuppe, but that Christ him selfe did. lib. 2. epist. 3. And yet it was such a time also, as Cyprian and all the byshoppes of Africa decreed in Councel, that those whcih were baptised by he∣retikes, should be baptised againe. And therefore it was no such time, but that he and all his fellowes though they held the foundation of Christ, yet might and did erre in some opinions, contrary to the trueth of Gods worde. And where you aske whether the time of ignoraunce, that we limitte for our walke, doth rech so high as Cyprian his time, I woulde you knewe we walke not in ignoraunce of any time, but in the knowen path of Gods word, which is higher then Cyprians or any mortall mans time. But the time of ignoraunce which is limited for your walke, that call ignoraunce the mother of deuotion, first is all beside the path of Gods worde, and then euen from the time that the misterie of iniquitie beganne to worke. 2. Thess. 2. Euen vntill the time that Antichrist was openly shewed in the full power of darkenesse, in all times when so euer, and where so euer was any peese of miste, or darke corner (though all the rest were light) there were the steppes of your walke. As euen in the Apostles time, when the su∣perstition of Angells beganne to be receiued, there was one steppe of your waye, which you holde euen to this daye Colos. 2. And from that time the deuill neuer lefte to
set in his foote, for his sonne Antichristes dominion, vntill he had placed him in the temple of God, and prepared the wyde world for his walke. VVhat that holy sacrifice is, vvhich vvas euer counted so be∣neficiall to the liue and dead. The punishement of our sinnes by the heuy losse thereof. The great hatered vvhich the de∣uill and all his side, hath euer borne tovvardes Christes eter∣nall priesthoode, and the sacrifice of the Church. And that by the saide sacrifice of the Masse, the soules departed are especially relieued. CAP. VIII. 1 ANd nowe we must fall in hande with the good Christian Catholike, for the search of this so often named sacrifice, so comforta∣ble to the liue, so profitable to the deade: and what that oblation is, which the holy Catholike & Apostolike Church hath euer vsed through out the worlde for the sinnes of the departed, in place of the offeringes of the law, and that sacrifice which Iudas Machabeus made and procured at Hierusalem, for the offensies of his people that perished in battle. Surely it is no other but the sacrifice of our Mediatour, as S. Augustine termeth it, and the offering, vpon the altar. It is no other then that oblation which so fully and liuely expresseth the death and passion of Christ Iesus: VVho being once offered by the sheeding of his blessed bloud for the redemption of man kinde, hath wrought such a vertuous ef∣fect, not onely in the holy sacraments for the giuing of grace and remission of sinnes, but also hath lefte in a merueillous mistery his owne holy and blessed body and bloude, as well to feede vpon for the especial strength and comforth of our soules, as to offer vp the same for the remembraunce of his death, and cleansing of ou sinnes. Not in that wise as it was done vppon the Crosse by the painefull sheeding of his bloude, but as it was instituted first in the last Supper: VVhere Christ our God and Redeemer according to the order of Melchisedech, gaue to his Apostles, and offered to God the father that body which afterward was betrayed, and the same bloude which was shedde after also for the remission of
sinne, being with all tearmed by him, the bloude of the new and eternall testament: as that which in the newe lawe shoulde suc∣ceade the bloudy offeringes of the olde testament. VVherof, God almighty being (as a man woulde say) lothesome or full, hath instituted this by his onely Sonne, as a most pure and precious ob∣lation and sacrifice, to be continued in the Church through out the costes and corners of the rounde worlde: VVhich being cele∣brated in the blessed memory of his Sonnes passion, and hauing no other hoste nor oblation then that which then was offered, can be no other sacrifice then that which there was made for the for∣giuenesse of sinne, and redemption of the worlde. The which wor∣thy action of Christes Church, so fructefully applieth vnto vs the benefite of our maisters death, that thereby we may haue comfor∣table hope of remission of all such misdeedes, as most iustly deser∣ued Gods wrath, and terrible indignation against vs. CAP. VIII. 1 NOwe the good catholike shall haue holsome doctrine taught him, concerning the sacrifice of the masse, which first commeth in place of the sacrifices of the lawe, and that sacrifice which Iudas Machabaeus procured to be made at Ierusa∣lem. Well sayd M. Allen, shall the sacrifice of the masse shoulder out the sacrifice of Christ his death. The Apostle to the Hebrewes teacheth vs an other lesson. cap. 10. that Christ offering but one sacrifice for our sinnes, and that but once. cap. 9. hath made perfect for euer those that are sanctified: that our sinnes are taken away by that sa∣crice, and therefore there is no more sacrifice for sinnes left. Wherefore it excuseth not, but increaseth your bla∣sphemy, that you say the sacrifice of the masse is all one with the sacrifice of Christ his passion, which was but one sacrifice, and the same but once offered, and by that one oblation hath made perfect all them that receiue any be∣nefite by it. But Christ (you say) hath instituted this sacri∣fice to be offered vp for the remembraunce of his death, & the clensing of our sinnes. Shew one word M. Allen out of
the Scripture of any sacrifice instituted by Christ at his last supper, or else you are a most horrible and blasphemous ly∣er. The holy Ghost sayth we are sanctified by his will, tho∣rough the offering of the body of Christ once made for al, and where remission of sinnes is, there is left no sacrifice for sinne. Heb. 10. But you are not content to ioyne your sacri∣fice of the masse, as an appendix vnto the onely once offe∣red and no more offerable sacrifice of Christ his death, ex∣cept you proceede and vtterly deny all the force and bene∣fite of the oblation of his bitter passion. For you say, that Christ in his last supper, not onely gaue to his Apostles, but also offered to God his father that body which was after betrayed, and that blood which was shed after also for re∣mission of sinnes, being that sacrifice which should succede the bloody offerings of the olde testament. what place haue you here left for the passion of Christ? O intolera∣ble blasphemy. Christ offered vp but one sacrifice, and that you affirme to be before his death: Christ offered but once and that you affirme to be at his supper. By that one sacri∣fice which Christ did once offer, he redemed vs from all our sinnes, and that you affirme to haue bene offered in the sa∣crament. Doe you not now plainly exclude the death and passion of Christ and all the merites thereof? who can a∣bide to heare you afterward, when you say that the sacrifice of the masse, is an application of the benefits of Christ his death vnto vs, when now you affirme that it is the conti∣nuance of that sacrifice which Christ offered and instituted before his death, who neuer offered but one sacrifice and that but once. O Lord these blasphemers are more worthy to be beaten downe with thunderbolts, then their blasphe∣mies so directly contrary to the holy Scriptures haue neede to be confuted with wordes. 2 Now this is that blessed sacrifice, which S. Augustine with feare and reuerence termeth in a thousand places of his workes, the sacrifice of the Altar, the sacrifice of our Media∣tour, the sacrifice of our price, the sacrifice of the body and bloud of Christ, the holsome and profitable sacrifice, the sacrifice of
Melchisedech, the new sacrifice. S. Chrysostom the reuerent sacrifice, the honorable Mysteries, the Fearefull sacrifice,The com∣mon names of honour geuē to the holy Masse in old time. Atha∣nasius the propitiatory sacrifice, the vnbloody Host. S. Cyprian the sacrifice of the Church, the perpetuall sacrifice, the meate of∣fering, the medecine for our infirmities. Irenaeus the pure sa∣crifice, the new sacrifice of the new testament. Clement againe, the vnbloudy sacrifice, the rationable sacrifice: and so doth the holy Counsell of Ephesus call it. Dionysius the sacrifice most excellent of all sacrificies, and the hoste of hostes. The Latines al∣together afterward named it the holy Masse,S. lib. epist. 33. epist. & praecat. pri∣ma praepa∣rante ad Missam. so did S. Augustine call it, super vn∣dec prouer. Ambrose: Histor. tri∣partit. 24. Hierome, cap. li. 10. d Epiph. scholastic, with all the posteritie both in Latin, and other barbarous languagies. Besides many other excellent high and peculiar callinges, which can agree to no other common worship of God internall nor external, but onely to this most worthy and honorable sacrifice: which by the vertue that it hath receiued by the first examplar therof, and by the might and mercy of the Lambe of God, which vnder the couer of breade and wine is there the appointed hoste and obla∣tion, is profitable both to the quicke and the deade. And there∣fore is & hath ben vsed euer sith the Apostles age, & by Christes owne prescription and theirs,The force and institu∣tion of the holy Masse. commaunded to be religiously ob∣serued, and of all faythfull people honoured as the principall pro∣testation of our religion, as the grounde of all true worship, as the badge of Christian peace, as the bonde of holy society betwixt the heade and the membres, as the loue knot betwixt Christ and his spouse, as the vniting of the liue with the dead, the holy sainctes with vs poore sinners, Angells with men, heuenly thinges with earthly, and the Creator of all with his owne creatures beneth, as the plentifull condeth to deriue the grace of Christes death and merites of his passiō, to the continuall conforth of our soules, as the onely practise of his eternall priesthood according to the ordre of Melchisedech, & as the only effectuall memoriall and comfortable memory, of the sheeding of his blessed bloude, and sufferance of so deare and painefull death for our redemption. VVhat altar so euer be erected against this altar, it is nothing els but a waste of Gods worship, a canker of religion,The nevve communi∣on is here described. a token of dissension, a separation of the holy society of the Christian com∣munion, a larome towardes schisme, a departure from Christ, an
open badge of heresy, a saulsy shouldering with Christes Church and ordinaunce, an open robbry of his honour and priesthood, a plaine stoppe of the passage of his giftes and grace in his louing house, the onely waye to paganisme and eternall obliuion of his death and passion. 2 Now we shall heare how many of the olde writers call it a sacrifice, but he neede not take all that paynes, for we confesse, that the celebration of the Lordes supper, is commonly, but vnproperly called of them a sacrifice: How∣beit they ment nothing lesse, then to set vp a blasphemous aultar, and new sacrifice, and priesthoode against our Saui∣our Christ the onely priest, aultar, and sacrifice of our re∣demption, as Augustine calleth him, but onely there mea∣ning was, that it was a remembraunce and memoriall of that onely sacrifice with thankes giuing for the same. Au∣gustine de fide ad Petrum Diaconum cap. 19. shewing the dif∣ference of the sacrifices of the olde lawe, the onely sacri∣fice of Christ, and the sacrifice of breade and wine, which the Church offered sayth. In illis enim carnalibus victimis figuratio fuit carnis Christi, quā pro peccatis nostris ipse sine pec∣cato fuerat oblaturus, & sanguinis quē erat effusurus in remis∣sionem peccatorum. In isto autem sacrificio gratiarum actio, atque commemoratio est carnis Christi, quam pro nobis obtulit, & san∣guinis quem pro nobis idem Deus effudit. For in these carnall sacrifices, there was a figuring of the flesh of Christ, which he being with out sinne, shoulde offer for our sinnes, and of his bloude, which he shoulde shedde for remission of our sinnes. But in this sacrifice, there is thankes geuing and commemoration of the flesh of Christ, which he offered, for vs, and his bloude which the same God shedde for vs. In his 23. epistle to Bonifacius, he sheweth, that sacraments, take the names of those thinges whereof they are sacra∣ments, by a certeine similitude and liknesse that they haue vnto the thinges, them selues whereof they are sacraments. And so the sacrament of Christes sacrifice is called a sacri∣fice as after a certeine manner the sacrament of Christes body is the body of Christ, and the sacrament of Christes
bloude is the bloude of Christ, euen as the sacrament of faith is faith &c. Chrysostome vpon the Epistle to the He∣brues in cap. 10. Hom. 17. after he hath shewed at large, the force of the only sacrifice of Christ once offered for all vp∣pon the Crosse, declareth plainely how the sacrament of Christes death in that time was called a sacrifice, which one testimony is sufficient to declare what all the fathers ment by abusing the name of sacrifice for the celebration of the Lordes Supper. Hoc autem quod nunc facimus in commemora∣tionem quidem fit eius quod factum est. Hoc enim facite inquit, in meam commemorationem. Non aliud sacrificium, sicut ponti∣fex, sed id ipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem sa∣crificij operamur. This that we doe, we doe it in remem∣braunce of that which was done. For doe this (sayth he) in remembraunce of me. We doe not make an other sacri∣fice, as the high priest, but the selfe same alwayes, yea ra∣ther we worke the remembraunce of a sacrifice. The same thing in effect declareth Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. Et quia passionis eius mentionem in sacrificijs omnibus facimus (passio est enim domini sacrificium quod offerimus) nihil aliud quam quod ipse fecit facere debemus. And because in all sacrifices we make mention of his passion (for the sacrifice which we offer is the passion of our Lorde) we ought to doe nothing but that which he did. Here it is manifest that Cyprian calleth the sacrament a sacrifice, as he calleth it the passion of Christ, and the remembraunce of his passion. Irenaeus also sheweth that by the name of the sacrifice of the Church, he meaneth not the sacrifice of the Masse, which they call propitiatory for the sinnes of the quicke and the deade but the sacrifice of thankes geuing and prayers who writeth these wordes. lib. 4. cap. 34. Igitur non sacrificia sanctificant hominem, non enim indiget sacrificio deus sed conscientia eius, quae offert sanctificat sacrificium, pura existens & praestat acce∣ptare deum quasi ab amico. Therefore these sacrifices doe not sanctifie a man, for God needeth no sacrifices, but the conscience of him that doeth offer being puer, doth san∣ctifie the sacrifice, and causeth God to accept it as of a freinde. Iustinus martyr also Dial. Cum Tryphone aduersus
Iudaeos in plaine wordes affirmeth, that the sacrifice of breade and wine which the Church offereth, is the sacri∣fice of thankes geuing in remembraunce of the passion of Christ. The like places might be brought out almost of all the olde writers, but for tediousnesse, and yet to shew how vnproperly some of them vsed the name of sacrifice, I will cite one place out of Ambrose, Ad virginem lapsam. Si fuis∣ses communi sorte defuncta flessent te modicum propter deside∣rium parentes, sed exultassent granditer quia immaculatam prae∣miserūt virginem hostiam viuam, domino, propitiatricem suorum videlicet delictorū. If thou hadst dyed by the commō lotte, thy parents would haue lamented a litle for desire of thee, but they woulde haue greatly reioysed, bycause they had sent before them an immaculate virgine, a liuing sacrifice, propitiatory to the Lord for their sinnes. Here is the death of a virgine called a sacrifice propitiatory for sinnes, but very vnproperly. Therefore if the fathers haue spoken any thing vnproperly of the celebration of the Lordes Supper in calling it a sacrifice or by any like terme, which haue in other places expounded their meaning, to be onely a re∣membraunce, a commemoration, a thankes geuing for the onely true sacrifice of Christes death which is the propi∣tiation for our sinnes, we must not contrary to their mea∣ning vppon couller of their wordes set vp a newe and bla∣sphemous sacrifice to deface the onely sacrifice of Christ, much lesse breake out into such open blasphemies, as this Allen doth, that affirmeth this sacrifice of the Masse, to be the onely practice of Christes eternall priesthoode, accor∣ding to the order of Melchizedech which the Apostle com∣paring Melchizedech with Christ in all thinges in which he was comparable, neuer teacheth as any parte of his priest∣hoode Heb. 7. For that which they builde vppon, which make any resemblance of Melchizedechs offering of breade and wine, with Christes institution, is a false grounde, for Melchizedech did not offer but bring forth, not to God, but to Abraham and his company, not a sacrifice, but a refectiō of breade and wine: Hieronym confesseth that Melchi∣zedech protulit panem & vinum ad Euaginum. & in Quaest.
super Genesim. so doth Ambrose de misterijs initiandis ca. 8. so doth Augustine super titulū Psal. 33. Melchizedech brought forth breade and wine, yea the very vulgare translation hath proferens bringing forth. And that he brought it not forth to sacrifice, but to refresh the souldeirs of Abra∣ham: Beside that it is plaine by the texte that Melchizedech being both a king and a priest, as a king liberally entertai∣ned Abraham and his armie, and as a priest blessed him: we reade also in scholastica historia. cap. 46. At vero Melchi∣zedech rex Salem, obtulit ei panem & vinum quod quasi expo∣nens Iosephus ait: Ministrauit exercitui xemia, & multam a∣bundātiam rerum opportunarum simul exhibuit, & super epulat benedixit deum qui Abrahae subdiderat inimicos. But Melchi∣zedech king of Salem offered vnto him breade and wine which Iosephus expounding, sayth, he ministred vnto his army giftes of enterteinment and gaue them also aboun∣dance of thinges necessary, and beside that feaste he blessed God which had subdued vnto Abraham his ene∣mies. And out of doubt if the bringing forth of breade and wine had bene any thinge perteining to the priest∣hoode of Melchizedech, the Apostle to the Heb. 7. woulde not haue omitted to haue compared it with Christ. But of all others folies this is the greatest, that when the Papistes haue prated neuer so longe of the sacrifice of breade and wine, at the laste, they will haue no breade nor wine at all in their sacrifice: wherein they are not onely contrary to those of the olde writers which compare the celebration of the Lordes Supper, which sometime they call the sacri∣fice of breade and wine (and yet but a sacrifice of thankes∣giuing) with Melchizedechs breade and wine: but also they are contrary to them selues. As for the rest of that rayling, which he calleth a descri∣ption of the new communion, might aptly and truely be verified of the newe sacrifice of the masse. And that I may aunswere wordes with matter, I will vrge the Papistes to tell me, what we say or doe in the celebration of the holy communion, which Christ commaunded vs not to say and doe, or what Christ did or commaunded vs to doe, which
we doe not therein? If all the dogged Papists in the world, be not able to shew our default herein, as we haue shewed their infinite abuses and blasphemies, of their masse, then is our celebration the very true communion of the body and blood of Christ, and theirs a very wast of Gods worshippe, a canker of religion, &c. and a very blasphemy of all bla∣sphemies, that euer were vttered sith the beginning of the world, whereby euery scalde hedge priest, is made not only equall, but also superior to Christ him selfe, whom he pre∣sumeth to offer, who could not be offered by any, but by him selfe. 3 The deuill which is the olde serpent, knowing by longe experience and often proofe, that the holy Masse is the chiefe bane of sinne and his wicked kingdome, hath euer from the be∣ginning shot at this marke by all the cursed indeuours of wic∣ked heretikes, to roote out that stronge garde of vertue, and pil∣lour of deuotion & religion. How so euer they dissemble at their first interaunce, the deuill hath that fetch in his false heade in all times of such toyle and perturbation of religion. To which horrible indeuour though he hath for our sinnes and deseruing put greater force, and wroght with more aduantage then euer be∣fore, yet till the latter daye and onne of perditions appearing, which is vnknowne to him, he shall not bring it to passe. The law, the sacrifice, the priesthoode, the altar of the newe and eternall testament prefigured by Melchizedech, & perfected by Christ, shall stand with and in the holy Church, till the worldes ende. It is not your bare breade and borde,Heresie vvith her disordered ministers, shal not out face Gods, church and Christes e∣ternall priesthood. not your Ministers, nor your Seniours, nor Elders, nor your Nuper intendents, nor what so euer you lift be called, that shall out face Gods Church. She hath by the spirite of God beaten downe your proudders, the Arrians: the Macedonians: the Anabaptistes, and all your predecessours. And now I tell you, and be bolde of it, as old as our mother wax∣eth, as contemptible as you make her, so litle as you regarde her, she will once yet in her olde dayes gyue the Zwinglians, the Lu∣therans, or of what other straunge souldier so euer your campe standeth, an open ouerthrowe. For if Hell were broken loose, and the gates open,Psal. 100. Mat. 16. it coulde not preuaile. VVe haue our Priesthood
confirmed by a faire othe, we haue our mothers righ by an open promesse established. 3 This part of the chapter, conteyneth nothing but blasphemous boasting and more then ruffianlike rayling. First that the deuill which loueth the masse better then he doth holy water, shall not abolish it vntill the last day and sonne of perditions appearing. I doubt not but the deuill will doe all that he can to vpholde it, to the ende of the world, and whether he shall preuayle or no I will not di∣spute, but this I will boldely affirme, because I haue good warrant, that the sonne of perdition, who long agoe appea∣red and is now already greatly wasted and consumed with the breath of Christes mouth, which is his holy word, shall togither with the masse, and al them that obstinatly defend it, be vtterly abolished at the glorious appearing of our Sauiour Christ in the ende of the world, and from thence forth with him be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, there to be burned with the deuill and his angells world without end. 2. The. 2. Apoc. 19. & 20. Secondly he sayth that our bare breade bord ministers, &c: shall not out face their Synagoge of Satan, which he calleth the Church of God. But the Lordes table with the breade and wine which we minister in remembraunce of Christes death, and bloode shedding, which our ministers, Seniours or elders, and By∣shops or superintendents, when they shall be all approued by the word of God, shall be able to abyde the iudgement of God and be allowed for disposers of his mysteries and ministers of Christ: when your aultar, transubstantiation, renting of the Sacrament in peeces, robbing the people of the blood of Christ, worshipping of creatures, &c: with your Pope, Cardinalls, Priestes, Monkes, Friers, Chanons, Nunnes and all the rest of that romish rable, hauing no te∣stimony out of the word of God, either of their names, or of the signification of their names, shall be condemned of heresie, hypocrisie, Idolatry, and blasphemy, and haue the rewarde that to such horrible profaners of Gods holy or∣dinance, apperteyneth. Thirdly you boast that your church
hath beaten downe our prowders the Arians, Macedoni∣ans, Anabaptistes. It was the Church of Christ, that ouer∣threw those heretikes, & not your Antichristian assembly of heretikes. And therefore I tel you and be bold of it, that olde rotten whore of Babylon your mother, in whose name you threaten vs, as one priuy of her mischieuous and mali∣tious deuises, shall neuer bring to passe that pestilent plat forme which was concluded against vs in the conspiracy of Trent. The Lord shall mainteyne his Church, as he hath done hitherto, in spite of the deuill and the Pope for all their cruelty, treason, periury, truce breaking, and most vn∣naturall murdering. But of all other blasphemies who can abide this? that your priesthoode in the deuills name, is confirmed by a fayre othe, Psal. 110. O Lord who would e∣uer haue thought that any which professed the name of Christ, would euer haue challenged vnto them selues a∣gainst Christ that which neuer any Turke or Iewe durst presume to boast of. What will you leaue to Christ O you hell houndes? when you take from him both his kingdom and his priesthood, yea his eternall diuinitie, and euerla∣sting natiuitie. For vnto whom so euer the priesthood is confirmed by othe, of him that sayd, Thou art a Priest for e∣uer according to the order of Melchizedech, to him is confir∣med an euerlasting kingdome and an euerlasting priest∣hood: of the same it is sayed: The Lorde sayed vnto my Lorde sitte thou on my right hande vntill I make thy enemies thy foote stoole: to the same it is sayed that The scepter of thy power: The Lorde shall sende out of Syon rule thou in the mid∣dest of thine enemies: finally take the priesthood confirmed with an othe and take the whole Psalme vnto you. O Luci∣fer whether wilt thou clime? wilt thou not be content with the olde Lucifer to be like vnto the most highest, but wilt thou thrust downe the most highest him selfe euen the son of God from the right hande of his father, and sit at the right hande of God thy selfe? O ye that woulde see how Antichrist sitteth in the temple of God boasting him self to be God, and exalted aboue all that is called God or wor∣shipped as God, drawe nere and harken what he saith of
him selfe, by one of his blasphemous mouthes. Our priest∣hood is confirmed vnto vs by a fayer othe, Psal. 110. For seeing he alleageth the Psal. 110. to confirme his saying, he can not excuse or qualifie the matter by that generall royall priesthoode which all the children of God haue through Christ their heade, to offer vp spiritual sacrifices vnto God. 1. Pet. 2. Apo. 2. For that priesthoode which he challengeth by othe, is to offer a sacrifice propitiatory, which he affir∣meth the Popish priests to doe in their Masse. But lest I might seeme to doe them wronge in denying vnto them that priesthoode, which is confirmed by othe Psal. 110. Let vs here what the holy Ghost sayeth thereof Hebr. 7. And in as much as Christ was not made priest with out the othe (where as they meaning the sonnes of Aaron were made priest with out an othe, but he with the othe by him that sayed vnto him, the Lord hath sworne & will not repēt thou art a priest for euer after the order of Melchizedech) by so much is Iesus made suertie of a better testament. And among them many were made priestes because they were not suffered to endure by reason of death, but he because he abideth for euer, had such a priest∣hoode as passeth not by succession. VVherefore he is able perfect∣ly to saue those that come vnto God by him seeing he liueth for euer, to make intercession for them. For such an high priest it became vs to haue, which is holy harmlesse, and vndefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher then the heauens which needed not daily as those high priest, to offer vp sacri∣fice, first for his owne sinnes, then for the peoples: for that did he once for all when he offered vp him selfe. For the lawe maketh men high priestes which haue infirmitie: but the worde of the othe that was since the law, maketh the sonne who is consecrated for euer more. Marke well the plaine wordes of this testi∣monie, and iudge indifferently, whether I charge them with greater blasphemy, then ensueth this there assertion, That there priesthoode is confirmed by othe Psal. 110. 4 And yet neuerthelesse, good Catholike Christian,The holy Masse taken avvaye for our sinnes. let vs thus perswade our selues, that we haue so longe lost the vnesti∣mable treasure of this holy sacrifice, for our greuous sinnes: it is
our sinnes I say (woe is vs therefore) which haue deserued this plage, which haue set vs at variaunce with God and our mercy∣full redemer, which haue taken from vs, as vnworthy of so great a treasure, the daily sacrifice, the helpe of those which are a liue, the comforte of those which are departed, the onely grounde of all religion and acceptable worship of God. And our misery is the greater because fewe feele the sore. The lacke of this sacrifice for the departed onely with the godly prayers therin,Men that vvere gre∣uous offen∣ders in olde time puni∣shed by lacke of the sacrifice. was counted when Gods trueth and Church flourished, the greatest and extremest punishment that coulde be deuised, and euer enioyned for some notable crime to the terrour of other, as for horrible desperation, for willfull heresie, for con∣tempte of the decrees of Gods holy ministers, as by the late allea∣ged place out of S. Cyprian may be very profitably noted. Allasse we haue nowe in a manner lost that wholy, which then was denied onely to such for their greuous punishments, as were heynous of∣fenders. Otherwise in earnest consideration of our case can not I thinke, but that this blessed iuell is now denied vs of almighty God generally for our greuous offensies, which then was denied by his ministers to some one offender, for the due punishment of sinne and wickednesse. O good reader what would that holy mar∣tyr haue saide if he had liued in our dayes, when to haue that oblation either for the quicke or deade, which once was esteemed so necessary that no Christian man neither coulde in his life nor after his death lacke it, is nowe if it selfe odious to most men, and (which abhorreth me to speake) punishable by the lawes of the spiritualty, and condemned well neere of all men? what weene you this blessed bishoppe woulde haue saide, if he had seene the holy hoste and offeringe to haue bene taken awaye,De Coena domini. which he once affirmed to be so necessary, that if it were taken awaye or wasted, there were no religion nor worship of God at all? woulde not he thinke you, with feruent zele of Gods house haue cried out vpon the sinnes of the people, the blindnesse of the preachers and pa∣stours, the vnworthinesse of these our dolefull dayes? and bewai∣led his owne misery as we shoulde doe ours, crying out with an olde blessed father?Ita Poli∣carp. ex Iren. O Deus bone in quae me seruasti tem∣pora, vt ista blasphemia sustineam, O Lorde that I should be reserued for these times, to abide such blaspemie. Victor repor∣teth
in his history of the persecution of the Vandalles that were Arians,Victor de persecut. Vandal. that the Gouernour of that cursed company of cruell he∣retikes, would not suffer the Christian men whome he had slaine, to be brought home with seruice, and sacrifice: but then the good people wounderfully bewailed their case, seeing them practise cruelty vpon their soules also: in that they would not suffer them to enioyne at their departure and buriall, the rites of Gods Church. Thus saith that Author. Quis vero sustineat atque possit sine lachrymis recordari, dum praeciperet nostrorum corpora defunctorum, sine solemnitate hymnorum cum silentio ad sepulchra perduci? O Lord who coulde haue founde in his heart to beholde then, or coulde yet once thinke of it with out teares, how he gaue in charge, that the bodies of our brethern departed, should be brought to the graue and buried with out all solemnity of hymnes in silence and sorowe? It was euer giuen to wicked harde harted heretikes, to prohibere gratiam mor∣tuis: to be vnmercyfull,Eccles. ca. 7. and to staie the fauour of good men from the departed. Nouatus as S. Cypriā chargeth him,Epist. 8. li. 2. noluit patrem fame defunctum sepelire: woulde not bury his owne father deade of honger bane. 4 This collorable and hypocriticall complaint contai∣neth nothing for vs needefull for to aunswere, for the place of Cyprian, is aunswered already. But this maye be demaun∣ded of him, seeing he calleth the sacrifice of the Masse the onely grounde of all religion and acceptable worshippe of God, what religion or worshippe God had before the Masse came into the worlde? But this is the howling of the merchantes for the decaye of Babylon, because no man byeth their ware any more: what so euer they pretend this is the cause of their mourning, and this lamentation shalbe continued euen vnto hell fire, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth for euer. 5 But to let such men passe with the present bewayling of our vnhappy dayes, let vs with more comfort beholde the steppes of good men past: how kindely and brother like they haue prin∣cipally procured the holy sacrifice for their freindes and fellowes
gone before. For seeing the onely prayers of good men haue bene proued so profitable, and the representation of some holy workes of almes, hath often moued God to pity (as we haue proued) to∣wardes the release of the departed his paine, what maye we not hope to obteine for our brethern deceased, when we shall ioyne in prayers with the holy Angells, with the blessed sainctes, with Gods holy ministers in the representation of Christes most bles∣sed body and bloude before the face of his father? when the whole Church of God in that honorable action prayeth, and Christ him selfe is both the sacrifice and the priest, both the asker and the geuer of pardon, when the maiesty of God the blessed trinitie, is passingly pleaced by the merites of Christes death so liuely set out in these honorable, but vnspeakable misteries, what maye we not here procure for the soule of the Churchies childe? what shall be denied to so humble askers in the presence of Gods owne sonne and begging mercy for his deathes sake? And so doth S. Chrysostome assure the faithfull,Homil. 3. in Epistolā ad Philipp. in these golden wordes: Non frustra ab apostolis sancitum est, vt in celebratione ve∣nerandorum mysteriorum, memoria fiat eorum, qui hinc discesserunt: nouerunt quippe illis multum hinc emolumēti fieri, multum vtilitatis. stante siquidem vniuerso populo, manus in coelos extendente coetu item sacerdotali, veren∣doque proposito sacrificio, quomodo deum non placare∣mus pro istis orantes? It was not for nought that the Apostles decreed and ordeined, that in the celebration of the honorable mysteries there shoulde be an especiall memoriall of the depar∣ted: for they right wll knewe greate commodity and benefite to arise there vpon. For the whole multitude holding vp their handes towardes heauen, together with the company and quiere of priests, and the dreadfull sacrifice set forth before all men, how is it possible but we shoulde appeace Gods wrath praying for them? looke ye what this mans iudgement was, and see from whense he had it, euen of the holy Apostles▪ I warraunt you, and no worse nor later founders. But of that pointe, for the full deri∣uing of our Christian vsage from the first fathers of our faith, more conuenient place shall be geuen herafter, Nowe I will serue the cause and the readers desire, first with certaine peculiar ex∣amples of most learned and godly fathers worthy of all credit, in
the godly prouision for certeine of their dearest friendes by sacri∣fice and prayer, both made by them selues & procured by others. That we may haue here not onely whome to beleeue teaching the trueth, but whome to followe practising the same with deuotion, which they preached with constancie before. 5 Not altogether out of hope yet, to find some foolish merchantes that will paye dearly for vnprofitable wares, you comforte your selfe after your complainte, exhorting men to procure the holy sacrifice for their freindes and fellowes. why M. Allen if there be either such necessity or such profit of that sacrifice, wherefore doe not your priests with out procurement offer it vp to the vttermost aduaun∣tage that maye be had by it? But you must haue procurers, yea you must haue good paye maisters, or els the olde pro∣uerbe must be true: No peny no pater noster. As touching the place of Chrysostome I haue shewed already by his owne interpretation, that although he allow prayers for the dead vsed in time of the celebration which he calleth sacrifice: yet he alloweth no sacrifice in deede, but onely a thankes geuing in remembraunce of the sacrifice of Christ. But where he sayeth it was decreed by the Apostles that in the celebration of the holy misteries, a remembraunce should be made of them that are departed, he must pardon vs of crediting, because he can not shewe it out of the actes and writinges of the Apostles. And we will be bolde to charge him with his owne saying Hom. De Adam & Heua. Satis suffi∣cere credimus quicquid secundum predictas regulas Apostolica scripta nos docuerunt, vt prorsus non opinemur Catholicum quod apparuerit prefixis sententijs contrarium: we thinke it sufficeth enough, what so euer the writinges of the Apostles haue taught vs, according to the fore sayed rules, in so much that we compt it not at all Catholike, what so euer shall ap∣peare contrary to the rules appointed. And againe In Ge∣nes. Hom. 58. Vides in quantam absurditatem incidunt qui diui∣nae scripturae canonem sequi nolunt, sed suis cogitationibus per∣mittunt omnia. Thou seest into how greate absurdity they fall, which will not follow the canon of holy Scripture, but
permitt all thinges to their owne cogitations, but if we be further vrged we will alledge that which he sayth, In Euan. Ioan. Hom. 58. Qui sacra non vtitur Scriptura, sed ascendit ali∣unde: id est, non concessa via, fur est. He that vseth not the ho∣ly Scripture but clymeth an other way, that is by a way not allowed, is a theefe. We may be as bold with Chrysostome, as he sayd he would be with Paule him selfe, in 2. ad Tim. ho. 2. Plus aliquid dica, ne Paulo quidem obedire oportet, si quid dixerit proprium, si quid humanum, sed Apostolo, Christum in se loquentem circumferenti. I will say somewhat more, we must not be ruled by Paule him selfe, if he speake any thing that is his owne, and any thing that is humane, but we must obey the Apostle whē he carieth Christ speaking in him. Wher∣fore seeing it is certayne by testimony of Iustinus Martyr, that there was no mention of the deade in the celebration of the Lords supper, for more then an hundreth yeares af∣ter Christ, we must not beleue Chrysostome without Scrip∣ture, affirming that it was ordeyned so by the Apostles. That the practise of any pointe in religion maketh the most o∣pen shevve of the fathers faith. And that all holy men haue in plaine vvordes and most godly prayers vttered their be∣liefe in our matter. CAP. IX. 1 ANd I take the open practise of any point, to be a more pithy protestation of a mans faith, then by wordes can be made. There∣fore if a man were doubtfull either of the trueth of any article, or of the meaning of some doctors wordes, looke the same mans practise, and it shall put him out of doubt thereof straight wayes. as for an example: seeme some wordes of S. Augustine to make for the sacramentaries heresie, that Christ is in the honorable sa∣crament but by figure? or Theodoretus, or any other auncient fathers declaration? are their wordes doubtfull to the reader? leaue the wordes then, if thou sincerely seeke for trueth with out contention, & seeke out if thou can, some practise of those same
men, and that Church where they liued, for the same point. But what waye of worke in this matter consisting in doctrine, may as∣sure vs of their belefe, of whose wordes we doubted before? Mary sir this:Theodor▪ dial. 2. Aug. super psal. 98. Dionis. ec∣clesiast. hie∣rarch. cap. 3. Basil. de spi∣ritu Sanct. cap. 17. looke how they behaued them selues in the receiuing of it, in the ministering of it, in the carefull keping of it, whether they did adore it with godly honour, whether they solemnely shewed it to the people to be worshipped, whether they praide by solemne and formall wordes vnto it, whether they taught their children to call it God and Christ: yea so farre that Augustine affirmeth that the children in his dayes till they were after in∣structed, thought that God appeared in the shape of breade: as all these yongers, seeing the honour & reuerence of their elders,Lib. 3. de Trin. c. 10. and them selues nurtered to holde vp their handes and knocke their breastes, must yet needes meruail how these outward formes came to so holy an vse. further whether the Christian people were not sclaundered for worshipping and doing sacrifice to Ceres and Bacchus,Lib. 20. con¦tra Faustum cap. 13. when the wicked infidells sawe their behauiour towardes the holy Hoste: whether it was not vsed in working of miracles, in driuing away deuills, in daungerous times of tem∣pests, of trauelling, of sickenesse, and in other necessities. VVell these be plaine practises, no heretike can denie but they haue bene so vsed of the whole Church of God, with many such other like in that holy action: which can not in any case stande with bare breade, or any other way of presence, but onely the proper, true, and bodily presence of Christes owne person. A doctors wordes may be misconstrued, may be picked out of place: may be writhen and wastred by false teachers, but a mans example can not lightly be misconstrued. And therefore heretikes, whose pur∣pose is alwayes by sutteltie to deceiue the simple, will neuer make discours by the practise of the Church, or exercise and example of the auncient learned men through out the Church of Christ: hauing enough for their meaning, to racke a place or two out of the fathers whole workes, that may seeme to the ignoraunt to set forth their errour. So if thou woulde knowe whether that place that our aduersaries impudently doe alleage out of Gregory the great, against the soueraignty of the see of Rome, was in deede written for their seditious purpose, beholde the practise of the same father, and thou shals finde him selfe exercise iurisdi∣ction,
at the very same time when he wrote it, in all prouincies Christianed through out the worlde: both by excommunication of byshoppes that gouerned not well, by often citation of persons in extreme prouincies, by many appeales made vnto him, by con∣tinuall legacies to other nations, sent either to conuert them to the faith, or to gouerne in their doubtfull affaires, and by all other exercise of spirituall iurisdiction. Is it not now a very false suggestion to the poore people, that this blessed man in so plaine vtteraunce of his meaning by workes and not by wordes, shoulde yet be brought as a witnesse to condemne him selfe? though the wordes being well vnderstande make for no suche meaning in deede, as by others it hath bene sufficiently declared. The like impudencie it is, to alleage S. Bernarde against the Masse or the presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament. Good man I dare say for him, he sayde Masse euery daye, if he were well at ease: For other busines, did not commonly let them in those dayes, from that worke of all other most necessarie. So the reci∣ting out of S. Ambrose for the improuing of inuocation of holy Sainctes, is no more but an abuse of the simples ignorance: know∣ing well, that he and all other of that time did practise prayers both often to all holy martyrs, and sometimes peculiarly to such, whome for patronage they did especially chuese of deuotion a∣mongest the rest. I speake not this, that any might hereby iudge the doctors wordes to stande against their owne deedes: but that euery man maye perceiue, that where the workes and practise of all men be so plaine, their words in some one place founde darke, can not by any meanes be preiudiciall to that trueth which in all other placies they plainely set forth by wordes, and by the eui∣dent testimonie of their owne practise, to the worlde proteste the same. Therefore I woulde exhorte all men in Christes name, for their owne saluations sake, to take heede how they giue credit to these libelles conteining certaine wrasted places out of the doc∣tours workes, against any trueth, which by the further discourse of vsage and practise, they are not hable before the learned to iustifie. And therefore that all mistrust of vntrue dealing maye be farre from vs, I will, as I saide, let them haue the feeling and handling of our cause throughly. They shall behold in examples of most noble personagies, both for their name, vertu, and lear∣ning,
the peculiar practises in praying and Masse saying for the deade both in the auncient Greeke and Latine Churchies. CAP. IX. 1 NOwe shall we haue the practise and examples of the olde fathers, concerning sacrifice and prayer for the dead. And here M. Allen before he commeth to the matter, maketh much a do to shew how much more certayne, the practise is, then the wordes of any doctor: because the wordes may be mistru∣sted, or wrested, the practise can not be altered. As though he could shew vs any practise, but that which is vttered in their wordes, in which if there be any obscuritie or impro∣prietie, there shall be as great cōtrouersie of their workes as of their doctrine, as they vsed the name of sacrifice in their teaching, so they vse it, in declaring what they did practise according to their teaching. And therefore it is not worth a straw that M. Allen thinketh, we may knowe their mea∣ning rather by their practise then by their wordes: except he could either in picture, or in vision, describe vnto vs e∣uery thing that they did. But let vs consider the examples of those thinges, which he bringeth in to proue that pra∣ctise is more certeyne then wordes. First he can not deny, but the wordes of Augustine and Theodoretus stand with vs, that the sacramēt of Christes supper is a figure of his body and bloode and not the same naturally. But the practise must expound the words, not to stand with vs. For they did so carefully keepe it, adore it, shew it to be worshipped, prayed to it, yea they taught children to call it God and Lorde, which they would not haue done, if they had not beleued it to be the very body of Christ. For this is cited 1. Theodoret. Dial. 2. in the margent. His wordes be not set downe because they be directly against transubstantiation, and nothing fauouring the grosse ima∣gined presence of Christes body in the sacrament: for he calleth the sacrament signa mystica, the mysticall signes, and the diuine mysteries which represent the body of Christ, that is a true body and not fantasticall or absorpt of the di∣uinitie
as the Eutichians dreamed, wherefore it is playne that the adoration he speaketh of, is nothing else but the reuerent estimation of the sacrament, to be that which by Christ it is ordeyned to be, and not any knocking or knee∣ling as M. Allen would haue vs beleue. Augustine also vppon the 98. Psalme is cited, belike to proue the adoration, who in deede, alloweth the adoration of the body of Christ whereof that is a sacrament, but neither can you proue out of that place, that he would haue the sacrament hono∣red, nor that the sacrament is the very body of Christ, but euen in the same place speaking of the sacrament, he sayth in the person of Christ, non hoc corpus quod videtis manduca∣turi estis, & bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendaui, spirituali∣ter intellectum viuificabit vos. You shall not eate this body which you see, not drinke this blood which they shal shed, which shall crucifie me. I haue commended to you a sa∣crament, which being spiritually vnderstoode shall quic∣ken you. As for Dionysius because he is a coūterfect antiqui∣tie I will not vouchasafe to aunswere him. Basill in his booke de spiritu sancto, cap. 27. hath these wordes: The wordes of in∣uocation when the breade of thankes geuing, and the cuppe of blessing is shewed, which of the holy Apostles hath lefte vs in writinge? Before we goe any further, I will take this by the waye, that what so euer it was, that he spake of, it is not tought by the scripture, no more then many other cere∣monies that he rehearseth in the same place. Howbeit it is plaine enough, that he meaneth not, that the wordes of inuocation were sayed vnto the breade, or the cuppe, but vnto God who was called vpon to blesse those his crea∣tures, that they might be sanctified to the holy vse of Christ his institution. The shewing of the breade and the cuppe▪ was not to adore it (as M. Allen dreameth) for then he woulde haue called it the body and bloode of Christ, but either to stirre vp the people to praye effectually, or to ad∣monish them that all thinges were readye that they might prepare them selues to communicate. And whereas he al∣leageth out of Augustine De Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 10. that chil∣dren
were taught to call it God and Christ, he shamefully abuseth his reader, for no such thinge can be gathered out of Augustins wordes, which are these: Illas etiam nubes &c. Nowe as touching those cloudes or fire, howe the Angells did make them, or tooke them vppon them to signifie that which they did bring message of: Although the Lorde or the holy Ghost was shewed in these formes what man a liue doth know? euen as yong children know not what is set on the altar, and when the cele∣bration of piety is finished is spent out, whereof or how it is made, whereof it is taken into the vse of religion? And if they shoulde neuer learne by experience of their owne, or of others, and ne∣uer see that shewe of thinges but in the celebration of the sacra∣ments, where it is offered and giuen and saide vnto them with most graue authoritie whose body and bloude it is, they woulde beleue nothing els but onely that the Lorde hath appeared to the eyes of mortall men in that liknesse, and that out of such a side being striken that the same liquor did flowe. These wordes are plaine that Augustine affirmeth that no man knoweth more of those shapes, in which the Angells did appeare, then young children would imagine of the presence of Christ in the sacrament, if they were not otherwise instructed, then in telling them when they receiue it, that it is the body of Christ. wherby the cleane contrary to that which Allen affirmeth is plainely gathered, that children were other∣wise instructed, first by experience, bycause they sawe breade els where, then in the celebration, and also by doc∣trine, when they were able to vnderstande that it was not the Lorde him selfe in the shape of breade, but onely a sa∣crament and representation of him. And by the waye note here, one practise of a notable error in Augustines time, that the sacrament of the Lordes supper was geuen to chil∣dren, which wist not what it ment, contrary to the worde of God, who requireth men to examine them selues be∣fore they receiue it, wherefore if any other practise were in his time, or allowed by him contrary to Gods worde, we are no more bounde vnto it, then vnto this, which euen the Papistes them selues will confesse to be erroneous. Fi∣nally what the Christiās did by that they were sclaundered
with all, is a sory proofe, they were sclaundered to haue worshipped an Asses heade, to kill men and eate them, to vse all maner of beastlines in their metings. The rest of the practise that M. Allen nameth, with out shewe of proofe, I passe ouer as vnworthy of aunswere. The practise of Gre∣gory, although it were much more modest then of his suc∣cessors, yet can it not be excused, but it was contrary to his doctrine whereby he reproued an other in that he was not altogether cleare him selfe. Bernarde was but of late time, wherefore although he might note some abuses of the Masse, yet he might also saye it him selfe, but how often I can not tell. Touching Ambrose, which was sodeinely made a byshop, before he was a perfect Christian, if some steppes of hethenishe inuocation or rethoricall apostrophees and prosopopees appeare to be in him, and some other also about his time, yet was not that generally receiued of all the Church in his time, nor agreable to the doctrine of S. Paule who sheweth that we can inuocate none but him in whome we beleue, which to all true Christians is God onely. 2 And where may we better beginne, then with this famous Chrysostome? he bare the last wittenesse with vs for the reliefe of the departed by the prayers and holy oblation, therefore the practise of that excellent benefite shall first be shewed vpon him selfe. This blessed man therefore being banished, by the meanes of the Empresse Eudoxia, for the defense of the Ecclesiasticall discipline, & there in exile departing out of this world, was after her death by the happy and gracious childe Theodosius▪Lib. 10. Hi∣sto. trip. ca. 18 & 20. the yonger, translated from his obscure resting place, to Constantino∣ple which was his owne seate, there with meete honour to be bu∣ried, where with grace & wonderful dignity he ruled the Church before. The History reporteth, that the people of that citie, as thicke as men euer went on grounde, passed the waters of Bo∣sphorus, and couered that coste wholy with light and lampe, with tapers and torcheis to bring that blessed byshoppes body that was their owne deare pastor, home againe. The which pas∣sing treasure, being with all reuerence laide vp in the saide citie,
then loe the gracious good Emperour, earnestly beholding the graue of S. Chrysostome,Theodosius Iun. made most humble prayers to almigh∣ty God, for his father and mothers soule, the late Emperour and Empres: beseching him of pardō & forgiuenes for banishing that good Catholike byshop, because they did it of ignorance: & so the words may well be taken, that he asketh Chrysostome him selfe mercy also, for his parents offense vniustly committed against him: and withall full kindly prayeth for their deceased soules. And so being buried in his owne Church, he was then by Atticus a worthy man his second successour, written in the roule of Ca∣tholike bishoppes to be praide for at the altar euery day by name. Cum Ioannitae (saith Cassiodorus out of Socrates) seorsim apud seipsos sacra solemnia celebrarent,12. Lib. tri∣partit, ca. 2. iussit vt in oratio∣nibus memoria Ioannis haberetur, sicut aliorum dormien∣tium episcoporum fieri consueuit. VVhen Chrysostoms par∣takers saide Masse by them selues aside, Atticus gaue in com∣maundement that a memory should be had in the prayers of the Church for him, as the custome was that all byshoppes after their death shoulde haue. Here is now open practise of that which by wordes we proued before, here is an euident testimonie of the vsage of the Greeke Church for the buriall of bishoppes, and ge∣nerall custome of keping their memoriall in the publike prayers and seruice of the Church. It were not needefull to recite out of Eusebius the forme of Constantinus his funeralls,Euseb. in vita Con∣stantini. kept in the same Church with solemnity of sacrifice, singinge, lightes and prayers. Nor the buriall of the Emperour Constantius: who as Nazianzenus writeth, was brought forth with common prayses of all men, with singing, lightes, and lampes,2 Orat. in Iulian. all the night longe very honorably: with which thinges, saith he, we Christian men thinke it a blessed thing to honour the memories of our freindes departed. And if the aduersaries woulde here contentiously rea∣son that these solemne rites of Christian burialls be nothing pro∣fitable, or if the simple aske why they be profitable, S. Chryso∣stome may instruct such as list learne,In 2. Cap. ad Heb. hom. 4. and correct the other that list reprehende in these wordes. Tell me saith he what all these festiuall lights in the buriall of the deceased meane? what all this singing of Hymnes and Psalmes signifieth? to what ende be so many priestes and musicians called together? to which in fine
he thus aunswereth: do we not all these thinges to geue thankes to God and euerlasting glory, that he hath deliuered the depar∣ted from the troubles of this mortall life? do we not this to our comforte, and honour of the departed? And in the buriall of the Noble matrone Paula how the priestes did sing, how the bishops of Hierusalem,Hierom. Epitap. Paulae. and of all Palestine and Syria for the most part caried torches, how the religious both men and women, did the rites of the dirigies, how her almes folkes shewed their cotes to procure mercy, euen as they did at Dorcas departure in the Actes of the Apostles, how they cōtinued their singing and saying seuen dayes together at the Church in Bethleem where she was buried, S. Hierom him selfe a true record thereof beareth wit∣nesse in the like wordes as I haue recited, and many moe which the feare of weereing the reader causeth me full sore against my will, to omitte. They so set forth not onely the substance of the thinge, which standeth in prayer and sacrifice, but also do proue against the enemies of good ordre, that the smallest ceremonies that our Churchies of late haue vsed, were not lately taken vp by our couetousnesse and superstition, but with more aboundance, and numbre, and continuance, and solemnytie, practised in the flour of Christes Church, in diuers principall partes of the worlde: as at Hierusalem and Constantinople: by the praysing and appro∣uing of the grauest fathers of our faith. 2 Why M. Allen? what a mockery is this? do you make bragge in the title of your chapter, that you will shewe the practise of all holy men in words and prayers for the dead, and nowe beginne your examples no higher then at Chry∣sostomes translation, which was well neare 400. yeares after Christ? The people with great plenty of lightes, brought Chry∣sostomes body to Constantinople. VVell this ceremony in cary∣ing torches at burialls being taken of the Gentiles, they vsed to honour the memory of them that were deade, as the ceremonies of the Heralds are vsed for the same ende. What more? The Emperour prayed for his fathers and mothers soules, and as M. Allen thinketh (but the story sayth not so) he prayed to S. Chrysostome for them. What else? Atticus caused masse to be sayd for him, that maketh vp all. But where is any men∣tion
of masse or sacrifice of the masse M. Allen? Are you such a cunning interpreter, to expound celebrare sacra so∣lemnia to say masse? In deed such interpretations will help you well to finde that, which else you might seeke long e∣nough in the olde writers and goe without for all your la∣bour. It is all one with M. Allen, to celebrate holy solemne seruice, & to say masse. But you will say, memory was made of him in the prayers, so might there be and yet his soule not praied for▪ but how agree you with your selfe, M. Allen? your opinion is that Theodosius praied to him as to a sainct in heauen, howe then did Atticus cause him to be prayed for as one lying in purgatory? I wisse you forget your selfe to much to vtter things so contrary, so neare togither. And as for the funeralls of Constantinus and Constantius, what so euer you say, haue no mention of Masse, nor sacrifice of Masse. In the buriall of Constantinus, there is mention of prayer for his soule according to the error of the time, and in the funeralls of Constantius, there were lights, but there is also shewed the vse of them, as I haue touched already togither with the necessitie of some of them, because they were lighted in the night. The saying of Chrysostome, with the example of the buriall of Paula, shew nothing either of Masse, sacrifice, or prayer for the deade. And whereas you bable of the rites of your popish dirige, Ieronym saith, al was singing of Psalmes and giuing thankes for her godly life & happy departing: Hebraeo, Graeco, Latino, Syro{que} sermone Psal∣mi in ordine personabant. Psalmes were song in Hebrewe, Greeke, Latine, and Syrian language, by course as there were diuers nations that came to honour the solemnitie of her funeralls. Finally if your doctrine of purgatory were true, yet Ieronym describeth her to be so perfect a woman, as no prayers needed to be sayd for her, her life was so full of good workes, and her ende so full of faith. And therfore M. Allen, here is nothing for the sacrifice of the Masse, whereof you made your promise to shew the practise, in the chiefe partes of the worlde, naming Ierusalem for one, when Paula was buried at Betheleem and not at Ieru∣salem.
3 And now S. Augustine being of Aphricke, so farre from the other in distance of place, yet ronneth ioyntly with them in religion. He purposely writing of the solemne rites of Christian funeralls, in that golden treatise De cura pro mortuis agenda,De cura pro mortuis a∣genda. thus after longe consideration of the whole cause determineth: that the pompe of buriall, with all such solemnyties as there vnto be in Gods Church ioyned, is very seemely for that body which was the vessell of a Christian soule, and an instrument or compa∣nion in well working: whervnto it shall be also vnited in the re∣surrection, for to receiue together the inheritance of the euerla∣sting kingdome. But the lacke of these, where they be not arro∣gantly contemned, or can not be had, is nothing hurtefull to the good, nor the hauing any thing profitable to the wicked, as the examples of Lazarus and the Riche man may well proue. There∣fore, it is the sacrifice and prayers which properly do helpe or re∣lieue the departed.De ciuit. 1. Lib. c. 12. & 13. Curatio funeris (sayth he) conditio se∣pulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt viuorum solatia quàm subsidia mortuorum. Non tamen ideo contemnēda & abijcienda sunt corpora defunctorum, maxime que iu∣storum & fidelium, quibus tanquam organis & vasis ad om∣nia bona opera sanctus vsus est spiritus. Curious prouision for the buriall, and the pompe of the solemne obittes, be rather done for the solace of the lieue, then for helpe of the deade: neuerthe∣lesse the bodies of the departed, namely of faithfull folkes, may not be contemned or cast forth, the which the holy Ghost vsed as vessells and instruments of well working, By all which thinges it may well be noted, that some thinges haue bene vsually practised in funeralls for thankes geuing to almighty God, as Hymnes and Psalmes: other some, for decent comelinesse and solace of the liuinge, as the place of the buriall, the lights, the ringing and such like? although euen these things proceeding of loue and deuotion, be after a sorte meritorious to the doers, and a helpe to them for whome they be procured, and good motions and memories of mans duety. For which causies those and the like haue bene vniformelie vsed through out the whole Catholike Church from the beginning. But the principall thinges perteining to the iustes of the departed, be prayers and sacrifice, and other such like, whereby they are assuredly much
proffited, by release of their paines. So saith S. Augustine in these wordes. Non existimemus,Cap. 18. de cura pro mort. ad mortuos pro quibus cu∣ram gerimus, peruenire, nisi quod pro eis, siue altaris siue eleemosinarum sacrificijs, solemniter celebramus. Let vs neuer thinke that any other thinge properly apperteineth to the reliefe of the departed, sauing the solemne sacrifice of the altar, almes and prayer. And therefore as the saide holy doctour con∣fesseth,The sainctes pray for the soules in purgatory, & vve pray vnto saictes for them. Cap. 4. de cura pro mort. the worthinesse of the place where man is buried of it selfe profiteth not at all, but in respect of the holy prayers which be there rather made then els where, and the patronage of holy martyrs and sainctes, to whome he nothing doubteth but inter∣cession may profitably be made for the deceased: for which cause, as it may appeare by Paulinus, men were very desirous euer in the primitiue Church to be buried by some blessed martyrs body. And so must we thinke also of buriall by the reuerent holy sacra∣ment, that it wonderfully helpeth man, not for the placeis sake (although the deuotion of the desirer is therin commēdable) but because the liuing may there effectually commende the departed to God in the time of the holy sacrifice, & may be put in remem∣braunce to call vpon Christes blessed person there present, for the soule of that man, which with care and study laide his body in the hope of resurrection, by the soueraigne holy body that is already risen againe. And this was the cause that our forefathers from Christes time till our dayes haue had respecte and desire, as occa∣sion serued, to be buried there, where by ordre, prayers and sacri∣fice were daily had, and where the patronage of holy sainctes might best be procured. It is a high point of wisdome surely (good reader) onely to see what godly wisdome our fathers vsed, in shew of their zele, faith, and Christianity. As it is an vntollera∣ble arrogancy and a singular signe of infidelity to laugh at, and blaspheme those thinges, whereof, not the prowdest heretike that liueth, hath any intelligence at all: Obcoecauit enim eos ma∣litia eorum. For their owne malice hath blinded them. 3 But let vs now followe you into Africa. First you al∣lege Augustine in his booke de cura pro mortuis agenda, wher∣in he is so full of doubtes, that he knoweth not him selfe, what to determine but that he will hold the common opi∣nion
receiued in his time. But this pasteth (M. Allen) that you will content your selfe with Augustines authoritie, that the pompe of buriall, &c. profiteth not the deade, but that you will haue lightes, ringing, &c. proceding of loue and de∣uotion, to help them, for whom they are procured. If you may goe beyond Augustine, why may not we come short of him? But in the 18. chapter, he nameth the sacrifice of the aultar, to be profitable to the deade. This soundeth some∣what like the matter, but if it be well marked, it maketh no∣thing for the propitiatory sacrifice of the Masse, for euen in the same place, he calleth it the sacrifice of almes, which is but a sacrifice of thankes giuing. And that by this sacrifice he meaneth not the body of Christ, nor a propitiatory sa∣crifice is manifest in his booke de fide ad Petrum diaconum, cap. 19. where he sayth, that Christ offered him selfe for vs, that sacrifice whereby God was reconciled, and that the Church offered to Christ the sacrifice of breade and wine in faith, and charitie, which is a thankes geuing and memo∣riall of his death. The body of Christ is not offered to him selfe, but thankes giuing is offered to him for the offering of his body for vs. His wordes are. Firmissimè tene & nulla∣tenus dubites, ipsum vnigenitum, &c. Hold most stedfastly and nothing doubt then, that the only begotten sonne of God, being made flesh, offered him selfe for vs a sacrifice & ob∣lation for a sweete fauour vnto God to whom with the fa∣ther and the holy Ghost by the Patriarches, Prophets and Priestes in time of the olde Testament, beastes were sacri∣ficed: and to whom now, that is in the time of the new Te∣stament, togither with the father and the holy Ghost, with whom his diuinitie is all one, the holy Catholike Church, throughout all the worlde, ceaseth not to offer the sacrifice of breade and wine in faith and charitie. For in these car∣nall sacrifices there was a figuring of the flesh of Christ, which he him selfe being without sinne should offer for our sinnes. But in this sacrifice there is thankes giuing & com∣memoration of the flesh of Christ which he offered for vs and of his bloode which the same God shed for vs. Nowe for the other poynt of inuocation of Sainctes, M. Allen af∣firmeth,
that S. Augustine neuer doubteth but intercession may be made vnto them for the deade, who so euer will take paynes to reade the treatise de cura pro mortuis agenda, shall find nothing else but doubtes and questions of that matter, as cap. 5. Cum ergo mater fidelis filij defuncti corpus de∣syderauit in Basilicam martyris poni, si quidem credidit eius a∣nimam meritis martyris adiuuari, hoc quod ita credidit supplica∣tio quaedam fuit, & haec profuit si quid profuit. Therfore when the faithfull mother desired the body of her faithful sonne departed to be layd in the Church of the Martyr, if she be∣leued that his soule might be helped by the metites of the martyr, this that she so beleued was a certeyne supplicati∣on, and this profited if any thing profited. Here Augustine doubteth whether supplications to the Martyr profite any thing or no. Moreuer he can not tell, how the Sainctes de∣parted shoulde know our necessities or heare our prayers, cap. 15. Proindè fatēdum est nescire quidē mortuos quid agatur, sed dum hic agitur, postea vero audire ab eis qui hinc ad eos moriendo pergant. Wherefore it must be confessed, that the deade truely knowe not what is done here, while it is a doing, but afterwarde doe here it of them, which by death doe passe from hence vnto them. Wherefore if we will haue any thing vnto them, we must tary vntill some deade may cary our passage, and it must be such a one also, as knoweth our case, or else we are neuer the neere. Possun & ab angelis qui rebus quae aguntur hîc praesto sunt audire ali∣quid mortui. It may be also that the deade here some what of those Angels which are present at such thinges as are done here. cap. 16. Quanquam ista quaestio vires intelligentiae meae vincat, quemadmodum opitulantur martyres ijs quos per eos certum est opitulari. Although this question passeth the strength of mine vnderstanding howe the martyrs helpe them whome it is certaine to be helped of them. These places and the whole discourse of that booke, doth proue, that although Augustine were willing to meinteine the su∣perstition that was not throughly confirmed in his time, about burialls and inuocation of Sainctes, yet he hath no∣thing of certainety out of the worde of God, either to per∣swade
his owne conscience, or to satisfie them that moued the doubtes vnto him. 4 But leauing the thinges not principally intended, as suffi∣ciently by vse of the Church approued, let vs turne to the practise of the oblation and prayers, in the dirigies of the auncient: that seeing them both praye and say Masse for their dearest freindes soules, thou may be bolde to vse the same for thine. That doe I call Masse, which they call sacrifice: Because S. Hyerom vseth it in the same sense, in these wordes: Sunt qui de leuioribus peccatis cum quibus obligati defuncti sunt post mortē pos∣sunt absolui:Super 11. cap. Prouer. vel poenis videlicet castigati, vel suorum prae∣cibus & eleemosinis, missarumque celebrationibus, &c. There be some, which after their death may haue absolution of their lighter offensies, in the debt whereof they passed out of this life: either after iust punishment for the same suffered, or else through the prayers and almes of their freindes, with the cele∣bration of Masses. So sayth S. Hyerom, or else as some thinke, the reuerent Beda. either of their graue iudgement weyeth more with me, then any one mans alieue. VVell therefore, Masse, obla∣tion,Masse al∣vvaye saide for the de∣parted. or sacrifice, call it as you will, all is one for our purpose, and like hated of heretikes: howe so euer it be named, it was practi∣sed with praiers for the rest of the departed through out the Chri∣stian worlde. S. Ambrose exhorteth other men to doe it for their freindes, he did it for his owne. VVriting therefore a letter of comforte to one Faustinus that ouer much bewailed the death of his sister, thus with comforte he geueth counsell: Non tam de∣plorādam quàm prosequendam orationibus reor,Ambros. epist. 8. l. 2. nec mae∣stificādam lachrymis tuis, sed magis oblationibus animam eius Domino commendandam arbitor. I suppose thy sisters case should not so much be lamented, as she by thy prayers ought to be relieued: Thou must not sadden her soule by teares, but by oblations commende her to our Lorde.If the nevv byshoppes vvere like S. Ambros. their tea∣ching vvold not be con∣trary to his. How many byshoppes now in England of the new gise, woulde follow this kinde of consola∣tion by letters? Howe many woulde exhorte their freindes to got Masse saide, or prayers for their louers reste? So many as be like good Ambrose surely woulde so doe: that is neuer a one: make their accompt as neere as they can. But will you see how he pra∣ctised
vpon his owne prince the Emperour Theodosius? Da re∣quiem perfecto seruo tuo Theodosio,Super obit. Theodosij Imperato∣ris. requiem quam prae∣parasti sanctis tuis. Illò conuertatur anima eius vnde des∣cendit: dilexi, & ideo prosequar cum vsque ad regionem viuorum, nec deseram, donec fletu, praecibus, inducam virum quò sua merita vocant, in montem Domini sanctum. Giue rest good Lorde vnto thy good seruaunt Theodosius, euen that rest which thou hast prepared for the holy Sainctes. Let his soule ascende from whense it came. I loued him, and therefore I will prosecute him vnto the lande of the liuing, I will neuer leaue him, till with teares & prayers I bring that man according to his deseruinge, to the holy hill of God. This man knew his duety to∣wardes his prince, whome he loued a lieue, and forsooke not being deade:Super obi∣tu Valenti∣niani. So did he pray and offer for Gratianus and Valentinia∣nus: so did he vse the same for his owne deare brother the wor∣thy Satyrus, in these wordes much to be noted. Now Lorde al∣mighty to thee doe I commende the good soule of my brother Sa∣tyrus now lately departed, to thee O Lorde doe I make my obla∣tion, accept I besich thee this due office of a brother,In oratione funebr. su∣per Satyr. and mercy∣fully looke vpon the sacrifice of a priest. See loe, this good father vsed of brotherhood prayers, and because he was a priest he did sacrifice, in that respecte, and saide Masse for his brothers soules rest. VVhome in his funerall oration he setteth forth with many singular prayses and commendations, especially that he was both Christianed and buried in the vnity of the Romane Church, that is to saye (as him selfe expoundeth it) of the Catholike faith. 4 All this while we haue weighted for dirige, and Masse, according to your promise, and now belike we shall haue it out of S. Hieronyme I trowe. But who will graunt you, that the commētary vpon the prouerbes out of which you alleage your testimony, is Hieronyms worke? The olde coppies in parchment, as Amerbachius confesseth, declare that Beda was the author of it. Which you can not vtterly deny your selfe, but all is one with you. But so it is not with vs, to bragge of S. Hieronyms authority and then to alleage one that is 400 yeares younger then he. But either of their iudgements weyeth more with you, then any one
mans a liue, beware what you saye, doe you not esteeme the Popes iudgement more than either Bede or Ieronym? but perhaps you will answere me that the Pope is no man. Nec Deus es nec homo quasi neuter es inter vtrum{que}. Thou art neyther God nor man, but a neuter betwene both, you know who writ this verse vnto the Pope, and how it is al∣lowed for catholike in the booke of the Popes canon law. Well passing ouer Bede, we will come to Ambrose, who in deede alloweth prayer for the deade, as it was a common errour in his time, but not the sacrifice of the Masse, in that sense the Papistes doe. I haue shewed before, howe vnpro∣perly he vseth the name of sacrifice, as in his booke de vir∣ginibus, lib. 1. Virgo matris hostia est, cuius quotidiano sacrificio vis diuina placatur. A virgine is the oblation of her mother, by whose dayly sacrifice the wrath of God is pacified. But speaking expressely of the celebration, he sheweth that Christ is not offered but by him selfe, and that the oblati∣on which is here made of him is but in an image and re∣presentation Officiorum cap. 48. Hic in imagine, ibi in veritate vbi apud Patrem pro nobis quasi aduocatus interuenit. Here he is offered in representation, there in deede, where he ma∣keth intercession for vs with the father as an aduocate. As for the oblations whiche he nameth in the 8. Epistle to Faustinus, be nothing but prayers. For as he doth but vary his wordes, where he sayth weeping and mourning which are all one, euen so it is all one where he sayth prayers and oblations. And whereas you say there are none of our new Bishops will followe Ambrose in such kind of letters, they can shewe better reason not to follow him where he went amisse, then your popish Prelates can shew not to followe him where he writte well. which of your Prelates will fol∣low him in his commentary vppon the epistle to the Ro∣maynes? where he so often affirmeth that a man is iustified before God by faith onely. Or in his commentary vppon the Apocalyps, where he interpreteth the whore of Babylon to be the citie of Rome, or where he affirmeth that not Peter but the fayth & the confession of Peter, is the foun∣dation of the Church: and that the primary of Peter was a
primacy of faith not of honour, of confession not of autho∣ritie, or higher order. De incarnat. Dom. cap. 4. & 5. or in an hundreth places of his writinges beside. The other places that you allege out of Ambrose & Paulinus, do not so much helpe your purpose with prayer for the deade, as they are contrary to your doctrine concerning purgatory. For Am∣brose praying for Theodosius, calleth him a perfect seruaunt of God, but you hold that perfect men come not at all in purgatory, and therefore you haue qualified the matter by translating perfecto famulo to thy good seruaunt. Gratianus was not baptised, and therefore by your doctrine he should not come in purgatory, but strayt to hell As for the wordes that Ambrose speaketh of oblations for his brother Saty∣rus, you doe shamefully wrest them contrary to his mea∣ning. For he was so farre of from beleuing his brother to be in purgatory, that he prayeth to him as a Sainct in heauen, and the oblation and sacrifice that he offereth to God, is the soule of his brother, and not prayers or masses for his soule. Tibi nunc omnipotens Deus inno xiam commendo animam, Tibi hostiam meam offero, cape propitius ac serenus fraternum munus, sacrificium sacerdotis, haec mei iam liba prae∣mitto. To thee now O Almighty God I commend his in∣nocent soule, to thee I offer my sacrifice, receiue merciful∣ly and fauorably this gifte of a brother, and sacrifice of a Priest, this sacrifice as a part of my selfe, I now send before me. By which wordes as it is euident that he meaneth not the sacrifice of the masse, so it is manifest howe licentiously he vsed the name of sacrifice & oblation, that we may know when he speaketh of the sacrifice of the body of Christ, he meaneth not so grosely as the Papistes take it and vse it them selues. 5 Paulinus one of the same time and Bishop of Nola, de∣clareth him selfe to be of the same faith, by the like practise. He prayeth bitterly him selfe for a brother departed, and besecheth Amandus, a holy man of his acquaintaunce, to ioyne with him for the helpe of the departed soule. By his wordes the paine of Purgatory is noted, and the benefite of our prayers is proued▪
thus he sayth. Impense rogamus, vt quasi frater vnanimos fratres iuuans,In Epist. 1. ad Aman∣dum. & hanc meritis fidei tuae mercedem accu∣mules, vt pro eo infirmitati nostrae compatiaris, & orandi ab ore conspires, vt misericors & miserator Deus, qui facit omnia in coelo & in terra, & in mari & abyssis, refrigeret animam stillicidijs misericordiae suae per orationes vestras, quia sicut ignis accensus ab eo ardebit vsque ad inferni no∣uissima, ita proculdubiò etiam ros indulgentiae inferna pe∣netrabit, vt roscido pietatis eius lumine, in tenebris arden∣tibus aestuantes refrigeremur. I hartely beseeke ye, that as one brother helping an other, you woulde increase the desertes of your holy faith, by taking compassion with me, & ioyning prayers with me for the departed soule: that the God of pity and compas∣sion, who worketh all thinges in heauen and earth, in the sea and the depthe, woulde at the contemplation of your prayers, refresh and coole his soule with some droppe of his mercy. For as the fire kindled by him will burne to the bottom of hell beneth, so doubt∣lesse the dewe of his grace and mercie, shall passe downe to the neither partes, that by the comfortable louely light of his piety, the soules broyling in burning darkenesse may be refreshed. And writing also to Delphinus, he alludeth to the feruent heate that the rich man suffered in Hell when he craued for Lazarus helpe. And prayeth him to refresh the mans soule deceased,Epist. 3. with some droppe of pity, and his holy prayers. This man was very deare to Paulinus in his life time, for whome he was so carefull after his death. he doubted not of his saluation, though (as he sayth) he went out of this worlde a debter, and therefore feared him to be in great paine. So certaine was the doctrine of purgatory in the primitiue Church, and so profitable were the prayers counted, for the deceased in Christ. 5 The wordes of Paulinus importe, that he thought those whom he prayed for were in hell, howe so euer you dissemble it by translating inferna the nether partes, and dare not rehearse his wordes vnto Delphinus: where he iudgeth them that were prayed for to be. where the rich man was that desired refreshing of Lazarus. For purgatory in those dayes was but euen a breding, & yet not through∣ly
shaped out of prayers for the deade, and such other su∣perstitious ceremonies as were vsed about the departed. 6 But if you will haue, an examplare, and a full waraunt of your duety and deuotion, with vnderstanding the vsage of the auncient Church, in such aboundance of many the like, you shall (I thinke) be fully satisfied for this parte by S. Augustine,Ex lib. 9. Confess ca. 11.13. & vlt. in the goodly historie of his mothers death, a blessed woman and worthy of such a sonne. Her name was Monica, well knowen in Gods Church, and numbred amongest the sainctes. This good ma∣trone prouided especially, by her testament that she might not be forgotten at the altar of God, when the names of the faithfull de∣parted were in the sacrifice remembred. For that was common in all Churchies, as partly is, and yet shall be better declared anone, The which her worthy will, her sonne Augustine so alloweth, that he setteth it forth in the ninth of his confessions to her eter∣nall memorie, in these wordes. My mother (sayth he) when the daye of her passing hense was now at hande, much re∣garded not how her body might curiously be couered, or with costly spice is powdered: neither did she counte vpon any gorgious tumbe or sepulcre: these thinges she charged vs not with all. But her whole & only desire was, that a me∣mory might be kept for her, at thy holy altar good Lorde.Note the vvhole Hi∣story, and feare not to follovv it. at which she missed no day to serue thee: where she knew the holy hoste was bestowed, by which the bonde obliga∣tory that was against vs, was cancelled. Marke good reader as we go by the waye, what that is which in the blessed sacrifice of the aultar is offered, how cleare a confession this man and his mother doe make of their faith and the Churchies belefe, con∣cerning the blessed hoste of our daily oblation: beholde that wo∣men in those dayes knew by the grounde of their constante faith, that which our superintendents in their incredulity now a dayes can not confesse. Consider how carefull all vertuous people were in the primitiue Church, both learned and simple, as to be present at the altar in their life time, so after their death to be remem∣bred at the same. VVhose worthy indeuours as often as I consi∣der (and often truely I doe consider them) I can not but lament our contrary affection, which can neither abide the sacrifice, the
hoste, nor the altar in our dayes, and therefore can looke for no benefite thereby after the daye of our death once come vpon vs, as our fore fathers both looked for, and out of doubt had. But lea∣uing the peculiar consideration of such thinges to the good and well disposed, let vs go forwarde in the fathers pathes, and see whether this so well learned a clerke counted this zele of his olde mother, blinde deuotion, as we brutes thinke of our fathers holy∣nesse now a dayes.The cursed Cham hath many chil∣dren in our dayes. For which matter we shall finde, that first euen as she desired, the sacrifice of the Masse was offered for her, not onely for the accomplishment of her godly request, but because the Church of God did that office for all that was departed in Christ, as we reade in sundry placies of this mans workes, and as in the same booke of confessions he thus declareth and testifieth: (I leaue the Latine, because the treatise growes to greater length then I was aware of, at the beginning, if I corrupte the meaning or intent of the writer, let my aduersaries take it for an aduaun∣tage) thus he sayth therfore. Neither did I weepe in the time of the prayers, when the sacrifice of our price was offered for her:Cap. 13. lib. 9. & vltimo. not yet afterwarde when we were at our prayers likewise, the corps standing at the graue side, &c. VVhereby euery reasonable man must needs acknowledge that both prayers and sacrifice was made for her, as her meaning and godly request was before her passage. she being thus therefore brought home with supplication and sacrifice solemnely, was not yet forgotten of her happy childe. But afterwarde he thus very deuoutly maketh intercession for her quiet rest:M Grindall looke in your gram∣mer vvhat figure S. Augustin vsed he. Now I call vpon thee, gratious Lorde, for my deare mothers offensies, geue eare vnto me for his sake that was the salue for our sinnes, and was han∣ged vpon the crosse: who sitteth on the right hand of God, and maketh intercession for vs, I know she wrought mer∣cyfully, and forgaue those that did offend her: and nowe good God pardon her of her offensies, which she by any meanes after her baptisme committed, forgeue her mercy∣full God, forgeue her, I humbly for Christes sake pray thee, and entre not into iudgement with her, but let thy mercy passe thy iustice, because thy wordes are true, and hast pro∣mised mercy to the mercyfull. And in the same chapter a litle afterwarde, he thus both prayeth him selfe for her, and ear∣nestly
inuiteth other men to do the same, in these wordes: Inspire my lorde God, inspire thy seruauntes my brethern, thy children and my masters, whome with will, worde, and penne I serue, that as many as shall reade these, maye re∣membre at thine altar thy hande mayden Monica. And her laite husbād Patricius, through whose bodies, thou brought me into this life and worlde. Thus was that holy matrone by her good child made partaker after her death, of the thing which she most desired in her life. And him selfe afterwarde in his owne see of Hippo in Aphrike, had sacrifice saide for him at his de∣parture, though the daye of his death fell at the pityfull hauocke, which the Vandalles kept being Arians in those parties, com∣maunding the christian Catholikes to be buried with out seruice as I saide before. This blessed Bishop departing out of this life in the besiege of his owne Citie, had notwithstanding, oblation for his reste, as Possidonius writing his life, and present at his pas∣sage, doth testifie. Augustinus,Possidonius in vita Au∣gust. membris omnibus sui corpo∣ris incolumis, integro aspectu atque auditu, nobis astantibus & videntibus, ac cum eo pariter orantibus, obdormiuit in pace cum patribus suis, enutritus in bona senecture: & no∣bis coram positis, pro eius commendanda corporis depo∣sitione sacrificium deo oblatum est, & sepultus est. Augustine (sayth he) being sounde in his limmes, neither his sight nor hea∣ring fayling him, I being then present and in his sight, & praying together with him, departed this worlde in peace vnto his elders, being continued till a fare age. And so, we being present, the sacrifice for the commendacion of his rest was offered vnto God first, and straight vpon that was he buried. Thus loe all these fa∣tes taught: thus they practised, thus they liued, and thus they dyed: none was saued then but in this faith, let no man looke to be saued in any other nowe. 6 I haue sufficiently already declared what Augustine meaneth by the sacrifice of the altar, the sacrifice of our price, the sacrifice of breade, and wine, and what so euer name he geueth it beside. He meaneth nothing else, but the sacrifice of thankes geuing for the onely propitiatory sacrifice of Christ, wherof the celebration of the sacrament
is an effectuall memoriall, and liuely remembraunce. In Celebration of which sacramēt although the superstitious error of that time allowed prayers for the deade generally, or speciall remembraunce of any in the prayers, yet is it not the belefe of S. Augustine, nor of any other in that time, that the sacrament was the naturall body and bloude of Christ, nor that the naturall body of Christ was there sacrificed, as a propitiation of the sinnes, either of the liuing or the deade. Seeing therefore that he hath so plainely ex∣pounded, what he meaneth by the name of sacrifice, as I haue shewed in the beginning of this chapter: it is to much folly, vpon these vnproper, but yet in that time vsuall ter∣mes, to goe about to builde such blasphemous doctrine, as afterwarde gue to be mainteined (perhaps by occasion of such vnproper speach as then was vsed) of the sacrifice of the Masse, and propitiation both of the quicke and the deade. But that I may consider these places particularly, whereof you make so great accompt: First where you will vs to take our aduantage of your translation, I say you haue falsyfied Augustines wordes and meaning in the latter ende of the first sentence, to make fooles beleue that the priuate Masse was sayd in Augustines dayes, as it is among you. First you call memoriam sui fieri ad altare which is that remem∣braunce of her shoulde be made at the altar: that a memo∣ry might be kepte for her, as though she woulde haue her sonne to be a chauntry priest to sing for her, &c. Item you translate vnde sciret dispensari victimam sanctam, where she knew the holy hoste was bestowed, as though she had ment nothing, but that the hoste was layed vpon the altar where as you should haue sayed, from whence she knoweth the holy sacrifice was dispensed or ministred, by which wordes it is manifest that the communion was daily receiued not of the priest alone, but of all them that were present. You are as bolde as one of your wisedome may be with such a man, to will M. Grindall to looke in his grammer for Au∣gustins figures, but if I may be so bolde with so profound a clearke as you are, I woulde desire you to looke in the ety∣mologies of your grammer, whether sui, be, for her, and
vnde where. And if you can not proue these significations, by that parte of grammer which is called Etymologie, that you would defende them by that part of cunning where in you are better learned, called Pseudologia: but to the matter of this testimony, we haue in this first remembraunce of her, in the nexte we haue the sacrifice of our price offered for her. In deede this soundeth more like the matter you would haue: if S. Augustine had not before in plaine wordes expoun∣ded his meaning, which is nothing else, but that the com∣munion was celebrated, in ministration of which there was speciall remembraunce of her in the prayers, as there was of all deade in the sayth a generall memory. And if you aske me what figure S. Augustine vsed, though I coulde re∣ferre it to diuerse figures, yet it may best be excused by A∣cyrologia, which is an vnproper kind of speaking, to call that the sacrifice of our price, which was but a thankes gi∣uing for the sacrifice of our price, which Christ onely offe∣red once for all vpon the aultar of the crosse. As Augustine him selfe when he speaketh properly will confesse. The o∣ther two places proue nothing but prayer for the deade vsed by Augustine. But that you may see all this was but su∣perstition or will worship in him: he him selfe in a maner confesseth as much in the same place, where he prayeth most earnestly lib. Con. 9. cap. 13. Et credo quod iam feceris quod rogo, sed voluntaria oris mei approba Domine. And I beleeue that thou hast done already that which I pray for, but Lord approue this voluntary offering of my mouth. His meaning is to allude to the free will offerings of the lawe, but in deede he declareth that he prayed not according to the rule appoynted by God, but according to the corrupt motion of his owne minde. As for the place of Possidonius proueth plainly, that it was the sacrifice of thankes giuing that was offered for the commendation of the godly and quiet deposition or putting of, of his body, which he before describeth. In steed of which M. Allen translateth, for com∣mendation of his rest as though he had bene out of rest, & sayth, that not withstanding his holy life and godly depar∣ture, yet euen that day the citie was taken, had oblation for
his rest, But if the men of those dayes had bene of M. Al∣lens opinion concerning purgatory, they would not both haue compted Augustine for a perfect man, and yet after his death to doubt of his rest. Finally, where he boasteth, that none were saued in those dayes, but in this fayth, he followeth his owne vayne of lying, and not any proofe of auncient writing. For although they were in that tyme in∣fected with some errours, and that not so great as he char∣geth them withall: yet was the fayth of their saluation in the onely foundation Iesus Christ, and not in merittes or Masses, pardons or pilgrimage, but in the onely mercy of God. Tota spes mea (sayth Augustine) non nisi magna valdè misericordia tua. Da quod iubes & iube quod vis lib. con. 10. cap. 29. Al my hope is nothing else but thy exceeding great mercy. Giue that thou commaundest, & commaund what thou wilt. That vve and all nations, receyued this vsage of praying and sacrifycing for the departed, at our first cōuersiō to Christes faith. And that this article vvas not only conirmed by mi∣racle amongest the rest, but seuerally by signes and vvoun∣ders approued by it selfe. And that the Church is grovvne to such beauty by the fructes of this faith. CAP. X. 1 MAny moe examples of these matters might be brought out of S. Gregory, diuers out of Damascene, enowe out of what writer so euer you like best: such choise we haue in so good a cause, whereof euery mans workes are full. But I will passe ouer the rest, that I may onely reporte one history out of our owne Church, in the pure spring whereof, the Aposto∣like faith aboundātly ishued downe from the principall pastors of Gods Church, with great spreade of religion, which sith that time hath bewtified our country in all Gods giftes with the best. And amongest many euident testimonies of this trueth, with the pra∣ctise therof, both to be founde in Gildas and in holy Beda, there
is a straunge and a very rare example, not onely for the plaine declaration of the vsage of our Church in the first foundation of our faith, but for an open shew by miracle in this liefe, how God releaseth of his mercye, by the holy oblation at the altar, the paines of the departed in the worlde to come. It shall be comfor∣table to the Catholikes, to consider this parte of our belefe to be confirmed by the miraculous working of God, as all other light∣ly be, in placies where the faith is first taught. And that our whole faith which our nation receiued of S. Augustine the monke, was so confirmed by the power of God, not onely our owne histories do declare, but S. Gregory him selfe affirmeth it, writing his letters to Augustine in this sense:Beda lib. 1. cap. 31. that he should not arrogate any such wounderous workes to his owne power or vertue: which then God wrought by him, not for his owne holinesse, but for the planting of Christes faith in the nation where those signes were shewde. Beda therefore,Lib. 4. hist. cap. 21. writeth this notable history of a miracle done not many yeares after our people was conuerted, in the beginning of his owne dayes: that in a foughten field betwixt Egfride and Edeldred, two princies of our lande, it fortuned that a younge gentleman of Egfrides armie, shoulde be so greuously wounded, that falling downe both him selfe with out sense, and in all mens sightes starke deade, he was letten lye of the enemies, and his body sought with care to be buried of his freindes. A brother of his, a good priest and Abbate, with diligent making search for his body, amongest many happed on one that was exceeding like him (as a man many easly be deceiued in the alteratiō that streight falleth vpon the soules departure to the whole forme and fashion of the body) and bestowed of his loue, the duety of obsequies, with solemne memorialls for the rest of him, whome he tooke to be his brother deceased, burying him in his owne monasterie, and causing Masse to be done daily for his pardon, and soules release. But so it fortuned, that his brother Huma (for so was he called) being not all out deade, with in foure and twenty houres came reasonably to him selfe againe: an gathering with all some strength, rose vp, washte him selfe, a made meanes to come to some freinde or acquaintaunce, whe he might sallue his sores, and close his woundes againe: But by lacke of strength to make shifte, and by misfortune, he fell into his enemies handes: and
therby the Capitane examined of his estate, he denied him selfe to be of name or degree in his country. Yet by the likelyhoods that they gathered of his comely demeanure, and gentleman like talke, which he coulde hardly dissemble, they mistrust (as it was in deede) that he was a man of armes, and more then a common souldiar. Therefore in hope of good gaine by his raunson, they thought good after he was full recouered, for feare of his escape to laye yrons vpon him, and so to make sure worke. But so God wrought, that no fetters coulde holde him: for euery day once at a certaine houre, the bandes brake loose with out force, and the man made free. The gentleman maruailed at the case him selfe, but his kepers and the capitaine were much more astonied there∣at, and straitely examined him by what cunning or crafte he coulde with such ease set him selfe at libertie: and bare him in hande, that he vsed characters or letters of some sorcery and wichcrafte, with the practise of vnlawfull artes. But he aun∣swered in sadnesse, that he was altogether vnskillfull in such thinges. Mary ({que} he) I haue a brother in my country that is a priest, and I knowe certainely that he sayth often Masse for my soule, supposing me to be departed and slaine in bataile. And if I were in an other life, I perceiue my soule by his intercession shoulde be so loosed out of paines, as my body is now from bondes: The capitaine perceiuing so much, and belike in some awe of re∣ligion, seeing the worke of God to be so straunge, soulde him to a Londoner: with whome the same thinges happened in his bondes loosing euery daye. By which occasion he was licensed to go home to his freindes, and procure his ranson, for charging him with di∣uers sortes of surest bandes, none coulde salfely holde him. And so vpon promesse of his returne or payment of his appointed price, he went his wayes, and afterwarde truely discharged his credit. VVhich done by freindship that he founde in the same country, afterward returned to his owne parties, & to his brothers house: to whome when he had vttered all the history of his straunge for∣tune, both of his misery and miraculous relieuing, he enquired diligently the whole circumstance, with the houre and time of his daily loosing: and by conferring together, they founde that his bondes brake loose especially, at the very iuste time of his ce∣lebration for his soule. At which times he confessed, that he was
otherwise in his great aduersities often released also, Thus hath that holy writer almost worde for worde, and at the ende he ad∣deth this: Multi haec a praefato viro audientes, accensi sunt in fide ac deuotione pietatis, ad orandum, vel eleemosinas faciendas, vel ad offerendas Domino victimas sacrae obla∣tionis, pro ereptione suorum qui de saeculo migrauerant. Intellexerunt enim quod Sacrificium salutare, ad redem∣ptionem valeret, & animae & corporis sempiternam. Hanc mihi historiam, etiam hi qui ab ipso viro in quo facta est audiere, narrarunt. Vnde eam, qui aliquando comperi, indu∣bitanter historiae nostrae Ecclesiasticae inserendam credidi. Many hearing thus much of the party him selfe, were wounder∣fully inflamed with faith and zele, to pray, to geue almes, and to offer sacrifice of the holy oblation, for the deliuery of their well-beloued freindes departed out of this life. For they vnderstoode that the healthfull sacrifice, was auaileable for the redemption of both body and soule euerlastingly. And this storie, did they that hearde it of the parties owne mouth, reporte vnto me. VVhere vpon hauing so good proofe, I dare be bolde to write it in my ecclesiasticall history. And thus much sayth Beda aboute eighte hundred yeares agoe, when our nation being but younge in Christianity, was fedde in the true belefe, by sundry wounde∣rous workes of God. CAP. X. 1 THe examples out of Gregory or Damascene, you may spare for your friendes, there is none of vs, that maketh great accompt of them, and yet neither Gregory nor Damascene, were so grosse in their errour of prayer for the deade and purgatory, as you: but where you bragge of such choyse, that you can bring enowe out of what writer so euer we like best: you shoulde passing well prouide for the credit of your cause, and the discredit of ours, if out of so great store, you would helpe vs with some thing out of Iustinus Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, or any Authenticall writer, which liued with∣in one hundreth yeares after the Apostles age. But when
you beginne with Chrysostoms buriall, and yet can not proue that which you pretende, all men maye well thinke, and they which haue redde the olde writers know, you can not reach so high for all your proude promises. But you will do that, which shall be as good, you will shew that we and all na∣tions receiued these vsages of praying and sacrificing for the de∣parted, at our first conuersion to the fayth. you shall doe a great peece of worke, and such as no Papist yet, was euer able to doe. You shall be a Cardinal if you can doe it, yea you shall conuert all the Protestantes to the Catholike Church of Rome. Goe too man, beginne. Take the history of the Acts of the Apostles into your handes, in which mention is made of the conuersion of many nations to Christes faith, shew that the vsage of praying & sacrifycing for the dead, was receiued of them or any of them. Come of quickely, or all the worlde will saye you are but a prating merchant. But you will beginne with the conuersion of our nation. Goe to take Gildas into your hande, which testifieth that the Gospell was preached in this lande in the reigne of Tyberius the Emperour: proue vnto vs that Paule or Simon or Thaddeus or Ioseph or who so euer first preached the Gospell in this Ilande, tought prayers or sacrifices for the deade, Proue it I saye, and the daye is yours for euer, if you proue it not, as neither you nor the deuill for you is able to doe it: the worlde may see, your swelling bragges to be nothing but blowen bladders or bubles, in which there is nothing but ayre, as your wordes are nothing but winde, yet are you not ashamed, to name Gildas, who, as about the first conuersiō of the Britaynes to the faith he hath no worde of any such matters, so where he complayneth of there ruyne and decaye, he accuseth the priests of his time for sieldome sacrificing, but of sacrificing for the deade he speaketh not, although the error of praying for the deade were receiued in other places and whether this countrye were free from it I am not able to saye, nor you to proue, that it was infected with it. And therefore hauing nothing to shew for six hundreth yeare almost, in which this lande was neuer voyde of Christians, you come in at last with
the peruersion of the Saxons, by Augustine that prowde cruell and vnlearned monke, of whose pryde and cruelty our stories doe testifie at large: his ignorance and vnskil∣fulnesse is bewrayed by him selfe, in his writinges to Pope Gregory. I force litle what miracles he wrought to cōfirme his errors, neither doe I waye worth a flye that longe tale you tell, out of Beda, of him that had his cheines fallen o in Masse time. That credulous and superstitious age, had many such fayned miracles. 500 such tales are toulde in vitas patrum, serm. discipuli, legenda aurea, the festiuall &c. But make you no more accompt of Beda his graue autho∣rity then of those fayned fables? suerly I make this accompt of Beda, that if he had reported the matter of his owne knowledge, I woulde haue credited the facte done, and yet tending to the maintenaunce of false doctrine I would neuer the sooner haue bene moued from the trueth of Gods worde. But when he reported it onely of heare saye, and that not of the parties them selues that might haue bene witnesses, but of them that hearde this one man tell it by him selfe, it caryeth small credit with it. I beleue that such a tale was tolde to Beda, but what if they added some what to it that tolde him, and what if he that tolde them lyed? if Beda had not bene ouer light of credit him selfe, he shoulde not haue put it in writing, before he had perfect intelligence, not only of the party him selfe, but also of that Londiner and gentleman, and those that kept him in pri∣son. But how so euer the matter weare true or false, it is no proofe nor preiudice against the trueth of God vttered in the holy scriptures. Let Augustine speake for vs in his booke ae vnitate ecclesiae, against the Donatistes, which boasted of miracles, as the Papistes doe, but Augustine will not al∣low them for sufficient proues with out the authoritie of the scriptures, non dicat verum est quia ego hoc dico, aut quia hoc dixit ille collega meus, aut illi collegae mei, aut illi episcopi vel clerici, vel laici nostri, aut ideo verum est quia illa & illa▪ mirabilia fecit Donatus vel Potius vel quilibet alius, aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum orant & exaudiun∣tur, aut quia illa & illa ibi contingunt, aut quia ille frater no∣ster,
aut illa soror nostra tale visum, vigilans vidit, vel tale vi∣sum dormiens somniauit &c. Sed vtrum ipsi ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum scripturarum canonicis libris oftendant &c, Let him not saye it is therefore true, because I say it, or such a one my companion sayed it, or those my companions, or those our byshoppes, or clerkes, or laye men, or it is therefore true because Donatus or Pontius or any other did these or those miracles, or because men praye at our dead mens memories and are harde, or because these or these thinges doe happen there, or because this our brother or that our sister sawe such a vision waking or dreamed such a vision sleeping, &c. but whether they holde the Church or no, let them shewe none otherwise but by the canoni∣call bookes of the holy Scriptures. This place M. Allen if it might take place with you, might serue to cut of all con∣trouersies, not onely of purgatory, but of the Church it selfe and what so euer is in question betwene vs. But you are wise enough, you will neuer venture your cause vppon that triall. 2 VVe must here stay a litle, and ponder in our mindes, how our forefathers and people of our owne lande were taught in this article,That faith is the true faith into vvhich our nation vvas first cōuer∣ted from infidelity. when they were first deliuered out of Sathans bondage, and conuerted to the fellowship of Christes Church and let vs no∣thing doubt, but that which our owne Apostles both by worde and worke, by miracle and by martyrdome first proued vnto vs, is the very true and unfallible faith of our Christianitie. For if that were not true which at our first conuersion was preached vnto vs, then we receiued not the faith, but falsehoode at their handes: then the histories doe make a lowde lye, in testifying we were tur∣ned to the Christian faith both at that time and by such men, then it were no conuersion from heathen Idolatrie to the worship of Christ, but it were a chaunge from one superstition to an other: and this latter so much worse then the other, because vnder the name of Christ there were practise perpetuall of execrable sacri∣lege, in instituting of a sacrifice to the defasing of our redem∣ption, in adoring bare breade as the hoste of our saluation, in of∣fering it vp to God for the sinnes both of the quicke and deade,
in practise of vnprofitable prayers for the soules deceased, with the like false worship of God in all pointes. Then their preaching was highly to Gods dishonour, pernicious to the people, and dam∣nable to them selues. Then haue all that euer ranne the rase of that faith and doctrine, till this daye, which they taught, perished with them: then are they founde false witnesses, whome we haue accompted as our vndoubted, true and lawfull pastors: then God hath purposely deceiued vs with fayned miracles full many, with numbers of vaine visions, then all our labour is lost till this day. The holynesse of so many good princies and priestes is praised in vaine, the bloude of Martyrs shed in vaine, the exercise of all sacraments in vaine: and because all deuotion consisted in our fathers dayes in the earnest zele of so false a religion, as they thinke this to be, then the more deuotion the farther from Christ, the lesse religion, more neere to saluation: then happy was he that was the worst, and cursed was he that was counted the best: then is our case most carefull, then are we worse then all other nations, that neuer receiued the name of Christ: then are we worse then we were before our conuersion, then (to be shorte) there is no religion, no Christ, no God, no hope of saluation. 2 I am content to staye with you, and ponder as much as is meete, the conuersion of the Saxones vnto the faith of Christ. And first I saye that you reason both falsely and foolishly, to proue that either all opinions were true, or else all false, that the Saxones receiued at there first conuersion. For though prayer for the deade, and other superstitious opinions then receiued, were false, yet doth it not follow, that all that then was taught them for Christianity was false. For although Augustine had bene voyde of all true articles of the faith, yet the byshoppes and christian tea∣chers of the Brytish nation, in whose ayde they required, and at last obtayned, to the conuerting of the Saxones, re∣teyned the foundation of fayth Iesus Christ, and the onely sacrifice of his death. And this was the fayth that was re∣ceiued euen of the Saxones, as appeareth by those homy∣lies that yet remaine in the Saxon tongue, appointed to be reade vnto the people for their instruction, and namely
in that printed Saxone homylie, which was appointed to be reade at Easter, where in is declared not onely the faith of the Church at that time, concerning the sacrifice of Christ his death, but also that heresie of popish transubstan∣tiation, and the reall presence of Christes body in the sa∣crament is pithily confuted. And therefore it is altogither vntrue that you say (M. Allen) that they did institute a sacrifice to the defacing of our redemption, as you do: that they did adore the sacrament, as the natural body of Christ as you doe: or counted it a opitiatory sacrifice for the quicke and the deade as you doe: although they vsed vn∣profitable prayers for the deade, and many other supersti∣tions, Neither doth it follow, that all that taught or bele∣ued those errours, so long as they builded vpon Christ the only foundation, haue perished, or that all they taught was false, because some thing was vntrue: or that God hath de∣ceaued vs with fayned miracles, which Satan hath shewed to set vp the kingdom of Antichrist euen in the temple of God, with all lying signes and wonders, 2. Thes. 2. To con∣clude no truth is false, no vertue is vice, no good thing is e∣uill, because all was not true, all was not vertue, all was not good, that was receiued and practised among them. 3 All which things if they repugne to common sense and rea∣son, and to the comfortable hope of our saluation, which we haue receiued from God by Christ Iesus, and the assured testimony of the spirite of God, that we be a part of his chosen Church, & san∣ctified in his holy name by the word of truth and life, which we by the ordinary ministery of man haue receiued (signes and won∣ders confirming their calling and doctrine) then this religion which they planted first in our country, must nedes be in all points both holy, true, and accepable vnto God. Then as by that re∣ligion our fathers were ingraffed first into Christes body misti∣call, which is the Church, in which till this day they haue kept the high way to saluation, so who so euer forsaketh this, or any prin∣cipall article or braunch thereof,Note and take heede betíme. and so leaueth that Church into which we first entered at our conuersion, he leaueth assuredly life and saluation, and without all doubt euerlastingly perisheth. A∣mongest
which pointes of doctrine, our aduersaries can not deny, but the saying masse and offering for the deade, the almes and prayers for the departed, was taught with the first, and proued by miracles with the rest. The which either to deny were ouer much discredit of the antiquitie, and plaine impudencie: or else to at∣tribute them to the deuills working, were open vntollerable bla∣sphemy. 3 There is nothing that you saye in this parte, or that you can say in this respect, to proue that the religion here receiued was in all pointes holy, true, and acceptable to God, because it was in some and those the chiefe, but it may be sayed by the nations of the Gothes and Vandalles, which were first conuerted from hethenish idolatry, to the profession of the name of Christ, by the Arrian heretikes, to defend that there religion was in all pointes holy, true, and acceptable to God, or by them that were conuerted by the Donatistes, Nouations, or any other heretikes. For al∣though the Arrians were blasphemous heretikes, yet they tought many thinges truely and soundly concerning the faith of christianitie. And therefore no more then the reli∣gion of the Arrians, who first turned those nations was true in all pointes, though it were in many: no more I saye was euery article that was tought vnto the Saxons, which were conuerted by superstitious Romanistes, in all pointes true, notwithstanding that many things and the principall were true: So much therefore as may be iustified by the worde of God of that doctrine, is holy, true, and acceptable to God, but that which is contary to the doctrine of the holy Scriptures, is neither receiued from God, nor Christ, neither hath it any testimony of his spirite, by what pre∣sumptuous words, o apperance of signes and wounders so euer it be vttered. Neither is it any greater offence for the English men, to renounce the error of praying for the deade, or abusing the communion to the similitude of a sacrifice, or any other superstition, then or at any time after receiued: then it was for the Gothes or Vandalles, to for∣sake the hereticall and blasphemous opinions of the Ar∣rians,
by whome they were first perswaded to reuerence the name of Christ, or for any other that were turned by any heretikes, to forsake their first errors, and geue place to the trueth after reueiled vnto them. And whereas you af∣firme, that we can not deny, but that Masse, offering, almes, and prayer for the deade, were taught with the first, and proued by miracle with the rest: we may be bolde to deny, that they were at ye first taught so grossely, as they be now maintained impudently. And as for miracles, I meane such as were prophecied, to be the efficacy of error in the king∣dome of Antichrist, we will confesse, that these and like errors had alwayes great plenty to establish them, as they which had no authoritie out of the holy Scriptures to ap∣proue them. 4 Yea this doctrine hath brought the Church to this bewti∣full order in all degrees as we haue seene. All the noble monu∣ments, not onely in our common wealth, but through Christes Church doe beare sufficient testimony of our first faith herein. This doctrine (as the whole world knoweth) founded all Bishop∣rikes, builded all Churches, raised all Oratories, instituted all Col∣legies, indued all Schooles, mainteyned all hospitalles, set forward all workes of charity and religion, of what sorte so euer they be. Take awaye the prayers and practise for the deade, either all those monuments must fall,If praying for the dead vvere takē avvay, ther should no steppe of religion remayne. or else they must stand against the first founders will and meaning. Looke in the statutes of all noble foū∣dations, and of all charitable workes, euer sith the first day of our happy calling to Christes faith, whether they doe not expresly te∣stifie, that their worke of almes and deuotion, was for this one es∣peciall respect, to be prayd and song for, as they call it, after their deathes. Looke whether your Vniuersities protest not this fayth by many a solemne oth, both priuatly and openly. Looke whether all preachers that euer tooke degree in the Vniuersitie before these yeares,All our su∣perinten∣dents are deepely & daily periu∣red. are not bound by the holy Euangelistes, to pray for certayne noble Princes and Prelates of this Realme, in euery of their sermons at Paules, or other places of name. And so often as these preachers doe omitte it, so often are they periured: so of∣ten as they eyther eate or drinke of their benefactors cost, so of∣ten
beare they testimony of their owne damnation. 4 This and almost all the rest to the ende of the chap∣ter, might be as wel the expostulation of the heathen men with the Apostles, or them that first preached the faith of Christ. Were there not as goodly building of temples, col∣ledges, and vniuersities among the heathen as are among vs at this daye? but all they were builded and indowed by men of a contrary religion, doth it thereore follow, that their religion was good, which erected such noble monu∣ments, both of their common welth and of their religion? Although it is most false that Allen affirmeth, that this doctrine founded all byshopprickes, builded all Churches &c. but admit it were so, what argument were that to proue that his religion were true? Our stories testifie, that at the first conuersion of this lande to Christianity, in the time of Lucius, that arch flamines of the Paganes, were conuerted to archbyshopprickes. And the Pagane flamines, were con∣uerted to Bishopprickes, and so the temples of the Paganes were conuerted into the Churches of the Christians. Gre∣gory also instructeth Augustine, how he should conuerte the temples of the Idolatrous Saxons vnto the vse of the Chri∣stian Churches. If these stories be true, then is it both false that M. Allen sayth that his doctrine of Purgatory founded all Bishopprickes, Churches, &c. and also that all Bishop∣prickes, Churches, colledges, &c. must remaine in the re∣ligion of them by whome they were first founded: he pro∣cedeth further to charge all our superintendents of periu∣ry, for not keeping their othe made in the vniuersity to praye for the deade. Let them that haue made such othe aunswere for them selues, I am sure he lyeth of many and of the most of them, for that othe was onely in Oxeford for any thing that I haue heard which vniuersity hath yeil∣ded fewe to that place as yet. But it is certaine, that your popish Bishoppes of Queene Maries time, almost euery one and the chiefest, Bonner, Gardyner, Heth, Hopton, Therlebye, &c. were manifestly periured, against that othe, which they tooke in K. Henry & K. Edwarde his daies, to maintaine the
kinges supremacie against the vsurped power of the Pope. This all the world knoweth and therefore ye may be asha∣med to accuse our superintendents of periurye, of whome I am sure you can name but a fewe that euer tooke the oth. 5 Aunswere me but one question I aske you: VVhether the first authors of such benefites as you enioye in the Church at this daye,A harde questiō pro¦posed to the Prote∣stant. either of bishoppricke, or colledge, or any other spirituall liuely hoode, say your mindes vnfeinedly, whether they euer mēt that such men, of such a religion, of such life, of such doctrine, should enioy that almes which they especially ordeined for other men, and for contrary purpose? say trueth and shame the deuill, thought they euer to make roume in Collegies for your wiues, mēt they euer to mainteine preachinge against the Masse, against prayers for their owne soules? when they purposely vpon that grounde beganne so godly a worke? if they in deede neuer ment it, as I knowe they did not, and as your owne consciencies beare witnesse with them, and against your selues that they did not, how can you then for feare of Gods high displeasure, against their owne willes, vsurpe those commodities which they neuer ment to such as you be. A lasse good men, they thought to make freindes of wicked Mammon, and full dearly, with both landes and goods, haue they procured enemies to their owne soules. But if there be any sense in those good fathers and founders (as there is) and if they be in heauen, as their good deseruing I trust hath brought them, then surely they accuse you most iustly of wicked vniustice before the face of God, for deluding the people, for breaking their willes, for usurping their commodities, against their professed mindes and meaninges. Or if they be in hell (which God for∣fende, and yet you must needes so suppose, for raysing the monu∣ments of such superstition) then blotte out their memorie and names, that haue not onely in their life mainteined horrible abusies, but also after their death haue lefte such open steppes of superstition, to all posteritie. 5 The same question you maye demaunde of the fa∣thers of the primitiue Church, and in deede the same que∣stion or the like was demaunded of them, and it is not so
harde to answere as you imagine. Many of these Churches and colledges, yea the most notable cathedrall Churches in England, were builded for preachers of the Gospell and there wiues to dwell in. Our stories are plentifull in that point, that they were the first inhabiters of them and after∣warde, as Idolatrie, and superstition preuailed, were with all violence and iniury expelled out of them, and monkes pla∣ced in their steede. If you be so skilfull in antiquity as you make your selfe, you can not be ignorant of this, which is testified by Ranulphus Castrensis, Mathaeus VVestmonasterien∣sis the storie of Peterburghe and many other. Now whe∣ther any ment to maintaine preaching against Masse or prayers for their owne soules, as we knowe not whether they did or no, so we compt it not materiall. Such liuinges as are appointed by the prince and the lawe for mainte∣naunce of them that preach the Gospell, we maye enioye with a good conscience without regarde of their meaning, that first builded the houses or possessed the landes. For we must not seeke to learne our faith and religion out of their meanings and intentes, but out of the worde of God. And whether the builders of such places, be saued or damned, it perteineth not to vs to iudge, nor to enquire. Such things as were well done of them, we woulde commend if they were heathen men, but if any thing were euill in them, we may not allowe it, though they were neuer so good. 6 Suppose I pray you, which yet I woulde be lothe shoulde come to proofe or passe, but suppose for all that, that with the ta∣king away of this olde faith of praying and offering for the dead, all the workes of the same faith which ishued downe from that fountaine, might shrinke with all, or returne to the founders againe, because there is no rowme to fulfil their willes, how many Churches and Chappelles, what Colledges or hospitalls, woulde our newe no faith bring forth? VVould not euery bishoppes wife builde a Church thinke you, or founde a Colledge in such a ne∣cessitie, lest their husbands shoulde be driuen to serue in a refor∣med french barne? 6 Nowe as touching your vaine supposing, if all such
landes as were geuen to mainteine prayers for the deade, or other like purposes, either good or supposed to be good should reuerte to the heyers of their first founders, for not performing the intent of the founders, perhaps fewe mo∣nasteries, colledges, or hospitalles, In Italy, Spayne, Fraunce, or Flaunders, shoulde enioy one halfe peny worth of their landes, or reuenewes. They ment, not onely to be prayed for, but to be prayed for, by men of honester conuersation then the greatest parte of those cloysterers are. They are too well knowen to the worlde, to be taken for that they be called, holy, religious, and chaste. But suppose as you sayde, that we had no manner of Churches to assemble in, though byshoppes wiues be not able to builde them, yet we doubt not but in the time of peace and tranquilitie, vn∣der godly princes, we shoulde haue as many and as faire builded Churches as the religion of Christ hath neede of. Haue you not hearde of the Churches builded in Orleans and Antwerpe & other places by the professors of the Gos∣pell. But if it were in time of persecution and tyranny, I doubt not, but all godly bishoppes, had rather serue in a french reformed barne, then in a popishe gilded minster. And how so euer you iest like a scornefull caytifie, of those holy assemblees of Gods children in Fraunce, there barnes are more like those caues and vaultes vnder the earth that the olde Christian byshoppes were content to serue in, be∣fore the time of Constantine, thē your Idolatrous Babyloni∣call temples, are like those princely buildings, that by Con∣stantine and other Christian princes were first set vp for the publicke exercise of Christian religion. 7 One of these mocke byshoppes complaines very sore in a booke of his,Super Ag∣gaeum. that men be not now bent with such zele and deuo∣tion to preferre Gods honour, in maintenaunce of his Ministers, as they were in olde time, and as Constantinus, with the like christiā Princies in the primitiue Church, were. But the good man marked not wherevpon this colde deuotion ariseth: he conside∣reth not, that this is the fructlesse effect of so idle a false faith, as his owne lordship preacheth: he would not see that the main∣tenaunce
of Gods honour, both by liefe, landes and goods, in the peculiar fructe of that charitable louing faith, which the Catho∣likes doe professe: he weyed not well, that the great grauntes of Constantinus, were made to Syluester Bishop of Rome, and not to the maried Byshop of Duresme. He remembred not, that the like holy workes of the noble kinges of our owne countrie, were practised vpon such as would professe the trueth, and serue the altar, and not vpon false pastors, that were destroyers of all altars. Such honorable portions were parted out for Gods lot, and not taken from the worlde, to goe to the worldely againe. Thinke you any man were so minded, to take from his owne wife and chil∣dren, either landes or goods, to bestow on priestes babbes or bed∣fellowes? No no God knoweth: it was separated from them selues to the sacrifice, to the priesthoode, to the honour of Gods Church and ministerie. The which thinges by your owne preaching (my lordes) decaide, woulde you haue the Prince or peoples deuotion towardes you, as is was, and woulde be still, if you were like your predecessors, and serued the altar as they did? I wisse if the olde S. Cuthbert, Wilfride, and William, whome they compare in holynesse to horsies (so good is their opinion of their holy aun∣cieters) had bene of the same religion that the occupiers of their roumes now be, all the Prelates in England might haue put their rentes in a halpeny purse. Come in againe, come in for Christes sake, come in to the Church againe, serue the altar, and then you be wort to liue of the altar: followe our fathers, and you shall be loued as our fathers were, confesse that religion which our owne Apostles first taught, and we all haue beleued, and all the workes of Gods Church protest to be true, and then you shall be blessed of God, and honoured of men. 7 You are a priuileged person as your owne talke doth declare, and therefore you may prate what you list, if he be a mocke bishoppe, which beside his excellent learning, is also a painefull and diligent preacher of the Gospell, what are those vnlearned Asses, and rechlesse ruffians of your secte, which haue nothing of a bishop but a rotchet and a myter, or because I will not charge you with the worst, what are they which if they haue some more learning then
the rest (of which number there are but fewe) yet they count it the least part of their office, to preach and teach, which S. Paule counteth to be chiefe part of a Christian shepeheard & ouerseer. But to leaue the name & come to the matter, you mistake that godly mans complaint, if you thinke he meaneth of superfluous buyldinges of Syna∣goges, whereof you speake, or the vnnecessary enryching of Prelates, whereof you meane, when he speaketh of the necessary sustentations of a great number of Pastors, which through the rauening of your gluttonous Monkes, be rob∣bed of their portions. And whereas you aunswere, it is the fruite of so idle a false faith, as his lordship preacheth, your mastership lyeth. For that fayth which he preacheth, is both a true and a working faith, which if it were as gene∣rally receiued, in this land, as it is truely preached by him and others, the ministers of Gods word could lacke no li∣uings, as God be thanked they neither doe nor can lacke sufficient for necessity, among so many of high authority, nobility, and wealth, as doe vnfaynedly professe the Go∣spell, and dayly bring forth the fruites of a true, liuely, wor∣king, and onely iustifying fayth. The Churches of Fraunce in time of greatest persecution, yet haue alwayes liberally susteyned their Pastors, And as for the great grauntes, that Constantine made to Syluester Byshop of Rome, of such as he made in deede, he made to married Byshops of Rome, as some of them were since Syluester time, rather then vn∣to Syluester the coniurer, Hildebrand the hell hounde, Iulius the warriar, or any that succeeded Boniface the third, which beside their abominable life, were all heretikes and Anti∣christes. And touching such benefites as were receiued at the handes of princes, and noble men of our cuntry, if they were ment to be bestowed vpon ye professors of the truth, and such as serue the aulter of God, they are now bestow∣ed according to their founders intent. For they that serue the aultar of God, must needes pull downe the aultars of i∣dolls. And if any portions that were taken from the world, be gone to the worldely agayne, I meane the Abbies and their landes, it is the iust plague of God vpon them, that
vnder hypocrisie of forsaking the world, liued not like men of the world, but like deuills of hell. And whereas you aske agayne, if any man would take from his owne wife & chil∣dren, to bestow vppon Priestes wiues and children, I haue aunswered before, that the chiefe collegiat Churches in England, were first inhabited of married Priestes, which taught sounder doctrine and liued a more chast life, then the Epicureous Monkes that succeeded them. I might aske of you M. Allen if they meant not to mainteyne Priestes wiues & their children, whether they ment rather to main∣teyne Priestes whores & their bastardes, Byshops brothells, and their minions. Sodom and Gomor of Monkes & Fry∣ers, it was neither Cutberd, VVilliam, nor VVilfryde, we∣ther they were holy or superstitious, but the prouidence of God, that appointed such portion as the Church now en∣ioyeth, & if the same by any meanes should be taken from them, yet God hath appointed that they which preach the Gospell, shall liue of the Gospell. We are not so carefull of worldly liuelihood, as you (knowing your owne disease) i∣magine that we should be, that we would come into your filthy Synagoge, to winne Cardinalls hatts, or Archbishops palls, some of vs if they had sought worldly promotion, by abusing their learning & wittes, to ye maintenaūce of your horrible heresies, needed not to haue come frō you, to seke preferment among the Protestants, which you know is nei∣ther so great, nor so easy to come by as among the Papists. 8 But let them on thinke on these matters them selues. I will turne againe to my purpose, although I can not goe farre from my matter, so longe as I am in the beholdinge of that faith which our first preachers brought vnto vs at our first conuersion, or in any steppe of the antiquitie: which we well perceiue to be the fructe only of that doctrine which we haue declared, and an eui∣dent testimony of so vndoubted a trueth. I thinke there is no way so certaine for the contentation of a mans selfe, in this time of doubting and diuersitie in doctrine, as in all matters to haue an eye towards the faith which we receiued, when we were first con∣uerted. And for that point, I woulde wishe that S. Bedes history
were familiar vnto all men that hath vnderstanding of the La∣tine tongue, and to all other if it were possible: for there shall they plainely see, the first beginning, the increase, the conti∣nuance, the practise, the workes proceding out of the catholike faith: feare not that is the trueth, for that was the first, and that was grounded by Gods worde, and openly confirmed by miracle. And that point must be considered not onely for our owne coun∣trie, but for all others that be, or hath bene Christianed. For into the selfe same faith were they first ingraffed also: as by the pe∣culiar practising of euery good man towardes his freinde and louer, I haue already declared, and nowe for the generall vsage of Gods Church the reader shall at large perceiue, that nothing may wante to our cause, whereby any trueth or light may be had. 8 The conclusion of your chapter, is a recourse to the beginning, you thinke it is the suerest way, to looke to that faith in all poyntes, which this land first receiued. If men should follow your counsell, as in some things they should follow your faith which you now teach, so in many poynts & namely in that which you coūt the chiefe, (the reall pre∣sence of ye naturall body of Christ) they should go as farre from that you teach, nowe, as you would haue them come neare some things that were receiued thē. And wheras you wish that Bedes history, for that purpose were made famili∣ar, and some of you in deede haue taken paynes to tran∣slate it into English, they that list not to be deceiued but to see into what faith all nations were conuerted, that were turned by the Apostles, they were better to consider the word of God and the history of the actes of the Apostles, which if you durst abyde the tryall thereof, you would ex∣hort men to reade it, at least wise that vnderstand Latine. And if you were as zealous to sette forth the glory of God as you are earnest to mainteyne your owne traditions, one or other of you which haue so longe founde faulte with our translations of the scripture, woulde haue taken, paines to translate them truely your selues, as well as to translate Bedes booke, or else to write such bables, as you doe M. Allen and all the packe of you, but all in vayn, to
shadowe the same, whose right shoulde easely discusse all clowdes of darke doctrine and the more it is impugned, the more bright shall it shewe, and the more it is compa∣red with darkenesse the more glorious it shall appeare. That in euery ordre or vsage of celebration of the blessed sa∣crament and Sacrifice, through out the Christian vvorlde, since Christes time, there hath bene a solemne supplication for the soules departed. CAP. XI. 1 THerefore let vs see howe the Church our mother, of her piety vseth generall supplication in all seruice, and solemne administration of the blessed sacramēt, euen for those whose freindes haue forgotten them: whose paines and trauell worldely men remembre not: whose ob∣scure condicion of life or pouerty, woulde not suffer them to pro∣cure prayers, by their knowen deedes of charity or almes. Those men I say, that doe lacke singular patronage of their freindes, those hath she remembred in the rites of celebration, vsed in all countries, and in euery age sithens the Apostles dayes. VVhich ordres of diuine seruice, as they haue bene diuers in forme of wordes, so they perfectly and wholy agreed in the substance of the sacrifice, in praying and offering for the deade, and supplica∣tion to sainctes, as thou shalt straight wayes by their vsed ordre of wordes perceiue. And as we goe forwarde herein, euer let vs beare this rule in minde. Quòd legem credendi, lex statuit supplicandi, in that sense speaketh S. Augustine often against heretikes: the ordre of the Churches prayer,So sayth S. Augustine oftē against the Pela∣gians. is euer a plaine prescriptiō for all the faith∣full what to beleue. And the motherly affection that the Church beareth towardes all her children departed, the saide doctor thus expresseth:De cura pro mort. Non sunt praetermittendae supplicationes pro spiritibus mortuorum, quas faciēdas pro omnibus in Chri∣stiana & Catholica societate defunctis, etiam tacitis nomi∣nibus quorumcūque, sub generali cōmemoratione suscepit ecclesia: vt quibus ad ista desunt parentes, aut filij, aut qui∣cunque cognati, vel amici, ab vna eis exhibeantur pia matro
cōmuni. That is to say in our tongue. Prayer must not be omit∣ted for the soules departed, which the Church hath customably taken in hande for all men passed in the Christian Catholike so∣ciety, by the way of a generall commemoration, their names not particularly expressed: that such thinges may be prouided by our common kinde mother, to all those which doe lacke parents, chil∣dren, kinsfolke or freindes, for the due prouision of such neces∣sary dueties. By this holy mans wordes we may see the difference betwixt our owne tender naturall mother, and the cursed cruell steppe dame. The one followeth her children with loue and affe∣ction into the next world, with full sorowfull sighes, many deuout prayers, and all holy workes: which she vseth to their needefull helpe: the other being but an vnnaturall steppemother, and all the children of that adoulterous seede, hath them no longer in minde then they be in sight: whether they sinke or swim she maketh no accompt: she hath no blessing of her owne, she hinde∣reth the mercy of other. CAP. XI. 1 THe argumentes of your chapters be like the gates of Lyndum which being but a very litle citie, had exceding great gates, in so much that Diogenes willed them to shut them vp, for feare least their city went out of them. Euen so your titles are merueillous large, but the matter of your treatise, is won∣derfull streight. In the last chapter, we shoulde haue had prayer and sacrifice for the deade, with the conuersion of all nations, but a lacke we coulde not obteine so much, as the same altogether in one poore nation of the Saxons, and them (as some thinke) not so much conuerted from Gentility to Christ, as peruerted from pure Christianity to superstition. Nowe shall we haue euery order of celebra∣tion, sence Christes time, with solemne supplication for the soules departed, but our probation shall not beginne vntill three or fower hundreth yeares after Christes time, sauing that for a preamble, we shall haue a cople of players come vppon the stage, the one to counterfect Clemens the
auncient, the other to beare the name of Dionysius the A∣reopagite. But such disguised doctors, haue bene already to often shifted out of their players garments, and shewed to the worlde in their owne apparell, that any which hath wit should not be nowe deceiued by them. And as concerning the diuerse formes of Liturgies, which you saye doe per∣fectly and wholy agree with your masse, as they be corrupt, and falsely beare the name of them to whome they be in∣scribed, so notwithstanding, being of some antiquity, they differ almost as much from your masse, as your masse dif∣fereth from our forme of celebration of the communion. But to follow you at the heeles, as farre as you dare goe: I will agree with S. Augustins rule, that the lawe of beleuing, shoulde make a lawe of praying, but faith if it be true, hath no other grounde but the worde of God, therefore prayer if it procede of true faith, hath no other rule to frame it by, but the worde of God. And though Augustine proue a∣gainst the Pelagians, which allowed the prayer of the Church, that the Church woulde not so praye, except she did so beleue, yet it followeth not, neither doth he meane to defend, that what so euer the visible Church receiueth is true, if it be not agreable to the worde of God, and there∣fore all other perswasions set a side, he prouoketh onely to the scripture, to trye the faith and doctrine of the Church. Which rule if he had as diligently followed, in examininge the common error of his time, of prayer for the deade at that time, as he did in beating downe the schisme of the Donatistes, or the heresie of the Pelagians, he woulde not so blindly haue defended, that which by holy Scripture he was not able to mainteine, as he doth in that booke de cura pro mortuis agenda and else where. And where as you com∣pare our Church to a steppe dame, and your Synagoge to a naturall mother, we maye more iustly wringe backe that comparison vpon your noses. For our Church herein ap∣proueth her selfe to be a naturall mother, that she neither keepeth backe from her true children that heauenly inhe∣ritaunce, which their father hath appointed them, nor dis∣sembleth the eternall abdication of them that be obstinate
and rebellious. But your malignant church, sheweth her selfe to be a cursed steppe dame, both in feeding the wic∣ked with a vaine hope of release of paines after this life, and in tormenting the well disposed with a false feare of paines which God hath released, to al them that truely turne vnto him. So her terror tormenteth the vertous, deceiueth the wicked, her hope flattereth the vngodly and disquie∣teth the well affected. The Church of God sendeth her childrē into the euerlasting blessing of their father in hea∣uen, the Church of Rome sendeth her bastards out of the blessing of God, not into the warme sonne, but into whot burning cooles of purgatory to be thence deliuered at ley∣sure, as she promiseth, but neuer to come out of hell fire as they shall finde. 2 But let vs vewe all the orders, that we finde extant or v∣sed through the Christian worlde, for the celebration of the bles∣sed Sacrament and sacrifice, which nowe commonly in our vul∣gare speach we call the Masse, and see whether as Augustine saide, there hath not bene in all ages an especiall supplication of the priest and people, for the dead as well as for the lieue. First S. Clement, the Apostles owne scholar, reporteth how they pre∣scribed this solemne prayer in their holy ministery for the de∣parted:Constitut. l. 8. cap. 47. Pro quiescentibus in Christo, fratres nostri roge∣mus. &c. Let vs pray (sayth the deacon) brethern, for all thoe that reste in peace, that our mercyfull Lorde, that hath taken their soules into his hand, woulde forgiue them all their offensies, whether they were willingly or negli∣gently committed: and so hauing compassion vpon them, woulde bring them to the lande of the holy ones, and hap∣py rest with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob: and all other that pleased him from the beginning. where there is neither sighing, sorow, nor sadnesse. And a litle after in the same holy actiō, the Byshop prayeth him selfe, in this forme. O Lord looke downe vpon this thy seruaunt, whome thou hast receiued into an other life: and pitefully pardon him if either wil∣lingly or vnweetingly he hath offended. Let him be guar∣ded by peaceable Angells, and brought to the Patriarches,
Prophets, and Apostles, and the rest of all them that haue pleased thee sith the worlde beganne. Thus reporteth Cle∣ment, being one of the Apostles companie, and continually pre∣sent in the celebration of their mysteries. 2 S. Hieronyme in his cataloge of Ecclesiasticall wri∣ters, reherseth all the bookes that either were knowen to be written by Clemens, or sayed to be his, and were not. First a profitable epistle to the Corinthians, being like in stile to the Epistle to the Hebrues. Also vnder his name wente a second Epistle, which was reiected of the auncients, like wise the disputatiō of Peter and Appione written in a large treatise, which Eusebius in the third of his Ecclesiasticall storie reproueth. This is all that S. Hieronyme coulde finde concerning his writings. Who then hath raysed from hell these other Decretall epistles and constitutions, that M. Allen and his companions woulde flappe vs in the mouth with all, being nothing else but impudent lyes and foule forgeryes. 3 Againe,Eccles. hie∣rarch. c. 17. Dionysius Ariopagita of whome mention is made in the Actes (so auncient be the recordes of our faith) hath not onely left in writinge what he thought in this matter, which had bene enough, but also what the Church Apostolike in that spring of religion and pure deuotion, taught and ordeyned to be vsed, and that by the Apostles prescription: whome he there tormeth the heauenly gides and capitaines of trueth. For in the last chapter of his booke, titled of the Ecclesiasticall soueraintie, he telleth in ordre, howe first the body is placed before the holy altar, howe the solemne mysteries with heauenly psalmes and sonets be songe and saide ouer the corps, how the holy Bishop ge∣ueth thankes to God, maketh comfortable exhortation to the as∣sembly, to continue in assured hope of the resurrection: how he anointeth the body with holy oyle, and last of all maketh prayers for him, and so committeth him to God. The which whole ordre of the sacrifice, ceremonies, and mysticall prayers, exercised as well in burialls, as at other times in the reuerent mysteries, this author woulde not fully set out in writinge, for their sakes that
coulde not for the weaknesse of faith atteine to the worthy holy∣nesse of so high matters, as he him selfe professeth, in these wordes: Praecationes quae in misterijs adhibentur nephas est scripto interpretari, & misticam eorum intelligentiam aut vim, quae in eis, deo authore, efficacitatem habent, ex abdito in publicum efferre: sed quemadmodum a maiori∣bus nostris traditum accepimus &c: The prayers which be vsed in the misteries, maye not in any wyes be set out to the world in writinge, neither may the singular efficacie and grace of them be made common to all men: but euen as we haue receiued by the handes of our elders. And as longe as this ordre was reli∣giously kept in Gods church, the solemne secrets of the blessed sacraments, were not so contemptible as our news open commu∣nion hath of late made them, where there is nothing so holy but it may abide the sight and handeling, of who so euer is the worst. The holy and heuenly misteries of Christ his spouse, were not then prophaned by the presumptuous babling of euery idle heade: Then were not the soueraigne weighty matters handeled in ale∣houses, but vsed at the holy altars. Then the idle, contentious, vngodly, and vnprofitable quirkes and questions, had no other so∣lution but sharpe discipline, and worthy correction: then were not the Gides of Gods people controwled by euery restlesse fel∣lowe, that coulde cracke of Gods worde: but it was enough for a faithfull mans contentation to say with Basil the greate: Domi∣nus ita docuit,In homil. contra Sa∣bellian. Athan: ad Epitectum. apostoli predicauerunt, patres obseruaue∣runt, confirmauerunt martyres, sufficiat dicere ita doctus sum. Our Lorde taught so, the Apostles so preached, our fathers obserued the same, the holy martyrs haue sealed it, It is sufficient for me to say: so was I taught. O Lord, that this simple sincere fide∣litie might once take place againe in our dayes, for the comforte of the poore faithfull flocke, that are now so burdened with que∣stions of infidelitie, that the sely simples soules can not tell howe to turne them selues, nor finde meanes to kepe their faith inuio∣lated, in such a multitude of misbeleuers. VVhich I surely hope the earnest and pityfull prayers of so many good men that do be∣waile this miserie, shall at length after due punishment of our innes obteine at Gods gratious handes. But what sifte doe the aduersaries here make, with this euident testimonie of this so
auncient a writer? mary sir they indeuour with all their might, to robbe this excellent aunciēt & diuine writer of all his workes, whiche haue borne the title of his name euer sith they were writen:Ita Suidas testatur. which chalenge their owne author by that graue stile that no other man, as the skillfull in that language doe testifie, coulde euer lightly atteine vnto: which so sauore of the antiquity, and the Apostolike spirite, that thou woulde deeme them to be indi∣ted by some of the continuall hearers of Christ Iesus. But it were vaine to stande in contention for this matter, for we shoulde ne∣uer haue ende, if we should be put to proue that euery man made the bookes which be extant in his name: it were to much mis∣credit of antiquitie, and vncertainty of all thinges. Although this mans workes haue bene both named,Origen. Athan Damascen. Nicenum. 2. and certeine sentences alleaged out of them, by most auncient doctors and councells. VVith whome, the aduersaries if they list be busie, shall wrestle, for I will seeke out as my purpose was, whether in other times and vsages of celebration, this kinde memoriall of the deade, hath not bene kept. 3 If Dionysius the Aeropagite, had written any thing, or any Dionysius had written any bookes entituled de eccle∣siastica Hierarchia before S. Ieronyms time, or in his time, he would not haue left him out in his Cataloge of Ecclesiasti∣call writers, which he continueth from the passion of Christ vnto the 14. yeare of Theodosius the Emperour, or if any such writer, or writing had bene knowne in the Church two hundreth yeares after, Gennadius which addeth, if any were omitted by Ieronym, and continueth his cataloge vn∣to the raigne of Zeno or Anastasius, in which time he liued, he would not haue passed him in so deepe silence. yea the man him selfe, euen in the wordes that M. Allen rehear∣seth, plainly declareth, that he was not that Areopagite cō∣uerted by S. Paule, for then he would not haue sayd. Quem∣admodum a maioribus nostris traditum accepimus, as we haue receiued it of our auncestors. But as we haue receiued of the Apostles them selues, of whom Dionysius him selfe was turned to the faith. As for Suidas is to late a witnesse, to know that Ieronym and Gennadius and before them Euse∣bius
knew not. But M. Allen thinketh, he hath made a witty defence for these bookes, to be written by Dionysius the Areopagite, when he sayth we should neuer haue ende, if we shoulde be put to proue, that euery man, made these bookes, that be extant in his name. But what if we should receiue all bookes to be authenticall, that beare the name of some worthy person, shoulde we not thinke you haue many goodly treatises in the name not onely of auncient doctors, but euen of the Apostles them selues? But Origen and Athanasius both name this Dionysius and allege senten∣ces out of him, Shew that M. Allen and you haue wonne the fielde, for Dionysius credit except it be out of such Ori∣gens and Athanasiusses as this Dionysius is or as Damascene and the second Nycene councell alleage, to whom what so euer could be counterfected to serue their purpose, was wellcome and well receiued. Epist. 9. li. 1.4 S. Cyprian shall not be called to recorde for the Church of Aphrike or Carthage, because we hearde his iudgement be∣fore: who plainely commaunding the priestes vnder his iurisdi∣ction not to celebrate for certaine notorious offenders, geueth vs to witte, that of right and custome it belonged in his prouince to others that passed hense in obedience and piety. The which was continued in that part of the worlde till Augustines time, being about C C. yeares after him. Thus breefely he telleth you the practise of his Church. In praecibus sacerdotis quae domino deo ad eius altare fundūtur,De cura pro mortuis. & alibi saepe. locum suum habet etiam com∣mendatio animarum. In the prayers of the priest, which are made to our Lorde God at his altar the commendation of the de∣parted hath a place. 4 S. Cyprian should be called to record, if you could tel what to make him say. He plainly commaunded the Priests vnder his iurisdiction not to celebrate for certeyne noto∣rious offenders. He writeth to the Elders, Deacons, and people of Furnitanes. It were harde for you to proue, that all they to whome he did write were vnder his iuris∣diction. But I haue aunswered before, that neither prayer
nor sacrifice for the dead, can be proued out of that place, but thankes geuing for the departing, and sleeping in peace of the godly, & prayer for the liuing to make the like god∣ly ende. As for that which was done in Augustines time, doth not proue what was done 200. yeares before him. 5 Nowe for the Greeke Churchies and the Easte, S. Chry∣sostome and Basil in their Massies (for so nowe the worde Ly∣turgia is vsed of all the diuine writers, and so Erasmus transla∣teth it, and so it must needes be taken) beare sufficient witnesse of the Apostolike tradition in this point. For in S. Chrysostoms seruice thus the prayer is made for the dead:Lyturgia Chrysosto. Remembre good Lord our spiritual father and all the brotherhood in Christ, and all those that are departed hense in faith, our fathers and our brethern &c. And againe in the same Masse after∣warde, thus he prayeth: Remembre all those, good Lorde, which haue taken their sleepe in the hope of resurrection, and life euerlasting: Cause them to take rest, where the light of thy countenaunce is shewed.Lyturgia Basilia. In S. Basilles Masse which the Syrians vse, there is also prayers for the departed: in which the minister desireth God to remembre all them which be passed out of this worlde: and that he woulde refreshe them in his holy tabernacle, saffely leade them through the horrible and fearefull dwellings, & place them in quiet and ioyfull abidinge: that he woulde deliuer them from the lande of darkenesse, troble, and sorowe: that he entre not into iudgement with them, finally that he woulde mer∣cyfully remitte and pardon, what so euer they committed through the vesture of the flesh, that was worthy punish∣ment. This prayer was pithy, and toucheth the placies of punish∣ment and purgation in the next life. 5 Now come in the Liturgies vnder the name of Chry∣sostome and Basill, which M. Allen wil needes translate mas∣ses, and who can let him, seeing he sayth the worde is so v∣sed of all diuine writers, and Erasmus him selfe translateth it so. This man is very generall, alwayes, all men, all di∣uines &c. But why is Erasmus brought in? who as he trans∣lateth
Lyturgia for Masse, so he iudgeth that Chrysostome and Basill were not authors of those Lyturgies, but some later men. But be it that Chrysostome and Basill did write these Ly∣turgies the oldest fathers that can be geuen them, I woulde knowe, what Lyturgies they had in those Churches, before Chrysostome and Basill deuised those formes that are sayed to be theirs. And why Chrysostome, Basill, Gregory, or any other that prescribed new formes of seruice, were not con∣tent with the old formes, that were vsed in their Churches before their dayes. vndoubtedly because they were to sim∣ple for their curiositie, to sincere for their superstition, sa∣uoring of the auncient trueth, not fauoring their lately re∣ceiued errors. They had in deede in elder time as appea∣reth by Ephiphanius the name of oblation, but it was for the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, and martyrs, which plainely sheweth, that it was but an offering of thankes ge∣uing, as Cyprian doth declare, that they offered sacrifice for Laurentius and Ignatius martyrs, when they did celebrate the yearly dayes in commemoration of their suffering Lib. 4. epist. 5. Of which ceremonies and forme of speaking, as the error perhaps tooke strēgth, so the authors of these Ly∣turgies thought to confirme it by publicke authority, which was before but a blinde error with out a heade. 6 So there is extant an other ordre of diuine seruice and Celebration of the communion,Vniuersalis Canon. called the generall Canon, vsed in Aethyopia: which lately with the rest was set forth in Latine: in that so generall an vsage, there is supplication made to God for the soules also. Remembre Lorde (sayth the minister) all those which are a sleepe, and rest in the faith of Christ, place their soules, we besich thee, in the bosome of our fa∣thers Abraham,Lyturgia Armeniorū. Isaac, and Iacob. So likewise in the seruice of the Armeniās, consonant for the most parte to the Greeke vsage, after supplication in the time of the holy oblation for the liuing, straight waye prayers be deuoutly made for the deade. First the deacon saith. Rogate dominum pro animabus quae requies∣cunt in pace, in primis episcoporum hic quiescentium. That is to say: pray vnto our Lorde for the soules which rest in peace,
namely and before all other, for the Byshoppes resting in this place. And then he prayeth thus: Remembre Lorde and haue mercy, and shewe thy fauourable grace to all the soules de∣ceased, pacifie and illuminate them, adioyne them to the company of holy sainctes in heauen, and make them wor∣thy of thy loue. 6 For the Lyturgies of the Aethiopians and the Arme∣nians, as they are with the other before rehearsed, a great deale more modest then your masses, so are they not of such antiquitie that they can prescribe by continuall clame, vp to the Apostles time, nor with in a hundreth yeares and more of their time, they sauoure plainely as you confesse of the Armenians, the vsage of the Greeke Church, which follow these Lyturgies which beareth name of Chrysostome and Basill. 7 But S. Ambrose in his preparatory prayer towardes the holy oblation,In prima prece prae∣paratoria ad missam. geueth vs an excellent token of his Churchies faith, and a singular example to follow in the time of the dread∣full misteries, when we remembre our freindes departed: thus he saith. Rogamus te sancte pater, pro spiritibus fidelium de∣functorum, vt sit illis salus aeterna ac perpetua sanitas, gau∣dium & refrigerium sempiternum, hoc magnum pietatis sacramentum▪A notable solemne prayer of S. Ambroe for the sou∣les depar∣ted. domine Deus meus sit illis hodie magnum & plenum gaudium de te pane viuo & vero qui de coelo de∣scendisti, & das vitam mundo: de carne sancta & benedi∣cta, agni videlicet immaculati, qui tollis peccatum mundi: & potare de fonte pietatis tuae, qui per lanceam militis de latere emanauit crucifixi Christi, domini nostri, vt consolati exultent in laude & gloria tua sancta. This in English: we be∣sech the most holy father for the soules of all faithfull departed, that this high and greate sacrament of piety, may be vnto them helth and salfty for euer, ioye, release, and perpetuall refreshing: O my Lorde God geue them this daye greate and perfect com∣fort of thee, which art the bread that came downe from heauen, and geuest life to the worlde. Let them take ioye of thy holy and blessed flesh, that is to saye of the lambe that taketh awaye the
sinnes of the worlde. Geue them to drinke of the springe of thy piety, which by the pricke of the souldiers speare, did aboundant∣ly ishue out of the side of our Sauiour Christ and Lorde crucified, that they being so comforted, may reioyse in thy laude and glory euerlastingly. To be brieefe all the Christian worlde agreeing, as Isiodorus saith, vpon one waye for the celebration of diuine my∣steries,De Ecclesi. officijs lib. 1. Cap. 15. maketh intercession for the faithfull departed, that by the blessed sacrifice, they maye obteine pardon and remission of their sinnes. 7 It is a world to see that you haue nothing in a man∣ner but forged euidence, to proue the antiquitie of prayer for the deade, in publicke seruice of the Church. Who is so ignoraunt in antiquitie, but he that will needes be ob∣stinate, that knoweth not those preparatories to that masse, to be none of S. Ambrose his doings. Otherwise it were not harde to proue, that by the name of sacrifice, he meaneth thankes geuing for the sacrifice of Christ, as the maner of that vnpropre speach was to terme the holy sacrament, which is but the seale of our saluation and not the matter thereof it selfe. To be briefe what so euer Isidorus sayth, if all the worlde agreed, that intercession and sacrifice should be offered for the deade, seeing it disagreeth from the worde of God, and the practise of the primitiue Church so long as it followed the rule of Gods worde, it is no whit to be regarded. 8 For I assure the good reader, that all realmes which nowe by Gods grace are in true faith, and their Christianitie continu∣ing, or else before haue bene, and now by schisme doe forsake the same, that all those nations as they receiued one faith, so in sub∣stance they haue euer agreed vniformely in order of seruice, which they receiued at their first conuersion from the way of gen∣tilitie, by the good prouision of such, as wrought vnder God in their happy turne to the Christian faith, and religion. The same men that brought in the faith of Iesus, with all brought in this way of worshipping Christ in the same faith, take away then this order of worship, and solemne supplication which they planted,
thou must needes ouerthrowe the faith which they taught also. This I say was euer found, in the celebration of the fearefull my∣sterie of Christes body and blood, besides the oblation of that ho∣ly host for the quicke and dead both namely for certaine, and ge∣nerally for all departed in Christ, a solemne prayer and supplica∣tiō. VVhich no doubt Christ instituted at his last supper, which the holy Ghost afterward secretly suggested to the Apostles, which they againe faithfully deliuered to the nations conuerted by their preaching, and to diuerse of their owne disciples: by whom the same was deriued downe to our dayes, taught in all nations, and carefully practised of all people. VVhereof we haue worthy witnesses for all countries almost. For so the godly doctors Ter∣tullian, Cyprian, Augustine, both taught and worshipped in Africke, the same doth Hierom and Damascene in Syria, Origen and Athanasius in Egypte. Denyse the auncient, and Bernarde in Fraunce, Chrysostome in Thrase, Basill and his brethern in Cappadocia, Ambrose and Gregory the greate in Italy, Augustine our apostle and Bede in our countrie of England: with the rest of all nations baptized, whome I named before, and might doe yet a number: what shoulde I say a num∣bre? all that euer were counted Catholikes since the beginning, were of the same sense in that cause. And to name the residue where these do not serue, it were lost labour. For whome they can not moue, I can not tell what maye perswade him in any matter. Or if he dare not bestow his credit on these mens doinges, whome maye he salfely trust? If the communion and faithfull fellow∣ship, of so many godly and gracious men so vniformely consen∣ting both in the teaching and practising of this matter, can not sattell and quiet a mans conscience, who can appeace his disquie∣ted vnsteadfast minde and cogitation? If in the construing of Gods word and scriptures, so many of such graue iudgement, of so approued wisedome, of so passing learning, of such earnest stu∣die in tryall of the trueth, of so vertuous a life, of so heauenly a gifte and grace in the expounding of Gods worde, maye not be salfely followed in this our search, whome shoulde we follow, or to whome shoulde the simple addicte them selues, in so greate a turmoyle of learned men: one sorte craking so fast of scripture, and the other sorte, when the matter commes to triall, alleaging
so many, with so auncient and graue testimony for the true mea∣ning of the same? to which I saye, is it wisedome to geue consent and credit? if not to such as faithfully both followe and recite the scripture with the agreement of the worlde for the true sense thereof.Lib. 2. cap. 3. Contra e∣pistolā Par∣meniani. S. Augustine writing against Parmenianus the Dona∣tiste, much woundereth in that cleere light of trueth and the Churches doctrine, the heretikes coulde be blinde, or not see the euidence of that, which all the worlde but them selues sawe. And in many places he reckeneth the most horrible punishment in the worlde, to be the cecity and blindenesse which God striketh the stubborne mans hearte with all, in forsaking the fellowship of the Churches children. But he that considereth the processe of our cause, maye a thousand times more maruaill and feare Gods heuy iudgement, in the blinding of the disobedient mens heartes and senses for sinne. If they them selues were of their consciences examined, what els they would wishe for the triall of any doubt, I am sure they coulde name no one point, nor any meanes in the worlde, which our cause woulde not suffer and admitte. For by what waye so euer, any trueth in Gods Church was seuerally in the auncient times auouched against the aduersary heretike, I am sure we haue the same with the aduauntage. And for this last point of prayers in the Masses of all nations, it is so euident, that no man can gaine saye it: and so generally practised, that the vsage of praying coulde in no matter euer so cleerely set out the certaintie of our belefe, as in this. 8 If you will take M. Allens assurance in so weighty a matter, that vseth so commonly to lye, in euery tryfling matter, you are worthy to be deceiued. And that you may see I doe him no wrong, see I pray you how shamefully he lyeth in this matter, whereof he maketh such impudent as∣surance. He sayth the same men which brought in the fayth, brought in the same order of seruice, and planted the same sup∣plication, wherein they haue vniformly continued, &c: take away the same order, and ouerthrow the fayth which they taught. But who doth not know, that Chrysostom, Basill, Ambrose, Grego∣ry, which he nameth to be the first auctors of those orders of seruice & formes of supplication, which before he com∣mended,
were not the first, that brought in the fayth into Cappadocia, Thracia, or Italy. But ye Apostles them selues, and that those Churches continued more then 300. yeares with other formes of publike prayers, and celebration of the sacraments before these men were borne. And where he sayth there was euer found in the celebration of the sa∣crament, beside oblation of the host for the quicke and the deade, both particularly and generally, a solemne prayer for all departed in Christ: You must take it, as the rest of his assertions, which be euer more generall then their proba∣tions. But to reproue his vanitie, the order of prayers and administration of the holy misteries, described by Iustinus Martyr in his second Apologie, and of Tertullian also in his Apologetico doe sufficiently declare, what was the vsage of the Christians in those purer times. And although there be not set forth vnto them, what forme of wordes they v∣sed in their liturgie, yet is it expressed for whom and what they prayed. Oramus etiam (sayth Tertullian) pro Imperatori∣bus, pro ministris eorum, & potestatibus saeculi, pro rerum quiete, pro mora finis, We pray also for the Emperours, for their mi∣nisters and the powers of this world, for the quiet state of thinges, for stay of the end. Likewise he sheweth, to whom they made their prayers, and what was the chiefest sacri∣fice that they did offer. Haec ab alio orare non possum, quam à quo sciam me cōsecuturum, quoniam & ipse est qui solus praestat, & ego sum cui impetrare debetur famulus eius, qui eum solum obseruo, qui ei offero opimam & maiorem hostiam, quam ipse mā∣dauit, orationem de carne pudica, de anima innocente, de spiritu sancto profatam. These thinges I can not require of any o∣ther, but of him of whom I know I shall obteyne. For it is he alone, which graunteth, and I am he which should ob∣teyne, being his seruaunt, which worship him onely, which offer vnto him that principall and great sacrifice, which he him selfe commaunded, namely prayer proceding out of a chast body, out of a harmeles soule, and from the holy spi∣rite, This he speaketh comparing the prayers and sacrifice of the Christians, with the prayers and sacrifices of the Gentiles. But that I may returne to M. Allen which refer∣reth
the institution of prayer, and sacrifice for the deade to Christ, at his last supper, to the secrete suggestion of the holy Ghost, to the faithfull deliuery of the Apostles, and the constant continuance of all nations. Of whom will he be a feard to lye, when he fathereth such a blasphemy, vp∣on the Apostles, vpon the holy Ghost, and vpon Christ him selfe? But let vs consider your Sorites. Christ you say no doubt, did institute it: where is the warraunt of this vndou∣ted institution? you aunswere secrete suggestion of the ho∣ly Ghost, howe come we to the knowledge of this secrete suggestion? By tradition of the Apostles: who is witnesse that this is the tradition of the Apostles? Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Ieronym, and a great many more. But if it be lawfull for me once to pose the Papistes, as you do often the Pro∣testants, I would learne why the Lord would not haue this doubtlesse institution, and as you take it, the most necessa∣ry vse of the sacrament, plainly, or at least wise obscurely set foth by Matthew, Marke, Luke or Paule, which all haue set forth the story of the action of Christ, the institution of the sacrament, and the ende or vse of the same. If it were not meete at all to be put in writing, why was it disclosed by Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, &c. If it were meete to be put in writing, why were not those chosen Scribes Matthew, Marke, Luke, Paule, worthy of all credit, rather appoynted for it, then Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine and such as you name? But against this counterfect institution, secrete sug∣gestion, and fayned tradition, S. Paule cryeh with open mouth to the Corinthians. 1. Cor. 11. That which I deliuered vnto vnto you, I receiued of the Lorde, that the Lord Iesus the same night, &c. In which wordes he declareth without cou∣ler or couerture, what was the true institution of Christ, of what witnesse he receiued it, with what fidelitie he deliue∣red it, what the sacrament is, and what is the right vse of it, to condemne all maner of abuses what so euer may rise ei∣ther to corrupt this onely true substance, and onely right order of ministration, or to peruert this onely right vse and proper ende thereof. I knowe the Papistes will flie to those wordes of the Apostle, the rest I will set in order when I come,
but that is so manifest to be spoken of matters of externall comlines, and not of doctrine of the sacrament, as prayers and sacrifices, that no man which vnderstandeth what , doth signifie, can doubt or make any questiō of it. Now touching the credit and worthynesse of these, whom he so highly extolleth, as I woulde not goe about to di∣minish it, if they were to be compared with vs, so when they are opposed against the manifest worde of God and the credit of the holy Apostles, the instruments of the ho∣ly Ghost, there is no cause that we shoulde be caried awaye with them. But the controuersie is not (as M. Allen sayth) of the authoritie of the scriptures in this matter, but of the true meaning of them, which it is more like, that they being such men, then we so farre inferior to them, should knowe, I aunswere, they them selues for the most parte confesse, that prayer and oblation for the deade, is not ta∣ken at all out of the scriptures, as Tertullian, Augustine and other, the rest that woulde seeke confirmation in the scri∣ptures, as Chrysostome and such like, doe so manifestly wrest them to their purpose, that the Papistes them selues are a∣shamed to vse those textes of scripture for their proofes. And as for such places, as the later Papistes woulde vio∣lently draw vnto their error, they haue fewe or none of the olde approued writers which though they allow their er∣ror yet that so interpret them, as the place. 1. Cor. 3. and Matth. 5. And what a shamelesse creature is M. Allen, to say the controuersie is about the true meaning of the scripture, when he him selfe in the next leafe before, affirmeth that prayer and sacrifice for the deade, was instituted by Christ at his last Supper, which the holy Ghost afterwarde did se∣cretly suggest vnto the Apostles, and they as secretly deli∣uered to the nations. For, no worde nor halfe worde therof is conteined in their writings, which are to vs the only true testimony of their tradition. Thus haue these heretikes no grounde of their heresie, but shifte from the worde of scri∣pture to secret tradition, from tradition to the meaning of scripture, from the plaine meaning of scripture, to the vn∣constant opinions of men, from the variable and contrary
opinions of men in times past, to their owne obstinacy and continuaunce in error in time present & yet he woundreth, that we are so blinde, that we can not see the cleere light of the trueth. If Satan transforming him selfe into an an∣gell of light, hath so dasled their eyes, that they can not see the true light, they are iustly plagued, because they haue refused the faithfull testimony of Gods worde, which only geueth true light vnto the eyes (as the Prophet saith) and geuen heede to spirites of errors and doctrines of de∣uils, by whom they are blinded in vtter darkenesse, though it be with false imagination and dreaminge of light. Yet see the confidence of the man, he is suer, that if we were examined of our conscience, what triall of this doubt we woulde wishe, there is none we coulde name, but his cause might well abide it. Why M. Allen, we haue testified of our conscience longe agoe, that the onely authority of Gods worde written, shall satisfie vs, as well in this as in all other matters, if you were as desirous to satisfie vs, as you pre∣tend, and as able to performe, as you are to promise, we should haue hearde before this time some sentence of scri∣pture to maintaine, prayer and sacrifice for the deade, not standing vppon voluntary collection, but either in plaine wordes or necessary conclusion. For there is nothing that we are bounde to knowe, nothing that we are bounde to doe, but either in expresse wordes or in necessary colle∣ction, which is as good as expresse wordes, it is set forth in the holy Scriptures. Beside this, you shoulde bring a great preiudice against vs, if you coulde bringe the consent and practise of the primitiue pure Church for the space of an hundreth yeares after Christ. But neither of these doe we looke to see, we before see with our eyes the certainety of those thinges, whereof now we contend in words and wri∣tinges. The heretikes of our time and country, be yet further vrged vvith the practise of prayers for the deceased, their contra∣ry communion is compared vvith the olde vsage of Cele∣bration: They are ashamed of the first original of their Chri∣stian faith, they are vveary of their ovvne seruice, they are
kepte in ordre by the vvisedome of the Ciuile magistrates, and are forced flatly to refuse all the doctors. CAP. XII. 1 THe chiefe argument, that the Church of God vsed in olde time against Pelagius the enemy of Gods grace, was this: that at the holy altar the Priest prayed to God, for to conuert heretikes and infidells to the faith, and euill liuers wicked conuersation to ver∣tue and honesty: the which prayers had bene to no purpose, if the grace of God had not borne the principall stroke in the chaun∣ging of mans hearte. But being assured of this as a grounde, that the prayer of the Priest in the whole Churches name at the altar, can not but beare singular strength and trueth, it is necessarily concluded, that seeing the publike minister so prayeth, that we must needes beleue, that God hath mans hearte in his hande, and may turne it to the belefe of his worde, or loue of his will, as he liketh and listeth: notwithstanding the perfect freedome of mans will, which by Gods grace is neuer perished, but alwayes perfe∣cted. And in this assured foundation of the publike prayers, S. Augustine who then was the souldier of grace, so triumphed a∣gainst one Vitalis a Pelagian, that he ringeth him this peale, Exerce contra orationes ecclesiae disputationes tuas,Epist. 107. contra Vi∣tal. & quā∣do audis sacerdotem dei ad altare exhortantem populum dei orare pro incredulis, subsanna pias voces ecclesiae, & dic te non facere quod hortatur: & homo in Carthagiensi eruditus ecclesia, etiam beatissimi Cypriani librum de ora∣tione dominica condemna. Holde on fellow, exercise thy con∣tentious talke against the vsuall prayers of Gods Church, and whē thou hearest the Priest of God at his altar exhort the people to praye for the misbeleuers, scoffe at the holy wordes, and make him aunswere, thou wilt not pray as he biddes thee: And being brought vp in the Church of Carthage, condemne withall, S. Cyprians worke vpon our Lordes prayer, wherein he teacheth the same. I tary nowe the longer on this point, that thou mayest learne to kepe an heretike at the bay: and to fasten thy stroke so surely vpon him, that which waye so euer he shifte, he shall
beare thy blowe vpon his necke and sholders. It is not for our cause taken in hand, that I now so much trauell, for that is longe sith made sure enough, for all the deuills in Hell, or their fol∣lowers in earth. But I woulde in this one example of praying for the deade, geue the studious a tast of all such wayes, as the trueth of all other pointes in controuersy, may be both surely defended, and so plainly proued and vpholden, that the aduersary shall not be able to say baffe vnto any one of the least of all the groundes, wherevpon Gods trueth standeth. Handeling then our good men as S. Augustine did the like, say to them boldely: that the same Church which exhorteth the people to pray for the misbeleuers, doth geue vs example to pray for the soules departed: Vitalis and Pelagius were heretikes for withstanding the one, they must needes be as very heretikes for refusing the other. It was the greatest extremitie that Pelagius coulde be driuen to by force of Augustines argument, to mocke at the priests prayer made at Gods altar, and that which then was so foule an absurditie for those false teachers, can it be borne out of ours with honestie? Vitalis the Pelagian had a foule foyle by S. Augustine, hen he charged him with the contempt of S. Cyprians authoritie By∣shop of Carthage, being him selfe a hield of the same Church. And shall they goe away so smouthly nowe a dayes, not only with contempe of their owne English patrons and Apostles, but with impudent deniall of all the doctors at once, that euer were gydes of Gods Church sith Christes faith was taught? It was of Augu∣stine counted a singular arrogancy not to praye in that forme as Gods Church and ministers at the altar both praye them selues, and exhorte other to pray: and shall it be such prayse for our preachers to erect a new seruice to be checke mate with the olde, to controele the rites and vsages of solemne supplication in all countries Christianed, and with the true worship to banish toge∣ther our fathers faith? CAP. XII. 1 IN this chapter, where he vomiteth out nothing but rayling and lying, he doth rather bewraye his owne infirmitie, then touch the strength of our cause. For being trobled with a sore laxe of the tongue, which
I take to be a like disease in ye mouth that it is in ye wombe, he gusheth out nothing but bragging, and faceing, scolding, and sclaundering, tauntinge and trifling. And therefore I will but breefely confute his vanity and turne him to his matches to contend in that kind of quarreling. The chiefe argument (he sayeth) that the Church in times past and Augustine the Churches champion, vsed against the Pela∣gians, was to shewe that their heresie was contrary to the publicke prayers of the Church: what shoulde I vse many wordes? I appeale to the iudgement of all Papistes, that haue not loste all vse of naturall reason, and indifferent iudgement, which either haue reade, or will take paines to reade, so many workes as Augustine did write against the Pe∣lagians, whether of an hundreth arguments, that he vseth, this insultation be not one of the feeblest: which tooke no holde of the Pelagians by force of trueth that is in it, but by their owne concession and graunt, of that prayer to be godly and them to be of the Church that so prayed. But now the controuersie is not onely of the substance of do∣ctrine, but of the Church it selfe also. And therefore when Augustine had to doe with the Donatistes that challenged the Church vnto them selues, he setteth all other tryalles aside, and prouoketh onely to the scriptures. Therefore (M. Allen) if you wil teach your schollers to kepe vs at the baye as heretikes, you must not teach them to barke and baule, nothing but the Church the Church, like tinckers curres, but you must instructe them to open conningly out of the scriptures how our doctrine is cōtrary to the trueth, and yours agreable to the same. I do not blame you if you would faine haue that argument of the Church, without tryall which is the Church, to take place, for it woulde ease you and your fellowes of much paine, it woulde serue you both for a sworde and a buckler, all other bookes, argu∣ments and reasons, might be layed a side and keepe silence. The Church sayth it, and we are the Church, therefore it is true. The scriptures them selues are altogether neede∣lesse, where this argument may stand for payment. This is so plaine a proofe, that the aduersaries shall not be able to
saye baffe vnto it. In deede they were but sory whelpes that could not say baffe to the bleating of such a calfe as you are, which thinke that such a foolish cauill, can carry credit with them that haue any cromme of brayne in their heads. The Church prayeth so, therefore it is true. Nay Syr, you pray, and practise to controle the word of God, therefore you are not the Church of God. Proue that you doe not so, or else prate as long as you wil. And thinke not to dorre vs with Cyprians name, where as if you had his iudgement, we might be bold to say as the same Augustine hath giuen vs example: Nos nullam Cypriano facimus iniuriam, cum eius quaslibet literas, à canonica diuinarum scripturarum auctoritate distinguimus. Neque enim sine causa tam salubri vigilantia ca∣non Ecclesiasticus constitutus est, ad quem certi Prophetarum & Apostolorum libri pertinent, quos omninò iudicare non audea∣mus, & secundum quos de caeteris literis, vel fidelium vel infi∣delium liberè vindicemus. Contra Cresconium Gram. lib. 2. cap. 31. We doe Cyprian none iniurie at all, when we put diffe∣rence betwene any of his writinges, from the canonicall authoritie of the holy Scriptures. For not without a cause with so holesome diligence is the ecclesiasticall canon ap∣poynted, vnto which certeyne bookes of the Prophets and Apostles doe perteyne, which we dare not iudge at all, ac∣cording to which we may freely iudge of all other writings either of faithfull men or infidells. And againe in the 32. chapter. Ego huius epistolae auctoritate non teneor, quia literas Cypriani non vt Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex canonicis conside∣ro, & quod in eis diuinarum scripturarum auctoritati congruit, cum laude eius accipio, quod autem non congruit, cum pace eius respuo. I am not bound to the authoritie of this epistle, be∣cause I count the letters of Cyprian not as canonicall scrip∣tures, but I consider them by the canonicall scriptures, and what so euer I finde in them agreeable to the authoritie of holy Scriptures, I take it with his prayse, that which agree∣eth not, I reiect it with his leaue. Iudge here (gentle rea∣der) whether Augustine would or should with any indiffe∣rency, bind either men to the absolute admitting of Cypri∣ans authoritie, wherwith he would not be holden him self,
and know Allen for a Iangler on Augustines wordes against the meaning of Augustine, or any reasonable man. 2 I would learne by what Churches example they haue lefte out of their newe fangled phantasticall seruice, the offering and praying for the departed. One of them was so impudent, to say in an open booke that the Lyturgies of the fathers made all against the Catholikes, & for the proofe of their false assertions. VVhere∣in sir I pray you tell me? I woulde call you by your name, if I knew who you were there you were ashamed of your owne name,I gesse it vvas M. Pil∣kinton of Duresme. therefore ye shall lacke the glory of your assertion. But who so euer you be, I pray you what affinitie betwixt their office of cele∣bration and yours, doe you finde? they offer the holy hoste, they worship it, they shewe it, they pray vnto it, which of all these doe you? they blesse it with the signe of the holy crosse, they pra∣ctise the action vpon an altar, how well follow you these? they pray for the deade, they make inuocation solemnely to sainctes, they ioyne with all catholike Churches in the worlde, where is your cause here amended, or ours not plainely proued? If their seruice like you so wel, or at least better thē S. Gregories Masse, you might with more honestie haue chosed for any one of them, then haue forged a newe one of your owne: which in deede is di∣rectly repugnant to all other rites in the Christian world. VVhich you may well terme the seruice of contradiction and damnation, as one that neither communicateth with the sainctes in heauen, with the soules in purgatory, nor with the faithfull a liue. And being ashamed of the Latine Church, you chalenge an other ori∣gine of faith out of the Easte parte: as though your matter were well amended, if you might shake of that faith and worship which our countrie in her conuersion first receiued, and in which till this daye she hath happely lyued, and make the heade of our holy tradition vncertaine, by referring vs vnto an vnknowen origine. 2 He would know by what churches example, we haue left out of our seruice, which he tormeth like him self, pray∣ers and sacrifice for the deade, as though he hath not bene often tolde by the example of Gods Church▪ whereof w
haue sure warrant out of Gods word by example of the el∣dest Church, and nearest to the Apostles tymes, as we haue shewed out of Iustinus Martyr and Tertullian before he be∣came an heretike. And as for him, that affirmed the old Li∣turgies, to make against your masse, though he be better a∣ble to aunswere for him selfe, yet haue I shewed also, that there are none so full of blasphemy, as your masse is. And it is easie to be gathered by Epiphanius, that the olde forme of liturgie was, but to make mention of the deade, to haue them in remembraunce. And because they vsed to make memory of all sortes of men that were deade in Christ, he expoundeth it according to the errour of his time, that this memory was a prayer for the sinners, for the iust, as Patriarkes, Prophets, &c. a signification that they were in∣ferior to Christ. A simple cause why they should be remem∣bred, but this shift he is driuen vnto, because he did not cō∣sider, that the memory and oblation which the olde fa∣thers made for all departed in Christ, was a sacrifice of thankes giuing and not of prayers for them. The same or∣der & errour doe all the later liturgies follow, making me∣mory & prayers for all them that are departed in the faith. In the memory of all departed they follow the olde order, in praying for all, they follow the latter error, which had chaunged the sacrifice of thankes giuing into the sacrifice of prayer. But herein they declared, that they had not yet generally receiued your newe doctrine of purgatory, be∣cause they prayed not as you doe, for them onely that are in purgatory, to whom onely you confesse the prayers to be needefull and profitable, but for all that are departed in the fayth of Christ from the beginning of the worlde. And now Syr I haue shewed, wherein they make against you. But where as you taunt at the author of that booke, be∣cause he setteth not his name vnto it, you shew your witte, & bewray your disease. You can neither tell what to speak, nor yet how to hold your peace. In the margent you gesse it was M. Pilkington of Duresme: you would faine haue such a man to be your aduersary, that though you tooke the foyle, yt you might boast, that you were so bold as to fight
with him. But it is an easyer matter for such a desperate dicke to beginning a fraye, then to ende it. If I may be as bolde to gesse as you: I gesse that he which made that lu∣sty chalenge of the Papist against the Protestant, promi∣sing to recant at the ende of euery article, if he colde be aunswered, was such a tryed Thraso as M. Allen? if you aske me what is the grounde of my gesse, to omit the stile some∣what like, I will aunswere as one in Plautus doth: Credo te esse ab illo, nam ita nugas blattis. I take it to be euen you, you are so full of bracing and facing. But who so euer he was, was he ashamed of his name because he set not his name vnto it? and was the man of Chester ashamed of his name because he setteth it not to his treatise? Finally be all those Papistes ashamed of their names, which haue written so many petty pamphlettes to be caried abrode in Popish fel∣lowes pocketts? O intemperate tonge, which can not spare such tauntes, as redounde to him selfe and his owne good maisters reproch. Your lyes of offering, worshipping, and praying to the hoste be reproued alredy, you say we might with more honesty haue coped for one of those Lytur∣gies, if we liked not Gregories Masse, rather then to haue forged a new. I aunswere we haue with more honesty re∣formed our Lyturgie according to the worde of God, and example of the oldest Church, then Gregory, Basill, Chry∣sostome, (if they were theirs) or who so euer were authors of those Liturgies, did leaue the auncient Lyturgies that were vsed in the Church before their time, because they did not sufficiently expresse their errors and superstition, and forge them newe of their owne contrary to the worde of God. And where as you prate of the Latine Church and the East parte, we neither refuse the Latine Church while it was pure, nor receiue the East Church where in it was corrupt, but the scripture is a rule vnto vs to iudge all Churches by. Although it were easy to proue by that cōtrouersie, which the Britaynes and the Scottes had against the Saxons, a∣bout the celebration of Easter, that our countrie first recei∣ued their conuersion from the East Church, whose cere∣monie they did then defend, euen as the East Church did
longe before against Victor Bishoppe of Rome. By which it appeareth that this lande did neuer receiue the doctrine and ceremonies of the Latine Church before the time of the Saxons. And whereas you slaunder vs for referringe our faith to an vncertaine and vnknowen Origine, the con∣trary is manifest, when we referre it to no iudgement, or company of men, but to the authoritie of Gods worde and all them that will be subiect therevnto. But I tarye to longe in these trifles. 3. Euery man in the primitiue Church counted the spring of his faith more pure, and a great deale more cleare, if he coulde against an heretike declare by good testimony that his belefe did at length by iust counte, fall into the Romane Church. So doth Irenaeus against the Valentinians, so doth Cyprian against the Nouatians, so doth Tertullian and Vincentius against all he∣retikes, so doth Augustine and Optatus against the Dona∣tistes, so doth Hyerom and all the reste, against the Arians. All these thought they had a great vauntage, if they could by plaine accompt proue against an heretike that their doctrine ishued from the Byshop of Rome.De prescri. aduers. hae∣reti. Goe whether thou wilt (saith Tertu∣lian) and thou shalt finde some Apostolike seat to instruct thy conscience: thou hast harde by the Philippos, or Ephesus, or Rome,Epist. 165. and there loe fetch we the authority of our faith. S. Au∣gustine that knewe best how to fetche an heretike ouer the coles, vrgeth him euer to reduce his doctrine to some Bishop of Rome: when he had him once at that strait, then loe, he goeth through the whole ranke of holy Byshoppes by name, to the nomber of fourty well neare. Bring me once an euident declaration that your faith ishued from any one byshop of that Sea, and then you may passe throw the longe line of that succession with out bracke, or any rupture in the worlde. I coulde make accompt (sayth Ire∣naeus) of many successions of Apostolike Churches: but that were to longe, only Rome shall serue, that is the greatest, the aun∣cientest, and best knowen, and by the tradition of that Church confundimus omnes eos,Lib. 3. cap. 3 we vtterly confounde all heretikes. It is a straunge thinge, that the fathers hauing store of Aposto∣like successions, did euer chuse out for the warrant of their faith
from amongest the reste, the Roman Seate: And now when there is no apostolike Church left in the whole worlde but it,Note. that they will seeke to Churchies whereof there is neither certainty, nor succession: when by plaine open dealing we may reduce, and must needes referre our faith to that, which was euer of all other most farre from falshoodde. 3 Euery man in the primitiue Church, compted the springe of his faith more pure, if he coulde deriue it out of the holy Scriptures, and shew the continuance thereof, in any of the Apostolicke Churches whereof Rome was but one. And condemned all heresies of nouelty or later string, which coulde not bring the first author of their heresies, eyther from any of the Apostles: or apostolicke men which cōtinued in the doctrine of the Apostles: as Tertullian doth in that booke De praescriptionibus aduersus haereses. The like doth Irenaeus. And that these men specially named the Church of Rome, it was because the Church of Rome at that time as it was founded by the Apostles, so it conti∣nued in the doctrine of the Apostles. And these heretikes for the most parte had bene sometimes of the Church of Rome, as Valentinus, Marcion, Nouatus. But none of these fathers, as M. Allen woulde haue it appeare, was such a sclaue to the Church of Rome, that what so euer pleased the Byshoppes of that Sea, they were ready to accept. For then woulde not Irenaeus so sharpely haue reproued Victor, as Eusebius declareth of him Lib. 5. cap. 25. Cyprian woulde not haue taken vp Cornelius and Stephanus as appeareth by his epistles. Hieronym woulde not haue bene so bolde to call Rome the purple whore of Babylon Praefat. ad Paulinū in lib. Didym. Nor to compare the bishoppe of Eugubium with the bishop of Rome Euagrio, nor to make the Church of England equall with the Church of Rome: Nec iam al∣tera Romanae vrbis ecclesia, altera totius orbis existimanda est. Et Gallia, & Britania, & Africa & Bersis & Oriens & Indiae & omnes barbarae nationes vnum Christum adorant, vnam ob∣seruant regulam veritatis. Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis maior est vrbe. Neither must we thinke that there is one Church of
the citye of Rome an other of all the worlde beside. Both France and Britayne and Africa, and Persia, and the Easte, and India, and all barbarous nations worship one Christ, keepe one rule of trueth. If authoritie be sought, the world is greater then one citye &c. Loe Syr, here is a Church and christianity, and a rule of trueth, with out the byshoppe of Rome, with out the Church of Rome, yea, and contrary to the church of Rome. For to them that alleged the custome of the church of Rome, he sayth: Quid mihi profers vnius vrbis cōsuetudinem? what bring you me the custome of one citye? and Augustine him selfe, that knwe so well to fetch an heretike ouer the coles, I trowe fetched Zosimus, Boni∣facius, and Coelestinus byshoppes of Rome meetly well ouer the coles, when he and his fellowes the byshoppes of A∣frica, tooke them with plaine forgerie, and falsification of the canons of the councell of Nice. Consilio Milebitano & Africano. As for that which M. Allen compteth so strange, is for lacke of skill and right iudgement. For the same cause that moued those auncient fathers to appeale to the iudg∣ment of the church of Rome, moueth vs now to condemne the church of Rome of heresie. wherefore did they re∣uerence the church of Rome? Aske Tertullian, he aun∣swereth because it had by succession reteined euen vntill his dayes, that faith which it did first receiue of the Apo∣stles: Therefore it was a true Church, therefore it was an apostolicke Church, which because it doth not nowe, nei∣ther hath done of many yeares, and hath nothing to boast of, but the empty names of many good bishops, but thrise as many more of cursed Antichristes, therefore it is nowe a false church, and a company of heretikes, departed from the auncient Romaines true and apostolicke faith. 4 Bring my faith once to S. Gregory, and the very streame shall driue me to S. Peter and Paule, maugre all their beardes. In which ordre of Byshops, finde me one that set forth by decree any practise of contrary doctrine, to that which his next prede∣cessor did before him mainteine, & I will go seeke with the stray, a newe mother Church to founde my faith vpon. If all be in this
succession salfe and sounde, what a folly were it to forsake our owne mother, and spring of our belefe, to seeke other which haue often erred when they stoode, and nowe be almost wholy decaide. But yet it is wisedome for false teachers with all force to flie from so greate light, as maye arise to the trueth by the recognising of that sounde succession, and going the iuste contrary way from the olde doctors faith, it is not to be thought straunge, that they di∣rectly seeke to ouerthrowe that bulwarcke, which they euer lea∣ned vnto in the stormes of schisme and heresie. The shrewes do knowe full well the might of trueth in that Seate and succession, to haue beaten downe all their forefathers, the heretikes of all agies. They feare their fall, whose steppes they follow. They vt∣ter much malice, & torment them selfe in euery sermon in vaine: that Church feeleth no sore, but in sorow of compassion towardes her forsakers: she hath bidden greater stormes then this, first by tyraunts, then by heretikes, last and most by the euill life of her owne Bishoppes. In all which she yet standeth, and euer riseth to honour, as she is most impugned. Their owne preaching hath sin∣gularly opened the might of God in the defense of that Seate of vnity. VVhen they first beganne to touche and taunt the Pope in euery sermon, in euery playe, in booke and balate, men that be∣fore liuing in faithfull simplicitie much medled not with his mat∣ters, nor often hearde of his name, beganne straight upon their busy ralinge, to conceiue by reasonable discretion, that there lay some greate grounde of matter and weight of trueth vpon that point which they coulde not digest in so many yeares bauling and barking at his name: they saw the Pope euer in their way, neuer out of their mouth, and they doubted not but that singular ha∣tred grew vpon some great importance: and so admonished lucke∣ly by the aduersaries, they sought the bottom of that perfecte and deepe hatered, and found that it was the olde sore of the Arians, and disease of the Donatistes, and common to all heretikes: they perceiued by S. Cyprian that the first attempte of such men,De simpli∣cit. praela∣torum. was to driue awaye the pastor, that they might with out resistance de¦uour and destroie the flocke. And which was the pricke of all their endeuours, to take from vs the acknowledging of the great and singular benefite of our conuersion to the faith: that in stop∣ping the heade of that condeth, and plentifull well of our faith,
they might in heate of contention and heresie, casely drie vp the whole ishue therof.By heretiks preaching many are become Ca¦tholikes. And this earnest consideration causeth many at this daye to forsake their heresies: and to be a greate deale mo at this time, which know the trueth of this matter, then when they beganne first to preach thereof. 4 Bring this mans faith to Gregory, & then the streame shall driue him to Peter and Paule, Nay M. Allen bring you your faith from Peter and Paule by good testimony of their holy writings, and then you shall not neede to rowe in Cockelaurels bote, neither with streame nor against it. But you offer vs fayre play, we must bring you one Bishop of Rome, that did set forth by decree, any practise of contrary doctrine, to that which his next predecessor did before him mainteyne, and you will seeke a newe mother Church. If I should bring you Sabinianus which controlled the decrees of Gregory: or Stephanus that condemned the decrees of Formosus, from which time the story testifieth, that it grewe vnto a custome, that euery Bishop would cōdemne his pre∣decessors decrees, you woulde aunswere that all this was without your compasse. So will you say if I name Honorius, who was an heretike of the sect of the Monothelites, con∣demned both by his successor and by a generall councell. I bring no small proofes M. Allen, but such as you can not with for greater. Looke in the sixt generall councell, hol∣den at Constantinople. Acti. 13. there shall you reade that the decretall epistle of Honorius whereby he confirmed Ser∣gius in his heresie, was redde, and burned, & Honorius him selfe anathematized, as an heretike. Loke a litle further vn∣to the 18. action, there shall you find the decretall epistle of Pope Leo the second, written to the councell wherein he condemneth Honorius his predecessor for an heretike, and his doctrine for heresie. But what say you to Liberius & Fe∣lix whereof eyther one, or as Ieronym affirmeth, both were Arians? how were their decrees liked of their successors? how did they allowe the decrees of their predecessors? Fi∣nally where as you say, that our earnest & often preaching against the Pope hath wonne you so many Catholikes, we
will by Gods grace continue to gratifie you still by that meanes, and geue you good leaue when you haue counted your cardes, to boast of your winnings. 5 But I will not presse them ouer sore: suppose I graunt them that which they would so gladly winne: that we had not our faith first from Rome, though it be as false, as God is true. But suppose it were not so, and I geue you leaue to father your faith where you will. If it be not vpon Latimer (whome a foolish fellowe, in the booke of conference betwixt Latimer and Ridley, termeth the English Apostle: as one more worthy of that name (as he sayth) then Augustine, but else where you will: and when you haue done, proue me that your mother Church prayeth not for the departed in her Masse and solemne seruice, and you shall be exalted vp for euer. And at your next chaunge frame your newe communion after that olde vsage on Gods blessinge: If you can finde any forme of celebration farre enough from ours, fol∣lowe it and spare not. But I am sure, you shall neuer be hable to finde any olde ser∣uice in the worlde fit for your newe diet.Our Masse is all one vvith the Masses of al other cun∣tries and tymes. They be all to much like our Masse for your purpose, as in deede alone in euery pointe of importance with ours. As the Churches to whome they belonged, perfectly before their decay, in faith and vnity agreed with ours. 5 Although we account Latimer for a worthy teacher, and more worthy of the name of an Apostle for his apo∣stolike doctrine, then Augustine the Monke, yet builde we our faith (as you know) neither vpon him, nor any other, but onely vpon the word of God. And as for our mother Church, is no certayne place, or company of men in any one place vpon earth, but Ierusalem which is aboue, is mo∣ther of vs all. Galat. 4. And who so euer were children of this Church, would neuer find fault with our communion, which can not be condemned by the worde of God, and therefore careth not for the comparison of the custome of other men which whether they vsed the like or not, in forme of wordes, which is not materiall, so they vsed not other substance of matter except they did it beside the
word of God. How like your Masse is to other coūtry mas∣ses, when there was neuer any masse but yours, I leaue it to consider and compare to all them that had rather see the truth them selues, then to be deceiued by you. 6 I am sure when you can not like your owne communion, ye woulde not be pleaced with one of an others making. But an other you must needes haue, and further you must go from vs, walke forwarde you will to the extreme ende of heresie, and vtter denying of Christianity. All the world can not stoppe your falling from the hill of Gods Church, till you come in the bottomlesse pit of Hell. I woulde be loth to sclaunder them with the brute of the worlde, which though it be in euery mans mouth, that they like not this communion, yes vpon that rumour I would not haue sayd so farre, but that they haue vttered their owne meaning, in a treatise of their owne making, in these wordes: In mariage as in all other thinge beside,Against the Chester mā. we are but to much like vnto them: that is our ault generally that we differ not more from them in all our ministerie. These wordes vtter their griefe that they can got no further from vs in their seruice: and that you be not deceiued, the author of this booke where this complainte is made, knoweth well the meaning of his fellowes herein, and how gladde they woulde be shiftinge forwarde. They sit on thornes till they be doing with a newe gise. It is no worse man then the B. of Duresme that taketh colde in so longe a stand of their communion. My simple head coulde not deuise how they might possibly go forwarde, and kepe them with in any bonde of Christianity. VVhat they caste in their braine for their further proceding I can not tell, the serpent is suttel, and our sinnes be greate. 6 If any man mislike the forme of our seruice, as not differing sufficiently from yours, he sheweth his greater zeale in detestation of your idolatry and blasphemy. In the meane time what neede this great wondring, for once or twise alteration in the forme, where the matter is still re∣teyned, when if we shall beleue your owne stories, your ser∣uice hath not had much lesse then an hundreth innouati∣ons,
so often as one peece or other was added or patched to it. And yet in this one cuntry of England, howe many di∣uerse formes of seruice had you? so that you could neuer grow to vniformitie? Yorke, Salesbury, Bangor, Hereford, &c. 7 I much maruaill not nowe, to see the temporall Magi∣strates of their wisedomes, to hedge these mens wantonnesse in all their ordre of life: for they are so dronken and drowned in here∣sie, that they haue no sense of common reason. VVhat a do had the magistrates to make these wylde men go in priestelike appa∣rell, to kepe their Rotchettes, to obserue some steppe of antiquitie in their maners? How they were driuen to tempre their lustes in prouision for some ordrely choise of their wiues: that seeing them haue no respecte on what women they light,Looke the Iniunction for the ma∣riage of Priestes & other thīgs. that by Iustices of peace yet, they might be bestowed, if not well, yet with their lesse dishonestie, vpon persons not openly infamous. Such fellowes are more fit to be gouerned, then to beare rule ouer other: in whome without constraint you shall neither finde comelynesse in maners, ordre in life, nor constancy in religion. God of his mercye geue them some light to see their owne misery, and spirite of hu∣militie to subiect them selues in time to Gods Church, that is so carefull ouer them, though to their owne great harme, they so deadly hate her. They can showe no cause in the world, why they neede in any one pointe of all those which at this daye be in con∣trouersie betwxit them and their owne mother, rather to credit their owne phantasies, then her graue authoritye: which onely without farther questioning, with obediēt children maketh more, then all argument or eloquence of man, in the earth. 7 If the ciuill Magistrates haue thought good in some outward ceremony or vsage, to beare with the infirmitie of the weaker sort of your side, in hope to winne them, it is a small matter for you that are the obstinate of that secte to triumphe vpon, when all your blasphemous doctrine is a∣bolished, and nothing left but a fewe ragges of your robes to looke vpon. And as for the iniunction for Priestes mari∣age, was either to stoppe your slaunderous mouthes, when
godly ministers wiues should haue testimoy of their hone∣stie by men of such credit, or else to bridle the lust of your owne tounebulls the popish Priestes, which when licence of whordom is denied them, and liberty to marry permit∣ted them, would make no better choyse perhaps of their wiues, then they did before of their women. We can shew no cause in the world you say, why we neede in any one poynt of controuersie depart from your Church: yes M. Allen, this one cause shal serue for all, because your church is departed from the truth of Gods word, and dare not a∣bide the tryall thereof, but will sitte like a proud dame in a chayre, & controll the Scriptures, the ordinance of Christ, and the commaundements of God him selfe. But how so e∣uer you boast of her fast sitting, she shall downe, she shall downe, euen to the bottome of hell. 8 And for such as maye for their simplicitie be soone de∣ceiued by following other mens errors, with whome the names of doctors, or the onely bare bragge of scriptures, are as good as the allegation of places:The youn∣gers, must thus pose their mai∣sters. Let them aske of their teachers howe they can shifte them selfe when they see the practise of Gods Church generally so plaine for all Catholike assertions, as for the article of praying for the deade, amongest many other the like, is nowe before proued. Call vpon them, and aske them in earnest, because it lyeth vpon thy saluation, whether thou must giue any credit to the perpetuall agreement and consent of all auncient doctors? If they saye yea: desire them to aunswere first to all these places, so euidently confirming our purpose, that they can not abide any cloude or couer of mans sutteltye, for their shifting to any forged sense. If they can not, yet let them alleage some place of any auncient writer them selues, which do expressely denye purgatory or prayers for the deade: as we for the confirming therof haue done in plaine termes with out crafte or colour many. If they be not able to do so much, yet go further with them: aske them whether they haue any expresse wordes in scripture that denie prayers to be profitable for the deade, not by a fonde gesse of their owne heades, corrupt consciences, or preiudicate mindes, expounded to that purpose, but I say by expresse words: or at least
(which is liberty enough) expounded for that meaning by any one man of all the antiquitie. If they can alleage thee but one worde of scripture construed of any one, I say in all ages, to con∣firme their vnderstanding to be currant, and not framed for their phantasie, to serue the necessity of their cause, be bolde to followe them. I woulde not put them to the paines to make discourse throughout all ages, churches, times, and doctors, as we haue done: but onely let them to kepe their credit and scholars, and to saue their honesties, bring but one or two of all that euer wrote in the compasse of Gods Church, and thou maiest with lesse daun∣ger, and better reason, follow their doctrine. But there is no one such place, I assure the good reader, neither in scripture, doctor, nor councell, nor countrie, nor age sith the worlde beganne. I will go so farre in this point: where there was euer steppe of any true worship of God, there was prayer founde for the dead also. They can not shew me any forme of ministration in the Christian world, that was approued, which hath it not expressely: if it be knowen that it was in deede the seruice of any auncient Church, not cor∣rupted by them selues. The same I dare be bolde to auouch for the lawe of nature, and Moyses, because it is proued already. All their bragging of the example of the primitiue Church, the masses of other countries, of the doctors, of the scriptures, of the councells, is but an vntollerable delusion and abuse of the simpli∣city of such, as be not skillfull in the authors whome they name. For when the matter comes to an ishue, when they be harde hol∣den, either in this or in any other matter: thē the doctors, (whom they chalenged before the simple for their partakers) were but men, then they might erre, then they haue learned onely to cre∣dit the holy Scriptures, then there is nothing but Gods worde and booke with them: which els full faine would haue the doctors consent, out of whom it were but a meane place which they would not alleage for their purpose, if it might be founde. Then if de∣niall of all the doctors iudgements serue not their turne, In ac∣cusationem ipsarum scipturarum conuertuntur:Irenaeus Lib. 3. cap. 2 they will not sticke boldely to condemne the holy Scriptures with all. 8 Now the youngers must pose their maisters (as M. Allen a passing good Logician doth teach them) yea and
that is more, he will teach vs what to aunswere also, but sauing his wisedome, he must geue vs leaue to aunswere for our selues. First if we be asked howe we can shifte our selues against the generall practise of Gods Church, for all popish assertions, and namely this of praying for the deade: we aunswere, that we deny the practise to be gene∣rall, because we finde it not in the holy Scriptures, nor in the most auncient writers, that lyued with in an hundreth yeares and more after the time of Christ. And to the par∣ticuler practise of the later times, we aunswere, that it is not sufficient to controll the auncient doctrine, and primer practise. If we be required to shew some place of any aun∣cient writer, which denyeth purgatory or prayers for the deade, we haue already shewed that Augustine some time doth doubt whether there be purgatory, some time affir∣meth there is no meane or thirde place, but heauen for the elect, and hell for the reprobate, likewise for praying or satisfying for the deade, we haue alleaged Cyprian and o∣thers: your owne common law, out of Hieronym, sayth, that the prayers of the liuing profit not the deade. 13. quaest. 2. In praesenti saeculo &c. In this present worlde, we knowe that one of vs may be helped of an other, either by prayers or by counsells, but when we shoulde come before the iudgement seate of Christ, neither Iob nor Daniel nor Noe, can intreate for any man, but euery man must beare his owne burthen. Yea Gelasius the Pope sayth, that no man can be absolued of the Pope after his death 24. q. 2. C. lega∣tur. Wherefore serue the Popes pardons then? To that which is required of the expresse word of God, forbidding prayers for the deade, we aunswere, that all places of scrip∣ture, that forbidde prayers without fayth, forbidde prayer for the deade, for faith is not euery mans vaine perswasion, but an assurance out of the worde of God, which because we can not haue in praying for the dead, therefore we are forbidden to praye for them. If it be against the hope of Christians to morne for the deade, much more it is against the fayth and hope of Christians to praye for them. For by our prayer we suppose them to be in misery whome the
worde of God doth testifie to be in happines, to be at rest, to be with Christ, Iohn 17. Apoc. 14. And as for a place so expounded by an auncient writer, I will seeke no farther then the place of Hieronym euen now alleaged out of your owne canon lawe vppon 2. Cor. 5. referring the reader to many other places alleaged in this aunswere, as out of Cy∣prian, Origene and others, by which the intollerable lying, bragging, and rayling of this miscreant, shalbe better con∣futed, then by any contradiction of wordes. And where as he sayeth we chalenge the olde doctors before the simple, for our partakers, whether they be simple or wise before whom we speake, as we speake not alwayes before the sim∣ple onely, but often times and commonly before as wise and well learned men as M. Allen, we neuer make any such challenge of them as the Papistes doe, which offer to stand to their iudgement in all thinges, and yet in most thinges yea in the cheefest pointes of religion, that be so in deede, or be so compted of them, they are contrary to the doc∣tors and olde councells, for which cause, and not for con∣firmation of trueth, we alleage the authoritie of men, for we haue learned, as Augustine sayth, to geue this honor, only to the canonicall scriptures, that we must beleue them with out controuersie, and all other writings we receiue so farre as they agree with the scriptures and not other wise, wherefore we doe not onely saye that the doctors haue er∣red like men, but we haue proued it, so that the Papistes them selues can not saye naye for shame. But to that he sayth, we doe boldely condemne the holy Scriptures, that it out of all measure impudent, and sclaunderous. And that which he citeth out of Irenaeus, belike as he had it of some foolish priest, that fedde him with notes of doctors, or as he is impudent enough, to peruerte the fathers meaning, him selfe, so if he had alleged the whole sentence he might well haue taken him selfe, and the rest of his fellowes by the noses, for heretikes, by the iudgemēt of Irenaeus, whose wordes be these. Cum enim ex scripturis arguantur, in accusa∣tionem conuertuntur ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non rectè ha∣bant, neque sit ex authoritate, & quia variè sunt dictae, &
quia non possit inueniri veritas, ab his qui nesciant traditionem, non enim per literas traditam illam, sed per viuam vocem. When they be confuted by the scriptures, they are turned into the accusation of the scriptures them selues, as though they were not well, nor of sufficient authority, both be∣cause the trueth can not be founde of them which knowe not the tradition, for that was not deliuered by writing but by worde of mouth. How saye you M Allen, who is an he∣retike by Irenaeus iudgement? who accuseth the scriptures as though they were not of sufficient authority, who sayth the scriptures are like a nose of waxe? who saye the trueth can not be founde in scriptures without tradition of vn∣written verities? In good sooth M. Allen, you haue the worst grace of any that euer I knew, in alleaging the sentences of the doctors, for you alleage fewe or none, but either in whole or in parte they make against you. 9 But if you thinke that I feane of them, you shall see what shamefull shiftes the maisters and captaines of the contrary as∣sertion haue deuised for the defense of them selues: I dare say if the studious be but any whit indifferēt, he will leaue their shoole for euer. The chiefe Captaine of all these contentious heades, like an vnshamefast childe, affimeth that the doctors praysed and followed the common errors of the ignorant people, in almes and prayers for the departed. Brentius aunswereth, that Tertullian making mention of yearly oblations for the deceased, tooke his error of the hethen vsage of the gentility. And Augustine (he saith) affirmed pur∣gatory,In confes∣sione VVit∣tember. prayers, and almes for them, for the affiance that he had in mens merites towardes the remission of sinnes. Melancthon (as though he were no man that might orre him selfe) sayth the doctors were men,In Apolo∣gia. and discented amongest them selues. As for the vsage of any celebration in the worlde, what roume can it haue with these champians, when Cluin confesseth in plaine termes,Instit. de Coena. that the celebration of the Sacrament hath bene conta∣minated euen in a maner sith the Apostles time, and first plan∣ting of our religion? and to reduce it to the puritie againe, the man frames a newe one of his owne: so farre from superstition,
that it hath no steppe of religion or true worship of God. But well, the worde of God is yet safe with them, there a man may holde them. No surely: they are as alsie with the very scripture it selfe, when so euer it maketh against them. Brentius before named, is not ashamed to saye that he pardoneth the author of the Ma∣chabeis of his error and ignorance. And that thou may see the perfect image of a prowde heretike, Caluin sayth thus: as for the booke of the Machabeis I will not vouhsalfe to make aunswere to it. Mercifull God what faithfull hearte or eare coulde abide these blasphemous tongues who of vntolerable arrogancy doe so deface the examples and doctrine, not onely of the pillours of the whole Christian Church, whome they impudently for lacke of a more reasonable aunswere, condemne not onely of simple igno∣raunce: and errour in this point, with the residue of the whole faithfull people, which surely is ouer much to say of such learned and godly men as they were, but also of wilfull errour and super∣stition, in bearing and maintenaunce of the common ignoration, and ethnicke perswation of the worlde in their dayes: and fol∣lowing the heathen vsage of the gentilitie. And yet not content therewith, these lying maisters of their meere mercy be content to offer a pardon to the author of that booke for his errour, which booke the whole catholike Church of God through out Christian∣dome taketh for canonicall scripture, VVhich arrogancy and pas∣sing boldnesse, although I perswade my selfe no vertuous man will in them allowe, sith they nowe being put to their shiftes, vt∣terly doe condemne those fathers, whose names with great often∣tation they often to the simple repeate to make them suppose they be not with out scripture or doctors for the proofe of their will∣full heresies, yet euen the very answere it selfe which they imagine here in to disgrace the doctors, and delude the igno∣raunt, is contrary to it selfe in sundry points. For they one while affirme that S. Augustine and others allowed that errour which the people by their superstitious deuotion had before their time brought in to the prayers of the Church: and an other while, that Iudas Machabaeus did institute it, who was before these authors diuars hundreths of yeares: and somewhile that they borowed it of the gentilitie, all which pointes be repugnant eche to other. For neither coulde that beginne in our Christian do∣ctours
dayes, which was vsed before Christes birthe: neither neede they to borowe it of the heathen which was in estimation and praysed amongest the Iewes. 9 We neede no shiftes M. Allen for the authoritie of the doctors, whome we neuer allow for canonicall Scrip∣tures, and therefore we may boldly say, as Augustine sayth of Cyprian, what so euer we find in them agreable to the Scriptures, we receaue it with their prayse, and what so e∣uer is disagreeable to the Scriptures we refuse with their leaue. Now by what meanes they fell into this errour that maintained prayer and almes for the dead, I shal haue bet∣ter occasion to shew in the aunswere to the 14. chapter, al∣though it be not greatly material, to know how they came into errour, when it is sufficiently proued that they did erre. As for the abridgement of Iason, ye Cyrenians story, which M. Allen maketh such a precious iewell, I haue aunswered inough before, that the author him selfe, desiring pardon of his readers, hath testified sufficiently, that he was no scribe of the holy Ghost, as also by many other vnauoyda∣ble reasons, with the consent of the Catholike Church, which it were superfluous here to repete. Finally whereas you say, that our aunswere is contrary to it selfe, you seeke a knot in a rush. For all may be true. First the deuill sugge∣sted superstitious deuotion into the Gentiles, by peruerse emulation of whom, Iudas might be deceiued, and his fact giue occasion to the ignorant people of errour, and their ignorance first winked at, because it had a shew of pietie, confirmed by custome, might at length be allowed of Au∣gustine and others who neuer weighed the matter by Scri∣ptures, but by the commō practise. And this I thinke is the right degree of prayers for the deade and purgatory. That the praying for the dead vvas appointed to be had in the holy sacrifice, by the Apostles commaundement and pre∣scription: And that our doctors by the maiesty of their name, beare dovvne our light aduersaries. CAP. XIII.
1 BVt that this falshood may better appeare in these men, we will by good testimony trye out, when and by whom, the oblation and sacrifice with other ordinarie reliefes of the departed were so vniformely vsed through the Christian worlde: as like wise it shall be profitable to consider, who were the first authors of the contrary opinions. And that the holy Ghost by the Apostles owne preaching and prescription, was the first author of this solemne supplicatiō in masses of all vsages for the departed, I might first proue by this generall rule of S. Augustine. Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia,Epistol. ad Ianuar. & de Baptis. contra Do∣natist. lib. 4. cap. 24. nec concilijs in∣stitutum sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate apo∣stolica traditum rectissime credimus. that which the whole Church obserueth, and hath alwayes so bene kepte, being not in∣stituted by any Councell, it can not otherwise be had, but by the Apostles authoritie and tradition. And so by the like saying of Leo the greate. Dubitandum non est, quicquid in ecclesia in consuetudinem est deuotionis retentum,Sermone. 2. de ieiunio. de traditione a∣postolica, & de S. Spiritus prodire doctrina. It can not be doubted, but that what so euer is in the Church by generall cu∣stome of deuotion kept and mainteined, it came out of the Apo∣stles traditiō, and doctrine of the holy Ghost. But I will seeke with them by certaine demonstration, and plaine ordre of reason that it must needes so be. Praying for the deade was inuented by no man sith the Apostles dayes:A sure vvay to try the beginning of any doc∣trine. there can no one be named by the aduersary, before whome I can not name an other that praide for the dead. Let him say where he list: this man or that man was the first that euer praide for the deade in Christes Church: if I can not shewe an other before him so named, to haue praide also, we will take him for the first author, and then he fully stoppeth our course that we can not bring this obseruation so high as the A∣postles dayes. But if the aduersary can apoint me out no time nor person that began this vsage, before which I am not able to proue it was practised, then they can not let vs but we must needs driue it vpwarde, to the Apostles and Christes owne institution. CAP. XIII. 1 IF prayer for the deade was appoynted by the Apo∣stles commaundement, why is there neuer a worde
thereof in their writinges? there is warrant or lesser mat∣ters then this is made of, why is this and all other po∣pish trash counted their tradition, which can not be war∣ranted by their writing? If I were disposed to pose you, this question would make you clawe your poll an hundred times before you could imagine any couloable aunswere. for right aunswere you shall neuer be able to make. But I take not vpon me to pose but to aunswere, first your autho∣ritie of Augustine, serueth not your turne, for prayers for the deade haue not bene alwayes obserued, namely in the Apostles times, nor long after. The saying of Leo the great, may be backed with the writing of Leo the great. Epi. 10. Sed in hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cum ad cognoscendum verita∣tem aliquo impediuntur obscuro, non ad propheticas voces, non ad apostolicas literas, nec ad euangelicas auctoritates, sed ad se∣metipsos recurrunt. Sed ideò erroris magistri existunt quia veri∣tatis discipuli non fuerunt. They fall into this folly, which when they be hindered by any obscuritie, to knowe the truth, haue not recourse to the words of the Prophets, nor to the writings of the Apostles, nor to the authoritie of the Gospell, but to them selues. But therefore are they mai∣sters of error, because they haue not ben schollers of truth. In these words Leo as great as you would haue him. maketh ye Scriptures, & not customes or traditiōs, the rule of truth. But I will come to your demonstration, which you call a sure way to try the beginning of any doctrine, yet vnder correction of your demonstratiue Logike, I may be bold to say it is not the proper way, nor the way by which all do∣ctrine may be tryed, and so you breake 2. of those principal rules, that Aristotle giueth for demonstration  and  for the proper way to try all doctrine is by cō∣ferring it with the word of God Againe the first author of euery heresie can not be named. There was one heresie of them that were called Acephali, because there was no head knowne of them. It is harde to name ye first authour of the Manichees, whom the heretikes them selues call an Apostle of Christ. The Chiliastes, the Ophtes, the Caineanes, ye Setho∣ites, the Adamianes, the Melchezedchianes, the Apostolike,
the Hemerobaptistes, and an hundred more heresies, shall they be thought to haue their heresie from tradition of the Apostles, if the first author of them can not be named? & yet I weene it will be hard for him to proue out of any au∣thenticall writer, that any before Tertullian, either named or allowed prayer for the deade, who was almost 2. hun∣dreth yeares after the incarnation of Christ. 2 If they answere me, that this vsage is crept into the church sith the Apostles time, though the first author can not be knowen: I will also prouide, that there no shift shall serue them. Therefore I aske them whether that man which first preached it, was resi∣sted by the rest of Gods Church which before his preaching bele∣ued the contrarie, or no? That is it say, this doctrine of praying for the deade when it first came into the church, did any of the true pastors free from the same error, barke like a good shepheard against the beginner of that, which they count so great a corrup∣tion of trueth? Or all the Church was corrupted with it on one daye? say what you thinke likest in this case, aunswere with any probability or reason if you can: saye plainely, was our doctrine euer preahed against, or neuer? if it neuer were preached against, then it neuer beganne as any noueltie or newe doctrine? For it coulde not be that the Church being free from that doctrine, shoulde straight without contradiction allowe that, which they liked not before. Howe can any man arise in the common welth, and bring the vtter decay of all the olde ordres which he findeth, and erect vp a new deuise of his owne, and neuer man speake a word against him, but all in one moment allow and like the same, and that without all recorde by memory or monument of any chaunge? But this thinge is most farre from the Churches and Gods pastors diligēce, that neuer receiued false doctrine without open contradiction, and plaine noting the party that first began it, as we shal plucke our gentlemen by the slieue a none. All those that haue any skill in the antiquitie, will beare me recorde, that the pastors did neuer holde their peace when any wolfe did but once open his mouth against the sheepe. They can tell, that she did neuer beare the preaching or practise of any false and er∣roneous doctrine for one day together. then it must needes conse∣quently
followe, that the doctrine of purgatory and oblation for the departed with still consent of all nations receiued in the Ca∣tholike Church, had no beginning after the first institution of our faith and worship of God, but hath ioyned from the first grounde of our Christian institution in Christes faith, with that sacrifice and due honour of God which the Apostles by the suggestion of the holy Ghost planted in all nations with the same faith. Thus I make my argument:Note. euery falsehood was preached against, and withstanded when it is first entered, but this doctrine of purga∣tory and praying for the deade being alwayes vsed: was neuer controwled nor gainsaide in Gods Church, therfore it is no false∣hood, nor euer had any later institution then the Apostles owne prescription. 2 Supposing that this errour crept into the Church, though the first author thereof can not be knowne, he de∣maundeth whether any man preached against it when it began first to be receiued. I aunswere if the Pastors of the Church had done their duty to the vttermost, it could not so easily haue preuayled, And yet it is not to be thought but that some of the true Pastors in that tyme, opposed them selues against it, although the history of the Church in that time whn it began to be spreade, is to briefe & vn∣perfect, that we should be able to name, who they were that preached against it. Of so many heresies as Epiphanius na∣meth in his time, it were hard to require and vnpossible to shew, who preached against euery one of them, at their first entrance, & yet they be damnable heresies. In S. Augustines dayes, of whose time the history of the Church is largely set forth vnto vs, who preached or writte against that error which he and Innocentius Bishop of Rome, & al the church as he confessed did hold, that infants must receiue the ho∣ly communion or else they should be damned? Who prea∣ched against this error, except perhaps the Pelagians that were horrible heretikes? Was all the Church corrupted with it in one day? If euery heresie had bene beaten down as fast as it sprang, Antichrist should neuer haue set vp his throne in the temple of God. If God had not sent into the
world the efficacy of error, that they which refused to be∣leue the truth, should be iustly condemned to beleue lyes: the man of sinne and sonne of perdition, had neuer aduaū∣ced him selfe aboue all that is called God. 2. Thessal. 2. And therefore M. Allen plucke not vs by the sleue, but your self by the nose, you are the heretikes that refuse to beleue the truth, you are they that turne away your eares from truth to fables, you are they that attend to spirites of error and doctrines of deuills, forbidding to marry, and abstayning from meates which God hath created to be receiued with thankes giuing. There is the brande marke of Romish reli∣gion, that all the water in Tiberis nor in the Ocean sea, shal not be able to wash out. Must we finde out the authors of your heresies? Nay iustifie them your selues by the worde of God if you can. And because you bring in a witty exam∣ple of the common wealth, I will aunswere you with the like. Must the Magistrate either iustifie a theefes possession, or else bring out the author where he had it? Nay the theefe must bring out good proofe, howe and by whom he came by such goods, or else he is worthy to be serued like such a one. So shall you not compell vs to tell you, where, when, or how your heresie came in, seeing it is sufficient for vs to shew, that it came not from God, nor by the Apostles, nor through their doctrine. But you doe well to conclude your reason in a syllogisme, for then by the weakenes ther∣of doth appeare your maior and minor be both false, or at the least wise vnable to be proued of you. For euery falshod hath not bene preached against, at the first entry. And how are you able to proue, that purgatory and praying for the deade hath not bene preached against? therfore your con∣clusion is as true and as certeyne as your premisses. 3 But what needes all this a doe? by their owne consent we shall driue this doctrine thirtene C. yeares vpward. For so neare was Tertullian the Apostles dayes, whome they confesse to haue practised that pointe of oblations for the deade. And aske him where he had it (for surely he inuented it not him selfe) and he appointeth vs to his forefathers:De corona militis. he nameth the Apostles for the
authors and founders thereof, as of many other thinges, which he there reckeneth beside, that were generally receiued, and nowe be of heretikes likewise contemned. VVe might yet steppe two C. yeare forward, and find amongest the Apostles owne hea∣rers, the same doctrine both allowed and practised, but that they will make exception of Dionysius and Clements workes (such shiftes men must finde that will defend falshood.) Other I will name, that be out of their exceptions: VVho I thinke as well for their time, knowledge, and credit, as their excellent vertue, both can and will better tell the origine of that thinge, the authors whereof were more nigh their time then ours. If they woulde be∣leue S. Augustine, as they often professe they will, the matter might soone be ended: but because I feare they stand so much in the corrupt conceite of their owne singularitie, that they will be bold to reiect him, I shall both lay him to their charges & diuers other of greater antiquity that shal in expresse words affirme this vsage to come from the Apostles owne schoole. That thereby they may either acknowledge their errors, or else by such graue and vncorrupt iudges, be condemned of willfull malitious blindnesse. Thus S. Augustine writeth.Ser. 22. de ver: Apost. By the prayers of the holy Church, the profitable sacrifice, and almes bestowed for the soules depar∣ted, out of all doubt the deceased be releued, so that thereby al∣mighty God may deale more mercifully with them thē their sinnes required. For this practise deliuered vnto vs by our fathers, is obserued vniuersally in Christes Church, that for such as be de∣parted in the communion of Christes body and bloud, when at the sacrifice they be orderly named, praiers shoulde be made, and the same sacrifice mentioned to be done for them. Here, by his words thou vnderstands, that the profit rising by the prayers or sacri∣fice to the departed hath no doubt in it. They were through the world vsed, not in the Church which they say hath bene for nyne C. yeares corrupted by supersticious ignorāce, but in that Church, which our aduersaires doe confesse, maugre their heades, to haue bene holy, Catholike, and Apostolike. And it was not then be∣gon, but receiued by the prouision of Gods holy spirite, of the A∣postles: whome he calleth the fathers of our faith. 3 It is not denied, but Tertuillan maketh mention of
oblations for the dead, but what kind of oblations, it is not yet agreed vppon, but such they were, as were offered for mens birthes, for they be ioyned togither. Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs, annua die facimus, we make oblations yearely for the day of mens death, and the day of mens birth. Now it is not like, they offered prayers but thākes gi∣uing for mens birth, and euen so for their death. For those places, out of the other bookes, where he speaketh of pray∣ers for mens spirites, I will consider afterward. But in this booke de corona militis, if oblations were prayers, which he saith came from the Apostles, he vtterly denyeth that they came from the Scriptures. Therefore by Tertullians iudge∣ment, you doe abuse the Scriptures, which woulde wrest them to proue out of them that which he sayth can not be proued by them. But think you, prayers for the dead came from the Apostles, because he sayth so? If you aunswere yea, then must you likewise thinke, that it is a wicked thing to fast on Sonday, or to pray on your knees, for in the same place, he sayth that these opinions came also from the A∣postles. If you aunswere, he sayth vntruely of these, so doe we answere of the other. Now come backe of your 13. hun∣dreth yeares, to seeke your apostolike tradition where you can finde it. All is not Gospell that Tertullian hath sayd. As for the works of Clemens and Dionysius you know full well, they be not currant, and therefore I maruell at your mo∣destie, that you will not now oppresse vs with them. But it is because you haue store enough beside. Howbeit if the most auncient fayle you, it is not for the later sorte to helpe you. If Tertullian had no ground of his saying, when he affirmed that oblations for the deade came from the Apostles, what ground can Augustine haue which was 200. yeares farther from the Apostles time then he? But where you charge vs to confesse, that the Church in Augustines time was holy, Catholike, and Apostolike, you must witte, if you will, that although we may so confesse, in respect of the substance of true doctrine, which then was taught, yet we doe not ther∣by iustifie euery error & superstition of that age. But as Au∣gustine sayth, in his retractations lib. 2. cap. 18. he doth not
meane, that the Church is pure and perfect in this life, with out all spot of blemish, for euen the whole Church by rea∣son of certeine ignorance and infirmities of her members, hath neede to say euery day: Forgiue vs our debtes. 4 Athanasius (me thinke the aduersary part should quake when I name him) who was in his dayes terrible to the wicked, odible to heretikes, & to all vertuous mē an especiall stay in the troblesome times of the Church, whose grace was so great that he abbrigeth our whole faith into a briefe psalme called the Creede of Athanasius: which is beleued of all Christian men no lesse then the holy Scriptures of the new Testament. VVho as he right well knewe howe to defend him selfe against the wicked Arrians by the doctrine of the Catholike Church, so he hath left vs in writing howe to arme our selues against the like aduersaires of trueth, with his minde in such other points of weight, as in his dayes were not doubted of, which yet might fall in question, by the contentious wittes of many, that can not quiet them selues in the holsome doctrine of Christes Church. Amongest other things, what this holy mans minde was concerning the vtility & vsage of prayers and sacrifice for the deade, and who were the institu∣tors thereof, thou shall now heare. I will recite but a parte of his heauenly talke, though the whole make wholy for our purpose. Although (sayth this holy doctour) he that Christianly is hense in faith departed be hanged in the ayer, and his bo∣dy vnburied, yet after thy prayers made to God, sticke not to light lampe and taper at his sepulchre: for these thinges be not onely acceptable to God, but are rewarded. For the oyle and waxe be to him as an holocaust or a sacrifice to be consumed by fire, but that vnbloudy hoste is a propitia∣tion and remission to the partie. It may seeme by his wordes, that when by occasion of punish∣ment, or otherwise any person was vnburied, yet there was made some hearse or monumēt where his freinds lighted tapers, as they doe at this daye, and procured the holy Masse, which Athanasius calleth the Vnbloudy hoste or sacrifice,Hostia in∣cruenta. to be celebrated in his behalfe, for so I take that when he sayth that a man being hong in the ayer may haue tapers and Masse at his sepulchre: though
some seeke an other meaninge, which may well stande too, and it skilleth not for our purpose: for so much is plaine, that in Atha∣nasius his dayes, the sacrifice was called and counted propitia∣tory euen for the deade. But nowe a litle afterwarde in the same oration, he instruteth vs for the first authors and institutors of this vsage in the vnbloudy sacrifice,The Apo∣stles be the orderers of our sacri∣fice. and in the burialls of Chri∣stian men. All these holy thinges (sayth he) the Apostles of Christ, those heauenly preachers and scholars of our Lorde, the first orderers of our sacrifice, charged to be obserued in the me∣mories and anniuersaires of the departed: &c. he calleth the A∣postles, Curatores Sacrificiorum, as you woulde saye, men ap∣pointed to take ordre for all thinges perteyning to the solemne ministerie of the greate and high misterie. As in the Psalme,Psalm. 49. the spirituall gouernours are named. Ordinatores testamenti Dei super sacrificia: The prouisours of Gods testament touching the sacrifices. The residue of his holy wordes thou may finde in Da∣mascens oration of the departed, where he recyteth both the Gregories of the Greeke church, S. Denyse and S. Chryso∣stom too: which writers doe rather serue my turne nowe then the Latines, because they may put vs out of doubt for the vsage of the Greeke, and other Churches,The ende of schisme. which afterwarde by schisme fell together from the true worshippe of God into diuers errors. That we may knowe, those same countries vnder the gouernment of these excellent blessed men, to haue obserued the same things, which to their owne eternall miserie, and decaye of their Church and countries, they afterwarde contemned. For their dissension and diuision both in this point & others of no lesse importaunce, hath procured Gods vengeaunce so much, that nowe they haue almost no Church at all: as we may haue right good cause to feare what will become of vs, that followe their steppes in such pointes, as in them haue duely deserued Gods greuous plaques. 4 When you name Athanasius, and thinke we shoulde be so sore afrayd of his name, you haue good reason, for you allege nothing else of him but his name. I haue often tolde you, Damascens report, eyther for his corrupt iudge∣ment, or his cracked credit is nothing regarded of vs. And euen the authoritie of Athanasius without the worde of
God, is the authoritie of God. And as Augustine sayth of Cyprian, we count not all his writing for canonicall Scrip∣tures, but we iudge them by the canonicall Scriptures. The creede commonly called Athanasius creede, although it be very godly and agreeable to the holy Scriptures, yet by the iudgement of the best learned, was complyed by some la∣ter writer, then Athanasius. As for the plague of the Greeke Church, which M. Allen iudgeth to haue fallen vpon them, for their departing from the Church of Rome, he iudgeth both falsely and vnreasonably. For what schisme was the Church of Africa first plaged by the Vandales, that were Arians, and afterward vtterly subuerted by the Saracens? I doubt not but iustly, for their sinnes, but not for leauing the Romish Church. 5 Amongest other, for that Chrysostoms authority is ex∣ceding graue, I will let you see his opinion for the institution of these beneficiall relieuinges of the departeds paine. These be his wordes: Let vs sieke out all meanes whereby we may best helpe our brethern departed, let vs for their sakes bestowe the most present remedie, that is to saye almes and obla∣tion: for thereby to them ensueth great commoditie, gaine and profit: for it was not rashly nor without greate cause prouided, and to Gods Church by his disciples full of wise∣dome deliuered, and decried, that in the dreadfull miste∣ries there shoulde be especiall prayers made by the priest for all those that sleepe in faith. For it is a singular benefit to them. These were Chrysostoms wordes, whereby not onely the trueth of the cause and first authors of the practise be ope∣ned, but that there is wounderfull benefite to the parties for whome prayers be so made in the holy sacrifice. The which thing our forefathers well knewe, when they were so earnest after their departure to haue a memory at the holy altar. Now adayes he∣resie hath cankered euen the very deuotion of Catholikes, who although they thinke it to be true that Gods Church teacheth herein, yet the zele of procuring these meanes is nothing so great as the importaunce of the cause requireth. But if they note well those carefull admonitions of all these blessed fathers, they shall
perceiue that euery time that Christes holy bloude is represented vnto God in the Masse for the departed, they feele a present be∣nefite and release of their paines: they doe reioyse (sayth holy Athanasius) when the vnbloudy hoste, is offered for them. The old fathers to put a difference betwixt the sacrificing of Christes owne body vpon the crosse,Qust. 34. ad Antioch. and the same vpon the altar in the Church, doe lightly terme this way of offering, the vnbloudy sa∣crifice: and the thinge offered, which is Christes owne blessed body, they call likewise the host vnbloudy. And Chrysostome neuer putting any doubt of the first authors of offering for the deade, proueth that it is exceding beneficiall to the deceased, be∣cause the Apostles full of Gods spirite and wisedome, woulde else neuer with such care haue commaunded this holy action to be done for them. A lasse a lasse fo our deare freindes departed, that they must lacke this comforte: But wo euerlasting to them that are the cause of so much miserie. 5 Chrysostome can no more proue, that prayer for the dead came from the Apostles, then Tertullian could proue that oblation for the deade came from them. To detest fa∣sting on Sunday, and to pray kneeling, with diuerse like su∣perstitions, Tertullian referreth to the Apostles, as well as prayer for the deade, deny one and doubt of all the rest. And whereas M. Allen vpon contemplation of Chrysostome wordes, falleth into a hidden agony, & cryeth alasse alasse, if he would consider what the same man writeth vpon the Epistle to the Philip. Hom. 3. he would not make so great mone, the losse is not so great, Procuremus eis aliquid auxilij, modici quidē, attamen iuuemus eos. Let vs procure them some helpe, in deede but small helpe, yet let vs helpe them. Loe (M. Allen) your owne doctor confesseth it is but smal help that can be procured by prayers, almes, or remembraunce of them at the celebration of the holy misteries. You will say that soone after he sayth the Apostles that instituted such memory, knewe that much commodity came to the deade. Then see how soone he forgetteth him selfe, when he followeth not the rule of holy Scripture. Againe howe like you M. Allen that he alloweth not prayers nor the said
memory to helpe them that were Catechumeni, which were learning their catechisme, and dyed before they were bap∣tised? S. Ambrose you say cap. 9. of this booke did pray and offer for Gratianus which was but Catechumenus and dyed before he was baptised. Againe how agreeth this with your catholike doctrine which you boast is so well ordered to your handes, that Chrysostome denyeth them prayers, and alloweth them almes for their helpe? Catechumenos verò neque isto solatio dignamur, sed omni huiusmodi destituti sunt auxilio, vno quodam dempto, quo nam illo? pauperibus illorum nomine dare licet, vnde illis non nihil refrigerij accedet. As for them that be Catechumeni we count them not worthy of so much as this comfort, but they be destitute of all such aide, except one. What one is that? we may giue some thinge for their sake to the poore, whereof some refreshing shall come vnto them. 6 But heare I pray you what notable wordes S. Damascen hath for the vtilitie and institution of these thinges. The holy Apostles and disciples (sayth he) of our Sauiour Christ haue decried,Ibidem. that in the dread soueraigne, vndefi∣led, and liuely Sacraments (o he calleth the Masse) there shoulde be kept a memoriall of those that haue taken their sleepe in faith: the which ordinaunce, vntill this day with∣out gainsaying or controwling, the Apostolike and Ca∣tholicke Church of God, from one cost of the wide world to an other, hath obserued, and shall religiously keepe till the world haue an ende. For doubtlesse, these thinges that the Christian religion which is without error, & free from falshood, hath so many ages and worldes continued vnuio∣lably not without vrgent cause, those thinges (I say) are not vaine, but profitable to man, acceptable to God, and very necessarye for our saluation. Thus farre spake the do∣ctor, setting forth not onely his owne minde, but the faith of a numbre of the peeres of Gods Church: wherein to proue this do∣ctrine to be catholike, he fitly followeth the same way which Vin∣centius Lyrinensis gaue vs once for a rule to trye trueth by.The rule of trueth. Prouing that it hath antiquitie, as a thinge that came and hath
continued euen from the beginning of the Christian religion: de∣claring that it hath the consent of all nations, because it is and hath bene practised through out all the costes and corners of the wyde worlde: and last, that it hath the approbation of the wisest and holyestmen that euer were in the Church of Christ. And more then all this, that it shall so continue till the ende (though it be for a time in some peculiar nations omitted) because it is recei∣ued into a parte of that worship of God, which in the Church can not perishe. 6 As for Damascene, I know not wherefore his autho∣ritie serueth, but to fill vppe the number, for neither is his credit nor his antiquitie comparable with the former, we refuse not the rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, concerning an∣tiquity, so you can proue that it hath God to be the author, the Prophets and Apostles. As for witnesse vnder this an∣tiquitie, that which had an erroneous beginning shall haue a shamefull ending. 7 And this prescription of trueth our aduersaires can not auoyde, but with such vnseemely dealing as I trust they them selues now be ashamed of, as all other reasonable men are. For now let them come with brasen facies and blasphemous tounges, and say that prayers for the deade be vnprofitable, that the rites of the buriall be superstitious, that to say the Masse and sacrifice to be propitiatory for the soules departed, is iniurious to Christes death, that the doctors praised the errours of the ignorant people of their dayes, that they all erred and were deceiued, that the Church of Christ hath bene ledde in darke ignorance till these our dayes: let them bestowe these vaine presumptious wordes where they maye take place, for nowe all wise men doe perceiue that all these haue their holy institution by Christ and his Apo∣stles, practised vniuersally in the primitiue Church, embrased of all godly people, and approued to be wholy consonant to Gods worde by the pillors of Christes Church: who so consonantly agree together in this point, as well for the practise and proofe, as for the beginning therof, that to dissent from them and trust in these reedes of our dayes were meere madnesse, that are pufte to and
fro with euery blast of doctrine, that care not what they say, so that they say not as other their forefathers sayed, that had ra∣ther then they woulde geue ouer a singular opinion of their owne imagination, refuse and denie the authoritie of so many notable, wise, auncient, godly, and well learned fathers, whome we haue named. Although we haue left out many of no worse iudgement, plainely auouching these thinges to come into Christes Church, and worship, by the ordinaunce of his holy Apostles. All which thinges if our aduersaries haue reade, then they are in a most miserable and heuy taking, that doe withstand an open knowen trueth, and as I feare against their owne consciences too. Or if they haue not reade these plaine assertions of all learned men sith Christes time,Heretikes do against their ovvne consciences then they are most impudent that so vainely bragge in a matter whereof they are not skillfull. But I trust God will open their eyes, and breake their prowde hartes to the obe∣dience of his holy Church. 7 Nay M. Allen, your prescription is not yet proued, that this geare came from Christ and the Apostles. The oldest witnesse, that you haue alledged, fathered manifest fa∣bles vpon the institution of Christ, & the Apostles, as you your selfe can not deny, if you haue any conscience at all, and therefore not sufficient to be credited for that you al∣lege him. Wherefore you may bestow where you list these swelling bragges, of Christes institution, the Apostles tradi∣tion, the vniuersall practise of the primitiue Church. And what so euer great wordes beside you haue streyned your lunges, to pronounce, you haue sayd nothing for oblation or prayer for the deade, to be the institution of Christ, and all this geere, but I may say the same for the drinking of milke and hony after baptisme, for not fasting on Sonday▪ or prayer on knees, &c: by like vniuersalitie, antiquitie, con∣sent, authoritie. 8 If the authors be past hope, yet their followers shall take goodly occasion to forsake such wicked maisters, and be ashamed of all their vndecent dealyng, if they note and consider with me, that the first preachers of this peruerse opinion, were such, that
none of all their scholars durst euer for shame for the proofe of their assertion, name their owne doctors.Note. And truely a man might well maruel why heretikes hauing some that did plainely professe their opinions, had yet rather picke out some darke sentence of any one of our holy fathers, whome they knowe to be directly a∣gainst them, then out of those same doctors of their owne, which in expresse wordes make for them. You shall not lightly heare an heretike that denieth praying to sainctes, or holdeth with open breache of holy vowes, alleage Iouinianus, or Vigilantius. Nor a Sacramentarie, seeke for the authoritye of Berengarius, or Wicleffe, though they be of some antiquitie, and without colour plainely doe mainteine the doctrine that so well lyketh them. But they will trauell to writh with plaine iniurie to the author,Note the gile of an heretike. some sentence out of Augustine, or Ambrose, or some other that by their whole life and practise open them selues to the worlde to beleue the contrary: and all this by some shewe of wordes for the bearing of their false assertions. Marke it well (I saye) in here∣tikes that they can not for shame of them selues,Note. euer name any of the plaine auouchers of their owne opinions. The cause is, that the only vpholding of their opinions made them infamous to the whole posterity: And if any honour grewe vnto them amongest the simple, because they lacked not the wayes to procure the peo∣ples consent, with admiration of their eloquence, or other plausi∣ble and populare qualities in their dayes, yet trueth following time, their same raised vpon so light causes easely decayd, and the grounde of perpetuall infamie sattled in wise mens heartes by the wickednesse of their attemptes, remained for a testimony to all posteritie of their shame and ignominie. And this I speake not onely of the authors of our common sectes, for they neuer attei∣ned to any shade of famous report in their dayes, because they coulde deceiue none but simple wemen, but I meane by Arius him selfe, and Pelagius with the like, who in their owne time being of great esteeme amongest many whome they deceiued, yet after their death more & more they grew to shame and infamie: so farre, that who so euer were of their opinions afterward, durste not yet for shame vse their name or authority for proofe of their owne doctrine. See you not in our dayes howe freshe the name of Luther, Caluin, Bucer with that rable, was amongest the rude
people, whome they had wonne either with speach, or pleasure of licentious doctrine: and loe nowe it decayeth in a maner or their bones be coulde. The peoples sensies raueshed with the present pleasure of such as they hearde last, like them so longe as they heare them, afterwarde their memory remaineth onely to male∣diction.Psal. 36. Vidi impium superexaltatum & eleuatum sicut Ce∣dros Libani, transiui & ecce non est: quaesiui & non est in∣uentus locus eius. I haue seene the wicked exalted and set vp as the Cedre trees of Libanus, I passed by, and loe out of hande he is no body: I sought him, and his abiding can not be founde. VVho so euer shall seeke for our glorious preachers with in this C. yeare, he shall finde them in such estimation then, as their forefathers be nowe: that is to say, to be vnworthy the naming of their owne adherents, if any of that secte liue and last so longe. For let them neuer looke to come to the infamous fame of Ar∣rius, the best of all these secte maisters not worthy to be scholar to a hundreth of his followers. Thus loe is the case of heretikes, liked of fooles when they be alieue, contemned of all men when they are deade. 8 M. Allen marueileth and giueth a speciall note, that we name not Iouinian, Vigilantius, Berengarius or VVickleffe to be the authors of our doctrine but rather hang vppon some sentence of Augustine or Ambrose, and thinketh we are ashamed of the other. In deede if we depended vpon a∣ny mens authoritie, or that any man or men were the au∣thors of our faith as it fareth with ye popish faith, we should be iniurious vnto them if we did not acknowledge our foū∣ders, as they doe some of theirs. But seeing God him selfe is the father of that doctrine, which we haue receiued by his holy word, we neither boast vpon Augustine, nor Am∣brose when they dissent therefro, neither are ashamed of Vigilantius nor Beringarius, when they agree therewith. We refuse not ye truth that Tertullian & Origin haue taught, be∣cause they taught heresies also, neither do we receiue ye er∣rors of Cypriā & Augustin, because they taught many points of true faith. Onely the canonicall Scriptures are the rule, by which we iudge of all men and their writings, of all do∣ctrine and the teachers therof. It is a ridiculous thing, that
M. Allen like a cold Prophet, taketh vpon him to tell what shall be thought of our preachers names, within these hun∣dred yeares. But what so euer he prateth, the memory of the righteous shall remayne for euer, neither shall they be afrayde of any euill reporte, their names are written in the booke of life which are ordeyned vnto eternall glory, how∣so euer they be accounted of by the wicked of this worlde. And yet there is no cause, why we should not thinke that the names and writings of Luther, Caluine and Bucer, shal re∣mayne in good account with Gods Church euen vntil they them selues shall come with Christ, to iudge the worlde when in the meane time Eccius, Pighius, Cocleus, and such other shall not be remembred, but as obstinate withstan∣ders of the truth and enemies of the Gospell. 9 Now in the doctors of Gods Church it is cleane contrarie, and no lesse worthy to be noted for our purpose, for their honour and estimation rising vpon the sure vnfallible grounde of Gods trueth, by yeares and time gathereth such force, that not onely their memorie is in perpetuall benediction before God, but their workes follow them in the mindes of their posteritie, to their owne eternall praise, and benefite of all their followers. And which is much more to be woundered at, they haue so passed enuy and ma∣lice of man, that euen those which deadly hate them, dare not but praise them. And such as mislike their doctrine, and knowe of their owne conscience that they be directly against them, yet dare not openly charge them with falshood, as they doe vs their scholars, but rather (as I sayd) seeke some sentence out of them to helpe their owne cause, then with their plaine condemnation of falshood to refuse their authoritie. S. Augustine busyed much with the Pelagians: and charged by them in disputation that he defended the Manicheis doctrine concerning originall sinne, for his defense and warraunt, proueth vnto them that S. Am∣brose taught the same doctrine that he did, and yet they durst not be so bolde to call him a Manichie.Lib. 2. con∣tra Iulian. Dic huic Ambrosio si audes, quae mihi tam petulanter obiectas: Thou heretike (sayeth he) say the same by S. Ambrose, if thou dare for shame which thou so sausely and wantonly obiectes to me. Looke I pray
you, Ambrose was but newe deade when his onely name did feare the heretike,Lib. 2. con∣tra Iulian. whē other aliue of as good learning, was con∣temned of him, and by wordes of reproche charged with the Ma∣nicheis secte, who was a wicked man of horrible sectes not long before those dayes. Pelagius out of doubte thought no better of Ambrose and Cyprian deade, then he did of Augustine and Innocentius a liue, because their doctrine was all one: but yet the men departed were of more authority in Gods Church, then the liuing: of whose continuance to the ende men were vncer∣taine before the proofe thereof: and their wordes being deade might easely be wrasted to some shew of their purpose, when the authority of the liuing coulde not admit any such false dealinge, them selues bearing witnesse of the meaning of their own words. VVell then our doctors of Gods Church, being all of holy estima∣tion and blessed memory, doe so dase the eyes euen of their owne aduersaries, that being of the very same doctrine that we (who by Gods grace be membres of the Catholike Church) be of, yet they are past the malice of those which like not their doing and doctrine. For the heretikes well knowing them to be the authors, or at the least especiall mainteiners of this our assertion of the valew of prayers and the holy sacrifice for the departed, yet they dare not but clokedly reprehende them, when they flowe against the poore Catholikes nowe aliue, with wordes of infinite blasphe∣mie, and sclaunderous reproche. Therefore I nowe will call vppon them with S. Augustines wordes. Come on all the packe of you, who so euer is the prowdest Protestant vpon the earth, call if he dare S. Denyse, S. Cle∣ment, Athanas. Chrysostom, Ambrose, Gregory, Bede, we are not ashamed of their names as you be of your Maisters, Call these Papistes for praying for their freindes, call them Ido∣laters, call them superstitious, call them enimies of Christes pas∣sion: say they be iniurious to his death by prouiding a newe sa∣crifice for sinne: tell them they inuented Anniuersaries, monthes mindes, and yearly offeringes, for their owne gayne: call them masse mungers, call them blinde gydes. No you dare not for your eares, you dare not disprayse our heauenly gydes: you dare not once name your owne. 9 M. Allen sta our wisedome, there is no man will
graunt you that the doctors of Gods Church Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Basill, &c. are al togither yours, because they haue allowed some one or two thinges that you doe, and haue condemned the whole substance and principall groundes of your religion. Nay rather count vpon ye Popes to be the pillers of your Church, doctors of your learning, and fathers of your faith, that haue bene within these se∣uen, or eight hundreth yeares, and see whether we might not with more honesty, bragge of Iouinian and Vigilantius, then you in your conscience, can glory in a whole hūdreth of them almost. And whereas you bable of Augustine and the Pelagians, if you were posed to answere vppon your conscience: doe you defend Gods eternall predestination with Augustine, rather then free will with Pelagius? the on∣ly grace of God to be the whole cause of mans saluation as Augustine doth? or the merites of workes as the Pelagians doe? And whereas you allege that saying of Augustine, dic huic Ambrosio, &c. to proue that Ambrose may not be gaine sayde, what so euer he writ, you shall heare what Augustine him selfe sayth of the same Ambrose, when he was pressed with his authority by the Pelagians, as though he defended freewill in his booke de gratia Christi contra Pelagium, cap. 43. Beatus inquit Ambrosius Episcopus in cuius praecipuè libris Romana elucet fides, qui scriptorum inter Latinos flos quidem e∣nituit, cuius fidem & purissimum in Scripturis sensum, ne inimi∣cus quidem ausus est reprehendere. Ecce qualibus & quantis praedicat laudibus quamlibet sanctum & doctum, nequaquam tamen authoritati Scripturae canonicae comparandum. Blessed Ambrose (sayth the Pelagian) that Bishop in whose bookes specially, the Romane faith doth shine, which glistered as a certeyne flower among the Latine writers, whose fayth and most pure sense in the Scriptures, no not his enemy durst reprehend, &c. Behold (sayth Augustine) with what & howe great prayses he extolleth him, which though he be neuer so holy and well learned, yet is he not to be compa∣red with the authoritie of the canonicall Scriptures. Loe here the authoritie of Ambrose, or any man. And by the way note here the hereticall bragge of the Romane faith.
Finally where you stand forth, like a peeuish quarrell picker to dare vs with S. Augustines wordes, we may well say vnto you, as to such a busy body: good fellow thou makest more a doe then thou needest, here is no man disposed to striue with Clemens, Dionysius, Athanasius, Chrysostome, nor Augu∣stine, if they haue spoken any thing that helpeth the mat∣ter, bring it forth where due triall may be had, in the meane time, bragge of them as much as thou wilt, thou shalt ne∣uer be able to proue, that of 20. errors which thou defen∣dest, they did hold one. If they haue spoken otherwise then truth in any matter, they must be told of it as well as other men. But thou must not thinke, that for one error common with them, thou must hold an 100. cōtrary to them. Thou doest them wrong, to make them thy partakers, as thou shalt well know when the triall commeth, therefore quiet thy selfe, and talke of thyne owne mates, as for those men, thou hast litle to doe with them, nor they with thee, but for sclaundering of them to be altogither on thy side. 10 Such force hath the trueth, and such feare there is in falshood: and yet these doctors must needes be in a thousand times worse case then we be, if the doctrine of purgatory and prayers be not true. VVe may be saued or at least reasonably ex∣cused, by following: they in leading vs in falshood, can haue no excuse of their impietie. But howe glad may all we Catholikes be in our heartes, that haue the full consent of all them in the proofe of our beleue, out of whose workes the aduersaries woulde be glad of one likely sentence. And whose life and doctrine are so glo∣rious in Gods Church, that their owne aduersaries raling at vs aliue, yet dare not but with great feare once blemish their names departed: Though sometimes it brastithe out in some one of them to their owne miscredit. So beutifull is the light of trueth. And on the other side, howe miserable is their carefull case that fol∣lowe and defende that doctrine, the authors whereof they dare neither acknowledge nor name: whome all good men with open mouth boldely doe reprehend, and their owne scholars dare not defende. Such a glorious maiesty this doctrine of theires bea∣reth, that pricketh vp with pryde those that be alyue, and blot∣teth
out of honest memorie, her doctors that be deade. 10 Nay M. Allen, though those doctors build some hay or stuble, vpon the onely foundation Christ, their case is ten thousand times better then yours, which build no∣thing but dirt and donge tempered with hay and stuble vp∣on no foundation at all except it be the sande, and seeke by all meanes to digge vp the onely true foundation of our fayth Iesus Christ, making him nothing better then a com∣mon person: except his bare name: and woe may be to such Catholikes, as can finde nothing but hay and stuble, where such store of precious matter is, and the most precious cor∣ner stone the foundation of all excellency. And happy be those, which not regarding the streames of waters, that runne through the vaynes of earth, but seeking to the one∣ly fountayne of heauenly truth, conteyned in the holy scri∣ptures, haue certeyne comfort of saluation while they are aliue, and sure possession of felicitie with Christ, as soone as they are dead, yea which dye not at all, because they be∣leue in Christ which is life, nor enter into iudgement, but passe from death of this body, which is temporall, vnto life of body and soule which is eternall. The first Author of that secte vvhich denieth prayers for the departed is noted, his good condicions and cause of his er∣ror be opened, vvhat kinde of men haue bene most bent in all ages to that secte. And that this heresy is euer ioyned as a fit companion to other horrible sectes. CAP. XIIII. 1 BVt yet, because they haue diffamed our practise in praying and offering for the deade, by referring it to a later origine then the Apostolike authority and tra∣dition, seeing we haue fathered our vsage vpon such as the aduersaries dare not blame, we will helpe them to seeke out the fathers of their faithles perswasion, lest by the feare and bashfullnesse of their owne scholars, they be vnkindly forgotten. Mary to finde out these obscure loyterers it will be somewhat
painefull, because as theeues doe, they kepe by wayes: and light∣ly treade not in honest mens pathes. For the finding out of re∣cordes for the testimony of our trueth, we kepte the day light, the high waye of Gods Church. All the knowen notable personages, in the holy Citye of God offered them selues both to witnesse, and proue with vs. VVe droue this trueth from our dayes through the middest of that holy communitie which S. Augustine calleth the Citye of God: and our aduersaries will not saye otherwise but they were the liuely membres of that happy and heauenly fellowship. VVe brought the practise of it to the holy Apostles by plaine accompte, we went with the trueth of our cause to the lawe of Moyses,The high vvaye of trueth. from thense by like light to the lawe of nature. But nowe for the other sorte, we must leaue the cytie of God and the fellowship of these noble personages, of doctors, Apostles, Pro∣phets, and Patriarches, and seeke on the lifte hande in the other citye, which is of Augustine named the citye or common welth, as a man might call it of the deuill: in which body, all practise of mischiefe and origin of error, ishuing from that vnhappy heade to the corrupt and deadly limmes thereof, is to be founde. VVe shall heare of the aduersary perswasion then, in the company of Anabaptistes,The by vvay of heresy. of Arrians, of Saduceis, of Epicures: where so euer the weedes of the common enemies corrupte seede groweth, there shall we find amongest breares and brembles, this choking weede with all. For as the true preachers, the Apostles of Christ Iesu, did sowe in the beginning of the Christian church, which was the springe of the worde of lyfe and trueth, amongest other heauenly seedes of true doctrine, that profitable practise for the reliefe of such, as were hense departed in the sleepe of peace, with the de∣cent ordre which euer fithens the Catholicke Church hath obe∣diently followed,Math. 13. euen so, Inimicus homo superseminauit zi∣zania: the common enemy came afterwarde and ouersewe dar∣nell, and cockle, either for the vtter choking, or else for the espe∣ciall let of that good seede, which the Maister of this fielde by his houshold seruauntes had plentifully sowen before. This com∣mon aduersarie, as our maister him selfe expoundeth it, is the Deuill: who, as he in all other thinges beneficiall to mankinde is a great staye, so Christian mens commoditie in this point he notably hindereth by his wicked suggestions and deuilish de∣uise,
whereby he prouoketh many vnder the shewe of Gods word or bare name therof (for that is the lambes cote which this wyely wolfe boroweth to maske in) to be vnkind, vnnaturall, and with out all godly affection towards their departed frendes. The which contrary corrupt seede of false doctrine we right well know came of the sayd aduersary, because it was long after ouersowen: lear∣ning further of Tertullian,Tertul. de praescript. Id verum esse quodcunque pri∣mum, id adulterinum quod posterius. That to be true that was first taught, and that to be false and forged, which came latter. CAP. XIIII. 1 WHen the Apostolike writing, can not be shewed, it is but the poynt of an heretike to boast of Apostolike tradition. So did the Valentinians, although their heresie were newe, when they were confuted by the Scriptures, shrow∣ed them selues vnder the name of traditions, as we haue shewed before, out of Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 2. And therfore it is but vayne bragging, that you promise to seeke out any o∣ther fathers of our perswasion, then the Apostles of Christ, by whose holy writings, we neuer refuse to be iudged. what if any heretike haue affirmed some thing, that is true? is truth worse in an heretikes mouth? The deuills them sel∣ues confessed Christ. Their confession was true, their testi∣mony was refused. So if any heretike haue confessed the truth, we may receiue the truth and yet reiect his testimo∣ny. For truth hath testimony of God his word and whether it be affirmed or denyed by the deuill, it is all one. The high way that you prate of, is a bye way, for the Scripture is the onely high way to the truth, with the guidance of Gods spi∣rite. And yet that way which you haue taken, hath so ma∣ny hills and holes, woods and thickets, that you haue ra∣ther flyen ouer it in a dreame and imagination, then trauai∣led through it in deede when you walked through the city of God, which Augustine describeth. I maruaile you could not see the westerne Babylon, Rome, to be the city or cō∣mon wealth of the deuill. lib. 16. cap. 17. lib. 18. cap. 21. cap. 22.
cap. 27. The mother of all abominations of the earth, which either inuented or tempered of others inuention that gol∣den cuppe full of abominations & vncleanes of her whor∣doms, with which she made drunken all the Kinges of the earth. And therefore that we can not reade out of the word of God, we shall heare of Purgatory, among the Paganes, Carpocratianes, Heracleonites, and Montanistes, of whose heresies and pestilent practises, the whore of Babylon hath patcht vp her purgatory and sacrifices for the deade, as by and by I shall declare. In deede the enuious man the de∣uil, hath sowed these wicked sect masters. And that doctrine which is first, agreeable to Tertullians rule is vndoubtedly true, and that which is later is false. But howe shall the first doctrine be knowen but by the word of God, wherein all ye doctrine of God is taught. But by ye holy Scriptures, which are able to make the man of God perfect and prepared to all good workes. And seeing, praying, and offering for the deade as Tertullian him selfe confesseth, is not taught by the Scriptures, it is no good worke whereto ye man of God should be prepared. And for as much as you haue giuē me example of a syllogisme in Baroco in the last chapter, I wil frame you the like nowe. All good workes are taught by the Scriptures, oblatiōs for the deade are not taught by the Scriptures, therefore oblations for the deade are no good workes. The maior is S. Paule. 2. Timot. 3. The minor is Ter∣tullians de corona militis. Deny the conclusion if you dare. 2 And yet besides that generall and most certaine instru∣ction, learned Damascen, helpeth vs to the trial of this peculiar case. Doubting not to affirme, that all such cogitations as doe en∣tre into mans head against the prayers or charitable workes for the departed, be the deuills enuious and subtill suggestions, for the hinderaunce of our brethern departed from the heauenly ioyes. For thus he writeth in a sermon for the same purpose. That olde serpent (sayeth he) whose endeuoure is to corrupt and de∣face the good and acceptable workes of God, & to lay snares for the entrapping of mens soules, who is much perced through bro∣therly loue, and brasteth in sunder for the enuy that he beareth
towardes our faith, and finally is madded by our naturall com∣passion one towardes an other, as one that is the vtter renoun∣cer of all good lawes, he enspireth to some a fayned and false imagination cleane contrary to the holy constitutions: that is to saye, that all good and acceptable workes, before God, shoulde no whit proffet the departed soules. If this writers iudgement be good, as it is sure most sounde,Our Prote∣stantes be inspired by Damascens iudgement. then must all our vnnatural and vnkind preachers haue an espe∣ciall inspiration of the deuill him selfe, so often as they hinder fauour and grace from the deade. For as he reduced our origin to the Apostles, so he doubteth not to auouche, the contrary perswa∣sion to be euidently moued by the olde serpent, of especiall enuie towardes mans saluation. And nowe if thou list knowe in whome this subtill suggestion tooke first place and roote,Of the au∣thor of this nevv sect. after the longe vsage of the other, according to the Apostles planting: we shall make thee for thy especiall comfort partaker thereof also. VVe will not vse the aduersaries, as they doe vs: charging vs with later preaching or doctrine then the Apostles planted, & yet can neither tell, where, nor by whome it beganne. But we shal by open euidence call the woolfe by his name. Let an heretike but set out foot, and once open mouth, though he doe no harme at all, yet the watcheman of Israell hath him by the backe straight. The dogges were neuer so dumme in Gods Church, but they woulde barke at the first apparance of any straunge cattell. For that, the notation of his arising and name, was not onely a warning to the present time to take heede to their faith, but an admonition to all the posteritie to beware of the like. And it was euer counted a refu∣tation of an heresie to the full, to reduce it to a latter infamous author, by the certaine recorde of the Churches historie. The which kinde of reason both amongest the learned hath singular strength, and is sensible for the people, and of the aduersarie vt∣terly inuincible. Irenaeus vseth it against the heresies of his time, as a demonstration of much force. VVhat, saith he, before Valentinus there was none of that his false secte,Lib. 3. cap. 4. and he came in with his seede, after the first preaching of our faith a good while. I can tell when he beganne, howe he increased, how longe he continued.The trial of false prea∣chers. Both he and that other Cerdon entered first vn∣der the gouernment of Hyginius, grewe vpwarde vnder Pius,
and continued till Anicetus time: and so making the like ac∣compt of other archeheretikes, at length thus he concludeth: all these rose vp in their apostacie longe after that the Church was ordered in faith and doctrine. In this sense spake Irenaeus. 2 Damascene your doctor, which knew the depth of Satan so well, should first haue reproued that perswasion by Scripture, and then it had bene easy to haue found out the policie of the deuill. But when we learne by Scripture, that your doctrine is contrary to the fayth, and hope of Chri∣stians, it is not hard to iudge, that the deuill inuented it, vn∣der colour of charitie to ouerthrow faith, and vnder shewe of helpe of mē, to dishonour God. You spend many words in vayne, to proue that the first author of an opinion being found, the opinion is found to be an heresy. It shal be graū∣ted with all fauour, but so that no man shall be counted the first author of an opinion, that is able to proue his opinion out of the word of God. And withall, that who so euer is not able to proue by the word of God, any opiniō that he hol∣deth obstinatly, though he haue many authors before him yet is he neuerthelesse an heretike. 3 But the rule is common and certaine as any can be in the worlde, and I woulde stande vpon the grounde thereof against all false doctrine in the worlde,A generall rule to knovve he∣resie by. and thus it is: Any opinion, that may be truely fathered vppon any priuate man, that was longe after the trueth was first preached by the Apostles, if it be vpon a point of our faith, and contentiously mainteined, it is an heresie. And thus againe: who so euer was withstande in his first arising and preaching, by such as were in the vnitie of the Church, he was a false teacher, and his abettours be heretikes. And the force of this conclusion is so greate, that the heretikes them selues if they can get any likely shew of raysing of any doctrine, or practise of Gods Church in these latter dayes, they thinke they haue a good argument against the Catholikes. Therefore they woulde father transubstantiation vpon this Councell, the adoration of the Sa∣crament vpon that Pope, indulgencies vpon that byshop, &c. For they be as saulcie with Gods Church, Councells, & chiefe gouer∣nors,
as we be with the Iacke strawes of Geneua. And yet when they haue traualed to their heartes ake, they can finde no one thing first inuented by any of them, whome they falsely name to be the authors thereof. But well seeing it is so stronge an argu∣ment of heresie, to haue the ofspring of a later author, with plaine prouisò of Gods Church for his markinge, let vs adde so much strength to our cause, to haue the father of the contrary falshood knowen, and noted of the antiquity, by his name. 3 If you haue not a better vnderstander, then you are a rule giuer, your rule is false, for though you hedge it in with many conditiōs, yet you leaue out the chiefest, which is that the opinion it self be cōtrary to the truth, first prea∣ched by the Apostles, or else it is no heresie, though it may be truely fathered vpon any man priuate or publike, sooner or later. And here I muse why you put in the condition of a priuate man: belike if the Pope inuent a new doctrine, because he is a publike person that can not erre, it must not be taken for heresie. In your second rule, except you vnder∣stand that the opinion of him which is withstāded, be new and of his owne inuention, the withstanding thereof, no not by good men, maketh it not false. They that defended that heretikes should not be rebaptised, were withstoode by Cyprian and all the Bishops of Africa (who were notwith∣standing their error in the vnitie of the Church) yet were they not heretikes nor their opinion heresie, because it was not of their inuention but of the word of God. And wher∣as you affirme, that we can not find any of those thinges inuented by them by whome we say they were inuented, though we trauail vntill our hartes ake: I aunswere though you seeke vntill your head ake & lye vntill you haue worne your tongue to the stumpes, you shall neither finde those things in the word of God, nor to haue any other authors, thē ye writers of your owne sect haue named to be ye fathers of most of them. And that you charge vs with like saucines towards your Prelates, that you vse toward ye Iacke strawes of Geneua, if you had not thereby confessed your selfe to be a saucy Iacke, you might haue giuen vs occasiō to think
no lesse of you. For although perhaps you count the chief teachers of that Church for Iacke strawes, yet the worlde can testifie, that there is more grauitie and modesty in the lightest persons of all that Church, then hath appeared of many Popes and Cardinalls of your Church of Rome. Cap. 75. li. 3. In Anace∣phal.4 Epiphanius that notable man in his booke that he wrote for the confutation of all the heresies that were before his time, and in other of his workes too, nameth an obscure fellowe one Aërius to be the first author of this heresie, that prayers and sa∣crifice profiteth not the departed in Christ. But what maner a fel∣lowe he was, and how lickely to be the founder of such a schoole, thou shalt perceiue best by the writers wordes. When Aërius coulde not obteine the byshopricke of Eustathius deposed, after that he was once perfectly well skilled in Arius do∣ctrine, he inuented new sectes of his owne: affirming that there shoulde be no offering for the departed, and of him loe the scholars were called Aërians. Let not the simple (whome I woulde helpe in this cause) be deceiued by the liknes of these two names, Arius: and Aërius:Arius. Aërius. for this later was the author of their secte, and was a follower of the first called Arius in his doctrine beside. And of the same sect and sectmaister, S. Augustine thus sayeth, following Epiphanius: The Aërians were so named by one Aërius,In lib. de haeres. ad Quod vult. who taking snoffe that he coulde not get a byshopricke, fell into the heresie of Arius first: and then added therevnto, other heresies of his owne makinge: saying that we shoulde not offer sacrifice for the deade, nor obserûe the solemne appointed fastes of the Church, but that euery man should abstaine when he liste. And there both he and Epiphanius doe recken moe of his holy opinions, which I omit. For it is enough for our purpose, and to confunde all the heretikes of our dayes, that this opinion was no∣ted as it spronge vp in the primitiue Church for heresie,One that hath forsa∣ken the Church is indifferent to vvhat heresie you vvill. and the authors not onely condemned as heretikes in that point, but in many other thinges beside. For I neuer reade of, nor yet knewe any heretike, but if he once mistrusted the catholike Church, the Deuill was hable to perswade with him as well in a numbre of matters as in one. And that is the cause that any man seduced,
falleth from one falshood to an other, till he wholy be drowned in the waues of tempesteous doctrine.And there∣fore they call their doinges, Proceding. Prouer. 18. And when he commeth once at the bottom, then (God knoweth) he setteth light by the mat∣ter, contemneth it, and is often past recouery, as it is sayde: Pec∣cator cum in profundum venerit, contemnit. Euen so did this Aërius, first through ambitious pride fall to the Arians sect, but because he counted it nothing glorious to be a scholar, he woulde be a maister, and that of a misheuous matter, and a mat∣ter repugnāt to the sense of all Christes Church, which before his preaching, generally as after, receiued and faithfully vsed pray∣ers and oblation for the deade. Of which consent of the vniuer∣sall worlde, and the heretikes follye in withstanding the same, the sayde Epiphanius sayeth thus: I will report his wordes in La∣tine, because they sounde very well, though him selfe wrote not in that language: Assumpsit ecclesia in toto mundo,Vbi sup. 13. assensus est factus antequàm esset Aërius, & qui ab ipso appellantur Aëriani: quis autem magis de his nouit, hic ne seductus homo qui etiam superest nunc, an qui ante nos testes fue∣runt? &c. Thus in English. The Church hath receiued this trueth through the wide worlde, it was sattled in all mens mindes before Aërius was borne, or any of his secte that be nowe called Aërians. And who I pray you is most like to knowe the trueth of these thinges, this false wretche yet liuinge at this daye, or else the faithfull witnesses that were before our time? Beholde here you worshipfull maister▪ you may suerly take greate cause of com∣forte in his liuely worde: mary Sir he might haue bene an Arch∣bishoppe in our dayes, for he loued neither fasting nor praying. He was fayne to be an heretike for anger, because he coulde not be made a bishoppe then, who now if he were in this happy age, when the light is more plentifully powred vpon the people, might haue bene promoted at Caluins decease to the ouerlooking of Geneua. But his opinion was so notorious false, that it grew to no greate heade at that time, or else it was not so much regarded because it was ioyned to that horrible falshood of Arius, against the blessed Godhood of Christ Iesus our Sauiour.Note vvell. Euery greate wast of religion hath many false opinions knit together, amongest which one being as principall ground, shadoweth the other lesser branchies: as nowe the blasphemy of the holy Sacrificie and Sa∣crament
being the fountaine of their heresies, in a maner coue∣reth the meaner puddells of their stinking doctrine. And amōgest other, this vnnaturall affection of forbidding the reliefe of the parted, seemeth euer to be ioyned as an appendix to other false∣hoods. For in holy Damascens dayes this secte appeared againe with other false doctrine,Damascen in oratione pro defun∣ctis & de haeres. as a companion of all mischiefe. And to proue it to be an heresie, he seeketh out the first founder there∣of, and findeth euen as before, that vnder the deuill this Aë∣rius was the father of that faythlesse assertion. VVhome he bay∣teth well fauourdly in a whole oration and so driues the woolfe in to the woodde againe. 4 Now at the length commeth the author of this he∣resie by the testimony of Epiphanius and Augustine. But nei∣ther of them confuteth it by the Scriptures, but by the cō∣mon error of their tyme. I could proue out of Irenaeus and Epiphanius, that the first that brought in estimation the fi∣gure of the crosse & images were the Valentinians & Car∣pocratianes. But that is no aunswere to this matter, I haue promised to proue that the opinion of purgatory, had the same original that the most notable heresies had. Tertullian though him selfe an heretike, yet truely describeth the o∣riginall of heresies in his booke de praescriptionibus aduersus haereses. That as true doctrine was receiued from Christ by the Apostles, o heresie from the deuill by Philosophers and Gentyles. Also in his booke de anima he sheweth that all Philosophers which graunted the immortality of the soule, as Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Plato, assigned 3. pla∣ces for the soules departed, heauen, hell, and a third place of purifying. Carpocrates as Irenaeus doth testifie, was a great admirer of Philosophie, in so much that with the imagies which he made of Christ, he ioyned the imagies of Pytha∣goras, Plato, and Aristotle. This heretike learning out of Plato his philosophy, that mens soules must be purified after their death, inuented a kinde of purgatory out of the opinion of Pythagoras, and proued it out of that place of S. Matthew. Thou shalt not come forth vntill thou hast payed the vttermost farthing, euen as the Papists do Iren. lib. 1. ca. 24.
The Heracleonites as Augustine witnesseth, came yet a step more towardes the Papistes, for they would redeeme their deade after a new maner, namely by oyle, balme, water, and inuocation sayd ouer their heades in the Hebrew tongue. But Montanus of whom Tertullian receiued his heresie, had in all pointes the opinion of the Papistes. First that the Pa∣triarkes before Christes comming were in hell, that Abra∣hams bosome was in hell, or in the lower parts (as M. Allen had rather speake) that onely Martyrs and perfect men are priuiledged, of God to goe into Paradise, that all small of∣fences must be punished after this life, where the prison is & the vttermost farthing to be payed, witnes of this is Ter∣tullian in his booke de anima. ca. de inferis, &c. vlt. an aliquid patiātur animae apud inferos, &c. His words are these, after he hath proued that soules may suffer after their death. In sum∣ma, cum carcerem illū, quod Euangeliū demōstrat inferos intelli∣gimus, & nouissimū quadrātem modicum quod{que} delictum mora resurrectionis, illic luendū interpretamur, nemo dubitabit animā aliquid pēsare penes inferos salua resurrectionis plenitudine, per carnē quo{que}. Hoc etiā Paracletus frequētissimè cōmēdauit, si quis sermones eius ex agnitione promissorū charismatū admiserit. To conclude, when we do vnderstand that prison which thing the Gospell sheweth, to be hell, or the lower partes, and do expound that the vttermost farthing, which is euery small fault, must there be punished with delay of resurrection, no man shall doubt, but that the soule in hell doth suffer somthing, sauing the fulnes of the resurrection by the flesh also. And this the comforter hath often times commen∣ded, if any man will admitte his sayings, by acknowledging of the promised gratious giftes. By the comforter he mea∣neth the spirite of Montanus, whose heresie he defended. And therefore it is not otherwise to be thought, but that the Montanistes vpon the ground of this opinion, not con∣tent with the oblations for the deade which the Church then had by peruerse emulation of the Gentiles, and yet were but oblations of thankes giuing, as they could be no other for the birth dayes, they added also prayers for the spirites of them that, were deade, whereof Tertullian ma∣keth
mention in his bookes de castitate & de Monogamia, which were both written to heretikes of his sect, and by those prayers laboreth to proue, that second mariages are not lawfull. Also in his booke de anima before named, though for an other purpose, he rehearseth a miracle of a woman whom he knew of his sect (for none other he coū∣ted of the Church) which after she was deade and prepa∣red to buriall, by prayer of the Priestes, at the first begin∣ning of his prayer, she tooke vp her handes from her sides, and held them vp as they that vse to pray, and when the office of buriall was ended, layd them downe agayne. This miracle I take to haue bene an illusion of Sathan, to con∣firme that new opinion, that prayers profited the deade, as that also which he reporteth of heare say, of some of his sect, that when two bodies should be buried in one graue, the one lay further and made roome for the other: which was no doubt a sleight of Satan, to commend the vnitie of heretikes. And that the practise of the Church for oblati∣ons for the deade at the yearly day of their birth, were ta∣ken from the Gentiles, it appeareth by this, that Tertullian counteth them of all one origen with the oblations pro na∣talitijs, that is for the birth dayes. which Beatus Rhenanus a Papist, and a great antiquary, doth confesse, affirming that by the canons of the Nicene councell and other councels, which he hath seene in libraries, those oblations pro natali∣tijs with other superstitions, that Tertullian fathereth vpon tradition of the Apostles, were abrogated. And the oblati∣ons them selues, which were at burialls, mariages, & birth dayes, he affirmeth were mony that was offered in almes, to the reliefe of the poore. Origen to much a Philosopher was not content with Plato his purification, but he must bring in Platoes fire also, and that he would build as the pa∣pistes doe, and as he had better reason then the Papistes haue, out of the 1. Cor. 3. but because the Apostle sayd, that euery mans worke, should be tryed by fire, he thought that all men should passe through his purgatory, & at length be saued. Afterward when prayers for the deade were growne out of memoryes for the deade, which were without pray∣ers
in Origens tyme, as appeareth in his wordes in Iob. lib. 3. but kept with almes to the poore and reioysing for their rest, about S. Augustines time, the name of purgatory was first inuented, by some mediatores and conciliatores of O∣rigens error, with the erroneous practise of the church. And this was a great corruption of those auncient tymes, that they did not alwaies weigh what was most agreeable to the word of God, but if ye Gentiles or heretikes had any thing that semed to haue a shew of pietie, or charitie, they would draw it into vse, with such correction as they thought was sufficient. So they tooke the signe of the crosse from the Valentinians, oblations for the dayes of death and birth of the Gentiles, prescript tymes of fasting and vnmeasurable extolling of sole life, in the ministers of the Church, from the Maniches, Tacianistes, and Montanistes: prayer for the deade of the Montanistes: purgatory fire of the Origine∣stes, yea Ieronym was almost fallen into the heresie of Ter∣tullian in condemning second mariages: yea euē the name of sacrifice which was commonly vsed for the celebration of the Lordes supper, they tooke vp of the Gentiles. Finally it appeareth that the faithfull in Tertullians tyme, which were not of his sect, beleued not that the soules of Christi∣ans departed, came into his hell or lower partes, where he maketh so many mansions, but that they were placed in heauen where Christ is, against whom he reasoneth after his brawling and taunting maner, that he vseth against the Catholikes libro de anima, cap. de inferis. And they that so beleue, allow no prayers for the deade. Wherefore it is left that Montanus and his followers were the first that taught prayers for the deade to be profitable, because that the soules of the faithfull that were not made perfect by mar∣tyrdom or other streight penance, must pay the vttermost farthing in prison, and suffer the least offences in the lower partes, if they were not holpen with prayers. Therfore Ae∣rius was not the first that helde our opinion but Montanus before him was the first that held your opinion throughly, against the Catholikes of his tyme. Wherfore you are wel∣come home for heretikes by your owne rule.
5 Then for many a day together this doctrine was dashte till the time of holy S. Bernard and Petrus the reuerent Abbate of Cluny, by which two notable housekeping dogges, that were ne∣uer dumme in the Churches neede, this woolfe appearing once againe was both noted and oppenly vanquished.Note vvell hovv this falshood e∣uer ioyneth it selfe to other hor∣rible sectes. And in their dayes, this falsehood that before was a compagnion of the Ar∣rians (marke well the course of thinges good reader) was nowe matched with the Anabaptistes: who in that time, as the saide writers doe recorde, did call them selues Apostolici, that is to say Apostolicke or followers of the Apostles, so they woulde be termed to delude the ignorant by the bewty of that glorious name, as now their ofspring call them selues, Euangelici: that is to say, gospellers, and the pure preachers of the word, and gospell. S. Ber∣nard touched them to the quicke in a sermon, by these wordes, Loe (sayeth he) these miscreants, loe these dogges, they laugh vs to skorne that we baptise infants,Sermone 66. super cantic. that we pray for the deade, that we require the helpe of holy Sainctes, they exclude Christes grace in all sortes and euery kinde, in olde and younge, in the liue and in the deade. Looke you nowe, with their Gospell like name they were counted no better then prophane dogges of this holy father, that laught so skorne∣fully at Christes Church for praying for the deade and inuocation of Sainctes: and shall we make such Iewels of their scholars now a dayes? In all ages since this wielde seede was first sowne, the true preachers, the workemen of Gods haruest, haue euer plucked it vp, as it first appeared: The which wede was better knowene from the corne, because it euer grewe amongest the bundels of briers and brembles, & was of that waisting nature, that it could not be tolerated without the vtter choking of the wheate. 5 Barnard was but a late writer to speake of, and whe∣ther those that were called in his tyme Apostolici, were sclaundered for denying of baptisme to infantes when per∣haps they denyed onely some of your popish ceremonies which you vse, about baptisme, I am not able to say, certein it is that the godly called pauperes de Lugduno & VValden∣ses, which were about that tyme, were sclaundered with many detestable opinions, which it is nowe well knowne
that they neuer did holde. But howe so euer it were, that which they affirmed of trueth, must not be condemned because of that where in they erred: the Arrians were the first that added vnto the Symbole the article of descending into Hell: shall we thinke worse of that article which is true, because of there heresie which is false? 6 This doctrine (I saye) being of it selfe very pernicious, yet it is euer in company of other mischiefe. For the principall author of this secte was an Arian, then the followers as Bernard witnesseth, were Anabaptistes or worse. To whome all men much maruell that God should rather reueale such misteries of trueth, then to other that were sownde in faith. And in deede I woulde gladly meete with some one good fellowe or other of that secte, that were learned with al, that he might resolue me in this doubt, why this conclusion of not offering or praying for the deade, of not keping the ordinarie fastes, of contemning the Sainctes helpe in heauen, and the residue of your new Creede, why God (seeing all light of trueth commeth of his grace) openeth these miste∣ries alwayes and onely, to such as you your selues can not deny to be heretikes.I trovve no Protestant cā ansvvere vvith rea∣son to thi point. VVhy did he reueale in the primitiue Church that doctrine to an Arian, being an open enemie of his holy name, and not to Athanasius or Epiphanius, or some other blessed men of that time? I stande the longer vpon this point, that the worlde and who so euer is the simplest, maye beholde your miserie and shame: for I knowe you can say nothing in this case for your de∣fense, but euen beare with blacke blotted consciencies the infa∣my of willfull blindnesse. Howe saye you, did not your doctrine afterwarde appeare againe amongest wicked Anabaptistes, that deny amongest other things, the baptising of infants? it was nei∣ther reueled to Bede nor Bernard I warrant you.Here this sect ioyneth vvith the sa¦cramētariés and the rest of miscre∣aunts. But come lower yet to our owne time: you knowe full well we haue store of Ana∣baptistes, of Arians, of Saduceis, of Epicures, and of all other sectes that the deuill euer deuised (such light of trueth hath our happy age by your preaching) tell me trueth nowe, be not all these whome you counte heretikes as well as we doe, be they not all I saye of your opinion in this matter and not one of them of our?
6 I may by the example of Christ aunswere one que∣stion with an other: why was it first reueiled to the Arians in councell holden against Christ? that the article of his descent into hell, was meete to be added to the creede and confession of faith, which was not reueiled to so many godly mē as set forth the Symbole, nor to the holy Nicene Councell. Aunswere me if you can, or any Robin good fel∣lowe of your sect▪ learned or vnlearned, is it any preiudice to the trueth of that article? or to the right that it hath to be placed in the creede, that it was first added by the Ar∣rians? why was the trueth reueiled to heretikes concer∣ning rebaptisation, rather then to Cyprian and so many ca∣tholicke byshoppes? why was it reueiled to the Pelagians, that infantes might be saued without the participation of the sacrament of Christes body and bloude rather then vnto S. Augustine, Innocentius byshoppe of Rome, and as Augustine sayeth all the catholicke fathers of that time? which thought it was as necessary for them to receiue the communion as to be baptised. If heretikes shoulde not af∣firme somethinge that were true, they shoulde neuer de∣ceiue any man. And sometime Satan affirmeth the trueth, not because he will haue it beleeued, but rather that proce∣ding out of his lying mouth it might the sooner be discre∣dited. And therefore sometymes Arrians, Pelagians, Ana∣baptistes and such like, by the subtilty of Satan, haue af∣firmed somethinge that is true, either to winne credit to their manifolde lyes, or else to drowen the credit of that trueth, among so many errors. 7 Nay I will pose you further, is not your preaching the ve∣ry ready waye to all such extreeme blasphemies, as they boldely mainteine? did euer man fall from the Catholicke Church to those further heresies then you yet openly professe, but he tooke yours by the waye, as a plaine passage to extreme infidelitie? yea your opinions doe so well stande with the other, that they neede not afterwarde to refuse any one pointe of all your doctrine to mainteine their owne. There is no article of Catholicke doctrine, but it is as much hated of them, as of your selues. Helpe your
selues here my maisters, or else all the worlde will take you to be in your heartes,Marke vvel. of the same sectes wherevnto your faith is al∣wayes so dearely ioyned. Put your heades together, and tell vs whie your doctrine is so deare to the Ariās, & all wicked men, & so hated of the holy fathers of Christes Church? If you frame not your aunswere well, you liese your credites, your scholars, and your honesties. VVell, thus haue I pointed out your author, his name was Aërius: you must be called Aërians: you maye kepe the name of Protestaunts or Euangelistes beside. For a holy newe calling is lightly ioyned to such men. VVhereby though some simple be deceyued, yet wse men be warned. Or if the olde au∣thors of this secte be not so glorious as these new reuiuers, if they list and like so, they may call them selues Lutherans, or Calui∣nistes, or what they will, but Catholickes. Although Martyn Lu∣ther graunted purgatory and prayers, with this error: that such as were there, might yet by their diuers deseruinges, winne or loose life euerlasting, as men of doubtefull state, as they were be∣fore in the worlde: plaine against our Sauiours admonition, and carefull warning,Vide Hiero nimū sup. 3. ad Galatas. Ioan. 9. veniet nox quando iam nullus operari po∣test. VVorke whiele the day lasteth, for the night shall come whē no man can labour. But I neede not to stande vpon this point, which of neither parte is much regarded. Neither will I spende any more time in getting them an author of their secte, seeing they haue choise of diuers. Let them goe out of the Citye of God, from amongest the holy company, and turne on the lifte hande, and looke amongest the outcastes of all agies, and they shall haue freindes and fellowes enowe. 7 That you saye of our preaching to be the waye to so many heresies, might haue bene sayed of the Gentiles and Iewes, to the whole Church of Christians. The Gen∣tiles continued constant, so did the Iewes without schisme in their errors, when the professors of Christianity were rent and torne into an hundreth sectes and heresies. There were no heretikes but they hated Iewes, and Gentiles, as much as the true Christians, was therefore the religion of the Iewes and Gentiles better then the religion of the Christians? Yea there neuer was since Christ any heresie,
or heretike, but they agreed in many more thinges, with the Christians then with the Gentiles and Iewes, was therefore the Christian religion false? or the Paganes and Iewes superstition true? It is therefore, no dsredit of our doctrine, that Arrians or Anabaptistes of our time, either haue any thing of yours, or prayse any thing of ours. Nei∣ther our credit, schollers, nor honestie, are in daunger for their errors, which they learned not of vs: neither are your wit, learning, or heresie the greater, for vttering this foo∣lish conceipte, which no more toucheth vs, or defendeth you, then it carpeth the religion of Christ and mainteineth the Idolatrie of the heathen. The worlde seeth what vaine reasons you leane vnto, being destitute of the worde of God. An heretike helde this opinion, therefore it is, false. The deuill beleueth there is one God, therefore shall not Christian men beleue so? why woulde God reueile any trueth to heretikes? why did the Pharizees, which other∣wise were heretikes, defende the resurrection of the deade? This vaine frothe of wordes, and smoke of foolish and vn∣learned questions, will euen fall downe and vanish awaye of it selfe, though it be not blowen away by vs. The latter end of this chapter, hath one croppe of his olde custome, to charge Luther with defending of Purgatory, which either was while he remained in ignorance, or else it is but a fai∣ned fable, as many other of him and others are deuised by the Papists: who as they erre from the trueth of God, so they delight in sclaundering of good men: but they shall not preuaile, their madnes is made knowen to all men. That their falsehood is condemned, and the Catholicke trueth approued by the authority of holy Councells. Their pride in contemning, and the Catholickes humilitie in obedient re∣ceyuing the same. And a sleight vvhereby the heretikes de∣ceiue the people, is detected. CAP. XV. 1 ANd for our parte it is sufficient, good reader, that we knowe the first founder thereof, and that we be nowe right well assured, that he in his time, and his
scholars in theirs, haue bene noted, called, and condemned for heretikes, in this as in other fonde peruerse opinions beside, not onely by the singular iudgements of diuers learned men, but by the common sense and consent of the worlde, and by auncient Councells both generall and particular, as we maye reade in the Councells of Carthage the iiij. of Bracharense, and Vase. the De∣crees of which, by occasion we rehearsed once before.Cap. 79. Cap. 34. Cap. 2. They are both auncient and of greate authority, and honored with the pre∣sence of many notable fathers, as Augustine and other. But espe∣cially for the approuing of our faith, and condemnation of the aduersaries part, the whole processe of the great Councell of Flo∣rence must be noted. for there the question of purgatory and prayers for the deade, was fully handeled, by the most learned of both the Latine and Greeke Church, the Patriarche of Constan∣tinople him selfe, with the Legats of Armenia and other nations of that parte, being present: and fully condescending with the Romane Church vpon the trueth of purgatory, and other graue mysteries: into the doubt of which, that part of the Church by schisme & miscredit of their forefathers, had fallen into, not lōg before: and so made perfect protestation of their faith, with the abiuring of the contrary, as heresie.Note. But omitting that longe pro∣cesse and large treatie of the matter, for the establishing of euery mans conscience, I wil conclude vp all the matter with the Coun∣cell and the holy Ghosts determination of all the whole cause, in these wordes: Si verè poenitentes in Dei charitate decesse∣rint, antequam dignis poenitentiae fructibus de commissis sa∣tisfecerint, & omissis, eorum animas poenis purgatorijs pur∣gari, & vt à poenis huiusmodi releuentur prodesse eis viuo∣rum fidelium suffragia, missarū scilicet sacrificia, orationes,In initio Concilij Florentini. & eleemosynas, & alia pietatis officia, quae a fidelibus pro alijs fidelibus fieri consueuerunt, secundum ecclesiae institu∣ta, VVe define and determine,The holy Councel of Trente hath also deter∣mined the same against the hereti∣kes of our times. that true penitents departing in the fauour of God, before they satisfied for their negligencies or faultes committed by worthy fructes of penaunce, shall be clen∣sed by purgatory paines: and likewise for the release thereof, the prayers of the faithfull, the sacrifice of the blessed Masse and almes, with other thinges customably practised by the faithfull for their freindes decessed, according to the ordinaunce of Gods
Church, to be profitable. CAP. XV. 1 ANd for our parte it is sufficient, that we knowe God in his holy worde to be the first founder of our doctrine, and therefore that they lye blasphemously, which woulde make any here∣tike the author of it. And as for the authority of Councels that is alleaged against vs, we haue shewed before, that the decrees of 95. Can. of Car. the forth and second of Vase are flatly falsified, which speake not at all of oblations for the deade, but oblations of the deade, that is, such mony as the departed haue bequethed to the vse of the poore. The 79. Can. of the forth Councell of Carthage decreed, that if penitents dyed before absolution, they shoulde haue their memory commended with prayers and oblations. The Bracarense decree Can. 39. prescribeth how the mony offered at such commemoration of the deade, shoulde be distributed. The 34. Can. of the same Councell, wherevnto he pointeth vs in this place, decreeth that for them that kill them selues, no commemoration shoulde be made nor that they shoulde be buried with Psalmes. But wherefore trowe you did he omit the next Canon to it? which de∣creeth that neither the commemoration of the holy obla∣tion, nor the office of singing Psalmes, should be bestowed vpon them that were cathechised and dyed before they were baptised. Either he sawe not the booke him selfe, or else he misliked that phrase, the commemoration of the holy oblation, wherby the Bishoppes of that Councell ex∣pound, what they meane, when they named the holy com∣munion to be a sacrifice. That is, they did not take it to be so properly, but onely a commemoration of the holy sacri∣fice of Christ. As also when we reade in the olde writers or councells, oblation for the deade, we must not alwayes vnderstand the celebration of the communion as the Pa∣pastes imagine, but that monye which first was offered for almes, and afterwards superstitiously was taken to be a kind of redemption for their sinnes. As in the 11. Councell of
Toledo. cap. 12. is declared where they decree of such pe∣nitents, as dyed before reconciliation: Placuit nobis, vt & memoria talium in eccless commendetur, & oblatio pro eorum delicto a presbyteris recipiatur. It pleaseth vs (say the Bishops of that Synode) that the memory of such maye be com∣mended in the Churches, and the oblation for their of∣fence, maye be taken by the priestes. This office that was bestowed vppon the deade, which so generally of the olde writers and councells is called a memorye, vndoubtedly tooke the name of that which it first was. Namely nothing but a memory with thankes giuing, which after was corru∣pted to a prayer for them. Lykewise the oblation (as Ori∣gen testifieth) at the first was nothing but almes to the re∣leife of the poore, for ioy of the rest of them that were de∣parted, and for comfort and godly exercise of them that were a liue. But afterwarde it grew to be compted a redem∣ption for the sinnes of the departed, and the name of ob∣lation was drawen further to the celebration of the com∣munion, and to be compted a sacrifice for the quicke and the deade. But before this Councell, there was an other Synode helde in Spayne at Toledo, called Toletan. 3. cap. 21. Where it was decreed, that they which by Gods cal∣ling departed out of this life, shoulde be cayed to their graues, onely with singing of Psalmes. Forbidding that fu∣nerall song which was wonte to be song to the deade, and all other vnseemely gestures of morning. If you saye this doth not exclude prayers and oblations: they adde, that it must be thought sufficient for the buriall of Christian mens bodyes, that the office of singing of godly Psalmes is bestowed, in hope of the resurrection. And so through∣out the Canon they woulde haue men comforted by the hope of the resurrection, affirming that Christian mens bodyes throughout the worlde ought to be no otherwise buried. As for the decree of the Councell of Florence, is but a meere mockerie. For it was helde not past seuen score yeares a goe, when at the same time, there was an other Councell holden at Basill against it, in which the Pope En∣genius the fourth, who gathered that mocke Concell of
Ferraria and Florentia, was deposed, and an other Pope chosen against him. So there was one Pope and his coun∣cell in Italy, and an other Pope with his councell in Ger∣manie. Goodly gawdes for fooles to playe with all. As for the holy councel which was helde the other day at Trent, you did well to put in the margent, for it was not worthy to come in the texte. If the determination of that coun∣cell be so holy, why do you Papistes daily breake a nom∣bre of canons decreed therein, which conteins scarse a-shadow of reformation? But you can dispense with coun∣cells as you liste. To omit all other canons, why doe not your bishoppes and parish priests, as often as they minister the sacraments to the people, declare the effect of them to such as receiue them in the mother tongue? Session. 8. c. 7. 2 The which graue determination if any man be so willfull to contemne, Let him know, that he despiseth, being but a mortall fraile man, the grauest iudgement that God hath left in earth for the determination of any matter. Let him be ashamed that he be∣ing but one man, taketh vpon him to controule diuers hundreths of the most chosen for vertue, for learning, for experience in the whole Church of God: yea let him if he haue any affection of grace, tremble and feare to deface the dealing of that honorable and vniuersall parlament, that representeth vnto vs Gods holy whole Church, hauing the assured promise of the holy Ghostes as∣sistance for their guiding in all truth. Yet I see before hand the aduersaries will not admitte the iudgemt of these or any other Councells: neither in such men doe I much maruell to finde so li∣tle humility, and so much impudency. For all heretikes condem∣ned by councells did euer condēne, as they could, the same coun∣cells againe. So were the first 4. councells which all Christian men with S. Gregory accept as the holy Gospells of God,All here∣tikes do cō∣demne coū∣cels. vtterly re∣fused by the parties in them condemned: The Arians by great force of worldly Princes and many assembles, deuilishly with∣stoode the Councell of Nice, the Macedonians reiected the coun∣cell of Constantinople the first, the Nestorians nothing estemed the councell of Ephese, Eutiches and Dioscorus litle regarded the councell of Chalcedon: in which they & their followers were
condemned of heresie for sundry pointes, which now were ouer∣long, and not for our purpose to rehearse. Then by refusing the heauenly sentence of the Churches iudgement, they win nothing else but the assured marke of an heretike. They declare them selues, that as they be in heresie as deepe as the best, so they in pride and boldnes, be not behind the worst. But all Catholikes & faithful beleuers, as soone as they know the determination of such a number of so well learned fathers gathered in the vnitie of Gods Church and spirite,The humble obedience of Catholi∣kes to the gouernours of Gods Church. streight way they receiue it, and submit them selues, as to the iudgement and reuelation of the holy Ghost. For so the Christian brethren that were molested by the contentious clamors of certeyne troublesom heades at Antioch, being once certified by the letters of that first Christian councel, what was decreed and enacted concerning the matters called in question, they then regarded no more what the aduersaries thought therein, but out of hand Gauisi sunt super consolatione, they reioysed in that comfort of their agreement. And Ruffinus writeth,Ruffin. that when Constantinus the great vn∣derstoode the determination of the doubtes proposed in the great councell of Nice, he receiued it as the oracle of God: Defertur ad Constantinum sacerdotalis concilij sententia, ille tan∣quam a Deo prolatam veneratur: the decree (sayth he) of the priestes was shewed to Constantine, and he straight with all reue∣rence accepted it, as Gods owne sentence. And if our aduersa∣ries coulde learne a litle humilitie, they might quickely be dis∣patched of a great deale of heresie. The which as it first beganne with the conceite of singularitie and contempt of other, so it pro∣cedeth with maliperte boldnesse, and endeth in plaine disobe∣dience of the Church, of the Councells, of the scriptures, and Gods owne spirite. VVhome without moe wordes I woulde nowe geue ouer vnto God, hauing (as I trust) already geuen them suf∣ficient occasion by the euident proofe of my matter, to remembre their misery and heuy condition, but that I must remoue out of the simples waye, such stoombling stockes, as perhaps might some∣what trouble the vnlearned, who for lacke of deepe iudgement, be moste subiecte to the aduersaries deceites. 2 It is true humilitie that all men should submit them
selues to the authoritie of Gods worde, and it is horrible presumption, that any man or multitude of men, shoulde take vppon them authoritie to define against the worde of God. As the councell of Constance which decreeth in plaine wordes that notwithstanding Christ instituted the sacra∣ment to be receiued in both kindes, and that the faithfull in the primatiue Church did so receiue it, yet the custome of the church of Rome shall preuaile, and whosoeuer sayeth contrary is an he∣retike, &c. The councells that are receiued are therefore receiued, because they decreed truely, and not the trueth receiued because it was decreed in councells. Else why is Nicene councel receiued and Arriminense reiected? why is Ephesinum primum embraced, and Ephesinum secundum dete∣sted? Finally, why is the determination of Nicene councell which is but one beleued, against 10. councells holden by the Arrians, but that the Nicene councell decreed accor∣ding to the worde of God, and all the rest against it? wher∣fore if any councell decree according to the scriptures as the councell of the Apostles did Actes 15. and the coun∣cell of Nice with diuers other, we receiue them with all humilitie, as the oracles of God. But if any councell decree contrary to the authoritie of the scriptures, as many did, without all presumptiō or pride, we may iustly reiect them. 3 And with such thus they lightely practise: first by lofty lookes and high chalengies,Hovve they practise vvith the simple. they crake and boste with passing boldnes, that the learned men of the worlde, the sage fathers of the auncient times, all the graue Councells, the whole vsage of the primitiue Church, with plaine Scripture, to be on their parte. And as for the contrary teaching,Gre impu¦dēcy in he∣retikes. that it came in of late with the decay of learning and light of trueth, in these barbarous times when superstition and dake ignorance had wasted the doctrine of the yeares past. And in this bragge they stande, till some Ca∣tholike man encounter with them. By whome when they see them selues so driuen from the standinge which they kept with greate glory before, that they must be wholy naked and destitute in the face of the worlde of all such helpes, as they accompted to haue for the outwarde shew of their deceitfull doctrine, then in plaine
wordes they confesse their teaching not to hange on the antiqui∣tie, not on councells, not on Doctors, nor on any man, but on Gods holy spirite and worde, which can not deceiue them. And so at the ende, the olde vse of the primitiue Church, the fathers, and the generall Councells arrogantly contemned, or rather vnwor∣thely condemned (marke well their prety conceites) they make then a matche betwene them selues with Gods worde on the one partie, and the doctors and fathers with out Gods worde, on the other partie.The sophi∣stry of he∣retikes. Affirming that they be not bounde to beleue them but where they agree with the scriptures of God. And then tur∣ning their talke to the simple, thus they preache vnto them by a captious and foolish demaunde, whether they thinke it more rea∣son or conuenient to beleue the scriptures, or doctors: the deter∣mination of the true and liuely worde of God, or else the decree of a generall Councell: which deceitfull wreasting of the state of our question, somewhat troubles the vnlearned, which can not perceiue hereby that they betray them selues, and deface their owne doinges, in so rude a defense. For who seeth not nowe, that they renounce all that helpe of Councells & Doctors which with vauntes they clamed before, whiles they impudently make a di∣uision or contrarietie betwixt them and the holy scripture? And we take it at their hand as an open acknowledging of their lacke, there where they pretended greatest store. The which thinge if they likewise would confesse openly in pulpit and in plaine words, as they meane nothing lesse when they shew the people that they were but men, that they might erre, that they followed the cu∣stome of the common people in their time, that they are not to be receiued but where they agree with scripture, & that them selues must try whether they be consonant to the word of God or no: if they would, I say, without such cloked wordes bouldly pronounce as Luther their maister did, that they cared not for a hundreth Augustines or Hieroms, that they esteemed not the consent of all nations, that they would be tryed by the iudgement of no coū∣cell, that they would purposely runne contrary to the Councells decree in all causes, that they would take that for thonely truth which is conteined in the holy Scriptures, and that for Scripture which them selues thought good, and last of all, that for the true meaning which agreed best to the vpholding of error and here∣sie,
then would the people leaue these lewde masters on the plaine field, which now they keepe with them, one while by the praises of the doctors and antiquitie, and somewhiles by thabasing of them againe, and deceitfull referring all to the onely Scriptures, to which they say credit may safely be giuen, where the doctors without daunger can not be further followed, then as they be not found to disagree with Gods word. So that the cause seemeth now to be driuen to this ishue in the eyes of thignorant, whether men should rather beleue the Scipture or the doctors, the word of God that can not be false, or the fathers that were but men, and ther∣fore might erre, deceiue, and be deceiued. 3 But that you loue to spende many wordes about a thinge of naught, you might haue spoken as much in three wordes as you haue done in three leaues. But that I maye breefely cut of your lauesh lippe labor: whereas you vse in deede as greate impudencie as you charge vs withall in wordes, first you would make our chalenge contrary to it self, as though one while we boast of the doctors, and then being driuen from them, we flie to the Scriptures. They that dayly heare our preaching, & with any diligence per∣use our writing, can beare vs witnes, that you doe falsely & shamefully belie vs. For we stand for authoritie onely to the iudgement of the holy Scriptures, and whatsoeuer we say of fathers, councells, or the most auncient primitiue Church, it is either for testimony of our truth, or for con∣uiction of your lying. For it is, you M. Allen, the Papists, that boast of all antiquitie, all fathers, all doctors, all councells, all Churches, to be all togither on your side, among whom as we will not deny, but you haue some Patrones, of some of your errors, so will we affirme, that you haue more ene∣mies, in the greatest of your heresies. And therefore this i∣shue is rightly ioyned, and without any Ieofayle vpon this point, that the Scripture is to be credited rather then the doctors, the word of God rather then the writings of men. 4 But this is not the state of our controuersie, nor of any question betwixt the Catholikes and them. And that they knowe
full well, though they craftely cloke it with chaunge of wordes. for we acknowledge most gladly, that if any Doctor, Prophet, A∣postle or Angell (if it were possible) preach vnto vs any thing a∣gainst the word and truth of Gods Scripture, that he is accursed of God, and to be reiected of men. But here is the stand, and the point of all our doubtes in generall (note it well Maister Prote∣staunt) whether the auncient fathers, some of them being in Christes time, diuers of them scholars to his Apostles,Here lyeth the doubt and diuersi∣tie betvvixt heretikes & Catholikes many with∣in one hundreth or two of yeares afterward, most of them more thē a thousand yeares since (I speake of such as we haue named in our cause) & all wonderfully learned as well in the knowledge of the secretes of Gods mysteries, as the tongues: all mercifully endued with great giftes and graces, all exceeding studious in the Scriptures, all hauing the same testament and written worde of God that we now haue, all vsing meruelous diligence in the conference of diuers places, for the true meaning and vnderstan∣ding of the same, all hauing feruent zeale in teaching the Chri∣stian people, all at times appoynted resorting togither from diuers partes of the world to some one general search, in which, by hum∣ble conference togither and prayer, they doubted not to obteyne the spirite of truth, as it was by our Maister promised: the que∣stion is now then, I say, whether those holy men, thus holpen by nature, diligence, time and grace, be not more like to vnderstand the Scripture then these men, which either lacke all these helpes, or most of them. Secondly it followeth thereupon, whether we should rather giue credit to them, affirming purgatory and pray∣ers for the deade to be not onely consonant, but plainely proued by the Scriptures, or else to our new aduersaries, auouching these thinges to be against the Scripture. VVhereby you see, we must not nowe reason, whether we ought to beleue the doctors or the Scriptures better, but whether for the true sense, we must not be∣leue the olde fathers, better then these newe fooles. 4 In wordes you graunt our ishue, because you knowe that all the cuntry of christians, would otherwise go against you. but in deede you deny it. For ye ishue which you would ioyne vpon is both captious and doubtfull. Captious, be∣cause it disioyneth those thinges which are not to be sepa∣rated,
namely the Scripture and the true meaning thereof. Doubtfull, because it standeth vpon a likelyhoode and not vpon a certeinty. For thus you ioyne: whether the olde doctors be more like to vnderstand the Scriptures then the Protestants. I haue aunswered before, we wil make no com∣parison with them. Neither will we challenge the likely∣hood to vs, neither will we leaue it to them, for whether so euer we doe, we shall be neuer the more certeine of the truth. But this will we set downe as a most certeine princi∣ple, that no man can vnderstand the Scriptures, but by the same spirite by which they were written. What then? shall we arrogate the spirite as proper to vs and deny it to them? God forbid. They had their measure of Gods spirite, & (we humbly thanke his maiestie) so haue we. How then? is the spirite of God contrary to it selfe, because they and we a∣gree not in all thinges? God forbid. Cyprian and Cornelius were both endued with Gods spirite, and both Martyres, yet they agreed not both in one interpretation nor iudge∣ment of the scripture. what then? there remaineth but this second principle as certaine as the first. That the spi∣rite of God hath a meaning in the scriptures, which is not to be sought out of the scriptures, in the opinions of de∣ceiuable men, but onely in the scriptures, where is nothing but the spirite of trueth. These 2. commaundements, serch the scriptures, and trie the spirites: teach how to attaine to certainety of trueth. For the scriptures are not vnder∣stood but by the spirite, and the spirites are not tryed but by the scriptures. Therefore that the spirite maye declare his owne meaning, one place of scripture must be expoun∣ded by an other. All other ordinary meanes and healpes, of wit, learning, knowledge of tongues, diligēce in hearing, reading, and praying, are subordinate and seruing to this search and tryall. And who so obserueth this serch and tryall most precisely, shall come to the knowledge of the trueth most certainely. And who so euer is negligent in this search and tryall, though he haue otherwise neuer so many and excellent graces, and giftes, may easely be decei∣ued, yea euen when he thinketh he followeth the autho∣rity
of the scriptures. I coulde alleage for confirmation of this truth, the testimony of diuers of the auncient fathers, which if they had alwayes followed that which some times they so highly commended, they should not so lightly haue passed ouer some thinges, and other thinges so slenderly haue mainteined. But my thinkes, the testimony of the Pope shoulde be a per se with all Papistes. The Pope him selfe in his canon lawe (for Cayphas some times doth pro∣phecy) hath allowed this to be the onely waye to expound the scriptures. Affirming that no where else, but euen out of the scriptures themselues, the true sense of the scriptures is to be taken. Ascribed to Clemens dist. 37. cap. Relatum. Lex Dei cum legitur non secundum propriam ingenij virtutem, vel intelligentiam legatur, vel doceatur. Sunt enim multa verba in scripturis diuinis, quae possunt trahi ad eum sensum, quem sibi v∣nus quisque sparte praesumpserit, sed non oportet, non enim sen∣sum extrinsecus alienū & extraneum debetis quaerere, vt quo∣quo modo ipsum ex sripturarum authoritate confirmetis, sed ex ipsis scripturis sensum capere veritatis oportet. When the lawe of God is reade, let it not be reade or tought, after the force or vnderstanding of a mans owne witte. For their be many wordes in the holy scriptures, which maye be drawen to such sence as euery man of his owne heade shal presume to make, but you may not doe so. For you ought not to seeke forth without, any forayne or strange sence, that you may confirme it by any meanes by authority of the scriptures, but you must take the sence of trueth out of the scriptures them selues. And thus much for the true vnderstanding of the scriptures and now to your false superstition. First I de∣ny that any of the auncient fathers in Christ his time, or scholers to his Apostles, or within one or two hundreth yeares after Christ, except one that had it of Montanus the heretike, as he had more thinges beside, in any one worde mainteined your cause, for purgatory or prayers for the deade. Secondly of them that mainteined prayers for the deade, the most confessed they had it not out of the scrip∣tures, but of tradition of the Apostles and custome of the Church, therefore they are not to be compared vnto vs in
better vnderstāding of the scriptures, for that point, which they denyed to be receiued of the scriptures. Thirdly those of the auncient fathers that agreed with you in any parte of your assertion (for none within foure hundreth yeares was wholy of your error) notwithstanding many excellent giftes that they had, yet mainteined other errors beside that, and about that discented one from an other, and sometime the same man from him selfe, and that is worst of all from manifest trueth of the holy Scriptures. There∣fore neither is their erroneous interpretation in this matter to be receiued, nor M. Allens wise iudgement of vs to be regarded. An aunsvvere to such arguments as the heretikes doe frame of the holy scriptures not vvell vnderstanded, against the pra∣ctise of Gods Church, in praying for the deade, or the do∣ctrine of Purgatory. CAP. XVI. 1 THerefore to stoppe their waye at euery turne, and be∣cause they talke so fast of scripture, full fayne woulde I heare what scriptures they haue, that make either expressely agaynst purgatory and prayers for the deade, or else by any one learned man in all the worlde, was euer expounded for any such sense. And loe now (good reader) what scriptures they alleage that can abde nothing but scripture. First out of Ecclesiastes. The tree whether it fall to the south or the north,Cap. 1. it lyeth euer where it lighteth. Then they alleage out of S. Matthews Gospell, that there be two wayes, one to bring to heauen,Cap. 7. and the other leading straight to hell. And then out of the second to the Corinthians, they bring in, howe we must all stande before the iudgement seat of Christ:Cap. 5. there to receiue eche of vs according to our workes and life: and that by other mens labour, our state can not be amēded. Againe they allege this sen∣tence of the Apocalypse. Beati mortui &c. blessed be the deade that dye in our Lorde,Cap. 14. for after that, the spirite sayeth, that they shall reste from trauells. All which textes, and the like of that sorte, make no more against purgatory, then they doe against hell
or heauen: excepte, that as Anaxagoras the philosopher saide, all thinges were in euery thinge,Phisic. 1. l. so these diuines can finde euery texte of scripture to make for what purpose they liste: and yet if the Catholikes alleage a numbre of scriptures, and them with the minde and iudgement of the whole worlde, that doubteth not but they proue that, for which they be recited, yet they set light by them, and impudently with clamors beare men in hande, that they haue no scriptures at all. VVhich thinges as they smell of much arrogancie in all men, so in these folke that so malpert∣ly controwle others, where them selues haue no scripture at all, it is vntolerable. CAP. XVI. 1 THis chapter is but pro forma tantum to make a shew of a confutation, where neither the tenth parte of our arguments are rehearsed, nor those that are named with any couller of reason, and lest of all with authority of scriptures, are confuted. First he will allow vs but 4. textes of scripture, because he will not take paines to wrest any more. And those make nothing for vs except all thinges be in euery thinge as Anaxagoras said. It should seeme M. Allen, that you your selfe dreamed so with Anaxagoras, else would you not finde purgatory in euery one of them, which we saye is in none of them, but rather excluded by them all. But who can prescribe the de∣uill a measure in lying? when he is disposed to lye? we haue no scriptures at all, the Catholikes haue all the scriptures, and the iudgement of the whole worlde vppon them: you haue sayd enough, M. Allen, to winne the whet stone, if it were as bigge as any mountaine in the worlde. 2 And for these, which they here or else where alleage, I aske them sincerely, and desire them to tell me faithfully, what doctor or wise learned man of the whole antiquity, euer expoun∣ded these textes recited, or any one of them, or any other which you bring in else when, against Purgatory or practise for the deade? If they did not, how can you for sinne and shame dissent
from the whole Church of Christ, vpon so light groundes? Or how dare you be so bolde, that seeke in euery controuersie expresse scripture, to alleage these places, which wise men, nor I thinke your selues take for any such purpose? Or how may you for shame reiecte the euident worde of God, by vs truely reported for the triall of our matter, your selues hauing almost nothing, that can be wrasted to your sense? 2 Before the heresie of Purgatory was planted in the world, how could the olde doctors interprete these places, by name against that which they neuer heard named? yet haue they so interpreted some of them, that their interpre∣tation can not stand with purgatory or prayer for the dead, as I will shew in their particular aunsweres. When we re∣quire expresse Scripture for euery controuersie, we doe not require that euery thing should be named in Scripture, but necessarily concluded out of the true meaning of the Scri∣ptures and purpose of the holy Ghost in them. As for the euident word of God, which you report for tryall of your matter, is yet to shew, and shall be for euer. You shame not to boast of that to be your triall, which you dare as well eate a fagot as abide the iudgement of i, in any lawful con∣ference or disputation: your great bellwethers and Bishops declared before ye whole world in the conference of West∣minster, what they durst abide, when they came to hande∣strokes. It is a gay matter for such a chattering pye, as you are, to make a fond florish a farre of in wordes of common wrangling, to please your patrones and exhibitioners, it is an other thing to stand to the proofe in deede. An ansvver to the first place.3 If you stande to the triall of our alleaged testimonies, you will be much abashed I know. For how can you imagine, that the place recited out of Ecclesiastes, shoulde further your intent any thinge at all? Seeing, that euen then when the wiseman spake those wordes, the soule of man straight after her departure, and the fall of the body, continued not where it first fell: for the iuste had a place of abidinge and rest in the inferiour partes, which was called of Ezechias the gate of hell.Esay. 38. In the Gospell Sinus
Abrahae, the bosom of Abraham, and nowe Lymbus Patrum: in which they all abode till they were deliuered by the bloude and trauell of our Sauiour Iesus. VVith whome, they after were translated to the eternall ioyes of heauen.Bern. ser. 4. de fest. om∣niū Sanct. Amb. super 5. ad Roma∣nos. VVhich thinge if it be true, as it can not but be true and certaine, which the whole course of scripture, the article of our faith in Christes descension into hell, and all the auncient fathers doe constantly setforth, what blindnes be they in then, that bring this place against Pur∣gatory, which as it is a stay of certaine for a time from heauen, so the other before Christ, was the staye of all. And therefore, it is plaine, that this fallinge of the tree meanith nothinge lesse, then that euery man shoulde straight vpon his departure be conueide either to hell or heauen. Or if any wedded to Caluines blasphemous and vnfaithfull paradoxes, doe with Purgatory deny the fathers place of abode, before the comming of Christ, and impugne the beleefe of Gods Church so much, that he withstande the article of our Creede, for Christes descending into hell, to turne the cause of his going in∣to hell, to some other purpose then the loosing of their captiuity that there were in expectation of his ioyefull apparance, yet I would demaunde so much of Caluins successor or scholar,Caluins ab∣surd do∣ctrine is re∣futed. seeing he will of this figuratiue speach of the trees falling gather so grounded and generall a rule, that with out delay euery man must to heauen or hell straight after his death, there to remaine in perpetuall state of his fall in the next life, either good or badde, I woulde aske of him (I saye) what he thinketh by all those, that were by the Prophets, Apostles, or Christ him selfe, raysed vp a∣gaine from death to life. VVho receiuing by death that fall, by their accompt must needes abide where they first fell: and so not in case to be reuoked, by this their false conclusien they diminish the power of the spirite in working their raising againe. Or else they must impute deceite to the holy men, and our maister Christ (which abhorreth me to speake) for that they raysed them not being perfectly deade, but in some deadly traunce, or apparance of death. But because the soule of Lazarus,The state of such in the next vvorld as by Gods omnipotē∣tie vvere raised to life againe. was nowe foure dayes out of his bodye before Christ wroght vpon him, it is sure and most certaine, that it had some place of abyding after the separation
from the fleshe. I can not thinke that his soule was in heauen: nor it is not like, that our Sauiour would so much abase the hap∣py condicion of him whome he loued so well, as to reduce him to the vncertaine state of this life. I will define, in this my igno∣rance, nothing touching the secrets of Gods wisedome herin. But very like it is, that the parties raysed from their fall and death, were not in the ioyes of heauē. As before Christes death, I am sure they were not, but I speake of Tabitha also or other reuoked by the Apostles handes, that then after Christes passion might full well, dying in perfect state of life, goe straight to heauen, of such I say it is very reasonable, that they were not in the ioyes of the elect. For else Tabitha shoulde not haue had such a benefite by her almes, as the fathers doe witnesse she had. And they vse her for an example, of the benefite which maye rise to one after de∣parture, by charitable workes done in this life. It had ben a small pleasure to haue plucked her from heauen to this mortalitie a∣gaine, and misery of our common life: and I trowe no man maye auouche wth salfety of his belefe, that she or any other raysed againe miraulously, was reuoked from the desperate estate of the damned soules, then she must necessarily be called from some meane condicion of her present abode, and perhaps from paine too, to this former state of life againe. But as in this secret of God, no man without iuste reprehension maye deeply wade, so it maye reasonably be gathered that the fall of the tree before mētioned, can not induce with any probability, the necessity of the soules abiding in all respects, where it first light. Mary we freely graunt with diuers of the auncient fathers, that the fall of the tree into the Southe parte, maye signifie vnto vs the departure of man in the happy state of grace, and the Northe side likewise, the cursed and damnable state of the wicked: and tha he which passeth hense in either of these estates and condicions (as euery lyuing man doth) can not procure by other, neither deserue by him selfe, the chaunge of his happy lot, or his vnluckie happe, otherwise then in his life time he deserued. That is to saye, if he passe this worlde an electe person, in the loue and grace of God, he is out of doubt of all damnation, or rather out of possibilitie to be reie∣cted: and so the case of the forsaken is vtterly remedilesse. And further by that figuratiue speache you had not best on your owne
head to be ouer bold, least some Saducete of your sect, gather the perpetuall reste of the bodye, without all hope of resurrection. I can not tell how it falleth, but yet so it doth, that your doctrine and arguments minister ouer much occasion of errour, and that to the deceiued in the depest matters of our faith. But I will rubbe you no more on that sore. I warned you before, to take heede to the resurrection. 3 If we had no stronger testimonies, then these, and you no better aunswers then you make to these, yet should not we haue so much cause to be abashed at our allegatiōs, as you to be ashamed of your confutations. Your first aun∣swere is, that the soules of men at that time continued not where they at the first fell, but went first into the inferior partes, which you call Lymbus patrum, but neither Ezechias nor the Gospell, knew any such place. For Ezechias spea∣keth of the graue, the Gospell of that place of comfort, where the soules of the faithfull are in happy estate, euen where Christ is. But O learned Logitian, that aunswereth one controuersie with an other, as much controuersd. Nay, stay a while, the article of Christes descending into hell maketh all out of doubt. If that be so, why doe we not say that Christ descended into Abrahams bosome or into Lymbus patrū, or seeing Christ sayd he would be in Paradise, why say we not that he descended into paradise, and seeing he commended his spirite into the hands of his father, why say we not he descended into his fathers handes. But be∣cause these be no absurdities that follow of M. Allen, & that papisticall assertion, you shall heare Caluins absurd doctrine, refuted by the sayd famous Clerke M. Allen with famous reasons. He will aske (for his aunsweres be questions) what is it to be thought, of those that were raysed from death to life, seeing they receiued their first fall. This were a pretty question for a Sophister in Oxeford to demaund in their parleis. But the poore man tormenteth him selfe in vayne, they which deny prayers to be profitable by that place of the wise man, vnderstand the fall of the tree to the South or to the North, to be the iudgement of God concerning
euery man, either of reward or of punishment, which can not be altered after a mans death. This restreyneth not God from working miracles, and sending some to life a∣gaine, but sheweth what the ordinary state of men is after their departure. This place is of them that dye & remaine in death, vnto the day of the generall resurrection, as for the other, although they were dead, yet they were appoyn∣ted to liue againe, they fell in deede, but to haue a particu∣lar rising, but when they fell to abyde the generall rising, they were in the same case with the rest. But examples will make the matter cleare. The soule of Lazarus was 4. dayes from his body, M. Allen thinketh he was not in heauen, for Christ loued him too well to bring him out of heauen: and not that onely, but to reduce him to the vncerteyne state of this life. As though it were iniury to Lazarus to forbeare the ioyes of heauen, for the short tyme of this life, to be∣come such a glorious example, of the maiestie of Christes power, and as though Christ, which brought him to lyfe temporal, was not able in the incerteinty of this life, to pre∣serue him to eternall life. O prophane heathenish Sophi∣ster, of Gods high mysteries. But seeing you thinke M. Allen he was not in heauen, where thinke you in your conscience he was? in hell, or in purgatory, or in Abrahams bosome? for you haue store of diuerse places, if he were in hell, you hold there had bene no redemption. And it is not like that he whom Christ loued so well was 4. dayes in torment. If you say he was in Abrahams bosome, yet he was in comfort and certeinty of saluation, then by your owne reason, it is not like that Christ which loued him so well, would abase his happy condition to bring him to the state of this life which is miserable and as you say vncerteyne, yea he had bene better in purgatory: for you holde he shoulde haue bene in certainety of saluation, but so he was not when he returned to the vncerteine state of this life, the like may be saide of Tabitha. But these be foolish and vnlearned que∣stions M. Allen, which the Apostle willeth vs to auoyde, as gendring strife rather then edificatiō. And yet when you haue questioned about them all you can, you shall neuer
proue the common case of the departed in Christ, by these fewe peculiar cases. For when so euer and how so euer it pleased God, that their soules remained, it was determined of God that they shoulde be restored to their bodies. And although there soules were in heauen and in happines, as I doe not doubt but they were, yet was it no iniurie nor hurt vnto them, to serue the glory of God. For I doubt not but as all the Godly in this life, confesse it to be a parte of angelicke felicitie, to be obediente to the will of God, so those that were so raised from death, so long as their secōd life continued, caried in their hartes, a heauenly fruition of the glory of God shining in their restitution: and of their thankefull obedience, submitting them selues to the will of God. But when these matters passeth the reache of M. Allens sophystrie, as of which he can prate much, and de∣fine nothing, he falleth to an other shifte: that the fall in∣to the southe, signifieth the certainty of saluation, that the elect be in, after this life, and the fall into the North, the certainty of damnation, that the wicked are in. For though the elect be in purgatory, yet they be in the fauour of God, and certaine of saluation. But this glosse corrupteth the texte, for then they should alwayes lye in purgatory, which is a warme south (if it be as they saye) for the certeinty or vncerteinty of their saluation, is as great before they were borne, as after they be deade. It can not be therefore that the wise man speaketh thereof. And because you cracke of the exposition of the fathers, Hieronym in his commenta∣ry vpon this place, expoundeth the Northe and the Southe not for the states of grace or wrath, but for the places of re∣warde or punishment of them that die. Si dignos Austro fru∣ctus attulit in plaga iacebit Australi. Nec est aliquid lignum quod aut ad Aquilonem non sit aut ad Austrum. If it haue brought forth fructes worthy of the South, it shal lye in the Southe coste. Neither is there any tree but it falleth either to the North or to the South. As for your babling of the Saduces secte, and doubting of the resurrection, bidde your Popes and Cardinalls take heede of it. Pope Iohn the 23. was condemned for it in the Councell of Constance.
Epicureisme and Saduceisme is more common at Rome then Christianitye. 4 Nowe for the other texte recited out of S. Matthewes Gospell of the double waye,An ansvver to the secōd text. the one to perdicion, and the other to saluation: there is almost none so simple, but he seeth that it ma∣keth no more for your purpose, then the other. For there, as our aduersary can not but knowe (though to deceiue he liste dissem∣ble) mention is made, and the meaning is only of these two wayes in this worlde and life, in one of which, being full of ease and li∣bertie, the wicked walketh towardes hell or damnation: In the which waye, the riche man and vnmercifull tooke his time: of whome Abraham said, that he had receiued good in his dayes. In the other, being both straite and harde, the small numbre of the chosen take their iourney towardes heauen. And yet if you thinke good, you maye ioyne the place of temporall punishment for sinne in the worlde to come, to the straite and painefull pas∣sage of the elect, though perhaps all they entre not thereby. And so shall you finde this place not onely nothing to further their cause, but somewhat to helpe ours. 4 If there be but two wayes in this life, there are but two abiding places after this life. If there be more then two after this life, then there be more wayes then two in this life. Controll our Sauiour Christes partition as vnperfect, if you list. You will saye, that needeth not, for purgatory after this life is that straight gate or a pece of it. what els? It is not enough for our English Anaxagoras, to exclude our opinion out of these places, but he must finde purga∣tory in them also. This is plaine to make quidlibet ex quo∣libet. But the commaundement of Christ marreth the market of this interpretation, vnlesse you thinke when Christ willeth vs to striue to goe in by the straight gate, that he biddeth vs striue to goe into purgatory. An ansvver to the third argument.5 And so for the other taken out of the fift to the Corinth: S. Augustine shall aunswere you, and beare me witnesse, it ma∣keth nothing for you, his wordes be these in his Encheridion:
This practise that Gods Church vseth in the commenda∣tions of the deade,CX. is nothing repugnant to the sentence of the Apostle, where he saith that we all shall stande before the iudgement seate of Christ, that euery one may receiue according to his desertes in the body, either good or euill: for this in his life and before death he deserued, that these workes after his death might be profitable vnto him, for in deede they be not profitable for all men, and why so? but because of the difference and diuersitie of mens liues, whi∣lest they were in this flesh, &c. And this same sentence the Doctor often repeteth, almost in the same forme of wordes in di∣uers places, both to correct their ignorance that mighe take a way prayers for the deade, because they finde the sentence of Gods iudgement to be executed on man according to the deseruing of this liefe: and no lesse to geue monition to the carelesse, that they omitte not to doe well in this life, vppon hope or presumption of other mens workes after their decease: which as they be exce∣ding beneficiall to many, so they helpe none such, as in their owne life woulde not helpe them selues. The like declaration of this pointe hath S. Denyse in the 7. chapter of his Ecclesiasticall so∣ueraignty: which I omitte, lest in this point, by S. Augustine suf∣ficiently auouched, I weerye the reader without cause. 5 And S. Ieronym with your owne canon law shall aun∣swere you, that prayers preuayle not after this life 13. q. 2. In praesenti, In this present world we know, that we may be helped one of an other either by prayer or by councel, but when we shall come before the iudgement seate of Christ, neither Iob nor Daniel nor Noe can intreate for any man, but euery man must beare his owne burden. 6 The last obiection, of the Angells wordes in the Apoca∣lypse,An ansvver to the laste scripture. afirming the state of all those that dye in our Lorde to be happy, to be past trauell, and in reste and peace: they be properly spoken there, of holy men that sheede their bloude in the times of persecution for Christes sake: to geue them assured comforte, after a litle toleration and patience in the rage of Antichrist, of blessed and eternall reste, and so the circumstance of the letter
plainely geueth, and so doeth S. Augustine expounde it. And for such holy Martyrs it is needlesse to pray,Cap. 9. lib. 20. de ciuit. as to pray vnto them is most profitable. Albeit the wordes are true, and maye be well verified of all that passe hense in the happy state of grace, being past the cares of this troblesome worlde, and which is the greatest trauell of all other, vtterly dispatched of the toile that sinners take in their wayes of wickednesse: with freedome from sinne, and all feare of sinne and damnation, for euermore. So that this reste from labour, is no more but a happy ioye of conscience, with se∣curitie of saluation and peace in Christ Iesu. For which cause in the holy Canon of the Masse, it is saide, Christianos dormire in somno pacis, & in Christo quiescere, That Christian folkes doe sleepe in the sleepe of peace, and rest in Christ, though for all that, in the same place, we aske Requiem & refrigerium, reste and refreshing for them. And this holy peace from all toyle of the worlde, and worme of tormented conscience, the electe children of God in their fathers correction, being assured of his eternall loue doe blessedly enioye. But the wicked be in contrary case, of whome it is saide, non est pax impijs, there is no rest or quiet∣nesse to the wicked: no not in their dayes of ioye, much lesse in their infinite miserie of their euerlasting torments in the worlde to come. Of whose vnhappy state, the Prophet warneth vs thus againe.Isay. 57. Impij quasi mare feruens quod quiescere non po∣test: The wicked be right like vnto the tumblinge and tossinge sea, that neuer resteth. The place of S. Iohn then, being name∣ly spoken of holy Martyrs that straight with out all paine after this life passe to heauen, may yet very fitly stande with the happy case of all those that dye in the fauour of God, and assurance of their saluation: though they abide sharpe, but sweete paine of fatherly discipline, for their better qualifying to the ioyes prepa∣red for them and all other the elect. So that nowe, the mouing of these doubtes hath so litle aduantaged our aduersaries, that it hath somewhat geuen occasion of further declaration of our mat∣ter, then otherwise perchaunce we shoulde haue had. 6 The last obiection that you list to trouble your head with all, is that voyce which was heard from heauen. Apoc. 14. of the blessed state of them that dye in the Lord, in the
meaning of which you wrest and wrigle, like a snake, that is smitten on the head, but you can not auoyd the strife. First you vnderstand it onely of Martyres, that dye in the Lord, and call Augustine to witnesse thereof. As I will not deny but Martyrs are specially comforted by that voyce, so I wil affirme, that it is to the common comfort and rewarde of all the faythfull in Christ, who as they liue in Christ so they dye in Christ. And witnesse hereof I will not take of flesh and blood, but of the holy Ghost. Rom, 14. None of vs liueth vnto him selfe, neither doth any dye vnto him selfe, for whether we liue, we liue vnto the Lorde, and whether we dye, we dye vnto the Lorde. And the Apostle 1. Cor. 15. nameth the faithfull that are a sleepe in Christ, and 1. Thes. 4. them that are deade in Christ. Wherefore in despite of the deuill and the Pope, this blessing apperteyneth to all them that dye in the Lord Iesus Christ, as true members of his body, and not to them onely that shedde their bloud for Christ. True it is, that all they that would liue godly in Christ Iesus, suffer persecution, but not all to the death, else who are those innumerable Saincts that no man can num∣ber of all nations and tongues, which S. Iohn sawe, Apoc. 7. who are likewise in happy and blessed rest, without all ma∣ner, lacke or hurt, hunger, thirst or heate? but when you are weary of that interpretation, you wring out an other: that they in purgatory also be happy, because they be sure of saluation at last, and the rest from labours, is either the rest from sinne, or else no more but ioy of conscience. wit∣nesse of this exposition is the canon of the Masse. The wit∣nesse, the matter and he that vseth it, are all of like credit. But if I might pose your conscience M. Allen, can you call that a happy rest, which is ioyned with such torment & mi∣sery, as you beare men in hand is in purgatory? Haue you forgotten that you sayd yere while of Tabitha and Laza∣rus, that it was a benefite for them to be deliuered out of purgatory into this life, and is it now a blessing to be dis∣patched out of this life into purgatory? And as for that which you allege out of the canon of your masse, declareth that your masse was patched togither of many peeces of
diuers colours. For you pray for the rest of them whome you confesse to be at rest in Christ: you wish easement for them whom you affirme to sleepe in peace. As though in Christ were not perfect rest, as though in peace there were torment, and this exposition you your selfe are weary of also, and turne agayne to your former and then backe a∣gaine to the latter. An vnconstat man is vncerteyne in all his wayes, yet all were litle worth, if this place helped not to proue purgatory also. For the payne of purgatory is a sweete payne, a happy rest, a fatherly discipline. And yet as Augustine sayth, it is but for small faultes, or as you say, for great faultes, that by penance are made small. And is God such a mercifull father, to punish small faultes so extreme∣ly in his children, whom he pardoneth of all their great and heynous sinnes? O blasphemous helhoundes. An aunsvvere to their negatiue argument, vvith the Conclu∣sion of the booke. CAP. XVII. 1 BVt yet one common engine they haue, as well for the impugnation of the trueth in this point, as for the sore shaking of the weake walles of the simples faith, allmost in all their fight that they kepe against the Catho∣likes. VVhich, though it be not stronge, yet it is a marueillous fit reasoning for so fonde a faith. For if thou caste an earnest eye vpon their whole doctrine, thou shalt finde that it principally, and in a maner wholy consistithe,Their nevv no faith is vpholden by a nega∣tiue argu∣ment. in taking awaye or wasting an other faith that it founde before: so that the preachers thereof, must euer be destroyers, pluckers downe, and rooters vp of the trueth grounded before. VVill you see then, what a Protestants faith and doctrine is? deny onely and make a negation of some one article of our be∣lefe, and that is a forme of his faith, which is lightely negatiue. There is no free will,A Prote∣stāts Crede. there is no workes needefull to saluation, there is no Church knowen, there is no chiefe gouernour therof, there be not seuen sacraments, they doe not conferre gratiam, geue grace. Baptisme is not necessary to saluation, Christ is not
present on the aultar, there is no sacrifice, there is no priesthood, there is no aultar, there is no profit in prayers to sainctes, or for the deade, there is no purgatory, Christ went not downe to hell, there is no limbus, finally if you liste goe forwarde in your nega∣tiue faith, there is no hell, there is no heauen, there is no God. Doe you not see here a trimme faith and a substantiall? looke in Caluins Institutions and you shall finde the whole frame of this wasting faith. There is nothing in that blasphemous booke, nor in their Apologies, but a gathered bodie of this no faith. For so it must needes be that teacheth no trueth, but plucketh vp that trueth which before was planted. Is it not a prety doctrine that Caluine makes of the sacraments, when he telleth not the force of any of them all, but onely standeth like a fearce monstruous swhine, rooting vp our fathers faith therein? CAP. XVII. 1 IT vexeth you at the very hart, that we require the authority of the holy Scriptures, to confirme your doctrine hauing a playne commaundement out of ye word of God, that if any man teach otherwise then the word of God alloweth, he is to be accursed. And ther∣fore you runne to a childish kinde of Sophistry to say that our argument is negatiue. A perlous point that almost all the Papistes thinke them selues more then Chrisippus, or A∣ristoteles, when they tell vs that our argument is ab auctorita∣te negatiuè. Alacke poore logicke. All knowledge that chri∣stian men haue of heauenly thinges, is grounded vpon the authority of Gods word, therefore as it is no good logicke to conclude negatiuely of one place or booke of Scripture, this is not conteined in it, therefore it is not true: so of the whole doctrine of God, wherein all truth necessary to sal∣uation is conteyned, the argument is most inuincible that concludeth negatiuely thus. All true doctrine is taught in the Scripture, purgatory is not taught in the Scripture, therefore purgatory is no true doctrine. And this conclusi∣on M. Allen him selfe made of mans authoritie, cap. 13. pur∣gatory and prayers for the dead were not preached against, at their first entry, ergo they are true. But of all mens autho∣ritie
it is false, wheras he sayth we are ouerthrowers & de∣stroyers, we confesse we are so, of all false doctrine and he∣resie. For the word of God is appoynted not only to teach truth, but also to ouerthrow error, not onely to build faith but to destroy falshood. But it is a proper cōceit wherin he pleaseth him self, as other of his sect do, to tel vs that all our faith standeth vpon negatiues. I could frame the Papists as holsome a creede all vpō affirmatiues if they wil receiue it. This is more then boyish babling. All trueth is to be affir∣med, all falshood to be denyed. Therefore it is not to be lo∣ked what is affirmatiue and what negatiue, but what is true or false that is affirmed or denyed. But to runne through the articles of that creede, which he hath framed for vs, we truely beleue that man after his fall hath not free will, no not aptnes of will, to thinke any thing that is good. 2. Cor. 3. we beleue truely, that a man is not iustified by workes, but by faith onely. Rom. 3. And yet we beleue that good workes are necessary to be in euery man that is iustified. Iac. 2. we beleue that the Church is not alwayes knowne to the wic∣ked vpon earth, neither the vniuersall Church seene at all of men, because it is in heauen, Gal. 4. we beleue that the catholicke Church hath no chiefe gouerner vppon earth but Christ vnto whom all power is giuen in heauen & earth Matth. 28. we beleue there are but 2. Sacraments of the new testament, baptisme and the Lordes supper instituted by Christ, 1. Cor. 10. we beleue that they geue not grace of the worke wrought but after the faith of the receiuer, and ac∣cording to the election of God. 1. Cor. 10. Baptisme is ne∣cessary for all Christians to receiue, that are not by necessi∣tie excluded from it. 1. Pet. 3. Christ is present at his Sup∣per, but not after a grosse and caparnaiticall maner, but as he was present in Manna to the fathers. 1. Cor. 10. There is no sacrifice propitiatory for our sinnes, but onely the sa∣crifice of Christes death once offered for all. Heb. 10. There is no priesthood to offer sacrifice propitiatory but only the priesthood of Christ according to the order of Melchize∣dech Heb. 7. The spirituall priesthood is common to all Christian men and women. 1. Pet. 1. we haue an altar of
which it is not lawfull for them to eate, which serue the tabernacle, and other beside we haue none. Heb. 13. we call not vpon Sainctes, because we beleue not in them, for how shoulde we call vpon them, in whome we beleue not? Rom. 10. There is no prayer for the deade nor purgatory after this life, because they that liue vnto Christ dye vnto him and being dissolued are with him. Ioan. 17. Christ descen∣ded into hell to redeeme vs out of hell, by suffering the wrath of God for our sinnes Heb. 5. There is no Lymbus, for the fathers were at rest with God, where they are now: whether we call the place Abrahams bosome, or paradise, or heauen Luke. 16. and 23. 2. Cor. 12. The rest which you adde, maye be the beginning of the Popish creede, which you maye as you list continue negatiuely or affirmatiuely after this maner. God a lone knoweth not the heartes of all men. God onely is not to be worshipped and serued, for Sainctes haue both the one and the other. God onely is not true, for the Pope can not erre. Christ is not our onely mediator and aduocate, for Marie and the Sainctes are also. Christes death is not a sufficient redemption for vs, for we must satisfie for our selues. Christes death hath not taken away both our sinnes and the punishment of them, but the Popes padon maye. Christ is not onely our high priest ac∣cording to the order of Melchizedech, for euery hedge priest is of the same order. Christ hath not made them that are sanctified perfect by a sacrifice once offered for all. For y• greatest part is lefte to the masse. Our sinnes are not freely forgeuen vs by Christ, for we must satisfie for them. A man is not iustified by fayth without the workes of the lawe, for euery man must merite for him selfe. The scriptures are not sufficient to teach vs all trueth, but we must haue vn∣written verities. The worde of God is not of soueraine authoritie, for the decrees of the Pope and generall coun∣cells be equall with it. This is the Papistes creede both in the affirmatiue and in the negatiue. But in that you exhort the Papistes to reade Caluins institution, and there to see whether he teacheth any truth therein: I woulde to God that all Papistes in Englande woulde followe your counsell
& pray vnfaynedly that God would open there eyes, that they may see his trueth if it be taught in that booke. 2 This negatiue faith hath no grounde nor confidence of thinges to be hoped for, nor any certaintie of such thinges as doe not yet appeare, but it is an euident ouerthrowe of all our hope, and a very canker of the expectation of thinges to come. This faith therefore of these pluckers downe, must needes vse a con∣uenient instrument to destroye, and not to builde: to plucke vp and not to plante, to improue and not to make proofe. But what way is that?Like faith like argu∣ment. mary by way of negatiue proofe, they confirme their negatiue and no faith. Purgatory, say they, nor prayers for the deade be not so much as once named in all the scripture, ergo there is neither of them to be beleued. VVhich forme of argu∣ment serued the Arians against the consubstātiall vnitie of God the father, & his sonne our Sauiour. It helped the Anabaptistes against the baptisme of infantes, it was profitable to Heluidius against the perpetuall virginitie of Gods mother: and it helpeth all pluckers downe, but it neuer serueth a buylder. The vanity whereof is so well knowen, that I will not stande to talke thereof: namely, seeing it hath no place in our cause, for which we haue brought diuers scriptures, all construed by most learned fathers for that sense: and some so euident, that they droue our aduer∣saries to the open deniall of the holy canonicall scripture. 2 What grounde or confidence of thinges not seene and yet hoped for our fayth hath, it is not for infidells to iudge, no more then for blinde men to iudge of collours. And as for our negatiue argument, it is stronger then your affirmatiue error can abide: & there of groweth the spight. But when as you saye we frame our argument, of the name of purgatory onely or prayers for the deade, you followe your customable course of lying and sclaundering. And yet we maye saye it is a greate preiudice against your pur∣gatory and prayer, which you make so necessary, and about which no small parte of your religion is occupyed, that it is not so much as once named in the scriptures. But we saye, and truely saye, that neither the name nor the thinge it selfe, is taught or can be proued by ye scriptures, & so of all
other heresies. All trueth maye be proued by scripture, ei∣ther in plaine wordes, or by necessary conclusion, which is all one. And therefore the Arians, or Anabaptistes haue no more helpe of this argument then you Papistes. As for the perpetuall virginitie of the mother of Christ, as we can thinke it is true, so because the scripture hath not reueled it, neither perteineth it vnto vs, we make no question of it. what scriptures you haue alleaged, and howe falsely you slaunder vs, for denying the canonicall scripture is set forth at large allready. 3 But yet one of these ouerthrowers frameth (as he suppo∣seth) his negatiue argument,M. Grindall in his fune∣rall sermon. to the more sure shake of our faith herein, after this sorte. In the olde lawe, all sacrificies and expia∣tions both appointed and reckoned euen for the smallest offensies that man coulde commit, yet there was neuer no sacrifice for the purgation of the dead. How Lorde like Maister Grindall made his Argument here? VVhere he shoulde plainely haue inferred the contrarie after this sorte. There was no sinne so small vnpar∣doned, but there was some sacrifice of release or expiation there∣of in the olde lawe, ergo if any man were bounde with sinne, were it neuer so small, whether he were aliue or deade, there was some appointed purgation therefore. For there is no consequence nor any apparance of right deductiō, to inferre vpon the naming or rehearsall of all sinnes, the peculiar mentioning or plaine re∣hersall of such persons as maye be burdened with those sinnes. There were sacrificies then in the olde lawe for wemen as well as men, for the Princies no lesse then for the poore, for the priest & for the people, for the deade as well as for the liue. And where there was no difference nor respect of persons, in that point there was no peculiar mention to be made, for the distinction of states. The peculiar rehersall therefore, was onely made for the diuer∣sity of offensies, and not alwayes for the difference of persons. And nowe the departed in faith being but distincted by state of life, and not by bonde of sinne from those that be aliue, must needes in the case of like sinne, for the vnitie which he is in, haue the like remedie as the lieue hath for the same sinne. And therefore to helpe your ignorance some thing, thus you must learne:Note. that
there was no peculiar sacrifice for the deade, as though they were not of the common body with the liuing, but they had the same sacrifice done for them that the liuing in this worlde in the like case of sinne, or punishment for offensies, had. Doe you not see Gods Church, Maister Grindall, sacrifice for the deade? but not for them by a peculiar meanes of offeringe,One sacri∣fice for the liue and the deade. but the very selfe same oblation she euer vseth for her Children departed, that she practiseth for her faithfull flocke a liue. And in all other pra∣ctises, there is a perfect communitie of all benefites betwixt the deceased and their brethern remayning yet in this worlde. And therefore when you seeke for sacrifice in the olde lawe, looke not for any distincte waye of handeling their offensies, which is not common with the lyuing. But consider what there was practised for the release of the smaller trespassies, and that was vsed for both the liue and dead, without distinction. Marke what sacrifice was for the abating of any paine due for great offensies, and the same shall be well vnderstande, to be with out difference practi∣sed, for the liue and deade together. That therby we may by good reason conclude, seeing sacrifice was then offered for purgation of euery light offense, that it was done for all states of persons that were either in this life, or after their death to be perfectely clen∣sed from the same. Although the facte of Iudas Machabeus be a plaine proofe that there was a common knowen ordre of sacri∣fice: for else howe coulde he haue conceyued any such sacrifice neuer hearde of before? howe coulde he limite the value of pro∣curement therof, by a certaine summe for euery soule deceased? howe coulde he gather in pretence of a thinge neuer vsed be∣fore, the peoples almes with out their murmure or motion therein? VVhy woulde he haue sent mony to Hierusalem to procure that, which had no example in the lawe, or vse in the Church? was he so ignorant that he knew not their ordre herein, or so vnwise to haue sent his mony for nothing?Lib. 2. de Orig. Animae Cap. 11. S. Augustine aunswering an heretike, that by the authoritie of the facte of Iudas, woulde haue proued, that by sacrifice men might be saued though they died vnbaptized, or in deadly sinne, sayth vnto him: that he is not hable to proue, that Iudas or any other in the lawe, offered for his freinde, or any man else being vncircumcised, no more then the Church nowe practiseth for any man not baptised.
VVhereby he plainely confesseth, that the lawe had a sacrifice for the deade: which, being vrged by that heretike, he might haue denied with good helpe of his cause, and aunswere to the aduersary: but that the contrary case was so cleare, not onely by that booke which he tooke for Canonicall scripture, as before is proued, but also by the full consent of all the Church of God, which both by plaine practise, and most graue ordinaunce, had from Christes time set forth and approued the vndoubted trueth thereof. 3 To passe ouer your saucines and scurrilitie being as agreeable to your profession and leuitie, as vnmeete for his grauitie and dignitie whom you name, the argument is of more force then you haue wit to vnderstand. But to beate it smaller, that it may enter into your head, or at least wise that they which haue any brayne in their heades, may con∣ceiue the strength of it, I will vse your owne figure and mode. All lawfull sacrifices were prescribed by the lawe, sa∣crifice for the deade was not prescribed by the law, therfore it was no lawfull sacrifice. you aunswere that the rehersal of sinnes proueth not the peculiar persons that may be burde∣ned with those sinnes. And with this foolish distinction you thinke you haue broken out of prison. But you that so like a proud foole, take vpon you to help his ignorance, bewray your owne intollerable arrogancie and more then beastly blindnes. For if you had redde the law whereof you make your selfe such a Rabbine, Leuit. 4. & 5.12. & 15. you should haue seene the peculiar mentioning and playne rehersing of all such persons for whome sacrifice was to be offered, both men and women, the Princes and the priuate persons the Priest and the whole congregation, yea and speciall re∣gard of the oblations of the poore. And in the perticular rehearsing of diuerse kind of persons, and the forme of the sacrifice, named according to euery perticular state, it is so farre of, that the deade shall be reckned that such thinges are enioyned euery of these perticular persons to doe, as it is playne that none but the liuing could offer, or haue sa∣crifice offered for thē. What law was appoynted touching lamenting for the deade, you may reade Leuit. 21. how the
Priest was forbidden to lament for any, but speciall per∣sons, also Nu. 19. diuerse ordinances concerning the deade yet neuer any sacrifice or prayer for the deade. When Na∣dab and Abihu were slayne, their father and brethren were forbidden to mourne for them, the people were permitted. By all which it appeareth, not only that no sacrifice for the deade, was offered, but that they were so separated from the liuing, that the Priestes might haue nothing to do with any of them, but in speciall cases. And as for your common shift of the common body of the liuing and the deade, hel∣peth you nothing, for although all the faithfull make one body in Christ, yet there is one state of them that worke, an other of them that are iudged according to their works, & to put no diuersitie betwene them, is not to make a com∣munion but a confusion. But of all other it is a clerkely cō∣clusion that you send M. Grindall to looke vpon the exam∣ple of your masse, whith is a sacrifice both for the quicke & the deade, and thereof will proue that the olde lawe, had but one sacrifice for the liue and the deade. In deede there you were to good for him, if ye practise of ye popish church be a good president for Moyses to follow in his law, we will reason no longer. But the fact of Iudas Machabaeus putteth all out of doubt. Surely then the fact of euery man that transgressed the lawe, shall be sufficient to proue what the lawe was and not the booke of the lawe. For else how coulde he haue conceiued any sacrifice which he neuer hearde of? How did Dauid conceiue the cariage of the arke in a newe cart, which he neuer heard of? except it were of the Phili∣stians that sent home the arke in a cart. And euen so it is like, that Iudas Machabaeus, if he deuised not that sacrifice of his owne head, yet tooke it by imitation of the Gentiles, whose studies and practises, your owne author confesseth were more frequented in those dayes among the Iewes, then the preaching or keeping of the law. Finally to all the other howes and whyes, I aunswere with one word, he had no warrant of his fact in the law of God. Neither doth S. Augustine sufficiently answere ye heretike that would proue by that fact, that men dying in deadly sinne might be saued
by sacrifice. For though they were not vncircumcised for whom Iudas sent an offering, yet they dyed in deadly sinne, and such sinne, as for which they were iustly slayne, as your owne author confesseth, for the idolatrous iewells, that they had euery one in their bosomes. Concerning the au∣thoritie of that booke and how it was taken by Augustine, I haue aunswered enough before. 4 But here will I nowe make an ende, desiring thee (gentle reader) with such indifferency to weighe the doing and dealing of both parties, as the importaunce of the cause, the loue of truth,The cōclu∣sion of the vvhole boke, vvith an admoni∣tion to the reader. the necessary care of thine owne saluation, and thy duety to∣wardes God and his Church requireth. There is none of all those pointes, which the vnfaithfull contention of our miserable age hath made doubtefull, in which thou mayest better beholde howe vpright the wayes of trueth and vertue be, and howe pernicious, double, and deceitfull, the dealing of heresie is. The one is vp∣holden by the euidēt testimony of holy scripture, the other main∣teineth her traine by bolde deniall of scriptures: the one seeketh with humility the meaning at their mouthes, whome God hath vndoubtedly blessed with the gifte of vnderstanding and inter∣pretation, the other by singular pride foundeth her vnfaithful∣nesse, vpon the phantasies of light and lewde persons, that are pufte too and fro with euery blaste of doctrine. The one resteth vpon the practise of all nations, the vsage of all ages, and the holy workes both of God and man, the other holdeth wholy by con∣tempte of our elders, flatery of the present dayes and vnhappy waste of all workes of vertue, religion, and deuotion: the one fol∣loweth the gouernours and appointed pastours of our soules, whose names be blessed in heauen and earth, the other ioyneth to such, as for other horrible heresies & wicked life, are condemned both a liue and deade, of the vertuous, and can not for shame be na∣med of their owne scholars. The one hath the warraunt of Gods whole Church, the other standeth on curse and excommunication by the grauest authority that euer was vnder God in earth. To be shorte, trueth is the Churches dearlinge, heresie must haue her maintenaunce abrode. This one, holy, Catholike, and Aposto∣like Church is it, wherevnto we owe all duety and obedience both
by Gods commaundement, and by the bonde of our first faith and profession. There is no force of argument, no probability of rea∣son, no subtelty of witte, no deepe compasse of wordely wisedome, no eloquence of man, nor Angell, nor any other motion that can be wrought in the world, that shoulde make a man doubte of any article approued by her authority. And if thou yet feare to geue ouer thy whole sense, and thine owne selfe to so carefull a mo∣ther, in whome thou wast begotten in thy better birth, compare our Church with theirs, compare her authority and theirs, her maiesty and theirs. 4 In Gods name let the readers waye indifferently, the doinges and dealinges on both partes, the cause, the trueth, their saluation, the Church, and the glory of God aboue all thinges. And as they see this pointe handeled, so let them iudge of the reste. The trueth is vpholden by euident testimony of scripture, the error, by custome, pra∣ctise, and iudgement of men. The trueth seeketh vnder∣standing of the scriptures, of the spirite of God in the scrip∣tures, error at the mouthes of mortall men. The trueth resteth vpon the onely authority of God, error vpon the maintenaunce of carnall deuises. The trueth is founded vpon the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, the other vpon Gentiles and heretikes. Trueth is embraced of the pure and primitiue Church of Christ, error is continued from a corrupt state of the Church of Christ, vnto a plaine departing awaye into the church of Antichrist. To be short, trueth is tryed by the worde of God, heresie by the inuention of men. The holy Catholicke and Apostolicke Church is that which humbly obeyeth the word of God, and the Synagoge of Satan is that which arrogantly chal∣lengeth authoritie aboue the worde. The true Church shall neuer decaye but alwaye reigne with Christ, the false Synagoge shall daily more and more decaye vntill it be vtterly destroyed with Antichrist the heade therof, and last of all be damned with the deuill and his angells. And who so woulde make choyse of a true mother Church, from a whorish Synagoge, let him compare our church with the church of Rome, the authoritie of our church which is the
authoritie of God in his word, with the authoritie of theirs which is the opinions of men, the maiesty and glory of our church which is spirituall, & the whorish outward brauery of theirs which is carnall. And where he findeth the true church, let him know that in the communion therof, he re∣ceiued his second birth, and not of the place, time, person, or element, where, when, by whome, or with which he was baptised, either among them or among vs. 5 Ours is that Church, that hath borne downe hethen Prin∣cies, that hath destroyed Idolatrie, that hath cōuerted all nations to Christes faith, that hath waded in bloude, that hath liued in welth, that hath bene assalted by hell, by euill life, by heresie, and yet she stādeth. Take away all this, compare her constancy in do∣ctrine, with their inconstant mutability: compare the noble army of Martyrs, the holy company of Confessours, the glorious trayne of so many blessed, wise, and learned Doctours, of many thousand Saintes that euer accōpany her maiesty: compare (I say) all these with the raskall souldiars of the contrary campe:Math. 24. Vbicunque fuerit corpus, illic congregabūtur & aquailae. I warraunt thee, gentle reader, feare nothing, for where so euer so honorable a per∣sonage is, there is the kingly company of egles. Beholde her grace of miracles, her workes, and her wonders, her authority in disci∣pline, her wisedome in gouernement, her equability in all estates: and I am sure thou shalt confesse Quod dominus est in loco isto, & ego nesciebam. Our Lorde suerly is in this place,Gene. 28. and I was not aware thereof. For Christes loue, if thou hast followed, or yet haue any phantasie to the seuered company, grope with out flatery of thy selfe, the depth of thine owne conscience: feele whether God hath not suffered thee to fall for some sinne. Come into this Church, and at the same time thou shalt be healed to thy eternall reioysing. Touch once the hemme of Christes gar∣ment, adore his foutstoole, cleaue vnto the altar, and if thou finde not comfort of conscience, ease of harte, and light of trueth, neuer credet me more. Proue once what is In horto concluso,Cantic. 4. & fonte signato, in the garden enclosed, & the wellspring so surely sealed vp. Ioyne with the Sainctes in heauen, with the soules in Purgatory, with the fathers of thy faith in earth, with all holy
THE ARGVMENTES OF euery Chapter of both the Bookes. Of the first Booke. THe Preface, vvhere in be noted tvvo sortes of heretikes: the one pretending vertue, the other openly professing vice. And that our time is more troubled by this second sorte. VVith a briefe note of the Authors principall in∣tent in this Treatise. Pref. argu. pag. 10. That often after our sinnes be forgiuen by the sacrament of pe∣naunce, there remaineth some due of temporall punishement, for the satisfying of Gods iustice, and some recompense of the often∣sies past. 31. The double and doubtfull shiftes of our aduersaries pressed by this conclusion, are remoued: and it is proued against one sorte, that these foresaide skourgies vvere in deede punishments for sinnes remitted. And against the other secte, that this transitory paine hath often endured in the next life. 43. That the practise of Christes Church, in the courte of binding and loosing mans sinnes, doth liuely set forth the ordre of Gods iustice in the next life, and proue Purgatory. 65. That the many folde vvorkes & fructes of penaunce, vvhich all godly mē haue charged thē selues vvith all, for their ovvn sinnes remitted, vvere in respect of Purgatory paines, & for the auoyding of Gods iudgemēt tēporal as vvell as eternal, in the next life. 74. A briefe ioyning in reason and argument vppon the proued groundes, vvith the aduersaries, for the declaration and proofe of Purgatory. 89. That Purgatory paines doth not only serue Gods iustice for the punishement of sinne, but also cleanse & qualify the soule of man defiled, for the more seemely entraūce into the holy placies: vvith conferēce of certaine textes of scripturs for that purpose. 92. That there is a particular iudgemēt and priuate accompt to be made at euery mans departure, of his seuerall actes and deedes, vvith certaine of the fathers mindes touching the textes of scri∣ptures alleaged before. 103. Origen is alleaged for our cause, vpon vvhose error in a matter somvvhat apperteining to our purpose, S. Augustins iudgement is more largely sought: and there vvith, it is declared by testimo∣ny of diuers holy authors, vvhat sinnes be chiefly purged in that temporall fire. 114. A further declaration of this point, for the better vnderstan∣ding of the doctors vvordes. VVherein it is opened hovv Purga∣tory is ordeined for mortall sinnes, and hovv for smaller offenses: vvho are like to feele that greefe, and vvho not at all. 125. A place alleaged for Purgatory out of S. Matthevv, vvith cer∣teine
of the auncient fathers iudgements vpon the same. 132. An aunsvvere to certaine obiections of the aduersaries, moued vpon the diuersity of meaninges vvhich they see geuen in the fa∣thers vvritinges, of the scriptures before alleaged for Purgatory: and that this doctrine of the Church standeth not against the suf∣ficiency of Christes Passion. 148. An euident and most certaine demonstration of the trueth of Purgatory: and the greeuousnesse thereof, vttered by the prayers and vvordes of the holy doctors, and by some extraordinary vvorkes of God beside. 156. Of the nature and condicion of Purgatory fire: the difference of their state that be in it, from the damned in hell: vvith the conclusion of this Booke. 169. THE ARGVMENTES OF THE Chapters of the seconde booke. THe preface of this booke, vvherein the matter of the treatise, & the order of the authors proceding, be briefly opened. 180 That there be certeyne sinnes, vvhich may be forgiuen in the next life, and that the deserued punishment for the same, may be eased, or vtterly released, before the extreme sentence be to the vtmost executed. pag. 187. That the faythfull soules in purgatory being novve past the state of deseruing, and not in case to helpe them selues, may yet receiue benefite by the vvorkes of the liuing, to vvhom they be perfectly knitte, as fello members of one body. 197. VVhat the Church of God hath euer principally practised for the soules departed, by the vvarrant of holy Scripture: vvith the defence of the Machabees holy hystory, against the heretikes of our tyme. 205. That the funeralls of the Patriarches, both in the lavv of na∣ture, and Moyses, and Christ, had practise in them for the reliefe of the soules departed. 220. Man may be relieued after his departure, eyther by the almes vvhich he gaue in his life tyme, or by that vvhich is prouided by his testament to be giuen after his death, or else by that almes, vvhich other men doe bestovv for his soules sake, of their ovvne goods. 238. Of certeyne offerings or publike almes presented to God for the deceased, in the time of the holy sacrifice, at mens burialls, & other customable dayes of their memories: and of the sundry mindes kept in the primitiue Church for the departed. 266. That the benefite of praier & almes apperteyneth not to such as dye in mortal sin, though in the doubtfull case of mans being, the Church vseth to pray for all departed in Christes faith. 271. VVhat that holy sacrifice is, vvhich vvas euer counted so bene∣ficiall to the liue and deade. The punishment of our sinnes by the
heuy losse thereof. The great hatred vvhich the deuill and all his side, hath euer borne tovvardes Christes eternall priesthood, and the sacrifice of the Church. And that by the sayd sacrifice of the Masse, the soules departed are especially relieued. 288. That the practise of any poynt in religion maketh the most o∣pē shevv of the fathers faith. And that all holy men haue in plain vvordes, and most godly prayers vttered their beliefe in our matter. 304. That vve & all nations, receiued this vsage of praying & sacri∣ficing for the departed, at our first conuersion to Christes faith. And that this article vvas not onely confirmed by miracle amon∣gest the rest, but seuerally by signes and vvonders approued by it selfe. And that the Church is grovvne to such bevvty by the frute of this faith. 328. That in euery order or vsage of celebration of the blessed Sa∣crament and Sacrifice, throughout the Christian vvorlde, since Christes time, there hath ben a solemne supplicatiō for the soules departed. 347. The heretikes of our tyme and cuntry, be yet further vrged vvith the practise of prayers for the deceased, their contrary cō∣munion is compared vvith the olde vsage of celebration: hey are ashamed of the first originall of their Christian faith, they are vveary of their ovvne seruice, they are kept in order by the vvis∣dome of the ciuill Magistrates, and are forced to refuse all the do∣ctors. 364. That the praying for the deade vvas appoynted to be had in the holy sacrifice, by the Apostles commaundement and prescri∣ption: And that our doctors by the maiestie of their name, beare dovvne our light aduersaries. 386. The first author of that sect vvhich denyeth prayers for the departed is noted, his good conditions and cause of his error be opened, vvhat kind of men haue bene most bent in all ages to that sect. And that this heresie is euer ioyned as a fitte compagnion to other horrible sectes. 407. Their falshood is condemned, and the Catholike truth appro∣ued by the authority of holy Councells. Their pride in contem∣ning, & the Catholikes humility in obedient receiuing the same. And a sleight vvhereby the heretikes deceiue the people, is dete∣cted. 424. An aunsvvere to such arguments as the heretikes doe frame of the holy scriptures not vvell vnderstanded, against the practise of Gods Church, in praying for the deade, or the doctrine of Pur∣gatory. 436. An aunsvvere to their negatiue argument, vvith the Conclu∣sion of the booke. 448. FINIS.
