13356 99839808 4263
Vpon the Frontispice. Convivas Vitulos, Hircos, Asinosque suesque, preusae vides bruto stringere vina pede, Quid mirare? ivos hic aspicis Helluo fratres, qui, quoties coptus, talis es ipse pecus: Quandoquidem pressis rationem sensibus aufert, AEmula Cyrcaeis Artibus Ebrietas Quam si bellipotens Brittannia tollerit Hostem, Clarior hac nusquam natio, gente foret. Thus Interpreted. CAlues, Goates, Swine, Asses, at a Banquet set, To graspe Health's in their Hooff's, thou seest here met; Why wonder'st thou oh Drunkard, to behold Thy brothers? In whose ranke thou art inrowled, When thou (so oft, as tox't at any Feast) Can'st bee no better held, then such a beast, Since, like Cyrcaean Cups, Wine doth surprise Thy sences, and thy reason stupifies, Which Foe, would Warre-like Brittaine quite expell, No Nation like it, could bee said to excell. T.H.
Philocothonista, OR, THE DRVNKARD, Opened, Dissected, and Anatomized. LONDON, Printed by Robert Raworth; and are to be sold at his house neere the White-Hart Taverne in Smithfield. 1635.
The Author to the Booke. THere's no faith in the forehead, Drunkard, goe, Tell all of that condition, that are so (Stil'd worthily) they are Helluoes and not men; If they be vext? say ore and ore agen, They are Statues, onely gasping a short breath Like dying men, each houre expecting death; Tubbs-bottomlesse, in which what ere you fill, All runs to waste, the more you powre, you spill; Casks, open to receive what so you please To glut their Concaves with, health, or disease; To them all's one: Fowle Kennells that make stinke The pure raine they from spouts and gutters drinke, And turne them into puddle: Froggs, not content To live in water, (their sole nutriment) But ever croaking (to find something new) After the evening and the mornings dew: Dry Spunges, alwayes thirsty (in their kind) And (drunke) being squeez'd, leave all the dregs behind; They are no day-birds, rather Owles and Batts, These looke not on the Sun, but see like Catts, Best in the night: To rest, they lay their heads, When th'early Cock calls other from their beds: Though men of fashion, and possest of land, Yet on their owne free ground they cannot stand; They live in thicke Foggs (which like Etna choake) By Candle-snuffes, and in Tobacco-smoake; Somtimes, they like those heathen Idolls be, Have Eares, and Eyes, but neither heare nor see, Meere Ethnicks il'e not call them; Christians neither, But the seuen grand sinnes, bundled up together: Thou art none such; Then Booke, away, begon, And tell the World, Ebrietas quid non. Tho: Faeni-lignum.
GEORGE DONNE, To his industrious Friend. THere rests the height of knowledge, when wee see The Praticke part linck'd with the Theorie; To both these, Obseruation. To contend, Whether this Art th'ast best obseru'd, or pen'd, Is questionable: most, thou say'st doe draw A lawlesse drinking into rules of law. The Souldier, Clearke, and Sea-man, from this part Speake all in their owne termes, and drinke by Art; Yet heer's the master piece thy Art could faine, To shew to drinke, and drinking to abstaine. OF PHILOCOTHONISTA, The Reader: To the Author, NEPHALIOPHILVS. THou hast (my learned friend) with happy fate, Shew'n to the world A Monster, (at cheape rate:) Much more A Prodegy, then all the Toyes Set out to cozen Women, Fooles, and Boyes At Fayres and Markets. In the Gulph of drinke, Where giddy vessells reele, and lastly sinke; The Quick-sands, Whirle-pooles, the Rockes, the Shelues, Are so describ'd; that they must read Themselues Guilty of wilfull Shipwracke, who ore-looke Thy paines, yet then be saved by thy Booke. Hang Bookes! Let it goe round! Follow your Leader! Pardon; I'm but Interpreter to th' Reader. IOHN FOORD.
❧ The BOOKE to the sober and discreet Reader. GEnerous Reader, thou hear'st my charge, and I come to present my selfe to thy viewe, like a Chance∣ry Bill, pitifully complaining. The reason is, because I am turn'd out, like a masterles man, without Patron, or Mecaenas to counta∣nance mee, much misery I under∣goe, meerely for my names-sake: For is he that hath a bad name is said to be halfe hang'd, what may I hope for then, when mine is so abominable; Notwithstanding, if my condition had accorded with my Title. I might have had Incouragers enough, and too many; but when they un∣derstood my nature and my name were directly oppo∣sites (For many who were loath to have me follow them publikly in the streetes, would have beene glad to have hugg'd me in their private Chambers) I then was left de∣stitute, both of pitty and patronage: For instance; I pre∣sented my service to a great Favourite in the Court, who when hee apprehended that my comming was, rather to plucke up, then plant the Vine, and to condemne, not countenance the vice, he bit the lip, contracted the brow, and made me this answere: And would'st thou barre me from drinking healths to the Prince whom I serue? the Lords whom I honour? and my Mistris whom I love? So with a looke able to sowre the next draught before he swallow∣ed it, left me.
From the Court I tooke my progresse into the Coun∣trey, where hearing of a Noble house-keeper, who kept liberall hospitalitie (not common in these dayes) I ten∣dred my seruice to him, who generously excused himselfe thus. Friend, would'st thou have mee now close-handed, and to set a pad-locke upon my Buttery hatch; If my seruants bee freely entertained in other great mens Sellers? Shall I for∣bid their followers to drinke drunke in mine? From him I went to an old Country Lawyer, his next Neighbour, who presently clapt his spectacles on his nose, and reading my inside, with my Title (in a great chollar, which swell'd up his ruffe as hie, as his veluet cap) said, Hence from my doores thou imposture, which art not what thou seemest, were it not for such of thy name, who quarrell in their cups, how should I doe for clients to maintaine my estate? Neere unto the Lawyer, dwelt a Farmer: I descended so low, as to offer my selfe to him, telling him my con∣dition and qualitie, he replied in a furie, How then shall I pay my Land-lord? were it not for Drunkards, I should sow no more Barley, so might the Malt-men starue, and I perish. Having such cold comfort in the Countrey, I then pro∣vided to come up to London with the Carryer. The first Inne wee came unto, I open'd my selfe to mine Host (a Iollie Corpulent fellow, and a boone Companion) who at the very motion, first stamped, then staring, he began at length to be starke mad, saying aloud; Who then shall keepe my guests vp all night? call in for drinke? and put them to unnecessary charges? how shall my Tapster live? or I main∣taine fire in thy Kitchin? As good perswade me to cut downe my signe-post: For thinkest thou, that I can eate and drinke hay and water, with the Horses? Much adoe I had to get lodging there that night, but with condition, to be gone thence by the day breake in the morning. At length I came to the Citie, and hoping to have beene entertain'd by one of the Sheriffes, I found the Seargeants and Yeo∣men, ready to beate their siluer Flagons about mine eares.
Their Sellers were open for all commers, and I onely ex∣cluded, and extruded, for by no intreaty, they would shew me to their Masters. The French and Spanish Mer∣chants, that trade in Wines, rejected me, as one who had laid some project to undermine, and blow up their trafficke. I then thought good to find some reliefe at Vintners Hall, but there I was more churlishly repulsed, then at any time before. They call'd mee Innovator, and told mee, I had laid a plot to begger them, who had  so many. I went thence to the Fraternitie of the Brewers, and finding them assembled, I had no sooner petitioned to them; but they presently open'd so many stale bottles mouthes against mee, that I was afraid either to be drown'd in their frothy  (which powr'd upon me like a deluge) or to be shot to death with their corkes, which peal'd against mee like so many Pot-guns: For which injury, I complained to a Iustice, desiring his warrant; and withall, besought him of entertainement. But hee gave me this short answere. I prethee friend, how then dost thou thinke my Clerke should live? I then was in dispaire, but thus comforted my selfe, surely one Schollar will  the worke of ano∣ther, and so put my selfe upon a Poet, who looking first stedfastly upon mee, after a small pause, gave mee this short answere, and so left mee. Ennius ipse pater num nisi potus ad Arma prosiluit. Old father Ennius never durst aspire To write strong line, till Bacchus lent him fire. I have now no refuge; but to thee (oh temperate and di∣screete Reader) under whose wings I hope at length to be shadowed, if not supported; For which favour, I shall protest me thine in all sober sdnesse, Philocothonista Anatomized.
The Contents of the first Tractate. CHAP. I. THe excellency of Sobriety illustrated, and the hrrid effects of  discovered: The first for Imitation; The second for detestation, &c. CHAP. II. A Catalogue of sundry Helluoes, and great quafsers amongst the Grecians; Infamous for their . CHAP. III. Of famous Wine-bibbers amongst the Romanes and other Natios, &c. CHAP. IIII. A particular discourse of those nations most ad∣dicted to Vinosity and Drunkennesse: with the mon∣strous effects thereof, &c. CHAP. V. Of sverall sorts of quaffing Cups and drinking Bowles most frequent in Greece, and other Coun∣treys. CHAP. VI. A discovery of sundry other Cups of severall fa∣shion and size.
CHAP. VII. Of Nestors quaffing Bowle, the same which hee used at the siege of Troy. CHAP. VIII. A discourse of severall sorts of Wines; and first of them most frequent in Italy. CHAP. IX. The like of the Wines of Greece and elsewhere, with their appellations and operations, &c. The Contents of the second Tractate. CHAP. X. OOf our English Drunkards. The titles they give one to another; with the varietie of their drinking Cups, and Vessells. CHAP. XI. What forraine Wines and sundry sorts of drinks are now frequent in this Kingdome. CHAP. XII. Of a new order of drinking lately come up a∣mongst us, call'd a drinking Schoole or Library. The degrees taken in the Schoole: The Tongues and Bookes which they studdy, with the severall titles proper to the Professors of that Art. CHAP. XIII. Their phrases borrowed from severall Courts, with
places of dignity  by them, both Civill and Martiall. CHAP. XIIII. Of their Sea-seruice: Their new termes for new : Their Writing-Schoole, &c. CHAP. XV. Of certaine penall statutes enacted by drunkards, vpon severall forfeitures committed in their health∣ing; With Writs that issue upon the forfeitures, &c. CHAP. XVI. Of sundry Termes and Titles proper to their yong Studients, with Customes to be obserued, and forfeits upon the breach, with divers Proverbs used amongst them, &c. CHAP. XVII. Divers Cases to be put in their healthing, which have beene weightily considered, and learnedly deter∣mined amongst themselues. CHAP. XVIII. Divers stories of such whom immoderate drink∣ing hath made most ridiculous. CHAP. XIX. Of some who have liued abstemious, and altoge∣ther refrained from Wine. CHAP. XX. A moderation to be obserued in drinking, borrow∣ed from Antiquity. CHAP. XXI. Of the most horrid effects of Drunkennesse, and a Christian like admonition, to Sobriety and Tempe∣rance.
Philocothonista, OR THE DRVNKARD. CHAP. I. The excellency of Sobrietie Illustrated, and the horrid effects of Drunkennesse discovered: The first for Imitation; The second for detestation, &c. THe first age of the World, which is reckoned from Adam to No∣ah, (or the Creation unto the Deluge) might be called the Temperate, or Sober age, for then Man-kind neither tasted the flesh of Beast, nor Bird, nor dranke of the Ivice, or liquor of of the Grape; their Meate was the fruites of Trees, and the Rootes and Herbage of the Field: Their Drinke, the fresh and unmixed Water of the Ri∣vers, and Fountaines. But after the great Cataclis∣me,
or Flood, when the waters were ceased from off the face of the earth, Noah The first Planter of the Vine. was the first that plan∣ted the Vine, and was made drunk with the strength thereof. Some are of opinion, that because in the dressing of it, hee moystened the rootes with the blood of sundry beasts. It still retaines that predo∣minant quality to put Drunkards into such severall humors. For wee find by common experience, some in their healthing, to be made Severall o∣peration of Wine. wilde as Lyons, (apt for any mischiefe, or outrage.) Some in their Cups, dull and sortish as Asses, (almost voide of motion or spirit;) some Luxurious as Goates (for∣getting both Civilitie and manners:) Others craf∣ty as Foxes, (then most subtle, either in Cheates, or Bargaines,) and so of the rest, but it is an Argu∣ment on which I will not insist, but passe it over, as rather a fancie then a maxime; onely I will make my first Corrolary to shew a reason why severall Drunkards may be properly paralleld with sundry Beasts; and first of Ebrietas Asinina. THe horrid vice of Drunkennesse and Intempe∣ance, which like the Cup of Cyrces, turnes Men into beasts, is to be avoided, as an open enemy to all goodnesse and vertue, Macrob. lib. sat. 2. tells us, that of the five Sences, the unlawfull pleasures of two (If immoderately used) Man communicateth with the unreasonable Creature: Namely these of the Touch and Tast: and therefore all such are to be numbred amongst Beasts, who brutishly forget the
Noblenesse of their owne Nature, and give them∣selues over to inordinate and carnall appetites: A∣mongst which, such may be called (and not amisse Drunken Asses, who beare themselues in their lavish and riotous cups, no otherwise then the Beasts, whose names they deserue) as being rude, Ignorant, Infacious, Ill-nurtered, shamelesse, Ill-tutered, and unmanerly; who neither obserue their betters, nor reverence their elders, regarding not Matrons, nor respecting Virgins: who not onely are of that im∣pudence, to utter squirrelous and absceane speeches in their hearing, but in their absence to asperse their Chastities; boasting what either they have, or might have done, when their more sober conscien∣ces can Iustifie against their toxed Insolence, their words to be as farre from Trueth, as their sences were at that time from reason; complying with that of Ovid. Corpora cum nequeunt, quod possunt nomina tangunt, Et nulli; non se Concubuisse ferunt. Whose bodies are debarr'd, their names they taint, And boast t' have lyen with all, both shrew and saint. Ebrietas Canina. OThers are said to bee Dogge-drunke, or as drunke as Dogges, and of such ought all men to beware; these like spannells faune upon any man in their better temperature, but when their braines are heated in the blood of the Grape, they will fa∣sten on thee like Mastiffes, who in their native and
genuine malice, against the lovers of Arts, and fa∣vourers of vertue; never expresse their virulency but in thir pots, when they can no longer con∣ceale it, on whom that of the Psalmist seemeth to re flect, Seplchrum  es guter orum, venenum As∣pidum sub labiis orum: Their mouth is an open se∣pulchre? and the poyson of Aspes is under their lippes. Ebrietas Ovina. THose are said to be sheepishly sttish in their healthing, when wine takes away all manly courage from their hearts, melting them into such Eeminacy, as if Bacchus and Venus were met toge∣ther: These never thinke of Hell or Heaven, or have any religious thought, but at such intempestive sea∣sons: Insomuch that they will oft times weepe in a kind of superstitious piety, and seeme to be terrifi∣ed with the feare of Sprites and Hobgoblins, for∣getting that of the Poet. genus Humanum, falsa formidie mortis, Quid stiga, quid Tenebras, quid nomina vana timetis, Materiam vatum falsique pericula mundi. Why stupid generation, dost thou feare The bug-beare death? Or lend a timerous eare, To styx and darknesse? Idle names and errours. From the Poets fictions, and worlds terrours. Ebrietas Vitulina, &c. SVch are said to bee drunke like Calues and Apes, who when they begin to bee Cup-shot, and that the Wine or Al worketh in their heads,
can stand upon no ground, but leape and dance, and caper, toy, laugh, sing, and prattle, troubling the whole company with their Antick gesticulations, and tedious verbositie, on whom that of the Psal∣mist may bee confer'd: Circumcederunt me vituli multi, et Tauri pingues obsederunt me: many Calues have compassed mee about, and fat Bulls have be∣sieged me round. Mille boves pascunt vitulorum millia centum, Musca super vitulum quemlibet vna sedit. An Hundred thousand Calues, (and heere, A Thousand Oxen graze) And upon every drunken Calue, There sitts a flie, and playes. Ebrietas Vulpina. OThers are said to bee drunke as Foxes, and those are they who Insidiate men in their Cups, and urge others, quaing and healthing for no other purpose then to intrap them in their spee∣ches, and bring them into trouble, or to catch some advantage at their words, thereby to supplant them in their estates, and such may bee call'd Pollitick Drunkards; of whom Cicero speakes. The craftier and subtiller a man is (saith hee) the more hee ought to bee hated, as one who hath forfited repu∣tation, and opinion of goodnesse, the serpent hid in the the grasse, stingeth the foote, and these En∣gineers under the pretence of honesty, deceive the simple. Sic avidis fallax Indulget piscibus hamus, Calida sic stultus, decepit esca feras.
So cannot from the crafty hooke, The greedy fish beware, And so doth the deceitfull baite, The foolish beast Insnare. Ebrietas Porcina. BVt above all; These are most ridiculous and nasty, who by giving themselues over to all beastiall vinositie, by spending whole dayes, and consuming night after night in Tavernes, and Tip∣ling-houses, returne from thence, either led or car∣ried, who oft times stumbling, lie wallowing in the kennells, and so appeare no other then Hoggs and swine, newly come durty and dawbed out of the puddles, and such may be called (and not unpro∣perly) Scrophae, and Scrophi pasci. i. Sowes, or sowe∣feeders. I might run through all the severall sorts of Drunkards. As  Leonina, Caprina, Anse∣rina, &c. Of some that are like Lyons, some like Goates, others like Geese, in their height of vinosity, but by the former deciphered, the rest onely named, may bee apprehended: leaving therefore their expression I commit them to your Imagination, and (mixing Democritus with Heraclitus. I thus proceede. BVt before I come to speake of the Moderne Drunkards of these times, and a new Grammar of a late, and the last addition In frequent use, ∣ly studied, and hourely practised, it shall not be vn∣necessary (the better to Illustrate his present Tra∣ctate) to reckon up, some of the former ages, who
have bin notorious in that kind, and for their great vinosity, and excesse in carrowsing, howsoever not commended, yet remembred to all posterity, as also of their manner of Healthings: The fashions and sizes of their Cups and Goblets; The height, and depth of their draughts, with the customes, and Ceremonies, used and obsrued in divers Coun∣tries, which, though they were strange, and almost prodigious, yet if we compare them with the Rio∣tising and intemperance of these times, It will ma∣nifestly appeare, that though wee come short of them, both in stature and strength, yet wee in many degrees exceede them, both in distemperature and . The bad man (saith ) liveth to eate and to drinke, but the good man eateth and drinketh to live; Homer, to make men beleeve the Immorta∣litie of the Gods, taught the people that it was not possible they could die, because they did not eate, thereby intimating; that as eating and drinking maintaine life, so they are likewise the occasions of death: Surfett (saith one) hath kill'd more then the Sword, and Wine hath drown'd more then the Sea. And another, the Vine bringeth foorth three * Grapes; The first of Pleasure, the second of drun∣kennesse, seve∣rall  the Vine. the third of Repentance; Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas (saith Ovid) Wine blasteth Beautie, and hasteneth Age: It maketh of a man, a , of a strong man an impotent, of a wise man a foole (saith Origen) whereof, the contrary according to the words of , Sobrietie is the very sinewes, and strength of the soule: Plato lib. 8. de
legibus, writing to the Lacedemonians, useth words to this purpose; To drinke too much, doth not be∣come you, oh you men of Lacedemon, unlesse it be at the high Feast of that God, who first delive∣red the use of the Grape unto you, therefore I per∣swade you to forbeare al intemmperate carrow sing. To which the Lydians, the Persians, the Thratians, the Carthagineans, the Celtae, the Teutones (by whom is ment the Galls, and the Germanes) are too much addicted, Ebrietatem vitet verecundus quis{que}Lib de Garrat: & modestus, aith Plutarch, Let every bashfull and modest man auoid drunkennesse, for it is a monsterDrunkennesse a Monster. with many heads, one of obsceane talke, others of Blasphemy, Prophanation, Lying, Cursing, wrath, Murder, &c. For Wisedome is hindred by Wine, and Vnderstanding dark'ned. One  being demanded how it came to passe that hee had lived to the number of an hundred and eight yeeres, re∣turned this answere, because I never in my life-time ate beyond satietie, nor drunk to : Wine (saith ) will make the wise man sing foolish∣ly, the temperate man laugh outragiously; The stayd man dance rediculously, the silent man vtter secrets openly, and to speake things immodest, and vncomely:  est in corde , est in lingua . Whatsoever things lies hid in the heart of the sober man, is  made publike by the tongue of the drunkard: When a prating fellow upbraided Bias of follie, because hee  silent at a banquet, hee made him this answere, Friend didst thou ever know a foole that was tongue-tide in his Cups? And when certaine Forreigne Ambassadors
were feasted in Athens, by one the most emi∣nent amongst the Areopagitae, whither divers learned Philosophers were invited to discourse, and keepe them company; After many Argu∣ments, gravely and weightily debated, one of the strangers obseruing Zeno in all that time not once to have opened his lips: Tooke up a bowle and dranke unto him, saying, But of you grave Sir, what shall wee report to the King our Ma∣ster? To whom he replied, say to him nothing else but this: Wee have  an old man, who had that power over himselfe to be silent at a Banquet. It is reported of Phillip King of Macedon, the Father of Alxander, that having leavied a Po∣tent Army to invade the Persians, and understan∣ding by his skowtes and spies, that the land a∣bounded with daintie fare, and delicate Wines, and that the People were wholely addicted to feede hie, and to drinke deepe, he presently re∣tired his Forces, and returned into his owne Countrey, and being demanded the reason, hee made answere: To what purpose should I make warre upon them, who are every houre ready to over∣come themselues.
CHAP. II. A Catalogue of sundry Helluoes, and great quaffers amongst the Grecians: Infamous for their vinosity. I Come now to speake of the anci∣ent Carowsers: I will first begin with the merry Greekes. From whom the Good-fellowes of this age would borrow that name, and see what Frollike healthers I can find amongst them. Hee that had a great inclination to drink Wine, was called Philoenus: He that lov'd to make himselfe merry with that liquor, which was  of Water, and Graine (which I ima∣gine to be like our Ale, or ) was stiled Phi∣: He that dranke immoderately, and a∣bove his strength, had the denomination of Phi∣locothonista: Among whom * Old Nestor, even a great drinker. in his third age, was numbred; He was observed to take his rowse freely, and more at the siege of Troy, then the Generall Agamemnon, whom A∣chilles upbraided for his immoderate drinking▪ Neither in the hottest of the battell, was hee e∣ver knowne to venter further then within sight of his Bottle: To whom Sir Iohn Falstaffe may not unfitly be compared, who never  ride
without a Pistoll, charg'd with Sacke, by his side. You may reade in Homer: Nestora non latuit clamor, tamen ille bibebat. Old Nestor, notwithstanding, all the Noyse and clamour made by the Tumult, would not breake his * draught. His Cup was comparedAtheneus Dy∣pa: lib. 10. to Achilles his Shield; as the one never enter'd the field, nor ingag'd his person without his Targe to guard his life—So the other never heated his body in any skirmish, without his bowle to quench his thirst: Proteus the Macedo∣nianProteus, lib. de Sepulc. A∣lexand. et He∣phestion. had the character of an inuincible quaffer; For as Ephippus testates, Alexander the Great; drinking to him a full bowle of Wine, contai∣ning twelue Sextaries (which according to our measures, held two Gallons and a quart, hee pledg'd the King, and carowsed it off at one draught, with a great applause from the stan∣ders by, and after some small interim, he caused it to be filled againe, and began a new health to Alexander: In the pledge whereof, the King fai∣ling in his strength, and not being able to over∣come it, the bowle slipt out of his fingers, and hee (with it) fell likewise groveling to the earth. It is further reported of * Alexander, that hee the greate. would sit up and drinke so long, that being over∣come with sleepe, he hath not left his bed for two entire nights and dayes together, insomuch that it grew to a common Proverbe in Greece,
That if any man could powre more liquor down his throate then his companions, they would say hee were able to drinke with Alexander; divers Authors report of him, That carowsing one dayMenander in Adulatot: . with twenty Persons in his company, hee dranke healths to every man round, and pledged them severally againe; And as he was to rise, Caliste∣nes the Sophist, comming into the Simposition, or Banquetting-house, the King offered him a deepe quaffing-bowle, which he modestly refu∣sed, for which, being taxed by one there present: Hee said aloud. I desire not, oh Alexander, to receive a pledge from thee; by taking which, I shall be presently inforced to inquire for a Phy∣sition. Theophrastus writes, that by continuall rio∣tising, his body was made so unable to performe any venerall Act, that when his mother  sent unto him a most beautifull Lady, called , notwithstanding, his opportunitie, and her importunitie, shee departed unvitiated from him. King Darius had these words inscri∣bedDarius. upon his Tombe. Vinum multum bibere potui Idque perferre. I could drinke much Wine, and beare it well. Etesias reports, that the Kings of India, were not suffered to drinke, but with great moderation. But the Kings of Persia had liberty for one day in the yeere to carowse even unto surfet, and that was in their sacrifice offered to the Sunne: For
so saith saith Duris. Philip of Macedon was sir∣namedPhilip King  . Bibax (for so saith Thepompus) who ha∣ving. 7.  lib. . 26. one night bounteously feasted the Athenian Ambassadors, they were no sooner departed to their lodgings, but he caused shee minstrells and fingers to be called into the roome, with Aristo∣nicus the harper, and Dorionus the Piper, with sundry other Iesters and Bafoones, with whom he often used to revell and carowse. In whose company having spent the whole night; the day no sooner appeared, but he commanded them all to leave the place, and sending for the Ambassa∣dors early in the morning, even when he was scare able to utter one ready word, dismist them with a ridiculous answer. Caristius in his hi∣storicall commentaries writes, That when hee purposed to take his rowse, he was wont to say, Now may I drinke freely and safely, for it is suf∣ficient to me that Antipater is sober and awake. Vpon a time, being at hesse, and one bringing him word that Antipater was comming to see him; he suddenly flung away the bag, the men, Chesse-board and all, and hid them behind the bed on which he then sate; as if he either feared or was ashamed to be found (by him) at so un∣profitable an exercise. Amongst these great wine-bibbers, Dionysius. Iunior is numbred by Thepompus, who almost drunke out his eyes; for his continuall surfetts made him purblinded and dull sighted: For as Aristotle reports of him, he hath beene knowne.
to drinke, and then sleepe, and waking, to drinke againe without , for the space of nineteene dayes and nights together: divers of his Followers and Flatterers, because the King had bad ,  themselues blind, faigning that they could not see their way, but as  them; nor distinguish the meat upon the Table, but as he sed the; nor would they discerne the cups that stood brim'd before them, but as he reached them▪ and put them into their hands; for  palpable , they were called Co∣.  Tirant of , with his bro∣ther of Si∣: Appollocrates, both sonnes unto the forena∣med Dionysius, were immoderate . Nyse∣us understanding by his , that hee could with no possibility outlive some few moneths, resolued with himselfe to  them voluptuously, in all the varieties that could best taste his pallate, drinking the most sweete and delicious wines, even till the very moment of his death; Hee was no sooner instated in the king∣dome, but he caused Chariots to be made; and wore a vesture of divers colours; his chiefest de∣light was in riotous feasts and inordinate draughts, being frequently attended by Cata∣mites and strumpets. In all which his brother Appollocrates equall'd, if not exceeded him. TheA . same Author speakes of  the Theb,. and Charidimus  the Athenian, both bran∣ded. for their intemperance in wine, and inconti∣nence with women. Arcadion drunke himselfe.
to death, of whom Polemon the exigramatist writPolemon Epig. this Epitaph. Arcadionis habet tumulus his ossa bibacis Eroctusque— This Tombe containes, drunkard Arcadions bones; If you desire to know who laid these stones, 'Twas Charmilus and Dorcas, to his fame, Who as he liv'd in drinke, dy'd in the same. The same Author in one of his Epigrams, re∣members Erexemus guilty of the like intempe∣rance..  Salaminus, and Diotomus Athe∣niensis two approoved writers, commemorate one , who was likewise call'd ∣dibulum,. which signifies a Tunnell: For when a Tunnell was put into his mouth, what wine soe∣ver was powred downe his throat, he received it into his belly without , gulping, or fetch∣ing his breath: of him  witnesseth. He∣rodotus tells us that Cleomenes the . was an extraordinary quaffer, and slew himselfe with his owne knife, when hee was extreamely Cup-. The Poet Alcaeus, and Baton Synope∣us were taxed of the like life, though not remem∣bred. in the like death.  Rhodius was.  his bibacity call'd Metator, as the Poet Epho∣rion in Chi∣. testat's. Chares Miletenus writing of Alex∣ander reports, that when he came to the Tombe of Colanus the Indian Philosopher, he there cele∣brated to his honour and memory, a contention
in Musicke, and another in wrastling; a third likewise he instituted in drinking: In which the first, who exceeded the rest, had for his reward proposed a talent, the second prize was thirtyA prize of . pound weight of siluer, the third tnne; to, try which mastery, 30▪ Indians fell instantly dead in the place, and sixe more expired within a few houres afte: He that drunke most, and attain'd to the first, which was a talent, powred downe soure Choas (which holds just the same quantity with that which the Romanes call Congius) which containes a gallon and a pint, and he was call'd Promachus. Tymaus writes, that Dionysius theDionysius . tyrant was the first who in the feast called Choas proposed a golden crowne as a reward to him who could drinke off a Choa at one draught which Zenocrates the Philosopher first compassed,. and was therewith crowned; but immediately taking it from his head, he exposed it to that sta∣tue of Mercurie which was erected in the great hall, to which hee had before accustomed to offer wreathes and garlands of flowers. Phanodemus reports that the feast called , celebrated in Athens, was first instituted by King Demophoon at his entertainement of Orestes; at the end of which sacred, every guest there present, had a Chao of wine delivered into their hands, which done, the King spake aloud and said, that he who first could turne up his bottome, to him should be given a  or Marchpane. Antigonus in his Booke of , sirnamed: .
Heracleotes relates, how that at one of these Drinking-feasts; the King having his chiefe and best affected Mistris there present, hee retired her apart to have had some dalliance with her, but finding himselfe unable, by reason of his age, he brought her backe into the Drinking∣schoole, amongst his fellow carowsers, and said to them openly; For my owne part I am now past it, but he whose youth is about him, and finds himselfe best able, let him doe this Wo∣man a curtesie. Anacharsis Scitha, upon a time,, . when a contention, or wager of drinking (cele∣brated by Periander) being the first that was toxt in the Company, hee demanded the prize as his due, as if celeritie in drinking, and speedy in the race had beene all one, and that he might challenge a right, and with as much Iustice, for being quickly drunke, as he that attain'd soonest to the Goale. Herodatus tells us of one Micer∣niusLib. . an Egyptian, who being told by the Priests. that he had not long to live, resolued with him∣selfe to doe nothing but drinke, till the snuffe of his life was quite burnt out: The same Author ranks  King of  amongst these immo∣derate  Methimnerus reports one Nicolites Corinthius to bee of the same con∣dition. 3. . and : And  writes that  the sonne of , and Nephew to Scotta.   on. . the Auncient, was so devoated, and quite given over to , that hee was often seene to come  from the common ; some∣times
hee would cause a Chaire of state to bee brought him, and being placed thereon, would be carried publikely through the streetes to his Pallace, on mens shoulders. Philarchus relates, that King Antigonus was soLib. Histor. 6. R. Antigonus. be sotted with the love of wine, that scarce one day past him without extraordinary distemper; for seldome was he sober when he sate upon the Iudgement seat: Insomuch that not being able to governe himselfe, he appointed two to manage the affaires of his Kingdome; Aristeus and The∣miston brothers, and Ciprians by nation. King Antiochus sirnamed the Illustrious, he who wasAntioch. Il∣lustr. once sent on hostage to Rome, was (as PtolemeusComent. lib. 1. and 5. Evergetus reports of him) call'd Bibax; he, much addicted to the Indian commessations and sur∣fetts, devising new and unheard of wayes of riott, and excesse: In which he exhausted an infinite Magazine, who in his wine would take handfulls of gold, and cast it into the streetes and high∣wayes, saying, This belongs to them to whom For∣tune hath disposed it, they that finde it let them take it: He was often seene to weare garlands of Roses about his browes, and garments upon him of golden texture: Hee wash't openly, and dawb'd himselfe with sweete unguents, Inso∣much that a private man comming by and ob∣seruing him, said aloud, how magnificently dost thou smell (Oh King) which hee hearing, com∣manded a vessell (of the measure of two Choas of sweete oyntment, to be powred upon his head,
to which the people thronging to dip their hand∣kerchiffes and garments, the place was made so slippery, that many of them fell groveling, which moved in the king extraordinary laughter, Polibi∣usPolib. lib. Hist. 26. would not allow him the name of Illustrious, but calls him a mad-man. For he was not onely seene to quaffe and carowse amongst strangers, but with common men, and the most abject of the people: Posidippus Apamaeus speakes of ano∣therPosid. lib. Hist. 16. Antiochus, hee who fought a great battell inAntiochus. Media, against Arsaces: And gives him also the character of Bibax, who being slaine in the con∣flict, and the body brought before Arsaces, hee taunted him in these words: Thy Wine and thy boldnesse hath much deceived thee, Oh Antiochus, who in thy deepe and lavish Cups, didst promise to thy selfe to have drunke up the Empire of Arsaces. Antiochus sir-named Magnus, whom the Ro∣manesAntioch. Mag∣nus. Prolib. li. 20. after subdued (by the relation of Polibius) when hee came to Chaleis in Eubora, though hee were in the midst of his Warres, and inviron'd with nothing but combustion: yet being above Fifty yeeres of Age, he grw inamor'd of a Chal∣idian Virgin: and in his drunkennesse married her; she was the daughter of Cleoptolemus, one of the most eminent men of that Nation, and shee the fairest of the Damosells of Enboea,. whom after, the King stiled by that name: There hee spent a whole Winter in gormandising, and drinking without any regard of the safety of his Army. But in the spring following, being over-come
come in Battell by the Romanes, hee was forced shamefully to flie with his new Mistrisse, and hid his head in Ephesus. Polibius tells us likewise of Agrones king of thePolib. lib. 20. Agrones. Illirians (who was wont greatly, to glory in his conquest of the Etolians.) that hee made him∣selfe more like a vessell of Wine, then a man, and died of an extreame paine in the belly: Hee re∣members onely of one Teuthiones, King of the. same Countrey, and a successor unto Agrones, who performed many excessive outrages in his Cups: for night and day hee continued his Ry∣ots: Amongst other execrable acts, he caused his brother Pleuratus, who had married the daughter of Menanius to be slaine, that most in∣cestiously hee might enjoy her bed, neither spa∣red hee any of his subjects; but murder still fol∣lowed whithersoever Wine and lust led him: Demetrius who was a pledge unto the Romanes,Demtrius, lib. 33. and escaping thence, after raigned in Syria, was also one of these brothers of the Grape, and such was Olophernes, remembred by the same Author,, li. 32. who raigned but a small season in Capadocia. For neglecting his Fathers precepts, and wandring in a wilfull deviation fom his former strict and austeere government, entertain'd from other for∣raine Countreys, all brutish and infamous vices, denison'd them in his owne, naturalising all ali∣en disorders, ryots, luxvries, intemperances, va∣rities, and vinosities, which were Incouragers, and Abetters to all the rest: so that as his go∣vernment
was wicked, and his manners disso∣lute, his life was short, and his end miserable. Most commendable and wholesome there∣forePlut. lib. . was the Counsell of Divine Plato, advising that Children should by no meanes be suffered to tast any Wine at all, till they were eighteene yeeres of age, as holding it inconvenient to adde fire to fire, and so proove Incendiaries to the bo∣dy. But it is lawfull from the eighteenth to the thirtieth yeere, for young men to vse Wine mo∣derately and modestlie: but to proceede so farre as surplus, or drunkennesse, they ought altoge∣ther to abstaine. He that hath past forty yeeres, and shall be some-times invited to feasts, and banquets, may amongst the rest of the Gods, of∣fer some Ceremonious rights to Bachus, as to him that is  and medicinable to Au∣steritie and old age: because hee infuseth into them that alacrity not onely to forget evills, and cares, but to thinke themselues for the present restor'd againe to part of their former youth. Amongst so many men drunkards, give mee leave to insert one woman amongst the Greekes (for it is no rara avis in terris) named Cleo, re∣membred by Phalaecus in one of his Epigrams, in these words, Auratam vestem, & croceam, succincta Lyaeo Ista dedit patri, munera magn Cleo,Cleo. Simposijs quoniam prestabat, quam bibere aeque Nullus tentavit vincere vel potuit.
Thus paraphrased: Her yellow gold-robe, Cleo (full of wine) Cast off, and said; Father, this great gift's thine. Famous for her deepe healths; on even hand, whom None could, none durst contend to overcome. But it is now high time that I leave the Gre∣cians, and proceed to the Romanes, of whom I will be the more briefe, because their histories are frequent amongst us. CHAP. III. Of famous Wine-bibbers amongst the Romans and other Nations, &c. IT is read of Alexander the great, That he was of rare temperance and continence, till he had subdu∣ed the Persians, but as he conque∣red them, so their vices captiv'd him; for they were much addicted to effeminacy and pleasure: So the Romanes who were a nation of austere behaviour and absteimious diet, thir∣sty in their fare and sparing in their cups; having recovered the Monarchy from the Grecians, and subjugated their Empire; As they could teach the other to sight, so they could learne of them to drinke; for in short time he was accounted
no brave fellow, that could not Graecari, or Greco more bibere, that is, could not measure his cup with theirs, and drinke after the Greekish fashion: Neither shall you scarce read of any fa∣mous Generall imployed in the conquest of for∣raigne dominions, but that although the spoiles he tooke from them were never so rich, yet hee brought withall from thence, part of their vices, were they never so dangerous. So the French∣men are said to have brought the Neopolitane disease from Italy, and since ingrost both the ma∣ladie it selfe and the name therof to themselues. And many of our nation have used the Lowe∣Countrey warres so long, that though they have left their money and clothes behind, yet they have brought home their habit of drinking. Of the Roman Emperours, these were they who were most Voratives and Infamous for their intemperance, as too much indulgent over their throats and bellies, namely, Claudius, Tiberius, Caius, Caligula, Nero the Tyrant, Galba, Vitellius, Aelius verus, Plautianus, Severus, Antonius, Heli∣ogabulus, Bonosus, Maximinus, , Galienus: neither can Augustus Caesar himselfe escape as∣persion. Amongst the rest Claud: Tiber: Nero was so obserued for his extraordinary quaffs and carowses, that the very souldiers in his Campe did not feare to nick-name him, even in his hea∣ring, and for Claudius call'd him Calds, for Tibe∣rius, Biberius, and for Nero, Mero. Marcus An∣onius one of the Triumvirate, with  and
Lpidus, hath bin likewise not unjustly taxed for his night reuells, and elbowe-deepe healthes. Infinite more I could capitulate unto you, whom for brevities sake I omit. Now if the Emperours, and great men, were so given over to intemperate bibacity, there is no question, but the People and Communalty being more apt to apprehend their vices, then imitate their vertues, would fashion themselues to their example. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. CHAP. IIII. A particular discourse of those Nations most addi∣cted to Vinosity and Drunkennesse: with the monstrous effects thereof, &c. BOcton in his discourse of Alexander journeys, and Amintas in diversor, reports that the Tipirians were so besotted of the grape, they did not onely please their pallate, and swell their bellies therewith, but they dipt their gar∣ments in wine, not induring the savour of any o∣ther odoriferous . Ctesias in his booke de tribut. Asiatic. assirmes as much, giving them the character (notwithstanding) of honest and upright men; which comes something neere the
Proverbe wee have amongst vs, In vino veritas, In Wine there is trueth: Harmodius Lampreates speaking of the Phigalenses, who are neere neigh∣boursThe Phiga∣lenses. to the Nessenians, brands them with the Title of common Drunkards; and Philarchus, lib.Byzantians. 6. termes the Byzantians Helluoes: For their cu∣stome is to bring their beds into Tavernes and Tipling-houses, and there drinke with all com∣mers, till they fall into such a dead sleepe, that a Trumpet sounded in their eares cannot awake them. They are people given over to all volup∣tuousnesse, and impatient of labour: Therefore when the greate Captaine Leonidas had drawne them to battell on his party, hee shut up all the Drinking-houses within the Citie, and caused great store of Wine to be carryed without the walls into the Tents, where they were billited, but when the summons was given, and his forces ready to Incounter the enemie; even then saith Damon, lib. de Byzant, could they bee but with great difficulty, thrust out of their drinking∣tents, and bee drawne to the battell, Menander on Mineruali saith, that Bysantium makes all the Merchants that trade with them drunkards, nei∣ther they to have sufficient, till every one seeme to one another, to have foure heads upon his shoulders. Ephippus in Busyrid. taxeth the Argi∣uesArgiues.Tyrinthians. and the Tyrinthians; For being perpetually overcome with Wine, insomuch (saith hee) as of∣ten as they enter battell, so oft they turne their backe upon the enemie, and flie the field. Eubu∣las
in conglut mat. reports the like of the Mile∣sians,Eubidus. and Polemon in his Booke of Epigrams, ac∣cusethElis. the Citie Elis, both of Drunkennesse andElis. Lying, in these words: Ebria fitque Elis, mentinurque; ac domus vna qualis erit, mox vrbs, tota reperta tibi. Elis will drinke and lie, and as one house to thee Proves; thou wilt by and by, find the whole Citie bee. Theopompus lib: 22. speaking of the Calceden∣sesCalcedenses. in Thracia, sayth thus, they are a nation who contemning all Arts, and disciplines, with such things as induce to vertue, and good manners, give themselues over to Wine, and sloth: The Thratians in generall hee call's homines Bibaces,Thracians. of whom the Poet Callimachus thus writes. O derat hic Thraces potantes, ore patenti Fusim: grata{que} erant pocula parua sibi. The Thrasians drinking open mouth'd, And scattered on the flowre, He hated: thirsty cups he crav'd, And did desire no more. Theopomp. lib. 5. affirmes the Methimnians to neglect all things, that even belong to their ne∣cessary uses, to spend their houres in carowsing,
and quaing, whom Cleomenes the Tyrant re∣moov'd from his People, and divers of their Bawdes (who professed to keepe drinking∣scholes, and under that government, inticed free∣women to prostitution,) hee caused to be so∣wed up, and throwne into the river: The like act Hermippus, lib. septem sapient. ascribes to Periander, and the same Authour, lib. 2. rerum Philippic. reports that the Illirrians, are seldome. or never out of the Simposij, drinking so long, till their wives setch them thence, and support them staggering to their houses: they are all (saith he) voluptuous, who at their first comming into the Taverne (having broade belts, or girdles to con∣tract their bellies within compasse) still as they drinke, let them out by degrees, till hee that came in a Rundlet, goes out like an Hogs-head. The same Authour tells us, that the Ariaei, and. Helotes, when their Army in the field hath fil'd. up the number of Three hundred Thousand fighting men, they have beene so effascinated with the delicious taste of the , as that they were perpetually intoxicated with the fume and strength thereof, being  or never sober, Insomuch that the Celtae leading A potent hoste against them, and searing the aduersaries puissance & number, the night before they were to joyne battell (knowing their greedinesse of Wine) they caused their Tents to be furnished with tables; on which were  costly ban∣quets, with all the rarieties the campe could af∣ford,
with great choyce of Wines and quaffing∣bowles, which were tempered with the Ivice of certaine pestilent and venenifferous hearbes, whose operation was to trouble, and wring the guts, and purge the belly: which done, leaving their Tents desolate, they pretended a suddaine and secret fight; The enemie aduancing, and supposing them fled for feare, their licorishnesse so farre overcame their reason, that they had not the apprehension to suspect the deceit, but pre∣sently swallowed the baite, and laying aside their Armes, betooke themselues to gormondi∣zing and quaffing: of which the Celtae, taking ad∣vantage, came suddenly upon them, slew many, and those that escaped the slaughter, were fore't through the extreame paine of their bellies, to cast themselues into Rivers, perishing by Wa∣ter, who were so much besotted of Wine. The Danes have made a profession thereofThe vinosity of other na∣tions. from antiquity, and are the first upon record, that brought their Wassell-bowles and elbowe-deepDanes. healthes into this land. It would aske too long discourse, to tell when and how the Swethians,Sweathland. Norwayians, with other inferiour nations underNorway. their dominions, as the inlander Lopplander, Greenelandr, &c. all bred in cold Climates, love to warme themselues within, and where wine is wanting they have Confections made of honey and other ingredients, with which they will drinke themselues so farre out of their sences, that though they be uncovered upon the Ice, or
frozen earth, hid with snow in the very depth of their winter, yet for the present they are not sen∣sible of the bitter weather or ayres distempera∣ture. It is further observed, that the cooler the Climats are, the more the inhabitants are addi∣cted to strong and toxing drinkes of which they provide themselves great plenty and much variety. The Italians are something moderate, yet atItalians. certaine times, either at the celebration of pub∣like feasts or private banquets, they will take their rowse freely, though not commonly. The French are our neighbours, I will spare to speakeFrench. much of them, but it seemes they love the best of their owne grapes so well, that they keepe the choyce and chiefe wines to themselves, and send the smallest and refuse into England and other Countreys. The Spaniards notwithstandingSpaniards. they have such choy and plenty, yet are to bee commended for their temperance; drunkennesse being  Vice so much hated generally among them, that whosoever hath beene noted to be de∣linquent in that kind, he is neither admitted to be of any Iury, neither, in his best sobriety, will his evidence bee taken in any matter of contro∣versie. The Transiluanians, Wallachians, Hunga∣rians,Transiluan.Walachians. Bohemians, Polanders, &c. for the most part drinke after the Dutch; neither can any of these free Principalities and Provinces belonging to the Empire, acquit themselues of the great a∣persions (in that kind) which is laid upon whole
Germany in generall. The Russian hath his quasse▪ the Scot his Ale, the Welsh his Metheglin,Scot. the Irish his ▪ and none of these butWelsh. hath sometimes the operation to make middayIrish. looke with them, like midnight: but from arch drunkards, I come now to speake of the severall sizes and fashions of Cups, Bowles and Goblets, which they used in old time to quaffe in. CHAP. V. Of severall sorts of quaffing Cups and drinking Bomles most frequent in Greece, and other Countreys. WEe reade in History, of some whose sole delight was to bee possest of many kind of quaffing cups of va∣rious shapes and qualities; inso∣much that they used not to give a valuation of their riches, by how many Talents they were worth, or what they might yeerely dispend, but how many Pots, Cups, and Gob∣lets of Siluer, Gold, and Chrystall, they could shew, when they made any solemne invitation of their friends. Amongst whom was Arcadius Pi∣theas,. . who at his death intreated to have that E∣pitaph inscribed upon his tombe, of which Har∣modius Pepreates. lib. legittim, maketh mention.
Pytheas hoc tumulo, tegitur prudensquae bonusquae Pocula cui vini multa fuere viro, &c. Within this Tombe, here Pytheas lies, A man in life both grave and wise; With many Cups seru'd in his Chamber. Of Siluer, Chrystall, Gold and Amber▪ Who for variety and store, Exceeded all that went before. Zenophon lib. 8. saiththat the Persians were most ambitious that way, so that he was most magnified amongst them, who at any inuitation could shew the richest Plate, and the greatest choyce of quassing Cups; neither made they any scruple how unjustly they compast them, so that they had of them abundantly to furnish their Cup-boards. Cerilius the Rhetoritian reports of Agathocles,. that he was much delighted in drinking vessells of Gold and Siluer, amongst which wer inter∣mingled earthen Pots and Steanes, in remem∣brance that he was the sonne of a Potter; and would usually shew his Plate to his familiars, and say, Behold, all these have I bought and pur∣chased since I was made King. Sophocles in La∣riss: speakes of Acrisias thus;Acrisias. Exponit aeneas lebetes vt ferunt &c. His brazen kettles he would shew (they say) And hollow Minerall Cups, with some of Clay,
Others of Siluer (whose store) could afford Sixty two cups at once upon the board. Possidonius in his 26. booke of histories, writes, that when Lysimachus the Babilonian inuited Hy∣merus. with three hundred gentlemen to supper, (which Hymerus governed the Babylonians and Selucians at one time) when the Table was taken away, he put into the hands of every one of the 300, a siluer bowle of foure pounds weight, which when they drunke off brim'd with wine, he bestowed the cups freely upon them, to dis∣pose of at their pleasure. There were a sort of Cups call'd literatae, or liberate. with letters, when Anticlides the Athenian, with other Princes, sent a Collonie into Lesbos; In which expedition, a beautifull virgin was cast O∣ver-boord into the Sea; one Enallo a chiefe Cap∣taine amongst them being much  on the damsell, leapt in after her, with purpose to save her, but both of them were suddenly over∣whelm'd with the waves, and no more seene, but after some few yeeres, when Methimne came to be Inhabited, Enallo appeared to some chiefe men of the Citie, and to them delivered the cause of his so long absenting himselfe, relating nto them that the Virgin was still living, and made a companion with the daughters of the old Sea-god Nereus, and that hee himselfe was entertained by Nepture, and made his chiefe heards-man, to feede his Sea morses, or oxen,
and then presented them with a Cup of Gold, (of no great quantitie) made round with eares, and very ancient, about whose compasse were in∣graven eleven Greeke Letters to Iupiter, the deli∣verer, or preseruer; Achaeus tragicus in  speakes of this Proculum Libertum, thus: They cal'd me of late a Iugge, or drinking-cup, conse∣crated to the Gods, whilst D. stands in the first place, I. in the second, then O. and N. with Y. followeth, and after O. which filleth up the word Dyoniso, or to Bacchus. CHAP. VI. A discoverie of sundry other Cups of severall Fashi∣on and syze. PHiletus Megarenses, lib. de ordinat Prothenius, and  the Priest of Aollo, writ of a Cup called Giala; that whensoere the King en∣ter'dGiala. into any City, he was presen∣ted with a Giall of Wine at the gate, of which he tasted before hee was permitted to procede any further: There is another sort call'd Dynus, of a. great capatious receit, of which divers Authors make mētion, as Archidies, Appollophanes in Dau∣lid, Telesilla poetria, and others, amongst which is
Dinosius, Synopaeus; who of a drunken old Wo∣man thus writes. Dic quo tuplex est poculorum genus, Faeminae? Dicothili Tricotili & ingens Dinus, &c. Tell me, oh woman, if thou now be'st able, How many severall Potts be on the Table? Cups of 2. draughts, or 3. or the great Dyne, Of a capatious measure, brim'd with Wine, Boat-cups, or bowls cal'd Rhytae may there be?Boate-Cups. For nothing else but cups the Crone can see.Rhytae. Silemus, and Clitarchus in linguis said, that a∣mongst the Clytorians, there were Gobletts in fre∣quent vse, cal'd Depastra, as Antimachus, Colopho∣niusDepastra. lib. 5. Thebaid. affirmes. Regibus & Graijs mox atulit ipsa Depastra. To the Kings and Greeks, she straight brought in the Depastra, which were Golden vessells, and made with eares, after the fashion of those which were called Dactilotae, so termed, because. they were straight and tall, after the manner of the Sydonian bowles, or else because they were altogether plaine, and came not neere the fire, Homers Caldron, or Kettle, was never set to warme any liquor, or to coole that which was be∣fore heated. Damoxemus speakes of another kind of Gob∣lets,
call'd Elephas, est poculum (saith he) magnumElephas. quod trium sit Choarum & Capax, It is a great spacious Bowle, and holds three Choas: Of the same Epinicus in Repondent maketh mention, there was another call'd Ephebus, vulgarly stil'dEphebus. Embacicaeta; of which Pholemon Atheniensis lib.. Attic. nomin: & lingua: speakes, as also Stepha∣nus Comitas in phicilotacone in these words, mecum tuli grandes Ephebas & graves simul, I brought with me those great and heavy pots, which were cal'd Ephebae. Lynceus Samius writes of another kind call'dThe names of severall quaf∣fing bowles▪ Hedipotades, some were styled Herculea, Hetha∣nia, Semisecta, Thericlea, Cadus, Cadiscus, Cantha∣rus, Carchesius, Calpius, Celeba, Cornu, Cossibuium, Cotila, Cyborium, Condy, Canonius, Caelicus, Hemin, Cotabides, Cratanium, Crumum, Cyathides, Calyx, Cilichnides, Cymbium, Cpella, Cymba, Colcon, La∣tronia, Lacaeum, Lepasta, Laebasnis, Spondium, Lesbium, Peluis, Lyciargus, Mela, Holmus, Oxyba∣phet, Aenesteria, Vnguis, Proaros, Pelica, Rheontes, Rhycydes, Rhotyades, Rhytus, Sannacra, Selencides, Syphus, Callina, Scythus, Tabaeta, Tragelaphus, Tri∣remis, Hystiachus, Phyale, Chrysides, Argirides, O∣dus, Ovum, Otyscyphium, &c. every one of these taking denomination, either of the Matter, Met∣tall or Signe; the measure they containe, the place where they were forg'd or cast, or the Ar∣tist who first devised them, it askes too mch time to give you of them a severall Character.
CHAP. VII. Of Nestors quaffing Bowle, the same which he vsed at the siege of Troy. OF Nestors quaffing Bowle the Poet thus writes; Poculum erat Pulchrum, &c. 'Twas a faire Cup with golden studds transfixt: Foure eares it had, with equall space betwixt, (In which he drank at home) you might behold There double Liviaes feeding upon gold. Two bottoms t'had, and when t'was brim'd, not one Could lift it from the board, save he alone: The graue old Nestor) with no labour too, &c. Some would have these Claues to bee golden nayles artificially driven in; but Asclepiades Mirlyanus takes them rather to be swellings, bea∣ten out in the manner of studds, such as Homer describes to be in Achilles his Septer, and the hilt and chape of Agamemnons Sword; the fa∣shion of this Bowle was not usuall, but onely in these Cups call'd Seleucides; such as had two bottomes were styled Oniscipia parui cantheri, and Carchaesia; such a quaffing Cup there is in
Capna a City of Campania, dedicate to Pallas, yet to be seene; which they say was Nestors drinking Cup before spoken of. The mettall is of siluer, and hath certaine verses charactered in gold;Livi. Nor are these Liviaes to be understood (as some have interpreted them) these birds which we call Doves and Turtles, but rather the Pleiades, the daughters of old Atlas (who is said by the Poets to support the whole frame of heaven upon his shoulders.) For the grave and wise Nesor, in ma∣king the substance of siluer, seemed to have a re∣ference to the colour of the firmament; and in the golden studds to comply with the starrs, and by the Liviaes the Pleiades, we are taught when to sowe, to mowe, or to reape; and by their ap∣pearance to know the time of the growth or ga∣thering in the fruites of the earth, according to that of the Poet Hesiad: Tempus adest Messis cum sunt Atlantides ortae, Ast ubi Merguntur jubeo proscindere campos. When Atlas daughters rise, haruest com's on, When they are drensht, the plough then thinke upon. Many other Criticismes that may arise hence, might be disputed, but I purpose not to bee pro∣lix in any thing.
CHAP. VIII. A discourse of sevall sorts of Wines, and first of those most frequent in Italy. IT would not stand with propriety, nor suite with Custome, to expose so many empty cups before you, and no liquor at all in them, and therefore it followes by course to speake something of Vines, and irst of those in Italy. Galen speaking of the Falernum or Muscadell,Vinum Faler∣num. saith, It is commonly drunke from ten yeeres old to fifteene, and so to twenty: before ten, it is nei∣ther wholesome nor tastefull; and after twenty, offensive to the head and stomacke, there bee two sorts thereof, white and yellow. Then they. have vinum Albanum, of which there are likewise two kinds, the one sweet, the other bitter, both of them commonly drunke from the fifteenth yeere to the twentieth. Their Surrentinum is not toSntinum. be drunke till after five and twenty yeeres, it is fat, but weake, and hard of digestion. Rhegium isRhegium. more fat then the former, and is not drunke till after fifteene yeres. Privernum comes of a grape which is smaller and lesse offensive to the braine. Phormianum is somewhat like it, but not so.
strong and sooner ripe; a degree below which, for strength, is the Trypholium, neere unto which. . is the Sentinum: The Tybertine is more heady. then the former, and the older it is, the better itLibicanum. relisheth the pallate; the Libicanum is a Wine full, and sweete-tasting, betwixt the Album, and Falernum. The Gauranum is sweete and fat, thicke and strong; but very rare, and esteemed the best,. as preferr'd before the Tybertine, or Prenestine: Marsicum is very tart and sharpe, and healthfull to the stomach; It growes in the Provinces cal∣led Campania, neere unto the Cumae: Asconita∣num is fat and good; The Picentinum is like the, . Albanum, and profitable to digestion, Calanum is a light Wine, and better tasted then the Mus∣kadell, the Caecubum is called Vinum generosum, a generous Wine, very strong, but not in its prime till after many yeeres; Fundanum is strong and nourishing, but sooner fumeth into the head, and inflameth the stomach, therefore sel∣dome drunk in the Simposium: The Scyathium is. lighter then all these, and is drunke from seven yeeres to fifteene: The Signinum is good at sixe yeeres, and the older the better: The Nomenta∣num. quickly comes to ripenesse, and hath in it little or no sweetnesse at all▪ The Spoletinum is sweete in taste; and of the colour of Gold; That call'd Acuannm parallels the Surrentine in▪ all things; Valuinum is sharpe and vnpleasant;. Cansinum is held to be a generous Wine, and ve∣ry. like Muskadell▪ Venefranu comforts the sto∣mach,.
mach, and is light: Trebellicum is most in use inTrebellicum. and about Naples; It cherisheth the stomach, makes a cheerefull countenance, and is of a mo∣derate strength: Eubulum is first blacke, but af∣terEubulum. some few yeeres changeth colour, it is small, but delicate in taste: Massiliense is wholsome,Massiliense. thicke and strong, but there is very small stoore of it, therefore it is the dearer, and the more de∣sired: The Tarentinum, and all in that climate are soft and pleasant, and very comfortable to the stomach: Mamertinum growes not in Italy,▪ Iolinum. The Sicillians call it Iotalinum; It is sweete and strong, Chares Mytilenaeus speakes of A Demon, or spirit adored amongst the Indians, whose name is Soradius, which as the Greekes interpret it? was the first that brought the use of Wine into their Countrey. CHAP. IX. The like of the Wines of Greece, and else-where, with their appellations, and opperations, &c. THe Kings of Persia drinke onely of one kind of Grape, which was cal∣led Vinum Calybonium, whch Pos∣sidonius n. affirmes, grew in Damas∣cus, a Citie of Syria: But Agarsi∣des. writes that the best Wines grow in Issa, an ∣land. neere unto Adria, Epilichus remembers us
of the Wines in Chyus and Thasius; Fubulas co∣memorates others call'd Thasium, and Psythi∣um,Thasium. and Peparethinum: and Arestrates Dypnolo∣gus. of Lencadinum, and Milesium, and Blebina, which grow in Syria: Phenicum and Lisbinum, Xenophon of Mendaeum, and the Poet HermippusMendaeum. speaking of Wines, sorteth them thus; Mendaeum Mingunt Caelestia regna tenentes, Molibus in stratis, sunt dulcia Thessala vina. The Gods Celaestiall, in their beds Divine, Having drunk deepe, pisse out Mendaena wine. Thessalium Wines are pleasant, relishing well,Thessalium. The Thasunim too, that doe of Apples smell; And that I thought all others had surpast, Till mellow Chyum better pleas'd my taste. There is a wine cal'd Saprium, which if pow'rdSaprium. Into a bowle, and cover'd but an houre, The lid remov'd, thence will arise a smell So rare, that shall the Violet excell, Or Hcinthe; as of that fragrant race, The casements shut; it sweetens all the place, Such noble Nectar may my friends devoure, My foes, the Peparathium, tart and sower. The Mendoians, as Phantas Eressius writes,Phantas. use often to water their Vines with certaine Medcinable Ivices, cal'd Elateria, to make the Wine taste the more pleasant and gentle: Se∣us in Icaro reports that ther is another sort
cal'd Pramnium, which takes the denominationPramnium. of a Mountaine so called: Amphis speakes of A∣cantium:Acantyum. . Alexis of Corinthium, and Euboicum:Enboicum. Archilochus of Napium, and : Chres∣musNapuim. of Pollium, so cal'd of Pollio the Argine, who. Pollium. raigned in Siracusa: Wee reade further of Vi∣num. Oaenantium, Benthium, Paristium, Onoglium,Benthium. Pavistium. Stathmium; from the places where they grew:Onoglium. Polyrelus speakes of a Wine in Rhodes▪ cal'd An∣titum;. Antitum.  Comicus of Capria, the best of which. hee saith is in Bonaventum in Italy: Amphium isAmphium. remembred by , and cal'd Malum, &c.
THE SECOND TRACTATE. CHAP. VIII. Of our English Drunkards. The titles they give one to another, with the varietie of their drin∣king Cups, and Vessells. TO leave all other natives, and now at last to turne our eyes inward, and looke back upon our selues, we by comparing their ryotts, excesses, intem∣perances, surfets, varietie of drinkes, and choyce of quaf∣sing Cups with ours frequent in our land, rather for figure, or syze, Mettall, or matter, shall easi∣ly find, that wee are so farte from comming short of them in any one thing, that wee appa∣rently exceede thm in all things, first, where∣as other languages afford but some few wordes,
as amongst the Grecians, Philocothonista; the Latines, Ebrius, or Bibax; the Spaniards, Bora∣chio: The French, Yurogne: The Italian, Boraco, and so of the rest. To title a drunkard by, wee (as loath to give such a name, so grosse and harsh) strive to character him in a more mincing and modest phrase; as thus: Hee is a good fellow, Or, A boone Companion, A mad Greeke, A true Tojan, A stiffe Blade, One that is steele to the backe, A sound Card, A merry Comrage, A Low-Countrey Souldier, One that will take his rowse, One that will drinke deepe, though it bee a mile to the bottome, One that knowes how the Cards are dealt, One that will be flush of all foure, One that will be subtile as a Fox, One that will drinke till the ground lookes blew, One that will wynde up his bottome, One that beares up stiffe, One whose nose is durty, One whom the Brewers horse hath bit, One that ca relish all waters,
One that knowes of which side his bread is butter'd, One that drinkes vpse-freeze, One that drinkes supernaculum, One that layes downe his eares and drinkes, One that can sup off his Sider, &c.. Next for variety of drinking Cups, we needDrinking∣Cuppes. not be said to come neere, but to goe farre be∣yond the Grecians, of whose carow sing bowles I have before given you a sufficient catalogue; di∣vers and sundry sorts wee have, some of Elme,Wooden∣Cuppes. some of Box, some of Maple, some of Holly, &c. Mazers, broad-mouth'd dishes, Noggins, whis∣kins, Piggins, Crinzes, Al-bowles, Wassell-bowles, Court-dishes, Tankards, Kannes, from a Pottle to a Pint, from a Pint to a Gill: other Bottles weeOf Leather. have of Leather, but they most used amongst the Shepheards, and haruest people of the Countrey; small Iacks wee have in many Ale∣houses of the Citie, and Suburbs, tipt with sil∣uer, besides the great black Iacks, and bombards at the Court, which when the French-men first saw, they reported at their returne into their Countrey, that the English-men used to drinke out of their Bootes; wee have besides, cups made of hornes of beasts, of Cocker-nutts, of Goords, of the egges of Estriches, others made of the shells of divers fishes brought from the In∣dies, and other places, and shining like mother of : Infinite there are of all measures, and
fashions model'd of earth, Cotili, and Dycotili, single pots, and double pots, some plaine, others of many colours: Insomuch that the Dutch-men have removed their Furnaces hither, and driven a great trade as if our owne Nation and soyle, could not either asford vs earth, and clay enough, or worke-men sufficient to maintaine our : some I have seene made in the forme or figure of beasts, as of Doggs, Catts, Apes, and Horses, others of Fishes, as Dolphins, &c. But the most curious and costly, either for Workmanship, or Mettall, are brought from China: Of glasses toGlasses. quaffe in, the fashions and sizes be almost with∣out number, some transported hither from Venice, and other places, some made in the Citie by strangers; besides the ordinary sort, I have seene some like Shipps under-sayle, accommo∣dated with Mastes, Sayles, Ordnance, Cable, Anchor, and saylors to man her: others like boates, Lyons, Ratts, Trumpets, and indeede what not? Come to plate, Every Taverne canPlate. afford you flat bowles, French bowles, Prounct Cups, Beare-bowles, Beakers, and private hou∣shoulders in the Citie, when they make a Feast to entertaine their friends, can furnish their cup∣bords, with Flagons, Tankards, Beere cups. Wine-bowles, some whire, some percell guilt, some guilt all over, some with covers, others without, of sundry shapes and qualities. Many can make showes of 50. pounds, or an hundred Marke-worth of plate upon his Table, when hee
hath scare an hundred shillings to dance in his pocket, and that makes the proverbe to grow so common amongst them. A good pane never shames his master. But come to a great mans In∣vitation in the Citi, the varietie and value of their plate, were it not so common, might to some appeare wonderfull: what then may wee imagine the estate of the Nobilitie, and the Court to be in that kind: No question without valuation; Insomuch that divers of good expe∣rience and Iudgement have beene of opinion; that the Plate doth much out-value the Coyne in the Kingdome: you see how wee may com∣pare with others in varietie of cups, let us now examine what competitor-ship wee can claime with them in diversitie of drinks. CHAP. XI. What forraine Wines and sundry sorts of drinks are now frequent in this Kingdome. IT is unquestionable, but that where other nations and Provin∣ces are contented with such wines or other liquors as their owne Climats affoord; Yet we, as if do∣ting upon insatiety, borrow from them all: From the French; Red, White, Claret, Graves, High-coun∣trey,
Gallicke, from Gascoyne, Rochel, Orleance, &c. From the Spaniard, all kinds of Sacks, as Malligo, Charnio, Sherry, Canary, Lcatiea, Palerno, Frntini∣ack, Peeter-see-mee, Vino deriba , Vino dita Frontina, Vino blanco, Moscatell perarsarvina Ca∣lis, Callon gallo paracomer, &c. And from other Islands, sweet wines, Bstard white and browne, Raspis, Tent, Halligant, Melnisee, Muskadell. From Germany; Rhennish, Backrag, &c. And besides these, sundry Greeke wines; to every of which, as they but vary in taste, so they giue them new a∣dulterate names never before heard of. We have moreover Wine of the Vintners owne making conjvred from the rest: Ipcras white and red, Boxt Alligant with Sugar and Eggs; Stitch∣broth brew'd with rose-water and Sugar, Burn'd∣Sacke; Burn'd-Wine; Muld-Wine; Tomlons∣Balderdash, &c. And notwithstanding we have it in our owne dominions, Metheglin from Wales, and nearer hand, Whey, Perry, Syder, Beare, Braggat, and Ale: To adde to these chiefe and multipli∣city of wines, before named, yet there be Stills and Limbecks going, swetting out Aquavitae and strong waters, deriving their names from Cy∣namon, Lemmons, Balme, Angelica, Anniseed, Sto∣mach-water, Humm, &c. And to fill up the num∣ber, we have plenty both of Vsque-ba'he and Scotch-Ale; neither can I thinke that any nation under the Sunne thirst more after variery of variety. But I could wish all our deep Carowsers and
health-quaffers to listen to the words and coun∣sell of Zenophon, who thus saith, I would have all my friends to drinke Wine, but with a limit and moderation; for when it hath water'd and quick∣ned the spirits, It qualifieth cares, and expellsThe effects of moderate drinkers. the dolourous passions of the mind; it th the power of Mandragora to provoke men to quie and sound sleepe, and as oyle putteth life into the flame, so it wakens and stirres up the dull and slothfull spirits to agility and quicknesse; for mens bodies may be compared to the flowers and plants of the eth; for when they are over∣watered, and almost drown'd with suddaine showers; and tedious and intempestive Raine: they droope, and hang their heads, as not able to hold them up, through the extremitie of moy∣sture: but when they receive a gentle dewe, and drinke no more from the soft melting cloudes then is sufficient, they appeare much refreshed, and are made more capable thereby of suddaine grouth, and fertile production, so wee, when wee poure into our bodies deepe and lavish cups, they dull the understanding, darken the eyes, captive the sences, suffocate the breath, dull the tongue, making vs neither fit for speech, nor motion; but to drinke moderately sharpeneth the appothite, helpeth digestion, and prepareth the spirits to active mirth and alacritie. Our Feasts, banquets, and meetings should be rather ordered and prepared like that of which Zeno∣phanes Colophonius speaketh, expressing himselfe in these words:
Iamque solum purum, est manus huic & pocula cunctis, Puraque quae-cingit nexa corona caput, &c. Cleane swept the flower, white hands, Pots without staine And pure and fresh the Crowne that girts thy braine. An unguent one Cup holds, with odours sweete, A second fraught is brought, these a third meete, Full of sweete smelling flowers, in midst of which Another bowle is plac't, thats fil'd with rich And purest Frankinsence, the feast to grce, Whose devine smell doth sweeten all the place: Fresh pleasant water is not wanting there, Vpon the the reverend Table; All the cheere Is Yellow cakes, pure Hony, and fat cheese: The Altan that stands by, hath the degrees With faire flowers strowed, so likewise is the ground, With festive songs, the Courts about resound. They offer first unto the Powers divine, (As good men ought) before they taste their Wine: With hearts sinceere, unto the Gods they pray, That nothing ill may there be done that day. They doe not drinke to surfit, but for thirst, Ryot with them is starv'd, and temperance nurst; Extreames they shun, the meane they doe not breake, Not he that most can drinke, but best can speake, Hath their repute. All quarrells they extrude, Mong'st them the Giants warres are not renew'd; Nor Centaines Feasts: but in their cups they beare, Hearts like the Gods, so upright and sinceere. The like we reade in the Excellent Poet Ana∣creon. Nullus amicus erit, qui tecum pocula siccat, Dum rixas bella &c.
No friend of thine let such a man be held, Who when he empties cups with thee: is swel'd With rage to braule and fight, but onely hee With whom the Muses, and sweete mirth agree. CHAP. XII. Of a new order of drinking lately come up amongst us, call'd a drinking Schoole or Library. The de∣grees taken in the Schoole: The Tongues and Bookes which they studdy, with the severall titles proper to the Professors of that Art. HOw farre fom these and the like, our Bachinalls are, may appeare by the sequell; For there is now pro∣fest an eight liberal Art or Since call'd Ars bibendi, . the Art of Drinking. The Students or Professors thereof, call à grene Garland, or painted hoope hang'd out, A Colledge: A signe where there is lodging, mans-meate, and horse-meate: An Inne of Court an Hall, or an Hostle, where nothing is sold but Ale and Tobacco, A Grammar Schoole: A red or blew Lattice, that they terme A free Schoole, for all commers. Now wee know that in all Schooles there are severall degrees to be attain'd unto, therefore they in their deepe understandings, and pro∣sound
Iudgements have thought it expedent to call: A fatt corpulent Fellow, A master of Art. A leane Drunkard, A Batchelor. Hee that hath a Purple face inchac't with Rubies, and such o∣ther ornaments. A Batchelor of Law: Hee that hath a red nose; A Doctor, and hee that goes to schoole by sixe a clock in the morning, and hath his lesson perfit by eleven; him they doe hold to be a pregnant Schollar, and grace him with that Title. Now before they goe to study, at what time of the day, or night soever it is necessary to know what language: If the English Tongue, He drinkes Al.The study of Severall tongues. If the Dutch,   Beare. If the Spanish,   Sack, or Canari. If Italian,   Bstard. If the Grecian,   Rennish, or . If Irish,   Vsqueba'he. If Wel,   . If Latine,   Hallig. If Greeke,   Muskadell. If Hebrew,   Hypocr. The bookes which they studdy, and whose leaves they so often turne over, are for the most part three of the old translation, and three of the new, those of the old translation:
First, the Tankard.The bookes which the drunkads study. Secondly, the Black-Iac. Thidly the Quart-Pot rib'd, or Thorondell. Those of the New be these. First, the Iugge. Secondly, the Beaker. Thirdly the double or single Can, Or Black-Pot. You heare what the Bookes most in use a∣mongst them are: It followes now as a thing ne∣cessary to make knowne unto you, what the pro∣fessors bee, or at least what Titles they have a∣mongst them.The professors of this Art. He that weepes in his cups and is Maudlen drunk— studies Hydromancy. He that laughes and talkes much—   Natural Phi∣losophy. He that gives good coun∣sell—   Morality. He that builds Castles in the Ayre—   Metaphisicks. He that sings in his drinke-   Musicke. Hee that disgorgeth his stomacke.—   Phisicke. He that brags of his Tra∣vells—   Cosmography. He that rimes extemporie, or speaks play speeches-   Potry.
He that cryes trill-lill boyes, is a—Rhetoritian. He that calls his fellow Drunkard, a—Logitian. Hee that prooves his argument by a Pamphlet or Ballad, a—Gramarian. Hee that rubs off the score with his Elbow Ha or Cloake, an—Arithmetitian He that knocks his head against a post, then lookes up to the skie, an—Astronomer. He that reeles from one side of the Kennell to another, a—eomitrician. He that going home-ward falls into a ditch, or Kennell, a—Navigator. Hee that leeseth himselfe in his discourse or talke, a—Mooter. He that brawles and wrangles in his Cups, a—Barrister. Hee that loveth to drinke in hugger-mugger, a—Bencher. He that drinks to all commers, a—Yong Student. He that hath no money in his purse, but drinks on trust, a—Merchant Ven∣terer. He that in his Wine is nothing else but complement, a—Civilian. Hee that drinkes and forgets to whom: is said to study the—Art of Memory.
CHAP. XIII. Their phrases borrowed from severall Courts, with places of dignity vsurpt by them, both Civill and Martiall. TO leave the Colledges it is need∣full now that wee inquire what is done in the Courts, and to learne what phrases and words of Art belonging to their profession they borrow from them: Hee that plucks his friend or ac∣quaintance,Phrases bor∣rowed from severall courts into a Taverne or Tipling house perforce, is call'd a—Sergeant. He that quarrels with his hostesse and call's her whore—Puts in his Declarations. He that is silent or tongue-tide in his Cups, is said to—Demur upon the Plaintiff. He that ingrosseth all the talke to himselfe, is call'd—Foreman of the Iury. He that with his loud talke deaf∣fens all the company,—Cryer of the Court. He that takes upon him to make the reckoning,—Pronounceth judgment. Hee that wants money, and ano∣ther man pays for, is—Quit by Proclamation
He that gives his host or hostesse a bill of his hand, is said to be-—Sav'd by his Clergy. Hee that is so free that hee will pledge all commers—Attourney Genrall. He that weares a Night-Cap, ha∣ving been sicke of a surfet—Sgeant of the Coyffe. He that is observed to be drunke but once a weeke—An ordinary Pursant. He that takes his row freely but once in a month, a—Sub-Sheriffe. He that healths it but once in a Quarter, a—Iustice of Peace. And hee that takes his rowse but twice a —Iudge of a Circuit. There be likewise belonging to this Art, orPlaces of dig∣nitie belong∣to this Ar. Science, diverse places of respect and dignity, both Civill and Martiall; Of the Civill rst; Hee that is unruly in his Cups, swaggers, and flings Pots and Drawers downe staires,  Glasses, and beates the Fidlers about the roome; they call by the name of—Major Do. He that cuts down signes, bushes or —Master Controler. H that can win the favour of the hoesses daughter to lie with her,—Principall Secretary. He that stands upon his strength and begins new healths,—Mr. of the Ceremonies. He that is the first to begin new frollickes,—Mr. of the Novelties. He that ings Cushiōs Napkins and Trenchers bout the room,—Mr. of Misule.
He that wanting mony is forc'd to pawne his Cloake,—Master of the Wardrobe. He that calls for Rashers, pickle∣Oysters, or Anchovyes,—Clerke of the Kitchen. He that talkes much, and speakes non-sence, is call'd a—Procter. He that tells tedious and long tales,—Register. He that takes the tale out of a∣nother mans mouth,—Publike Notary. The Martiall degrees follow in the next place; And their order, thus; He that drinkes in his bootes and Gingling-spurs, is call'd a—Collonel of a Regiment. He that drinkes in Silke-stock∣ings and Silke-garters—Catain of a foot-company. He that slings Pottle and Quart pots downe the stayres,—Marshall of the field. He that begins three healths to∣gether to go round the table,—Mr. of the Ordnance. He that calls first in all the com∣pany for a Looking-glasse,—Campe Master. He that waters the Faggotts by pissing in the Chimney,—Corporall of the field. He that thunders in the roome and beates the Drawers,—Drum-Major. He that lookes red, and colours in his drinke,—Ensigne-bearer. He that thrusts himselfe into cō∣pany and hangs upon others,—Gentleman of a Company. He that keeps company and hath but two-pence to send,—Lansprizado. Hee that pockets up Gloves, Knives, or Handkerchers,—.
He that drinkes three dayes to∣gether without respt,—An Old-souldier. Hee that sweares and lies in his drinke—An Intelligencer. CHAP. XIIII. Of their Sea-seruice: Their new termes for new Pa∣radoxes: Their Writing-Schoole, &c. HAving past the degrees, both Civill and Martiall, It followes in the next place that we come to take view of the Sea, or rather, Seller-seruice; of which we have already made this Quee: He that having over drunk him∣selfe,Of their Sea∣seruice. and utters his stomake in his next fellowes Bootes or Shooes, they call—Admirall of the Narrow∣Seas. He that pissth under the Table to offend their Shooes or Stockings—Viz-Admirall. He that is first Flau'd in the com∣pany before the rest,—Master of a ship. Hee that is the second that is drunk at the Table,—Masters Mate. Hee that slovenly spilleth his drinke upon the Table,—Swabber. Hee that privately and closely stealeth his liquor,—Pyrate of the Narrow-Seas He that is suddenly taken with the Hitch-up,—Master-Gunner.
Hee that is still smoaking with the Pipe at his nose,—Flute. Hee that belcheth either back∣ward or forward,—Trumpetr I might run through the rest of the Offices in the ship but for tediousnesse, therefore these be∣fore-named suffice for the present. I am next to acquaint you with new tearmes for new Para∣doxes; As first, Your Drinking-Schoole must not be tearm'd a Study, a Buttery, a Taverne, a Tap-house, or a Seller; but a Library, wherein is specially to be obserued, That whosoever shallNecessary ob∣suations. drinke himselfe from off his leggs, in the Libra∣ry, must be Raised, Recovered, and Conjured up with a book of the Old-translation: But he that is drowsie, and sleepes only to prevent the biting of Flees, must reade in one of the New; and in so doing, it is judg'd by the most learned of that Society, that the exercise is well performed for that present. You have heard how they practise to study; It is requisite that you likewise know how they teach one another to write: He that is industrious to learneTheir . the Secretary-hand, calls for a Bowle or Glasse of—Six-shillings Beare. He that desires to write a faire Romn-hand,—for Chico. Hee that for that time would practise the Court-hand,—Cary.
He hat will write the Chancery hand, calls for three horns of—Braggtt. He that would bee perfect in the Checker-hand, begins with a draught of the Wooll-sac—Beare, or Al. Hee that cannot see the way out of the Library, must call for a legeble hand to reade, and that's—A cup of Sacke. CHAP. XV. Of certaine penall Statutes enacted by Drunkards, vpon severall forfeitures committed in their healthing; with Rits that issue upon the for∣feitures, &c. I Come now to the penall Statutes enacted for diverse forfeitures, up∣on most grave and mature delibe∣ration,Of penall Sta∣tutes enacted upon divers forfeitures. as followeth; No man must call a Good-fellow Drunkard, for that's a name of reproach and indignity, as quite ex∣termin'd out of their learned Society: But if at any time they spy that defect one in another, they may without any forfeit or iust exceptions taken, say; He is Foxt, Hee is Flaw'd, Hee is Flusterd, Hee is Suttle, Cupshot, Cut in the Leg or Backe, Hee hath seene the French King, He hath swallowed an Haire or a Taverne-Token, Hee hath hipt the
Cat, He hath been at the Scriveners and learn'd to make Indentures, Hee hath bit his Grannam, or is bit by a Barne-Weesell, with an hundred such like adages and sentences, extracte out of the most Authentick Authors in their Liberary. Now upon the breach of these Statutes di∣vers Writts Issue, to be srued upon the delinquents; of which: The first cup, or Writ, withOf Writts that Issue upon the foritures. which hee is to bee serued, is—A Subpaena. The second granted out by the Court, is call'd—Alterum summoneas. The third that comes upon him for his forfeiture,—An Exigent. The fourth, if hee be peremtory, and stand it out,—A capias. The , which by no meanes can be avoided, a—Fieri-facies. And if the Liquor be soure, flatt, muddy, or any way distastefull, so that it giveth no content unto the company: There presently goeth a Writt out,—Admelius inquirendum. There are divers other Writts for vers other causes. If any shall rudely presse intoOther Witts for other cau∣ses. the roome without leave,—A forcible Entery.
If hee bee admitted, hee then pleadeth—Libertate probanda. If one depart the Roome with∣out paying that which hee call'd for,—No exeat . If he begins to stagger, then two cupps more, is an—Atachment. But if hee chance to fall under the Table:—A binding processe. If hee be drowsy, and offer to sleepe in the roome, an—Habeas corpus. If he be dead drunke, and with∣out motion,—Capias ad Vigatum. If any to cease drinking, fall to whisper,—A Writ of conspiracy. If any shall offer to buy the stooping,—Champertaine. If an unruly drunkard chance to be kick't downe the stayers,—Excomunicato capiendo. But if he be suffered to stay with good leave,—Dedimus Potestatem. If any one of them shall hide his head for the reckoning,—A Latitat. If a drunkard sitting long in the Taverne, shabe fetch't home by his Wife, a—Quo Iure. If hee drinke from the morning till the Sun goe downe,—Diem clausit extremum.
CHAP. XVI. Of sundry Termes and Titles propper to their young Studients, with Customes to bee obserued, and rfits upon the breach, with divers Proverbs u∣sed amongst them, &c. HEE that makes him∣selfeTermes and Titles. a laughing-stocke to the whole company, is cal'd a—Tenant in Fee-simple. Hee that will be still smowching and kissing his Hostesse be∣hind the doore,—Tenant in-taile speciall. Hee that will be still kissing all commers in,—Tenant in-taile generall. Hee that is three parts foxt, and will bee kissing,—Tenant in-taile after possi∣billitie of Issue extinct. Hee that is permitted to take a napp, and to sleepe,—Tenant by the curtesie de Angliter. If two or three Women meete twice or thrice a weeke, to take Gossips Cup, they are—Tenants in dower. Hee that hath the disposing of a donative amongst his com∣rades,—Tenant in Frank Almaine. Hee whose head seemes to bee heavier then his heeles, holds in—Capite. Hee whose heeles are heavier then his head, holds in—Soccadge. All Gentlemen - Drunkards;
Schollars, and Souldiers, hold in—Knights sice. Hee that drinkes nothing but Sacke and Aquavitae, holds by—Grd . Hee that drinkes onely Ale, or Beere, holds by—Petit serientry. He that drinks uncovered, with his head bare,—Tenders his homage. Hee that humbles himselfe to drinke on his knee,—Doth his fealty. Hee that hunteth the Tavernes, or Taphouses, when he comes first to age,—Paies his reliefe. Hee that hath sold and mor∣gag'd all the land he hath,—Sueth for his livery. Hee whose Wife goeth with him to the Taverne, or Ale∣house, is—A free-holder. Hee whose Wife useth to fetch him home from the Library, is a—Tennant at will. Hee that articles with his Ho∣esse about the reckoning, is a—Coppie-holder. Hee that staggering, supports himselfe by a wall or a post, holds by the—Verge. Customes to bee observed: and forfeits upon the breach. First, not to drinke unto any man in the com∣panyCustomes and forfeits. if a Woman bee in presence.
2. Not to drinke to the Drawer, Tapster, or Buttler; Vpon paine of drinking twice. 3. To keepe your first man, and withall to re∣member whom you drinke unto. 4. To have a care to see your selfe pledg'd. 5. That you see the health to goe round. Other customes there bee in some places held by Tradition, as to have Thirteene to the dozen, and call for the reckoning pot, or come againe. Certaine learned Proverbs, and proper Phrases be∣longing to the Library. AS to drinke Vpse-phreese, Supernacu∣lum,Proverbs. to swallow a Slap-dragon, or a raw Egge: Then to see that no lesse then three at once bee bare to a health: And of Proverbs These and the like. Hee that drinkes red, gaines by the colour▪ A pound of care, will not pay an ounce of debt: A raw stomach makes a rumaticke head, &c.
CHAP. XVII. Divers Cases to be put in their healthing, which have  considered and leaedly  amongst themsels. AS first; If a Clerke happen to bee dead-drunk in his owne Library, in that case, his Wie may make him Cuckold without Impeach∣ment of waste: If shee can doe it before hee revive, and therein shee may plead custome. Now followeth a case in the Common-Law. IF there be two brothers, and the elder beingA Case in the Common-law. seased of sixteene pence in credit▪ and shall be made dead-drunke in the Liberary, the youn∣ger may enter as the next Heire, upon the sixteen pence in demeane, and presently conuey it over in Fee to his Hostesse: but except she please, the  in credit shall not descend, be∣cause the elder brother died not seazed. If three Gentlemen Ioyntly purchase three Gallons of Sacke to themselues and the remain∣der over to their seruants in fee: If the men fall
drunke before their masters, without Issue: Th remainder reverse, or escheate to the , and the suruiving purchaser (his fellowes being blowne up) goes away with the whole, which he may Alien to the next commer in non obs, the Statute of Alienions. If a Female Covert, offer her Petticoate or Smock to Morgage, to the Clerke of the Li-ary, and he taketh one or both up for the  or reckoning, If her Husband come just in the Nick, the Plantiffe shall abate, and the Clerke shall be forced in despight o his Breeches to with-draw his Action, or to let it fall, and all be∣cause it was not before enter'd. In case of Linnen, it hath beene adjudged, that if foure brothers have but one shirt amongst them, If by consent of all oure, that single shirt be condemned to the Lombard, and the purchase spent in the Library, the naked ueth of the common law in that case is; that they are compellable to weare no Linnen, but to goe wooll-ward for Pennqnce, till the next bounti∣full hedge commiserates their necessitie. If two empty Corporalls, or Low-Countrey Souldiers lately come over, happe into a strange Library, and after the turning over the Bookes of the old Translations, they be call'd to account for their learning; If they upon some feign'd case, fall to quarrell, and the lerke bee well and throughly beaten for his labour, they may by the force of the Common-Law, depart
whilst the disputation is hot, sco-free, and shot-free. If a Bottle of Aquavitae, or Strong-Waters, discend to three Gossips, they may as partners divide the liquor by a cup, or glasse of partition, but i the Bottle as a thing not dividable, they shall occupi in common, till two of them de∣cease, and bee buried in the Library; then the suruiving Gossip may carry away the Bottle whole (if she breake it not by the way) and that by the way of suruivership. If a Clerke bring to any approoved Schol∣lar, A Booke of a false Translation, that is, when it should bee in Quarto, to bring him one in Octavo, or in stead of one in Duo decimo, to bring him one that is in Decimo sexto, although the student turne it over for instction sake, yet if he mislike the Volumne, hee may lawful∣ly breake the cover of the Booke about the Clerkes head, and justifie it by a decree, made at the rst setting up of the Library. But of these no further; I now proceede to matter of more weight and consequence.
CHAP. XVIII. Divers stories of such whom imoderate drinking hath made most ridiculous. TO leave all forraigne, discourses, which might exemplifie unto you how Wine hath debilitated the sences, and made some men derisi∣ons and laughing stocks to the world; I will now onely present you with a few domesticke examples, either of mine owne notion, or related from others. A Seruing-man much over taken with wine,A drunken Seruingman. when he perceived that he could beare no more, stole out of the Tverne by a backe doore, and passing through a dke and narrow Lane, late in the night when the Moone shined very bright and cleare, and at length comming to crosse Cheape-side, to goe into Friday-street, he presently began to apprehend, that the shadow wherein he stood was the Shore, and the Moone-shine a Ri∣ver (for hee directly conceited it to bee water) therefore he first call'd aloud, A Boate, a Boate, but hearing none to make him answere (for who would but imagine him to be some drunkard or madman) he next bethought himselfe, It might
be possible for him to wade over, in which con∣ceit he laid by his Cloake, pluckt off his Bootes and Stockings, and then his Breeches: when drawing up his shirt to the highest, he laid the rest of the luggage upon his shoulders, and stay∣ing himselfe upon his Sword, put one foot first softly into the Moone-shine, andfinding the Channell firme under him, hee aduentred the other; and wading further, in great feare and supposed difficulty, at last got over to the Shore, and then fell de∣voutly to his prayers, thanking those powers who had granted unto him such an happy and safe passage. The Watch sitting close, seeing and perceiving all that was done and said, let him a∣lone till he had wiped himselfe dry and put on his clothes, and then shewed themselues, and told him they were Water-men and came to rowe him backe againe to the Counter, which they would have done, had not the Constable (of milder temper (and being well pleased with the jest) stay'd them, and commanded one or two of them to see him safe at his lodging. Another Drunkard comming homward lateA trauelling Drunkard. over the fields, thinking to passe a bridge, slipt into the ditch where he stood knee deepe in wa∣ter, and not able to get out, in that posture fell fast asleepe. Towards morning one passing that way heard him first muttering & grumbling to himselfe, at length, turning to one side, he said a-loud,
Thou Whore, why doest thou no more clothes upon my feet. Before the old Exchange was built, the Mer∣chantsAn old man Cup-shot. kept their meeting in Lumber-Street where dwelt a plaine honest old man, call'd Fa∣ther Garret, who having plaid the Good-fellow a whole night together among his Countrey∣men (which was not usuall) and drinking a cup or two too much, it was morning before his wife and maid could get him into his warme bed, where hee slept soundly; and waking about noone (his eyes being gum'd together, so that he could not well open them) hee groped by the bed side for the Chamber-pot, and perceiving it to be full, he rose up, open'd the Casement (which was toward the street) and powred it out upon some of the Merchants heads, who after they had well shooke their Hats and their Cloakes, call'd to him by his name, and said; Why how Father Garret? what doe you meane by this? who putting his head againe out at the window, made them this answere Marry it is to teach you for walking abroad so late at midnight. A Loader, or Miller in the Country, was suchA swaggering Miller. a notorious swaggerer, and so dangerous in his drinke, that none of the Townesmen durst keepe him company, unlesse he would first put off his great basket-hilt Dagger (which was a Swords fellow, and still wore about him) and lay it by; which at their request he upon a time had done;
The fashion was to weare great broad Belts of Leather, buckled about their wastes: They ha∣ving drunk their dozens round, and he amongst the rest  Flusterd, the motion was made to breake up Company; when the rest rose, he sit∣ting upon the bench side, and groping for his Dagger behind, he happened upon a  that was , and putting the end of his Belt through the handle of it, buckled it about him in the stead of his weapon, and so walking with∣out a Cloake through the street in the day time▪ all thd Boys and Girles ran laughing and hollow∣ing after him to looke behind him, For his Dag∣ger dropt out of the Scabberd. It was somewhat more wittily put off by him,A witty drunkard. who living in a Chamber, over heard where the watch wa set beneath, emptied a Chamber-Pot upon their heads▪ who calling unto him, and asking him why he had used them so slovenly  demanded of them, Who they were that questi∣on'd it▪ They told him they were the Watch, why then saith he, Harme Watch, harme Catch, and so shut to his Casement. Another comming from  at a very.  houre over the Bridge, justled against one of the Chaine-posts ovr against Saint Magnus Church, who being naturally very quarrell some in his Cups, supposed that some night-walker had given him that affront; and therefore very
desperatly out with his dagger, and by great for∣tune strooke into the very hollow of the post; and perceiving it to give way, made no further que∣stion, but he had slaine the party: with the sud∣daine apprehension whereof, he leaves the wea∣pon in the wood, presently begins to devise of some suddaine shift to save his owne forfeit life, he dares not goe home to his house: and knowes no man whom he may trust with such a secret: Therefore he presently takes boate, downe hec goes that night to Graves-end, and from thence gets shipping into the Low-Countreys. The wea∣pon the next morning was found in the post, and knowne, and the owner thereof mist by his wife and friends: but not to be heard off. After a twelue-moneth, notice being given to his wife, where he liv'd, and by circumstances, being pos∣sest of the mistake, hee came over like an Asse as he went, and was a jeere to the Citie his whole life after. Certaine Gentlemen using much to our Ta∣vernes,A sleepie  some of them affecting Tables: Their custome was still when they met to play at Irish or Tictack: and whatsoever the stake was, to call in Wine, because they would not charge the house, so that the standers by might drinke free∣ly of the gamesters cost, and thus somtimes they would spend the whole night: Amongst the rest, one obserued to be a sharke, that would save his purse, but could never be drawne into any game, or expences, and yet would devoure more Wine
then any two in the Company, and whil'st the rest were either busie all playing, or looking on, hee would be still tampering with the cups, till hee had stolne himselfe drunke, and then hee would fall alseepe in the roome: This being no∣ted by the rest, whil'st he was taking a sound nap in a chaire, they devised to put a tricke upon him, and watching his waking, they suddenely put out all the lights in the roome, and still pre∣tended to hold on their game: The dice run, and the Table-men walke, the standers by, bet, some on this side, some on that, every cast was named as it was throwne, all which he heard, but saw no∣thing: This Ieast was held up so long, and carri∣ed so well, that he presently apprehended, that he was strooke blinde, and quite bereft the use of his eyes, and so fell into a great passion and clamour: The Gentlemen came about him, and feined to wonder what he meant, bid him looke up, and bee of good cheere, hee told them, hee knew them by their tongues, but could not di∣scerne any one of their faces: at which they see∣med to be the more amazed, and so concluded that he was miraculously deprived of his eye∣sight, still they call'd for more lights, more lights; Another answered, there were sixe in the Roome already, and if not by them, hee could ever see at all▪ one offers to leade him, another began to shrive him, perswading him, that sure this judgement was fallen upon him for some great sinne hee had committed: Some hee re∣membered
and confest; sure saith another, he hath beene a great sparer of his Purse, a stealer of his drinke, and a dissembler with his friend, none of which hee deemes: At length, when they had got out of him what they coul'd, and Ieer'd him (as they thought) sufficiently, they suddainely caused light to be brought in, by which, finding how hee was gull'd, hee grew so ashamed, that he who was before a burthen to them, could never be seene in their company after. I knew a Citizen, and a substantiall house∣keeper,A Citizen who having beene drinking late, could not find his owne doore, and though he knew the streets, and the postes that stood at other mens gates, and how farre distant his house was from them, yet still e rather came short of it, or past beyond it; at length (loath to be noted, but mere loath to lie upon the stall) hee percei∣ved a light in one of his Neighbours windowes, hee rapps at the doores, the good man (being upon some occasion late up at that time) look'd out of the window, asked who was there? and what he would have? Nothing good friend an∣swered hee) but onely to intreate you to direct me where such a man dwells, (meaning him∣selfe) and shew me his house; his Neighbour knowing him, replied, calling him by his name, I hope no man knoweth that, or at least should know it better then your selfe: True it is aith hee, but not at this time; so his Neighbour per∣ceiving in what case hee was, came downe, ope∣the
doore, and light him over the way, which howsoever it was secretly carried, yet made his intemperance palpable, even after mid-night. A Malt-man comming ling at noone dayA  Malt-man. from a Red-lattice, wearing about his waste a leatherne Belt, buckled before, with a thong hanging downe, went to turne to the wall, and standing some yard from thence,  his head on the one side to see who went and past by; and putting his hand downe to grope for something to shew the wall, he mist of his aime and lighting upon the thong that hung downe, held it out betwixt his fingers, and pist in his breeches; The people that saw the water drop downe by his knees, grew into a generall laugh∣ter; by which he finding the mistake, grew sen∣sible of the plight he was in, and so ashamed, stagger'd away as fast as he could, like a drunken Coxcombe. A drunken Sailor hauing beene foxt in theA  Saylor. Towne, his ship being then in harbour, he call'd aloud for the Cock-boat to fetch him aboard, and in the meane time layd him down upon the Banck, and there fell fast asleepe▪ The Tide was then comming in (for it was young flood) and by degrees first came up and washed his feet, and then retyred; the next time it came up to his knees, and then fell backe, o to his very necke, yet all this while hee waked not; the next wave came up to his mouth, of which being somwhat sensible, he said, No more drinke I pray thee, and
the second time and the third, and still as it covered his face, when it was fallen off, assoone as he could recover himselfe, he said nothing else, but No more drinke I prothee, and had not the Boate come just at the instant, there he had been drowned, and never told who hurt him. A company of drunkards having tost theA drunkard in a Wll. Cans all the night long, even till the day breake, in the morning, one of them riseth from the ta∣ble reeling, with a purpose to pisse in the Chim∣ney, and having let something fall upon the harth, and stooping, thinking to take it up: when he raised himselfe, his head was got within the Mantle-tree (which he perceived not) but ha∣ving made an end of that which he went to doe, and being something tall of stature, he made proer to come away, and first walked from one end of the Chimney to the other, then backe a∣gaine and felt about with his hands, but could find no way out, at which he began to blesse him∣selfe and wonder where he was, and in his devoti∣on casting up his eyes he perceived a light above (for it was then day) by which he presently ap∣prehended, that he was fallen into a well; but seeing by the distance betwixt him and it, it was so deepe that there was no possibility for him to get out without helpe, hee began to bee in de∣spaire; And as hee was musing what hee should doe, hee heard them laughing and talking in the roome, which he supposed were some above that passed by the wells mouth upon businesse; and
not willing to loose that opportunity, hee call'd out aloud, Helpe, helpe, Ladders, Ropes, helpe, helpe, I am fallen into the Well? The rest won∣dring by the hollownesse of his voyce whence the noyse should come (for the clamor ascended upward) at length by his strugling and striving perceived him to be in the Chimney, and so in the stead of pulling to draw him up, they pluckt him out by the leggs below, and these and such like are the ridiculous effects of drunkennesse, which end with that of the Poet; Nam maximum Ebrietas Malorum est omnium. Mortalibus, quod laedat hos est maximum. The greatest evill that on earth can be, And most hurts mankinde, is Ebrietie. CHAP. XIX. Of some who have liued absteinious, and altogether refrained from Wine. IAm loath to cloy the reader with too much impertinences, I will next set before you the absteni∣ousnesse of some Ethnicks of the sormer Ages; To whom, if we op∣pose the Libertines of these our times, and this
nation, it will easily appeare how farre those Morall men excell us in sobriety and tempe∣rance, and on the contrary, how much we Christi∣ans exceed them in vinocity and surfet. Philar∣chus. relates that Theodorus Larissaeus was of such abstinence, that he alwayes withdrew himselfe from the presence of King Antigonus, when hee went to any quaffing feast. The same Author , that the Iberians, though they were the. richest and potent of all their neighbouring na∣tions, yet they drinke nothing but water, and eat but once a day; yet in their atyre they were gorgious and sumptuous. Aristotle and Theo∣phrastus remember a man call'd Philinus, who ne∣uer. in his whole life time, eate, or dranke any thing save Milke. Hegesauder Delphus writes that Anchimolus and Mosschus, two Philosophers. that read in Helis, never in their life time dranke any thing but water, and eate nothing but fruits, yet they were of strong and able bodies. Matris. an Athenian, eate little or nothing, save the fruit of the Myrtle, he never tasted of the Grape, but water onely. Lamprus Musicus was most abste∣nious,. commended by Pbrinicus, both for the sweetnesse of his voyce and wisedome, he never dranke but from the river or fountaine. Macho the  Poet remembers the like in one. Moschiaedes. Aristotle in his booke de Ebrieta, speakes of divers, who notwithstanding they fed upon salt meats, yet were never thirsty, amongst whom were Archonides the Argine, and Mago the. .
Carthaginian who past the Desarts three severall times, eating onely dry meats, and never dranke in all their travell. Antigonus Charistius reports Accad. of Poleman the Academick, that beginning from thirty yeeres of his age, he drunke nothing but water to the houre of his death.  Scep∣tius witnesseth of Dioeles Peparethius, to have ta∣stedDiocles. no other in the whole terme of his life. He∣rodatus, lib. 1. speakes of a King of Persia, whoA King of Persia. dranke onely of the Rier which flowes neere unto Susas, and whithersoever he remooved, ma∣ny Waggons, drawne by Mules, and laden with siluer vessells fill'd with that Water followed him. The second King of Egypt, sirnamed Phi∣lodelphus, having contracted his daughter Bere∣nicePhilodelphus. unto Antiochus King of Syria; at his infinite charges provided, that the water of Nilus should be continually conueyed unto her, because hee would have her drinke onely from that River, for so reports Polibius. Heliodorus relates, that Anti∣ochus the Illustrious, used to mixe his Wine with. a water drawne from a Fountaine in Antioch, which Theopompus, saith Midas, King of Phrigia, caused first to be made, when he thought to sur∣prize Sylenus, the drunken Priest of Bacchus: I is call'd Inna, and lies (as Byon sayth) in the mid-way betwixt the Medi and the Paerniaus: Staphinus saith, that Meampodes was the first. that used to drinke Wine commixt with water. Demostenes the famous Oratour, protests of him∣selfe,. that for a long space together, he dranke
Water onely, of whom Pytheus thus writes. Now behold, and cast your eyes upon Demosthe∣nes and Demudes, both pleading at the barre, the continence of the one, and the intemperance of the other: The on tasts nothing but water, the other swilles altogether Wine, Demosthenes al∣wayes sober, Demudes ever drunke; the one ad∣dicted solely to his study, the other to his belly. Euphorian Calcidensis reports of Lysirtus Lasivi∣nius,. that hee was never knowne to bee thirsty at all, and though he seldome or never tasted any liquor: yet his urine hath beene as free to him, as to any other man: At which when many won∣dred, yet by triall they found it to be true. In∣finites I could exemplifie in this kind, but I will surfet you with nothing, for I obserue with the Physitians, that a sparing diet is better then sur∣fet: but on the contrary, concerning those spun∣ges that powre downe their throats cup after cup, and glasse after glasse, as if their thirst would never bee satisfied, or as if their stomachs were of the nature of fire, which the more it eates, the more it askes; let them listen to that of the Poet Antiphanes. Hee that with Wine, Wine thinks to expell, One ill, would with another quell: A Trumpet, with a Trumpet drowne. Or with the Cryer of the Towne, Still a loud man: Noyse deafe with noyse▪ Or to conuert a Bawde, make choise
Of a Pander, pride with pride, shame thus, Or put a Cooke downe by Calistratus; Discord, by discord, thinke to ease, Or angry men, with scoffes appease: So Warre by Battell to restraine; And labour, mittigate, by paine: Command a suddaine peace betweene Two shrill scoulds, in their height of spleene: By drinke to quench drinke is all one, As if by strife, strife to atone. CHAP. XX. A moderation to be obserued in drinking, borrowed from Antiquity. EPichermus is of opinion, that all sa∣crifices which were first piously deoted to the Gods, have since, by the corruption of times, beene a∣dulterated, as meerely chang'd into ryotous Feasts, and banquets; And those which were at first sacred, made profane by voluptuous and excessive quassing, from whence ariseth wantonnesse, or furie, begetting blastings, misery, and fetters; The Poet Panga∣scs dedicates the first moderate draught to the houres, and the Graces; the second to Venus and Bacchus; the third to Injury and discommoditie, according to that of Euripides: Sunt praemium
Lascivienti verbera: To him that wantons in his cupps, stroakes are due. And Pamasis, before named, thus speakes concerning the use or abuse of Wine. A superis homini vinum gratissima dona Conueniunt, Illi, Cantus, Choreae simul omnes, &c, Wine was the gratefull gift of Gods, to men, To which agree songs and all danes, when Their straines are chast, and comely: and above, Where gifts passe free in interchange of love. Tooke modestly, all sorrowes it expells; Immoderate cups, breedes madnesse, and nought else. The Poet Eubulus, Introduceth Bacchus the God of Wine, speaking thus: Prudentibus viris, Ego tres misceo Crateras, unam, sanitatis gratia Primum bibant hunc, gra Amoris Alterum, &c. I Temper three cups to the wise-man: one To preserue health (if it be drunke alone) The next of love, and pleasure, both to keepe Firme and intire: A third to provoke sleepe; These may the grave and discreete men carowse, Yet each of them▪ art sober to his house: No more I doe allow, who these exceeds In a fourth draught, brauls, and contention breeds; Clamour a fift: A sixt to Lust inuites, And loose incontinence: A seventh accites Spots in the cheeke and fore-head: The eight doth make Tumult, and confused noyse, able to shake
The strong Simposium: and the ninth cup, hath Power to exclude all peace, and stirre up wrath Whats beyond these, is madnesse: if you fill Great Vessells into small, you waste and spill. Zeno Citieus saith thus, To doe justice unto all men, is Prudence; To follow what is good, and avoid what is ill, Temperance; To endure all adversity with patience, Fortitude. The counsell then that I would give to all such as are given o∣ver to vinosity, I will borrrow from Plutarch lib. de Audiend. Poetis; It is great wisedome (saith he) for a man who is subject to anger and wrath, not to be ignorant of his imperfection, but to take heed to himselfe, that he entertaine no mo∣tive that may accite him to choller: so should the intemperate man arme himselfe against drunkennesse. And as King Agesilaus would not suffer his cheeke to be kist by a beautifull yong man, lest he should grow inamor'd of his feature; And Cyrus commanded the faire Paccthea not to come into his presence, for feare of being cap∣tivated by her beauty; so hee should avoid both wine and bad company, lest he bee tempted by the one, or taken by the other; be aduised by So∣lon, whose maxime was Nequid nimis, take not too much of any thing, the branches (saith Pla∣to) which proceeds from the root Abstinence, are Modesty, Shamefastnesse, Continence, Tempe∣rance▪ Moderation, Honesty, Parsemony and So∣briety; when the fruits of Drunkennesse, are the
trembling of the Ioynts, the stammering of the tongue, Errour, Oblivion, Babbling, Dulnesse, Baldnesse, age in Youth, imbecility of Body, de∣fect in the braine, a diseased Life, an immature death: Salust saith, Nothing can be more abject and base, then a man to live a slave to the plea∣sures of the mouth and belly. It is a true saying, Much meat, much malady; Plenty of Wine, and store of antonnesse. It fareth with men, saith Origen, as with vessells upon the water; put in the one too much loading, they sinke; power into the o∣ther too much wine, they surfet. It is a great fault, saith Seneca, For a man to bee ignorant of the measure of his owne stomack; Every man knoweth what weight his beast can beare, but not what burthen himselfe can carry; loath hee is to overlaode him, but still ready to over∣charge himselfe; But how difficult a thing it is (saith Cato) to preach Abstinence to the Belly which hath no eares; and is still importunate, that it will brooke no deniall: I will conclude this Argument of Abstinence with that of Vir∣gil, de vino & venere, Nec veneris, nec tu Vini capiaris amore. Vno namque modo, vina, venusque nocent, &c. Doate neither upon Women, nor on Wine, For to thy hurt they both alike incline; Venus thy strength, and Bacchus with his sweete And pleasant Grape, debilates thy feet:
Blind-Love will blabb what he in secret did, In giddy Wine ther's nothing can be hid; Seditious warres, oft Cupid hath begun, Bacchus to Armes makes men in fury run; Venus (unjust) by horrid war tost Troy, Bacchus by war the Lapyts did destroy: When thou with both, or either, art possest, Shame, Honesty, and Feare, all sly thy brest: In setters Venus keepe, Gyves Bacchus tyde, Lest by their free gifts thou beest damnisi'd Vse Wine for thirst, Venus for lawfull seed, To passe those Limits, may thy danger breed. CHAP. XXI. Of the most horrid effects of Drunkennesse, and a Christian like admonition, to Sobriety and Temperance. DOsitheus lib. 3. rer. sycular. writes, That Cyanippus Siracusanus sacrifi∣cing to the gods, amongst all the rest had neglected Bacchus the god of wine; for which, boing in∣raged, he sent the plague of Drunkennesse upon them, (as the greatest punishment he could in∣flict) who in the heat of his cups, meeting his daughter Cyane in a place remote and , vici∣ated her Chastity; In which act (not knowing  the ravisher was) she wrung a Ring from his
singer, and after gave it to the keeping of her Nurse, as hoping by that token to find out in the future who had done her that outrage: In pro∣cesse, a great plague beginning in the City, and they sending to Apollo Pytheas, to know why the gods were so incenst against them; answere was returned by the Oracle, That to remove it thence and to appease the anger of the gods, an incesti∣ous man must be sacrificed. Cyane having sound by the ring, the intent of the Oracle (which none else apprehended) and that it pointed at the fa∣ther, she tooke him by the haire of his head and beard, and dragging him to the Altar slew him there, and presently her selfe fell upon  same sword, and so died: Though this may to some appeare fabulous, yet hath our owne countrey afforded accidents in the like nature, as prodigi∣ous and strong. One Master Coverlee, a gentle∣man of quality and good desent, in the like dis∣temper wounded his Wife and slew his owne Children; whom I am the bolder to nominate, because the facinerous act hath by authority bin licensed to be acted on the publike Stage. And very lately in Wilt-shire, A yong gentleman well borne, but riotously conditioned, ran his sword through his owne mothers body, and slew her when shee came with her grave and Matron like advice, to counsell and diswade him from ryoti∣sing and lewd company. Nay, have not some Husbands slainc their Wives, when they have come home from swil∣ling?
and Wives cut their husbands throats, after they have beene tipling? The Father hath flung his knife at the Mother, and missing her, kill'd the Child▪ one Brother hath slaine the o∣ther in the Taverne: and one man stab'd his deare friend in the Ale-house: I neede not wander far to inquire for these fearefull accidents, when this very Citie it selfe affords such frequent ex∣amples▪ Wine (saith one) is the blood of the arth, and the shame of those who abuse it: St. Ambrose saith, the first evill of drunkennesse, is the hazard of chastity. And Saint Augustine, It is a sweete sinne, a pleasant poyson, and a be∣witching devill. Of this cursed (I may say) most contagious sinne (for commonly, one drunkard infecteth another) heare what the wise man, King Solo∣mon saith, Proverb. 23. Keepe not company with drunkards, nor with gluttons, for the glutton, and the drunkard shall be poore, and the sleeper shall be clothed with raggs: To whom is woe? To whom is sorrow: To whom is strife: To whom is mourning? To whom is wounds without cause? And to whom is the rednesse of the eyes? Even to thee that tarryest long at the Wine, to them that seeke mixt wine; looke not then upon the Wine when it is red, and when it sheweth his colour in the cup, or goeth downe pleasantly; In the end thereof, it will bite like a serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice: Thine eyes shall looke upon strange Women, and thine heart shall
speake lewd things, and thou shalt be as one that sleeps in the midst of the sea, and as he that sleep∣eth on the top of the Mast. They have stricken me (shalt thou say) but I was not sicke; they have beaten me, but I knew not when I awoke, there∣fore will I seeke it yet still, Saint Luke 21. 3, 4. Take heede to your selues, least at any time your hearts bee oppressed with furfets and drunkennesse, and cares of this life, least that day come on you at unawares, for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Take therefore the Counsell of Boethius the Christian Philosopher and Poet, who speaketh thus: Then necessitie impells to a sober and up∣right life, when wee apprehend and consider, that all our actions, how private soever, are visible to him that shall judge them; Neither ought wee to delay the amending of our lives, or correcting of our manners, for as Saint Augustine saith: Dat penitenti veniam, fortasse non dabit peccanti penitentiam. i. Hee that gives pardon to the pe∣nitent sinner, will not perhaps give repentance to him that sinneth, for there is no man who drinks to day, that can presume to lift the cup to his head to morrow. If lavish cups be not permitted to Kings and Princes, how much lesse to common men: Heare what the Wise-man saith, Proverbs 31. 4. It is not for Kings (Oh Lemuel) It is not for Kings to drinke Wine, nor for Princes strong drinke, least he drinke, and so forget the decree, and
change the judgement of all the children of Af∣fliction. To you therefore I speake (who are al∣together given over to this sinne) hated of God, and abhorred of all good men,) which St. Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians 5. 17. And be not drunke with Wine, wherein is excesse, but bee satis∣fied with the spirit. Let us therefore speake unto God, as if men did heare us: And live amongst men, as know∣ing that God seeth us, whose eyes peirce into the secrets of the prison, into the corners of the hearts, into the hiddennesse of time, and the con∣cealednesse of Eternitie: For not to the offen∣der, but to him that is offended, doth God grant pardon, saith Saint Augustine. Iohannes Episcop. tells us, What doth carnall man know more, then warily to keepe his owne, and watchingly to scratch from another? Or if hee cannot compasse it, yet at least to desire it▪ But the heavenly Phisitian hath to all vices, made obvious vertues, as remedies. For as in the Art of Phisicke, they worke by contraries, ministring hot things to heale cold infirmities, and cold things to helpe hot diseases: So the Creator of the Heavens, the Earth, and vs, hath provided cordiall Medicine to cure contrary corrupt Maladies: To make sound the slothfull man, is to bee applyed Labour and Industrie: The Avaritious man, Bounty and Charity: The wrathfull man, Gentlenesse and Patience: The Proud, Humilitie and Lowlinesse: The drunken
man, Sobriety and Temperance. Let us then be swaid by Leo Pap. who tells us that wee ought all to labour (by the Almighties Grace and helpe, that he may in His owne Temple, which is our bodies, find nothing that may be offensive to the eyes of so Divine a Majestie, but let the Ta∣bernacle, and habitation of our hearts be cleane swept from all vices, and furnished with Vertues, keeping them still shut and lock't, against the Temptations of the devill, but alwayes open to receive our Redeemer. Thus I conclude, beseeching the Almighty, that as our Nation being the most forward to commit this grievous and abominable sinne of drunkennesse, so it may be the first to expresse a true Repentance, and contrition for the same, that his heavy Iudgements, long threaten'd, and now impending, may be turned from us, which hee grant for His mercy sake, and Merits of His Sonne our blessed Saviour. In Cratere meo, Thetis est conjuncta Lyaeo Est Dea Iuncta Deo, sed Dea major eo. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 3. line 7. reade, for infacious, infacetious. p. 4. l. 5. r. patens. p. 12. l. 8. r. Symposium. p. 22. l. 20. r.thrifty. p. 26. l. 5. r. mentitur. p. 33. l. 6. r. Poculum. p. 43. l. 1: r. nations. p. 62. l. 13. r. Ligatum. p. 75. l. 4. r. denies. p. 78. l. 17. and in the rest. r. abstemious. p. 8. l. 3. r. Demades. p. 84. l. 20. r. Panthaea p. 18. l. 5. r. lost. Diverse mistakes are in the proper names, which I intreat the understauding Reader favourably to correct.
