17746 20241199 23901
COR CHARTE APPENSAM ROSAM VICE CERNE SIGILLI SPRETA MORE TVI SALVS ID EGIT AMOR IHS
THE PATTERNE OF ALL PIOVS PRAYER, AND The epitomie of all Christian Catholique Beliefe. Being a Patheticall and Paraphrasticall meeter vpon the Pater Noster, Ave Maria, and Credo in Deum, &c. Together with a divine Dittie made vpon St. Patricks Day last past in honour of the Christian Crosse. WITH Wholsome preparatives for Death and Judgment ALSO, A short Panigyre on MARY-Land in America. AT DOVVAY, Superiorum Permissu, MDCXXXVI.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND TRVLY RELIGIOVS LADY, THE LADY Vizcountesse BALTEMORI, &c. 1 ƲOuchsafe Religious Lady to make choyce ('Mongst All your Vertues) of humilitie, That your poore Suppliant justly may Reioyce In the fore-front of his Apologie: To frustrate All objections by this shift, An humble heart A'cepts the meanest guist. 2 May you Accuse mee of Presumption; no Spare that paine (Madam) 'tis Already done, J have accus'd my Selfe: And you I know To pardon faults Confest are easily wonne: Let Zoylus snarle, let Momus looke asquint, Your worth will guard the Booke, And, MARKE PRAYER IN'Y.
WITH THE COVRTEOVS Christian Reader thus I expo∣stulate. COurteous Reader, should I suffer knowne faults to passe without cra∣ving pardon, I might bee justly accu∣sed and condemned both of Ignorance and Presumption; which I hope thy Charity will acquit me of when thou hast read this my reasonable Apologie; The way to gaine Remis∣sion is Confession, And in this I cannot rightly excuse but rather accuse my selfe, in that assu∣ming a taske fit for a more sublime Intelect: I haue (peradventure) marr'd that which a better Workman might have made Admirable; yet if
good will may supply want of skill, I hope wee shall agree well enough. I found the Latine something difficult to Rime too, especially the CREED; And there∣fore having preocupated curious Censures, in confessing my fault I hope thou wilt excuse and connive if thou finde it any thing Defective ey∣ther in meeter or the length of the lines, there beeing some Articles in the CREED over∣long for my intended line, And vpon necessity must passe without fraction where Rime may not exactly bee made, without distruction of reason. Any indifferent Reader (I trust) will favourably passe over such faults as cannot bee holpen: To conclude gentle Christian, permit mee a little (after confession of immateriall De∣fects) to say something in praise of the Work though not of the Workman; The subject is
olde, therefore it is fit to bee reverenced. The Paraphrase is new (without Ostentation bee it spoken) none having ever written in this way before, And therefore to bee loved for its raritie. VALE. Hee who composed what is heere in print,  His name in Anagram hear's: Marke Prayer in't.
Ad Authorem. TO make the English answer Latine phrase In Meeter meete shewes wit that's worthy Praise, But where the Subiects Godly; Lines exceede, All best Wits Apprehension there indeede, More be thy Piety, for such essayes, Prays'd then thy Wit to frame such Heavenly layes. I. P.
A PARAPHRASTICALL MEETER VPON PATER NOSTER. CHarity's the guift of guifts, if we have lost her Who can restore her to's but — Pater noster: For hee in all distresse our onely weale is And none but thou alone — Qui es in Coelis: Our soules bedrencht in sinne with grace renew'em For which — Sanctificetur nomen tuum: Those who doe erre reduce, and true light shew'em Make hast O Lord, — Ad veniat regnum tuum: To whom the Heavenly Quier sings Alleluia 'Tis fit wee say; — Fiat voluntas tua: Wee wish the same either in Ioy or Sorrow 'Tis due — Sicut in Coelo & in terra: As thou mad'st all of nought thy power mainteyn'm With bounty — Panem nostrum Quotidianum:
And every day to shew what due wee Owe thee Wee earnestly doe begge — Da nobis hodic: 'Tis fit wee should when wee doe merit most; pray Deare Lord — Et dimitte nobis debita nostra: On this Condition else our prayer all lost is, — Sicut & nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris: Though wee offend in wrath doe not rebuke vs, O bee propitious — Et ne nos in ducas: When by my selfe in private I alone am Permit mee not Ihesu: — Jn tentaetionem: In Sensuality let vs not wallow, Nor fall from thee — Sed libera nos a malo: This in thy name Ihesu wee aske, And when All's done, wee pray that thou mayst say — Amen. Ave Maria. VVHo ever hopes for helpe from our Messia, Must to his mother say — Ave Maria:
To thy Sonnes Court being sent for by Subpaena, Wee vse thy Prayer, for thou art Gratia plena: Those Prayers none can misse that dayly seeke 'em; How can wee fayle, knowing that Dominus tecum The holy Angell Gabriels words were very thus, To thee Benedicta tu in Mulieribus: Wee are perswaded that thou canst protect vs, For thou art high in power Et benedictus: Wherefore by thee sweete Mediatrix sue I Vnto that blessed, Fructus ventris tui: Sicke soules, Alas, whom can w'expect to case vs, But that Maide, Mothers Sonne, Emanuell-Ihesus: To get admittance at this Gate, the nigh way Is by thy powerfull ayde Sancta Maria: Virgin of Virgins, in this case to thee I Addresse my selfe as vnto Mater Dei: All sinnefull Soules, that for misdeeds are sorry thus Doe say, Ora pro nobis Peccatoribus: And let vs least our part in Heaven bee lost, pray O helpe Nunc et in hora, Mortis nostra:
Sweete Lady wee intreate thee now and then, To pray thy Sonne (our Lord) to say, Amen, Credo in Deum, &c. IVdg'd at the high Tribunall what shall wee doe, If each in Tongue and Heart, cannot say Credo: When storms arise, he with his breath can scatter 'em Therefore I doe confide In deum Patrem: What ere men plot 'gainst him he can prevent 'em Whose onely Epithet's, Ommiptent em: Wee nothing have but what from him wee borrow, For hee is, Creatorem Coeli, et Terrae: He made all things, and to mans vse he blest 'em I beleeve in him: Et in Ihesum Christum: Sweeter to mee then Honey, or th'honey Combe Is he whom God calls, Filium ejus vnicum: He to Redeeme vs, when our Soules were lost came, Therefore wee rightly call him, Dominum-nostrum:
Wee cannot Retribute sufficient thankes to Him, Qui conceptus est de spiritu Sancto: The Prophets and the Sybels wrote at large when he Should come to be, Natus ex Maria Virgine: Our loving Lord, tendred our wretched State so That hee, Passus sub Pontio Pilato: And meekely hee for Man that doth insult thus Was Crucifixus Mortuus et Sepultus: And that he Victory over Hell might winne for vs, Our blest Redeemer, Decendit ad inferos: To give possession of the Heauenly Court to vs, Hee tertia die resurrexit a Mortuis: All to confirme being of our wellfare Zealous, Hee crown'd with tryumph, Ascendit ad Caelos: In splendant Glory that most Excellent is, Sedet ad dextram Dei patris Omnipotentis: At th'end o'th World, (as verity doth report to us Inde ventarus judicare vivos et mortuous: God as his Elect Children all hath ranckt 'em, Who in their Hearts say, Credo in Spirit um sanctum:
Yet woe is me (alas) I in meere Folly am, Vnlesse I beleeve — Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam: Who takes the name of Catholique vpon him, Also beleeves Sanctorum Communionem: In this true Church, I that a Sinner fore am; May finde — Remissionem peccatorum: And all the faithfull shal have this grace shewen 'em As they beleeve carnis Resurrectionem. Let Christians looke to't this doth most concerne 'em Which is the Crowne of all Ʋitam eternam: Beleeve one God, beleeve his Church, and then, Thou maist enjoy Christ promises, Amen.
A DIVINE DITTIE, Made in Honor of the Crimson Crosse. To bee Sung by them who please. To the tune of, From the faire Lavinian Shore, &c.
YOu who take delight to know Things that were done long agoe, By our Auncient Predecessors, And their Catholicke Successors. Lend your attention Let noe Fancies tosse, Your mindes a stray But regard what I say For I meane to display, The Honor of the Crimson Crosse. He or she, who hath not bin (In the Font that cleanseth sinne) Marked with this sacred signe Give me leave though noe Divine, To make a question. (Though some a strange glosse Doe set on the text) Whether they be well fixt In this world, for the next; Sith Christians are knowne by th' Crosse.
Our blest Lord to give vs breath And Redeeme our Soules from Death, On a Crosse was Crucified At that time he Sanctified, This Badge of Honor, When with his lives losse, After much pine While his bloud like to Raine, From his wounds slowed amaine, Hee made it a Crimson Crosse. All the Christians Primative To advance the Crosse did strive, Glorious Martyres Valiantly Death and Torments did defie. Vnder this Ensigne Deeming but drosse, All things beside When for CHRIST Crucified They couragiously Dyed, To Honour the Crimson Crosse.
Bishops and Confessors Grave, This Coelestiall Banner have, Fixt in Countryes, Salvage and Rude, To CHRISTS Crosse they have subdued, Barbarous Nations From their errours grosse, To CHRISTIAN Faith As Antiquity saveth Both in Life, and Death, They Honor'd the Crimson Crosse. Once 'twas Englands primest Honor Chiefely cald Saint Georges Banner, Still the tree wee all retaine Though the fruit on't most disdaine. But Ancient Customes, Preserved from losse Though just in sight Of Heraldryes Right Wee on Land, and Sea sight, To Honor the Crimson Crosse.
It the Divell doth affright, He dares not abide in sight Where this holy signe is made Wherefore it may well be said, That he and the Puritan With his false glosse, Are neere of kinne Neither dares enter in If I once doe begin To arme my selfe with the Crosse. Blest St. Patricke who 'at th' first (As Apostle) Ireland nurst In the Faith Apostolique Scoft by every Heretique, He so Devoutly Did Vertue engrosse, That in short time Hee converted that Clime To CHRISTS Faith then in Prime And Honor'd the Crimson Crosse.
Ireland then was sore opprest With foule things that did infest And the People sore annoy Which St. Patrick did destroy, Snakes, Toades, and Adders, O gainefull losse, All by his Prayer Quite Bannished were Never more to come there This Honors the Crimson Crosse. To his Honor and the Chutch, Every seaventeenth day of March Irish men doe farre, and neare, Crimsen Crosses that day weare Then let true CHRITIANS Esteeme Wealth as drosse, And in all wants Let vs move our Complaints Vnto CHRIST by his Saints And Honour the Crimson Crosse. AMEN, Finis.
COR CHARTE APPENSAM ROSAM VICE CERNE SIGILLI SPRETA MORE TVI SALVS ID EGIT AMOR IHS
WHOLSOME PREPARATIVES FOR DEATH AND IVDGEMENT: VERY FIT TO BEE APPLYED TO the necessitie of every true Ca∣tholique CHRISTIAN at all times; But more especially in this present time of Mortality by the Plague of Pesti∣lence occasioned. Statutum est hominibus semel mori: Post hoc autem Judicium. Hebr. 9.27. Superiorum Permissu, MDCXXXVI.
TO THE CHARITABLE READER. GReat cause I had (Christian Reader) to invite thee by this Epistle (Charitable,) for this poore Babe of my braine begot∣ten in charity, desires to have charitable nutri∣tion, charitable Censure, and chiefely Charita∣ble acceptation; For the tender weakeling by reason of its Parents weaknesse, (should it bee rigidly dealt withall) would even perish in the very blast of an over-curious or fastidious ver∣dict; Therefore let Charity cover what indis∣cretion
hath left naked, and let a loving heart excuse Defects of Art; What I have heere published was done at the (powerfull) solici∣tation of a very good Friend of mine, or else this rude worke had onely beene for the work∣mans owne vse: And as it was written to anti∣cipate worse employment; so as a Whetstone to his devotion, It might have (and I trust will) set a sharper edge vpon the same, And conse∣quently produce more keene and piercing ef∣fects of Charity, Feare of GOD, Obedience to his immaculate Spouse the Holy Catholique and Apostolique CHURCH; Reverence to his Saints, Zeale of his Honour, Fervor in true Religion, and in all pious and laudable Exer∣cises that a CHRISTIAN ought to practice. Among which, nothing can bee more vsefull and necessary at all times, And especially in
this heauy time of Mortalitie, Then the thought of DEATH and IVDGEMENT: Although it bee a Subject that hath beene written vpon by divers Angelicall quils, (To whose Iudge∣ments I humbly prostrate mine;) yet I know that a single Penny or a halfe-penny is as good silver and as Currant coyne as a Shilling: To conclude, if any Fruit spring from this simple Seed, to him bee the honor who first inspi∣red the mo∣tion, AMEN.
Hee who composed what is heere in print, His name in Anagram hear's: Marke Prayer in't,
WHOLSOME PREPARATIVES FOR DEATH AND IVDGMENT. 1. TIs fit that every minute Night and Day, Whilst we draw breath in this terrestiall frame We should reflect on the vncertaine stay, Lent's here, till we returne from whence we came This being pondered as it is most fit, Much Ghostly comfort, wee may reape by it. 2. That Hee, or Shee, Young, Old, or Middle-aged, Whose minde continually hereon is fixt,
Shall finde Robustious stormes, so farre asswaged (While earthly joy's with heavenly sorrows mixt) That with a gentle gale the Soule doth glide, Over all Passions borne by Vertues tide. 3. No sooner Borne, but subject vnto Death, (All Mortals are indeed borne to that end) Noe Permanent Estate here vnderneath, For all must pay this Tribute in the End, Or Young, or Old, wee must (nothing so sure) All to the Grave, no meanes can vs secure. 4. Methusalu the Oldest: Salomon The Wisest: Sampson strongest man, all these Though they had wisdome, strength, long life al'sone Death would not set them quit paying their fees, What ever Holy-writ hath Testifi'd Of them in Life, be sure youl'e read they Dy'd.
5. Cressus his Wealth, nor Alexanders Pompe, Nor Caesars (rarely Imitated) Honor Could winne on Earth Eternity; nor Campe, Nor Court, nor City, can prescribe a manner, How to shunne this inevitable Doome, All men must Dye, and then to Iudgement come. 6. As it is certaine that we all must Dye, (Sith divine Statutes are Irrevocable,) So that wee may't expect continually To know the time, we Mortals are vnable; Therfore wee should from'th houre we first draw breath Looke for this certaine, yet vncertaine Death. 7. That certaine Doctrine of Gamaliels Scholler, Statutum est hominibus semel mori,
Which is the Godly's joy, the Wicked's dolour, The Prouds confusion, and the Humbles glory, Is the elected theame of my Discourse, In carelesse Christians to procure remorse. 8. Yet least the onely certainty of Death, Should not be weyed, as Iustice doth require Post hoc autem Judicium: After Death, Some Iudg'd to Blisse, some to Eternall Fire: Mee thinkes the memory of these two points Should (Palsie-like) shake proud Belshazers joynts. 9. Though it be true a Christian rather ought, For th'only love of God live Vertuously If in our Hearts wee still retaine this thought O Blessed Ihesu, thou for Sinne didst Dye; And shall I wretch reitterate the same Which caus'd thy cruell scourging Death, and shame.
10. But yet alas, vilde Man is so propence T'ingratitude, and Epicurian sloath Doth so consopiate and dull his sence Him to awake, Mercy and Iudgement both (Being joyntly vs'd) doe all too little seeme, Of God and Goodnesse, to winne his Esteeme. 11. Indeede a tender hearted Man, or Woman, That curiously in Pious Contemplation Shall with Devotion dayly call and Summon, Within the Breast to scan our Saviours Passion: May finde most Charitable motives still, As spurs to Good, as Bridles to all Ill. 12. To such as these the memory of Death, And after Iudgement: Are both comfortable,
They knowing that this momentary Breath, Doth but detaine them in a Life instable Which having once forsaken, they are sure, T'injoy a Life that ever shall endure. 13. Yea to both Good, and Bad Memento mori, is a most profitable Document In all Discourse, and Concourse 'tis a story Fit to bee told, and heard, for most are bent Vnto forgetfulnesse; Nay, many strive, The memory of Death away to drive. 14. Tell a young Royster, of his vicious wayes, And bid him mend his life, (which is but short) With a fastidious pish, hee smiles and sayes Forty yeares hence is time sufficient for't, And yet too many of these Youngsters come, By vnexpected Death, to their long Home.
15. Your Female Painters that will mend by Art Natures defects, (to compasse base desire) Aske any one of them when shee'le depart From folly, and doe what our Lord require; Shee'le say that when shee's Old all shall be left, Some times next Day, she is of Life bereft. 16. Your Goatish-Leacher, counsell him to leave Those sordid courses wherein hee delights Noe other answer you'le from him receive, But, why should I rob Nature of her rights; He'le leave when hee's vnable more to sinne, Nor Death, nor Iudgement, hee regards a pinne. 17. The Gormandizing-Glutton that destroyes, More at one meale, then 20. poore would serve
If you demand why hee all this enjoyes While nak'd, and hungry Christ i'th streets doth starve He puts off Charity, till Death arrests him, Till then he thinkes not on't nor him that blest him. 18. The bold Blasphemer (who audaciously) Belcheth out Oathes, and Imprecations strange Devising new for Curiosity, As men their fashions, they their oaths do change: Thinke you? if they of Death or Iudgement thought Such damned words could from their mouths be brought. 19. The Grinding Vsurers, the hard Oppressors, Did these each minute thinke vpon that Day, That shall to Iudgement summon all transgressors, Sure conscience in their soules would beare more sway But Sathan still to traine them in his path Makes them to put farre off the day of Wrath.
20. Those Luke-warme Christians, that doe at this day (For worldly Honors and promotions sake) With Heretiques participate; they'le say Before they dye another course they'le take, But God in Iudgement oftentimes prevents, And by Deaths warrant frustrates their intents. 21. It is a dangerous thing with God to dally, (Whose eyes are open to discerne all Hearts,) Art thou well minded: stand not shall I, shall I, Take hold of him, whilst he his Grace imparts, Experience lamentable proves too well, That millions for this fault now burne in Hell. 22. To punish our remisse and carelesse Lives, Our Lord hath sent his Angell with commission
To take from wives their men, from men their wives In many Families is this Division It'h Morne all sound, at Night all Dead and gone; O, is not this a case fit to bemoane. 23. If it be requisite at any season, To thinke of Death, and judgement certainly T'th time of Plague and Pestilence most reason Wee have to looke each day and houre to dye; Woefull effects envite vs to this care, Many are seized by Death ere the'yr aware. 24. Let every CHRSTIAN thus Expostulate, With his own conscience every houre, and minute, Is my state better then my Neighbours state, (My friends, and Kindred, who have suffered int) What priviledge can I vile wretch pretend, That heaven (more then they) should mee defend.
25. And if thou bee protected from the same Vaunt not thy selfe as though thy Merrits were (Without Gods grace) the cause: No rather claime Continuance of his love with trembling feare, Glorifie him, and still in this confide That thousands better then thy selfe have dyed 26. This meeke acknowledgment of Heavenly ayde And thy vnworthinesse assure thy selfe Is the best Antidote that can be made Against the Plague, these will not wast thy pelfe; Not that I speak 'gainst Corporall provision, For th'holy Ghost sayes, honor the Physitian. 27. Art thou infected, be not heavy hearted, But with alacrity thy selfe prepare
To take from him who hath much Good imparted, This little Ill, now't fals vnto thy share; In holy Iob a perfect mirror see God plagued him, yet he loved him, why not thee? 28. And thou that with no Sicknesse art perplext, Bee Charitable vnto all that need, Thinke every houre thy turne may be the next, Prepare for that while yet thy selfe art freed: Doe good to all (as holy Scripture sayth) And chiefly to the Family of Fayth. 29. Bee conversant in Prayer and vse the meanes As God by meanes of Holy Church affords, That when this sad Contagion thee restraines, Thou being in heart resolu'd to bee our Lords: While all thy thoughts are in this order kept Our Lord the will, will for the deed accept,
30. Aboue all things have care to keepe thy Soule From the contagious malady of Sin, While that best part's preseru'd from being foule Then what estate so e're thy corpes bee in, Sicknesse and health, what 'tis the sender please Thou shalt at all assayes finde Ghostly ease. 31. Lastly in generall, all you who bee (Because of this pestiferous Infection) Sequestred and shut vp from Company, Bee pleased herein to follow my direction: Let this seclusion make you thinke what 'tis The glorious Company aboue to misle. 32. And from this meditation may proceed An ardent fervor of their intercession,
Desire their prayers and merits in your need, That CHRIST of blisse may give you full possession; And let your memory evermore retaine The thought of Death and Iudgment, joy and paine. 33. Thus for their sakes who may want better meanes I spend this Humble talent with goodwill, Desiring nothing of them for my paines, But that in their Devotions they may still Remember mee as I for them are zealous, Sweet IHESVS both in Soule and Body heale vs. AMEN.
A BRIEFE YET DEVOVT PRAYER TO THE GLORIOVS Citizens of the Coelestiall IERV∣SALEM, very fit to bee vsed in time of Mortality. O! all you Coelestiall Inhabitants of the new IERVSALEM, Vn∣to whose names and memories our parish Churches were (by our pious
progenitors) Erected, Dedicated and Consecrated; Wee devoutly begge of you by that vnbounded love where∣with our common Lord hath loved you, that you will make Intercession vnto him in the behalfe of those pari∣shes whose Churches yet reteyne your names; That our mercifull Lord will be pleased to revoke the destroying Angell lately sent out with Commission to pu∣nish our sinnes with the Plague of Pesti∣lence; And although (such is the pro∣phanenesse of these times) most of the Inhabitants being miserably consopa∣ted & inebriated with heresie, doe con∣temne
your suffrages, and seeke (as farre as they are able) vtterly to annihilate that Authority wherewith the King of all Kings hath ennobled you. Yet O yee holy company be pleased for their sakes who devoutly craue your patronage protections, merits and Intercessions, to desire our Lord to be mercifull to all in generall, and that he will not for the ini∣quitie of the Disobedient punish the O∣bedient; But rather in mercy spare the chaffe for love of the wheate, least pluc∣king vp the one hee destroy the other, before the harvest of separation is come. Pray for vs O yee beloved of God, heare
vs O mercifull IESVS, and divert thine anger from vs miserable wretches, who meekely come vnto thee, relying vpon thy wonted favours; O bee pittifull, spare vs O benigne IHESV: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, Bee all glory for ever and ever, AMEN.
