17839 99847915 12983
A SERMON OF REPENTANCE. Preached By GEORGE MERITON Doctor of Diuini∣ty, and one of his Maiesties Chaplaines in Ordinary. Imprinted at London for Thomas Clarke, and are to be sold at the signe of the Angell in Paules Church∣yard, 1607.
To the Right Honourable, the Lord Sheffeild, Lord President of Yorke, and Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter: increase of Comforts in this life, and after death, a Crowne of Glory. RIght Honourable: my desire is to cast my Mite, into the Treasury of the Church: and for want of Gold, Pearle or Pretious stones: to bring a Rams skinae or twaine, and a little GoatsExod. 35. 23. haire, to the building of the Lordes Tabernacle▪ I may seeme (perhaps) to passe the boundes of modesty, in crauing your Honors protection for so smal a thing. The smaller it is, the more needefull to be pro∣tected. And sithence you vouchsafed not long since, to heare part of it with patience: I will now presume vp∣on your L▪ fauoure for the whole. I doe not dedicate it vnto you, as doubting of your Honours care, in this point of Repentance, your loue to Religion: Zeale to the Truth: practise of Piety: haue made you Honou∣rable, not in your selfe alone; but also (as Samuel1. Sam. 9. 6. was) in the heartes of the people. Yet giue mee leaue2. Pet. 3. 1. (Ibeseech you) to stirre vp and warne your pure mind,
That as you haue begun to cleaue vnto CHRIST, with a good purpose of heart: So you would continue to aoe it still: and to do it more and more. Remember alwayes (Noble Lord) that bloud vnstayned before Men, is stayned bloud before GOD; if it be not continually restored by the bloud of CHRIST. This Sermon then, I commend vnto your Honour, and it, to the good bles∣sing and holy protection of GOD. Hadleigh in Suffolke, May the 26. 1607. Your Honours to bee commanded: GEORGE MERITON.
Except yee amend your lines, yee all shall likewise perish. Luk. 13. vers. 5. OTher Mens afflictions, are our in∣structions: and the punishments which are laid vpon some, are, or should be profitable vnto vs all. The Dogge, is beaten in the presence of a Lyon; that by the stripes, and cries of a Dogge, a Lyon might bee tamed; The Thunder bolt, falleth, and burneth, but in a narrowIud. vers. 7. compasse, yet is it terrible to a great number, round a∣bout: so the calamities of a few, are set forth for en∣samples vnto the rest, to worke amendment in them. This true vse of iudgements, did not many of the Iewish people make: Pilate had destroyed some, and mingled their blood, with their sacrifices: The Towre of Siloam fell downe vpon others, and bereaued them ofVers. 4. their liues. Those who escaped these punishments, (as the Nature of man is) fauouring them selues too much: beeing wise abroad, and fooles at home (as the Poet speaketh:) hauing their eyes in their purses, when they should behold their owne deformities, like Lamia in the Fable, and staring in their heades,
to gaze vpon the sinnes of others, with the proud Pharesie in the Gospell: concluded from hence, like badde Logitians from weake and slender premises: that, Therefore they were more righteous and holy then their fellowes. Our Sauiour CHRIST, to crosse this vaine supposall, answereth them heere Laconically: : Nay: And least that beeing ouer-blinded in themselues, they should all fall into the ditch: to pre∣uent their ruine, hee denounceth out a threatning, that, Vnlesse they amended, they should all likewise perish. Threatnings they are forcible meanes, to draw sin∣ners vnto GOD: For although good promises, are alurements vnto good men: yet such (for the most part) is the corruption of our heartes, as that wee are more mooued with feare, then with loue; more with the rodde of Aaron, then with heauenly Manna: more with seuere threatnings, then with friendly pro∣misings: Injuries do worke a deeper griefe in vs, then benefits do affect vs with delight: Sicknesse doth more weary vs, then health doth refresh vs: and wee are wont to esteeme rightly of prosperity; by the harmes of aduersity. For this cause therfore are these misdee∣ming Iews, fore-told, that vnlesse they amēded their liues, their destruction was at hand. CHRIST laun∣ceth them, for to heale them: hee threatneth them; for to draw them: hee denounceth iudgements against them, for to saue them: his wordes are like the Ar∣rowes of Ionathan, which were shot after Dauid, not1. Sam. 20. to wound him, but to giue him warning. In olde times, thus was GOD accustomed to reclaime his
people: The writinges of the Prophets are euen stuffed with woes. Take a booke saith GOD vntoIer: 36. 16. Ieremy, and write therein all the euill, that I determine to doe vnto the house of Iudah, that they may returnee∣uery man from his euill way: and in the same Chapter it is recorded, that when they heard the wordes of the booke they were amazed. The like course hath GOD vsed in latter times. Iohns manner of preaching, was as rough, as himselfe. Now is the Axe (saith he) laid vnto the rootes of the trees, and euery tree that brin∣gethMat. 3. 5, 6. not forth good fruit, shall bee hewen downe, and cast into the fire: What followed herevpon? Ierusa∣lem, all Iudea, and the region about Iordaine were bap∣tized of him, confessing their sinnes. CHRIST also in this place threatneth the Iewes, and in them euerie one of vs: for that which stoode good against them, standeth still in force against vs: Except we amendour liues, we shall all likewise perish. How this wrought, to the conuersion of these Iewes, it is not mentioned in the Scripture; how farre it will preuaile, for the bettering of vs, I am not able to coniecture. This am I sure of, that in former times, threatnings haue preuailed: and I beseech our GOD to make them profitable now. The partes of my Text are these foure. First, there is a duty required (Amendment of life) Secondly the necessity thereof inforced (vn∣lesse) Thirdly the time prescribed (Amend) not haue amended and fallen againe, not will amend, I know not when; but vnlesse you (Amend) doe it speedily, and continually without delaye or interruption.
sorrow for sin, without hope of grace: where there is knowledge of guiltinesse, without amendment of life: where there is a killing of the old mā; without a quick∣ning of the newe: where there is the sentence of death in the Soule, & not of life in the Sauiour. Though we should recount vnto GOD, all our sinnes ouer, & ouer againe; euen in the bitternes of our soules;M. ch. 1. 8 though we lament with Dragons, and mourne like Ostriges, yet had we but that part of this grace, which euen the wicked and reprobates haue; Cain, Saul, Iu∣das,Heb. 12. 17 were greatly grieued for theyr sinnes, Esau lift vp his voice, and howled out, yet found hee no place to repentance, though hee sought a blessing with teares. What was the cause of this? (my beloued) but that there was in him penance without desire of repētance; griefe without faith, a sorrow without conuersion: whereas sorrow, faith, and new obedience, they should go together. The first, driueth to the second; sorrow, to faith: The second to the third: fayth, to conuersion▪ Sorrow without faith is hopelesse; faith without con∣uersion, is fruitlesse; the one killing, the other dead, all must concurre in true repentance. As it must haue the knowledge of sinne in the soule, rising from the Law of GOD; and a sorrow for sinne in the heart, proceeding from the feare of punishment goe be∣fore it: so must it spring from faith, and by faith bee finished: from the faith of science, wherby wee giue credance vnto the Gospell must it spring: and by the faith of confidence,, by which the heart is conuerted vnto GOD, is it fully perfected.
There is no part of Christian religion of that maine importance, wherein men doe more voluntarily de∣ceiue themselues: then commonly they doe in this duty of Repentance. In consideration whereof it will not be amisse, to deliuer vnto you certaine infallible fignes, and vnseparable frutes; whereby we may as∣sure our selues that wee haue repented. S. Paul na∣meth seuen fruites which (in some measure) alwaies follow, where true amendment goeth before. Behold (saith hee) your godly sorrowes what care (1) it hath2 Cor. 7. 11 wrought in you▪ yea what clearing (2) of your selues: yea what indignation (3): yea what feare (4). yea how great desire (5)▪ yea what Zeale (6): yea what punish∣ment (7)? Those then who are true conuertes, who doe vnfaynedly amend their liues: they are not slug∣gish or secure in sinne, but Carefull to redresse what is amisse: not hiders, or excusers of cuill: but Con∣fessors; and by humble supplication Clearing theyr offences: They are not contented to dwell in wic∣kednesse: but vexed in soule and full of Indignation against them-selues for their sins committed, they stand in awe, and are affraid of GODS iudgments. They Desire his fauour, as the Hart desireth the wa∣ter Brookes: they labour by religious Zeale, to ap∣proue their liues, to GOD and good Men: and they are so farre from fauoring of their faults; as that they seuerely punish them vpon them-selues. These bee good Conuerts indeede. But those who haue not this care to keepe the Law of GOD. Who vse not the meanes to cleare the score: who be not angry
with them-selues for their sinnes: who feare not GODS iudgements, who desire not his mercie: who contend not to go before others in Zeale, and honesty of life: who reuenge not their sinnes vppon them-selues: irridentes sunt, non paenitentes (saith Gre∣gory) they are proud mockers▪ not true repenters. Must then amendment of life, yeelde such worthy fruites? Is Care? Is Clearing? Is Indignation? Is Feare? Is Desire? Is Zeale? Is Punishment, required heere-vnto? O then (My beloued) to repent, can bee no light matter, nor trifling labour; which a man may haue at command, or performe when hee list. No, noe: As sixe dayes went before the creation of Man-kind: so must wee thinke of our Recreation; not as if wee were then conuerted, when as Euening, and Morning, make the second, or third or fourth day: it is a sixt dayes worke: that is, much toyle and trauaile belongs vnto it. Sinne cannot be cast off as an vpper garment. The heartes of sin∣ners must suffer an Earth-quake with-in them, and tremble, and rende: There must bee mortifying, and crucifying; and sacrificing, both of Bodyes and Soules. Strange wordes! (Mortifiyng, Crucifying, Sacrifyeing) arguing as strange actions. That must torment vs at the Heart, which delighted vs in our Bodies: that must bee sower to our Soules, which was sweete in our Liues: wee must change our Vices into as manye Vertues: and so turne vnto our GOD, as if wee neuer more would returne vnto sinne.
Many are there (saith Fulgentius) which are sorrow∣full for their sinnes, yet leaue not their sinning▪ but these take not awaye their sinnes by sorrowing; be∣cause they leaue not sinning after sorrowing. For as Saint Augustine speaketh, nihil prosunt lamenta vbi replicantur peccata: Mourning is in vaine, if wee sinne againe. But more (alas) are there, which sel∣dome, or neuer, are sorrie for theyr sinnes at all: Which will not learne to drinke Gall with CHRIST, which cannot abide a bitter Soule, nay in steed of sorrowing for sins, they glory in them; they say vnto them, as GOD said vnto his Creatures: increase & multiplie▪ proclayming with a Trumpet, their own reprobation. O let vs remember, that the hearts ofEccl. 20. foolish sinners, are like broken vessells which cannot be mended, till they must first bee melted: That (as Beda sayth) we must plowe vp our groundes, before wee can ridde them from thornes. That (as Saint Ambrose speaketh) great sinnes, craues great wee∣ping, great lamentation. If Naman will bee clean∣sed from his leprosie, hee must wash him-selfe sea∣uen times in the water: and if wee will purge vs from the filthinesse of our sinne, wee must rench our selues often with teares, wee must vnder-goe the Agonie of Repentance: mingle our Drinke with weeping, water our Couches with Teares: yea the very bloud (as it were) of our soules must gush out of our eyes: we must be grieued, that wee can∣not alwayes be grieued.
When CHRIST considered the sinnes of Ierusalem,Luk. 13. 34 he wept ouer it: O Ierusalem, Ierusalem &c. When Dauid heard that his Sonne was slaine in his sinne, he2, Sam. 18. lamented for him: O Absolon my sonne, Absolon my sonne; my sonne. Haue these wept for the sinnes of others? much more ought wee then to mourne for our owne transgressions. Michah followed the soul∣diers; crying because they had stolne away his Idols; and the question beeing moued, why he cryed so pi∣teously?Iudges. 17. Why (saith he) yee haue carried my gods away, and aske yee me why I crie? Did this Idolatrous wretch thinke it cause sufficient to lament for the losse of his false gods, which his owne handes had made? Iudge you then (Beloued) how we should be grieued for our sinnes, which depriue vs of the true GOD whose handes haue framed Heauen and Earth. Wil examples moue vs to the performance of this duty? Looke vpon repenting Dauid, and behold there are ashes vpon his head, and sack-cloth vpon his backe: he did not braue it in atire, nor lay streaking vpon his bed, with a bare (Lord helpe mee) in his mouth. Looke vpon the repenting Nineuites; and behold King, and people, are strangely humbled. Men and beasts, fast and drinke water; they sat not bealching at their bordes, saying (Pardon Sir) & so post it ouer. Looke vpon repenting Magdalen. and behold (saith Grego∣ry) quot habuit in se oblect amenta, tet de se fecit hollo∣causta: so many pleasures as shee found in her selfe, so many sacrifices shee made of her selfe. Shee had abu∣sed her eyes to wanton lookes; and therefore nowe
she caused them to flow-ouer with teares: shee had made her lips the weapons of lasciuiousnes and gates of vanitie, and therefore now shee caused them to kisse her Saniour: her hayre once set out and frizeled after the newest fashion, doth shee now make serue in steed of a napkin; her precious ointment, that was her wonted perfume, she now powred vpon CHRISTS feete, which her eyes had watered, her hayre had wi∣ped, her mouth had kissed. The Philistins being pla∣gued with Emrodes, offered Emrodes vnto the Arke.1. Sam. 6. The Isralites being stong with Serpents, erected a ser∣pent in the wildernes, serpens momordit, serpens curauit.Num. 21. a Serpent did bite, & a serpent did heale. Those that gaue their Iewels to the making of a Calfe, did af∣terwardsEx. 35. bestow them vpon the Lords Tabernacle. And this was Maries practise: so many sinnes, so many sa∣crifices: such sinnes such sacrifices: her eyes, her lippes, her hayre, her ointment, all the instruments of her death were turned (at her conuersion) into the means of life. Notable examples to teach all their duties. Haue you delighted in pride of attire? put on sack∣cloth: haue you offended in surfetting, & drankennes? fast and drinke water: hath your mirth beene immo∣derate? weepe; strangle that sinne with the streame of teares: haue you robbed or wronged your bre∣thren? make restitution: no restitution, no attonement.Exo. 6. 7. Nay further reuenge that sinne vpon your selues; by giuing some-what of your own: haue you beene vn∣cleane, fleshly liuers? chastise your bodies with Paul: demete aliquid de hordeo, as it is in the Poet, keepe1. Cor. 9. 27.
before his couenant: as Amend: and Enter: but Nis, vnlesse you amend, Regnum amittitur, the Kingdome is lost, ye shall surely perish: Repentance is as Ne∣cessary a condition to life, as a Shippe is needefull to him that will sayle ouer the Sea: or as a medicine is necessary (saith S. Ambrose) vnto a wounded body. Neither is it necessary to some: but to all. All shall pe∣rish, vnlesse there be amendment. The whole race of Adam stand bound to this strict condition. Not Moy∣ses: Not Abraham▪ Not Dauid: not the Patriarches not the Apostles of CHRIST: Not any who may challenge vnto them-selues (eyther by Birth or brin∣ging vp) the greatest prerogatiues in the world, can plead exemption from this Condition. Hast thou fayled in thy faith, and repented? behold GODS mercy towards repenting Peter: Hast thou robbed thy Neighbour and repented? behold GODS mer∣cy to the repenting Theefe: Hast thou couetously gai∣ned, and repented? behold GODS mercy to repen∣tingZachy re∣stored. Zachie. Hast thou burned in vncleane lust, and repented? behold GODS mercy to repenting Mag∣dalen. Hast thou committed Adultery, and repented? behold GODS mercy to repenting Dauid. But hast thou done these and many more: and not repented: take heede to thy selfe: if the condition bee still broken: thou shalt surely be damned. GOD accepteth of no mans person: he feareth no mans power, hee is de∣ceiued by no policie; he is corrupted with no money, he is allured by no flatterie. Who would not haue thought, but that the Pharisies should haue beene
saued, which made a shewe of a precise life: or that Esau should not haue beene respected, who lift vp his voice and wept bitterly. Or that Ahab had not binHeb. 12. in good case who humbled him-selfe exceedingly: Or that Herod should not haue gon to Heauen: who2. King. 21 heard Iohn Baptist gladly. But wo vnto the PharesiesMar. 6. 20. said CHRIST. Esau did GOD hate: Achab was aLuk. 11. 42 counterfeit, Herod was a cruell Tyrant. Will not aMal. 1. 3. seeming precise life, out-ward humility, crying for2 Kin. 21. Luk. 3. 19. 20. a blessing, hearing of GODS word with some gladnesse serue our turnes? No verily: I may say of this condition, as S. Paul speaketh of Charity. Though1. Cor 13▪ wee spake with the tongues of men and Angells: though we had the gift of Prophesiyng, and knew all secrets: though we had faith to remoue mountaines: though we should feed the poore with all our goods▪ though we should giue our bodies to be burned; and want Repentance: all would be nothing worth: but like the Golden Ap∣ples of Caligula, which might please the sight of his Ghests (saith Plutarch) but not slake their hunger: or like the gold on the out-side of the Tēple, which (as Origen writeth) was neuer sanctified: Say what wee can: beleeue what wee can, doe what wee can: suffer what wee can: vnlesse we repent wee shall surely pe∣rish. As CHRIST IESVS is a Lambe full of mercyIoh. 1. & meeknesse: so is he a Lyon, full of wrath & fierce∣nes.Apo. 5. Vnto the repenting person he giueth a soft heart, for his mercy indureth for euer: he sendeth the comfort of his spirit: for his mercy indureth for euer: hee giueth peace of conscience: for his mercy indureth for euer: and
bestoweth on them the ioyes of Heauen; for his mer∣cy indureth for euer. But as for the impenitent: hee giueth them ouer vnto hardnesse of heart: for his iu∣stice indureth for euer. Hee leaueth them, in a Re∣probate sense, for his iustice indureth for euer. Hee sendeth into them the horror of Conscience, for his iustice indureth for euer. And cafteth them at last in∣to the torments of Hell: for his iustice indureth forJud. 6. euer. Did not GOD spare his Angells, but re∣seruedGen. 7. Num. 14. them in Chaynes vnder darkenesse? did hee not spare the olde World, but drowned it with a flood? did hee not spare his owne people, but de∣stroyed them in the Wildernesse? And will hee spare vs without our conuersion? Is there nowe an other waye to Heauen? or a newe tricke to escape danger? Let no Man flatter him-selfe there is no Atheist, no Drunken swil-tubbe, no Coue∣tous wreatch, no doting Dreamer, who despiseth gouernment, and speaketh euill of those that are in Authoritie: no Swearer, no For-swearer: no Theefe, no Adulterer. In one word no kind of sinner, without Repentance shall escape GODS vengeance. CHRIST IESVS hath spoken it: the Life that fayleth not: the Way that misleadeth not: the trueth that deceiueth not. Vnlesse yee amend your liues, yee shall all likewise perish. Thus much of the necessity of this duty, 3. The time is prescribed. Amend instātly, cōtinually. In omnibus obligationibus, in quibus dies non poni∣tur, presente die debetur: In all Obligations (sayth
the Lawyer) where no time is specified the Condi∣tion is presently to bee performed. Vppon this Theame the Holy-Men of GOD spent many of their Sermons: Looke into Esay, Ieremy and the rest, and you shall finde, that they euer beate vppon the present time: Now turne vnto the Lord. Now,Efa. 55. whilest it is called to day; to day if you will heare hisIer. 35. Heb. 3. voice, this is the acceptable time &c. What werePsal. 95. they so barren headed; as that penurie constray∣nedHeb. 4. them to harpe alwayes vpon the same string? GOD forbid wee should thinke so. But iniqui∣ty did then abound (as now it doth) and procrasti∣nation, was euer dangerous: and therefore they iudged no Doctrine so fit, as oftentimes to vrge re∣pentance without all delay. GOD will not per∣mitte vs, to giue the prime dayes vnto the Deuill: and the Dogge dayes to him: to poure out our wine to the world, and serue him with our dregges. Amend (saith my text) heere is no time speciall annexed? and therefore is our payment presently required. And as we must amend, without deferring▪ so must wee continue without back-sliding. Wee may not repent by quames and startes, but go through stitch. Fatte promisings may not haue leane performances. It is a principle in the Ciuill Law. Nihil praesumitur fuisse actum, dum aliquid superest ad agendum. To be∣gin a thing is pleasant, and for varieties sake many will do so much, but the prise and praise is at the end. Some in the world resemble Snayles, which push out a long payre of hornes, but beeing touched neuer so
little, they drawe them in againe. Such a one was2. Chr. 15. Asa, carefull to doe good, till the goute did take him;1. Sam. 14. 27. Others are like Ionathan, who will follow the chase hard, till they come where hony is. But true repentance may not be by lease, or after the manner of Bethulia,Iudg. 7. 30. a composition for fiue dayes: wee may not say one day Gloriapatri, the second & filio, the third & spiri∣tuo sancto: and after that come to sicut erat in principio;Dan. 2. 32. 33. this were Nabuchadnezers image, the head of brasse the breast of baser mettall, and so neerer the endeLuk. 18. worse and worse still. But we must follow repentanceGen. 32. as the widdow did her sute, keepe our hold as Iacob did in wrestling. Amend to day, amend to morrow▪ runne on, not for a time, but euen our whole time: actu continuo with a continued act, Moderately at the first; constantly in the middest; cheerefully to the end. All the trees in GODS Orchard must bee Palmes and Cedars: Palmes, which bring forth fruit betimes; Cedars, whose fruites lasteth very long. Consider well, the manifold dangers which fol∣lowes the want eyther of speed or of continuance. First our liues, of all things are most vncertaine. Short areIob. 13. the dayes of man saith Iob, who also amonst the Philo∣sophers is but , a man of a day old. SalomonEccle. 2. surueying mans life calleth it Vaine: and then think∣ing not that word sufficient, correcteth himselfe and calleth it vanity: but Dauid goeth yet further, andPsal. 6 2. tells vs. That man is lighter then vanity too. Euen asPsal. 90. 9. a thought in the braine, wherof there may be no few∣er then ten thousand in one day. What answer was
made vnto him that promised ease vnto his soule ma∣ny yeares? thou foole this night shall thy soule be takenLuk. 11. 19 20. from thee. Young men (saith Seneca) haue death behind them: olde men haue death before them: and all men haue death not farre from them. Mee thinkes the Lord threatneth an vtter ruine vnto all the World: The Earth not long since hath trembled: the Lightes of Heauen haue beene often darkened. Rebellions haue beene raised. Treasons haue beene practised▪ Plagues haue beene dispersed, Windes haue blustered: Waters haue raged, and what wan∣teth there now, but fire for vs, from Heauen to bee consumed? And is it nowe time to buye, to sell, to eate, to drinke, to liue securely in sinne, as they did in the dayes of Noah, and thinke of nothing else? Is it nowe time to say vnto GOD as the Niggard dothProu. 3. vnto his neighbour, Cras reuertere, come againe to morrow? or as that drowsie sluggard doth; yet aProu. 6. 10. little sleepe, yet a little slumber, yet a little folding of the handes? The foolish Virgins supposed that the Brid∣groome would not come like an Owle or Bate in the night: there is time enough (saide they:) what needes all this hast? but poore fooles they were ex∣cluded. O (My beloued) many thousands are nowe, no doubt in hell, who purposed in time to haue tur∣ned from their sinnes, but being preuented by death are for euer condemned. Let therefore the vncer∣tainety and shortnesse of our liues, teach vs to watch because we know not the houre, to do good whilst we haueMat. 25. Gal. 6. time; to make hast into the promised rest, and alwayesHeb. 4▪
let vs esteeme it, as an imminent danger, to line in that estate, wherein wee would bee loath that death should finde vs. Secondly badde customes are dangerous, andIob. 20. 11 greatly to bee feared: Hee that from his youth hath liued wickedly, in his old age shall haue sinne in his bones. Can the Black-moore change his skinne, or theIer. 13. 23. Leopard his spottes? no more may hee doe good (sayth GOD) who is accustomed vnto euill. It is a true speech vsed amongst Physitions, Custome is another Nature. A Child brought vp in closse prison, can there sport and play: when hee that lately saw light, and had his liberty: can do little else but bewayle his Captiuity: The Isralites beeing long in bondage,Luk. 13. were loath to depart; the Woman which had an in∣firmitie eighteene yeares, called not vpon CHRISTLuk. 19. as the Leapers did. Sinnes are not like Disseases in the body. The older the sorr: sed consuetudine plus quam ciues studio plus quam hostes (saith Saint Au∣gustine) the older the sweeter, and yet the more toothsome, the more troublesome: for Custome not resisted becommeth a Necessity. Olde Sinners are compared to Lazarus in his graue. First, they stinke: they are corrupt, and become abhomma∣blePs. 14. 1. 3. as the Psalmist speaketh. Secondly, they haue a greate stone of Custome rowled vpon them, which can hardly be remoued:Ioh. 11. 43. CHRIST must grone and crye aloud, before Laza∣rus can bee raised. Thirdly their seete and handes, are bound, they
cannot imploie them to any good action. And last∣ly  their faces are couered, hauing by the darkenesse of their sinnes, lost the sight of GOD. Againe an∣cient sinnes, are by the Prophet compared vnto Chaynes: where one lincke, one sinne doth draw on another. First commeth secret suggestion, after sug∣gestion, Cogitation: after cogitation, Affection: af∣ter affection Delight: after delight, Consent: after consent an Act: then many actes make a Custome: Custome bringeth Despayre: despaire a Defence of sinne: defense a Boasting in it: and this is the next steppe to condemnation. Here is the Chaine of sinn: wherein euerie lincke is more heauye then an o∣ther: the former, are the easier: the latter, al∣wayes the harder to bee shaken off. Peter at the first did but denye CHRIST, afterwardes hee de∣nyed him with an oath: at last hee did curse and swcare, and for-swore him-selfe. The Disciples ofMat. 26. CHRIST could not caste out a Foule Spirit, that had remayned in one from his child-hood. Hee that hath had long possession, will plead prescrip∣tion.Mar. 9. A Language (saith Bassill) first learned; is not soone forgotten, and a custome long retayned, is not quickly changed. It is therefore very dange∣gerous, not to examine or trie our selues before wee bee indged: not to vse phisicke before wee bee deadly sicke: not to repent before wee can sinne no more. It wil be too late, to come to the kaye when the ship is launched: too late, to transplant trees, when they
be growne in yeares: too late to apply a medicine, where the disease is desperate: too late to resist ene∣mies, when they haue gotten, and fortefyed the hold: too late to season flesh, when it crawleth with wormes: or to mend a house when it is on fire. So standeth the case with him that hath lined long in sinne: what is there no hope of Saluation for him? Non dico saluabitur, non dico damnabitur (saith Saint Augustine) I will not say, he shall be saued, I will not say, he shall be damned. The Theefe was receined in the end of his dayes. Where vpon Origen writeth thus. There is no man which hath cause to dispayre of pardon: seeing CHRIST said vnto the Theefe, A∣men dico tibi, &c. verily this day shalt Thou bee with me in Paradise: and yet may we not too much presume of pardon, because CHRIST sayde not. Amen dico vobis, &c verily this day shall You bee with mee in Pa∣radise. Wherefore let vs remember before wee sin; that CHRIST pardoned not the multitude; and thereby feare his iustice. And after we haue sinned, let vs remember that CHRIST pardoned the theefe; and thereby hope for mercy. Et si paenitentia est sera, tamen indulgentia non est fera, saith Lombard▪ GODS mercy is aboue our misery: and an euening sacrifice is accepted by him, And yet on the other side: wee neuer read, that CHRIST cured one blind man of∣ten; that he healed the same Leapers diuerse times: that hee raised Lazarus twice. Antiochus prayed for mercy at the ende of his life and was not heard.2. Macha. 6 Hee that sayeth, at what time soeuer a sinner doth
repent, I will put away his wickednesse: saith also,Eze. 33. it is good for a man to beare the yoak from his youth:Lam. 3. 27. for olde age is like to flint, you may breake it, be∣fore you can soften it: and therefore the wiseman ad∣uiseth, to bow downe the neck of thy sonne whilest hee isEccl. 10. 12 young; to beate sinne on the sides, to nippe it on the head while it is a child: for it will else grow stubborn, and get the Mastery. In youth, sinnes are few and fec∣ble; but by continuance they grow to be as strong as Gyants, and increase into mighty Armies▪ Besides they are a burden; heauier then the whole earth. They made wicked Angells to fall like thunder-boltsIud. vers. 6. from the Highest Heauen, into the lowest Hell: they caused GOD to complaine. Behold I am pressed vn∣derAmo. 2. 13 you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of sheaues. The creatures grone vnder this burthen; beeing by mans sinne, subiect to vanity, and corruption; and shallRom. 8. 22. crooked age be able to sustaine it? A thousand to one wee shall bee constrayned to crie out with Cain. MyGen. 4. 13. sinne is heauier then I am able for to beare. Thirdly we must remember, that the longer wee  continue in sinne, the farther and greater space, we runne from our GOD. Your Iniquities (saith GOD) makes a Separation betwixt mee and you. And is thereEsa. 59. 2. any likelyhood, that he who hath beene running from his GOD, forty, threescore, perhappes fourescore yeares together, who with the prodigall, is runne in∣to a farre Countrey: can returne againe, in the space of sixe dayes? sixe houres? sixe minutes? For it may be his sicknes, (vnto the time whereof
hee deferreth his conuersion) will not be sixe daies, sixe houres, sixe minutes long: and how is it possible then to returne vnto GOD? Say that the forcea∣ble working of the holy spirit (like a great gale of wind) bee able to blow thee home vppon the so∣daine: yet art thou not sure for to haue it. Nay GOD hath told thee: Because I haue called, and you refused: you shall call vppon mee, and I will notPro. 1. 28. answer you. A dolefull and heauy doome, for a dying man. Lastly let vs euer remember, that in time of sick∣nesse wee thinke most vppon that wee most feele: Death beseegeth vs: Sinn affrighteth vs: our wiues grieueys: our children with-drawe vs: beeing many wayes distracted, how shall wee then amend? be∣ing then at the weakest, how can wee resist Sathan, who is then at the strongest? now hee must haue vs, or else euer loose vs: nowe therefore standeth the redde Dragon, ready to deuoure his prey. Vaun∣ting him-selfe against CHRIST IESVS: I neuer dy∣ed for these, I neuer was whipped, crucified, tor∣mented for them. I neuer promised them eternall life, not Paradise, not the ioyes of Heauen. And yet loe howe they followe mee vnto their liues ende? A∣vaunt Sathan: in the Name of CHRIST IESVS. And let all true Christians Amend speedilie: Con∣tinually. 4. There is punishment threatned, Yee shall all perish. Amongst the Philosophers, to perish, doth vsually
signifie, A returning vnto nothing which the Crea∣tures of GOD, doe naturally abhorre. For euer since that first blessing Increase and multiplie, thereGen. 1. hath beene in the Creatures, a naturall desire, to pre∣serue themselues. In this philosophicall sense, is not the word here to bee vnderstood. It were a peece of happinesse to impenitent persons, if they might become as though they had neuer beene. But death shall depart from them: and as the Heart of Promethe∣us was (say the Poets) alwayes eaten with Vultures,Apo. 9. and not deuoured, so shall it bee with these: They shall euer perish, and neuer bee consumed. In the Scriptures, To perish: is a word of a large extent: contayning in it, the plagues of the Soule, the pu∣nishmentPro. 21. of the body, the wrath and curse ofDan. 2. Psal. 1. GOD, vpon the Reprobates in this world, andIoh. 10. 28. in the world to come euerlasting condemnation. The meaning then of the word [perish]. First, is this: You shall haue in this life the face of GOD against you: Heauen shal be as Yron, and Earth as Brasse vnto you. Cursed shall you bee in the Citty, cursed in the Fieldes: cursed shall you bee in your Barne, cursed in your Store, cursed in the fruites of your Wombes, cursed in the fruites of the Earth, cursed in your heards of Cattle, cursed in your flocks of sheepe: cursed shall be your going out, cursed shal be your comming in: your Honours, your Plea∣sures,Deu. 28. your Riches, your Children: all the bles∣sings of GOD shall bee turned into curses, vntill you be destroyed and perish vtterly.
This is the portion of the impenitent in this world. Secondly, the meaning of the word (perish) is this: you shall in the world to come, bee euerlastingly condemned. Which the Schoole-men haue reduced, to two kindes of torments: poena damni: paena sensus. 1. the torment of losse, or wanting: 2. the torment of sense, and feeling▪ the effect of both is this: you shall loose the ioyes of Heauen, you shall feele the paines of hell. The ioyes of Heauen, are these of such valewe, or the losse of them so great, as should moue vs to re∣pentance? what those ioyes are, and by consequence how great their losse is, wee may behold as in a Glasse darkely: but tongues of men and Angells can in noe wise expresse. S. Paul being rapt into the third2. Cor. 12. Heauen, heard there such things as cannot bee vtte∣red. First we may roue at them, by that high price which is set vpon them. CHRIST the Sonne, and onely Sonne of GOD, not by Adoption but by na∣ture, louing, and best beloued: bought them, not with money, but with bloud: not with the bloud of Goates and Rammes: but with his own blood: not with the bloud of head, handes or feete: but with his owne heart bloud. And as hee prayed soundly for them him-selfe: so hath hee prized them vnto his Friends, and Children. None can enter into them but by ma∣ny tribulations. They cost Paul a beheadding, Peter aA &. 14. 22 crucifiyng: Steuen a stoning: millions of Martirs a racking or burning, a torturing, a tormenting. GOD1. Cor. 10. who is faithfull and true, hath not deceiued his Son, nor ouer-sold his ioyes vnto his Saints. And therfore
vnspeakeable are those ioyes, which CHRIST hath purchased, and his Children obtayned, thorowe a world of miseries. Secondly we may conceiue of them: by taking a  view of inferior beauties. Looke vpon the meddows: consider (sayth our Sauiour) the Lillies of the field, how they growe and florish: I say vnto you; that Sa∣lomon in all his glory, was not like to one of these: all Salomons glory, not like to one Lilly. Hath GOD put such glory and gladnesse vpon the grasse of the field? hath hee so gorgiously attired them? which to day haue a being, but to morrow are cut downe, and cast into a furnace? how much more then shalLuk. 12. 2 be the glory, and ioy of you, O yee of little faith? Thirdly wee haue a resemblance of these ioyes, in  CHRISTS transfiguration: when as his face didMat. 17. shine as the Sunne, and his rayment was as white as snowe. For hereby we learne what glory our bodyes shall haue in the day of the resurrection: when (as S. Paul tells vs) wee shall beare the image of the heauenly,1. Cor. 15. and bee like the Sonne in glory. Fourthly, the place of blessednesse, doth informe  vs of these ioyes. First it is a place of puritie and holi∣nesse: no vncleane thing shall enter thereinto. SecondlyApo 21. a place of beauty, and brightnesse: as cleare as cristal, glistring as Iasper▪ the twelue gates are twelue pearles; the sireetes like gold, and shining glasse. Thirdly aApo. 22. place of roomth, and largenesse: O Israel how great is the house of GOD, and how large is the place of his pos∣session?Baruch. 3 into this pure, bright, large place of glorie
shall true Conuertes enter: for where I am▪ (saith CHRIST) there shall my seruants bee: and that isIoh. 12. not all; but Kingdomes shall bee giuen vnto them: Come yee blessed of my Father, possesse a Kingdome:Luk. 2. 29 and in this Kingdome, the Lord him-selfe will ho∣norLuk. 12. 37 them with his owne attendants: and there shall they raigne for euermore. Fiftly wee may make coniecture of these ioyes, by reflecting our eyes vpon those innumerable perilles, which we haue heere escaped. For if such as are de∣liuered from the daungers of the Sea, do wonder∣fully reioyce when they come vnto the shore. Much greater then is the ioye of those who hauing beene tossed in the waues of this World; troubled with sinnes, with Sathan; with the fraylties of the flesh, with the feare of hell, (Quorum periculum probat periuntium multitudo (saith Gregorie) whose dangers appeares by the multitude of those that pe∣rish) are nowe arriued at Heauen, for their Ha∣uen: and are wholie freed from all their miseries: Quanto fuit maius periculum in praelio▪ tanto maius gaudium in triumpho: (as Saint Augustine well spea∣keth:) the more dangers escaped, the more ioyes increased: as the most doubtfull battell, maketh the most ioyfull victory. Lastly though wee knowe not what it is to be∣hold the Face of GOD: yet herein consisteth theExo. 33. 18 highest degree of happinesse, and therefore are the ioyes of the Saintes in Heauen super-Superlatiue▪Esa. 33. 17. because their eyes doe alwayes see their King in his
glorie. It is a pleasing sight and delight-some vnto the eye, to behold the Sunne: Sed illud est verum gaudium (saith S. Bernard) non quod ae creatura sed quod de creatore concipitur: but that is the true and onely ioy indeede, which is conceiued from the Creator, not from the Creature. Iohn leapt in his Mothers wombe, when but the Mother of his ma∣ker came neere vnto him: the Wise-men reioyced exceedingly, when they but sawe his Starre. The Bethshemits were comforted at the sight of his Ark, were these causes of great and vnwonted gladnesse? Then are the Saints rauished with ioy in Heauen, who behold theyr Creator face to face. If the peo∣ple shouted for ioy, so as the earth did ring againe with the sound of their noyse when Salomon was1. King. 1. proclaimed King: O what a Hallaluiah is there in Heauen, at the sight of the King of Peace, crow∣ned in his Throne of Glorie? Huic comparata, om∣nis aliunde iucunàitas, maeror est: omnis suauitas, do∣lor: omne dulce, amarum: omne decorum, foedum. (saith Saint Bernard) In comparison of this, all ioy, is sadnesse: all sweetnesse, sowernesse: all beauty, black∣nesse: yea all the delights in the World put them together; which haue beene, which are, which shall bee to the day of Iudgement: all, are but as a droppe of water, to the mayne Ocean, in re∣spect of that blessednesse which wee shall drinke from the euer liuing fountaine of the face of GOD. For if wee finde such store of sweetnesse in a peece of one little Creature (bee it Sugar, or Honie; or
such like:) what shall wee not finde in the Creator? if the foote-steppes of the goodnesse of GOD a∣bound in pleasures: what hath not the fountaine of goodnesse, GOD himselfe? The consideration whereof caused Moyses to sue vnto GOD, that hee might see his glory. Compelled Dauid oftentimes humbly to request, that hee might behold the facePsa. 27. 8. of his GOD, and when GOD said vnto him:Psa. 80. seeke my face: his heart answered as an Eccho, O Lord I will seeke thy face. And as a man not contented hee trebleh his request. O thou shepheard of Israel, cause thy face to shine vpon mee, that I may bee saued. Twice more hee prayeth. O thou shepheard of Israel &c. His saluation and eternall happinesse, hee reposeth in the sight of GOD: for hee knewe full well, that in his presence, there was fulnes of ioy for euermore. Let meePsa. 16. 11. but shewe you now, what Saint Augustine speaketh of the ioyes of Heauen, and so will I passe vnto that which followeth. Wee may (saith hee) sooner tell you, what they are not; then what they are. Yet take a surusie of those manifolde benefits, which GOD bestoweth vpon our base, and ignoble bodies. Shed out both vpon good and badde, from the Heauens, from the Ayre, from the Earth, from the Waters, from light, from darkenesse, from heate, from cold∣nesse, from all the creatures, shed also out, by suc∣cession, to exclude a loathing. Doth GOD bestow vpon our bodies, and promiscuaily vppon all; these excellent benefits? Then O Lord howe great and wonderfull are those good things which thou hast
laid vp for thine Elect in the Kingdome of Heauen? if these be so good, which thou hast giuen to good and badde: what shall they bee, which thou hast re∣serued onely for the good? if they bee soe pleasant, which thou sendest to friendes, and enemies: howe sweete are those, which thy friends shall enioy? if there bee so many comfortes in the valley of teares: what shall there bee in the day of marriage? if thou beest so kind vnto vs, in this prison of ours: how wilt thon imbrace and hugge vs, when we come into thy Kingdome? Into that euerlasting Kingdome, where euerlasting glory shall bee vpon our heads: where that which we would haue, shal be present with vs: and that we would not haue, shal be as sent from vs: where there shal be a measure of ioy, heaped vp, shaken together, pressed downe, running ouer; mensura sine mensura (as Bernard speaketh) a measure without measure. Where we shall haue health without sick∣nesse: strength without weakenesse. freedome, with∣out bondage: beautie without blacknesse: Knowledge without ignorance, plenty without want: peace with∣out trouble: safety without feare: life without death: glory without shame. Where wee shall be filled with ioy: yet beeing filled wee shall still desire, least our fulnesse procure a loathing: and in desiring wee shall alwayes bee filled, least our desire beget a greeuing: (to conclude) neither eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor heart of man can conceiue those excel∣lent things that are prepared for vs. Neyther can GOD giue more: nor man receiue more then we
shall there inioy. And is not this then a most la∣mentable losse, to bee debarred from these ioves of Heauen? Mee thinkes the remembrance of it should dismaye the heart of a wicked man. When hee re∣counteth with himselfe that hee shall bee shutte out off doores with Dogges, that hee shallbe excluded from those vnspeakable ioyes, which CHRIST IE∣SVS hath bought with his pretious heart bloud: that hee shall bee bereft of that glory, whereof the beauty of the most glorious Creatures is but a sim∣ple shadow: that hee shall be cast out from that pure, bright, and large place of happinesse: from an Eternall Kingdome. Did the losse of the Arke of1. Sam. 4. GOD cause Elye to breake his neck? This then is inough to breake a Pharaohs heart in peeces; to know that after troubles heere, there is no hope of har∣bour, of rest, of safty in the world to come: that he shal be depryued of the face of GOD, the sight of CHRIST, the fellowship of the Spirit, the compa∣ny of holy Angells, and blessed Saintes: finally that hee shall haue no part in that great measure of ioy; which is so infinite as it cannot enter into vs, but wee must enter into it: Thou good and faithfullMat. 25. 21 seruant enter into thy Maisters ioy. O wofull, and vnsufferable losse! more then can bee counter∣nayled by the gayning of ten thousand Worldes: Nay all the teares which shall be in Hell: will (saith Chrisostome) neuer be sufficient, to bewayle the losse of Heauen. And is this all the punishment, the impenitent
shall sustaine? shall they onely loose the ioyes of Heauen? we may not stay heere: They shal pe∣rish, they shall likewise feele the terrible paines of Hell. Many motiues are there (saith Saint Hierom) to stirre vs vp to amendment of our liues. The consi∣deration of the teares, and of the bloud, which CHRIST shedde for sinners: our owne ennume∣rable offences; the weaknesse of our bodies, and frailty of our liues: GODS continued mercy to∣wardes vs: his Iustice and reuenging power: but es∣pecially the feare of loosing the ioyes of Heauen. All these are as spurres to prick vs forward to repen∣tance: and as Trumpets to rowse vs vp from our carnall securitye. Yet such is the dulnesse of ma∣ny, and so dead a sleepe are some in their sinnes, as such motiues as these will worke but small effect in them. Let CHRIST weepe till his Head, and Heart ake: let him suffer neuer so extreame Torments: let sinnes bee as redde as scarlet: and liues of all thinges most vncertaine: shewe GODS mercies, tell of his iudgments, Preach of the losse of Heauen. Yet were there no Hell to receiue them; or Tortures prouided for them: they would easily put off all these with a Tush: and bee as reso∣lute for their owne destruction as Hester was for the sauing of her people, If wee perish, wee pe∣rish. Oderunt peccare mali formi dine paenae. Wic∣kedHest. 4. 16. ones, must bee scarred from sinne, with feare
of punishments: let them then set before their eyes the fearefull and horrible paines of heil. These in the Scriptures, are expressed by diuersApoc. 10. names, Sometimes they are called fire▪ hee that is not written in the booke of life: is sent into a lake of fire.Esa. 66. 14. Sometimes they are tearmed a Worme: their worme shall not die. Verme roditur conscientia, igne cremantur corpora: (saith Bernard) with the worme is their con∣sciences gnawed, and with the fire are their bodies burned. Sometimes againe, are they set out, by the loathsome stench of Brimstone: vppon the wicked heePsal. 11. 6. will raine fire and brimstone. Otherwhiles by weeping,Mat. 13. 42 and gnashing of teeth. Weeping because of the fire that will not be quenched: and gnashing, because of the worme that wil not bee killed. the one comming fromEsa. 65. 13. 14. griefe, the other from rage. Sometimes they beare the names of thirst, of hunger, of sorrow, of shame. And such penury is there in hell, as there is nothing to re∣lecue the damned which are therein. The rich man begged a droppe of water, and could not haue it. guttam petijt (saith Gregory) qui micam negauit: hee craued a droppe, that denied a crumme. Neyther is it a little torment to bee imprisoned, and tortured by the vgglie Fiendes of hell: by those Etheopian An∣gelles; (as Cyrill calleth them) whose armes (saith Cassian) are like the heades of Dragons, whose eyes shoote forth arrowes of fire: whose teeth, are like the teeth of Elephants; whose tayles are like the tayles of Scorpions, that is gushfull, and grisly Diuils: if the sight of one of them be able to bereaue a man
of his wittes: O how great will the horrour be, when they shall all appeare? And what doth the place of punishment afford? that place of confusion? of dark∣nesse? of chaines? of most horrible shapes? but euenMath. 22. Ecchoes of woes. Well then; suppose one to be bur∣ning in a lake of fire, hauing a Viper at his heart, alwayes gnawing and stinging his soule: imagine boy∣ling brimstone to bee powred vppon him; that with the heat thereof, hee is scalded: with the smoake thereof, hee is stifled, and with the noysome sauour continually choaked: let him weepe, wayle, wring his handes, and stand gnashing of his teeth▪ let him be euer languishing and pining with want of foode, de∣nay him all things which may any waie ease him. Conceiue yet further that he is bound handes and feete; that he is affrighted and tormented with vgglie Diuells, and compassed round about with horrible darkenesse. Thinke well of the misery of such a man: and know that these are the paynes of an impenitent wretch in hell. These the paynes? nay (my beloued) these are not the tenth part of Hels torments. CHRIST calleth them Euerlasting paynes▪ As they are extream without decreasing, so are they endlesse without all re∣demption.Math. 25. There are sighes, with-out pittying: criesVerl. last. without moning: lamentation, with-out relecuing: a flood of black flimes, euer flowing: ibi dolores tor∣quent animas, non extorquent, puniunt corpora, non fi∣niunt: (as Prosper speaketh) there is a Death, which alwayes liueth, and a Life, which alwayes dyeth:
there hee that tortoreth, fainteth not, and hee that suffereth fayleth not: There is Euer parching fire, for warming loue: Euer banishment, for reconcile∣ment: Euer heauinesse, for singing; Euer darknesse for shining: Euer fetters, for crownes; Euer gna∣shing of teeth, for clapping of handes: Euer mise∣rable immortality and immortall miserve. Alasse who is able (saith Esay) to dwell in euerlasting bur∣nings?Esa. 33. 14. It were some comfort in the middest of afflicti∣ons, to thinke that one day, they will come vnto an end; and the damned spirits in hell, had they but a little hope, that after the space of manye thousand, thousand yeares they should bee released: this little sparke in the middest of their flames, would in some sort make them ioyfull: but Euer to burne, Euer to boyle, Euer to weepe, Euer to wring, Euer to bee in chaynes, to suffer vnsufferable torments. Euerla∣sting paynes? This is that which cutteth heart-strings a sunder. Yet is not this all. For as they are eternall with-out redemption: so are they Generall with-out exception. For first; all suffer them: and iudge you, what a dolefull sight it will bee, to see infinite mil∣lions of males and females, continually without any intermission, hacking and hewing, their teeth toge∣ther: to heare howling and crying, Woe, woe, be vn∣to vs, that euer wee were borne: to heare one Diuel, one damned Ghost, calling vnto another, to strike, to rend, to kill, to spoyle, to heape on coales, to poure on Brimstone: like one that is pressing to death, who cal∣leth
for more waights to bee cast vpon him. Secondly as they all suffer in all parts, in all the members of their bodies, in all the powers of their soules. they haue corporall flames with-out, and spirituall flames with-in: no part; no power is free. Hast thou offen∣ded with thy Head? thou shalt haue scalding: hast thou offended with thine Eyes? thou shalt haue wee∣ping: hast thou offended with thy Mouth? thou shalt haue howling: with thy Tongue? thou shalt haue scorching: with thine Eares? thou shalt haue yelling: with thy Nose? thou shalt haue stincking: with thy Feete? thou shalt haue fettering: with thy Handes? thou shalt haue wringing: with thy Heart? thou shalt haue gnawing; in thy Soule, and Body, bur∣ning, and boyling. Pro disparibus generibus peccatorum sunt disparia tormenta suppliciorum (saith Saint Augu∣stine) euery man shall receiue according to his seuerall1. Pet. 1. workes. Coniecture yet further of Hells tortures, by things of no accompt. Put thy foote into a see∣thing bath, and how dost thou grieue? what sorrow dost thou conceiue? if thou beest vexed with a sharp burning ague; how dost thou tosse, and tumble, and art out of quiet? is the scalding of thy foote, or a fit of an Ague so grieuous vnto flesh and bloud? which are but Flea-bitings, no though thou did dest abide them, thy whole life long? O howe then wilt thou bee able to endure euerlasting burnings? Will CHRIST now profit thee, who stretched his armes out pon the Crosse for sinners? No, hee will now
NOW IESVS CHRIST our Lord, and GOD, Euen the Father which hath loued vs, and giuen vs euerlasting consolation by his spirit: and good hope through grace: purge our dead con∣sciences, and stablish our hearts in euery good word and worke vnto the end▪ that beeing made the seruants of GOD, wee may haue our fruit in holinesse, and in the end eternall life. Amen. Laus DEO.
