18142 99850354 15548
FOWRE BOOKES, OF THE INSTITVTION, VSE AND DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY SACRAMENT OF THE EVCHARIST IN THE OLD CHVRCH. AS LIKEWISE, HOW, WHEN, And by what Degrees the Masse is brought in, in place thereof. By my Lord PHILIP of Mornai, Lord of Plessis-Marli; Councellour to the King in his Councell of Estate, Captaine of fiftie men at armes at the Kings paie, Gouernour of his towne and Castle of Samur, Ouerseer of his house and Crowne of Nauarre. The second edition, reuiewed by the Author. Saint Cyprian, in the treatise of the Sacrament of the Cup of the Lord. We ought not herein to regard, what any man hath iudged meete to bee done; but rather, what he which was be∣fore all men, euen Iesus Christ our Sauiour, hath done himselfe, and commaunded others to doe: For we follow not the custome of man, but the truth of God. ALSO; If some one of our predecessors haue not so obserued and kept it; God may haue pardoned him in his mercie: but for t, from henceforth there will remaine no place for pardon, we hauing beene instructed and admonished by him. FOR THOV SHALT LABOR PEACE PLENTIE printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed by IOHN WINDEY, for I. B. T. M. and W. P. 1600.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE, LORDS AND others of her Maiesties most Hon. Priuie Councell. HAuing lately (right Honorable) tran∣slated out of French this most learned and fruitfull Treatise of Monsieur du Plessis, touching the Institution and Doctrine of the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, and how and when, and by what degrees the Masse hath beene brought into the Church in place thereof: J haue pre∣sumed to present these my poore paines to your most fauou∣rable acceptance, and honourable patronage of the same. Thus haue I thought good to do, not so much in any perso∣nall respect of my owne priuate paines, as in regard both of the Authour, and of the matter of this Treatise. For tou∣ching the Author, who may bee iudged so worthy to take vpon them the protecting of the labours of a Gentleman so learned & honorable, as Monsieur du Plessis is, being al∣so a Councellor of State to the most Christian King, as they who are likewise learned, honourable, and of Councell to a most religious & Christian Queene? As for the matter of the booke, what is it els, but an ample and singular Apologie
of that most ancient, and truly Catholike religion, which her Highnes in the begining of her renowned raigne, by the ad∣uise of many most reuerend & learned Diuines, by the ex∣presse warrant of the word of God, by the gracious direction of his holy spirit, with the free consent of all the States assē∣bled in Parliament, did most Christianly establish, & euer since for the space of fortie two yeares (a goodly, blessed, & golden time, the like whereunto all things well weighed, no nation vnder heauen, euer enioyed) by the most singular prouidence of God, and her princely prudence, & your Ho∣nors assistance, hath most constantly maintained, to the ex∣ceeding comfort of all her louing and loyall subiects, and the great astonishment of all her enemies. Embrace therefore (right Honor.) the excellent learning of the Author: ac∣cept the trauel of the translator, & chiefly vouchsafe coun∣tenance and defence to the cause it selfe, which is the cause of the true Catholike Church, or rather of Christ: from whom in most hartie humility I wish to you all the increase of all true honour here on earth, and euerlasting happines hereaf∣ter, in the heauens. Your Honours in all humble dutie and seruice, R. S.
The Author his Preface to the Lords and Mrs. of the Church of Rome. THE Apostle Saint Paul said to the Israelites his brethren according to the flesh, I speake the truth in Christ, Rom. 9 I lie not, my conscience beareth me witnesse by the holy Ghost, that I haue great heauines of hart, that I could wish my self accursed, & to be separated from Christ for your sakes. This that great Apostle, notwithstanding who would not know any thing for all, but Christ, who desi∣reth to be separated from all the world, yea and separated in himselfe, to bee with Christ: and therefore verilie for some exceeding great and important cause: as, for to see them drawne out of the wayes of destruction, into the state of saluation: that is to say, coupled and vnited to Christ: And therefore it is most euident that hee iudged them lost, in that estate wherein they were, in asmuch as they coulde not bee founde in Christ, and so without saluation, for that they were without Christs. They neuerthelesse (sayth hee) to whome belonged the adoption, and the glorie, and the couenants, and the ordi∣nances of the law, and the diuine seruice, and the promises: of whome came the fathers, and of whom according to the flesh came Christ? And yet notwithstanding all this, he letteth not to declare them to be of Israel, and yet not Israel: to be the seed of Abraham, yet notwithstanding not all children, because (saith he) the worde of God cannot fall away, &c. May I here my masters be so bolde, as to say the like vnto you? In respect of my selfe verily I may not. I desire your saluation with a great affection: I wish it heartilie, with the hazard of this my life: yea I will say in a good conscience, as the saide Apostle saide vnto Agrippa: That it might please God to make you all such like as I my selfe, except these bondes: except those afflictions, whereunto this profession is subiect. For what is more, belongeth not to any man besides the Apostle, in whome the exceeding measure of knowledge begot an exceeding measure of loue towards God, and charitie towards his bre∣thren, which as we cannot imitate in effect: so neither must we in worde: besides that this hyperbolicall kinde of speech, can hardly fit vs. But rather in respect of you, I dare be bold to say more: for the couenants and ordinances of the lawe, and the diuine seruice, and the promises, were giuen vnto you long ago: but not vnto you alone, but not to you more then others. And many fathers are sprung vp amongst you, and you it may be discended of them, according to the flesh: but yet for all this, the worde of God cannot fall away or perish, no not although Christ himselfe, who is God blessed aboue all things, should be descended of you ac∣cording to the flesh. That word verily which giueth vs to vnderstande, that there must fall out an apostacie in the Church, that the man of sinne, the sonne of perdition, should sit in the Temple of God, causing himselfe to be adored therein as God. And seeing you cleaue vnto him vnder the shadow of this See, of this pretended discent, I dare bee bolde to say vnto you freely with the Apostle: Deceiue not your selues with thinking your selues to be the children
of Abraham, for you are not children at all, such as are of the faith, and not of the suc∣cession, Galat. 3.7. Rom. 9.8. are Abrahams children, for they are the children of the promise, they ve∣rily are reputed for the seede. There is question then about this faith, In controuer∣sies we must haue recourse to the Scrip∣tures. and euerie man saith that he hath it. To know of what side Christ is, and euery man betaketh himselfe to him as his ayde, and thereupon all Christendome liueth in suspence and doubt, or in trouble. But, my brethren, let vs not be∣leeue men: Men, saith our Lord himselfe, who know not of their owne vnderstanding, ei∣ther from whence he commeth, or whether he goeth: The spirits of men, saith the spirit of God, which are not able to comprehend his wayes. In a Sea so vnknowne to man, in these gulfes so perillous, we cannot attaine to the deliuering of any sure and certaine speech from other where then God himselfe: from the father, who hath spoken from heauen, shewed vs the sonne, Matth. 17.5. Iohn. 5.3 9. Psal. 19. 2. Tim. 3. and said vnto vs, heare him: from the son, who crieth vnto vs in the midst of the Temple in the heate of the Pharisies, and all these great doctors their disputations, Search you the Scriptures diligently: and from the holie Ghost, who hath said to vs, They cause the eyes to see: they giue vnderstanding to children: by the Apostles, they are inspired of God, they make the man of God, euen the Euangelist and teacher himselfe, instructed vnto euerie good worke, and wise vnto saluation. Our fathers (say some vnto you) beleeued as well, liued as well, whereto serue these alte∣rations? Verily if you vnderstand this of your carnall fathers, then what other thing doe you say, S. Bern. Epi. 91 besides that which the Iewes said to our Lord? or which the Turkes or Iewes may not yet say vnto vs? How farre better, saith Saint Bernard, speaking of the reformation necessarie in the Church: Let them be cast behinde both me and you, which say, we will not liue better then our fathers. If of the spirituall, as of those that haue begotten vs to Christ: then who are they, but the Apostles, and the holie fathers that followed them? And what say we herein, but by their mouthes? And who is there to leade vs more from customes, to the lawe, from traditions to the holie Scriptures? Irenaeus saith, The Apo∣stles preached the Gospel, Iren. l. 3. c. 1. & 11. con. h. ret. Tradiderunt. Iust. Mart in Dialog. cum Tryphon. & in exposit. fid. and afterward by the will of God deliuered it vs in the Scriptures, that so it might be the foundation and pillar of our faith. Iustinus Mar∣tyr; We must fixe our faith vpon God, and his onlie instructions: not vpon mans Traditions: we must haue recourse to the Scriptures, to the ende we may finde assurednesse in all things, &c. That Dauid, that the Euangelists, that the Epistles of the Apostles doe teach vs, Tert. con. Her∣mog. Cum Aposto∣lis senti. &c. Tertullian: I doe not receiue or admit of that which thou bringest of thine owne, without any Scripture. If thou bee an Apo∣stolicall writer, be furnished with the doctrine of the Apostles, &c. Bring backe the heretikes to the Scriptures, and so (saieth hee) they will not bee able to maintaine themselues. What would he haue said then at this day of our pretended Ca∣tholikes, who abhorre nothing more, then to bee drawne backe to the Scriptures? Verilie and without all doubt, the same which he saith of these heretikes: Heretici sunt lucifugae Scripturarum, Like Owles they flie from the light of the Scriptures. Wherefore if that which thou speakest be not written, beware of that Vae, that curse, which is pronounced by the spirit of God, against them which adde vnto the Scriptures. S. Cyprian, Cypr. de laps. & in Epist. 74. Doe the Martyrs commaund any thing to be done? But what if it bee not written in the law of the Lord. &c? That (saith he) must bee done which is written, for so God appointed Iosua: wee must haue good regard to see if it bee written in the Gospel, in the Epistles of the Apostles, or their acts: for if it be, then such holy traditions must be obserued and kept. Traditions, as we see, contained in the Scriptures: for so did the fathers vse this worde, and not for all that which may be ima∣gined
in mans braine, prouided that it be of continuance and toleration. Origen, Orig. in Ierem. & in 25. in Matth. Wee must call the holie Scriptures to witnesse: without these witnesses, the sence and expositions which we giue them, worke no beleefe. VVhatsoeuer the golde bee which is without the Temple, yet it is not sanctified, and as litle that sense which is besides the Scripture. Athanasius: Athan. contr. Idol. ad Ioui∣nian. in 2. orat. contra Arrios. de interpret. Psalm in Sy∣nopsi. Theodor. l. 1. Socrat. l. 1. & 5 Basi. de ver. fid. in Mora. & Regu. 26. & 80 The holy Scriptures are sufficient of thēselues for the demonstrating of the truth. The stones wherewith the heretikes are to be stoned, are fetcht from hence: they are the Mistresses of the true faith, the an∣chors and props of our, &c. And this is the cause why in the disputation against the Arrians, Constantine the Emperor breaking the array vnto the Councell of Nice, appoin∣teth not any other weapons. The Euangelicall bookes (saith he) as also those of the Apostles and Prophets, doe teach vs euidently, whatsoeuer wee must beleeue. Let vs gather from thence the deciding of our controuersies. Saint Basil, It is a most euident signe of infidelitie and pride, to go about to bring in any vnwritten thing: for the Lord hath said, My sheepe heare my voyce, and follow not the voice of any other, &c. Whatsoeuer we doe or speake, must bee confirmed from thence, for the beleefe of the good, & cōfusion of the wicked, Euery faithful man hath this proper to him, not to adde any thing thereto, neither yet to ordaine any new thing: for whatsoeuer it is, that is besides the Scripture, is not of faith, Ambros. de vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 3. & in lib de Parad. c. 12. and therefore is sinne. Saint Ambrose: VVhere the Scriptures speake not, who shal speake? VVe must adde nothing to the commaundement, howe good soeuer it be: who so addeth thereto any thing of his owne, argueth it of imperfection, &c. Saint Hierome, The Church of Christ, which dwelleth well, Hieronym. in Mich. l. 1. in ps. 98. in Ezeen. c. 3. in Agg. c. 1 in Mat. c. 23. in Esa. c. 8. and all ouer the world, &c, hath her townes, the law, the Prophets, the Gospel, the Apostles. It goeth not beyond her limits, that is to say, the holy Scriptures. VVhatsoeuer we say, must be auouched from thence. The Scriptures are our true meate, and our true drinke: of this wood is the house of wisdome built: whatsoeuer is not autho∣rized by them, should be contemptible to vs, & is likewise striken with the sword of God, who so is desirous to deliuer himself out of any doubt, let him go thither: but let him know that tendeth any other course, that he shall not attaine vnto the light of the truth, which he shal grope after in darknes. To be short (saith he) what soeuer is said since the apostles times, is cut off, it beareth no authority with it, &c. Hieronym. in Psal. 87. how holie & prudent soeuer the Authors thereof might be. S. August. The Cano∣nicall Scripture is set vpon a throne, and euerie faithfull vnderstanding must be subiect thereunto. If we, yea if an Angel from heauen, August. contr. Faust. l. 11. c. 5. & cont. lit ras. Petil. 6 lib. 2. contr. Dona∣tist. c. 6. tract. 2 in Ep. S. Iohan do teach any thing more then that which is contained in the Scriptures, the Law, or the Gospel, let him be accursed. In our cōtrouersies, let vs bring this ballance, these gold waights, as out of the closet of God, to iudge that of weight from that which is light. Let vs there iudge of errors, for God hath placed in the Scriptures a bright and cleare shining firmament, to discouer & confute them. The Councels: for saith he vnto the Arrians. I alledge not vnto thee the Councell of Nice, Cont. Maxim. Episc. Ar∣rian. l. 3. c. 14. De Ciuit. Dei. l. 11. c. 1. Epist. 166. De vnit. eccles. c. 1. 3. 4. 5. 6. 16. neither therefore doe thou alledge vnto me the councel of Rimini, but let vs trie the maistry by the Scriptures, which both you and I my selfe doe well approue, &c. The Church likewise: for, The citie of God doth beleeue in the Scriptures, and by them is faith conceiued. In the Scriptures (saith he) we haue learned Christ, therein also haue we learned to know the Church: we haue knowne the head, and therefore cannot misknow the bo∣die thereof. VVhether we, or the Donatists be the Church, the Scriptures alone will teach and instruct vs. Saint Chrysostome, The ignoraunce of the Scriptures
hath begotten heresies, &c. Though the dead should liue again, or an Angel des∣cend frō heauen, Chrysost. in hom. de Laza. yet we must principally and before them beleeue the Scripture. The Angels are but seruants & ministring spirits, but the Scripture is the Lord & maister. In Epi. ad Gal. hom. 1. In 5. Mat. hom. 43. & 49. In 1. ad Thess. homil. 7. In 2. ad Corin. homil. 33. In Psal. 5.95.142.147. In at this gate doe both the sheepe and shepheard enter, they driue a∣way heretikes, who so entreth not by them is a theefe. The Scripture is the king∣dome of heauen, it is inclosed therein, and fastned thereunto. The gate of this kingdome, is the vnderstanding of the Scriptures. Setting our course and sailing after them, wee haue the sonne of God, for our patron and protector: they are our rule and our squire. As the light is vnto the eies, so is the law of God vnto our spirits, without it all our senses halt. An heire doth willingly possesse himselfe of his fathers will and testament, and so should we no lesse of the Scrip∣tures, the furniture and prouision for our warre against sinne and Sathan him∣selfe, &c. In which saith he in another place, wee must either denie Christ, or blot out the Scriptures, or else become the obedient seruants of the Scriptures. And if he said this then against the heretikes of his time, then much more against Antichrist to come, and vpon farre more iust causes and considerations. For saith he, when this cursed heresie, the armie of Antichrist shall possesse the Churches, there will not bee found any proofe or maner of helpe to trie and know Christendome by, but the holy Scriptures. By them alone a man shall know where and who shall bee the true church. In this confusion and hurlie burlie, there will bee no want of bro∣ching and blasing abrode of miracles: for euen alreadie the counterfet Christi∣ans haue most: but and if a man looke any other way then to the Scriptures, hee cannot but bee offended, perish, and fall into the abhomination of desolation, which shall bee in the holie places of the Church. And therefore our sauiour Christ knowing afore hand, that such confusion should follow in the latter daies, will that we flie vnto the Scriptures. And now also this is the cause, why according to the aduertisement of Saint Chrysostome, we call you thereunto, we which thus alledge and contend, with the hazard of our liues, and for the working of your saluation and our owne, that that Antichrist is alreadie come, and seated in your Church: and all this according to the Scriptures, and by the Scriptures. Hereto you replie, If his Scriptures alone take place in this controuersie, then what shall become of so many goodly traditions? What becom∣meth them of the traditions 1. Cor. 11. What shall become of our Church? Verely if you speake of diuine traditions such as whereof Saint Paule saith, I haue receiued of the Lord, Quod & tradidi vobis, whatsoeuer I haue deliuered vnto you, of those which haue their foundation in the Scriptures, and whereof Irenaeus saith vnto vs; Looke what Gospel the Apostles preached, the same they deliuered vnto vs, tradiderunt, in∣quit, nobis, in the Scriptures. Of them saith Saint Cyprian, which descend from the authoritie of the Gospel, Cypri. in Epi. 74. ad Pomp. and the writing of the Apostles. Verelie we will be readie to defend them, if you will beleeue vs, with common armour: we shall be both the one and the other, quit and freed from all our paines and trouble, for the Scriptures and they wil mutuallie acknowledge one another, as doe the little riuers, and their heads or springs: be∣ing touched with the touchstone of the Scripture, they will hold their value. But if by Tra∣ditions you meane mans inuentions, and doctrines that are without, and out of the Scrip∣tures: then we tell you that Christ hath giuen definitiue sentence thereof: In vaine do you serue me, Matth. 15 9 teaching for doctrines the commaundements of men. And thus spake he to the Pharisies, who wholy rested themselues in the Church, & in the Sorbone of that time, which said as you do of yours at Trent, that it was no lesse grieuous an offence to commit a∣gainst,
or omit any thing contained in their traditions, In Thal. ord 4. tract. 4. dist. 10 Esay. 29, 13. then and if such commission or o∣mission had beene in respect of any point of the law it selfe. And there is great like lihoode that it is come vpon you, which was forespoken by the Prophets: They haue serued mee according to the ordinances of men, Ierem. 8, 8. and therefore wisedome shall perish from their wise men: They haue cast behind them the worde of the Lord, and there is no wisdome in them. But if you suspect the soundnesse of the Scripture, Iust. in Tryph or rather the vp∣rightnesse of God in his owne cause, then let vs heare the fathers. Iustine: We must giue credite to God and his ordinances alone, and not vnto humane traditions. And that he ruleth them according to the Scriptures, appeareth by that which he said before; That Dauid, that the Euangelists, that the Apostles doe teach vs, &c. Cyp. in Epi. 74 Saint Cy∣prian, If it be commaunded in the Gospel, if it be contained in the Epistles or acts of the Apostles, let vs obserue it as diuine and holie. But if it be not there, then what followeth but the contrarie? Saint Basil: VVe must learne the Scriptures, Basil. regul. 95 as concer∣ning that which is to be practised in them, as well to replenish our spirit with pie∣tie, as to leaue of to accustome humane constitutions. Saint Ierome: Hiero. in Esas It is no mar∣uell (saith he speaking of the Iewes,) if you follow your traditions, seeing that eue∣rie country goeth to seeke counsaile at their Idols: but God verely hath giuen vs his scriptures, and darknesse shall ouerwhelme you if you follow them not. As also vnto Christians, for euen in his time, saith he, it was come to the lees. In. Matth. 23. VVo be vnto you wretched Christians, to whom the sinnes of the Pharisies are translated and come, euen that damnable tradition of theirs, &c. wee swallow downe against the commaundement of God the things that are great, and hunt after the opi∣nion of religion, in the small and little ones, &c. And once for all: The sworde, Ad Laetam. saith he, of the Lord striketh at all those doctrines, which are found bearing the shewe of Apostolicall traditions, without the authoritie and testimonie of the Scrip∣tures. And this is the verie thing whereof Saint Augustine so greatly complained him∣selfe in his time, that in the Church euery thing was full of presumption, S. August. in Epi. ad Iouin. In S. Ioha. tract. 96.97. and preiudicate opinion, that contrarie to the expresse worde of Christ, the yoke of Christians was be∣come more heauie and greeuous, then that of the Iewes: That men made lesse conscience of the law of God, then of the least humane ordinances, or rather fansies. All this, or the most part thereof, comming from heretikes, and certaine Apocripha bookes, vnder the shadow, (saith he) of this worde, From the Lord, I haue yet many things to say, insomuch as that there is not the veriest foole that is, that dareth not to abuse the same: A place that some obiect against vs euen vnto this day about the same matter. But (saith he) when the Lord hath kept any thing hidden from vs, who is he that is so vaine, as to goe about to gesse at it, or so rash and foole-hardie as to take vpon him to re∣ueale it. And this is the cause why Saint Bernard, wearie of those insupportable traditions, Bern. Epist. 91 ad Abba. Suis∣sioni congreg. said, I desire with all my hart to present my selfe as a partie in that Councel, wherin traditiōs are not obstinately defended, nor suspersticiously obserued: but rather the good and perfect will of God, with all humilitie and diligence searched after and sought for. And againe: De precepto & dispensat. If there be any such as charitie hath beene the inuen∣ter of, it is iust that by the same charitie they bee ceased and giuen ouer, if it bee so found expedient. Againe, The precepts which are of the ordinances of God, are necessarie, but those which are of humane constitution, arbitrarie, and at dis∣cretion, &c. And in deed the Ecclesiasticall historie doth witnesse vnto vs, that the anci∣ent fathers did leaue such things, as were meere obseruations, indifferent both vnto whole Churches, and particular persons, not inforcing any thing, but what was of the pure and vn∣defiled
commaundement of God, as is to be read in Socrates, Nicephorus, &c. Can not the Church then ordaine any thing? Socrates. Niceph. l. 12. c 14. Wherein, or how far the authority of the Church stretcheth. And wherein shall the authoritie there∣of consist? Nay let vs not feare that it hath ouer little to doe. It is not a small thing, in the blindnesse wherewith man is blinded, and in the darknesse of this worlde, to keepe it selfe from straying and wandring out of the way of life, to keepe it selfe from loosing the heauen∣lie light, through the sight of the eyes, and to guide it selfe and others by the same. And would to God it would haue contented it selfe to haue knowne this onely, and to haue beene ignorant in all the rest. Where as hauing toucht the forbidden tree, and hauing transgressed this worde, Deute. 4. & 12 Cursed be they which adde thereunto, shee hath opened her eyes to these false and deceyuing fiers, but shut them at the light, and so consequentlie lost her puritie, loyaltie, and innocencie; and leauing the truth of God, is further become left vnto her∣selfe. The ancient fathers verily, The Fathers made faith the limits of the Church, and the Scriptures the bounds & limits of faith. Colos. 2.8. 1. Cor. 4.6. Iohn 8.13. Not by succes∣sion. Iren. l. 3. con:. heres. c. 11. & l. 4. c. 43. & 44. Tertul. de pre∣script. & de pudicit. Id verius, quod prius. Tertul. de virg. land. Con. Praxeam. Tertul. de pre∣script. Cypr. Ep. 55. De lapsis. In tract de simplicit. pon∣tif. & in ep. 74. Gregor. Nazi∣anz. in orat. habit ad lau∣dem S. A∣thanas. & cont. Arrian.  haue not thought it any thing dishonoured, when they tyed it to the obedience of her Spouse, for they bounded it by faith, and faith by the Scriptures. And it would haue beene on the contrarie, a verie strange doctrine vnto them, that it shoulde haue spoken or heard any other language then her owne, seeing it is said vnto her by the A∣postle; See that none spoile you through Philosophie, or vaine deceitfulnesse, ac∣cording to the traditions of men. Againe, Learne of vs not to be wise aboue that which is written. And in vs, saith the Apostle, that is to say, by our example. And by her Spouse himselfe. If you abide in my worde, you shall be truly my disciples. Irenaeus saith; The Gospel is the pillar and foundation of the Church. It behoueth it to flie from all those, which flie from and forsake the principal succession, and cleaue vnto thē that keepe the doctrine of the Apostles. Tertul. The Church is knowne to be apostolical, not by nuber, not by succession of Bishops, but by the consan∣guinitie of doctrine. And this doctrine again. In this (saith he) in that the most anci∣entis most true, & that is most ancient, which was from the beginning: and that which is from the beginning, is that which is frō the Apostles: from the Apostles (saith he) who left the Scriptures for vs, vpon whom are come the last ages: the Scriptures, by which the truth is defended, and not by tradition or custome. For how (saith he) could a man be able to speake of the things of faith, but by the wri∣tings of faith? Saint Cyprian; Those are the Church (saith he) which dwell in the house of God. But how? Verily (saith he) who so is separated & diuided from the Gospel, the same is not ioyned to the Church: for this is all one (saith he) after the maner, whereby Antichrist was brought in, vnder the name of Christ, by coun∣terfetting things likely, thereby subtilly to frustrate the truth: where as it had be∣hooued him to haue returned to the originall of truth, & haue hasted back to the spring-head, to see at what place the pipes conueying the water vnto vs, were broken, & by this meanes to haue lent his eare vnto the doctrine of the heauenly Master. For saith Nazianzene vnto the Arrians; The church is not defined by mul∣titude; if they haue the people, we haue the faith; if they haue the golde and sil∣uer, we haue the true doctrine; succession must be valued by pietie, and not by Sea, or seate. Who so retaineth the same doctrine of faith, hee possesseth the same Sea: as he that retaineth the contrarie in the same Sea, is to be helde as an enemy. Because, saith Saint Chrysostome; The Church consisteth not in walles, but in faith: so that where faith is, there the Church is; where faith is not, there the Church is not. This is the true Ierusalem, whose foundations are placed vpon the moun∣taines of the Scriptures. As also, (saith he) he goeth not out from the Church, that
goeth out from the bodie, but rather he that forsaketh the spirit, the foundation of the ecclesiasticall truth. We then (saith he) are gone out from them, in respect of the place, but they frō vs in respect of faith: we haue left with them the founda∣tions of the walles; but they haue left with vs the foundations of the Scriptures. Saint Ambrose; Christ alone is he whom no man ought to forsake, or change a∣way: to whom it is by good right said, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the wordes of life. It is then giuen vs in charge aboue all things, to seeke out the faith of the Church, in which if Christ dwell, howe that then wee must make choise thereof, (namely for our habitation:) but if wee finde therein either an vnfaithfull people, or an hereticall teacher, that spoileth the dwelling, such Synagogue is to be auoided. And if, to be briefe, a Church forsake the faith, it behooueth vs to forsake and abandon it, &c. And he yeeldeth a reason: Christ (saith he) is the rocke: Petra, non Pe∣trus. S. Ambr. l. 1 de paenit. c. 9. the foundation of the Church, that is faith: if thou be in the rocke, thou art also in the church. But to the end we may not take one rocke for another, Know (saith he) that they which haue not Peters faith, can neither haue Peters portion and inheri∣tance. Saint Ierome expounding the Creede, He hath not said, I beleeue in the holie catholike church; but I beleeue the holie church. The holie church is that which keepeth the faith of Christ, in the integritie and soundnesse thereof. It consisteth not of walles, but vpon the veritie of doctrine. VVhere faith is, there is it also, and there it was at such time as heretikes possessed all these churches. In Psal. 133. VVouldst thou enter into this church, and that by the right way? In Psal. 5. It is the reading of the Scrip∣tures. Do thou, O Lord, so lay out and fit my way, as that I may not fall, or take offence in these Scriptures, seeing that by them I desire to enter into thy church. Yea (saith he) these Scriptures they are the kingdome of God himselfe. In S. Mat c. 21. And when it is said, that the Lord hath translated the kingdom of heauen from the Iewes vn∣to vs, it is as much as to say, that he hath taken the Scriptures from them, to giue them vnto vs. In them (saith Saint Augustine) we finde Christ, in them wee are to seeke and search for the Church: in them, and by them, it is shewed vnto vs. Aug de vnit. Eccles. And let vs not once imagine that we haue and hold the church, because we are in that wherein Ambrosius, or Optatus haue beene before vs: no nor yet because there are miracles wrought therein: for euen our Lord himselfe woulde that his disci∣ples should be confirmed by the Scriptures, more then by any other meanes, and of that nature are the titles, precepts, and foundations of our cause. Cont. Petil. l. 3. c. 6. & in Psalm. 69. If then (saith he) there be any question, either of Christ, or of the church, or of any thing what∣soeuer, that belongeth either to life, or faith, cursed bee hee that goeth out of the Scriptures. To the ende that thou maist not be deceiued, and that no man may cause thee to take him for Christ, that is not Christ, & that for the church, which should not be the church, hearken vnto the voice of the shepheard; he hath she∣wed himselfe vnto thee, he hath shewed thee the church, In Ioh. ser. 131 My sheepe heare my voyce, &c. The church is the house of God, but it is not God: wee beleeue the church, but we beleeue not in the church: It is the mother, In Epist. Ioh. tract. 3. In Psal. 103. Obpubilatur Epist. 48. Srm. 237. de Temp. ad Lucernam. Ber. in conuer. S. Paul. ser. 1. but the two testa∣ments are her teates; from them we must sucke the milke of all the mysteries of our saluation. The Bishops may erre, there haue beene of them authours, both of schismes and heresies. The church in like maner is sometimes eclipsed, and mar∣red with wet and tempestuous weather. The surest course is to make the Scrip∣tures our looking-glasse, as also for vs to walke in the torch-light of the scriptures. O Lord our good God (said Saint Bernard) such as seeme to holde the Primacie
in the church, I Cant. ser. 76 are the formost & most forward to persecute thee. It is not inough for such as should be our guard and watchmen, to giue ouer their care of protec∣tion and vigilancie, except they further worke our spoile. At the least (saith he else∣where) let him abound in his sense & vnderstanding that will, Epist. 77. but as for vs I could wish that they would let vs abound in the sense of the Scriptures. In the meane time, Durand. appel∣lat mensuram fidei in prefat. Sentent. Tho∣mas regulam intel ectus in  ad Tim. cap. 6 lect. 1. Scot. mensur. Theol. in l. 1. Sent. q. 1 Gerson, regulā fid, de cōmu∣nic. sub vtra∣que. against these Scriptures, the law of the Church, the measure of faith; the rule and bridle of all maner of vnderstanding: I speake according to the Schoolemen themselues, Thomas, Durand, Scotus, Gerson, &c. These miserable Doctors and teachers either of this world, or of the Prince of this world, enemies of the true light, children of darknesse, seeing they please themselues so greatly therein, doe not cease to furnish vs with ap∣peales, being imployed euer and anon, more in making of such, then of any other bookes. So that if we had nothing else against them, but that we might iustly suspect them of vnsounde dealing, seeing the auncient fathers of the Church did alwayes make their appeales vnto them, against the heretikes: and that in such sort, as that when they once perceiued them to come within the bounds of their iurisdiction, they held themselues victorers in their cause. The holie Scripture, say they to vs, is not sufficient. And what other sufficiencie doe wee looke for therein, The scripture sufficient, but to possesse God, who is sufficient of himself, euen for al maner of thinges? or what other, to be briefe, but to come to saluation? But and if thou wilt not beleeue the Apostle, who telleth thee, that the holy Scriptures are able to make thee wise vnto saluation, by faith which is in Christ, that is, the man of God: the Euangelist, the teacher of others: Iohn 5 39. Iohn 20.31. at the least beleeue the sonne of God, who sendeth vs so expressely to the Scriptures: Because (saith he) that we haue life in them. And hast thou them to seeke and search for thine owne saluation? The Lord commaundeth thee to search them diligent∣ly, in them thou hast life. Dost thou labour and seeke how to teach it others? They are pro∣fitable to teach, conuince, correct and instruct. By them the sonne of God, the eternall word, did teach his disciples Hast thou to deale against heretikes? By the verie same hee stopte the mouthes of the Pharisies, and confounded the Sadduces, who did not admit of any mo par∣ties then one. The heretikes cannot keepe their holde before them: yea they cannot possiblie defend themselues, otherwise then by refusing them: No sooner are they drawne there∣to (saith Tertullian) but they are confounded, whether Ebionites, Hermogenists, or Marcionites, &c. Yea, and if the controuersie should bee against the diuell himselfe, we know that from thence the Lord put him to silence; that he cōfuted him in all his schoole points, Apocal. and sent him backe againe to the bottomlesse pit of hell: how much more the sonne perdition, for the ouercomming and discomfiting of whom, there are not any other armor or weapons spoken of? As he that must be ouerthrowne with the breath of his mouth, and beaten downe by the powerfulnesse of his Scriptures? wherefore the Scripture hauing beene of such sufficiencie in those dayes, both for the children of God, and against his aduersaries, where shall it sithence haue lost that his sufficiencie? Or who shall not rather suspect that we are become ouer sufficient, that is to say, spoyled with presumption? That we accuse it of insufficiencie, because our pretended and deuised sufficiencies are not found therein? And againe, if it were so much, at such times as the Church had no more but the olde Testament, both vnto saluation and condemnation: what shall we say of the times succeeding, and those of the present, According to the Fathers. Iren cont hae∣res. l. 2 c. 47. accompanied with the accomplishment of that in the person of Christ, and made more cleare by the new? And verilie the fathers also haue carefully kept themselues from this point, rather to be tearmed infidelitie, then errour or heresie. Irenaeus saith, We knowe verie well that the Scriptures are perfect: for they are appointed and spo∣ken
by the worde of God, and his spirit. Tertullian: Tertul. contra Prax. & Her∣mog Cypr. de Bap∣tism. Christi. I adore and reuerence the fulnesse of the Scriptures: the scripture hath his reason, and is sufficient of it self. Saint Cyprian: Speake on Lord, thy seruant heareth. Christian religion shall finde that out of this Scripture doe spring the rules of all manner of doctrine, and that from thence riseth, as also that thither returneth, al whatsoeuer the discipline and gouernment of the Church doth containe. Antonius the Hermite; Antonius in sui Epistolis. Athanasius cont. Idola. Ad Serapion. In Ep. Senten. Dyonis. Hillar. l. 2. de Trinit. The Scriptures are sufficient for all manner of knowledge of God, and all manner of discipline. Athanasius, who notwithstanding hath to deale against the Arrians, The holy scriptures are sufficient for the demonstration of the truth: learne onely the scriptures, for the lessons which thou findest there, will be sufficient for thee. Although (saith he in another place) I haue not found this word , cōsubstantiall, yet so it is as that I haue found the thing it selfe. Saint Hillarie vpon the same argument: The word of God, which by the testimonie of the Gospel hath beene transfused and con∣ueyed into our eares, is sufficient for the beleeuers: for what is there belonging vnto mans saluation, that is not to be found contained therein? Or what is there therein either lame or obscure? Verily euerie thing therein is full and perfect, Basil, de vera fide. Homil. 29. In oratione Ethica In Esai. c. 2. Chrys. hom. 9 in 2. ad Tim. &c. Saint Basill attributeth it to the same pride and infidelitie, to bring in any thing that is not written, or to reiect that which is written. The old and new Testament, (saith he) are the treasure of the church. All the commaundements of God are written, and must be obserued. All whatsoeuer is besides the straight and euen line of the Scripture, is a cursed abhomination before God. S. Chrysostome: The holie Scripture teacheth thee whatsoeuer thou shouldest know, or be ignorant of: Thou art a Gentile, and wouldest become a Christian: but our controuersies doe trouble thee. Thou knowest not to whom to goe, for euerie man pretendeth and alledgeth the Scriptures, &c. Knowe that that which agreeth therewith is christian; but that which disagreeth with the same, In Acta. hom. 33.  Aug. de bono Viduit. De doct, christ l. 2. c. 9. serm. 88. ad fratres lib. de confes. 7 c. 7. In S. Ioh. tract. 49. vbi viamad vitam. De consensu Euan. l. 1. c. v. t. is farre off from the rule of christianitie. Likewise, saith he in another place: It is the propertie of the diuell, to adde vnto the commaundements of God. Saint Augustine: The Scripture (saith he) doth prefixe and set before vs a law, teaching vs not to be more wise then we ought: looke not therefore that to teach thee, on my behalfe and part, is any o∣ther thing, but to expound vnto thee the wordes of my master: for euen (saith he) in the things that are openly taught in the Scriptures, is fully found al that which is to be done, or left vndone: all that which appertaineth vnto faith, or concer∣neth maners. Some haue made choise to write of all that which may seeme to be sufficient for the saluation of the faithfull: In thy Christ, O Lord, and in the ho∣ly Scriptures, I perswade my selfe, that thou hast placed the way of mans salua∣tion. Whatsoeuer he would haue that we should reade of his deedes or wordes, Cyril. Alexan. In S. Iohan. l. 12 c. vlt. that hath he commaunded his Apostles to write, as if it had beene done with his own hands, &c. S. Cyprian Bishop of Alexandria; All that the Lord hath done is not written, but rather so much as the pen-men thought to be sufficient, both for ma∣ners, and doctrine of faith, to the end that shining through a right faith, manners, and the truth, we may come to the kingdom of Christ. Now those pen-men of whom he speaketh, were they not inspired of God? Is it not his holy spirit himselfe? Againe, Lib. 5. in. Leui. whe∣ther it were he or Origen vpon Leuiticus. In the two Testaments, we may finde out and discusse, whatsoeuer matter concerning God, & from the same gather, what∣soeuer knowledge of things: in so much as that if any thing remaine not deter∣mined by these Scriptures, there is not any third, which we are to receiue and ad∣mit
of for the authorising of such knowledge. Cyrill Bishop of Ierusalem: Beleeue me not, Cyril. Hieroso∣lim. Catec. 4. if I shew it thee not by the Scriptures: for the saluation of our faith is not bolted out by the meanes of any disputation, but plainly demonstrated by them. Thom. 1. part. Sum. q. 1. art. 3. Supra omne debitum crea∣turae. Et q. 147, art. 4 p. 3. in add q. 6, art, 6. And what will they say more, when as Thomas one of their side, saith; That the things that proceede of the onely will of God, besides whatsoeuer is due vnto the creature, cannot be made knowne vnto vs, otherwise then in that they are de∣liuered vnto vs in the Scripture: That the doctrine of faith and the Sacraments, cannot bee but of Christ: That the ordinances and statutes of the church are not of themselues of the necessitie of saluation? When also expounding the place in con∣trouersie at this day, of the second to Timothie, chapter the third, he vseth these wordes: That the Scriptures teach the truth, In 2. ad Tim. c. 3. reproue falshood, perswade vnto that which is good, and draw backe from that which is euill: Not (saith he) after any faint or feeble maner, but to the perfecting of the worke of saluation; yea (saith he) euen in the highest degree, &c. And Scotus after him, That the holy scripture is sufficient for the Pilgrime, that is to say, for the Christian trauailing heere below, to come to the end of his purposed voiage, that is to say, vnto saluation: That this way is not doubt∣full; but most certaine: that in the same likewise is founde sufficiently laid open, whatsoeuer is to be beleeued, hoped for, or done. And Cardinall Caietan vpon the place afore named; To the making (saith he) of the man wise vnto eternall salua∣tion, and furnished with all those partes requisite for the making of the man of God perfect. Admit (will some say vnto vs) that it is sufficient, The scripture is cleare and plaine vnto saluation. Lactan, l. 5. c. 1. but yet notwithstanding obscure, dif∣ficult, ambiguous, & by consequent daungerous. This is all that which can be said against a wicked mā making his will, & taking pleasure to set his heires togither by the eares, through sutes in the law. And what would they say then to the Gentiles, to Celsus, to Iulian, to all the Philosophers, who tooke occasion by reason of the facilitie and simplicitie of the same, to account thereof as base and contemptible. He that is the light of lights, and together there∣with all goodnes it selfe, shall he delight himselfe in becomming obscure and darke vnto vs? This light that lightneth euerie man that commeth into the world; shall he be come downe here vpon earth to blind the world, euen them whom he hath chosen and set apart from the world? Shall not the essentiall & almightie word of God haue power or knowledge, or will to expresse and make plaine his meaning in his worde; when as he is come from heauen vnto vs, from the bosome of the father amongst men, to expresse and manifest himselfe? The ho∣ly Ghost sent downe from the father, and the sonne, to teach the Apostles the things concer∣ning saluation, and in them vs; comming downe vpon them in tongues of fire, to interpret himselfe in all maner of languages, shall he be no better then barbarisme and darknesse? shall he not be prouided of wordes cleare and plaine inough, to make himselfe to be vnderstood in the Scriptures? Verily we learne not this lesson in the Prophets, if they be not able to auouch vnto vs in that they speake their own cause. Thy word (saith Dauid) is a torch vnto my feete, Psal. 119. & 19 & 12. that is to say, a light, causing our eies to see. They that speake not according to this word, (saith Esai) it is because they haue no light in them. Neither yet of S. Peter, Esai. 8.2. Pet. 1.19. who in his iudgement hath thought it to be so far off from obscuritie, as that he hath commaunded vs to hearken to the Propheticall worde, as vnto a light that shineth in dark∣nesse. And what then shall be the brightnesse of the Gospel, which is the light of this light? the Sunne in respect of the lampe; and declared vnto vs by the Sonne, the brightnesse of the glorie of the father? Afterward the Apostle saith, that he hath spoken diuerse wayes to the Fathers, and to the Prophets, &c. And to whom then shall he be obscure? to whom shall
he bee hidden, except as Saint Paule saith vnto vs, vnto them which perish, 2. Cor. 44. to them whose vnderstāding the God of this world hath blinded, to the end that the light of the Gospel of the glorie of Christ might not shine vnto them. Likewise the Fathers, they speake not according to our aduersaries: According to the fathers. for when they aun∣swere the Pagans, they go not about to excuse the simplicitie and clearnesse thereof, by deny∣ing them; but rather, say they, it behoued them to be such, to the ende that that which was for the saluation of euerie particular partie, might be vnderstoode of all. Irenaeus saith: Iren. cont. hae res. l. 2. c. 42, & 67. Iust. in Tryph. Tertul. de re∣surrect. All the Scripture, both Propheticall and Euangelicall, is manifest and without ambi∣guitie, and may likewise be vnderstoode of all. Iustine; Let vs haue recourse vnto the Scripture, that therein we may find where to be safe and sure. Tertullian: The heretikes shun the light of the Scripture. So farre is it off that they should be able to shrowde themselues vnder the darknesse of the same. Athanasius: Athan. in Epi. ad Iouinian. True faith in Christ is cleare by the Scriptures. Let vs set (saith he against the Arrians) this candle vpon the Candlesticke, and it is sufficient. Saint Hillarie to the same purpose: Hillar. de vnit. patris & fili. The Lord hath set forth the faith of the Gospel, in the greatest simplicitie that possibly can be, and hath fitted his wordes for our capacitie, so farre forth as our infirmitie is able to beare it. Constantine the Emperour likewise in the same cause: Constant. in Concil Nicen. Socrat. l. 1. Chrysost. in 2. ad Thess. hom. 3. in Gen. hom 13. in S Iohn. hom. 6. in Esay. c. 1. in proaem. in Ep. ad Rom. in S. Mat. hom, 49. in S. Ioh. hom. 58. in S. Mat. hom. 22. The Euangeli∣call, Apostolicall, and Propheticall bookes do plainly teach vs, what we are to be∣leeue concerning diuine things. Saint Chrysostome: All things are cleare in the scriptures; they declare themselues, not suffering any man to erre. The truth lieth not hidden, or obscure therein, except it be vnto such as will not search for it. As the light is to the eie, so is the law of God vnto our spirits: such as looke not ther∣to, doe walke in darknesse. Our whole mischiefe is for that we reade it not: that same, which is a doore, by which doe enter both the sheepe and the shepheard more necessarie for the simple & idiot, then for the learned doctor. To be short, in that confusion which shall happen vnder Antichrist, we shall not be able to tell whither to haue recourse, but to the Scriptures: and there are none but those which are of a peruerse heart, that doe not vnderstand the mysteries, being such as in whom the spirit of truth resteth not. There might a whole volume be compiled of the like places. Epiphanius: All things are cleare and euident in the Scriptures, to such as with a holie discourse, according to reason, will heare the worde of God. Epipha. haeres. 69. & 70. Hieronym in Matt c. 22. In Esay. c. 8. Saint Ierome: They erre because they know not the Scriptures: and seeing they are ignorant in them, they know not the power of God, &c. If we follow not the testimonies conteined in them: darknesse will oppresse vs, and ouerrun our doc∣trine, &c. Saint Augustine against the Donatists: Augu. de vnit. eccles. c. 5. Let vs make choise of the plaine and manifest places: for if they should not be found such in the Scriptures, in vain should it be said, that wee shall finde in them to lay open the things shut vp, & to make cleare such as are dark and obscure. Again; Epist 3. There is not any such great difficultie in the Scriptures, to come by the things necessarie vnto saluation: the making likewise whereby they are wouen & set togither, is to be come by of all. There is matter fitting all sorts of spirits, as to correct the peruerse, Praua & parua to nourish the weake and yong nouices, and to delight such as are growne old and great. In the things that are manifestlie apparant in the Scriptures, De peccat me∣litis. l. 2. c. vit. are clearlie founde to be all those which concern faith & maners. When we reason of any thing that is verie obscure, if wee bee not helped by the cleare testimonie of the Scriptures, man must be curbed and kept short for presuming too farre. De doct. Chri∣stian. l. 2. c. 6. The holie Ghost hath in such sort qualified them, as that in the cleare places they feede our hungrie appe∣tite;
and in the obscure they sharpen our dull taste: wee are refreshed with the things that are cleare, and set on worke by the obscure and darke. The profound∣nesse of this worde sharpneth, De verb. dom. serm. 11. & de verb. Apost. serm. 13. and setteth an edge vpon our indeuours, neither doth it for all that denie vs the vnderstanding thereof, &c. Now if thou thinke to in∣ferre hereupon, then there is obscuritie therein: and of this obscuritie to conclude, either an impossibilitie of vnderstanding of them, or else a secking of something therein, that is not there to be found: De verb. Apo. Serm. 13. To the one he answereth thee: The euill spirit hateth vnderstanding, for feare that by vnderstanding he should be forced to do and practise according thereunto: Planissime. De doct. Chri∣stian. l. 2. c. 6. And to the other; That out of all these obscurities there is not almost a∣ny thing gathered, that is not elsewhere deliuered in verie plaine and cleare sort. In briefe, to the ende thou maist not bring in any distinction betwixt the word written, and vnwritten, where as the Psalmist saith; Thy worde is a torch vnto my feete, &c. This is (saith he) that worde which is contained in the holy Scriptures. And againe; The faithful that cleaueth to them, cannot be dazeled with the iniquitie of the world; no more then the starres fixed and set in the firmament, which cannot haue their light put out by the night. So farre is it from him, as our aduersaries doe, to terrifie the fathfull with going about to make them afraid of it, by reason of the obscuritie that is therein. Yet so it is, But there are darke places. 2. Pet. 3. will you say, as that there are difficult things in the Scripture; for S. Peter likewise saith, That in the Epistles of Saint Paule, there are, &c. And what booke is there in any maner of facultie whatsoeuer, which hath not some, yea and many moe? But if thou hadst diligently read this text, and well weighed the Relatiue, it would haue appeared, that he saith not, that the Epistles of Saint Paul are difficult, but cortaine things in certaine points, which he handleth in them. And indeed what higher thing is there then the mysterie of our saluation, or more profoundly expounded? What thing more obscure, then that of the Tri∣nitie; or more clearlie vttered? But thou shouldest therewithall haue added that which followeth; That the ignorant and vnstable doe wrest them, as they also doe other places of Scripture to their owne destruction Verilie for these obscurities, the Fathers did not driue Christians from the Scriptures; but rather encouraged them to labour there∣in so much the more. Iren. l. 3. c. 12. contr. haeres. You haue (say they vnto vs) this furtherance, that there is not anie contrarietie therein; and further, that one place may expound, but not make more intricate an other. If we could but say as much of the Bookes of other sciences, where∣in so many contradictions, as also antinomies doe encounter and crosse one another, how ma∣nie difficulties should we auoide? how much of our way and trauaile might we thinke our selues to haue gained? Lib. 2. c. 46. contr. hres. Irenaeus saith; The whole Scripture, which God hath giuen vs, will be found to agree togither; the things spoken manifestly do expound the parables therein, Ambr. in psal. 119. serm. 8. &c. Saint Ambrose; There is much obscuritie in the Scriptures, but if thou knocke with the hande of thy Spirit at their gate, thou shalt begin to gather the reason of that which is there said; and it will be set open vnto thee, not by any other means then the word it selfe. Augu. de doct. Christian. l. 2. c. 25. Iren. l. 2. c. 46. contr. haeres. Basil in Asee∣ticis. 267. Aug Ep. 48 & de doctrina Christiana. l 2. c. 6. S. August. To illustrate the obscure ma∣ners of speaking, let vs take our paternes from the manifest ones; and so of plaine and euident sentences for the opening of the hidden & couert ones. But otherwise, if vnder the colour of obscuritie, thou labor to gather any point of new doctrine, Irenaeus will say vnto thee; Thou must reason from the cleare places of the Scripture, and not from parables. Saint Basil: The things that may seeme darkly spoken in one place, are most cleare in another. Saint Augustine: Who is so impudent, as to expound a∣nie place of Scripture for himselfe by an Allegorie, if he haue not an other verie
cleare place in the Scripture, which may make it plaine? Seeing likewise saith he in another place, That of all that which is obscure therein, Lomb. l. 3. d. 5 there riseth not any thing almost, but that which is cleare elsewhere. Lombard: Tho. in Sum. q. 147. art, 10. Pet. de Alliac Where as the Scripture is si∣lent, it will be good for vs not to affirme any thing. Thomas; Thou canst not rea∣son from an Allegoricall sense, &c. To be briefe, the Cardinall Alliaco, That the scrip∣ture is a lampe that giueth light; and that wee must haue recourse thither to haue saluation. Gerson; That an idiot, a woman, yea a childe, Gers. de Script & de exa. doct. Pic. in Quest. an Papa sup. Concil. are better to be beleeued alledging the Scripture, then the Pope and a whole Councell. And the Counte Io∣hannes Picus Mirandula, after the same manner. So farre off were these men, who yet were the lights of their time, from this darke opinion, sprung no doubt out of the pit of vtter darknesse; That the Scriptures were not any thing but darknesse. But in a word, the mischiefe is, for that we will finde it difficult, because that in the clearnesse thereof, it is im∣possible for vs to finde out our inuentions; obscure because that our traditions cannot stand before this light; and imperfect, because that neither by it, nor before it, we are able to de∣fend our imperfections. Yet so it is, that our aduersaries replie, that there are controuersies amongst vs, that wee cannot agree of the expounding of the places which are alledged respectiuely; How they must be ex∣pounded. and therefore who shall expound them vnto vs? who shall cause vs to admit of one exposition, more then of another? Let vs striue thitherward, hauing Gods grace to assist vs; let vs come thereto with the Zeale of his glorie, the loue of the truth, and the desire of saluation; and then a meane knowledge ioyned with a good conscience, would speedily attaine the ende. And for some small taste thereof, may it please the reader to examine certaine rules that follow, being those which the auncient fathers doe teach vs. The first is, That we be agreed vpon the Canonicall Scriptures, thereby to auoyde the confounding of them with the Apocrypha; that is, To agree of the bookes cal∣led Canonical. of the setting downe of the spirit of God for iudge, rightlie discerned and distinguished from euerie spirit of man: for humane scrip∣ture, after the maner of monie, is so much the more hurtfull and damnable, by how much the coine that it hath counterfeited is the better: and hereof the olde Church hath had a speciall regard. I call this the first, because that by this doore, it did perceiue both vanities and heresies to enter into the Church, vnder a fained name of our Lord and his Apostles. They tell vs, that the Scripture is the ballance, the rule, and the squire, &c. Hieronym. ad Laetam. And therefore to render to things, their weight, measure, and streightnesse, it is necessarie that it should be iust. And this is that which S. Ierome telleth vs; Let vs looke vnto our selues to beware of the Apocrypha bookes: and if we will reade them, &c. let vs know that they are not theirs, by whose names they are called, that many faultie things are mingled there amongst; that it craueth a singular prudencie in him, that loo∣keth to gather golde out of mud; and in a worde, that we must not reade them, ad dogmatum veritatem, for the confirming of doctrines. So farre off is he from beeing of iudgement, that wee shoulde rake togither the dregges of all manner of such Au∣thours from all parts, therewith to defile the Church. And in another place; In Symb. Ruf. in Praefat, in Prou. & in Reg. in prolog. Galeato. Hibe∣ras naemas. Certaine per∣uerse men, to strengthen their opinions, haue inserted vnder the name of holie personages, things that they neuer writ: and notwithstanding there are some which preferre these Hiberian fables, before the Authētike bookes. And this is the cause why S. August. doth presse the heretikes continually with the Canonicall Bookes, and refuseth the Apocrypha, wherin they did their whole indeuour to ground themselues. Let vs lay aside both on the one part & the other, that which we produce frō elswhere then out of the Canonicall bookes: let vs shewe forth the holy Church, by the
holy Oracles; let vs search for it in the holie Canonicall Scriptures, &c. To them I yeeld this honour, that their Authour could not erre any maner of way: the o∣thers I read in such sort, how holy or lerned soeuer they might be, as that I beleeue them not in that which they say, because they say it, but because they perswade me either by the Canonicall bookes, or else by probable reason, &c. And therefore he saith further: Ep. 19. ad Hie∣ronym. l. 2. con. Dona. c. 3. con. Faust. l. 11. c. 5. The aduised searcher of the holy Scriptures shall reade them first all ouer, but those onely which are called Canonicall; for then he shall be able to reade the others more safely, being alreadie instructed in the faith of the truth, for feare that otherwise they might forestall and get the aduantage of a weake spirit, abuse it with dangerous lies, & infect it with some preiudicate opinion, cōtrarie to sound vnderstanding. Lib. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 15.23. For although therin be found some truth, notwithstanding because of many vntruthes, they are vtterly without all Canonicall authoritie. And in the meane time what impudencie is it to go about to make him (to giue credit to the decree by committing the offence of a most notorious lie, D. 9. c. in Ca∣nonicis. acknowledged also by Alphonsus of Castres) to haue said, That the Decretall Epistles of the Bishops of Rome, are of the same authoritie, Cyril Hierosol Catech. 4. that the Canonicall Scriptures? Cyrill Patriarke of Ierusalem: Studie these Scriptures onely, which wee boldly and confidently reade in the Church, but haue not any thing to doe with the Apocrypha. Nazian. de ve∣ris Scripturae libris. Nazianzene: In them wee see the light, &c. But to the ende that the bookes that are excluded from thence may not deceiue thee, learne to know the true and legitimate number, &c. If you find any other then those, holde them for base and bastardlie ones. Yea, and this was one of the first workes of the Apostolike and Primitiue Church, to seale vp vnto vs the Canon of theese bookes, by the same spirit, which had inspired them, and so called them Canonicall, as if a man should say Reguler, because they are ordained the rule of Christian doctrines, and stand as a law to guide all our discourses. And to this first number it belongeth not, neither hath belonged since then, to any either man or Church, to chop in, or to adde other bookes, without the violating of the iudgement of the Apostolike Primitiue Church. For what other thing were it but to say, that it had excluded the bookes which it should haue ad∣mitted? Wherefore we may thinke that what they haue said of such as at this day leade vs to Iewish fables, Tit. 1.14. and to the commaundements of men (which Saint Paule so earnestly war∣neth vs of) to the pretended Gospels of Saint Iames, Saint Bartholmew, Nicodemus, Io∣seph of Aremathia, &c. yea and to the verie bookes, which the Church both Christian and Iewish haue pronounced Apocrypha, was not done to teach vs to draw from thence anie patternes of good manners, as sometimes the olde fathers do, but pretended articles of faith: not to strengthen any poynt of Canonicall doctrine, but to lay a foundation of a new inuen∣ted one, such as neuer came in the Canon. Euen as Saint Augustine after his modest maner would tell them the same that he said to the Donatists; These men wanting examples of their wickednesse, do boast themselues to haue found in the booke of the Ma∣chabees, August. cont. Gaudent l 2 c. 23. one Razias to imitate, who slue himselfe: but the Iewes make no such account of these bookes, as they doe of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalmes, to which God hath giuen testimonie, as to his witnesses. They haue beene recei∣ued not vnprofitablie of the Church, if so be they be soberly read, principallie in respect of these brethren the Machabees, who laboured and tooke paines for the law of God, &c. Could he haue spoken thus of the diuine bookes inspired of God without blasphemie; Caletan in 1. ad Cor. c. 12. v, 28. Not vnprofitablie, if they be read soberlie? &c. And this is the same that in our time Cardinall Caietan hath acknowledged, laying out the difference betwixt the Apostles, and all others in the Church. The vniuersall gouernment of the church,
(saith he) belongeth onely to the Apostles; not onely by worde and action, but also by writing: and therefore the onely writings of the Apostles, or those which haue beene approued by them, must haue the authoritie of holy writ. The second rule is; That for the vnderstanding of these Canonicall bookes, To haue re∣course to the originals He∣brew and Greeke. Ambros. de S. Spir. l. 2. c. 6. & de incarna. c. 8 or any place in them that is in controuersie, we haue recourse for the olde Testament, to the truth of the Hebrew; and for the New, to the Greeke: seeing there is neuer a translation, by whom soeuer it may haue beene performed, which can be called either Canonicall, or Authenticall: See∣ing also, that as from false premisses or propositions there cannot follow but a false conclu∣sion; so from false Grammar there cannot proceede true Diuinitie. And this is that which the Fathers say vnto vs: If any man striue about the diuersitie of Latin copies, that some vnfaithfull persons haue falsified them, let him in such case looke vpon the Greeke, &c. Againe: We haue found it so in the Greeke copies, Hillar. in Psal. 11. the authoritie whereof is farre more to be preferred. Saint Hillarie: We haue oftentimes tolde you, that we cannot be satisfied in the vnderstanding of the Scriptures by the La∣tine translation. And this Saint Ierome spoke to him that was ignoraunt in the Hebrew tongue. Saint Ierome also, whose translation some men doe so highly esteeme, howbeit that the best learned doe doubt if it be his, and all agree that all of it is not: S. Hier. in Epi. ad Paulin. & Marcel. & ad Suniam, & ad Damas & in Prefat. in 4. Euang. & in Zac. c. 4. &. 8. & ad Lucin. Augu. de doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 11 Epist. 59. & 19 De doct. christ. l. 2. c. 10 & 15 & in Decret. D. 9 c. in ve∣terum. Genes. 3. It behooueth vs to haue recourse to the originall of the Hebrew, for the Olde testament, and to the Greeke for the New: For (saith he) there are so manie diuerse Latine copies, as there are bookes; and by these originals wee must alter and correct that which hath beene ill translated by the Interpretors. Saint Augustine: The Latins to attain to the knowledge of the Scriptures, haue neede of two wings, of the Hebrew and Greeke tongues: let the Latines haue recourse vnto the Hebrew and Greeke co∣pies, &c. Againe: For to correct the Latins, let vs vse the Grecians, &c. Let vs ra∣ther beleeue the tongue from whence the Expositors haue translated the Scrip∣tures into other tongues, &c. Saint Augustine, I say who knew nothing in the Hebrew. And that they had iust cause to say so, may be made to appeare vnto vs by infinite examples. In Genesis it is said; That the seed shall breake the head of the Serpent: that is to say, Christ: The Vulgar translation saith, Ipsa, she not Ipsum, that is to say, semen, and so by that means it is referred vnto the virgin Marie and so a Sauioresse set vp in stead of a Sauiour. At this stone good S. Barnard stūbled, as Burgensis, Caietanus, & Canusius do acknowledge, &c. And still they would that wee should leaue it in the way, to the ende that euerie man may stumble thereat. S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrewes, saith, Hebr. 13. That God is well pleased with charitie and well doing. The Interpreter hath translated it, That by them men merit at Gods bands. See you not therefore, say some vnto vs, Merit proued in the Scripture? Yes, were it not that euerie man knoweth, what the worde  meaneth, nemely that God taketh pleasure, &c. Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine to Abraham. In stead of Protulit, he hath translated it Obtulit: Genes. 18. and see you not how thereupon also the sacrifice of the Masse But Vatablus, and Pagnine, and Caietan also, doe acknowledge the sooth: and therefore reforme the translation, and withall you wipe out the Masse. So vpon the Psal, 68. For, To sleepe amongst pots or Andirons; he translateth it, Inter Cleros, amongst the clergie; The lots or heritages: & ex lapidibus sacculi, is made, lapides saeculi, stones of the ballance, that is, of weights, are made eternall stones: and fiue hundred such like. Where is the Doctor how holie or great soeuer he may be who resting and relying vpon any such translation, shall be able to gather any true sense? Who shall not be forced thereby to deceiue both himselfe and others? No lesse then Accursius in the law, when he vnder∣standeth not by reason of his time, either some exquisite Latin, or some Greeke word alled∣ged
by the lawier. And yet the Councell of Trent (who set it downe for their position, to make errours authentike) will haue this translation to be authentike, and that in lectures, disputations, Sermons, and Expositions, it be vsed ordinarily; yea and that before that of Pagnines, or Arias Montanus, who haue kept themselues nearer vnto the Hebrew, And why? Not for any other cause then that ignorance may continue, so as that errour vnder the darknesse thereof may hide it selfe, seeing it cannot stand before the truth, true vnder∣standing, or the light. The third is, Scripture is expounded by Scripture. That we expound Scripture by Scripture, one place by another, one by manie; obscure and darke ones, by cleare and plaine ones, or one darke one by many plaine ones: In which attempt we haue a farre greater facilitie, then they who should assay the like in prophane authours, because that we are assured that there is no contrarietie therein, be∣cause also that there is a perpetuall correspondencie betwixt the new Testament and the old, and both in the one and the other, in it selfe: betwixt the new Sacraments and the old; and in the olde and new in themselues, &c. And finally, because that in obscure places, wee are not to search for, or gesse out any thing that is new: yea on the contrarie, not any thing; said Saint Augustine, which is not clearely apparant in such places as are most cleare. This is the order, Nehem. 8.8. which we reade to haue beene practised by Esdras, who, saith Nehemiah; read in the booke of the law of God, and therewith gaue the meaning, causing it to be vnderstood by the Scripture it selfe: The question at that time was about the purging and casting out of cer∣taine abuses, Actes 17.11 which were crept into the Church during the time of the captiuitie, by being mingled amongst the Gentiles. And hence are they of Berea commended, as conferring the Scriptures most diligently one with another, to see if it were so as Saint Paule preached vn∣to them. The question was of the resoluing of themselues by them, against the opinion of the Pharisies and Doctors of the Law, by the Scriptures, Whether Iesus crucified were that Christ or not. And this also is the precept which the Fathers teach vs. Irenus: The de∣monstrations which are in the Scriptures, Iren. cont. Hae∣res▪ 1.2. c. 46. & 67. Basil. in asceti∣cis. 267, Chrysost. hom. 13. in Gen. & in Psalm. 147. Aug. de verb. dom. serm. 2. & 11. Tho. 1. p. sum. q. 1. art. 9. Aegid. l. 2. Dist. 37. cannot bee shewed but by the Scrip∣tures. Againe, The exposition which is according to the Scriptures, is that legi∣timate and safe, &c. Saint Basil: That which seemeth darke and ambiguous in one place of Scripture, is cleare and plaine in another. Chrysostome; The Scrip∣ture is expounded by it selfe this is ourarmorie against the Diuell, &c. Saint Au∣gustine, The wordes of the Gospel doe carrie their interpretation with them. A∣gaine: VVe vnderstand the darke places by the cleare what is darkly deliuered in one place, is clearly set downe in another, &c. S. Thomas, That which is spo∣ken metaphorically in one place, is spoken simplie in another. Aegidius Romanus; Of manie expositions we must take that which agreeth with the other scriptures, and not that which hurteth any part of them. Following also that which is said by the Canon Relatum, Can Relat. That we must not seeke out a sense at our pleasure, from the purpose, to confirme it any maner of way by the authoritie of the Scriptures but take the meaning of the truth from the Scriptures themselues, if the place may be drawne into diuerse senses. The fourth is; In all exposi∣tions the ana∣logie of faith must be kept. That we see that the exposition which we giue or take, do alwaies retaine and keepe the analogie of faith, that it be proportionable and correspondent to the bodie of Christian doctrine, which some of the olde fathers haue called the rule of faith: I say, not to establish any new principles or articles of Christianitie, but to conforme and referre them∣selues to those which haue beene receiued therein from all times. For the holy Scripture is the vniuersall principle of our faith, and it is well said, That there are as many articles of faith as sillables in it, because it is said of the least iota, that it shall not passe, and by conse∣quent,
that we must most firmely beleeue it all. But notwithstanding, as this said Aegidius saith, All the Scripture is resolued into certaine articles of faith, to which all the doctrine therein is to be referred, and those as principles abide firme in them∣selues, and are not resolued into others. And from these principles we deduct our Theo∣remes, and answere our Problemes, no lesse then the Mathematicians doe their Maxims, Axiomes, and demaunds: but so much the more firmely, by howe much wee are the faster founded vpon the Creator, then vpon the creature: vpon the Law-giuer to the whole world, then vpon the law which he hath giuen it, which is Nature. Thom. in. Sum. q. 1. art. 5.6, 8. And this is it which Thomas saith: That the holy doctrine taketh not his principles from any humane science, but from the wisdome of God, from which as from the most soueraigne wise∣dome, all our knowledge must take his direction and ordering: and that this skill commeth not vnto vs from naturall reason, but by reuelation: that is, from the Scripture diuinely inspired: and therefore, that it iudgeth of all. Verie farre differing from them who dispute of diuinitie according to the principles of Philosophie, or other sci∣ences: against the law of Logicke, which saith, , &c. That we must not leape out of one science into another, but rather from a true vse of Logicke, & discourse of reason from principles of one science, to draw the propositions and consequences that be∣long to the same. Our principles then are articles of faith, against which we must beware that our expositions doe not strike and dash themselues; but one the contrarie it is necessarie that they become conformable thereto. To strike thereupon, that is amongest the Mathemati∣cians, Deduci , to be brought to an impossibilitie, that is to say, frō out of the bounds of reason, of Nature, & of true diuinitie: this is according to the lawes of combate, to rub against the bands or ropes that pale in their ground, that is to bee ouer∣came, to be conuinced of falshood. Now the primitiue Church hath gathered them for vs in∣to a briefe collection, al those which the Councels put forth afterward, are nothing but Com∣mentaries thereupon: and it is the same which Tertul. calleth Regulā fidei: Vnder which, Tertul. de vela vig de praes. & aduers. Prax∣eam. August. de Symbol. Beda in S. Ioh. l 1. c. 4. & l. 3, c 5. saith Saint Augustine, hath beene gathered togither whatsoeuer was dispersed throughout the diuine Scriptures: to the end that the memorie of the most dull and slow of conceipt, might not be ouerlaboured. And whereof Beda after him lea∣ueth vs this lesson: That we must beware that, Secundum fidem fit Sacramenti diuini expositio; That the exposition of the diuine mysteries be according to faith. In such sort as that we haue two Canons, but the one neuerthelesse an abridgement of the other, the Canonicall Scripture, and the Canon of faith, that is the Creede: that to stay our spirits, so that they may not search for in substance, any thing in faith, Tertul. de praescript. (saith Tertullian) anie where else then in the doctrines of faith. This to direct them in the expounding of that, that is of the Scriptures and doctrines of faith; to the ende that they may not admit of any sense, how plausible soeuer it might be, which is gone, be it neuer so little, from the arti∣cles of faith. For example  wee haue to deale with an Arrian, we shall say vnto him after the maner of Saint Augustine: let vs pitch our selues without any shifting vpon the Cano∣nicall Scriptures: we haue no other titles whereby we may learne the right, but them. But if from these Scriptures he alledge vnto vs, The father is greater then I, &c. we shall call to mind, that it is also written, I and the father are one: and the Scripture cannot be con∣trarie. To the ende then, that the one and the other may proue true, we shall distinguish: re∣ferring the first vnto the humane nature, and the other vnto his diuine, that so we may not conclude against that which is said, I beleeue in Iesus Christ: for, Cursed be hee that putteth his cōfidence in any thing but God, &c. And let vs further obserue here, that, as hath bin said, there is no societie since that of the Apostles, that can make that Canonicall
Scripture which is not: as in like maner there is not any that can make an article of the faith, of that which of it selfe is not one. This power saith the Cardinall Caietan himselfe, did ende there, and there is not any, either succession or discent, which can attribute it vnto it selfe, or which can pretend the same. What then? How we are to receiue and intertaine the Fathers. And shall the Fathers that haue so highly deserued of the Church, that haue so much and so well trauelled in the Scriptures, serue vs for no vse? Yes, but marke the place due vnto them, and the which no other can bee attributed vnto them: they could not be called any sooner: It is for God in his word to giue vs his law: he is our onely Lawgiuer, to whom alone it appertaineth (saith the Apostle) to saue and to destroy. Iames. 4.12. Expounders not lawgiuers. The greatest honour that man can haue giuen him in the Church, is to be an expounder. To take vpon him to make any lawes therein of himselfe, this is to coine money this is to incroch vpon the Prince, he cannot doe it without committing of treason, yea without the incurring of blas∣phemie. Here therefore we admit of the Fathers, as expounders of the law, word, and diuine Scriptures: we receiue their interpretations with reuerence admiring their pietie, doctrine and zeale, but alwayes with this exception most reasonable: That they be but expounders, not law-giuers: dispensers of the mysteries of godlinesse, and not authours. In whom we must consider what they haue said, not in that they haue said it, but in that they haue said it by the way of expounding of the Scripture; not speaking of their owne heades, but according to their capacitie of the sense and meaning thereof. As for example, we reason of purgatorie: The question here is not to know, if it be to be found in Origen, Augustine, or S. Gregorie: this rule abideth alwayes firme: That if there be one, it must needes bee that God hath made it, for there is not any Doctor that hath power & abilitie to make it. If it belong to vs to know it, let God haue reuealed and disclosed it vnto vs, for it is not to be learned at the gesse of any of the Fathers: let vs then haue found it in the Church her treasurie, the Scripture. Now there will be some to shew vs some places out of it, from which they would collect and gather it: and accordingly they will, that they should be vnderstood on this sort, and we on the con∣trarie. In this controuersie we shall reade ouer the Text verie carefully, as also that which goeth before, and that which followeth: we shall examine it to see if it be faithfully transla∣ted, we shall make comparison of the like places. All this hitherto is nothing else, but to call vpon the Spirit of God to be our aide, so much the more to inlarge and open our spirits, ac∣cording to that which the Apostle saith vnto vs. 1. Cor. 14 Let the spirits of the Prophets, that is of such as haue the gift of interpretation, be subiect to the Prophets. We shall here consult with the olde Fathers, we shall compare their expositions, both with the Text, and amongst themselues, we shall marke if they haue vsed a good translation, whether they handle the place, by the way, or of set purpose, affirmatiuelie or doubtfully: and where they differ (as ordinarily it falleth out) we shall weigh them, both according to the age wherein they shal haue liued, (for it importeth infinitely,) and according to the testimonie that the Church shall haue giuen of their doctrine, for they are not all of one weight. And in the ende, caeteris paribus. We shall not despise the consent and agreement of many against a few. But God forbid, that we should receiue them for Law-giuers, or yet for Authours of opinions in the Church, either contrarie vnto, or without the scriptures. And as farre off must it be, that we should make them correctors or iudges ouer that ballance, which iudgeth them, and wher∣in themselues will be weighed. For this should be blasphemie against God, treason against the Church, and an iniurie to themselues. We wholie yeeld vnto them in thus doing, the ho∣nour which they haue giuen to their predecessours, as whereby they haue set a law, and giuen an example for their successors, practised by them against those by these against themselues. If they had done otherwise, where had we beene long agoe? Seeing there is not so much as one
of them that hath not erred in some thing? many of them in the points of faith, and cer∣taine of them so farre as that they haue fallen into heresie? Verily wee had beene Chiliasts, with Irenaeus; Montanists, with Tertullian; Anabaptists, with Saint Cyprian; Arrians, with Theophilus; Pelagians, with Faustus; the originals of all errours, yea euen of Arrianisme with Origen, we should wound the bodie of Christ, not being subiect to paine: Zonar. de Ori. in Constant. S. Hie ad Pam∣mach. & Oce∣anum de Origen. we should like∣wise speake doubtfullie of the Deitie of the holie Ghost, with Saint Hillarie: we should con∣demne children dying without Baptisme, with Saint Augustine; we should giue them the Eucharist with Saint Cyprian, and the greatest part, vntill the time of Charles the great, euen vnto the mouthes of the dead, as certaine Councels doe beare vs witnesse. In a word, we should haue made with lesse then nothing, of the Church of Christ, Augeas his Oxehouse; Canus. l. 7. de locis. Theol. c. 3. Gen. Cent. 3. & seq. ad finem. c. 4. Villavincē∣tius de ratione studi Theolo. l. 4 c. 6, obseru. 1. &. 2. Baron. annal. tom. 2. of Noes Arke, a sinke of all superstitions and errours. Which thing our greatest aduersaries themselues at this time not being able to dissemble, doe say: All the Saints, such onely ex∣cepted as haue written the Canonicall bookes haue spoken by the Spirit of man, and haue sometimes erred, euen in the matters of faith, both in worde and wri∣ting, what profoundnesse of learning, or innocencie of life soeuer, that we can ob∣serue and marke in them. And they come so farre as to set downe their errors, and that both by their names, as also by their kinds: concluding that the Scriptures are onely without error, and exempted from lies. As therefore there are rules for the expounding of the Scripture, by the Scripture, The Fathers must be admit∣ted as expoun∣ders, but not as law-giuers. so there are also for the expounding of them by the Fathers, the first whereof is alwayes this; That they be receyued and read as expounders, not as law-giuers, and that they referre their expositions to the rule of faith, and the articles thereof, and not to make any new faith, any new articles: according to that which Saint Ierome saith vnto vs: Hieron. cont. Iouinian. August. de Bo∣no viduitat. As oft as I expound not the Scriptures, but speake freely of mine owne sense, reprooue me who will. And Saint Augustine: The holie Scripture hath set vs a rule, not to dare to knowe more then it behoueth: My teaching of thee then, may not be any other thing, then to expound vnto thee the words of the Teacher that is of the Lord. Vincentius c. 2 &. 22, & 41. And this is the same that Vincentius Lyrinensis saith vnto vs: The Canon of the Scriptures (saith he) is perfect, and superaboundantly sufficient in it selfe for all things. Wee are not then to make any addition of the Fathers, to make by them any supplie vnto the doctrine of the Scriptures: but rather (saith he) seeing that they may bee interpreted in diuerse senses, it is meete to ioine therewithall the authoritie of the Ecclesiasticall vnder∣standing: Not to adde vnto, or alter any thing that is written, but onely to make for the vnderstanding of it. For, saith he elswhere, It is written, Depositum serua: That which hath beene committed of trust vnto thee, not what thou shalt haue inuented: That which thou hast receiued, not what thou hast found out, wherein thou must not be an authour, but whereof thou art a gardiant: not an ordiner, but a disciple: not a guide, but a follower. What thou hast receiued in golde, redeliuer the same in golde, &c. And in the person of Timothie, this is spoken vnto all Tea∣chers, it is spoken to the whole Church, &c. And what we say of one of the Fathers, we take it as spoken of all togither: for although all the men of the world could bee assembled and called togither, and that euerie one of them were worth an Augustine, they could not make, or cause to be made one article of faith, to binde the faith of a Christian to beleeue a∣nie other thing necessarie vnto saluation, then that which is in the holy Scripture: Ga. following that which Saint Paule saith: Though I my selfe, or an Angel from heauen, should preach vnto you any other thing, then that which wee haue alreadie preached vnto you, let him be accursed. And a little after he setteth downe the reason: For I haue
not receiued or learned it of any man, but by the reuelation of Iesus Christ, &c. And this hath beene renued by all the olde Fathers, though but ill fauouredly kept by them which were their successours, and whereupon notwithstanding our maister Gerson, and Car∣dinall Caietan after him, haue framed this conclusion: That the Church of this time cannot any more, neither hath bin able besides that which the Primitiue Church could, to canonize any booke, establish any article of faith, &c. The second is, That we discerne in the workes of the Fathers, the true and legitimate bookes, from the faigned ones, not to attribute them vnto them, and by consequent sucke out of them an other mans errors, in stead of their sound opinions, & not to receiue any doctrine for old, when as the same shall be either new, or else verie sparingly commended vnto vs of the ancients. For it cannot be denied, but that there are many such, and those easily found out, either by the stile, being otherwise in one age, then it is in another, yea differing in some one time of some one father, from that of another, or by some apparance of contrarietie, and that either in doctrine, or exposition, a thing hardly befalling any one authour, or by the alled∣ging of Authours which are notoriously knowne, not to haue liued till after them, or by the v∣sing of some tearmes and speeches, not as yet practised in the Church in their time, &c. Of all which sorts, the malice of men hath furnished vs with sufficient store of examples. For the stile of the Epistles attributed to the first Bishops of Rome, is meerely barbarous and Gottish, in the times of the greatest flourishing of the Latine tongue: and when there could not bee found in all Italie, nor in all the Romane Empire, either learned or idiot, that could speake this language: The stile of Denys the pretended Areoopagite, is nothing like to Saint Pauls, containing nothing of Apostolicall note or marke, nothing of the spoiling of Ceremo∣nies, so oft repeated by the Apostle: The treatise of Sina and Sion against the Iewes, &c. nothing of that vigor which was in Saint Cyprian his other writings against the very same, but farre lesse of his elegancie, zeale, and doctrine: The pretended Canons also of the Apo∣stles, how should they proceed from them, when they forbid that which the others approue? and command that which they do openly disproue and disallow? And therefore by so much the more daungerous and poisonfull, for hauing purloined the name of so soueraigne a drug. And in such sort we are likewise to say of Saint Clement his reuises, and Saint Peter his peregri∣nation, Hieronym. in Apolog. cont. Ruff in. Epiph. haeres. 27. which Saint Ierome and Epiphanius do witnesse vnto vs, wittingly to hold and take part with the heresie of Eunomius and Ebion, the most pernicious ones that haue been in the Church: Of the vnperfect worke vpon Saint Mathew, wherein Arianisme sheweth it selfe most euidently, howsoeuer notwithstanding condemned and conuinced by Chrysostome in all his bookes, &c. The Liturgie how can it proceede from S. Iames, seeing it euery where spea∣keth of this worde Consubstantiall? a name in his time not heard of in the Church? The booke of the Hierarchie, how can that be made by S. Denys, at least the Areopagite, seeing it citeth Clement Alexandrinus? Or that of Christian questions, Iustine Martyrs; seeing it speaketh of the Manichies? De variis quaest. q. 23. Or how can that of diuerse Questions bee made by Athenasius, seeing it alledgeth Athanasius the great? That of the calling of the Gentiles, by S. Ambrose, seeing it speaketh of the Pelagians? Those by Clement, Abdias, and Iulianus Africanus, which are full of Temples, of Altars, and of Porches, of Sextens chambers, seeing they were built in the honour of Saint Iohn at Ephesus? That of the Resurrection in Ethiopia, & that by the commaundement of S. Mathew, in a time when al Christendome dreamed of nothing but Martyrdome? When as there was nothing more busily prouided then pyles of wood to burne the Apostles, and their disciples withall? And when they prepared nothing but Thea∣ters, from whence the people might behold them deuoured of wilde beasts? And yet forsooth these are the goodlie bookes, whereto our aduersaries for the most part doe appeale, for ayde
and that oftentimes in those things, which haue beene the cause why they were condemned of falshood, and which haue caused the Church to account of them but as fables. But after all, who knoweth not how greatly the heretikes haue giuen themselues to falsifie thē, how greatly they haue bestirred themselues, to slip in either some of their heresies, S. Hieronym. in Symb. Ruff. as Ruffinus witnesseth in the bookes of Clement, and S. Ierome in many others: or of their Traditions, as it is easie to be obserued in those of the Montanists? And if further, according to the measure of the growth and getting of foote of errours in Christendome, the Church of Rome haue beene al∣so carefull, (as we haue seene at Trent) to cut off or alter in the bookes of the Fathers, what soeuer might be founde to impugne their superstitions: (and who can doubt of this practise to haue beene followed for the space of many ages, hauing beene guided by one and the same spirit) who shall be able to assure himselfe of the truth, sinceritie, and naturalnesse, euen of the most legitimate? Seeing in Gratian his Decretall, wee may marke so manie places of the Fathers and Councels notoriouslie corrupted, according as the authoritie of the Pope, or powerfulnesse of deceipt did growe in the Church, and tempered ad sensum currentem, as they call it, according to the disease of the time, and course of the Market? Seeing by name in the Copies of Beda and Theophylact, (who are of the time when the doctrine of the Eu∣charist began to varie,) we perceiue by the comparing of them with old bookes found in Mo∣nasteries, places concerning this matter, either gelded or cut out or added and augmented? And thus also it is euen at this day, wherein great personages haue complained themselues, how they haue beene driuen to labour to discerne and finde out for vs, the stiles and spirits of writers: from whose paines taken herein, wee may ease our selues in the practising of this rule. And let this bee saide for no other ende, then of manie to giue an example in some few particulars of the cursed practises that Sathan hath continued in the Church, for the bringing in of his errours, vnder the name of the most approoued Teachers. And this veri∣lie not newe or straunge, seeing that euen presently after the life time of the Apostles, if Saint Iohn, who ouerliued them, had not prouided against it, he had fathered some vpon Saint Paule, Saint Peter, and certaine others, and those also of the peregrination of Saint Paul and Thecla; which our aduersaries at this day labour to raise againe out of the graue, and to set in their former liuelihood and credite. The third is; That we marke diligently if the father or ancient Doctor which we handle, To consider well if such father haue v∣sed a good translation. haue followed a sound translation, haue well vnderstood the words and phrase of the Text in controuersie or not: for, for example, what apparance is there, that the Commentaries of S. Hillarie, or of S. Gregorie vpon Iob: of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, or S. Bernard vpon the Psalmes, can alwaies reach vnto the sense and meaning, when they haue vsed a translation, wherein there are almost as many faults as words? That S. Anselme, or S. Gen. 3. Bernard should be able to gather good doctrine from that place, in the translation of Genesis; Ipsa conteret ca∣put Serpentis, the woman, and not Christ shall breake the Serpents head▪ Gen. 4 Or out of that other, Gen. 4. Quam vt veniam merear: from whence our aduersaries gather the doc∣trine of merit? There where it is: My punishment is greater then that I can beare. Whereas then we shall find that a Father shall haue followed a false translation, we shall not possiblie be able to come by a true exposition: so that in such case, we are to preferre and make more account of the least, that shall haue had it right, then him who shall haue followed the false, following the precept which they themselues did giue vs here tofore: That we are not to rest vpon the Latine translation, but to haue recourse vnto the originall and fountaine, whether Hebrew or Greeke. And now behold the fourth, which is, that when we are once agreed of the literall sense, we should weigh the expositions of the Fathers the Interpreters, both in the ballance of the
Scripture, and in the analogie of faith: respect their pietie, doctrine, and time wherein they liue, and receiue their opinions with reuerence: whether they shall be differing, or agreeing in one, or arising from diuerse and sundrie persons; let vs preferre that which is spoken in handling the place of purpose, before that which is spoken in touching of it by the waye: that which is saide in teaching familiarly, before that which may bee spoken rhetoricallie, as it somtimes falleth out in preaching: that which is spoken affirmatiuely, before that which is spoken doubtfully: that which is spoken from the proper sense of the Authour, before that which is spoken by imitating of another: that which is gathered from the literall sense, before that which is drawne from some allegoricall sense, which proueth not: and aboue all, that which is spoken of some place in cōtrouersie, before the controuersie rise, at such time as there is nothing sought after therein but the simple truth, yea or otherwise after it hath beene ar∣gued, when as we shall haue searched out thereof, for the fortifying of our opinion. Here also will occasion be administred, to put difference betwixt the Fathers, according to the degree and qualitie that their doctrine and pure life hath aduaunced them vnto in the Church: for there is some such a one that is worth manie, according to their times; according, I say, as they haue beene nearer, or further off from the true light, seeing that Saint Ierome com∣plaineth himselfe, S. August. ad Ianuarium. Bed. l. 4. in Sam. c. 2. that he was in his time come vnto the lees. Saint Augustine; That all was now become full of presumptions, preiudicate opinions, and more then Iu∣daicall Ceremonies. Beda likewise: That it was a lamentable thing, and not to bee vttered without teares, how that in his time the Church grewe worse and worse euery day. And this will proue true in counting cleane contrarie to our Iesuites: for they to cast dust in the eyes of the world doe tell vs: Such a one who liued 800. or 1000. yeares since, hath said this or that: whereas they should say, such a one who liued 200. 300. or 400. yeares next after the Apostles, hath spoken thus, &c. For our question is not how long time a lie hath indured. The diuell (saith the Lord,) is a liar from the beginning: but what manner of doctrine that was which was first, that is according to Tertullian the truth, then, when, how, & by what degrees, falsehood and lying sprung vp, increased and grew great, & aduaunced it selfe against, Vincent. Lyri∣nens. c. 39. and aboue this truth, &c. And this is that which Lyrinensis saith: For the expounding of the Canonicall Scripture, we must summon and call togi∣ther the aduises of the fathers, but preferre that euermore which they haue spoken, either all or the greatest part of them, and that verie manifestly, often, con∣stantly, assuredly, &c. what hath beene otherwise deliuered, what Saint, Martyr, or Teacher soeuer he hath beene, let vs hold it, inter proprias & occultas, & priuatas opiniunculas, for Apocrypha and priuate opinions. Furthermore we are euer to proceed forward to the fifth: that they are to be read as great personages, That we must reade them in such sort as they will be read. but neuerthelesse as men, whose writings cannot be equall with the Scripture, as little as their spirits can match the holy Ghost, yea such on the contrarie, as must be iudged by the scripture, examined one by another, euen the old with those which in regard of them are new, as they haue sufficiently learned in some places to reproue them, of whom they had beene instructed in many things, Cyrl in Leuit. l, 5. according to the rule which S. Cyril giueth vs. If there be any thing in the scripture to be decided, besides the two Testaments, let vs know that we haue not any third, the authoritie whereof we are bound to receiue. This also is the same that the Fathers say vnto vs. S. Ierome, Let euery thing that shall haue bin spoken after the Apostles time be cut off, Hieronym. in Psal. 86. let it not carrie any authoritie with it, how holy or eloquent soeuer the Author may bee. Saint Augustine: Augu. de vnit eccles. c. 6. Reade to me of the Law, Prophets, Psalms, Gospel, and E∣pistles: reade & we wil beleeue, &c. Al others saith he, how holy or learned soeuer
they be; I read them, not to belieue that which they affirme to bee true, because they say it, but in as much as they proue it vnto me by these canonical Authors, Ep. 19. ad S. Hieronym. Ep. 111. & 112 &c. For how Catholike so euer they may be, there is alwaies something in their writings, which (their honour reserued) it is lawfull for vs to reproue, if it doe not agree with the truth. Thus am I affected in other mens writings, and such wish I them to be in mine, &c. And if you would know of what manner of men hee pur∣poseth to speake, he speaketh of his owne bookes: Rest not thy selfe (saith he) in my books, Lib. 3. de Tri∣nit. contr Cres∣con. l. 2. c, 21 Ep. 112. but correct them by the reading of the Scriptures. Of those of Saint Cyprian: I doe not hold them for Canonicall; but I examine them by the Canonicall: Where∣in I find them conformable I praise him, where otherwise, there (with his good leaue) I reiect and forsake him. Of these, namely Saint Ambrose, and Saint Ierome, Contr. Faust. l. 11. c. 5. & l. 2. Contr. Donat. &c. I purposed not (saith he) to intermingle their opinions, that so thou maiest not thinke that wee should follow the sence of any man, as the authoritie of the Scripture. Of all them in generall, that haue written since the time of the Apostles. In them all (saith be) the reader or hearer hath free iudgement, to approue or dis∣prouethem, not being bound of necessitie to belieue them, but with libertie of iudging, &c. Yea, saith he elswhere: All the letters of Bishops, (without any excepti∣on to those of the Bishops of Rome) which haue beene written, or are written after the Canon of the Scriptures, may be reprehended by the Councels; and the pro∣uinciall Councels giue place to the generall; and the first generall are oftentimes amended by the latter; Sine vllo typo sacrilegae superbiae, without any swelling of wicked pride. In like manner saith hee to Maximinus Bishop of the Arrians: August. contr. Maxim. l. 3, c. 14. I al∣leadge not vnto thee the Councell of Nice, (though the worthiest that euer was) by way of preiudice, neither alleadge thou against me that of Rimini: For as I hold not my selfe bound to the authoritie of the one, so neither doe I take thee to be bound to the authoritie of the other; wherefore let vs reason the matter toge∣ther by the authoritie of the Scriptures, &c. Of which onely (saith hee against the Donatists) by a speciall priuiledge, denied to all others that come after, it is not lawfull to doubt. And in the meane time Peter Abbot of Clugnt, Petr. Cluniac. l, 2. amongst the preten∣ded errours, for which Peter Bruits, who read the Diuinitie Lecture at Tholosa, was bur∣ned, about the yeare 1200. obserued this: That hee belieued in the Canonicall Scrip∣ture only, and would not consent that the Fathers had the same authoritie with it. And that this was the errour of that time, appeareth in Gratian; who liuing at this time, maketh the Decretall Epistles of the Popes, equall with the Epistles of Saint Paul; and falsi∣fieth Saint Augustine to fortifie his owne saying. How farre better dealt Gerson and the Count Picus of Mirandula, who doe more accompt of a lay man, an idiot, an olde man, a child, with a place of Scripture, then a Pope or vniuersall Councell without Scripture? Now, who so shall read the Scriptures, and the Fathers vpon the Scriptures, furnished with these rules, calling vpon the name of God, and bringing a right zeale to the searching out of the truth: let vs not doubt but that hee may easily discerne of the controuersies of this time, as to know on which side truth or falshood is; as also the right and naturall interpre∣tation of such places, as are in controuersie, as well as the peruerted and bastardly. Yea the Gentile himselfe (said Chrysostome) will learne by our controuersies, Chrysost hom. 33. in Acta. to what Church he ought to cleaue; howbeit that both the one and the other do pretend Scriptures: seeing we say not that we belieue in humane reasons, that might be
able to trouble him; but in the Scriptures that are simple and true. And how much the rather then the Christian, who, as one would say, should be borne, fed and made, by the language of the Scriptures? And in deed I hope that in this discourse which wee haue vn∣dertaken of the historie and doctrine of the Masse; it will appeare from place to place, that it is altogether in vaine for the most part, that our aduersaries fortifie them selues with the fa∣thers; who verily if they were to come amongst  againe, would neuer acknowledge for their children, the deceits and abuses, that are authorised vnder their names. But as S. Augustine said; August. Epist. 166. We haue learned Christ in the Scriptures, as also wee haue there learned the Church: I dare also here say vnto you my masters; therein wee shall take knowledge of Antichrist; therein shall we obserue the corruption that hee hath brought into the Church: The corruption: for it serueth not any more either for seed graine, or grasse, as sometimes: The darnell & good Corne alike perhaps, vntil the time of earing, would be able to deceiue vs a little; but growne into flower, and being come to their perfecti∣on, that filleth with the stench of the smell, and poysoneth with his vapour, all such as should stand a farre off: And euen so Antichrist; for there is no more any question of a starre, to conduct and guide vs to him; of seeking of him in a Manger, in his swathing band, or in his first infancie: As at such rime (saith S. Paul) as iniquitie began but to worke. For to make vs all inexcusable, the day of the Lord is come to his full height: He is seated vpon seuen mountaines; incamped in the Temple of God, extolling himselfe aboue God, extolling himselfe against God; working with all the efficacie of Sathan, in all powerfulnesse and my∣racles of lying; making drunke with his Cup, the Kings and Princes of the earth; opening his mouth in blasphemies against the highest, against his Christ, and vnder the name of Christ. All his properties, all his circumstances are therein so liuely painted out vnto vs; as that there is nothing wanting, but the putting to of his name: and yet that is also therein giuen vs in Cyphers in a mysterie; which succession of time, and the euident plainnesse of his effectes hath sith then deciphered. To you then my Masters vpon whome the last times are come, it belongeth to take knowledge of him; either by the pourtraiture which yee haue of him in the Scripture, or by his working which you see in the Church; or by his words, or by his workes. For then you shall not haue to say vnto vs any more: Who are you that declare him vnto vs? Where are your Commissions? Where are your Bulles? These are the petti∣foggeries of the Court of Rome. It is said: that the Sonne of perdition shall cause a great Apostasie: Either we must turne with those of the Apostasie, or protest against it. But you should giue him thankes, that shall haue counsailed you to flie from the plague into your towne; from the Wolfe into your sheepefold; and from fire, into your barne. You should ring the alarum Bell your selues; to the end that men might runne thereto, that men might seeke to succour you. Apoc. 18.4. You should come forth: for it is said; Come out of Babilon my people, with great haste, and without looking backe; for this is the spirituall Sodome: And it is said; 1. Iohn. 5. Apoc. 18. & 19 My little children flie from Idols. And we all together will goe crying: Shee is fallen, shee is fallen: Yea we shall goe singing; Saluation, and glorie, and ho∣nour and power be giuen to our Lord God: His iudgements are true and iust: He hath reuenged the bloud of his seruants: He hath executed iustice vpon her which hath cor∣rupted the whole earth: The smoake thereof shall ascend for euer. AMEN.
THE END AND DRIFT OF THE Author in the writing of this Booke. IEsus Christ our Lord, who is the Truth, Ignatius, Cy∣prian, & Ter∣tullian euerie where. Math. 19.8. (as auncient writers declare vnto vs) not Custome, aunswered to the Pharisies and Doctors of the Law. In the beginning, (that is to say, at such time as God accomplished the worke of Creation) It was not so. The question was aboute the law of diuorce∣ment, a lawe ordayned by Moses, by authoritie giuen him by God, a law practised amongst the people for the space of sixteene hundred yeares and more, without any checke or controlement: euen amongst the people of Israell, and Church of God, and yet notwithstanding the Sonne of God, not waighing eyther the prescription, or the continuance of toleration, calleth them backe to the consideration of the e∣state and condition of the thing at the creation, and to the first institution of the same. God (saieth hee) made them male and female: what God hath ioyned together, let not man put asunder. Thus likewise let vs learne to aunswere, according to the example and commaundement of our Lord, but vpon much more vrgent occa∣sion, whensoeuer the inuentions and deuises of men shall bee set before vs, to the defacing of Gods ordinance and institution: yea when any shall goe aboute to foist in humaine fansies, to the abrogating and thrusting out of his holie word. It was not so from the beginning, not from the creation of Christes Church: not from the institution of Christ, not from his Apostles, not from their Disci∣ples, not from the obseruation of the Primitiue Church, not from any decree or determination concluded by the saide Church her first councels: what God hath once appointed and ordayned, let not vs cast off and reiect: what the Son hath spoken vnto vs by his owne mouth: Iohn 14.26. what hee hath taught vs by his Apo∣stles: that sonne, concerning whome the Father hath giuen this charge, heare him. Those Apostles of whome the Sonne hath thus saide vnto vs, I will sende the holy Ghost which shall teach you all thinges: Him let not vs forsake for anie other thing that may come, for anie faire & goodlie shew or appearance that possibly it can haue, for anie authoritie, prerogatiue, or prescription of time that it may pre∣tend. By thus framing our selues, we shalbe able easilie to agree with euery soule that hath anie taste of godlines, and which hath in reuerence God his holy word and ordinances. But the question shall bee at this time, whether there bee not a∣buses brought into the Church of Rome, to the preiudice of his holie seruice and worshippe, and of his holy ordinances contained in his worde: of the obserua∣tions of the Primitiue church, seeing that a verie strong preiudicate opinion hath seazed the spirites of the greatest part, that nothing is done now a dayes in the church of Rome, but after that sort & maner, that to require any reformatiō ther∣in, is nothing else but a longing after nouelties, and a remouing of the ancients their markes and limittes: and lastlie, seeing that they which make their aduan∣tage of such abuses, are not without store of colours, thereby corrupting and
disguising the olde and auncient monumentes and writinges, and besmoking the new and latter ones, that so they may carrie the greater shew of antiquitie, a∣mongst which, that of making, as to receiue the thinges for olde and auncient, which haue meerelie regarded the succeeding times of the church, is verie newe and latelie hatched. This I say, is the taske and text which we are now to finish, and make plaine by the grace of God, that so wee may prouide helpes for the strengthning and supporting of some simple men, and preuent the malice of the contrarie minded, to the end that antiquitie may shew it selfe antiquitie, and no∣ueltie may appeare to bee but noueltie: and also to the end that the superstitious and long obseruation of some ill established noueltie, may not carrie away the title of antiquitie from olde and auncient veritie, That truth which is of all other most an∣cient, may not grow out of date by reason of the antiqui∣tie thereof. That the dis∣agreements in religion are for the most parte aboute traditi∣ons, establish∣ed without the warrant of the word. carelesly and negligentlie loo∣ked vnto: Ne, inquam, antiquissima illa veritas, vel ipsa antiquitate antiquari vi∣deatur. Certainelie, hee that shall weigh and consider with sound and vpright iudge∣ment the controuersies which are at this day in christian religion, shall not finde them to be anie such things (for the most part) as are founded vpon any doctrine that is trulie auncient: vpon anie doctrine (I say) that is taught or mentioned in the holie Scriptures: notwithstanding, that the Scriptures bee the true and proper boundes of whatsoeuer may fall into mens fansies, and the olde and authentike Registers and Maisters of the church, to line and square out what∣soeuer is the proper due and true possession of any one. And further, we doo freelie declare & testifie, that whosoeuer shall dare to remoue the same, though neuer so little, shall worthilie fall into the curse pronounced by the Prophet a∣gainst them, which remoue auncient boundes and markes. But the question is of Traditions, which haue insinuated themselues, and are sprung vppe together with the time by the industrie of men, and that to the choaking of the true plantes of Christes fielde. Of Traditions, which by the reading of Antiquities, wee see and behold first in the bare and naked seede, then in the bud putting forth, growing and rising vp into a stalke, bearing fruite, ouergrowing in the end the good corne, ouerspreading the earth, watred with the vanitie and ordinarie curiositie of men, manured and fed with the ignorance of the most darke and o∣uershadowed ages. Of Traditions, one marke or step whereof, for the most part we cannot espie or finde out eyther in the holie Scriptures, or in the Primitiue church: but which from age to age we finde and see to haue sprung vp of some crosse or ouertwhart word, or else of some vnexpected action, as hearbes cōming by chance, & wherof there is no great regard or reckoning made: or else to grow by a priuation, or negatiuelie in some doubtfull question, from thence procee∣ding into some affirmatiue not well and firmelie grounded, and finally ending in a full and absolute conclusion, from whence is drawne within some space of time after, and so throughout euerie age, such strange increase and ouerrunning measure, such consequences so far differing from the first steps and footinges, as that they which first cast the seede into the grounde, not thinking of any such haruest, would not bee able (as it falleth out with the fowles of the aire, letting fall some nut or acorn) euer to auouch the same for theirs, if they should returne to beholde them, yea which would rather haue smothered and stifled them in the birth, if they had foreseen anie shew of such monstrousnes to haue eusued. And finallie of Traditions, which smoothlie conuey themselues vnder the ha∣bite of indifferencie, and a certaine kinde of pretended seemlines into thercome
and place of profite, of necessitie of subiection (yea and that greater then any Iu∣daicall seruitude) and of the Articles of faith: Articles I call them, seeing that men now a dayes (such as are our aduersaries,) are farre more tenderlie affected and deeplier doting vpon their owne inuentions, then vpon faith it selfe. And for the which they let not to stand and contend a great deale more in the church of Rome, to maintain the same, then they do striue and seeke to root out Atheisme, notwithstanding it iet vp and downe like a Lord, and spreade it selfe into euerie coast and quarter vnder the name of Philosophie, priuilie vndermining, and thereupon forciblie ouerturning the foundations of the church of Christ, the holie Scriptures, and the holie Sacramentes. Articles againe, for the strength∣ning whereof they are not ashamed, to weaken so much as lieth in them the force and authoritie of Gods word: and for the procuring of authority thereunto, they defend the sufficiencie, integritie and simplicitie of the same, they make no con∣science to call the ministerie of death the ministery of our life, and to pronounce as imperfect and vnsufficient vnto Saluation the Scriptures, whereof the essenti∣all worde did say vnto the Iewes (and then by a stronger reason to vs:) Examine the Scriptures diligentlie and carefullie, for you thinke to haue eternall life by them: and they are those that beare witnes of me. Now it were no hard or difficult matter to demonstrate and shew foorth the same throughout all the Articles which are in controuersie, and indeede the matter hath beene performed by diuerse alreadie. But I will rest my selfe for this time in shewing the truth thereof, in the matter of the Masse, and the ap∣pendances thereof: because at this day it occupieth the principall place of Di∣uine Seruice in the church of Rome: because it seemeth vnto them the badge & cognizance to distinguish betwixt the good and euill Christian: because that in not going thereunto, or in going thereunto, is (as they hold in their opinion) to worke a mans damnation or saluation: And lastly, because that it containing & comprising in it, eyther the doctrine or the practise of the principall pointes which are in controuersie betwixt vs, it shall stand for a full reuew of the whole bodie of their religion, or not want much thereof, if it bee throughlie examined and sifted. If then it be of such moment and importance vnto saluation, as they would make vs belieue, we need not to doubt anie thing at all, but that we shall finde it so most clearelie and euidentlie by the holy Scriptures: as also that wee shall bee able to deriue it from the first and purest ages, wherein the sacred foun∣taine of mans saluation continued and stood in his vnspotted puritie and exqui∣site bringhtnes, not hauing beene as yet troubled with our humaine inuentions, not hauing been as yet defiled with the superstitions which the preposterous i∣mitarion of Iudaisme, or the vnaduised skill of fashioning themselues after the manner of the Gentiles, did together with the time, draw in huge and massie heapes vpon them. For otherwise certainely if we can neither become acquain∣ted with it by the holie Scriptures, nor finde out anie markes or tokens of the same to haue beene vsed in all that space of pure and vncorrupted Antiquitie; but rather that not so much as the name thereof is therein specified, and that any o∣ther seruice was then offered vp to God: let vs bee bolde to say, that then the misterie and price of our Saluation lyeth not therein, seeing that Saluation it self hath not instituted or ordayned the same: as also that the Seruice to be perfor∣med by the church, doth not consist therein, seeing the Primitiue church did neuer know it. But then may we well see and perceiue, that it is some bastardly
broode and intire and vniuersall corrupting of Christ his institution, and of the first and auncient manner of seruing of God, transformed and changed by little & little from an abuse of words, into an abuse of matter and substance, from a Sa∣crament to a sacrifice, and from a sacrifice eucharisticall, to a propitiatorie sacri∣fice, and from the commemoration or remembrance of the onely sacrifice of Christ, into a pretended reall and dayly killing and offering vp of himselfe, as al∣so that this saide Masse which we see now a dayes is nothing else but a collection and patched thing of many ages, & a composition incorporated by many Popes, for the more precisenes whereof, there haue not beene admitted thereunto anie other ingredientes from time to time, then the abuses which Sathan, men and the iniquitie of time, haue beene able to bring in, eyther of pretended malice, or through carelesse negligence, or through ignorance into the church. In so much as that finallie, the holie Supper of our Lord, cannot there retaine anie thing to be knowne by, neyther hath it anie thing so contrarie, opposite or repugnant, as the Masse: which from this lawfull and legitimate issue (as some of the old Wri∣ters haue called it,) is changed into an illegitimare and bastardly thing, from a publique into a priuate, from the communion of the faithfull in the same Sacra∣mentes, into a particular celebration by one priest, and (to be briefe) from a seri∣ous meditation of the death of our Lord, into a colde and ridiculous representa∣tion of the same, from a real and effectual participation of that flesh, giuen for the life of the world, and of that bloode shed for the remission of our sinnes, into a dumbe and doltish ceremonie, and that to be therewithall such a ceremonie, as which assisting & aiding vs (a thing neuer heard of in any of the former times) there is more hope and helpe to be expected. I say not then from the holie sup∣per of the Lord, administred according to his institution, nor then from all the Sacramentes of the Church of Christ: but then from the verie sacrifice which the Lord hath once offered vppon the tree of the Crosse, for the saluation of mankinde. Now therefore for the clearer handling of this matter, I will diuide this trea∣tise into foure partes. The first shall bee of the originall and proceeding of the Masse according to all the partes thereof, and the second of the circumstances, & whatsoeuer is depending thereupon, which is all that which properlie concer∣neth the historie thereof. The third shall declare how it is to be considered and tried according to the nature and quality of a sacrifice: and the fourth, how in the nature and qualitie of a sacrament: being that which commeth neerest to the touching of the doctrine thereof. And I beseech all those that loue the truth, and are feruentlie touched with an earnest care of their owne saluation, that they would open their eyes, and bring them to the sight and view of this matter, clean and purged from all manner of preiudice, of whatsoeuer forestalled opinion: as likewise I pray God that he would giue me the grace of comming vnto this work with a true and sincere affection and vnfained defire to see the church of Christe reformed according vnto true antiquitie in these our daies, & purged from al no∣uelties, which degenerate from the same, reformed according vnto that antiqui∣tie I say, which hath for his foundation the doctrine of the Sonne of God, & the practise of his Apostles gouerned by his spirite, but purged from that noueltie which can alledge nothing for his maintenance, but the dreams of men, & those, such as are alwaies younglings and babes in things concerning God, yea rather alwaies brutish (as sayeth S. Paul) in that which concerneth his seruice.
The Contentes of the Chapters of the first Booke. 1 AFter what manner the Supper of the Lord was first instituted and ordayned: and that the Masse hath no ground or foundation eyther in the Scriptures, or in the practise of the Apostles. 2 That the Masses fathered vpon the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, are notorious and meere suppositions. 3 In what manner God was serued in the Christian Church, in the time of the Apostles, and their Disciples. 4 What manner of diuine seruice was vsed in the Church, vntill the time of S. Gregory, or thereabout, and namelie what manner of Masse that was, which was so called by those that were catechised. 5 What manner of diuine seruice there was vsed, namelie in that which was called the Masse of the faithfull. 6 Answeres vnto certain obiections, and what maner of diuine seruice is most conforma∣ble vnto that which antiquitie indeed commendeth vnto vs, as whether that of the church of Rome, as it standeth at this day, or that of the reformed Church. 7 VVhat change and alteration was admitted in the celebration of the Supper, about the time of Gregorie the great, which falleth out to be in the sixt age of the Church. 8 VVhat manner of growth and proceeding the Masse had from Gregorie the great, vn∣till about the time of Charles the great. 9 VVhat manner of proceeding aswell concerning the framing and rearing of the Masse, as also about the vse therof, was after the time of Charles the great, and particularly of the dismembring of the Sacrament, by the taking away of the Cup of the Lord from it. 10 That the Communion vnder both kindes hath beene practized of all the auncient Churches. 11 VVhat manner of effect and working, the taking away of the Cuppe of the Lorde had amongst the faithfull: and vnder what colour and pretext. 12 VVherin are answered the pretēded reasons of the aduersaries, both by the holie Scrip∣tures, and by the fathers. A recapitulation or briefe rehearsall of the matters handled in the first booke. Of the Second Booke. 1 OF Churches and Altars: their first beginning and proceeding. 2 Of Images, that olde and auncient Christians had not anie. 3 VVhat manner of increase and proceeding Images had amongst Christians, and of the licentious abuse thereof, after they were once brought into the Church of Rome. 4 Of vnleauened bread, wine mixt with water: and of such thinges as serued in the ad∣ministration of the Sacraments. 5 That the old worship and auncient manner of seruing God was altogether performed & done in such a language as the common people knew and vnderstood, and by what degrees it was altered and changed.
6 That in the Primitiue Church, and a long time after, the holie Scriptures were read amongst the people in all tongues and languages. 7 Wherein is intreated of the Ministers of the Church, and of their charge and vocati∣on in the same. 8 That the Bishops and Ministers of the old Christian Church were maried. 9 How a sole and vnmaried estate of life grew and got increase and strength in the church of Rome, vnto the publishing of the decree made by Calixtus. 10 The reestablishing of abstinencie from mariage, and the continuing of the same, euen vnto our dayes. A briefe rehearsall of the matters handled in the second booke. Of the Third Booke. 1 THat the propitatorie Sacrifice of Christ is not reiterated in the holie Supper, and in what sence the old Church did vse this phrase and manner of speech. 2 Answeres vnto the aduersaries their obiections, which they pretend to draw from the holie Scriptures for the prouing of their sacrifice. 3 That the pretended propitiatorie sacrifice of the Masse hath no ground or foundati∣on in the new Testament. 4 That the olde VVriters haue not knowledged anie other propitiatory sacrifice, then that onelie one made vpon the crosse. 5 How and by what degrees the Sacrament of the holie Supper was turned into a propiti∣atorie Sacrifice. 6 That there is not anie Purgatorie, the foundation and ground pillar of their Masses for the dead, and first how that it was not knowne vnto the Church of Israell, or vnto those that liued vnder the olde Testament. 7 That Purgatorie hath no ground or foundation in the new Testament. 8 That neither the Primitiue Church, nor the Fathers liuing in the same for the space of many ages did euer acknowledge the Purgatorie of the Church of Rome. 9 Wherein are answered the aduersaries their obiections endeuouring to proue their Pur∣gatorie by the olde VVriters. 10 In what manner Purgatorie hath proceeded in the Church of Rome, and by what degrees. 11 That praying vnto Saintes hath no foundation in the holie Scriptures of the olde Testament. 12 That praying vnto Saintes hath no ground in the holie Scriptures of the newe Te∣stament. 13 That praying vnto Saintes was not taught in the Primitiue Church, and how it sprung vp and grew. 14 The continuing of the puritie of doctrine in the matter of Inuocation, and of the sprin∣ging vp of the corruption of the same in the Latine Church. 15 The springing vp of the corruption of inuocation, aswell in the Greeke as in the La∣tine Church. 16 That a man eannot merite or deserue eternall life for himselfe, and much lesse for an other: wherein he is considered first as he is before his regeneration. 17 That a man regenerate cannot merite eternall life for himselfe, or for any other. 18 That the law was giuen vnto man, to conuince him of sinne, and to cause him to looke for his saluation, from grace through faith in Christ, according to the Scriptures and the Fathers.
19 That good workes are the gift of God, and therefore cannot merite: and to what vse they serue according to the holy Scriptures and fathers. 20 How the doctrine of merite first set foote into the Church: how it proceeded: and how it hath beene oppugned, and set against in all ages: yea euen vnto S. Bernard his time. 21 How merite proceeded and went on, euer since S. Bernard his time vntill thse our daies: and what oppositions haue beene made against it, euen vnto the time of the full light of the Gospell breaking forth againe. A Recapitulation of the third Booke. Of the fourth Booke. 1 WHat a Sacrament is, and wherein it consisteth: and of the difference of the Sacraments of the old and new testament, where are likewise laide downe cer∣taine rules by the old writers, for the better vnderstanding of their writings. 2 That the doctrine of the holy Supper must be examined by the rules before deliuered: as all other doctrine whatsoeuer touching any other Sacraments, eyther of the old, or of the new Testament. 3 That the exposition which our aduersaries giue vpon the wordes of the holy Supper, de∣stroyeth all the foundations of the Christian faith, as also the nature of Christ and of his sa∣cramentes. 4 That the fathers knew not Transubstantiation, nor the reall presence in the signes: and that which is touched of the times, euen to the first Nicene Councell, is also included therein. 5 The continuing of the beliefe and faith of the fathers of the Church in the matter of the holy Supper, from the first Nicene Councell, vnto the time of Gregorie the great. 6 Likewise that a long time after Gregorie, Transubstantiation was not knowne: and in like manner that all the most famous Liturgies amongst our aduersaries, are repugnant to the same. 7 That the old Church did not belieue nor teach Transubstantiation, seeing it neither did, nor obserued in respect of the kindes or Sacramentes, that which is done and practised at this day. 8 In what manner the opinion of Transubstantiation was begun, increased, and finished, vntill the yeare 1215. and that it was ratified and confirmed by a Decree made in the Councell of Lateran. 9 What manner of increase and proceeding befell the opinion of Transubstantiation, from the Councell of Lateran, vntill the Councell of Trent: and the absurdities and con∣tradictions rising from the same. A comparing of the holy Supper with the Masse. A briefe rehearsall of the chiefe matters contained in the whole worke.
THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE MASSE, AND of the partes thereof. CHAP. I. After what manner the Supper of the Lord was first instituted and ordained, and that the Masse hath no good ground, eyther from the Scriptures, or from the practise of the Apostles. OVr aduersaries for the laying of a surer foundation for the Masse out of the holy Scriptures, haue attempted to driue and draw the same from the institution of the holy Supper of our Lord, & ordinarily now a daies, do vse to set downe as a note and marke of the same vppon all such places as concerne the holy Supper. Heere is the institution of the Masse: whereas their predecessors, & namely the ordinary Glose was wont to note such places thus: Heere is the institution of the Supper or Eucharist. Wherefore the better to know how like and how vnlike they be, as likewise to see so much the more cleerely, how farre the one is swaruing and degenerating from the other; wee must first consider after what manner the holy Supper was instituted, that holy Supper which is the sacrament of the new Testament, and succeeded the feast of the Passeouer, which was the Sacrament of the olde: that holy supper which is the true commemoration and memoriall of the sacrifice of the lambe without spot or blemish slaine for our sinnes; the figure and representation whereof had before beene liuely set out in the Paschall lambe. For we do altogether agree in this, all the sort of vs, that as the law was ordained to leade vs to grace, Moses and the Prophets to bring vs to Christ: euen so all the propitiatorie sacrifices of the law were to fit and to pre∣pare vs for the laying holde vppon that true and onely propitiatorie, the very lambe which taketh vpon him the sinnes of the worlde. And all the sacrifices of thankesgi∣uing likewise, which were offered for the acknowledgement of temporall benefites, serued to stirre vs vp to the consideration of this great and vnspeakeable spirituall be∣nefite which it pleased God, according to the riches of his mercie, to manifest and lay open in his Sonne. And therefore as we must come to the knowledge of the Masse by the holy Supper: so to that of the holy Supper by the Passeouer: the holy Supper ha∣uing succeeded the Passeouer by the institution of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the Masse in the Church of Rome hauing taken vp the place of the holy supper, through the cor∣ruption which hath beene brought in by the See and gouernment of Antichrist. Behold therefore the institution of the Passeouer in Exodus: Pharao perseuering in his rebelliousnes, Exod. 1. That the holy Supper came in place of the Passeouer. God declared vnto Moses that he would roote out all the first borne of Egypt: & yet neuerthelesse to the end he might put some difference betwixt the vessels of his wrath, and those of his mercie; he would spare the first borne of Isra∣ell; spare them I say, not because of any their merites, but for his owne compassions sake, through the fauour purchased by the lambe slaine for sinne, from the foundation
of the world. Wherefore hee ordained that in euerie familie, betwixt two euens a lambe without spot, for a type and figure of the true and verie lambe, should bee kil∣led and eaten: that with the bloode thereof, the postes of the houses of his people should be sprinckled, to the end that the destroying Angell might passe ouer: as an euident warning and admonition, that whereas this blood was not sprinkled (what familie or person soeuer it might be) there was nothing but matter for his wrathfull anger to worke and feede vpon: that moreouer this killing of this lambe should bee renewed euery yeare, and that for euer, to teach and instruct the ages to come, as well in the memorie of the benefites alreadie receiued, as in the expectation and faithfull looking for of greater that were to come and to be receiued. Now in this institution wee haue both a Sacrament and a sacrifice to consider and thinke vpon. In the Passeo∣uer is a Sacra∣ment and a sa∣crifice. The Sacrament giuen of God vnto his people for a seale and assurance of his promise, and of the fulfilling of the same: for to this end are the Sacraments gi∣uen of God vnto his people, when he saith: And this blood shalbe for a signe vnto you in your houses, that when I shall see it, I will passe-ouer, and that there shall not be any deadly stroke amongst you, when I shall smite Egypt. A sacrifice offred vp to God by his people: for as properly are sacrifices offered vp to God by the people, as Sacramentes come from God are giuen to the people, as is witnessed when he saith: And this day shall be for a memoriall vnto you, and you shall keepe holy this feast in your generations: in as much as God smote Egipt, and passed notwithstanding ouer our houses, &c. Such a Sacrament notwith∣standing as leadeth vs from this lambe vnto another lambe, from this blood vnto an other bloode, and from this temporall effectualnesse vnto a spirituall; in as much as it is chosen without spotte, it is for a signe of our Redeemer his innocencie; and in that it is slaine, it serueth vs for a signe of his death and passion; in that it is eaten, it is a signe to vs of that life and nourishment which wee draw from his death; and of our communicating of his flesh and of his bloode, as being bone of his bones, & flesh of his flesh &c. And a Sacrifice also, which besides that it is truely and verily one of the number of those which were of praise and thankesgiuing, ceaseth not neuerthelesse a∣ny manner of way to hold the place of a propitiatorie: seeing that this lambe offered by the father of the familie, doth prefigure vnto vs the lambe which the heauenly fa∣ther did sacrifice vpon the tree of the crosse, for the saluation of such as were of his houshould through faith, and our Propitiation in his bloode, as it is expounded by S. Iohn the fore-runner: Ioh. 1.19. Behold the lambe which taketh away the sinnes of the worlde. And by the Euangelist in better forme, referring and applying that to the substance and truth, which was ordained and decreed of the type and figure: To the end (saith he) that the Scripture might be fulfilled: There shall not one of his bones be broken. Now our Lord the true and verie lambe, The same in the holy Sup∣per, & to what end. which came to fulfill the law and not to destroy it, kept the feast of the typicall or figuratiue lambe with his disciples, both ac∣cording to this institution, as also according to all the circumstances thereof. Hee kept it (I say) the fourteenth day of the moneth, beginning at the euening, according to the order of the Hebrewes, the first day of vnleauened bread, betwixt two euens; that is to say, betwixt the euening Sacrifice and the Sunne-set. Therein hee likewise obserued the accustomed washing, excepted onely that hee therewithall endeuou∣red to draw men euermore from the naked ceremony, to the doctrine contained ther∣in: there he taught vs humilitie, washing the feet of his disciples, whose dutie it was without all doubt to haue washed his. Thereat after Supper he distributed and gaue the bread and the cup from hand to hand vnto his Apostles, as he was wont to do vp∣on that day among the Iewes in a certaine kind of collation, which they call Aphico∣min, of the greeke word : otherwise Kinnuah: but in steed of the words which euery housholder did vtter in this distribution, which intimated no other thing to those that stood by, then the miseries they sustained in Egypt, and Gods mercy which had deliuered them from the same; our Lord in this action (as oftentimes elsewhere) raiseth their spirites from the type to the truth, from the shadowe to the bodie, from the temporall deliuerance, to the spirituall, from the seruitude of Egypt, to the thradome and slauerie of sinne, and to be short, from the eating of this lambe which they had solemnized with him, vnto that very and true lambe, shadowed and pointed
out so many ages before this paschall lambe, whose bodie was likewise vpon this day giuen for them to the death, Ioh. 6.50.15. and whose blood within a few houres after was shed for the remission of their sinnes. Your fathers (said he in S. Iohn) haue eaten Manna in the wildernes, and are dead. But will you see the true bread of heauen, the breade of life, the quickning bread? that am I my selfe, which am truely come downe from heauen, and this bread it is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the world, who so shall eate thereof, shall neuer die, but liue for euer, &c. As if he should say, as followeth. Your fathers haue eaten the lambe, and we againe haue eaten the same here at this present time: but the true and very lambe in deed it is my selfe, euen the same of whom Esay hath said vnto you. He is led to the slaughter for the transgression of the people, Esay. 53: his soule is offred vp for a sacrifice for sinne. Of whom not long since Iohn Baptist said vnto you, behold the lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world: and of whom I my selfe say vnto you at this present: That I go to be deliuered vp to death for you; that you shall haue from henceforth my flesh to eat, and my bloud to drinke, for the remission of your sinnes, and for the nou∣rishing of your soules vp vnto eternall life: your soules (I say) that are barren and void of all righteousnes in themselues, and therefore also voide of true life, but yet such as shall find life in me in my obedience, and in my iustice and righteousnes: all which are made yours by the sacrifice which now I am about to offer vp of mine owne accord and free will, vnto you they shalbe become the foode and foison of eternall life: if you acknowledge and confesse your sinne, your nakednes, your vnprofitable∣nesse and great miserie: that is to say, if you truely hunger after my grace; if you finde and perceiue your selues changed and altred of righteousnes. And to the end that the remembrance of this great benefite may be alwaies fresh and new in your memorie, thinke vpon & remember it I pray you in such sort & maner, as you would think vpon your meate and drinke, without which your bodies cannot stand, and much lesse your soules without the benefite of my death, and of the life and spirituall nourishment of the same, which is secret and hid: Do this, whensoeuer you shal do it, in remembrance of me: in remembrance of my torne, rent, and broken bodie, and of my blood shed for you, and that such a remembrance as shall notwithstanding exhibite and communicate them vnto you, for the assuring of you of the pardon and remission of your sinnes, & consequently of the saluation of your soules. For alwaies, and as oft as you shall eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup, you shall expresse the death of the Lord: that is to say, you shall receiue the new couenant of grace, the seale of your life in him, vntill that hee come, But this shall be expounded more largely in his place: and in the meane time consi∣der and beholde our Lorde and Sauiour doeth take occasion by the Sacrament of the Paschall lambe, to institute and ordaine the Sacrament of the holy Supper, pas∣sing (as Saint Ierome saith) from the olde to the new; wherein as also in this, wee haue likewise to consider both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice. A Sacrament, in that God there presenteth vnto vs bread and wine visible signes, and yet notwithstanding exhi∣biters of an inuisible grace, of the participation which the faithfull haue in his bodie and in his blood, being members of this head, branches of this vine, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, &c. A sacrifice in like manner, for that in the holy Supper we giue thankes to God, for this great deliuerance which we receiue, from the seruitude and punishment of sinne in the death of his welbeloued: and hereupon it commeth, that we call it Eucharisticall, and that it hath the name Eucharist giuen vnto it; and which neuerthelesse retaineth in some sort somewhat of the nature of a propitiatorie sacrifice, in as much as therein wee carefully obserue and keepe the remembrance of this onely sacrifice, which is the onely true propitiatorie, which the Sonne sent from the father, hath once offered vp for all, vpon the tree of the crosse for vs: differing herein from the Paschall lambe, that the institution of the Lambe was a Sacrament of the deliuerance to come, whereas the holy Supper is the Sacrament of grace alreadie wrought and purchased: and herein againe for that the Passe-ouer held of the pro∣pitiatorie sacrifices, in that it represented, and set before their eyes, that which ought to be accomplished in the bloud of Christ: whereas the holy Supper holdeth somwhat of them, for that it setteth before our eyes this propitiation made and perfected. And thus much be spoken briefly, deferring the rest till we come to speake of the Sacrifice pretended to be in the Masse.
What we haue hitherto obserued, What was the forme of the holy Supper instituted by our Lord. 1. Cor. 11. The institution of the holy Supper. Math. 26. Marke 24. Luk. 22. Paulus Fagius. Deut. 8. Deutr. 16.3. is nothing else but that forme of the holy Sup∣per, wherein it was first instituted by our Lord, as we haue it set downe in three of the Euangelistes, and in S. Paule to the Corinthians, the first Epistle, and the 11. Chapter. The summe whereof is as followeth: that our Lord after Supper, tooke breade and blessed it. They vse the word . This was done after the manner and laudable custome of the Iewes, whose ordinarie manner of blessing in this place is yet to bee read: Blessed be thou O our Lord God king of eternitie, which hast sanctified vs by thy comman∣dements, and hast ordained that we should eate vnleauened bread, &c. Afterward he brake it, gaue it to his disciples, and said; Take, eate, this is my bodie, do this in remembrance of me, Whereas the Iewes were accustomed to say these wordes: This is the bread of miserie, (for so is the vnleauened bread called) which our fathers did eate in Egypt. Hee that is hungrie, let him come and eate, and he that hath neede, let him come and celebrate the Passe∣ouer. Our Lord in this place making the bread of miserie, the sacrament of the bread of life, that so who so eateth thereo worthily, shal neuer hunger. Afterwards it is said, that he tooke the cup and gaue thankes, (the Euangelistes vsing the word , in the same sence and signification that the former word  was vsed) and gaue it to them from hand to hand, saying: Drinke ye all: This cuppe which the Iewes call Chos halel, , the cup of blessing, the cup of prayse or thankesgiuing, which they did blesse in these words: Blessed be thou O Lord our God, King of eternitie, &c. which hast created and made the fruit of the vine, &c. And in distributing it they did sing one of the Psalmes of Dauid, which beginneth Halle-lu-iah, Praise ye the Lord. But to the end, that from thenceforth it might continue the Sacrament of the new Te∣stament: our Lord addeth thereunto these wordes: For this is my blood, the blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sinnes. And according to the A∣postle, to the end that it might be henceforth a perpetuall institution and ordinance in the Church of Christ. And euermore, and as oft as you shall eate of this bread, and drinke of this cuppe, you shall declare and shew forth the Lords death vntill his comming. In the end it is said, that our Lord and his Apostles did sing a Psalme, and afterward went vp into the mountaine of Oliues. . Munster vppon S. Marke. Paulus Fagius vpon Deut. c. 8. Scaliger de E∣mendat. temp. lib. 6. Cassander in his Liturgies. The Psalme I say which was wont to bee sung of the Iewes in the closing and shutting vp of this solemne feast of vnleauened bread after Supper, and is recorded in their bookes of rytes, to be the 114. Psalme: when Israel came out of Egypt. But Burgensis is of opinion, that it was a Psalme composed of many Psalmes, that is to say of all the Psalmes from the 113. vnto the 119. which thing is more at large to bee seene in Munster, Fagius, & others: but yet better in the Lord of Escalles his booke of the reformation of time; for it goeth farre beyond all the rest in the clea∣ring of this matter. And now we haue to consider, what it is that the Masse hath common, and what it hath like, with this holy Supper at this day; this holy Supper I say, wherein wee see that our Lord, the Lord of the Sabbath, the Lord of all the ceremonies, the Lord of the law it selfe, did not disdaine exactly to obserue all the circumstances of the cele∣brating of the same as they are ordained in the law, as namely the day, the houre, and the manner and forme there prescribed, referring the same to his true and proper vse onely, and to the onely end it respected, which was himselfe pointed out & prefigured in the same. Whereas they of the Church of Rome, men & sinners (as all the kind of man is) haue not beene ashamed to dispense with the institution of this holy Sacra∣ment, and to cut and clip it, change and alter it after all, after their owne best liking & fashion. Our Lord distributed the bread and the cup vnto his Apostles, the maister of the houshold vnto his children: where is there any one step or marke of this com∣munion, of this communicating in the Masse? It is his will and pleasure that this holy Sacrament should be a remembrance of his death and passion vntill he come: that we should comfort and strengthen our selues in this faith, combine and knit our selues in mutuall loue and charity, waiting for the participation of his glory, that so wee might make vp & perfect his body in the heauens. Where is this remembrance in the Masse? where euerie thing is vttered in an vnknowne language, where all is done by signes & whisperings, mumbled vp & not vnderstood, & the expositions whereupon are so ridi∣culous, fantastical & ful of controuersies amongst their Doctors. And furthermore who
euer hauing seene the celebration of the holy Supper in the first ages, could once dreame of finding the same in the Masse? Or who is he, who giuing good and atten∣tiue eare vnto the true institution of the Lordes Supper, read as it is set downe by the Euangelists, that can proue himselfe so quicke sighted, as soundly from the same to gather the doctrine of the Masse? But say they, th'Apostles haue not set downe euerie thing, there are many more ceremonies belonging thereunto: Of the place, Other things when I come, &c. 1. Cor. 11. for S. Paule himselfe saith: Caetera cum venero disponam, other thinges I will set in order when I come. But doe they not make any conscience to comprise vnder one Et caetera, the doctrine either of the sacrifice, or of transubstantiation, the whole force and marrow of their Masse? Is it credible, that S. Paul would vse such delaies in things so important and so necessary, as wherein (according to their owne saying) resteth their saluation, as without which the same cannot stand? Neyther are they yet ashamed to set before vs the foundation of the Masse, so huge and massie a building, vpon a meere gesse & supposall, that hath no ground or foundation at all to rest it selfe vpon? Ambros. in 1. Cor. c. 11. Nay then let vs heare what the fathers say: S. Ambrose, He teacheth vs that we must first handle for order sake the head & principall thinges concerning our saluation, as wherein one cannot erre without committing of some grieuous offence: Caetera, but as concerning other thinges which are for the edification of the Church, he passeth them ouer till his comming. Chrisostome vpon this place: S. Chrisost. vp∣on the 1. Cor. c. 11. hom. 28. Theod. vpon the 1. Cor. c. 11. Oecum. in 1. Cor. c. 11. Gloss. ordin. vpon the 1. Cor. c. 11. Thomas 3. parte sum. q. 64 art. 2. & in 1. ad Cor. where he speaketh (saith he) of the same thing or of some other , not verie vrgent or necessa∣rie, thereby to make them carefull to reforme their faults, when they shall thinke of his comming. Theodoret: He could not set in order all things, but hauing written of the most necessarie, he reserueth the lesse necessarie till he come in person. Oecumenius, Either hee speaketh of the same thing, as if the holy supper of our Lord had neede amongst the Corinthians to bee refor∣med in other pointes, or else hee speaketh of some other thing which hath neede of his owne pre∣sence. The ordinarie Glosse: Of the same, but by your selues you cannot wade any further therein. Saint Thomas, He speaketh vpon some slight and familiar traditions, he speaketh of thinges containing no matter of waight, that is to say, indifferent thinges. And in another place; But as concerning thinges which are necessarie in the Sacrament, Christ himselfe hath appointed them. In like manner, Caietanus: Caetera (inquit) praenarrata, that is to say, the things before spoken of, as that one came drunken, an other hungrie; that there were con∣tentions amongst them; these are the other thinges which he promiseth to redresse at his com∣ming. If then these other thinges, whereof Saint Paule would speake, bee not the Masse, then the place is ill applyed to that purpose: which if it be so, then let them refraine to make any such collection thereof hereafter: if not, yet how are they a∣ble to proue from thence their Masse, (as that which he reserued (as they say) fur∣ther to be laid open and deliuered,) not to bee one of those thinges which are not necessarie? and how from thence will they aunswere such as say, that it is not of the nature of the Lordes supper, the doctrine whereof hee had there deliuered them? But wee will yet make it more cleare, that Saint Paule did not deferre or put off any doctrine necessarie vnto saluation, as being of the substance thereof, vnto his comming, but onely certaine circumstances, 1. Cor. 1. such as were for comelinesse rather then for necessitie. I make knowne vnto you (saith hee in the same Epistle) the Go∣spell which I haue preached vnto you, which you haue receyued, wherein you abide, and by which you are saued. Wherefore the things which he setteth not downe in this Epi∣stle, are not of that nature and qualitie. But if the Masse be necessarie vnto eternall saluation, it is not of the number of those that are reserued, & the place therefore is al∣together misalleadged. Or if it must needs haue a roome amongst other things meant in that place, then it wil follow, that it is no necessary thing, contrary to that they hold & maintaine. S. Augustine epist. l. 8. c. 6. Neither doth it make any more for them which they alleadge out of S. Augustine. That it appeareth by this place, that all those ordinances which are obserued in the church, are ordained of the Apostles. For first it is manifest, that hee speaketh of the cir∣cumstances of the holy supper, & not of the substance, by the answeres which he ma∣keth vnto Ianuarius his questions: which are, whether it must be celebtated vpon such & such dayes, at such or such an houre, before or after meate, &c. Now from hence would they proue matter of speciall waight and substance, but not any thing of cir∣cumstance, a doctrine of a propitiatory sacrifice, & not the order & maner of celebra∣ting of it. Afterward for the circumstance, they had to proue that the order wherof S.
Augustine speaketh, is in euerie point the same with theirs, that is to say, that the ce∣remonie of the Masse was the same in his time that it is now: seeing it is our purpose hereafter to shew, that the holy Supper was then celebrated sincerely, and that the Masse was altogether vnknowne both for his name, and likewise for his effectes. But there is yet more behind, for in this same Epistle, after that S. Augustine hath squared out and established the holy supper of our Lord according to the holy scriptures, in all the pointes thereof concerning faith, in these words: Sicuti communicatio corporis et sanguinis Christi, &c. How the communicating of the bodie & bloud of our Lord, and if any o∣ther thing be recommended vnto vs in the scriptures. Againe: If the authoritie of sacred writ doe inioyne vs, we must not doubt but that we are to doe whatsoeuer we reade therein to be done, &c. he commeth in expresse tearmes vnto the circumstances of the same, the day, the houre, fasting, or not, &c. things whereof the scripture speaketh not: and as concer∣ning our cariage, wherein he wisheth vs to behaue our selues after the most receiued custome of the Church, because there is some likelihood that such obseruation pro∣ceedeth either from the Apostles, or from the great Councels: or els according as it is there receiued, where one dwelleth, as S. Ambrose counselled his mother: It being vnreasonable (saith he) to trouble mens consciences, about such obseruations, either through too obstinately contending for them, or through any superstitious kind of fearefulnesse. And yet notwithstanding to shew how we ought to preferre the scripture before any manner of tradition: That the Masse hath no groūd from the pra∣ctise of the A∣postles. Act. c. 23.  If our Lord (saith S. Augustine) did ordaine, that we should receiue the Supper after other meates: I belieue that none of the Apostles would haue taken vpon them to haue altered or changed the same, &c. Howsoeuer it be (say they) the Apostles haue said Masse. And that this is true, you haue in the Actes, , that is to say, that as the Prophets and Teachers there named, ministred vnto the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost said vnto them: separate vnto me Barnabas and Saule, &c. The question then dependeth vpon the Greeke word , from whence commeth the word Lithur∣gie. We say that it signifieth to doe ones dutie, and they will needs haue it to signifie, to say the Masse. 2. Cor. 9.12. Rom. 15.27. Philip. 4.18. S. Paul in many places calleth the bestowing of almes, , a Li∣thurgie. The ordinarie Glosse: The charitable laying out of our goods vpon our brethren. Oe∣cumenius: The Apostle hath not said , to make common worldly things, but , that is to say (saith the ordinary Glosse) to administer. Because (saith Oecume∣nius) that hereby he concludeth the Romaines to be publike Officers, for the paying of tribute vnto the Saints, as duely, diligently and iustly, as vnto kings. For which cause S. Paule also calleth Epaphroditus , Philip. 3. the minister of, or one ministring vnto him in his neces∣ties. And for this cause likewise Suidas a famous Grammarian saith, that , a Lithurgie, is , a publike office or charge, as , a freeing and setting of a man at libertie, either from charge in diuine or prophane matters. But not to go out of the place in the Actes: Oecumenius saith, What meaneth this word ? truely the same that , Oecumenius in Act. cap. 13. as they preached. And so Chrysostome. The old in∣terpreter, Ministrantibus as they were administring or executing their office and charge. The Syriacke and Arabian, as they were at prayers: because he there speaketh iointly of fa∣sting. Nicholaus de Lyra: As they serued God euery one according to his degree, fasting to the end, that their spirits might be so much the more raised & lift vp to heauenly and diuine things. Caietanus: He speaketh nothing of what kind their ministerie was, but in as much as hee had spoken before of Prophets & Teachers, he wold insinuate vnto vs, that he serued God in teaching and prophesying, that is to say, in expounding the scripture. And in like manner the rest. Amongst all which Expositors, there is not so much as one to be found, which did e∣uer dreame of finding the Masse in that place, vntill our yesterdaies sophisters sprung vp, and by the same argument & reason would proue, that the Angels said Masse, see∣ing that the Apostle to the Hebrews calleth them , spirits which serue God & his children, Heb. 1. as his officers, &c. But let vs further grant vnto them, that  in this place doth signifie, how that they celebrated the holy Sacrament; what can they gather from thence, if so be that they haue not first proued, that the supper is the Masse; yea & further let it be granted thē, that it doth signifie to sacrifice: what o∣ther thing wil this proue to be, Epiphan. haeres. 79. against the Collyridians. thē as Epiphanius saith, that they sacrificed the Gospell throughout the whole world? speaking especially & by name of Paule, Barnabas and others mentioned in that place? According as S. Paule likewise calleth it, ,
to sacrifice the Gospell? . Rom. 15.16. And yet in the meane time they doe nothing but play vpon the ignorance of the world, which with shamelesse faces they go about to make belieue, that the Masse is found in such writers, as in deede neuer thought of it, translating out of the old writers these wordes, , into this sence, namely, to say Masses, to celebrate Masses, &c. whereas in deed they signifie no other thing, then to preach, to assemble, to celebrate the supper, to administer &c. I am ashamed to refute the inuention of one of this time, Genebr. in the Lithurgie of Denis. which hath perswaded himselfe, that the Apostles did sing their first Masse vpon the day of Pentecost: and that he could find it in the old Testament, seeing himselfe put out of the new. And his reason is most excellent: for so it pleaseth them to sport themselues with the scriptures. It must needes be (saith he, that this was the day of the comming downe of the holy Ghost vpon the Apostles, following that which our Sauiour Christ said in S. Iohn: The words that I tel you are spirit & life. Act. 2.42. There is some question moued about that place in the Acts, where it is said: That they did perseuere in the doctrine of the Apostles, in communicating, in breaking of bread, and prayers: from whence he deriueth the whole matter at one iumpe, namely: that this day S. Iames began to say Masse. And his proofe is, that in the old Testament God had ordained, that on the day of Pente∣cost there should be offred vp vnto him a new cake for an oblation, which is called in Leuiticus, Minha Hadascha. In Deut. saith he, Missath Nidbath. Leuit. 23.16. Minha Hadascha. Deuter. 16.10. Missath Nidbath. Of this word there∣fore he will make the Masse to take his original, as ordained & instituted in this place by way of prophecie, and fulfilled and accomplished on the day of Pentecost by Saint Iames. Vnto this he ioyneth a graue and weightie coniecture: For (saith he) before it was onely said, that they perseuered in praier, and not in the communion and breaking of bread, &c. In stead that he should haue considered that this word perseuere, cannot proper∣ly be referred to any thing which is but in beginning to be done; and yet how in that place it is equally and indifferently affirmed both of the communion and breaking of bread, as also of their praiers. But let vs come to the foundation thereof. In the place which he alleadgeth these words are contained Missath nidbath iadecha. Thou shalt keepe (saith he) a solemne feast of weekes vnto the Lord thy God, in bringing the free will offrings of thy hand. The Greeke saith, , according to thy power: Which thou shalt offer, according as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee. Who seeth not that this ordinance extendeth it selfe vnto all and euery one of the people: to offer their first fruits vnto the Lord, according to that blessing which hath been receiued? And who is it that hath any smattering in the Hebrew, which knoweth not that Nibdath is to be vnderstood to signifie a thing which is freely & willingly giuen by euery one, according as he is touched in his conscience by the due consideration of his power & abilitie: as for example, is to bee seene in that contribution which was made for the building of the Tabernacle; in which place this word is ordinarily vsed? And what is there then in common betwixt the Masse, the offering of one onely priest, and a contribution rising from euerie particular man amongst the people? betwixt his host and the first fruits? betwixt the Son of God (whom they make men belieue to be there offred vp) & these new fruits? But & if he thinke to strengthen his cause, & make it good only by reason of the name: how cōmeth it to passe then that so many exposi∣tors, both old & new, (yea and diuers who cannot please themselues, but by running much into allegories) haue not once so much as pointed at the Masse? As Origen, Origen in homil. 13. in Leuit. S. Hieronim. in Aggeum. not∣withstanding that he translated the institutiō of the shew-bread in this place, vnto the holy Supper? S. Ierome although he expound this feast very particularly, citing & ex∣pounding this same place vpon Haggee? But much more, how commeth it to passe that this word once indowed by S. Iames, (if we belieue this inuentiō) with this sence & signification, hath not still retained it, and passed it along from church to church, as it befell vnto many Christians, first broached and springing vp in Antioch? How ly∣eth it buried foure hundred yeares after, in deep and deadly silence, not any old either Grecian or Latinist, so much as once renewing the memory of the same? And what should be the happy influence of this time, that should reuiue & set it vp againe? Why was it not preserued amongst the Orientall Lithurgies, which they beare vs in hand, to bee of so high a price and valewe, aswell as many other Hebrew wordes; namely
Amen, Hosanna, Hallelu-iah, Sabaoth, Pascha, and others? At the least why was it not re∣tained in that Lithurgie of Ierusalem, in the Syriacke tongue, if it were vsed & vttered in this sence, out of the mouth of so great and famous an Apostle, vpon so solemne a feast day, in so honourable and reuerend an action, and that but once? Againe, I can∣not perceiue that any other man hath gone about to seeke or search for that, either in that place of the Acts, Gloss. ordinaria in Leuit. & Deut. or in that other of Deu. or Leui. which this fellow there findeth. The Glosse saith; A new sacrifice, because it is made with new fruits, not with corn as at easter, but with breads: & therfore he addeth the breads of the first fruits &c. And again: A free will offring, because that God loueth those which giue cheerfully, those which adde more & more vnto their good wrks; In azymis sinceritatis & veritatis, that is to say, in the vnleuened bread of sin∣ceritie and veritie. And as for the place of the Acts: They perseuered (saith S. Luke) in the doctrine of the Apostles, Gloss. ordin. in Act. 2. in the communion and breaking of bread, &c. The Glosse saith, Of bread, as well common as consecrate, that is to say, as well ordinarie, as sacramentall. And Lyranus: Partly (saith he) because they did communicate together day by day; partly likewise because they did vse their victuailes and goods as in common. Oecumenius in Act. 2. And Oecumenius: Breaking the bread (saith he) to shew the plaine and cheape diet which the Apostles vsed. Caietanus: Distributing the breade, that is to say, their prouision of victuailes from house to house, accor∣ding to the store which they had receiued by the gift of the able faithfull. And when shall we learne to speake like to the Siriacke and Arabian expositors: communicating in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, called the Eucharist: for they, to signifie the same, doe vse the word Vcaristio, and by the same reason they might haue retained the worde Masse. What cōmunion or agreement is there betwixt that & this new inuention? And who is he, that is not out of all doubt, that this was not any of the Apostles and disciples their ordinarie exercises of pietie? And withall marke well how that to establish the truth, the whole bodie of holy scripture, is not sufficient to content and satisfie this sort of people, whereas one onely word mis-vnderstoode, falsely construed, drawne into a by-sence, rent and torne frō the best interpretation of most ancient antiquity, & of the best learned in these latter ages, & euen their owne, a gesse and coniecture, a dream, is sufficient, yea & more then enough for them to establish & build a lie vpon. But that the Apostles and disciples of our Lord did keep themselues to his institu∣tion, without any swaruing from it at all: if our aduersaries will not belieue S. Paule, when he saith to the Corinth. and to vs all: I haue receiued of the Lord, that which I haue deliuered vnto you: Gregor. lib. 7. de Registr. c. 67. let vs see at the least, if they will belieue their owne Doctors. Gre∣gory the great (who notwithstanding hath plaid the part of a liberal benefactor to the erecting and setting vp of the Masse) telleth vs that, The Lords Prater is said presently af∣ter commō praier: because the custome of the Apostles was to consecrate the Host in saying the Lords praier onely &c. where he calleth the consecrating of the host, the sanctifying of the signes or sacraments. Platina in the life of Xistus the first: He ordained, that Sanctus, Sanctus, Platina in vita Xisti. &c. was sung in the office or Lithurgie: for at the first these thinges were nakedly and simply done, & S. Peter added nothing to the consecration, saue onely the Lords praier. Walafri∣dus Strabo vnder Lewes the Gentle, Walafri. Stra∣bo, abbas c. 22 in lib. de rebus ecclesiast. about the yeare 850. a famous Abbot, as Trithe∣mius writeth, What we do at this day (saith he) by a ministery multiplyed and enlarged with praiers, lessons, songs and consecrations, the Apostles, as our faith bindeth vs to belieue, and those which followed next after them, performed in most simple and single maner, being no other thing then that which our Lord had commanded, by prayers, and remembring of his passion. And therefore they did breake bread in houses as it appeareth, Actes 20. And our Elders like∣wise report vnto vs, that in former times Masses were no other thing, then that which it vsually done vppon the day of Preparation, otherwise called the Fryday before Easter, vppon which day there is no Masse saide, Mandatum. but onely the communicating of the Sacra∣ment, after the pronouncing of the Lordes Prayer. And in like manner according to the commandement of the Lorde, after a due commemoration of his death and passion, they did participate and receiue in old time his bodie and blood, euen all they (I say) who were for capacitie and reason meet to be admitted thereunto. Berno Augien∣sis de rebus ad missam spec∣tantibus. c. 1. Berno Augiensis to the same effect: In the birth of the Church (saith hee) Masse was not said and celebrated as it is at this day, witnes Pope Gregorie, (and therewith he alleadgeth the place aboue named): And it may be (saith he) that in former times, there was nothing read but the Epistles of S Paule: af∣terward
other lessons as well of the olde as of the new Testament haue beene mingled therewith. B. Remig. An∣tisiado de cele∣bratione nusae. Cap. 1. And all this he may seeme to haue taken out of the life of S. Gregory, and S. Remigi∣us Bishop of Auxerre vnder Charles the bald: It is held (saith he) that S. Peter did first say Masse in Antioch, that is to say, in such sort as the Lord had giuen in commandement vnto his Disciples, in these words: Do this in remebrance of me, that is to say, call to your minds that I am dead, to purchase your saluation, and do ye the like, and that both for his & your owne sakes. And some say, that he said not at that time aboue three prayers, which began with these words, Hanc igitur orationem &c. Durandus in his Rationall, Durand. in Rationali. The Masse in the Primitiue church was not such as it is at this day: for it did not properly consist of any moe then these eight wordes; This is my body; This is my bloud: Afterwards the Apostles added thereto the Lords Praier, &c. And furthermore, the steps & marks of this truth are yet to be seene in the Mona∣stery of S. Benet, wherein the three daies before Easter, the Abbot alone doth hallow the bread and the wine: and the Monkes sitting with him receiue them at his hand: & vpon these daies there is no other manner of Masse said: The Lords institution is read, and certaine places of the holy scripture, and that they call Mandatum, that is to say, Mandatum. the Lords commaundement, as Walafridus, Berno, and Remigius, &c. Now in all these places they vse the word Masse, being vsed in the times wherin they liued for the holy supper: This which wee haue run out into of fitting our selues with the testimo∣nies of such, as speake their owne language, and agree with them in their worship and seruice, hath got vs thus much: namely, that from the testimonies of all the said Ab∣bots, which haue professed to write of the Masse, wee get this ground and aduantage: namely, that the Apostles did retaine the Lords institution, and as of consequent it must follow, did also deliuer the same vnto their disciples and followers. That they had not (as they themselues doe affirme) added any thing thereunto, but that which was of the same spirit and maister, namely, the Lords prayer; and this we must assuredly conceiue to haue beene, not so much in respect of the forme of the Lordes Supper, as in respect that it was commended vnto them for their ordinarie prayer: And that there was neither Canon, nor beginning, nor any note or marke of any part of this Office and seruice, which now they vse more then the bare words of the insti∣tution, which are repeated in the same. Howsoeuer that Hugo de S. Victor. Hugo de Sa∣cram. altaris. Gabr. Biel. lec∣tione 36, Innoc. 3. de ce∣leb. missae. c. cū Marth. et ib. glossae. be not a∣shamed to say, that the Canon of the Masse is of like authoritie with the Gospell, and that Gabriell Biell haue much enhaunced the same, saying: That that onely worde Enim (which they haue added to the wordes of our Sauiour Christ) cannot be left out in that place by the Priest, without committing of mortall sinne. CHAP. II. That the Masses fathered vpon the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, are notorious and meere suppositions. WHat shall become then (will you say) of the Masses or Lithurgies, which are so confidently builded & founded vpon S. Peter, S. Iames, S. Ma∣thew. S. Andrew, S. Marke, S. Denis Areopagite, S. Clement, &c. all A∣postles, Euangelistes, or disciples? I answere, that we will in this Chap∣ter take away whatsoeuer scruple of doubtfulnes or cloude of darknes that may arise to the troubling of any mans minde about the same. Onely let the readers beare about them such care and diligent watch and attention, as they would do in the receiuing of some paiment, least they should be deceiued with false money, or as they would vse in some suit, for the auoiding of counterfeit writing or false euidence: yea rather a great deale more, because the sonne is much greater, & the inheritance of a far higher nature, as containing in it our title and interest vnto e∣ternall life. Assuredly if these Masses rise from such authors as are the Apostles and E∣uangelists, there is cause for vs to yeeld & stoope: for they were gouerned by the holy Ghost; and the holy Ghost is alwaies, like himselfe, and so by consequent it must follow, that wee giue vnto them the honour which wee vse to giue vnto their Epistles and Gospels. But if on the contrarie it will be proued very clearely, that they cannot be of the Apostles or Euangelistes, then let vs confesse, that that which they teach, is
worthily to be suspected of vs to be the meere seed & tares of the enuious man, which bestirred himselfe in the night, yea and that in most abhominable manner. For as there is none so hardie as to falsifie and counterfeit the coine of the Prince, but such as in whom the spirit of lying and rebellion raigneth: so there cannot any be found so bold and impudent as to counterfeit the spirit of Christ the style & hand of his A∣postles, saue such as in whom the spirit of Sathan beareth rule and sway. But I speake not this vpon any conceit of these pretended Masses, which can nothing preuaile a∣gainst vs: seeing that our aduersaries themselues dare not auouch them for authen∣tike: seeing also that there is neuer a Priest of them all amongst the Latine Churches, which can perswade himself to haue made a good consecration by following of their rules: seeing also that we can fortifie and strengthen our owne cause diuers sorts of waies by them: seeing the confession therein is not made vnto any but vnto God a∣lone: seeing the Communion is therein administred vnto all the people, and vnder both kindes, and for that also that the Canon thereof is farre differing from that of the Latine: and finally, for that they are said in a language that is commonly vnder∣stood of all, and for many other reasons which shall be handled in their place. And that the rather in good sooth, for that it is our dutie, (for that testimonie sake which we do owe vnto the truth) to make our selues parties against them, and that the more by reason of the horrible hugenes of deceiuing lies, so impudently broached in the matters concerning our saluation. Then let vs enter into the listes, The lithurgie of S. Iames. and trie the strength of that which they pretend & make shew of to haue beene done by S. Iames. S. Iames the iust (say they) the brother of our Lord did first set downe the Masse in writing, he hath offred sacrifice after the manner of the Iewes, as also after the manner of the Christians: and to him alone be∣fore all or any one of the rest of the Apostles, it was permitted by the Iewes, because of his tribe & holines of life, to go into the most holy place. Iudge what apparance of truth is in these assertions, when as S. Iames, who had seene and learned, yea did teach, that the onely sacrifice of our Lord & Sauior Christ did put an end to all the sacrifices of the law, should not yet giue ouer, but continue to offer sacrifices according to the Iewish fashion and manner: that the Iewes (who did abhorre and detest nothing so much as the Apostles, persecuting S. Iames vnto the death, and Ananias still hold∣ing the place of the high Priest) wold euer permit & suffer him to do any such thing: & that as they add with the garments of the high priests, but principally in cōsideration of his stock and lineage, a thing making him to be so much the more suspected of the Romaines, who had the gouernment ouer Iudea. But still they continue their claime and say, Concil. Con∣stant. 2. in Trul. Canon. 32. that it was alleadged in the second Councell of Constantinople, against thē who did not mingle water in the Sacrament of the holy Supper. Let vs adde then, that this was neere vpon seuen hundred years after that Christ was ascended, & that of all that time it had neuer a tongue to speake. Whereas of a truth, if it had beene true, and known so to be from of old, it wold not haue beene forgotten of the former councels, seeing the power and authority thereof comming from so great an Apostle, would haue beene able to haue put downe and made nothing worth all the controuersies, though neuer so great, that were moued and raised in the same. In the Councels of E∣phesus the first and the second, where the controuersie was handled against Eutiches and Nestorius, and where the Fathers produced no proofe of antiquitie, besides a certaine place out of Eusebius and Origene, in which the holy virgin is called the mo∣ther of God:) Iudge you and thinke what aduantage they had got against Nestorius if they had had forth comming this Lithurgie, wherein fiue or sixe seuerall times she is called , the virgine that did beare and bring forth God? namely all that which may growe from the saying and testimonie of an Apostle, yea all that which the testimonie of the spirite of God is able to afforde, to the establishing of the truth of a doctrine of such importance and weight, as also to the authorizing of the first and principall Canon of those Councelles. And yet notwithstanding some holde that Proclus Archbishop of Constantinople was present at the first, and disputed against Nestorius: euen hee the verie man by whome they woulde beare vs in hande, that this Lithurgie of Saint Iames was first brought to light.
Againe, it would as little haue beene omitted in the first councell of Constantinople against the Macedonians, calling in question the deitie of the holie Ghost, seeing that it calleth him Consubstantiall with the Father. And so in the first Nicene Councell, at such time as they sought to confute Arrius, to establish the word Homousion, and to declare the Sonne to be Coeternall and Consubstantiall with the Father: And in ma∣nie other councels following, as that of Sardis of Rimini, &c. where it should haue decided the difference betwixt  and : whether the Sonne should be held to be of the same, or of the like substance: seeing that in this Lithurgie these wordes are verie ordinarie, both concerning the Sonne and the holie Ghost, and so might haue ended all the strifes, and preuented, without anie more to doe, so mani∣fold tragicall accidentes, as fell out in Christendome. Let vs ioyn vnto the former, Saint Ciprian, one of the most auncient Fathers and writers, as one that felt himselfe sufficientlie confirmed in the lawfulnes of mingling of water with wine in the holie Supper, in the place where he hath recourse vnto Allegories. And so likewise Saint Ierome, who had not got a small aduantage against Vigilantius about the ceremoni∣es, for which he did contend and striue with him. For who can belieue, that he which had read all manner of writinges extant, and which dwelled in Ierusalem, where they would that this Masse should be borne, and where by consequent it should find most carefull & tender custodie, for the preseruing of the same, should not so much as haue knowne it. As in like manner it is most certaine, that these words  and  neuer vsed in the Primitiue Church before the Councels of Nice and Ephesus, were not onelie receyued in the Church, where they were brought to light aswel as the sub∣stance and doctrine, but also grounded in expresse and plaine sort vpon the worde of God, and manie others of the like nature, which may serue notoriously to proue vn∣to vs, that the deuise of this Lithurgie, was not hatched till after these Councels: for besides that our aduersaries know well inough how to alledge for the authoritie of the Church, that the worde  is of the ordinance of the Councell of Nice, and not of the Scriptures, nor of the Apostles. It is euident that before this time it was not read in anie author that can bee defended and auouched. Some there are which al∣leadge one Prochorus a pretended Disciple of our Lord, but hee himselfe which hath caused it to be imprinted, hath by the same reason made it to be suspected for false & counterfeyte, and the stile or manner of writing in his own iudgement, carrieth no re∣semblance of an Apostolike spirite. As also Iustin Martyr likewise about the year 150. Iustinus, tom. 3. in a book intituled, The exposition of the Creed, of the right confession, or of the Tri∣nitie consubstantial, . But besides that this booke is not named by Photius, Honorius, S. Ierome, Eusebius, or anie others amongst the workes of Iustine, as also for that it is knowne not to aunswere or bee like vnto his stile. It is to bee noted, that this worde  is not mentioned, so much as in anie one place of this Treatise, and therefore may bee thought out of all doubt, that some man hath slipt it into the title, for the plainer declaring of the meaning of these wordes , of the right confession, &c. And for these reasons it is doub∣ted of, euen by Perion himself. You haue afterward in the same Lithurgie a , which is sung, and it signifieth asmuch as thrise holie, or most holie, it consisteth vpon these words , Thou O holie God, O Holie, Mightie, O Holie, immortall haue pittie vpon vs. But how did this rise? Behold and see how Pope Felix the third, writing vnto the Emperour Zenon, layeth downe the originall and first beginning of the singing thereof in the Church, as namelie that the Cittie of Constantinople, being sore shaken with continuall earthquakes and the people crying  shew mercie Lord, a little child in the sight of the people and of the Patriarke Proclus, was rauished and carried vp into heauen for the space of an houre, where he learned this Hymne: and comming downe againe, taught the same vnto the people, who singing the same, the earthquake ceased. And hereupon it came, that this was receyued of the Church into the beadroule of holy Hymnes, and ratified by the Councell of Calcedon. For this Felix the third liued aboute the yeare 480. the Patriarke Proclus about the yeare 460. and this is that Proclus, whome they obtrude vnto vs for a speciall witnes concerning this Lithurgie. And can it pos∣siblie
come to passe that this Hymne falling out vpon this miracle, coulde not be re∣ceyued into the Church til neare fiue hundred years after our Lord, and yet notwith∣standing to be found placed, & that in the same place that it is vsually set in in others in this Lithurgie? But let vs go forward. There was publike prayers made for them which were in the Monasteries. At this time nor yet for three hundred years after, were there anie Monkes in Syria, that is to say, in the countrie where Ierusalem is scituate, much lesse were they then in Monasteries. S. Hieronim. in vita Hilar. S. Ierome a witnes of that assemby in the place aboue mentioned, they did run (sayeth hee) with emulation from Syria and Egypt to Hilario in such sort as that manie belieued in Christ, and became Monks: for at that time as yet there were no Monasteries in Palestina, neyther yet did anie know in Syria what they meant, & there was Hillario, the first founder and ordayner of this kind of life and conuersation: he pray∣ed to God, that he would giue vs to find grace with the Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors. But where is read the name Confessors, Bellarminde missa. lib. 2. cap. 20. but of a long time after? And for their better in∣struction I wold haue them yet at the least to belieue Bellarmin, who would proue the antiquitie of the Romaine Canon, because it is not mentioned in that place: In as∣much (sayeth he) as the name of Confessors was not admitted into the prayers of the church, til after long time, euen a little before Charles the great, He bringeth in Temples, Altars, bur∣ning of incense, and making of censors, In a time wherein euerie man knoweth, that no man speaketh of anie thing but persecution, and priuate prayers in houses and caues, and who knoweth not how manie ages were expired, and spent before euer it grew to that heade? But O intollerable blasphemie. He offered incense vnto God: He offered it v∣pon the same tearmes, as it seemeth to him that hee offered his owne sonne, as with the same faith and with the same hope. Receiue (saieth he) at the handes of vs sinners this offring of incense for a sauour of a sweet smel, for the remission of our sinnes, and the sins of all thy people &c. and this he repeateth againe afterward without changing anie thing there∣in, when hee blesseth and presenteth the Sacramentes. How will this agree with the doctrine of the Apostles, which is, that there is no remission of sinnes without blood? & that our onelie propitiation is in the onelie blood of Christ, Genebr. in Miss. S. Dionis. &c. yea, and how will it agree with that of our Lithurgists, who hold that the offring of incense is an oblation of thankesgiuing, not of propitiation, expiation, or satisfaction: and that altogether concurring and answe∣rable to the old law (from whence they would deriue and borrow their ceremonies) forbidding to powre anie oyle or put anie incense vpon the oblations which were for sinne. Leuit. 5.11. And this we see to bee directlie contrarie to that which they will make Saint Iames say, a Sacrificer notwithstanding, say they both of the one & other Testament. Furthermore there are manie things contained therin, which might be verie wel obser∣ued and noted for the conuincing of the same of error & falshood, as the Gloria patri, and the Gloria in excelsis, both which as we shall see did enter a long time after into the Lithurgies, as also prayers for the dead, prayer vnto the holie virgin, &c. which are yet of later time then the other, witnes hereof is likewise Epiphanius, who cōdemned praying vnto the holie virgin fiue hundred yeares after, who would not haue opposed himselfe as a contrary party to an Apostle of Iesus Christ. And without doubt this Li∣thurgie hath beene presented vnto the world vnder this name, for no other end, but that it might giue credite and applause vnto all these errors. But all these particulars shall bee spoken of euerie one in more fit and conueniente places. One thing wee will not omit, which runneth as a long thread throughout the whole length of the webbe of this Masse or Lithurgie, which is that there is an infinit sort of sentences and whole clauses out of S. Paul his Epistles wouen in here and there, notwithstanding that they were not written by S. Paule, till after S. Iames his death. All that which we haue saide of the word , S. Marke his Masse. of , of the Prayer for the Monkes and Monasteries, of the offring of incense for the remission of sinnes, &c. let stande as saide (that so wee may not bee driuen to vnnecessarie repetitions) and spoken concerning and about the Masse of S. Marke also. And yet ouer and besides them, it hath his particular notes and brands of false and feyned counterfettednes, as namelie, a prayer for the Pope? where was the Pope then, in conscience tell me I pray you? or where was he knowne then? For the Subdeacons, Readers, Chanters, &c. whereas wee are of the minde, that the Primitue Church knew not anie degrees of
Officers, vnder Deacons. And a third prayer for the Cittie of Alexandria, that God would keepe and preserue it in the vertuous life of the Martyr S. Marke, &c. S. Mathew his Masse. who can excuse these contradictions, these fooleries? And Againe, in S. Mathew his Masse, be∣sides whatsoeuer hath beene discouered before, you may see the blessing of the boxe, the Chalice, and the spoone for the taking vp of wine: A prayer for the Popes, Patri∣arkes, and Archbishops, though they were not ordayned and extant for many ages after: Mention of the Councell of Nice, whose Creed is likewise sung therein: Of the Councels of Constantinople, Ephesus, &c. Of Saints, as that Chrysostome, Basill, Gre∣gorie the great, &c. Of all Christian kinges, whereas there was not one when S. Ma∣thew liued, who now is he that is able to protest for these Masses, that they are the A∣postles, if he consider either the matter, or the forme thereof? But yet if anie man wil replie and say, that for the substance thereof, or in grosse these things are true, not∣withstanding that from time to time, there haue beene some small and particular cir∣cumstances cast in and mingled amongst: expecting that wee should proue the con∣trarie as we will; yet at the least, what man is there that shall dare to be so bold, as to take vpon him to distinguish of that which was the Apostles, from that which was ad∣ded by others? betwixt that which was from God, and that which was from men? that which is authentike and originall, from that which is positiue and of it selfe? &c. Of the Masse attributed to S. Andrew. Con∣cerning that which they pretend of S. Andrew, we haue it not: but they alledge about the same one Abdias, a Bb. of Babilon, made and appointed thereunto by the A∣postles, who reporteth of himselfe, that he did see our Lord in his humane bodie, &c. This witnes (themselues being Iudges) may easilie bee controld and conuicted of fal∣shood. He hath seene (saieth he) our Lord, and he alledgeth Hegesippus the Histori∣an, who liued a hundred and sixtie years after: vpon which proposition, S. Augustine a∣gainst Faustus, lib. 11. & 22. cap. 80. Against Adim. ch. 17. Of faith against Ma∣nich. ch. 38. Cont. aduer. leg. lib. 1. ch. 20. Distich. 21. Sancta Roma∣na. wee may ea∣silie inferre the conclusion. But which is more, S. Augustine teacheth vs in many pla∣ces, that this is for the most part the same booke, which the Manichies chaunged for the true historie of the Apostles; when wee reade therein the Historie of S. Thomas cursing a man, who by and by afterward was torn in peeces of a lion. Of Maximil∣la refusing to lye with Eger her husband, putting in her roome her maide seruant Eucleia, &c. cited by S. Augustine in the same words, and gathered out of the fore∣named hereticall bookes, which he condemned: and Pope Gelasius was of the same opinion. Adde to the former the miracles which he attributeth to the Apostles, how∣beit vnworthy of them in respect of their worthines and dignitie, as namelie, the re∣pairing and mending of broken fingerstals, the turning of trees and stones into golde, & a thousand such follies. A temple builded at Ephesus to S. Iohn in his life time, &c. whereas for more then two hundred yeares after, Origen was much troubled how he might answere Celsus, asking of him what might be the cause that Christians had not eyther temples or altars, &c. There is yet remaining (as not spoken of) the Masse, Of the Masse attributed to S. Peter. which they call S. Peters, and which they hold to be the same with S. Marke his Disciple, fra∣med and contriued somewhat neer vnto that (sayeth Turrian the Iesuite) which is sung in great Greece, or that part of Italie which is called Basilicata. But who will belieue, or giue anie credite vnto him? seeing that Gregorie telleth vs, and manie others af∣ter and besides him, that S. Peter did celebrate the Eucharist most plainelie and sim∣plie without adding to the words of the institution so much as the Lords prayer. And who can perswade himself that the Church of Rome, holding so much of S. Peter, that vnder his name, it exalteth it selfe aboue the whole world; would offer him the iniurie, as to make his Masse inferiour to that of S. Gregories, yea & to driue it out of Rome, to restraine and keepe it within the number of a few poore priests, keeping the moun∣taines of Basilicata? And such notwithstanding, altogether are the proofes which they produce for their Masses or Lithurgies, which they pretend to be the Apostles. Of the Masse attributed to S. Denys. Acts. 17. Neither yet haue they anie firmer ground or more assured warrant for those Masses which they attribute vnto the Apostles their Disciples. It is said in the Actes, that Denis Areopagita, was conuerted at Athens at the preaching of S. Paule: a great mischief, if he shall not haue left with vs the same institutiō, which he receiued of Paul: but yet verilie it is greater if S. Paule deliuered anie other to him, then he did to the
Corinthians, yea such an other as he neuer receiued, or was taught of Christ the Son of God. In the meane time they clap vs vp together a Masse of his diuine function, and seruice, but farre differing (as shall bee seene) from that which they themselues do ex∣ercise and practise, and yet notwithstanding, the same hauing as little part and porti∣on in Denys, as the others had in the Apostles. That wee may not alledge against them how that the stile is altogether differing from the Apostolicall manner of wri∣ting, neither yet the curious speculations therein, propounding and setting before vs, as it were in an Inuentorie whatsoeuer is contained in the heauens, howsoeuer they be expresly forbidden by that great Apostle, howbeit that he had beene rapt and car∣ried vp into the third heauen: because (it may bee) that these thinges would not con∣tent the contentious. Let vs come and see how these bookes can be thought to bee his, hauing obserued the proofes to the contrarie, as they follow. Eusebius reckoning vp all the famous men in the Church, called by the name of Denys, and whatsoeuer they had written, sayeth not a word of this man. S. Ierome in his Catalogue of wor∣thy men, speaketh of two or three of this name: but of this man, or of any of his books he is not remembred. Origene, Chrysostome and all the first Greekes and Latines, in like manner altogether as little. Gregor, homil. 33, de decem drachmis Yea Gregorie the great, citing the bookes of this Denys, calleth him not Areopagite. He speaketh of the consecration of Monkes: who can denie but that these ceremonies were vnknowne more then three hundred yeares after Christ? And that Denys speaketh also of their shauing; which cannot bee proued to haue beene knowne or heard of, more then 600. yeares after: saue that the Fa∣thers in generall termes did admonish those of the Clergie, that they should not fa∣shion themselues after the vaine manner of such men, who gloried in their long haire? Of the vse of Godfathers in Baptisme; but who is hee that is able to shew out of anie old, either Greek or Latine writer, I say not this name: but so much as any trace or smal impression of the thing, for many ages after? Howsoeuer they haue beene verie exact and exquisite in describing all the ceremonies obserued in Baptisme? Dionisius de diuin. nominib. But what De∣nys soeuer this might bee, he neuer so much as once pretendeth that it should bee the Areopagite: for in his bookes of diuine names, he reckoneth vp Clement the Philo∣sopher, and they will haue him to bee the Romaine: but it appeareth that hee was an Alexandrian; seeing it is so found and proued by a place in his viii. booke: hee liued a∣bout the yeare 200. And therefore further, or otherwise then hee witnesseth of him∣selfe, what haue wee to doe to expect and looke what others doe say? In like manner wee see that Theodore Gaza in his preface vpon the Problemes of Alexander Aphro∣diseus, Theod. Gaza in praef. in pro∣ble. Aphrod. Erasmus vpon Act. 17. Caietan vppon the Actes cap. 17. and vpon the third of the Kings. Sixtus Senen∣sis. lib. 4. in dictione, Atha∣nasius. dedicated vnto Pope Nicholas the fift, pronounceth that these bookes of the Hierarchie, were neuer made by Denys the Athenian. So sayeth Erasmus also, writing vpō the Acts, and he addeth his reason; I do not thinke (sayeth he) that in these first times the Christians had so manie ceremonies, &c. Laurentius Valla: that the learned of his time did attribute them vnto one Apollinaris: as also the Cardinall Caietan sheweth, that they could not bee his: and Sixtus Senensis dooth so faintlie and doubtfullie mantain the contradictorie part, as that he reiecteth the questions concerning the old & new Testament attributed to Athanasius: Seeing (sayth he) that in the fourth question there is mention made of the misticall Diuinitie, which I thinke to haue beene vnknowne at that time. To bee short, I doubte not but that it will befall the man whosoeuer hee bee that shall reade them through, as it happened to one Gulielmus Grocinus a worthy man, an English Diuine, nothing suspected of our aduersaries; who, as Eras∣mus maketh mention, hauing vndertaken in the time of king Henrie the eight, pub∣likelie to expound this writer in S. Paules Church in London; did straine himself migh∣tilie, euen from the beginning to take away all doubt from such as should once ima∣gine that Denys Areopagite should not be the author thereof: but scarse was he pro∣ceeded to the middest, before that he vnsaide it againe, and was neare to haue craued pardon and foregiuenes of his auditors, whereby we may note what consciences our aduersaries beare about them, not letting to paye out anie manner of counterfeyted coyne whatsoeuer. Nicen. Synod. 2. Against all this they set the councell of Nice: but let vs marke, that it is the second, held about the adoration and worshipping of Images, about the yeare
800. and therewithall, that in the same, he is not called Areopagite. Constantinop. Syn. 3. They alledge al∣so the Councell of Constantinople the third, wherein there is a certain place (though cold and blunt inough,) alledged about his books against the Monothelites. This was helde about the yeare 680. But what is this for to proue vnto vs the antiquitie thereof. For as concerning that which they take out of the first Homilie of Origen v∣pon S. Iohn, they might blush and be ashamed, seeing he nameth none but the Mani∣chies, and Arrians in that place: and how long was that after him? But what shal we say, seeing in France, where it is held that he exercised his Apostleshippe; we haue so negligentlie looked to the keeping of this Masse, as that wee had it not till after the yeare 900. or thereabout: when Michaell the Emperour of Constantinople sent it vnto Lewes the son of Charles the bald? where we must not forget that so great igno∣rance raigned when it was brought vnto vs, so able were wee to giue a sound and vp∣right iudgement vpon it; as that to the end wee might be able to celebrate and keepe the same yearlie vpon S. Denis his day, in the Abbay of S. Denis neare Paris, (as it was then appointed,) it must needes bee written in Latine, in which language it is read as yet vnto this day. Let vs come to Clement. They shew vs his Lithurgie. I dare take them vpon their oath, Of the Masse attributed to Clement. to speake in what estimation they haue it concerning the good∣nes and sufficiencie thereof: and whether that they would think themselues to haue made a right consecration, and according to the lawes of their Canons, if they should bee ruled by the same: and yet notwithstanding, Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 16. S. Hieron. de eccl. Scriptor. they are not ashamed to make it a buckler of theirs. Eusebius and S. Ierome allowe not anie worke of this Clements, (from whome euerie day doth giue vs a newe spring of volumes,) saue onelie one Epistle written to the Corinthians: (and yet that same is lost and perished,) although they let not to confesse that there are manie bookes that walke abroade vnder his name: but such as are verie much swaruing from the doctrine of the Apostles: those especially which are intituled his reuiewes, : for Ruffinus alledged by S. S. Hieron. in Apol. aduers. Ruff. Dist. 15. sancta Romana. Epiph. haeres. 27. Sixt. l. 2. Bibl. Ierome, doth affirm that they contain the heresie of the Eunomians in such euident and manifest manner, as that it might seeme to haue beene Eunomius himselfe spea∣king in them. Gelasius the Pope giueth the same censure vppon the booke called I∣tinerarium Petri, or S. Peter his voiage. And Epiphanius addeth, that the Ebionites did make vse of the same, for the prouing of their heresies. And the Inquisition (saith Sixtus Senensis) hath likewise disalowed of, and condemned them. As for his Epistles vnto S. Iames the Bb. of Ierusalem; it is apparantlie cleare that he was dead 30. years before that S. Clement could be Bb. of Rome: and yet notwithstanding, hee taketh vpon him this facultie: But how can it be maintained being before the death of S. Peter? And yet after all this, who is there that will stand forth, and warrant vs, that there is no falshoode in the bookes of Constitutions, newlie brought ouer from Candie, by a certaine Venetian called Capellus, in which we may reade this pretended Lithurgie of S. Clements: seeing that the Councell of Constantinople held in Trullo, doth complaine that these Constitutions of Clement haue beene falsified: seeing also that the Cardinall Bessarion, not knowing possibly how to approue the words of consecration vsed therin, doth vtterlie reiect the authority therof, as Apocrypha, & o∣penlie suspected of, being counterfeite and fained. Now therfore what haue they me∣rited, or what seruice haue these bookes of Clementes done vnto the Church, since that time, hauing beene condemned by the Primitiue Church, that they should now find allowance and approbation in our Church? Shall books containing the seede of controuersies bee admitted as deciders of controuersies? what shoulde let vs to condemne euerie particular of the doctrines which they containe, seeing they were euerie where, and vniuersallie then condemned in the Church? But let vs see some notes of vntruth in them, such as are in others, and withall such particular ones, as are proper vnto them alone. Behold, prayer for Confessors, not receiued (as saith Bellar∣mine) for the space of 700. yeares after in the Church of Rome: and so they woulde proue that from that time there was a Pope: That the remainder of the Euchariste should be cast into the Sextens chamber or roomes called Pastophoria, which in olde time were certain galleries in the Temples of the Painims, appointed for lodgings for
such as resorted thether for to offer sacrifice: and how short came poore Christians, as then of hauing anie such Temples or buildinges. Let vs make an end of that which remaineth concerning this matter, Decretall Epistles. all after the same manner: what shall we say then of those goodlie Epistles, written by the first Bbs. of Rome, wherein so oftentimes mention is made of the Masse? shall they also swing in the same ballance, and obtaine as vile an end? This would (it may bee) but anger and vexe them too much. But who can indure that it should bee thought that such E∣pistles should bee attributed vnto so great Clearkes, and personages, and that in those ages, wherein the Latine tongue most flourished? being more full of incongruities and barbarismes, then euer were found amongst the verie Gothes, as for example: Epis∣copi sunt obediendi, sunt vener andi, non sunt detrahendi, and in that, written to Euaristus: non sunt respuendi, non insidiandi, againe, in an other to Telesephorus: Also, ab iis om∣nes se fideles cauere debent, and such like: who euer spake such Latine? or else who can∣not say (if they did speak so, that of all the Latine, the B bs. of Rome (the head citie of the whole world) were the most barbarous and the least Latinistes? But is it in these pretended Epistles, that we find these goodlie Decrees? Of Clement the first. Let not the Laitie enter into the Presbiterie, whilest Masse is in saying: when as at this time, not 300. yeares after, there were not anie, eyther Temples or Presbiteries: witnesses here∣in are Origene and Arnobius. And as wee shall see, the name of the Masse was as lit∣tle amongst the Latines, and lesse amongst the Greekes. Of Alexander the first. Let not a Priest say anie moe then one Masse a day. De Consecr. D. 1. Can. Sufficit. Can Nocte Sancta, &c. And of Telesephorus: That hee may say it thrice vpon Christes day, and that because the people flocke and run together by thousands vnto Christianitie, and that euerie one is desirous to communicate vp∣pon that daye; yea, hee had an expresse commaundement. And thus they euerie where deceiue with the name of Masse, in stead of Communion or Eucharist. And yet of all this while, haue they not got so much as one Masse, neither of the A∣postles, nor of their Disciples, neither yet of the first Bbs. of Rome, by turning ouer and pressing all the recordes of one hundred yeares space after the death of Christe. And although we should allow for good and currant whatsoeuer they alledge, how far off notwithstanding should we finde them from that great Masse of these our times, and how farre to seeke for their priuate Masses? But they replye, who is able to proue any thing to you, seeing you deny so manie Testimonies and bookes? Nay rather, how can we receiue and admit of them, seeing they belie themselues? or build our selues vpon them, seeing they plucke downe themselues? hauing receyued the black sentence by the Primitiue Church, and being confounded by their owne mouthes & wordes? And in all this who goeth away with the losse? our aduersaries, for produ∣cing false witnes: or we for charging them therewithall? they for offering to make vp theyr payment of counterfeyte coyne, and that in a bargaine of merchandize of such prices and worth: or we for touching, and making an assay thereof? But what is the greatest gaine that riseth by such faining and counterfeyting of bookes? Certes, e∣uen such as ordinarilie attendeth Sathan, in all the trauell and paine hee putteth himselfe vnto; namelie, to drawe and allure, and afterwarde to keepe man kinde in the snares of ignorance or errour, by his counterfeyte and fained deuises: The same which fel vpon those deceyuing Spirits in the first ages of the christian Churches, for foisting in the goodlie Gospells of Nicodemus, S. Iames, S. Bartholomew, S. Thomas and others, which was a derogating from the authoritie of the holy & true Scriptures, so much as in them laye, by the bringing in of those which were false. What did the Manichies pretend, sayeth S. Augustine, by their false Actes of the Apostles? Euen no∣thing else but to weaken the truth of the holie historie, and to strengthen the arme of falshoode: which suteth verie well with that which Leo the first saide; That these pre∣tended writinges of the Apostles, which vnder this faire name, contained the seedes of ma∣nie false doctrines, ought not onelie to bee forbidden in the church, but quite banished, yea burned. Againe, it is most certaine, that one of the hotest persecutions that euer the Primitiue Church endured, and whereof it so grieuously complayneth, was that which was kindled with the bellowes of false and counterfeyte writinges; and those procee∣ding
so farre, as euen to shrowde themselues vnder the name of Iesus Christ, of the truth it selfe: so ragingly did the spirite of lying ouerflow, and so licentiouslie did he run loose at his libertie in these first ages: & as there was not to be found a more dead∣ly wound, then that against the puritie of the Gospell: so the ancient Fathers did for∣tifie and arme themselues, to the vttermost of their might, for the keeping out of the same: as Ireneus, Iustine; Origene, Melito and others, by distinguishing the Cano∣nicall bookes from the Apocrypha: whereas our aduersaries now a dayes, that they may haue the better meanes to support and beare out their lies, are nothing so care∣full for, or so zealously and earnestlie set vppon anie thing, as to shake and weaken the authoritie of the holie Canonicall Scriptures: and that partlie by slipping in amongst thē such books as the Primitiue Church had cut off as dead & vnprofitable members; partlie by reuiuing, yea by new coining such store of such manner of fables; such store of such & such fooleries, as possiblie they could deuise, & al to that end, that amongst so much filthie and durtie stuffe as they brought, (and as had beene of olde swept and cast out of the Church by the auncient Fathers) they might at the leaste finde out some scantlins more or lesse, of the stuffe wherewith they did infect and corrupt their Church. CHAP. III. What manner of diuine Seruice was vsed in the Christian Church, in the time of the A∣postles and their Disciples. NOw it may not content vs to know that the Masse which is v∣sed at this day; was no parte of the diuine seruice of God in the Christians Church, in the time of the Apostles and their Disciples, nor yet anie other thing comming neare vnto the same: but wee must goe further and search what manner of seruice it was, though wee bee put to fish and finde out the truth, from the botomles lake of lying deceitfulnes: a thing become very hard and difficult for vs to atchieue by reason of the piled heaps of ceremonies, and the mighty multiplying of Nouelties, for men to play and sport themselues withall, throughout the whole conti∣nuance of so manie ages: and because also that besides all such, we shall bee forced to vndertake the clearing of this so intricate and intangled a matter, by the darke and dimme traces (as they may be found) which are apparant in the bookes that are left vs, and which our aduersaries themselues doe approue: to the ende that on the one side we may bee able to discerne of Superstition, from which we must depart, and that on the other side, we may not hang in suspence, what is the true seruice of God, wher∣unto we are to cleaue, and according whereunto we ought as neere as may bee to de∣sire and labour for the reformation of the Church. Now this ought to suffice vs, 1. Cor. 11. that S. Paule hath tolde vs, that he hath not taught the Churches anie thing, but that which he had receyued from the Lord, and which also he hath declared vnto vs: and againe, that S. Peter by the bookes of our verie aduersaries, is sayed to haue tyed and kepte himselfe to his institution. And who is hee that would receiue or belieue otherwise of anie one, or al the rest? but yet notwithstanding, men will not be content herewith∣all, wee must be forced for their satisfaction to handle the matter in a more large and ample manner. And here first we are to consider what S. Angustine telleth vs: that is, What the ser∣uice was a∣mongst the Christians. that the church of God, yea of Christ had his beginning in Adam, & shall end in this world by the last Christian, which is asmuch to say, as that there is but one Church euer since the be∣ginning, euen vnto the worlds end, howsoeuer it haue his diuerse periods: amongst all which that was the chief and principall which happened vpon the change of Iudaisme into Christianitie; for to speake properlie, a good Iewe was no other thing then a
Christian, by faith looking and waiting for the Messias, which is Christ: as in like manner a Christian is a true and naturall Iew of the true seed of Abraham; in asmuch as by the same faith he hath receiued Iesus for the Christ. The diuine seruice like∣wise amongst the Iewes, (notwithstanding that they were darkened in their opinions, by the peruerse glosses of the Pharisies) was abiding sincere and pure, purged and free from all Idolatrie, in as great measure, as euer at any time before, when our Sauiour Christ came into the world: whereupon wee see, he made it not straunge, neither yet his Disciples to be conuersant in their Temple and Synagogues. But on the contrary there was the place, where our Lord did chuse oftentimes to take occasion to teach & instruct the people, & to interprete the Scriptures, which were therein diligentlie read; as in like manner his Apostles did after his example: Iohn 18. Actes 15. and to this end we haue infinite store of plaine and manifest places, both in the Euangelistes and in the Actes: As then our Lord came not to abolish but to fulfill the law: seeing likewise that the Apostles were not sent to change the pure Seruice of God, instituted and maintained in the Sy∣nagogues, but rather to establish and confirme it, wee neede not doubt, but that they did fashion and conforme themselues according to the patterne which our Lord had shewed them for the performing of this holie seruice: seeing it was not any cause to disanul or destroy the comming of our Lord and Sauiour, who did by his only sacrifice and offring vp of himself, abolish all the Legall Sacrifices, which were nothing, but in asmuch as they were applied vnto him. Now the Iewes had in euerie towne and cittie a Synagogue, whereinto they assem∣bled themselues euerie Sabboth day, there to pray vnto God all together, and there to heare the reading of the law, and the expounding of the same: againe, according to the bignes of the Cittie, they had it deuided (as is amongst vs) into manie parishes, so that the Rabbines do reckon in Ierusalem to the number of fiue hundred, and they were called in Hebrew  and  as if one should say, Houses for Con∣gregations, Bathei Mi∣drascoth. Fagius in Le∣uit. Paraph. Chald. cap. 231. Luke 4 18. Acts 15.21. Sermons, Expositions, &c. Of this order we haue the steppes and prints in the Gospell: Iesus (sayeth S. Luke) came into Nazareth where he had beene brought vp, and entred into the Synagogue on the Sabboth day, according to the custome, and stoode vppe for to reade, &c. and lighting vpon the place of Esay, The spirit of the Lord is vpon me, because he hath annointed me, &c. This day (sayeth hee) is this Scripture accomplished in your hea∣ring, &c. In the Actes likewise, S. Iames sayeth, For Moses of olde time hath in euerie Cittie them that preach him: seeing hee is read in the Synagogues euerie Sabath day, &c. And such was the order in those Synagogues that S. Paule went vnto, confuting of the Iewes by the Scriptures euerie Sabath day: for Paule and Barnabas (sayeth Saint Luke) being entred into the Synagogue vpon the Sabath day, they sate downe, and after the le∣cture of the Lawe and Prophetes the chiefe of the Synagogue sent vnto them saying: Men and Brethren, If you haue any worde of exhortation (which is signified by the worde ) for the people, speak on: then Paule stoode vp, and made a signe with his hand, &c. Where by the way we haue to obserue, Acts 15.42. that vpon the other daies of the weeke , (that is on the dayes betwixt Sabath and Sabath,) they beseeched and intreated the Gen∣tiles to preach the Gospell vnto them, and not as some haue deliuered, the Sabath following: and thus we are come to the reading of the Law, and the ordinarie ex∣pounding of the same in the Synagogues. But this exercise of Pietie, which was pra∣ctised in the holie congregations vnder the Law, began with prayers, and those pray∣ers (according to the opinion which is helde most probable) with a generall Confessi∣on of the people acknowledging their sinnes, a Confession accustomed of olde in all their Sacrifices, Leuit. 16.5. & the 16. Fagius in Pa∣raph. Chald. Leuit. ch. 16.16 Numb. ch. 5. Thalmud in the treatise of Sacrifices. which otherwise without this should haue missed of their appointed end, and by consequent haue become vnprofitable: and besides that the markes and signes thereof are in the law, and the patterne & platforme thereof in the Prophetes: we haue the same particularlie in the bookes of the Iewes in these wordes: We haue sinned O Lord, wee haue done wickedlie, wee haue dealt deceitfullie in thy sight, thy people and all the house of Israell, we repent our selues thereof, and are ashamed for the same. And therefore O Lord we beseech thee forgiue vs our sinnes, our iniquities, and our transgressions, as it is written in the booke of Moyses thy seruant, &c. And this confession is cal∣led
a verball Confession, which brought the Iewes to remember and call to minde the true vse of Sacrifices, vz. a witnessing against themselues, and condemning of their deserts and merites: as vnto Christians the benefite of the death and passion of our Lord, without the which both the one and the other should lye dead in their sins. Then there followed certaine Psalmes of Dauid, and other Prophetes, which were sung cleane through, and certaine  thankesgiuings for the free mercies of God bestowed vpon his Church, and are held to haue beene instituted by Esdras, at such time as he set downe orders for the people returned out of captiuitie, as is to be seene in the prescript forme amongst them: afterwarde the reading of the law was de∣uided into 51. Sedarim, or Parsioth, that it is to say, Sections, and of the Prophets, into as manie Haphtaroth, that is to say, openinges of the booke, lessons, or as others take it, Dismissings, because the Seruice ended there, to the ende they might bee of proportionable number with the 50. or 51. Sabathes of the common yeare, or to the 54. of the Leape yeare. Next after this reading and expounding of the Law, there fol∣lowed a generall prayer for the necessities and wantes aswell of the Church, as of the state, whether publike or priuate, and finally: the Congregation receiued the blessing pronounced vpō the people, by the mouth of the Minister, or chief of the Synagogue, and so they had leaue to depart. This was their ordinarie seruice: but in the great feasts, and especially in the feast of Easter, whereunto answereth the ceremonie of the holy Supper, there was this ouer & aboue, namely, after the blessings & thanksgiuings before mentioned, a long praier deliuered by the mouth of the householder  wherin thanks was rendred vnto the Lord God of eternitie, for that of his sole mercie he feedeth the whole world, for that he had deliuered them from Egypt, and giuen thē in possession the promised land, for that he had vouchsafed to scale vp the truth of his couenant in their flesh, and to declare his law vnto them: he did therein likewise hum∣blie intreat him, for his onelie goodnes sake, to take pitty vpon his Israel, on his Ieru∣salem, on his Tabernacle, to hasten the comming of the Prophet Elias, that is to say of the forerunner, and to giue them to see the daies of the Messias, the Redemer of Israel, &c. which done, and euery one of those which were present, hauing in a praier vttered in a low voice, seuerally and apart ratified this generall praier, they proceeded to the distributing of bread, and of the cup, with a prescript forme of wordes, and that in re∣membrance, aswell of the miserie they had suffered, as of the mercy they had tasted in their deliuerance from Egypt. The first Christians then framed themselues after this manner of seruice, That the ser∣uice of Chri∣stians was de∣riued from thence. excepted one that (after they had with all honourable reuerence and tender compassion buried the olde Synagogue) they prayed vpon the Lords day, that is to say, vpon the first daye of the weeke, in remembrance of the resurrection, in stead of the Sabath, and brought in the reading of the Euangelists, & the Epistles of the Apostles, with that of the law & the Prophets, out of which the Bb. or Pastor did expound somewhat vnto them; then after these lectures the holie supper was celebrated amongst the faithfull, by the reci∣ting of the institution of the same, and the distributing of the bread and cup vnto the people, the which for the most part were taken from their owne offrings, for the vse of the holy Sacraments; which done, there followed certain Psalmes of thanksgiuing for the spiritual good things receiued of God at this holie table, after which the assembly brake vp: and all this was done and said, euen till all was ended in great simplicity and singlenes, and in a lauguage vnderstood, and in such garmentes as all the people did weare, as it shall bee certainelie proued hereafter from point to point. Of the Confession of sins, the first profession that euery Christiā must make, Matth 3. Mar. 1 we haue some prints & marks in S. Iohn Baptist, for such as came vnto him cōfessed their sins & were baptized: for without the knowledge of sin, no man can come to the acknow∣ledgement of grace: Acts 13. & the shutting vp of Paul his sermō to the Iewes in the Synagogue at Antioch, standeth vpon these words, Be it known vnto you that by Iesus Christ, remission of sins is preached vnto you, &c. wherby likewise we see that they which were cōuerted by the preaching of the Apostles, were touched with compunction of heart & confessed their sins: & hence cōmeth that which Lyranus telleth vs vpō those words in Leuiticus.
And the high Priest laying both his handes vppon the Goate, Leuit. 16. shall confesse the iniquities of the children of Israell, &c. Not (sayeth hee) declaring all their particular sinnes, for that were impossible: but in generall, as wee doe in the confession vsuallie made in the beginning of the Masse. And yet notwithstanding, now a dayes the Priest hath neuer a word that waye, saue onelie for himselfe, whereas the Pastor holding the place of the high Priest, (that is, which is the mouth of the people in the Church,) ought to confesse vnto God the iniquities of that people, in setting before them for the remission thereof the be∣nefite of the Sacrifice of his onelie begotten sonne Iesus Christ our Lord: which should make vs belieue, (together with other signes and marks, which we shall see hereafter,) that this parte of seruice was of good praise and commendation: as for reading, it was ordinarie (as we haue seene) in the Synagogues; whereinto the Apostles came for to instruct and teach the Iewes: Acts 20. and for the publike assemblies wee haue a manifest example thereof in the Actes, where S. Paule (the Disciples being come together for to breake bread, that is, to celebrate the Lordes Supper,) handleth the word of God amongst them, and continueth his speech vnto midnight, that is, he did not only reade vnto them, but expounded it vnto them also; and drew out from thence doctrines for their vse after the manner vsed in preaching: and likewise hee ordinarilie calleth his office and function, the Ministerie or administration of the word. And as for prayers to be made for the aduancement of the glorie of God, for the necessitie of the Church, and state politique, the heads and members of the same, and for our owne sal∣uation, we haue both precept and prescript forme deliuered vs by our Lord; Mat. 6. &c. Mat. 6. 1. Tim, 2. the admonition of S. Paul, to make intercessions, prayers, supplications, &c. for all men, for kinges, for men set in authoritie, &c. and the example of the Apostles, perseuering in prayer and in the breaking of bread, &c. and S. Augustine doth by name, expound that place of S. Paule of solemne prayers, of the Lordes Supper: and as for the administration thereof, we haue the forme set downe in the 1. to the Corin∣thians 10. 1. Cor. 10. & 11. and 11. vnder the signes of bread & wine, which were wont to be brought to the common feastes of Christians; they were blessed, according to the institution of the Lord, as it is there set downe; for the communicating of his bodie and blood, and in remembrance of his death, which he suffered for our sinnes. And this whole action was intermingled with Psalmes, and spirituall giuinges of thankes, taken and deriued from the example of our Lord, who after the holie Supper sung a Psalme with his A∣postles: according to the exhortation likewise of S. Paule, speaking thus vnto vs; Be yee filled with the spirit, speaking amongst your selues in Psalms and Hymnes, and spiritual songs, &c. Ephes. 5.18.19 Colos. 3. giuing thankes alwaies for all thinges, in the name of our Lord Iesus, vnto our God and Fa∣ther: vpon a solemne or festiuall day, it is cleare and euident by these wordes in the Actes: Acts 20. And the first day of the weeke the Disciples being assembled, &c. that is to say, v∣pon the Lordes day: confirmed likewise, 1. Cor. 11. where these assemblies may seeme to bee appointed properlie for the holie Supper of our Lord. 1. Cor. 11. To bee briefe, that all was done in a knowne tongue, 1. Cor. 14. we need no other witnes then S. Paule, I esteem more (sayeth hee) of fiue wordes in the Church spoken to my vnderstanding, then often thou∣sand in an vnknowne tongue, &c. And againe, this verilie was the scope and drift of the Spirit of God in the gift of tongues. Now concerning all that hath gone before, especiallie, that of the more often ce∣lebrating of the holie Supper by the faithfull, exercising themselues therein, during the continuance of the first loue and zeale, then they did afterward; it is confirmed by all them that haue written anie thing of sacred functions: but wee will insist vpon and presse them onelie, who are of most authoritie and best allowance. For Confes∣sion, Lyranus hath told vs, that they had a generall confession of the sinnes of the people in the beginning of their seruice, imitating therein the manner of the Iewes in their prayers and sacrifices. And to him let vs ioyne S. Ciprian as next: The holy Hierarchie (saieth hee) that is the Minister of the Church, whome the holie Ghost toucheth with compunction: Ciprianus siue quis alius de card. operib, Christi. let him watch thereto, let him dwell therein, and keepe holie the same, &c. and let him pray boldlie and confidentlie for his own ignorances, and those of the peo∣ples, by making a confession from a wounded hearte, &c. Of Psalmes and reading
of lessons out of the Scriptures, Walafridus speaketh: Who first instituted and ap∣pointed lessons to bee read out of the Epistles of the Apostles, Walafrid. de diuin. Oftic. c 22. Microlog. c. 1. and out of the Gospels before the celebrating of the Sacrifice, it is not certainely knowne, but it is thought the Apostles their first successors did so ordaine, especially, because the celebration of these Sacrifices is com∣maunded in the Gospels: and in the Apostle is taught the manner how it must bee done, &c. And in the same Chapter, Telesphorus (sayeth hee) the ninth Bb. of Rome, ordained that the Gospels and Epistles should be read in the assemblies of the Christians, in steade of the propheticall writinges: And againe, Before Pope Celestine, that is before the yeare 430. or thereabout, there was nothing rehearsed before the consecration, but the Epistle and Gos∣pell: Againe, (sayeth hee) there was a time when there was nothing read but Saint Paule: namelie, (as may bee presumed) the place which concerneth the holie Supper: Albinus Flaccus in like manner sayeth: Albinus Flac∣cus de diuinis officiis. Rabanus de instit. cleric. Berno Aguien∣sis. cap. 1. Heretofore the Epistle of Saint Paule onelie was recited, and after it the holy Gospell; and then the Masse was celebrated: Rabanus likewise, vseth almost the verie same wordes, saue onelie that hee addeth, that this fashion of singing was not vsed in the Church in such sorte, as it is at this day. All these cited Authors were about the yeare 800. and 900. The Abbotte Berno al∣leadging the life of S. Gregorie: He bindeth vp (saieth hee) into one volume Gelasius his booke of the solemne orders and Customes vsed in Masses, cutting off much, changing a little, and putting to somewhat, and calleth it the booke of the Sacraments: and it may be, that in the for∣mer times, there was nothing read but the Epistles of Saint Paule: Then afterwarde it fell out that other Lessons, Amalar. lib. 3. cap. 5. both of the olde and of the new Testament were mingled there∣withall, in such order ad manner as solemne thinges are wonte to require. Amalarius Bishoppe of Trire: Celestine was the first that ordayned that the Psalmes of Da∣uid shoulde bee sung by course: not (sayeth hee) that they had beene vsed to haue beene sung: for before time the Epistle of Sainte Paule, and the holie Gospell were onelie wonte to bee read, and afterwarde the Sacrifice was celebrated: and the Masse beganne by the foresaide Lecture, where vppon custome hath retayned it vntill this daye in the vigilles of Easter and Whitsontide: that is to saye at these solemne feastes, wherein, now in these latter dayes euerie man appointed himselfe to receiue the holie Supper. And this I woulde haue marked by the waye against those that finde faulte with the reformed Churches, for hauing taken the chiefe grounde and principall foundation for their prescript forme of administring and recey∣uing of the holie Supper out of the first Epistle of Saint Paule to the Corinthians, chap. 11. where hee rehearseth the institution of our Lord: seeing they may well perceiue, that it was so practised in the first olde age, as their owne Au∣thors doe witnes vnto them. Of Psalmes, Radulph Deane of Tongres, sayeth: That the olde Diuine Seruice consisted in Psalmes and in Lessons, but that the Psalmes made vppe the greater parte, insomuch as that the Psalter was runne through there euerie weeke: and hee giueth a reason for it: Because (sayeth hee) that it is a perfect abridgement of Diuinitie, wherein Dauid hath spoken more like an Euangelist then a Prophette: and furthermore, it is to vs and to all true re∣penting sinners, an example of the mercie of God: and that for the same cause the rea∣ding of Saint Paule his Epistles was so much vsed, as wherein we are instructed and taught the manner of his conuersion and profiting; Walaf. c. 26 in them likewise obseruing the rich and bountifull goodnes of God: and in like manner Walafridus in Chapter 26. Now after these Lectures, there was a place wherein they vsed to speake of the preaching that had beene made and framed thereof: for the Bishoppe or Pa∣stor was wonte to expounde some one place or other vnto the people, where∣vppon wee reade these wordes in the Lithurgie, attributed vnto Clemente. How that after the Lessons the Bishoppe speaketh vnto the people by waye of exhortati∣on; and hereuppon sprung so manie Homilies of the olde Fathers, Clemens, siue alius in Litur∣gia. aswell Greeke, as Latine: as likewise the Bbs. when they tooke their oath, did bind themselues by promise to performe this dutie, in signe and token whereof the booke of the Gospell was deliuered to them with these wordes: Take the Gospell and preach it vnto the people, that is committed vnto thee: as wee shall see hereafter.
The traces and steps whereof may seeme still to bee seene in that part of the Masse, cal∣led in French the Prosne; wherein the Curates doe laye open vnto the people some rudimentes of their Christian faith: but the ignorance, or else the riotousnes of the Prebates, hath now through tract of time so preuailed with these Copiers out of bookes, as that they haue left out what was mentioned of making of Sermons; and goe on with a smooth foote, from the Lecture to the Offertorie or offring, which Wa∣lafridus and Berno affirme to bee sprung vp, Walafr. c. 22. Berno Augi∣ensis c. 1. ex prioris populi consuetudine, of the cu∣stome of the Iewish Church. And these offrings in the Christian Church, were for the most parte of breade & wine, or of the first fruites thereof in corne and in grapes, and these were consecra∣ted vnto God by prayer; afterward they tooke that which was necessarie for the Communion of the holy Supper: and looke what remained, it was eyther eaten of all in common, or else giuen to the poore. And further, let it bee marked, that both of them say in proper and apte tearmes: We do not reade it in plain and euident forte, who it was that added vnto our Lithurgies, that which is sung inter offerendum, at the offring: and as little of that singing by course, vsed in the communion: and as certainelie doe wee receiue, & verily belieue, that the holie Fathers in the first times did offer and communicate without anie voice heard: which also is furthermore obserued vpon the holie Saturday of Easter. Wher∣by wee perceiue verie clearelie, that the Bbs. or Priestes did not say, Offero, Sacrifico, Offerimus, Sacrificamus: but that according to the example of our Lorde, after they had pronounced and vttered the holie wordes of the institution of the Sacrament, they gaue it vnto the people without saying anie thing: all those precise and strict ceremonies, coupled and fastened to a number of wordes, vttered with one breath & to certaine signes of the Crosse, &c being crept in a long time after: and whereof these honest fellowes can render no other reason, saue that according to the measure of the growth of the Church in mightines, Walaf. c. 22 there was shew and apparance, that it was meet that it should likewise grow in pompe and ceremonies. And moreouer concerning the circumstances of time, and of the howre, they saye sometimes that it should bee before: sometimes they say, that it should bee after Noone: sometimes at Mor∣ning: sometimes at Night: and sometimes in the night season. And for the place, that it was in priuate houses, in caues, in dennes, and holes, and in most secret places. And for garmentes: In the first ages (say they) Masses were said with common apparrell, the priestlie robes hauing altered and increased from time to time, which notwith∣standing, Walafr, c. 23 there are some in the partes of the world, lying Eastward, which yet vse them as at the first. And as for vessels: The cups in the Primitiue Church, were of glasse and of wood, &c. Then (say they) were our Bbs. of gold. Thus then you heare what these industrious searchers out of the ancient seruice of the Church do say, vsing notwithstanding, the Phrases and tearmes of the age, wherein they liued, though vnknown amongst the former, as those of the Masse of the Sacrifice, &c. And they might also haue seene in their times and dayes, the Bookes of the rites, or prescript formes vsed in the Church; before that the autho∣ritie of Popes, suborned and vnderpropped by the power of great Princes, for so long a continuance of time had abolished both the vse and memorie thereof. But to the end that wee may not thinke them to goe by gesse, in that which they say; neyther yet that we may seem to repose our selues vpō that only which they say, nor regarding how much or little they agree with the former, and more honorable reportes of antiqui∣tie, drawing neere vnto the times of the Apostles: let vs heare in what manner Iu∣stine Martyre about the yeare 160. describeth the holie Supper: On the daye (sayeth hee) which is called Sundaye, Iustinus mar∣tyr, in Apolo∣gia, 2. . (that is to say the Lords day) there is an assembling and comming together of all manner of people, dwelling eyther in the fieldes or in the citties into one place, and there are read the Actes or Recordes of the Apostles, and the writinges of the Prophetes, , so long as the time would suffer. Then when the Reader had left off reading ô , that is to say, he which was President or chiefe in the assemblie, (that is to say the Bb. or Pastor,) deliuereth an admonition and exhortation, , by way of discourse, tending to the stirring of them vppe to follow and practise those good thinges: after∣warde
we rise all as one, and send our praiers vnto God. And as wee haue said before, praier being ended, the breade, the wine, and the water are brought : and he which dire∣cteth the action  deliuereth with all the power and might in him, prayers and thankes∣giuing: and the people , that is, consenteth, adde thereunto their approuing voice, af∣fection and blessing, saying Amen. Then followeth the distribution, which is to euerie one pre∣sent, & the cōmunicating , that is, of the thinges which were blessed by thanks∣giuing, and they send of the same vnto those that are absent, by the Deacons. In the end, they which are of abilitie, and are moued therewithall, giue euerie one according as it pleaseth him: and that which is gathered, abideth, , with him which is president or chiefe a∣mongst them, wherewithall he made prouision for the fatherlesse, widdowes, sicke persons, cap∣tiues and needie straungers, &c. And in another place going before: After (saith he) that we haue washed, that is to say, baptised him that hath receiued the faith, and ioyned himselfe with vs, we bring him into the assemblie and congregation of the brethren, where they are come together to make their common prayers, both for themselues, and for him that hath beene enlightened: and for all manner of persons in what place of the world soeuer, &c. When prayers are thus ended, wee salute one another with a holy kisse: and then there is brought vnto him that is president , the bread and the cup of water and wine: and he hauing taken them, giueth praise and glorie vnto the father of all thinges, in the name of the Sonne and of the holy Ghost: and maketh a great thankesgiuing, , for that he hath vouchsafed to thinke them worthie of these thinges: which being ended, all the peo∣ple , ioyne and put their blessing thereto, saying; Amen: which being Hebrew, signifi∣eth as much as, So be it. Afterward , the Pastor hauing blessed them, , and the people answering to this blessing; those whom we call Deacons, giue to euerie one of those that are present to receiue of the bread and wine and wa∣ter, so blessed by the said thankesgiuing, , and they carrie it to those that are absent. And this foode is called amongst vs , the Eucharist or Sa∣crament of thankesgiuing, which it is not lawfull for any one to receiue, which hath not before receiued the truth of our doctrine by faith, and which hath not beene washed with the baptisme of regeneration for the remission of sinnes &c. Now in these two places thus laying out the forme and patterne for the manner of the celebrating of the holy supper, in the Pri∣mitiue church, (for our aduersaries cite them in these words, , (that is) of the Lithurgie or diuine office) we haue all that which is before mentioned, together with the euident markes of the whole Iewish seruice, and yet we shall hardly bee able therein to find out the Masse. Therein we well behold and see a flocke of Christians, and one Pastor which doth call them together to serue God, and to be fed with his word, and with his sacraments: the reader that readeth the holy scripture: the pastor that frameth some exhortation out of the same vnto the people: deuout prayers in a loude voice offred vp to God before and after, aswell for the Church, as for all other men. Then afterward how the bread, the wine and water are brought, and not offe∣red, which are blessed by the Pastor, by thanksgiuing, vttered in a language that is vnderstood of all, and not consecrated, neither turned or changed by the whispring and muttering of certaine wordes, the people ioyning therewithall their vowes and inward affections, & becomming a partie in this seruice. Finally, after a mutuall kisse, the signe of the holy charitie, which ought to be nourished amongst them as the mē∣bers of Christ: the sacraments are distributed by the Deacons to euerie one: yea, vnto thē which through infirmity were not able to come, as a signe of that coniunction & vnitie, which they had with the rest: Tertul. in Apo. , Instino, quod Tertulliano caetus. Pro mora finis, that is, either of the world, or of the Em∣pire. what can there be found more vnlike vnto the ceremony of the Masse? or more like and answerable vnto the simplicitie of the refor∣med Church? Tertullian in his Apologeticall Oration some fiftie yeares after: Now (saith he) I will declare vnto you the practises of the Christian faction, to the end that when I haue refuted the euill, I may shew you the good: we come together into one congregation, to haue recourse vnto God by prayer, forcing him (as it were) by the ioyning together of all our prayers: and this violent inforcement is well pleasing and acceptable vnto God. Wee pray for Emperors, for their Officers, and Potentates, for the estate present; for the quieting of matters,
and for the deferring and putting off of the ende: we come together for the communicating of the holy scriptures, if the estate of the time present do presse vs, or to preuent somewhat to come, or to take acknowledgement of the present: and thus we shall feed our faith with holy spee∣ches, we relieue and succour our hope, we make strong our confidence: and therewithall like∣wise fortifie our discipline and manner of gouernment, by the vrgent and vncessant rehear∣sall and renewing of the memorie of good preceptes. In our congregation are likewise v∣sed exhortations, reprehensions, and the exercise of sacred censures: for there matters are iudged with great aduisement, as is wont to be done of such men, as assuredly know, that the face of God is towardes them, to behold and see their doings. And it is a great fore∣shew of the iudgement to come, if any one amongst vs haue sinned so deepely, as to bee ex∣cluded from the communication of prayer, and of the assemblie, and from all manner of hauing any thing to doe with this holy societie and fellowship. The Elders that are best approued and found most faithfull, , Iustino. doe sit as Presidentes in our assemblies, aduaunced and called to that dignitie, not through any summes of money, but vpon the waight and sway of the good testimony, Tertul. de Co∣rona milit. which they haue giuen, &c. And at their handes (saith hee in another place) wee receiue the Lordes Supper. In the second booke written by him to his wife, speaking of the exercises of pietie, which a woman married to an vnbelieuing man could not inioy. Tertull. l. 2. ad vxorem. At whose hand (saith he) shall shee desire the Sacrament of bread? and of whome shall shee participate and take the cuppe? What shall her husband talke and com∣mune of with her, or what shall she talke and commune of with him? Doe you thinke that it will be meete for one to bee talking of Tauernes in the time of the receiuing of the Lordes Supper, or of Hell &c? And where then shall bee our due and holy remembring of God, our calling vpon Christ, the nourishing of our faith, and the intermingled reading of the scriptures? Tertull. de ani∣ma. In his booke of the Soule: There is (saith hee) a sister amongst vs, vnto whom is giuen the gift of reuelation: In the middest of diuine seruice, shee is cast in∣to an extasie: She is brought into the companie of the Angels, and sometimes into the presence of the Lorde himselfe, Adlocutiones proferuntur. &c. Againe according to the scriptures which are read, or the Psalmes which are sung, or the Sermons which are made, or the prayers which are offe∣red, newe matter of visions is administred and offered vnto her: she seeth and heareth the Sacraments, &c. In which words he may seeme to haue comprehended in briefe all the substance of the auncient diuine seruice. Tertull. de Pu∣dicit. c. 10. For the circumstances in his booke of shamefastnesse, there was alleadged vnto him a chalice, whereupon was painted our Lord seeking the stray sheepe: Out of this cuppe (saith he) thou wilt drinke, that is, deriue and fetch a second kinde of pennance: (he speaketh after the phrase of the heresie of Montanus) but as for mee, I draw and drinke of the scripture of this Pastor, which cannot be broken in peeces: Tertul. de orat. c. 12. alluding to the glasse cuppes, which were of Glasse in his time. As likewise in his booke of prayer, he reproueth them which after the manner of the Pagans, Posit is penulis orabant, that is, put off their cloakes or vpper garments to pray. Where haue you (saith he) any commandement either from the Lord, or from his Apostles? This is superstition, and not religion; a curious and not a reasonable seruice: wherein was nothing but an apish imitation of the Gentils. I omit to speake of the kisse of reconciliation before the holy supper, which he calleth, Signaculū orationis: without the which we canot pray well vnto God; nor come neere vnto his mysteries. And therfore hee taketh them vp roundly, Tertull. in lib. de oratione. which habita oratione, subtrahebant osculum pacis: that is, which after prayer did depriue themselues of the kisse of peace, that is, refused the marke of reconciliatiō with their brethrē. But let it be that we & our aduersaries agree wel together about all these places; yet notwithstanding, they will draw vs forth an African Masse. But what wil they gaine themselues that way, seeing they shalbe able to proue nothing, but that the holy supper was distributed vnder both kinds vnto all, in generall, & euerie one in particular, by the Pastor or Minister? That there was vsed ardent and deuout prayers before and after? that the word of God was there read & expounded by the Praeses or Pastor of the Church, & applyed likewise in reprehensions and censures? That there∣in men and women did vse to sing Psalmes? That all was done there in a knowne tongue, without any curiositie about the vessels, and without any distinction or
difference for or about apparell and garmentes? S. Cyprian in E∣pist. ad Ccū. Cyprian in an Epistle vnto Ce∣cilius, disputing Contra Aquarios, against such as vsed water in the holy Supper; which he calleth Dominicum, as if a man should say, the Lords banket, sheweth vs very well, that we must keepe and hold our selues fast and close to the institution of Christ, with∣out changing any thing thereof, and that throughout his diocesse hee vsed it so: for he sendeth them to the Gospell, and to Saint Paule to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. out of whom he rehearseth the place, euen through to the very end. Of a truth (saith he) seeing that neither any Apostle, neither yet any Angell from heauen could declare or teach vs any thing, (Praeterquā quod Christus semel docuit,) besides that which Christ hath once taught vs: I can∣not but meruaile, how against all both Euangelical & Apostolicall doctrine, men dare to offer (in some places) water in the cup, &c. Afterward he addeth: For they should aske counsell at those whom they follow: wherefore if in the sacrifice, which is Christ, wee are not to follow any other then Christ; it must of necessitie follow and be laid vpon vs, that we ought to obey, and doe as Christ hath done, and also commanded vs to doe: seeing hee telleth vs in his Gospell, If you doe the things which I command you, I call you no more seruantes, but friendes. For that Christ ought onely to be heard (saith he,) God the father himselfe hath witnessed it from hea∣uen, saying: This is my welbeloued Sonne, &c. heare him. Whereupon then it must follow, that we are not to regard what euery one before vs hath iudged meet and conuenient to be done, but vnto that which Iesus Christ hath done, which is before all: because wee are not to apply our selues to follow and imitate the custome of man, but the truth and veritie of God. But and if thy conscience checke or trouble thee, by reason of the life and doinges of thy pre∣decessors, who haue so and so liued, and which haue followed such and such traditi∣ons, he putteth into thy mouth what to answere vnto thy selfe in that case likewise: For (saith he) if any of our Predecessors, either through ignorance, or foolish simplicitie, haue held otherwise then the Lord hath taught vs, eyther by his precept, or by his example: God will pardon such his simplicitie, through his rich and aboundant mercie, but vnto vs forewarned & taught the contrarie by himselfe, it cannot be pardoned and forgiuen. Now in deede it were meet that we should write out all the whole treatise, because it driueth onely and ay∣meth at the annihilating of all manner of mens traditions, that so nothing might bee embraced, but the pure institution of Christ, contained in the Gospell, and in the A∣postle. But that wee may come to the particular and speciall pointes of this diuine seruice, we haue alreadie seene and heard what he hath said of the generall confession which the Minister or Priest made of the sinnes of the people and his owne. There was also at this time in the Christian assemblies a mounted or raised place, out of which the reader appointed for the same vsed to reade the scriptures, as also the Bb. to make his sermons vpon the same so read. Cyprian de o∣perib. Cardi∣nal. Christi. Conciliū Lao∣dic. Canon. 19. Which said place Cyprian calleth Tri∣bunal ecclesiae, but others Suggestum pulpitum, &c. And the sermon or Homelie was made after the reading of the Gospell, and before the celebration of the Sacrament, as appeareth by the Councell of Laodicea: that is to say, before the going out of those which were to be instructed and catechised in Christianitie to the end that they might bee receiued into the Christian Church. This reading is likewise apparant, Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 5. where Saint Cyprian ordained for the reader, a Confessor of the name of Christ: He was worthie (saith he) not for his age, but for his deserts of some higher roome in the church: but it seemed good vnto vs, that he should begin at the office of reading, because nothing soun∣deth better in that mouth, which hath confessed Christ by a glorious professing and witnessing of him; then the sound of the celebrating of the diuine lectures. To reade (saith he) the Gospel of Christ, which maketh the Martyrs to come from the stockes, to the pulpit, &c. and because such ioy loueth not any lingring delay, Dominico legit, Hee began to reade vpon the day of the holy Supper, &c. And as for the sermon Eusebius maketh mention, that it was ordina∣rily and commonly vsed in the holy assemblies of the African Churches: Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 22. and wee haue many places also to that effect out of Saint Cyprian. Wee learne also of Ori∣gene, that it was the custome, that the Reader should reade the scripture, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 12. Cipri. serm. in orat. Doinic. and the Pa∣stor expound it. And Socrates maketh mention, that in the Church of Alexandria this was Origene his professed practise. And as concerning prayers: Our praying (saith Saint Ciprian) is publike and common, not for one man alone, but for all the people, for
that likewise all this people is but as one. And to the end that all carnall cogitation may bee far from vs, the Minister before praier, prepareth the hearts of the brethren by this preface: Sur∣sum corda, which is, lift vp your harts on high, to the end that the people which answere, Ha∣bemus ad Dominū: that is, we lift them vp vnto the Lord, may be forewarned not to think of any thing but him onely. And consequently, the celebration of the Lordes Supper fol∣lowed, the insticution whereof was read for the blessing of the sacraments, and after that a generall prayer: as appeareth in a historie of one possessed of a Deuill, of whom he saith, Cypr. in serm. de lapsis. that she was impatient during the time of this prayer. Precis orationisque no∣stra impatiens &c. But that solennibus adimpletis, the holy things being accomplished, that is to say, Et accipienti∣bus caeteris lo∣cus eius ad∣uenit. Cypr. de Caena Dominic. the blessing of the sacraments, the Deacon beginning to giue the cup, she would haue taken it in her place: howbeit very quickly, by a secret instnct, and motion from God, she began to turne away her face. At which time likewise all the faithfull indifferently without exception of any, did communicate, practising the same that he speaketh of elsewhere saying: The Priests are not admitted alone to the com∣municating of this foode, but the whole church, euery one receiueth his portion equally, &c. Hitherto you see the simple and sincere manner of diuine seruice, continued and vsed in the Church: but let vs see what thinges they were that in this meane time are reported to haue beene added thereunto by the Bishops of Rome. Some attribute to Pope Alexander the first, this clause: Qui pridie quam pateretur &c. that is, who in the day before his passion, tooke the bread in his precious hands, and lifting vp his eyes vnto thee O God his father most mightie, and yeelding thee thankes, blessed it, brake it, and gaue it to his disciples saying, take, eate ye all, &c. Whereby appeareth, that in former times, by their owne te∣stimony, these words, Hoc est corpus meum, was pronounced without any Canon, and without any preface, Iustin. Apol. 2. Plat. in Sixt. 1. as we may reade them all naked, and by themselues in Iustine his second Apologie. Do this in remembrance of me; This is my bodie, This is my bloud, &c. To Sixtus 1. is attributed, Sanctus, &c. Holy, holy, holy, Lorde God of hostes, the hea∣uens and earth are ful of thy glorie. And this which Platina did set downe of him, is in the historie of his life: Plat. in Te∣lesph. That in the Apostles time, all thinges were done nakedly, plainely and simply in the action of this misterie, &c. To Telesphorus (or according to others, to Symmachus liuing a long time after) the song of the Angels to bee sung before the holy supper, that is to say, Gloria in excelsis, &c. But how many thinges are there in the Masse, and those of the most substantiall pointes thereof, which haue their seue∣rall distances and distinctions of the time of their first being and entrance, as the same is said at this day? And it shall be further noted here by the way, that the San∣ctus and the Gloria, are in the Lithurgies attributed vnto the Apostles and disciples, and before by vs confuted, as nothing else but the counterfeites of antiquitie. To Marke 1. in the end, the song of the Creede, in that manner that it was drawne & agreed vpon in the first Nicene Councell, about the yeare three hundred thirtie fiue, or according to some, to Iulius the first, to bee sung by and by after the Gospell, by the Cleargie and the people. D. l. . vasa. c. vt Calix de con∣seer. And as for the circumstances, Zepherine ordained, that the wine should be put in glasse vessels: but Vrbanus the first, that it should bee put into vessels of mettall: Siluester the first, that the priestes should not weare any silke, nor coloured cloth, but onely linnen: but not a worde all this while of the pompe of Rome. For I pray you what likenesse is there betwixt all that which wee haue here said, and that which may be said of that which is vsed at this day; whereof all the Authors going before, vntill this time, (how many soeuer haue written in Latine) haue not seemed to bee acquainted so much as with the name? That the name of the Masse was vnknowne at this time. For where as some would make vs belieue that the Masse was written of at this time; I do here once again giue you to vnderstand for all that, that this is a manifest fraude and tricke of deceipt, and that it is found in the Greeke authours translated in these latter ages, into La∣tine, onely by the imagination of the translators, who were disposed to finde it where it neuer came. Ignatius in an epistle to the Church of Smyrna. Thus it is founde in Saint Ignatius, in Saint Denis, in the Tripartite historie, &c. in such places, as where these Authours haue writ∣ten, , that is to say, to administer the Supper, to say seruice, to preach, and to call the Church together, &c. they haue
not beene ashamed to translate to doe, say, sing, and celebrate the Masse. Dionis. lib. 3. Hier. Hist trip lib. 3. cap. 11. & lib. 4 cap. 13. & lib. 7 cap. 31. & lib. 9 cap. 9. &c. That the De∣cretall epistles are ridiculous. And from the fountaine of a like good conscience are sprung those glorious Decretall epistles of Zepherinus, Calixtus the first, Pontianus, Sother, and such like, wherein indeede the same name of Masse is read, but to the iust making of those to blush who counter∣feited them. For who will euer belieue, that at such time as there was a Tertullian & a Ciprian, which did write so eloquently, exactly, and learnedly, of the deepest and waightiest pointes of our faith, and that in Afrike, where the Latine tongue was not so pure and neat: the Bishops of Rome in the midst of the palace of the world, should euer busie their heades to make and write lawes, of such childish and fond things: and that in such childish, fond and barbarous manner? Persecutiones patienter portandae sunt: Praesentē fraternam syllabam exposuimus: Modernis temporibus Christianitatem susce∣pistis: Habent potestatem ordinare regulariter, and these goodly words: Intronizare, prae∣textatus modus, charitatiue conuenire: I appeale vnto their owne consciences, if these be eyther Latine wordes or phrases? Is it possible that they should bee hatcht or euer heard of before the ouerrunning made by the Gothes? And againe, what ancient & old writer did euer make mention of these Epistles, Eusebius, Ierome, Damascene, or others, who neuer forgot any one of the writings and workes of those men which yet were not any whit so earnestly recommended vnto them? And who is hee further∣more, but and if he bring his eyes with him, will say and well perceiue that some craf∣tie forger hath framed these lies, for the aduancing of their See and iurisdiction? As likewise the most and best learned do hold, that they were all made after the time of Syricius, that is neere fiue hundred yeares after our Sauiour Christ. And then from what spirit can they come but from the father of lies? Thus we haue coasted along till we are ariued at the great and famous Councell of Nice, where were come together about the yeare 328. from all the partes of Chri∣stendome, 318. Bishops, That the Masse was vn∣knowne at the time when the Councell of Nice was holden. all of them vtterly without any knowledge of the Masse vsed at this day, eyther by name or deede, for any thing they could gather out of any an∣tiquities, yea or out of the Romaine Church it selfe. Neither hauing any Canon, in∣uocation of Saints, or any such other things, as are now become the principall partes of the same: and yet the Masse, the most formall part of seruice that the Church of Rome hath, the Canon, the soule and life of the Masse: without the which a man can∣not possibly seeme to them to bee a Christian, and without the which it could not keepe the name it hath: yea whereof if there be but the least word left out, it becom∣meth all and altogether vnprofitable and vnperfect. But well, we haue found the ad∣ministration of the holy Supper of the Lord, celebrated with publique praiers: sin∣ging of Psalmes of all the people: reading of the scriptures, and the interpreting of the same: blessing of the sacraments, according to the Lord his institution: and the distributing of the same, simply in their whole and sole nature vnto all the peo∣ple: and all this in a knowne tongue, which euerie one present vnderstoode and aun∣swered accordingly from time to time, Amen: without any superstitious affecting of garments, curiositie in vessels, or other vaine ceremonies. And all this vnder the name of Coetus Dominicus, , Caena Dominica, Epulum Dominicum, or Dominicum, simply and by it selfe: that is to say, of the assemblie, congregation, ho∣ly supper, or banquet of the Lord. Wherefore let the readers iudge both of the one and the other, as namely which of them approcheth and com∣meth neerest vnto the true antiquitie, the Church of Rome, or the reformed Church.
CHAP. IIII. What manner of seruice was vsed in the Church vnto the time of S. Gregorie, or therea∣bout: and namely what manner of thing that was, that is called the Masse of those that are catechised. NOw in the time of Constantine his rule and gouernment in the Empire, A notable alte∣ration vnder Constantine, & afterward. we see and behold the estate of the Christian Church to change, from persecution to peace; from seruitude and slauerie, to principality, rule and dominion, by remouing out of the de∣serts, to dwell in Citties, and from keeping in caues and holes, to sit in faire and stately palaces: Here we see it imbraced of the multitude, entertained of Emperors, and those the most famous and worthiest of all the rest, namely the Emperours of Rome, and receiued of whole nations, and those such as bare away the pricke and price from the whole world for pride and riotousnes. Let vs not find it strange, if in this great change we see it altogether changed euen at one blow: if the Church embracing the world into her lappe, become sweld and puffed vp with the same in a moment; if the worlde enter into the Church with the worlde, being brought thereinto, by the en∣trance it obtained: I meane the vanities, superfluities, affections, and imperfections, together with all the rest of the infections of the world. The Church had beene nou∣rished in mountaines and deserts, she came forth of such places clothed with Camels haire, in all so brietie, simplicitie, and innocencie. The Bishops for the most part brin∣ging her forth into the world, were ashamed to shew her in such sort vnto the Gen∣tils, to them which newly came, or else were willing to come out of Paganisme. These good Emperours likewise desirous to haue her receiued of these people, becomming more curious in setting out of the vtter partes, then of the inner: of the shew and ap∣pearance, then of the truth, and of the ceremonie, then of the substance: did not make conscience or spare to decke her vp after the manner of Paganisme; to prepare her the glorious ornaments vsed amongst the Gentiles, and to accommodate and fit thereunto (as farre as they thought possiblie they might, without preiudicing of their holy faith) the seruice and ceremonies of the Christians to those vsed amongst the Pagans. And this their course and manner of proceeding was called amongst them zeale and prudencie: which Tertullian, a precise and seuere obseruer and challenger of the first puritie, had called sacriledge. Wherein againe they thought it meet to keep such a tempering, because that hauing at the same time to care for the satisfying of them of the circumcision, euen the Iewes, which embraced Christianitie, furthered and helped forward thereto, for the most part vpon a conceited opinion that they had dreamed of, of the greatnes of the Messias; they thought they might thereby be able to shew them the accomplishment of their expected hope in the outward gorge∣ousnes of the Christian Church: and where they thought they ought to beautifie her simplicitie and nakednesse, there they borrowed willingly all they could, either of wordes or ceremonies from the Iewes. Seeing then the whole outward seruice both of the Iewes and Gentiles did con∣sist principally in sacrifices: (those of the Gentiles, hauing no certaine scope or marke to ayme at, and those of the Iewes looking all forward vnto Iesus Christ, vpon and in whom they were all founded and finished) it seemed hard and harsh vn∣to them, and like to giue much offence, if they should wholly abolish all sacrifices: because these proselites newly conuerted to Christianitie, did not belieue that religi∣on could stande without sacrifices; not conceiuing the truth, how that all sacrifices are nothing, further then they are applied vnto the onely true sacrifice of the Son of God fulfilled vpon the crosse. Least therefore they might exasperate and prouoke ei∣ther the one or the other, the Christians applyed themselues to heare and speake both of altars and sacrifices. And because that the Apostles had taken paine to beate
it into their heads and harts, that all sacrifices tooke their end in Christ: they tooke pleasure in calling their seruices, offeringes, and oblations, sacrifices: the table of the Lord his Altar; the remembrance of his death in his holy supper, the sacrifice of the Altar, a holy host: the Bishops and Pastors, Sacrificers, and the Deacons, Leuites, &c. These kindes of speeches being easily to bee vnderstoode of euerie one amongst them, and such as at that time were not hurtfull, howsoeuer in the ages following, falling out to bee fuller of ignoraunce, and further swaruing from the clearenes of the light: they became causes of great abuses, because they would aduenture further, & go from the figure and signe, to the thing: from the spirit to the letter; from an im∣proper manner of speech, into an errour of doctrine. The Gentiles likewise had a multitude of Gods, vnto euery one of which they had builded churches, raysed altars, and made sacrifices. Now to restraine such a people at once, to the seruice of one onely God, and that God altogether a spirit, to a seruice altogether spirituall: be∣ing a carnall people, a people brutishly enamoured with their pompous manner and ceremonies, with their images of wood and stone: the wisedome of man found to be scandalous, full of offence, and without the bounds of discretion: and therefore would haue regard of the saide Gentiles in such sort, as that they might build them vp, and not pull them downe: and feede them first with milke (as they called it) and afterwarde with strong meate, (for so this place was then abused,) whereas then the first ages had sharpely and couragiously contested, that to haue many Gods, was not to haue any at all: It was found pleasing and plausible, to turne their Gods into Saintes, and their Goddesses into she saintes, and to place our Apo∣stles and Martyrs in their roomes: to dedicate vnto them their temples and Altars, to allow them sacrificing priestes, and high priestes, to ordaine feastes and seruices in honour of them. But this matter is handled hereafter more at large. Where (be∣fore that we come thereto) let vs consider, seeing the spirite of man is blinde in the thinges belonging to God) how that these good men vnder a shadowe of drawing Iewes and Gentiles vnto Christ, in course of time did faire and softly bring into the Church both Iudaisme and Paganisme: I meane their ceremonies and outwarde pompes, superstitions and vanities, yea and that is worse, many of their presump∣tions and preiudicate opinions in the matter of doctrine: and how also it followed thereupon, that the people did euerie day apply and ioyne themselues more & more to the outwarde parte, and put vs in daunger to bee rather Iewes and Gentiles, then true Christians, abusing the example of Saint Paule, who became (as hee saith) a Iew to the Iewes, a Gentile vnto the Gentiles, and euery thing to euerie man, to winne them vnto Christ: and that without any manner of consideration how that the spi∣rit of God is not giuen to all in one measure, or how that euerie man is not capable to stand fast, and keepe his hold in such tickle and slipperie places. Neither yet that S. Paule became a Iew, and obserued the law, but to the end that hee might draw them from their rudiments: or that in like manner by becomming a Gentile, hee held not any thing of their vnknowne God, but rather preached vnto them the sonne of God come into the worlde, that is to say, without the annihilating of the crosse of Christ, without preiudicing, yea to the aduauncing of the veritie, simplicitie and puritie of doctrine. But as yet the substance of the truth ceased not to swimme and flote a long time vpon the face of these humane inuentions, being the good seed, & husbanded by the care and industry of good teachers, who suffered not the same to be choked & ouer∣run with the darnell at the first blow: vntill the ouerflowing streame of barbarous and rude men, which happened some ages after, did vtterly ouerwhelme it, and make an end of the same: by occasion whereof the darke and palpable thicke cloudes of igno∣raunce did burie and swallow vp Christianitie. The Pastors being partly ignorant and partly negligent, suffered the darnell to grow: so that the darnell occupied the place of the corne, euen the incorruptible seed of the word: in so much as that the greatest part of Christendome suffered the famine of the true breade, that is, of the true prea∣ching of the Gospell, becomming drunken & opprest in the meane time with the ex∣cessiuenesse
of mens inuentions, the proper darnell-bread, thrust vpon them vnder the name of traditions. And this is that which we haue now to verifie concerning the matter of the Masse, going forward with the handling of the growth and proceeding thereof from age to age. And here let vs call to mind in what estate & condition we left the diuine seruice in the former Chapter. It consisted of a general confession of sinnes; in singing of whole Psalms; in the reading of the holy scriptures; in the Pastor his preaching vpō the same: after that in a generall prayer for the whole world; in the blessing and distributing of the Sacraments to all the faithfull vnder both kindes; in a thankesgiuing for the be∣nefite receiued of God in Christ, renewed in the action of the Sacrament: and how that all this was vttered in a knowne tongue, and a language vnderstood of all the people, which answered thereunto from time to time; the vessels and apparrell being such as were commonly vsed, & euery thing done in simplicity, without vaine ostenta∣tion, & void of all manner of wauering ceremonies: and all these thinges continued vnto the times and ages that we are now to speake of, being the substantiall partes of the true and lawfull diuine seruice. Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 2. & 3. Eusebius speaking of the ordinarie actions of the true diuine seruice, maketh mention of prayers, psalmes, lessons, sermons, the bles∣sing & communicating of the Sacraments, Euseb. lib. 4. of the life of Constantine. S. Hilarie psal. 65. S. August. in epist. 119. of thankesgiuing, &c. Likewise (saith he) Constantine the Emperour praied with the congregation, sung himselfe, heard the sermon reue∣rently, and that standing, (saith he) not thinking it seemly for him to sit downe in that place. S. Hillarie: If any man stay without the church, he shall heare the voice of the people which pray∣eth, he shall vnderstand the solemne tunes of the Psalmes, and in the offices of the holy Sacra∣mentes, the aunswere of a denout confession. Saint Augustine in as many wordes: Jt is not to the purpose (saith he) to sing Psalmes in the Church when the scripture is in reading, or when it is in handling: which is the same that he meaneth by these words: Quan∣do disputatur: when the chiefe, the Pastors or the Bishops doe pray aloude, or when war∣ning is giuen by the Deacons, that wee must giue our selues vnto the generall prayer. But these meane whiles excepted, what can the assemblies of the faithfull bee better occupied about? what more holy thing is there which they may exercise themselues in, then in singing of Psalmes? Hesychius vp∣on Leuit. lib. 7 cap. 24. Dionys. in Hi∣cratch. lib. 3. Hesichius: Prayer is holy, the reading of the scriptures is holy, the hearing of the expounding of the same is holy, yea and holy it is whatsoeuer is said or done in the church of God according to his law, &c. This in briefe is the summe of the whole seruice: as is testified likewise in the Hierarchie of Saint Denis, (for it must needes bee referred vnto this time) describing the manner of the celebrating of the holy Supper, for he affordeth and graunteth place vnto euerie one of these partes, making it to begin with the harmonious singing of Psalmes, the whole ordinance of the Church singing with the Bishop. Afterward hee causeth the reading of the holy scriptures to follow , by the Ministers of the Church, and from thence to draw out exhor∣tations vnto the people: after which hee giueth leaue to those which were not ad∣mitted to the sacramentes, to go forth of the Church and temple, as namely those that were catechised, the penitents and the possessed. Then the holy sacraments are set vpon the table, and are blessed and sanctified by holy prayer: the which are first receiued and taken by him that is the chiefe in these holy actions, as the Minister or Bishop, and after giuen to all that are by, after that they haue testified their spirituall vnitie by a holy kisse. Which done,  (saith hee) , that is, hauing participated and distributed the Sacramentes, that is, the breade and the wine, hee closeth vppe the whole action with a holy Eucharist, that is, a publique than kesgiuing for the benefite receiued from our God in the receiuing of his ho∣ly Supper. Let vs now follow on, The Psalmes. Chryso. in his eight hom. vpō the Heb. Chrysost. in hom. 6. de paenitent. and go forwarde through euerie one of these partes. Chrysostome saith of the Psalmes: Euerie weeke the Psalmes are read, twise or thrice. Againe: Wherefore haue the Christians the Psalmes alwayes in their mouthes: seeing wee reade the Gospell but once or twice, neither yet the writinges of the Apostle? and why also doe wee sing those with our owne mouthes, doing nothing but lending our eares to these? Saint Augustine recommendeth them vnto vs by the example of
Christ and his Apostles, for the profit comming of the precepts contained therein: & for the edge which they set vpon our zeale. Againe, he taketh vpon him the protecti∣on thereof, against such as blamed the Church of Carthage, because it did sing them, S. Augustine li. 2. retract. ca. 2 whether it were before the offering, or in the time of the distributing thereof vnto the people, that is to say, the Lordes Supper. Now it was the auncient custome to sing them, and that altogether & all throughout, The Psalmes cut in sunder & diuided into parts. Optat. lib. 4. Epiph. haer. 64. as it is to this day vsed in the Greeke Churches. But about this time the zeale of Christians waxing cold, they began in the Church of Rome to deuide them into certaine peeces or pawses, which were called partes, to the end that seruice might be made the shorter: as we reade in Optatus, who citeth the 2. part of the nine and fortieth Psalme. And alth ought this diuiding of Psalmes, into partes, may seeme to haue beene in the time of S. Hillarie, yet it was not receined into the Church. Epiphanius calleth them distinctions. S. Ambrose in his Lithurgie, Psalmulos, or little Psalmes, which are nothing else but verses: and they were sung within a certaine time after countervoicewise, one side singing one verse, and an other an other. Of the Institution Theodoret reporteth of Flauianus and Diodorus in Antioch, Theodor, lib. 2 cap. 24. that they caused them to be thus sung about the sepulchers of Martyrs: but in the La∣tine Church, Paulinus reporteth it to be by the appointment of Saint Ambrose in his Dioces: which was afterward about the yeare 430. spread abroad euerie where, and that by the authoritie of Pope Celestine, who by name did practise it, at the first be∣ginning and entrance into ecclesiasticall or diuine seruice. Of reading, S. Chrysostome reporteth ordinarily: When it is told thee in the church, Of reading, Chrysost. hom. 36. in 1. ad Cor. & hom. 3. in 2. ad Thessal. Concil. Laodi. cap. 17. Cut & diuided readings or lessons. Ambr. in prae∣fat. in Psalm. De Offic. lib. 1 cap. 11. & 44. Seuer. Sulpit. de vita S. Mart. l. 3. De Offi. l. 1. c. 8 De Virg. l. 3. ad Gratian. l. 4. &c. S. Agust. tract. 9 in Ioann. serm. 236. de temp. serm. 7. & 10. de verb. Apo∣stol. &c. Beloth. c. 57. Berno & Ra∣dulphus. The Sermon. Ambr. epist. 33 post tractatū. S. Basil. in psal. 14. & 114. S. August. in 1. Epist. S. Ioh. Amb. epist. 33. S. August. de ciuit. l. 22. c. 8 August, de do∣ctrina Christia. the Lord saith so, and that the Deacon doth bid all the world to be silent and still, thinke not that it is not to the ende that thou shouldest honour the reader, but rather him that speaketh by his mouth. Againe, when thou hearest the Prophete which telleth thee, the Lord saith this; Remoue thy solfe O earth, and rise thou higher O heauen, thinke within thy selfe, who it is from whom the Prophet speaketh vnto thee. If these readinges had beene such as are now a daies in the Masse; to what end should those exhortations of S. Chrysostome serue? But the Councell of Laodicea, is likewise plaine and pregnant in this point: Let the Canonical scriptures be read in the church, & not any others. S. Ambrose oftentimes: What seueritie of punishment haue we established in the Church, to the end that silence may bee kept whiles the scriptures are reading? whereas notwithstanding, the Psalmes doe keepe silence of themselues. And these readinges or lessons were aswell out of the law, as out of the Gospell and Apostle, as appeareth in infinite places of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and others: and that throughout whole books, vntill such time as S. Ierome by the com∣mandement of Pope Damascene, because the lithurgy seemed as then to be too long, did make an extract of certain lessons out of the Prophets, Epistles & Gospels; where∣vpon he composed the booke, called Comes, or the booke of lessons: from which time they began to be in vse in the Church. Now the Bishop or Pastor of the Church was wont to take the place whereof he wold make his sermō, ordinarily out of those lessons as appeareth by those wordes of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and others so oftentimes vsed: We haue heard in the lesson that hath beene read, &c. and vpon the same we must deliuer and speake as the Lord shall vouchsafe to enable vs, &c. And sometime out of the Psalme that had beene sung, as may be seene in S. Basill vpon Psalme 114. Or else they tooke a whole booke, as S. Augustine in his treatise vpon S. Iohn: saue that vpon the daies of great feastes, as the feast of the Natiuitie, Easter, and Pentecost, they chose out pic∣ked places, from thence to intreate of the historie and misterie. And the sermon was called Tractatus Sermo, and from thence grew these speeches, Homilia tractare, de su∣periori loco dicere, siue de exedra. And it was the custome of the Pastor before he began to speake to the people, to pray vnto God, that hee woulde shew him the fauor and mercie to teach them well, and to giue them well, and throughly to appre∣hend that which hee should teach them according to Saint Augustine his precept: Before he speake, let him pray vnto God for himselfe, and for them to whom he is to preach, and let him be (saith hee) Orator antequàm dictor: which is, let him pray before hee preach. And this sermon did continue (as wee learne out of Saint Basill) about an
houre, in the ende likewise concluding the same with prayer. In Saint Augustine: Conuersi rursus ad Dominum, &c. we betake our selues againe vnto God, &c. And further∣more, as this is the principall charge of the Ministers to preach the worde: as those vnto whom our Lord (deliuering his commission) spake in these expresse wordes: Go preach the Gospell vnto all creatures, &c. So haue we from these great and worthie men, infinite sermons, as by name from Saint Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, S. Chrysostome, S. Basill, &c. but not from any one of these, any booke of rites or ce∣remonies, neyther yet any patterne of any sacrifice: And they let not to take great paine to prescribe and point out vnto vs, the qualities of a preacher, and the partes and conditions of a Bishoppe, that is worthy the roome and place of teaching the people: especially Saint Augustine in his bookes of Christian doctrine: but for teaching of him howe many diuers wayes, and with howe many ceremonies hee should say Masse or offer his pretended sacrifice, they trouble not themselues at all. Now after the sermon, That the holy Supper was frequented at that time of al the faithful. it was ordinarily the custome to beginne with the admi∣nistration of the holy Supper, especially during the time of their first loue and zeale, when as the Christians for the most part did communicate euerie weeke: yea and some euerie day, the Sacramentes being neuer set vpon the Table of the Lorde, but that there would bee a number of faithfull Christians to communicate thereof. And furthermore, S. August. ad Ianuar. ep. 119 Saint Augustine exhorteth the faithfull to communicate euery Lordes day: Prouided (saith hee) that thy soule be not set vpon sinne. Saint Ambrose gi∣ueth warning, and admonisheth them to celebrate the memorie of the Lord euerie day: rebuking certaine of the East Churches, which did not communicate oftener then once a yeare. And Eusebius saith, that the same custome was vsed in his time. And the same thing is witnessed by Saint Ierome, Euseb. l. 1. de Demonst. S. Hieron. ad Lucinium. Chrysost. in epist. ad Ephe. especially of the Church of Rome, and those of Spaine. Whereupon we see likewise that Chrysostome cryeth out most vehemently, as complaining of the frosennes of his age: as being such, as that though the supper of the Lord were celebrated dayly, yet there came but a very few people to the holy table: yea of so great accompt it was held, as that it appeareth vnto vs by a law made by the Church, and set downe in the ancient Canons: that the sacraments being blessed, all the faithfull, that is, all those which were admitted to bee of the communion & fellowship of the Church (for so they called them) should stay in the assemblie, The difference betwixt the faithfull, and those that were catechi∣sed. and should be exhorted, euen as they would auoide the punishment for doing otherwise, to communicate. But on the contrarie, such as could not bee re∣ceiued thereunto, namely such as were catechised, as not hauing as yet beene suffici∣ently instructed: Penitents, which had not as yet giuen sufficient, cleare, and mani∣fest signes of their repentance: as also the possessed, for being vexed of the euill spirit, should be aduertised to withdraw themselues, and to leaue the place cleane for the faithfull. Concil. Anti∣och. c. 2. C. peracta. D. 2. de consecrat. And this is it which the Canons say: As for such as enter into the Church of God and heare the scriptures, but communicate not in prayer with the people, but rather by some intemperancie doe keepe backe themselues from the holy communion: let them bee excommunicate and cast out of the Church, &c. Againe, The consecration ended, let euerie man giue himselfe to receiue the communion, if they will not bee cast out of the Church: Hiero. in 1. ad Cor. c 11. Chrysost. in 2. ad Cor. ho. 18. for so it was ordayned by the Apostles, &c. Whereuppon Saint Ierome tel∣leth vs: The supper of the Lord must bee common to all, for hee hath giuen the Sa∣cramentes vnto all his disciples equally. And Chrysostome: In some thing the Mi∣nister differeth not from the common people: Nihil differt sacerdos à Subdito; as when the participating of the holy mysteries is in hande: For wee are all alike thought worthie to receiue them: Not as in the olde law, where the high Priest tooke his certaine portion, and the people theirs: and so as that the people could not haue any thing of that which was the sacrificers part: for vnto euery one there present is deliuered one and the same bodie, and one and the same cuppe. And therefore hee was greatly offended with those, who stayed behind with the faithfull after those which were catechised were put forth, Chrysost. in epist. ad Ephe. hom. 3. and yet woulde not communicate, as offering iniurie vnto the Lordes table and feast. Thou art come hither (saith hee) and hast sung Psalmes in the place with all the
rest, and in that thou hast not departed, hast acknowledged thy selfe to bee of the number of those which are worthy to bee admitted thereunto: howe commeth it therefore to passe, that thou hauing stayed, doest not receiue the Lords Supper? And if thou aunswere that thou art vnworthy: art thou not so likewise by consequent of the communion which is in prayers? &c. As for those which were catechised, put to do pennance, and possessed, Of the catechi∣sed which had leaue to depart the Deacon after the sermon, made knowne and signified vnto them in plaine wordes, that they were to depart and go away: which thing might bee practised with lesse adoe at this day: when as there is not almost one to bee seene possessed of the euill spirit, and for that the rigor and seueritie of doing of pennaunce is much abated: as thirdly, in that there come into our Churches none but the children of Christians. And this leaue which was declared and openly told them, was called, Mittere, vel dimittere: vnde Missio & Missa, in Greeke , From whence the name of the Masse grew. & hence was the first origi∣nall of this worde Masse in the Church: because (as Bellarmin himselfe confesseth) that this leaue was deliuered in these wordes: Ite, Missa est, as amongst the Pagans was wont to be said, I, licet, &c. And by little and little (as abuse is apt to seaze vpon wordes that are most familiar and well knowne vnto vs) it came to passe, that that part of the seruice, which endured vnto the sermon, Raban. l. 1. c. 32. Innocen. l. 6. de Sacr. Hugo l. 2. part. 8. cap. 14. Tertul. de prae∣script. & corona and inclusiuely vnto the re∣hearsing of the Creede, was called the Masse of those that were catechised: and that which was afterwarde, that is to say, the celebrating of the holy Supper, had appropriated and giuen vnto it the name of the Masse of the faithfull, accor∣ding to the olde and auncient distinction made in the Church, betwixt those which were called the faithfull, and those which were catechised. And this is likewise testi∣fied by Tertullian in many places: and the Masse of the faithfull began where that of the catechised ended. But admit that this sending away was practised in the Church, Rabbi Leui. in Leuit. cap. 5. after the manner of the Iewish Church, which would not suffer that any leprouse or other infected per∣sons shoulde bee admitted vnto their sacrifices: or els according to the Pagans themselues, who woulde chase the prophane from their misteries and holy thinges with these wordes, , that is, leaue for the people to depart: so farre it hath preuailed, as that without all doubt it hath brought forth a name for the Masse, a name which was neuer read in any Hebrew, Greeke or Latine Authour be∣fore this time, that is to say, till foure hundred yeares after the death of our Lord: and yet so new in that age of the worlde, as that Saint Ierome the Pastor of Rome, and one who hath written so many great volumes, hath neuer so much as once made any mention of it: yea and Saint Ambrose, who vttereth it once, and Saint Augu∣stine onely twise, did yet neuer take it in that sence and signification, that we vse it: for neither the one nor the other doth speak of it, in touching or deliuering the mat∣ter and doctrine of the Sacrament: although that Saint Ambrose haue written there∣of sixe bookes: and that S. Augustine haue handled the matter more amply and large∣ly, and more often then any other, both vpon S. Iohn, and in other places. But both of them in a signification farre differing from that wherein it is vsed at this day, that is to say; not meaning or vnderstanding by this worde, either sacrifice or sacrament. Furthermore, the place alleadged out of S. Augustine his sermons are of small force, because the best learned thinke not these sermons to bee his, as being founde else∣where to bee attributed to Saint Ambrose, or to Hugo de Sancta victoria; such further∣more as haue thus found them without any name, Erasm. de con∣cionib. Amb. & August. ad frat. Eremit. August. in ser. de tempore. 23/ not knowing to whom well to at∣tribute or impute them. Saint Augustine saith: Ecce post sermonem fit Missa cate∣chumenis, manebunt fideles, that is, that after the sermon, leaue shall bee graunted vn∣to those that are catechised to depart, that is to say, such as yet haue neede to bee instru∣cted in the faith, whereas the sufficient instructed and grounded in faith shall abide. In which place by Bellarmine his owne iudgement, it cannot bee taken for any other thing then a simple leaue to depart, and not for any sacrifice or Sacrament. Againe, In le∣ctione, quae nobis ad Missas legenda est, audituri sumus: that is, We shall heare in the lesson which shall bee read in the Masse, &c. In which place hee may seeme to comprehend,
not onely the one or the other seruice, or part of seruice, that is to say, that of the catechised, and the other of the faithfull: but euen all manner of spirituall exercise in the Church, Cassian. l. 2. c. 7. l. 3. c. 7. & 8. Amb. l. 5. epis. 8 whether it did follow the celebration of the holy Supper, or not, as it is ordinarily taken and meant in Cassian, who writ more then a hundred years after, S. Ambrose: The day following, which was the Lords day, Post lectiones atque tracta∣tum, dimissis catechumenis, &c. Missam facere coepi: After the lessons and Sermon, hauing giuen leaue to the catechised to depart, I began to say Masse: Where behold how that here seemeth no other thing to bee meant, then a restrayning of that hee did to the seruice which was proper to the faithfull, that is to say, to the blessing, com∣municating and distributing of the Sacramentes, verie farre differing as wee shall well see, from the Popes Masse: once I say for all in Saint Ambrose, neuer in Saint Ie∣rome, and in Saint Augustine cleane in an other sence: And this assuredly maketh the suspition of no small weight, which some haue had of these bookes: namely, that they should bee none of Ambrose his workes, Hieronymus in Prou. Salo. c. 11. as contrarying his doctrine in many places. For as for the place that is alleadged out of S. Ierome vpon the Prouerbes, who will belieue that it was his, seeing that S. Gregorie is there alleadged? and not rather some worke of Beda, to whom the best learned doe ascribe it? But what fa∣tall chaunge or translation was destinated vnto this word, that from an ill throwne Latine word, signifying leaue or libertie, it should necessarily be drawne in first to sig∣nifie a part of Gods diuine worship and seruice, then a pretended sacrifice: Thirdly, a worke wrought for the saluation of the quicke and the dead: and finally, to leape in∣to the roome of the market place, called Palladium in Rome, promising as large and plentifull store of wares and marchandise for the Christian soule, as euer that other did commodities for the carnall bodie? And yet here we are not to omit that which wee haue alreadie touched: namely, that all the seruices and exercises of the church, as publique prayers, singing of Psalmes, by night, by day, euening, or morning, were called Masses, in the ages following: although they medled not at all with the administration of the Lords Supper: & the reason thereof was, because that all Chri∣stian assemblies were wont to dismisse themselues vpon a general praier made, which was called Collecta, & sometimes Missa, that is, a leaue or libertie to depart, or a Masse: in asmuch as the departure followed imediately after the same. This appeareth by S. Benet his rule, wherein after he hath declared the order of prayers and supplications to be kept at the houres canonicall: there is added, Et sint, vel fiant Missae, which is as much as if he should say: And then let them depart, giue them leaue to go away. The same al∣so appeareth by Cassian to be so, who saith, speaking of the Monkes of Egypt, that after the Masse of the vigils, they were permitted a little sleepe vntill it was day. And againe, that vpon the Lordes day they had but one Masse or departure before dinner, which was reckoned vnto them for their thirdes, and sixtes, &c. But in as much as in this they were wont to communicate and receiue the Lords Supper altogether: the name by little and little, and by succession of time tooke roote and continued, to the rooting out of all others. But that we may not content our selues with our former store, & go no further, we haue testimonies of this dismission, Masse, or departure from the best & most appro∣ued of this our time. I speake not of the Liturgies touched heretofore and which shall be againe touched hereafter, in all which these wordes are to bee founde and read: , Dionys. in Hie∣rar. l. 3. Hieron. in pi. ad Gala. l. 3. c. 6 Chrys. hom. 24 & 83. in Math. 24.61. & 79. ad popul. Antioch. hom. 3. & 4 de natur. Dei. &c. that is to say, let the catechised and such as are inioyned humili∣ation for their transgressions, withdraw themselues, & let the faithfull onely stay, &c. And frō the time euen of Gregory this was the crie of the Deacon after the Gospel, & not any more after the sermon, because that after that time there was but little prea∣ching, Si quis non communicat, exeat, which is, If there be any man that wil not communicate, let him go away out of the congregation. But in Saint Denis, in S. Ierome and in S. Chry∣sostome this ceremonie may bee obserued and marked in infinite places. And the Counsels of the same time shew it euidently: Catechumeni in Missa corum ne demit∣tantur, &c. Let not those that are catechised, bee licensed to depart from their Masse,
except it bee after that they haue heard eyther the Sermon made by the Bb. Concil. Laod. c. 19. Concil. Cth¦gin. 4. c. 84. or the Sermon made by the Minister: Neither let the Bb. keepe anie one from entring into the Church for to heare the word of God, whether it be Iew or Gentile, or from staying there vntill the Masse, that is to say, vntil the time of admonition, to depart giuen to those which are catechised. And thus we haue seene what manner of seruice it was, whereat they were present, namelie, the first prayers, singing of Psalmes, reading of holie Scriptures, the Sermon and the Creede. It remaineth that wee see what manner of seruice the second was, namelie, that which was reserued onelie for the faithfull. CHAP. V. What manner of Diuine seruice was vsed, namelie, in that which was called the Masse of the faithfull. IT is first to bee noted, that in that space of time happening be∣twixt the two seruices, that is that of the catechised, Of Offrings or obltions. and that of the faithfull, there was a place and libertie for the presenting & bringing in of offringes, which the Christians vsed to offer of their increase and fruits vnto God in his Church, to be imploy∣ed, partlie to the vse of the Sacramentes, and partlie to the re∣liefe of the poore: according to the example of the Israelites, Exod. ch. 25. Deut. 16 & 26. Leuit. 23.11. & the 17. c. 34. Deut. c. 26. De consecr. dist. 1. C. omnis Christ, &c. & 12. q. C. Vul∣turand. Philip. 4. Heb. 13. Irenae. l. 4. c. 34 to whome it was giuen in charge: You shall not appeare before the Lord your handes emptie: These offrings were brought vnto the Priest, and presented with a protestation made of the grace and mercie receyued of God: which (sayeth the Lord) hee shall shake before the Lord, to the end that they may bee acceptable for your sake. And this is it which Walafridus & Berno told vs hertofore, namely, that the offring sprang and tooke his beginning from the old people, whereof also wee haue some steps and markes in the Epistles of S. Paule, where these offrings made for the relief of the poor, are called Sacrifices, Irenaeus sayth, The Lord aduising his Disciples to offer vnto God the first fruits of his creatures, not because he hath neede, but to the end that they should not be vn∣fruitfull and vnthankefull, taketh that which by his creation was bread, giueth thanks and saith, This is my bodie, &c. Againe, we offer vnto him to giue him thankes for the gift which hee hath bestowed vpon vs, and for the sanctifying of the creature, that is the bread & the wine, con∣secrating them in the bodie and in the blood of our Lord: Then a little after hee addeth the other vse: To feede (sayeth hee) the hungrie, to cloath the naked, &c. according to that which is written, hee that hath pittie vpon the poore, lendeth vpon vsurie vnto God, &c. From whence wee plainlie gather both the one and the other, Iustinus Mar∣tyr. Apol. 2. S. Cypri. de E∣leemos. & in Epist. ad De∣centium. D. , C. parem igitur. Custome. . Paulin. in libel. de Gazophyl. August. Ep. 121. Ad victorinum. Thod l 5. c. 17. Nicephl. 1. c. 41. Pul in vita Ambros. August. Ep. 187 and that these gifts were or∣dinarie in the church, and that out of them they did take the bread and wine for to be sanctified, and serued in the holie Supper, the residue that remained, being reser∣ued for the poore, Iustine sayeth, The bread and the wine , are brought vnto him, which is the chiefest among the Brethren, that is, to the Bb. or Minister, which per∣formeth the action. S. Cyprian is more cleare and plaine in this point, As rich as thou art, Dominicum celebrare te credis, that is, thou thinkest to celebrate the Lordes day, or the feast of the Lord, and takest no care to bring thy offrings, and so thou commest ad Domi∣nicum, to this holie assembly without anie sacrifice, & wilt thou take part of the sacrifice, which the poore shall haue offred? So auncient is this ceremonie in the Church: and further∣thermore, Paulinus testifieth that there was a table in the midst of the Church, where∣unto these offringes were brought; which S. Augustine calleth the altar of God, after the mannor of the Iewish imitation, complaining in a certaine Epistle, that the poore Captiues amongst the Barbarians, as the Iewes in Babilon, could not bring their of∣fringes to this Altar, nor yet finde anie man, by whome they might offer vp the same vnto God. And were reade of Theodosius, that hee was wont to offer such giftes be∣fore the celebration of the holie mysteries, and of the Emperour Eugenius, that his giftes and offringes were reiected and refused, because hee had polluted himselfe
with Sacrilege: So likewise of the Earle Boniface, for hauing rauished one of the Church: for because (say they) to take of these the Sacrifice which they should bring vnto God, S. Hieron. in Hierem. l. 2. c. 11. & in Ezech. c. 18. l. 6. Innoc. 1. Epist. 1. c. 2. were to approue them to bee in state to bee partakers of the prayers of the Church. The abuse hereof grew in the ende to bee such, as that for to inuite and call euerie man to it, the names of those which offred, & the gifts which they gaue, were re∣hearsed with a lowde voice in the Church: which likewise was found fault withall and reprehended at large by S. Ierome. Now these offringes were ordinarilie cal∣led , in Greek & in Latine, Dona, munera, oblationes, that is, gifts, presents, fruits, oblations, &c. which did sanctifie & make holie the whole lump: whereupon it commeth that these wordes are read in the Lithurgies, , Tuaex tuis, that is, we giue thee of thine owne that which is thine: And they were con∣secrated and dedicated to God by the prayer of the Priest, after the manner of the Iewish Church, in these wordes, or the like, Has oblationes famulorum, famularùmque tuarum benignus assume, quas singuli obtulerunt: might it please thee fauourablie to receiue these oblations of thy household seruants and handmaides, which euerie one of them hath offred vppe vnto thee. Sometimes going so farre as to name them by their names, contrary to the good liking and iudgement of Ierome, and that in such manner, as we see by the steppes and printes thereof in these wordes changeablie vsed in the Masse, Pro quibus tibi offerimus, vel qui tibi offerunt, that is, for whome we offer vnto thee, or which offer vnto thee. In like manner in the prayers of the fift, sixt, and seauenth Lordes daye after Whitsontide in these wordes, Has oblationes famulorum tuorum, &c. benignus assume, & accipe sacrificium à deuotis famul is tuis, & pari benedictione, sicut munera Abel sanctifica: that is to say, take this sacrifice of thy seruants, and sanctifie it as the offringes of Abell: A∣gaine in these wordes of the Masse and of the Lithurgie: May it please thee to receiue them for a sacrifice of praise, and of a sweetesmell, as those of Abell, Noe, Melchisedech, Samu∣ell, &c. Which forme of prayer grew afterward to be most blasphemously abused, as shall be shewed, by being applyed vnto the pretended sacrifice of the bodie and blood of our Lord. Now all the while that these offringes were in bringing to the ta∣ble to bee laid thereupon, the people were ordinarily wont to employ the same in praysing of God by singing of Psalmes, whereupon came the Offertorie, that is to say, in the beginning certaine Psalmes, and afterward certaine verses onelie, which were sung in the meane space. Neither must it here be forgotten, that one parte of these offringes, according as was the aboundance thereof, beganne to be imployed about the maintenance of the Pastor: & hereupon couetousnes and other abuses compani∣ons of the same, was first bred and brought into the Church, to the infecting of the Ministers of the same. S. Ierome sayeth, Clerici de altari viuunt, altari seruientes, altaris oblatione sustentantur, &c. The Cleargie liue of the Altar; those which serue at the Altar, are fed and maintained of the oblations of the Altar, &c. And as Walafridus, Berno and o∣thers haue told vs, that the Offertorie came to bee in the Diuine seruice, by reason of such a custome practised amongst the Iewes, so indeed wee finde manie of the steppes threof by obseruing and marking of the same. For the bookes of the Hebrewes doe teach vs, that there are seauen thinges to bee obserued in the oblations and offringes of the first fruits; The first, that the chiefe and gouernours of the house, did bring them themselues vnto the Church porch, and hauing them vpon their shoulders, did euerie of them say these wordes of Deuteronomye, ch. 26. verese 3. vnto the Priest: I giue you to vnderstand this day before God, &c. that I am come into the land which hee had promised vnto our Fathers, &c. The second; that the Priest receiued the basket of euery one from his owne hand, and put it before the Altar: The third, that this excellent place of Deuteronomie, where this thankefulnes is ordained, with such a liuelie re∣presentation of the miseries of the people; and of the mercifulnes of the Lord, should bee read vnto them all along: Of the eleuati∣on. Exod. 29.24. & 27. Leuit. 23.11 &c. The fourth, that to the offring of the first fruites, there was ordinarily ioyned the Sacrifice of thankesgiuing; The fift, that there was an ordinarie singing of Psalmes, without which, say they, there did not passe anie Sacri∣fice: The sixt, that the offring of those first fruits was lifted vp on high by the Priest, which wee read commaunded in verie manie places of the Scripture, and whereof we
will speake hereafter in place conuenient: they adde thereto the seuenth: that they which offred were inioyned to passe the night in the Citie, to shew that they came not thether eyther for fashion sake, or in hast, but for to render thankes vnto the Lord vpon good deliberation. Here now beginneth the seruice of the faithfull, Generall pray¦er. The Letanie with a generall prayer for the whole world, for the estate of the Church, for publike and particular necessities, which the Grecians call , that is to saye, supplication, , that is to say, pray∣ers for peace; because that therein they vsed to pray vnto God for the peace and pro∣speritie of euerie particular person: , that is, an vniuersall Collect, because it contained an abridgement of all prayers, wherof it may seeme that there a∣bide some notes and markes in the Prosne, so called, because that euerie one did fall downe flat vpon his face, the Minister of the Church for to say prayers, and the peo∣ple for the better ioyning of themselues in deuotion with him: and thereupon it is as yet called prayers in some places: the forme thereof continued (as we haue seene it) since the time of the Primitiue Church, is to bee found and read in the writers of that time, S. Ambrose, Oratio praemittitur, prayer for the people, for kinges and all others, go∣eth before, &c. S. Ambrose, cont. relat. Sym mach. & Epist. 29. & l. 4. de Sacr. cap. 4. & in 1. ad Tim. cap. 2. S. Ambrose de vocatione gen∣tium. August. Ep. 119. ad Ianuar. & serm. de temp. 237. & Ep. 59. ad Pau∣lin. q. 5. Epist. 106. & de bon. per∣seu. cap. 22. & haeres. 88. Chrysost. hom. 79. ad Pope Antioch. & 72. in Matth. The Lithurgie attributed vnto S. Basill. Chrysost. in Epist 2. ad Cor. hom. 18. The blessing of the Sacraments and this rule is deliuered and giuen vnto vs and our Ministers by the Mai∣ster of the Gentiles, &c. that is, by S. Paule. Insomuch (sayeth he) as that it became a rule and patterne obserued and followed in all the Churches: it became a rule obserued in all the Chur∣ches to pray not onelie for the Saintes and regenerate in Christ: but also for the Infidels and e∣nemies of his Crosse, for the Idolaters, persecutors, Iewes, Heretikes and Schismatikes. S. Au∣gustine after the lessons and sermon addeth: Aut cum Antistites clara voce deprecan∣tur, that is, when the Pastors doe pray with aloude voice: Againe, After the sermon those which are catechised, haue leaue to depart, the faithfull stay behinde, then they shall come to the place of prayer, &c. And for the form & maner, for all men, for kings, & for them which are in authoritie, &c. for those that are catechised, for the vnbeleeuers, and for the infidels. Chryso∣stome, Wee pray for the whole world, for the Church spread and dispersed euerie where, for the vnitie of the same, for them which gouerne it, and are the chiefe in the same, &c. Againe, for the possessed, for the pentients, for sinners, for the afflicted, and for our selues. S. Basill, for the uire and weather, for the fruits of the earth, for peace, for Trauellers, Saylers, sicke persons, Prisoners, and Captiues, for the troubles, the forgiuenes of sinnes, the Church, the Bbs. and the Emperours, &c. And this is it which S. Denys calleth the holie prayers: others the Le∣tanie, that is Supplication made and offred to one onlie God by Iesus Christ, and that euerie where and for all things. And that they were made properlie, in that place ap∣peareth by S. Chrysostome: After (sayeth hee) that wee haue put forth them which may not bee partakers of the holie Table, we haue an other praier to make, and then we are altogether af∣ter one manner cast flat vpon the ground, both the Pastor and the people, and do all of vs rise a∣gaine, after one and the same manner, &c. This prayer thus ended, which was verie long, but deuided into Articles, to euerie one whereof the people, that they might be kept the more attentiue, were bounde to aunswere, Amen: they came to set the bread and the wine appointed for the holie Sacramentes, vpon the holie Table, and that with reuerence and deuotion, and cer∣tain forespeeches, which might stir vp the people to come also after the same maner: then the Pastor said, Dominus vobiscum, a Salutation vsed amongst the Hebrewes, that is, The Lord be with you, and the people answered him saying, Et cum spiritu tuo, and with thy spirit, The Minister saide, Sursum Corda, , which is, ft vp your heartes on high, , Doe not imagine here, or thinke vpon anie terrestriall or earth∣lie thing, the people aunswered, , Habemus ad Dominum, we haue them fixt and bent vpon the Lord. Againe, the Minister, , &c. Gratias aga∣mus: Let vs giue thankes vnto our Lord God: The people, It is meete and conuenient, &c. And then the Minister did handle in manner of a briefe preface, the causes why they gaue thankes, as namely, for that he had created man after his owne image, for that he hauing reuolted and forsaken him, it pleased him to recouer and recall him in Iesus Christ, for the giuing of his Law vnto him, for hauing admonished him by his Pro∣phets, for hauing sent them his onely begotten Sonne in the fulnes of time, to fulfill
the law in his owne person, for quickning by his death, those that were dead in Adam to make them capable of eternall life; and for that to this ende hee had dyed, risen a∣gaine, and ascended into heauen: and for that also hee gaue himselfe freene to the death, readie to deliuer vp his life for the life of the world; and for hauing left vs a liuelie representation of this so great a benefite: and for that he had taken the bread in his holie handes, blessing, sanctifying, breaking and distributing it vnto his Dis∣ciples and Apostles, saying: Take, eate, This is my bodie, &c. and for hauing done, in like manner with the cuppe, saying, Drinke yee all; This is the cup of the new Testa∣ment in my blood, &c. And in this place in the processe of this goodlie Preface, was read in a briefe manner the institution of the holie Supper, as it is to be seene also in all the Lithurgies: The Lithurgie of S. Basill. The Lithurgie of S. Denys. and this action was shut vp and ended, with the answere of the peo∣ple in these wordes: Lord, wee remember herein thy death and passion, and do emfesse thy resurrection, vntil the time of thy comming, or as it is read in S. Denys, with a protestation, Lord , Thou hast said, Do this in remembrance of me: which done, the bread and the wine were held consecrate, sanctified, and for sacraments, by vertue of the institu∣tion of our Lord, which is alwaies powerfull, and hath his efficacie, and not by vertue of certaine wordes spoken ouer the elementes. Of which thing as shall bee decla∣red in his place, the purest old Churches neuer dreamed. Then there followed a prai∣er, that it would please God to shew them all the mercie, as that they may commu∣nicate the bodie and blood of his Sonne, by a true and liuelie faith, and not to their condemnation and iudgement; as also that it would please him to knitte them alto∣gether in true charity and loue, in the communion of his Sonne by his holy spirit, e∣uen in so effectuall a manner, as they did certainely eate and drinke all of the same bread and cuppe: then the conclusion followed with the ioyning thereunto of the Lordes Prayer: and after that, for a signe of this holy vnion of their spirites and wils in Christ, a mutuall kisse, the signe and testimonie eyther of true and vnuiolate a∣mitie, or else of an vnfained reconciliation, and that they had not vainely and for a fa∣shion spoken, The kisse of peace. Forgiue vs our sinnes, as wee forgiue them, &c. and thereupon also it was called Osculum pacis, the kisse of peace: as also further, to signifie that this knot of the v∣nitie of the faithfull, did not end in this world. After this peace, there was mention made of them, who either had liued wel, or which were dead in Christ, especially of the Martyrs, whose names were read , that is, out of a certaine register or catalogue: partlie (sayeth S. Denys,) to signifie that they were not dead, but verilie liuing: (and therefore the Primitiue Church, called the death of man, by the name of birth & natiuitie:) and partly to stirre vs vp to the same constancie by their example: Now when this was finished, the Pastors and Deacons, which were to distribute the holie Supper, did first communicate themselues, and after deliuered the bread and the cuppe to the faithfull, and gaue it them in their hands, speaking the significatiue wordes of this ho∣ly Mysterie; but so as that they did not all binde themselues to vtter them in the same tearmes. And during this whole action, Psalmes were sung by the people, and that such as concerned the thing in hand: and the same in the end was shut vppe with a so∣lemne thankesgiuing, and before that, it was not lawfull for anie man to depart and goe away: and all this was alwaies done in a tongue, which the people vnderstoode, and with so loude a voice as might be, that so the people might bee able to say, Amen. And this order will wee runne ouer againe, particularlie, according to euery parte of same. Of the Preface speaketh Chrysostome, saying, when we beginne to say, The Lord bee with you, Of the Preface Chrysost. in 1. ad Corint. hom. 36. & in 2. hom. 18. Chrysost. hom. de Eucharist. & ad Heb. hom. 22. the people doth aunswere, And with thy spirite: Againe, In the holie and reuerende Misteries the Pastor praieth for the people, and the people for the Pastor: for these wordes and with thy spirit, can not tell vs or giue vs to vnderstand any other thing: The councell of Nice 1. sayth, Let vs not rest our selues in the bread and wine which are set vpon the Table: but let vs lift vp our heartes on high, that is, Sursum Corda, namelie, to the Lambe of God, &c. Chry∣sostome, Hast not thou promised to the Priest, who saieth, Lift vo your hartes and mindes on high; we haue them fixed and setled in the Lord? This table is altogether furnished with my∣steries: the Lambe of God is offred for thee, &c. And in an other place; Wee lift vp our
mindes on high: This is a table for Eagles, and not for Crowes to feede at, &c. S. Augustine; August. de bono perseuer. cap. 13. de ve∣ra: elig. c. 3. de bono vid. cap. 16. Epist. 15. in Psalm. 85. &c. Chrysost. in hom. 26. in. Genes. That which is saide in the sacrament of the faithfull, namely, that wee should haue our heartes raysed vppe to God on high, Vt sursum corda habeamus ad Dominum, sheweth that it is a gift of God: as also, in asmuch as the Pastor saieth vnto vs afterwarde, that we are to yeelde him thankes, and that wee make answere, that it is meete and right, that we should so doe, &c. And these wordes are repeated in an infinite sort of places: And yet (sayeth Chry∣sostome) not because hee hath neede of our thankes, doe wee say vnto him , &c: for who is able sufficientlie and worthilie to performe such a seruice, seeing the Cherubius cannot attaine vnto it? but he willeth it, to the end that the gaine may redound to our selues, &c. And the reasons of this thankesgiuing laid downe by the Minister of the Church, in the short abridgement of the historie of the redemption of mankinde, or rather of the Church, are no lesse to bee noted and marked of vs. Chrysostome, We thanke God (sayeth hee) in this Sacrament, for that hee hath deliuered vs from errour, Chrysost. in hom. 24. in 1. ad Cor. for that hee hath adopted vs for brethren, so far off as we were from al hope, by reason of our impieties, and ther∣fore we call it the cup of blessing, and the Eucharist. In the lithurgie likewise, which is at∣tributed vnto S. Basill, is wholie set downe the storie of our redemption, and in the ve∣rie place of the Canon of the Romish Masse, Of the Canon and endeth with the institution of the ho∣lie Supper, no word or mention made of anie propitiatorie Sacrifice, other then of our Lord himselfe: to bee short, it is worth the noting, that we cannot by tracing out, find or meete with anie one step or footing of the Canon of this Masse in the olde Writers, though otherwise diligent inough to anotomize vnto vs the partes and prices of their seruice: if it were not for one onelie place in S. Ambrose, in his bookes of the Sacra∣mentes, and yet those bookes not acknowledged of all men to be his, howsoeuer vn∣der his name for the foresaide end, abused most notoriously. S. Ambrose sayeth, S. Ambrose. l. 4. & 67. de Sacr. Fac nobis hanc oblationem adscriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis, & san∣guinis Domini, &c. that is, vouchsafe O Lord to make this our oblation and offring to bee al∣lowed vs in our account, and hold it as acceptable, because it is the figure of the bodie and blood of our Lord, who, the day before he suffered, tooke bread in his holie hands, &c. And wee haue said inough hereof before, namely, in what sence they vsed this word oblation, accor∣ding to the imitation of the Iewish Church, which is likewise plainely seene by this prayer, framed according vnto that of the law, Let the offring of their gifts be acceptable. But whereas S. Ambrose vseth this word, figure, their Canon sayeth, Grant that it may be vnto vs the bodie and blood of Christ. Againe, of this oblation, that is to say, of the ele∣ments of bread and wine, taken from the Masse, and whole lumpe of the same, set be∣fore and presented vnto the belieuers, for Sacraments, and vnto God for a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, in remembrance of the passion, death, and resurrection of Christ, Saint Ambrose saide, Vnde memores eius passionis, &c. precamur vt hanc oblationem suscipias, &c. We pray thee that in remembrance of his death and passion, &c. thou wouldest receiue this ob∣lation vpon thine heauenlie altar, by the hands of thine Angels, as thou didst vouchsafe to re∣ceiue the gifts of Abell thy seruant and deare child, and the sacrifice of the Patriarch Abraham, &c. Now that which he speaketh of the oblation of the Elements, made Sacraments by the word, the Romish Canon vpon the insuing of the first corruptions, and depra∣uing of thinges, tooke occasion to speake it of Iesus Christ himselfe; so that what the one said of the figure, the other spake of the thing it self, & so by consequent make the sacrifice of Christ inferiour to those of Abell, Abraham and Melchisedech: Acceptable (sayth he) as those, which indeed we know by the vniform consent of the whole Scrip∣tures to haue been acceptable to God by no other meanes, saue onelie in Iesus Christ. And let vs further note by the way, that in the Lithurgie which they attribute vnto S. Ambrose, they haue razed and scraped out the worde figure, that so they might fit the Canon the better to that of the Romish Masse. As for the consecration or blessing it was not attributed vnto certaine wordes, Of the conse∣cration or blessing. and much lesse vnto a prefixt and set number of wordes, but onelie to the institution of the Lord, and to the effectuall power thereof. And this appeareth in that the olde Do∣ctors did neuer teach otherwise: and in that diuerse men haue vsed diuerse and dif∣ferent wordes herein also, for that in diuerse Lithurgies, the wordes are diuerse, and
herein likewise, for that the Latines doubted not, but that the Greciās (as they speak) did consecrate; and yet notwithstanding the Greeks did not make account that their consecration was accomplished till afterthe prayer which followeth the instituti∣on of the holy Supper: the Latines on the contrarie defend at this day, that it was accomplished in these onelie wordes; Hoc est enim corpus meum, &c. Let it bee so. In these Lithurgies, wherewith they would dazell our eyes, and which they attribute to S. Iames, S. Clement, S. Basill. S. Chrysostome, &c. according to the translations of their interpreters, In S. Clement his Lithurgie. Ostendat. the wordes of consecration are these, in the praier which they make after the reading of the institution of the Supper: We O Lord mindfull of the passion of thy deare Son, do beseech thee according to thy institution, that it will please thee to send thy ho∣lie spirit vpon the Sacrament here present and set before vs, who may cause and manifestly de∣clare, that the bread is the bodie of Christ, and the wine his blood, shed and powred out for the life of the world: And so likewise speaketh Cyrill in steade that in the Church of Rome, the consecration is neyther attributed vnto the institution that goeth before, nor vn∣to the prayer that followeth, but vnto the onely pronuntiation or speaking of their wordes, giuen and deliuered by strict accountes without interruption, as though for∣sooth it were some precise forme of wordes, for the passing of some bargaine in the ci∣uill law, as the Schoolemen are wont to reason: notwithstanding, that the Cardinall Caietan doth hold, that when it is said Benedixit, it was Benedictione laudis, non consecra∣tionis, and that hee was neuer willing to make any exposition vppon the pretended wordes of consecration, because hee coulde not finde therein anie ground or foun∣dation laide vppon antiquitie. Now as for these wordes how they should bee vnder∣stoode wee will handle that point when we come to speake of the question of Tran∣substantiation, so that here it shall suffice to haue spoken of it by way of historie. The prayer, The praier. that it would please God to make the faithfull communicating to be∣come more and more one bodie and one spirit, that is to say, the misticall bodie of Christ, is in all the Lithurgies aboue named, according to that which Saint Augustine teacheth. That the Sacrifice of Christians is, their being of manie, one bodie in Christ: That which is most worthy (sayeth hee) and notable in the Sacrament of the Altar, August. Epist. 59. is for that in the oblation, which the Church offreth, shee is offred vppe her selfe vnto God, and to bee offred (sayeth hee in an other place) is as much as to bee vowed and dedicated vnto him: seeing that in this Sacrament we protest by a sacred and soueraigne vow, to dwell in Christ, and in his bond and couenant: And therefore (he addeth) I suppose that the Apostle commaunded, that in the sanctification and preparation going before the distribution thereof, there should be certain prayers made. S. August. Ep. 118. et 1. Tim. 2. Hee calleth them ; (because of the vow, as the A∣postle sayeth to Timothie,) wherein this vow of vnion and agreement was witnessed: as furthermore, the scope and drift of the Sacrament is, that wee should grow to bee one with Christ, and one amongst our selues. Of the Lordes prayer Saint Augustine sayth, Of the Lords praier. August serm. 237. de temp. Item Epist. ad Paulinum. &c. Ambrose l. 5. de sacr. c 4. Hieron. l. 3. ad∣uers. Pelag. Concil Tolet. 4. The kisse of peace. Chrysost. in l. 1 de compunct. cord. After the Sermon we will come to the Prayer: you know whether we must come, namely, to the holie Table, and that which you shall haue first to demaund of God, Dimitte nobis debita, &c. forgiue vs our trespasses and debtes, as we forgiue them that are indebted to vs. And in an other place: All the Church almost con∣cludeth this whole prayer, with the Lordes prayer, &c. And S. Ambrose, and S. Ierome in like manner: That this Prayer was said, Post verba Christi, that is, after the wordes of institution, and it was followed by all the faithfull: and there are also certaine coun∣cels, which reproue the Priestes of Spaine, for that they did not say it but vppon the Lordes day. And as for the kisse of peace, Chrysostome sayeth, The Lord commandeth to leaue thy gift before the Altar, and first to be reconciled vnto thy brother, &c. We retaine the shadow of this commandement, and let goe the substance and the trueth thereof, for it is a common custome, to be present at the kisse of peace, at such time as the gifts are offered to God: but J feare me that it doth come from a number of you, from no further than the lips, &c. And in an other place hee putteth it presently after the Lords praier; We do all of vs (saith he) fall downe together) namely the Ministers and the people, and when we are to come to the dutie of the kisse of peace, we doe euerie one mutually salute one another &c. Ierome, Is there any that communicateth against their wils? or which in the administration of the holie food doe
put out their hande to take it, but turne away their face, and offer the kisse of Iudas. Saint Augustine more plainely: After the Lordes prayer (sayeth hee) there is saide Pax vo∣biscum, peace be with you, S. August. Serm. de vigil. Pasch. In Ambrosia∣na. In Graecis. and the Christians doe euerie one mutually kisse each other with a holie kisse: but let the signe of the peace of Christ, which the lips doe testifie, be rooted inward lie in the conscience, that so the harts may ioyn, and be vnited as close together as the lips. And it is the verie same which is read in the Lithurgies: Offerte vobis pacem, , Offer to your selues peace: Let vs salute one another with a holy kisse, &c. The peace of Christ and of the church be alwaies with vs, &c. Now after that they had prayed vnto God to vnite & knit them more & more one vnto an other in Christ, The Commu∣nion. and protested their sincere vnion in the Spirite amongst thē∣selues, there followed the communicating and distributing of the holy Sacramentes in this forme and manner: The Ministers did communicate amongst them, then they distributed them vnto the Deacons, and afterward the Ministers and Deacons vnto the faithfull: This appeareth by the Canon of the first Councell of Nice, ioyned to Ruffinus: Let the Deaconreceiue the grace of the holy Communion, at the handes of the Bb. Concil. Nic. c. 18. Ruff. l. 1. c. 6. or Pastor: and let the Deacon likewise distribute it in the absence of the Pastor: where we see, that this action was not thought to depend vpon the power and effectualnes of the Minister, as some afterward would haue had it: they did distribute it vnder both kinds, the bread and the cuppe. Whereby it appeareth, that (to speake in a word) it cannot be noted out of any olde Writer, in any one place, where the bread was separated from the cuppe, or the cuppe from the bread. In S. Ambrose also, S. Ambrose. in 2 ad Cor. who yeeldeth a reason, though not altogether so pertinent and fit: The Sacrament which wee receiue (sayeth hee) serueth both for the bodie and the soule: the flesh of Christ for the saluation of the bodie, and the blood for the saluation of the soule. Whereby at the least wee learne with what conscience our aduersaries alledge against vs S. Ambrose his Masse, which they haue most lewdly gelded in taking the distribution of the cuppe from it: they did de∣liuer the Sacramentes into the proper handes of the Communicants, men or women: Euseb. l. 6. c. 43 and this is manifest by that which is spoken by Nouatus, who gaue vnto euery one his part of the oblation being consecrated; and by the hereticall woman, who made shew to take the bread at the hand of Chrysostome: and by these wordes of S. Niceph. l. 13. c. 7. Ambrose vn∣to Theodosius: Wilt thou take with thy bloodie handes, the holie bodie of our Lord, &c? a most euident signe, that this opinion had not as then taken place, that this o∣peration did change the nature of the thing in such sort, as that it might not be touch∣ed with the handes of Christians: and the bread was giuen in gobbets, and the cup went along from hand to hand, according to the multitude of the Communicantes; The wordes. speaking and vttering vnto them in diuerse Churches, diuerse wordes: As in the La∣tine; Accipe corpus Christi, Take the bodie of Christ: Take the blood of our Lorde, and they aunswered, Amen: let it bee so vnto me; or So be it. An other waye: The bodie of our Lord, the blood of Christ keepe and preserue thee vnto eternall life: Also, The bodie of Christ: And they aunswered, Amen: The blood of Christ, the cuppe of life: Aunswere, Ambrose lib. 4. de sacr. cap. 5. S. Clemens. in Lithurg. Microlog. c. 19. Amen: as it is to bee seene in the Latine Lithurgies, imitating therein the wordes in the Gospell; Take, eate, this is my bodie, &c. Where in the meane time wee may note and marke, that the wordes which the Priest rehearseth now a dayes for him∣selfe alone, were then by the Minister spoken vnto all the faithfull Communicantes. In the Greeke Church, I giue thee to communicate, (sayde the Minister) the precious bodie of our Lorde and Sauiour, for the remission of thy sinnes, and to the assuring of thee of eternall life. And so likewise of the cuppe, according to the wordes of Saint Paule: The bread which wee breake, and the cuppe which wee blesse, is it not the Commu∣nion of the bodie of Christ? And all the prayers in the meane time both before and af∣ter haue these wordes continually mingled amongst them; Let vs not here thinke vp∣pon any thing that is earthlie, anie thing that is carnall: all whatsoeuer is contained herein is full of mysteries: This is a sacrifice of praise, spirituall, reasonable, without bloode: a heauenlie breade, which is receyued by a firme and constant faith, and by a mind pur∣ged from vncleannes: a Christ which is distributed, without being deuided into parts, eaten
without being chewed; and which nourisheth, without being wasted or consumed, &c: that so wee may learne alwaies to keepe the reuerence due vnto the Sacramentes, and not∣withstanding, not to confound them with the thing it selfe: that wee may not thinke of anie proper chaunge, that should be wrought in these signes: but rather of the chaunge, which this spirituall nourishment, which ioyneth vs to Christ, ought to worke and doth worke in vs. Let vs adde hereunto, that it is most certaine, that there was neuer any Seruice said at this time: but there was also the administration of the Communion ioyned therewith: and that all the Canon now receyued, speaketh of nothing but of the people their being assembed and come to gether for a Commu∣nion, Cassan. in prae∣fat. ad Ord. Roman. & their offring & communicating, not mentioning anie such thing to bee done of the Priest; insomuch, as that the best learned, and that before wee began to haue anie controuersies with them, did openlie hold and dispute it: that the Canon could not bee read, neyther haue anie worke or operation in priuate Masses; prouing the same by S. Gregorie. Psalmes in the time of the distributing of the Sacra∣ments. Now all the while the Sacramentes were in distributing, because it was not without the spending of much time, there were many Psalms sung. Those which we find to bee most vsuall, are the 23. The Lord is my shepheard, the 34. I will blesse the Lord at all times, and especially this verse: Taste and see that the Lord is good: the 145. O Lord my God, and my king, I will praise thee: the 103. My soule blesse the Lord, S. Dionys. in . De Hierarch. Cyril. Catech. Liturg. S. Cle∣ment. August. lib. 22 Retract. c. 22. &c: as may bee seene in S. Denys, S. Cyrill, S. Clement their Liturgies and others; especiallie those of the Greekes, seeing that at Rome they beganne at this time to deuide them into verses. The place of S. Augustine is cleare and euident for the pur∣pose, speaking of Psalmes; Let it be (sayeth hee) that they bee sung before the offring, or else at such time, as it is distributing to the people, which hath beene offred. And it must not bee forgotten, that the Psalms quoted aboue, are at this day for the most part, the most ordinarie in the reformed Churches of this Realme, in the time of the celebration of the Sacrament of the holie Supper. After the distribution followed a Thankesgiuing, Thankesgi∣uing. S. August. E∣pist. 50. Dionis. in Hi∣er. 3. according to that which Saint Augustine sayeth; Gratiarum actio omnia concludit: Thankesgiuing in the conclusion, and ending of al. And S. Denys, The holie Communion endeth with a holie Thankesgiuing. And Chrysostome, After the hymne sung, they went vp to the mountaine: This word touch∣eth you who doe not abide and continue vnto the end of the last prayer: for this song was this man his shot: Our Lord beganne and ended with a Thankesgiuing, that he might bee an ex∣ample vnto vs for to doe the like. Chrysost. hom. 23. in Matth. And namely, in the Lithurgie that is called by Chryso∣stome his name, there is for a Thankesgiuing, the Song of Simeon, as is vsed in the reformed Churches. But the auncient custome was (saieth hee) in one place, that the faithful, after they had heard the doctrine, offred their prayers, and communica∣ted at the Lordes Supper, &c. did not returne home to their owne houses by and by after that the Assemblie was dissolued; but the richest caused their victualles to bee brought from their owne houses, and calling the poore, did feast them there in the Temple. Loue-feastes. Chrysost. in 1. ad Corinth. Opotret haere∣ses esse. Tertul. in. A∣polog. August. l. 20. c. 20. Siue frugibus siue carnbus. Concil. Lao∣dic. c. 27.28. August. ad Ianuar. Epist. 119. In a knowne tongue. And this was the thing which was called in the Primitiue Church by the name of Loue-feastes, whereof wee reade in S. Iude: These are spots in our loue-feastes. In Tertullian, Nostra caena, &c. Our Supper taketh his name of the thing it is called Aga∣pe, that is loue: whatsoeuer it cost, yet this is our gaine, that wee spend with godlines for the com∣fort and refreshment of the poore, &c. And S. Augustine, Our loue-feastes feede the poore, whe∣ther it be with bread or with flesh; you say that the charitie of Christians is like to the Pagans their Sacrifices, &c. But for certaine abuses, which were therein committed, this cu∣stome ceaseth, yea, and there were expresse articles framed in certaine councels, that those loue-feastes should not anie more bee made in the places appointed for pray∣er. Well may wee see that in the time of S. Augustine, the manner of making a Supper was continued, and that vpon the day of the Lordes passion, in the breaking vp wher∣of the guestes did communicate in the Sacrament together: and this is yet conti∣nued in the Monasteries of S. Benet, as shall be seene else where, and they call it man∣datum. Let vs adde for the shutting vp of this speech: that both the one and the o∣ther
seruice, aswell that whereat those were present which were cateehised, as that whereat the faithfull were present, was done in a language both well knowne and vnderstoode: as namely, to the Latines in Latine; to the Graecians in Greeke; to the Syrians in Syriacke, &c. and which is more in a loude voice the people not onelie an∣swering, but oftentimes singing with the Ministers of the Church. S. Ambros. in 1. ad Cor. c. 14 Whereupon S. Am∣brose saith, expounding that place of S. Paule; Better are fiue wordes spoken in the church in a knowne tongue, then ten thousand others, &c. That the intention of S. Paule was to reproue the Iewes, which tooke pleasure for the commending of their own language, to the vse of this Syriacke in their sermons and oblations, that is, in the celebrating of their diuine seruice & the holie Supper: directly against those which would main∣taine, that it is sufficient, that sermons be vnderstoode, and not the seruice which is said in the Church. CHAP. VI. An aunswere vnto certaine obiections: and what seruice it is which commeth neerest to that of the purest auncient times: that of the Church of Rome, as it is vsed at this day: or that of the reformed Church. NOw therefore we haue seene in part, wherein the celebrating of the holy Supper consisted, during all this time: that is to say, from the first Councell of Nice where wee had left it, vntill the times of these great lights of the Greeke and Latine Church, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Ierome, S. Chrysostome, S. Basill and others. Where we wil note by the way, that the church of Rome hath had this il hap or rather curse, as namelie, that in so plenti∣full a haruest of learned men as that age did beare, it cannot be founde to haue brought foorth so much as one Doctor of anie name or note in the Church; being (as may be presupposed) more studious to set her∣selfe vp the Monarch of the world, then to establish the kingdom of Iesus Christ. But we may notwithstanding imagine, that althogh in substance the seruice of these chur∣ches did agree together, that therfore there was one and the same prescript forme ob∣serued and kept in them all. Diuerse pre∣script and set formes of the holie Supper. Damas. in Ep. ad Hieronym. August. ad Ia∣nuar. Epist. 118. Concil. Vene∣ticum.. Canon 15. For besides that the differences and diuersities amongst them in that respect bee more then palpable, it appeareth also in Damasus, that the Greeke Lithurgie, was differing from the Latine: againe, amongst the Grecians, those also are differing, which are attributed to S. Denys, S. Basil, and S. Chrysostome: as a∣mongst the Latines, those which are attributed to S. Ambrose, S. Isidore, and S. Grego∣ry. And S. Augustin writing vnto Ianuarius saith, that Milain and Rome had diuerse & differing ceremonies. And the councell of Venice helde in the time of Leo 1. That not onelie in diuerse Prouinces, but in one and the same there were differences of seruice: inso∣much as that the prescript and set formes were referred ouer to the discretion of the Bbs, prouided that they did keep the institution of the holy supper intire and inuio∣late; such as it is set down in the Gospels & S. Paul. And furthermore, there is not any Lithurgie, how much soeuer it hath beene tumbled and tossed, wherein the same is not found: which is the same that Optatus, who liued at this time, calleth Legitimum, Optat. lib. 2. aduersus Par∣men. The additions of the Church of Rome. Damas. in Ep. ad Hiero∣nym. Tom. 1. Con∣cil. quod in Sacramentorum mysterio praeteriri non potest: That legitimate, that is to say, essentiall part, which cannot bee omitted in the mysterie of the Sacraments. But seeing that we are chiefly to stand vpon the Church of Rome; let vs consequēt∣ly obserue and marke that which the Church of Rome hath added vnto this seruice, throughout this whole time. Damasus about the yeare 368. writing vnto S. Ierome, praieth him to send him Psallentiam Graecorum, the forme of the Grecians singing; because (sayeth hee) there is such a search and striuing after simplicitie, as that vpon the verte Lordes daye, there is not read anie more then one Epistle of the Apostle, and one chapter of the Gospell: Et nec Psallentium mos tenetur, nec hymni decus in ore nostro cognoscitur, that is to say, the decent comelines of singing of Psalmes is not knowne in our mouthes, &c.
And thus wee returne to the thing whereof wee spoke before; namely, that of olde there was no certaine introit in the Romish Liturgie: and so wee haue seene that the Psalmes were more ordinarie there than any other thing: for euen after the councell of Nice, for to discerne and know the sound and true beleeuers from the Artians, the Gloria Patri was ordained to be added to the end of them, and that in the time of the Emperour Constantius. Theodoret. l. 2 c, 34. Sozom. l. 3. c. 19. C. Sacerdos. C. Apost. auth. The Orthodoxes said Patri, & filio, & spiritui sancto, that is, to the father, to the sonne, and to the holie ghost: the Arrians who would seeme to counter∣feit them, Patri per filium in spiritu sancto: to the father by the sonne, in the holy ghost. Ana∣stasius about the yeare 405. ordained that as well Clarkes as the vnlearned people, should stand at the reading of the Gospell. Innocentius the first, in the year 411: that at the assemblies and solemne feasts the Pax should bee giuen to Christians before the receiuing of the Sacrament. This leapt into the roome of the holy kisse, which we noted to haue beene vsed before, in signe of mutuall reconcilement of euery one to another; D. 1. de Conse. Can. Pacem. de Conseer. Dist. 2. Bergom. l. 9. and was called The publishing of peace, in these wordes, Pax omnibus fideli∣bus, &c. Celestine the first, about the yeare 418. that the Psalmes of Dauid should be sung by countervoices, that is to say, by course one verse aunswering an other, by all the people, before the celebration of the holy sacrament: and from that time euer after, they were diuided into verses for the Introit, the Graduell, and the Offer∣torie. The Introit was that which was sung at the entring into the seruice. The Gra∣duel that, which was properly sung when the Deacon went vp to the steps of the pulpit for to reade: and the Offertorie that which was sung, while the people were offering vp their gifts. Leo the first, about the yeare 440 added this praier, Hanc igitur oblatio∣nens, &c. We pray thee therefore o Lord, that thou wouldest fauourably receiue the offering of our seruice, as also of thy whole familie, and to settle and dispose of our daies in peace, without going any further, which, who so will diligently waigh and consider, shall finde that these words in the Canon did immediatly follow, Haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sa∣crificia illibata, that is, These gifts, these sacrifices, for it is spoken by name, super oblata, of the gifts and offrings of the people: and all that in the middest was notoriously placed in afterward, without any naturall coherence or hanging together. The same Leo the first did likewise thrust into the praier, Vnde memores (mentioned by S. Ambrose) after these words, Ambros. lib. 4 c. 6. Sabel. Ennead. 8. l. 1. Sigibert in Chronic. Polyd. l. 1. c. 21. Nauclerus in Gen. Innocent. 3. de Sacrament. altar. Let thy high priest Melchisedech offer vnto thee, those which follow, a holy sacrifice, an immaculate host, drawing the words of the praier by little and little ab obla∣tis ad oblatam, that is, from the gifts of the people, to the part which was consecrate by the minister for the vse of the sacraments. And to him likewise doth Nauclerus attri∣bute Orate per me fratres & Sorores, and the Deo gratias in the end. Gelasius came about the yeare 409. who ranged and set in order the Collects and complends, amongst the which there are some which yet doe stand and continue pure and vncorrupted: and the same were reperused and handed ouer againe by Gregorie, as he reporteth of him∣selfe. Hee appointed likewise that the people should bee blessed in the end with these words, Benedicat vos omnipotens, &c, and that seruice was shut vp with the song of the three children in the furnace. Also, for that now the Church beganne to be very rich of gifts, that the sacrifices, that is, the offerings of the people, should be distributed and diuided equally into foure portions: for the Bb. or Pastour, for the Cleargie or mini∣sters of the Church; for the poore, and for the repairing of the church. And there∣vpon (and that not without cause) euerie one being hereby thus tickled and pricked forward to adde euery day some thing to the seruice as their fancie led them, the Mi∣leuitane Councell in the time of S. Augustine tooke the matter in hand, ordaining that no other praiers, prefaces, supplications, and masses, that is, Collects, Recom∣mendations or Impositions of hands should be vsed in the Church, but those which were approued in that Councel or Synode, Least (as the same saith) by negligence or igno∣rance, there might slip some thing which might be contrarie to the faith: & this reason is like∣wise giuen afterward by the Africane councell: and it came as yet timely enough if it had been well obserued by those which after came in place, yea by Gregorie himselfe. And thus be hold, The vnlikenes of the Romish Masse. we are come to the fiue hundreth yeares after Christ, finding in all this time one seruice, consisting of confessions and praiers, Psalmes, reading prea∣ching,
blessing and distributing of the sacraments, according to the institution of our Lord, singing of praises vnto God, during the time of the communion, and a thankesgiuing for the end and conclusion, &c. without any new offering or sacrificing vp of the sonne of God, without any inuocating of the creatures by praying vnto thē, without adoring and worshipping of the sacraments, and without, & as yet free from infinite other, both impieties and superstitions; and therefore by consequent far from the Masse vsed at this day; and on the contrarie side, comming much neerer vnto the manner of the holy supper, as it is now vsed in the reformed Churches. The Romish Masse, which is the action of one onely man, saying, reading, speaking by figures in a language not vnderstood, that is, voide of edification: then eating & drinking with∣out communion all alone: and yet speaking continually in the plurall number, being a colde ceremonie, if euer there were any. The holy supper on the contrarie, consi∣sting of a feruent praier, by the which the Pastour maketh open protestation, The cokerce and agree∣ment of the Lords Supper, with that of olde. and de∣claration of the miserie and destruction of mankinde, for the people and himselfe: of their serious repentance vnto amendement of life, and of remission of sinnes by faith in Christ: in Psalmes sung with one consent of heart and voice by all the people, for to quicken and stirre vp their fainting and ouer dull spirits vnto God: in the reading of the sacred word, and the interpreting and applying of the same in his time & place by the Pastour; as namely, after that he hath in solemne sort supplicated the Almigh∣tie creator, in the fauour of his onely begotten, that it would please him to open his mouth, for to teach and deliuer the same profitably, and the eares and hearts of the people for to vnderstand well: in a generall praier for the necessities of the Church, and of the whole world: for Magistrates, pastours, the conuersion of Infidels, the ex∣tirpation and rooting out of heresies, the publike peace, and all maner of generall and particular afflictions: in the reading of the holy supper, and expounding of the same, by the which, namely the faithfull, are exhorted to come to the holy table, in humi∣litie and deuotion, in assurance of faith and ardent charitie, with an earnest acknow∣ledgement of their sinnes, and notwithstanding in a stedfast affiance in the mercies of God, manifested and reuealed in Iesus Christ, admonished to renounce all rancour and hatred, contentions and strife, and carefully to labour to bee reconciled, if so be that they bee broken forth, and come to the knowledge of others: but the impenitent and wilfull obstinate are debarred from the same, and that not by the voice and decla∣ration of the Deacon alone; but by a seuere denunciation of the iudgement of God, if they abuse the bodie of the Lord, as likewise by the sence and feeling of their owne consciences, or by the iudgement of the Church. After which things all and euery one came neere vnto the holy table in decent order and due reuerence, to communicate the bodie and bloud of our Lord; they receiued the holie sacraments at the hands of the Pastors, with the most significant words that are, either in the Gospel, or in any of the Epistles of the Apostles, lifting vp their hearts on high, and praying to God that it would please him by the vertue of his holy spirit, to giue them the flesh of his sonne for their spirituall repast and foode: and his blood for their drinke vnto eternall life; seeing that of his infinit mercie he hath vouchsafed to make them bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, &c, that so they may abide, liue, and dwell continually in him. And during all the time of this action the deuotion of the assemblie was cherished and nourished with the reading of the holy scriptures, as most meete to declare the death of the Lord, vntill his comming, and to record the vnspeakable benefite of the same: with singing of Psalmes also, chosen out of purpose, both for the calling to minde of man his miserie, as also for giuing vnto them the sence & feeling of Gods mercie; and thirdly, for the stirring of them vp to giue vnto God for the same, all vnfained and solemne thankes. And finally there followed the dismission of the assemblie, with a praier of the whole people vnto God, containing a briefe thankesgiuing, for that it had pleased him to make them to see and taste the assurance of their saluation in the communion and participation of his welbeloued sonne, ioyning therunto the singing of the song of Simeon, vsed of the old Church, as wee haue alreadie seene, to the same end and purpose. And after the solemne and accustomed blessing, admonition being
giuen them, how they should witnes and testifie the coniunction & vnitie, which they feele and find in Christ, by the way and manner of that liuelie sence and feeling, which the members of the bodie haue with the head: they were to distribute euery one ac∣cording to his abilitie vnto the poor, for whome the Deacons were to receiue what should be giuen. I speake nothing of the order of Catechising, both publikelie and priuatelie, which was wont to bee appointed and practised certaine weeks before, for the instruction and examination of such as should be partakers thereof: the mor∣ning Sermon which ordinarily is spent in the expounding of the doctrine of the Sa∣crament vnto the people: and that also of the after noone, tending to the stirring of vs vppe to the giuing of thankes vnto God. Now then let euerie man iudge without being partiall in the matter, in which of these two it is, that antiquitie resteth, and in which it is, that noueltie hath built her selfe a nest: as namely, whether antiquitie dwell with the Church of Rome, which of the old and auncient seruice retaineth one∣lie the sleight and vnprofitable rind: or with our reformed Church, which hath re∣stored and reestablished, both all the parts, as also the substance thereof vnto his for∣mer estate and whole right. But here it is obiected against vs; Obiections for ceremonies. yet you cannot deny but that many ceremoni∣es were now already brought into the Church, and into the seruice and ministerie of the same, which you allow not of in your Churches. And who doubteth, but that in the space of fiue hundred years, containing more then one hundred thousand nights, the aduersarie Sathan, who vseth to rise in the night, had sowen mo then a few tares? And who can find it strange, that in these fieldes, before time both possessed and hus∣banded by the Gentiles, as also by the Iewes, there should remaine of their seed? And on the contrarie, who is he that will not wonder, where the dore is once set open to licentious liberty, traditions and mans inuentions, if there should anie thing abide & continue sound and sincere? But who will not rather finde occasion with vs to praise God, who in despight of Sathan and all the malice of the Diuell, the tyrannie of Custome, the licentiousnes of Tradition, the slipperie nature of Superstition, the pre∣sumption of mans spirit, and the darkenes of ignorance, ouershadowing and coue∣ring all toward the end of this time, hath vouchsafed so long to conserue the prin∣cipall part of his seruice, at least so much as was of the substance? Or who will not yet more admire his goodnes, for causing as it were a new creation of the Sun of truth in these our dayes, after so horrible a confusion, and after such an eternall and euerla∣sting night? S. Augustine writing of the ceremonies and Traditions of his time, said vnto Ianuarius; Before all other thinges, I would that thou shouldest know the great & maine point of this disputation, August. Ep. 118. ad Ianu∣ar. that is, that Iesus Christ our Lord is willing to subiect al his, & to bring them to beare his sweete yoke and light burthen, as hee calleth it himselfe in the Gospell, and thereupon also it is, that he hath ioyned and coupled together the societies and companies of his new people by the Sacramentes which are verie few in number, verie easie to obserue and keepe, and yet notwithstanding, most excellent in signification, &c And what is it that he sayeth vn∣to vs therewithall in the Epistle following? August Ep. 119. Cortainelie (sayeth hee) it displeaseth mee, that there is no more care and regarde had of thinges that are most safe and wholesome, and com∣maunded in the sacred bookes, whereas in the meane time euerie thing is full of presumptions, (that is, of forestalled opinions) in such sorte as that a man is more reproued for hauing touch∣ed the ground with his bare foote these holie dayes, then if hee had made himselfe drunke with wine &c. So that the state and condition of the Iewes is more tollerable then that of the Christi∣ans: who as they haue not knowne anie time of libertie, so neyther haue they beene charged with anie other burthens, then those of the Law, (which was of God, and not with the pre∣sumptions of vaine man: for hereby the Church of God seated in the middest of great heaps of chaffe & darnell, vndergoeth, and is made to beare manie burthensome things, &c. And this S. Augustine said, vpon the speeches of certain Christiās, which were giuen in such sort to abstaine from eating of flesh, as that they iudged those vnclean who did eate the same. And this thing (saith he) is most plainely against the rule of faith & of holesome doctrine. Now then let vs shoule away this chaffe and darnell, 2. Cor. 3. laid vpon a golden and siluer foun∣dation, sowen in the field of Christ, and notwithstanding adiudged worthie to bee
burned with fire by the word of the Lord, and by the writ of the Apostle. Let vs praise God onely, that these good Doctors haue to deale with him; a Lord full of mildnes, a Maister full of clemencie: but and if their workes and inuentions burne before the fire of his spirit, yet at the least they are saued as concerning themselues, because of the foundation, through his mercie in Iesus Christ. They alleadge against vs for the first, that which they call holy water, Holy water. Basil  S. Spi∣ritu ad Am∣philochium. c. 27. Ambros. l. 2. de Sacr. c. 5. going about to proue it vnto vs out of Basile in his booke of the holy Ghost, written to Amphilo∣chius, where he saith: We consecrate the water of baptisme, &c. And out of S. Ambrose; That in the Westerne Churches there was a prayer made to God, that it would please him to blesse the water, &c. I aunswere, that this argument is not well framed, being from the water of baptisme to the holy water: from a prayer by which the vse of crea∣tures is blessed, according to the nature and right vse of euerie one of them, to the ex∣orcising of a creature turned quite an other way from his right vse. And as for S. Basil, you may adde an other answere with Erasmus, that this booke from the midst there∣of, containeth nothing that is Basils. Gregor. Nazi∣anz. hom. 3. de Sancto Ianu∣ario. And Gregorie Nazianzene his brother had aunswered him, that baptisme may indifferently be administred with any water. And if the vse of their holy water were at that time in the Church, it had but S. Bafill his particular approbation: and how commeth it then to passe, that it is not found in the Liturgie which they attribute vnto him? For whereas some would impute it to Alexander 1. let vs not go about to offer the Church of Rome that iniurie, De consecr. D. 3. Aquam. either by word or beliefe, as that at that time when S. Iohn said in his Epistles: The bloud of the sonne of God doth purge vs from all iniquitie: there should bee a Bishop at Rome, that should say in his: That water besprinkled with salt, and consecrated by prayer, doth sanctifie and make cleane the people after the manner of the ashes of the redde cow, &c. But the verie truth is, that this water was brought in a long while after, and that by the imitating of the Gentiles their purging or expiatorie water, who vsed it at this time, and with the verie same ceremonie. Iustine saith: The Gentiles when they enter into their temples, Iustinus Mar∣tyr. Apol. 2. doe sprinckle themselues with water, and then they go and offer sacrifice vnto their Gods. Va∣lentinian a Tribune of warre, vnder Iulian the Apostate, following him to the tem∣ple of Fortune, the Churchwardens which were at the dore, cast water vpon all those that went in, in so much as that there lighted one drop vpon his cap: he then turning himselfe about, gaue one of them a blow with his fist, Theodor. l. 3. c. 15.16. esteeming himselfe (as saith Theodoret) defiled and not cleansed thereby, because he was a Christian. And fur∣thermore he saith the like elie where: as namely, that Iulian caused all that which was sold in the market to be sprinckled, to the ende that the Christians might not buy any thing at all there. And that by this sprinkling, they held that sinnes were defaced, appeareth by these wordes of Hippocrates himselfe, de morbo sacro: Hippocr. de morb. sacro. that I may haue nothing to doe here with the alleadging of Poets: In going in (saith hee) wee sprinkle our selues with this water, to the end that if we haue any sinne, we may bee purified and made cleane. And Proclus saith: That it was not onely made of fresh water, but of Sea water also, Proc. de sacrif. & Magia. Turneb. in Aduers l. 13. c. 21. Athenaeus, l. 9. because that salt is detersiue. And they sprinckle Aspergillum, either of Rosemarie, or of the boughes of the Bay tree, or of the Oliue tree: and not onely for the purging and clean∣sing of men, but Citties, Temples, and other things without life, as also is practised at this day in the Romish Church. To be short, as they had amongst the Gentiles a peculiar and proper forme of sanctifying it, dipping therein, as Athenaeus telleth vs, a fire brand taken from off the Altar, whereupon they offered their sacrifices: Durand. l. 4. c. 4. so like∣wise haue they a peculiar manner of making this, exorcising the salt first, and then the water, and after that them both, being mixt together: which being done, both they and the Gentiles do thinke that it purgeth away sinnes. Of burning of incense, it was so common a custome amongst the Gentiles, Of burning of incense. Theod. l. 3. c. 16. Sozom. l. 5. c. 17. as that Iulian the Apostate, that hee might cunningly binde the Christians to the same, ordained, that when anie came vnto him according to the custome, to receiue anie gifts at his hands, they should burne incense before him, whereupon certain no∣table Christians hauing vnderstanding of his purposed intent, came and brought them backe againe vnto him, that so they might not be polluted: and but for a lit∣tle
he had caused them to haue beene put to death. Ruffin. lib. 1. C. 36. To be briefe, Thurificantes, that is, such as burnt and offered incense vnto creatures, no otherwise then to idols, were in old time accompted amongst them, which had turned aside from the puritie of Christianitie. But whether it come from the Gentiles, or from the Iewes, amongst whom incense represented the sweet smell of the holy praiers of the faithfull in Gods nostrels: by the same maner of peruerse & lewd imitation it came to passe, that in the end it was brought into the Christian Churches: but yet not so soone as some would haue vs to belieue. For S. August. S. Ambr. S. Basil, S. Chrysost. and other ancient fathers do not speake one word of it in any of all the books they haue written: if one∣ly certain Lithurgies alleadged out of them be excepted, which yet hereafter wee will confute & proue to be false and counterfeit stuffe. S. August. in Psal. 49. & 50. S. Augustine to the contrarie: Be∣hold (saith he) we are out of care: we go not any more to seeke incense in Arabia, God requireth of vs a sacrifice of praise: and such a sacrifice had Zacheus in his patrimony, &c. Againe, shal we not then offer any thing vnto him? shall we come before God in such sort? How then shal we appease his wrath? Offer, thou hast whereof to offer in thy selfe: go not about to take any farre iourney to buy incense, Plat. in vit. Sixt. 1. Polyd. l. 5. but saie: Thy vowes are vpon me, O Lord, which I will render vnto thee in singing of praises vnto thee &c. The onely man wherein it is found, is S. Denis, an Author better stuft with vaine ceremonies, then with solide and sound doctrine. And a long time after, about the yeare 800. wee reade that Leo 3. ordained that it should be vsed in the Masse. For Tapers, waxe-candles, & lights in the Church: it is to be noted, that the grea∣test part of Christians their diuine seruice was done in the beginning in priuate, Lightes. and secretly before day; as we may reade in Plinie the second, and in all the ecclesiasticall writers, and thereupon they could not be without light. Now this custome of com∣ming together in the night because of persecution, did likewise continue and hold on in the times of peace: Euseb. l. 4. de vit. Constant. whereupon it commeth, that wee reade, that Constantine continued in holy watch vntill it was day, and caused to bee lighted for his going to the place, and comming backe againe, great waxe candles, Tapers, and verie great torches, throughout the whole Citie, and lampes in the place of prayer, to giue light to them that were present. Epiphanius calleth them thereupon, Psalmos & orationes lucernales, Epiph. l. 3. t. 2. that is, Psalmes and praiers which were said by a lampe: and this was the office of the Acoluthes, , to light them. after cleare day, we do not see that e∣uer the Primitiue Church did euer vse them. Tertull. in Apol. Tertullian on the contrarie: Wherefore (saith he) do we not deck the posts with baies vpon the daies of ioy, and why breake we not off the day-light, by lighting torches? Againe, Who forceth the Philosopher to sacrifice, to play the malecontent, Lanct. l. 6. c. 2. and to light fond and vaine torches at high noone? because the Gentiles con∣strained the Christians to do it. And Lactantius after he perceiued that he had beene a long time mocked of the Pagans, at length concludeth in these wordes: Who can esteeme or make account of him to bee wise, which offereth candles and lampes for giftes vnto him, who hath created and giuen the light? a reproch which had beene vnfitly charged vpon the Pagans, if then it might haue beene cast backe vpon, and obiected against the Christians. To be briefe, the Elibertine Councell forbiddeth them vpon paine of the curse, to light any in the places of the buriall of the Martyrs, being the places where the Christians vsed to assemble and come together: for hee called it, The troubling of the Ghostes and spirites of the Saintes and holy ones. But (as a great number of others did) this ceremony tooke his passage from the Gentiles to the Christians in the time of S. Ierome, that is more then 400. yeares after the death of our Lorde. And Vigilantius the Pastor of Barcelonia writ against the same, Conc. Elibert. c. 34. complaining of it, that he should see the superstition of the Pagans drawne into religion; and deriued & fetcht from the Gods of Paganisme, to bee bestowed vppon the Christian Martyrs. Saint Ierome did boldly take him vp for so writing: yea and somewhat too sharpely in the iudgement of the soundest writers: so farre as that Gregory himselfe said that hee could haue desired, that he had proceeded more modestly against him: and yet at the vpshot hee doth not defend them, Hieron. cont. Vigilant. except you call it a defending of them, to turne his backe vpon them and run away from them: We do not (saith hee)
light candles when it is cleare and bright day, as you do slaunder vs, but we doe vse the light for the mitigating of the tediousnesse of darknes, that so wee may watch vntill day, &c. Else∣where he confesseth, that there are some in deede, which doe lighten them euen at noone day, but that it is through ignorance and simplicitie in honour of the Mar∣tyrs: With a godly zeale (saith he) but not according to knowledge. These reasons in consci∣ence, are they not directly against the practise of the Romish church? In an other place he obiecteth against Vigilantius: that in the Easterne Churches they were vsed to be lighted, when the Sun did shine, at such time as the Gospell was read: not (saith he) to the end that they shold giue light, but for to be a signe of ioy and reioycing. So that in the end, they grew from the forbidding of them, to winke at them, to a tolerating of them, to the approuing of them: & by these degrees vnder Gregorie the Great, some hundred yeares after, to an expresse commanding and ordaining of them: Gregor. l. 12. in dict. 7. cp. 9. Platina in Sa∣biniano. Dund. l. 4. in Ration. Extrauag. de celebr. Miss. c. sin. &c. Of the crosse. Coloss. 1.20. Galat. 6.14. for hee it was that ordained the reuenewes for the maintenaunce of waxe candles and tapers. And Sabinian his successor: let the lamps burne continually in the Temples. Where∣vpon Durandus and others going about to giue a reason, thinke it better to say, that this is after the example of the candlestickes of the old testament, deriuing the Chri∣stians from Iudaisme, whereas the Apostles had taken great paines to draw and pull them quite away from the same. Of the crosse they alleadge maruellous wonders. They make a thousand allegories, and as many hyperboles. But what can be said more then S. Paule saith: God hath re∣conciled all thinges to himselfe, hauing made the attonement by the blood of the crosse of Christ: And in an other place: God forbid that I should desire to know or reioyce in any thing but in Iesus Christ, and him crucified. But roundly and all together at a blow we see them come downe from this crosse, that is, from the death and passion of our Lord, the effectuall powerfulnes whereof is adored of the Angels, vnto the only signe of the crosse, name∣ly the forme of the wood whereupon hee was hanged: and there passing ouer accor∣ding to their custome, from the signes to the thinges, and from the thinges to the signes, they come to attribute vnto this dumbe and naked signe, all whatsoeuer is said eyther by the Apostles, or by the old fathers, of the true and very crosse of Christ: I meane not that of verie wood, that is the thing that there is least reckoning made of: but that of the precious bloode of our Lord, verily and really shedde vpon the tree of the crosse for vs. How much more worth had it beene for them to haue dwelt and rested vpon the first tearmes and phrases of speaking? Galat. 2.29 3.2 To haue Iesus Christ (saith he) painted before our eyes, crucified amongst vs and we with him. Now S. Paule teacheth vs, that the crosse of Christ was an offence vnto the Iewes, and foolishnes vnto the Gentils: and the truth is, that they scorned and cast in the teeth of the Christians, Minut. in Oc∣tauio. Tertul. in A∣pol. c. 16.  Cruces ferales, the deadly and mortall crosse, and called them, Religiosos crucis, the reli∣gious cleauers vnto the crosse, &c. as vntill this day the latter Iewes do not call him by any other name, then the crucified one. Whereupon the Christians, to shew that they were not ashamed of the crosse, but rather that it was their glory; did plant it in the midst of their forehead, and made it their marke and badge: & whereas the infidels would shew it them in token of a mocke, they deuised how to vse it with honour and reuerence, and turne the matter of their reproch, into a most worthy monument of their victorie, and signe of their triumph. It is to the same purpose, Tertul. de co∣ron. milit. Augu. de verb. Apost. serm. 8, & in Psal. 41. that Tertullian saith: Frontem signaculo crucis terimus: that is, we do oftentimes marke our selues in the fore∣head with the signe of the crosse. And S. Augustine, We haue a hart, but not such a one as yours: we are not ashamed of the crucified one, that is to say, of Christ: for by contraries we deale, pla∣cing the signe of the crosse, where shame is wont to be most apparant in his signes, that is, in the face or forehead, the barest and most vncouered part of man. But thinke not for all this that they did worship either this signe, or the figure and shape of the crosse: yea rather in the beginning, this signe was made amongst the Christians in the aire, Arnob. l. 8. ad∣uersus gentes, aut Minutius. Cyril. 6. contra Iulianum. and so went away, hauing no abode: and those which haue written 300. yeares after the first wri∣ters, at such time as the Gentiles did reproch and reuile them therewith, say in plaine and euident tearmes: We doe not adore or worship the crosse, neither doe wee wish for or de∣sire it, but rather your selues, (saith Arnobius) who consecrate Gods of woode, and doe
worship the crosses of wood, Chryso. hom. 55. in Matth. August. tract. 118. in Iohan. yea these make you the parties. And Cyril against a like reproch of Iulian, aunsweeth flat; That the Christians do neither adore, nor honour the signe of the crosse. But if in any place, there be any found which happen to fall in praysing of the crosse, saying, that it perfecteth all the Sacraments, that there is not any thing well done without the signe of the Crosse, &c. it must be vnderstood to be spoken by way of alluding vnto the crosse of Christ, and to the efficacie of his death, as that whereupon are founded all the Sacraments and Mysteries of the Church, Hieronym. ad Eustochium. Athanas. de humanitar. verb. August. de peccat. merit. l. 2. c. 26. Contr. Faust. l. 19. c. 14. & in Psal. 141. and with∣out which all the doctrine of the same is as though it were not. As when Athana∣sius saide: That the Deuil doth go away at the signe of the Crosse: hee addeth pre∣sently, that this is by the calling vpon the name of Christ. But and if our aduersaries will needs take it strictly according to the letter, then let them learne also to be of the same mind with S. Augustine, when he saith in the very same places; That the catechi∣sed in a certain maner were sanctified by the sign of Christ: That the signe of the crosse is a Sacrament, which is receiued in the forhead, as the others are in the mouth and in the bodie: improper speeches as well the one as the other, & haue begotten and hat∣ched sutable & like opinions. Els, what will they say to Thomas Aquinas, who main∣taineth and defendeth, that the signe of the crosse is not necessarie in the sacraments? And how much better had it beene to the purpose, for them to haue kept themselues to the serious meditation of the true crosse, the death and passion of our Lord? But all that they thus struggle and striue for, Thomas 3. p. Summae, qu. 84. artic. 42. add. 3. is to be able to approue and make good, the signes of the Crosse, which are so often in the Masse: but yet they cannot tell how to become friends with S. Denis, who amongst so many ceremonies reckoned vp in his lithurgie, hath not made any mention at all thereof. But they tell vs, The lithurgies of this time. that all these ceremonies are found in the lithurgies or offices of this time; as that of S. Basil, S. Chrysost. &c. as likewise many doctrines which we ap∣proue not. I auouch & confesse the same most freely, and reserue the doctrines to han∣dle them in their place: but I aunswere here in a word, that I will not let to indorse & write vp the title of false and counterfeite, against all these lithurgies, and that by pro∣uing either that they were neuer written nor made by them; or that if they did ordaine any prescript forme of the administration of the sacrament in their diocesses (as there is some apparance and likelihood that they did:) that according to the measure of a∣buses that haue beene brought in, they were corrupted and depraued afterward. And first, he that shal compare that which the Syrians vse vnder the name of Basil, with that which we haue, shall find most notable differences therein. Then againe of that which we haue, there is one patterne and copie which the old interpreter did vse: and ano∣ther which the latter & new interpreter did vse; & so likewise it standeth with it, in the matters of substance. Secondly, for that that, which is attributed vnto Chrysostome, is not agreed vpon by the copies of Leo Thuscanus, Erasmus and Pelargus: one of the making mention of the dead, & of the inuocating of the virgin, there being nothing in the other concerning the same: one of them also being printed at Rome, and the o∣ther at Paris: where may also be obserued the forward readinesse, and zeale of one place to corrupt and falsifie a thing more then another, which is a matter of no small moment, to cause men to doubt of the truth of them both. And furthermore, the Doctor of Espence noteth: Claud. Espenc. de Missa pri∣uata. That this Leo went about to alter and change that which Chry∣sostome had said of the priuate Masse, into an ill fauoured sence, and that far from the purpose for which he had deliuered it: fitting and applying it to the fashion of the Latine Church in his time, into which as then they had brought the same: for he was Secretarie to Emanuel Emperour of Greece, about the yeare 1170. and did interprete vnto him the writinges of Trithemius the Abbot. Which notwithstanding (saith hee) I doe not stand vppon, eyther to make it suspicious, or to bee thought vnworthie of Chrysostome, and the Greeke Church: but rather to cause that it might bee receyued and certainly knowne, that as it was begunne by Saint Chrysostome, so it had beene amplified and inlarged by others in succession of time. The same likewise for the same reasons may bee saide of Saint Basill. Third∣ly, wee haue the , both in the one and in the other. And wee haue shewed before, that it was not receiued till about a hundred yeares after them, by
Proclus Archbishoppe of Constantinople, and in both of them there is menti∣on of Confessors, after the Martyrs. Now it is confessed by our aduersaries them∣selues, that their name was not receiued into the seruice of the Church, till a long time after, and yet also a great deale later into the Latine Church. Wee find also in both of them the name  the mother of God, speaking of the holy virgin: the doctrine concerning the same is as old, and was borne with the Church; but the he∣resie of Nestorius gaue occasion of the worde, first receiued in the Councels of Ephesus, which were after them. In both of them wee find the offring vp of incense , for the remission of sinnes: a ceremonie altogether vnknowne vnto these auncient fathers, and a blasphemous doctrine not tollerable amongst Christians. In that of Basil particularly wee finde the ; in Latine Panis Catechumenorum, the holy bread, to bee distributed after seruice, vnto them which had not communicated; not knowne at this time in the Church of the Greci∣ans, neither yet mentioned in Basil, Nazianzene, nor Chrysostome: againe, in that of Chrysostome by it selfe, the Priest adoreth the image of our Sauiour crucified, and of the holy virgine: a thing not heard of in the Greekish Church for 300. yeares after, neither made mention of in any one of all his bookes, though he writ verie many vo∣lumes; and that amongst the rest, he was giuen very diligently to write of the ceremo∣nies of the holy supper: yea and which is more, condemned by himselfe in expresse tearmes: Is not this (saith he) a shame, that those whome God hath indued with reason, Chsysost. in hom. 57. in Genes. c. 31. doe honour wood and stone? that those vpon whom he hath bestowed a voice and speech, should bee caried away to the worship of dumbe thinges? yea doe we thinke that such brutish and beastly Apostasie can be within the compasse of mercie? Fourthly, ioyne to the former, that there is mention made, not of Chrysostome only, who is inuocated and prayed vnto there∣in in certaine copies, but of many moe Saintes, who liued after Chrysostome: and that therein is prayer made for the Emperour Alexius, and for the Pope Nicholas, by the name of Oecumenius or vniuersall. Now it is well knowne, that the Greeke Church, did neuer take any acknowledgement of the Bb. of Rome, by this name and title: but that euer since the yeare 1054. the Greekes haue degraded him, and set vp in his place the Patriarch of Constantinople, that is to say, more then 30. years before Alexius came to the Empire. And from other places it is to be proued, that the first of this name fell to be in the yeare 855. that is to say, more then 200. yeares before Ale∣xius: in somuch as that this must needs be Nicholas the Patriarch of Constantinople, of whom Zonarus maketh mention, as liuing in the time of Alexius, & not the Pope. Zonar. tom. 3. Bellarmin. de praef. Ro. Pont. é Signibert. & Leon. 9. Ounphfast. lib. 4. And furthermore, in the saide lithurgie are rehearsed all the names of the other Pa∣triarks: and what appearance of truth can there be alledged, why the Patriarch of Constant. should be forgotten if it were made by him, & that the rather, because the Bb. of Rome is remēbred therein? as likewise for the empire of Alexius: And the first of that name raigned about the yeare 1080. This was 700. yeares after Chrysost. So that he whosoeuer he was that was the cōpounder & mingler of these liturgies, shold haue looked a little better vpon his receipt, & takē better aduisement with him in his matters. And neuertheles, we gaine and get the aduantage in these points ouer and aboue: namely, that by them it is said, that the people cōmunicated euery day in the sacraments, & that vnder both kinds, not the cleargie alone, as they call it: that as then it was not known what should be meant by the priuate Masse, neither yet by the Opus operatū, the worke wrought: and that there are in the same many thinges for to condemne the Romish Masse: but no one thing to induce or leade vs to the approba∣tion thereof: and let the same serue likewise for other the lithurgies, which are at∣tributed vnto the same time. As concerning the Decretall epistles of these times, Decretall Epi∣stles. they are not of any better passe then the rest going before. The very same reasons perswade me to reiect them: besides the barbarousnes, the fooleries and ignorances apparant and euident in them. If we allow them to haue been written by the Popes, thē let vs also giue this allowance vnto the Popes, as to be the most insufficient & least capable Bishops of any that were then liuing: and to haue beene more Gothish then the Gothes themselues. And yet in
the meane, I am not ignorant, how that the pietie of these times was grown to a verie great confusion, as being much mingled with superstition, through the intermingle of infidels with Christians: by reason also of the deepe and dead bed of negligence that Christians were fallen into: the great swarmes of barbarous people, and the ig∣norance of the Prelates: all which did one after another, as it were hand in hand fol∣low and fall out. But I say, that these as yet were but the doting deuotions of some particular persons, and were not growne vp so farre, as to get a law vppon their heades: Particular Superstitions. , Verè appellemus, we may call them with the scripture, wil-wor∣ships or seruices; the wandring and vnruled deuotions of some men, rather then of the Church. As for example, when we reade in S. Cyprian, that certaine women ca∣ried away the Eucharist in their handkerchefes, kept it in their coffers, & took it eue∣rie morning fasting. In S. Ierome, that it was wont to be sent to new maried folkes, to take it at their owne house together. In S. Augustine, that it was wont to be giuen to infants, Concil. Car∣thag. 3. cap 6. Concil. Hip∣ponensis compendium. Concil. Alti∣siod. Amphi∣loch. in vita Basil. mistaking this place following: If you eate not the flesh of the Son of man, you haue no life in you, &c. In the third councell of Carthage, and in that of Bonne in A∣frike: That it was put into the mouth of the dead, contrarie to that which is said, Take and eate, which likewise we reade to haue beene practised by S. Bennet, about a woman that was dead, and forbidden in the Councell holden at Auxerre in expresse wordes. And likewise to be briefe in that goodly booke of Amphilochius (if we will belieue it) which telleth vs: that S. Basill caused a piece of it to bee buried with him, which hee had kept, I cannot tell how many yeares for the same purpose, &c. all of them being superstitions, which haue presidentes and examples of great antiquitie; though neuerthelesse at this day condemned by the Romish Church, which yet is faine to builde and boulster vp her selfe with such antiquitie. For who can tell into how many by-waies man erreth and wandreth, when once hee is out of the right path; or into how many falsities and vntruthes hee falleth, when once hee depar∣teth from the institution of the Lorde, to follow his owne humour and floating fancie. CHAP. VII. What a metamorphosis and mishapen chaunge was wrought vpon the celebration of the Supper, about the time of Gregory the great, which happened about the sixth age of the Church. WE passe now from out of the calme pathes of silence, into the rough and vnbeaten way of darknesse; and from the glittering beames of dazeling pompe, into the blacke duskish clouds of the dreadfull ig∣norance of the Church; I meane in respect of the outward face and appearance of the same, as it was then to bee seene. If the first did mightily inlarge the bounds of vanities and ceremonies, no doubt the other was not behind in the promoting of superstition and false doctrine. And that we may the more easily comprehend & compasse the truth here∣of, let vs briefly call to mind in what estate and plight wee haue left, either the holy Supper, or the Masse, (and by this name onely let vs call it hereafter, seeing that this name beginneth to get the vpper hand in this time and age, whereof wee are now to speake.) It was an assemblie of Christians, calling vppon the name of God by Iesus Christ, singing his prayses, hearing his worde, attending vnto the expounding of the same, as it was deliuered them by the Pastors: then offering afterward vnto God, in giuing thankes for his graces, for the fruites and goods that hee had giuen them, that some part thereof might be consecrate to the vse of the Sacramentes, and some part imployed in the sustaining and nourishing of the poore, or for other such like necessities of the Church. And as for the Canon, that is to say, that principall part of seruice, in which the Sacraments were blessed, receiued and communicated, wee haue left it, as it was composed and made of a preface, which lifted vp the spirites of
those who were at it, on high; of a rehearsall of the pure and holy institution of the Supper; of a prayer vnto God, that it would please him to giue an effectuall power, and operation to the sacramentes, to knit and vnite together more and more those which were communicantes, to Iesus Christ their head, & to the members of his bo∣die, which is the Church, and as such to foster and feed them vp vnto eternal life, with a commemoration of the holy Martyrs; of their life, and of their death, for the stir∣ring vp of the zeale of euerie one so farre, as that they may not grudge at, or be spa∣ring in any thing which might serue for the setting forth of the glorie of God, neyther yet preferre any thing whatsoeuer to the working and assuring of their owne saluation: of the participating and communicating of the bodie and blood of our Lord, vnder the Sacramentes of bread and wine, distributed and deliuered into the handes of the faithfull: during which action the Christian assemblie was occupied in singing of Psalmes, and finally there was the dissoluing or breaking vppe of the whole assemblie concluded and finished by a post-communion, that is, by a solemne thanksgiuing, for the benefites receiued in Christ, and recorded and sealed in the ho∣ly Supper. All this seruice was in a language vnderstood of all, common both to the Ministers of the Church, whom they call Clearkes, and also to the rest of the peo∣ple, whom they call lay men, or the layetie: all, and euery one of which, euen to the simplest amongst them, did aunswere Amen: that is to say, did ratifie all the whole action, so much as lay in them, and put to their vowes and requestes vnto all that which was said and done, as vnto thinges by them well vnderstood. Now let vs in order looke vpon, & see that which was added thereunto afterward, and let vs iudge without all partialitie of affection, whether this seruice be amended or impaired by such addition and inlargement. Certainly if the Mileuitane and Africane Councels had beene well obayed, The chaunge and cause thereof. wee should not haue had this trouble: for the auncient godly learned fathers that were present thereat, seeing the licentious scope and libertie, that euerie one gaue vnto his owne conceite and fancie: one sort vnder the shadow of tradition, and an other vnder the colour of good intention, had verie excellently ordained & prouided, that no man should dare to take vpon him, the placing or putting in of any thing without the aduise of the most graue-wise, and the authority of the Councels. But bold igno∣rance, which is neuer without presumption, did quickly ouerskip all these boundes: and that so much the more daungerously, by how much it was ioyned with preuay∣ling authoritie, which then grew vp to his height: the authoritie, I say of the Romish Church, which then succeeded the authoritie of the Emperours, and by little and little inthronised her selfe in their seates of more then royall estate, thereby growing mightie in power and credite, & nothing lesse or inferior in being followed in euery thing, as a most perfect patterne and example. Then the Gothes, the Hunnes and the Vandales, &c, more then a whole hundred yeares, spoiled and made hauocke of the Westerne Empire, and the Persians and Parthians of the Easterne: where∣upon it followed, that all good literature lay raked vp in the dust, and in no lesse wise did they weaken the flourishing estates of all good and naturall policie. The great and worthie personages both in the East and Westerne partes, were taken a∣way by death, hauing beene in their life time the lightes of the Church, and the scourges of heretikes, and hereticall opinions: their successors borne and brought vp in barbarousnesse, did go before them in power and authoritie, but they did not succeed them in like measure of sufficiencie. And this caused that the seedes of Pelagianisme and other heresies, hauing laine a long time rather couered then quenched, did reuiue, and found more carefull husbanding then the good plantes: because they had more affinitie with common sence, and the proud aspiring driftes of our corrupt nature. So then those which could not so well make their part good by sound learning, would yet beare the bell away with setting a good face on it: & such as could not feed their flocke with the worde of God, would fill them full with superstitions & ceremonies, and for want of milke, like vnto drie nurses, they
would serue them with the first licour that they met withall: and for lacke of bread, they would set before them huskes. So then in this time and age we see all these no∣uelties and innouations to flow in with full streame, without any barre, without any manner of let or bridle. Now became the computation of the shepheards Calender, to be accompted of for a worthie peece of historie, and the dreame, of men for sa∣cred Gospell. And the Church likewise doth then come forth vpon the stage all mas∣ked and disguised with the Pagane and Iewish guise, and that in a moment; and that not by shifting her robes onely, but (which is the worst of all the rest) by shaking off all the commendable parts of gesture and matter. Let vs begin at the Greeke Church. Additions in the Churches of the Grecians We haue spoken heretofore of the , brought in by Proclus a Patriarch of Constantinople, and receiued into the Church, vpon the naked report of a certaine child, who being extraordinarily rapt and cari∣ed vp into heauen, said that hee heard it sung there. We haue likewise handled the point, how in the Councell of Ephesus, as a thing following vpon the disallowing & condemning of the heresies held by Nestorius and Eutyches, it was said: That the holy virgine might bee called , that is, the mother of God. And now further behold a certaine man Petrus Gnapheus, who started vp in Antioch, and thought to make his aduantage thereof, for the establishing of heresie and superstition: this fellow was a priest of Chalcedonie, and of the secte of Eutyches, who through the fauour of Zeno Isaurus, afterward Emperour, shufled himselfe into the Bishop∣ricke of Antiochia, by discarding Martyrius the true and lawfull Bishop of the same: and being receiued, then it was ordained in his Church, which was of very large precinctes; Theodor. Ana∣gnostes in Collecta. that at the end of Trisagium, the hymne so called, because it contained these wordes, Sanctus Deus, sanctus fortis, sanctus immortalis, miserere nobis, there was added, Qui crucifixus es pro nobis, which wast crucified for vs, applying the same to God the father, whom in the vnsoundnesse of his hereticall assertions, hee held to haue suffered for mankind, confounding both the persons and the natures: and Ny∣cephorus saith, Nyceph. lib. 16 that the same continued euen vntill his time. And moreouer, that in all the prayers made in his church, the name of the virgine the mother of God was called vpon, with an intent and purpose to make this doctrine plausible and well li∣ked of the Councell of Ephesus, and as a baite for the giuing of free passage to the swallow of the rest of his heresies. Now it followed presently hereupon, that the Em∣perour Leo the great being aduertised of these nouelties, condemned him into ba∣nishment, vntill such time as he promised to disclaime and giue them ouer, which in deed he did, and made not shew to the contrarie, vntill such time as that false and for∣sworne Basilicus went about to seize vpon the Empire, by the meanes whereof he re∣couered his libertie and licence to worke mischiefe both at one time, his doctrine likewise being afterward supported and borne out by Anastasius the Emperor, being himselfe an Eutychian. Iustinian the Emperour added somewhat, but destroyed no good thing: for it was by him ordained that there should be sung in the Christian as∣semblies this hymne, Paul. Diac. lib. 16. , &c. Thou sonne of God, thou diuine worde, who being immortall, didst vouchsafe for our saluation, to take vpon thee humaine flesh of the holy virgine the mother of God, and alwaies a virgine, dead, risen againe, &c. saue vs. This may seeme to haue beene by the authoritie of the generall Synode of Constantino∣ple, for the repressing of the Samosatenians, Arrians, Monothelites, &c. And this was to honour the holy virgine, according to the intent and purpose of the Coun∣cell of Ephesus, being without all preiudicing of the honour due vnto God, and de∣nied to all manner of creatures. At this time also the Letanies or supplications were hatched, and that first of all in the Easterne Churches, and then afterward in the westerne: not without some imi∣tatation of the Pagans their Ambaruales, or Gangweeke: and the occasion therof did first rise from Constantinople, by reason of a plague: then from Lyons, by reason of an earthquake, from whence they tooke their flight all ouer the East and West. The forme and manner thereof was this: They contriued and drewe into cer∣taine
articles, the publike necessities and calamities, that did presse them or threaten them: vnto euerie one whereof, as it was vttered and spoken by the Priest or Bishop which went before, the people answered: , Lord haue mercy vpon vs, Lord heare vs. Praying vnto Saintes, or yet vnto the virgine Marie, was not admitted till a long time after, saue onely where as Anastasius the Emperour, an Eu∣tychian & fauourite of Petrus Gnapheus his opinions, and an innouator in this be∣halfe, did vndertake to set them a foote, and giue them force to stand. But let vs come to the church of Rome, where we shal find a great deale more matter, Alterations & chaunges in the Romish Church. Alcuinus, Ber∣no, Rabanus, Walafridus, &c. Symmachus the Bb. of Rome, about the yeare 506. ordained that euery Lords day, as also vpon euery festiual day, there shold be sung Gloria in excelsis: but this is attributed to Telesphorus by others. Other some distinguish betwixt both, & say, that this man did not ordaine it at all, but onely vpon the day of Christ his natiuitie. So farre is it off that the Grecians should haue it any sooner, for this is the same which they doe call . He added in the Councell of Rome held vnder him: That no Priest in the Church of Rome shal say any Masse without his priuitie. Now let men iudge here∣of, if this bee not to come backe to that which we reade and speake of in other places: That there was not any moe then one Christian assemblie in euerie parish, in which the faithfull did pray vnto God, heard the Gospell, and communicated to∣gether in the Sacramentes. Agapetus the first did institute the processions, Petr. de Nata∣libus. at the first, before the Masse at Easter: because (saith Durandus) that the Angels said to the women: Tell the disciples, that he will be before them in Galile. And of these pro∣cessions did spring those which were afterward said vppon the Lordes daies. This was about the yeare 535. Vigilius ordained about the yeare 536; That those which were to celebrate the Masse should looke into the East: Petr. de Natal. and euer since the most part of the altars were set and turned to serue for the purpose: Also, That the festi∣uall daies should haue their particular readinges and lessons: and yet notwithstan∣ding he would haue the giftes, oblata munera, Vigil. ep. 3. to bee consecrated vnto God euery day af∣ter one and the same order of prayers. Wherein wee see, that the Canon was not then growne to a rule and set thing, as wee see it was afterward: and in an other place, that the praiers whereof he is vnderstood to haue spoken, are referred; ad oblata mu∣nera, to the giftes which were offered by the people: and not to the sacrifice of Christ the Sonne of God, that pretended oblation made by the Priest, vnto his father. The feast also of Candlemas is attributed to him; and there is a reason giuen vs for the same. The Pagans, Rhenan. in Tertul. de co∣rona milit. (saith Rhenanus) in the entraunce of Februarie did celebrate the feast of Proserpina with burning tapers: Now that their wilfull obstinacie might not bee incensed or prouoked to discontentment, it was ordained, that the same day there should be the like burning of them vnto the virgine Marie: Iacob. de Vo∣rag. serm. 82. de Sanctis. and Iacobus de Ʋoragine speaketh of the same thing after the same manner. Pelagius the second, about the yeare 580. ordained, that mention should bee made of the deade in euery Masse, after the eleuation of the host: (whether he meant it of all the of∣frings, which after the manner of the old Testament were wont to be eleuated or lif∣ted vp, for a presenting of them vnto God; or of that parte which was put apart for the Sacrament:) for so speaketh Hermanus Gigas, Hermanus Gigas. vsing the tearmes currant in his time to expresse what was then practised in this point, not being as then growne to that head and height of corruptnesse. Whereby appeareth the truth of that which wee said a little before: namely, that that which was done for the dead, was a custome fetcht and deriued from the Paganes, and not grounded vppon any Christian law; a sufferaunce and not an ordinance of the Church. And thus be∣hold wee are come to Gregorie the first, who of all these ingredientes thus di∣spenced and many moe, maketh one Masse, which hee calleth the Romish or∣der, or Gregorie his Masse. And this is the point whereuppon wee are nowe to insist. Gregory then (as Historiographers do tell vs) being come to the Archbishopricke, The notable change and alteration vn∣der Gregorie his time. purposed to reforme the whole order of the church in al the parts therof; so far forth, as that after that Platina had specified the masses, songs, letanies, stations, processions
feastes, Plat. in Grego. magno. &c. What shall I say more, (saith he) seeing all the whole order and institution of the ecclesiasticall office, (especially of the old and auncient one) is inuented and approued by him? which would to God we had kept, and not receiued this barbarousnes, which so much distasteth all the learned men that are liuing at this day, &c. But of a certaintie vnder the shadow of redressing the order and discipline which had sustained great iniuries by the bar∣barous inuaders and spoilers, he did not a little damnifie the truth and sinceritie of doctrine: wherein yet those which came after and succeeded him, (as saith Platina) did worse. The Introit. For the lithurgie: It had no Introit in the beginning; and after that Ce∣lestine had made one, Gregorie would haue it doubled and sung twice. The Psalmes at the first were wont to be sung intire & whole of all the people, and with one voice, where afterward they were diuided into pauses, and in the ende into verses; in the singing whereof the Cleargie and the people did by course sing one one verse, Hermanus Gi∣gas in Flore temp. Psalmes. and the other the other. Gregorie appointed an Antiphonarie for the time and space of the whole yeare, consisting of Versicles & Responsories for euery day. Likewise he or∣dained a schoole of singers to sing the lithurgie, and hee laboured greatly to haue his song or maner of singing receiued euery where throughout the Latine Churches, fin∣ding himselfe much offended with the barbarous voyces of the French, Singing. Germaine & English men, Ioann. Diaco∣nus. l. 2. c 6. & 7. Walafr. c. 22. Kyrie cleison. as not hauing beene able to fit and tune themselues thereunto. He ta∣keth the Kyrie eleison from the Grecians, and was found fault with therefore: for said some: This is far off from reducing the Church of Constantinople vnder the church of Rome, seeing thereby he did nothing els but draw their fashions & manners vnto Rome. But he excuseth himselfe in these wordes: Amongst the Grecians all the people doe say it; but amongst vs the Cleargie (that is the Ministers of the Church) onely, and the peo∣ple answereth. Greg. l. 7. epi. 63. indict. 2. Prayers. Againe, Looke how oft we say Kyrie cleison, so many times also do we say Chri∣ste eleison: which is not done amongst the Grecians. For prayer, hee made a booke, some part whereof was taken and drawne out of that of Gelasius, which is called the Sacra∣mentarie, containing those thinges which were to be said euerie day throughout the yeare. If there be found (saith Walafridus) any thing in this booke which halteth, it is to be thought, Gregor. l. 2. c. 17. Walafr. c. 22. Lessons. that it is none of his, but that some other hath added the same thereto afterward: yea and there are old Masse-bookes to be seene, where are noted the praiers, secrets, and Post-communions of Gregorie, to make them tobe knowne from the others, which in deed are more corrupt then his. For the lessons of the Gospell and Epistle, he fol∣loweth directly and altogether the booke of lessons, or the bookes called Comes, at∣tributed vnto Saint Ierome: saue onely that vpon the festiuall dayes, the institution of Pope Vigilius was receiued and kept: and thereto also was his booke of An∣themes fitted and squared, endeuouring to raise and draw Anthemes taken out of the Psalmes, to answere to the seuerall drifts and purposes of the lessons: whereas before this prescript forme of reading, the Gospels, Epistles, Prophesies, and other bookes of the old and new Testament were read through. Sermons. And as for their preachings and expositions of the word of God vnto the people, hee speaketh of himselfe in a certaine place, that he had expounded forty lessons out of the Gospel, as it had beene accustomed to be read vpon certaine daies in the Office: Gregor. in praef. Homil. and that some of his exposi∣tions were deliuered by word to his Clearke or Secretarie, that he might afterward reade them to the assemblie: and that he had himselfe pronounced and vttered other some of them with his owne mouth. But therewithal he complaineth himselfe great∣ly of the iniquitie and abuse of the time, which had preuailed so far, as that The Pa∣stors of the church had left and abandoned the chaire of teaching and preaching of the Gospell, Gregor. D. 92. and would not find leasure to do any other thing then sing. And this (saith he) grew, because singing men were aduaunced and placed in the Ministerie of the Church, who sup∣posed themselues to haue discharged their duty, when they had opened their pipes, & tickled the people with their singing, though they had done nothing vnto them, ey∣ther in instructing of them in the articles of their faith, or in the doctrine of manners. For offerings, Offeringes. they continued and were brought in euerie day, notwithstanding that the Church was growne very rich: in so much as that diuers of the old Fathers com∣plained themselues saying, that the Bishops had not done as Moses did, who caused
proclamation to be made amongst the people, that they should not bring any more, Gregor. in Di∣alogis. when he saw that there was enough for the building of the tabernacle. For wee find likewise that in the time of Gregorie, there were offered sheep, and calues, &c, against the expresse Canon which commanded that nothing but bread & wine should be of∣fered. But the greater abuses hapning about the consecration of the offerings, cause vs to leape ouer the other which were not so waightie, with a lighter foote. Now we haue alreadie seene that it was the peoples custome to offer of their fruits and increase vnto God, as the old people of the Iewes did: and that these fruits were consecrated vnto him by a holy prayer, after the manner vsed by the Priest amongst the Israelites; wherin he was humbly intreated to take in good part that their thanks∣giuing, and to accept of this their sacrifice of praise. And these fruits, as all the peace offerings amongst the Iewes, were lifted vp or shaken for to shew them vnto the peo∣ple: after that of the same fruits, that is, of the bread and wine, was taken that which was sufficient for the Sacraments, and the remainder reserued for the poore, &c. Now all this so commendable a custome beganne not to degenerate, but to turne into a plaine poison, about this time of Gregorie: Walafr. c. 22. and not without iust cause saith Walafri∣dus, seeing he ordained the order of Masses & consecrations as well as of singing. For in deed the forme of consecration was so far changed at that time, by chaunging of the subiect: as that the words properly vsed in the blessing of the gifts and offerings, were appropriated directly to the Sacraments. The Canon. There then beganne the worke about that part of the Masse, which properly they call the Canon. In the Primitiue Church the holy Supper was celebrated euery Lords day, and all the faithfull there present, were bound to participate thereof: by little and little thir zeale waxed cold, whereof we heare S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostome, and others to crie out. In the ende it came to that point, Can. non iste C. quotidie. de consecrat. dist. 5. that the people did not for the most part accustome any more to commu∣nicate, neither were they pressed any thing thereunto by the diligence of the Pastors. Whereupon likewise followed a tolleration and ceasing from the looking vnto of the seueritie and straitnesse of the Canons; namely those, which enioyned men, that they should communicate at the least three times a yeare, at the natiuitie of Christ, Easter and Pentecost: otherwise they should not bee taken for good Catholikes, which af∣terward was restrained to the Natiuitie of Christ onely. And thus it came to passe, Synod. Agath. c. 18. that there was not any one ordinarily to cōmunicate, saue the ministers of the church, whom they call Clearkes or the Cleargie. And what came vppon this? The Priestes notwithstanding would not leaue taking of offerings: and to the end that the people might not quaile, or let fall their deuotion that way, they make them belieue, that the worke which they doe, doth not cease to profit them, being but onely present. But by little and little these offeringes were not any longer brought from the table to the Altar, or from the bodie of the Church into the Quire, for to bee consecrated by the priest: as also in deed it had beene vndecent, seeing they were of such things, as the Canons did forbid, that is to say, consisting of siluer, wooll, cattell, &c: onely that part which consisted of bread & wine, and was to serue in the Sacrament, conti∣nued his former course. And yet whereas they were wont to consecrate many loaues for the seruice of the whole assemblie, being cut into peeces & distributed; now the Priest contenteth himselfe with the blessing of so much as he thought would bee re∣quisite and needfull for the number of communicantes, and that was verie small. In so much as that ordinarily hee needed not to consecrate aboue one loafe, which in Gregorie his time was great, large and round, kneaded after the manner of common bread, and of no other substance or matter then the ordinarie bread then vsed was: he calleth it Coronam, or Corollam, and this loafe grew lesser, Greg. l. dial. 4. euen as deuotion it selfe diminished, in so much, as that within a little after it became nothing, as the Canon testifieth, which saith: That the Priest cannot celebrate the Communion with fewer then three to communicate with him. And thereupon also it came vp for a custome to breake the bread made so small and thin, into three peeces; whereupon afterward, as we shall see in place conuenient, diuers and sundry allegories haue beene fra∣med and made.
Now we come by these steps and degrees, The change & alteration, which was ab oblatis ad ob∣latam. falling out in this time, to passe ab obla∣tis ad oblatam; that is, from all such thinges in generall as were offered, vnto this small pettie parte reserued for the Sacrament, which by corruption came to bee called a Wafer cake; from such breads and loaues, as were vsually brought for offeringes, (as Saint Gregorie teacheth vs) to one onely bread without leauen; which also the priest himselfe within a small time after tooke vpon him to prouide for the seruice of the Sacrament. Gregor. in dialogis. And so also the praiers and supplications which were wont to be said and made in the consecration of these first offrings, came to be transferd & applyed vnto the bread and wine appointed and put apart for the priest, and that small com∣panie that was to communicate with him. And here it was, that they found them∣selues incumbred, whether it were Scholasticus, or Gregorie, whē as the question was of reforming these praiers that made vp a part of the Canon: for in deed these words, Vt accepta habeas & benedicas haec dona, haec munera, haec sancta sacrificia illibata: that is, that thou woldest accept these gifts, these offerings, these holy and whole sacrifices: Againe, Qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis: that is, which offer vnto thee this sacrifice of praise: Againe, Supra quae propitio vultu ac sereno respicere digneris, & accepta habere sicuti dignatus es mu∣nera pueri iusti tui Abel, &c, that is, that it would please thee to behold them with a mercifull and fauourable countenance, and accept of them, as thou didst of the offerings of thy righteous Sonne Abel, &c: Againe, Iube haec perferri per manus Angeli tui in sublime Altare tuum, &c: that is, Command that these may be conueyed by the handes of thine Angell vpon thine high Altar, &c: I say, all these wordes cannot be soundly vnderstood, but of these offeringes: nor without folly be turned to the blessing of the sacraments, which wee receiue from God, & in stead whereof it pleaseth him to receiue againe at our hands the sacrifice of praise. No not without blasphemie can they be wrested to the oblati∣on which the Priest pretendeth to make of the Sonne of God, seeing likewise that it is said: Qui tibi offerunt; they which offer vnto thee: for this must needes bee meant of the people that are present, and not of the priest alone. And yet notwithstanding all this, they skip me at one iumpe in their Canon, ab oblatis ad oblatam, from the obla∣tions and offeringes, to the Wafer cake: without any manner of agreement, coherence or consequence: from a sacrifice of praise, to a Sacrament: and from a Sacrament, to a sa∣crifice propitiatorie: from the signe to the thing signified: & from the remembrance of the death of Christ, to the pretended real sacrificing & offering vp of himself. And they will haue it, that all this which hath beene spoken and said of these offeringes, should bee spoken of Christ, whom they pretend to offer and sacrifice vp vnto God: notwithstanding whatsoeuer absurdities in construction and diuinitie vtterly con∣uincing and ouerthrowing them in their fond and blinde assertions: As namely in Diuinitie these: That he would be intreated to vouchsafe to accept of the sacrifice of his onely begotten sonne, as he did of that of Abel: That his Angels should offer him vp vnto him vpon his Altar: and a thousand such impertinent thinges, which shalbe better examined in their place. And notwithstanding after certaine praiers which stand indifferent betwixt both, they cannot looke to themselues to goe on with the course which they are fallen into, but they returne againe vnto these offringes, yea and that after the consecration: Per quem (say they) haec omnia Domine, semper bona creas, sanctificas, viuificas, benedicis, & praestas nobis, by whom thou O Lord, doest alwaies create, sanctifie, quicken, blesse and giue vs all these good thinges, &c. which is most eui∣dently and directly applyed to, dona, munera, sacrificia illibata, to the giftes, offerings, and whole sacrifices: and was wrested by them first to the Sacraments, and afterwards to the sacrifice of Christ himselfe, which by such their accompt and reckoning, they did acknowledge for a creature, that was to be created, sanctified, quickened and blessed day by day. And in deede in the lithurgie which they attribute to Clement, yea and that after the consecration they pray, Pro dono oblato, for the gift offered: but in no such sence or meaning as the Romish Masse, that is to say, after this man∣ner: That it wold please that our good God, to receiue it vppon his holy Altar by the intercession of Christ, for a sweete sauour: which cannot by consequent bee spoken of Christ himselfe.
In the Seruices going before there was mention made of Saintes and Martyrs, The Praiers of the Saints. the names wherof, as sayth S. Denys, were read , out of a certain regi∣ster or catalogue: partlie to shew vs that they did liue and make vppe one part of the Church: and partlie to encourage vs to follow their example: and afterwarde the de∣uotions or rather superstitions of some particular people had brought it so aboute, as that they were prayed vnto. But in this Canon they are a great deale more forward; namelie, to pray vnto God, that hee would receiue their merites and intercessions for the liuing. And it was in this time that Gregorie would haue it put into the Leta∣nies, for the virgin Marie; Ora pro nobis Deum, pray vnto God for vs. And this in tract of time, became common, and was not thought vnmeet or vnworthie of anie one of the Saints. And indeed it is most cleare, that in the time of S. Augustin, not the Saints, but God alone was prayed vnto in the prescript forme of the celebrating of the Lords Supper. The place is plaine and euident; They are named (sayeth hee) as men of God, August. de Ciuit. Dei. l 22. c. 10. which by standing vnto their confession haue ouercome the worlde: but they are not pray∣ed vnto by the Priest, which sacrificeth, that is, which performeth the holie office, &c. Afterward there was taken vp a custome, that they which died, Prayer for the dead. should bestow some giftes vpon the Church; and their kinsfolke for them; that they might be distributed vnto the poore: and these gifts were wont to be blessed, as the other giftes & offrings were: but by this meanes men fell into the fowle errors of the Pagans, as namelie either to pray for the dead, or to moue it themselues, that they might be prayed for af∣ter death. And this is it which we haue before obserued to haue in expresse wordes been ordained by Pelagius the second. As then offringes grew to come in place of sa∣crifices: so these giftes in their place did grow to bee sacrifices for the dead: and there∣vpon we read those wordes in S. Gregorie: Gregor. in Di∣al. 4. & passim. To offer a wholesome and sauing host for e∣uerie one; vnknowne to the a ges going before; and after which a certaine time sprung vp the Masses for the dead. And thus this parte is receyued againe into the Canon, in more forcible tearmes then before; although as yet not receyued and practised euery where: for there are as yet some Masse bookes to bee found, The old Masse booke of Zu∣rich. Bullinger de origine erroris c. 8. and those verie auncient and authentike, where prayer for the dead is not any thing specified at all. Againe, if we waigh and consider well the wordes of the Canon; Pro his qui dormiunt in somno pa∣cis, for such as sleepe the sleepe of peace: they may seeme rather to concerne the memo∣riall of such, whose saluation is sure and certaine, or the opinion of men, as it was then most commonly receyued, of a place of refreshment, or rest, where they wait & attend the fulnes of glorie to be inioyed after the resurrection, then anie opinion of Purga∣torie full of tormentes: or else the forme of prayer vsed at this day, for the deliuering & setting at libertie of the dead. For the liuing, For the liuing. Gregorie bringeth in the custome of making mention of them in the place of the mysteries, (as wee see) hee writeth vnto Constantius Bb. of Millaine, Gregor. l. 3. Epist. 37. & l. 6. Ep. 71. that it is done (by name) of Iohn Bb. of Rauenna: although before the ordinance and appointment of Innocent the first, there was nothing spoken of any in that place, saue such as had offred, whose names were wont to bee read in the place of the conse∣cration. And thus wee see clearelie, that all that which is said and done in the Canon for the liuing and for the dead, is traduced and wrung from the Sacrifices of praise, that is from the offringes which the Christians offred, whether they were as tokens of their plentifull increase, or for to impart and bestow vpon the poore, to this preten∣ded propitiatorie sacrifice of the Priest. Now Gregorie telleth vs that the author, be it of the Canon, Who shoulde bee the author of the Canon. Gregor. l. 7. Ep. 63. or be it of the prai∣er of the Canon, was one Scholasticus: and of him we finde not a iot in Eusebius, S. Ierome, Sophronius, yea nor in Gimodius, though he haue drawne a catalogue of ecclesiasticall writers, about the yeare 500. insomuch, as that hee cannot bee eyther anie ancient author, or worthy personage, as may also be easilie gathered of his work. And as for them, who to acquite themselues somewhat the better, say that it was Pope Gelasius called by Gregorie, by the name of Scholasticus, as willing by this title to signifie the worthy account and name which he had obtained before hee came to the
Popedome: it is answered them that it appeareth by other places of S. Gregorie, that this Scholasticus was a proper name, and verie vsuall: for a Iudge of Champagnie in Italie, Gregor. lib. 2. Ep. 54. & l. 6. Ep. 14. and an other, who stoode out for a defender of the Church, are both of them called by that name. But wee know from else where by the historie of the Church, all whatsoeuer is attributed to Gelasius, who therein is neuer called nor qualified by the name of Scholasticus: besides, that it is most plaine, that Gregorie had rather haue adorned and marked it with his proper name, which carried so great honour with it, then with a borrowed name, which wee know not whether euer it were bestowed vpon him or no. Againe, it is not the phrase or custome to call men, yea and those greate personages, by the first and least offices which they haue borne, but by the last, as being ordinarilie the most worthy and excellent. But whosoeuer it was that was the author, The three petitions. S. Gregorie doth not let to take it in hand againe after him, as is very apparant vnto vs: and indeed it is agreede vpon that hee did adde thereunto; Diesque nostros in tua pace disponas, &c. which they call the three petitions; issuing and proceeding euermore from that spirite, which wre∣steth the offringes of the faithfull vnto the sacrifice offred by the Priest. For the prai∣er of Leo the first, which was called (as yet the Masse is called) Super oblata, vppon the giftes and oblations, it did onely carrie and containe, That it would please thee O Lord to receiue and take in good part these giftes of our bounden dutie, and of all thy family; And after some Authors, And dispose of our dayes in peace, that is, to continue vnto vs of thy fauour and mercie, thy holy blessinges, according to the praier of the Israelites. But Gregorie, which sticketh fast to the pretended offring of the bodie of Christ, go∣eth further; To deliuer vs from eternall damnation, and to ingraft vs into the number of thine elect. Now after this consecration, the Priest and Ministers of the Church were wonte to communicate, That the Communion is the most part of it sup∣prest. Iohn Diac. l. 2. c. 41. as wee haue said, and consequenthe the people; to whome the Sa∣craments were distributed, euen yet in the time of Gregorie, with these wordes: The bodie of our Lord Iesus Christ, preserue thy soule vnto eternall life: The blood of our Lord, &c. that is to say, so oft as they did present themselues at the same. But as the people became carelesse and negligent in the communicating of the sacramentes; and the Priestes verie eager and forward in hauing them still to continue their offringes, they beginne to giue them to vnderstand, that it is sufficient for them to heare the Masse without anie communicating in the same. Whereupon within some time after, there beganne to grow vp this manner of speaking, to heare the Masse, and to sing the Masse, which was vnknown, & neuer had been heard of in al the former ancient times: & in summe, that if they did not cōmunicate in the Sacrament, that yet they had their part in the sacrifice, &c. And so from hence by little and little crept in the priuate Masses, especiallie in the Monasteries, at which the people would bee present; but the Priest alone, or with him some certain number of Monkes, or Clearks, did onely com∣municate. And then these wordes; Corpus Domini, &c. & Sanguis Domini, &c. custo∣diat animam tuam in vitam aeternam: The bodie or the blood of our Lord preserue thy soule vnto eternall life: which were wont to bee spoken to all manner of persons, and to ey∣ther sexe; and who aunswered thereunto, Amen; tooke vppe their habitation in the Masse; at the first, for those few persons which did communicate with the Priest, and in the end, for himself alone. And yet notwithstanding, to continue, and hold on al∣waies in their contradictories, although hee tell them, that they are for himselfe, and accordingly do take them himselfe: yet in the Prayers following afterward, hee spea∣keth fondlie of al; Quod ore sumpsimus Domine, fac pura mente capiamus: Grant Lord, that what wee haue taken in at our mouthes, we may receiue with pure and cleane minds, &c. Which is the cause that some olde expounders of the Canon, helde opinion, that it could not be read but in publike Masses, such as in which the people was wont to re∣ceiue the Sacramentes, that is to say, according to the Canons of this time, in any case at the feast of the Natiuitie, at Easter and at Pentecost; because it is altogether set down in tearmes of the plurall number. And yet S. Gregorie had this one good thing in him, namelie, that he alwaies left
it in the libertie of the Churches, Gregory doth not presse o∣thers to re∣ceiue his Masse. Gregor. in Ep. ad August. Anglic. Episc. Change of speech. Sabel. En. 8. l. 5. eyther to receiue the order which hee had newlie set vppe at Rome, or else to retaine their owne. For in the Epistle likewise, which hee writ vnto Augustine a Bishoppe in England, who would haue brought it into England, hee vseth these wordes: The Churches haue diuerse formes of celebrating the misteries: It is left in the libertie of euerie one of them to follow that which shall like them best: In euerie Church take and retaine that which thou shalt finde the best. Let vs yet furthermore adde two other verie great changes and alteratiōs in this time; the rather, because they are in thinges that are sensible, and to bee conceiued of euerie one. The one is, that about the yeare sixe hundred, (as wee reade in Sabel∣licus) the swarmes of barbarous people continued in Italie, France, and Spaine for a long time, where the Latine tongue was receiued, and by consequent the ser∣uice of the Church in Latine: but by little and little it was found in such sorte to bee corrupted and chaunged into Italian, Spanish, and French, as that it was not anie longer to bee vnderstoode of the common sort, and further in space of time, from age to age it still became more obscure and intricate. Whereuppon insued though not by anie decreed ordinance, but eyther by too much tolleration and sufferance, or else by negligence, that the seruice continuing in Latine, & the people growing to vnder∣stand it nothing at all; euerie thing was done in the Church, contrarie to the in∣stitution of the Apostles, the vse of the auncient Churches, Iustin Nouel. 123. yea and the verie ordi∣naunces of the Emperours, in a language that was not vnderstoode: and by consequent without edification, and the meanes for the people to come by in∣struction. The other is, that in steade of the Christian simplicitie, Alteration in apparrell. which was easie to bee seene and obserued, in the habites, apparell, and garmentes of the Pastours that celebrated the Sacramentes and other holy exercises: Gregorie brought in the pontificall and statelie garmentes; imitating therein, Raban. l. 1. Institut. c. 14. (as sayeth Raba∣nus) the Iewish Church, the Priestes and Leuites; as also their consecrations, annointinges, and purifyinges; yea, and that in the matter of Temples, Altars, garmentes, vessels, and euerie thing that is of vse in the Church; thinges alto∣gether vnknowne vnto his time, and not finding anie manner of grounde or foundation in anie of the olde Writers, except one weake and reeling Canon, which appointeth for the Readers, Laeuam lino tectam, the left hand couered with some linnen; and some Surplisse made of them for the Priestes. And yet this riseth from hence onelie, namely, that Innocent the third, maintained that the ceremo∣nies of the law were not abolished. Innoc. 3. lib. 4. de Sacr. Altar. cap. 4. And yet it was too great a worke, (notwithstanding that the foundation of abuses, and superstitions, were deepelie laide in the time of Gregorie:) for the vpper building and top-frame to be finished therewithall at a trice. For both in his time and afterwarde that law remained in the Church: That the faithfull did communicate after the consecration of the Sacramentes: and the good Pa∣stors did blame and finde faulte with all carelesse negligence therein, as they espied and founde it out: exhorting and stirring vppe their Parishio∣ners to continue their zeale and forwardnes in the participating of the same: they continued also to administer it vnder both kindes, yea, and it was ratified and confirmed by the ordinances of the state Politique, now and then, as wee shall see hereafter.
CHAP. VIII. In what sort the Masse prospered, and grew greater from the time of Gregorie the great, vntill about the time of Charles the great. GRegorie was no sooner dead, but that Sabinian his successor caused his bookes to bee burnt, Platin. in Sabinian. either for hatred and enuie, or for some other sinister opinion that hee had conceiued. Inso∣much, as that whatsoeuer wee haue of his at this day, was saued at the request of one Petrus Diaconus, hauing some care of the same. But it was to verie good purpose, that hee had in his life time left the forme of seruice, to the discretion of the Pastors; and that those, which presentlie after succeeded him, did not stirre much or trouble themselues in causing of his to bee ob∣serued; for by that meanes the Churches remained a long time, inioying their liber∣tie, in such sort as wee haue alreadie acknowledged to bee contained in the Canons of the Councell of Venice and Gerond, helde about the yeare 500. and 550. that is to say, that all whatsoeuer was to bee got thereby, was; That in one and the same Pro∣uince, or vnder one and the same Metropolitane, there was obserued one and the same seruice: except it were in such countries, as where Christianitie did settle it selfe a fresh, for there the reformers, sent thether from the Popes, caused them strictlie and directlie to admit and follow the Romish order. In France, this Augustine a Monke of Rome, of the Order of S. Bennet, trauelling on the behalfe of Gregorie into England; found himselfe offended, that the Order of Rome was not obserued, and thereupon did write vnto Gregorie, who repressed & redressed his ouer forwardnes in these wordes: That hee must take that in euerie Church which is good, &c. Againe, the authoritie of the French Church was then so great, as that it helde his councels apart, and within it selfe, and not fearing or stan∣ding vpon whatsoeuer anie man could or would gain-say, as caring but a little, or else nothing at all for the Church of Rome. In England, The Romish Masse first re∣ceiued in England. where hee thought hee should find a greene ground, that neuer had beene husbanded or tilled, hee proceeded further, insomuch as that hee procured from the Pope, to bee created Archbishoppe of Canterbury: and the rather, because of his good happe so seruing him to meete with an ignorant king, and a superstitious Queene: and there hee preached (so was it called) the Christian religion, that is to say, all the ceremonies and trumperie of Rome; as their Masses, Letanies, Processi∣ons, Copes, Vestmentes, Altars, Candlestickes, holie Waters, Consecrations, &c. and there hee brought to passe to haue them receiued: and yet vpon condition, That no man should bee forced or constrained thereunto. Beda lib. 1, & 2. But going about to purchase still further credite to himselfe, and beginning of a wilie Foxe to play the fierce and furi∣ous Lyon, a famous Abbot named Dinoth, a great Diuine, who taught vnder him more then two thousande Monkes, for the Nurcerie of seauen Diocesses in England, opposed himselfe verie stoutelie against him, in a full Synode, and boldly auouched, that hee ought not to chaunge the olde and auncient formes of Christian religion, refusing therewithall to acknowledge him for an Archbishoppe, &c. insomuch, as that this good Augustine did incense Ethelfred king of Northumberland against him, who caused him to bee knockt in the head with twelue hundred of those that did belong vnto him. From that time forward, the people being bold, and farre from feare, about the yeare 637. at the earnest sute of Pope Iohn the fourth, and the solici∣tation of Laurentius, Mellitus, Iustus Honorius and others, sent from the Sea of Rome one after an other, to presse and vrge forward the kinges and Cleargie of England, for the entertayning of this change and alteration, beganne to celebrate the feaste of Easter after the manner of Rome. And about the yeare 666. the Bishoppes receiued
shauing and vnction: and the Pastors which were there, beganne to bee called Sacerdo∣tes, that is to say, Priestes. Afterward, about the yeare, 679. there was established the manner of celebrating in the Latine tongue, Beda lib. 4. c. 18. de geshs Anglor. at the great labour and diligence vsed by an Archchanter, or chiefe singing man of Rome, whom the Pope Agatho sent thether: and as for the playing of organes, it being added vnto the Romish manner of singing by Pope Vitalian, Beda could not abstaine but say; Heretofore in steade of these thinges the principall seruice of God consisted in the preaching of the Gospell, and hearing of the word of God. But as the Romains thought not themselues absolute Lordes and Conquerours of anie Countrie, who did not consent to liue according to their lawes, The Romish Masse first re∣ceiued in Italy & speak their lan∣guage: euen so the Popes at this time aspiring vnto, and greedilie gaping after the Monarchie of the Church, did not thinke, or make account of hauing the same in good earnest, except they brought it to bee subiect vnto their lawe of the Latine ser∣uice, and that ioyned with the Latine tongue. And as Pipin and Charles the great, new vsurpers both ouer the French, as also ouer the Empire in the West, had great neede of their fauour, for the authorising of them, and making of their places to be graunted and acknowledged, as rightlie descending vnto them by the people: so the Popes did not spare to looke to receiue from them againe, a giue for their gaue: as namelie, to establish their lawes, seruices and ceremonies, so farre as they shoulde be able, that is, so farre as their authority or sword might establish and settle the same. Thus Adrian the first, about the yeare 790. held a councell in Rome, Adr. D. 63. Durand. l. 5. c. 2. wherin hee caused to bee ordained, that Gregories Masse should bee obserued in all Christi∣an Churches. And Charles the great liuing at the same time, ordained that the de∣crees of the Pope should bee obeyed throughout all his Empire and Dominions; and particularlie, that Gregories Masse should bee receiued into all the coastes and coun∣tries of the same: and for the easier accomplishing of the execution of the same, which could not but be full of difficulties, hee did not spare either threatninges or punishmentes: The historie is set downe all at large in Nauclerus, Naucler. Gene. 2. fol. 44. Iacob. de Vo∣rag. in legenda Gregor. & B. Eugenri. Iacobus de Vo∣ragine and others, to the breaking out of these wordes: Carolus Imperator omnes Clericos minis & suppliciis coegit libros Ambrosiani Officii, &c. Hee compelled all the Church men by threatninges and punishmentes to burne all the bookes of S. Ambrose his Of∣fice or Lithurgie, &c. Yea, there was no sparing of miracles; whereupon the malice of a few became very pregnant and fruitfull, preuailing much against the ignorance of a great sort. It is reported that in this Councell of Rome, the Masse-bookes or Of∣fices of S. Ambrose, and S. Gregorie, were laid vpon S. Peters Altar, the dores of the Temple close shut, and sealed with the seales of diuers Bishoppes, they all abiding in fasting and prayer, vntill such time as it shoulde please God by some signe to shewe which of the two was most acceptable to him. Now in the Morning when they should come to open the dore, they found the Masse-booke of S. Ambrose open and whole, and in the same place where they had laid it: and contrarywise, that of S. Gregories all rent and torne in peeces, and scattered round about the Temple. Thereuppon it seemed to bee the law of the game, that S. Ambrose his Masse-booke should conti∣nue whole, and that of S. Gregories rent and torne in peeces. But on the contrarie, they expounded it quite after an other manner: Quia placuit, aut placeat, because it so pleased them, as they say in their councels (for they neuer giue anie other reason:) That that of S. Ambrose, should not bee permitted in any place but Millaine: but that of S. Gregories should bee licensed to passe throughout the whole Church. And thus be∣holde it was first receiued throughout all Italie, there being no other place properlie left or remayning to come and witnes any thing against it, except the Diocesse of Mil∣laine, by reason of the authoritie of S. Ambrose. Berno Augiensis testifieth, that before the time of Gregorie, The change and alteration in France. Epist. Hilde∣win. ad Ludo∣uicum pium there was an other manner of seruice in France then there was at Rome, and this hee proueth by a cer∣taine epistle written by Hildewinus to the Emperour Lewes the Gentle; and that not∣withstanding Pope Innocent, Gelasius, & Gregorie (Bbs. of Rome,) had done their vttermost endeuour by gentle intreaties and faire words, to bring them to conforme
themselues to the Order of Rome: and hee sayeth asmuch of Spaine and Germany: yea further, that in the Registrie of his Monasterie, he hath as yet an olde Masse-book, that is farre differing from that of Rome. Guaguin. l. 3. Pipin then to shew himselfe deuoted and inwardlie affected towardes the See of Rome, which had set him in the throne of the kingdome, defrauding Chilperich (the lawfull king) of the Crowne of France, at the instant request of Pope Steuen, who came of purpose into France for to hallow it, re∣ceiued at the first the whole order of Rome, and gaue charge for the establishing of the same vnto Giles or Remigius Archbishoppe of Roan, his brother. But as it fal∣leth out in such changes, that they cannot bee done all at a dash, Charles the great, vnder colour, that by combining & knitting together of both the seruices, the church and the Empire would be vnited in a neerer and straiter bond of loue and agreement, tooke it to bee needfull for him of his owne accord to intermeddle in the matter, and to shew some parte of his power and authoritie, seeing especially the fauour of Pope Adrian the first (acknowledging him for Emperour) did somewhat stir him vp there∣to: for so also he constrained (sayeth Durandus) all the people of the Church, that were of the nations vnder him, by tormentes and punishmentes to obserue the ser∣uice instituted by Gregorie: and yet by reason of the resistances, that hee met with∣all in that attempt, hee was contented to begin his purpose by the help and assistance of the Monks, which at that time had Masses in their Monasteries; wheras the custome had been, Carol. l. 1. c. 0 that they should bee bound to those of the Parishes. And this is that which we read in the ordinances of Charles the great, Let the Monkes (sayeth hee) obserue and keepe the manner of singing vsed in Rome: (for now it was come to that, that no man spake of any thing but singing) according as our Father of worthy memory Pipin, decertauit vt fieret, Alias decreta∣uit. did his endeuour to bring to passe, when hee tooke away gallicanum cantum, the French manner of singing; for the confirming and better ratifying of the concord and vnitie betwixt him and the See Apostolike, &c. which also he continued by the Go∣uernours in the Churches; Lib. 5. c. 219. Let euerie Priest (sayeth hee) celebrate the Masse, ordine Ro∣mano, after the manner of Rome with sweete so unders; and let the people bee put in minde to offer euerie Lordes day, and that the same bee receiued without the place compassing in the Altar. Sigibertus in Chronic. Odo Camera∣cen in Canon. Walas. c 25. Ioan Salisbu∣riens. lib. 1. Policr. c. 6 Chronic. En∣golis. Gregory his Masse recei∣ued in Germa∣ny. And yet the soundest opinion is, that the fift book and those following, are of the constitutions of the Emperours that came after him. But so it is as the Chro∣nicle of Engolisme sayeth, that Charles demaunded some of Pope Adrian his singing men, to conforme the manner of the French singing to that of Rome; and that ther∣vppon hee graunted Theodore and Benet, whome hee calleth doctissimos Cantatores, and the bookes of Anthemes, which S. Gregorie had noted with his owne hand, that hee might correct those of France by them. And the greatest maistrie of singing (saieth hee) doth abide in the City of Mets. About the same time the Popes forgot not Germany: Gregorie the seconde shooting at the same marke with those before him, sent thether for Legate a certaine Englishman, named Venofridus, a slaue well knowne for his ambition; who afterward for hauing preached his owne inuentions, and not the Christian faith, which conti∣nued pure and vncorrupt there for a long time, was surnamed the Apostle of the Germaines. This man after he had well sounded the state of Germanie, and through∣lie looked into all their affaires, returned to Rome; where the Pope for the easier at∣chieuing of his purpose, created him Archbishoppe of Mentz, and appointed that hee should bee called Boniface: hee gaue him the booke of the Decrees of Rome, accor∣ding to the ordinances whereof, hee willed that the Churches of Germanie might be reformed; and thereupon to that end taketh an oath of him. Hee setteth him out with manie letters of recommendation of diuerse and sundrie Princes, Estates and Nations; insinuating by them that hee craueth nothing, but that they would patient∣lie and willingly suffer themselues to bee reformed: hee promiseth Paradise to all such as shal help forward this his enterprise; but denounceth a curse against all them which shall not receiue him as the Legate of Iesus Christ himselfe: and for to make vppe the paire, hee ordained Charles Martell to stand by him as a stout Champion in the defence and patronage of this attempt and great enterprise, in respect of the
high conceite and hope that was put in him for his prowes. 2. Tom. de cō∣cil. vbi epist. Gregor. 2, & 3. Auent. lib. 3. Naucl. Gent. 25. Gregorie the third comes after and walketh as crookedlie as the crab Gregorie the second, that went before; hee fortifieth himselfe in his place with as much care, vsing Pipin and Charles the great with their ioynt power and authoritie: Pipin by name being indebted and bound vnto this Boniface, whome the Pope Zacharie had vsed as his Agent in the deposition of Chilperich, and the establishing of him in his place; and in absoluing and discharging of the French men of their naturall oath: insomuch, as that they in∣duced the people of Franconia, Hessia, Bauaria, Saxonie, Frisia, &c. to receiue the Romish Order: they preuailed by might against such as with stoode them, Vide literas Zachariae ad Bonifacium & cius rursus ad Zachariam. Item Iuraniē∣tum quod Papae dedit. as Virgili∣us the Bb. of Iuuauia, otherwise called Saltzburge, Clement, Scotus, Samson and other great personages; as also one Albert a French man by nation, whome Boniface suffe∣red to dye in prison, for writing of a booke against his innouations: then to continue this order, hee created new Bbs. in the countrie, and there accordingly installed thē after his manner; as namely, at Wirtzburge, Bamberg, Erford, Eichstat, Hirtafeld, &c: all which were shortly after confirmed by Pope Zacharie; and these in their places in∣stituted and set vppe the Romish ceremonies: the which that they might bee so much the more strongly auouched, it was ordained, Munster. aetat. 3. that there should be a Synod held yearelie in Germany. The particular wordes of the oath that Boniface made vnto the Pope, are not to bee ouerpassed without noting; Fidem meam atque concursum ti∣bi, & vtilitatibus Ecclesiae tuae exhibebo; I promise thee my faith and help, in, Auent. lib. 3. and about euery thing which shall concerne the profites of thy Church. Againe, writing to Zacharie; As manie Disciples (sayeth hee) as God doth giue mee in this my embassage, I am not slacke or cold in drawing their affections vnto the obedience of the See Apostolike. Wherupon may ea∣sily be discerned whether his chief scope & drift were to win them to Christ or to the Pope; to preach the Christian faith, or the Romish authoritie. Neuerthelesse, Annales Carē∣tanorum. wee reade that about the yeare 860. a great and holy Personage, named Methodius Illiri∣cus, did bend himselfe againe and againe against these abuses; turning the holie Scripture to this end into the Sclauonian tongue; reestablishing the auncient seruice in all the Churches of this language; assaying likewise to doe the same in Bauaria, Austria, Sueuia, and other Prouinces of Germany; abolishing from thence the La∣tine Masse, and the ceremonies of Rome: against whome these new Bbs. raised the princes and people, which notwithstanding, he dyed peaceably in Morauia, being buried in Olmuntz, the Metropolitane Cittie of the Countrie, and where his name is yet had in great reuerence. In Spaine (the people being giuen to cleaue fast vnto the thing which they shall once take hold of) the Popes had not so soone wonne this goale. The Masse re∣ceiued in Spaine. In the beginning they had many prescript formes of seruice as wee learne out of the Councell of Ge∣rund, wherein it was ordained, that vnder one Metropolitane at the least, there should bee but one forme of seruice. And after that in the fourth councell of Toledo, it was decreede, that in all Spaine there shall bee vsed one order in prayers, in singing, Concil. Tolet. 4. cap. 2. C. Bracar. 1. c. 22. in the Sacramentes, and in the solemne celebrating of the Masses, &c. which thing also was confirmed by the councell of Bracare: and it may seeme that the forme or order in∣stituted eyther by S. Leander, or by Isidore the Bb. of Siuill, and Disciple of Saint Gregorie (cōmonly called the Office of the Mozarabes) was preferred before all the other, because the Moores mixt amongst the Christians, did vse the same in Spaine, not much differing in the rest from the Gregorian seruice, no not any more then the Disciple differeth from the Maister. And indeede it appeareth by the Councell of Bracare, that the Metropolitane Profiturus had brought it from Rome, into the Church of Bracare, by the authoritie of the See of Rome. Notwithstanding the Popes to procure vnto themselues all manner of further credite, woulde haue that all manner of considerations, consultations, deliberations or aduises, being omitted and quite forgotten, the order of Rome should bee receiued in Spaine: but this they coulde not obtaine, till a long time after that they had gained all other nations: namelie, in the time of Gregorie the seauenth, and Vrban the se∣conde, aboute the yeare 1090. and that because of the contradictions and re∣sistances,
which were brought in and made against the same. Then sayeth Roderi∣co Archbishoppe of Toledo in his historie; Pope Vrbane the second reprouing the waies of Pope Gregorie the seauenth, Roderie. Tole. lib. 6. c. 24. called Hildebrand his predecessor, sent a Legate into Spaine named Richard, Abbot of S. Victors of Marseilles, at the request of king Alphonsus the 6. to reforme the Churches of Spaine, endamaged by the long and hard persecutions which they had suffered, which Richard vnder this colour ha∣uing perswaded the king Alphonsus by the means of the Queen Constance his wife, which was a French woman; hee ordained that the French Order, and that was then the Romish or Gregorian Order should bee receiued, and that of Toledo o∣therwise called Mozarabique abolished and banished out of Spaine. The three estates of the Realm fell to be verie turbulent; and yet notwithstanding the king would not goe backe from his worde, to the procuring of his least discredite: insomuch as that in the end the thing came to this issue, namely, that it should bee decided by a combat: and thereuppon there was named and chosen for the king a Knight, and hee should fight for the French or Gregorian Office, and by the States an other, and hee should fighte for the Office of Toledo. But the kinges Champion, as say∣eth the historie, was quicklie ouercome, not without the exceeding ioye and re∣ioycing of the States, for the victorie obtayned of their Champion for the Order of Toledo, who was of the house of Matanza neere vnto Pisorica, whereof there is a hardie and valiant race and offpring remaining aliue yet vnto this daye. The Queene Constance hauing so much the more edge set vppon her, did not giue o∣uer to follow the point with the king her husband, alleadging for herselfe that the triall of the combat should not stand as a righteous sentence, or become Iudge and Vmpier in such matters, &c. vppon which wordes the States were much discontented, and neare vnto the raising of a tumulte and mouing of sedi∣tion. Insomuch as that it was the seconde time agreede vppon, that the booke of the French Office and that of Toledo, should be both of them cast into a great fire, and that the Primate, the Legate, and the Church men should in the meane while keepe all the people in fasting and prayer. And now likewise it so fell out, as that the booke of the French Order was burned and consumed all into ashes, whereas on the contrarie, that of the Order of Toledo remained whole, not so much as smelling of any flame. And notwithstanding, (sayeth the Historiogra∣pher) The king continued as yet obstinate, without being moued to feare at the sight of the miracle, and nothing turned at the humble sutes and requestes of the people: but on the contrarie commaunded vnder the paine of loosing goodes and life, that the French, that is, the Romish Order, should bee kept throughout all his Countries. Then it was saide to the great hearte griefe of euerie one, and that not without dolefull teares: Quo volunt Reges, vadunt leges &c. The Law must sing as likes the king, &c. Now this Legate Richarde was called home againe to Rome from out of his Ambassage, because of his insolencies, by Pope Vrbane the seconde, after hee had effected this mu∣tation and chaunge: which notwithstanding for some manner of contentment vnto the people, the auncient office and seruice was retained in sixe parishes at Toledo, and there it continueth still vnto this present, as it doth likewise in the Cathedrall Church, in the Chappell of Cardinall Ximenes, and in that of Doctor Talabricas, in the Cittie of Salamanca. But wee neede not doubt whether after all this time that Lithurgie bee much altered or no, no more then of that of S. The seruice of S. Ambrose corrupted. Ambrose, wherein they are not ashamed contrarie to all his writinges to rob the Communion of the cuppe, which continued without gain-saye, more then sixe hundred yeares afterwarde in the Church. Neyther haue they lesse spared to thrust into it certaine prayers, aswell in the little Canon (as they call it) as in the great, which by their owne confession (as wee shall see) were not receiued in∣to their Masse till a long time after, as Suscipe sancta Trinitas communicantes, &c. Other∣wise who coulde belieue that of so small differences shoulde rise so greate a discorde, or of so few wordes, so daungerous and notable an alteration in thinges of estate?
But what manner of Order, that Romish or Gregorian order was at that time, What manner of Order the Romish Order was. Ordo Roma∣nus ex Cossan∣dro & caeteris. which was brought in both with such earnest desire and difficultie; it may be seen in the booke which is left vs, approued and allowed by the most diligent searchers out of antiquitie: wherein notwithstanding wee obserue and note, that during the time that the Offertorie verses are singing, the people present and bring their offringes, that is to say, men and women, and nothing but bread and wine, & the Priestes and Deacons bread onelie: that hee which sayeth seruice, receiueth the of∣fringes, the Archdecon following him, who powreth all the little wine pots into one great cup, and the Subdeacons doe receiue and wrappe vppe the loaues in a sheete or white table cloath: that these offringes being receiued without the roome inclo∣sing the Altar, are by them brought in and set vppon the Table or Altar: then the Of∣fertorie being ended, that they are blessed with a prayer vttered in a low voice: & that eyther by the Bb. or the Pope himselfe, for in this Order whereof we haue the book, hee describeth the Masse of the Bb. of Rome: That the Bb. after hee hath communica∣ted himselfe, causeth the hosts or offrings (for so he calleth the consecrated bread) to be broken by the Priestes which are assisting, and partly he distributeth them himself: partlie he causeth them to bee distributed by the Bbs. Suffraganes, or by the Priestes vnto all the people, both men and women: That those to whome the Pope or Bb. of Rome hath ministred the Communion, are confirmed by the Archdeacon (these are the tearms and language of that time) that is to say, the Archdeacon giueth the cup to those, to whome the Pope hath giuen the bread, &c. That during all the time whiles the people are in communicating, the Schoole of singing men singeth Psalmes by counteruoices; which done, the postcommunion doth follow, that is to say, the Thanksegiuing after the Communion, and that shutteth vp all, making an end of the seruice. And it is not to be forgotten, that both leprouse men, and those which had the falling sicknes, were admitted to this publike Communion: the Leapers at one ta∣ble by themselues, and those which had the falling sicknes came all together, and al∣waies last, as it is to bee seene in the Epistles of Gregorie the third, Epist. Gregor. 33 & Zachar. ad Bonifacium. and Zachary vnto Boniface Archbishoppe of Mentz. Now vnto this forme appertained those ordinan∣ces which were made eyther by Charles the Great, or by Lewes his sonne, and they are those which follow: No Priest can sing a Masse alone: Lib. 5. c. 93. Add. 2. c. 7. for how then should hee say, God bee with you: Lift vppe your heartes on high? And in an other place: We finde not by the wordes of our Sauiour, the preceptes of Paule, nor the practise of the Apostles, that one Priest can celebrate alone the mysterie of the bodie and blood of our Lorde, &c. where hee calleth such Priestes, Solitarios, consecratores, sole and solitarie consecrators: and such courses to bee, Dehonorationem mysterii, to dishonour the misterie or sacrament. On the contrarie, L. 5. c. 182. festiuitates praeclaras. l. 6. c. 167. Ad. 3. c. 38 Charles the great willeth and vnderstandeth that things should be done according to the auncient Canons; That all vpon the Lords day and good feastes do communicate the Eucharist: Againe, That they offer daylie in the Church, and at the leaste haue one Sermon and communicate vppon the Lordes daye: because it is said, who so eateth not my flesh, and drinketh not my blood, &c. albeit the ecclesiasticall cen∣sure and punishment was practised principallie against those, which did abstaine and keepe themselues away three principall feaste dayes, and especially vppon the day which they called the day of the supper. But now in all this what similitude or a∣greement is there betwixt the Masse which is vsed at this day, where so many people present, are nothing else but so many gazers on, not participating, not hearing, not vnderstanding, and that which was then vsed? and by much stronger reasons, how farre vnlike must it bee vnto those, for the retayning whereof, there was such op∣posing and resistances made against the Romish Masse? And indeed the Latine Masse, which was vsed before the vniuersall receiuing of that other, about the yeare 700. What manner of Masse the Latine one was about 800. years ago. Index expur∣gatorius. p. 77. such as it was when Cassander brought it foorth vnto vs, and printed it in Germa∣nie, hath not that parte which is called the Canon; which yet is esteemed as the verie life and soule of the Masse. Wherefore they must not bee abashed if the Index expurgatorius ordayned by the Councell of Trent, inioyne that the Li∣thurgies of Cassander, aswell as the Catholike Romish and that Latine Masse
should bee razed and quite blotted out. And here let euerie man note and obserue the good faithfulnes and sound dealing of that Councel: for this booke is an Index or table of all the places, And what it is that doe displease them throughout all the authors, which haue written at anie time within this hundred yeares; yea, of some such as haue writ∣ten seauen or eight hundred yeares agoe, all which they appoint in the first next fol∣lowing impression to bee eyther omitted or chaunged, or cut off, and namely, those which are found in the commentaries which haue beene written vppon the auncient Doctors. Amongst others, they doe not forget Volaterrane, Polydore Virgill, Faber Stapulensis, Reuchlinus, Munster, Langus, Rhenanus, Viues, Erasmus, Cassander, &c. and to bee briefe, the most worthiest men of this age, that professe, as the Church of Rome professeth. That therefore wee may returne to our former purpose, such was the Masse in the time of S. Gregorie, yea and a long time after Charles the Great, through the grea∣test part of Christendome: such I say, as against which, notwithstanding for many no∣uelties contained therein, there were that opposed themselues, and yet neuerthelesse such as in which there remained the communiō intire, administred vnder both kinds, and vnto al the people: Concil. Bracar. 2, c. 84. neither did there any Canons or Doctors appeare at that time, which did anie thing contresay the same. The Councel of Bracare the second: Jf any man enter into the Church of God, and there hearing the Scriptures, doe insolenthe auoide himselfe from the communicating of the Sacraments, Concil. Altisi∣od. c. 42. &c. we will that he be excommunicated and cast out of the catholike Church. The Councell of Auxerre: Let euerie woman when shee communicateth haue her Sabath: but and if shee haue not, then let her not communi∣cate the next Lordes day. And Rabanus describing the seruice of his time: After the Sanctus (sayeth hee) the consecration of the body and blood of our Lorde is celebrated, then a verie earnest and feruent prayer vnto God, and after that the Lordes prayer; after∣warde when they come to communicate, the faithfull doe mutuallie giue and take the kisse of peace one at a nother, singing, O Lambe of God that bearest the sinnes of the world, haue pittie vppon vs: to the ende, that receiuing the sacrament in peace, wee may bee thought worthie to bee numbred among the children of God. And indeed to shew that the con∣secration serued not for any other purpose then for the Communion, Alexander Hales the auncientest of all the schoolemen, hath vttered these wordes a long time since; Alex. Hales. 4. q. 35. memb. 2. Ibid. solut. 2. Consecratio est propter communionem, communio maior est in effectu sanctitatis, quàm consecratio, &c. that is, the consecration is for the communion, and the communion is more holie in effect then the consecration, &c. And Cardinall Humbert, Hoc quotiescunque feceritis, &c. As oft (sayth he) as you shall blesse, as you shall breake, & as you shall distri∣bute & giue, Humber. cont. libel. Nicet. Monach. Gabr. Biel. Lect. 38. you shal do it in remembrance of mee: because (sayth he), that if anie one of these three (which soeuer it be) be omitted; it is not perfectlie to represent and shew the remembrance of the Lord. And Gabriell Biell of our time hath these wordes; The consecration is not alwaies the end of consecration: but rather the vsa that the faithfull make thereof, for the bodie and the blood are properlie consecrated, to the end that the faithfull may make vse there∣of in eating of the same, &c. And neuerthelesse, wee are not to doubt, but that the priuate Masses were very nimble and full of endeuour after the best manner that they could, to plant and establish themselues, though it were against the discipline of the Church, and that for both respectes, that is to say, in the first place vnder the name of being priuate; and secondlie in as much as they were without com∣munion: for against these wee haue the expresse lawes of Charles the Great, and of his sonnes: Lib. 5. c. 38. Addi. 4. c. 39. Lib. 1. c. 25. & 154. The Priest which performeth the Agenda, that is, the seruices in priuate pla∣ces without the license of the Bishoppe, let him bee degraded: let no man doe it in an other mans parish: yea, and let none bee ordained, but such as are appointed to some certaine parish, &c. And against the same in a further degree then the former, Walafridus, who liued in the time of Lewes the Gentle, after hee hath discoursed vnto vs by what de∣grees the Masse came to bee so common, as that in stead of one, which was wont to bee celebrated vppon the Lordes day in euerie Parish, at such time as the faithfull were wont to communicate all together, doth come in the end to make compari∣son or rather opposition betwixt the legitimate and lawfull Masses, and the solitarie
or priuate ones, calling the lawfull and legitimate those, Where there are (sayeth hee) a Priest, Answerers, Offerers and Communicants, as the forme of prayers vsed doth shew; and by consequent the solitarie or priuate ones (as hee calleth them,) wherein there is no communion, Walafr. c. 22. illegitimate, vnlawfull, and bastardlie. Adde hereto further, that in the time of Charles the Great, it was not wont to bee saide, Pro quibus tibi offerimus, for whom wee offer vnto thee: but which offer vnto thee this sacrifice of praise, Qui tibi offerunt hoc sacrificium laudis: seeing it was the people and not the Priest which of fered vnto God, Lib. 6. c. 173. and that a sacrifice not propitiatorie, but of praise. Againe, it is not to bee forgotten, how that amongst all the Churches which professed the name of Christ, there was not one but the Latine Church which did receiue them: witnes to all those of Greece, Russia, Syria, and Ethiopia, No Lithurgie but the Ro∣mish without a Communiō. in all which there was not vsed anie priuate Lithurgie or Masse: yea, some goe further and say, that there was not anie at all vsed, either for the liuing or for the dead, neither yet vpon anie other particular deuotion: but rather a publike one, and that according to the multitude of the people, whether it were dayly, or but euerie Lordes daye, and that in the language of the common people, and in which they did all communicate together in the Sacraments, and that vnder both kindes. Now let vs come to that which these ages and latter times haue added ouer and aboue vnto the making vp of the Masse: first, we reade how that in the time of Agatho, Additions to the Masse af∣ter the time of Gregorie. Plat. in Agath. that is to say, about the yeare 670. Iohn Bishoppe of Port did say the first Latine Masse in the Temple of S. Sophie at Constantinople, whereupon the allowance of Masses is drawne from the Grecians: and then we aunswere them, that if they approue and allow of that which was then, and not of that which is now; that then it must bee now at this day such as it was then. But was hee not ashamed for the insinuating of himselfe into the fauour of the Grecians, to father vppon Chrysostome a booke of the Masse, seeing wee finde it euident by that which hath beene saide heretofore, that it was not possible for him to heare it once spoken of in this signification? Processions. In the second place, Gregorie the first had instituted a procession to bee made vppon Easter day with a supplication or Letanie. Now the ordaining of these supplicati∣ons or Processions, did first rise vppon the occasion of publike calamities, as of the plague, of the earthquake, &c. for the taking away whereof the people ioyned together in prayers vnto God. But Honorius the first appointed that euery Lordes day, there should be a Procession made at Rome, from the day of S. Apolli∣naris vnto the daye of S. Peter, with Gregorie his Letanie. Some attribute that or∣dinaunce to Agapet. Sergius as a thirde Promoter of this worke of augmentation followeth aboute the yeare 690. and casteth in vnto the rest all the festiuall dayes, as namelie, the fowre Ladie dayes: and thus more and more superstition increased, as the Moone when shee is past the change, vntill it had gained the place and preheminence vpon the Lords dayes, and that in all places. This is the thing that Charles the Great, the true and trustie aduancer of all Romish in∣uentions speaketh of: Let the Priest with the companie of singers goe aboute the Church, &c. This same Sergius did further appoint, that whiles the bread of the Communion was in breaking, there should be sung, Agnus Dei, &c. hee gaue censers to the Church∣es: he ordained that the Priest should make three partes of the bread which he held in the Masse, according to the custome which was then established, namelie, that there should alwaies bee an ordinarie and set number of Communicantes: and that there should not bee anie Masse without a Communion: The breaking of the bread into three parts and that the casting of the bread (ordained for the same) into three parts, should bee to the end, that the Priest might haue one part; the other officers of the Church an other, and the people that did com∣municate the third. But whereas then also; these priuate Masses beganne, in which the same order of breaking and deuiding of the bread into the said partes was conti∣nued notwithstanding that no man but the Priest alone did receiue & eate of it, that no absurdity might seeme to cleaue vnto this practise, it was clapt into a misticall mat∣ter: the meaning whereof sayeth hee is, Because that one parte of Christ is risen, ano∣ther parte walking vppon earth, and a thirde parte of him remaining in the Sepulcher, &c.
Others there are, who had rather vnderstand it to signifie and haue relation to the faithful in heauen, on earth, and in Purgatorie. Others again vnderstand thereby the Patriarkes Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob: and so euery man according as his inuention pleased him, The Pax. and Allegories likewise of the same stampe. The fourth Maister of this augmentation was Innocent the first, who in steade of the custome vsed amongst the auncient faithfull to kisse in signe of peace, ordained a Canon, whereout leapte that law & decree of Charles the great: Lib. 1. c. 53. & l. 5. c. 94. Vt pax detur ab omnibus, confectis Christi sacramentis: that is, that the peace, that is, the kisse of peace shold be giuen of al, &c. And he yeeldeth a rea∣son: because that therein is signified the true concord, &c. Now a little before the time of Charles the great, Leo the second had changed the same into superstition, orday∣ning in stead thereof the plate of siluer or copper, which is wont to bee held out to kisse after the consecration, Of taking of the Eucharist with the mouth. Lib. 7. cap. 367 Concil. Altifi∣od. c. 36.37. which within a while after was receiued together with the rest of the ceremonies. The fift practise of augmentation was, that where the Eucharist had wont to bee deliuered into the hands of the Communicantes, yea and that in the time of Charles the great, as appeareth by this Canon: Vt qui accepe∣rint, sumant, That those which haue taken it with their hand, may take it with their mouth, for otherwise let them bee shutte out and excluded for sacrilegious persons. It was now forbidden women to touch it with their naked handes, yea, and to touch the lin∣nens wherein the Sacramentes were wrapped: far from the practise which was vsed by Gorgonia, the sister of Nazianzene, who handled it with her handes, and kept it about her, going aboute her busines. Then they beganne to giue it them at their mouthes, Alber. Krantz. in Metrop. l. 1. c. 19. Beda de rat. temp. lib. 2. Paul Diacon. l. 6. de gestu Longobard. Adon. aetat. 6. Many Masses. as wee reade of Iustinian in Nicomedia, who tooke it with his mouth at the hand of the Bishoppe of Rome; and of Witikind which saw, as hee said, a little childe, who had it giuen into his mouth; for euen such fables were plentifull at this time. The sixt, there was wont to bee celebrated but one common supper for all, and so by consequent they had in euerie Temple or Church but one Table or Altar. But as the people grew slower and slower in communicating; so they perswaded them so much the more to bring offrings, yea constrained them thereto by the Canons of their Synods, and by the lawes of the Empire: and to this end they made men belieue that it was sufficient for them to bee present onelie, so that they forget not to offer, in so much that Masses and Altars did multiplie, the communion in the meane time wi∣thering and falling away; and that so farre foorth, as that the Priestes themselues sometimes did not receiue it, Lib. 7. c. 50. though they had consecrated the same. This is faithful∣ly witnessed by Charles the great his lawes: Let the people bee warned to offer, Iugiter, continuallie: Whereas the former went no further, but to communicate often, and the reason is added: Because that these offringes are verie profitable for those which offer and for theirs: Lib. 6. c. 16. Concil. Altissi. cap. 10. Againe, Let the people offer daylie to the Priests, or at the least euerie Lords day, &c. And for the multiplying of Masses these goodlie Canons: It is not lawfull to say two Masses vpon one Altar in one day: neyther yet for any Priest to say anie the same daye vpon the Altar, whereupon the Bishoppe shall haue saide one. And of the not com∣municating of the Priestes themselues: Wee will (sayeth Charles) That so oft as the Priest doth offer the bodie and blood of Christ, so oft hee doe receiue the same, &c. Because (sayeth the Canon) manie doe otherwise as it is reported vnto vs: Concil. Tolet. 12. De consecr. Dict. 2. c Re∣latum est. Lib. 6. Car. c. 118. Concil. Worm. c. de purgand. Monach. Concil. Altisi∣od. c. 12. Carol. lib. 1. cap. 161. insomuch, as that there is neede that the Emperour his authoritie shoulde prouide for the same. The seauenth, and by this you may see how farre the abuse was now growne: namelie, as that if a Monke had robde the Monasterie of neuer so little a thing, for his pur∣gation, hee was put to receiue the Sacrament in these wordes: Corpus Domini sit tibi in purgationem, Let the bodie of the Lord bee thy purgation; that is for a proofe and triall, whether thou bee guiltie or no: whereas they were wonte to say in the sup∣per: To feede thee vnto eternall life: Some gaue it vnto the deade; whereuppon the Canon in the councell of Auxerre was made, De Eucharistia mortuis non danda: and all did vse to giue it to young children: whereuppon came the constitution and lawe made by Charles the great: To haue the Eucharist readie for to giue to children e∣uerie daye. Others, did weare it at their breast, as they vse to doe the Agnus Dei, the blessed graines, &c. at this day. The eight practise was the beginning of the con∣secrating
of it in honour of the Saintes, the Masse drawing to their profit and aduan∣tage, all the abuses and poisonous infections which were sprung vp together in the Church. Whereupon we reade, that Gregorie the third added these wordes vnto the Canon: Quorum festiuitas hodiè celebratur, whose feast is solemnized this day: About the yere 750. and 800. because that at this time beganne the inuocation of Saintes to be very rife in the Church of Rome. To be briefe Adrian the first, as we haue seene, redoubled and drew out the Offertorie into a far greater length; to the end that there might be the more time & leasure for the bringing of their offeringes, and caused to be receiued, so neere as he could, the Gregorian office in euerie place. So likewise did Stephen his successor: and ordained moreouer, that in euery Masse said vpon the Lords day, there should be sung Gloria in excelsis; whereof wee haue a law by Charles the Great: lib. 6. c. 170. The saying of Masses for the dead, was not yet established by law. Ep. 2. Gregor. ad. Bonifac. in Tom. 2. concil. Naucler. Ge. 25 so carefull was he to apply himselfe to all their decrees and nouelties. And all this fell betwixt the time of Gregorie the first, and the thirde, which fell about the time of Pipin and Charles toward the yeare 800. And yet this is to be noted, that Masses for the dead were not as yet established by law: for Boniface the great Apostle of the Romaine ceremonies in Germanie, consulting with Gregorie the second about his commis∣sion, demaunded of him amongst other questions: If kinsfolkes shoulde offer for their dead, and so thereupon was inioyned by the Pope to see it done and obserued. CHAP. IX. What was the manner of the proceeding of the Masse, and of the making vp of the same, as also of the vse thereof after the time of Charlemaine, and particularly of the ta∣king away of the cup of the Lord. NOw we haue hitherto seene the setting together and building of the Masse, and that for many ages, and by many authors and rearers of the same; and of the diuers & differing peeces where∣of it was patcht. From henceforward we are to looke vpon and take the view of the rising, not so much of the building, as of the vse and manner of vsage thereof, falling out more pernicious & faultie then the former. Let vs alwaies call to mind; that the holy Supper by hy his first institution, was a remembraunce of the death and passion of our Lord, and a communicating of the faithfull in the bodie and blood of the same, with the creatures of bread and wine, as seales and assurances of eternall life: and wee haue seene the making of a Supper without any Communion; a pretended sacrifice without any remembraunce of the death of Christ. But now it becommeth a custome to vse it in remembraunce, not any more of the passion of our Lord, and of the merite of his crosse, but of the Saints, Masses in the honour of the Saints, and for diuers other vses. of their sufferings, and of their merites. It is made good for all vses, for the liuing & for the dead, for the whole and for the sicke, for men and for beasts, for the fruits of the earth and the distemperatures of the aire, &c. This is now from henceforth be∣come a Catholicon and vniuersal remedie, good for euerie thing, except for that from which it is fallen and degenerate: as namely for that for which the holy Supper was instituted: and contrariwise, there is not left vnto the holy Supper, (whose place it vsurpeth) the least marke or signe of it selfe. It is good for the dead: Let the remembrance of the dead be made in all Masses, Concil. Cabi∣lon. Can. 33. (saith the Councell of Caualion: and the reason is added though it bee smally to the pur∣pose: For euen so (saith it) therein is prayer dayly made for the liuing. And it was likewise at this time, that they were begun to bee ordained by tennes and thirties, &c. as it appeareth by the Epistles of Sigibaldus, Torchelmas, Cuthbertus, Lullus, &c. of gi∣uing landes to the Church, in these wordes: Offero Deo omnes res quae in hac chartula continentur insertae, pro remissione peccatorum meorum & parentum, ad seruiendum Deo ex its, in sacrificiis, Missarumq́ue solemniis, &c. I offer vnto God all that which is contained in this
scedule, for the remission of my sinnes, and the sinnes of my forefathers; for the seruice of God practised in the offering of sacrifices and saying of Masses: a thing neuer heard of to bee vttered and spoken of by any former writers. Good against tempestes: Call to your mindes (saith Lullus) and remember to sing the Masses, which are accustomed to be sung for tempests. Good against sicknes: The priests (saith Wigbertus) at this time haue said euery one of them fiue Masses, for the recouerie of Lullus. Good for warres: Let the Priests (saith Charles and Lotharius) say the Masses vsed for them that go to wars with vs. Good for to purge offenders: If any man in the Monasteries (saith the Councell of Wormes) be suspe∣cted of theft, let him be purged by the taking of the Sacrament. And Sybicon Bb. of Spire in the councell of Mentz, about the yeare 1100. did by it purge himselfe of adultery. Good to hallow cities and fortresses: Leo the fourth about the yeare 900. did hallow the Cittie Leopolis, against the Saracens. And finally, good against inchanters (for the priestes do vse the hallowed linnens, wherein the Eucharist is wrapped) for to quench and put out fire. And it was requisite, that the Councell of Schelestat should helpe and remedie the same by an expresse article. Concil. Seleg∣stad. c. 6. But how farre off are all these vses from that which is ordained by the Sonne of God: He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, he abideth in me, and I in him. Againe: All we (saith the Apostle) which doe eate one and the same bread, are one bodie, &c. But let vs proceed: if it bee S. Gregories, it deliuereth soules out of Purgatorie: if of S. Roc, from the plague: if of S. Anthonie the Hermite, it saueth cattell: if of S. Sigismund, it cureth the feauer: if S. Anthonies of Padua, it bringeth againe lost things: if S. Apollines, it taketh away tooth-ache: if S. Lucies, it cleareth the eyes: if of the holy Ghost, it giueth a faire husband or a beautifull wife, &c. And for euery one there must be obserued a particular ceremo∣nie; a set number of tapers lighted, & to say them vpon some certaine altars, &c. And would S. Paule say, Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, were they crucified for you? And is there any other death or passion auailable amongst Christians, but the Lords? or any other commemoration & remembrance ordained in the Church but that of Christs? what more? Gabriel Biel saith: It profiteth verie specially, indifferently, and very general∣ly: most specially him which saith it, for it is worth eternall life to him: most generally, that is, all the Church: for all the members thereof doe participate of the same though they bee not there: and yet but indifferently, that is to say him, for whom it is particularly said: (and in his greatest efficacie, and highest prerogatiue) Ex opere operato sine bono motu vtentis, onely by the worke done, & being present thereat, though there be neuer a good motion brought there∣to by him that is present. How farre then (if we will belieue them) is it more precious then the holy supper instituted by Christ? for the worthy receiuing whereof, euerie man is to proue himselfe, enter into iudgement with his deeds, turne ouer the booke of his conscience, and foresee the wrath of God in comming vnworthily? And who will find it strange, that the people did cast off the holy supper, for to runne to the Masse, the practise whereof is so easie, and yet withall so readie to bring saluation? where there is nothing to do but to cast abroad the eyes, without taking any due con∣sideration of any thing, or to open the eares, without the vnderstanding of any thing. Againe, it is scarce credible, how vnder the ignorance of these times, it was receiued of kingdomes and commonwealthes, and the Lordes supper laide aside, as a mani∣fest iudgement of God, for the despising of his holy institution, and casting of it far from them, for from hence forwarde you heare not any thing spoken, but of the founding of Masses: all whatsoeuer duties belonging to the quicke or the dead are reduced into that: all the whole order of priesthood hath no other occupation. And whereas our Lord had said vnto all his Apostles: Go and preach the Gospell vnto all na∣tions, baptise, do this in remembrance of me: about the yeare 1000. they beganne to or∣daine and make priestes, Vid. Iuellum, c. 13. Synodus Sele∣stadiensis, c. 5. Synod. Rom. c. 5. c. 21. q. 2. Praecipimus. with these wordes: Accipe potestatem Missas celebrandi, & sacrificium offerendi provinis & mortuis, take thee power and licence to celebrate Masses, & to offer sacrifice for the quicke and the dead: yea you may see the Councels busied and bent to the keeping in of the forwardnesse of the ouerflowing streames of the same. Let it not bee lawfull (say they) for any Masses to bee said in publique places: let it not be lawfull for any moe to be said in one day in the Monasteries then one Masse,
yea and that by the decree of Saint Frauncis: Francise. in ep. ad fratres. Carol. l. 1. c. 25 Let it not be lawfull (saith one) for the Priest to say any moe then one: saith an other, not to say any moe then two: and an other then three at the most in one day. There shall not any priest be made absolute∣ly, that is to say, without title, or without a certaine parisp; and hee shall say but one in the place of the publique assemblie. On the contrarie, there is now no more spo∣ken of the Supper of the Lord in the Church: the Chambermaid hath put her leg o∣uer her mistresses bed. One Canon saith: That who so shall not communicate three times a yare at the least: as at the Natiuitie of Christ, Easter, and Whitsontide, shall nor bee held for a Catholike. But an other doth yet rebate of this number, and saith: Who so shal not communicate at the least once a yeare, shall be held as excommunicate. And then commeth the custome of distributing the holy bread vnto them, that is, a great loafe com∣ming of the offerings, in stead of the bread of the holy supper. And which is worse; to aduance and raise themselues in authoritie from day to day aboue the laytie: first they bring in a custome, that the laitie should not communicate any more with the Priest but onely three or foure of the Clearkes: and afterwarde neither laitie nor Clearkes, setting it downe that it was sufficient if there were one answerer, whome they called Gampanarium, that is, he who is wont to ring the hell. And finally the laitie came to be almost quite shut out from all, for the Priestes euen then when they were to communicate, did take from them the cuppe of the Lord; and to leaue them some shadow and blind picture of the same, they allow and permit them onely to wash their mouthes: whereas the Lord had said, Drinke ye all of this: which all the church vnderstandeth to bee, that, All the people haue commandement to take and to drinke. Now also this is the reason, wherefore by degrees they came to this little bread or wafer cake vsed in the Masse. For as the assemblies were great, so they brought many great loaues, which were cut in gobbets, and distributed vnto the people: and as they grew to drawe backe, and to diminish in number, came the decree of Clement the third: that there should not be any more bread set vpon the altur, then should bee necessarie and requisite for the number of the people that was to communicate. And so in the end it comming to this, that there did not any moe but the priest and his clearke cōmunicate; yea & for the most part none but the priest himselfe alone: from many loaues of an ordinarie bignesse, they came to one great one, and from one great one to a middle sised loafe: and in the end to this little one (saith Durandus) of the bignes of a penie, denarioli. And to help and salue all the whole matter, Gemma ani∣mae. c 36. he goeth about to pay vs with an allegorie, for lacke of sound reason to make better payment withall: Because (saith he) our Lord was solde for the like peece of money. Let euerie man iudge here againe, who ought to be accounted the innouator, and new fangled: they which woulde restore and set antiquitie in her place againe, to the shouing out of these nouelties, which are we: or els they who would vphold and maintaine these nouelties against antiquitie: and those our aduersaries doe euidently shew them∣selues to be. And yet let vs not think that this spirit of nouelties, Additions to the Masse. which hath of so long time ac∣companied the Romish church, hath cast it off and forsaken it in these latter times, for we haue manifest marks and signes to the contrarie. All the curious ouerlookers and expounders of the Romish order are of one mind and consent; that betwixt the offe∣ring and the Canon, or the secret, as they call it, there was not any prayer wont to be said. But now we find within the space of these foure hundred yeares, or there about, fiue to be placed and put in, as they themselues also doe acknowledge; and it is the same which they call the pettie Canon: that is to say, Suscipe sancte Pater hanc hostiam: or els as it is in some others, Suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem, Belarm. de Canon. receiue O Lord God this oblation or host, which I offer vnto thee for my sinnes, which are innumerable, and for those of all them which are present, and for all faithfull Christians either aliue or deade, to the ende that it may be profitable vnto mee and them vnto saluation, and eternall life. Againe, O Deus qui humanae substantiae: Offerimus tibi Domine calicem salutaris, in spiritu humilitatis, &c. Ven: Sanctificator Spiritus: Then the blessing of the incense, Anno 1065. wherein there is men∣tion made of a propitiatorie sacrifice: and of the intercession of Saint Michael: new
praiers cast and molded according to the mettall of the time vpon new and straunge doctrines. Alexander the second, put the Alleluiah out of office, from the time called Septuagesima, Herm. Gigas. vntill Easter: albeit that by an epistle written frō Michael of Constanti∣ple, Anno 1090. 1165. 1200. 1370. 1250. Nauclerus Gezer. 42. Vnder the Em∣perour Ro∣dolph. The Councell of Colen. it may seeme that that decree was more ancient. Vrbane the second ordained a Masse to be said vpon euerie Saturday in the honour of the Virgine Marie. Calixtus the third ordained the office of the transfiguration. Innocent the third, comman∣ded that the Psalme Deus venerunt Gentes, should be sung after the Agnus Dei. Grego∣rie the ninth, brought in the Salue Regina, with the ringing of the bell. Albert the great, compiled the sequences for the most part. And Thomas of Aquin the Office. which they call the Office of the feast of God. A Councell held at Colen ordained how the host should be chosen, namely round, and verie smooth and sleeke, not too old, of what bignes, how it should be couered, how it should be eleuated, what man∣ner of wine it should be, and what water, in what proportion and quantitie, how the priest should discerne and iudge of them by their odor and smell: what manner of ones the hallowed linnens should bee, what cautions, prouisoes, and remedies are to bee vsed in respect of the sowring and moulding of it, as also to keepe it from the rats, mice, cobwebs, &c. that is to say, according as the errour of Transubstantia∣tion increased, An. 1165. so likewise the errours in ceremonies accompanying the same increa∣sed. Whereupon it came, that Innocent the third, in the Councell of Laterane willed that the host should bee kept in some coffer or casket appointed of purpose for the same: Anno 1216. Blond. l. 7. dec. 2. and declareth how that the wordes of the Canon are equall to the wordes of the Gospell. And Honorius the third enioyned euerie man to kneele downe at the eleuation of the host: and that it should be caried in decent habites vnto the diseased and sicke. And Grergorie the ninth for notice or warning sake, added the ringing of the bell. It was likewise instituted and ordained in these latter times, that the Canon shoulde bee vttered in a lowe voice: whereuppon it is called a secrete. And Hugo de Sancta Victoria, Durand. l. 4. c. 35. Beleth, cap. 44. Durandus, Honorius, and Beleth doe yeelde a rea∣son: Because (say they) that euerie man can it by hart, and because that some of the Pastors a∣bused it to transubstantiate their bread into flesh, as it came to passe, and yet they were neuerthe∣lesse miraculously punished by fire from heauen: Gabriel Biel. contrarie to the auncient vse of the East and West Churches, as appeareth by all their lithurgies, in which the wordes of the consecration are pronounced with a loude and audible voice. And yet notwithstanding it is to be noted, The prescript formes of the Masse, were diuers and not all one till the yeare 1200. that it was a long time, that is to say, more then 600. yeares after Gregorie the first, before it could bee obtained, that there should be but one prescript forme of the Masse throghout all the latine church. For we reade about the yeare 1000. and Bellarmine confesseth the same; that Bruno the brother of Otho the Great, Archb. of Colen, did as then reforme the office and order of the Masse in his diocesse, according to that of Rome. And likewise in France they had Masses, which they called two faced, three faced, and foure faced Masses, bifaciatas, trifaciatas, &c. becaused they respected three or foure diuers subiectes: as namely diuers Saints, & for that they were to diuers ends, saue onely when they came to the offertorie; and notwithstanding they concluded with one Canon, which time hath at length abolished, Petrus Cantor in verbo ab∣breuiato, Such as haue spoken a∣gainst these abuses. or rather the good husbanding of the priestes, who would haue dispatched all at twice or thrice. Tantae molis erat (saith one speaking to that pur∣pose) Romanam condere Missam. Loe here you may see how that the Masse would take his foundation & root from the holy Supper, hath in the end cast it quite out of house & harbor, so that now the place thereof doth not know it, or any the signes & markes therof any more. And therefore they need not to maruaile, if Petrus Cantor more thē 400. yeares since, did taxe & confute the multiplying & profaning of Masses: blamed the priests for hauing left the preaching of the word, for to sing Masses: for hauing se∣wed and set together again the vale of the Temple, Petrus Cantor in verbo ab∣breuiato, citat. per Cardinal. Alliac. rent in sunder by the death of our Lord, to bring Iudaisme again by their ceremonies: & in summe (saith he) for hauing neglected the commandements of God to follow the inuentions of men. Neither yet if Arnoldus de Villa noua one of the most famous men of his time and age, saide: that for these three hundred yeares, the Masses and sacrifices for the deade haue
not beene any thing but abuses and departinges from the veritie of Christ: that the Priest in his pretended sacrifice, doth offer nothing vnto God; and that the Deuill by succession of time hath turned out of their right way, and caused to erre all Christian people from the truth of our Lord and Maister. If the Waldenses, and after them the Albigenses, which haue replanted Christianitie by their dispearsinges and scatte∣ringes, according to the purenes and sinceritie of the Gospell, did teach at this time; that the Masse did retaine and hold nothing of the institution of Christ, neither for the liuing nor for the dead: that the consecration was not tyed to the wordes of the Canon, but to the Lordes institution: that the holy Supper ought to be celebrated according to that institution, or else that it is no supper: that all other ceremonies therein are vnprofitable, and the vulgar or naturall tongue of euery people necessary for the instruction of the people, &c. If also, the king S. Lewes, (although caried a∣way with the streames of custome,) did exhort Henrie king of England to heare ser∣mons taken out of the word of God, rather then to frequent Masses: Matth. Paris. addit. Because (saith he) the one will bee much more auaileable vnto you to saluation then the other. But because we haue handled it before, how that the priestes had got so much by their daies la∣bors, that they had in the end cut off, and taken away the cup of the Lord from the people: it concerneth vs now consequently to looke about vs, and see by what pro∣ceedings they attained thereto, being no change or alteration, but a meere dismem∣bring and violent rent, vndertaken in so deepe a degree of presumption, and perfor∣med with so high and horrible an enterprise of sacriledge. CHAP. X. That the Communion vnder both kindes was practised all in the old Church. SEeing for certaintie that our Lord Iesus Christ hath once said, The commu∣nion vnder both kindes. Take, drinke ye all, this is the cuppe of the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you: where shall be found such a priest, as dare vn∣der the name of the church, refuse & deny to giue the same vnto the faithfull? and what faithfull person should he be, that should not be so bold as to vrge and importune the priest, if he denie the cup, the blood, and the saluation in the blood of our Lord shed for vs: the cup of the couenant, if we will not willingly bee excluded and shut out from it: the cup of the new Testament, if wee will not by too open and euident a contempt, frustrate and make of no effect our inheritance: if wee will not be blotted out of the booke of children? And yet such are excommunicate, as require that they may haue the communion in the blood of Christ: and which do stifly hold and contend, that the one halfe of the legacies bequeathed them by their Lord and Maister his last will and testament is stolne from them, those are called Sacramentarie Heretickes, which complaine, that the Sacrament of the bloode of Christ is taken from them. And it is nothing but noueltie, newfanglednes, and inno∣uation, to haue recourse to this will and testament, whose title is so auncient and authentike: or to sue by force and vertue of the couenantes and conditions contai∣ned and agreed vpon therein. It is antiquitie to eiect, disseise and dispossesse vs, by a new ordinance, which hath no ground nor foundation but meere fansies; no reason but presumption; an antiquitie which cannot but verie hardly and with great diffi∣cultie deriue his pedegree further then one generation. But now let vs looke into the stately march and proceeding of this great abuse. The holy Supper of our Lord is cut off, as we haue seene close by the ground and vpon the ruines thereof is built the Ro∣mish Masse. By this meanes the people hath beene frustrate of the ordinarie vse of the bodie and blood of Christ. From weekes it hath beene reiourned and put off to monethes: from monethes to quarters: and finally from quarters to once a yeare. In stead of the bread of the Eucharist, there is giuen the holy bread when they go out
from the Masse: In stead of the cuppe of the Lord in the communion: they are now vouchsafed as much as will wash their mouthes, and all this from time to time coue∣red with the glorious name of the Church. And what shall wee then say if all the olde Church be cleane contrarie thereunto? If of all the deformities and corruptions of the same there bee not one that is newer or later then this? Let vs trace ouer there∣fore the ages of the worlde, and the workes of the fathers: for I am willingly dipo∣sed to take the paines to make it plaine vnto the readers, though they might enuy me for the same; and though this matter be of the nature of those, whereof S. Augustine hath giuen this rule: Valeat ad sui demonstrationem ipsa rei ouidentia, let the euidence and clearnes of the thing it selfe, deale and speake for the proofe thereof. Saint Paule in the first to the Corinthians beginneth at that end: 1. Cor. 11. I haue receiued of the Lord, that which I haue also giuen vnto you: he is not so bold as these fellowes, which giue cleane contrarie, euen that which they haue neuer receiued; and that which hee had receiued, and that which he gaue, that is, the communion vnder both kinds. Let vs vse this word kindes for the signes or Sacraments, that so we may the better ap∣ply and fit our selues vnto them. As oft (saith he) as you shal eate this bread & drink this cup, &c. Let euerie man proue himselfe, and so let him eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup, &c. The man (saith he) and not the Apostle, nor the disciple, nor the Priest, nor the Clearke, but euerie Christian, for so he writeth vnto the Church of God which is in Corinth, to the sanctified in Iesus Christ, to them which are called Saintes: Yea and vnto all them (saith hee) which call vppon the name of our Lord, in what place soeuer they be. Ignatius writing to the whole Church of Philadelpha: The consent of the fathers Ignatius ad Philadelph. Anno salutis. 100. Iren. lib. 4. c. 32 33.34. I exhort you (saith he) that you vse all one faith, one publike ministerie and preaching of the word, and one Eucharist: for there is but one flesh of Iesus Christ, and one blood shed for vs; one bread broken for all, and one cup di∣stributed to all. He saith to all and not to the priestes onely: for euen in the same epi∣stle before these words he had made mention of the Bb. Elder, Deacons and people. Irenaeus ioyneth and coupleth both of them together continually. The Lord hath commanded (saith he) vnto his disciples, to offer vnto God the first fruits of his creatures; the bread to be his body, and the cup to be his blood, &c: and we neuer find them seperated the one from the other in him. Saint Cyprian writing vnto Cornelius the Pope: Epist. 2. Anno 200. How (saith he) doe we teach, how doe we incite and stirre vp the faithfull to shedde their blood, for the confession of the name of Christ, if we denie vnto them his blood? vnto them who haue to fight for him? How shall wee fit them for the cuppe of Martirdome, if wee haue not first receiued them into the Church, to drinke the cup of the Lord, by the right of communicating? And in an other place making mention of the historie of a Deacon, which gaue the Sacrament of the wine vnto a young maid possessed of a Deuill: Serm. 5. de lapsis. As (saith he) after the solemne consecration accom∣plished, the Deacon began to giue the cup to those that were present, and that the rest hauing re∣ceiued the same, it came to the young maid her turne to take it; she began to turne her face away, by the instinct and motion of his diuine Maiestie, &c. Loe here the distributing thereof vnto the laitie both men and women, and not vpon speciall priuiledge, but by com∣mon right, for he calleth it, Ʋis communicationis. Besides that all the rest of the dispute which hee maintaineth against them that tooke nothing but water, Contra A∣quarios, may bee brought into this purpose, in as much as his scope and drift is to bring them continually to vse both kindes, Gabr. Biel. lect. 84. litera R. commanded in the holy Supper. Where∣upon Gabriel Biel saith: He spake (saith he) according to the manner of the Church which he gouerned, in which it may bee that in his time the communion was administred vnder both kindes. And in like sort Ecchius De sumptione Eucharistia, hom. 33. Both these not∣withstanding great schoolemen in our time. Tertullian saith: Lib. 5. aduersus Marcionem. Tertul. ad vxo∣rem. lib. 2. By the Sacrament of bread and of the cup, we haue proued in the Gospell the veritie of the bodie & of the blood of our Lord against the fantasticall dreames of Marcion. And in an other place, speaking of the woman which was maried to an infidell: At whose hand shall she desire, vz. the sacrament of bread: With whome shall she participate of the cup? that is, the sacrament of wine.
Origen neuer otherwise: The faithfull (saith he) doe eate in the bread the bodie of Christ, they drinke in the wine his blood: For so said our Lord vnto his disciples: Take and eate, take and drinke, &c: and he would not that either the one or the other should be reserued for the next day, &c. Iustinus Martyr is yet more plaine: After the Pastor hath giuen thankes, Iust. Mart. Apol. 2.  and the bles∣sing of all the people, the Deacons gaue vnto euerie one of those that were present, a piece of bread, & of the cup delaied with water, by which is administred the Eucharist or Sacrament of Thankesgiuing: & likewise they left off the carrying of it vnto those which were absent. And this is it which we call the Eucharist, &c. And this place is so much more forcible, be∣cause therin is described the whole forme of the holy supper in the Primitiue church. And as for S. Denis, I can produce him as a witnesse in this point in his Lithurgie, where he speaketh orderly of the communicating and distributing of both kinds: but I let it alone for a fitter place, in as much as I haue sufficiently shewed, that this re∣straint of the cup could not be either in the first or second age. In the same manner the lithurgies attributed vnto S. Iames and S. Clement: besides that in this latter by name, speaking of them which communicate in the bodie and blood, by the distri∣bution of the Bb. and Deacon, he vseth these wordes: After that, let the Bishop take the Eucharist, then let the Elders, Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, Chanters and Ascets: and of women, the Deaconnesses, maides and widowes, & in the end the children & all the people, eue∣rie one in his order and place, with reuerence and without any tumult, &c. The Article of the Councell of Nice which is found in the librarie of Vatican, Anno 300 saith thus: At this diuine table let vs not abase or bow our selues before the bread & cup, which are there set before vs, but lifting vp our minds, let vs by faith thinke and consider, how that the lambe of God taking away the sinnes of the world, lyeth in this table offered by the priests, with∣out being sacrificed; and how that we receiuing in truth his precious bodie, do belieue these things to be the signes of our resurrection. This is the cause why we take not much, but a little, to the end that we may know that we take them not to fill vs, but to sanctifie vs. Now wee cannot doubt of whom he speaketh, for there the question is of all the faithfull. S. Hillarie: The bodie and bloud of our Lord taken and drunke, doe cause vs to be in Christ, Accepta & hausta. Hillar. l. 8. de Trinit. Hillar. de con∣secrat. D. 2. C. Si non. and Christ in vs. These two tearmes are vsed respectiuely, and haue relation to the two kinds. And in another place: If that a mans sinnes be not so great as that they let and hin∣der him from the Communion, then let him not in any case seperate and keep away himselfe from the phisicke of the bodie and blood of our Lord. And as there were at this time, (that is to say, about the yeare 340.) some which would not altogether cut off the vse of the cup, but giue bread dipped in wine, which they called Intinctam, vnder the colour, Euseb. l. 6. c. 44. Cyprian serm. 4. de lapsis. Prosper de promis. c. 6.26. q. 6. C. Is in Decret. Iulius Papa de Consecratione dist. 2. Canon. Cum omne paragr. illud. Anno 400. Ambr. l. 2. Of∣fic. c. 41. Ambr. l. 4. c. 6. de Sacram. & l. 5. c. 3. l. 5, c, 1, 2.3. that in extraordinarie cases it had beene pra∣ctised in the behalfe of children and those which were sicke, as may be seene in the hy∣storie of Serapio, in S. Cyprian de lapsis, and in Prosper de Promis. &c. So Iulius the Bb. of Rome maintained the contrarie, and that very roughly, namely, that it was against the institution of Christ, against the doctrine of the Apostles & Euangelists, & against the custom of the Church. And that for to decide the controuersie, there was no other course to be taken, but to repaire to the head & fountain of truth, frō whence the my∣steries of the Sacraments do proceed. Where (saith he) hath our Lord-ordained the bread by it selfe, & the cup by it selfe? &c. And what would he say then if he should see his suc∣cessors, cutting the cup off altogether? & condemning of heresie those which demand it? Or what can they aunswere vnto vs, when we are able to proue against them, both by authoritie, as also by the very same reasons that their predecessors vsed? In S. Ambrose, Laurence the Deacon saith, that the Bb. Sixtus had committed to him the dispensing and administring of the blood of our Lord, (and so in deed this was the ordinarie Office of the Deacons:) and he called it Consummationem Sacramen∣torum, the accomplishing of the sacraments: as not accompting it perfect without the cup. Yea, and he himselfe did neuer seperate the bread from the cup: Thou hast (saith hee vnto the people) receiued the heauenly Sacraments, the body and blood of our Lord, &c. And thereto applyeth the words of the Canticles: I haue eaten my bread with my hony, Canticl. ch. 5. and drunke my wine with my milke, &c. Againe: If as oft as the blood is powred out, it be vnto the
remission of sinnes, e consecrat. st. 2. c. Si uotiescūque. Ambr. in epist. . ad Cor. I ought to receiue it euerie day, to the end that euery day my sinnes may bee forgiuen me. And in another place, to the end that we may not thinke that he speaketh of himselfe, he speaketh vnto euery faithfull one: Thou receiuest the remission of sinnes, and art drunke with the spirit, &c. And yet more plainely: for hee will giue a reason, al∣though it be but a bad one: Because (saith he) that that which we take serueth for the de∣fence of the bodie and of the soule: for the flesh of Christ is offered for the saluation of the bodie, and the blood for the saluation of our soules, as Moyses did foreshew: The flesh (saith he) is of∣fered for your bodie, Ambr. in 1. ad Cor. 11. and the blood for your soule, &c. Which agreeth well with the rule which he giueth, intreating of this sacrament. Hee is vnworthy (sayeth he) of the Lord which celeb rateth this mysterie otherwise then it hath beene giuen him: for hee cannot bee de∣uout therein, who presumeth to giue it otherwise then it hath beene deliuered vnto him by the author, &c. And yet notwithstanding impudent and shamelesse dealing hath so raig∣ned heretofore, Officium Am∣brosianum. as that in the office going vnder his name, there is no mention made of the communion of the bodie, against the expresse doctrine of S. Ambrose. S. Ierome vpon Sophonie: Hieron. in Soph. cap. 3. The Priestes which serue in the administration of the Eucha∣rist, and which distribute vnto the people of the Lord his blood, do transgresse wickedly against the law of Christ, in supposing that the wordes and not the life do make the Eucharist, &c. He speaketh by name of the people. Ad Damas. And vnto Damasus: We are fed euery day with the flesh of the Lord, we are watered with his blood: this banquet is celebrated euerie day. Saint Augustine: August. in lib. sentent. Prosper. de consecr. d. 1. ca∣non. Du fran∣gitur. & Can. Qui mandu∣cant. August. in Le∣uit. c. 57. When the host is broken, when the blood is powred out of the cup into the mouthes of the faithfull, that is, of all the communicants, what can be ment or signified ther∣by but the bodie of the Lord offered vpon the crosse, and the blood shed out of his side? Againe: They which eate & drinke Christ, do eat and drinke life: To eate him is to make himselfe again; to drinke him is to liue. And the Glosse doth say excellent well vpon that place, Vnder the kinds of bread & wine. And in another place he proceedeth further: So far is it off (saith he) that it should be forbidden any man to take for spirituall nourishment, the bloud of this sacri∣fice, (seeing it was so taken of the old Churches) that on the contrarie, all they which will haue eternall life, are exhorted to drinke the same. The Grecians haue not spoken otherwise at any time, and yet to this day they pra∣ctise no lesse, The consent of the fathers of the Greeke Church. communicating all of them vnder both kinds, holding it for a horrible sacriledge to doe otherwise: notwithstanding whatsoeuer our sophisticall schoole∣men vnder colour of some fables, or cold and foolish histories would go about to make them belieue. The lithurgie of S. Denis is verie plaine for the communicating and distributing of the sacraments vnder both kindes vnto all the people, in these words, , &c. S. Basil saith: Basil. de Bapt. l. 1. c. 3. It behooueth them that shal approch & draw neere to the body & blood of the Lord, to proue themselues, &c. He speaketh simply of all the faithful, & not of the priests: De accedente, non de offerente: For feare (saith he) least he should eate and drinke to his iudge∣ment. In the lithurgy which they vse whē it pleaseth them, he did not administer other∣wise vnto his people. Basil. in ep. ad Caesar. And as for that which they alleadge out of him; that there were certain hermits in Egypt which had no priest, but kept the communiō in their hermi∣tages, taking it by themselues: our aduersaries striuing to conclude frō thence, that they had nothing in their cōmunions but bread, in asmuch as wine wil hardly be kept in Egypt: assuredly, in stead of deciding this tauerne case as they do, I answere, that whether wine keep well in Egypt or not, it were better for thē to conforme & fashion thēselues both vnto S. Basil, & the holy assemblies of the church of his time, thē vnto these hermits: and yet they should haue done far better then so, if they had learned the sharp & seuere sentence, Basil. in Mo∣ral. Summa. c. 14. Nazian. in o∣ratione in sanct. Pascha. which he telleth them of in that place, which is: He that commandeth what God forbiddeth, or forbiddeth what God commandeth, let him be accursed vnto all them that loue the Lord. Nazianzene in the prayer of Easter, saith vnto the peo∣ple, Without shame and without doubt eate the bodie & drinke the blood, if at the least thou de∣sire eternal life. The example of his sister Gorgonia doth not proue the contrary, being but the deuotion of one priuate person, which cannot make against the publike vse & practise of a church: but in deed to proue the quite contrary there is mention made of both kinds as thus: That she did mingle her teares with the types or figures of the precious bo∣dy and blood of Christ, &c.
Saint Chrysostome will yet giue vs in a clearer testimonie, himselfe administring the Sacraments in that famous citie of Constantinople: for wee may not imagine to finde in him this Maxime grounded: Chrysost. in 8. ad Cor. ho. 18. that it behoueth that in the sacramentes the priestes should be priuiledged to receiue one kind more then the laitie, seeing euen in the entrance he giueth vs an other rule cleane contrarie: There is a thing (saith he) wher∣in the priest differeth nothing from him ouer whom he hath charge, that is, from the lay man: as for example, when the enioying and receiuing of the high and reuerent mysteries is called in question: for we are all alike thought worthy to receiue them: and not as in the old law, Hom. 84. in Matth. where the priest did eate his part alone, and the people theirs by themselues; so as that it was not lawfull to take part of that which was appointed for the part and portion of the priest. It is not so at this day, but there is set before and giuen to all one and the selfe same bodie, & one and the same cup. The lithurgie also which they attribute to him, doth so celebrate the same. And when he would stirre vp the people to reuerence the sacraments, he doth it alwaies by ioy∣ning together of both kindes; What manner of mouth wilt thou bring for this bread? Chrysost. de Eucharist. Theophilact. in 1. Cor. c. 11. Idem in Ioha. c. 10. Idem in Ioh. c. 10. and what manner of lips for this cup? and such like speeches. Whereupon also Theophilact, which hath made in manner an abridgement of Chrysostomes workes, saith: That the cup of the Lord was ordained for all equally and alike. And in another place: When (saith he) thou commest to the cup of the communion of the blood of Christ, so dispose thy selfe, as if thou camest to drinke of his proper cost and charges. These wordes when thou commest, can not be vnderstoood but of the faithfull people. In the time of Leo the first, about the yeare 440. The condem∣ning of them that take but the bread. Leo serm. qua∣drag. 4. Rom. 16. the communion vnder both kinds was so ordinarie and certaine, as that it was the marke whereby to know the Mani∣chees, the most pernicious heretickes that were in the Church. And thereupon Leo the Pope saith in a sermon: They take in their vnworthie mouthes the bodie of the Lord, & refuse altogether to drinke the blood of our redemption: which he calleth a sacrilegious hy∣pocrisie, and applyeth to the same purpose the words of S. Paul to the Romaines; Be∣ware of them that raise dissentions and offences, contrarie to the doctrine which you haue lear∣ned, &c. What would he haue said then if the priests and Bishops had refused to ad∣minister it to the people? But as euerie Processe doth intend an arrest, and heresies ingender decrees: so there being certaine presumptuous and superstitious priestes about the yeare 540. which were tampering to seperate the bread from the cup, Pope Gelasius vttereth his iudgement; De consecrat. D. Can. 2. We haue heard (saith he) that there are some mē which ha∣uing receiued the bodie, do abstain & refuse to receiue the cup of the sacred blood: whom, seeing superstition hath blinded them, we will either wholly & entirely to receiue the Sacraments, or els to be wholly & vtterly restrained & shut out from the same: because that the renting a sunder and diuiding of one and the same mysterie cannot be done or tollerated without great sacriledge. Note and marke that he saith Superstition, not heresie. He speaketh not then of the Ma∣nichees, as Leo doth, but of other persons receiued into the Christian Church. Again, that Gelasius saith and declareth; that not to receiue any more then the bodie, is not to receiue the whole Sacrament: but to the contrarie, it is so far from receiuing the Sacrament, as that it is nothing else but a notorious inwrapping of a man in sacri∣ledge. And here Gratianus his Glosse is not to be admitted, that this Canon is to be vnderstood of certain priests, who hauing consecrated both kinds, did take but one of them: neither yet the deprauing and corrupting of the same, as it is done by some Chroniclers, who to apply themselues to the abuses of their times, say that Gelasius ordained this Canon, that the priests should not consecrate the one kind without the other. For here I would aske of them, if they consecrate both, what must bee done then with the other? but if one onely must be consecrated, then I would know of thē where I might find any history making mention therof? But the truth is, that by that Canon are condemned such superstitious persons as would receiue but the one, as may well be collected out of these words: Ab integris arceantur, let them bee wholly put backe & debarred: which must needs be applyed vnto the parties receiuing, and not to the parties distributing. Now superstition is called of the schoolemen, Cultus Dei in∣debitus; that is, when one serueth God after his owne manner, & not according to his com∣mandementes.
Let vs adde as an ouer-measure of these first fiue hundred years, S. Remigius, who is called the Apostle of the French men: Hincmarus Archb. of Rheimes writing a book on set purpose of him, telleth vs, that he neuer celebrated it otherwise: For (saith he) these verses are yet found written vpon his cup vnto this day. Hauriat hinc populas vitam de sanguine sacro, Iniecto aternus quem fudit vulnere Christus: Remigius reddit Domino sua vota Sacerdos. S. Gregorie, The further continuance thereof after the time of Gregorie the Great. an. 600. Gregor. in ho. de Pasch. De consecrat. di. 2. C. Quid sit. Greg. Dialog. l. 3. c. 36. notwithstanding that he was a great changer and alterer of religion in his time, yea, and in that parte thereof, namely, the administration of the Sacra∣ments, doth not meddle any thing with this point. In the Homelie on Easter day: What is it (saith he) that you haue not yet learned of the blood of the lambe, in hearing of it, as also in drinking of it: which blood is then sprinckled vppon the two postes, when it is drunke not onely with the mouth of the bodie, but also with the mouth of the heart: now hee speaketh in that place vnto all the people. He sayth the same in the Homelie which beginneth, Fractus longa molestia. And writing to Augustine Bishop of Canterburie, as also in his dialogues he reporteth, how that a certaine man named Maximinian, afterward Bb. of Sarragossa in Sicilia, being distressed by tempest, all they which were in the vessell, receiued the bodie & blood of our Lord, after they had prayed for the peace one of another: in stead whereof they vse not now a dayes to say any but drie Masses vppon the sea. Ordo Roma∣nus. Micrologus. But that which is more, the Romish order which is held to haue beene ordai∣ned in his time, doth carrie it in expresse tearmes: as that the Archdeacon did distri∣bute the cup to all them to whom the Bb. did giue the bread, and the blood to those to whom the body was giuen: whereby the one was called by the name of communi∣cating, and the other of confirming: and that these words were vttered and spoken vnto them; Corpus Domini, sanguis Domins, &c. custodiat te ad vitam aeternam: the bodie of our Lord, &c. the blood of our Lord, &c. preserue & keepe thee vnto eternall life: and there are by name comprised and specified the clearkes and the laitie, men and women of euery condition. And in deed the prayers before and after haue these wordes: We beseech thee O Lord, that all we which haue receiued the holy body & blood of thy Son, may be replenished with all grace & heauenly blessing, &c. And the Post-communion, that is, the Thanksgiuing after the communion was there: Thy body O Lord which we haue taken, & thy blood which we haue drunke, let cleaue vnto our inward parts, & let not any spot of vnclean∣nes abide in vs, which haue beene refreshed with so precious Sacraments. Beda in the homily vpon these words of S. Iohn, An. 700. Beda in hom. Vidit Iohan. &c. Iohn s Iesus comming vnto him, &c. Iesus Christ (saith he) doth wash vs dayly in his blood, when the memorie of his death & passi∣on is vnfolded vpon the Altar, when the creatures of bread and wine by the vnspeakable power of the sanctification of the holy Ghost is translated into the Sacrament of his flesh, and of his blood: for then his bodie and his blood are no more slaine or shed by the infidels to their destru∣ction, Concil. Tolet. 11. c. 11. but taken by the mouthes of the faithfull to their saluation. And the eleuenth Councel of Toledo of the same time witnesseth, that the one and the other kinde were caried vnto the sicke, when it excuseth them from excommunication, which through weak∣nes did cast out of their mouthes the one or the other. Beda l. 4. c. 3. Vincent. l. 23. c. 7.81.97. Vadianus in Aeoli. & Tro∣ade. Anno 800. Carol. Mag. l. 2 & 3. de imagi∣nibus. Gregor. 3. Pap. And Beda maketh mention of Ceadda a king of England, and Vincentius of Bauon, Furseus & Richarius, that they did receiue both the one and the other at the time of their death. Charlemaine saith: We take the flesh of our redemption for the remission of our sinnes, & we escape the stroke of the Angel, being besprinckled with his blood. And again, The misterie of the bodie and of the blood of the Lord is daily receiued by the faithfull in the Sacrament &c. And Pope Gregorie the third at the same time saith: That there is neede that two or three cuppes should be prouided to set vpon the altar, at such time as the Masses are celebrated, that the people may communicate. And thus likwise do all the great men of this age witnesse and testifie vnto the same. Rabanus: Anno 900. Rabanus. l. 1. c. 33. de Instit. Cleric. Lib. 1. c. 29. The water and the wine in the cup doe shew the sacraments, which did run out of our Lord his side vpon the crosse, wherwith we are watered. Again, the faithfull in the church do dayly eat the bodie of Christ,, and drinke his blood. And in another place he teacheth by the comparing together of corporall food, which consisteth in meates and drinkes,
that we haue neede of both kindes: likewise he commandeth that all those which are baptised, doe communicate in the bodie and blood of our Lord. Paschasius saith: O man as oft as thou drinkest this cup, Pasc. de Euch. c. 15. c. 48. think not that thou drinkest any o∣ther blood then that which hath beene shed for thy sins. And afterward he addeth: Take and drinke ye all, as well the ministers (saith he) quā reliqui credentes, as the rest of the beleeuers. And againe: The flesh is well accompanied with the blood, because the flesh cannot bee by good right communicated without the blood, neither yet the blood without the flesh. And therefore he saith in another place: We are refreshed with the flesh, c. 7. Anno 1000. Haimo l. 1. c. 2. in Apoc. & su∣per haec verba, Ecce Agnus Dei. Super haec ver∣ba, In Cana Galil. Item, tum ve∣nit Iesus in partes Caesar. Philip. In 1. Cor. c. 11. Conc. Worm. 1.36. Rup. Abb. Tu∣icens. in Mat. c. 27. in Ioh. c 6 De Offic. Diui. l. 6 c. 9. & 22. Vincent. l. 24. c. 75. Regino Mo∣nach. c. 119. de discipl. eccl. Radulph. Tungrens. in Leuit. lib. 14. c. 4. Anno 1100. Ansel. in epist. ad Cor. c. 10. Lanfranc. de Euch. Alger de Euch. l. 2. Damianus in Apol. ad Ni∣col. Papam. Berno in serm. de purific. Mariae. S. Bernard. in Psalm. 90. ser. 9 Ser. 3. de Ram. palm. Serm. 2. de Coen. Dom. Serm. 3. super Cant. of the diuine word and we haue our thirst quenched with his blood. Haimo the Bb. of Halberstat, writing vpon the Apo∣calips: The faithfull doe daily eate in the Church the bodie of Christ, and drinke his blood. Againe: The cup is called the communion, because of the communicating therein: for all doe communicate thereof. And in like manner vpon S. Iohn. ch. 1. & 2. and vpon S. Math. Chap. 16. The Councell of Wormes speaking of the incestuous: Let him abstaine for the space of three yeares from the communion of the bodie and blood of our Lord. And moreouer, that about this time, Gisilbert vpon the ensuing of the reall Transubstantiation, taught the doctrine of concomitance, that is to say, that vnder one of the kinds there is com∣prised as much as vnder both: and further inferreth, that it were more to the purpose not to be in daunger of shedding, that the people might not communicate of the cup at all, howbeit that continuall and dayly vse bee to the contrarie. Witnesse Robert, Abbot of Duits, who maketh mention how that the Sacrament in his time, was giuen and taken vnder both kindes, purposely handling this matter. And Vincent, who saith, that a certaine holy Lady named Elgyfa receiued them at the time of her death. Regino the Monke: The soules of the infirme and weake must be refreshed with the bodie & the blood of our Lord. And Radulphus Tungrensis yet more plainely: The people receiue the sacred body of Christ, and drinke a holy draught of his blood, &c. Anselme, Archb. of Canterbury: All we which take of the same bread and of the same cup, are made one body. And Lanfranc: The host of the Lord is broken, when the blood is pow∣red out of the cup into the mouth of the faithfull. And Alger: The bodie and blood of our Lord are taken of the faithfull together, to the end, that hauing receiued the bodie and soule of Christ, the whole man in bodie & in soule may be quickned together with Christ. And Damian: How may we thinke that the Lord is agreeued, when a wicked man commeth to the holy altar to re∣ceiue his body & his blood. And Berno Abbot of Reichenaw; We are not onely fed euery day with the bread of Christ, whem we are refreshed by the nourishment of his flesh, by the Masse of the altar: but we haue also our thirst quenched with his blood, as he hath promised vs: He that eateth my flesh & drinketh my blood, &c. And so are all those aboue named, especially they that writ against Berengarius. Saint Bernard: He that soweth nigardly and sparingly shall not be without a haruest, but it shalbe but a poore & niggardly haruest: for this reaping is to receiue hire. But we know him who hath promised, that he that shall giue a glasse of cold water for his sake, shall not bee without his hire & reward: but this is to be knowne, whether that it shall bee measured backe againe vnto him in the same measure which he measured out and gaue: or whether in the recompence he shal be made equall to him, who not in giuing of water, but in shedding of his blood, shal haue drunke the cup which God the father hath powred out vnto him. Assuredly here is not any cup of colde water, but a cup full of strong wine to make drunken, a cup of pure and neat wine, &c. For my Lord Iesus & no other hath the pure wine in his possession, &c. In another place: Iesus Christ the night before his passion prescribed vnto his disciples the forme of this Sacrament, gaue it po∣wer, & commanded them to doe it. The prescription giuen for the forme, consisteth in bread and wine. Marke the order: As they were yet at supper, he rise from the table, washed the feet of his disciples; and returning to the table, instituted the sacrifice of his bodie, and of his bloode, giuing the bread by it selfe, & the wine by it selfe, saying of the bread: Take, eate, this is my bo∣die: of the wine thus, drink ye all of this, This is my blood, &c. And the same may be gathered out of diuers other places. And in deed Vincent reckoneth vp one Tundatus, Vincent. l. 27. c. 88. a wicked man, who seeing himself smittē frō heauē with a mortal blow, required the cōmunion: & whē he had taken the body of the Lord, & drunk the wine, he cried, O God thy mercy
is greater then mine iniquitie, how great soeuer it be. And William Duke of Normandie hauing to giue the Danes battell in England, we reade that he caused all his armie to receiue the sacrament, and by name vnder both kindes. But it is more then time to see by what manner of proceeding, and vnder what colour the blood of Christ was cut off and taken away from the people: and this will afforde vs matter inough for an other Chapter. CHAP. XI. How the cutting off of the cup of the Lord from the faithfull proceeded and grew, and vn∣der what pretext and colour. NOw in deed the case standeth thus, that the Deuill, the enemie of the blood of Christ, who neuer shrinketh backe, or giueth o∣uer, did from time to time and at an inch prosecute the point of cutting off of the cup from the faithfull: and which is worse, vnder the shadow of deuotion. For we haue seene that about the yeare 350. vnder the shadow of children and sicke folke, it was laboured to bring in bread dipt in the wine: which Iulius Bishop of Rome did hinder, expresly opposing thereto the in∣stitution of the Lord. And againe we reade, that about the yeare 950. the Monkes of the order of Clugni, vnder the colour of fearing to shed the cup, did institute in their conuents, to deliuer bread wet in wine, Intinctā vnto their no∣uices, though freely acknowledging, that it was against the vse and order of other Churches: Because (say they) that there are of our nouices so raw and grosse-headed, as that if they did receiue the blood by it selfe, they would fall into an inconuenience: and this incon∣uenience is that which they call, Periculum effusionis, the daunger of shedding, bred and brought vp as we shall see, with transubstantiation, and hath spred it selfe abroad in∣to as many countries as the other. From that time forward, in a Councell held at Tours, for the same consideration, it was permitted to giue Intinctam, breade dipt in wine, vnto the sicke, and that not onely in Monasteries, but in Parishes: and the rea∣son thereof is added; Yuo de diuinis Offic. Hildeb. se E∣pise. vocat, epist. 64. To the end (saith he) that the Priest may truely say, The bodie and blood of our Lord doth profite thee vnto the remission of thy sinnes, &c: so needfull did they alwaies iudge both the kindes to be. In the end of the time of Yuo Bishop of Char∣tres, it came to be giuen in some places vnto the whole & sound. But Hildebert Bb. of Mantz, kept a great stirre about it, findeth fault with the custome, and insisteth vp∣on the institution of Christ, vrging the same: That either kind ought to be giuen by it selfe, and that otherwise it is but to giue Iudas his sop and not the bodie of Christ. And in deed it is cleare, About the yere 1280. Hugo de Sacr. Altar. that at this time the greatest and most autentike writers did speake no otherwise. Hugo de Sancta Victoria saith: Men receiue both the one kind and the other, to signifie that this sacrament hath a double effect: for it is the redemption of the bodie and of the soule, which will not be sufficiently expressed and signified, if it should not be receiued vnder any moe then one kind. And in another place: The receiuing vnder both kindes signifieth his redemption vnto him that so receiueth them, and that both of bodie & soule, &c. Now thē of which of the two wil they frustrate & depriue vs? Peter Lombard saith the Maister of the sentences maketh this question: Lombard. dist. 11. l. 4. Wherefore do men receiue Iesus Christ vnder both kindes, seeing bee is whole and intire in one? Who answereth him with Saint Ambrose his answere, vz. Because this Sacrament profiteth both bodie and soule, and because that our Lorde would shew thereby that hee had taken vppon him the whole na∣ture of man, that so hee might redeeme whole man. So that now alreadie there was some dreaming of a concomitancie, (that is, an vnseperable fellowship and vnion of the flesh and blood of Christ) a thing deriued and springing from transubstan∣tiation, as in deed followed to be maintained more fully afterward: and yet notwith∣standing this consequence did not inforce that which followed afterwarde: namely,
That of necessitie against the expresse wordes of the institution the cuppe must be cut off from the Laitie. On the contrarie, Lombard l. 4. dist. 11. The Eucharist dipt in wine (sayeth hee) must not bee gi∣uen to people in steade of the Communion: for wee reade not that the Lord hath giuen it so vnto anie of his Disciples, but onelie vnto Iudas, &c. Gratianus the compiler and Author of the decree, intreating at the same time of this matter in his Treatise, Of the conse∣cration, repeateth it more then twentie times, that Iesus Christ his ordinance vnto his Disciples, was vnder both kindes, and neuer speaketh otherwise: so farre off is it, that there should bee the printes and markes of the forbidding of the cuppe in his decree gathered out of all the Fathers. De conse. dist. 2. Canon. tun is Petrus. ex August. de vtilitate cre∣dendi. & Psal. 33. & 35. Vide de consec. dist. 2. C. Com∣perimus. C. quia passus. C. Si non sunt. C In Caena C. Timorem. C. Quum fran∣git. C. Quid sit Sanguis. C. Sacerdotes 1. q. 1. Hymnus iste extat in Offi∣cio. fest. Sacram. quod S. Tho. attribuitur & ea de causa co referendus est. And indeede the places which hee there al∣leadgeth out of the old Writers, are verie expresse and fit for the purpose: 'Peter (sayeth hee) preacheth vnto them to belieue in him, whom they had crucified, to the ende that belieuing, they might drinke the bloode which they had spilt in their madde and furious moode. Againe, The same blood which they shedde in their follie, they drunke by his grace, &c. And the Canons which hee draweth out of Iulius, Gelasius, and Gregorie the Great, doe vtter the same: neither doth the Glose vpon the decree speake otherwise in any part thereof, de Consecr. d. 2. To bee briefe, the olde Agends, euen to this daye in the Rubrick of the visitation of the sicke, do beare these wordes; Let the bodie and the blood of the Lord bee administred vnto them vnder both kindes, yea and since that su∣perstition brought in that which they call Periculum effusionis, the daunger of shed∣ding; so that vntill this time there is not one bare worde to bee found in all the olde Writers to the contrarie, but that the cuppe was administred vnto the people: Suf∣ficient proofe of the same are the verses engrauen vppon the olde cuppes: as like∣wise this Hymne in vse as yet vnto this daye. Dedit fragilib us corporis ferculum, Dedit ex tristibus sanguinis poculum: Omnes ex eo bibite: Sic Sacrificium istud instituit, Cuius Officium committi vo luit, Solis Presbiteris quib us sie congruit, Ʋt sumant & dent caeteris. As likewise Beatus Rhenanus reporteth, that in his time there were to bee seene in some cathedrall Churches the cuppes wherewith they ministred vnto the people, and that they were called ministring cuppes: likewise in the Romish pontificall, which were couered, and of the weight of some 480. or 560. ounces: hauing a certaine pretie little beake or pipe, at which the people did drinke to auoid all shedding. And name∣lie, there is to bee read of that of the cathedrall Church of Mentz, and of that of the Abbye of S. Gall in Swisserland. And as yet to this day in the Abbye of Clugni at the great Masse, the Priest doth consecrate three hostes, the one whereof, they say is for himselfe, and the others for the Deacon and Subdeacon; which being receiued, hee drinketh in the cuppe one parte of the consecrated wine with a hollow reede or pipe; and then after him his Deacon and Subdeacon, one after another doe drinke the rest with the same reede or pipe. And the Christians called Maronicks of the Citie Marcinas in Syria, remaining still vntill this present in Ierusalem practise the same. And now wee are come to twelue hundred yeares and more after the death of our Lord, obseruing in all ages, and pointing out from age to age this vse of both kinds in the Church. And then what manner of antiquitie is that which our aduer∣saries can obiect against vs from that time forward? But as the doctrine of Transub∣stantiation, authorised by the Councell of Lateran after the yeare 1200. had within a while after engendred and brought forth by consequence the concomitancie or ioyning and coupling of the bodie and blood of Christ together, as also the daunger of shedding, this new conclusion followed of these two ouer-measures about the yeare 1300. That therefore it was sufficient (seeing also that it was lesse daungerous,) to giue
vnto the Laitie onelie the kind of bread. And yet hetherto it stoode rather by tolerati∣on then by ordinance or constitution; for it was not yet throughlie founde out as be∣ing but in certaine Churches, not in all, and the rather seeing the daylie resolution of the best learned, was, That the Sacrament was not perfect, but vnder both kindes. Gulielmus Durandus Bishoppe of Miniat, Gulielm. Du∣rand. in ration. diuinorum. L. 4. p. 3. titulo de osculo pa∣cis. did euerie where maintaine and defend, that our Lorde did institute it for all vnder both kindes, and that they are requisite for the perfection of the Sacrament: in briefe, hee sayeth, All those in the Primitiue Church, which were present at Masse, did communicate, because that all the A∣postles had drunk of thee cup the Lord commaunding them, Drinke yee all: for they offered a great loafe sufficient for all, which thing is as yet practised of the Grecians. Where is now the difference betwixt the Priestes and the Laitie? Againe, Although that vnder the kinde of wine the bodie bee receiued with the blood: Duran. l. 2. p. 2. tit. simili mod. notwithstanding, according to the iudge∣ment of Innocent the third, the blood cannot bee drunke vnder the kinde of bread, nor the bodie is not eaten vnder the kinde of wine: because that like as the blood is not eaten, nor the bodie drunken; so neyther is the one and the other drunke vnder the kinde of bread, nor eaten vnder the kinde of Wine, &c. And this is the cause why he addeth in certain places after the taking of the bodie and of the blood, there is reserued and kept behind in the cup some little quantitie of blood and wine powred vpon it, to the end that the other Communicantes may take it, because it should not bee conuenient to make so much blood, and because also, that there cannot be any cup found to containe it: and notwithstanding, (sayeth hee) in manie places, men doe communi∣cate with breade and wine, that is with the whole Sacrament: and this is also confirmed vnto vs by Thomas. And hereof it commeth, that some do attribute the taking away of the cuppe vnto this Innocent, notwithstanding, that he made not anie decree for the same. Balaeus, l. 5. de vit. Pap. But yet it was much about the verie same time, that the giuing of wine to wash the mouth withall was brought in; in steade of the cutting of the kinde: for wee reade in the Synodall booke of the Church of Nisme these wordes: Wee com∣maund and inioyne all Priestes, Synodalis liber Nemau, eccles. that they haue pure wine readie in the Church, to giue vnto e∣uerie one of the people presentlie after that hee shall haue receiued the bodie of the Lord, for∣bidding them in expresse tearmes, not to depart out of the presence of the Priests, vntill they haue taken some, and verie well washed their mouthes therewithall. And notwithstanding, this error did not vniuersallie as then possesse all Christendome: Abbas Visper. for wee reade that the Christian Souldiers which were to vndergoe the assault made vpon Damiata, before that they would buckle themselues thereunto, did all of them communicate the bodie & blood of our Lord, &c. Alexander Hales maketh mention, how that in his time the deuout and religi∣ous persons found it strange, that the cuppe should bee taken from them, de∣maunding that it might bee restored vnto them againe: and that this their request was made of no effect by a pretended miracle, which was by the making of blood to come out of an host, Alexand. 4. q. 40. M. 3. art. 2. & 4. q. 53. M. 1. &c. And yet in respect of himselfe, you may perceiue what his iudgement was by these words: Though it may seeme to receiue but one kinde, notwith∣standing to receiue both is of greater merite and desert: Againe, Whole Christ is not sacra∣mentallie contained vnder either of the kindes: but the flesh vnder the kinde of bread, & the blood vnder the kinde of wine. Againe, it appeareth that the rule was not generally re∣ceiued in his time, when hee sayeth, Jtafere vbique fit á Laicis in Ecclesia, fere vbiq́ua non vbiq́ue: it is almost thus practised in euerie Church by the Laitie, almost euerie where, say∣eth hee, Linwold. de sum. Trinit. & fide Cathol. but not euerie where. As likewise when Linwoldus sayeth, That in the lesse and inferiour Churches it is not permitted saue onelie to the Priestes to receiue the blood, vnder the kinde of consecrated wine: for in that hee sayeth, In the lesse or inferiour churches, hee meaneth the Countrie Churches, thereby excepting those that were in the Citties, presuming that Cittizens had more knowledge then Countrie men. Insomuch, as that this Sacrament instituted by our Lord, to signifie in the Cōmunicating of one and the same bread, and one and the same wine, the vnion and agreement betwixt al the saithfull in one bodie, would serue by meanes of this corruption, to sunder and separate in manifest and open shew, first them of the Cleargie from those of the Lai∣tie:
and secondlie the Countrie people from those that dwelt in Citties: as though forsooth the soules of the one sort were more deare then the other, to him who hath purchased all with one and the same blood. It springeth likewise out of the same Di∣uinitie, which Thomas Waldensis a white Fryer sayeth in his book, which he hath written, of the Sacramentes against the Wickleuistes, and yet approued by an expresse Bull from Pope Martin the fift: for after that hee hath reasoned mightilie for the maintaining of the Communicating of the Laitie vnder one kind, hee commeth in with this exception, vz. That it is notwithstanding permitted the Pastors, if they haue not made an end of the Sacraments, but onelie receiued the same in part, that is, if they haue not drunke all, that then they should distribute the remainder vnto those of their Parishioners, which are strong in faith, and discreete persons: Euen as (sayeth hee) the Pope is wont to deale with the Deacons and Ministers, and with other persons famous for their faith, or aduanced in dignitie and worthines, with Doctors & with Kinges, or as the Church dealeth at this day, with religious persons, or men of great place, &c. And againe, wee doe not allow it them (sayeth he) generallie, neither doe we generally forbid it them: for wee know that it is reserued of purpose for the Church and Prelates, to com∣municate and distribute the cuppe vnto such persons, &c. And yet in the meane time, it hath thriuen so well in their fingers, as that indeed Kinges hauing kept the Charter and priuiledge of this libertie, all others haue by one meanes or other lost and forfeyted the same: and yet Kinges hold not this te∣nure (say they) as they are Laye-men, but as they are sacred persons: whereuppon we reade that the great king Frauncis demaunding the reasons of his Diuines: Because (said they) that kings are annointed as the Priests be: Which thing S. Ambrose as it may seeme by this reckoning did not vnderstand aright, when hee caused the Emperour Theodosius to come out of the Queare of the Temple, as a meere Laye-man. Thomas Aquinas sheweth vs plainelie, that it was in his time, Thomas de sacram. altar. that this abuse was brought into the Church: for in the place where Lombard had made this question, Wherfore the Sacrament was receiued vnder both kindes, Thomas did propound the con∣trarie: why doe not the people receiue the blood vnder the wine. And there is some dif∣ference betwixt them, in respect of some certaine yeares; during which distance this sufferance crept into the Church. Now these are his reasons: first, That as there is neede of a more speciall vessell to put the wine in, then to put the bread in; so it is meet and requisite, that it should bee a more speciall and sacred person for the re∣ceiuing of the blood, then for the receiuing of the bodie: which must bee expoun∣ded of the holie Priestes onelie, and not of any of the vnholie Laitie. But how shall those wordes of Chrysostome then take place, where hee sayeth: That in the recey∣uing of the Eucharist, there is no difference betwixt the Priest and the people? The se∣cond, That there is danger therein, least the people should shed the bloode, which was not to bee feared in receyuing of the bodie. And then what place shoulde bee found for the prudencie of the old Church to abide and rest in? how hath shee mai∣med and wounded herselfe for these manie ages, at such time as the people flockt and ran to the receiuing of the Sacrament by millions, that shee did not foresee, yea re∣medie and helpe this inconuenience; but onelie because that new opinions haue be∣gotten new prouisoes? The third, For feare least the common people, which is giuen to bee wilfullie rude and ignorant, hauing taken the blood vnder the kinde of wine; could not afterward belieue the receiuing of it vnder the kinde of bread; how true notwithstanding soeuer it bee, that it is therein truelie and verilie. What other thing is this, but to reach vs that Transubstantiation hath begotten concomitancie, and concomitancie the communicating vnder one kinde; and by consequent, that the Communion vnder both, practised by the space of twelue hundred yeares in the Church, did presuppose and take for granted a farre other kinde of doctrine, then that of Transubstantiation or concomitancie? But this saide Thomas did acknow∣ledge in an other place, that both the kindes are the institution of the Lord: for hee sayeth expresly: Thomas ad∣uers. Gentes. l. 4. c. 51. Because that the working of our saluation was accomplished by the
passion of Christ, by the which his blood was separated from his bodie; the Sacrament of his bo∣die is giuen vs apart and by it selfe, and the Sacrament of bloode vnder the wine by it selfe, to the end that vnder this Sacrament may bee contained the remembrance and representation of the death of our Lord, and that so it may be fulfilled which hee sayth: My flesh is verilie meat, and my blood verilie drinke, &c. And there hee speaketh expresly, not of the pretended Sacrifice of the Priest, Iodoc. Clit∣ho. in Elu∣cidario Theo∣logico. but of the distribution of the Sacramentes vnto the faithfull. Likewise in the Office appointed for the feast of the Sacrament, ordayned by him, this Hymne doth testifie the same vnto vs: Dedit fragilibus, &c. Again, in the Hymne Ʋerbum supernum prodiens, he sayeth. Quibus sub bina specie, Carnem dedit & sanguinem, Vt duplicis substantiae, Totum cibaret hominem. Where hee acknowledgeth the institution of Christ. Thom. in 1. ad Cor. 11. lect. 5. But vpon the Epistle to the Co∣rinthians, This Sacrament (sayeth hee) is giuen vnder a double kinde for three reasons: The first, for the perfection therof, for seeing it is a spirituall sustenance, it must needes haue a spirituall meate, as also a sprituall drinke: wherefore it is saide in the tenth Chapter: that all haue eaten one spirituall meate, and all haue drunke one and the same spirituall drinke: The second, by reason of the signification thereof, for this is a remembrance of the death and passi∣on of our Lord, wherein the blood was separated from the bodie: and therefore is giuen alone, and by it selfe in this Sacrament. And the third reason is this, because of the sauing effect that is in this Sacrament: for it serueth to the saluation of the bodie, & therefore the bodie is giuen: it serueth to the saluation of the soule, and therefore the blood is giuen. But tell mee I pray you, how farre more fit these three reasons are for to proue, that it ought to bee gi∣uen, then the other three are to proue that it ought to bee taken away? And what followeth hereof then? but that to cut off the same, is to depriue men of their spirituall food? to weaken the remembrance of the passion of our Lord? yea and to frustrate his people, so much as in them lyeth, of their saluation? But see how time carrieth thinges away: Thom. in Summa par 3. q. 8. art. 12. for after that hee had saide: To the perfection of this Sacra∣ment there is required manducatio & potatio, eating of the bodie and drinking of the blood & by consequent he that shall take the bodie without the blood, shoulde haue but a lame and imperfect Sacrament: hee addeth vnto this truth (the error of the time carrying him away: Notwithstanding, there had great care & reuerence need to bee vsed of them which re∣ceiue the same, that so nothing may bee committed which might turne to the misprision & con∣tempt of so great a mystery: which is most chiefly like to happen by shedding of the bloode, if it should bee vndiscreetlie handled, (this is that which they call periculum effusionis): & be∣cause the Christians encreasing in number, & that there are amongst them old men, young men, & children, all which cannot bring such discretion as were requisite to so bolie a Sacrament, it is obserued in some Churches, not to offer the blood vnto the people to bee taken of them; but the Priest taketh it himselfe alone: hee sayeth that it is obserued, wherein wee way well picke out this construction, Thom. Opusc. 58. c. 13. vz. that it is not a law, but a custome, & in some churches, that is, that as yet in his time this custome had not preuailed euerie where: And his reason of the great number of Christians is not to the purpose; for the question is not of the daunger of spilling, or of the number of Christians, but of the number of Com∣municantes. Now wee haue shewed before, that the zeale of the Primitiue Church in frequenting the Sacramentes, did farre exceede and goe beyonde the zeale of this time. In brief, for the vpholding of this opinion, it is resolued vppon and conclu∣ded by him, that the blood vnder the signe of bread is ioyned with the bodie, per connexienem, Scotus in Rep. dist. 10. q. 3. as all the rest of the humors, which is one branch of his Transubstan∣tiation. But Scotus disputeth against him, both in the stocke and in the branches in these wordes: Non est certum, nam vtrumque potest sustineri, & noutrum probari: This is not certaine, for the one and the other may bee argued and reasoned, but neyther the one nor the other can be proued.
Richardus de Media villa, and Petrus de Tarentasia, who liued since Inno∣cent the fourth, doe witnes that in their time the Sacrament was distributed vnder both kindes, not onely to the ministers of the Altar, but also to the best of the pa∣rish, being such as by reason of their discretion were not to be feared of committing this matter of daunger. Petrus de Palude sayeth: Petrus de Pa∣lude in 4 Sent. d. 11. q. 1. That in certaine Churches this was done vnto all manner of persons in his time, by the good order that was taken to a∣uoide shedding: also, It is meete and of necessitie that there should be a twofold matter in this Sacrament, meate and drinke, D. 11. art. 1. because the effect of the Sacrament must be perfectly repre∣sented by the figure: now the effect of the sacrament is the perfect nourishing of the soule, &c. Cassander out of Gulielmus de Monte-landuno; Idem in 4. Sent. d. 11. q. 12. art. 1. q. 1. Qui recipit corpus Christi, totam veritatem recipit, sed non totum sacramentum: & ideo multis in locis cōmunicatur pane & vino. i. toto sacramento: He that receiueth the bodie of Christ, receiueth the whole truth, but not the whole sacrament: and therfore in many places they communicate with bread and wine, that is to say, in the whole sacrament, &c. Bonauentura, a gray Frier famous amongst the schoolemen, In the sacrament two things are to be considered, the efficacie, & the signification: Bonauent. in lib. 4. Ser. t. d. 11. and therefore to be of the perfection or soundnesse of the sacrament, is ment two manner of waies: either according to the efficacie and power fuluesse thereof, and so euery part is the whole: or as concerning the signification, and in this sort and manner, the two kinds are of the perfection and intirenesse of the sacrament, in as much as this sacrament is not sufficient in one of them but in both. Also, Of the two signes there riseth a perfect sacrament, of the integritie and perfection whereof, the dispositiue reason riseth naturally: because neither the bread nor the wine doe either of them apart, refresh and feede mā, but rather both together. The reason completiue riseth also of the holy institution, which hath ordained these two signs, to represent a perfect nourishment. And he neuer speaketh otherwise. In so much, as that yet euen in these latter ages and times, men were not come so farre as to denie, that the Communion vnder both kinds was the institution of Christ, or the obseruation of the auncient Church: Lyran. in 1. ad Cor. c. 11. & Proucrb. 9. Sup. haec ver∣ba, bibite vi∣num quod miscui vobis. Dionys. in 1. ad Cor. c. 11. & 2. part. serm. In die caenae Dom. or else to alleadge any other cause of the taking away of the cup, then the daunger of shedding: for Lyranus saith plainly, ex∣pounding the place of the first to the Corinthians, He speaketh here of two kinds, because that in the primitiue Church, they were both giuen vnto the faithfull: but for feare of spilling, there is nothing giuen now a daies vnto the laitie, but onely the kind of bread. And a long time after him, Dionys. Carth. called the Doctor of trances, said vpon the same place: In the primitiue church the sacramēt was giuē vnder both kinds to al the faithful: afterward the church did forbid the distributing of the kind of wine vnto the people, propter periculum effusionis. And now wee are come to the notable opposition that Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage made against this abuse, about the yeare of our Lord 1400. At the same time (I say) that the taking away of the cup gained and got entrance in Church after Church throughout Christendome, by the practises of the ingrossers amongst the Cleargie. And it is to be noted, that this Iohn Hus, as Pope Pius the 2. Aeneas Syluius hist. Bohem. c. 23. maketh mētion in his hi∣storie of Bohemia, was a mā Lingua potēs, & mūdioris vitae opinione clarus, mighty & power∣full in speech, as also in being reputed to liue a holy life: and which is more, one that was called to the function of the ministrie: for besides that, he was principall of the Col∣ledge erected at Prage by the king Wenceslaus, according to the foundation of that of Paris: hee was called to preach the worde of God in the vulgare language, in the Church of Bethelem (as they call it.) This man then began to preach against the abuses of the Romish Church, and namely against the profaning of the holy supper, and the taking away of the cup, contrarie to the institution of Christ and practise of the Primitiue Church: and he was seconded herein by Ierome of Prage, and followed of many. But whereas the Romish Church should haue reformed what was past, and returned into the olde and auncient way, repenting her selfe, and correcting her by∣waies and doctrines, by the originall of all wholesome and sound doctrine, the holy Scriptures: she calleth a generall Councell at Constance, at the instant request of the Emperour Sigismund, and summoneth or calleth to appeare there before them, vpon warrantize of being equally and vprightly heard by the pawning of their faith and
faithfull promise thereupon, the said Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage: they against the publike and sacred oath and promise passed both by the Emperour and Pope, did condemne them before they had heard them: the one of them forthwith, and the o∣ther (after long imprisonment) to be burned quicke, leauing in the end a writ for the posteritie succeeding to learn & hold: that there is no faith or promise to be kept with pretended heretickes: to the end, that from thence forward, all hope of reforming the Church, or curing and reconciling of the pretended schismes by that Councell, might be cut off. Wee haue not any to beleeue or giue credite vnto, concerning the matter of their martyrdome, saue Pope Pius or his Secretarie Poggius, who in their owne persons did sit iudicially vpon them in the same Councell: Pertulerunt (saith he) ambo constanti animo necem, & quasi ad epulas inuitati, ad incendium properarunt, nullā emit∣tentes vocem, quae miseri animi possit facere indicium. Ʋbi ardere caeperunt, hymnum cecinere, quem vix flamma & fragor ignis intercipere potuit. Nemo philosophorum tam forti animo mor∣tem pertulit, quàm isti incendium. Poggius Florentinus aetatis nostrae nobilis scriptor, de morte Hieronymi ad Nicholaum Nicol, conciuem suum elegantem scripsit epistolam, &c. Both of them suffered death very couragiously, and went as merrily to the fire, as if they had been inuited vnto some great feast or banquet, without vttering of any one word, that might argue a sorrowfull heart: when they began to burne, they sung a hymne, which could hardly by flame or noise of fire be kept from being heard. Neuer did any Philosopher suffer his death so constantly as they indu∣red the fire. Poggius in Epist. ad Leo∣nard. Aretinū. Fasciculus re∣rurn expeten∣darum. Poggius a Florentine, a worthie Secretarie of our age, hath written an excellent epistle vnto Nicolas Nicol, his fellow cittizen, of the death of Ierome, &c. And as for this Poggius alleadged by Pope Pius the second (who was Secretarie to the Councell) writing to Leonardus Aretinus, his Epistle deserueth to be read vpō that place, or els to be here set downe at large: It is not credible (saieth hee) how hee defended himselfe by arguments, how well he was furnished both with scriptures and Doctours, &c. He neuer vttered one word mis∣beseeming a good man. If he beleeued as he spake, he was so farre from being worthie of death by iust desert, as that indeed there was not any cause of offering him the least discourtesie that may be. Euery man tooke his case heauilie, in bewailing him, euery man desired that he might be saued: but he desired rather to die, than to vnsay any thing that he had deliuered. Was there neuer Cate, Scae∣uola, or Stoike, that inaured with such courage and patience the losse of one member, as he did of his life: nor that so went to his death, as he to the fire. But this (saith he) deserueth a more large discourse, &c. But the Councell kicking against the pricke and hardning their hearts of a custome brought in by sufferance, made a law: and in stead of restoring the communion, ex∣communicated all those which were vrgent and earnest suters for the same. The very words are (let euery man iudge whether the spirit of Christ or Antichrist did speake in this Councel:) Seeing we are giuen to vnderstand that in many Churches there is continued the administration of the Sacrament vnder both kinds vnto the laitie, wee pronounce and declare that although Iesus Christ hauing supped, did institute and minister this reuerend sacrament, vnto his disciples vnder both kinds: and that since then it hath been receiued a conficientibus, by those which haue administred it, that is by the Priests, vnder both, and by the laitie vnder that onely of bread: yet notwithstanding all this, the laudable authoritie of the holy Canons, and the commenda∣ble custome of the Church, hath obserued and doth obserue, that for the avoiding of certaine daun∣gers and scandals, this sacrament shall be onely administred vnder one kind. Thus then you may see the Pope his Canons opposed to the institution of Christ, the onely Canon and rule of all sacraments: the Church of this time opposed to the Primitiue, howsoeuer it be the patterne by which all others ought to square & fashion themselues through∣out all ages. And therefore he addeth, wee commaund vnder paine of excommunication, that no Priest doe administer the communion vnto the people, vnder both the kinds of bread and of wine, contrarie to that hee had reserued and kept in the power of the Church and Pastors, to iudge of the discretion of them to whom they were to administer, as wee haue al∣readie seene out of Thomas Waldensis, who writ at this very same time: yea and it is a worke of this time which our maister Gerson drew into a treatise against the heresie of the cōmunion vnder both kinds; therby condēning of heresie both Iesus Christ, the author of the sacrament, and the whole Primitiue Church, but hee was intreated to
doe it by the fathers of this Councell, two yeares after this decree, for the iustifying and confirming of the same after the best manner that hee was able. And this he per∣formed to the vttermost that hee could, as may appeare by the proude, arrogant, and presumptuous clauses hee inserted into the same, to the offending of all Christen∣dome therewithall; Licet Christus aliter instituerit, licet Primitiua ecclesia aliter obseruauit, howbeit that Christ haue otherwise instituted it, The foolish reasons of the Councell. Can. Interro∣go vos D. de Consecrat. 6. and the Primitiue Church otherwise obserued it, &c. and that with this Notwithstanding following vpon the said clauses: and a little more, grounded vpon the reasons of these good fathers alleadged in the saide Coun∣cell, which are those that follow. The first, That a licour may be shed. S. Augustine in like manner saith, that the bread may fall: and is hee therefore of iudgement that it ought to be cut off, and not at any time to be vsed in the sacrament? Secondly, That it cannot be carried without daunger, neither indeed was it euer ordained to bee carried: and the Churches which carried the same to the sicke, did neuer busie or trouble their mindes with this inconuenience. Thirdly, That it might be frosen in winter, and that it might turne and become tart in summer. And thus it was subiect to do during those 1200. yeares, wherein it was vsed, and yet not a word in all the old fathers to bee seene con∣cerning these questions, Quid siacescat? quid si congelescat? aut computrescat &c. Fourth∣ly, That it may hurt and annoy the heart, after that so many people haue drunke of it: but in the Primitiue Church they vsed to communicate as oft and oftner, and in greater mul∣titude. Fifthly, That in some countries wine is not to be come by, but either at a very deare rate, or otherwise very hardly. Neither was it lesse deare or scarce amongst the Christians in the Primitiue Church. Sixtly, That whiles it was practised, the laitie did touch the cuppe. Where are they forbidden to touch it, seeing they are bidden to take it? Seuenthly, That some haue ouer long beards, and that other some haue the Palsey, &c. How much more tollerable were it to cut off the beard, then the cup? and to supplie the infirmities of such as haue the Palsey, rather then to cut off the perfection of the sacrament? And who seeth not that all these reasons are hatcht vnder the hen of Transubstantiation, vnknowne vnto the whole Church for euer before? The eight, That the dignitie of the Priests and of the laitie by this should be all alike: where haue they euer read that our Sa∣uiour Christ and his Apostles did make any distinction or difference in the sacrament? The ninth, Men would then co nceiue that the sacrament consisted more in taking of it, then in consecrating of it; in receiuing of it, then in seeing of it, and thus we should come back again from our pretended sacrifice vnto the sacrament. And who can doubt hereof, seeing our Lorde hath said: Take, eate, drinke, &c. The tenth, Euerie man will iudge, if it shall be giuen to the people, that then it will be alwaies necessary and needfull. And what more vrgent and vna∣voidable necessitie can there bee, then for the disciples of Christ to fulfil the wil of their maister? Lastly, That then the Church of Rome should haue failed in the sacraments, and the Councell of Constance in the matter of faith and manners, whereuppon would followe a contemning of the Church, and consequently a schisme in Christendome. Now heere indeed is the sore and pinching griefe: and it is for nothing else but for the top of honour, that all this contention falleth out. But how much better had it beene to haue bewailed and wept for the fault committed, when they heard the cocke crow? And doe we not see how God hath cursed all these reasons bent vpon the setting vppe of a pompe and statelinesse, and not to the establishing of the Church? when as vnder pretence of a∣uoiding of a pretended schisme, they haue made themselues odious and abhominable vnto the greatest part of Christendome? But our worthie maister Gerson, doeth take the checke, and is offended at this clause of Notwithstanding, and therefore setteth his wits vpon the racke, to find out some others, but no lesse blasphemous, then those alleadged by the good foresaide fathers, were sottish and ridiculous, That the cup had no ground in the word of God, and that it was not of the necessitie of the sacrament? That it was not appointed or ordained for any but the Apostles, and in them for the Priests: That men must not hold so much of the scripture, as they must of the traditions of the Church; that is, as Car∣dinall Cusanus saith in his second epistle to the Bohemians, That the institution of the scripture doeth change in time, and apply it selfe vnto the ceremonie that is currant and receiued
in the church, Secundum currentem ritum ecclesiae. But the strongest of all the rest, and that which alreadie hath beene practised in that place, is, that in this point, Viendum est (sayeth hee) brachio seculari contra refragantes, that is, there must the secular power bee stretched out, and punishment with all hote pursute bee executed vpon those that will not obeye vnto this Canon: neuer trobling the braine with disputing and arguing aboute the matter, and that the Emperour must bee exhorted to put his helping hand thereto freelie and willinglie. But it is not to bee belieued, how much blood hath beene shed in Bohemia, Mo∣rauia, and other Prouinces, for the taking away of the blood of Christ from the faith∣full. The Pope will haue obedience what price soeuer it cost; the people to keepe this pretious pledge of the blood of Iesus Christ, freelie exposing themselues to losse of goods and life. In fine the affaires of Christendome so vrging in respect of the Turke, The Councell of Basill. there was held some twentie yeares after, the Councell of Basill, where the Pope (whose custome it is to stretch out and shrinke vp his constitutions and ordinan∣ces at his pleasure, according to the length of businesses which he hath in hand,) did decree cleane otherwise: The faithfull (sayeth hee) whether they bee of the Laitie or of the Cleargie, are not bound by the commaundement of the Lord, to receiue the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist vnder both kindes, but the Church gouerned by the spirite of truth must ordaine, how the Communicantes, Conficientes. and not those which consecrate it, ought to receiue the same, according as it shall seeme expedient in respect of that reuerence which is due vnto the Sacrament: whether therfore a man cōmunicate vnder one kind or vnder two, according to the ordinance & obseruati∣on of the church, it auaileth vnto saluation, vnto such as worthilie communicate therein. Note that for the saluing of the honour of the Councell of Constance, hee will haue the thing not to depend vpon the institutiō of Christ, but vpon the custom of the church. Againe, how that hee maketh that to bee a matter of indifferencie in the Sacrament, which is indeed essentiall vnto the same, and further, he will haue the Bohemians, not onelie to take it thankefullie at his hands, but also binde themselues, that when hee hath solde them the blood of Christ, they should quite claime and wholie burie in silence, whatsoeuer other agreeuances which they had conceiued against the Church of Rome, especiallie that of the iurisdiction and Primacie of the Pope; If (sayeth he) the Bohemians persist to demaund this communion, and according lie send their Legate with ex∣presse commaundement to bee instant and importunate for the same, then the holie Councell shall giue libertie to the Priestes of Morauia, and Bohemia, to administer the communion vn∣to their partishioners vnder both kindes: but yet with condition, sayeth Nauclerus, that if so bee, in all other thinges, the onelie matter of communicating vnder both kindes excepted, they doe conforme themselues vnto the faith, Naucl. Gen. 48. f. 174. ordinances & ceremonies of the church of Rome. Wher∣fore were those deadlie and cruell wars, wherefore was there so much blood shedde, to purchase this decree in the end? Let euerie man iudge, if it were not vppon good ground and cause, 1500. that Albertus Pigghius one of our great aduersaries said, speaking of these two Councels: That they haue made decrees against the law of nature, against the cleare and manifest Scriptures, against the authoritie of antiquitie, and against the Catholike faith of the Church. As also the Thomists doe holde that the Councell of Basill was assembled and called in ill sorte, and ought to bee helde as no Councell. And yet after these Councels the Doctors stoode not firme and well assured of the soundnes of their determinations: so harde a thing is it for falshoode to get out of the clouches of Veritie and Truth: for Gabriel Biel sayeth that, The Priestes are more worthie then all the holie Laitie, Gabr. Biel. Lect. 52. litera f. yea then the virgin Marie, because that they doe communicate vnder both kindes. And therfore the Sacrament vnder one kinde, (notwithstanding their concomitancie is more excellent, then vnder both kinds.) And yet in another place he lancheth deeper. That it is not sufficient to haue the grace of the communion by the taking of the bodie which is signified by the element of bread, if we haue not the grace of redemption by the bloode, signified by the element of wine: otherwise sayeth hee) The Sacrament is imperfectum alimentum, that is, an imperfect foode and nourishment.
In the ende wee are come to the Councell of Trent: Concil. Trid. Sess. 6. wherein as appeareth by the tenor of the same, it was required by many great Princes and estates of Christendom, that the cup might be restored vnto the people: which thing was put to be consulted vpon, & about the same was the whole summer in the yeare 62. passed ouer with great strife and contention in wordes; some holding with the inhibition ordained in the Councell of Constance, Consule. Cas∣sand. de com∣munione sub vtraque specie, edita Colo∣niae. 64. the hard tearmes onelie (whereof they had been admonished by Gerson) being somewhat qualified, and others for the grant and allowance there∣of, made in the Councell of Basill vpon certaine conditions, which being indifferent; Talis confessio fieret sine detrimento & imminutione plenariae potestatis ecclesiae Romanae: such graunt and allowance should be made as might stand without the preiudice or diminishing of the ful power of the authoritie of the Church of Rome. But manie words hauing passed to and fro, they keeping a middle way, ordayned, That non conficientes, that is, such properlie as make not the sacrament, but receiue it onely, aswell Priestes as the Laitie, are not bounde by the institution of Christ to receiue both kindes; Wherein they doe not stretch the priui∣ledge of the Priestes, but quo ad actum conficiendi, so far foorth as it concerneth the acte of Consecration: But what greater necessitie can wee looke for to bee laide vpon vs then the commaundement of God: they goe about to proue That it hath beene alwayes in the power of the church to dispence of the Sacraments, as hee shall thinke best, salua eorum sub∣stantia, that is, reseruing their substance safe and entire vnto them. But from whence shall wee learne the substance thereof, but from the institution of Christ? And yet not∣withstanding they conclude, That it is verie considerately and well done of the Church to ordaine the communion vnder one kind alone: as if that the receyuing of it vnder two were not of the substance of the Sacrament. But what is there notwithstanding, that can bee more substantiall in the sacramentes, then that which maketh them Sacra∣mēts, that is, the signes instituted by Christ? And moreouer, That seeing that Iesus Christ is whole and entire vnder one of the two kindes, it is not needfull to take anie moe then one, and that those which take that one alone are not defrauded for all that of anie thing necessarie vnto their saluation. Who doubteth that this Diuinitie was vnknowne vnto the Primitiue Church: That Christ in what place soeuer hee bee, is there whole and entire? And notwith∣standing who euer was so bold to draw from thence a conclusion directlie contrarie to the expresse institution? and is the question in this place about the practising of that rule of naturall Philosophie: That which may bee done by the fewer and lesse num∣ber, should not be done by the greater, &c? And if this might finde place, who would not take vp some one colourable excuse and reason, or other, to reiect all the sacramēts? seeing it is saide, That Jesus Christ dwelleth in our heartes by faith: Ephes. 2. Heb. 3. Iohn 6. Calat. 3. that we are made parta∣kers of Christ by faith in his word: that hee dwelleth in the belieuers, and the belieuers in him: that we put him on in Baptisme, &c. For who cannot conclude from thence, Baptisme is sufficient, what haue I to doe with the holie Supper? The word sufficeth, what neede haue I of the Sacraments? if it were not that wee did giue that reuerend and Christi∣an regarde vnto the institution of Christ, to bound and limit all our conclusions with∣in the tearmes of the same. In the meane time it curseth all them which hold that the Communion vnder the two kinds is necessarie, either in respect of saluation, or otherwise in respect of the commaundement of God: as all those likewise which say, that the cuppe hath beene taken from the Laitie without anie manner of sounde ground or sufficient reasons: and as for the sute and request amde by Princes, that it might bee restored to them and their Subiectes; they commit that to the Pope alone for to decide and aunswere, together with the aduise of diuerse Bishoppes: and in euerie case they send vnto him certaine conditions and articles, whereto hee is admonished to binde them, by whome hee shall bee wonne and ouercome; and these articles are such as are not contained in the Decrees of the Councell, but were then retained in mente Curiae, and were afterwarde communicated vn∣to the saide Princes. First, Those that wil cōmunicat vnder both kinds shal protest that they agree in hart & mouth vnto al that the church of Rome hath receiued, aswel in this matter of the sacramēt, as in all the
rest, either of faith or ceremonies, and that they doe religiously imbrace all the Decrees of Coun∣cels, as well published as to be published. How many errors may they thus gaine and get in, whiles they doe nothing but grant some one thing or other that is done? Secondly, That the Pastors and preachers vnto those nations or people to whom the vse of the cup shall be graunted, doe beleeue and teach that the custome of communicating vnder one kinde, is not against the sacred institution of the Lard, but rather laudable and worthie to bee obserued & kept as a law, if the Church ordain not otherwise. That such as teach or beleeue otherwise are hereticks: and that they shall not administer vnder both kindes vnto any but such as shal both be∣leeue and confesse the same. But and if this be to applie themselues onely to the infirmi∣tie of the people, that they thus giue place and yeeld vnto them in this their request, then what a hell is that, to force and violently to wrest this profession from them, cō∣trarie to their infirmitie; by this meanes offering them one fauour with the left hand, and in the meane while drawing twentie from them with the right? The third is, That they shall promise to acknowledge the Pope to be the lawfull Pastour and Bishop of the vniuersall Church, yeelding to him as dutifull children, all manner of reuerence, from a free and loyall heart. Who will beleeue that such things did euer come from the Apostles? or who will beleeue that Saint Peter before that euer hee would graunt the sacrament to the faithfull, had gone about to draw such an oath & homage frō them? And againe, who doth not see that they sell the blood of Christ to the people? yea the same blood which Christ himselfe did so freely and without any price shed for them, doe they not make them buy with the high price of the seruitude of their soules? and not of their soules onely, but of the whole Church? yea and of the truth it selfe? But in as much as these conditions seemed vnto the Princes and Estates too hard and heauie a yoake, and too much ouerlaid with tyrannie, it was thought good that things should stand and continue altogether in such state as was graunted and allow∣ed by the consent of the Councell. And let them not maruaile any more at that which Luther said; That it was wisedome to be well aduised and warie in taking any thing that the Pope shall yeeld and agree vnto: namely, seeing that for to take away one abuse, hee would vn∣doubtedlie aime at and stand for the establishing of all others how many soeuer. And it standeth him vpon, seeing that of all the Christian Churches that are, whether Greeke, Russi∣an, Syrian, Armenian, or Abissine, &c. there is not so much as one, but the commu∣nion is administred therein vnder both kindes: and contrariwise, the administration thereof vnder one kinde disallowed and condemned. And this is the reason why they wish so much mischiefe vnto the writings of Cassander containing the Lithurgies, ra∣ther then the reformation of their own profession: Index expur∣gato. p. 38. ordaining in their Index expurgato∣rius (in that booke, I meane, wherein they haue set downe a register of all the places which they would haue razed and defaced in the reimprinting of the good and sound books that are now extāt) that what soeuer Cassāder hath writtē of both kinds, should be blotted out, Deleantur apud Cassandrum, quae de vtraque specie, &c. Now I woulde gladly know, 2. Thess. ch. 2. by what priuiledge or dispensation the Pope is able to claime and chal∣lenge to himselfe alone this power, if it be not from that which is belonging onely to the man of sinne, the sonne of perdition, who is deciphered in the second to the Thessalonians; That he opposeth and lifteth vp himselfe against all that which is called God: or that is worshipped, so that he doeth sit as God in the temple of God, shewing himselfe as if he were God, &c.
CHAP. XII. Wherein the pretended reasons of the aduersaries are aunswered: as well by the holy scrip∣tures as by the Fathers. THus then it behooueth vs brieflie to examine the reasons which they pretend to beare them out, The cōsutati∣on of the rea∣sons that are made against the vse of both kinds. in so bold and hardie an enter∣prise of change: howbeit indeed to goe about to alleadge and oppose reason against Christ his sound and solide institution, is properly, as the Poet saith, Cum ratione insanire. And first they in∣ferre that the cup is not necessarie in the sacrament, because (say they) that the sacraments of the old Testament, which did pre∣figure and foreshew the same, had no drinke; as the Manna, the Paschall lambe, &c. Indeed those sacraments were figures and types of this, the Man∣na of the true bread, which was to come downe from heauen; the lambe of the true lambe, which should beare and take vpon him the sinnes of the worlde; in the com∣municating of whom we are saued. But what force can this reason carrie with it, being drawne from a figure or shadow, against the expresse word of Christ? So then, Bap∣tisme comming in place of circumcision, because that in circumcision men were cut and not washed: should it follow that in Baptisme men should be cut, seeing they were so in circumcision? or else that it should not be needfull to wash in Baptisme, because in circūcision there was no washing? On the cōtrarie, Paul speaking of the sacraments of the olde law; as of the sea, of the cloude, &c. 1. Cor. 10. Our fathers (saith he) were all baptised in the cloud & in the sea, they did all eat of one spiritual meat, & they did al drink of one spirituall drinke, &c. & from hence haue some of the old writers proued the communicating vn∣der both kinds. But what wil they say of Melchisedech, whō they (the said old writers) would haue to represent in bread and wine the sacrament of the Eucharist, when as wee cannot but see that hee did distribute them to Abraham, and those that were with him, as his seruants and souldiers? It is said, Drink ye all, all say they, that is to say, all the Apostles: and therefore this precept prooueth nothing for the rest of the faith full. Math. 26. These men boast much of antiquitie, whom will they haue to be their expositor? S. Paul: But he giueth (saith he) that which he hath receiued. 1. Cor. 11. He giueth to the Church of Corinth both the kindes: then he had receiued them for it. And indeed Lyranus saieth vppon this place, That is, because the faithfull in the primitiue Church did communicate vnder both kinds. Doe they beleeue the primitiue Church? the old doctours? we cannot possibly iudge better of their expounding of the word, then by their practise which wee haue seene, and by their condemning of them which did abstaine from the one kinde, would they heare the Councels? That of Constance guided (as they say) by the holy ghost, publi∣sheth and proclaimeth with a loude voice, That although Iesus Christ haue instituted the Sacraments vnder both kinds, when he gaue it to his disciples: & although the Primitiue Church hath so distributed it vnto the faithfull, &c. In briefe, Iesus Christ did either speake vnto his Apostles alone; or else in their persons, to all the faithful, or to the Priestes onely. To his Apostles alone it cannot be auouched: for it is written, Doe yee this in remem∣brance of me; Declare the death of the Lord vntill his comming. Vnto the Priests alone vn∣der the names of the Apostles; but what apparant shew or likelyhood is there of that? For the Apostles in this action, Non erant conficientes, sed sumentes, they did not occupie the places of Priests, but of the faithfull, not of Pastors, but of sheepe. And to take it then at the hardest, Iesus Christ hauing spoken vnto them, whom they call non conficientes, and hauing commaunded them to take the cup, it should follow, that the commaun∣dement of God doeth of necessitie charge them to communicate vnder both kindes, which is directly contrarie to the Article of the Councel of Trent: which saieth, Clericos non conficientes non obligari ad viramque speciem, &c. That Clarks themselues not consecrating the host, are not bound to receiue vnder both kinds. It remaineth then that those wordes are spoken vnto them, as being faithful; and so representers of al other Christian people, that is to say, that Iesus Christ as the housholder and maister or Pa∣stour of the church hath dispensed & distributed the Eucharist vnto his disciples; and
ordained and instituted it for them which did beleeue their word, that is, his owne; and that hee did appoint them to distribute vnto them, euery one in his place, that which they had receiued at his hands. Gerard. Lori∣chius in lib. de priuata Missa abro∣ganda. And indeed Gerardus Lorichius, howsoeuer he be a great patron of Transubstantiation and the Masse, is ashamed of this starting hole, in these words: There are (saith hee) false and counterfeit Catholickes, which make no conscience of hindering the reformation of the Church by all manner of meanes. They to the end that the other kind maey not be giuen to the laitie, spare not to vtter blasphemies, for they say that Iesus Christ said vnto his Apostles onely, Drinke yee all: and therein doe nothing consider the proper words of the Canon; Take, eate yee all. Let them now therefore (I pray them) tell vs, if these wordes also should be intended and ment onely to the Apostles, for then also the laitie must needs abstaine from the bread, which would prooue an heresie, and a pestilent and execrable blasphemie. Wherefore we must conclude (saith hee) that both the one and the other word, was intended and ment vnto the whole Church. It is said; S. Luke. ch. 22. Doe this in remembrance of me, sooth indeed (say they) but this commeth onely after that the bread is distributed: and therefore this commandement doeth not binde the Pastours to distribute the cup. But assuredly the Euangelist doth shew it plainly enough in the words that follow; likewise also he tooke the cup, &c. that if these words Doe this, &c. haue relation to the bread: that then by the same proportion they are to be vnderstood of the cup. 1. Cor. 11. But Saint Paul doth resolue vs in this difficult point: for after that he hath said; This is my bodie which is broken for you, doe this, &c. he addeth thereupon, This cup is the new couenant in my blood, doe this euer and as oft as you shall drinke it, in remembrnnce of me, that is, you Pastours administer the bread and the wine; you that are the faithfull receiue them at their hands, being the Sacraments of my bodie and my bloud; manifesting my death vntill my comming. And this also is the opinion of Iohn of Louaine taken out of the old writers. What shall we say, Luke 24. if they will not onely make vs beleeue, that our Lord hath not onely not commaunded it, but that he hath done the contrarie? S. Luke in his 24. chapter maketh mention, that our Lord after his resurrection, being at table in Ema∣us, tooke breade, gaue thankes, brake it and gaue it to two disciples whome hee had met withall; and that then their eies were opened, and that they knew him, &c. They would that this should be the bread of the supper, administred by consequent, vnder one kinde vnto his disciples. The frame and scope of the historie is cleane contrarie: for he had said before, that they had trauailed farre, that they came neere vnto a vil∣lage, that the night beganne to come on, &c. all which is as much as to say, that it was time to eate and refresh themselues. Esa. 58.41. Lament. ler. And the word of breaking of bread is ordinary amongst the Hebricians in this sence. But heere againe, whom shall we cleaue or giue credit vnto in this controuersie? The Syrian Interpreter saith, They knew and perceiued who hee was, as hee broke the bread. Saint Ambrose, Theophilact, and other old writers, in their commentaries at large make mention of no such thing. Hugo, The bread, that is, the word of God, which the Pastour must blesse by praier, breake by expounding of it, & giue vnto the hearers by preaching of it, &c. Lyranus, They seeing him breake it (saith hee) as smooth and eauen, as if he had a knife, according as he was wont before his passion, that is, whiles he abode with them. And the Cardinall Caietanus in like sorte, and Dionysius Carthu∣sianus vpon this place, Caietanus in Luc. Dionysius Carthus. Gulielm. Wi∣def. contra Wicklef. Alph. de Ca∣stro lib. 6. August. de consensu E∣uangel; l. 3. Not as in the supper, but according to the ordinarie manner of bles∣sing of meat. And the great Postill, as he was ordinarily wont before his passion. Gulielmus Widefordensis, writing against Wickliffe, goeth further, It cannot be gathered (saieth he) neither from the text, nor from the glose, nor from the olde Doctours, that the breaking of bread spoken of by Saint Luke, was the breaking of consecrated bread. And Alphonsus de Ca∣stro would not define or say any thing thereof by way of expounding of the same. And indeed the Councels of Constance, Basill, and Trent durst neuer alleadge this place, leauing it to such Aduocates and mainteiners of their errors, as had put on a more brasen face, to make their best aduantage therof. For whereas they alleadge, that S. Augustine calleth this breaking of bread, Sacramentum panis, they themselues know that it neuer came into his minde, to gather and frame the sacrament vnder one
kinde: and that in his Church to the contrarie it was alwaies administred vnder both. And that this came by allegorizing vpon the place: and that Sensus allegoricus, as they cal it, is not argumentatiuus, that allegoricall sences do not proue any thing. And that it is af∣ter the same maner that he calleth by the name of Sacraments, that is, mysteries, other ceremonies, which in deed are no Sacraments at all, as the signe of the Crosse, all the obseruations of Baptisme, the bread of those which are catechised &c. As likewise S. Hillar. in Mat. c. 11 12. . & lib. to de Tri∣nit. Bernard. in sr. de caena D. Hillarie calleth, Sacramentum orationis, ieiunii, saturitatis, sitis, lachrimarum: The Sacra∣ment of prayer, fasting, refreshment, thirst, teares, incarnation, &c. S. Bernard, the washing of the feet a Sacrament, &c. Likewise S. Augustine allegorizing vpon this place, ex∣presseth the two kinds: The man (saith he) that doth not eate nor drinke his iudgement and condemnation, doth know Iesus Christ in the breaking of bread. Wherein he manifestly ac∣knowledged a Synecdoche, which is when one kind is named for two. But his intent and drift is more manifest in these wordes: In as much as they haue loued hospitalitie, they haue knowne in the breaking of bread him, whom they could not knowan the expounding of the Scriptures. Then followeth S. Augustine his conclusion: Let no man thinke that hee knoweth Christ, if he be not a partaker of his bodie, that is (saith he) of the church, the vnitie whereof the Apostle recommendeth vnto vs in the sacrament of bread, when he saith, we are all one bread and one bodie, &c. And in deed, Lyranus doth necessarily inferre of these words of S. Augustine, that it must not be vnderstood of the naturall, but of the my∣sticall bodie of Christ, which is the Church. And their owne Doctors likewise at this time do iarre and disagree about this place of S. Luke. For as Belarmine confesseth, Iohn of Louaine would haue it vnderstood of the Eucharist, and would also fit S. Au∣gustine to his humor. Cornelius Iansenius is of the contrarie iudgement, and resteth satisfied in himselfe, in taking it for a figure of the Eucharist, and not the thing it selfe. And he proueth his collection out of the place of Saint Augustine aboue named, by Beda, Theophilact, Innocent the third, &c. But in the end what manner of diuinity will this come to be, by a place verie intricate & doubtfull, to ouerthrow that which is grounded vppon verie many most plaine and pregnant places? by the storie of a matter passed and done in an Inne, the prescript and precise institution of the sacra∣ment in the assemblie of his Apostles? And what will they say to Lyranus, who saith, that S. Luke was one of these trauelling pilgrims? And vnto Epiphanius, which saith, that it was Nathaniel? if they will not conclude, that euen the ecclesiasticall persons themseles ought to be debarred from the cup as well as the laitie. They go forward: The Apostles themselues likewise did neuer vse it otherwise. Act. 2. & 24. And this is proued by the Actes: for there it is said, that they did communicate in the breaking of bread. In deed some of the old writers do vnderstand it of the Eucharist; others of the societie and brotherly fellowship that was amongst the Apostles, but neuer a one of them all of the communicating of the sacrament vnder one kind. But Chrysostome & all the Greeke expositors, collected into one by Oecumenius, inter∣prete it of the sober diet, which they vsed being come together. And the ordinarie Glose is somewhat doubtfull vpon this place, In fractione panis (saith it) tam prophani quam sacri; as well common as holy. So farre off are they from such impudent collecti∣ons, as Gardinall Hosius would seeme to gather, namely, that S. Iames in his church did administer the sacraments neuer but vnder one kind; howbeit that S. Paule did deliuer two: wherein they are confuted both by the hand of fellowship, which these Apostles had giuen one vnto another, Galat. 1. in respect of the vnitie of doctrine: Galath. 1. as likewise by the lithurgie which they attribute to Saint Iames, where there is distribu∣tion made of two. But this is a maruaile, that these men should in another place go about to gather the whole bodie of the Masse from this place as if the day of Pente∣cost had then beene first celebrated: and now they content themselues, that it stan∣deth them in stead for the establishing of their communion vnder one kind, Actes 20. nothing at all considering, that it is said Actes 20. that S. Paule tooke bread, being the man that did consecrate the sacrament, and so they make him to communicate vnder one kind, that is, to commit sacriledge; it being a Maxime amongst them, that no conse∣crating
priest, may omit to take either of the kinds without sacriledge. What then? will it be collected any thing more directly out of Act. 27? Act. 27. They had beene four∣teene daies vpon the sea without eating: S. Paule exhorteth them to take foode: for the better incouraging of them so to do, he himselfe taketh bread, he giueth thanks, hee breaketh it, and eateth it, and then they doe the like after him. Whereto doeth all this discourse and all these circumstances carrie vs, but vnto an ordinarie manner of taking of meate? Wherefore should that be a sacrament vnto S. Paule, which was but an ordinarie food vnto the saylers? And againe, if it had beene the sacrament, how could it haue beene giuen vnto them which were infidels? And if it were but for himselfe, was he not then also Consiciens, that is, he that consecrated it? And wherefore then did he not communicate but vnder one kind alone; that is to say, why would he commit yet a second sacriledge? If it were not yet further, that they would drawe from hence, their goodly institution, of not being able to say any other but dry Mas∣ses whiles they are a shipboard at sea? But and if they say that he blessed it, that hee gaue thankes, who can make any other thing hereof, but that he onely did accor∣ding to the laudable manner of the Iewes, who neuer take either bread or wine with∣out this blessing? Blessed be the Lord that giueth vs, &c. Againe, the ordinary Glosse saith in that place: He tooke bread, that he might be an example to others to do the like: Et gratias egit, he gaue thankes: Iuxta morem solitum in comedendo, according to their wonted custome in eating: Et cum fregisset, coepit manducare; and hauing broken it he be∣gan to eate: Exhortationis verbo (saith it) & operis exemplo, in the word of exhortation and example of worke, &c. The same which Oecumenius saith, : And Chrysostome, that he perswaded them to eate, for feare that after so long fasting they should die with hunger: and the Cardinall Caietan likewise did not vnderstand it otherwise. In this place then there is nothing that toucheth the Supper: and in deed the foresaid Councels durst not alleadge it. But the great word remaineth behind, Oecumenius in Acta. Chrysost. in Act. Cardinal. Ca∣ietan. in Act. Caetera cum venero, disponam, I will set in order the rest at my comming. We haue answered therunto before: vnder one Et caetera, they would make S. Paule the father of all that which they haue chaunged, added and ta∣ken away from the holy supper. They will haue to dispose and set in order, to be to ouer∣turne: what all the old writers haue vnderstood, as wee haue shewed heretofore to be meant of certaine circumstances, they would stretch to the substance. They would (to speake in a word) that by vertue of this word, euerie thing might bee lawfull for them. But how much more commendablie & soundly dealeth Durandus de S. Por∣tiano, Durandus de S. Port. d. 7. q. 3 art. 10. & 11. he whom they cal in Sorbone by the name of the most resolute Doctor, intrea∣ting of this matter? We must hold and keepe fast (saith he) according to the common doctrine, that nothing which is of the substance, and essence of the sacraments, or els of the things belon∣ging vnto them, being instituted by Iesus Christ, may be chaunged by any man whosoeuer: for in such thinges Christ hath not giuen commission to any man, no not to the Pope himselfe, fur∣ther then for the simple administring of the same: and that which is more, the church hath very small authoritie to change, take away, or diminish any thing about the order and manner of the administration, Lib. 4. Act. 10. &c. And in another place: The matter (saith he) and the forme are of the perfection of euery sacrament, that is, it can not be kept sound and entire, except they bee kept sound and entire. But I aske of them, euen in their consciences, if the bread and the cup bee not the matter? if they bee not Sacramenta, neither yet Sacramentalia? And what will follow hereof then, but that all manner of men, all the Popes, and all the Councels in the world cannot touch the same? Finally, they renounce the Canonicall scriptures, and flie for refuge vnto the Apo∣crypha; they let go sound and authentike histories, to take hold of fabulous tales. It is read (say they) in the Gospell according to the Hebrewes, that our Lord after his re∣surrection gaue the Eucharist vnto Iames the Iust vnder one kind. In the Legend of S. Denys, Roffensis. that our Lord administred nothing vnto him but onely bread. What itch∣ing fingers these fellowes haue, to cut off and pare away this sacrament, seeing that al the holy scriptures elswhere cannot satisfie them: and that here they shold content
themselues with such writings? And of how contrarie sorts of spirites are they com∣posed and made, when as in the forme of this Sacrament they do so presse the letter, and in the matter of the same they build so much vpon figures and allegories? The aduersa∣ries their con∣tradictions. that they which haue taken so great paines and labour in the kind of bread, by heaping additions of their owne hereupon, should please themselues so greatly in paring & cutting away of the kind of wine? But let not vs forget their manifold contradicti∣ons, the ordinarie traine attending vpon false doctrine. For sometimes they say, that the Iewes did not drinke in their sacrifices, & from thence would draw a consequence for the holy Supper. Sometimes they alleadge this place of Exodus; how that after that the people had sacrificed to the golden calfe, they sate downe to eat & to drink. Also, it was (say they) left indifferent in the primitiue Churches, Verga de Euch▪ to communicate the sacrament vnder one onely kind, or vnder both, and as it were with one breath they by and by againe auouch the contrary. As that two were ordained for the Gentiles, Idem Verga and but one for the Iewes: as being a people that loathed wine in their sacrifices; & neither the one nor the other grounded vpon the scriptures. Againe, the two kinds were instituted for the Gentiles: and yet in the turning of a hand they go and exclude the laitie, and allow them vnto the priests onely. Againe, sometimes they say, Verg. & Bel∣larm. that the vse of the one kinde is come from the Apostles: and a little after they say, that the Church did ordaine it against the Nestorians, who did not confesse or admit of concomitancie, where of notwithstanding the ecclesiasticall histories doe not speake a word. In briefe, in one place they say, that Hoc facite, do this in remembrance of mee, respecteth both the kindes: and in another that properly it must bee restrained vnto the bread, as meant thereof onely: for it (say they) was giuen a long time be∣fore, yea and was disgested before that our Lord had distributed the cup. And thus you may see how in parting the kinds of the sacrament, or rather the signes, and pul∣ling them a sunder, they are rent and diuided one from another, and euery man in himselfe. And as for the practise of the old Church, when they are not able to deny it, yet they will not cease to extenuate and diminish the same: The Councell of Trent espe∣cially in these wordes: Licet in Primitiua ecclesia vtrius{que} speciei vsus non infrequens fuerit, although that in the Primitiue church the vse of both kindes was not seldome vsed: whereas the Councell of Constance had declared with an open mouth, Licet in Primitiua eccle∣sia hoc sacramentum à fidelibus reciperetur sub vtraque, &c, although that in the Primitiue church the faithfull receiued this sacrament vnder both kindes. Now we haue seene, that for the space of 1200. yeares the holy supper was not otherwise distributed through∣out all Christendome: and that when it began to be administred otherwise, it came to passe but by sufferance, and not by any law; Latomus. vntill the time of the Councel of Con∣stance. Others say, that the Primitiue Church being as yet rude and dull of conceit, Latomus. did obserue most religiously, the institution of Christ: but that afterward she learned of the fathers, that the two kindes were for the priestes, and not for the laitie: Bellarminus. a learned ignoraunce and eloquent rudenes, to keepe themselues to the law of their maister, but an ignorant learning, and rude vnderstanding to depart from the same and leaue it. Others say, that the course was good whiles there were but a few Chri∣stians: but that after there grew to be such great concourse and flocking, it was no good order: and by this goodly reason they would cleare themselues of all the olde fathers. But what will they say to Tertullian, who saith: Tertul. in Apol. We haue filled your cities and your fieldes, your pallaces and your armies: where is the empire that can withstand vs, if our doctrine did not carrie with it the doctrine rather of dying, then of killing? And notwithstan∣ding all this people did receiue the communion vnder both kinds. Or to S. Chryso∣stome, where we see soldiers pressing and endeuouring desirously to receiue the cup? And to the conuersion of the nations vnto Iesus Christ, all which intirely and wholy we read to haue receiued both kinds? I meane the citties, prouinces, nations, and armies, yea and that in the wide open field? whereas we see on the contrarie that this custome came in when Christendome beganne to decline and fall away from her first
zeale, euen at such time as there was not such pressing forward nor deuotion, eyther vnto the word or Sacraments. They say, What the laye mans commu∣nion is. yea wee do ordinarily reade in the old writers, Communionem laicam, the communion of the laeitie: that was this which is administred vnder one kinde. This guile and craftie shift is too plaine and manifest, the distinction and difference of the laitie and of the Clearkes, is well inough knowne what it meant in the old Church: these being such as were to take charge in the ministerie vpon them, as to be Pastors, Elders, Deacons, Subdeacons, &c. and those to be such simplie as were faithfull, go∣uerned and led by the ministerie of the others. Now the old Church, that they might the better containe and kepe such as had charge of the dispensing of the word in the performance of their dutie, did hold them vnder a more straite and seuere kind of discipline: and if it had happened, that any one of them had swarued in the confession of Iesus Christ, or grieuously failed in any parte of his dutie, accor∣ding to the qualitie and measure of his fault, he was suspended from his ministerie, or els he was wholy depriued and put from the same, notwithstanding whatsoeuer acknowledgement of the same that he made: reserued notwithstanding their libertie to be receiued into the Christian societie, and to communicate in the sacraments, af∣ter the manner of other faithfull people, that is of the laitie: but not to dispence or distribute the sacraments in the charge & place which before they had inioyed, nei∣ther yet to communicate amongst them of the cleargie. Euseb. l. 6. c. 33 And this is that which they call, recipi ad laicam communionem, that is, to be receiued to the communion of the laitie. And in the Canons, Ad veniam non ad dignitatem, &c. In this sorte saith Eusebius, that of three Bishops which had vpon importunate sute & request laid their hands vpon the hereticke Nouatus, there came one incontinently vnto the Church, confessed his sinne, and was receiued into the communion of the laitie, and that at the request of the people, that is to say, not to be any more a publike person in the Church but a pri∣uate: Cypr. 2 cp. ad Stephanum. and to be simply a sheepe and not a shepheard. And Cyprian layeth the mat∣ter open in more plaine sort writing vnto Stephanus: If there be any Elders or Deacons (saith he) which hauing beene ordained in the Catholike church, are become rebellious, or car∣rying themselues disloyally or vndutifully towards her, &c. we adde and set downe this by com∣mon authoritie, that if they repent, communicent laici, that is, let them be receiued into the communion of the Church, as laye people, and let them rest satisfied that they are receiued into the peace of the church, hauing beene the enemies thereof: but not to heare armes or any ensigne of ordination or honour, seeing they haue abused them to rebellion against her, that is, that which commonly they call Orders, &c. as if they should say, let them bee receiued into the church, to receiue the Eucharist with the faithfull, but not to blesse and distribute it. And the reason which he addeth, taken out of the olde Testament, doeth wit∣nesse as much: For it behoueth the Priestes and Ministers (saith he) which serue at the altar and sacrifices, C. 1. Q. conue∣nientibus. that they bee without spot and blemish. The Glose of Gratian saith: By this authoritie wee learne, that those who haue beene willing to be ordained by the heretikes, if they came to forsake their heresie, are receiued into the Church; but yet so as that notwith∣standing they cannot exercise their office. And by that of S. Cyprian: That they are excluded and altogether restrained from all ecclesiasticall Ministerie. This is then to say, Ad laicam communionem recipi: to be receiued to the communion of the laitie: is interpreted by these words: Administratione ecclesiastica prohiberi, to be excluded from all ecclesiasticall admi∣nistration, Dist. 84. C. Quisquis Cle∣ricus. 1. q. 4. C. homini. &c: which a certaine Canon of Pope Syricius calleth, Omni dignitatis eccle∣siasticae priuilegio denudari, to be stript of all manner of priuiledge of ecclesiasticall dignitie. And by one pronounced by Innocent against them which are baptised by here∣tikes, that Laicam quidem communionem accipiant, ne ex iis aliquis in clericatus honore vel ex∣iguo subrogetur, Concil. Sard. c. 1. Conc. Agath. c. 34. let them receiue the communion with the laie people, but that no one of them be admitted vnto the least dignitie of the cleargie: that is to say, that the graunting of the one pre∣supposeth the deniall of the other. And thus also it is vnderstood in the Councell of Sar∣dis, of Agatha, and others, wherein is handled the question of Bishops, going from one citie to another, of Elders & Deacons offending in matters of life and death, &c.
Whereupon also Georgius Wicelius doth confesse, that Laica communio in S. Cyprian, Georg. Wicel. in lib. qui in∣scribitur typu ecclesiae prio∣ris. Cyprian. lib. 4. c. 2. is no other thing, but that Triphonius a Pastor reuolted from the truth, and repen∣ting of the same, might communicate with the laye people, but not celebrate the communion according to his office of ministerie. Adde hereunto, that all these ca∣nons are of the same time, wherein as we haue proued, all the faithfull did receiue both kinds. And it is nothing to the purpose that Bellarmine saith, that these canons doe speake for the most part of Deacons, to whom it did not belong to consecrate. For besides that he speaketh there of Bishops also, he doth not deale onely with per∣sons whose office serueth to consecrate, but with all maner of persons hauing charge in the Church: besides that it was the ordinary function of the Deacons to admini∣ster the cup. As little consequence is there in that which he gathereth of that, that the ambitious Bbs. at the request of Osius were not receiued to the cōmunion of the laie people, no not vnto the death: which is likewise affirmed afterward of all haynous crimes: for the seueritie of the old Church did excommunicate all such as had com∣mitted any criminall trespasse, from the holy supper, Concil. Sardic. c. 1. for the reuerence they had of the sacrament, and detestation of malefactors, according to the qualitie of their offences; for ten yeares, for twentie yeares, for the whole time of life, and sometimes so as that they would not giue it them, no not to the death. Whereupon at this time riseth that practise which wee see, of not giuing it to such as are conuicted of any enormous crimes, nor vnto those which are going to execution. But in the meane time they lay amongst the penitentes, in a place seperated both from the Cleargie and lai∣tie. And of them if they bee laye people, speake the Councels: Ne in fine quidem iis communionem dandam, that they should not haue the communion, no not to their dying day. If they were Clearkes, then there is added: no not the Communion amongst the laitie, Ne laicam quidem: for tenne, twentie, thirtie yeares, yea not to death. And when they did graunt it vppon the manifestation of their repentance, and shedding of their aboundant store of teares, yet it was not to any other effect, but to accompt and take them as laye men, without any inabling of them to their former places of dignitie, that so the Ministers of the Church might bee the better brideled and kept in the doing of their duties. For as for that which Bellarmine sayeth: That there was nothing giuen them but bread, because they durst not touch the cuppe: what appearance of truth is there in it, that they should take the bread in their hand; a thing that some doe agree vnto, and durst not touch the cuppe? that they durst not touch the vessell, and yet touched the Sacrament? Againe, what punishment had it beene to giue the bodie and not the blood, and the bodie according to their concomitancie, which extendeth to the containing of the blood? And had not this rather beene an iniurie to the sacra∣ment, then a punishment to the crime? In briefe, it is apparant by many exam∣ples, that both the one and the other was giuen to the sicke. Iustinus saith, Iust. in Apol. that the one and the other was carried to those that were absent. Saint Ierome speaking of Exuperius Bishop of Tholosa, saith: De canistro vimineo, & de vase vitreo, out of a wicker basket for the bread, and out of a glasse for the wine. The historie of Serapio vseth these words: to runne and to poure into the mouth: which cannot be vnderstood but of licor. But euen as we haue said before, that wheresoeuer they find Eucharist, Iustia. Apol. 2. they haue translated it Masse: so now they will vnderstand by this word Eucharist, nothing but the sacrament of bread, against all antiquitie, which speaketh it both of the one & of the other: And this food we call the Eucharist. Againe, When the word commeth to the wine min∣gled, & the bread broken, they are made the Eucharist of the bodie & blood of our Lord. And as for the sicke, the old fathers did not carrie it indifferently vnto all, Irenaeus lib. 5. but vnto them which were neare vnto death, hauing beene suspended from the Sacraments, as may bee seene in the historie of Serapio, that so there might effectually be declared vnto them their reconciliation with God, and their peace with the Church, to the esta∣blishing of their consciences, vpon their departure out of this life into another, which otherwise should haue beene diuersly tossed and perplexed in this agonie;
dying vnder the censure of the Church. To this purpose S. Cyprian saith: In the ex∣treame perill of death, the excommunicate must not stay till he be reconciled by the Bishop, but let him testifie his vnfained repentance before the Deacon, August. ep. 180 and so depart in peace. Saint Au∣gustine: When it is come to that point (say they) they runne to the Church, some desire to bee baptized: others to bee reconciled: others, the testisying of their repentance, &c. And if the Ministers faile, into what daunger do they cast them which depart from the church, either not baptised, or bound with the censures ecclesiasticall? But the historie of Serapio cleareth this matter. In the time of persecution he had sacrificed to an Idoll; the Church had excommunicated him, deliuering him vp vnto Sathā: then he was as a heathen & ido∣later, shut out not only from the communion of the sacraments, but from the societie of Christians. Hauing in the end beseeched his brethren with teares, hee fell sicke through sorrow and heauines of heart, losing his speech within three daies, which he recouered againe vpon the fourth, and said: How long will ye hold me in this case? bring me hither a minister, that I may be reconciled vnto God, and restored vnto the church before I die. And then the sacraments were administred vnto him, in token that the Church was at peace with him againe. Against the ordinarie vse of the Church which we propound and stand vpon, they continue to oppose the extraordinarie abuses of certaine women or priuate persons. There are found (say they) such as did take the cup in the Church, and notwithstan∣ding carried home to their houses the sacrament of bread. And thereupon they al∣leadge vnto vs the example of Gorgonia the sister of Nazianzene: Tertul. lib. 2. ad vxorem. Ieronym. ad∣uer. Iouinian. Nazianz. in funere Gor∣goniae. of Satyrus the bro∣ther of S. Ambrose, &c. & of a certain infidel woman, who stole the bread from Chry∣sostom, &c. as also of S. Ambrose himself, who died after he had taken the sacrament of bread. &c. what can the authoritie of these priuate examples doe, against a pub∣like law and custome? these examples of poore sillie women, of infirme and weake persons, or such as had beene slenderly taught, against the institution of the Sonne of God? And if these examples be so infalliblie certain, why then did they not rather depraue them of the bread; seeing they all agree, that they caried it home with them & tooke the cup in the Church? And afterward, why did they not call to mind, what is said of Gorgonia, that shee kept both the one and the other kind , saith Na∣zianzene, , the signes of the precious bodie and blood? And that in the historie of Satyrus there is mention made, Haustionis & fusionis in viscera, of the shedding and poowring of them into the entrailes: which cannot be vnderstood but of li∣cour? And that this pretended Paulinus which hath written of S. Ambrose, is he, as saith Erasmus, Which hath marred all S. Ierome and S. Augustine: borne (saith he) onely to spoile good writers? But as we do not denie vnto them, that these superstitions tooke place at the least amongst some particular persons: so they should not haue concea∣led and kept backe, Concil. Tolet. 1. c. 14. Concil. Caesar. August. c. 3. Liturg. Prae∣sanctificatorū Interprete Ge∣nebrardo. that they were condemned by the Councels. The first of Toledo saith: If any man do receiue the Eucharist of the Minister, and doe not eate it, let him be put backe and excommunicate as a Church robber. And that of Saragosa: If hee doe not eate it in the Church, that is, in the verie place, let him be accursed for euer. Whereas Bellarmine alleadgeth the lithurgie of the presanctified amongst the Grecians, which was said in Lent, pretending that therin they did not consecrate or take any moe then one kind: for certaine, the lithurgie saith expressly; that after that the Minister hath sanctified the bread, he powred out the wine and water into the cup, & pronounced the accu∣stomed words. And the praier of the faithfull saith; For behold his bodie without spot and his quickning blood, &c. which are set vpon this table. And in the Post-communion they giue thankes vnto God, for the receiuing of the one and the other. That which is more speciall & proper herein, is, that they consecrate for many in one day: where∣of they alleadge some one or other tradition. But these are their cold and friuolous arguments vpon this point: and in deed how can they be otherwise against the ex∣presse word of God? But we against these particular deuotions so endles and bot∣tomles, doe set this Maxime and generall rule: In vaine do you serue me after your owne fancies: being properly called in the scriptures , will worship. And against
that custome, Tertul. de virg. veland. Cypr. ad Quin. & ad Iuba∣num. August lib. 2. contra Dona∣tist c. 6. & de Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 2. c. 14. that euerie man frameth and fashioneth to himselfe whether new or old, as best pleaseth him, let vs set the true antiquitie: Iesus Christ (saith Tertullian and S. Cyprian) hath said: I am the Truth, and not Custome. And whereas Custome hath preuailed against the law, let vs say with S. Augustine: We must waigh and ponder the doctrines in the right balance of the scriptures, and not in the false and deceiptfull scales of Custome. But let vs draw all vnto a conclusion, and let vs not be ashamed with S. Cy∣prian his saying: That what others before vs haue erred in and done amisse: let vs correct at the admonition and warning of the Lord: (and where doth he speake lowder and more clearely, then in his word?) to the end that when he shall come in his glorie and heauenly Maiestie, he may find vs holding fast such admonitions as hee hath giuen vs, obseruing that which he hath taught vs, and doing that which he hath done. So be it. And now by this time wee haue looked into all the partes thereof, A Recapitula∣tion. how and by what degrees the holy Supper of our Lord is degenerate and turned into the Masse: how of the corrupting of the one, the other was first begotten, then nourished: and afterward brought vp to that state wherein it hath stood for these certaine ages, and that so long, as vntill it hath vtterly brought the other to nothing in the Church of Rome: So straunge an alteration, as that in the whole frame and booke of nature there is not the like to bee met withall: seeing the Masse now retaineth no more of the holy Supper, either in his outward or inward partes: seeing that the best sighted, hauing considered the one, could not obserue or find so much as one step or note of the other: because also, it is to go against and exceede the lawes of nature, to passe from one extremitie to another: a thing not credible, not possible to be acknowled∣ged, if the diligent obseruation of histories did not point out vnto vs both the first proceedings, and also the growing of the same, till it came at the midst. The holy sup∣per was an assemblie, a bodie of the faithfull, vnited and knit together in one spirite, strengthning the faith; stirring vp the charity; and kindling the zeale one of another: in one common manner of celebrating of the seruice of God. The Masse what con∣taineth it, being said by a priest, in some corner of the church, & shuffled vp by a cleark who vnderstandeth not for the most part of the time, one word that he speaketh? The holy supper did resound with songs to the praise of God, sung indifferently by all the people: it taught them by the reading & expounding of the holy scriptures: it lifted them vp vnto God, & raised them out of themselues by feruent & ardent praier. But what impression can the Masse make in the heartes of men? being a certaine kind of muttering noise, posted ouer by one man alone, not vnderstood of those which are present, yea hardly vnderstood of himselfe, where the scriptures are read of purpose, so as they may not be vnderstood: the praiers vttered with a low voice, in an vnknown tongue, that so they may not be heard with attention, and lesse followed deuoutly by the people, where by consequent they abide fixt vpō that which they see, not minding any higher matters: it hath signes, without any signification: it hath pretended my∣steries, without any thing misticall in them, except it be the muttered hums, artifici∣ally affected by him that consecrateth, and the carefull regard of a premeditated ig∣norance to be wrought and effected by such meanes vpon and in the poore silly peo∣ple. In the holy Supper was celebrated the memory of the death and passion of our Lord, by a plaine and open rehearsall of the cause, manner, and benefites of the same: and thereby the faithfull were taught to acknowledge and call to minde the greatnesse of their sinnes, and to admire and magnifie the great and vnspeakeable mercies of God, stirred vp consequently to renounce and forsake themselues, to giue themselues vnto God, to die vnto their lusts and concupiscences, to liue vnto Christ: to Christ I say, who hauing once deliuered himselfe to the death of the Crosse, for to giue them life, did yet further vouchsafe to giue himselfe to them in his sacra∣mentes euerie day, as meate and drinke vnto their soules, to the feeding of them vp vnto eternall life. In the Masse I appeale vnto the consciences of all those that eyther say or see the same, who of them it is that can say by being at the same e∣uerie daye, that hee can learne or carrie away any of all this; that the infidell
can thence playe the diuine; that thence hee can receiue any instruction, either of the deadly fall of Adam, or of the quickning death of Christ; that the Christian can profit therby any thing be it neuer so little, in the true acknowledging of the mercies of God; or in the knowledge of himselfe, or in briefe that he can therein perceiue his transgressions, that so he may run to seeke the remedie: or this drynes & alteration of the soule and mind, which our Lord calleth the thirst of righteousnes, to quench the same in the welspring of life, this reuiuing water, gushing out vnto eternall life, this precious blood of our Lord, which is made our iustification, yea our iustice? Againe, in the holy Supper all the faithfull did communicate together in bread and in the cuppe, in the bodie, and in the blood of our Lord: being taught thereby, that they were but one bodie, euen the bodie of Christ; but diuers members, quickened, mo∣ued and gouerned by one spirite, euen by his spirit: liuing one life, and consequent∣ly taught mutually to loue one another, mutually to imbrace one another: the grea∣ter becomming seruants to the lesser, the strong vnto the weake, the learned to the ignorant, and the wise and prudent to the foolish and simple, referring all their ac∣tions to the glorie of their head, to the seruice of the bodie, and to the saluation of his members. In the Masse, what is there that may imprint this brotherly loue and charitie in vs, or expresse and teach vs any such instruction? yea on the contrarie, which doth not suppresse and burie charitie, which doth not oppresse and smother, & that in all dispightfull manner such lessons and doctrine? where the Priest (if hee may be lawfully so called) communicateth alone, one for all: where the auncient bread of the communion of the bodie of Christ: great, according to the proportion of the communicants, is brought to one wafer, & that in some places no greater then a penie, being for the priest alone; whereas our Lord deliuered himselfe to death for all, and gaue himselfe to all: where also so oft as any are admitted thereunto, they are depriued of the cup, of the communion, so much as in them lyeth, of the blood of Christ. Then what proportion holdeth it with the supper? yea, what opposition and contrarietie is there, that it maintaineth not against the Apostle: We are one one∣ly bread, 1. Cor. 10.17. and one onely bodie, &c. To be short, in the holy supper, man was taught how he was indebted vnto one onely God for his creation, as likewise that hee was not bound to any for the work of his regeneration, iustification, sanctificatiō & saluation, but to one only Christ the eternall son of God, the beginning, midst, and end of our spirituall life: in so much as that he which doth regenerate vs in baptisme, and doth nourish and feed vs in the holy supper, is made our meat himselfe, and in so much as that he which washeth vs from our sinnes, doth cloath and couer vs with his righte∣ousnesse. In the Masse what shall wee say? where of the holy table of our Lord, they haue made vs an Altar of all sortes of saints: where of the remembrance of his death, they haue made vs a legend of the Saintes, their sufferinges and passions: where, in stead of his blood, the onely propitiation for our sinnes, they pretend to admini∣ster vnto vs their praiers, intercessions and merites: where, to shut vp all in a word, is pretended to sacrifice in honor of the Saints, him, for whose glorie and names sake all the Saintes haue offered whatsoeuer they haue sacrificed, yea and for whose names sake they ought to sacrifice themselues. To bee short, let vs set before vs on the one side an assemblie of faithfull people praying vnto God, singing his prai∣ses, hearing his worde, and attentiue to the expounding of the same: a seruant of God in all simplicitie, so ripping vp their sinnes, as that hee maketh them to haue a sence and feeling of the same by the worde, declaring thereupon the remission thereof in the death and passion of our Lorde, distributing vnto them rounde a∣bout the table, his bodie and his blood, in the sacrament of bread and wine, which he hath instituted, and prouoking and stirring of them vp to the giuing of all heartie and euerlasting praise vnto him for this so great a benefite: This was the holy supper of the faithfull in the old Church: this is ours. And now set before your eyes on the other side a Priest with a straunge garment, his face fixt vppon an Altar, with a Clearke standing behind him, muttering in an vnknowne language, interlarded
with signes, lifting vppe a Wafer in an affected and ceremoniall sorte, causing it to bee worshipped; dippping it in his wine, eating it alone, vsing no word of inter∣pretation or exhortation, neither yet giuing the people any other taste thereof by any manner of instruction; perswading them notwithstanding, that by thus much as hath beene done, being at their or his request, and bought with some peece of mo∣ney, he hath sacrificed our Lord for them or him, that hee hath with this his one la∣bour set his father in Paradice, drawne him out of Purgatorie, &c. This is the Masse of Rome: that same which wee so greatly complaine of, and whereof there is so much talke: but how differing and disagreeing both for manner and effect (I call their owne soules to witnes) from the seruice of the fathers? how farre off then from the institution of Christ, and how farre off from the order of the Apostles? But it is now time to finish this discourse: let vs leaue the partes, and looke into the circum∣stances; and so we shall come to behold the truth of this matter in more cleare and e∣uident manner. The end of the first booke. The Second Booke. WHEREIN ARE HANDLED THE CIRCVMSTAN∣CES AND APPERTINANCES BELONGING TO THE Diuine seruice; as those also which belong vnto the Masse. CHAP. I. Of Churches and Altars, and of their originall and proceeding. IT followeth after wee haue spoken of the parts of seruice, their first originall and beginning, as also of their increase and pro∣ceeding, deprauing, corrupting, &c. that we now examine the circumstances thereof. And therefore let vs beginne with the Churches, Altars, and images, and therein consider how by the good husbanding of the matter by the Sea of Rome, the cir∣cumstances haue taken the place of the substance, and the acci∣dents of the subiect: in such manner, as that in Papistrie there is more regard had of a pretended adorning & beautifying of places, thē to the forme & substance of that which is to be done therein, for the saluation & instruction of men. The ancient Iewes by the commandement of God had built a temple for sacrifices; Act. 2.5.21. Act. 9.13. & after that many Sinagogues like parish Churches, therein to reade and expound the word of God. Our Lord did often vse to go into the same, to draw the Iewes to the knowledge of the truth: his Apostles likewise did imitate his example. But in as much as it was not lawfull for them to doe the seruice ordained in the new Testa∣ment therein, they are content to doe it in their owne priuate houses; Act. 1.2.4.5.10.12.20.28. no lesse conse∣crate and dedicate, then the temple and the synagogues: seeing it is the seruice that sanctifieth the place, and not the place that sanctifieth the seruice: yea so much the
rather, in that the voice of Gods owne Sonne manifested in the worlde did sound therein, Euseb. lib. 2. c. 16. & 17. in the doctrine of the Gospell. For whereas Eusebius would applie vnto Christians, that which Philo saith in the treatise , that they had at that time sacred or consecrate houses, which they called , the best learned do vnderstand & acknowledge, that he speaketh there of those religious & Monkish Iewes which were called Essei, for that he saith that they are , alluding vnto their name: De praeparat. e. uang. l. 8. c. 4. and Eusebius himselfe in another place doth ex∣pound it of them. Those which haue written after him, as Sozomenus, Epiphanius, Nicephorus, &c. as they followed his steps, so they stumbled at the same stone. And that which Onuphrius saith, that Anacletus the first in the life time of S. Peter, did build the temple of Laterane at Rome is verie fond and friuolous. And in deed the first Christians were without temples for certaine ages: That there were no chur∣ches at the be∣ginning. Orig. contr. Celsum. l. 8. Minutius in Octauio. Euseb. l. 9. c. 10. Tertul. cont. Valentinian. Onuph. in ap∣pendice Platin. Euseb. l. 7. c. 9. Euseb. l. 9. c. 42. which ap∣peareth by Origen and Arnobius, who were reproched by the Painims, for that the Christians had not any. As also by Eusebius, who saith, that the places wherein they prayed, were caues and dennes, as hauing made them places for to pray in: whereas on the contrarie our Sauiour Christ reproueth and reprocheth the Pharisies, for that of the places of praiers they had made dennes for theeues. Tertullian sheweth vs that in his time they had no where to assemble and come together, but in simple and silly houses, where he saith: The house of our doue is but a simple one, scituate in high places, & daily inuaded and beset. This was about the yeare 200. & their first publike assemblies were in the places where they vsed to burie the Martyrs. So wee reade, that in the time of Valerian, Aemilianus, gouern or of Egypt, defendeth the exercise of religion in the Christians of Alexandria, by these words: You are vnthankefull for the mildnes and lenitie of the Emperors, &c. you are not like to hold and inioy your Synodes and assemblies in the places of buriall of your Martyrs any longer. And it is said of Galerius: That hee may spoile vs and bring vs to nothing, he will take away from vs the libertie of our assemblies, in the places of the buriall of our Martyrs. Euseb. l. 6, c. 3. But contrariwise of Galienus: That he restored them the places of the buriall of their Martyrs, to the end that they might celebrate the diuine seruice: that is, saith Onuphrius, baptisings, the holy Supper, and sermons, &c. But in time they began to build and erect certaine slight manner of buildings to defend them against the iniuries of the weather, and them they called frames. And this is attributed to Fabianus a Bishop of Rome, and a Martyr by Damasus. And hereby is seene the impudencie of those men, which haue imagined and deuised these good∣ly legendes; wherein is reported, that Sauinian did build a temple vnto Saint Peter in his life time: and Alexander the first another which hee called Advincula. And Hyginus ordained, that temples should not be dedicated without Masse, & that the stuffe brought into the place to build withall, should not be conuerted vnto profane vses, &c. All such as liued in the heat and raging times of persecution, being more bu∣sie to build the Church by their death, then by any such monuments which might be the remembrauncers of their life. After the yeare 200. at certaine spaces of time which fell out calme, they assembled more freely, and builded more solide and sub∣stantiall places of praier, and that in Citties, in the time of Alexander Seuerus, Gor∣dianus, Euseb. l. 8. c. 1. 2 Philippus, Aemilianus, Marcus Aurelius, &c. Whereupon Eusebius crieth out: Who shalbe able to describe vnto vs these goodly assemblies in euerie citie, this great con∣course of people vnto the places of praier, which are so far inlarged and made much bigger then the old? But within a short while after they were seene, pulled downe again and ouer∣throwne by Dioclesian, The beginning of Temples. in so much as that their foundations therewithal were razed; and in this ruinous & vnprouided estate they continued, till it pleased God to raise vp Constantine, who did not onely command that they should be built againe with all diligence: but himselfe began to erect & build them in most sumptuous and cost∣ly manner, going on from necessitie to vtilitie and profit, and from profitablenes, to wast & superfluitie, conuerting and turning by little & little in the great & famous ci∣ties, the temples that had beene dedicated vnto idolles, vnto the vse of Christians: the like did his successors according to his example. And from that time forward we
find the Bbs. of Rome more careful & industrious to build churches, as they call thē; then the Church it selfe: the Doctors on the contrarie, calling vpon them, that rather (to the praise of God through the beauty and brightnes of the same) they wold labor for the true ornaments of the Church. Lactantius the Maister of Constantine saith; It behooueth not to build such sumptuous temples vnto God, but it behooueth euery man to con∣secrate his breast vnto him, to retire and betake himselfe into the same, therein to fall downe & worship. And Chrysostome: Wouldest thou build a house to God, giue vnto the poore faith∣full ones, to sustaine their liues withall, and then thou hast built him a reasonable house. Chrysost. in Matth. The Martyrs take no delight or pleasure in it to be so honoured with thy siluer: when the poore in the meane while do mourne and weepe. But Ierome more then any other, Hieronym. ad Demetriad. howsoeuer or∣dinarily too much giuen to outward decking and trimming: Let others (saith he spea∣king to Demetrias) build Churches, parget the walles with marble rough-cast, let them gilde the heades of these huge pillars, which do nothing at all perceiue their beautifying, &c. I speake not against it: but it behooueth thee greatly to haue some other drift and purpose: and what must that bee? To cloath and couer (saith he) Iesus Christ in his poore, to visite him in those that languish, to feed him in the hungrie, to barbour him in those that haue no house or roofe to lie vnder, but especially in those which are of the houshold of faith, &c. Meaning by these speeches that Christian charitie proueth a far better lodging and house, then all these goodly and stately buildings. And vppon Aggee: Hieronym. in Aggeum. Wouldest thou know what I meane by the money, wherewith the temple of God is to be garnished? verily the words of the holy scripture whereof it is written: The words of the Lord are pure words: they are as siluer purified in the fire, purged from the earth, & refinedeuen seuen times. And what gold is that whereof the Pro∣phet speaketh? verily such as is hid from the outward sences of the Saints, but in the inward clo∣set of their hearts is bright, and shineth with the light of God, according to that which the Apo∣stle saith: that some build vpon gold, others on siluer, and others on precious stones, &c. And thus behold how that, faith & true doctrine is the true building of the Church. And againe: Many people do build walles, and raise pillars, &c. but where is the choise that is made of the Ministers of the church? And let not any man alleadge here vnto me the temple of the Iewes, the table, the lampes, the censors, &c. These thinges were good when the priestes did sacrifice beastes, when their blood was the ransome for sinnes, &c. Idem in c. 7. Ierem. But now that our Lorde (poore though he were) hath dedicated the pouertie of his house: let vs not thinke vppon any thing but his crosse: let vs make lesse accompt of riches then of durt: let vs not be in loue with this Mammon, which our Lord hath called vnrighteous: let vs not loue that whereof Saint Peter confesseth so freely and cheerefully, that he hath none; let not vs say of our goodly marble stones, as the Iewes did: The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord: for the temple of the Lord is there where a true faith, a holy conuersation, and the societie of all manner of vertues doe dwell. That is to say, if wee belieue S. Ierome, that the temple of God is that place, Chorus. what manner of one soeuer it be, where pure doctrine is preached by good Ministers, and where it is receiued by the faithfull vnto obedience of faith and charitie, &c. Whereby we also see, that after that Christians had these gorgeous temples, they now and then forsooke and cast them off, to retaine and hold fast the pure seruice of God. Victor. l. 1. & 3 Vnder the time of the persecution by the Vandals, Victor maketh mention, that they came again to celebrate diuine seruice without making any difference of place, euen wheresoeuer they could: & further, that because of the furious outrage of the Arrians, they assembled in priuate houses. And at Constantinople we reade, Sozom. l. 8. c. 21. & 27. that the Ortho∣doxes, for the vniust exile of Chrysostome, did forsake the temples to come together in priuate: First at Constantine his cestern: thē without the citie, in a kind of old the∣atre: & finally, during the sharpnes & rage of the persecution, Socrat. l. 6. c. 18 Chrysost. ho. 46. in Math. sometimes vnder close walks in the suburbs, somtimes in the fields. Wherupon Chrysost, saith in certain pla∣ces: We haue retained the fundamental points of doctrine, howsoeuer we haue left for them, the foundations & groundworks of the temples & wals thereof. Now the places of Christian as∣semblies, according to the diuersitie of the time, and manner of building had diuers names. In Actes 1. , a high hall; in other places , houses; then , places or houses of praier; Dominica, the Lords places, Martyria, because they met in the
places of the Martyrs their sepulchers, for the kindling of their zeale. As they grew in the faith about the time of Constantine, they called them Basilicae, borrowing their names from the pallaces where Princes were wont to sit and hold their assises: Then Temples, at such time as Christendome fell to gratifie and temporize with Paga∣nisme: as is to bee seene in the time of Saint Augustine, S. Ierome, &c. And in the end the thing containing, taking the name of the contained, they were called Chur∣ches, because that the Church was there assembled, as prophane authors doe say, , Lueia. in Dial. Merc. & Maiae. to make cleane the Church or assemblie, or banquet, that is, the place where these things should be done. In this first antiquitie it is not read that they were built or dedicate to any other then God onely: To whom they were built. Sozomen. l. 2. c. 3. Euseb. l. 3. de. vit. Constant. & l. 5. c. 2. Sozom. l. 2. c. 26. Socrat. l. 1. c. 16 and therefore were called Dominica, : and from thence came the name Kirke, as yet in vse amongst the Germains. And Constantine did not vse to doe any otherwise: and therein they had a purpose to differ from the Paganes. In the place of Christes sepulcher he builded a stately Church: Eusebius calleth it Mar∣tyrium magnum, because (saith hee) it was consecrate to Iesus Christ the great and faithfull Martyr, &c. At Constantinople hee named one Irenen, by reason of the peace of the Gospell: and another, the Church of the Apostles, because of their do∣ctrine, but both of them dedicated vnto the Sonne of God. For as concerning that which is read in Nicephorus, that Constantine did dedicate the citie of Constan∣tinople , to the Mother of God: Langus (although a Romanist) hath ve∣rie well noted and proued from Eusebius, that the accent is abused, taking , for , Dei genitricem, for Deo genitum, that is, the mother of God, for the Sonne of God, where there is nothing to make the difference, but onely the accent. And Nicephorus in another place acknowledgeth the same. Niceph. l. 8. c. 49. & l. 7. c. 49. Athan. in lib. de passione Domini. August. ad∣uersus Maxim. In Athanasius, (but this little booke cannot be his) the Iewes of Beryta being conuerted, did dedicate their Sinagogue vnto the Sauiour of the world: and many others afterward by their ex∣ample. And Saint Augustine also reasoneth from thence against Maximinus the Arrian; If we build (saith he) a temple of stone and of wood vnto any holy Angell, be he neuer so excellent; should we not be accursed of the truth of Christ, and of the church of God: seeing that thereby wee shoulde giue vnto the creature, the seruice which is due vnto none but vnto God onely? Idem de ciui∣tat. Dei l. 8. c. 27. l. 22. c. 10. August. in Psalm. 94. As likewise he teacheth in euerie other place, that the temples, the pastors, & the sacrifices are not belonging or due to any but to God: Ʋni magno debentur: And that there was not any temples or altars built vnto the Martyrs: Because (saith he) they are no Gods, but haue the same God that wee haue: but although there bee sepulchers built for them, memorias sicut hominibus mortuis, they are but as memorials of dead men, whose soules notwithstanding liue in the presence of God. Whereby we learne, that if we reade (yea though it were in his time or somewhat after, as abuses crept in) that there were pla∣ces of prayer, as chappels, chauncels, or temples, called by the names of Martyrs, or of saints, that the doctrine of the Church was contrarie thereunto, holding them as mo∣numents rather then temples, and differences of names, rather then of any such in∣tentions. But the great abuse sprung vp vnder Iustinian the Emperour, and in the time of Gregorie, about the sixt age: after that the great personages which did vnder∣prop the Church, and beare it vp against the assaults of idolatry, were dead, when bar∣barousnes had ouerflowed all nations, and consequently ignorance had besotted the Church: For then it was, that after the imitation of Paganisme, saints crept vp into the places of Gods, and challenged or was thought worthy of, euerie one his temple: that all the edifying and building vp of the Church seemed to consist in buildinges, and not any longer to assemble and couple together, according to the doctrine of S. Peter & S. Paule liuely stones: that successiuely and by degrees, sinnes beganne to be ransomed thereby: And that so greatly, as that Chroniclers ordinarily, after that they had set downe and deliuered all the wickednes & mischiefe that they could of any king or Emperour, yet they would conclude in these words; and notwithstan∣ding Erat pius & deuotus, he was full of pietie and deuoutly giuen towards God: For (say they) he builded such a monasterie, such a church, &c.
Together with excesse in buildings, The dedicati∣on of Tem∣ples. there entred into the Church the ceremo∣nie of dedications, taken from the Iewish rites; for the simplicitie of Christianitie knew no such thing, and that which wee reade in the Epistle of Clement vnto Saint Iames, is very friuolous: for seeing there was no Temples in their time, it could not possibly come to passe, that there should bee any dedicating of them. But as Salo∣mon had dedicated the Temple by a solemne prayer, which hee vttered and deliue∣red with his owne mouth in the presence of all the people; Constantine consecrated the Citty of Constantinople vnto God in the presence of the Fathers of the Councell of Nice: the Temple of the holy Sepulcher at Ierusalem, Euseb l. 4. de vit. Constant. Athanas. Apo. 2. before them that were as∣sembled at the Councell of Tyre. And this manner of consecration was performed by solemne prayer, and in homilies and exhortations taken out of the word of God; as also in the celebrating of the holie Supper, then with a publike and generall ioye and reioycing, in large and bountifull giftes from the Prince, and such like things. But as for holy water and all such odde trumperies as are vsed at this day, there was not a worde: but as the authoritie of Bishoppes grew, so they drew vnto themselues this power and facultie of dedicating Temples. And thereupon it is that Gelasius his Decree came forth a little before the yeare 500. 26. q. 5. De Conse. 1. C. Nemo. Socrat. l. 2. c 8. That the Basilickes or new Temples should not bee dedicated without the commaundement of the Bishoppe of Rome: and that of Felix the third a little before the yeare 600. That the Bbs. should dedicate them and not the Ministers. And Socrates addeth thereunto this word, with the con∣sent of the Bb. of Rome. Whereupon Durand giueth an excellent reason, saying, Be∣cause hee carrieth the image of Christ, of whome it is saide, without me yee can do nothing. A∣gaine, If the Lord build not the house, the builders labour but in vaine. For the forme, who would belieue Clement in his Epistle vnto S. Iames; Clem. in Epist. 2. ad Iacobū. Euarist. in De∣cret. Epist. Diui∣nis precibus sacrabantur; they were consecrated by prayers: For it is too cleare and manifest, that as then there were no Christian Temples. Or who in like manner would follow Euaristus his assertion, that sayeth it was with saying of a Masse: when as wee haue proued that this word was not knowne of more then 300. yeares after him: and yet it is from this place and assertion, that Gratianus woulde haue it that the Masse is of the substance of the dedicatiō. But the truth is, that the first was made by Constantine, Anno 350. with prayers, sermons, Psalmes of praise vnto God, &c. And Siluester the first, con∣secrating the Temple of Lateran, added vnction thereunto, after the custome of the Iewes, as sayeth the Bull of Clement the sixt. Clemens. 6. in Bulla. An. 6 oc. But this was with a purpose to doe some manner of extraordinarie honour thereunto, the like whereof was not practised a∣gaine till the time of Gregorie the first, who ordained furthermore that there should be vsed perfumes and the reliques of Saintes: but this was yet no further grounded then in a simple admonition: but thereupon commeth the idolatrous Councell of Nice, namelie the second, and maketh it a law; Anno 788. Concil Nic. 2. c. 7. Synod. Bracar. 2. c. 5. That there should bee no more consecra∣ting of Temples without the reliques of the Saints. It was an vsual custome in the time of their ioye and reioycing, willinglie and freelie to giue somewhat to the maintenance of the Church: and this also was drawne into a Decree; That they were not further to consecrate, then when and where as they did see meanes for the maintaining of the Priestes, Cleargie, Lampes and all the rest of the seruice: and this they tearme to bee assured of a dowrie: And thereupon the historie deliuereth great and plentifull store of the deceitfull and craftie sleightes which the couetousnes of the Priestes did there∣upon practise and deuise: Then they made a Sacrament, consecrated them to the name of the holie Trinitie, and in vttering the wordes, gaue the name vnto the Tem∣ple, and they accounted it as a great error to consecrate the thing twise, as though forsooth it had beene so deepelie imprinted, as that it could neuer bee worne or blot∣ted out, and thereby they proceeded to strengthen it with the same lawes that were due to Baptisme, as wee finde in the Epistle of Zacharie vnto Boniface, Anno 800. about the yeare 00 wherein hee sayeth; If in the time of his Priesthood he haue consecrated Churches in the name of the Trinitie, or baptized infantes, let such consecration and baptisme abide firme and immoueable: And in this goodlie Decree deuised by Gratianus saying, The churches
once consecrated, must not be consecrated againe, no more then a child once baptized in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost. Finally, towardes the yeare 1000. it was grown into a full and absolute forme, Anno 1000. D. 68. c. ecles. stmel. as namely, that the Bb. after a short pray∣er, should besprinckle the outside of the wals with holy water, with a bunch of hy∣sop, and afterward strike the dore with his pastorall staffe, saying, Lift vp your gates, O ye princes, &c. and that thrice, which being opened, then hee painteth it with some manner of letters on the inside of the wals, he coniureth the salt, the wine, the water, the ashes, & maketh a composition thereof, wherin he dippeth his thomb, vsing euer amongst certaine prayers hanging together like sand-ropes. And for the making vp of the full measure of his superstition, he vttereth these wordes; Sanctificetur hoc tē∣plum in nomine patris, & filii, & spiritus sancti, Amen, halowed and consecrated be this temple in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, & of the holy Ghost. And yet neuerthelesse Du∣randus hath taken the paines to allegorise vpon all these apish trickes (which haue no other foundation but fickle mans fansie,) Anno 1300. Thom. test. 1. Summae. q. 83 art, 3. vnto good purpose. And Thomas is not ashamed to say, That Churches and other thinges without life consecrated as before, do put v∣pon them a spirituall power, by the which they are made the more apt for the seruice of God. Let euerie man here iudge and consider how auailable vnto edification all this can bee, and withall what grounde or foundation it hath in Iesus Christ. If in brief, this haue not beene the same, that S. Paule saide, that is, to builde vpon it, wood, haye and stubble. Let vs come to the Altars: Of Altars or Tables. Behold the honour, behold the reuerence that is done vnto them, is there any man that can bee so blind or harde hearted as to thinke that these were vnknowne in the old church? assuredly and without all doubt, together with the accomplishing of the sacrifice of our Sauiour Christ, all other sacrifices were complete and fullie finished: this same being euermore new & fresh before the eyes of God must serue & suffice. Neither need we doubt but that in his Crosse are abolished all Altars whatsoeuer, Heb. 13.10 there being one onelie left vnto vs, euen that whereof the Apo∣stle speaketh, saying; We haue an Altar whereupon they may not eate which serue in the Ta∣bernacle, that is, Iesus Christ our Lord. The Pagans did ordinarily reproach and vpbraide the Christians, for their not hauing of any Altars: and wee see how they iustified their doinges. It had beene a more easie and readie thing for them to haue aunswered that they had Altars, and that in saying that they had none, it should seeme that they were mis-informed. Clem. Alexan. l. 7. strom. Clemens Alexādrinus, sayth; Yea rather we haue an Altar: & what maner of one? The earthlie congregation and company of those who bow themselues in prayers, which haue one voice and one common intention. And againe, one holie Altar, one iust soule, one holy smell of a sweete sauour which proceedeth out when we are in prayer, but they belieue it not. Origen hath the same thing obiected vnto him by Celsus, hee telleth him not that he abuseth him, Orig. l. 8, cont. Celsum. but he sayeth; Yea rather our Altars and our Temples are the spirites of good men, which smell as sweete incense, and the vowes and prayers of a good conscience. What comparison is there betwixt those of thine, and these O Celsus? thine are perishable and subiect to corruption, but these of ours as immortal as the soule it selfe. Minutius Felix likewise in his Octauius, bringeth in one Cecilius a Pagan, mouing this question. Wherefore haue not the Christians Altars, Arno. l. 2. &. 4 Temples, nor Images? And this reproach continued in the time of Arnobius, that is, neare 300. yeares after our Lord; for hee sayeth; You accuse vs that wee haue no Temples, no Images, nor Altars. And these are the most auncient Do∣ctors of the church. Our aduersaries say, that seeing there were Altars, there were pro∣pitiatory sacrifices of the Masse also, &c. but we reason to the contrarie; There was ne∣uer a Masse in all this time, because we cannot see that there were any Altars. It is obiected against vs, that Sixtus the first ordayned that the Masse should bee saide vppon an Altar. These forenamed Fathers haue tolde vs, that for 200. yeares after him there was not any: Tertul. de pae∣nit. c. 9. Cyp. l. 1. Ep. 7. & 9. l. 3. Ep. 13. and I haue proued vnto them, that for 400. yeares after him the name of the Masse was not knowne: then I woulde haue them giue vs leaue not to belieue them. They replie with greater likelyhood and appearance, that Tertulliā maketh mentiō, Adgeniculationis panitentiū aris Dei, of penitent persons kneeling
at Altars: That S. Cypriā likewise speaketh sometimes of the Altar. Certainly they can∣not be contrarie, being all of one faith, & al of one time, there must then be admitted somedistinction. Now as concerning the place of Tertullian, Pamelius Archd. of S. O∣mer, correcteth it by the copies of Vatican, wherein there is a mutuall harmonie and concord, Caris Dei adgeniculari, & non aris, and they maintaine this correction by a verie plaine and euident reason; That the Penitents were not suffered to come vs{que} ad Pastophoria virorum & mulierum, vntill the men and women were departed: much lesse to the grates of the Cleargie, and least of all neare vnto the Altars. As for the place of S. Cyprian, it is certaine that in the Primitiue Church, there was presenting & bringing of offrings, as we haue said, partlie for the vse of the holie supper, and part∣lie for the reliefe of the poore; and that in the middest of the saide assemblie there stoode a Table, whereupon they were laide, or whereto they were brought. And be∣cause that these offringes which the people brought of their fruites vnto God, were by them called sacrifices, (imitating therein the olde law,) yea and by S. Paule himself (who calleth the almes sacrifices) this Table by consequence, did likewise sometimes beare the name of the Altar: at such a Table did our Lord celebrate his first supper, with his Apostles: and of such a like one, S. Paule sayeth; 1. Cor. 10. ver. 11. 1 & 8. You cannot participate at the Table of Christ, and at the table of Diuels. Now hee in that place speaketh of the Com∣munion, which wee haue with Christ in his holie supper: and before hee had saide, Those which eate of the sacrifices, are not they partakers of the Altar? drawing his reason from the olde Altar vnto this Table. Of the Tables that were ordinarilie of wood, the olde writers haue made mention to haue beene in the Church long before. The first Councell of Nice intituled the Article of the holy supper, , Athanas. in E∣pist. ad Ortho∣dox. that is of the holy supper. Athanasius speaking of the furies of the Arrians and Ma∣cedonians, sayeth, It is not credible what impieties they commit, and what outragious spee∣ches they cast out against the holie Table, as you shall see there sacrificed and offered birdes, pine-aples, &c. And in his Epistle to such as liued a solitarie life, hee sayeth plainelie, Idem in Ep. ad solitariam vitam agentes. Theodor. l. 3. c. 11. Idem l. 5. c. 18. August in Io∣han, tract. 26. that they were of wood. So Theodoret amongst the insolencies of Iulian, the vncle of Iulian the Apostata, sayeth, that being at the Temple builded by Constantine the Emperour, he pissed against the sacred table. And in an other place hee sayeth, that in Millaine there was a Table, whereupon were offered giftes. And S. Augustine vpon S. Iohn, That the Sacrament of the bodie and blood praparabatur in mensa Dominica, & in mensa Dominica sumebatur, It was prepared vpon the Lordes Table, and vppon the same it was taken. And after that hee had called it a Table, hee calleth it also sometimes an Altar in the same place: where by wee see that the table of offringes, the table of the Lord, and the Altar were one and the same thing, he saith: Men vow vnto God that which is offred vnto him, especiallie the oblation of the holy Altar. Idem Ep. 50. And if wee doubt eyther of the offring or of the Altar, he maketh himselfe plaine, saying, When that which is v∣pon the Table is sanctified and blessed. And Durandus acknowledgeth that this Altar is the Table, whereat our Lord banqueted with his Disciples: Durand. l. 1. c. 2. That the Ta∣bles were of wood. Optat. l. 6. and those Altars were of woode, (if wee may belieue Optatus) who sayeth, In some places for want of wood, they haue scraped them; and whereas there was good store, there they broke them, &c. And Saint Augustine in his fifty Epistle, where the Donatists breake the woode of the Altar, af∣ter that they had hurt the Bishoppe. And those, such as were to bee taken in sunder or remoued and not set fast, or made all of a peece: for in another place hee sayeth, that the office of the Deacon was to carrie the Altar, that is, this Table. Chrysostome calleth it ordinarily the holy or sacred Table. The Greeke Lithurgies in like maner. August. in quaestione ve∣teris & noui¦testamenti. q. 101. Iraen. l. 4. c 24. And when they speake otherwise, it is but by a Metaphore: and yet notwithstanding, not that I denie altogether that they vse this word Altar, in this sence, but more often in the other. Thus sayeth Irenaeus: Our Altar is in heauen, whether our prayers and obla∣tions are directed; that is to say, Christ. Origen giueth the same name vnto our hearte, and the Greeke Lithurgies doe pray God, That it would please him to receiue the spi∣rituall Sacrifice, the Sacrifice of praise vpon his heauenlie and spirituall Altar, &c. And the Masse, Iube haec in sublime Altare tuum ferri, nimirum dona. But after the time
of Constantine, vse preuailed by little and little, whereupon they became to be made of stone, as witnesseth Gregorius Nyssenus, (but yet not at the first dash in euery place,) and to make them immoueable, according as the estate and condition of Chri∣stians grew more and more stable. Whereupon Gerson saieth, that Siluester the first was the first that made them of stone: Gerson l. 4. cont. Florent. Gab Biel. lect. 13. in Can. De Conse. D. 1. Can. Nemo. Durand. l. 100. 7. & l. 4. And Gabriel Biel: That in former times they vsed a portable Altar of wood, which Clement calleth the Table of the Lord. And Durandus hauing witnessed the same, yeeldeth a reason worthie of himselfe, why they were made of stone, saying: Because that the rocke was Christ, the stone which the builders refused, the stone cut out of the mountaine without hand, &c. But whether wee call them Tables or Altars, they were consecrated to the participating of the holy Supper. And to the end that men might come vnto it on all sides, it was placed in the midst of the Temple, The Table in the midst. Euseb. l. 10. c. 4 inclosed and set about with a certaine kinde of lattise-worke to holde out the presse and throng of the people. Eusebius describing the famous Temple built by Constantine, sayeth, After that the Temple was finished, and raised seates placed for the Presidents, August. in Iohan. tract. 42. &c. there was placed in the middest, the Sanctum Sanctorum (after the manner of the Hebrewes) that is to say, the Altar. And S. Augustine teacheth vs that this was the custome: Iesus Christ feedeth vs dayly, behold and see the Table prepared in the mid∣dest: whereof commeth it O yee hearers, that you see his Table and come not to eate of the meate? Concil. Con∣stantinop. 5. c. 1. Whereupon wee see that in the Councell of Constantinople the fift: Sub tempus Diptychorum, at the time of the commemoration of the Martyrs, all the people ran with silence round about the Altar for to heare. And how had that beene possible, if they had beene as at this day, trussed close vppe to the end or vtmost partes of the Temple or place, wherein they stand, or fastened into some wall? But further, the Minister or Pastor, at such time as the holie supper was distributed in the Church, did not turne his backe vpon the people, but saw them, and was seene of them all vpon the face: and hereof there remaine some prints and markes in the Cathedrall Churches of Rome, Millaine, Naples, Florence, Lyons, Maguntia, &c. where the Priest turneth his face towardes the west, & hath thereby the people continually before his eyes: and Durandus doth acknowledge the same. Durandus l. 4. One onely Al∣tar. Ignatius ad Phila. Euseb. l. 10. c. 4 Chrysost. in 2. ad Cor. ho. 8. This Altar likewise was onelie one, and this did shew the Communion of Christi∣ans, communicating at one Table; Ignatius sayeth, There is but one Altar for the whole Church: Eusebius speaking of this great and magnificall Temple, built by Con∣stantine, sayeth, One onely Altar in the middest, and that a greate and statelie one. And this Altar is interpreted by Chrysostome in these wordes, saying: One Baptisme and one Ta∣ble. And indeed in all the ancient Christian Temples of Greece and Italie, their manner of building was not fit to receiue anie moe Altars then one, as hath beene obserued by the studious in antiquities, & where there are more to be found they are not vsed. And as to this day, there is but one in the Temples of the Grecians, & that in the midst of the Quire. And consequently this one Altar was dedicated vnto the one onely God. Dedicated vn∣to God onely. For the first ages or antiquitie which worshipped not Saintes, did not yeeld them anie: for else with what face should S. Augustine haue reproched vnto the Gentiles, the Altars consecrated to the Gods? And what power or force should this argument haue had in the mouth of the Christian against the Gentiles: There may no Altar bee con∣secrated, Augustinus, .10. serm. 6. de verbo Domin. but to that which is called God: If at such time the Christians should consecrate anie vnto Saintes, and againe, if the Saintes of the Christians were not taken of them for Gods? It is the Altar (sayeth hee) which testifieth that he is taken and held for God, to whome it is erected and consecrated: for otherwise what should the erecting of an Altar doe, if there were not a Deitie belieued and firmelie receiued? Let no man tell mee: It is no Godheade: It is not a God: what was pleasing and acceptable to God, they belieued and knew aswell as wee doe know or belieue any other thing that is. But notwithstanding, so it is, that the Altar doth testifie, what they tooke that to bee, for which they made and erected the Altar, &c. Now with the inuocation of Saintes, entred the multiplying of Altars, after the manner of the Pagans, and yet the multitude thereupon receyued, did not satisfie thē,
but afterwarde they added thereunto according to the fruitfulnes and manifold in∣crease of their Masses, according to the verse of the Poet; Vbi Templum illi, centumque Sabaei, Thure calent arae: or rather according to the saying of the Prophet; Osee. c. 8. Ephraim hath multiplied his Altars, &c. But in the meane time it came to passe, that there was neuer a Table to bee found in the Temples for the ordinarie Communion of the holy sup∣per, for the which and not for any other vse, all, whether Tables, or Altars were at the first instituted and ordained, in such sort as that the Masse hath wholy displaced the holy supper, and the Altars the holy Table of the Lord. Hereupon followed, as one abuse begetteth an other, Consecration a thousand superstitious de∣crees, and a thousand apish toyes, some deriued from the Iewes, and some from the Gentiles: Let the Altars bee consecrated, let them bee annointed with creame, Concil. Epau∣nense. c 26. Gratianus de Consec D. 1. C. Altaria. & C Nullus. Concil. Bracar. c. 37. but not any saue those onelie which are made of stone: thereby they haue by little and little banished the Tables: Let the Bbs. onlie doe it, if any Clearke do meddle therein, let him be degraded: and if any Laye man, let him bee excommunicated. Was this the charge which S. Paule inioyned Bishoppes? And what foolerie is this, that a Priest should receiue the body and the blood of the Lord for the people, and not to bee helde able or allowed, to powre out a little oyle vpō a stone? The Consecrating of these Altars, is made of the same ingredientes with that of the Temples: that is, of a sprinkling with water ming∣led with salt wine, and ashes, of crosses made with holy water at the foure corners, & in the midst, the Bishoppe his going about it seauen times, the singing of the one and fiftie Psalme; Asperges me Hyssopo: not without the prophaning of the wholesome Scripture, and in particular that doctrine of the remission of our sinnes. Therewith∣all hee prayeth to God, that he would vouchsafe to accept of his sacrifices; not with∣out the making of the Crosse of Christ, as the Apostle sayeth, of no effect. Therein he burieth some reliques: Three (say they) are too few, fowre sufficient, and fiūe too manie: hee putteth them in some prettie little case with three graines of incense, to the ende, that for the affection and good will that God beareth vnto them, he may receiue the prayers and sacrifices which shall bee offred thereuppon, &c. Then hee annointeth the Table of the Altar: andas hee is annointing of it, singeth: Erexit Iacob lapidem, &c. Iacob set vp a stone and annointed it, &c. All of them late inuentions, growing long after the times of the Apostles, 700. 800. 900. or 1000. years, & that from their owne doctrine, which is a great deale further swaruing from that of the Apostles, without sence and signification, yea and without all solide and sound foundation. And this same ceremonie extendeth it selfe within a while after vnto all the ornamentes, as linnens, cups, wine-pots and censers; and that with far more carefulnes and industrie, then euer they tooke about the Lord his lawfull Sacraments. What may wee thinke that these fellowes will aunswere, when he shall say; Who hath required all these thinges at your hands? And howmuch better had it beene to haue taught Christians the abo∣lishment of all sacrifices, by the one only sacrifice, and of al Altars, by the Altar of the Crosse? then to haue led vs frō the corner stone, to Iacobs stone; from the annointing stone, to the stone annointed; from Christianitie to the Iewish religion, and to the e∣recting and setting vp of Altars after the manner of the Iewes, in hope of some newe sacrifice to bee offred vp, to the annihilating of the sacrifice of the Lambe, slaine be∣fore the foundation of the worlde, and yet new and fresh in the eyes of God to the ende of the world? And againe, how much more worthie a thing had it beene, to haue destroyed the Altars of the Gentiles, then to haue dedicated them vnto Saints? and to haue pluckt their ceremonies vppe by the rootes, then to haue transplanted them into the Church? seeing it is most plaine and euident, that they were not de∣riued or borrowed from anie where else, as appeareth, when as wee see that the Soothsayers take ashes from the towne-house, Pausaanias l. . to mingle them with the water of the floode Alpha, and therewithall to besmeare the Altar of Iupiter Olimpius, &c. For what is there that can come more neerelie vnto the same then our manner of Dedicating? And againe, when wee see our Altars washt with wine and wa∣ter, and rubde with the boughes of Sauin, Durand. l. 6. c. 76. with the singing of some penitentiall
Psalme, Arnob. l. 7. &c. For is it not like the washing of the picture of the mother of the Gods with sope, wherewith our Countrie man Arnobius sporteth himselfe in his time? CHAP. II. Of Images, and that the old Christians had not any. NOw follow the Images, the ornament and goodliest garnish at this day, that is about eyther Temples or Altars, the refuge and succour of such as are deuoute: without which the Temples seeme prophane, notwithstanding, whatsoeuer holy manner of seruice bee offred to God therein in all holy and reuerend sorte, neither are the people thought to bee sufficientlie in∣structed, how clearelie, purelie, and shrill soeuer his worde do sound therein. Who doubteth but that (if they bee of such importance, (if they haue anie such roome and place in the Church,) there is eyther precept or example to be found for the warrant of the same? And againe, who will not conclude and acknowledge it for manifest impietie, or ex∣treame lightnes, if there bee nothing to bee found for the maintenance thereof, but much to the prouing of the contrarie. The eternall God sayeth in his law, in the law which was giuen to his owne people in the toppe of the mountaine, with thunde∣ring and lightning, the visible threatners of the dreadfull sounde that was to insue; Thou shalt not make to thy selfe anie grauen Image, nor anie likenes, &c. thou shalt not bow downe to them, nor worshippe them. When God speaketh so clearelie and so loude, what is it that men can possiblie finde out to cauill at to the contrarie? but hee ad∣deth a reason: For I am a strong, mightie and ielous God, visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the children, &c. setting foorth vnder this title of ielousie a burning fire, and such a seuere taking of vengeance as neuer sleepeth, as also so aggrauating and laying out the hainousnes and enormitie of this sinne, and the extremitie of the punishment, and that by the drawing out and continuing of the same, as hee doth not the like againe in any other of the commaundementes. And againe, we see this commaundement repeated in the olde Testament almost in euerie line: and in all the holie histories, nothing more vsuall, then the reuenging of this sinne, vppon kinges, vppon people, vppon whole estates and kingdomes. In the Pro∣phetes nothing more vehement then the threatninges against Idolaters, and ala∣rums against Idols. And if any should replie and say, that all this is against Idols, and not against Images (a pittifull distinction against the expresse commaundement of God. It is aunswered, that hee manifestlie speaketh there of euerie similitude and likenes, before which there is anie bowing or kneeling, and of euery resemblance, which is worshipped. And all the Church vnder the law hath so expounded and pra∣ctised the same, insomuch as that thereuppon they haue refused to receiue the pi∣ctures of Emperours, and the Eagles of Rome into their Churches. In like man∣ner (sayeth Origen) to the ende they might not bee tempted of this sinne, they haue decreede not to admitte or tollerate anie ordinarie abode, Origen, cont. Cols. and being for Painters, or Caruers of Images in their common wealth: and yet notwithstanding, they did not want puissant kinges, holy Prophetes, and other excellent seruantes of God in all this time; by whose handes and Ministerie hee manifested his pow∣er; by whose mouthes hee declared his will, and who as subiectes meete and wor∣thie for his seruice, woulde haue intertained and retained Images in the Church, if it had not beene the verie indirect and contrarie course; yea and woulde haue honoured, worshipped, offered incense vnto them, yea and prayed vnto them; as Moises, Aaron, Iosua, Dauid, Ezechias, Iosias, Elias, Elizaeus, Isaye, Da∣niell, and diuerse others moe. In all whose dayes and times this was not to bee
found, notwithstanding whatsoeuer corruption otherwise, that tooke place vnder the law yea notwithstāding whatsoeuer the Pharisaical mis-interpretations & Gloses had afterward brought in. Now if vnder the law in his people of Israel, the Lord haue so greatly abhorred, and so straightly forbidden & condemned Images, who wil belieue that the Son, the liuely Image and ingrauen forme of the Father, hath approued them in the Gospel, hath accepted of them in his Christian church? And who doubteth on the contrarie, whether being come to teach and iudge the world, he teach according to this law or no? as we see in S. Iohn: My little children flie from Idols: 1. Cor. 6.10. Apoc. 22.15. As likewise iudge according to the same; following the sentence set downe by S. Paul, saying; Idolaters shall not inherite the kingdome of God. Yea, himselfe speaking in the Apocalyps not of old and ancient Idols, but of them of the latter times, he saith; They which shall do my com∣mandements, shall eate of the tree of life, they shall enter in at the gates of my cittie, but without shall be Dogs, Enchaunters, Idolaters, & all those which make and loue lies. Wherefore? but because Idolatrie, as sayeth the Glose, is directlie against the commandement of God, yea euen against himselfe, as also because it is the schoole of vanitie and lies. Againe, the Christian Primitiue church, did neuer practise it otherwise; and that we shall see by the succession of times. Clemens Alexandrinus sayeth: That there were no Ima∣ges amongst the first Chri∣ans. Clemen. in Paraenetico, & in 6. strom. It is forbidden vs to vse this cosening and deceitfull art; for the Prophet sayth, Thou shalt not make the likenes of anie thinges, that are aboue in heauen, or below here on earth, &c. There belongeth not vnto vs anie sensible Image of sensible matter, but that onelie which is apprehended by the vnderstanding and inward mind, inasmuch as God, which is the onely true God, is apprehended of the vnder∣standing and inward mind, and not of the outward sences, &c. And therefore also he saith: There belongeth not vnto vs any maner of Image, or the counterfeyte of anie thing in this world, because that amongst all the thinges created, there is not any one that can represent the image of God. But and if you will needes haue Images saieth the other Clement, which was more ancient, and Bb. of Rome, Successor (say they) to S. Peter, writing as they pretend vnto S. Iames: Yet make you not anie (sayth he) of stones, to intitle them with the name of God: Clem. Episco. Rom. ad Iacob. fratres Dom. l. 5. for who dare be so bold as to make any of the Emperour? But and if you will honour them, then this is that which we perswade you vnto, you do good and bestow the honour thereof vppon men your neighbours, which are the image of God: looke to the feeding of the hungrie, giue drinke to the thirstie, cloath the naked, visite the sicke, harbour the straunger, succour the prisoner, &c. And not to runne (saith hee) vnto these Images of wood and stone, to honour pistures and I∣mages that haue no soule: and in the meane time to make no account of thy neighbour, the true and verie Image of thy Creator. This is nothing but the suggestions of the old Serpent, who ma∣keth you belieue that you are verie deuout, when you honour the insensible thinges, and to for∣get that you are impious and wicked, when you offend the reasonable, not onelie sensible. And what manner of impietie, (saieth hee) and how great an ingratitude is it, to receiue the be∣nefite from God, and to giue thanks vnto stockes and stones. Whereby it appeareth, that these first Christians had no Images, that they did not acknowledge any other here on earth, but the members of Christ, their poore Brethren. And this lesson had this Clement learned of Simon Peter, not making any distinction betwixt Idols and I∣mages by the names that are giuen them but by the honour which is bestowed vpon them: but our aduersaries haue receiued and learned the contrarie doctrine of Simon Magus, and not of Simon Peter: of whome it is written by S. Theo. & Aug. de haeresib. Augustine and Theodo∣ret, that hee gaue vnto his Disciples his owne image, and the image of his concubine Selene to worship, in the forme of Iupiter and Minerua, as also of Basilides and Car∣pocrates verie auncient Heretikes, of the sect called Gnostici: of whome Irenaeus saith: That secretlie they vsed certaine Images, eyther painted or grauen in gold and siluer, Iren. l. 1. c. 23. &. 24. Epiphan. l. 1. haeres. 27. Tertul. de co∣ron, Milit. which they affirmed to be Iesus Christ, whereunto likewise they did vse to sacrifice. Tertullian ordinarily doth either mocke at, or else is angrie with Idols. And that no man may thinke that he distinguisheth them from Images, hee expoundeth himselfe in plaine tearmes, saying; S. Iohn crieth aloude: Little children keepe your selues from Jdols: not so much (saith hee) from Idolatrie, that is, from yeelding anie dutie or reue∣rence towardes them, as from the Idols, that is, euen from the verie shapes and images: For
(saith he) it is a great indignitie, that the Image of the liuing God shold be translated into the I∣mage of an Idol or of a thing that is dead. Now there is no cause for thē to obiect against these plain and expresse words of the old Father, Tertul. lib. de pudicitia. that in his book of shamefastnes, he maketh mention of a certaine cup, whereupon was painted the historie of a good Pa∣stor, going about to gaine and get againe his stray sheep: for what agreement is there betwixt the painting of a cup, and the worshipping of an Image? the workmanship of a glasier, with the iudgement of the Church? Origen against Celsus handleth the question throughly. Origen. cont. Celsum. l. 7. This Pagan did obiect a∣gainst him: That the Christians were worse then the Barbarians, yea worse then Atheistes: who would not see or looke vpon (saith he) eyther Altars, Images, or representation of any thing, &c. The aunswere whereto, if hee had belieued or taught, as our aduersaries do, had beene easie and readie, vz. It is not our intent or desire to haue anie Idols, but rather Images, we will not honour the resemblances of your Gods, but of our Saintes, &c. But what sayeth hee? The Christians abhorre Images, (saith he) but not for the same reason that the Persians doe, whome thou callest Barbarians. For they verily doe not suffer anie wor∣shipping of Iesus Christ in Temples, in Altars, in images, &c. but it is, because it is written: Thou shalt haue no other Gods but mee: Thou shalt not make to thy selfe anie likenes: Thou shalt not worshippe them nor serue them. Then the question in this place is of the Images of Christ, and not of the Gods; which notwithstanding, hee taketh to bee no lesse forbidden in this place, then those of the Gods themselues. Heracli∣tus saide: It is a follie to pray vnto Images, that do not know the Gods. Origen go∣eth further, saying: Yea rather wee know God: wee know his onelie begotten Sonne: wee know the Saintes: Statuis. Simulachra. but wee doe much more confidentlie affirme, that it is impossible for to know God, and to kneele downe to Images: and it is not onely follie to fall down before them, but euen to make a semblance or similitude of them: and therefore wee worshippe not Images for feare least any man should thinke that we attribute vnto them anie manner of Deitie. What doth Origen here in this place leaue vs to conclude, but that hee setteth the Images of the Sonne of God, and of the Saintes, in the same rowe and ranke with the olde Idols? Furthermore hee sayeth, that hee knoweth verie well to put diffe∣rence betwixt the true God, and the false and counterfeite: the Sonne of God, and the Saintes: and betwixt Sathan and his Angels. But if Celsus replie, as others doe a∣gainst vs: who is so ignorant but he knoweth that Images are not Gods, &c? hee taketh not this excuse for good payment: For sayeth hee, You cannot acquite your selues from being in fault, seeing that you honour them: The poore idiote seeing what you do, taketh them to bee Gods: though wee do not so, which know that they cannot bee so much as Images: seeing that God cannot be represented by any Image, seeing likewise that man is not his Image, but inasmuch as regard and consideration is had of his reasonable soule, which he hath in∣spired into him, and not in any respect of his outward forme and shape. In briefe, if Celsus say, You abhorre our Images: Origen. l. 8. hee saith not: It is to set vppe others in their places: But ra∣ther: We haue others in our selues, fashioned according to the word of God, the examples and pat∣ternes of vertues in our Soules, drawn and fashioned according to the patterne of our Lorde, the first borne of euerie creature. And if hee say againe, why set you them not vppon Al∣tars? No rather, We will lodge them in our spirits the true Temples of God, wherein he vouch∣safeth to dwell by his holy spirit, &c. Now there is no cause that any should after so many plain & pregnant proofes, alledge vnto vs the distinctiō that he maketh vpon Exodus, betwixt an Idol, Idem hom. 8. in Exod. & the likenes of a thing: Inasmuch (saith he) as that the Jdoll is a fantasti∣call picture of some thing which is not in nature: but a likenes is a representation and shadowing out of a thing that is. For besides that, the Hebrew will not beare it, what skilleth it vs how or by what names hee calleth them, seeing hee condemneth both the one and the other? and seeing he declareth and manifestlie sheweth by the law of God, that both the one and the other sort is disallowed and condemned? So farre as that they are not to bee honoured, either in affection inwardly, or by anie outwarde appearance. And this to be meant of all those, which eyther are not but in our fantasies and imagina∣tions, as well as of those which haue a bodilie substance in some one place or other,
aswel of those which are of the true God, as those which are of the false Gods, & aswel of those, which are of his only Son, God and man, and therefore representable in the humaine nature, as of that of the eternall God, which is not able to be comprehended of vs, either by our inward spirites or outward sences. And this suteth with that of S. August., cont. Faustum. l. 20. c. 3. Augustine, vttered by him in a word; Pagani ea colunt quae sunt, the Pagās worship the things which are: and therfore not fansies, and yet such things as are not to be worshipped for Gods; Sed quae pro Diis colenda non sunt: Wherin resteth the effect and worke of Idola∣trie. And hereby likewise is taken from them that which they alleadge out of S. Paule; An Idoll is nothing. Sunt quidem Idola (saith Chrysostome) sed nihil possunt, 1. Cor. 8.4. Chrysost. in 1. ad Cor. hom. 20. Theoph. ibid. August cont. Foust. l. 20 c. 5. Beda, Bruno. Hugo victor. Dionys. Carth. Faber Stapul. Genebrard, in Psal. 65. & 96. Arnob l 2. aduers. Gent. Lactan. l. 2. c.  4.18. Idoles (saith he) are something, but they can do nothing. And S. Augustine. They are, but they are nothing vnto saluation. And their own Doctors: Formaliter sunt, efficaciter non sunt, if you look vpon them outwardlie, you shal perceiue them to haue a forme and shape, but and if you looke vpon them as effectuall and powerfull, then they are nothing at all. Arnobius and Minutius Felix say, We haue neither Altars nor Images; and they do defēd and answere for themselues against the Pagans, who reproched them therewithall, & that so far, as that Arnobius telleth them, that they can haue no religion, wheras there are Images, he saith, Simulachra, & not Idola. How far was this man from being of their minds, who can finde no religion, if they see no Images? But Lactantius his Disciple & Schoolemaister to Constantine the Great, doth lay open this matter at large in these generall rules: That Images, Imagines, inquam, were not taken vp for any other cause, then for such as were absent, & that the Image of God is alwayes superfluous, because he is present euery where: That man is the truest Image that can be made of him, as re∣presēting him in the actions of the soule: That it is a meer foolerie to paint such things as one hath, and after to fal down and worship them, seeing that the Images to the cō∣trary, if they had vnderstāding, haue iust cause to fal down and worship man, who hath made them. It is likewise a great blockishnes for them which haue sence to worshippe senceles thinges, and for those which haue reason, the vnreasonable, as it is for them which are heauenly borne to worship the earthlie: That Images are nothing else but the shapes and similitudes of dead men, or the works of mortall men: In the end con∣cluding after the maner of his Maister in these words; Nō dubium est quin religio nulla sit, vbi simulachrū est, It is most certain that there is no maner of religion whereas Images are. But with what face could he say this, if in his time, that is in the time of Constantine, the very time wherein was held the famous Councell of Nice, the Christians had Images? seeing that all the reasons which he alledgeth against the Pagans, are aswell to be ap∣plied to the Christians, in asmuch as they may equally and as indifferentlie be spoken against their Images? And indeed the Councell of Elibert held at that time, Concil. Elibert c. 36. deliuereth vnto vs this writ in expresse tearmes: Placuit picturas in ecclesia esse non deberi, ne, quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietibus depingatur, It hath seemde good vnto vs, that is, it is de∣creede, that there should be no pictures in the Church, for feare that what men do honour and worshippe, should be painted vpon the walles. Yuo. in decret. l. 2. Therefore not the three persons of the Trinitie, for wee worship them: but so do we not the Angels, neither the Saintes in the same sence with our aduersaries, who worship and adore them: Neither is that to bee taken for an aunswere which some men alledge, namely, that this was in the time of persecution: for the reason serueth indifferently for all times: As that that which is worshipped shold not be painted, &c. But on the contrarie it may seem that this Decree was made for feare that the rest, which then the church inioyed, should minister occasiō to the Christians to follow the lewd maners of the Pagans, it hauing bin freely confessed before by the Pagans, that the Christians did not vse thē at all; as may bee gathered as well by the reproches wherewith they were ordinarily giuen to reproach them; Lampridius in Adriano. as also by the testimony of the Historiographer Lampridius: as That the Emperour Adrian willing to receiue Iesus Christ into the number of the Gods, caused to be prepared for him many Temples without Jmages, which were well remembred vnto the time of Constantine, and called the Temples of Adrian, &c. Athanas. cont. Gentes. Athanasius sayth, The inuention of Images is not good, it sprung from that euill one: and
that which hath an euill beginning cannot bee iudged good, but altogether and wholy naught: for how I pray you can God bee knowne by Images? If it bee by the matter, then what needeth any forme? And doth not his glorie appeare in all thinges? If by the forme, what neede is there then of colours & painting? and might hee not be better known in reasonable creatures? And other∣wise what a pittifull and lamentable thing is it, that the seeing should worship the blind? the hea∣ring pray vnto those which cannot heare: for where is there any creature that can saue an o∣ther, &c? Reasons altogether alledged against the Pagans, but so, as that they haue the same force against the Christians: and as for that little treatise of the Image of Christ, slipt in amongst the workes of this great and worthy man; let it bee farre from any man to obiect it against vs: there is indeed recorded therein, that Nicode∣mus did make one, and that it fell into the hands of Gamaleel, Zacheus and others, & after that into the handes of the Bbs. of Ierusalem, and that after the destruction thereof it was carried into Barutus a Citty of Syria, where being pierced and thrust through by a Iew, there issued out of it blood, & that by it likewise were miracles done &c. For besides that this fable may seeme to come out of the Legends budget, and for that also it is not confirmed by any Author, Nannius in praef, in Atha∣nas. Nannius a Doctor of Louaine, who hath reduced the workes of Athanasius into tomes, doth not let to put it in the number of the bookes imagined falsly to bee his: and Bellarmine himselfe for shame cannot deny it: whereunto you may also adde the testimonie of Sigibert, who sayeth, that that accident in the City of Barut happened in the yeare 765. Sigibert in Chronic. Le∣gend 30. and the historie of Lombardie in the yeare 750. that is neare 400. yeares after the death of Athanasius: as indeed this Treatise is neuer found to be alledged before the second Councell of Nice, about the yeare 800. and thus you see how vpon this and other such vntruthes, this doctrine of lyes is founded and built. And indeed we read these words in Atha∣nasius: He that worshippeth the Image of the king, worshippeth in it the king himself. And this our aduersaries vse to serue their turn withall against vs but they do willingly let passe to speake what image it is that hee meaneth: Serm. 4. cont. Arrian. for indeed he meaneth not that made by Nicodemus; seeing it would haue serued his purpose for the maintaining of the wor∣shipping of the Sonne of God against the Arrians: but the substantiall Image of the Father, Iesus Christ our Lord, whome hee concludeth to bee worthy to bee worship∣ped in himselfe, August. Epist. 119. and the Father in him: as S. Augustine sayeth by the same reason: That whereas it is forbidden in the law of God, to honour his similitude or likenes; it was not as though there were not an Image of God, but because hee had but one which ought to be worshipped, euen that which is himselfe, namely, the Sonne of God, and that not for him and his sake, but with him: not Christ himselfe considered as a man, how glorious soeuer he be, seeing that the holy Fathers do call the Arrians Idolaters, because they honoured Christ as they held him to be a Creature: and like∣wise the Nestorians, worshippers of men, because they separated the two natures, that is the Sonne of God, Athan. cont. Arrian. orat. 1. Greg. Niss. in laud. Basil. Synod. Ephes. in Ep. ad Theo. & Valēt c. 67 Synod. Nic. 2. Act. 7. in Epist. Synod. ad Constanti. & Iren. Amphilo. Ambros de obitu. Theod. & in Epist. ad Rom. from the Sonne of Marie. Athanasius, Gregorius Nissenus, and the first and second Synodes of Ephesus, and the second and last of Nice: how be∣it otherwise very idolatrous: and yet with this priuiledge and prerogatiue, that if a∣ny creature were to be worshipped, who should be more worthy then Christ the man, because Christ was acknowledged by these heretikes to be the Sauiour of men? Amphilochius Bb. of Iconium; We take no care to set out in colours or tables the Images of Saintes, because we haue no need: but we ought rather to call to our mindes the puritie of their liues And this he may seeme to speake against the Carpocratian Heretikes so called, which did honour the Images of Christ and his Apostles. S. Ambrose sayeth: Helena found out the title. What did shee? shee worshipped the king & not the wood: because this is an error of the Pagans, & an impious vanitie: Thē she worshipped him that was hanged vpon the wood, who was described by this title. Now hee speaketh there of Helena the mother of Constantine: the contrarie wherof our Legends wold make vs belieue. And in another place he saith: By what reason or by what authority ought wee to worship the Images of Angels or of Saintes, when as the Angels and Saintes in their life time did neuer suffer themselues to be worshipped?
Optatus Mileuitanus maketh mention that the Donatistes to make the Catholickes to be hated, did threaten the comming of a people amongst thē, Optat. cont. Parm. l. 2. which would set Ima∣ges vpō their Altars: And worthily saith he, if the thing had succeeded according to the report: but there was no such matter seen, there was not seen amongst them anie thing but the accustomed purity & ordinarie solēnity, &c. S. August. skirmisheth very hotly in many places against Images: as in the Epistle 222. and on the 114. Psalm, August Ep. 222. & in Psa. 114. which is very plaine & powerfull against the vanity thereof: and we can bring from thence whole leaues: for he abaseth them, & maketh them more vile then bruit beasts, carrion, or any other creature, cal∣ling them the instruments of error, and the habitations of Diuels, &c. And addeth his reasons agreeable with those of our times: but trussed vp in a few wordes, saying: They worship what their own hands haue made of gold and of siluer: and we haue like wise certain ves∣sels of gold & of siluer for the vse of the Sacraments, which are called holy, for the ministery sake wherein they serue. If there had beene anie such like Images in the Temples of his time, who seeth not but the scope of the text, did carrie him to haue spoken much ra∣ther of thē, then of these vessels? wherunto he annexeth a conclusion which cannot by any meanes be deluded, saying: They haue more power to bend & bow our miserable soules, because they haue mouthes, eyes, eares, nostrils, &c. then to correct & amend them: Cassand in Consult. 4.151 inasmuch as they neyther speak, see, heare nor smel, &c. And indeed Georgius Cassander in his consul∣tation with the Emperour Maximilian, proueth from this place: That there were not anie in the Temples within S. August. his Diocesse. But to the end that no man may ga∣ther to himself any opiniō, that he meaneth here the Pagans only: he saith in his book of the maners of the Catholike church: August de morib. Cathol. Ecclel. l. 1. c. 34. I know manie that are worshippers of Sepulchers & pictures, which make good cheare vpon the graues of the dead, and burie or powre wine vpon those that are buried, and place these their actions amongst the workes of religion, &c. If any man say that he reproueth this fault in the Manichies, how would he then haue taken it in the true professors of Christ? For the Church (saith he) condemned these dealings, & forced her∣self as much as she could, to correct & amēd them from day to day. Idem contra Adimant c. 13 And against Adimātus the Manichie, he saith: Adimantus reproueth our zeale, that is, Of the Catholikes: by which we abstaine to honour Images: his meaning is therfore that we should belieue that he fauoureth them: which for certaintie no man need cal in question, or doubt of concerning the Manichies, who by that means seeke to win grace and fauour to their accursed sect from the Pagans. Then it appea∣reth hereby, that to honour Images, is to play the Pagans, Idem in l. 6. de fid. & Symbo. c. 7. and contrariwise to liue as a true Catholike, is to detest and abhorre them. In his booke of faith and of the Creed he sayth: Wheras we say that the Father is set, we do not imagine, that it is as men vse to sit with their hams bended: for that were an impious and vngodly part for a Christian to place such an Image in a Temple, but much more in his hart, which is the very Temple of God? And what would he then haue said of these Images of the Trinitie, which are painted at this day, where the Father is set with a gray beard, a crown imperial vpon his head, Index expur∣gatorius. 146. Pet Ram. in Schol. Meta∣physic. Damas. de Or∣thod. rid. l. 4. c. 17. Nicaetas in vit. Isaaci, commē. Niceph. l. 18. c. 53. Synod. Nicen. 2. Act 6.7. art. 3.4.5 6.7. Thom. part. 3. q 23 art. 3. Oleaster. in Deu c. 4. Abusens. Epis. in Deut. c. 4. & the Son in his arms, &c? And what wold he haue said to Bellarmine, who blusheth not in the cleare light of the Gospel to maintain thē? To Pope Sixtus the 5, and Pope Clemēt the 8. who pictured thēselues in the begining of the Bibles, which they caused solemnly to be imprinted? To the Councel of Trent, which appointed that these words should bee raced out of a certain book? Taxat, inquit, cos qui Trinitatis Imaginem humana specie depin∣gunt in Templis: deleatur, &c. A thing detested and accounted of in the Church as abo∣minable, euen to these latter ages, and to the most part of the worshippers of Idols? To Damascene, telling vs, that to paint God is an extream impietie? To Nicaetas calling it a madnes and doting furie? To Nicephorus calling it an heresie? And to the Idolatrous Councel of Nice the 2. iudging it impossible, vaine and wicked? And to Thomas and Oleaster maintaining in plaine tearms, that God cannot be pictured in the olde Te∣stament, but rather in the new, since such time onely as the worde hath become flesh? Wherupon Abulensis doth note 2. inconueniences in those which picture the Trinity: Of Idolatry, for feare that we shold worship the Image: for so goeth the case (saith he) that God doth not forbid onlie to worship Images, but likewise to worship him in Images: Of heresie also, least that by such meanes wee should attribute to God a corporall and bodilie Masse, or essen∣tiall
difference, such as we may obserue to be giuen vnto him in these three figures and shapes. And thus much be saide by the way of the pictures of the Trinitie. And in another place S. Augustine sheweth the daunger generally of all Images in these wordes say∣ing: When men see them set in places appointed to honour in, the resemblance which they haue with our members, toucheth and striketh the spirites of the infirme and weake, with some affec∣tion of praying and sacrificing vnto them, especiallie at such time as the multitude is seene to runne and flocke thether. August. l 1. de consens. Euang. c. 10. And in an other place speaking of such as deuised Epistles & letters from Iesus Christ to S. Peter, and S. Paule: Can it bee (sayeth hee) because they had seene them pictured together. And thus deserue they to bee mocked, which haue sought Christ and his Apostles on painted wals, and not in the holy scriptures. Chrysostome vpon Genesis, Chrysost. in Gen. c. 31. ho. 57. mocketh at Labans Gods: Wherefore (saieth Laban vnto Iacob) hast thou stolne away my God? A deepe dotage: And thy Gods (sayeth hee) are they such as that one may steale them from thee? Again, You know that when you were Gen∣tiles, you were turned aside vnto dumbe Idols, euen you, who speake, see and heare, vnto insen∣sible thinges, and is it possible that this thing should bee pardoned? But and if in the Tem∣ples of Constantinople any such abuse had beene, how had hee beene able to haue spoken these things, and not to haue become ridiculous? But yet (sayeth hee) to the ende that it might be known that these rules reached to the Images of the Christians, We haue not to deale but with the Images of our Saintes: for wee doe not inioy their presence, by their bodilie Images, but by the Images of their soules which wee haue, in asmuch as that which they spake, Litur. Chry∣sost. was the Image of their soules. Now there is no cause why any shoulde obiect, that in the Lithurgie attributed to him, there is mention made of the Image of the Crucifixe: for how can that be Chrysostomes, seeing therein is prayer made ey∣ther for Pope Nicholas the first, neere hand 500. yeares after him: or for Nicholas the Patriarke of Constantinople, who was more then 700. yeares after likewise for the Emperour Alexius the first more then 700. yeares after? for who cannot perceiue & see that it was made 400. Hieronym. in Esa. c. 2. Idem in Iere. Idem in Da∣nicl. c. 3. yeares or thereabout after his death, a long time also after the second Councell of Nice, which established Images. S. Ierome sayeth, Man a liuing and reasonable creature, doth worship copper and stone, &c. And againe, This error hath ouertaken vs, euen to place and put religion in riches. And in another place notwithstanding, that he entreat of the matter of the three children in the bote fierie furnace, yet he giueth this generall rule: The seruantes of God must not worshie Images. And vpon the 113. psalme, hee dealeth no better with them then S. Augustine did before. But amongst the rest of his Epistles, there is one of the fa∣mous man piphanius, Bb. of Salamine in Cipres, writing vnto Iohn Patriarke of Ie∣rusalem which S Ierome hath not disdained to translate: by which it appeareth mani∣festlie vnto vs, what opinion the Church had conceiued of Images euen vnto this time, Epist. Epipha ad Ioh. Hiero although as hetherto it neuer came in their mindes to worshippe them, but on∣lie to haue them as remembrances. As I was come (sayeth hee) into a village called Anablatha, & had espied as J went along a burning lampe, and therewithall learned, (after some enquirie made) that it was a Church: I went in to pray, and found at the entrance into the same a vaile hanging, dyed and painted, hauing the Image as it were of Christ, or of some Saint, for I doe not perfectlie call to mind of whome it was. Then when I had seene this thing, that in the church of Christ, against the authoritie of the Scriptures, was hung vp the image of a man: I cut in pieces the vaile, & furthermore gaue counsell to the keepers of the place to burie some poor dead persō therin, &c. And now also I am to entreat you, that you wold giue in charge by straight commandement, that there be not any moe such vailes hung vp in the church of Christ, as do stand against our religion: for it is more seemlie to take away this disquieter of a tender and soft consci∣ence, being vnworthie of the church of Christ, & of the people which are committed vnto thee. They labour themselues & fall into a great pusle about this place, some one way, some an other way: some disputing against Athanasius, and indeed these are they that haue vndertaken the waight and burthē of the strife and contention: others in most solemn and deep sort, auouching that this Epistle was but lent him, which notwithstāding is alleadged vnder his name in the famous Synod of Paris, whereof we shall speake by &
by. But whome may we better belieue then himselfe, if he teach the same in his works? Epiphanius tom. . cont. haereses, l. 3. In the second tome against heresies, hee maketh a beade-roule of the traditions then obserued in the Church, and our aduersaries would make vs belieue, that ima∣ges come in by Apostolike tradition: but of images notwithstanding not one word. What is there of more honor in the Church of Rome, then the image of the holy vir∣gine? and yet you shall see what he saith euen of her selfe; We vnderstand (saith he) that there are some, which would bring her in for a God, and which doe sacrifice vnto her Collyri∣dem, (this was a certaine kind of tarte or cake) and which assemble and come together in her name: but this is a blasphemous worke, contrarie to the preaching of the holy spirite, a diue∣lish worke, and the doctrine of the vncleane spirit. And herein are accomplished the wordes of the holy Ghost: Some shall depart from the faith, giuing themselues to fables, and the instru∣ctions of deuils, &c. And let it be then (saith he) that she be dead and buried; admit that shee were taken vp, or suppose that she abideth and liueth still, let vs take out this lesson, that we may not in any case honour the Saints, further then is decent and becommeth, but rather the maister of the Saintes, our Lord. And let this errour broached by these seducers vanish and cease: for Marie is no God: let no man offer in her name: for hee that doeth it, destroyeth his owne soule, &c. Who will belieue that hee which spake these wordes should euer approue of images? Yea, on the contrarie, who doubteth but that hee would haue thundred against them, in the fierie flames of his holie zeale, if hee had seene these couents of Friers, & other fraternities, these vowes, hanging tablets, these gorgeous garments, of cloth of gold, and siluer, renewed and repaired according as the fashions alter and chaunge? And all the idolatries of the Pagans of all ages heaped together in these our daies, and bestowed vpon the image of the holy virgine? But let vs heare what he saith of her image in expresse tearmes: This loue and longing lust to make images, Haeres. 79. what is it, but the vttermost endeuour and whole strength of the Deuill, who vnder a colour of iu∣stice, conueieth himselfe into the vnderstanding part of man, seeking to set vp and aduaunce to the place and dignitie of God, mankind that is mortall, making Gods of them by pictures & images, bearing the shapes of men? But those whome they worship are dead: but not content therewith, they set vp their images to bee worshipped, which in deed cannot possiblie die, be∣cause they were neuer aliue: And thus man goeth a whoring from the true and onely God, as a common harlot, prostituting her selfe to euerie mans couch and companie, &c. In deed the bodie of Marie was holy, but not a God: and as certainly she was a virgine, and an honorable virgine, but not giuen vnto vs, that we should fall downe and worship her: but rather she wor∣shipped him, who according to the flesh was begotten of her, but yet descended of heauenly na∣ture, by the father-side. And therefore the Gospell armeth you against this errour, when hee saith: What haue I to do with thee O woman? as it were thereby prophesying of the sectes and heresies which should rise thereupon in the world, least that any doting vpon, or too deepe falling in loue with her holines, might be plunged into the pit of this rauing and senceles madnes of foule and filthie heresie, &c. But she is honourable and renowned as Elias, as Iohn the Euangelist, &c. yea and more renowned by reason of the dispensation of the mysterie, for which she was thought to be a fit and worthy instrument: but yet not so worthy as to bee worshipped and adored no more then the other. For farre be it from vs, that we should euer be ouertaken with that old errour of leauing and forsaking of the liuing God, to fal a worshipping of the things which he hath made. For if he will not haue any man to worship the Angels, how much lesse her that was borne of An∣na, which was giuen by Ioachim to Anna, begotten of the seed of man and woman, after the or∣dinarie course of all other men and women, &c. Let not Marie then go without her due honour, but let vs bow before and worship the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: let no person, whether man or woman worship and bow before Marie. This mysterie is due vnto the one onely God: the Angels looke not for any such glorie: let vs blot out all such abuses as haue beene cursedly carued and written in our hearts: let vs take from before our eyes the coueting of wood: and let euery creature turne and apply themselues to him which hath made them. Now he which speaketh thus of the Virgine Marie herselfe, what would he then haue said of the Saints? what would he haue said of her image and theirs? He that condemneth the idolatrie that was committed in respect of her, which was but then in sproute, and as it were in the
huske, Epiphan. tom. 1. l. 3. contr. Anom. haeres. 76. & l. 2. tom. 1. haeres. 55. contr. Melchi∣sed, & in Amir. what would he haue said at this day, if he should come and see it in the floure; yea, if he should come and see it in the heape? He letteth not to say the same in other places of those which worship the image of Moyses in Arabia, and that of Iephtha his daughter in Samaria, &c. But that which is alleadged of him in the seuenth Coun∣cell of Constantinople is more notable: Beware (saith he) and take heede to the obser∣uing of the traditions which you haue receiued, decline not either to the right hand or to the left. Remember your selues my deare children, and go not about to bring any images into the church, nor into the places of the burying of the Saintes, but beare you alwaies God in your hearts, like∣wise suffer them not in your priuate houses: for it is not lawful that a Christian should be tyed by the eyes, Alphons. de Castro in verb. Imago. Theodor. epis. Ancyrae but rather that he should be intentiue in the spirit. To be briefe, Alphonsus of Ca∣sters vppon this occasion intreating of heresies, imputeth the same to Epiphanius, namely, the condemning of images. Theodore Bishop of Ancyra, neere about Epiphanius his time, and somewhat trea∣ding Epiphanius his steps, saith: We do not iudge it to the purpose, to make the pictures or i∣mages of Saints, of materiall colours, but rather now and then to renew the vertues which wee reade of them as of liuing images: for by that meanes wee may come to the imitating of them. And as for such people as doe set vp their images, what profite I pray you, can they report vn∣to vs, that they reape thereby? Is it because they would after a certaine manner and sorte bee put in mind of them by looking vpon them? But that is verie apparant to be nothing but a vaine cogitation, and an inuention of diuelish deceipt. And Theodoret of the same time vpon the 113. Theodor. in Psal. 113. Psalme, saith: God maketh what it pleaseth him; but images are made such as it pleaseth men to make them: they haue the receptacles of sence, but they are sencelesse; and that in this thing more then flies or fleas, or any other vermine: and it is iust that such as worship them, should lose both reason and sence. Nowe this is to come to that which Erasmus saith in his Catechisme; Erasm. in Ca∣teches. & in ec∣clesiast. l. 2. that vn∣to the time of Saint Ierome, and as wee see somewhat later, images were not ap∣proued of them which were of the best approued religion, no not the image of Christ himselfe. And therefore, after he hath turned himselfe round, that he might applie himselfe vnto the time, yet notwithstanding hee commeth to conclude: That there is neyther law of God nor man, which ordaineth images in Temples. And that it is both more easie and more sure to take them all away, then to go about to deale with the peo∣ple, that they would vse them sparingly, or to preuent that superstition, do not mingle it selfe therewithall. And that although otherwise the spirit were very free and void from all super∣stition: yet herein it is intangled and inwrapped with a certaine kinde thereof, by knee∣ling before an image of woode, by hauing his eyes bent thereupon, by framing his speech thereto, by kissing the same: and in a worde, in holding it vnmeete to pray in any other place, but before an image. Likewise the good Fathers of Trent, proceeding in good earnest, Index expurg. pag. 255. as they are wont in all their matters, haue not forgotten to appoint, that in printing the workes of Erasmus againe, this place should very diligently be looked vnto and razed out. Now if the Church haue beene 500. yeares, & those in her chiefest flourishing with∣out setting vp or harbouring of any images in her temples, what profite could there be in receiuing of them, or what perill can there now be in taking of them away? what conscience in persecuting of such as remoue them? what audacious and impudent boldnesse in calling such heretickes? when as the first fathers called it heresie to haue any of them, and a diuelish inuention to bring them in? and what would they haue said of the worshipping of them? But least they should be accompted as dumbe as their images, The aduersa∣ries their obie∣ctions. Damas. l. 4. c. 17. Niceph. l. 2. c. 7. they wil not be with∣out some thing to reply. Abgarus (say they) king of Edessa, sent a painter to take the proportion, and portraiture of Iesus Christ. They reade this in Damascene and Nicephorus, who writ after the yeare 800. How commeth it then to passe that Eu∣sebius a writer both more ancient and autentike saith rather that he hath read in the records and Monuments of the commonweale of Edessa, that Abgarus sent vnto our Lord to bee healed of him, and speaketh not a word at all of the drawing of his por∣traiture?
And what is there in that which is common and equally fitting our questi∣on, if wee must haue images in the Church to worship them; and if the Primitiue Church haue had them? For there is nothing to be gathered but the curiositie of a Prince, strangely affecting a portraiture, and that of a prince which was no Christian; so that here can nothing be concluded for Christians. And why do they not remem∣ber themselues, at the least that Pope Gelasius in his decree, as also Isidore do place this historie amongst the Apocrypha, whose originall is vnknowne? They charge vs a fresh with the Ʋeronique (that is, the liuely picture,) & that hath no manner of testimo∣nie or approbation, saue onely in their Legenda Aurea. What will they say to Viues, where he saith? The golden Legend consisteth for the most part of Iron or Lead: so as the au∣thour thereof could not but haue a hart of leade, or a mouth of Iron? And then with that of Nicodemus. But how will they answere the vntruthes clearely proued, freely confes∣sed euen by themselues of the pretended treatise of Athanasius, which onely maketh mention thereof? yea rather for all these images of Christ, how will they salue them∣selues of the Epistle written by Eusebius to Constance the Empres? saying: Seeing thou hast commanded me to send thee the image of Christ, Euseb. in E∣pist. ad Con∣stant. Augu∣stam. I desire to know which it is that thou mea∣nest, whether the true & vnchaungeable one, which carrieth with it the characters & ingrauen formes of his diuine nature, or rather that which he tooke vpon him for vs, clothing himselfe in the shape and habite of a seruant; that is, the humaine nature, &c. But without all per∣aduenture thou desirest the image of this carnall bodie which he tooke for vs, and yet notwith∣standing the same ioyned with the glorie of his deitie, rather then subiect to passions and mor∣talitie. But who shall be found able to expresse in painting with dead and liuelesse colours, the shining brightnes of so great an excellencie, of so great a glorie? But and if they were not in the time of Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea in Palestina vnder Constantine the Great, where were they then found out afterward? And further what a vanitie is it, to go a∣bout by false and counterfet images to proue the truth of images? The like is that of the image of the virgine Marie, painted (say they) by S. Luke. And this is told them by one Theodorus Anagnostes, who writ after all the rest; & one Simon Metaphrastes the compiler and gatherer together of the Legendes, Maister of the schoole at Con∣stantinople, and a verie late writer. But the Apostle S. Paule telleth vs, that S. Coloss. 4. Luke was a Phisition and not a painter: and being a Iew, what likelihood is there that it should be he, if you do but marke that Origen saith, that the Iewes did not suffer any amongst them? But certainly as the Iewes heretofore in conuersing and keeping company with the Gentiles had taken vp their images, euen so the Proselite or con∣uerted Gentiles affecting to become Christians, brought them with them: the Chri∣stians also thereupon became verie easie and readie to apply themselues vnto their fashions, in thinges (especially) indifferent, to haue them as recordes and remem∣braunces, & not for to worship them; and so those which followed after, went somewhat further, as mans nature in thinges tending to super∣stition cannot keepe any measure. But this point shall be handled in the Chapter following.
CHAP. III. What manner of proceeding Images had amongst Christians: and of the most licentious abuse thereof after they once came into the Church of Rome. IT is certainly agreed vpon by all the Christian Doctors, The Gentiles the inuentors of images. Ambr. in psal. 118. Concil. Nic. 2. Act. 6. Cypr. de Idol. Vanic. That images were brought in amongst the Christians by the Gentils. Euseb. l, 7, c. 18 that the Gentiles were the first inuentors of images. S. Ambrose: The Gentiles worship wood as the image of God. Gregory Bishop of Neo∣caesarea; The religion of the Pagans did inuent & giue entrance to ima∣ges. S. Cyprian; They were made at the first for to retaine the counte∣nances of the dead: but after that which was brought in for the comfort and consolation of the liuing turned to a religious carriage toward the dead. That the Gentiles brought them in amongst the Christi∣ans also, still keeping and cleauing fast vnto some of this their old leauen, Eusebius beareth vs witnesse: for speaking of her picture, whom our Lord healed of a fluxe of blood in Cesarea Philippi, & of that which she had erected vnto him of brasse, neer vn∣to that of her owne, he saith: There is no cause why we should maruell, that those which had belieued amongst the Gentils, for the benefites which they had receiued of our Sauiour, should offer vnto him such a thing, as it were in manner of a present: seeing that we do behold euen yet to this day, the pictures which were intended and drawne for the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, yea and our Sauior himselfe, and the tablets which are made of them, as likewise certain old ones which haue beene kept. And this seemeth to me to haue beene retained , without the chaunging of the fashion according to the custome of the Gentiles, which were wont so to ho∣nour them whom they iudged worthie of honour, and whom they acknowledged for Sauiours. Whereupon also Beatus Rhenanus saith vpon Tertullian: Beat. Rhenan. in Tertul. de Coron. Milit. Niceph. l. 20. c. 30. That the Gentiles which re∣ceiued the Christian religion in their old age, did very hardly forsake the fashions which they had beene accustomed vnto all their life long. But that it was but for a monument or remem∣brance, and not for any religious vse, appeareth by Nicephorus likewise, though the most superstitious of all other the ecclesiasticall writers. For besides that we see that this image is not in any Church, but in a streete, there were not for whole 300. yeares any eyther Altars, sacrifices, perfumes, praiers or pilgrimages made vnto it: Hee speaketh properly as of an old one, when he saith: That processe of time had worne out all remembrance of it, concerning wherefore it was there and whose it should be: that the drop∣ping of water, slime, and mosse had so rot it, that there was not any of the letters about it, to bee knowne: and that this miraculous hearbe within some short time after, was not any more to bee found, &c. Assuredly if images deserued either reuerence or worship, then that more then any other, being the image of Christ, authorized by a miracle, &c. And there∣fore if that were so vtterly neglected by the old Church, we cannot excuse it of a most notorious contempt; yea and of an vnauoidable error. Or else certainly, seeing that it made no greater accompt thereof, being that Church which we follow & set before vs for our patterne, let vs say, that it was because they then belieued as it now behoo∣ueth vs to belieue, that there is not due to speake according to the termes of religion, eyther worship or reuerence vnto any image whatsoeuer. And if not at those times when images might haue beene kept in some true proportion of resembling them for whom they were made, how much lesse at this day, when euerie man painteth as his humour and fansie perswadeth him? &c. We say the same of the crosse, Of the Crosse. August. de verb. apost. serm. 8. Galath. 3. Tertul. in Apol. and we haue also said it before in another place. In the beginning it was nothing els but a signe, which was made with the fingers in the ayre, as we reade in Tertullian. And S. Augustine giueth a reason thereof saying: To the end that men may not imagine that we are ashamed of the crucified. How farre better had it beene to haue had him grauen, to haue had him crucified, saith the Apostle before our eyes? Thereuppon the Paganes called the Christians, as saith Tertullian, Reli∣giosos
crucis, the religious of the crosse, in way of derision: but truely, for as much as (as the Apostle saith) this crosse was a stumbling blocke vnto the Iewes to bee offended at, and foolishnes vnto the Gentiles, it was acknowledged of them for a misterie of the vnspeakeable wisedome of the eternall God. Arnob. siue Minutius lib.  contra Gentes. But when the Pagans obiect vnto the old Christians, that they adore and worship it, how doe they take it in the questi∣on of honour? Arnobius telleth how, saying: Wee doe not wish for, neither yet do wee worship the Crosse: but rather you, who consecrate Gods of wood, doe worship also, it may be, the crosses of wood, as partes of your Gods. For what are your banners of armes, but gil∣ded crosses? And what are your Trophies and Monumentes of victorie, but men fastned to the crosse, nothing but crosses? Constantine to shew to whom he gaue the honour of his victories, (namely to Christ) altered the Labarum, that is to say, his oriflam or imperiall banner, causing the name of Christ briefly written and abbreauiated to be set there∣in, after he had had the vision, for the confirming vnto him of his calling and voca∣tion to the deliuerance of the Church. For as for the Crosse wee haue seene in Arno∣bius, that from the times of the Pagans, the staues of their Ensignes were crosse-wise made and fashioned. But what communion is there betwixt a temple and a campe; a warlike banner or standard, and a banner of procession; an ensigne ordained for the attonement and keeping together of an armie, with a tablet carried about to bee worshipped? And againe, where will they find that Constantine did euer worship it, Cyril. lib. 6. cō∣tra Iulianum. or cause it to be worshipped? And what will they say of Cyrillus the Patriarke of Alexandria, who answered the Emperor Iulian a long time after the death of Constantine, reproching him for the honour giuen vnto the Crosse: that the Christians did not giue any wor∣ship or honour vnto the signe of the Crosse? Petr. Crinit. l. 9. de Honest. discipl. Or vnto the Emperours Theodosius & Valens, which yet after that did forbid Crosses by expresse edictes, saying: In as much as wee haue not any greater care for any thing, then for the seruice of God; wee forbidde all manner of persons to make the signe of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, either in co∣lours or in stone, or in any other matter, or to graue him, paint, or carue him: but on the con∣trarie, we will and command, that in what place soeuer any such bee found, that it bee ta∣ken away, vpon paine of being grieuously punished for withstanding and doing to the con∣trarie. Whom notwithstanding we see not to bee reprehended by the great and famous Doctors of that time, Saint Augustine, Saint Ambrose, &c. men like enough not to haue concealed or kept backe any good admonition, or instruction from them, which they were to know or to bee admonished of, much lesse by the Coun∣cels of the Church, which at this time were more vsuall then in all the former. And as for the Poet Prudentius his wordes, they are not any barre or stop against the soundnesse of this matter: Crux pellit omne malum: The Crosse driueth away all euill and mischieuous thinges, &c. For this is a poeticall phrase, and their ordi∣narie manner of speaking, attributing to the signe, the properties of the thing signified, as vnto the Crosse the effectes of the shamefull and reprochfull death, which the Sonne of God suffered thereuppon for vs. As in deede it is very plaine and manifest in that treatise of Saint Cyprians, called Lignum vitae, and hath beene obserued by the best learned, that the olde writers by the Crosse did not vn∣derstande the woode, but the Lorde himselfe fastned vnto it, fastning thereunto by his death, the hand writing of eternall death, wherein we stood obliged and bound. In so much, as that the Councell of Trent hath decreed, Index expurg. pag. 28. & 30. that this should bee raced out of the bookes of Georgius Fabricius, touching his censure vpon the workes of Christian poets. Now as wee haue seene the diligent endeuoure and industrie of the first Pastors of the Church to remoue and put farre away all idolatrie, That images were first vsed but as monu∣ments and re∣membrances, in the nature of histories. by the keeping out of Images: so consequently and in the next course wee shall see, how by little and little it was brought in by the carelesse negligence of their successors, and vnder their receiuing and admitting of the same, which Sathan deuised to be by a gentle
kind of secrete creeping from priuate houses, to publike houses; from a prophane & historicall vse, to the abuse of worship & adoration, and that altogether vpon meere deuotion. Chrysost. invi∣ta S. Meletri. Niceph. l. 12. c. 14. We reade of Meletius of Antiochia, who died in the second Oecumeni∣call Councell, that he left behind him such a desire in the people to haue him, as that euerie man was willing to haue his picture vpon his walles, vessell, ringes, &c. This came partly of too much curiositie; partly of the seeking of humaine comfort. In as much also as there were celebrated and solemnely kept the yearely memorials of the most famous Martyrs, as namely the Panegyricks in their praise and commen∣dation, & the day of their martyrdome, thereby to kindle the zeale of the Christians, that they might bee the more constant in holding out, after their example: It was to be seene, that in certaine temples, histories containing such matter were painted, the better to reuiue and keepe aliue, what memorie might let slip and fall away: As that of Martyr Barlaam in S. Basill, Basilius in o∣rat. de Bar∣laam. saying: Better painted vpon the wall, then described in his oration and speech: and that of Theodorus in Gregorius Nissenus, saying: Where the Mason hath polished the stone, as if it had beene siluer, and where the painter hath not spared a∣ny thing of his arte, &c. And lastly, the histories of the old and new testament vpon the walles of the temple of Nola, which Pontius Paulinus about the yeare 430. caused to be painted for to keepe occupied with the consideration of those tablets, those that came to the feast which was made in the honour of S. Felix the Martyr, who other∣wise (as saith Trithemius) suffered themselues to be carried away, and wholly giuen to their wine and good cheare. But how farre off is all this from worshipping and ado∣ring of them? There is one onely place alleadged against vs vnder the name of Saint Basill, wherewith they go about to dazell the eyes of the world: I honour (saith hee) the images of the Apostles, and I honour them publiquely, for they haue left vs the same by tra∣dition, and therefore it is not to be gainsaid or forbidden, and thereupon also we erect and set vp in all our Churches, their memorialles and histories. But vpon their owne consciences let them speake if euer they haue found any such word in all S. Basill his workes? and in deed what likelihood is there thereof, that he should at the same time call that an A∣postolicall tradition, which Epiphanius holdeth to be a Diuelish inuention? And further, how can this word Adoration stand and agree with his time? which was heard, but little spoken of for many ages after, yea in the most idolatrous, and which is as yet to this daye dissembled and caried onely vnder hand? Concil. Nic. 2. And in deede this is onely the allegation of Pope Adrian the first, writing to the Empresse Irene, from the second Councell of Nice 400. yeares after S. Basill his time, and when as the power and heat of Images did most furiously rage. Now Images were scarse any sooner receiued into the Churches & Temples, The begin∣ning of the worshipping of images. then that the people which had lately left and cast off their paganisme, thinking to haue found in those of the Apostles and Saints, that which they had lost in their images of their owne Gods, began at their pleasure to yeeld them the very same honor. And this abuse was spread and propagated in diuers places diuersly, according to the igno∣rance or capacitie, negligence or diligence of the Bishops: but still so as that it gay∣ned in all mens sight great and large countries at that time when barbarousnesse had ouerrunned the whole Romaine Empire, by the inuasion of such infinite multitudes of fierce and barbarouse nations: and that in such sort, as that being once admitted and receiued, there was not any meanes left to cast them out againe; the most part of the Bishops thinking they had done sufficient seruice, in letting the worshipping of them. But how much more prouident were they that had vtterly cast them out? And how much more wisely had they dealt if they had taken heed to S. Augustine his ad∣monition: August. in psal. 113. That they are more mighty to deceiue soules, in as much as they haue eyes, then to reforme and amend them, in as much as these their eies see not at all. Therefore Serenus Bishop of Marseillis in the time of S. Gregorie, Oppositions & withstan∣dings of the worshipping of Images. about the yeare 600. was offended that his people did worship them: he is moued with a holy zeale, according to the example of king Ezechias, and breaketh them. Alphonsus of Ca∣stres reckoneth him amongst the heretickes for doing so: Bellarmin notwithstanding
saith, that he did him iniurie therein. Gregor. l. 7. Epist. 109. But what saith the foresaid Pope Gregorie vnto him, notwithstanding that for the most part he was the father of all the superstitions wherewith the Church was corrupted? It hath beene giuen vs to vnderstand, that your bro∣therhood seeing certain adorations of images, hath broken & cast thē out. And certainly we haue commended your zeale, in that you would not suffer that any of all the thinges that are wrought by the hand of man should be worshipped: Ne quid ma∣nufactum. Gregor. l. 9. Ep. 9. but therewithall likewise we iudge that you ought not to haue broken them: which thing he speaketh of more at large in an Epistle to Serenus. And addeth afterward: It is one thing to adore a picture, & another to conceiue and apprehend by the picture, that which is to be worshipped: for the picture is for idiots, & that which is writ∣ten, for them which can reade. Hee did not not then acknowledge them for any other thing then remembrances and stories: and thereby doubtlesse in great daunger to haue beene condemned of heresie, if he had beene at Trent. And in the end, to hold the mid way, he saith: It is needfull and requisite, that thou shouldest call the children of the church, that is, those of thy diocesse, and that thou let them see & vnderstand by the testimony of the scripture, that it is not lawfull to adore or worship any of the workes of mens hands: because it is written; Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, & him onely shalt thou serue. And that thou shouldest after this then signifie vnto them that thou wast offended with them, for that they had abused themselues by adoring & worshipping of such pictures as were not made, but only to teach the histories of such as they did represent to such as could not reade: & that that was the occa∣sion wherefore thou didst breake them. And therefore vppon condition that they will containe themselues within the bonds for which they were admitted and receiued, that thou art content to suffer them to enioy them. And to be briefe, if any man will make any, those hinder not: but if they beginne or offer to worship any, then looke about thee and suffer it not in any case. Now I could haue wished that as Gregory said to him; Teach them by the scriptures, that they must not worship them: for it is written, &c. that he also had added: yea, but they ought not to haue them for instruction: for so also it is written, &c. But the mischiefe is, Ierem. 10, Abacuc. 2 that the good man found the cleane contrarie in the scripture. In Ieremie: Ierem. 10, Abacuc.  That the wood is a doctrine of vanitie. In Abacuck: That molten images are nothing els but the tellers of lies. So that this Bb. though caried away with the waue of time, and the multitude of people, is one who speaketh all one with a certaine Councell, which was held in the same age: If thou canst, without the people their making of any stirre or talke about it, Concil. Car∣thag. 4. beat downe the Altars which haue beene erected to any other end, then to be memorials of the Mar∣tyrs: but let them alone & tolerate them, if they begin to stir. And who hath not any other reasons then those of the Pagans, euen the very same which the heathen Philosophers did vse, to alleadge against Serenus, for the supporting of these relikes of Paganisme; Which (saith Athanasius) when they perceiued themselues pressed hard by the Christians in the matter of their images, answered, Athanas. contr. Gent. that they were visible signes to know the nature of the inuisible God, and that they are as bookes vnto the ignorant, by which they come to the vnderstanding of celestiall things. But Athanasius and Eusebius do scoffe at these answers. And hereup∣on also S. Augustine hath told vs: That those are subiect and apt to learne lies, who seeke for Christ Iesus & his Apostles in the paintings of wals, & not in the scriptures. Within a short time after Pope Boniface (the same who aduanced Phocas the parricide to the Em∣pire for images, had exceeding great need of the patrons and protectors) opened the temple of all the Gods that were at Rome, called Pantheon, by the licentious li∣bertie and free permission which he gaue to euerie man to deuise and do therein, and in stead of the images of all the Gods, Sigibert. & Plat. Blond. l. 9 Dec. 1. he placed therein the image of the virgin Mary and of the saints: as likewise at the same time there were set vp in the Chappell of La∣terane the images of Phocas and Leontia his wife, because he had graunted the Pope the supremacy and supreme authoritie ouer all other Bbs. Afterward about the yeare 700. it was ordained by the sixt generall Councell: Synod. 6. c. 82. Constant. 3. Gregor. Ce∣dren. in hist. that whereas it had beene the cu∣stome to picture & represent our Lord vnder the similitude of a lambe, he should frō thence forward be pictured in the similitude of a man; seeing that the truth was come in place, & had abolished shadowes: for thus it saith: To the end we may be put in mind of his conuersation in the flesh, & of his passion & death, & in them of our redemption. And all this while no one word of the adoring and worshipping of them, howsoeuer Gratian
do most falsely cite & bring this Synode for the adoration of images, Gratian. de consecrat. D. 3. c. venerabilis. Zonara. tom. 3 taking in stead therof a canō of the second councel of Nice, which began Venerabilis, as Zonora doth teach vs: & that Polydor, who had not as yet seen the canons of this councel, alleageth at the sight of the country: that the worshipping of the images of the Saints was resolued vpon. Now at this time fell in the great strife and contentions which happened about this worship and adoration, Wars falling out about images. or to speake more properly, the warres of images, or rather of the Empires vnder the colour of images. This sixt general councell had con∣demned the heresie of the Monothelites, that is, their heresie who acknowledged but one will in Christ, namely, a diuine will. And Constantinus Pogonatus had caused to be painted in the porch of S. Sophies temple in Constantinople, the images of all the fathers which had beene present at that councel. But Philippicus holding the foresaid heresie, & cōming to bee Emperor, caused such images to be taken away. Pope Con∣stantine in despight caused them to be painted in S. Peters porch, & not those onely, which had beene at the sixt generall councell, but all the fathers which had beene at the 6. general councels. Wherefore now the question of images which had beene but as an accessorie, becōmeth chiefe & principall, especially after the Synode held in the time of Constantinus Copronymus, Bedo. l. 2. Paulus Dia∣con. l. 6. c. 11. wherin all the decrees of the sixt generall Synode were approued, (that especially against the Monothelites) saue only that therein ima∣ges were condemned, for which alone the strife & contention continued, the contro∣uersie of the Monothelites lying extinct and buried. Then Constantine the Pope cal∣led a councell at Rome, Lib. Pontisic. Plat. where he caused it first to be affirmed and decreed, that ima∣ges ought to be honoured, and excommunicated the Emperor Philippicus, &c. And it is no maruell, seeing he also was the first which would haue his feet kissed in the ci∣tie of Nicomedia by the Emperor Iustinian. And from that time forward, the cruell wars for images betwixt the East and West, the Greek and the Latine church, the Em∣perors and the Popes, entred and set in footing. Philippicus is driuē out of his king∣dome by Arthemius, and Arthemius by Theodosius: who hauing need of the Pope his fauour, for the installing of him, ordained, that images should be restored. But this man dying about the end of the yeare, Leo the third, called Isauricus succeeding him, tooke vpon him the hearing of this matter, Anno 730. Sigibert. Paul. Diacon. l. 21. together with his diuines, and to that end assembled a Councell at Constantinople: all things being reasoned and debated by the scriptures, the worshipping of images & making of praier vnto them, was therein condemned: the Archb. Germanus, who defended thē, deposed, the idols broken, & the painted pictures defaced & blotted out, a cōmandement and iniunction from the Emperor, Bonfin. l. 8. dec. 1. Anton. Arch. Florent. 1. 14. c. 1. S. 1. Canon. Perla∣tum D. 3. de consecr. that the determination and sentence of this councel shold be obaied. Gre∣gory the 2. to the contrary taketh this occasion to strengthen himself, & make his part strong in Italy, calling an other councell at Rauenna, and therein causing it to be esta∣blished, that whosoeuer should destroy, prophane, or speake euill of images, should be declared and pronounced accursed: (he durst not say, whosoeuer did not worship; or this had beene against the canon of Gregory the 1.) He further excommunicated Leo the Emperor; quit of all manner allegiance vnto him all Italie, and forbad his subiects to pay him any thing: he confederated himself with the French against him, couenanting to part the westerne Empire betwixt himself and them. Again, this was one principall cause mouing thē thereto, for that images were nothing but images. Chroniclers ob∣serue, that vpon these alterations, there appeared extraordinary eclipses of the Sunne & Moon, lightnings & thunder, flouds & earthquakes, as warnings of Gods wrath, & of the declining and falling away of the church: but whereat the Popes did no more stir then their images. Anno 755. After Leo succeeded Constantinus Copronymus: he assembled againe an other councel at Constantinople against the pretended one of Rome: the Pope was called thereto, but he wold not appeare. Therin it is decreed, that images shal not be honored: and Gregory Bb. of Naeocesarea, had the charge of drawing into one book all the reasons: wherupon the councel grounded this their decree, cōmitted vn∣to himal which were read & solemnly published in the hearing of all the people. Ger∣manus the Patriark, & Iohan. Damascenus the son of Manzar, were in expresse termes condemned: which treatise of Gregory is as yet extant and to be read. Now this Em∣perour
was no Monothelite, but rather had taken his oath for the establishing of the sixe generall Councels, and whereto he ordained, that this should be added for a se∣uenth, & this he signified to the Pope, to the end that he might haue him to cause it to be kept & obserued. Againe, he sent in like maner to Pipin into Fraunce, who at that time did beare all the sway there; who caused a Councell to be assembled at Gentilli: Pipin holding his place by the benefit of the Pope, did therein what fauour he could to his part, & so it was concluded therein, that images should be tollerated: it was not as yet said, that they should be worshipped. Yea there were as yet many that resisted and stood out against them, & about this time it was, that they were receiued in England. At this time also it was, namely, in the time of Adrian the first, that Bbs. began to sub∣scribe their publike actes and writings with the signe of the crosse. In the meane time Stephen the third cause it to be decreed in a Councell at Laterane, Anno 768. that there should be burning of incense before the images: but his chiefe and principall scope therein was to make his part good against Constantine the Pope, whom his faction & parta∣kers had deposed, because he seemed to place & set himself aboue the Emperor in au∣thoritie: as in deed he was brother to Didier king of the Lombards, who sought aide at the Emperors hand against the Frenchmen. And thus continually the matter of Di∣uinitie was crossed and thwarted by the matters and affaires of the state. But as Irene the Empresse, daughter to a king of the Tartars, Anno 790. being by birth & coun∣trie a Pagane, & widow of Leo the fourth, came to be gardeant to her son, & so to the regencie of the Empire: she sought for some meanes to enter againe into the West, & for that purpose could not bethinke her self of any more fit, then to gratifie the Pope with the making of images, she then called a Councell at Constantinople: Concil. Nic. 2 Diacon. l. 23. a great part of the Bishops there present, maintained the abolishing of Images: the Empresse for diuers coloured considerations; went about to exclude them who had beene pre∣sent in the former: the people were offended, and thereupon she interrupted & brake off the assemblie. But the yeare following, after she had disarmed such as were of the contrary opinion, she banished the best and most powerfull families maintaining the same, and armed those which were the fauourites of images, and so called another Councell in the Citie of Nice. There appeared and were to be seene Pope Adrian the first his letters ful of speciall fauour & good will to her and her Patriarch Tharasius. There it was also in plaine termes (for the deuill was there set loose in all maner of li∣centious libertie) pronounced, contrary to the opinion of all those which had gone before, yea euen of Gregory the great himselfe: That the images of Christ, of the virgine Marie, & of all the saints must be worshipped & adored. And there (to be brief) were accur∣sed all those which should think the contrarie: & the Bbs. who had condemned them in the former Councell, constrained to reuoke their sentence, as namely, Basill of An∣cyra, Theodore of Myra, Gregory of Neocaesarea; not that old Gregory, but a later: & so when they had thus done, they were set euery man in his charge & place againe. And it was decreed, that this should be called the seuenth generall Councell, and not that of Constantinople, held vnder Constantinus Copronymus. This Councell was held about the yeare 800. which our aduersaries are accustomed to alleadge for ima∣ges vnder the name of the Nicene Councell, but making semblance as though it were the first Nicene Councell, & not the second, that so they might grace themselues with the name of that famous councell, which maintaineth the diuinitie and adoring of the Son of God, whereas this, that is the second doth attribute both these vnto i∣mages, whereas there is almost fiue hundred yeares betwixt the one & the other, the one being held in the time of Constantine the great, the deliuerer of the Church, and the other in the time of a mad and brutish woman, that was the bloodie butcher to murther her owne son, addicted to southsayers, borne of Paganes, and continuing no lesse by profession, of whom histories make mention, that the Sun was eclipsed, Eutrop. & Abb. Vsperg. that it might not behold her enormous and detestable deeds, & that the earth did shake the Citie of Con∣stantinople as wearie of bearing them. And notwithstanding at the same time, as Adrian the first had sent to Charlemain
the decrees of this Synode, Concil. Franc∣ford. contr. that he might approue them, there was a Councell held at Franckford by the Bishops and Prelates of Italie, Fraunce and Germanie. There∣in were examined and discussed the two contrarie Councels, Eginard. in vit. Carol. Regino. Add. Vsperg. Ammon. l. 4. c. 85. that is to say, that of Constantinople, and the second of Nice, and a decree passed, that the Nicene should not be held either for a generall one, or for the seuenth generall one, neither in deed for any thing els of value. Ʋt nec septima, nec aliquid diceretur: but for an imagined and deceitfull Synode, calling it a bastardly Synode: the decrees of the worship∣ping of images cut off and cast away, a booke framed in expresse tearmes appro∣uing that of Constantinople, and confuting for false and counterfeit that of Nice, the same being signed by all the Bishops. And furthermore, for the further gracing of the same, published vnder the name of Charles the Great, which is yet at this day to be read: and was put forth here some fortie yeares since, by my L. Iean du Tillet, Bi∣shop of Meaux. This booke keepeth the meane or middle way betwixt the Synodes of Constantinople, and that second of Nice: that is to say, That images might be had to be remembrances of thinges; which the Councell of Constantinople denied: but, that they might not be worshipped, and this the Councell of Nice affirmed. Neither doth it make, as the sophisters of our time vse, by a false Grammer, that common distinction betwixt an idoll and an image: but it rather affirmeth according to sound Diuinitie: We call not idols those images which are in Temples, but we forbid them to bee worshipped, for feare that they should be called idols, that is to say, that by worshipping of them they become not the thing which they are not. And to the end that no man may call this booke in question, Augustinus Steuchus Bishop of Agobio, & the keeper of the Popes librarie, testifieth that it is kept in the library of Laterane, Hinemar. Archiepisc. Rhemens. c. 20 Bellarm. de eccles. triump. l. 2. c. 19. written in old Lumbardie letters: and Hinemarus Archbishop of Rhemes, doth alleadge whole pages out of the same: and Bellarmine likewise doth acknowledge, that in it is contained the Councell of Franckford, yea and that which is more maruellous and strange, that is, that Adrian by letters which he writ vnto the Emperour of Constantinople, and to Tharasius the Patriarch, the furtherer & aduauncer of images, doth approue that which was done at Franckford: as in deed the truth is, that he had his legates there which were asha∣med of that which was done at Nice. But seeing that images had beene retained in Churches, when Charlemaine was once dead, idolatrie found an easie reentry in the West, as will be seene in the time of Charles his sonne, who was constrained to write a sharper booke then the first: as on the contrarie Constantine the son of Irene, com∣ming to his age, would not obserue & keep that Councell, held in the time of his mo∣thers regencie, who for that occasion wrought his death and dissolution. And this contention in the Empire of Greece, indured more then 200. yeres, according as the Emperours were well or ill inclined, working sometimes the ruine and ouerthrow of images, and sometimes, the establishing and confirming of the same. In this contrarietie of Councels, A comparing of these two councels to∣gether. to which of them I pray you, shal Christians haue recourse to stay and rest their consciences vpon? To whom say I, when as they see the East armed against the West, about this cause and quarrell? yea the East against the East, that is, the Churches and Empires of those partes at iarre amongst themselues? Doubtlesse nothing can assure or certifie them but the word of God: Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, &c. thou shalt not worship or serue them. The word which the Popes & Emperors neuer could, neither euer shalbe able to dispatch & quite de∣stroy from out of the world, neither yet out of the hearts of such as are truely faithful: howbeit, it may be obserued, that from this time, this commandement beginneth (such is the shameles boldnes) to be raced out of the law of God: as may yet be seene in the ancient lawes of England, Archaeonomia Anglicana. written & published shortly after the second councel of Nice; whose first title containeth the ten Commandements, but the second com∣mandement is wholly wanting therein, & the third continued in place thereof. But let vs notwithstanding briefly weigh the reasons of these Councelles, the one against the other: because it may be, that out of their disagreement, wee shall make the truth and light to appeare. The Nicene doth alleadge the image which
Iesus Christ sent to Abgarus, that which Nicodemus painted vnder the name of a false Athanasius, which we haue proued to bee onely imagined and supposed: like∣wise the vision of Constantine, as it was foretold him by Peter and Paule before that hee was baptised, which all ecclesiasticall histories, together with those next afore mentioned, do note for Apocrypha. It playeth and sporteth it selfe with the scrip∣tures, as men vse to doe with Pasquils. Adrian the Pope in his Synodall Epistle: Concil. Nic. 2, Act. 2, God tooke of the myre and clay, and made man according to his owne image and likenesse. And the Prophet Dauid saith: Confession and dignitie are before him. Againe, I haue loued the beautie of thy house, O Lord, I will seeke thy face, &c. It behooueth therefore (saith it) to haue images in Temples. Theodorus saith, As we haue heard, so haue we seene: wherefore we must haue images to looke vpon them. And God is wonderful in his Saints: there∣fore we must haue painted pictures. And, No man lighteth a candle to put it vnder a bushell: therefore it must bee set vpon Altars. To bee briefe, the Psalmist hath said: Worship his footstoole, worship him in his holy mountaine: O Lord, all the riches of thy temple, shall worship before thy face: wherefore we must worship images. But I would verie gladly, that of all the ancient Doctors that haue written vppon the Psalmes and Prophets, they would shew me but one, who hath from these places, or any one of them found out images. They alleadge the fathers with like conscience, Quest. 16. citing an Epistle written by Basill to Iulian, which is not to bee found, and another of Gre∣gorie the Great, which is manifestly knowne to be written by Gregorie the third: a certaine booke of questions vnder the name of Athanasius in the sixteenth questi∣on, and it is found to haue beene written by one Leontius, almost three hundred yeares after, in the time of the Emperour Mauritius. And how should they spare the Doctors, when they haue not beene ashamed to corrupt the first Councell of the Apostles held at Antioch; daring to affirme, Actes 15. that they therein ordained that the image of our Sauiour Christ should bee worshipped in steade of the images of the false Gods? Although it be so, as that there were not according to their owne confession, any images in the Christian Churches before Constantine his time; there∣by charging the Primitiue Church with an vnsupportable crime, for hauing made so small accompt of the Apostles their ordinance, yea or rather of the holy Ghostes, and that in a full Councell. In the end they come to the legends of the Saintes, and to pretended miracles. And what miracles? How that there was a woman healed of the gnawings and gripes that she suffered in her bellie, by looking vpon the ima∣ges of Saint Cosme and Saint Damian: an other of the fluxe, in looking vppon the image of Simeon: and that an other found a Well, by causing the image of Theo∣dosius the Abbot to be brought her. An image of the virgine Mary kept the candle of a certaine Abbot from going out a long way: and an other helpeth to conueigh water from the cesterne to the house. And how a woman was tempted of the De∣uill by forsaking and leauing to vse the image of the virgin; whereupon the Abbot Theodorus sheweth her, that it were better to go to the stewes and brothell-house a thousand times, then to leaue and forsake the worshipping and adoring thereof. What baggage are these to oppose & set against the holy law of God, Giuen (as saith the Apostle) by the ministery of Angels, and vttered by his owne mouth: Thou shalt not worship images? Now let vs heare on the contrarie the foundations of the Councell of Francford: We must not (saith it) worship images, seeing we must not worship any besides one onely God, & one onely Iesus Christ, who with the father & the holy Ghost raigneth eternally. Because like∣wise, there is neither commandement nor example, either of the Apostles, Patriarkes, or prophetes, or of the fathers of the primitiue Church for the same. And on the contrary, that if any man haue images for remembrances and monumentes, that yet notwithstanding it ought not to be any president for the trimming & decking vp of the Church: that such ornamentes and courses are nothing els but the waies of the Gentils: that the good fathers Antonius, Hilarius, and others, who loued well the beautie of the house of God, did yet verie well leaue off to haue any dealing with them. And as little for the instruction of the people.
That God hath giuen them the holy scriptures to this end; the law whereby to come to the know∣ledge of Christ, and not by Images. And not any more for imitation or example sake to bee followed: That the vertues of the Saintes, as faith, hope, and charitie, are inuisible: and that we must therefore seeke them in their workes, and not in their painted pictures. It fur∣ther proueth, that whatsoeuer the patrons of images alleadge of scripture, it is ey∣ther to no end, or contrarie to the end for which they alleadge it; that their tales of the image of Christ are Apocrypha, their authorities out of the fathers meerely imaginarie, and their pretended miracles no better then either doubtfull, or noto∣riously false, or els diuelish; Yea and although (saith it) that they were true: because that God appeared to Moyses in a bush, shall we therefore worship all bushes? or vnder the colour of Aarons rod, shall we worship all rods? And so for Sampson his iaw-bone, all other iaw∣bones? Or from the shaddow of S. Peter, all other shadowes? &c. That this assertion of the Nicene Councell is damnable: I adore and worship the image with the same worship where∣with I worship the Trinitie it selfe, and do curse those that say otherwise. The word being so plaine and euident. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and that exclusiuely meant, (say they) of all other maner of worship, besides that which is due vnto God alone, not excluding one∣ly that of images, but of whatsoeuer other creatures, be they neuer so excellent. In like man∣ner, that their other reason is as weake, which they would draw from the nature of relation and reference, which the image hath with the thing whereof it is the image, seeing that Christ said not: He that receiueth Images, but he that receiueth you, receiueth me: Nor that which you haue done to images, you haue done to me: but rather, what you haue done to one of these little ones. And therefore that whosoeuer doth say of a picture, This is Christ, sinneth, lyeth, and committeth villanous wickednesse: instead that the second Nicene Councel hath by name said and affirmed, that a man may speake it in godly & religious maner. And all these things with such grauitie, learning, and religiousnesse, together with such reasons drawne so to the purpose from the scriptures & fathers, S. Ierome, S. Augustine, S. Gregorie, &c, and pressed with such good consequence and so necessarily, as that all the Dagons of the Philistines, bee they neuer so firmely vn∣derpropped, shal not be able possiblie to stand before them. And yet furthermore this booke is approued by Hincmarus Archbishop of Rheimes, who alleadgeth a whole Chapter out of the same against Hincmarus Bishop of Laon, who liued in the time of Charles the great: and as for Ecchius himselfe, hee doeth not once call it in question. Let vs go forward with the effectes and successe insuing vppon these two Coun∣cels. The effect of these Councels It appeareth that that of Franckford did stay the course of idolatrie for a time in the Churches of France and Germanie: which is gathered hereby, namely, for that Haimo and Rabanus, who followed shortly after, do not speake a word of the wor∣shipping of images: and in that Walfridus Strabo, liuing at the same time, continu∣eth all one phrase and manner of speech: Walfrid. Stra∣bo. c. 8. That it is not lawfull either to worship them, or els to banish and cast them out. And because likewise that Claudius a famous Priest brought vp in the Court of Charles the Great, was no sooner made Bishop of Turin in the time of Lewes the Gentle, then that hee pulled downe and defaced the ima∣ges: when as hee founde the people of his Diocesse giuen to worship them, by reason of the Romish superstition which had gained and preuailed so farre amongst them. Claud. Tauri∣nens. de ado∣rat. imaginum. An Abbot called Theodomirus set himselfe against his proceedings: where∣vpon this Claudius writte a booke vnto him, against the worshipping of Images, which hee was not afraide to send to the Emperour Lewes, who committed the same to Ionas of Orleance to examine. But hee neuer vouchsafed to vtter his iudgement of it, till after that both Lewes and Claudius were deade, neither is it found that Claudius was disturbed or troubled by the French Church vppon this occasion: Anno. 840. Ionas Aureli∣an. aduers. Claud. Tauri∣nens. a signe that the doctrine of images was gouerned by the Councell of Franckford. Now of this booke of Claudius Bishoppe of Turin, there is no parte to come by, more then that which Ionas his booke (wherein hee goeth about the confutation of the same) doeth afford vs, and that after his death. It may
iustlie bee doubted whether hee haue dealt faithfullie with it in alleadging and setting downe the whole: but onely that his owne aunsweres do sufficiently witnes that Idolatrie as yet was verie young and tender in the Churches of France. Claudi∣us reproueth the worshipping of Images according to the Councell of Francford: Io∣nas doth not maintaine the same: for hee aunswereth onlie as Gregory, aunswereth Serenus, that they may bee had for instruction sake to the people, and not for to bee worshipped; proceeding euen to the cursing of them who do worshippe them. Clau∣dius maintaineth and proueth by Origen, S. Ierome, Fulgentius, Lactantius, &c. That they ought not to be honored either with inward affection, or worshipped with outward gesture: That wee ought not either to worshippe or serue any creature, &c. And that it is likewise an error to do it for the contemplating of them, whose Images they are made to bee. And it is so far off, that Ionas should gainsaye this, as that on the contrarie hee saith; As for those that maintaine the worshipping of Images, and saye that they giue not that worship vnto the similitude and thing representing, but vnto them which are therein represented; as do (saith he) they of the East Churches, who are ouertaken with this most mischiuous error: wee doe reproue and detest them euen as thy selfe: And the Lord become both to the one and the other gracious and fauourable, as that they may bee pulled from this vile and detestable superstition. Claudius affirmed against the worshippers of Images: The law, Exod. 20. forbiddeth vs not onelie the Images of Gods, but all whatsoeuer in generall, that wee shoulde worshippe them. And Ionas acknowledged that this was a wholesome, sound and holie beliefe. Againe, If the workes of Gods hands be not to be worshipped (said Claudius) much lesse the workes of mens hands. And Ionas thereto addeth, Sobrie no∣biscum sapis, testifying that in that point he dealt like a wise & prudent teacher. What is then the oddes betwixt them? Truely this, (saith Ionas) namely, that Claudius ought to haue condemned superstition, and reproued ignorance; and not to haue defaced the Images, and that he ought to haue left them as they were, not to the end that anie worship shold be done vnto them, but that they might serue both for an ornament in the Temple, and for a memoriall of thinges past vnto the ignorant. As indeed saith hee, France hath and suffereth them; howsoeuer it be held and reputed for a great abhomina∣tion to worshippe them, and so likewise the case standeth with Germany. In briefe, that it is a plaine and manifest fault, ignorance, error, and superstition to fall down before the Images of Saintes, but yet that the offenders are to bee reclaimed by reason, & not by curses: in asmuch as that it can hardlie bee belieued, that they abiding and continuing in the free and holy confession of the blessed Trinitie, should haue anie purpose or resolution to turne aside to the worshipping of Idols. But how far I pray you was the beliefe of the French and Germaine Churches at that time (that is, a∣bout the yeare 850.) differing from the faith and beliefe of the times that now are? yea and what great oddes is there betwixt the present, and that which Ionas held and belieued, notwithstanding that he was fullie armed and prouided for the defence of Images? And indeed Nicetas teacheth vs, that euen in the time of Fredericke Bar∣berossa, about the yeare 1160. Nicetas in vita Isaac. Angel. l. 2. the worshipping of Images was forbidden the Ger∣maines: For (sayeth hee) as hee tooke & surprised Philippople, the Armenians staying in the Cittie, did not estrange themselues because of the Germaines, inasmuch as the worshipping of Images was condemned and vtterlie detested both of the one and the other. As also Ana∣stasius the Library-keeper, in his Epistle vnto pope Iohn the eight, Anno. 1160. Anast. Bibliot. in praef. in Syn. Nycen. 2. witnesseth that the worshipping of Images was freelie receiued in his time in the Church of Rome, but not in France: and this was about the yeare, 900. But the storie following will make vs to see the truth much more clearelie: It is therefore to bee known, that in the yeare 824. the Emperours Michaell and Theophilus, the Father and the Sonne being troubled in the East, about the contention raised for Images, the same not being possiblie able to bee quieted by the second Councell of Nice, doe send Embas∣sadors of purpose vnto the Emperour Lewes and Lotharius in France, setting before them on the one side, the superstitions that were practised about Images, since the breaking out of this pretended Councell: & on the other side, the seueritie vsed for
the beating downe and suppressing of them euerie where, that so the very rootes of superstition might be plucked vp and dye, desiring their best aduise and councell therupon. Synod. Paris. Ann. 825. Lewes and Lotharus for the shaping of their answere, caused a verie famous Nationall Synod to be holden at Paris, which is yet forth comming entire and whole: wherein the learned that were assembled made a collection of the iudgementes and opinions of all the auncient writers vppon this point, and the same was sent with a goodlie Epistle from the whole Synod vnto the said Lewes and Lotharus, by the hands of Halitgarius and Amalarius Bbs. Halitgarius. The summe and brief wherof behold as followeth: That with speciall care they haue read the letters of Pope Adrian the first, who ordained that I∣mages should be worshipped, calling them Saintes, and pretending that it was the way to great holines to serue and worship them, which (with the leaue of his pontificall authoritie bee it spo∣ken) is contrarie to the truth, and cannot be auouched without the note of vndiscreetnes, super∣stition and error: and that all the places whereuppon hee groundeth himselfe, whether they bee out of the Scriptures, or out of the old Writers, are drawne by the haire, and that the same was likewise well aduertised the Emperour Charles the Great, by Engelbert the Abbot, sent for the same purpose vnto him, who finding himselfe hardlie pressed, did in the end declare, and make known that he would containe and keepe himselfe within those limits and boundes which Saint Gregorie had drawne and set downe; which were, that Images might be had for memorials, and remembrance sake; but for to worshippe or honour them was open impietie: That this superstiti∣on did afterward preuaile in some Countries, partlie through ignorance, and partlie through mis∣chieuous custome: and that in very deed they are not ignorant, how that the Seat and Sea of S. Peter is tainted and defiled with this plague and pestilent error, Pessimae con∣suctudinis vsu (for so they call it) but that as yet sustained and strengthned by Gods grace, they had not giuen it place of entrance in France: and by his further fauour and assistance aiding them, they ment not to giue it anie more in anie time to come. To this end they brought in all the places before by vs alleadged out of the Fathers, & that all along in their whole answer, but it shall be more fit and con∣uenient to reade thē as they are there set down in the Synode, then tomake any repeti∣tion of them here again. If any should goe about to establish this action and course of worshipping Idols with custome; Their originall is from the Pagans, Egyptians, Simon Magus, Carpocrates, &c. That God is not to bee found out or knowne by his old age, but by his eternitie: That this is in summe, to run (as Ieremie sayth) after the Idols, which they haue learned of their Fathers: That wee must cleaue and sticke to God, as hee is manifested vnto vs in his Scriptures. August. l. 3. de doctrin. Christ. Idem de locu. ad Genes. As for that which is obiected of the Che∣rubins, they answere it by S. Augustine; That there is a commaundement from God for the making of them, and that it is the taking of the signes for the thinges. To the annointing of the pillar of stone by Iacob, they likewise answere from the said S. Augustine: That Iacob did it to signifie a mysterte in the annointing of this stone, and not for to honour the pillar of stone. Comming in the end to that point, as to affirme, That when there had neuer been anie Images in the Church; that then faith, hope and charitie were no whit in worse plight: and that when they are in the same for monuments and remembrances simplie, that then the same ver∣tues, are not thereby embased or made worse. But that they may not be forced vpon them, who would not haue them, nor permitted them in any wise, who would haue them to worship them in any maner or sort: whether it be by praying vnto them, kissing them, or gilding them, and much lesse in offering vnto them, &c. Now this booke is sent vnto Pope Eugenius the second, by the foresaide Emperours, by the hands and mediation of the Bbs. Ieremy and Ionas, that they may impart the same vnto him, being therewithall inioyned, to be∣seech him in their names, that he would examine it throughlie, and shew himself wil∣ling and forward to satisfie the consciences of the Emperours of the East: as also that hee would vouchsafe to send his Legates together with the saide two Bishoppes vnto them, with whome they shall also finde for the same purpose, at the place of ta∣king shippe, Halitgarius and Amalarius in the behalfe of the Synode, for the better yeelding of an answere and reason of the resolution and iudgement, which they em∣braced and approued therein. And it is to be marked, that in the letters which they writ vnto Ieremie and Ionas, containing their aduise how to demeane themselues,
they writte vnto them that they should intreate the Pope kindlie, and rather to in∣cline to yeeld and giue place, then to dispute and argue the matter: for feare (say they) of incensing the Romish obstinacre, pertinaciam Romanam, whereby hee might take such an opinion, as from which he would neuer be remoued. This was in the yeare, 825. Anno 825. Of the Crosse. As concerning the Crosse, we haue seene what the olde Writers haue taught: & againe, it is verie certaine, that those ages were far off from that, which is practised at this daye. For the Synode of Francford speaketh of the Crosse after the maner of S. Paule, and of the purer antiquitie, vnderstanding by the same the whole mysterie of our redemption accomplished vpon the Crosse, as likewise the afflictions which hap∣pen continuallie amongst the members of Christ. In this sence S. Paule sayeth: That he gloryeth in the crosse, and woulde haue that Iesus Christ should be crucified day∣lie before our eyes, that is, that wee shoulde euerie howre remember the sham full and ignominious death which he hath suffered for vs, by dying for our sinnes, Chrysost. ho. 1. &. 2 de Cruce. Homil. de Cruce. & la∣trone, & de Cruce Domi∣nica. and so seeke for our life in him. In the same sence Chrysostome sayeth: The Cross is vnto vs the cause of all blessednes, the hope of the Christians, the resurrection of the dead, and the o∣uer throw of the Diuell. But of what Crosse doth hee speake? assuredlie of the same whereof hee had spoken before: To day he did hang vpon the Crosse; that is of the death and passion of our Lord: That Crosse (saieth hee) which he hath not left here vpon earth, but carried vppe to heauen, that is, which hee hath ouercome by his resurrection: which he hath garnished and cloathed with all manner of glorie: that Crosse which wee must beare: Not by laying (sayeth hee) a peece of wood vpon our shoulders, but by pre∣paring and making our selues readie to shed our blood at all occasions for his glorie, &c. And S. Augustine in like manner: All the sacraments are perfected by the Crosse. S. August. For what are the sacraments both of the olde and of the new law, but dumbe signes without this Crosse? Likewise Honorius Bishoppe of Autun: Honor Au∣gust. in Cem∣ma Animae. Nowise man worshippeth the Crosse, but rather Christ, that was crucified thereon, &c. notwithstanding, that he liued in the midst of grosse and palpaple darkenes. But what Communion or Fellowshippe is there betwixt the Crosse, thus taken and vnderstood, and these two crosse peeces of wood, wherto Ionas doth applie the former benefits & blessings? or with this do∣ctrine of Pope Adrian? That when we see the Crosse we must say vnto it: We worship the Crosse, and we worship the Speare, &c. And therefore the foresaid Claudius, Bishoppe of Turin, and brought vp from his childhoode vnder Charles the Great, Adrian in Ep. ad Constan. & Iren. reasoned verie well to the purpose: and doubtles like vnto himselfe both for his stile and in∣tention, saying: If we must worship the Crosse, because that our Lord sufferd his death and passion vpon such a peece of wood, then let vs worship all virgins, because hee was borne of a vir∣gin: let vs also worship the maunger, and swathing cloutes, because hee lay therein, because he was wrapped therein: thornes, reedes and speares, for such were instruments vsed about him in his passion: Asses, for Jesus entred into Ierusalem sitting vpon an Asse, &c. But so the truth is, that our Lord hath commaunded vs to beare, and not to worshippe the Crosse, &c. And I doe not as yet see, that Ionas hath deuised or found out anie thing to aunswere him withall. As for the second Councell of Nice, as it was in all mens sight ill begunne, so it contented not the consciences of the Grecians in anie respect at all. For Constan∣tine, as he grew out of his minoritie and came to age, and his libertie, did repeale & difanull the same. The Emperour Michaell did set it vppe again, and persecuted the gainsayers. The Emperour Leo the fourth an Armenian, encouraged by the Monkes of Greece, which cried out, that to worshippe Images was idolatrie, did pull them downe againe. Michael le Begue and Theophilus his sonne, Zona. tom. 3. did chastise and correct such as did maintaine them. Theodore his wife, came by his death to the Regencie, and being perswaded by other Monkes, did reestablish them with great seueritie. Her sonne Michael Bardus being come to full age, did destroy and ouerturne them againe. Likewise Zonara the great patron and maintainer of Images, doth tell vs, that he made the Pope his Legate to consent and agree thereunto. Insomuch as that pope Adrian obtained of Basill the successor of this Bardus, that there shoulde a
Councell bee helde at Constantinople, Anno 870. which they call ordinarilie the eight generall Councell, whose Actes and decrees wee cannot finde extant in the volumes of the Councels, and but a verie fewe of them else where in histories. And Bartholomeus Caranza sayeth that hee met with them so depraued and falsified, as that he durst not coppie them out. Onelie the Popes fauourites doe affirme, that therein should bee confirmed the worshipping of Images: and the curses of the second Councell of Nice repeated. So that wee neede not doubt, if we consider the proceeding, such as it is set downe in the Pontificall booke it selfe, Lib. Pontifica∣lis. that is to say, that Adrian the Pope gaue vnto his Legates a little booke containing all that hee would haue to be belieued of the supremacie of the Pope, and of the worshipping of Images, with this charge, that they should not receiue or admit any man into counsel or consultation with them, be∣fore they had first signed the same: but that by this meanes hee preuailed in the cause hauing no aduerse partie to stand against the same. Againe, that which is left remai∣ning with vs, is such stuffe, as that it would make a man quake and tremble to reade it; the Emperour Basill vttering these speeches therein; Now are you out of the Diuelles clouches, true Christians, worthy of eternall life: for if you had not abandoned this heresie, Christ could haue profited you nothing. How manie heresies, yea and how many blasphe∣mies be there in these few wordes? Christ (saith the Apostle) doth profite vs nothing if we bring in againe the ceremonies of the law. But what manner of conclusion is this: If we obserue and keepe this Commaundement being one of the ten: Thou shalt not make any grauen Image: Thou shalt not worshippe them, &c. Christ doth profite vs no∣thing. An other Canon sayth: We ordaine that Images be worshipped as the holie Gospell. The reason hereof is worth the noting: for say they, As men are saued by the sillables of these bookes: euen so are both the wise and foolish mightily helped by Images. And notwith∣standing these their beetle headed reasons; Nicaetas and Zonara, do write, that from that time forwarde, all such were accounted Heretikes, as did not adore and wor∣shippe Images. And yet so as that this kinde of superstition, did neuer proceede or prosper in the Churches of Greece, as it did amongst the Latines; for besides the Greeke Churches had but a few and those painted pictures onelie, and not any gra∣uen or carued Images, the difference betwixt them in the maner of worshipping them is so great, that Emericus in the volume of his inquisitions, rehearsing the errors of the Greekes, setteth down these; That they may not pray vnto Saintes, no not vnto the holy virgin Marie; That they hold, that to offer vnto them, is to offer sacrifice vnto the Diuell; as also that to worship or kisse the Crosse, is meere impietie, & sence∣les sottishnes. But this must be distinguished of, according to the times and coun∣tries. But from hence forward, let vs lanch forth into the depth of Idolatrie. We make our selues offensiue to the Iewes in giuing them matter to stumble at, and as loath∣some as any stench vnto the Turks, whome it had beene our duties rather to haue wonne and drawne to haue beene one with vs by the puritie of doctrine, and the ho∣lines of our ceremonies. The more contradiction we find, the more care and indu∣strie doe wee bring with vs for the propagating and spreading abroad of the same, the more authoritie for to establish it, and the greater rage and furie for to warrant and make good the same withall. The Princes working the same sometimes in despight, sometimes vpon enuie and malice, which they beare one against an other, but all of them to gratifie and pleasure the Bishoppe of Rome: The Pope by his Decrees, cen∣sures and curses, by degrading and putting down of Emperours, by absoluing their subiects of their oaths, & by rooting out and burning of all whosoeuer shall dare to say any thing to the contrarie, &c. In fine the pure seruice of God, maintained so long a time vnder the Primitiue Church, becommeth heresie, and from hence forwarde, no man speaketh of them, which will not worship Images by any other name or tr∣tle then heretikes: the worshipping of them on the contrarie, is accounted for sound and good to bee belieued, yea and is reckoned vp amongst the markes and principal signes of the Church. In the meane time to bring about the worshipping of Images
in the French and Germaine Churches; Friuolous & fling di∣stinctions. the Church of Rome was forced from the beginning to bring into them some certaine distinctions and limitations, carrying some more plausible construction and consideration as that of Dulia, and Latria, from the thing representing, to the thing represented: howbeit they are not of anie force or worth either in Grammer or Diuinitie; but onelie as certaine vizardes ser∣uing in the time of shamefast bashfulnes, to couer the follie of the second Councel of Nice. For as for the first, such as are any thing acquainted with the Scripture, do know that Dulia and Latria are ordinarilie vsed to signifie one and the same thing: Gen. 9. Exod. 2 Esa. 14. vbi Septuaginta. Deuter 8.34 Rom. 1. Ephes. Coloss. vbi Occumenius. Matth. 6. Eustath. in Homer & Suidos. August. l. 8. c. 28 27. de ciuit. Dei. Idem de verb. Domini Secundum Mat. Serm. 6. Idem cont. Faustum Manich. l. 15. c 9. & contra Arrian. Serm. 5. c. 17. Idē ad Quod vult Deum. L. 3. de Tradit. 9. consider. and those likewise that vnderstand the Greeke tongue doe know, that Dulia is a more strict kinde of seruice then Latria: because that to speake properlie, Dulia is the ser∣uice performed by a slaue, who is altogether at the checke, controll and commaund of his Maister, and Latria the seruice, which the mercenarie and hireling taketh him∣self bound to perform, who vpō the offer of the wages or the reward doth waigh with himselfe what it may be vnto him, and accordinglie vndertaketh some such peece of seruice, as his pay shall counteruaile. And thus the best learned in the Greeke do in∣terprete and take it, what reason is there then, that the lesse part should bee giuen to God, and the greater vnto men? And who can thinke that S. Augustine who first brought vp this dinstinction, did vnderstand it after that manner; who shutteth the deceased Saints & Martyrs out of al Temples, and frō hauing any Altars, sacrifices or seruices done vnto them? And that yet our aduersaries, should giue them the same vnder the colour of this word Dulia? And in verie deede S. Augustine hath no such intent or scope in that place, namelie, to giue vs free libertie to serue creatures, but rather to detaine and draw vs backe from the same, shewing vs what is the true seruice of God, that so we may not giue it vnto anie creature. For he that reproued Marcel∣lina because she burned incense to the Image of Christ, what would hee haue saide to them which burne incense euerie day vnto the Images of the Saintes? And hereupon also it came that the Spaniard Peresius found fault with this distinction. And as for the other, namelie, That they doe not worship the Image, but the thing whereof it is a signe: can they deny that the Pagans said not asmuch vnto S. Augustine, Lactantius, Arno∣bius and Tertullian, who yet did not therefore surcease or giue ouer to reproue and condemne them? And if they coulde not tell how to excuse the matter or defende themselues against those Fathers; Idem l. 3. de doctr. Christi. c. 7.8. & 9. what hope is there left that our Idolaters can speed any better in the same cause and matter? But S. Augustine cutteth off al excuse by a generall proposition, saying: The signes of the Iewes are profitable, because they are or∣dained of God: but those of the Gentiles vnprofitable, as their Images, pictures, &c. notwith∣standing that in them they bee properlie giuen to honour their Gods. Afterwarde hee spea∣king of the one and the other, saith; If thou honour the signes, in stead of the thing signifi∣ed, intending the honour vnto these, and not to them: yet this is notwithstanding a carnal scrui∣tude, wheras Christian libertie hath euen deliuered the Iewes. And so by this meanes this respectiue kinde of worship goeth downe the streame, Cassand. in consultatione. which Cassander likewise sin∣cerelie acknowledgeth neuer to haue had anie place, nor yet to haue found any reason to pleade for it in the olde Church. But after this, they speake a great deale more plainelie: The growth & proceeding of Idolatrie. and Idolatrie begin∣neth to lift vp her Maske. Theodore Bishoppe of Myra, had said in the second Coun∣cell of Nice: There are not two sorts of worshipping, Latria and Dulia, there is but one: There is likewise no question to bee made of relation or respectiue regard, the resembling thing and the thing resembled, are worshipped both the one and the other in one and the same degree and measure. But this proposition was not wel and equallie liked of all. Thom. in 3. sent. D. 2. Idem Scous. But beholde the Schoolemen haue now found out the meanes to remoue the blocke out of the way, by vertue of a place out of Aristotle, (but what hath he to do with our Diuinitie?) saying, The thought that is bent vpon the Image, and that which is bent vpon the thing signified by the Image are both alike: and therefore the worship of the one and the other is alike. And therfore they con clude and resolue that the Crosse and Image of Christ must be wor∣shipped with Latria. And therefore they vse to sing to the Crosse in the Church of
Rome; Behold the wood of the Crosse, we worship it; O holie Crosse, graunt that Iustice may grow and increase in good men, and pardon thou the transgressors and the sinners, &c. And of this opinion are likewise Thomas, Iacob Nancl. Clugiens. Epis. Anno 1557. Scotus, and Bonauentura, &c. so long as till that Iaco∣bus Nanclantus, Bb. of Chioggia in Italie, did sharplie reproue them which said, that Images ought to be worshipped, and would haue had the wordes to worship Images to bee cut out. But what increase insued there, vpon these goodlie principles? Sure∣ly thus much, that euē as they held their Images by the tenure of imitation, counter∣feyting therein the Pagans; so they borrowed of them all the fashions which they v∣sed to worship their Gods withall, as to offer offringes vnto them, to make vowes, Temples, Altars, and Sacrifices, to say also their Masses, that is to say, to sacrifice the Sonne of God, Tertul. in lib. de Idololatria. Germanus in. Ep. ad Thom. in Nice. conc. 2 so far as in them laye, vnto them: and afterward gorgeous apparrell, garlandes of flowers, burning of incense, wax-candles, burning lampes, fastinges & solemne feastes in honour of them: the carrying about of their pictures, and a wor∣shipping of their bones. What one thing is there of al these, that was euer practised in the Church of Israel, or in the Primitiue Christian church? Or on the contrarie, what one is there amongst them al, which is not cōfirmed both by testimony & example in the stories of the Pagans? And what then can they haue reserued as proper and pe∣culiar vnto God himselfe vnder the name Latria? Or what becommeth of Lyranus with his distinction: That we are not to bow or kneele vpon both our knees to any but to God alone, when as it is in this seruice done vnto the creatures made by God, and the workes of mens hands? But neither haue they yet contented themselues and stayed here: for after the manner of the Pagans, they haue likewise so consecrated these I∣mages in such blasphemous sort, as that Paganisme it selfe would haue been ashamed and blusht to haue done the like: a thing (as appeareth by the Councell of Franc∣ford) vtterlie vnknowne, at such time as it was held and kept. For in consecrating of the Crosse, they pray vnto God: That all such as shall kneele downe vnto the same, may haue remorse and compunction of heart and remission of their sinnes. Now what remaineth besides this for the true Crosse, that is, for the mysterie of our redemption, accom∣plished in that death vpon the Crosse suffered by Christ? Againe, That this wood of the Crosse, (so they call it) may besaluation vnto the soule, health to the bodie, and a remedie vnto mankinde, for the strengthning of faith, the increase of good works, the ransome of soules, and for a defensatiue against the Diuell. What shall now bee left behinde for the power of the holy Ghost to effect and work, for the spirit of Christ which regenerateth vs, sanctifieth and strengthneth vs, making vs inheritors of eternall saluation, &c? Pope Iohn the 22. In Antidotar. Animae. ordained a prayer to bee said, that to the Veronique, that pretended Image of Christ, which was imprinted in a handkerchife: Salue sancta facies Redemp∣toris nostri, &c. And in the same place it is praied vnto: To cleanse and wipe away all the staines of whatsoeuer vices: to vouchsafe to infuse light into the heart: to increase and adde vnto the merites of such as doe belieue therein: to destroye heretikes: to defende the Christian faith: to conduct and guide those which pray vnto it: to the fruition of eternall life: to the behol∣ding of God: to their coniunction and ioyning with Christ, who of bread is made God, &c. And the Pope last aboue named, granteth in the same place ten thousand dayes indulgen∣ces to him that obserueth the same. And what doe they reserue more for Christ him∣selfe? Or who shall alledge and say, that this is but some particular mans deuotion, when the pope himselfe is author thereof? Pius 2. com∣ment. l 8. And when as likewise Pius the second, or∣dained that vpon Easter day it should be shewed at Rome, and that the people with a lowde voice crying and weeping, should aske mercie of the same? When in like manner they consecrate an Image of the holie virgin, they pray: That it may bee of power against thunderinges and lightninges, against floudes, ciuill warres and inuasion by for∣raine and barborous people. What will they aske of God himselfe, if they pray vnto the virgin for these thinges? yea which is more, if they aske them of her image? But yet much more, That who so shall pray vnto this Image, the Queene of Mercie may by it obtaine pardon for whatsoeuer sinfull deedes hee hath committed, and for euerie good worke which he hath omitted, as also merite present grace & saluation for all that time that is to come.
What meaneth all this, but to make the Crosse of Christ of no effect? These and such like blasphemous superstitions are those which are practised about the Images of Saintes, yea euen to the blessing of the incense; That the Diuels may run from it, that such as shalbe senced therewith, may neuer be bitten of the old Serpent: that is may be exemp∣ted from sinne, &c. He that expecteth and looketh to receiue such graces of a deade creature, what remaineth for him to hope, or looke for to receiue of the Creator? But these and other such like things haue been handled by others more particularly; and their Pontificall booke doth testifie and witnesse the same, so that this which is now done, is rather but to point out then to examine the thinges. And who is there that cannot thereby discerne the spirite and worde of Christ from the spirite and word of Antichrist: of Christ, as being he who euen of stones doth raise vppe children vnto Abraham: of Antichrist, as being he who of the children of Abraham maketh stones, yea worse then stones, seeing that he maketh them to fall down and worshippe stones? God in the meane time taking care of his church hath not left these abhomina∣tions without contradictions: Such opposit ons and gain∣sayinges as haue beere taken vp a∣gainst these abhominati∣ons. Durand. in ra∣tion. Diuin. Offic. Holcot. in l. Sapient. lect. 158. but rather in the thickest of the darkenes hath caused some light to shine forth, and that euen out of the darkenes it selfe. The first Councel of Mentz saith; Images are not set vp in the Churches that they should be either worshipped or honoured. Durandus the Bishoppe of Miniate saith; If neither men nor Angels must bee worshipped, let them looke well to themselues what they doe, who vnder the colour of deuoti∣on do worshippe diuerse Images: for it is not lawfull for vs to worship the worke of man, ali∣quid manufactum, &c. There is but one Image of the Father, which wee must worshippe as the Father, that is to say, the Sonne, &c. Robertus Holcoth a Fryer Iacobine, liuing a∣bout the yeare 1350. whome they called Doctorem Moralissimum, reproueth the de∣ciding of the difference by Thomas, saying: Latria cannot conueniently be giuen to any thing but onelie God, the Jmage of God is not God, and therefore Latria or diuine worship cannot bee attributed vnto it, for if it should, then should also the Creature and the Creator bee wor∣shipped after one & the same maner: that is to say, otherwise Idolatrie should be cōmitted. And therefore the Fathers of the Councell of Nice are Idolaters. Durandus de S. Durand. tit. 57 Portiano is of the same opinion, both for the Crosse, as also for the Image of Christ, but hee feareth the censure; Loquendum (sayeth hee) vt plures, wee must speake as the greatest number doe. And so are Henricus de Gandauo, Petrus de Aquila, Io∣hannes de Guiuerra, and other schoolemen. About the yeare 1380. in the time of the schisme of Vrban the 6. and Clement the 7. Anno 1380. lib. de Concil. whereof Theodorus a Niem hath writ∣ten, there was published a book de Concilio, wherin is handled how necessarie a coun∣cell were, both for the taking away of the schisme, as also for the reforming of the Church. And amongst other abuses, he complaineth much of the multitude of I∣mages, saying: That they gaue occasion to the people to commit Idolatrie. In the time of the Councell of Constance, Gerson the Chancellor of the Vniuersitie of Paris, Gerson in Ep. de neglig. praelat. Anno 1415. writ an Epistle of the negligence of prelates, saying: It is great pittie to see how religion falleth away from day to day, and becommeth worse: euerie man is continuallie adding vnto it some one or other thing that is naught: but no man doth cut off or lop away any part of all that is c∣uill. All abroad in our Temples wee see not anie other thing exercised, but the reliques of the Idolatries of the Pagans, and our Spiritualtie will not haue anie man so much as to touch them. And for the like reprehensions and reproofes, hee was driuen out of Paris, and died at Lions. The same thing was taught by Nicholas de Clemangis, a Doctor of Sorbone, and Archdeacon of Barre, in his booke Of the corrupt estate of the Church. So in like manner did the Cardinall of Alliaco in his booke Of the re∣formation of the Church, presented by him to the Councell of Constance. And these were the lights of their time. That great worthy Picus de Mirandola in his Theses, which hee propounded for to bee disputed at Rome, saieth: Conclus. 3. Gab. Biel. in Cant. lect. 43 Neither the Crosse nor the image of Christ can bee worshipped with Latria, neither yet after that manner that Tho∣mas setteth downe. Gabriel Biel the interpreter of the Canon of the Masse, holdeth with them that taught: That an Image coulde not bee worshipped eyther in regarde of it selfe, or in regard of the thing which it represented, saying: That in what
manner soeuer it bee considered: yet it is euer more a senceles thing and a creature, for both which respectes it cannot be worshipped with Latria. And hence (sayeth hee) wee may see the sottishnes of such as attribute a certaine kinde of Diuinitie, grace or holines vnto I∣mages, waiting and looking for the healing and curing of diseases, or some other miracles from them: and likewise the vndiscreetnes of some others, which are more willingly drawne to wor∣ship such as bee faire then such as be fowle, the newe rather then the olde, and the trimmed and tricked vp, rather then the rude and nakedones: and the grosse lightnes of others, who make their vowes vnto them, binde themselues to goe on. Pilgrimages, sometimes to one Church, sometimes to an other, to beholde and take the view of certaine Images, thinke to finde some miracles or powerfull workes more in one then in an other, or more in one place then in an other. All these thinges are altogether wrapped in superstition, whereinto wee shall neuer fall, if we know what the right seruing of God is, or else bee willing in humilitie to learne the same. For the way to serue God is founde out in his soueraigne and singular workes of creation and gouernment: in the creatures also there are some vertues, which are communicated vnto them by God: in the Image there is neither the one nor the other: Polyd. Virgil. l. 6. c. 13. for it can neither see, heare, nor vnderstand, &c. Polydor Virgill doth like∣wise take offence against these superstitions, and concludeth in these wordes: Wee are fallen into such a vaine of follie, and doting rage towardes our Images, as that the duties and seruices of pietie, Caietan. in Pentatcu. Exod. c. 20. which wee seem to performe in that behalfe, are nothing but verie impieties themselues. The Cardinall Caietanus is taken vppe and checked for comprising and lapping vppe together both the Idoll and the Image in a like defence, notwithstanding that he make a distinction inter Dolatum & Similitudi∣nem, in respect of the wordes: and Paulus Burgensis likewise one of the most learned Hebricians which had beene amongst them: and in whome notwithstan∣ding our aduersaries do place and put their chiefest hope of defence. Paulus Ri∣cius sayeth franklie and freelie, after hee had weighed all the reasons and aunsweres to the same, which were brought to that ende and purpose: If wee must abstaine from thinges sacrificed to Idols, because of the infirme and weake in faith, how much more then (whatsoeuer Thomas can say) from this pestilent worshipping'of Images, &c? These are the wilde vine growing vp, and ouerspreading the natural vine of Christ: these are the Dar∣nell in his field. The Iewes haue brought in the works of the law, & the Gentiles Images, &c. which I would to God that they had neuer come in our Temples, then we should haue learned to haue lift vp our hearts to heauen, in stead of bowing and casting them down to fixe them vpon I∣mages. In a word Ludouicus Viues writing vpō S. Augustine saith: That he cannot see any difference betwixt certain Christians addicted to the honouring of Images, and the Pagans, worshipping their Idols. And Erasmus concludeth: That it is more safe and sure to take them away, then to expect or waite vntill there be some rule & good directions for the moderating of the same, Cassand. in Consult. deuised and established. But Cassander after that hee hath alleadged Biel, saith; Who shall be able to do it? who shall be able to bring backe the people from this their entred course of superstition, especiallie seeing that such as teach them, are themselues the authors of these su∣perstitions, Michael Episc. Mersburg. in Cathechismo. are those that nourish and cherish them in their harts, to the end they may sucke out some profite from them? But our Fathers of the Councell of Trent imagined that they had well looked into the curing of all the mischiefes threatned against them by all these so euident testimonies, when they ordained in their Index expurgatorius, that these places of Polydor, Viues, Erasmus, Cassander and others, should be raced and left out in the first impression insuing. But the very defenders of these abuses cōmitted in this our time haue bin in some sort ashamed of their doctrine, as Martinus Peresius, Am∣brosius Catharinus, & Nicolaus Saunderus, intreating of this matter, holding against Thomas, Scotus, & Bonauētura: That the Images cannot be worshipped after the same maner that the persons may, whom they do represent. And Alphonsus of Castres their resuter of heresies, proceedeth yet further, That wee must not at all worship or doe any reuerence vnto Images, but rather before the Images, for feare of being condemned for He∣retikes our selues. And Bellarmine willing to set them at one, commeth so farre as to saye, Bellar. de Ima. l. 2. First; That we must honour, but not adore or worship them by praying vnto thē: Secondly, That no man may teach especiallie in any sermons, that they ought to be worshipped
with Latria, no not the Image of Christ himselfe, but rather the contrarie: Where is now the second Nicene Councell affirming? That there is but one kind of Worshippe, one I say for the originall, and for the image framed after the same, &c? Thirdlie, That images cannot properlie and of themselues be worshipped, as the patternes themselues, whereby they are made, and that neither Latria, nor Huperdulia, nor yet Dulia, or any other adoration or ser∣uice is properlie due vnto them: but I know not what, after the proportion of those, whereof they are Images. What will now become of Thomas his ordering of the controuer∣sie betwixt Scotus and Bonauentura, &c? And finallie, That there is no other honour dew vnto them, then such as is vouchsafed and giuen to the bookes and vessels of the Church, as to the cups and their couerings, &c. And what is now become of these kneelings, inuoca∣tions, and cleare & euident worshippings? For who did euer worship the Masse books, the holy linnens or cups, &c? But how much more brief and shorter course had it bin, to haue held themselues to the pure & vndefiled word of God, & to the obseruatiōs of the ancient church, thē to incumber the people with so manie superstitions, ignorances and impieties, as that no man is able to free them againe, no not with all the distinctions, limitations, & fine deuises or shifts that can be imagined? And how much better had it been to haue fol∣lowed the counsell of Gratianus in his Decree, and that vpon far better ground, Gratian D. 63. C. Qia Sancta. seeing that all Images in the Church of Rome are of mans ordinance; whereas the brasen Serpent in Israel was of Gods ordinance? And notwithstanding hee saith, Ezechias destroyed the brasen Serpent which Moses had set vp in the desart by the expresse commaunde∣ment of God, because the people moued by the miracles which they saw, betooke themselues to the worshipping of it: whereupon (saith he) we see the greatnes of the authoritie of the church, as that if our fathers & predecessors haue done any thing in their time blameles, & without falt, & that the same afterward do turn into superstition or error, that thē & in such case the succeeding per∣sons are to destroy and vndoe the same, without delay, & that with great authority. In the ende they make God a party with them: It is he, (say they) who hath taught it vs: for wher∣fore did he commaud Moses to erect a brasen Serpent in the desert, and to make Che∣rubins ouer the Arke? As if God had bound himself by the commandements that he hath giuen vs, and left vs free: As if Abraham had aunswered God, I will not sacrifice my Son: for thou hast said; Thou shalt not kill. But wee haue authority to beare vs out for the caruing and worshipping of Images; let them shew vs a contrary commande∣ment, forbidding vs to make any. To this blasphemous obiection, by which they make God the author of their abhomination, they shal be aunswered by Tertullian for me; Tertullian being beaten with this argument by the Idolaters of his time: Tertul. de Idolo. (for euen as they haue borrowed their Idols, so haue they also their arguments for their defence,) saith; It agreeth verie well, that the same God who hath forbidden in his law to make any si∣militude or likenes, hath likewise commaunded by an extraordinarie commaundement for to make that of the Serpent: If thou worshippe and feare this same God, thou hast his law for thy direction therein: Make not anie similitude or likenes, and if thou consider the commaundement that commeth after, inioyning one to bee made, in that thou art to imitate and do as Moses did: Make no image or likenes contrarie to the law, if this same God do not expresly commaund it. And by this meanes Tertullian cutteth them off quite, inferring that the law of God is generall, and that no man must dare or presume to doe any thing to the contrarie, without an expresse exception, and the same to issue and come forth of the same mouth: which thing Paulus Ricius though one of their side doth resolue them of in this manner, saying: The law of the Lord forbiddeth thee to kindle any fire for thy familie vpon the Lordes day, and thou sinnest mortallie if thou do it, and yet notwith∣standing hee commaunded thee to kindle a fire in the verie same day in the Tabernacle. The like is that of the Cherubins, ordained by the expresse word of God, howbeit to haue Images is fetcht from some other fountaine, then his commaundement, being such an abhomination and mischief as cannot bee answered. Wherefore our aduersaries deale herein, as our first Father did, being taught therunto by the Diuell: for when God went about to tel him of his sin, he would post it ouer to another, saying: The woman which thou gauest me was the cause:
and so they became the wofull accusers of the most vpright God. If wee bee Idolaters it is thy worke: for wherefore didst thou euer cause that the similitude of Cherubins or Serpents should be set vp, &c? But their condemnation waiting for them is iust, ha∣uing drawne it vpon themselues, in asmuch as they will pretend vnto themselues li∣cense and priuiledge to lift and aduance themselues aboue all that is of God, yea euen aboue his plaine and expresse lawes. And that such a priuiledge, as may seeme to be∣long to him alone, and that in this very respect, being denied vnto all others: For the Greeke churches notwithstanding, the curses and excommunications of the seconde Councell of Nice, did cleaue vnto their pictures: but honouring them rather after a ciuill then a religious sort. The Abissines and Armenians in like manner, howbeit there are also some, as Aluarez reporteth vnto vs, which haue not any at all, and those which haue, to shew that they bee the goodlie presents of the Bb. of Rome, doe fore∣see that it is good, that they should haue no other but Latine inscriptions: so now this same which wold be but the fountain & original, is become the stream to ouerflow the seruice of God, and as a mightie floud, to couer and drowne vp the whole earth. CHAP. IIII. Of vnleauened bread, wine mingled with water, and of the thinges which serued to the administration of the Sacraments. NOw we haue intreated of Temples, and of their principal or∣naments (as our aduersaries esteeme them) that is of Images: we haue likewise spoken of the holy Tables, otherwise called Altars: whereupon the bread and the wine ordained for the sacrament were wont to bee set, the wine in certaine clean ves∣sels, either of Glasse or of mettall, the breade wrapped in a linnen cloth, that so nothing might fal vpon it: without anie manner of superstition or curiositie, and in some places these Tables were shadowed with some vaile or curtain. It remai∣neth now that wee looke about vs to finde out, how this simplicitie did change into curiositie, and this puritie into superstition, as likewise how the indifferencie and li∣bertie, which was in old time in these things, is turned into a necessitie and slauish seruitude, worse then euer was that of the Iewes. Our Lord celebrating the Passeouer with his Disciples, Leauened or vnleauened bread. vsed vnleauened bread. And there is no doubt thereof; for the Passeouer according to the law must be celebrated without leuen, it was by expresse ordinance so appointed: and our Lorde came to fulfill the law, and that in matters of farre more weight and difficulty: howsoeuer E∣piphanius and the Grecians after him may seeme to say, that he did keep the feast soo∣ner then it was appointed by the law, and that he also gaue vnto his Disciples leauened bread. 1. Cor. 5. v. 7.8. But that the institution should bind vs to this circumstance, S. Paule the true Interpreter of Christ, sheweth to the contrarie, saying: Our Passeouer hath beene sacri∣ficed, &c. Let vs there keepe the feast not with the old leuen of maliciousnes & bitternes, but with the vnleauened bread of sinceritie and truth. It might then be kept and obserued, but without keeping of a leauen more daungerous, namely, a schisme betwixt the Greeke and latine Churches: as also without binding of themselues to the circumstances of leauen, being a ceremony belonging vnto the Iewes; seeing that the Christian Church had taken thorough acknowledgement, how that the Passeouer might be celebrated without offending of the law vpon the Saboth after the 14. day of the Moon of the moneth Nisan, and not the 14. according to the institution, as also that the day of rest might be kept vpon the Lords day, and not vpon the Saturday, after the manner of the Iewes, whiles as the substance of the institution was kepte whole and inuiolate, in∣asmuch as the feast of the spirituall deliuerance accomplished by the resurrection of Christ was celebrated in stead of the carnall and corporall deliuerance, and the feast of the second birth and creation of mankind in steade of that of the first creation. Now in the time of the Apostles and their first Disciples, wee see not anie title of
this distinction. It is to be thought, that they did keepe themselues to S. Paule his admonition: Purge out the old leauen, that so you may bee a new lumpe: That is, that they should purge and clense their heartes to become new creatures in Christ. For as for the Decretall Epistle of Alexander the first, it is not good, but that it should be read, that so it may bee reputed and helde for a deuised and counterfeite thing. In the Councell of Laodicea about the year 400. Concil. Laod. 29.36.37.38. it was forbidden that any Christians should vse any part of the ceremonies vsed in the Iewish seruice, as to rest vpon their Sabath, to haue Philacteries, to keepe any solemne feastes vppon the dayes of their solemne feastes, and by name to take of their vnleauened bread, that is, to tye themselues vnto the Iewish cer emonies, and more particularlie vnto that. This had not beene to anie purpose, if thē the Church had taken herself to haue beene bound to vse vnleauened bread at the celebration of this diuine mysterie: as indeed there is neuer any menti∣on made but of bread simplie. And all the offringes from amongst which the breade of the holie supper was taken, was such bread, as was ordinarilie vsed to bee eaten in houses, which as al men might see, was not without leauen, seeing that the old church did communicate euerie day; except wee will not belieue that the Christians likewise did not eate any other bread at their owne houses but vnleauened bread. Chrysost. 1. Cor. c. 5. Chryso∣stome saieth: Take no care hereafter about this leauen: for now likewise thou hast an other lumpe, the shadowes are past. And Gregorie the Great maketh not mention of anie other bread in the holie supper, then the common and vsuall, such as they kneaded and baked at the Bakers house, and was solde in the market at Rome. Gregor. in Re∣gistio. Likewise in his Register we haue these wordes; When wee take the breade, whether it be leauened or vn∣leauened, wee are made a bodie of the Lord our Sauiour. Againe, expounding the Passe∣ouer vnto the Christians he saith: Hee eateth vnleauened bread which doth good works, and when they are done, doth not marre them with vain glorie, and hee that doth the workes of mercie, without the mingling of sinne with them, &c. To be brief, Niceph. l. 8. c. 53. & 54. Nicephorus intreating of the heresie of the Theopaschites, and Monophysites, so called because they taught that the Godheade it selfe did suffer, doth obserue and note for our behoofe, that in the supper they vsed vnleauened bread; and not common and ordinarie bread. And this they affirmed that they held from Gregorie the great, Bb. of Armenia, so far was it off to be held at that time, either for an heresie, or for an error, to vse common bread in the celebrating of the holy supper. And this was after the year 700. Insomuch as that it may seem, that this custom entred into the Latine Church about the same time that the popes delighted themselues to trim vp their churches, with al maner of Iewish ceremonies, after they had once spoild and robd it of al her principal and goodly or∣naments indeed, as humilitie, simplicitie, purity, &c. And indeed the Decretal of Cle∣ment the third, about the yeare 1188. against the Priests which vsed cups of wood & leauened bread; sheweth that this ordinance was not as yet throughlie established. De celebrat. Miss. cont. lit. We reade that about the year 1100. there began a schisme betwixt the Greeke and Latine Church about this matter, and that the reasons were handled on the one parte and on the other by Nicaetas Monke of Constantinople, standing for the partie of Michael the Patriarke, and Humbert Bb. of Sylua Candida, standing for the side of Leo the 9. the one and the other, shewing himselfe but weake, in that they striue to make that necessarie, which the Church had helde indifferent. The worst was that vppon this question and controuersie, these two Bishoppes fell into an other, namely, the Primacie or supremacie: Durand. l. 4. c. 41. Extrauag. de celebr. Miss. C. finali. Thom Aquin. op. 1. cont. error. Grec. c. 32. Hildebert Ce∣neman. Ep. 44. which caused that neither of them to auoide the impeach∣ment and weakening of his authority, would yeeld a haires bredth from his concei∣ued opinion. For about this time Durandus wrote, that the Masse might bee cele∣brated with leauened bread, and brought in to proue his purpose the Extrauagantes de Celeb Miss. And Thomas Aquinas after him: That of a truth it agreeth better with the puritie of the mysticall bodie, to vse vnleauened bread in this sacrament: but not (saith hee) as though it coulde not bee well administred with leauened bread. And the Epistle of Hilde∣bert Bb. of Mans, which censureth the Priest that had offered common bread, vseth these wordes: Therein hee swarueth from the rule of custome, but not of faith and
it behoueth thee to correct the fact, Concil. Ferrar. as a scandall and offence, rather then as a sinne, and that thou carrie thy selfe rather like a Father towardes him, then like a Judge. And this thing was afterward decided by a Councell held at Ferrara, for the agreeing and reuniting of the Greeke and Latine Churches: That it was indifferent to celebrate the holy Supper either with leauened or vnleauened breade. And therefore why shoulde such diffe∣ring and disagreeing affections continue so long, for thinges so reasonable and in∣different? Of the wine. The like hath beene about the wine of the Lordes Supper. Some vnder the colour of sobrietie, would vse water and not wine. Of such S. Augustine and Epiphanius make mention amongst the Heretikes, and not without cause, seeing they abolished one part of the substance of the Sacrament. But S. Cyprian doth refute them sharpelie: and bringeth them backe to the institution of Christ, who onely must bee heard in all thinges concerning them. And hereupon it is, that he hath it so oft in his writings: That in this sacrament which is Christ, no man is to be heard but Christ himselfe. Others would haue the wine delaied with water: and the most auncient Christians did so vse it, and that not without apparant shew: inasmuch as the people of the Easte, did not ordinarilie vse wine without water, as the Hebrew and Greeke phrases of speech do proue: howsoeuer they alledge other reasons for thus their vsing of it: as, that there came out of our Lord his side water and blood: That this is a signe of the two natures in Christ, or rather of the vnion of Christ with his church, allegorizing vp∣pon euerie thing according to their accustomed maner. Howsoeuer it bee notwith∣standing, it may bee that the course of the text, would not shew vs in this particular point of the blood and water, anie thing but the true and vndoubted death of the Lord: in this that the wound had pierced the case of his heart: because also, that if wee should fall to allegorizing, then with the greatest part of the Fathers, we shold thence collect and gather the two sacraments of the Church, that is, Baptisme from the water, and the Eucharist from the blood, &c. Onely let vs not finde fault with this obseruation, prouided that it bee voide of superstition, that is, free from con∣demning of those, which do not administer anie thing but onely wine, as also with∣out any preiudice to the libertie which Christ hath left vnto his children, which will not admit any manner of necessitie, but that which is grounded vpon the holy word. If any doe contrarywise bring in any other necessitie, wee affirme that it is not with∣out an error, because as they themselues do say, to make that to bee a matter of faith, which is not, is to sinne and erre in the faith: And therefore wee condemne the Ca∣nons of the church of Rome, which say absolutelie, that the wine cannot bee admi∣nistred without water, Canon. Opor∣tet. & C. in sa∣crament. D. 2. de Cons. seeing there is nothing saide or spoken in the scriptures, but of the fruite of the wine: shewing thereby how much dearer their owne inuentions bee vnto them, then the institution of our Lorde, in asmuch as they haue made the wine of the holie supper, according to their doctrine to bee superfluous, hee hauing by his institution made it necessarie, and the water on the contrarie, which is of their owne inuention necessarie, which the institution of our Lord hath left indifferent. It is certaine that the Churches of Armenia vnto the time of the Councell of Ferrara, which was vnder Eugenius the fourth, did not vse any thing but onelie pure wine, and yet were neuer excommunicated therefore: and as yet to this day, they doe not obey vnto that which they were made subscribe vnto in the Councell. And the Abys∣sines stand so strictlie vpon the point, as that they wold neuer consent, that the daugh∣ter of their Prince should bee married to any that receiued the Communion without the wine. And as for the Grecians, Durandus, Scotus and Innocentius doe saye that in their time for the most part they did the like: howbeit that in the Lithurgies, which we can come by, Niceph. l. 8. c. 54. Concil. Aurel. 4. c. 4. it is mingled and delaied, and that with warme water, which thing sayth Cabasilas, is, That it may represent the blood the more fullie: so deepely is the spirite and minde of man tickled and delighted with his owne inuentions. And as for the Churches of the Latines, the Councel of Orleance forbiddeth to offer wine delaied with water, adding the reason thereto: Because it is sacriledge to offer anie other
thing, then what our Sauiour hath instituted. Conc. Worm. c. 4. Concil. Ti∣burt. c. 19. C. Sicut. D. 2. de Consecr. & ibi. gl. Thom. 3. part. q. 74, art. 7. & q. 8. art. 6. & ad 4. Sentent. D. 11. q 2. art. 4. & in 1. Cor. c. 11. Iohan. Scot. D. 11. q. 6, l. 4. Sentent. Innocent de Offic Miss. Bonauent. D. 11. q. 3. Richard. D. ead. art. 3. Vessels. Hieronym. ad Rusticum. And this was in the time of King Childe∣bert, when as Pelagius liued, that is, before S. Gregorie. The Councell of Wormes more then 200. yeares after ordained the contrarie: after which followed the Coun∣cell of Tiuoli or Tibur, a Citie of the Sabines, wherein it was ordained, that there should be one third part of water put to two third partes of wine. And these differen∣ces may at the least suffice to shew the indifferentnesse. But the Glosse of the decree saith, that this is De honestate tantum, onely in regard of honestie. And Thomas: that this is not fetcht or deriued from the Gospell, but that it hath some apparant shew for it selfe, as that by reason of the strength of the wine, it is delaied in some countries. And Hales, Scotus, and Bo∣nauentura say, It hath no hold or warrant in the scriptures. And Richardus: Non de ne∣cessitate, sed de congruitate: not for any necessitie, but for seemelines. And thereupon it fol∣loweth, that the councell of Trent doth excommunicate and cut off from saluation, as farre as lyeth in it, for fantasies and things nothing making vnto saluation. That more is, that this mingling of wine and water is not any whit significatiue or respec∣ting the misteries which are therein sought and searched for; but growing onely, ey∣ther of the custome of the countrie, or of some apparant seemelinesse. Now the bread prouided and prepared for the holy Supper, was carried either in a linnen cloth, or in a small chest, as we reade in S. Ierome, and set vpon the holy ta∣ble, couered with some table napkin, for to keep it cleane, without any other cere∣mony. Men and women did touch it without any superstitious scrupulousnes, accor∣ding as they brought their offeringes, yea and after the blessing or consecrating of it. It was distributed vnto the faithfull, not into their mouthes, as we haue seene it, but into their owne hands. And as for the wine, it was carried, as we reade in the same S. Ierome, in vessels of all sorts, euen of glasse, notwithstanding the daunger of brea∣king of them: yea and sometimes it was sent in that sort, in signe of vnitie and agree∣ment from one to another. Vaine & curious superstition came in afterward, first for∣bidding women, and then afterward men also, to touch either the linnen clothes, Concil. Altisi∣odor. c. 36.37. wherein the bread was wrapped, or els the cups. Transubstantiation was set at a higher price and rate then all the rest, for in respect therof the cups must be halowed, as also the patines of the same, with vnctions and wordes expresly vttered, because of it, all the instruments and vessels of this sacrament, were turned into Sacraments, the Altar stone was called the sepulcher or graue, and the linnens, the shroude wherein the bodie of our Lord was inwrapped: that from thenceforth the cuppes should be of mettal, & that siluer, not any longer of glasse. Things which antiquity (more regar∣ding the things thē their signs) did neuer so much as once dreame of: because that she could neuer once bethinke her self, or conceiue any thing of this monstrous doctrine of transubstantiation, the fountaine and welspring of so many and so foolish vanities. And in deed whereas the Primitiue and ancient church had care according to the ad∣monition of S. Paul, that the faithfull the proper vessels of the body and bloud of our Lord, shold receiue thē worthily: we see the councels after these times to conuert and turne all this zeale, & all this care, from the spirit to the flesh, from spirituall temples, to materiall ones: from the vessels of God, elect vnto saluation, to the implements & instruments onely which they vsed in the administration hereof. Witnes hereto let be the Councell of Rhemes, held about this time, Concil. Rhe∣mens. as the decrees thereof which are ex∣tant do shew: Let the cups or chalices be, if not of gold, yet at the least of siluer, and let the peo∣ple be exhorted to contribute thereunto, as for the tabernacle in the time of Moyses: not of cop∣per, neither of brasse, for feare they should prouoke men to vomit, the wine being apt to make them rust: but in any case neither of wood nor glasse. Let the clothes wherein it is wrapped be a verie faire and cleane linnen cloth. After the Masse let them be put into a booke of the Sacra∣ments, and before they be deliuered to be scoured and washed cleane with lee, let them be washed in the Church by the Priest, Deacon or Subdeacon: because (saith he) that they be spotted & stained with the blood of our Lord. Conc. Colon. c. 7. We reade the same and something worse in a Coun∣cell held at Collen about the yeare 1300. Let the prieste smell diligently the little pots, that he may know the water from the wine by the smell therof: and then let him so marke them
as that he may know afterward the one frō the other, & not be deceiued: let the cup haue a sound and large foote, least it might ouerturne. But and if there do any thing of the body or of the blood fall vpon the couering or pall of the Altar, let them in any case cut it away and burne it, and lay the ashes in some cleane place, &c: a great matter, if so be such regard & care were so ne∣cessary, that the ancient church should forget this; or that the ancient church whereof we stand so greatly, hauing neglected it, we should notwithstanding hold it so need∣full and necessarie. Before the holy table, The vaile. whereupon the elements gifts or offerings were set, there was especially in the Greek church a vaile drawne, which after that they, which were as yet to be catechised, Chrysost. in hom. d. Pop. Antioch. & hom. 36. in 1. Cor. were departed & gone forth, was drawne together: & then they went forward with the blessing of the Sacraments. Chrysostome in many places: When thou hearest, let vs pray altogether: and therewithall seest the vaile drawne together, then thinke that heauen is about to open, and the Angels to discend, &c. This custome was retained as hauing beene first borrowed from the Iewes, for they had a vaile in the midst of the temple, and this vaile was clouen and rent in sunder, in signe of the vniting of the Iewes and Gentiles, the one with the other: or els from the Gentiles, for they likewise had vailes spread and drawne abroad before their altars. Tertul. in A∣pol. Apuleius saith: Ʋe∣lis candentibus reductis, the white vailes being drawne together. Tertullian: Conspectus cae∣terorum velo oppanso interdicebatur: There were (saith he) not any but priestes that came neere, for euen the very sight was kept from all others by the meanes of a vaile hanging before it. And in these indifferent things the ancient church did apply it selfe very wisely, some∣times to the Iewes, and sometimes to the Gentiles. But all this great adoe and pre∣paration came in a long time after, the Church through the corruption of the time proceeding by little and little from the inward to the outward, from the center to the circumference; from the substance to the circumstance; and from the discipline of Christ, to an imperiall statelinesse and eminencie in the world. Now these sacraments being there placed, wee haue declared the manner of the blessing, consecrating and distributing of them to the faithfull, with what prayers & with what holy wordes, &c. But there is yet behind one circumstance, which is, whe∣ther these prayers and words were vttered in a language knowne and vnderstood of the common people or not: which is a matter in controuersie betwixt vs and our aduersaries. CHAP. V. That the old and auncient seruice was said in a language vnderstood of the people: and by what degrees it was altered and chaunged. ASsuredly, That the ser∣uice vsed in the Church of the Iewes was vn¦derstood of all the care that it hath pleased God to take for the in∣struction of his people throughout the whole course and cari∣age of the Church, should bee able in a word to make this que∣stion friuolous and needlesse: He that would haue all his peo∣ple to know all his law and all the ceremonies likewise of the same at their fingers end; who so much commanded them to get knowledge, and condemned ignorance so sharpely; who would haue it as a frontlet betwixt their browes, and as a glasse before their eyes, that the father should teach it vnto his children in the fields & in his house, lying & standing, &c. cannot in any wise be thought that he would haue it kept hid & secret from him by the barbarousnes of a language not knowne or vnderstood, that is lockt and clapt vp in ciphers, that it might not be comprehended or attained. He likewise that so expresly commandeth fathers to teach their children the cause of the institution of his sacraments, (namely, that of the Passeouer, into whose roome that of ours, called the holy Supper is come:) who would that children should question their fathers therof, & that fathers should answer their children, & that in the time of the shadows of the old Testament, & rudiments of the law, shal not be vnderstood and
taken to haue meant, that his people should be taught in a language not vnderstood, neither yet to haue taken it for an honour and worship to bee praied vnto and serued of them, without vnderstanding. And in deede the Sacramentes of the old lawe are instituted in the Hebrew tonge, which was the vulgar and common language a∣mongst the people. And againe, when he would terrifie and make them afraid, hee threatneth them with a strange and barbarous language, 1. Cor. c. 14 and with lips which they do not vnderstand. And S. Paule concludeth, saying: Tongues are signes not to the beleeuers, but to the infidels and vnbeleeuers. And there is no cause why it should be here alleadged, that from the time of Esdras vnto Christ the people had learned the Chaldee tongue vnder the captiuitie, and that yet notwithstanding the Scriptures were alwaies read in the Church in the Hebrew tongue. For the question is not in what tongue it was read: but whether it were vnderstood of the people or not. Nehem. 8.2. And for that let Esdras himselfe be belieued, saying: Esdras the Priest brought the law before a multitude of men and women, and all those which could vnderstand. So then it may bee seene hereby, that not so much as the women but they vnderstood it. He read the same vnto them in the street before the water gate, frō the breake of the day vntill noone: and the eares of all the people were attentiue to the booke of the law. Wherefore were they thus attentiue, but that they had a purpose and intent to vnderstand? But that is more: Nehem. 8.8.3 They themselues did reade distinctly & plainly for to vnderstand, & did vnderstand it in reading of the same. What is that other properly, but to reade Esdras, without hauing any purpose to vnderstand him? But say they, It is said, that Esdras and the Leuites did expound the law vnto the peo∣ple. True, but it is as plaine and cleare, Nebe. 8. v. 7.9. that it was the sence and meaning of the law and not the words or phrases of speech, for this selfe same Chapter hath alreadie cer∣tified and assured vs that they vnderstood them. And in the same sence it is said, Act. 8.35. that our Lord and Sauiour expounded Esay in the Sinagogue, whereat the people were rauished: and the scriptures likewise vnto his disciples in Emaus: Suk. 24.27. that Philip expoun∣ded the 53. of Esay to the Eunuch. Who will belieue that this great noble man did not vnderstand the words, seeing he did reade thē? seeing also he demanded whether the Prophet did speak of himself or of some other? But in deed he did not know that this prophesie was of Christ. For whereas they go about to make vs belieue, that the Iewes did not vnderstand Hebrew, vnder the colour of certain words, which their familiaritie with the Chaldeans had dropped into their language, Ioh. 5.39. Act. 17, 11. the truth may easi∣ly appeare: for wherefore then should our Sauiour haue said vnto the people: Search the scriptures? And how should the Iewes of Berea haue otherwise done as they did. And what will they say to that in the Actes, that S. Act. 21.40.22.2.21. Paule made an oration vnto the people in the Hebrew tong, & that the people hearing him speake vnto them in that language made the more silence? And if they did not vnderstand, whence commeth it, that when he spake of going to the Gentiles, the people should be in a mutinie, & crie out: Away with such a fellow, let him be taken from off the earth; it is not meete that he should liue? Now therefore we stand resolued and firme: That it was not otherwise vnder the new Testament. that in the time of the old testament the seruice of God was practised and exercised in a language vnderstood of the peo∣ple: and who can belieue that it was otherwise in the time of the newe? who will belieue that the light should be more darke then the shadow? & the fulnesse of know∣ledge more barbarous and rude then the rudiments? without all peraduenture our Lord is come to dismaske the mystery concealed & kept close from before all worlds, to vnfold them, and lay them broade open to the Iewes, to the Gentiles, to all nati∣ons and to all languages. Gal. 3. And before him (saith the Apostle) there is no distinction or dif∣ference betwixt the Iew & the Grecian, nor yet betwixt the Grecian and Barbarian. There∣fore let vs conclude, that whatsoeuer hath serued for the better clearing and manife∣station of his holy mysteries, or for the instruction of Christians, hath likewise beene acceptable and well pleasing vnto him. But let vs not once imagine, that any thing tending to the darkning and dimming of that which is light and bright, can proceed from any example giuen by him: and then much lesse from his lawes and comman∣dementes.
He instituted his holy Supper amongst his disciples: who doubteth but that all the words thereof were vttered in the same tongue & language by him, which he ordinarily was wont to speake in vnto them? It is his will that it should bee cele∣brated after his example in his Church: that so we may therein shew forth his death vntill his comming. What manner of shewing forth & declaration doth he require, to vtter it in a language which the people doth not vnderstand? Now in deed, in asmuch as it was decreed, that his Gospell, death & resurrection should be preached vnto all nations, and that it was hindered by reason of the manifold variety of languages that possessed men, he sent his spirit in tongues of fire vnto his Apostles, he graunted and continued the gift of tongues a long time vnto his Church. Such as affirme that vp∣on the same day of Pentecost the Masse was instituted, and will notwithstanding, that throughout all Christendome the same should be said in Latine, let them tell me I pray them in what language it was deliuered, if it were deliuered but in one, or what tong was excepted if it were deliuered in all? There are some that come after, and do abuse this gift vnto vanitie and ostentation in the Church. What saith S. Paule vnto them? 1. Cor. 14. Languages are for signes, not to the belieuers, but to the vnbelieuers: they are giuen vn∣to vs for the gracious worke of edification, and not for our ouerthrow and confusion. If you vt∣ter a language that is not vnderstood, you speake in the aire: you are as Barbarians one vnto an other; vnprofitable as the trumpet which giueth a sound that no man vnderstandeth. If thou blesse with thy spirit and not with thy vnderstanding, the simple and vulgar sort of people that are there, how shall they be able to answere Amen, to thy thanksgiuing? how can they possibly be edified by thee? And the Conclusion is after all these generall propositions, (the least whereof all the rabble of our aduersaries are not able to auoid: I loue it better to speake fiue wordes in the Church, in my vnderstanding (that is, that are vnderstood) then ten thousand in a language that is not vnderstood, &c. And a little after, I teach so in all Churches: if any man be spirituall, let him vnderstand and know that what I write vnto you, are the com∣mandements of God. Hieronim. in 1. Cor, c. 14. If they doubt of the interpretation and meaning of this place: let vs heare the Doctors what they haue deliuered vpon the same. S. Ierome expoun∣ding it in plaine and expresse termes: Euerie word which is not vnderstood, must be iudged and thought barbarons. Againe: The spirit signifieth in this place the tongue, as when he hath said: he that speaketh tongues, that is to say, an vnknowne speech. He maketh no question whether Greeke or Latine. Ambr. in 1. Cor. S. Ambrose: This is spoken because of the Iewes, who in their sermons and oblations did vse amongst the Greekes sometimes the Hebrew tongue. And yet this was the holy tongue, the language of the Patriarkes: and he saith in their oblati∣ons by name, that is, in the administration of the Sacraments: as in deed it seemeth that in this word , S. Paule would speake of the holy Supper. Againe, he saith; If thou blesse with the spirit, he speaketh of such a one as speaketh vnto himselfe in a language which he knoweth: and saith, that he giueth thankes well, in as much as he knoweth what hee saith, but another (saith the Apostle) is not edified: so that if you come together to edifie the Church, you must speake such thinges there as the hearers do vnderstand. For to what end is it, that a man should speake in it a language that he himselfe doth onely vnderstand, and whereby the hearer doth not profit a dodkin? but rather he should hold his peace in the Church, to the end that such may speake, as can profit the hearers. And his conclusion is; So the ignorant which doth not vnderstand, cannot say Amen: for he knoweth not the end of the prayer, to an∣swer thereto with this word, Basil. in reg. contract. which is the confirming and sealing vp of the blessing in his place. S. Basill maketh this question, intreating vpon this place: How can the spirite of any man pray, when his vnderstanding is idle and vnfruitfull? This (saith he) must by name be meant of them which make their prayers in a tongue vnknowne vnto the hearers: For when the words of prayer are not vnderstood of those that are present, his vnderstanding that prayeth is vnfruit∣full, Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 14. in as much as no man reapeth profit thereby. Chrysostome: S. Paul would say, if I speake not the things which you may easily and plainly vnderstand, but that I go about as it were no other thing, but to shew that I vnderstand tongues, you cannot chuse but go away without pro∣fiting any thing: for what good can there come of a word not vnderstood? you altogether in like manner if you speake, but not with such wordes are as significant and sensible, doe speake to the
wind, that is, to no bodie. Againe; Idem in ho. 36 If the vnlearned do not vnderstand that which thou pray∣est, he is not edified, he cannot giue his consent vnto thy praiers: thou speakest to the wind and by consequent in vaine. Againe: Thou who speakest an vnknowne language, if there be not any that can interpret & expound it, hold thy peace: for in the church there is no place to do any thing that is superfluous or tending to ostentation. Let such a man speake vnto God & himself, that is, Theodor. in 1. Cor. 14. in his spirit, without making any noise, & by himselfe. Theodoret: The Apostle cōmandeth that euery thing may tend to edification in the church: and therefore (he saith) hee that hath the gift of tongs, let him pray vnto God, that he may also haue added thereunto the gift of interpre∣tation, that so he may be able to do some seruice in the church: for the fruitfulnes of the spea∣ker consisteth in the profiting of the hearers, and this cannot he possiblie haue, that speaketh in an vnknowne language. He therefore calleth the spirit the gift of tongs, but the vnderstanding, the interpretation or giuing of the sence of that which is said, &c. Oecumenius, who hath made a collection out of all the Greeke fathers: I call the spirit the spirituall gift of tongs; the vnderstanding, the facultie and abilitie to interprete & expound that well which is said: To pray then with the spirit, doth no good to any, but himselfe that so prayeth: but to pray with vn∣detstanding, is auaileable vnto the edifying of thy neighbour. And therefore when he saith: If thou blesse with the spirit, it is as much as to say, that thou thy selfe doost onely vnderstand, and art not vnderstood of others, &c. Whereunto Chrysost. added: And there is as much dif∣ference betwixt the one and the other, as there is betwixt the whole Church and one man, and as there is betwixt the edifying of the whole Church and himselfe onely. Iustin. Nouel. 123. S. interdi∣cimus. Iustinian the Empe∣rour in his Nouelle, wherein he commandeth the Ministers of the Church to doe the diuine seruice in a language that is plaine & vnderstood, hath not otherwise expoun∣ded this place: for he saith: Thus the diuine Apostle teacheth vs in these wordes: If thou blesse with the spirit alone, how shall the simple people be able to say Amen vnto thy blessing, see∣ing that they vnderstand not what thou sayest? And this he cōmanded with such earnest∣nesse, as that he proceeded against them to the death, which did the contrarie. And yet no more then the Councell of Aix doth the Chapter, which Councell saith: The speech and the vnderstanding of those that sing vnto God, must accord: that so it may be ful∣filled which the Apostle saith, I will sing with the spirit, & I will sing with the vnderstanding al∣so. Haimo Bb. of Halberstat in the time of Lewes, the son of Charlemaine, saith: Haimo in 1. Cor. 14. I am a Grecian and thou an Hebrew: if I speake Greeke vnto thee, I shal seeme to be a Barbarian. I pronounce the Creed in Greeke, because I haue found it so written, & I am a Latine: I am a Bar∣barian vnto thee, &c. If then (saith he) an idiot be with thee, a man that knoweth no more thē his mothers tong, & thou sayest thy Masse in a tong not vnderstood, how shall he answer thee A∣men, when he knoweth not what thou sayest? &c. I had rather therefore (saith he) to speak fiue words in the assembly of the faithfull that are vnderstood by them, then ten thousand otherwise which will do no good. And Cardinall Hugo in like manner. In a word, Hog. Cardin. 1. Cor. 14. Lyranus expoun∣ding this scripture in his place: The Apostle speaketh here of publike prayer: wherein if so be that the people do vnderstand the Minister his giuing of thanks, he is a great deale the better stirred vp to God, & made the more deuout & ready to say Amen. And Thomas after him: That in the Primitiue church seruice was celebrated & solemnly done in a language that was vnderstood. And S. Augustine his generall rule tendeth to the same end: August. l. 12. de Genes. ad lit. c. 8. The practise of The old church. That no man can be edified by hearing that which he vnderstandeth not. Now next after the institution of our Sauiour Christ & his Apostles, it followeth that we look into the practise of the an∣cient Church. And first it is to be noted, that the practise of the publike seruice was such, as that the people did answer the Pastor: whereupon it must needes follow (as saith the Apostle) that they did vnderstand him, but which is more, that all of thē did answere to all, the people doing their part in the office and seruice, no lesse then the cleargie: which could not wel & conueniently be done without vnderstanding. S. Paul saith: how can he (qui supplet locū idiotae) that occupieth the room of the vnlerned, say Amē? Theodor. in 1. Cor. 14. l. 7. stromat. Iostin. in A∣pol. 2. S. Ierome: He speaketh of the laitie, & not of the cleargie. Chryso. & Oecumenius after the same sort. Theodoret; He calleth him an idiot, which is of the order of the laitie, as we likewise call them idiots, which are void of subtiltie & craftines. And all the old writers doe testifie this custome & vse. Clemens Alexādrinus: In their praiers they haue but one cōm on speech,
as likewise one spirit. Hieronym. in 2. procem in Galat. Chrysost. in 2. Cor. hom. 18. Iustinus in the description of the holy Supper saith: All the people , speake aloude in signe of approbation, Amen. And the pretended Dionisius Areopagita vseth the same words. And S. Ierome: All the Church like a thunder soun∣deth out, Amen. Chrysostome: The prayers are common both to Pastor and people: they say prayer together: the people pray for the Pastor, and the Pastor for the people, &c. Againe, All that which is vsed about the Eucharist is common to both: all the whole bodie of the sa∣cred liturgie is common vnto them: why doest thou maruell then to see them speaking together in their prayers? Basil. in exa. hom. 4. Idem epist. 63. S. Basill: Men, women, and children cast forth their prayers vnto God: you would say that they were floods beating against the shore. In another place hee describeth how they sing Psalmes diuided in the halfes, and intermingled with prayers, medita∣ting deeply, and with a feruent zeale vpon that which they did sing. And can any man in his conscience affirme this of those who vnderstand nothing of all that which they say? And now what followeth hereupon, but that, (seeing that the lay man did vnder∣stand the seruice to say Amen,) all the laitie, (for that all had to answere, and did per∣forme a part & dutie therein) had also the vnderstanding thereof, and by consequent, that the seruice of the ancient Church was solemnized in a language vnderstood of e∣uery particular person. And how could euerie particular person vnderstand it, if it were not their vulgar and common speech? The proofes of this practise, Proofes from all nations. drawne from seuerall & particular nations will make the same more cleare and manifest. In the Church of Ierusalem and regions therea∣bout, it is not doubted but that they vsed their praiers in the Hebrew tongue; and we haue proued that it was commonly knowne & vnderstood of all. But to the end that they may not alleadge that this was one of the three tongs which were sanctified by the title vpon the Crosse of our Lord, Theodor. l. 4. c. 29. Theodoret telleth vs that Ephraim an Archdea∣con of the towne of Edessa in Syria, vsed the Syriacke, a corrupt kind of Hebrew, and that his Homelies were in this language, and so were his canticles likewise and songs, saith Sozomenus, which were sung in the Churches of Syria. For as concerning the Greeke tongue, Hieronum. de Eccle. Scriptor. Basil. ep. 63. Theodoret & Amphilochius do testifie, that he was ignorant therein. Now this was aboue 400. yeres after the death of our Lord. S. Basil after he hath deli∣uered & set downe, how that all the church did sing together, & kindle their zeale by meditating of that which was sung, which canot possiblie be conceiued to haue been in a tong not vnderstood, addeth these words, saying: If you auoid & shun vs for this, thē also shun the Egiptians, the Lybians, the Thebanes, Palestines, Arabians, Phenicians, Syrians & Euphrateans, for amongst al these, the vigils, singing of psalms & praiers that are cōmon, are had in honor & chiefe accompt. Hyeronym. ad Heliodor. in epitaphio Ne∣potian. S. Ierome in like manner, saith: Now the tongues and lips of all maner of people do sound out the death and resurrection of Christ. I cease to speake of the Iewes, Greekes and Latines, which our Lord hath consecrated by the title of his crosse: but the wilde and sauage nation of the people called Bessi, euen this whole people cloathed in skins, and who sometimes were wont to kill and sacrifice men, haue broken the harsh and rough veine of their tongue, and turned it into Christian hymnes: and now what speech or talke doth there sound throughout the whole world, but onely Christ. And furthermore at this time the Maronites had their seruice in the Chaldie: the Armenians in the Armenian language: the A∣byssines, in the tong of the Abyssines: & these namely which make such a sum & mea∣sure of the name Christian, as that all the countries, which at this day haue giuen their names to the Bb. of Rome, do not amount or rise to a greater number. In the Chur∣ches liuing after the manner of the Greekes, their liturgies were kept and continu∣ed in Greeke, & that throughout euerie place, whereas this language had planted it selfe: as appeareth by the liturgies attributed to S. Basil and S. Chrysostome: as also by the very vse and custome of Greece. But to the end they may not attribute that, ei∣ther to the worthines of the tongue, or to the prerogatiue which they pretend to be purchased by the title of the crosse; in such place as where their language is not greek, and yet their Church ordered after the manner of the Greeke churches, their seruice is in the vulgar language of their countrie, and not in Greeke. This is euident by all the Churches that are in that great Empire of Muscouia and Russia, in all which
there is no other language receiued or heard then the common and vulgar: howsoeuer they acknowledge and approue of the course of the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Greeke confession. And as for the Latine and Westerne Churches, The like in the Laine chur∣ches. let vs not imagine that there was any other rule kept and obserued in them. The Greek tong, saith Cicero, went in his time almost ouer all the world: the Latine, also because of the Empire had spred verie farre. And this is it which maketh some shew and likelihood, that the seruice of diuers of the Westerne regions was said in Latine: but yet so notwithstanding as that euen there also the rule will proue generall, namely: that were it in Latine, or were it other∣wise: yet in the old and ancient Westerne Churches it was alwaies so as it was in others, namely, in a language vnderstood of the hearers. The vulgar and natural speech in Italy was Latine, and therefore wee are of iudgement, that in the neighbour prouinces of Spaine, Fraunce, &c. there is likelihoode, that the Empire in establishing his lawes, did likewise propagate and multiplie the vse of his language: as in deed the prouinces were reported to speake Romaine, that is the tongue of the Empire; how∣beit that their originall language was neuer altogether abolished and extinct. But if it bee doubtfull whether the seruice there were done in Latine or no, yet it stan∣deth certaine and firme, that it was done in a language knowne and vnderstoode of the people. Sulpicius in the life of Saint Martine, saith; As the Reader, Sulpicius in vita Martin. whose course it was to reade vppon that day, was detained by the throng of people, one of his assistants taking the Psalter, betooke himselfe to the first verse that bee met withall. Now the Psalme was, Out of the mouthes of babes and sucklinges thou hast perfected thy praise, &c. Which place being read, there was a shout and crie made by the people, in such sort, as that all their aduersaries were ashamed and confounded. The people no doubt was moued with that which they vnderstood: yea it is most cleare and manifest, that it was so: for if this portion of scripture were read at this day in the midst of our common people of Fraunce: it is most certaine, that seeing the ignorance that raigneth amongst them, there is not one that woulde be moued to crie, in as much as not any one woulde take any re∣gard thereto. And as for Spaine, it appeareth that the Latine tongue hath beene fami∣liar in it of old, by the steppes and markes thereof remaining amongst them still, by the lawes which the Gothes established amongst them, by the Gothish Code (as they call it) which is written in very good Latine, Lucius Mar∣miculus. l. 5. and by those worthy personages which haue sprung out from amongst them, as lightes of the Latine tongue, as Lu∣cane and the Senecas, with diuers others. In so much as one of their Chroniclers saith, that if the Gothes and the Mores had not come into Spaine, the Spanish tongue had remained as pure and incorrupt, as the Romaines their language was in the time of Cicero: and therefore if their seruice were in Latine, it was vulgar: if it were not vul∣gar, then had Isidore, Archbishop of Seuill, said in vaine: Isidor. de eccle. Offi. c. 10. That when there is singing in the church, it behoueth euery man to sing, and when there is praying, that euerie man doe pray: for what edge or quickning to the spirit can the singing of a Psalme, or the making of a praier that is not vnderstood affoord & bring? And so of England; the language of their Iland was peculiar to themselues, and no Latine amongst them, saue what the Romain Colonies did speake. They will haue it, that Christian religion was established there in the time of Ioseph of Aremathia: howbeit Chrysostome saith, that it was about his time. And yet neuerthelesse S. Gregory saith, that in his time, the tong of the ancient inhabitants of great Britaine, called at this day England, Gregor. in Iob. c. 27. had no better a sound then a barbarum frendere, a rude and barbarous kind of grunting: and how then could the Latine seruice be found there? But the truth is, (as certaine English Iesuits do confesse) that S. Augustine the Monke sent by Gregorie, did there chaunge and alter both the forme and tongue wherein they had before celebrated their seruice: for they could not fetch or deriue the antiquitie of their religion any further off. They say, it cannot at the least be denyed, but that the Latine seruice was vsed in the Churches of Africke: then let vs adde thereto, that the Latine tongue was also common there amongst the rascall and poorer sorte of people. This appeareth, for the sermons of Saint Cyprian
and S. Augustine Bbs. of Africke, were made in the Latine tongue. Now wee are of the same iudgement with our aduersaries: that sermons euer were, & so ought to be made for the instruction of the people in the common & vulgar tong: because (say they) that properly they are to be applyed and fitted for the capacitie of the people, & praiers di∣rected vnto God. But in another place. S. Augustine saith, that being borne in the Ci∣tie of Tagusta in Africa, Idem. l. 1. re∣tract. c. 10. he had learned the Latine tong, Inter blandimenta nutricum, by means of the sporting & pleasing speeches which are currant amongst cockering nurses: that is, in his swathing clothes, or whiles he was very young & tender: whereby it appeareth that nurses had the knowledge of it. Againe he saith: To the end, that euen the most simple and ignorant may see & perceiue, that it is of purpose because of the Donatists, I haue turned a psalme into Latine, that it may the better remaine with them & be remembred. Hence is proued, that it was common to the basest and coursest kind of people. And for as much as that the people there did not speake good congruitie, S. Augustine applyeth himself vnto their Solaecismes, Idem in psal. 118. saying; ossum for os: and sometimes taking one case for another, saying: Be∣cause it is far better that the Grāmarians should reproue vs, thē that the people should not vnder∣stand vs. In a word, he saith, This is a Prouerbe amongst the Carthaginers: I wil tel it you in la∣tine in asmuch as you al do not vnderstand & conceiue the Punicktong. Hence it followeth that the Latine tong was better knowne in Afrike, then the Punicke it selfe. But will you fur∣ther see, that whereas the knowledge of this tongue was wanting in this country, there they did not tie themselues to haue their seruice in it? Throughout all Sclauonia, they had their seruice in the Dalmatian tong, Ecchius de Missa Latina. & S. Ierome likewise did translate it into their tong: and our aduersaries are of iudgement, that it is still so obserued there vnto this day. In this part of Italie likewise called great Greece, ouer against Sicilia, it is said in Greeke, because the Greeke tong was there vulgar and common. In Germany, to the cōming in of the pretended reformation of Boniface, that is to say, vntil after the yeare 800. Walasr. c. 7. it was obserued after the like maner & order: in so much as that Walafridus the Abbot saith, that euen in his time the Northern countries had their seruice in the Ger∣maine tong. Aeneas Sylu. histor. Bohem. c. 13. And Aeneas Syluius after the time of Pope Pius the 2. reporteth after many others, that as Cyril & Methodius were conuerted to the Christian faith, certain people speaking the Sclauonian tongue were come to intreate the Pope about the yeare 800. that it might be permitted them to haue their seruice in their vulgar tong: whereupon the Consistorie being gathered together, and standing doubtfull what to do therein, there was heard a voice, as it were from heauen, in these words: Omnis spiritus landet Do∣minum, & omnis lingua confiteatur ei, let euery spirit praise the Lord, & let euery tongue confesse & acknowledge him. And in deed whatsoeuer our aduersaries do alleadge against this, as done, is more then 600. yeares after the death of our Lord: that is to say, all that which they alleadge, after the time that the Popes for to establish their authority did vnder∣take as we haue said in another place, to impose and thrust the set forme of the Romish seruice vpon all nations, abolishing others as theirs came in place: & that in their Ro∣maine language: for so of this exploit some attribute the first attempt & onset to Pope Vitalian, about the yeare 700. Now this old custome of the Church is to be compared & ioyned with those goodly Maxims & generall rules of the ancient Doctors. S. Augu∣stine saith: August. in psal. 18. Basil. in ps. 28. Let vs be well aduised & looke that we take hold with a cleare & inlightned heare of that which we sing with one consent of voice. And Basil conformablie: Let the tong sing, but let the hart & vnderstanding at the same time sound and reach the sence & meaning of that which is sung. Cassiodor. in psal. 46. And Cassiodorus; Let vs look that the vnderstanding of the thing, be ioyned with the singing of it; for nothing can be done wisely without the vnderstanding of it. Which things cannot con∣curre & go together after the rules and practise of popish doctrines. And Iustinian the Emperor for to remedie such abuses tooke the matter in hand, about the time that the Pope laboured with might & maine to bring them in, in these words saying: We will and command, that the Bbs. and Pastors do celebrate the oblation and praiers in baptisme with a loude voice, Iustin. Nouel. de diuers. eccl. c. 123. such as may be vnderstood of the people, to the end they may be stirred vp to greater deuotion to praise God, &c. alleadging for the confirmatiō of his constitution, the places of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14. & menacing & roughly thundring out against thē the iudgements of God if
they shold do to the contrary. And wheras they answer, that this constitution was not further of force then in the Greek churches, it is not to be taken for any answere. Euseb. in vita Constan. ora. 4 For we know that if the iurisdiction of Rome haue bound the whole empire, that then in like manner this constitution made by Iustinian, and his drift in the contriuing and ordaining of his ecclesiasticall lawes, is knowne by these wordes: C. de Iudic. l. propemod. C. de Epise. & Cleric. I. generaliter. Carol. l. 1. c. 70. & 173. l. 6. Orig. contr. Celsum. l. 8. Thom. in 1. Cor. 14. Lyranus ibid. Ioh. Belet. in summa de di∣um Offi. Cardin. Caie∣ta. in 1. Cor. 14 Which we vnderstand & take to be of force, not in the old & new Rome onely, but vniuersally without any prescription of place throughout the whole world. Charles the great for the same purpose ordained, that the people should know and vnderstand that which they demand of God, & that which is said in the Masse, and not the priest alone. Thus we haue sufficiently proued, that which Origen saith in one word: That all the people of his time did praise and call vpon God in their owne proper language. Whereupon Thomas and Lyranus do both of them say vpon the 1. Cor. 14. That that without all doubt was the custome of the Primitiue Church, and by that meanes more zealous and deuout. And Iohn Belet saith further: But what shall we do now a daies, sith there are so few that vnderstand any thing, whether you meane the hearers or the readers? But that wee should rather hold our peace then sing? In a word, our aduersaries, euen the most wilfull & obstinate amongst them, are constrained here to submit themselues. The Cardinall Caietan who saith: That it is more for edification to do seruice in a language vnderstood of the people and of the Cleargie, then in Latine: Sixtus Senens. lib. 6. nnot. 263. and is reproued by Ambrose of Compsa a citie of the Hir∣pines, and censured by Sixtus Senensis. Harding likewise, who acknowledgeth that that was necessarie in the time of the rawnes of the Primitiue Church: which being confessed, let him shew a reason why it should be lesse necessarie in ours? and let him lay his hand vpon his conscience and answere, if the darknesse of that Church were not more pre∣cious and of greater value, then all that which we call light? and their rawnes and vn∣lettered condition, better then our learning? But what will this matter come to, Innocent. 3. Extrauag. de offi. iud. ordin. if we conclude & shut it vp with a sentence against the Pope, & that vttered by a Pope? For thus saith Innocent the third: In as much as in diuers places in one cittie or diocesse, there are people, which holding the same faith, vse diuers tongues, we most straitly charge and command the Bishops of the same, that they be prouided of capable and sufficient persons, who according to the diuersitie of ceremonies and tongues may celebrate and say them scruice, and administer vnto them the Sacraments. Concil. Latera. c. 9. And the same is ordained in the Councell of Late∣rane, Chap. 9. Our aduersaries say, that the same extendeth no further then to the two languages of Greeke & Latine: which thing we desire to be proued. Yea rather let vs say and boldly affirme to the contrarie, that this was decreed vpon the requests of diuers nations that had taken Constantinople: as namely, Germans, Frenchmen, Italians, Englishmen, &c. whereunto they reply and answere, how that at least it was neuer yet kept or obserued. And I can tell them, that Leo the tenth did permit vnto the Chaldeans and Syrians their seruice in their vulgar tongue, & that at Rome. But for a second answer, who knoweth not that the best Canons are neglected euen in the Church of Rome? And further therewithall take this, how that this decree was a∣bout the yeare 1200. It is then the next question to know how so great a change and alteration should happen? In which point let vs note, that it is but in the Latine Church: A tongue not vnderstood in the Romane Church onely, and by what meanes. for in all other places seruice is vnderstood of the people: a prerogatiue purchased & obtained part∣ly of ignorance, & partly of malice, which is fallen vpon them more then vpon any o∣thers. But yet further, how and by what meanes in the Latine Church? certainly in part by the alteration and changing of tongs, and in part by changing of seruices, for that Pope Gregory did vndertake the change & alteratiō that is in the Latine church, which the Popes his successors caused to be receiued, as we haue alreadie said by the authoritie of princes, & aboue all the rest by the worke of Pipin & Charlemaine: the Popes and they, the one of them lending their hand to the other, the one by the authoritie of the spirituall Monarchie, and the other by the authoritie of the tem∣porall. And to the end, that all might depend and relie vppon Rome: they caused their seruice to bee receiued in all the Westerne prouinces, and that not onely after
the Romaine order, but also in the Romaine tongue. The abettors and furtherers whereof were Remigius Archb. of Roan, brother to Pipin: amongst the French men, Boniface an English man, Archbishop of Mentz in Germanie, and Augustine the Monke an Italian Archbishop of Canterburie in England. And afterward, as the na∣tions of the infidels were sudbued by the Christian Princes, the Latine seruice was e∣stablished amongst thē, after the maner of the Romish Church, as in Sueueland, Den∣marke, Saxonie, Bauaria, &c: The tongues also, in as much as the Northerne nations did ouerflow the whole Westerne Empire for a long time, did likewise there take roote, and settle their abode: whereupon insued so great and grosse a corrupting of tongues, and especially of the Romish, which was for the most part admitted and re∣ceiued in those places, in so much as that by little and little it came to passe, that the common people did not any more vnderstand it: so farre differing from it selfe, in processe of time became the tongue which had beene ordinarie and common, that is to say the Romaine tongue, from that which sometime it had beene, when they did vse both to speake and write in it. Which thing is easily found out and perceiued to haue happened in Italie, Spaine, and Fraunce, where the tongues vsed at this day were but dialects or manners of speech somewhat differing at the first: and then af∣terwards all of them, Or the Latine tong somwhat corupted. corruptions of the Latine tongue. The seruice therefore con∣tinuing still in Latine, and the vulgar language altering and chaunging: the seruice, which at the first was easie to be vnderstood of the people, became rude and barba∣rous vnto them, that is, such as they vnderstood not, the prelates hauing no care to draw them backe againe to the first institution, whether lulled asleepe through care∣lesse securitie, or willingly admitting the meanes whereby they might excell and go beyond the laitie, & therewithall the well inclined being still oppressed & kept downe by the authoritie of the Pope. Euen iust after the same manner as it would haue fal∣len out in other cases with vs in Fraunce: in as much as the case so stood in the begin∣ning, as that matters of sute and law were pleaded in Latine, and all manner of wri∣tings made in Latine, howbeit that the common people by reason of the change that happened, did not vnderstand it: but that our kings as those which did more care∣fully watch ouer the goodes of the people, then the Romish Bishops did ouer their soules, haue beene very prouident wisely to foresee, and by their ordinances to pro∣uide for the same. CHAP. VI. That in the Primitiue Church and a long time after, the holy scriptures were read amongst the people in all tongues. THe liturgie then or diuine seruice, That the scrip∣tures were translated into all languages, euen from the first times. was retained in the Church in the vulgar and common tongue for a long space, following the precept of Saint Paule: Let euery thing be done to edification in the Church. And as for the Maxime of the Church of Rome, which is to hold the people in ignorance, that so they may not come to the knowledge of their faluation, it did not take place but of late, and that for no other end but to bind their consci∣ences and knowledge, to go no further, neither yet to come short of the conscience & skill of their curates, that so they may pray vpon their simplicitie, either by leading them into vaine superstition, or into seruile subiection. The holy scriptures of the old Testament, say they, were written in Hebrew, and those of the new Testament in Greeke, and not in any other tongue. Let it bee so, and good cause why, seeing the Hebrew tongue was the language of Is∣rael, to whome the law was properly and peculiarly giuen, and the Greeke likewise very common, knowne vnto all the East parts, where Christianitie did first spring and
spread abroad. But what prerogatiue do they shew vs why they should so aduance and cleaue vnto the Latine? Let them answere them that the Gospell was notwith∣standing preached by word of mouth in all tongues, and to that end was the gift of tongues sent vnto the Church: which was no sooner ceased, but that the scriptures both of the old and new Testament were found as a supply of the same, translated in∣to diuers tongues, as Hebrew, Syrian, Arabicke, and Scythian, as the ecclesiasticall historie doth witnesse vnto vs: that this diligent indeuour continued and endured by the industrie of good pastors, in such measure and sort, as that the knowledge of Christ, gained and got ground in the world. Thus we see that Saint Ierome transla∣ted the holy scriptures into the Dalmaticke tongue: Hieronym. in ep. ad Sophron. Gregor. Patri∣arch. Alexand. in vita Chry∣sost. Sixtus Senens. in l. 4. in lit. l. k. Postellus in ep. ad Ambr. Theseum. Chrysostome into the Armeni∣an: Vlphilas, Bishop of the Gothes into Gothicke: Methodius into the Sclauonian: and their translations are founde as yet both extant and in vse. And that the same zeale was followed and imitated in the end in all Churches, so that wee haue as yet the Gospels in the Ethiopian tongue, the Psalter in the Egyptian, as also in the Indian tongue, but imprinted in Syriacke Characters: the fiue bookes of Moyses in the Persian tongue: the Psalter & all the new Testament in the Gothish or old Frize∣land speech: all the Bible, from the time of Ethelstanus king of England, that is, nine hundred yeares, in the Brittish tongue, &c. And therefore Chrysostome sayth: The Syrians, Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Ethiopians, and innumerable other nations, haue the heauenly doctrine translated into their naturall tongues, and by this meanes haue left off their barbarousnes to play the philosophers in good earnest. Theodoret: Theodor. de corrig. Graecor. affect. The He∣brew bookes are not onely translated into Greeke, but also into Latine, Egiptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Saromatian, and in a word, into all tongues, which the nations vse as yet vnto this day. All these good Pastors zealously and feruently af∣fecting the wholesome instruction of their flockes, and all these famous Churches had not yet studied or busied their braines about the title of the Crosse, to conclude from thence, that the scriptures could not bee read but in three tongues: because in deed they had no desire or will by any such shift, so to worke their purpose: as that the poore people might not learne the way wherby they might be saued, that so they might hold their consciences in homage vnto them. Whether it be daungerous or no for the cō∣mon people to reade them. But whatsoeuer any man may seeme to bee able to say to the contrarie (say they) it is and alwaies hath beene daungerous for the people to haue and reade the holy scripture in their common and naturall tongue. And to whom then was it that our Lord said: Search the scriptures? And wherefore had all Christian Churches so translated them? But now therefore let them heare, euen they which make such vauntes of the auncient writers, into what daunger those auncients did bring mens consciences, by the reading of the holy scripture: and into what daunger, if a man will belieue them herein, they brought the whole Church. Irenaeus without all doubt did not conceiue any such daunger to bee therein, Iren. l. 4. c. 12. & 31. when hee said of the heretikes the Valentinians: That their not knowing of the scrip∣tures had brought them to this heresie. He found preseruatiues therein: and our ad∣uersaries are afraid to meete with poison. And as little paines did he take to draw backe the faithfull from the reading of them, because of obscuritie, for he saith: The scriptures are open and cleare, without ambiguitie or doubtfulnesse: Origen. in Esa. hom. 2. in Ex∣od. hom. 9. they may bee alike heard of all. Origen in like manner, who tooke so great paines to translate and publish them in all tongues, saith: Woulde God wee all belieued and did that which is written: Search the scriptures: they are shutte and sealed to the negligent, but they are founde to bee open and vnlockt to them that seeke and knocke at the dore. By them hee would haue his parishioners, his people that were, still to be instructed and catechised, and his disciples to trie and examine his doctrine, for hee saith: Origen in Io∣suam, hom 20. Idem in Leuit. hom. 9. When I teach you that which I thinke, then examine and iudge you, whether it bee right and true, or no. For wee desire (sayeth hee in another place) that you shoulde not onely heare the wordes of God in the Church: but therewithall that you shoulde
exercise your selues in them in your houses and meditate in his law day and night. Idem in Ios. hom. 20. Yea and to the end that they may not bee afraid of any difficultie, hee saith: Whatsoeuer diffi∣cultie thou shalt meete withall, yet if thou reade them, thou shalt profite by them: for if our Lord find vs occupied in the scriptures, he will not onely vouchsafe to feede vs, but also if hee finde these meates readie drest at our houses, hee will bring vs the Father thither with him, Hieronym. in Epist. ad Ephes. l. 3. c. 4. &c. Saint Ierome giueth a generall rule, saying: Wee must reade the scriptures with our whole affection, to the end that as good exchaungers, wee may know to distinguish the good money from the false. So farre off was hee from fearing least wee shoulde therein receiue the false and counterfeite. For (saith hee in another place) our Lord hath spoken by his Gospell, Idem in Psal. 86. not to the end that a fewe might vnderstand, but all. The laitie are not excluded: but rather on the contrarie, he saith: The laitie must not onely haue sufficiently, but aboundantly, that so they may instruct one another, that so they may also reproue one another. Idem in ep. ad. Coloss. c. 3. Idem in Epi∣taph. Paulae. Idem de virgi∣nitate ad De∣metriad. And hee taketh his assertion from the thirde to the Colossians. Let the word of God dwell aboundantly amongst you, &c. The wo∣men in like manner as little: for hee saith of his Paula in praising of her: It was not tollerated or winked at in any of her sisters, that they should bee ignorant in the Psalmes, or faile to reade and learne something dayly out of the holy scripture. And hee giueth the same counsell to Demetrias. On the contrarie, hee condemneth cer∣taine of his time, who did refraine to reade them as our ignorant friers doe, vn∣der the shadow of humilitie, Idem in 1. ad Tit. saying: They giue themselues to ignoraunce, idlenesse, and sleeping, thinking in the meane time, that it is their onely sinne to reade the scrip∣tures: and therewithall they contemne and set light by those which meditate in the lawe of the Lord day and night, accompting of them as pratling and vnprofitable fellowes. And Saint Augustine speaketh to the same effect: August. serm. 1. fer. 6 post Dom. passionē. Wee take great comfort and consolation in the reading of the scriptures: for in them a man may view & see himselfe as in a mirror. This reading purifieth and purgeth him from the filth of sinne, partly by setting before him the horrour of hell, and partly by kindling the feruent desire of comming to heauenly ioyes. Who would bee oft with God, Idem in psal. 33. let him pray and reade. When wee pray, we speake to God: when we reade he speaketh to vs. And he further giueth this lesson to all, saying in these wordes: Reade the holy scriptures, for God hath commanded that they should bee writ∣ten, Idem in Vo∣lus. epist. 3. to the end that you might all receiue consolation both learned and vnlearned, and as well Cleargie as laitie: for (sayeth hee) God speaketh in the scriptures as a close and pri∣uate friende: Hee speaketh without any colour or painting, vnto our heartes, whether we bee wise and skilfull, or ignorant. And hee is not contented, that one should heare in the Church: Idem in c. Ie∣iunn. But furthermore, saith he vnto those of his Diocesse, It is not suf∣ficient that you heare the holy lessons in the Church: it behooueth you to reade them your selues in your owne houses, or that you seeke out such as may reade them vnto you. On the contrarie, hee censureth certaine people of his time, who thinking to bee more humble then the rest, would not reade them, who feare (saith he) to learne, least they should grow proud: Idem in psal. 131. Idem in lib. 2. de doctr. Chri. c. 6. &  tract. 45 in Iohan. And by that meanes (saith he) they continue still as suck∣linges in their milke, which the scripture reproueth. In like manner hee armeth vs with couragiousnesse against all obscuritie and difficultie that may bee conceiued or thought to be in them, saying: There is nothing spoken obscurely in one place, which is not made verie cleare and plaine in some others. All whatsoeuer belongeth to faith and good workes, is therein set downe very clearely. There are therein plaine and cleare points to satisfie thy hunger, and there are againe some obscure and darke places to whet thine appetite. And the same thing is giuen out by Fulgentius and Gregorie in other wordes: Fulgent. in ser. de cōfessionib. Gregor. in ep. ad Leandrum. Basil. in psal. 1. There is store and plentie for a strong man to eate, and for the child and weakling to sucke vppon: in this riuer the lambe may sporte it selfe and bee merrie, and the Elephant may swimme, &c. Saint Basill: The holie Scripture is as an , a shoppe or storehouse furnisht with medicines, from amongst which euerie man may make choice of that which is fitte for his disease: the onelie way to come to finde out the truth, is the meditating of the scriptures: And hee handleth this pointe at large. Bellar∣mine
replieth, saying, Idem in Ep. ad Greg. Mang. that hee sent the Stewarde of the Emperour Valens his kit∣chin vnto his kitchin, when hee went about to be speaking of the Scriptures. And what and if against so many places, hee did alledge this one little storie in truth? But Theodoret onelie sayeth, that this was not in respect of the Scriptures, Theodor. lib. 4 Eccles. hist. c. 19. Chrysost in hom. de Laza∣ro. but in respect of his course and barbarous carriage towardes him. But let vs heare Chry∣sostome: for hee perplexeth them greatly, and maketh them in a pittiful case, say∣ing; The reading of the scriptures, is a great bulwarke against sinne: the ignorance and not knowing of the Scriptures, a headlong downfall, and a bottomles mudpit. To know nothing of the law of God is a mightie meanes of the ouerthrow of our saluation: This is it which hath begot∣ten heresies, and corrupted the manners of men, which hath turned all things vpside down: Idem ad He∣brae. hom 8. The Manichies (saith hee) and other heretikes doe beguile & deceiue the simple: but if wee haue acquainted our soules with discerning betwixt good and euill, it shall bee easie for vs to know & finde them out, and this acquaintance and familiaritie wee shall attaine by the vse of the scrip∣tures. Theophilact, who followeth thē almost step by step, saith of the scriptures, which arme vs to withstand such delusions, because that they are that light which doth discouer & catch the thiefe, &c. They are good for our Monks and Doctors of Sorbone, will our aduer∣saries say. But to this point let vs heare further, for the same Chrysostome saith; Idem in Mat. hom. 3. Loe here the plague and bane of all, you thinke the reading of the holie scriptures doth not belong to anie but Monks: but it is more necessarie a great deale for you then for the Monks; & it is so much the more your sinne, to thinke that one ought not to reade them, then not to reade them your selues. Such speeches cannot but come from a diuelish meditation. We are assaulted by the weapons and fierie darts of the Diuell, how shall we shun or quench them? surelie by the reading of the scrip∣tures: for I tell thee, and tell thee againe; Idem in hom. 3. de Lazaro. that without the continuall reading of the scriptures no man can come to eternall life. Euery artificer is furnished with such tooles and instruments as serue for his mysterie and occupation, as are necessarie for his work: and I tell thee O thou Christian, that the bookes of the Prophetes and Apostles are the instruments of a Christian to amend his soule, to redresse what is amisse, and to renew that which is growne old in vs, &c. But thou wilt say, happy is euery simple soule, he that walketh simplie, walketh surelie. But S. Idem hom. 16. in Ioh. Prouerb. 10.9. 1. Pet. 5.15. Colos. 3.16. Peter hath saide vnto thee: Be yee alwaies readie to render a reason to any whosoeuer shall aske you anie question of the hope that is in you. And S. Paule, let the word of Christ dwell plentifully in you, &c. The cause of all euill is, that for the most part there is not any, that know how to alledge anie places of scripture to the purpose for that which they speake: for the simple is not there to be taken or vnderstoode of one that is a sot or an ignorant person, but for that man which is not giuen to wickednes, which is not giuen to guile & deceitfulnes, &c. For otherwise how should our Lord haue saide: Be wise as Serpentes, but simple as Doues. Chrysost. hom. 3. de Lazaro. But I haue an occupation or office to attend vpon in the kinges Court, or in some of the Courtes of the law: I haue a trade: I haue a wife: yea, but is it not the property of those that haue forsaken the worlde to reade the scripture? Is it not the property of those which sit vppon the tops of the mountaines? O man (say∣eth hee) what wilt thou here say vnto vs: hast thou nothing else to doe but to turne ouer the bookes of the scriptures? and certainelie that a great deale rather then they: for they being freed of these worldlie cares, are as it were in a hauen: But thou who art tossed continually amidst the waues of this worlde, hast thou not so much the more neede to take vnto thee these same to bee thy consolation? But certainelie they who shall vse such speeches, I knowe not how they should bee worthie to liue and breath, how they should not bee ashamed to looke vppon the Sunne. But we cannot all haue bookes, wee are too poore to buye them: I pray thee tell me, Idem hom. 10. in Iohan. hast thou not as poor as thou art, the tooles and instruments of thy craft & occupation? and wilt thou excuse thy selfe of pouertie, when thou shouldest prouide thee instrumentes of thy profes∣sed Christianitie? these implementes and tooles, whereby there groweth so great commodi∣tie? But in the ende, for hee stoppeth as it were by the way of prophesying of these latter times, all the holes that our aduersaries doe set open; Wee shall not (it may be) vnderstand that which we shall reade in the holie scriptures. But (sayeth hee) will you doe well? At the least vpon the sabath daye bee diligent to reade the Gospell. Idem ibid. And before that you goe to heare the sermon, repeate mee it oft at home, take paine and dili∣gentlie
endeuour thyselfe for to finde out the sence: Idem hom. de Lazaro. which will shew it selfe to be either plaine or obscure and darke, or will seem to hang and agree well together, or to disagree: marke mee these thinges well, and then prepare thy selfe to heare the sermon with all attention. I tell thee moreouer, that although thou doe not vnderstand the thinges which lie therein hidden and secret, that yet there doth not cease to rise and come vnto thee a great measure of sancti∣monie and holines. Notwithstanding it is impossible that thou shouldest be euerie where alike ignorant in them, seeing that the holie Ghost hath in such sort tempered them, as that the Publicanes, Fishers, Dyers, Shepheardes, his simple Apostles, and in a worde the vnlear∣ned were saued by the same. And that to the end, that the most ignorant may not excuse them∣selues in that sort, to the ende that it may appeare that the thinges which are there spoken of, may appeare vnto all to be most easie to be knowne: and finallie to the end, that the artificer, the seruant, the widow, the sillie woman, and the most rude and barbarous, may take profite by the reading of the same, seeing they are not written vppon anie vaine glorie of them that were the Pen-men thereof, as the bookes of the Pagans were, but for the saluation of the hearers. For it was the course of the Philosophers, that although they deliuered that which was profitable, yet they would folde it vppe in obscure tearmes, the rather to be admired: the Prophetes and Apostles their course was contrarie, for they deliuered all thinges plaine and cleare, they made them manifest and euident to all men, as they which were the common Doctors of the vni∣uersall world: insomuch as that euerie man may learne by the onely reading thereof, the things that are deliuered therein. Idem hom. 3. in 2. Thessal. Learne (sayeth hee againe in an other place) without a Prea∣cher: For (saith he) in that we haue Preachers, it is but as the remidie of our negligence. All thinges are cleare and plaine in the holie Scriptures, all the necessarie doctrines therein are ma∣nifest. And as for you which are otherwise addicted to bee hearers rather then readers, you become delicate, and giuen to seeke forth such Preachers, as will please and flatter your cares. But Thou aunswerest againe, and sayest I vnderstand not the scriptures. And tell mee why? Are they written in Hebrew? are they in Latine? are they in any strange and vn∣knowne tongue? hast thou not them in Greeke? But thou aunswerest, so in Greeke, as that therein abideth much obscuritie. From whence should this obscuritie come? are they not sto∣ries which thou vnderstandest clearelie? and dost thou speake vnto vs of obscuritie? These are but excuses and vaine wordes. Idem hom. 12 in Genes. Idem in Psal. 95. & 49. The scripture sayeth hee in an other place, expoun∣deth it selfe, it suffereth not him that giueth his eare thereto to erre: So soone as the testimonie thereof is produced, it confirmeth both his worde that speaketh, and his spirite which hea∣reth. And that so farre as that the common people by them may bee able to iudge of Antichrist. If you haue not (sayeth hee) recourse to the scriptures, if your affections runne after other matters, you will stumble and take offence, you will perish, you will not bee able to discerne which is the true Church, you will fall into the abhomination of deso∣lation, Idem opere impers. hom. 29. Idem in Ep. ad Coloss. hom. 9. which is in the holy places of the Church, &c. Because (sayeth hee in another place) that wee must not belieue the Churches, if they say not and doe the things which are agreeable to the Scriptures. Now then what is there further to be expected after so many reasons, but that we shold crie out with him: Looke about you, you of the secular sort, yee Laitie which haue wiues and children, how you are here commaunded to reade the scriptures: (and hee taketh this his exhortation from the Coloss. 3.16.) not simplie, nor sleightlie, but diligentlie: Coloss. 3.16. looke about you (I say) and consider well of the matter, buye yee Bibles, the me∣dicines of your soules, at the least the new Testament, the Actes of the Apostles, the Gospels, &c. And here you haue no neede of Logicke: the pesant and the simple women vnderstande them, the husbande may talke thereof with his wife, the father with his sonne, &c. The hereticall Priestes doe shut the dores of truth vppon you, Chrysost. hom. 1. in Ioh. Idem in opere imperf. hom. 44. Sixt. Senens. l. 6 annot. 152. because they knowe that you for∣sake their Church, and that they shall come from the Priestlie dignitie wherein they are, to be no better then popular persons, and of the common sorte. But what doe our aduersa∣ries aunswere hereunto? There was a time (say they) when the faithfull recei∣ued the Sacrament with their handes: which custome was afterwarde, as ha∣uing been an vnworthie maner of vsing of it, corrected, and an ordinance made by the church that they shold not touch it any more: the same hath shee thought good of
the holie Scriptures. Is this in conscience to vnloose and dissolue the hard tied knots, or else to cut them in pieces? to answere, or to wrangle? And hath not the Councel of Trent yet dealt more francklie, who haue appointed in their Index expurgatorius: Ind. Expurga∣torius. pag. 27 That wheresoeuer these words, Scripturae omnibus necessariae, the Scriptures are necessarie for all persons, are found in the Tables of the workes of the holie Fathers, that they should bee raced out, and that to the intent that the Tables thus wiped, there might not remaine anie direction to guide a man to the places in their works, where this do∣ctrine is handled. And how much rather would they haue raced the verie places thē∣selues out of the bookes, if there had been but one or two copies of them? Epiphanius was not altogether agreeing and of one minde with Chrysostome, and yet the truth hath conioyned and knit them together in this point, for hee saith: Epiphan. cont Anomantas. All thinges are cleare and manifest in the scriptures: no contradictions or contrarieties, no deadly traps laide in them. For such (sayeth hee elsewhere) as with the vpright sway of sound reason haue to do with the same, not comming thereunto with a diuelish conscience, to throw themselues downe headlong into the bottomles pit of destruction. And wherefore (saith Lactantius,) Lacta. l. 6. c. 26 He that hath made the vnderstanding, the tongue, and the voice, was not he able to speake so as that he may bee vnderstoode? Yea on the contrarie, hee would in his singular prouidence ordain, that the diuine thinges which he spake for all, should be without all painted and deceitfull colouring, to the end that they might bee vnderstoode of all. Whereupon also Theodoret saith, Theodor. de natura hom. Wee see commonlie that the points of Christian doctrine are not onelie vnderstoode of them, which are the chiefe in the Church, and teach the people: but euen of Shoemakers, Lock-Smithes, and those that worke in woole, and of all other sortes of Artificers, yea and which more is, of al sorts of women, as Semsters, Chamber-maides, and others which get their liuing with their handie worke, aswell hauing no learning, as those which haue learning, if any such be. Againe, they which dwell and keepe in the citties, are not onelie become skilfull therein, but in verie good sort those also, that are labourers in the fieldes, as neatheardes, and setters of plantes, whome thou shalt finde disputing of the holy Trinitie, and of the creation of all thinges, yea, and those more skilfull in the nature of man, then euer was Plato or Aristotle. Now let it bee iudged by this place, if this people had been thus instructed and taught by that manner of in∣struction which is deliuered and taught in the Church of Rome. Now it remaineth, that after wee haue done with these good Fathers, The answere of the Councel of Trent. Index lib. pro∣hib. Reg. 4. that wee take a view of that which the Fathers of the Councell of Trent shall say vnto vs. Inas∣much (say they) as if the Bibles should remaine in the vulgar tongue, men through their rashnes would take more harme, then good thereby, we forbid them to haue any without the leaue and li∣cense of the Bb. or Inquisitor, and that vnder their hand writing; who will be readie to grant thē the same, vpon the certificate or witnes of their Curate or Confessor. If any man haue anie o∣therwise, we declare and make knowne vnto him, that he cannot haue absolution from his sinnes vntill he haue giuen vp his Bible vnto his Curate or Ordinarie. And as for the Printers, they shall loose the valew of such bookes to be bestowed vpon the poore. Likewise it is our meaning that the Regulars shall not read or buye them without the permission of their Prelates. What shall wee say here or rather what shall we not haue to say? The old Writers did chide the Laitie as culpable of a notorious crime, for not hauing of Bibles, and here the Pope and his shauelinges do punish the Laitie for hauing of them, they do confiscate the Bibles, they forbid them not as a sinne onelie, but vpon the penaltie of not hauing their sinnes forgiuen, yea and which is more, the Regulars themselues vowed by their institution and ordaining to the studie of holie Scripture, are likewise subiect to the penaltie. I pray you, is it possible that one and the same spirite can say and vnsay? And what will follow hereupon then? but that those good Fathers being assured of the soundnes of their doctrine, did take pleasure that it might be viewed and looked vpon in the light, and that these which auoide and shun the same, who can doubte but that they do doubt of theirs, as conuinced in their consciences of abuse, super∣stition and heresie. Now they are not satisfied with hauing their seruice in an vnknowne language, The secret of the Masse. as if the strangenes of the language did make it so much the more to bee reuerenced,
euen as it falleth out in the receipts of coniurations, and witchcraft, whereof we read in Cato, Trallianus, Scribonius, &c. But further they haue added thereunto the pro∣nouncing and vttering of the principall part thereof, according to their construction, which is that, which containeth the consecration to bee done secretlie and closelie, & thereuppon they call it a secret, and that of purpose in such sort, as that neither the wordes nor the sound thereof can be vnderstoode of the people, learning the same of the Pagans, who vnder the muttering of certaine strange and vnknowne wordes, concealed and priuilie couered their mysteries: Whereas the glorie of our Maister is to publish and make open proclamation of his, this great secret especiall which hath laine hid from before all worldes, of the saluation purchased for mankinde, by the blood of his Sonne, whereof he saith vnto his Apostles: Preach my Gospell, this good tidings vnto all creatures: which by name hee would haue published and repeated at all times in his holy Supper, instituted of purpose for this end in these wordes: You shall shew forth the death of the Lord vnto his comming. But what meaneth this shewing forth, but to vtter and speake it so lowde, as that it may bee heard and so plainely, as that it may be vnderstood? And what then is there more contrarie to the institutiō of the holy supper of our Lord, and to the renewing of the remembrance of his death & passion in the Church, then this pretended mysterie? this strange and vnwonted kind of muttering and whispering? Concil. Colo∣niens. yea and yet furthermore the Councell of Colen, about the yeare 1300. hath added: That the Priest must hasten as fast as he can, in the saying of the Canon, for feare of being interrupted by some hicket, yexing, neesing or otherwise: as if it were the propertie of our God to take vs at a word, or at a halfe sillable, or as if this myste∣rie depended, and had his whole force vpon the bare pronunciation after the manner of the conceiued words of the Pagans their sacrifices: whereas indeed our God wor∣keth therein by his holy spirite, which cannot be interrupted, and looketh therein at the faith, as wee shall see afterwarde (and yet so as that hee examineth and tryeth the same in great mercie) of him who presenteth himselfe vnto this holy Table. But let vs heare notwithstanding what the Fathers will say vnto vs. Saint Paule will that the people should bee able to aunswere Amen; which they cannot doe, as wee haue al∣ready seene, except they vnderstand, and yet a great deale lesse, if they do not heare. So also it was obserued and noted by all the auncient Writers. Clemens Con∣stit. Apost. l. 8 Their Clement whom they so much alledge vnto vs, testifieth aswell in his Lithurgie, as in his Apostolike cō∣stitutions, that after the vttering of the wordes which they call the wordes of conse∣cration, that is, of the institution of the holy supper, the people saide Amen: a signe that they heard and vnderstoode them. Seeing then that the Apostles had so ordai∣ned, Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 5. by whome and by what authoritie is this change and alteration? S. Denys sayeth of one who had beene baptised by the Heretikes: That hee heard the Eucharist, and saide Amen, together with the rest. S. Ambrose sayeth: And after these wordes, thou sayest Amen, August. in Psa. 33. Cardinal. Bess. de Sacrament. Euchar. that is, it is true. S. Augustine, Our brethren likewise do celebrate the Sacraments, & aunswere the same Amen. S. Basil. S. Chrisostome, and all the Greeke Churches do the same to this day in their Lithurgies, whereupon also the Cardinall Bessarion sayeth; The Priest according to the order of the East Church, vttereth with a lowd voice these words: This is my bodie, &c. And Iustinian the Emperour in his new constitution before al∣leadged, commaundeth the same vpon paine of grieuous punishment, adding ther∣to the threatning of Gods iudgements, grounding the same vpon the precept of Saint Paule, and rendring this reason thereof, saying: To the end they may bee the better vn∣derstoode of the faithfull people, and that the heartes of the hearers may bee so much the more pricked with repentance, as also moued and stirred vp so much the more to praise God. And all are of that minde, that in the Primitiue Church it was neuer practised otherwise. Where then will these our aduersaries grounde this their newe deuise? Gab. Biel. in Exposit. Can. l. 15. Lit. D. And of what time, by what Scripture, Tradition, or Councell? They say, we must haue a reuerent regard of the Sacrament. And our Lord will say vnto them, who hath taught you this pretended reuerence? Who hath required this honour at your hands: And that S. Basill sayeth: That contempt is companion vnto that which is common. From whence Innocent
the third, doth ground his speech: Ne sancta verba vilescerent, Laicis nota, for feare that these words being vnderstoode, should become vile. But why doe they not rather say with Moses: Would to God they had all prophesied: with S. Paul, Labour aboue all thinges that you may prophesie; that is, that you may vnderstand your selues, and make others to vnderstand? But and if S. Basil would haue stretched this rule to this Sacrament, and to this kinde of pronunciation, wherefore hath hee left vs a contrarie example? And why doe wee not as quicklie call to minde the saying of Lactantius: Lactanc. l. 5. c. 20. That these mutteringes so greatlie recommended, haue beene deuised and ordained by wilie and crafty Mar∣chantes, to the end that the people might not vnderstand what they worshipped. Concil. Laod. c. 19. They are not ashamed to alledge the Councell of Laodicea, but yet so as that they will not seeme to know that there is any thing spoken of the Canon, nor of the consecration made by the Priest: but rather of the first praier of the seruice of the faithfull, which euery one of them being exhorted therunto by him, made vnto God, with a lowe voice, praying him that it would please him to blesse this holie action and ministerie, the steppes and printes whereof are yet to be seene in the Lithurgies. In the ende, when they can say no more, they flie vnto miracles: as that certaine shepheardes who had learned these wordes by heart, did abuse them in saying them ouer their breade: for which they were presentlie punished of God: and from thence forward, the church ordai∣ned that these words should not be spoken otherwise then in secret. But where may wee read this historie? Where is the councell or decree that followed vppon this so euident and important a miracle? And what other thing do they herein, but oppose & set a tale made for sport, and in a word the whole shepheardes Calender, against the institution of Christ, the vse and custome of the whole Church, the constitutions of Emperours, and the testimonie of all the Fathers? Yea and therewithall our aduersa∣ries are not ashamed at this day to say: that who so doth vse them otherwise, Harding. doth ful∣fill the saying of our Lord, In giuing pearles vnto swine, and casting holie things before dogs. And what will they say then of all the old Church? and amongst whome shall all the faithfull during the time of so manie ages be accounted, but amongst hogs and dogs? Againe, the Councell of Trent is so bold as to pronounce and say; Concil. Tridēt. c. 8.9. If anie man condemn and disalow the manner and fashion of the Church of Rome, for speaking the Canon and wordes of consecration verie low, or by affirming that the Masse ought to bee saide in a common and vulgar tongue, let him be accursed. Now it is certain that this custome slipt in for com∣pany with the rest of the abuses of the Masse. The Lordes supper was wonte of olde to bee celebrated euerie Lordes day, and neuer without the communicating of the faithfull in the same: all the people made one partie, both of the whole seruice, as al∣so of the holy supper. By little and little it began to bee more rare and seldome, as also lesse frequented and resorted vnto: insomuch as that in the end there came but a verie few people to it, yea there was not anie to communicate in the same. The Pa∣stors notwithstanding, to hold fast their former authoritie, were verie readie to per∣swade them that their alone presence was profitable, and to this end they went and disguised this sacrament, and put vpon it the visarde of a sacrifice: and closed vppe this generall communicating of the faithfull in a particular action performed by the Priest. The Priest then which was eyther alone with his onely Clearke to aunswere him, or else very slenderlie accompanied, beganne to speake with a lower voice: and Transubstantiation comming vpon this solitarie condition of the Masse, tyed the force of the sacrament to the pronunciation of words: which the olde Church was alwaies wonte to attribute in parte to the power of Gods spirite, and partlie to the faith of the communicants: Gab. Biel. in expos. Can. l. 4. l. f. g. h. and that so farre as that Gabriel Biel was so bolde as to say, that the consecration was wrought by a hidden and secret power of these wordes, euen altogether in such sort, as charmers and witches are wont to draw milke out of a bench or forme, and a helue out of a hatchet. So that to giue honour and reuerence vnto the Masse, but especiallie to the consecrating thereof, it grew by little and little to bee a custome, to pronounce these wordes as secretlie and mysticallie as may bee. And this for a certaintie was not found to bee obserued before the Councel of Lateran in the Roman Church, nor after it in any other.
CHAP. VII. Wherein is intreated of the Ministers of the Church, and of their charge and calling in the same. IT followeth that we intreate of persons; That the Mi∣nisters of the Church are to preach the Gospell, and not to offer sacrifices. and inasmuch as the Masse hath no grounde in the scripture, or if it would, yet it cannot haue any other then that of the institution of the ho∣lie supper, whereof wee auouch that it is the meere depra∣uation: the Ministers of the same can consequentlie be no otherwise sought or found in the scripture, then in those which haue the charge of administring the holy supper, that is to say, in those which are called Ministers of the worde, as Pastors, Ministers, Bishoppes, diuerse names, but signifi∣ing one and the selfe same charge, that is to say, the preaching of the Gospell, and dispensation of the sacraments: for as for sacrificing Priestes, which they call Sa∣cerdotes, wee haue none of them in the new Testament: inasmuch as all the sacri∣fices of the law (as wee shall see hereafter) had relation all of them to the onelie sa∣crifice of our Lord, finished and consumate vpon the Crosse: and inasmuch as that in this sacrifice were ended and accomplished all the other sacrifices, there remaining none other but the sacrifice of thankesgiuing, instituted in the holie supper, to de∣clare this death, to renew it vnto the belieuers, and to stirre vppe in their heartes the praises of God, in acknowledging of this benefite. And in this sence (sayeth Saint Peter) all the faithfull are sacrificing Priests. Neither was there anie order of Priest∣hoode more fitting the name; and the rather, for that they are all annointed, in as∣much as they are Christians, and so haue receiued the annointing of the holy spirite from Iesus Christ the first borne amongst his Brethren. Our Lord sendeth his Apo∣stles, Matth. 18. Marke 16. he giueth them his holie spirite. But is this to offer Sacrifices? Preach (sayeth hee) the Gospell vnto all creatures: Baptise in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holie Ghost, &c. that is, declare my worde, dispense and distribute my Sacra∣ments. Tit. I. 1. Tim. 3.5. S. Paul sayeth: Let the Bb. be firme in the worde, faithfull and mightie to ex∣hort by wholesome dostrine, fit to instruct and teach, as also to reproue and correct the sinners, &c. Of the sacrificing of the bodie and blood of our Lord for the quicke or deade, not a word. And furthermore we doe not see that in the auncient Church at such time as they receiued the imposition of hands, that any such charge was giuen vnto them, notwithstanding, that for to applie themselues both to the Iewes and the Gen∣tiles, the auncient Doctors did sometime call them Sacerdotes, and their Ministerie, Sacerdotium, that is to say, Sacrificing Priestes, and the action of Sacrificing: as S. Paule also saith, Rom. 15. Orig. in Ep. ad Rom. l. 10. Nazian. in ora. ad plebem. Chrys. in Ep. ad Rom. hom. 19. Pacym. in Dionys. 1. Pet. 2. Cyprian. de Vnct. Chrisma. Origen in Leu. hom. 9. August. in ex∣posit. inchoata ad Rom. I sacrifice the Gospell of God: calling the Ministerie of the word a sacrifice: and so in like manner the most auncient Writers. Origen: This is the worke of a Sa∣crificer to preach the Gospell of Christ. And Nazianzene to his people: I haue offered you to God, as an offring or beast that is sacrificed. And Chrysostome: My offring and sacrificing is to preach and publish the glad tidinges of the Gospell. Whereupon also Pachimeres the expounder of Dionisius saith, He calleth a Priest him, who is properlie called , an Elder, because that custome hath so obtained. On the contrarie, all Christians are cal∣led Priests in S. Peter: You are a royall Priesthood. In the Reuelation of S. Iohn in like manner, &c. Whereupon S. Cyprian vttereth these wordes: All those which of the name of Christ are called Christians, do offer vnto God a daylie sacrifice, and are ordained of God Priestes of holines. And Origen. All such as are annointed with the holy vnction, that is, with the holy spirit of Christ, are made Priestes thereby. And hee presseth the place of S. Peter to that purpose. And S. Augustine goeth further, saying: Euerie man of∣fereth the whole burnt offring of the passion of our Lord for his sinnes. Which is the cause
also, that S. Ambrose would haue men to be throughlie intentiue; Ambros. 1. Cor. 83. Chrysost in 2. Cor. hom. 8. To the end (sayeth hee) that this oblation which is of many, may be celebrated together. And Chrysostome set∣eth it downe vnto vs for a general rule; That in the mysteries, that is in this sacrament, the Pastor differeth not from the Parishioner, &c. In like manner the forme and ceremonie of ordaining and instituting of Mini∣sters in the Apostolike Church, is most cleare and euident. The maner of the laying on of hands, vsed of the olde Church. The Church prayed God that it would please him to be present by his holie spirit, at the election, & to blesse it. And to the end that they might be the more feruent in praier, they vsed to fast before: after which, those which were elect by the Church, receiued the imposition of hands, in the beginning by the Apostles, and afterward by the Pastors & Bishops, but neuer without a perfect knowledge and triall of their doctrine and life. It is also to bee obserued, that whereas our Lord breathed vppon his Apostles, saying vnto them: Receiue the holie Ghost: the Primitiue Church notwithstanding, did not practise the same, because such signes haue no other power then that which God hath giuen vnto them, and therefore must not presumptuously be conceiued to haue anie such, except there appeare the expresse institution and ordinance of the Lord for the warrant of the same. In the election of the Bb. Fabian, Eusb. l. 6. c. 29 wee see the simplicitie that was in the olde Church. The Church came together, aswell the Elders and Deacons, as the other peo∣ple: manie were propounded, as thought worthy to vndertake the charge: in the end Fabian by the common consent and voice of the whole Church is named Bb. and sometimes wee see the common people make the election and after to present the e∣lected to the Presbyterie, that is, to the ecclesiasticall assemblie: and other sometimes wee see the Presbyterie to propound them vnto the people for to approue them, if there bee no man that can say anie thing against them: onelie it was alwaies vsed, that before they were ordained and installed in their Ministerie, there was a generall agreement and consent of the people and ecclesiasticall order, that is, of the whole Church, as concerning the soundnes of his doctrine, and vnspottednes of his life, which was to bee chosen Bishoppe or Elder. And this wee coulde proue through all ages successiuelie, if so be it were anie controuersie amongst vs. For the present, the questiō is, first of the charge of the Minister of the church, whether Bishop or Priest: for the first were intituled by the Ancientes, with the name of Ministers, & the old Episcopall bookes doe yet make mention thereof: secondlie, of the ceremonie, which was obserued in the ordaining of the same. And seeing that these two pointes doe one of them cleare and make plaine the other; wee purpose to insist and stand vppon them. The charge of such a one I say, was to preach the Gospell and administer the Sacramentes: not to say Masses, not to sacrifice the bodie of Christ for the liuing and for the dead. The forme of giuing of or∣ders in the an∣cient time. Theodoret l. 4 c. 23. Concil. Carth. 4. c. 1. & 2. Epiphan. l. 1. tom. 2. Sozom. l. 4. c. 24. Iust. Nouel. 123 de eccles. diuer. The auncient forme and manner also (say wee) had not any ceremonie that did shew anie thing eyther of Priestes or sacrifices. And this wee must proue by taking the search and view of the auncient recordes of antiquitie. Theodoret teach∣eth vs in the election of one that was to succeede Meletius the Great, that it was the custome in ordaining of a Bb. that all the Bbs. of the Prouince should be present ther∣at, at the least three or fowre. Where hee was examined of his doctrine, and some∣times called to make confession of his faith: and in his life, so farre foorth as that hee was to aunswere therein to whatsoeuer hee could bee accused of, or charged withall; whereuppon wee haue a most expresse lawe made by Iustinian the Emperour. After∣warde it was agreede that the Metropolitane, or in his absence the most auncient Bishoppe should lay his hand vppon him and blesse him: and all the others likewise laide to their handes in signe of consent. And to the end that he might bee aduertised and put in minde of his dutie by an eye signe, two Bishoppes helde the holie Gospels ouer his head, to the end hee might know that his calling tyed him to the preaching of the Gospel. And this ceremonie was ordinarily done before the holie Table, where the Sacraments were wont to bee administred. Nazian in leu∣dem Basil. In some places likewise it was ob∣serued, that the Bishoppe passed through all the degrees of the Church, before
that hee came to that place and roome. S. Denys describing this ceremonie, sayeth The Bishoppe is kneeling before the Altar, hee hath the bookes giuen of God, helde ouer his head, and the hand of the Bishoppe, that is, his, who layeth his handes vppon him, and is blessed of him by most holie praiers: the consecrating Bishoppe doth set vpon him the signe of the Crosse, &c. but of the Masse, or any sacrifice, or yet any other ceremonie, hee speaketh not at all. August. l. 3. cont. Crescon. c. 21. & 22. Sozom. c. 19. l. 8. Chrysost. 2. Cor. 8. hom. 18 Volaterr. l. 22. Herman. Gigas Concil. Aquis∣gran. c. 9. The same forme and manner was practised in the person of Cresconius, Maximilianus, Theophilus Alexandrinus, &c. and these alwaies with publike prai∣ers and fasting going before. And from thence the Romaine Church retaineth as yet the fastes of the fowre times, because that Pope Gelasius did ordaine that Orders should be giuen onelie fowre times a yeare, vpon a Saturday, the dayes going before being spent in examining their liues and manners. The ages following added therto the staffe and the ring, saying; The staffe as a shepheardes crooke to reforme and call the stragling into the way, as also to vpholde the infirme and weake, and the ring in signe of the ho∣nour due vnto Bishoppes, and for to seale their secrets withall. But the truth is, that this was after that they were become Lordes of great Lordshippes, & that the Popes and Em∣perours would receiue fealty and homage from them; inuesting them with these en∣signes and badges, as Knightes and Squiers are wont to bee noted out by the speare, the sword and shield, &c. But what get wee hereby? but that the Bb. both in his e∣lection and examination, as also in the whole forme and maner obserued in his ordi∣nation, was charged onelie to teach the word of God well and faithfullie, and to ad∣minister his holy sacraments purelie and sincerely, & to correct his people by his pre∣scribed form of discipline, and his church with such a gouernment as is truly Christiā? And look what we say of the Bbs. Bishoppes and Priestes in olde time were all one. Paul. in Ep. ad Philippens. Acts. 20. Tit. 1. 1. Peter 5. 1. Timoth. 4. Hieronym. in Ep. ad Titum. in Ep. ad Euag. in the old church, the same we say also of Priests, and that by a much more stronger and more forcible reason: first, because there is no like∣lihoode, that the Priest should haue power by his orders to sacrifice the Son of God, and that it shold be denied vnto the Bb. secondlie, because as we haue already said the minister or priest, and the Bb. in ancient accompt were but one. And indeed S. Ierome intreating of this matter, proueth the same by many plain and expresse texts out of S. Paul as may be seene in the place, and therupon he also inferreth, that they were di∣uerse names of one and the same person; the one hauing relation to the age of the par∣tie, the other to the dignitie of his office: and that the Priestes had power in the olde time to laye their handes vppon such as were to bee ordained: and that whereas the Priests did chuse one from amongst themselues to be Bb. it was not because indeede one was greater then an other, but onely for the continuing of vnitie, and cutting off of schisme: and that by the law of God, the Bb. could not assume or chalenge any more to himselfe then the Priestes: and that the Priest or Elder did nothing which the Bb. did not, Ambros. in Ep. ad Eph. c. 4. Chrysost. in 1. Timoth. Isidor. D. 12. c. Clros. Beda ad Philip. Sedul. Scotus. in Epist. ad Ti∣tum. Anselm. Can∣tuar. ad. Titum and so on the contrarie: that in his time Ordination & giuing of Orders was allotted to the Bb. for the reasons abouesaid, & hee handleth this matter of purpose, not by the way, and that euen to the very bottom. S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, Beda & Isidore affirme the same, concluding in fine, that the Bb. had not any more to doe to giue Orders then the Priest: wherupon it should come to passe, that the controuersie would remaine alwaies vndetermined amongst the Schoolemen & the Doctors of the Canon law, the Schoolemen striuing to place the Bbs. in the Order of the Priests, and the Doctors lobouring to make a seuerall Order, for the Bbs. And of al this we con∣clude: seeing that the office and charge of the Bb. and Priest was but one, and that the Bbs. did not consist in anie thing, as we haue seene, but in the dispensation of the word and sacraments, and in the conferring and exercising of discipline, and ecclesi∣asticall policie: that there were not besides these any Priestes, sacrificing for the quick and the dead in the Primitiue Church. In like manner we shall find as little of the Priestlie annointing in S. Of Vnction. Dionys. Hier∣ar. c. 5. Ambros. de dignit. Sacer. 5. Denys himselfe, though he may seem to be wholie composed and compact of ceremonies: for althogh he say, that the Bb. did vse vnction or annointing in manie of his offices and functiōs, yet it is not mentioned that he euer vsed it about Ordination. And from the practise of Bbs. we conclude the same of Priests. S. Ambrose saith: Man layeth on his hands, but
God giueth the grace, Sacerdos, the Priest laieth on Supplicem dextrā, his right hand, making request to God for him, and God blesseth with his powerfull right hand. So then this was his place, for in this booke he intreateth expresly of the Priestly dignitie. The very same is set down in the Councell of Africke, which was helde in the time of S. Augustine, Concil. Afri∣can. c. 2.3.4. &c & from whence we haue heretofore brought and alleadged the Canons concerning Or∣dination, & yet all the ceremonies vsed thereabout are handled throughout the same. In a word amongst so manie elections and promotions of Bbs. to be found in the ec∣clesiasticall historie; there is not anie manner of mention made thereof, except we wil belieue the Legends of one Simeon Metaphrastes, who taught in the Colledge at Cō∣stantinople about some 150. yeares agoe. They obiect vnto vs S. Cyprian: Cyp. de vnct. Chrysin. but Bellar∣mine himselfe is of iudgement, that the booke of Chrisme is not his worke, and for a∣ny place elsewhere, he speaketh of the ordination of a Bb. not one word. On the con∣trarie, he maketh the true vnction or annointing cōmon not onelie to all the Clear∣gie, but vnto all Christians. They themselues are ashamed of Anacletus his Epistle. To be short, the first that speaketh plainelie thereof is Gregorie the Great, Gregor. 1. Reg. 9. in the sixt age in his Commentaries vpon the Kings; who asmuch as laye in him, did cast vppon the Christian Church all the Iewish ceremonies, for the abolishing whereof the Apostles tooke so great care and paine, saying; Now wee annoint them which are in Culmine, that is, which haue the principall charge in the Church: as though the thing had but sprung vppe in his time. The Greeke Church did not vse it, as is confessed by Pope Innocent the 3. Innoc. 3. de vnct. sacr. in his time, that is, about the year 1200. neither in the ordination of Priests, nor in the consecration of Bbs. He addeth moreouer, that for this cause the Church of Rome was taxed of certain ancient Writers, for hauing fashioned themselues to the Iewish Traditions. Wee alleadge the text his proper wordes, howsoeuer Bellarmine doe change it after his own fansie, and wil that it should haue Aliqui, Duran. in Ra∣tional. l. 2. c. 10 and not Antiqui And Lombarde saith by name, that it is borrowed from the olde law. Durand also saith, that it was deriued from the Priesthood of Aaron, commaunded by Moses, Leuit. 8. Now therefore what may we iudge of the audacious boldnes of the Councel of Trent, in pronouncing such accursed, as should not thinke vnction to bee necessarie, that is, against the whole auncient Church? We haue heretofore toucht the matter of garments: The Priestlie garmentes. but this place craueth that we shold say somewhat more thereof. The simplicitie & plainnes of the old Fathers made no difference thereof, saue onely in respect of modestie, and not of the fashion: inso∣much as that the habites or apparrell of a Minister, when hee was to bee occupied in discharging his place, did not differ from his ordinary garments. Walafridus Strabo, Walafr. Strabo who hath written of the time of Charlemaine and since, doth speake it verie plainely: That in the Primitiue Church they used no other apparrell in the action of their Ministerie, then their ordinarie; and that likewise in his time in many places of the East, they liued as then after that sort and maner. The Councell of Gangres likewise, held neere the time, Concil. Gangr. when the Nicene Councell was, doth excommunicate them which iudged that one garment was more holy then an other, as our Monkes do at this day. And Erasmus noteth vppon S. Ie∣rome, that the apparrell of Churchmen was all one with the apparrell of the time, Index Expurg. pa. 6. & not of any set or affected sortes or sutes. As likewise the garmentes of the Monkes of the Order of S. Benets, were not anie other thing then the Latus-clauus of the Ro∣maines. Which when our Fathers of the Councell of Trent perceiued, they caused this place in the Table of the notes of Erasmus vpon S. Ierom, to be set down amongst other places that they decreed to be raced out and defaced. Afterward as the appar∣rell of men doth hardly continue in one state, they begun to alter amongst the secular sort, and were notwithstanding continued in one fashion amongst the Church-men, & thereupon grew the difference betwixt the one and the other. And notwithstanding that the ancient Canons do stay there, yet by & by after the time of Constantine, Plat. in vita. Syluest. when the church was in her prosperitie, it followed that the Ministers were appointed to weare a speciall kind of garment by the ordinance of Syluester the first: Let them re∣fraine and abstaine from all cloth of silke, and from dyed or coloured cloth, contenting themselues
with linnen at the time of the administration of the Sacraments: and further let them not goe. But as Gregorie had vndertaken to reduce all the olde Testament into the new; changing the Elders into the sacrificing Priestes of the lawe, the Tables into Altars, the sacramentes into sacrifices, and the Deacons into Leuites, then there entred an endles peece of worke. And then also beganne from time to time these priestlie gar∣mentes, consecrate for the action of their Ministerie, which wee reade to haue beene giuen to Churches, sometimes by princes, as by Charles the Great, and Lewes his sonne: as also these goodly Canons and Rules: that euerie man euen to the Por∣ter should bee apparelled otherwise then the common people, and that of these gar∣mentes there should be a differenec betwixt those which were to be worn on working dayes, and those which should bee worne on festiuall dayes: as also that they should bee diuerse, according to the diuersitie of feastes, as white, blacke, redde, greene, &c. white ones, vpon the festiuall dayes of Confessors and Virgins; redde ones, v∣pon the festiuall dayes of the Apostles and Martyrs; blacke ones vpon the dayes of affliction and abstinence: and from Aduent to the Natiuitie of Christ, as also from Septuagesima sunday, to the Saturday before Easter, greene ones, vpon com∣mon and working dayes: and a thousande other such like particular obseruations, which it would bee too long to repeate, wherewith the Romish Church hath spor∣ted herselfe from time to time, to holde vp with nouelties, and not to instruct in the olde and auncient truth, the poore simple people. Through which also the Doctors addicted to speculation, as Innocent the third, Durandus in his Rationall and diuerse others, haue runne themselues out of breath in allegorizing vppon the vestmentes of the Massing Priestes, vppon their stoles and tippettes, &c. and in blazoning of the colours, after the manner of the olde Romaines: fonde Cu∣riosities, which the first antiquitie did neuer thinke of, but haue beene deuised by that antiquitie, which in respect of the former is but as a yesterdayes Noueltie. Now it was likewise about the same time, How Vnction and the Order of Priesthoode grew vp and prospered. that Vnction grewe to bee re∣ceiued for a Priestlie Order. Gregorie the Great beganne the same by a peruerse imitation of the Iewish religion. The times so shaped, whiles the Barbarians did beare swaye in Christendome, that euerie man, as the scripture sayeth, filled his hande, that the calling of the Ministerie was prostituted to euerie ignorant fellowe, and the imposition of handes offered to euerie one that came. By the same meanes also the zeale of Christians waxed colde, and resorte vnto the sacra∣ment of the holie supper was rare and seldome. So that what through the negli∣gence of the Bishoppes busied with the affaires of this worlde; what through the multitude of Priestes, vnable for the most parte to teach the worde of God; and lastlie, through the coldnes and benummednes of the faithfull, in the bestirring of themselues in holie exercises, all these abuses were bredde and brewed; name∣lie, that the Bishoppes and Priestes preaching the worde of God no more, and the faithfull repayring to the sacramentes but certaine times in the yeare, the whole seruice was become a hearing, or as the Italians saye, a seeing of the Masse. As also that whereas the Bbs. and Elders were wont to be called to the preaching of the gos∣pell, the Elders from henceforth were not ordained, but onlie to celebrate the Masse: which at the first they tearmed to consecrate, and afterward to sacrifice. They were ordai∣ned by these wordes, Accipe potestatem, &c. Take the power of sacrificing for the quicke & the deade, Duran d. l. c. 9. without anie one worde spoken of the preaching of the Gospell: set in∣to their charge per calicem & patinam, with a cuppe full of wine, and a dish full of hostes, and not by the deliuering of the Gospell, as being inioyned to this onely du∣tie, and with these wordes: Take vnto thee power and authoritie to offer vnto God, hosts able to appease his wrath, &c. And they were annointed for this worke, by the annoin∣ting of handes with this praier: Ʋouchsafe O God to consecrate and sanctifie that which these handes shall consecrate and sanctifie, Anno 1000. &c. And this chaunge fell out about the yeare 1000. in a time most famous for all manner of ignorance, of all others that had beene since the time of our Lord, and that in the common opinion of all men, and
wherein all manner of superstition grew and increased more then it had done in ma∣ny ages before. In the end, Transubstantiation was added vnto the rest, and that the Priest who was to bee receiued into the Order, Hostia 40. dierst Fulbert. Epise. Carnot Ep. 2. ad Finard. shoulde haue giuen him by the Bb. a consecrated host, which he shold be eating for the space of full 40. daies, euerie daye taking some part thereof, though neuer so little, that so hee might be sanctifi∣ed by little and little, in signe of the fortie daies which our Sauiour Christ conuersed with his Disciples after his resurrection &c. But what ground haue all these newe inuentions in the scripture? what staye or holde in that which is true antiquitie? If so bee that wee will not intitle with this name all that which may bee alleadged and brought within the compasse of some hundred yeares, against the priuiledge of the Church: whose priuiledges and lawes, and much lesse doctrine, but least of all, the truth of Christ, there is no prescription, or number of yeares that can preiu∣dice or impeach. CHAP. VIII. That the Bbs. and Ministers of the olde Christian church were married. THere is yet remaining to be spoken of, The scripture contrarie to their single & vnmaried life. the vnmarried estate or sole and single life, a law and ordinance of the Romish church, by which the Ministers and Pastors of the Church are bounde to abstaine from marriage: those which doe administer their sacramentes, to abstain and renounce (according to their do∣ctrine) one of their sacramentes. But the scripture speaketh plainelie, how that our Lorde ordained and blessed marriage from the Creation: he vouchsafed to honour it in the Patriarks, to commaund it to his Priestes, to approue it also in the Prophetes, the cleare and ma∣nifest vessels of Gods spirite, hauing an extraordinarie vocation in the Church, ap∣proued by signes and miracles. These good fellowes which otherwise are most for∣warde in bringing backe againe and heaping vppon vs all the ceremonies of the olde Testament, why doe they banish and driue from vs this order & ordinance? In the new Testament our Lord worketh his first miracle at the marriage of Cana, the compari∣sonis often vsed in the Scripture of the mar riage of Christ and his Church. If it had been a worke of the flesh, as they say, would he haue been present at it? If it had beene a prophane coniunction and copulation, was it for necessity and lacke of other com∣parisons, that the holy Ghost should vse this? 1. Cor. 7. Hebr. 13. and that in laying open and pointing out of so high and holy an vnion? But furthermore the Apostles say generally; Let him that cannot liue continentlie take a wife, the marriage, and bed vndefiled are honourable among all men: and afterward particularly: A Bb. and a Deacon must be the husbands each of them of one wife, &c. If the Bb. do not gouern his children well, how shal he gouern the church of God? They likewise giue caueats and prouisoes against the contrary doctrine; For it wil come (saith S. Paul) vpon the people giuen ouer to spirits of deceipt and doctrines of Diuels: teaching lies in hipocrisie, seared in their conscience with a hote iron, who shal forbid to be married, &c. But after all this I leaue to speake of diuerse other places for breuities sake, what will they haue to say vnto vs? against so plaine and manifest a matter, what needeth either reason or interpretation? against the expresse commandement of God, why should we admit the inuention of man? and from whence can it come but from the spirit of lies? couering it selfe with the spirit of hypocrisie? and from whence commeth this fained holines, this making of consciēce of that which is no sin, but from a conscience which is dead and without feeling of any maner of sin, and which, that it might not seem past feeling of all sin, sheweth it self indifferentlie and alike feeling of that which is, and of that which is not? If wee obiect against them the example of the Priestes of the olde lawe, they tell vs, that this was because it behoued that they should come of the same stocke and
race. Who hath told them then, that the Ministers of the newe Testament ought not to haue anie? They adde further and say, that those Priests did one serue after an other in their seuerall courses, and that then they abstained from their wiues. Let them proue vnto vs therfore, if for that cause they renounced and altogether for∣sooke marriage. And how did the high Priest vse his married estate, who was com∣maunded to sacrifice euening and morning? 1. Paralipom. 24. And how in a worde did they passe ouer all the other whole fowre hundred yeares? For they cannot dissemble or cloake the matter, how that this order of seruing by courses came not in but by Dauid, a long time after the lawe. And where will they find vs, that it was com∣maunded them during the time of their seruice to forsake their wiues? and yet wee see that all manner of vncleannes which might defile them, was most precisely for∣bidden them, and all manner of clensing and purifying of themselues so distinctly commaunded them. If againe, wee obiect vnto them the Prophetes, who all of them were married, Chrysost. in Matth. hom. 56 in fine. and are acknowledged so to haue been by all the old Writers, but more speciallie by S. Chrysostome: then looke what they cannot vnloose, they will not let to cut in sunder, saying: They had not the charge of sacrificing. Or else they imagine, that they did put away their wiues during such time. And in the ende they are not ashamed to ordaine in the Councell of Trent by their Index expurgatorius, that it shalbe raced out of the Table of Chrysostome his workes: That all the Prophetes were married. Iesus Christ was founde present at the mariage in Cana of Galilie. Marriage therefore (say we) is not accounted amongst the thinges that are vncleane and doe pollute, nor amongst the workes of the flesh. But (say they) hee was present at it, be∣cause it was the marriage of S. Iohn the Euaugelist, that hee might hinder the mar∣riage, and to that end they finde vs out by and by, one Abdias Babilonius a late com∣piler of Legends, who telleth vs the whole storie from point to point: If thou waste not mine, saith our Lord in that place vnto S. Iohn, I would suffer thee to marrie. Directlie a∣gainst the expresse word: for God the Creator did institute and ordaine it, as also con∣secrate it both by his blessing & presence. And to the manifest calling in question of S. Iohn his faithfull and sincere dealing, who should haue had great wrong and iniurie to bee thought to authorize and alow mariage, as by the contents of this storie, it may seeme hee did; if Iesus Christ had condemned it in himselfe, and so also it should fol∣low, that it is not possible to bee the seruant of Iesus Christ, and to bee married toge∣ther. August. serm. 1 Dom. 2. post Epiphan. & tract. 8. in Ioh. But how commeth it then to passe, that the olde Fathers were not aduised of this point? As S. Augustine, who handling this place, sayeth: That the Lord hath not disdained or thought scorne of marriage, that it was his will and pleasure to honour it: that it was his will that thereby children should be begotten: that hee hath by his presence e∣stablished the lawes of vnitie and concord therein, and turned the marriage songes into holie psalmes to the glorie of God, Cyril in Io l. 2 c. 22. Chrysost. cont. Iudae. Gentil. & Heretic. Heb. 13.4. &c. Saint Cyril, That therein hee would declare the holines of marriage, and sanctifie the principall cause of our birth, &c. Saint Chrysostome, That he hath honoured marriage, and that therefore it is not anie let or hinderance vnto pietie; and in∣deed (saith hee) why should it be more hinderance to ours, then vnto Moses, Helias, or S. Peter his petie and godlines? The Apostle sayeth; Marriage is honourable in all men, , and the bedde vnde filed: but God will iudge fornicators and adulterers. There is no manner of exception to bee made against this generall affirmation? And Paph∣nutius doth alledge it in the Nicene Councel, against those that wold forbid Church∣men to marrie, and this place decideth the whole controuersie by the clearnes ther∣of, notwithstanding whatsoeuer cauillations, that may be brought to the contra∣rie, insomuch as that this manner of expounding and taking of it, is ratified by this fa∣mous Councell. And yet the spirit of lyes doth take an exception against it saying; In omnibus continere non valentibus, amongst all them that haue not the gift of continency. What ground can this exception find in this text? which is so wouen & set together, as that this exception doth cut away the whole strength of the Apostle his argument, which is such, God wil iudge al fornicators & adulterers so much the more seuerely, for that he
hath giuen them a remedy against the concupiscence of the flesh, euen mariage, which is honorable amongst al, of what condition soeuer they may be: namely, saith Chry∣sostome, Against the pollution of wandring pleasures, the bed vndefiled: Chrysost in ep. Heb. in Marn. 15 hom. 52. 1. Cor. 7.2. 1. Timoth. 3. Caretan. ibid. ad Hebr. Haimo ibid. following herein the same, which the Apostle saith in an other place: For the auoiding of temptation, let euery man haue his wife, and euery woman her husband, &c. And this is also the verie same that Cardinall Caietanus saith: In omnibus, that is to say, non in aliquibus, sic in aliquibus, non; that is, not in some; yea, and in other some, no. And Haimo Bishop of Halberstat ad∣deth; That a man riseth from the mariage bed vndefiled, in vsing it according to the institution of the Lord. Saint Paule presseth the matter further, saying; A Bishop must be vnblameable, 1. Tim. 3. Titus. l. 6. the husband of one onely woman. The same also is deliuered of priestes, and that in the same wordes. Wherefore to be married is a thing for which they cannot be blamed: see∣ing that one and the same man may be vnblameable, & the husband of one woman both together. Againe, he saith: It is meete and requisite, 1. Tim. 3. & 5. Tit. l. 2. & 3. 1. Timmoth. 3.4.5.6. that hee hold the mysterie of faith and wholesome doctrine, that is, that he be able to teach: Let him pray for himselfe, and for the Church; let him know to gouerne it with a holy wisedome in all the parts thereof, to esta∣blish the ministerie, to conuince the aduersaries, to censure the offendors, and to bee earnest for the reliefe of the poore: that he do all this with a good conscience: exercising himselfe in godli∣nesse and charitie, in faith, and in holines, giuing all manner of vertuous example, auoiding all contrarie vices, euen so as he may make the enemies of the truth to blush with shame, &c. And yet notwithstanding it is meete and conuenient that he should be married, that hee should haue children, that he bring them vp in the feare of God, that in the trayning vp and instructing of them, he expresse the scantlin of that care, which he hath ouer the Church. Then it must needes follow, that all these vertues may agree together with mariage: seeing that S. Paule will, that Bishops and Priestes may be maried, and yet all these vertues looked for at their handes, and which is more, euen chastitie, shamefastnesse, and honestie of life. This place needeth no clearing, and notwith∣standing against the sonues of darknes, wee will not find fault with the light of the Doctors, if it shine thereupon. Chrysostome saith: Thou demandest why S. Chrysost. in ep. ad Tit. 1. & in 1. Timoth. 3. Paule doth here lay out vnto vs, that a Bishop should bee the husband of one onely wife? doest thou know wherefore? It is to shut up all beetickes monthes, which giue out and teach abroad, that mari∣age is impure: thereby shewing them to the contrarie, that it is so honourable and precious, as that a married man may notwithstanding be admitted and aduanced to the great and hono∣rable place of a Bishop. And yet that there may bee obserued a modest and commendable mea∣sure, he saith but of one onely, that so they may not vnlawfully take vnto themselues libertie to inioy two together, after the manner of the Iewes. Theodoret. in 1. ad Tim. 3. & ad Tit. 1. And Theodoret saith the same vppon these places, confuting such in expresse wordes, as would abuse them against the se∣cond mariages of Churchmen. Chrysostome also saith the same: The Apostle saith, if he know not to gouerne his family, &c. seeing that he which is a good house keeper, becommeth quickly wife and skilfull in matters concerning a common weale: and he that hath attained, to keep and containe within the compasse of dutie, a wife, children, and seruants, is so much the more able to gouerne all sortes of people in the Church: as if mariage were an introduction and way of direction, teaching him to become fit for the degree and dignitie of the gouernment of the Church: so farre is it off, that hee should hold it as a meanes to cause him to stumble and fall. S. Ierome, Hieronym in 1. Tim. 3. & ad Titum. 1. though sometime not very fauourable to mariage, expounding this place vnto Timothie, doth not find therein any argument to disproue the mariage of Ministers: vpon the place to Titus he doubteth whether he should vnderstand it, that a Bishop cannot haue but one wife as who say, that ther∣by their second mariages should be excluded, or els that he may not haue two at one time, as the ancient Patriarkes, whose example the Iewes following, tooke it for a di∣spensation for them to doe the like: & yet he preferreth & maketh more accompt of a modest and chaste second mariage, then of one sole and onely mariage wantonly & lasciuiously entertained. Idem aduersn-Iouinianum. Being ouercome of choler (as he oftentimes was) against Iouinian, hee cutteth off all, saying, that the Apostle meaneth, that hee hath beene
maried, Idem ad Ocea∣num. ep. 83. but not that he may be. But his heate being quencht, and passion ouerpast, writing to Oceanus, he pleadeth the cause of Carterius Bishop of Spain, who had had one wife before his baptisme, and one afterward, saying: For him it is written: Mari∣age is honourable, & the bed vndefiled: but for thee who findest fault with him, (he speaketh of his aduersaries) God will iudge the fornicators and adulterers. Againe: The Apostle was amongst the Iewes, and the first Church of Christ was of the residue and remainder of Isra∣el; he knew that it was permitted by law, and accustomed amongst the people by the example of the Patriarkes, and of Moyses, to beget and multiply children by diuers women: yea and this libertie extended euen to the priestes: wherefore he ordained that the priestes (Sacerdo∣tes) of the Christian Church should not giue themselues such licence, as that they should haue two or three wiues (vno tempore) at one time, &c. Comming againe afterward to Carteri∣us: And doest thou thinke therefore, that this good man did offend against the Apostle, who accompteth it amongst the vertues of a Bishop, that he be the husband of one wife onely? And all the world (saith he) is full, not of priestes, nor of inferior persons, but of Bishops, so that the number would become greater then that which was found in the Councell of Rimini, &c. Tertullian himselfe, Pertull. de Monogam. although he were a Montanist, alleadging these places of Timo∣thie and Titus, is of iudgement, that Bishops and Priestes should be maried: onely he standeth vpon the disalowing of second mariages, for which hee is reproued by Saint Ierome in the place aboue named. But this point should not bee to our pur∣pose. In the meane time we are not to belieue, as some would go about to wrangle out the matter against vs by this place of Saint Ierome, disagreeing with himselfe, whiles he was caried away with the streame of contention, that we should nourish this opinion, that the Bishop had beene maried, but that he may not bee so, derogating and detracting the credite due to other places, wherein he handleth the question, & that of purpose and void of all passionate affections. Let vs say then, for it follow∣eth by like reason, from the coherence and scope of the text: that the Apostle doth likewise vnderstand, that the Bb. hath beene vigilant, sober, of good report, giuen to hospitalitie, apt to teach, &c. but that he may not be so any more. But the holy Ghost hath preuented such wrangling and false assertions, who saith: In the present time Let the Priest be established, Tit. 1. 1. Timoth. 3. & let him be the husband of one onely wife: let the Deacons also, , be the husbandes of one onely wife, &c. And Saint Paule doth describe afterward vnto vs what manner of women the wiues of Bishops, Priestes and Deacons should bee. And thus you may see whither a blind passion had almost led vs, against the cleare and euident light. Chrysost. in ep. ad Tit. hom. 2. In ep. ad Heb. hom. 7. Chrysostome therefore saith better: There are some that af∣firme, that S. Paule his purpose is to speake of one that hath beene maried, but that he may not bee so any more. But (saith hee) although hee shall bee so still, yet he may demeane & car∣rie himselfe honestly therein. Vse (saith he) mariage soberly, and thou shalt be the chiefe in the kingdome of heauen. Ambros. D. 26. C. Qui sine. Likewise Saint Ambrose saith: Who so otherwise blamelesse is the husband of one onely wife, is beld by the law to bee capable of the office of the Priesthoode. Saint Augustine: August. in quest. ex vtro{que} testam. Hug. Card. in 1. Tim. 3. Caiet. in 1. Timoth. 3. & ad Tit. 1. The Apostle saith, that hee which hath a wife, may and ought to bee made (Sacerdos) a priest, a Minister, a Bishop. Cardinall Hugo saith: At that time it was lawfull for Priestes to haue wiues. And Cardinall Caietan after him: This estate and condition must bee vnderstood negatiuely, that is to say, Non plurium vxorum virum, not a husband of many wiues. But Pope Calixtus the second about the yeare 1100. did turne & make it into an other maner of sence: The husband of one onely wife, that is, consecrate and put apart for one onely Church for one onely Bishoprick, & that to be taken so, as that he was not to haue any moe then one, or that he was not greedily or proudly to labour, to be translated and remoued from one to another. And in S. Ierome his time this Allegorie was begotten and borne, and by some preferred and better liked then that which was according to the letter: and Carterius his aduersaries themselues, saith he, did finde that interpretation to be violently forced, and very harsh. To whome hee answereth thereupon: Restore them to the scripture his simple sence and meaning, that so we may not reason against you, from the constitutions and conclusions of your owne lawes: that is to say, that wee may not oppose allegorie against allegorie, and iudgement against iudge∣ment,
but may hold and keepe our selues simplie to the wordes of the Apostle. O∣therwise, what will become of S. Paule his argument: If he know not to gouerne his owne children, how shall hee be able to direct and guide the Church of God? As also when the Apo∣stle shall tel vs of widowes: that choise must be made of such as haue beene the wiues of one onely husband; shal we vnderstand it of Bishopricks or Diocesses, that haue had but one only Bishop? But, to draw to an end, what should hinder the Apostle, that be could not more plainly say: It behoueth that the Bb. to the end he may be without blame, abide vnmaried, or at the least be a widdower? &c. But shame maketh them mingle these absurdities with a blasphemie: as that during the weaknes of the church these mariages were permitted, but prohibited and forbidden, when it came to bee strong. And what will they say to Chrysostome, who saith plainely: That S. Paul gaue this law to Timothie, not for himselfe onely, but for all them which were to come? Or rather vnto Egesippus, who endeth the flower and virginitie of the Church, at the death of the Apostles: Euseb. l. 3. c. 32 And presently after there followed (saith he) an infinite number of impuri∣ties and corruptions. They labour further to proue the matter in controuersie against S. Paul, by himself: 1. Cor. 7.5. for (say they) he telleth vs in another place: That they must abstaine from women, to at∣tend vpon fasting and praier. And what shall they doe then who are to pray euery day? let them with conscience carefully reade this place, & they shall see that which Chry∣sostome obserueth in the same: that he speaketh not there of an ordinary praier, but of an extraordinarie made with rare & singular attending thereunto by fasting. And therefore he saith: Defraude not one another, except it bee by mutuall consent, and that for a time. Againe, And come together againe, to the end that Sathan doe not tempt you, because of your incontinencie: And Chrysostome saith expresly: If he said, , that the maried which lie together, could not pray; how should that which he commandeth all Chri∣stians in another place agree therewith? Pray without ceasing: wherefore hee speaketh of an extraordinarie prayer (saith he) which requireth an exact attention: not that the societie betwixt the married, doth conuay or carrie about it any impuritie, , but rather businesse and affaires, . Whereupon also Saint Ambrose saith: Ambr. in ep. 1. Cor. 7. We must pray with∣out ceasing: but this is spoken, Vt orationi insistatur: by courses and distances of time (saith hee) to strengthen and increase meditation. And Theodoret: For to sanctifie the fast. And likewise hee saith in another place: That the Apostle hath deemed him worthy of a bishopricke, that liueth and dwelleth chastly with one onely wife. Nowe I am not ignorant, that Origen, who gelded himselfe, against the expresse Canon, C Apostol. cap. 21.22. which they attribute to the Apostles, which declareth him to be a man-slayer, hath badly expounded those words: Qui potest capere, capiat, & that he was reproued of the church for the same: as hauing therin gone about to conclude from this place, that it appertaineth not to any, but such as are chast, to offer a continual sacrifice vnto God; although notwithstanding that he speake it simply, It seemeth so vnto me: which hee would not haue done, if it had beene an ecclesiastical determination, wherein he was imitated of S. Ambrose in a certain place: whereas (in good sooth) they should both haue learned of S. Paul, that the bed vndefiled is not at debate with chastity, neither yet by consequent with the sacrifice. And the Councell of Gangres, Concil. Gan∣grens. 4. D. 28. c. Si quis dis∣cernit. held about the time of that of Nice, for the repressing of such superstitions, doeth remedie this ill throwne exposition by an expresse Canon, saying: If any man make a difference of a ma∣ried Priest, as though by reason of his mariage he ought not to offer: & do for that cause keepe a∣way from this oblation, let him be accursed. But it is further said, 1. Cor. 7.33. that maried folkes haue care of the thinges of this world, and the vnmarried of the pleasing of the Lord, &c. Graunt that to be true: but let them consider therewithall, that which Chrysostome obserueth against the superstitious of his time: that Saint Paule speaketh not there of Churchmen, but generally of all Christians. And what is it then that can fol∣low thereupon, but that all Christians indifferently and without exception should abstaine from mariage? whereas hee that hath ordained the Bishoppe, will that hee shoulde haue care of the Church the house of God, and his owne together.
And as for his owne, to the end hee might receiue comforts for the cares which this worlde might minister, hee hath assisted and seconded him with a wife: such a one (saith Nazianzene) as was his mother to his father, Nazianzen. de matre. who helped him much, yea so much as that thereby he had a great deale the more leasure & time to his Ministerie. And Chrysostome would haue a Bb. to be a good housekeeper, before that hee come to be a good politician. And our Bbs. at this day who haue no wiues, do nothing slack their desire to haue the gouernment of all the world. But O man, who art thou which iudgest another mans seruant? who wouldest teach God, how, & by whom he must be serued? who controulest the state and gouernment of his house, & the rule of his ser∣uice; after that he hath giuen & published it in such plaine and expresse tearmes? and which knowest better then he what is agreeable for his seruice? when as that which thou addest of thine owne inuention, what is it but , a seruice framed ac∣cording to thine owne will and pleasure; condemned by his spirit, because it procee∣deth from thine? And againe, who knoweth better then he, how deepe man may plunge himselfe; That the vn∣maried & sole life doth stand onely by the positiue law. D. 23.28. &c. or how high he may rise by the power which he giueth him? But fur∣thermore, they haue been constrained to acknowledge after all their shifts & turning wiles, that there is not any place in the holy scripture, which bindeth ecclesiasticall persons to a sole and vnmarried life. Gratian saith absolutely: The mariage of Priestes is not forbidden either by the authoritie of the law or Gospell, neither yet by the Apostles: but rather by an ecclesiasticall law. Hereafter wee shall see what manner of one and from whence it is. D. 84. vbi Gl. Thom. in 2. se∣cundae. q. 88. art. 11. And the Glosse vpon the decree saith in another place: That be∣fore the Pope Syricius, marriage was permitted vnto priestes. Thomas Aquinas: That the vow of continencie is not essentially tyed to the order, but onely by way of accident, and by occasion of ecclesiasticall constitution. And of this opinion were many of the most fa∣mous schoolemen. Caietan. in o∣pusc, tit 1. tract 27. Cardinall Caietan of our time: It cannot bee shewed either by reason or authoritie, that a priest sinneth in being maried, neither can his order, in that it is an order, neither yet in that it is a holy order, hinder or let him, either before or after the taking thereof, he abiding within the boundes prescribed by Christ and his Apostles, &c. The Cardinall Cusan writing to the Bohemians, Thom. in sum∣ma quae inci∣pit, Commise∣rationes Do∣mini, c. 165. Posthac dicen∣dum. Durand. sent. 4 D. 38. q. 2. Innocent. 4.1. de conuers. coniug C. Pla∣cet. doth likewise hold the same. Thomas of Aquin also goeth as farre, saying: But and if an ecclesiasticall person make knowne to his Confessor, that bee cannot containe himselfe, the Confessor shall not commit any great sinne, to counsell him to marrie secretly, without the knowledge of his bishop. And who cannot gather hereby what he would haue said, if he had not feared the censure? Durand, the author of the worke, called Speculum Iuris, speaketh more boldly: That the Coun∣cell should restore the libertie of hauing wiues to the priestes againe, seeing that it is but in vain, by the strictnesse of a number of Canons to go about to force them to chastitie. And yet ne∣uerthelesse he holdeth that the Councell can doe nothing contrarie to the expresse word. Pope Innocent the fourth, who liued about the yeare 1250. saith: Mariage by the lawe of nature doth not hinder any man from being receiued into orders, and he which should bee ordained, may enioy and vse a married estate, being alreadie contracted, as it is practi∣sed in the East Church: as also contract a new mariage, if the ecclesiasticall constitutions did not hinder the same. Now as a sole and vnmarried life hath no law in the scripture, That absti∣nence from mariage was not obserued in the old Church. Ambr. in 2. Cor. 11. . Cor. 9.5. Clem. l. 4. & 7. strom. August in quaest. ex vir. iest. nor yet consti∣tution from the Apostles, so likewise hath it no maintenance or defence from any practise of the Apostles, or from any of their disciples. Saint Ambrose vpon the 2. Corinth. holdeth that all the Apostles except Saint Iohn were married: and all of them (but that some writers doe except Saint Iohn) notwithstanding, Mar∣tyrs. The Gospell maketh mention of S. Peter his mother in law. S. Paule saith: Haue not I power to leade with me a wife, a sister, as well as Cephas. And Clemens Alexandrinus doth expound it of a woman in the state of mariage: & from thence reasoneth against such as were giuen to boast & brag of the goodlines of an vnmaried life. S. Augustine saith, that S. Peter did not cease to be the chiefe amongst the Apostles, because he had begotten children. And we must not say, that he had had one, but that after his calling he had not any: for frō this example in the same place, S. August. concludeth thus: And
for this cause the Apostle sheweth, that hee that hath a wife, Fieri posse & debere sacer∣des. Clem. l. 7. stro. prouided that in other things hee keepe the commandementes, ought and may be made a priest, vsing by name the word Sacerdos. In a word Clement and Eusebius witnesse, that Saint Peter liued to lead his wife vnto death, for the name of Christ, and comforted her, being ioyfull that shee was called thereto. Of Saint Paule the place of the 9. to the Corinthians, alleadged by Clemens Alexandrinus doth giue a sufficient and most euident note and marke, howsoeuer our aduersaries by the word , would vnderstand Mulierem, a wo∣man, not Vxorem, a wife: and as for the word , which is ioyned therewithall, they weigh it not. But yet notwithstanding Clemens Alexandrinus, neere vnto the time of the Apostles, vnderstood it of mariage. And Tertullian alluding thereunto, Tertul. in ex∣hor. ad castir. c. 8. Hillar. in Psal. 118. sgnat. ad Phi∣ladeph. saith: It was allowed the Apostles to marrie, and to leade their wiues about with them. And Saint Hillarie concludeth: That virginitie and abstaining from mariage, is of free will and not of necessitie. These are the oldest writers. But Ignatius the disciple of S. Iohn cut∣teth off all, saying: Ʋirgines I reioyce with you because of your holines, euen as I reioyce in Eli∣as, Iosua, Melchisedech, Elisaeus, Ieremie, Iohn Baptist, S. Iohn, Timothie, Titus, Euodius, and Clemens; all which liued vnmaried: But not (saith he afterward (that I would detract or withdraw any thing from the rest of the Saintes, , for liuing in mari∣age: For on the contrarie I long and earnestly desire, that God would make me worthie to sitte at their feete in the kingdome of heauen, euen at the fecte of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, Ioseph, Esay, and other the Prophets; of Peter also and Paule, and other the Apostle, who ledde a maried life. Note this word, Leade or keepe company, to signifie that they had not put away their wiues: as also it is to be noted, how he putteth them in the number with Abraham and Isaac, who continually without ceasing kept houshold together with them. Then he concludeth: If therefore any man confesse God and Christ, Mixtionem le∣gitimam, vz. copulam. Habet . Euseb. l. 3 c 30. ex Clement. Act. 21. and notwithstan∣ding call , the lawfull bedde, vncleannes or pollution, or abhorreth any kinde of meates, by the same name, such a one is inhabited and possessed by the Apostate Dragon, that is, by the Deuill. Clement saith of Philip the Apostle, that he was maried, had children, and maried his daughters. The Actes make mention of Philip the Euangelist, how that he had foure daughers. In a word Platina maketh mention, that S. Luke liued a married man, hauing his wife in Bithynia, till hee were fourescore and three yeares old. And the Nicolaitans do take their name from Nicolas the Deacon, companion to S. Stephen; of whose wife there is so oftentimes mention made in the historie of the church. And likewise Clement the pretended successor of S. Peter, Eusb. l. 3. c. 29. in the Epistle which is attributed vnto him, speaketh of wife and children in such sorte, as that it is likelie that he was maried himselfe. To be short, Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, saith to Pope Victor, that hee is the eight Bishoppe of his race, being come of seuen predecessors, Bishops. Our aduersaries do make great account of the Canons of the Apostles though they be declared to bee Apocrypha, by Isidore himselfe. Notwithstanding let vs heare them: If the Bishop, priest, or Deacon, &c. do abstaine from mariage, flesh or wine, Canon Apost, 50. not for to haue his spirit raised higher, and lifted vp in the exercises of pietie, but as hauing them in dete∣station, let him be deposed and reiected of the Church: and let him remember himselfe, that God created them male and female, &c. They will say, that this is meant against heretickes, which absolutely condemned mariage, and that they are no such. But listen what is said vpon the same matter: Let the bishop (say they) Priestor Deacon, Canō. Apost. c. 5. D. 28. Si quis docuerit, & D. 31. quicunque declar. C. 11. in ecret. Clem Alex. l. 2. c. 10. Paedag. & 3. strom. haue no cause to put away & reiect their wiues, vnder the colour of religion: but and if they do it, let them be cut off from the communion; and if they perseuere & continue, let them be deposed. Let vs go on & see further of the old writers. Ignatius his opinion is well enough witnessed vnto vs, by the place aboue alleadged. As also the opinion of Clemens Alexandrinus, who tea∣cheth, that the maried & vnmaried life haue both of them their diuers gifts & meanes to serue God by: that to liue well, whether it be in the one or in the other, is his gift; so that he maketh thē equal. Irenaeus maketh mention of a certain man named Mark, an heretike, who had corrupted & defiled the wife of a certaine Deacon, being a very faire womā; wherby it apeareth, that the orders of those times did not forbid them to
marrie. Hieronym. de eccles. script. Tertullian was a priest, as may appeare by that which Saint Ierome saith, and maried, as it may appeare by his bookes to his wife: and yet a Martyr notwithstan∣ding, if we credite some men. But the matter is, that he falling to bee of Montanus his heresie, did likewise embrace Montanus his opinions against mariage, the steps and signes whereof are verie manifest and euident in his latter bookes: but in so do∣ing, Tertul. in ex∣hortat. ad ca∣stit. c. 8. he giueth some more scope vnto the word aboue alleadged. Licebat & Aposto∣lis nubere, & vxores circumducere, Licebat & de euangeliis viuere, &c. It was lawfull for the Apostles to be maried, and to lead their wiues about with them: & it was lawful for them to liue of the Gospell, &c. ioyning these two lawfull thinges together, although he conclude, that whatsoeuer is lawfull, the same is not expedient. And although hee condemne second mariages in all persons, yet he teacheth vs, that the Catholikes or Orthodo∣xes of his time did not so: when he vpbraideth them with their Bishops, which were not once onely, Tertul. de Monogam. c. 12. but twice maried, saying: For it seemeth that all things amongst you are lawfull for Bishops: how many are there that rule ouer you, & haue beene twise maried? which are not ashamed of themselues, when they reade the wordes of the Apostle, the husband of one onely wife? Euseb. l 4. c. 23. Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, in an Epistle which he writ vnto the Gnosi∣ans about the yeare 170. disswadeth Pynitus, who laboured to bring in the conditi∣on of a single life amongst his brethren, that is, amongst his fellow ministers: That he would not impose the heauie yoke of a single life vpon his brethren, as of necessitie to be obser∣ued, but rather that he would haue regard vnto the infirmitie of many. And it is to be noted, that in the Index expurgatorius, Ind. Expurg. pag. 76. the Councell of Trent ordained, that Langus should be raced, which had noted the same in his annotations vpon Nicephorus. And Spiri∣dion vsed the like custome, Sozomen. l. 1. c. 11. Eccles. histor. l. 10. c. 5. Tripart. l. 1. c. 10. who being ordained Bishop of Cypres, was reported by Sozomene to haue beene neither worse in that which concerned pietie, nor lesse dili∣gent in his charge: and whom the story calleth a person of the order of the prophets, hauing a daughter whose name was Irene. And so likewise in Dionisius, Fausti∣nian, Syluerus, Cecilius, Sergius, Hormysdas, Talatus, Valerius, Tertullian, Leo, and Felix, all Bishoppes and Priestes, and confessed by our aduersaries themselues to bee maried: Athan. in ep. ad Dracont. and in many others of these first ages, of whome Athanasius reporteth, that hee knew in his time many Bishoppes, yea many Monkes that had children: and this continued for many ages after. To be briefe, the determination of the Synode is ex∣presly for the same, as it was set downe in the first generall Councell of Nice, about the yeare 330. where it hauing argued by many, that from that time forward Bi∣shops, priestes, Deacons, and Subdeacons, should not lie with their wiues, Paphnu∣tius, a Confessor rose vp and said: Mariage is honourable, and the companie of a lawful wife is chastitie: as we shall declare more at large hereafter. Whereupon all the Coun∣cell being moued, Socrat. l. 1. c. 8. Sozom. l. 1. c. 22. it was left to the libertie of ecclesiasticall persons to continue ma∣ried, &c. Neither will the lie or double dealing, which Bellarmine chargeth vpon So∣crates and Sozomene the ecclesiasticall historiographers in this place, bee sufficient to salue the sore. CHAP. IX. What bath beene the manner of growth and proceeding of the ordinance of abstaining from mariage, in the Romish Church, vntill the time of Calixtus his decree. ANd thus behold we are come to the first councel of Nice, a notable Period of the Christian Church: ended & shut vp with a law contai∣ning great fauour to the cause which we defend. But notwithstan∣ding let vs not perswade our selues that this spirit of lying, 1. Timoth. 4.2. where∣with the Apostle hath threatned vs, was asleepe all this while: but rather that vnder the shape of an Angell of light, he was sowing the doctrine of the Deuill, & vnder the hypocriticall maske of chastitie, he set vp the standart of shamefastnesse and honestie, but in deed bringing in all lasci∣uiousnesse,
foolish loue, adulteries, (and yet worse then all these) into the world. Abstinente from mariage proceeded from the Gen∣tils. Hieronym, l. 2. contr. Ioum. Clem. Alex l. 3 The Christian Church was compounded of Iewes and Gentils, and was not wel at ease till it had brought their leauen into it. Now the spirite of fornication had so blasoned marriage amongst the Gentiles, as that it was forbidden to many of their Priestes, namely, to their Hierophantes, who (as we reade) did make themselues chast with the vse of hemlocke, to those which were consecrate to the Mother of the Gods, and to those of Egypt, &c. And of them (saith Clement) the first heretickes learned to con∣demne marriage. And the heretickes called Essaei, about the time of the wearing away and declining of the Iewish religion had likewise learned of the Gentiles, but especi∣ally of the Pythagoreans, as saith Iosephus, to contemne and dispise marriage: Ioseph. Anti∣quit. l. 15. c. 13. & l. 18. de bell. Iudaic. c. 2. Philo apud Eus. l. 8. Epiphan. l. 1. t. 1. and those are they of whom Philo speaketh; and not any Christian Monkes, as wee haue obserued before. Likewise Epiphanius teacheth vs, that this superstition passed on euen to the Scribes and Pharisies, whereby we need not doubt but that by the hus∣bandrie of the spirit of lying, it glided forward very smoothly: First amongst the he∣retikes called Marcionites and Gnostikes, who by Irenaeus and Epiphanius are repor∣ted to abhorre and detest mariage altogether: grounding themselues vpon an vn∣certaine Gospell, written (as Clement saith) by the Egiptians. The Manichies also, who defended the same, at the least in their elect and chosen: and finally, by conta∣gion into the Church of Christ. The dispute which is in S. Paule, affordeth a liuely & round testimony, as the thing is. 1. Cor. 7. For let vs not thinke that Saint Paul fighteth there with his shadow, but that he maketh way for his entrance into the matter: namely that to liue and leade a single life, is not fitting all men: that hee hath no comman∣dement from God, for virgines: that hee would not put a snare about their necke: that he that cannot containe himselfe should marrie. And in another place he stretch∣eth this generalitie vnto the seuerall kindes and sorts of people, as meaning thereby to represse and beate downe the lightnesse of young widowes, counselling them to marrie, and to keepe the Bishops in the way of giuing good example, to direct them in expresse and plaine tearmes, euen so farre as to say, Ehiphan. l. 1. c. 2. haeres. 25. that the forbidding of mariage is the doctrine of Deuils, &c. Then it infected Nicholas one of the seuen Deacons. Epiphanius reporteth, that he seeing that many were admired and highly accompted of by reason of the leading of a single life, resolued, and renounced his wife, notwith∣standing that she was a faire and beautifull woman: & then not being able to contain himself, neither for shame to returne vnto her again, he gaue himselfe (as did likewise all his sect & followers) to all kind of vncleannes, euen to the committing of Sodo∣mitrie, perswading himselfe, that all was holy vnto him, or at the least tollerable, pro∣uided that he came not neare his wife to touch her. And as there is not any sect so in∣famous, but it hath his followers, so there was no wast of these kind of people in Asia, being a delicious & pleasant country, who of their captaine were called Nicolaitanes. But S. Iohn who taught in the cities of Asia, did oppose and set himself in his holy and godly zeale against this seducing deceiuer, and shut the Church dores against him. The Apostles for the most part being dead, Apocal. 2. and thereby the great lights wholy and for euer eclipsed: the spirit of darknes assured himself the better to work his feats: but the holy scriptures, which they had in this point left so cleare and bright, Apocripha bookes. did stand in his way to his great trouble. Wherevpon he opposeth and deuiseth others against theirs, namely Apocripha, and bastardly writings against the canonicall and manifest bookes of the scriptures. As for example a certaine pamphlet, of the peregrination of S. Paul & Tecla, made by a priest, & the contents therof are, that S. Paule hauing found this young maid betrothed to a certain man named Themirus in Iconium, Tertul. de bap∣tism. Ambros. de virginit. Hieronym. de script. Ecce∣siast. did so o∣uercome her by the praises of virginity, as that hee should take her away from her e∣spoused husband, drawing and leading her after him throughout the world; that he had put a vaile vpon her, and giuen her power to do the like to others, as also to teach and baptise. Now thinke with your selues how answerable this is to the scope of S. Paul his doctrine, who teacheth that wiues should cleaue to their husbands, who will not haue them to speak in the Church &c. S. Iohn, who was as yet aliue, saw the book,
caused the priest to come before him, cōuinced him of hauing forged it, deposed him from his ministerie, and for the instruction of the posterity to come, condemned the booke: which booke notwithstanding the Monks of our time haue absolued & set at liberty againe, vnder the name of the legend of Tecla, for the founding of their Mon∣kery; although it haue beene reiected & put downe again since the first time, by Pope Gelasius. And therby we learne how to esteeme & think of the traditions, which they thrust vpō vs vnder the name of the Apostles, & also of those goodly books wherupon they so build & stay thēselues: the Protoeuāgelion, Abdias the Babilonian & such like. After false and counterfeit scriptures, what remained but a forged and false holy Ghost? Montanus. And here behold starteth out Montanus his Comforter, about the yeare 230. who buckleth himselfe with speare and shield to bid mariage the combate. He ma∣keth Tertullian holding a hot and fierie pen, Tertul. de Monogam. his champion; especially after that (be∣ing turned about vpon a certain conceiued spight and stomack) he had embraced the heresie of Montanus: but yet not being able to purchase the establishing of a single life to be obserued by the Priestes, he standeth and striueth that they may not be per∣mitted any moe then one single mariage: he presseth (I say) and vrgeth that against the sincere and Orthodoxe Church, falling vpon the same in plaine tearmes with bit∣ter reproaches, for the practising of the contrary. And in as much as he was a man of great reputatiō, he caused to fall away a great number after him: wherby we may see, that some thinke that they haue neuer sufficiently praised virginitie, if they reproach not and speake euill of the married estate and life: others make scruple, that ma∣ried persons should administer holy thinges: Euseb in l. 9. de monst. c. 9. Opinions which at the first were a∣mongst some few, the seedes whereof we haue in Eusebius & Origen, vttered in some dumbe and muttering manner, and defended as yet in very faint and feeble sorte: That it seemeth to them that it would doe better so, that the Bishops might bee at more lea∣sure to receiue this great multitude of people, which flocke in so fast vnto Christianitie, &c. And which notwithstanding within a while after, had so farre prospered and preuai∣led, Prouincial Sy∣nodes. c. 10. 2. c. 19. Concil. Eli∣bert. c. 33. Concil. Are∣lat. c. 2. D. 16. Concil. Ancyr. c. 10. as that in the Prouinciall Synode held at Neocaesarea, it is said: That the Priest that is married, shall bee deposed, and hee that shall commit adulterie shall bee reiected of the Church. And in the Synode assembled at Rome: That he that shall bee married, shall bee depriued and put from his charge for tenne or twelue yeares. And in that of Elibert in Spaine: That Church men shall abstaine from their wiues vppon paine of being degraded. And in that of Arles the second, somewhat more mildly: That married men shall bee no more receiued or admitted vnto the same: and all these were held vnder Pope Sylue∣ster the first, before the Councell of Nice, which fell to bee in the time of Pope Iuli∣us the first. And in that of Ancyra: That the Deacons, which shall protest that they cannot contain themselues, may marie, but with the licence of the Bishop. Thus the presumption of man runneth on headlong, when once it hath taken liberty to it selfe, further then the word of God doth graunt it. In the end, The generall Councell of Nce. D. 31. C Nice∣na Synodus. the question alreadie forestalled by these Prouinciall Synodes, com∣meth to be debated and examined in the Councell of Nice: The writ giuen out, the parties heard, & the holy scripture sitting as Iudge, by the report of Paphnutius, (an old man, who had beene alwaies maried, and suffered much for the testimony of the truth, setting before them the pollutions & manifold vncleannes, which might spring vp in the Church by this inforcement vnto a single and vnmaried life,) it falleth out, that the libertie of mariage, as wee haue seene, remaineth whole and entire vnto the Church men. And yet so great is the subtiltie and wilinesse of the Deuill, and of such power with fraile & weak men, is a preiudicate opinion, when it hath once taken fur∣ther libertie, thē euer the word of God did giue it, as that rather then all shold be lost, they wold be content with small pay, & so they obtain: That those which shal haue beene receiued into the ecclesiasticall orders vnmaried, shall not be permitted to marry, because of the tradition of the Church. Euen as it fell out with Montanus his Spirite of Comfort, who not being able to obtaine a lawe for the cutting off of second mariages in the laitie, did forciblie and violently wrest it out against ecclesiasticall persons.
Now this generall Councell became a bridle vnto superstition for some time, and held backe the execution of the Canons of these Prouinciall Synodes, in as much as the most famous & notable Bbs. from out of all the nations and prouinces of Chri∣stendome were found to be present at the same. Hosius Bb. of Corduba did subscribe thereunto for Spaine; Mantuan. de Hilario. Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor, legitimo con∣iuncta thoro. who carried away with him from thence instructions for the correcting of the Canon of Elibert. Hillarius Bb. of Poitiers, so renowned & much spoken of in auncient writers, who without all contradiction was married, testifieth likewise, that it was obserued and kept amongst the Frenchmen, notwithstanding the Synode of Arles. And so likewise of other prouinces, as appeareth by Oceanus, Nu∣midicus, Seuerius, Restitutus, Cheremon, Philogonius, Apollinaris and Synesius; all of all them Bbs. or famous priestes, who liued and exercised their charges with great commendation, & yet were maried. Whereunto for an ouerplus we will adde Grego∣rie Nazianzene his father, S. Basil his father, and Gregorius Nyssenus his brother, Greg. Nazian. in Monach. Niceph. de Basil. Mantuanus, Praesule patre satus, nam tunc id iura si∣nebant, Pastorale pe∣dum gessit post funera patris. Sozom. l. 3. c 44 . Concil. Gan∣grens. c. 4. Epipha. l. 2. t. 1 haeres. 59. con∣tra Cathar. all Bbs. and great men in their time. But this Nicene Councell was not better executed in any place then in Armenia, by the diligent endeuour of the fathers of the Councell of Gangres. Now Sozomene saith, that a certain Bb. in those countries, called Eusta∣thius brought in new deuises, & amongst other, did forbid the mariage of the Elder of the Church, commanding all men to abstaine and refraine the praiers and Sacra∣ments administred by such as were maried, as prophane and polluted: and vnder the shadowe of holinesse this abuse preuailed in certaine countries, the neighbour Bi∣shops not daring to make head against it. Those then who had beene present at the Councell of Nice, being returned, condemned his Monkerie: and sutable to that of Nice, they make the Canon vnder mentioned: If any man put difference betwixt a ma∣ried Priest and another, let him be accursed. About some 40 yeares after, Iouinianus was not thought to speake highly enough in the commendation of virginity. S. Ierome maketh himselfe an aduersary partie in the matter, and taketh him vp very roughly, as it was his manner to doe in all other things. And Epiphanius in the Greeke Church becommeth of a strong opinion, that the Church ought not to receiue into the priesthood, , Such persons as yet did beget children. These were the remainders of the old leauen, that had beene cast out in the Councell of Nice. And these men did not thinke themselues to haue prai∣sed virginitie sufficiently, if they had not detracted from the married estate: and yet both of them the gifts of God, as Iustine and Clement doe both of them teach verie well. Of this controuersie did rise hyperbolicall and improper kinds of speech about this doctrine; which by reason of the reputation of the persons deliuering them, did proue to be of great moment in the Church: and yet notwithstanding to signifie that the vse and practise of the church was contrary to their opinion; Hieronym. l. 1. contr. Iouinia. S. Ierome teacheth vs in the example of Bb. Carterius, who had had two wiues, & that without contrarying of the precept of S. Paul 1. Tim. 3. that the Bbs. of his time might be maried. Against Iouinian he vseth these words: If Samuel brought vp in the temple, was maried, what maketh that against virginity? Are there not at this day priests enough maried? and that so far, as that in some places he would break forth into some signes of anger, that there was choice made rather of such as were maried, then others. And against Vigilantius hee saith: That in his time the Deacons were maried before they were made Deacons, Sacerdotes. Idem contra Vigil. to the end that they might afterward be promoted & preferred to higher dignities & orders; very contrary to that which he would seeme to conclude out of S. Paul: namely, that those which had been maried might be made Bbs. prouided that they were not so any more. But wee haue shewed before, that he letteth not to be contrary to himselfe. And as for Epiphanius how hard soeuer he be, yet he praiseth a Bb. of Cōstantinop. for that he was descended frō a priestly race: & teacheth vs, that in his time it was an vsual thing for priests, Dea∣cons; & Subdeacons to haue wiues and children. He addeth, that it is against the Ca∣nons. But what Canons? considering what we haue shewed out of the scriptures, and pretended canons of the Apostles; out of Ignatius, Clemēt, Tertul. & al the old writers; Chrysost. con∣tra heretic. yea & frō the generall Councel it self which was held at Nice. And therfore Chrysost.
himselfe in that point vnto him, and that roundly, maintaining that mariage is no impeachment vnto pietie, seeing that Moyses, Peter, and the Centurion were maried: and that S. Paule hath freed and set the Church at libertie from such heresies, Idem in 1. Tim. 3. when he placed mariage in the Episcopall chaire, and seate of the Bishops themselues. And although that these disputes had left some doubt and scruple in some places of the East, as in Thessalia (where hee that was married after hee had taken orders in the Church, was put out of his place) yet Socrates telleth vs that this was against the custome of other Churches: Socrat. l. 5. c. 22. Nicephor. and that as many famous Bishops in the East did abstain from mariage of their owne voluntarie inclinations, , not compelled thereto by any law: so also very many during the time of their exercising of their Bi∣shoprickes, had & did beget children of their lawfull wiues, and that in the houses be∣longing to their Bishoprickes. In the end (notwithstanding the authoritie of the scriptures, of the old Church, & of this famous & worthy Councell) the Church of Rome, Syricius his law. about the yeare 400. made a firme & stable law of these particular opinions. And in deed from whence could it rise or spring, but from the mother of fornications, seeing that according to the pro∣phecie of Paphnutius, she was to broach and set abroad Sodomitrie throughout the whole world? And whereas this law is fathered vpon Syricius, it may be that he hath wrong, Syricius, ep. 4. c. 9. Innoc. 3. c. 1. ep. 3. D. 27. 32. 81. 82. in like manner as certaine decretal Epistles written concerning the same mat∣ter, may seeme falsly to be attributed to Vrbanus the first, Lucius the first, and Calix∣tus the first: for thus they haue delighted and pleased themselues to abuse the people, vnder the colour of antiquitie. Wherefore it saith: Suademus sacerdotib. & Leuitis, &c. Our aduice & councell is to priests and Deacons, not to lie any more with their wiues: because they are occupied in the ordinarie Ministerie: then it fowlloweth, that they were married as yet at that time. D. 14. c. Is qui C. Christiano. But this milde aduice ended in a fierce and furious commination in these words: If anie man carie himselfe contrarie to this Canon, be it knowen to him that he is not to be partaker of our Communion, and furthermore that he is to indure the paines of the infernal Lake. 1. Cor. 7. And by the Consuls (concerning the date) it appeareth that this Epistle was written in the yeare, 405. But that which the Apostle calleth, The bed vndefiled, it there calleth, Carnall concupiscence. And whereas the Apostle hath tearmed, him blame∣lesse, that is the husband of one onely woman: it interpreteth it, that it is vpon condition, that he shall forsake her, & cease to keep any company with her, adding this reason: Because that they which are in the flesh cannot please God. And shall God then haue com∣manded a man to displease him, for he hath ordained and appointed, That they shalbe two, one flesh? Now therewithall be it known, that it is of the same time which we reade in the Canons. That he which hath not a wife, may haue a concubine, & not bee put from the communion for hauing of the same. And this course of life they did not iudge to be to liue in the flesh, or to liue reproachable and worthy of rebuke, &c. against the expresse cōmandement of Christ. Gentilitas. Grounded vp∣on the Gentiles and heretikes. But look a little with me I pray you to the spring & fountain from whence their diuinitie floweth. Let vs take away (saith it) this reproch, which the Gentiles might iustly obiect against vs: that is to say, because that the Gentils (as we haue said) ordained and decreed in many places, that their priests should be vnmaried. In∣nocent who liued not long after, in his Epistle vnto Exuperius Bb. of Tholosa, vtte∣reth the same, & vpon the same foundation & pains: & wheras the other hath allead∣ged the example of the Gentiles, this fellow hath made him a shield of all the places which the Gnosticks, 1. Tim. 4. Montanists, Marcionites, & Manichies did abuse against mari∣age, that is, of the doctrine of deuils, & of the spirits of error, aforesaid by the Apostle. But this law was not receiued and imbraced all at one time, The procee∣ding of the executing thereof. as may plainly be seen by the Prouinciall Councels that insued, as being troubled with the renewing and further establishing of the same from time to time, with the addition of some one ar∣ticle or other: but by little and little, by large distances of time betwixt point and point, and in the reuolution of diuers ages: the Popes continually gaining and in∣croaching, sometime by the example of some one Prouince set against another, and sometimes by the power of great Princes, standing in need of their authoritie. Ter∣tullian
had rough hewed the same in Africke by his writinges. Conc. Carth. 2. c. 2. Then Syricius caused a councell to be held at Carthage, where he caused this decree to be propounded by Faustine Bishop of Potentia, in the Marquesdome of Ancona: Whereupon it was pronounced: That they which did handle the sacramentes, should keepe themselues chaste, and abstaine from their owne wiues: as though chastitie were not properly so called in regard of mariage. And that it might the smoothlier passe, they adde: To the end that we may obserue that which the Apostles haue taught: & which antiquity hath obserued. But Gratian was ashamed of this reason, & therefore to couer this lie, he added this word Exemplo, that which they haue taught by their example; his conscience accusing him, and telling him that the worde which they had taught was contray thereunto. Grat. D. 84 Cum in prae∣ter D. 82. C. Plurimos. Conc l. Car∣thag. 5. c. 3. D. 84. C. Cum de quorundam. Pelag. 28. c. de Svracus. & ibi Gratian. And their Glosse saith vpon the word Antiquity, that this antiquity cannot be deriued or fetcht frō any elder time, then the time of Synecius: that is, that it was a very new & late thing. For it is granted, that this second Councell of Carthage was held in his time; & in the fift, (held within a while after vnder Pope Anastasius;) the Canon is renewed, but in more mild termes, grounded vpon the former decrees, or such as were meerly their owne (for there are diuers readings of the matter) & not vpon the Apostles. But Pope Pela∣gius about the yeare 550. doth tell vs more boldly the intent & scope of this decree in the cause of a Bb. of Siracuse in Sicily, as namely that, The principall cause shold be to a∣uoid the spending of the goods of ecclesiasticall persons, in the maintaining & aduancing of their wife, children, or kins folke, &c. Where Gratian addeth: And therefore such authoritie doth not let, but that a man which shalbe chosen Bb. may take a wife and haue children, it being pro∣nided that he take very good heed, as did this Bb. of Siracuse, that hee do not lauishly spend and consame them. And whereas none can be chosen, but such a one as is either priest or Deacon, Leo. 1. D. 31. in ep. ad episc. Maurit. Hilar. they may lawfully take vpon them the maried estate. Leo the first saith: Let them not put away their wiues, but let them abstain from them: Again, he commandeth the Bbs. of Maurita∣nia to depriue of their charges such as haue had many wiues. And Hilarius the second would haue them depriued, who had maried widowes, or any other then maids, and yet amidst all these inhibitions we see that mariage continued. In a word, Sidon. Apolli∣nar. in ep. ad Aquil. Euag l. 1. c. 15. that great and worthy person Sidonius Apollinaris Bishop of Auernia was maried, and had chil∣dren after he was Bishop. And Synesius Platonicus refused to be Bb. of Damascus, if he might not be suffered to lie with his lawfull wife: Protesting & openly affirming that he would pray oftentimes vnto God, to giue him children: and it was granted him. And at this time, that is about the yeare 600. Olympiodorus writ: Olympiod. in Eccleslast. 3. cap. There is a time when wee may keepe company with our wiues, to auoid the temptations of the enemie and there is a time when we are not to come neere them, as when we are to powre out our praiers before God. Let vs peruse and ouerlooke the Prouinces and countries abroad, The resistan∣ces made a∣gainst the re∣ceruing of this Decree. In Fraunce. to see and ob∣serue the difficulties which did euery where breake out, when the execution of this writte and Decree should bee put in practise. In Fraunce wee see it renewed after some importunitie vsed in procuring and furthering of the same in the councels of Agatha, Aurange, Aruernia, Orleance, Tours, Mascon, Auxerre, &c. And yet it is certaine that the first Councell of Tours did mittigate the punishment, contenting it selfe not to promote to any higher degree, those which were maried after they had taken orders. And by the second Councell of Tours held vnder king Cherebert, Concil. 2. C. 13 14.2 c. &c. al∣most 160. yeares after the decree, it appeareth that the Bbs, Priests, & Deacons were as yet maried, and that their wiues were called, Women bishops, women priestes, and wo∣men Deacons, which liued with thē, only they were forbidden to lie with thē, and were punished when they were taken doing otherwise. The same appeareth by the councel of Auxerre, held after the yeare 600. Concil. Altisi∣od. c. 21.22. by which it was forbidden to sleepe in the same bed with them, and to mingle themselues in sinne; as also their wiues to marrie a∣gaine: a hard commission to the Archpriestes, to watch betwixt the husband and the wife. We haue said that Sidonius Apollinaris, Bishop of Auernia was married, Soluian. Epise. Massi. l. . de prouid. Dei. and had children being a Bishop. But let vs heare Saluian the Bishop of Marselles vp∣on this matter, at such time as Pope Gelasius woulde haue bounde the Church of Fraunce with the same bandes: You thinke it (sayeth hee) a goodly conuersion:
alluding (as it may seeme) vnto the Canon, A labe & sce∣lere. which saith, that the maried priest must not be receiued vnto the priesthood, if he haue not promised, At his conuersion to abstaine from pollution & wicked dishonestie: for so they called the maried estate: When as they ab∣stain frō their wiues, but not from other mens goods: when as they professe continencie of body, but let loose the reines in most dissolute manner to all incontinencie of the soule: a new and strange manner doubtlesse of conuersion: they do not the things which are lawfull, nor make any consci∣ence of that which is vnlawful: they abstaine from mariage, but not from rapine & stealth. What doest thou O foolish and fond perswasion? God hath forbidden sinnes and not mariage: you do e∣uerie thing quite contrarie. This is not a conuersion or turning to goodnes, but a turning from all goodnes. You that are reported to haue left the honest companie of mariage, do you at the least abstain from dishonesty, yea at the least do you abstain frō monstrous dishonestie? Now he writ this against the priests of Rome and Italy in his time, not dissembling or hiding the matter, how that from that time Sodomitrie became publike & common in Rome. In a word, about the yeare 800. Zacharie writing to Pipin, & sending him the de∣crees, which he intended should be obserued in France, in the 37. Canon, he recom∣mendeth the abstaining of Bbs. Priestes, and Deacons, from their wiues. And one Claudius Bb. of Auxerre being countenanced and beloued of Charles the Great, de∣claimed boldly against the abuses of the Church of Rome, & amongst others, against that of forced continencie. And Sigibert telleth vs, that the Emperour Lothairus to∣wards the yeare 855. great resistance being made against this law, did also oppose himself therto: D. 32 C. de illo Clerico. as also about the yere 860. one Odo Bb. of Viēna permitted Aluericus a Subdeacon to be maried: whereupon Pope Nicholas was offended. And very neere to the yere 1100. Gebwiler. Lambertus Schafnaburgensis, and Gebwiler a Germaine writer, al∣though a Romanist, witnesseth that 24. Bbs. as well Germaines as Frenchmen, with the whole cleargie of their diocesses, were maried, and defended their mariages con∣stantly. The secular sword in the end was drawne out against mariage, euen that sword which Innocent the first had threatned against the same a long time; as that what the authority of the canons could not effect, that same should forcible violence perswade. And in the meane time it is not to be forgotten, that at the very time when Gregorie the 3. ordained in France, that no man should marie any woman that had beene wife to any Elder, Liber Pontifi∣calis. Bonifac. in ep. ad Pe∣chelin. & No∣thelin. Idem ad Za∣chariam. tom. 2. Concil. Naucler. gener. 25. In Spaine. Hieronym. ad Oceanum. Sectator libi∣dinum, & prae∣ceptor vitiorū. Concil. Eli∣bert. 1. c. 33. Deacon, Monke, or witnes at the baptizing of any of his children, &c. alleadging to the Frenchmen, that to do any of these was an enormous sin, that then notwithstanding Boniface in the right & behalfe of the Germains, saith, that he hath not yet acknowledged or conceiued of it so to be. This same Gregory permitted a∣gainst the expresse word of God, a man to marrie his owne aunt, the wife of his vncle, & to forsake his owne wife, because of her barrennes, or sicknes, following that which is written of the Pharisies: Which straine a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell. In Spaine it seemeth vsuall by Carterius a Bb. who was twice maried, & yet not bla∣med for the same by S. Ierome, neither yet accounted to haue transgressed the Apo∣stles precept: as also the resistance which was made against forced singlenes by the cholericke mood of Syricius: What will these loose liuers (saith he) say vnto mee, or els these maisters of vices? Thus speaketh he of the maried priests of Spain: and the Bb. of Arra∣gon telleth him, that he is not able to proue that by them Likewise the 33. Canon of the Councell of Elebert, is so contriued and laid downe, as that it cannot wel be said, whether it condemne or approue a single life, because of the ambiguity and doubt∣fulne, which is in these words: Placuit in totū prohibere, abstinere se a coniugibus, &c. And yet notwithstanding in the first Councel of Toledo, held vnder Syricius, Patronus the Bb. began there, saying: That he purposeth to stand fast vnto all that which shall be found to haue beene ordained in the councell of Nice. In so much as that mariage (to speake pro∣perly) is not forbidden there: but by a consequence falsly gathered frō the conclusion & latter end which was left in the Decree of Nice, for them which should marrie after orders, they exclude frō all further & greater promotion, such as after the said orders, shall haue had children by their wiues. Concil. Tolet. 1. c. 1.2.3.4.5. But the Councels of Girond, Seuil & Toledo, which folowed, did make the case & condition to be worse, euen to the arming of the
secular power against it: & yet about the yeare 600. Isidore the younger, Isidor. de vita Cleric. vttereth this speech, namely: That clearkes must either liue chastly, or els at the least content themselues with one onely mariage. Neither let vs thinke that it went otherwise in Italie, In Italie. D. 56. Plat & Volat. as the diuerse Popes begotten of Priestes in marriage, may sufficientlie confirme vnto vs: Boniface the first, sonne of Iucundus the Priest: Felix the thirde sonne of Felix the Priest: Gelasius the first, sonne of Valerius the Bishoppe: Agapet the first, sonne of Gordian the Priest: Syluerius the sonne of Hormisda the Bishoppe: Deus-dedit, the sonne of Steuen the Subdeacon: Theodore the sonne of Theodore the Bishoppe: Adrian the seconde, the sonne of Tolarus the Bishoppe, &c. all of them borne betwixt the yeares 400. and 900. and more, legitimate notwithstanding, although they were borne after the taking of Orders: Because (sayeth Gratian) that before the prohibition was receiued, Gratian. C. Ce∣nomanuensem D. 56. & in Pa∣lea Oluis. D. 28. C. de Syracus. vrbis. D. 31. c. 2. such marriages were lawfull, and are as yet in the Easterne Church. In Sicilia likewise we reade in the Decree, that those of the Cittie of Siracusa, ha∣uing chosen a Bishoppe who had both wife and children. Pope Pelagius delaied the well accepting of him, but in the end by their importunitie was constrained to yeeld vnto them. And as Gregorie about the yeare 600. went aboute to forbid the Sub∣deacons of Sicilia the vse of their wiues, contrarie to the custome which had continu∣ed amongst them till then; they did so stifflie stande in the cause, as that he was con∣strained to let them alone as they were, with this charge, that from that time after there shoulde not anie bee receiued to the Orders of the Church, but such as had promised in expresse tearmes their abstaining from marriage. In like manner Lam∣bertus Schafnaburgensis a learned Chronicler, who writ the Chronicles of Hirtsfeld, witnesseth that in his time, which was after the year 1000. there were manie that had wiues in France and in Italie. But Calixtus the second helde a Councell at Rome of 300. Bishoppes, for the establishing and making authentike of the Decree of abstinēce from marriage, about the yeare 1123 and how mightilie Sodomitrie increased there∣by, it was reported in two Councels held at Rome successiuelie; Synon. Ro. c. 11 Let the Clearkes that shalbe found defiled, do penance in Monasteries; and those which are found to retaine and keepe their wiues, let them be depriued of their offices and benefices: but such of the Laitie, as shalbe found attainted of Sodomitrie, let them be excommunicate: a proper proportion of the pu∣nishments, whether you consider the persons or the crimes. In Bulgarie a part of the Realme of Hungarie, In Bulgarie. D. 28. C. Con. sulendnm. vbi Nicol. 2d. Consulta. Bul∣gar. the ecclesiasticall persons continued married in the yeare 800. This is manifest by the question which they make to Pope Nicholas the first, which was to know whether they should retaine and maintaine, or else reiect and cast off a married Priest: whereunto the aunswere is, that such a Priest is verie blame worthy: whereas S. Paule woulde haue saide, vnblameable, the husbande of one onelie woman, &c. notwithstanding, that hee may bee tolerated, as Iudas was by our Lord amongst his Disciples. Guntherus and Thetgaudus their Bishoppes, did oppose themselues therein verie stoutlie, as they in like manner did against the Legates of A∣drian the second his successor, Syluester, Leopard and Dominicke, who went about to alter and change al their seruice into Latine, bringing to that effect their Latine priests with them, for to establish them amongst them: whereupon it followed, that they, ioyning themselues to the Church of Constantinople, were excommunicate by the Pope, as the most execrable and accursed men of all the world: the verie name also of Bulgaria became so abhominable, that vntill this day it is deriued of the most ab∣hominable vice that is stirring in the world. Germanie for the great seueritie and strictnes wherto it was giuen, In Germany, Hillar. in Ep. ad Epis. Germ. Ambros. ad Reginam Frid gildam. Hieronym. ad Simonē & Fridelum. being more vnfit to admit anie entrance for the practises of Rome, was not assaied or assailed with this abuse and detestable mischiefe till of later time, and being assailed, did resist and hold out a longer time then anie other nation, before they would yeelde thereunto. It had receiued the faith in the time of the Apostles, as wee reade in Ireneus; it had stoode and continued in the same according to their first institution and trayning vp; as S. Hillarie, S. Ambrose, and S. Ierome doe testifie vnto vs in certain of their Epistles.
About the yeare 730. the Bishoppe of Rome sent thether one Vinofridus, otherwise called Boniface, to establish his ceremonies there; for which purpose hee bounde himselfe by an oath to Pope Gregorie the second in expresse wordes, (and this is the cause why hee was called the Apostle of Germany, and not for that hee did establish the Christian faith there). Now when hee came into Germany, hee founde there one Geholibus, otherwise called Gerbilio, Bb. of Mentz, married, and being the sonne of Gerard, one that was Bishoppe before him in the same place, and after∣warde wee reade of one Paschal, Auent. l. 3. P. 294. Gasper. Nedio. in Eccles. hist. Nichol. 1. in Ep. ad Radul. Episc. Argent. Auent. l. 5. p. 574. Bishoppe of the Cittie of Coire, the head and chief∣est Cittie of the Countrie, called Rhetia, whose wife was called Antistita, or Episcopa Curiensis. And Pope Nicholas the first, aboute the yeare 865. inioyning penance to a Priest, that hee should not offer for the space of seauen yeares, did close it vp with this conclusion; And yet notwithstanding, let him not bee separated from his lawfull wife, least he should fall into the pit of fornication. And about the yeare 1080. vnder Pope Gre∣gorie the seauenth, Auentine maketh mention; that all the Priestes were married, & had children: that their wiues were called Presbyterissae, who also were founde ingra∣uen in the foundations which they made in their Temples and Monasteries: which thing Gebioiler aboue alleadged, did not dissemble or conceale. But now beholde how the Pope doth gette and gaine foote after foote vpon the Germanes. Greg 2. d Bo∣nifac. Ep. 2. Grego∣rie the second durst not commaund Boniface, that vpon his ariual and comming the∣ther, hee should wholie take away marriage: but contenteth himselfe to inioyne him that hee should not admit to the taking of any cure or charge, Auent. p. 290. such as had beene twise married. Gregorie the thirde commaundeth likewise: That they should either liue chastlie, Zachar. in Ep. ad Bonifac. or else that they should take vnto them wiues: a thing that cannot by any meanes be lawfullie denied them, &c. Pope Zacharie proceedeth further, and aunswereth Bo∣niface to the thinges wherein hee craued counsell and direction: That after Orders giuen he forbid them to marrie, but and if they bee married, that then they should liue and keepe comparie with their wiues. But in the Synod which hee caused to bee helde in the time of Charlemaine, described and set forth by Auentinus, there is nothing determined or enacted concerning that matter, notwithstanding that there were diuerse articles drawne to bridle the dissolutenes and loosenes of Priestes: a signe and token that Boniface saw not thinges as yet to fall fit, and marriage amongst Priests did still con∣tinue, Concil. Mo∣gunt. c. 10. and was celebrated euerie daye. And that which wee reade in the Councell of Mentz, helde about the yeare 813. That Clearkes doe keepe for euer an inuiolable chastitie in their bodies, is, as it hath beene verie well noted, a place drawne from the rule of I∣sidore his Clearkes, fraudulentlie mangled by these compilers and gatherers toge∣ther of thinges, D. 23. C. his igitur. who doe conceale and keepe backe the words that follow, Aut cer∣te vnius matrimonti vinculo faderentur, that is, or let them be once married: and yet they are not ashamed to alledge Isidore therein. And indeed it is so set downe in the lawes of Charles the Great, Car. l. 7. c. 384 ex Regul. Cleric. and in Gratian his decree also. The maine battell happened in the time of Pope Nicholas the first, about the yeare 800. betwixt him and S. Vlricke, Bishoppe of Ausbourg, whose Epistle we haue. The matter was, for that Odo Bishop of Vienna, hauing permitted a Subdeacon named Aluericke to be married, Pope Ni∣cholas tooke occasion to make this Decree; That it should neuer be permitted, that anie Clearkes should be married, D. 32. C. de illo Clerico. except the Readers of the lessons and the Song-men: and for that also the saide Nicholas the first, went about to presse the execution therof in the high∣est degree, and that euerie where, euen in Germanie. And certainelie this Epistle de∣serueth to bee throughlie read, Vlrich. Episc. August. ad Nicol. 1. both for the zeale and doctrine of this Vlrich: but wee will onelie touch the principall pointes: Reading (sayeth hee) thy decrees vppon the continencie and single life inioyned the Clearkes, I was taken with great feare and sadnes both at once; with feare, because the sentence of a mans Pastor, be it iust or vniust, is to be feared; and withall I feared, least they who hardlie obey iust and vpright sentences, should trample and tread vnder their feete, the vniust and wrongfull, their Pastor going about to lay vppon them an vnsupportable charge and commaundement: with heauie pensiuenes, or rather with com∣passion: for how can the members fare well, when the head is so grieuously diseased? for what
more grieuous maladie, what more to be pittied of the whole Church, then to bee out of the way of holie discretion? Wherein you are not lightlie ouertaken, in going about to compell and im∣periously to force them to leade a single life, whome you ought with all gentlenes to exhorte: when against the institution of the Gospell, and that which is spoken by the holie Ghost, you will notwithstanding that your priuate decrees bee executed. Of manie, (sayeth hee) I will tell you of some: God in the old lawe permitted the marriage of Priestes: and it is not read that he forbad the same afterward at anie time: in the Gospell there is mention made of Eu∣nuches, who gelded themselues for the kingdome of heauen: but euerie man saith, our Lord cannot learne this manner of speech. The Apostle saith, as concerning virgins, I haue no commaundement from the Lord, I aduise, &c. And you ought further to consider that all men are not fit to receiue this counsell: And whereas they say, that this place concerneth the Laitie onelie, they lie like hypocrites, in going about to wring the tender teates of the scripture; they haue sucked blood in steade of milke. That which the Apostle saith: Let euerie man haue his wife, hath not I assure you anie exception to bee taken against it, in respect of anie man, ex∣cept it bee of such as haue vowed chastitie, whereunto they are not to bee constrained. But the Apostle saith: It behoueth that the Bishoppe should bee vnblameable, the husband of one onely wife: and hee saith the same also of Deacons. And to the end that they may not say, that this is ment of the church, hee addeth: hee that cannot guide and gouerne his house well, &c. Again, you know verie well, that by the decrees of Pope Siluester, it is saide, that the wiues of Deacons must be blessed by the Priest. (And this by the way is to bee noted, that this Decree of Syluesters, hath beene raced out of the Decretall and Councels). There hee allead∣geth Isidore in the rule of Clearkes, and that entire and whole, not maimed and mangled as in the Councell of Mentz, the Canon of Gangres, the storie of Paphnu∣tius, &c. And whereas they alledge furthermore, That without chastitie, no man shall see God: hee aunswereth, Truth, but chastitie consisteth not onelie in the flower of virginitie, but also in the bond and knot of marriage. And whereas they holde forth S. Gregorie as a strong bulwarke for their defence; I cannot but laugh at (sayeth hee) their rashnes, and I pittie their ignorance: for hee earnestlie repented himself of this dangerous heresie. Ther∣upon also hee taketh occasion to make mention, how that S. Gregorie hauing sent to fish his pond, there were brought vnto him more then sixe thousande heads of yong children, which drewe deep sighes from the bottom of his soule, caused him to con∣fesse that this was the iust fruite of his forced single life; and to flie from his Decree, to the good aduise and counsell of the Apostle: It is better to marrie then to burne: and he added thereunto, it is better to marrie then to giue occasion of death. He passeth on forward to adulteries, incestes and buggeries, wherewith this Decree which was made in his time, made the earth to stinke: and further sheweth, that it was growne to a con∣clusion amongst men, that it was better secretlie to defile themselues with whore∣dome with manie, then in a good conscience to liue openlie, and in the sight of men with one lawfull wife &c. And that in a worde, to forbid marriage vnto ecclesiastical per∣sons, is a plague, a Pharisaicall doctrine, a peruerse sect, a daungerous heresie, and intollerable of∣fence, and scandall to the whole Church, the fulfilling of that which was threatned by S. Paule: That there should rise a people, that should giue eare to spirites of error, &c. forbidding mar∣riage. And there upon adiureth him to leaue off and forsake it, euen as he loueth the spouse of Christ, and desireth the vndefilednes of the same, and that he would take this reproof in good part, and remember himself, that though a Bishop be more then a Priest, yet S. Augustine may be lesse, and come behind S. Ierome, that is, may be taught by one of lesse accompt and dignitie. For otherwise he feareth that his Holines by this priuate decree (for so hee calleth it) will bee founde to oppose and set himselfe against the olde and new Testament, &c. That which is here further to bee noted for the proceeding and growth of this abuse, is, that there were certaine Bishoppes that being vnmarried despised others, and to those he saith: Presume not, neither be proud of your giftes, iudge not another mans seruant, beware that vn∣der this faire cloake of continencie, there lye not hid manie infamous delightes and pleasures. As also that in his time, they obtained and got their wils, rather by the franke and volun∣tarie accord of men, then by the swaye and force of anie lawe: and that the Clearkes
whom they admitted, did promise by word of mouth, or by the giuing of them their hand, that they would continue to liue a single life. From which S. Vlrich freeth him∣selfe, as putting in a caution, That there be no necessitie & constraint to be vrged. Now this Vlrich was a great personage of the house of the Conties of Riburg and Dillingen in Sueuia, & afterward canonized for the holines of his life. But to the end that no man may thinke that this Epistle was made by some other to pleasure and gratifie any bo∣die, although the stile it selfe do sufficientlie resolue all such doubt: Pope Pius the second in his Germany alleadgeth it, and reciteth the argument thereof: againe, it hath been seen in famous Libraries, before the controuersies of this time. And Ber∣told Priest of Constance, Berthold in ap¦pendice. ad Herman. cont. act. Chronic. who writ in the yeare 1079. alleadgeth it in these wordes: Gregorie helde a Synode at Rome, wherein he condemned the Epistle of S. Vlrich, vnto Pope Ni∣cholas the first, concerning the marriage of Priestes, as also the chapter in Paphnutius, intrea∣ting of the same matter. But the effect fell out to bee, that vntill the time of Pope Gre∣gorie the seauenth, that is, 200. yeares after, the forced single life was not admitted and allowed in Germanie: insomuch as that the Canons of the Bishopricke of Au∣spurge were married, yea and the Monkes themselues of the famous Abbye of Fulda, about the yeare 950. Bruschius. in the time of the Abbot Hadamarius: whereupon it holdeth and continueth as yet in many Nunries in Germany and in the Low-countries, that the inferiour Nuns do take vnto them husbands, when they find an honest man, but not the Abbesse or chiefe of the Sisters. The former reasons being found too weake to giue heade and entrance vnto the forced single life. New reasons for the esta∣blishing of the forced single life. Pet. Damian. in Ep ad Petr. Lateranensem. Anselm. in Ep. ad Heb. 7. After the yeare 1000. the doctrine of Transubstantiation (as one deceipt doth further and helpe forward an other) as it grew strong and of authoritie, did furnish them with new store: Euen as (say they) our Lord would be conceiued in the wombe of a virgin: so would hee bee receiued at the Altar with impolluted and virgins hands. And from hence Petrus Damianus and Anselmus doe conclude that Bishoppes, Priestes, & Deacons, cannot in any wise bee married; and that this sacrament can∣not bee administred by married persons. And what shall then become (and what can our aduersaries annswere in this point) of so many holy Bishoppes and Priestes, that were married? who haue administred the same in that estate? and to all those faithfull people which haue receiued the same sacrament at their handes? shall the sacrament haue beene vnto them in all nations, and for so manie ages, an abhomina∣tion, and notorious sacriledge? As therefore their reasons seemed to grow stronger, so likewise they added more force vnto their Canons, and fiercenes to the execution of the same. Leo the ninth a Germaine by nation, helde a Synode at Mentz, the Emperour being there present, to ratifie the execution of his Decree, Nicetas de coniugio Sa∣cerdotum. with 40. other Bbs. but therein he mended his matter nothing at all: for at that time one Nicetas surnamed Pectoratus, a Grecian Abbot, but resident and ruling in the West Church, made heade against him saying: That that was not the doctrine of the Apostles, neither yet anie of their Traditions: and that if it had been any of the Apostles their Traditions, that then it had behoued Pope A∣gatho to haue alleadged it in the sixt generall Councell, where this Edict was so solemnly dis∣coursed and debated, and sentence giuen against the forced single life: and notwithstanding he rested satisfied in the same, (as we shall see hereafter in further processe) as knowing in his conscience that these were base begotten Traditions, deuised and surmised Canons, proceeding from the spirite of error, Humber. cont. Nicetam. spoken of before by the Apostle, &c. And Pope Nicholas the second who succeeded Leo, caused an aunswere to bee shaped by one Cardinall Humberte, Bishoppe of Sylua Candida, who in this his aunswere cast in his teeth, that to main∣taine the marriage of Priestes, is the heresie of the Nicolaitanes, and he goeth about to proue it out of Epiphanius, deuising a place that is not there to bee founde, neither anie thing comming neare vnto it, whereas wee haue shewed indeed out of the verie same Epiphanius, that Nicholas beganne the error of single life, superstitiously deuor∣cing himselfe from his wife: hee did also corrupt and depraue the Can on of the A∣postles: That a Bb. Priest or Deacon, should not forsake & leaue his wife vnder the co∣lour
of religion, adding thereto these wordes: as concerning to make prouision for her food and apparrell and not otherwise. And in the end he groweth to presume, that by his sole authoritie hee may cut the throat of Nicetas his reasons, the same Pope Nicholas did likewise commaund Petrus Damianus Bb. of Hostia to aunswere Nicetas, whose book pincht him at the heart, and that so much the more, because that Auxentius Bb. of Millaine did holde with Nicetas his opinion. And then it was that Petrus Damianus found out this new reason: That our Lord conceiued of a virgin, could not be receiued or handled but with chaste and virgins hands, &c. But Gregorie the seauenth called Hildebrand, about the yeare 1074. (the whole seruice of the Church being almost turned at that time to a onelie hearing or seeing of Masse, by reason of the ignorance which had seazed vpon all Christian people,) in the end frameth and squareth out a Decree, by which he forbiddeth al vnder paine of ex∣communication to heare Masse of such as were married, or to paye them any Tenthes, Vincent l. 26. c 146. and he caused the same to passe in a Synode at Rome: By a new example (saieth Vincen∣tius) and by a preiudicate vnaduisednes, contrarie to the Decrees and sentences of the holy Fa∣thers, &c. And this Decree seemed to carrie the execution of the same alwaies about it, insomuch as that the people which could not liue without Masses, tyed their priests to abstaine from marriage, except they would be willing to loose their Tenthes, which were due vnto them. But here it was that the great conflictes and contentions began in Germanie: for Hildebrand commaunded all Bishoppes that they should cause his Decree to bee obeyed in these pointes: Epist. Hildebr. ad Constanti∣ens. Naucl. 1. 2. p. 140. Auent. p 603. Cranius in Metropol. That the married Clearkes shoulde forsake their wiues: that the vnmarried should not take anie: that none should be admitted to the Priest∣hoode, who had not bound himselfe to leade a single life: that the Masses of the married were as an infectious plague vnto them, &c. whereas wee haue shewed in the Epistle of S. Vl∣rich, that this vow was free euen in his time. But Otho Bishoppe of Constance, and Rathold Bishoppe of Strausbourg, did alledge the scriptures against him, as also the auncient custome of the Germane Church, against whome hee bestirreth himselfe to cause them of their Diocesse to rise vp in a mutinie, as appeareth by his letters to thē of Constance. And not contented therewith, hee summoneth Princes and Princesses, Ep. Gregor. ad Constantiens. Clearks and Laitie, to put to their helping hand: he forbiddeth them all manner of conuersation, and all manner of speech with married Priestes, vpon paine of the most extreame censures, Auent. 564. Fasciculus re∣rum sciendar. impress. Colon 1553. and vpon paine to be accounted heretikes of the sect of the Nico∣laitans, &c. absolueth the subiectes from the rule and gouernment of their Princes, the Diocesians and Parishioners from the obedience of their Bishoppes and Curates, he apprehendeth and layeth hold vpon the Emperour Henrie the fourth his own per∣son. And as his predecessors in the matter of Images had made their market by dri∣uing their Emperours out of the East, and out of Italie: so this man preuailed by con∣trouersie, and pluckt the Empire from Germany, or at the least did so loppe and clip it, as that it retained not so much as the shadowe of his auncient Monarchie. This controuersie notwithstanding being debated in diuerse Synodes, at Millaine, Lamb. Schas∣naburgens. & Nauclerus. at Mentz, and at Erphord, supported by the Archbishoppe of Mentz, and furthered to the vttermost by the Pope, was notwithstanding gainsayed both by all the Bbs. as also by all the Cleargie, opposing and setting against the Pope his Canons, the plaine and euident textes of scripture, as the Chroniclers themselues of the same time do declare, and had no other end, saue that the Archbishoppe did well see and perceiue that the whole Cleargie of Germany was resolued rather to forsake their charges, thē their wiues, and which is more, tooke vpon himselfe, to become the executioner of so notorious a tyrannie in his own proper person, letting passe all further conference with the Pope about the matter. In the meane time in the yeare 1076. there was a Councell held at Wormes, Auentinus. where were present all the Bishoppes both of Germany and of France, and therein Gregory the seauenth is condemned and deposed by the common consent of them all, Adul∣beron the Bb. of Wirtzbourg, and Herman the Bb. of Mets, only excepted. Amongst other causes this was noted for one; Hee separateth husbands from their wiues: he prefer∣reth
whores and strumpets to lawfull wiues: fornications, adulteries, and incests to lawful mar∣riages: he stirreth vppe the common people against the ecclesiasticall persons: and the ecclesia∣sticall persons against the common people, Sabellie. &c. And this Decree was signed by the Bb. of Mentz, (who was chiefe President in the same,) as also by the Bishoppes of Treues, of Vtrecht, of Mets, of Luques, of Verdune, Thoul, Spire, Halberstat, Strasbourg, Basile, Constance, Wirtz bourg, Bamberg, Ratisbona, Brichsen, Eichstat, Mun∣ster, Hildescheim, Minde, Osnabourg, Naumbourg, Padeburne, Brandenbourg, Lausanna, and Vienna vppon Roan: as also subscribed shortly after by the Bishops of Italie, assembled in the Synode of Pauie. Whereupon Pope Gregorie enraged more and more, stirred vppe the Monkes against the Priestes, the subiectes against the prin∣ces, Auent. p. 564. and the Princes against the Emperour. Neuer was the sillie flocke of Christ, sayeth Auentinus, afflicted with so cruell a sedition, as was this which sprung of the forbidding of the Priestes to marrie. All diuine and humane thinges were turned topsie turuie, euen to the pil∣ling and spoiling of the Temples, to the trampling and treading in the myre of the hostes that were consecrate by married Priestes. If anie Bbs. would not admit them Priestes without the vow, the people that had elected and chosen them, did not let to cause them to exercise their charges, to administer the sacramentes, &c. The Priestes on the other side did openlie preach and auouch, that Hildebrand was that Antichrist, set in Babilon, in the Temple of God, aduancing him∣selfe euen aboue God himselfe, &c. That hee did inuent fables, falsified the histories of euerie yeares actions and accidentes, depraued and misconstred the scriptures, turning them by his expo∣sitions to what best pleased him, &c. & al this to bring in a noueltie, a pestilent thing, yea a heresie. In the end Auentinus saith; Auent. 573. How that many more delighting themselues to abuse manie women, then to vse one lawful wife, had giuen ouer themselues to the same madnes with the Pope. About the yeare 1080. the Bbs. of Italie, Germany, & France, to meete with and remedy this mischiefe, Nauclerus. did assemble at Brixen in Bauaeria, where Pope Hildebrand was deposed the second time, as a Church-robber and heretike: Nauclerus saith, that one of the causes was, The law of forced abstinence from mariage, & the diuorcements, that in like maner he had violently made. Auent. l. 5. Auentine saith, that the Councell vseth these wordes: Suauis homo, This sweet fellow denieth that Priestes lawfully married can hallow the host, and yet receiueth for that bu∣sines whoremongers, adulterers, and incestuous persons. The saide Hildebrand dyed an ex∣ile at Salernum, whome the Germans called Hellebrand, a fire-brand of hell, for ha∣uing kindled and set on fire all Germanie, by his execrable life, and particularlie by his diuelish magicke and incantations. Who so is desirous to know further of this matter, Cardin. Benno in vita Greg. 7. Ponta in his Chronologie. Vrban. 2. D. 32 may reade Cardinall Benno, who liued at that time: and therefore one of their owne Doctors liuing in this age hath well and deseruedlie written of him, vir Pontificatu dignus, &c. And yet the spirite of error and deceipte doth not giue ouer. For Vrbane the se∣cond, about the yeare 1090. returned to the breathing out of his excommunications, and freeing of subiectes from their alleageance to their Emperours, and serueth him∣selfe with this Decree, to trouble Christendome, and more speciallie Germany, wher∣vpon Chroniclers giue him to name Turbanus. And this speech is particularlie giuen out of him; That he letted not straight to depriue the Clearkes of their offices & benefices, if they were maried: Because that thē benefices had gotten the places & roome of offices. Again, That he did ordaine that their wiues should become slaues vnto the prince or Lord whose subiectes they were. These good Fathers exceeding one another, in making impietie & tyrannie euerie day more and more precious: Paschall the second goeth on forward about the yeare 1105. for he armeth the Emperour which was Henry the fift, against Henry the fourth his father, not knowing how to accomplish a wicked and sacrile∣gious purpose, otherwise then by a hainous murtherer, & hauing engaged him deep∣lie in the matter by reason of this enormous fact, hee causeth him to ordaine in the Parliament and Synode helde at Northausen, in the time of his fathers life: That this Decree should be looked to and seene executed by the secular power of the Empire. And al∣waies vnder the counterfeite and sottish colour of the heresie of the Nicolaitans, whereof themselues were rather guiltie and culpable. And this was executed by Hen∣rie
the fift, and the Princes of Germanie, about the yeare 1120. in the time of Ca∣lixtus the second his successor, and therefore some doe attribute this Decree to him in particular. And for the working of some more credite and authoritie thereunto, some alleadge him by the name of Calixtus the first. Calixt. 2. D. 27 This man enlarged and added more vnto it, for it was not meete that hee should doe lesse then all his Predecessors: That it was forbidden Bishoppes, Priestes, Deacons and Monkes, to haue either concu∣bines or lawfull wiues: matching mariage, the worke and institution of God, with the keeping of Concubines, the suggestion and deuise of the Deuill: And that if anie were married, they should be separated and put a sunder: and this is the cause why the verse saith; O bone Calixte, nunc omnis Clerus odit te, Quondam Presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti, &c. And Polydore Virgil writeth, that aboute the yeare 1100. marriage was taken from ecclesiasticall persons in the Westerne Church, Polydor. l. 5. as shall appeare true hereafter in other nations. Now our good Fathers of Trent haue not forgotten to note down in their Index Expurgatorius, that these words Coniugium quando Sacerdotib. Occidentalib. in∣terdictum, should be raced out, and others which we shall set down hereafter. Index expurg. pag. 195. CHAP. X. The further proceeding and growth of abstinence from Mariage, and the full and peace∣able establishing of the same vntill our time. THis thing wil further verifie it selfe by the sequele of other nations. In England. Some holde that the Gospell came into England in the yeare 170. so that they heard not of abstaining from marriage, till such time as Augustine the Monke was sent vnto them from S. Gregorie to e∣stablish the Romane ceremonies there. The beginning there was, with the preaching of the praises of chastitie, and after by the plan∣ting of Monkes of the Order of S. Benet, and in the end, as other inuentions of Rome were laid for a foundatiō, they assaied to bring in this single life. Brithwoldus Bb. of Londō began about the year 714. assisted by the authoritie of Be∣da, the Monks banding and opposing themselues against the Priestes, the hypocrisie of the one against the loosenes, which the people knew wel to be in the other: but for this time without preuailing or profiting in their enterprise. Otho Archb. of Canter∣burie, about the yeare 950. declared marriage of Priestes to be hereticall: but hee was conuinced mightilie by the authoritie of the scriptures, and of the ancient Church, so that his attempt tooke no better effect then his Predecessors. On the contrary, Elserus Prince of Marsh tooke vpon him the defence of the maried Priests against the Monks, who had driuen them out of their Churches, and set them in againe by force. Polyd. & Mal∣mesburiens. Dun∣stan a man much spoken of in stories for the Art Magicke, doth reprehend and take him vp for the same verie sharpelie, goeth to Pope Iohn the 13. at Rome, and there of∣fereth him his seruice, (a president & example much commēded in the stories of that time) bringeth backe with him the Archb. of Canterburie his Palliū, for to succeede Otho: as also thunderboltes newly forged and sharpened; causeth a Councell to bee held at Winchester. And yet notwithstanding, (the cause being debated and decided by the scriptures) he was ouercome, notwithstanding all the sophistrie that Etheluold the Monke, whome he had brought from Scotland, could bring out of his budget to help him withall. Wherupon he presētly bethinketh himself of other sleights & cour∣ses, & so it was fained, that the Angel Gabriel had brought a certain schedule, which condēned the mariage of priests. And S. Paul saith vnto vs; Although it shold be an angell from heauen, &c. Polyd. l. 6 & M. Imsburiens And further in the heat of the disputation causeth a voice to be heard from behind a crucifixe; These men do not well which maintaine the mariage of Priests. The people being astonished vpon the cōming of the same, the priests replied couragiously
and saide, that the voice of God could not bee contrarie to his own word. And a Bb. of Scotland named Fathbodus, amongst others (being called thether by Elfred the K. as one recommended for his great godlines & learning) maketh all the faction and partakers of Dunstan to be ashamed and at their wits end. Ranulph. l. 6. c. 11. Capgra∣nius. Polyd l. 6. In which extremitie he hath recourse, either to his magicke, (as some writers of that time do affirme) or else to some other diuelish practise, and saith: I am now too old for to dispute, but much more for to studie: and yet you shall not carrie it away on this sort. And by and by after hauing caused his aduersaries to bee called into a hall, it shrunke vnder them, and ouerwhel∣med the greatest parte: hee onely hauing prouided for his owne safetie, stoode still vpright, possessed his Archbishopricke in peace, and established the Monkes of Saint Bennet, in steade of the Priestes, which were called Canons Regulars. This was con∣tinued by king Canutus, about the yeare 1020. in the Church of Cambridge: and by K. Edward in that of Oxford, &c. And yet for all this, priestes did not cease to take them wiues in England: whether it were (as some say) that king William tooke a certaine tribute for to permit them, or that the libertie thereof could not bee taken from them in so generall a contradicti∣on and gainsaying at one blowe. Anselm. ad ad Arnulph. The truth hereof appeareth by Anselmus the Arch∣bishoppe of Canterburie his letters, vnto Prior Arnulph, which acknowledge that vnder the former king, and Lanfranke the Archbishoppe his predecessor, they had both Churches and wiues together. Anselme then returning from Lyons out of ex∣ile, helde a Councell at London, aboute the yeare 1100. wherein after manie so∣lemne protestations, hee forbiddeth the Priests to marie. A few yeares being ouer∣passed, there grew a general complaint throghout the whole realm, that of abstaining from mariage, they were come to fall to adulteries and incestes, and from them to So∣domitrie, and that it spreadeth by the infection and contagion thereof, from the Cleargie to the Laitie, and getteth whole Countries euen to the publike committing of the same. Anselme thereupon made notable ordinances for the repressing of the same, in a Synode held for the purpose in the Church of S. Paul in London: he excom∣municateth them which were conuicted of Sodomitrie, vntill such time as they shalbe thought worthy by reasō of their confession and penance to be absolued, and the like to be done with thē who shalbe furtherers vnto them in the cōmitting of this crime: he ordaineth, that such as are religious, shal not be aduanced vnto higher order: (be∣comming by this his ouer mild and soft correction, no lesse faultie then the offenders themselues). On the contrary, he excommunicateth the Priests, who shall haue beene found talking with their wiues, without two or three witnesses, not contenting him∣selfe with hauing depriued them of their offices and benefices, &c. In the end the mis∣chief cōtinuing, he goeth being perplexed in his mind, for a remidy vnto Rome: wher∣upon the Pope in steade of hauing recourse to that which God hath ordained, sent one Iohn of Creme a Cardinal, into England, with letters to the Cleargie of England, that he should be receiued with all due reuerence, as the Vicar of S. Peter, and the like also to Dauid, K. of Scotlād, then keeping his Court at Roxbourg, who caused the pro∣fession of a single and vnmaried life to become much more authentike, that is, caused the plant of Sodomie to propagate and multiplie far more plentifully, in a Synode held at London. Ranulph. & Roger. Cesti∣ens. & Iohn Treuisa in Chronic. And histories make mention, that the same night that he caused it to be published, he was takē with a whore in London: wherupon it followed, that his de∣cree loosing authority, K. Henrie who then raigned, did license the Priestes to be ma∣ried and take their wiues again, paying vnto him a certaine summe of money by the way of tribute, vntill such time as Pope Innocent the 3. about the yeare 1138. sent Albert Bb. of Hostia, into Englād, who held a Synode at Westminster, and there made a full establishment of abstaining from mariage, saue that for a certain time it was tole∣rated (what a stinking and loathsome pranke of impietie?) that they which forsooke their wiues, should keepe thē as Concubines. And it was at this time that these verses were made in England: Prisciani regula penitus cassatur, Sacerdos per hic & haec olim declinatur, &c.
And as for Ireland, it appeareth plainelie that vnto the comming of the Arch∣bishoppe Malachie, that is, vnto the yeare 1150. In Ireland. Symeō Dnne∣nensis. Balaeus cen∣tur. 14. Priests inioyed their married wiues without anie interruption or molestation, whereby wee haue this confirmed vnto vs, as with an euerlasting witnes, that is, and such other their stuffe is not out of that heape of good seede, which was first sowne by the householder and farmer himselfe, but of those tares, which the enemie rising by night did sow thereupon. For Mala∣chias sent thether by the Pope, called The marriage of Priestes a peruerted priuiledge, a wicked custome, an execrable succession, and a mischieuous and adulterous generation, &c. Beruard. in vit Malach. And S. Bernarde in the life of Malachie saieth, that vnto his time the Bishoppes there were married: likewise that in the metropolitane Cittie of Armaghe, before Archbishoppe Celsus, who liued at the same time when hee liued, there were eight maried persons of good learning, who that they might not fal into the snares & trappes of vowed and forced continencie, had no purpose to send for their bulles to Rome: and that this Malachie did first bring forced continencie into that land. Whereupon we reade that Pope Adrian an Englishman, commaunded K. Henrie the first to oppresse and beate downe the Irish as heretikes, that is to say, as Nicolaitans: Because (saith he) they suffer and maintaine their Priestes to be married: and this was about the yeare 1150. At this time or neere there about, In Polonia. Martin Cro∣merus. in Po∣lonic. l 7. fell the establishment of forced continencie in the Northerne prouinces. In Polonia, aboute the yeare 1190. two hundred yeares and more after they had receiued the Christian faith, Celestine the 3. sent Petrus Dia∣conus, Cardinall of Capua, who accordingly did his best endeuour, & after some fur∣ther time, Henry Archb. of Gnesna, in the time of Honorius the 3. who hauing called a Synode there, tooke an oath of the Cleargy, to obey the Legate his ordinances, vpon paine of being depriued of their offices & benefices. In Bohemia, the same Cardinall about the yeare 1196. being come thether to the same end, In Bohemia. failed not to be well beatē and knocked, the Prelates and Priests consenting together and conspiring the same. In Denmarke, Clement the 3. excommunicated the Danes, Saxo. l. 15. In Den marke. In Sueu land. because they maintained their Priests to be maried. In Sueueland and Gothland, Cardinall Gulielmus sent by Innocent the 3. about the year 1200. assembled a Synode at Schoening, where hee tooke from the priestes their lawfull wiues which they had married publikely, Iohan. Magnus l. 9. c. 15. Goth. histo. & l. 3. de Pontificib. Vpsalensib. in vit. Iarlerit. Execrable and cursed spee∣enes giuen out against marriage. Heb. 13. and be∣fore the whole congregation, and that by the assistance and aide of Ericius the K. his power, and the Duke Brigere, but not without a great commotion and hurlie burlie, throughout the whole realme. And thus you see by this time the law of forced conti∣nencie established throughout all the Westerne Church. Likewise it is of the same time, that the spirite of error thinking to mount and raise it selfe on high by the hypocrisie of the Monkes, and fauour of the Popes, beganne to speake more shamelesly against marriage. Innocent the 2. that he might yeeld a reason for the forced continency of Priests, saieth: It is not meet that Priestes, which are the Lordes seruantes should serue at bedde and in the workes of vncleannes: as if he should speak in despight of S. Paule, who calleth all the faithfull the Temples of God, and marri∣age the bedde of cleannes, and the pure and vndefiled bed. Alexander the third said; Alexand. 3. ex∣trauag. de cle∣ric. coniug. 1. Timoth. 3. It is not possible to bee at leasure to attend the seruice of God, and carnall pleasures together: setting out holie marriage by this name. What shall become then of S. Paule, who could not find, but that the gouernment of a priuate familie, & of a publike assembly, that is, the gouernment of a mans own priuate house, D. 81. C. Mini∣str. and of the house of God might be matched together in one man? Lucius the 3. saith: Those which are married, are vn∣worthie to administer the sacramentes, imo indigni qui vrceum ad altare suggerant, yea vnworthy to carrie the water pot to the Altar. What shal be done now with so many holy Bbs. and holy maried priests, who haue in their own persons ferued at the Altar, in al nations and throughout all ages? And yet notwithstanding after all this, Concil. Late. ranense. c. 14. Innocent the thirde in the Councell of Lateran, about the yeare 1200. hauing promised to re∣presse and take away the filthy vice of Sodomitrie in the Clearkes, which the De∣crees before alleadged, had spread & multiplied throughout the worlde concludeth:
Let the Clearks, Regionis, alias Religionis. which according to the custome of their countrie haue not forsaken and put away their wiues, if they bee taken in fornication, be the more grieuously punished: inas∣much (sayeth hee) as they may vse lawfull marriage: an euident signe that, notwith∣standing all their thundering and terrible Decrees, there were found in manie places that continued their married estate: and an argument likewise, that they did not holde them prohibited and forbidden, Ipsoiure; seeing that after so many Councels, Pope Innocent still calleth them legitime and lawfull. Now wee haue hetherto seene sufficientlie, The fruites of the Popish sole life. that this forced continencie was neuer instituted of God, but deuised not so much by man, as by the Diuell himselfe: and the fruites thereof, if wee should stand to recken them vp, will shew, that God did neuer plant this plant in his Church. For our Lorde saide: By the fruites we know the trees: and as truelie are the doctrines of men tried by the fruites which they bring forth. This law sprung and tooke his beginning from the Gentiles and the Priestes of  tiles. Arnob. l. 8. Arnobius sayeth; Where doe these Priestes more willinglie commit their whoomes and fornications, then in their owne Temples? then in the midst of their Altars? where doe they contriue their bawderie? where doe they bethinke themselues of their adulteries, but there? Assuredly, whoredom is ofter lodged in the little Chambers of the Keepers, then in the very brothel-houses. And the same is to bee saide of this pretended continencie. Ni∣cholas the Deacon vpon an ambitious superstition renounced and cast off his wife: & hee had no sooner done it, but we may learne by Epiphanius into what vncleannes he fell. The Heretikes called Gnostici, would likewise haue their Leuites to leade this single life: and the same Epiphanius reporteth that presentlie thereuppon buggerie set in foote and tooke place. Iren & Epiph. But Syricius his decree is no sooner made (and indeede how can it be otherwise, there being such a mightie multitude of men to exercise their mischieuous villanies and loosenes of life, Saluian. l. 5. de prouident. more then ordinary?) but we heare Saluian Bishoppe of Marseillis, crying: Yee who forsake honest Marriage, at the least abstaine and keepe your selues from villainous wickednes, if not for altogether (sayeth hee) for it might bee too hard, yet at the least from that which is abhominable and monstrous. S. Gregorie, saith S. Vlrich, vpon the report of 6000. childrens heads found in his fishpond, being all confounded, fell a crying, being driuen thereunto by the remorse of conscience, striking his heart, and saide; I haue sinned, it is better to marrie then to burne. Saint Vl∣rich Bishoppe of Ausbourg, who vexed and tormented himselfe thereat, saith: This people which say, that the chast marriages of Clearkes are abhominable vnto them, are not a∣fraide of whoredomes, adulteries, incestes, buggeries, and other vitiouse practises, yea, to speake in a word, of nothing of all that which the scriptures call the abhominations of the Chananites. In England we haue seene how farre this cursed law preuailed, and what griefe and trouble it put Anselme the Archbishoppe vnto, himselfe being the brocher and pro∣curer of the same. As also in Germanie, where Auentine reporteth, that vnder the shadowe of sanctimonie and holines, All sortes of incestes were committed without the sparing of anie degree. Bernard in Serm. de con∣uers. ad Cleri∣cos. c. 29. And what can bee saide more then S. Bernarde hath saide, who tormented and vexed, yea who killed himselfe with crying, (it is shamefull to speake, and yet more shamefull to cōceale:) That the deuill hath strewed the ashes of Sodome vp∣on the very body of the church: (for so he calleth the clergie) That the number is maruellous great, but which is more, exceeding shameles, not caring to couer and conceale themselues: That they haue consented to forsake the lawfull remedie, Marriage, to take their swinge and libertie to the committing of all manner of villanie, couering it vnder the vaile of continencie. But how much better (sayeth hee) had it beene for them to marrie, then to burne? To bee briefe, Mantuan sayeth, notwithstanding that he was a gray Fryer: Sanstus ager scurris, venerabilis ara Cinaedis, Seruit, honorandae diuum Ganymedibus aedes. And to the end that the vice (as reason requireth) may the more plainly appeare: let vs repaire to the mother of fornications: There wee shall see the Cardinals car∣rying the curtisans aboute with them in their Coaches, and the Pope taking ordina∣ry tribute and yearelie summes of mony of them, and to keepe a stewes, (I loath and
abhorte to speake of the worst) himselfe. There we shall find Aretines, not in painted shapes, but in their liuely persons, Iohn de Casa, Archb. of Beneuento, Deane of the Apostolike Chamber and the Popes Nuncio, Ioh. a Casa. excus. venet. apud Tanū. Nauum. writing the praises of buggery in Italian verse, and causing the same to be imprinted at Venice. But I could hartily wish that this law were left indifferent, or that it were not at all, seeing that it hath a contremaund, and that from the great and mightie God, who knoweth better both our infirmities, and the remedies thereof, then wee our selues. But if that which is said in the Decree, ought euer to take place; That a Positiue law gi∣uen and ordamed for edification, should be abolished and repealed, when it turneth to the desirue∣tion of any: then let vs willinglie looke down into our consciences, & it cannot possib∣ly be denied, but that it ought to be put in practise in this point? for it cannot be excu∣sed, seeing the law was no sooner published, but the vice & villanie did also manifest it selfe and breake out into open sight, and not onely make it selfe to be seen, but to be complained on of euerie man, yea to be written against of euery man. Let vs cease to speake of the braules and broiles of many ages, about the publishing of this Decree: calling onlie to mind, how that in the time of Calixtus the 2. (yea euen whē he was in his full authority, raigning and ruling euerie where,) there were many great persona∣ges, which ceased not to summon the Pope by their writings, and as it were to set af∣fixes vpon his gates, shewing the deedes and workes that it brought forth, that so all maner of excuse might be cut off, that otherwise might haue been made for him vnto the posteritie following? Thomas of Aquin, Thom. in sū∣m, quae inci∣pit, Commise∣rationes Do∣mini. c. 165. Anno 1270. Durand. de modo celebr. conc. Anno 1320. Anno 1430. Reformatio∣nis articuli Sigismundi editi Argenti∣nae. Anno 1520. Aene. Svlu. in Act. Basil. l. 2. Quampluri∣mos. aduiseth the ecclesiasticall person to make his infirmitie known vnto his Confessor, if he cannot containe & subdue the lust of the flesh, & after∣ward to marie secretlie without the priuitie of the Bb. Durand disputeth the case by manie reasons: That a generall Councell should be held for the restoring of the Priestes vnto their for∣mer liberty of marrying. Marsilius of Padua in his book called Defensorpacis, at the same time: That it might without breach of pietie be permitted vnto them. Danta and Pe∣trarcha in like manner: To the matching of marriage with virginitie: but the latter of them more sharpelie, as one that had beene solicited to haue prostituted his sister to Pope Benedict. Against the time of the Councell of Basill, Sigismunde the Emperour caused certaine articles concerning thinges to bee reformed, to bee made ready, of which this was one: The Decree of Calixtus the second, hath wrought more mischiefe in the church then good, it were better therefore and more for the soules health, to permit Priestes their honest marriages, after the example of the Easterne church, &c. Aeneas Syluius, which was after Pope Pius the seconde, sayeth: It may be it would proue ill done, if many Priestes were married: for so it would come to passe, that many of them might saue their soules in a married Priesthoode, which in an vumaried are condemned. And hee reporteth that it was alleadged in the Councell of Basill: Wherefore doe our Doctors vse all this disputation, whether a married man chosen to bee Pope, bee not bound to giue vnto his wife all due beneuolence, but that because a married man may bee recey∣ued and taken into that place? For was there neuer anie Popes married? Aen. Syl. in Ep. 307. was not Saint Peter himselfe? And in his Epistle vnto Iohn Freund, who asked his counsell vppon the same, he saith; It had beene more meete and conuenient that thou haddest thought vpon this matter before thy taking of Orders: but seeing thou hast proceeded so far, know now, that it is better for thee to marrie then to burne. But as for the present, seeing the Pope will not giue thee anie dispensation, being setled and throughlie resolued to continue the strict and se∣uere course which hee hath begunne: thou must stay, till some other doe inioye the A∣postolike See, whome thou maiest finde more tractable and easie to bee wonne. Ad Panorm. O Cum olim de Cleric. coning. The autho∣ritie of Panormus, first an Abbot, and afterwarde an Archbishoppe, was great in the Councell of Basill, which propounded a question: If the Church could not make a statute, that the Clearkes might bee married? And hee aunswered that it could: and his reasons are: Because abstinencie is not anie branch of Gods lawe: neither yet anie parte of the substance of Orders: and that otherwise the Grecians should sin: Yea, (saieth hee) I am perswaded, that in respect of the saluation of soules it ought to bee made, and so much the rather, because that wee see that there hath followed vppon it
a cleane contrarie effect to that which was pretended: for now they let not, the greatest parte to pollute themselues with vnlawfull copulation, whereas their lying with their owne wiues, ac∣cording to the Councell of Nice is chastitie. And would it might please God (sayeth hee) that there might be a course taken with all those positiue lawes, that are so multiplied, as that there are not many liuing, whome they haue not caused to corrupt their waies. And many other Canonistes were of the same iudgement after Panormus; Stephan. Au∣frer. & Fran∣cisn decisio∣nib. saying, that this Decree ser∣ued for no other thing, but to intrappe weake soules in the snares of sinne: and that they had good hope, that the Church would discharge the Cleargie thereof, for their saluation. And thereuppon it went as it were in a Prouerbe, mentioned by Platina, and Sabellicus, which attribute it vnto Pius the second: Marriage was suppressed and put down for certaine reasons, it must be restored vpon more waightie and necessarie conside∣rations. Polydor. l 6. Index Expurg. pag. 2 c 3. Erasm. de laud. matrim. Idem in 1. Timoth. 3. Index Expurg. p. 249. 255. Item 210.211.227 Mantuan. l. 1. Fastor. de Hi∣latio. Stan. O∣rich. de. lege Syricii, ad Iul. 3. Oricho. Episc. Russiens. de Celibatu. Polydore Virgil, after he hath alleadged some reasons and authorities, con∣cludeth that it should be restored. The Councell of Trent ordained that that should bee raced out, and so in like manner of Munster. Erasmus also in his booke of mar∣riage did giue aduise, that it might not onely bee allowed vnto Priestes, but vnto Monkes also for to matrie; For (sayeth hee) let them extoll their single and vnmar∣ried life as much as they please, there is no life more holie then a married life chastlie obserued. Againe, he noteth; that this single condition of life, was not so much as knowne by his name in the most auncient Fathers. But the foresaide Councell hath decreede, that this whole treatise, and all other places wherein hee speaketh of the same, should bee defaced and left out. And we neede not to doubt, but that they will doe the same by those verses of Mantuan in the life of S. Hillarie, Bishoppe of Potiers, who was mar∣ried. To bee shorte, Stanislaus Orichonius a Bishoppe of Russia, put vppe a peti∣tion to Pope Iulius the thirde, in the yeare 1551. to the ende that it might bee permitted him to bee married; shewing vnto him the iniuriousnes of Syricius his law, as being contrarie to the whole law of God, alleadging vnto him further, that Pope Paule the second, had condemned it secretlie amongst his friendes, hardlie disgesting it, that a daughter of his, which by Gods law hee knew to bee lawfullie giuen vnto him, should bee accounted for a bastarde, and that in such sort, as that hee was resolued to haue reuoked it, if death had not preuented him; and reproching him with the children of Paule the thirde, worthy (sayeth hee) of a loyall marri∣age; and not sparing to tell him of his owne dissolute loosenes. And Lindanus, who elsewhere defendeth the most grosse abuses in Poperie, doth yeeld in this point, and concludeth with Paphnutius. And in the Councell of Trent the greatest parte of the Embassadors for the princes, doe require the libertie of marriage: as likewise the Emperour Ferdinand by his articles, how entirelie affected soeuer he stoode vnto the Church of Rome, alleadging the pollutions and vncleannes, that alreadie insued thereuppon, and the great inconueniences that were yet to come: and doe we not iustlie then maruaile at shamelesnes it selfe, as also at the mother of fornications, why, Turrian. l. 2. de Dogmatic. Character. notwithstanding all these warning peales, she still persisteth so busilie to be∣stirre herselfe for the hatching of whoredoms? For the Councell of Trent doth pro∣nounce them accursed, which say, that those of the Cleargie may lawfullie be marri∣ed: and likewise executeth the same with like rigor euen to this day in euerie place, where their power and authoritie may extend. And as for the Iesuites they are not a∣shamed since then to teach, that continencie is of the essence of the Priesthoode, and that the Pope may aswell murder or robbe a man without sinning, as dispense with a Priest in the matter of marriage and not sinne: thereby condemning all the westerne and Easterne Churches in all ages. In the East Church this doctrine was likewise assailed, Of the East Church. and wee haue heretofore seene how farre Epiphanius his opinion went: but it neuer came so farre as to bee made a law, but rather gaue an occasion of a law to the contrarie. Doubtlesse these two Churches, before the diuision of the Empire, or rather before the distraction & renting away of that of the West, remaining as yet vndeuided by the faction of the Popes, it could hardlie bee, that the euill which had infected the one, should not like∣wise
fasten it selfe vpon the other. And therefore we reade, Iustinian in auth. de nt∣tissima cor. 9. & col. 6. & 9. that Iustinian ordained & made a law about the yeare 530. that there should not be any Clearkes made which had had concubines, or bastardes: but either such as had neuer beene maried, or els such as had beene and were not; or such as yet were with a lawfull wife. And hitherto hee was in a good way, and went not besides the word of God: And the same no widow, neither yet diuorced or put away. And this also rise of the doubtfull interpretation of the place. But afterward he goeth further: In Auth. Qu∣modo Op∣ter, Concil. 6. Oc∣cumen. Constantin in Trullo. D. 32. C. Quo∣niam. . Familiarita∣tem. Cohabita∣tione. Let such as amongst the maried doe abstaine from their wines, he preforred. But the East Church about the yeare 680. to stay the further course of that streame, decided the controuersie in the sixt generall Councell, held at the pallace of Iustinian the second, called Trulla, there being assembled to the number of 227 Bishops. For in the thirteenth canon, recorded by Gratian, we reade these words: In as much as we haue knowne, that it is ordained in the Canon of the order of Rome, that such as should be ordained priests and Deacons, should declare that they would abstaine from the kee∣ping of company with their wiues; we following the ancient canon of the Apostles special care & diligence, and the constitutions of the fathers, do decree that loyall and faithfull mariages take place from this time forward, and that the knot of coniunction of priestes with their wiues be not dissolued, as also that they shall not be depriued of hauing familiaritie with them, in due time. Wherefore whosoeuer shall be found worthy to bee ordained Subdeacon, Deacon, or Priest, shall not be drawne back, by reason of his company keeping with his loyal wife, neither bound in his or∣daining to promise to abstaine from hauing due familiaritie with her. In like maner it behoueth them which serue at the Altar, at the time of the offering of holy thinges, to bee continent in all thinges, &c. And therefore, If any man presume contrary to the authoritie of the Apostolicall Canons, to bereaue the abouenamed persons of the inioying of their lawfull wiues, let him be de∣posed: and as for those who vnder the colour of religion doe cast off their wiues, let them be ex∣communicated: and if after the same they continue obstinate, let them be deposed. Where is to bee noted, that these fathers opposed against the Canon of Rome the Canons of the Apostles, and the decrees of the Fathers. But in as much as this Canon did torment them as if they had beene cast into some scorching furnace, D. 16. C. Ha∣beo. they haue taken vppon them to maintaine (notwithstanding their champion Gratian be against them) that it was not made and decreed for one of the Canons in the sixt Councell, making the world belieue, that this Councell was held at two seuerall times: and that at the first time they did not make any Canons: but at the second onely the fathers begunne therewith, saying: That after the manner of other generall councels going before, it behoo∣ued them to ordaine and make some. And Peter the Bishop mentioned by Gratian, saith vnto the Bishop of Nicomedia, that he had a booke containing 102. And Nicaetas Studensis citeth this same for the thirteenth. Nilus likewise Archbishop of Thessalo∣nica, saue that he leaueth out this part of it: Likewise it behoueth them that serue at the Altar, &c. because it seemeth not to hang well together with that which goeth be∣fore. But we haue thsi Canon all whole in Photius his Canon law, & in such tearmes as do giue much light to that of Gratian, and being further expounded by Gentian Heruet, and Perion: in so much as that it hath not stood them in any stead to haue cut it out of the volumes of the Councels. And that wee may not make any moe re∣petitions thereof, we will onely obserue, that in stead of this clause: Likewise it beho∣ueth them, &c. there is set down in the Greek Canon: Sed vicis suae tempore abstinebunt: That they should abstaine from their wiues, when their course was to do seruice. Againe, the words are much more proper & forcible throughout the whole tenor of the Greeke text, then they are in the Latine translation: whether it came, that Gratian in fauour of the Romaine Church did of purpose weaken the same: or of the vnsufficiencie of one tongue at all times to expresse an other. And it is furthermore not to be forgot∣ten, that Pope Agatho was presented in this Councell by George of Constantinople, and Theophanes of Antioch: which thing Nicaetas being assured of, did not let to obiect the same against Cardinall Humbert, who writ against him by the commande∣ment of the Pope, and in particular of this matter. Whereupon ensued that which is ordinarily happening in contentions: namely for peace sake, to remitte and lose
somewhat both of the one side and the other, that so they may accord in a middle o∣pinion. For the third Canon debarreth such as haue beene twise maried from taking of orders: the twelfth doth except from the general libertie of ecclesiasticall persons, the Bishops: (and some make the reason there of to be, that the goods of the Church might not bee wasted and spent: and yet this not to bee vnderstood, saue onely of those who should marrie after they were called to the Bishopricke: for the sixth doth excommunicate such Bishop whosoeuer, as vnder the colour of religion should for∣sake his wife: as also the sixth doth counsell them who would be emploied in any ec∣clesiasticall function, to take a wife before hand; esteeming it not so conuenient to do it afterward: and according to this law, it is to be seene practised in Greece at this day. But in deed the most certaine course is to cleaue fast vnto the law of the Lord, & the Apostles Canon: for after that we begin to make the decree of God to bee arbi∣trarie, it is not possible for vs to keep within any measure. And againe, all the Chur∣ches professing the name of Christ, those excepted which are vnder the gouernment of the Bishop of Rome, haue retained their married Priestes, as the A byssines, Syrians, Armenians, Russians, Muscouites, &c. And that in so much (saith Aluares) as that a∣mongst the Abyssines the Canons and Priestes haue wiues and children: amongst the Greekes & Muscouites, saith the Baron of Herbestein, according to the Councell of the Canon of Constantinople, it is oftentimes seene, that Priestes and Deacons are oftentimes maried and called to their charges in one and the same day: to the end, that amongst so many other markes of Antichrist, which doe so fitly and properly paint out the Church of Rome, as also amongst so many liuely representations of the spirit of errour working by hypocrisie, it hath yet ouer and aboue this one peculiar and speciall from all other Churches: namely, the forbidding of mariage, forespoken by the Apostle, and intitled by the spirit of God, by the expresse name, Of the doctrine of Deuils. Thus farre then haue we alreadie discoursed of, The summe of the second booke. and examined the dependances & circumstances of the auncient diuine seruice, and of the Masse, which hath intruded it selfe into the place thereof in the Church of Rome: examining what manner of ones they were first instituted in the Church of God; and after what manner they were obserued by antiquitie, what new inuentions and deprauations haue ensued thereupon, and at what times, as also by what waies and pathes. Wee haue seene the Church nowe shrowding her selfe into some pitte or caue of the earth: and af∣terward to haue seated and assembled her selfe in faire and comely Temples, and that such temples as haue neither altars nor images: then wee haue seene altars vsurping the places of the tables for the holy Supper, and after some long tract of time, imploi∣ed about the offering vp of a pretended sacrifice: and we haue seene how images be∣ing admitted for remembrances, at length grew to be worshipped and adored. And in the end both the one and the other to haue so increased & prospered, as that they haue brought the true altar Christ vnto nothing, to the offending of the Iewes and to the scorne and reproch of the Turks, through the madnes of silly miserable Chri∣stians. We haue seene the vessels of the Church changed, from decencie and come∣linesse, to great charge & costlines; from costlines, to be honoured; from honoring, to adoration. In like maner the apparrell and habites of the priests, from common ones into peculiar and speciall ones; from indifferent ones, to certaine and vnchangeable ones; from simple ones, by degrees into comely ones, yea into a ceremony, into ho∣lines, and into necessity: the whole seruice in the vulgar tong, such as was vnderstood of all, euen vnto the infants; common both to priestes and people in all the Chur∣ches of Christendome; afterward by the corruptnes, partly of languages, and partly of men, to become vnknown, not vnderstood of al the people, no not by those which were of best vnderstanding: to the bringing of men thereby to dispute against the scriptures, against the fathers, against reason, & against cōmon sence; how that it shold be both more profitable & holy for the same to continue so. We haue seen the Bbs. & Ministers of the Church, ordained to preach and to administer the sacramentes, and
afterward in succession of time, both the seruants and their seruice banished and dri∣uen quite out of place, & the bright burning lampe of Gods word altogether quen∣ched in the Church, the whole seruice turned to a Masse, and all the charge and of∣fice of the Priestes, to the saying of Masses, and that for the most part with their harts and eares at home, when their tongues are pronouncing the same. And in the ende that they might be thought and seeme rather then bee holy in deede, from married ones they become vnmaried, and promising abstinence from mariage for euer. And by what degrees? Surely, virginitie & chastity in mariage hauing been praised as a wel matching paire at the first, and as the singular gifts of God, and recommended both the one and the other vnto the church, were afterward (in steed of this seemely and louing yoking together acording to the Apostle) opposed and set the one against the other: and the praise of the one was neuer thought sufficient without the dispraise & disgrace of the other: whervpon it followed that the Bbs. & ecclesiastical persons who first were maried, began to put more holines in an vnmaried estate: and so in things that were free and indifferent, men haue not let to place, both difference and the pre∣rogatiue of excellencie, and therevpon exhortations to ecclesiasticall persons to em∣brace abstinence from marriage, then to binde them to it with faire speeches: and after to compell them thereto by law, and to force it vppon them by seuere punish∣ments and penalties, and in the end, by the depriuing of them of their Offices and Benefices, and by shamefullie disgrading of them. Whereupon so much vncleannesse ensued, as that the world stinketh thereof, as whereby the name of a Church-man is euill spoken of, all ouer the world. Now it followeth, that we come to the third part, which entreth into the handling of the doctrine of the holy Supper, and consequently into the doctrine of the Masse. And here I desire the Reader to be yet both more attentiue and more feruently affected: that so he may be the better able to iudge, both where the abuse is crept in, as also where the true vse is retained, as also where prophanenes hath entred, and where the holy Ministerie & true mystery is kept and obserued. The end of the second Booke.
The Third Booke, WHEREIN IS INTREATED OF THE SACRIFICE OF IESVS CHRIST: and of the pretended sacrifice of the Masse. CHAP. I. That the propitiatorie sacrifice of Iesus Christ is not reiterated in the holy Supper: and in what sence the old Church did vse this phrase and manner of speech. THe Lord our God hauing vouchsafed through his infinite mer∣cie to chuse vnto himselfe before all worldes, a people from a∣mongst men, which we call the Church: (which he hath by the same grace continued against all the changes and mutations which haue happened thereunto: and amidst all the broiles & confusions falling out in the world) was purposed to bind and tie the same vnto himselfe by certaine holy and consecrated ce∣remonies, full of instruction and efficacie: by which it is con∣tinually aduertised of the dutie which it oweth vnto God, and of the grace of God towards it: euen that grace of God, wherein it pleased him, according to the pur∣pose of his good pleasure, to giue himselfe to his Church, namely to his faithfull: and that dutie of man, which in the acknowledging of this grace, he is bound to offer and consecrate himselfe wholly vnto God, and that so much the more, because he could not finde any thing in his owne nature, that could merite euen the least thing that possiblie could or should allure and draw on this grace: nothing, yea on the contra∣rie, not any thing but that which ought to prouoke the wrath & curse of God vpon him. But for as much as the iustice of God, and the sinne of man were (as it were) two extreames, there was requisite a Mediator to ioyne them together: and that for the same cause he should hold of the said two extreames, that is, that hee should bee God and man: this is that Iesus Christ our Lord, begotten from euerlasting, before all time, borne notwithstanding and giuen in his due time. And therefore in this Mediator, all the holy ceremonies of the Church of God, doe take their roote and foundation; whether they bee those which are ordained for to offer vp our holy ser∣uice vnto God in: (for if our works be not considered in the perfection of this Media∣tor, the naturall imperfections cleauing thereunto, will cast them out of his presence, & cause them to be taken for trespasses & offences; so far will it be off, that they should merite and deserue grace:) or those which are ordained to assure vs of the grace of God: for where is the conscience, which being informed and roused vp, be it neuer so little by the law of the most mighty, yea if it haue neuer so small touch & remorce of it self, that can promise or perswade it selfe of the grace of God, how good, and merciful soeuer he conceiue it to be? yea, which on the contrarie doth not tremble & quake be∣fore his iust anger, or doeth not thereby condemne it selfe, saue that it pleaseth this Mediator to take it by the hand, and to leade it before the iudge, not so much to beg
or craue any thing for it, as to seale vp vnto and graft in it his grace? to say vnto it in full assurance and confidence: Father this is one of them which thou hast giuen me, by the merite of my obedience; or rather one of those whom I purchased with mine owne blood. Now of them I will not lose one, take them vnto thy grace: Ioh. 17. it is for them Father that I pray and intreate thee: Keepe them in thy name, let them be one as we are, let my ioy be fulfilled in them, &c. Now these holy ceremonies are of two sorts: such as are offered by man to God, Sacrifice and Sacraments. are properly called sacrifices: and those which are giuen by God to man, sacraments. In so much as that to speake properly, we may say: that in the sacrifices, man (as much as he could) was admonished to renounce himselfe, and to giue himselfe vnto God: in the Sacraments hee was aduertised and assured, that God putting off his iustice to cloath himselfe with mercy, did vouchsafe to giue himselfe vnto him: the people in their sacrifices, and euery faithfull man making protestation to endeuor themselues to become the people and children of God: God in the Sacraments bearing witnes vnto them, that he vouchsafed to be their God in Iesus Christ, according to his free promises, as also their father. To be short, a sacrifice is an acte or worke, by which we acknowledge, in the knowledge of the true God, the whole homage which we owe vnto him, and the faults which in our infirmitie we commit therein. A sacrament is a holy ceremony instituted of God, in which the faithfull are confirmed, by signes exhibiting that which they represent, of the grace of God promised vnto the faithful in the couenant which it hath pleased him to make with them. Now on Gods behalfe the couenant halteth not; he is faithfull, farre more readie to offer himselfe, and to deliuer himselfe to vs, with all his good things, then we are to hold out our handes to receiue them. But on our behalfe all our actions are maimed, this fleshlie hart, gi∣uen to the flesh, cleauing fast to it selfe, cannot offer it selfe to him, of or by it selfe, he must violently draw and pull it vnto him, when he will haue it. And there remaineth nothing in vs of all that which we owe vnto God, besides the manifesting and decla∣ring of our knowing of it, and the testifying of the sorrow and griefe which we haue, for that we are not able to render him the same; as also to acknowledge in our sacri∣fices, that all our good things, that all our prosperitie and good successe are of God alone, of his blessing and of his fauour, and that all that which hee can receiue of vs in stead of recompence, are nothing els then our new trespasses; that is, in stead of his bountifulnes our ingratitude, and of his benefites, our misdeedes; Psal. 16. & 19. in saying with Da∣uid, (a man notwithstanding according to Gods owne heart:) My soule, thou hast said vnto the Lord, thou art my Lord, my goodnesse reacheth not vnto thee. And againe: Who knoweth O Lord the faults and errours of his life? O cleanse me from my secret sinnes. And this was the cause why the old Church had two principall sortes of sacrifices: peace-offerings, by which all & euerie one did protest, according to the measure of increase which they inioyed, that all that whatsoeuer they had was of God: & the propitiatory sacrifices, by the which they did testifie all & euery one, that in stead of so many good thinges which they did receiue, they could not render vnto God any thing but vn∣cleannes and transgressions, which by the bloud of beasts shed therein, they testified and declared to be worthie of death: and by the ordinarie reiterating of the killing of so many innocent beasts, they did giue to vnderstand, that they could not be forgi∣uen or pardoned, but in the blood of that immaculate lambe, and of the true, onely, eternall and perpetuall propitiatory sacrifice of the Church, Iesus Christ our Lord. And notwithstanding it is here to be noted, That the holy Supper may be considered both as a sacri∣fice & a sacra∣ment. that although it hath beene already shewed, that there is a difference betwixt a sacrifice and a Sacrament, that yet there are some ceremonies in the Church, which may bee considered in diuers respectes, both as sacrifices and sacraments. The Paschall lambe in the Church of the Iewes, is taken for a Sacrament, and that in as much as it is giuen of God, for a certaine signe of saluation promised vnto the Church, and to euery faithful member in the same: as also in that, that this blood of the lamb, wherewith the dore posts are sprinkled, doth represent vnto vs the blood of Iesus Christ, which sprinkleth our soules, and remoue
farre from vs and our Christian families, the destroying Angell: and therfore it is saide: This blood shall be for a signe vppon your houses, that so when as I shall see it, I may passe ouer. And yet notwithstanding it may bee taken for a sacrifice of thanks∣giuing, in as much as it is commaunded to bee continued for euer, for a remem∣brance and thanksgiuing for the preseruation of the first borne of Israel, out of the midst of all the sorrow and griefe which they suffered in Egypt: as also it is a signe of the preseruation of the elect of God in the Church, from out of the midst of the con∣demnation of this peruerse and wicked world. And therefore it is said: This day shall bee a memoriall vnto you, you shall keepe the same holy in your generations, &c. As also in some sorte for a propitiatorie Sacrifice, in that it was a figure of the true and onely propitiatorie Sacrifice offered by the Sonne of God our high Priest, for our sinnes to God his father vppon the altar of the Crosse, according to the Euangelist his exposition: You shall not breake a bone of him. And the Apo∣stle Saint Paule: Our Passeouer, that is, Iesus Christ slaine or crucified. The same may bee said of the holy Supper of our Lord: It is instituted for a Sacrament of the new Te∣stament, in as much as it is the reall receiuing and communicating of the bodie and blood of Christ, truely God, and truely man, deliuered to be put to death vpon the Crosse for our sinnes, raised againe for our iustification, giuen in the vse of the holy Supper according to his owne institution, for the nourishing of our soules vnto eternall life. And therefore it is said: Take, eate, this is my bodie, which is gi∣uen for you. And yet it ceaseth not, considered in some sorte, to bee in manner of a sacrifice, in as much as this is a remembrance of this propitiatorie sacrifice of our Lord on the Crosse, according to that which is said: Doe this in remembrance of mee: shew forth the Lordes death vnto his comming: In such sort, that as the lambe was af∣ter a certaine manner a propitiatorie Sacrifice, in that it did prefigure him: so the holy Supper in like manner, in as much as it bringeth him vnto our remembrances, in that it representeth him vnto vs before the eyes of our faith. And yet further∣more of this remembrance, there proceedeth an other sacrifice, euen the true sa∣crifice of praise and thanksgiuing, which the Church hath called by the name of Eu∣charist. That is, that when we call to mind, that God hath so loued the worlde, or rather the Church, hated of the worlde, as that hee hath giuen his dearely beloued Sonne, the eternall and euerliuing, for the mortall; the iust for the vniust; to the ignominious and reproachfull death of the Crosse, to redeeme them from their sinnes: wee adore the bowelles of his mercies: wee are lifted vppe with a holy ra∣uishment, euen into the heauens farre from our our selues: wee vtter our cries in a certaine feruencie of faith, from all in generall, saying: praised bee thou O Lorde, for that thy grace hath appeared in the worlde: for that it hath superabounded in loue, for the sauing of sinners: and afterward let vs say with Saint Paule, being humbled in our infirmities, but imboldened in his grace, to the appropriating and particular applying of this benefite vnto our selues: Euen the sinners Lord, where∣of I am the chiefe, I, a blasphemer, a persecutor, and oppressor, &c. And this faith ap∣plyeth this sacrifice vnto our selues, it maketh it seuerall and peculiar vnto euery one of vs, it maketh vs then to say with confidence: No more, He that eateth the flesh and drinketh the blood of Christ hath eternall life: No more, I say: God so loued the worlde, as that he hath sent his sonne, &c. For what good doth this serue vs vnto, but to increase our sorrowe and griefe: if wee bee not the parties our selues? But more boldly with the Apostle: I am crucified with Christ, I liue, and yet not I, now, but Christ in mee: Galath. 2.20. in that I liue in the flesh, I liue in the faith of the Sonne of God, who hath loued mee, and who hath giuen himselfe for me, &c. Thus in remembring this sacrifice, the shamefull death of the Lord, wee acknowledge our selues lost in our selues: yea vtterly lost, seeing that for to saue mankind, it was requisite that the Sonne of God should be made man, and expose himselfe to the reuilinges and slaunderous spee∣ches of men. And this knowledge begetteth in vs an acknowledgement of the free mercie of God, which hath giuen vs his onely begotten Sonne, yea who hath giuen
vs himselfe in his Sonne. How can we then do lesse then offer vp, then sacrifice our selues to him? To offer vp vnto him, as saith the Apostle, Rom. 12.1. Our bodies a liuing sacri∣fine, holy, acceptable, a reasonable seruice? In such sort, as that in the holy Supper wee communicate really and effectually, in the bodie and blood of Iesus Christ, euen to the sucking of life & nourishment to our soules from the same: and this is that which proceedeth from it as a Sacrament. Wee celebrate likewise his death, from whom as out of a fountaine wee drawe life, and that the rather, because this his death is our life: in as much as wee haue the propitiation for our sinnes in his blood: and the celebrating of the remembrance of this propitiatorie sacrifice, although some∣what improperly may be called a Sacrifice. Seeing that consequently vpon the deepe meditation of this high mysterie and vnspeakable benefit receiued by the faithfull, & adored of the Angels, we enter into a serious thanksgiuing, in which we resolue to re∣nounce and forsake our selues, that so we may offer vp our selues the more freely vnto God, ceasing from thenceforth to fashion our selues any more according to this pre∣sent world, seeking rather to transforme and chaunge our selues, by the renewing of our vnderstanding, &c. And here we haue another sacrifice, euen a sacrifice of peace, in as much as there is a peace concluded betwixt God and the faithfull man; a sacrifice of praise, in as much as all increase and prosperitie, are giuen vnto vs by God, and God in this peace. Finally, a sacrificing of our selues in the offering vp of our thankfull heartes, and resoluing therewithall to liue and die in him, and vnto him, who hath giuen himselfe for vs, who hath vouchsafed to offer vp his body, and to shed his blood for to purchase vs life, who giueth vs them in ordinary bread and wine, to nourish our soules vnto eternall life, Amen. And it is not for any other consideration, Wherfore the old writers did vse this worde Sacrifice. that the olde writers doe sometimes call the holy Supper a sacrifice, a Sacrifice of remembrance and thankesgiuing of the faithfull. And if our aduersaries doe keepe themselues within these boundes, wee shall not neede to reason and dispute about wordes, neither yet refuse or re∣iect the worde Sacrifice. But and if that they tell vs, that the Masse is a sacrifice pro∣pitiatorie for the quicke and the dead; wee tell them, that wee would haue them to aunswere vs, whether they ground it vppon the holy Supper, or els borrowe the institution thereof from els where. If from else where, then wee boldly a∣uouch vnto them, that there is no title of the Masse in all the holy scripture, neyther of any thing belonging thereto, neither yet in the workes of any of the auncient writers: and this wee haue alreadie proued, and shall bee able further to proue most plentifully, if any thing bee wanting therein. But if they fetch and deriue it from the holy Supper, then wee auouch and say vnto them, that it is no propitiatorie sacrifice: that the Lord did neuer ordaine it for any such ende: that the Apostles did neuer so teach it: neyther yet that the fathers did so vn∣derstande it. And this is the matter that wee are to handle and intreate of in this Chapter. In the meane time wee will note and obserue by the way, that these wordes Sacrifice and Sacrament, doe not alwaies keepe the proper limites and boundes: but that sometimes they runne in their generall signification, and are taken ey∣ther for all holy offices, or for all the signes vsed in the Church to signifie any thing. August. l. 19. contr. Faust. c. 14. In Psal. 141. Psal. 65. de peccat. meri∣tis. Bernard. de caena Dom. And to the end that the doubt of this generall vsing of this worde Sacrament, may not trouble vs: it appeareth in certaine olde writers, that they haue gi∣uen this name to the signe of the Crosse, to all the ceremonies of baptisme: to the breade giuen to those that were catechised, which wee call the hallow∣ed breade, to the washing of feete practised vppon the Apostles, &c. which neuer∣thelesse do shew vnto vs at large in their treatises, that howsoeuer they abuse the word, yet they doe not let, as need requireth, to take and vnderstand it in the right vse and signification. And as for the worde Sacrifice, the Grammarians likewise say, , the priesthood, that is the care or administratiō of holy things. And this is the cause that euery consecrated action hath beene called by this name:
likewise it hath purposely beene vsed to signifie the diuine seruice, because that the Iewes and the Gentiles did vse it so, Rom. 15. Phil. 2. Orig. ad Rom. l. 10. Chrysost. ad Rom. hom. 29 Epiph. haeres. 79. Angust. de ci∣uit. Det. l. 10. c. 6 Tertul in A∣polog. Idem ad Sca∣pul. Iren. l. 4. contr. haeres. c. 34. Psal. 50.69. Ecclesiastic. 35 Ad. Heb. c. 13. August. epist. 120. ad Ho∣norat. Euseb. de De∣monstr. l. 1. c. 10. Tertul. c. 4. contr. Marciō. Philip. 4. Hebr. 3. Iren. l. 4. c. 32. & 34. Cypr. serm. 1. de cleemos. August. ep. 122 Psalm. 51. Ecclesiastic. 35. Rom. 12.2. who placed all their seruices in Sacrifices. Thus wee see that Saint Paul called all the ministerie of the Gospell, a Sacrifice. And O∣rigen saith: This is a very worke of the Priesthood, , to preach the Gospell. Chrysostome: My Priesthood, or sacrificing office is to preach the Gospell. Epiphani∣us speaking of them which were chosen in the thirteenth of the Actes, saith: They did sacrifice the Gospell. And in the same sence Saint Augustine likewise hath said: We call a sacrifice euery worke, that hath relation vnto God, being done to the end that wee may cleaue and sticke vnto him in a holy societie. As Tertullian speaking of prayers: I offer vnto him the fattest sacrifice that I am able, euen prayer, which hee hath commanded, pro∣ceeding from a chaste bodie, from a harmelesse soule, from a holy spirite, &c. Ireneus: Our altar is in heauen, whither our prayers and offeringes are directed. And the praises of God and giuing of thankes are called by the name of Sacrifices in the Psalmes. Where∣upon Saint Augustine saith: Wee giue thankes to the Lord our God which is the great Sa∣crament, in the sacrifice of the New Testament, &c. And Eusebius: We sacrifice and burne the memorie of this great sacrifice, &c. rendring thankes to the God of our saluation, &c. And Tertullian: The Samaritane intended to offer a true sacrifice, euen the sacrifice of praise and thankesgiuing, in the true temple, and to the true sacrificer Iesus Christ, &c. The offe∣ringes likewise which are made in the Christian assemblies, for the reliefe of the poore, haue had this name giuen them in Saint Paule: A smell of a sweete sauour: a sacrifice acceptable vnto God: offeringes wherewith hee is well pleased. In Ireneus; We offer vnto God the first fruites of his giftes, feeding the hungrie, and cloathing the na∣ked, &c. In Saint Cyprian where he reprocheth a rich widow: Comest thou to the Lords banquet without a sacrifice? And Saint Augustine which calleth the almes of certaine matrons, sacrifices; the table of the Temple whereuppon they were laide, an Altar: and to bee briefe, a broken and contrite heart is a sacrifice vnto God, Psalme 51. so is charitie towardes a mans neighbour: and the vowes which wee make of con∣secrating and dedicating of our liues vnto the Lord, Rom. 12. And why then should any man make it strange, that the olde writers haue called the holy Supper, a Sacri∣fice: seeing that all these actions doe meete together in it, namely a holy office, a remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ vppon the Crosse, the reading and prea∣ching of his worde, feruent praiers, a serious and deepe meditation of sinne, and of the grace of God both together, the contrition of hart, the vow of sacrifi∣cing from thence forward, soule and bodie vnto God, and the opening of the bo∣welles of compassion towardes the brethren: all of them such actions, as euerie one whereof by it selfe is called both in the holy scriptures, as also in the fathers, Ob∣lations and Sacrifices: and how much more then that, which doth comprise them all in it selfe alone? But that we may not contend about wordes, let vs come to the question, which is: If the Masse bee a propitiatorie Sacrifice: and also, if the holy Supper in his puritie, were instituted for the same end, if our Lord Iesus bee there sacrificed a new, really and in very deed, for a propitiation of our sinnes, that is to say, for the sinnes of the quicke and the dead, by the Ministers or Priestes, which things we denie, and our ad∣uersaries affirme. The scripture telleth vs; That there are no propitiato∣ry sacrifices in the new Te∣stament, be∣sides that of Iesus Christ himselfe. That the lambe was slaine before the foundation of the worlde: And this lambe is the eternall Sonne of God, whose sacrifice cannot chuse but be al∣mighty, all-sufficient, & absolutely perfect, in respect of the desired end, namely, the saluation of men. And therefore for the saluation of man, wee haue no need, neither of reiterating any sacrifice, neither of any other new and neuer before offered Sacri∣fice whatsoeuer: on the contrary all the Sacrifices of the lawe, in their imper∣fections, doe leade vs to the perfection of this same: in their being often reitera∣ted they shew vs their insufficiencie and weaknesse to bee cut off and ended, in the strength and efficacie of this onely one. Whereuppon it commeth, that in the new Testament, we heare not any more of Sacrifices or Sacrificing Priestes: Of Sacri∣ficing
Priestes, saue where as it is taught to bee the name and office of all and euerie Christian. You are (saith Saint Peter) a royall priesthood, a holy priesthood, a holy people, 1. Pet. 2. Apocal. 1. &c. And Saint Iohn: Christ hath made vs kinges and priestes vnto God his father: to of∣fer (saith the Glosse) acceptable sacrifices vnto God by him. Of sacrifices also in like manner, saue that wee render continuall thankes vnto God for this great sacrifice, by the consecrating of whatsoeuer is in vs: To offer vnto God (sayeth the Apostle) spirituall sacrifices, which may bee acceptable vnto him in Iesus Christ: 1. Pet. 2. Rom. 2. euen our selues a liuing sacrifice, which is our reasonable seruing, &c. Likewise in the holy Supper, from whence they woulde deriue the Masse, there is no worke of sa∣crifice for sinne. The sacrifice of Iesus Christ was accomplished vppon the Crosse, where hee was slaine for vs; and not in the holy Supper: but the remembrance of that sacrifice offered vppon the Crosse, is renewed in the Supper, accor∣ding to the institution of the Lorde, vntil his comming, that is, without the be∣ing of any other sacrifices for sinne that partition wall; and to the vtter cutting off of all expectation, or further looking after of either his offering vp againe, by the handes of the Iewes; or els any daily sacrificing of him, by any action of the priestes. The Apostle saith: The law which had a shadow of good things to come, That the sacri∣fice of Christ cannot be re∣terated. Heb. 8.9.10. and not the ex∣presse forme of things, by the sacrifices which were offered euery yeare, could neuer sanctifie those which approached thereunto, &c. What doth the Apostle conclude out of this propo∣sition? He setteth the law against the Gospell; the priestes of the same, against our soueraigne priest Iesus Christ; their sacrifices repeated and oftentimes renewed, a∣gainst his sacrifice which hath no need to be renewed; their weaknes and disabilitie to sanctifie, against the holinesse and effectuall sanctifying power which was in his. And afterward he concludeth: He taketh away the former, for to establish the latter: the sacrifices of the law, for to establish this onely Sacrifice. Now how could this con∣clusion be good, if this sacrifice were againe to bee reiterated? And that not yeare∣ly, as vnder the law, but daily: yea hourely, nay which is yet more, euery moment, and in euerie moment of a thousand thousand times? Whereuppon it is said: the sa∣crifices of the lawe are abolished, in the sacrifice of Iesus Christ: but it is not saide, that hee himselfe cannot bee sacrificed againe: let vs heare the Apostle; Heb. 9. v. 12.24 Christ being come to bee our high priest of good thinges to come, &c. not by the blood of goates, or of calues, but by his owne blood, is entred once into the holy places, hauing obtained an euerla∣sting redemption. Is entred (saith hee) into the holy places, euen into heauen, that nowe hee may appeare for vs before the face of God: but not to the ende to offer vp himselfe of∣tentimes, in such sorte, as the high Priest, who entreth into the holy places euerie yeare, with other bloode: for then it should haue behoued him to haue suffered oftentimes since the foun∣dation of the worlde: But nowe in the fulnesse of time, hee hath appeared once, for the put∣ting away of sinne, by the sacrificing of himselfe. And as it is appointed for all men to die once, and after that followeth iudgement: euen so likewise Christ hauing beene offered once, for to take away the sins of many, will appeare the second time without sinne, to those which attende vnto saluation. Where wee are to obserue, that the Apostle goeth ouer it sundry times: That Christ hath offered himselfe once. Where is now their preten∣ded reiterating? seeing that, by his one onely oblation hee hath purchased euerlasting re∣demption: that is, hath wholly accomplished and fulfilled the worke of the redemp∣tion of the Church, and that sufficiently (as the schoolemen speake) for the whole worlde; but effectually for his elect onely. And therefore what neede is there of a new propitiation? That he did appeare in heauen before the father, that is, to bestow by his intercession, the efficacie of this sacrifice vpon his faithfull ones: himselfe making the application of his owne sacrifice: That by this onely appearing, this onely sacri∣fice once offered, hee hath abolished sinne: I say not the sinnes of some fewe, but sinne, that is, destroyed the kingdome of sinne it selfe: in such sorte, as that euerie o∣ther propitiatorie sacrifice is from hencefoorth vnprofitable, euen vnto his seconde
appearing: that is, vnto the end and consummation of the worlde. And no man is here to say, that in deed hee hath offered himselfe once, but that others are to offer him hereafter: for in that he hath shewed the sufficiencie of this sacrifice, he hath an∣nihilated and disanulled in one word, Heb. 10. all others whatsoeuer: Others (saith he) which are not reiterated, but because of their imperfectnesse: in as much as it is impossible that the blood of Bulles and Goates, though they should bee a thousand times reitera∣ted, should take away sinnes. For which cause (saith hee) there is a yearely remem∣brance of sinnes reiterated: whereas our Lord by one onely oblation, hath conse∣crated for euer those which are sanctified. Whereuppon it followeth, that where blood is of sufficient effectualnesse, there is no neede of any reiteration. Now wee are of iudgement, that this effectualnesse is absolute and perfect in the precious blood of our Lord, that so wee may stay and content our selues with this onely Sacrifice. And as by the sufficiencie thereof, being opposed and set against the insufficiencie of all others, the reiterating thereof is excluded; so by the perfectnesse of the Priest, opposed and set against the vnperfectnesse of those before him, all others are exclu∣ded, and we tyed vnto one onely, and him resident and sitting in the heauens, at the right hand of the father, in whose sacrifice as all sacrifices haue an end: so in his person euerie priesthood is both fully finished and accomplished; One priest accor∣ding to the order of Melchisedech, without father, without mother, without stocke or kin∣dred, without beginning of daies, and without end of life: that is, which hath not had any such like predecessors: neither yet shall haue any such like successors in the line and tribe of Leui: an euerlasting priest, and therefore one onely: and therefore also, not succeeded of any other sacrificing Priestes, and much lesse of any other priestes which should bee imployed in the sacrificing of him: For (saith hee) the cause why there were many priestes, was because they were mortall; because that death would not let them indure. But this priest abideth for euer, and God hath wit∣nessed the same of him by an oath: and therefore he hath an euerlasting and eter∣nall priesthoode in himselfe and in the Church. A priest which is able to be both the Sacrificer and Sacrifice, together and at once: a holy Priest, which hath no neede to offer daily, both for his owne sinnes, and for the sinnes of the people: and such a one is Iesus Christ the sonne of the eternall God, and God himselfe. A Sacrifice also perfect and sufficient: which thing cannot possiblie be found in the blood of all the creatures that are liuing, no not in the offering vp of all men, and the whole worlde therewithall: and such a one againe is Iesus Christ, God and man, but man without sinne, seperated and set apart from sinners: the lambe without spotte: Hebr. 7. Who (saith the Apostle) offered himselfe once for the sinnes of the people, ordained by the worde of the oath, to bee consecrated for euer: alwaies liuing, that so hee might alwaies bee our intercessor: alwaies mightie and powerfull, that so hee might perfectly saue those, which draw neere vnto God by him: that is to say, continu∣ally offering vp the prayers of his brethren, sanctified and authorised by his owne, continually applying the merite of the sacrifice of his obedience, by his interces∣sion; Hebr. 10. by this sacrifice; by this oblation, of which it is said: That by one onely obla∣tion hee hath perfected for euer, them which are sanctified: that hee was once offered to a∣bolish the sinnes of many: that by the offering of his bodie once made, wee are sanctified: that by his owne blood hee is entred into the holy places, hauing obtained an euerlasting redemption: that hauing offered vp this onely sacrifice for sinnes, he sitteth for euer at the right hand of God his father. And in all this there is likewise as little to bee replyed: that Christ is no more offered after a bloody manner; but by a certaine kinde of sacrifice without blood. For besides, that this distinction hath no warrant in all the scripture, the Apostle, as if he had forseene the same, cutteth it off in a word: for not being contented to haue gone ouer it oftentimes, how that wee haue propitiation for our sinnes in the blood of our Lord Iesus Christ once shed: that all manner of other blood is voide and destitute of this effectuall power, &c. To the ende that wee
might place our propitiation in this his only blood, he yet further giueth vs these ge∣nerall rules: That it behoueth, that the death of this Priest should be wrought for the ransome of transgressors: that whereas there is forgiuenesse of sinnes, (that is to say, after this ran∣some paide) there is not any more offering for sinne: that as concerning the rest, there is no purifying or cleansing, no remission without blood. Whereuppon it followeth, that there is no more oblation for sinne, other then that of our Lord, no more propitiation, saue that in his blood: and therefore not any more by that pretended sacrifice of theirs without blood. But if they reply: that if this bloodlesse sacrifice of theirs bee not propitiatorie, yet it helpeth vs to make application, and to take hold of the true propitiation. Wee answere, neuer a deale: for wee are all Priestes in this be∣halfe, all annointed by the spirite of Christ, to represent and daylie offer vp vn∣to God, the sacrifice of his onely Sonne, in the feruencie of our prayers, made in a liuely faith, to the ende that it might please him, vpon the view of the same, to forgiue vs our offences. He himselfe likewise (as saith the Apostle) is sitting neere vnto his father, to make intercession for vs, to make way of entrance for our re∣questes, to apply vnto vs his faithfull ones, the merite of his obedience, the bene∣fite of his death, and the efficacie of his sacrifice; supplying the defectes of our pe∣titions, by his intercession; the infirmities of our faith, and the imperfections of our obedience, by the faithfulnesse of the couenant made in his blood, and by the perfect obedience performed by him vpon the Crosse. CHAP. II. An answere to the obiections of the aduersaries, which they pretend to gather out of the holy scriptures, for a Sacrifice. NOw therefore what is there that our aduersaries can obiect a∣gainst this doctrine grounded vpon the anology of the whole bodie of the holy scriptures, both of the old and new Testa∣ment, and that by so manifold, plaine, and expresse places? They tell vs, that the sacrifices of the law haue in such sorte shadowed out the sacrifice of our Lord vppon the Crosse, as that neuerthelesse they haue not vtterly bereft vs of all man∣ner of Sacrifice: and that in very deede the Sacrifice of the Masse, is prefigured and foretold in the old Testament, and that such a one as they vse to celebrate at this day, sacrificing the body and blood of our Lord vnder the kindes of bread and wine vpon their altars. But let vs see vppon what ground. In Genesis the 14. it is said: Melchisedech king of Salem brought, Genes. 14. Melchisedech. or cau∣sed wine & bread to be brought: and he was the priest of the high God. They cannot deny, but that this is not the true text in that place: and yet notwithstanding they gather with a full hand this conclusion: Christ is a Priest according to the order of Melchi∣sedech; and he brought bread and wine; therefore Iesus Christ hath sacrificed bread and wine, and vnder bread and wine his body and his blood: and the priestes do the same daily according to his example. Let vs agree in the grammaticall and literall sence, and the whole controuersie in diuinitie, wil be altogether void and ended. The Hebrew word which is vsed there, is neuer vsed in the scriptures, about the matter of sacrifice: & cannot be better expressed, then by that which we say in French: To draw forth, set forth, or to cause to be brought, or to bring forth. In this sence wee reade the same word for the drawing forth of a sword, Ezech. 21. & the drawing forth of the windes, Psalme the 135. And lice brought forth, Exod. 8. and water from the rocke, Cypr. in epist. ad Cecil. Chrysost. in hom. 35. in c. 14. Genes. Num∣bers 30. in which places and infinit others, the holy Ghost hath vsed the same word. The Chaldie Paraphrast saith: He brought, or caused to be brought: The Greeke, : The Latine, Protulit. Cyprian, & Chrysostome in like manner. Iosephus saith: He enter∣tained
him as a guest, Ioseph. l. 1. c, 18. Ambros. ad Hebr. c. 7. Cardin. Caiet. in Genes. c. 14 and suffered not him or any of his followers to want any thing. Saint Ambrose also: Protulit in refectionem. And Cardinall Hugo seemeth to hold himselfe satisfied with the same sence, affirming that the Hebrew Doctors had so expounded it. The vulgar translation, Proferens panem & vinum. And Cardinall Caietan in like manner: Here is not any thing written of any sacrifice or oblation, Sed de prolatione seu ex∣tractione; but of bringing forth, or causing of bread & wine to be brought (as Iosephus saith) for the refreshing of the conquerors. And thus also Erasmus & Sigonius do take it, for which they are reproued of Posseuinus the Iesuite. Possenin. Bi∣bliothec. Se∣lect. l. 4. c. 14. But the Apostle decideth the whole matter, who telleth vs, that Melchisedech came before Abraham, and blessed him. He speaketh not of the bread & wine, he findeth not any such profound mystery there: he concealeth it, as accessarie and priuy to that which went before it: and he procee∣deth to the mentioning of the blessing, without making of any other stay or delay. Now if the proofe of a Sacrifice do lie in this word, and that this word by the consent of all interpretors, containeth not so much as any shadow of a Sacrifice in it: what need we then to seeke to proceed or wade any further, to fish out long discourses, the fountaine fathered vpon the word, being alreadie dried vp and stopped? Graunt it, (say they) but yet he bringeth forth bread. But now let them not go about to be ig∣norant of that which they know, namely, that the Hebrews vnder the name of bread do comprehend all manner of food and sustenance, which likewise the Septuagintes haue translated in this place, , loaues or meates, in the plurall number, to shew that they were to be distributed vnto the troupes, and not , a bread to be sacrificed. They reply, that there is added, For he was the Priest of the high God, and yet false, and that more then all the rest: for the Hebrew saith, But he was, or and he was: and not as they would haue it, for he was: whereupon it is thus turned into Greeke, , &c. The Chaldie, Et erat Minister coram Deo. The coniunction causall not being acknowledged by any but themselues. Caietanus likewise: And wheras it followth in the vulgar translation: For he was the Priest, &c. as though this were the cause of the offering, the same is not so in the Hebrew, vz. Vt causa, sed vt separata clausula, that is, not as a cause, but as a distinct & seperated sentence: so weak & wauering are the foundations of so great a building. But & if we make any question here of a sacrifice, then it must likewise bee known to whō Melchisedech did offer his sacrifice? to Abrahā? to a man? this cannot but proue impiety; & an absurditie also, when the greater is made to sacrifice vnto the lesse. But they will say, that hee sacrificed vnto God? And in conscience, can they gather any one word to shew the same? And whether do we reade the holy scriptures to gather from thence the thinges it speaketh not of, or to heare therein that which it teacheth? But which is more, the Apostle to the Hebrewes vndertaketh the com∣paring of the Priesthood of Melchisedech, with the priesthood of Iesus Christ. Hee handleth it throughout all the partes thereof, making them both to bee kinges of righteousnesse and peace: and making them both also to bee permanent and endu∣ring Priestes, &c. What could there bee of greater weight and moment, then to say: And he sacrificed bread and wine, Hebr. 6. in token of the sacrifice which Christ offered in his holy Supper? &c. Hosius saith, and Bellarmine after him; that this mysterie was too great for the Hebrewes to conceiue. Heb. 6. But wherefore then had the Apostles said before: Let vs leaue the worde, which deliuereth the beginning of Christ, and let vs go on vnto perfe∣ction. &c. And what could there bee more hard then to setre before them a man, without father, without mother, without beginning, and without ending, &c. And if there had beene any darknesse therein, of whom could they haue learned the same more clearely and plainly, then of the Apostle? then of the spirit of God himselfe? And to what time, or for what manner of men, will they say, that hee did reserue the knowledge thereof? But let vs graunt them that he sacrificed to God bread & wine: this is all that they can gather out of this text with the help of all their falsifications; Exod. 29. Numb. 28. and what shal they gaine thereby? For first, is this any other thing but that which the Priestes according to the order of Aaron did euery day? And wherein then will the excellencie and prerogatiue, that the Apostle seeketh after,
be found? seeing namely, that they hold, that in respect of the mater the sacrifice offe∣red by Melchisedech, is not any thing more precious thē the sacrifices of the Leuits: Veg. de Missa The. 68. fol. 33 and that the death of our Lord was more amplie and liuelie figured out in these, then in that. And afterwarde, if it must needes bee, that because that Melchisedech offe∣ring bread and wine, became the figure of Christ, and that Christ may bee offered vnder the kindes of bread and wine; then why not aswell vnder all the other kindes, which did represent him vnder the law, being offered by the Priestes according to the Order of Aaron, which in like manner did figure and shadow him out? And again, if this sacrifice were the figure of Christ, hath hee not accomplished the same, as hee hath done all the rest? And then what remaineth there yet behinde to bee done a∣gaine therein? to what end should there neede a reiterating of that which is perfect? and when hee himselfe hath giuen this testimonie, Consummatum est, who shall gain∣say and denie the same, seeing that hee came to fulfill them all? But let vs saye on; They compare Christ to Melchisedech, Melchisedech his offring to the Eucharist; now betwixt the Offerer and the offring there is alwaies a proportion to bee kepte. As therefore there is not any Priest. that can assume and chalenge to himselfe, to inioye and holde the Priesthoode of Christ according to the Order of Melchisedech: so in like manner it cannot possibly bee, that anie shoulde bee founde to whome it might bee attributed to offer the Eucharist: and if Melchisedech, did offer breade and wine, then it was the substance thereof, and not the accidents or qualities, wher∣as notwithstanding in the Masse, there is nothing offered but the accidentes: why therefore doe they alleadge Melchisedech, if they will holde themselues vnto the fi∣gure? And wherefore likewise doe they hold Transubstantiation in the Masse? In a worde, though they should bee able to proue this same to bee a sacrifice, yet could they neuer proue it but a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, or peace-offring, and not a sa∣crifice propitiatorie: for it is saide, that Melchisedech said vnto Abraham: Blessed be the Lord, who hath giuen thine enemies into thy hand, &c. wordes all of them consi∣sting of Thankesgiuing, and containe nothing in them of any sacrifice for sinne, neither therefore the Masse of any propitiatorie sacrifice, if this bee a figure thereof. Against all this which we haue saide, they obiect certaine places out of the old Wri∣ters. But what will they saye, if they bee shewed the contrarie, if all those likewise which speake of offering, say, that Melchisedech offered bread and wine to Abraham; to whome hee that blessed him had no regard or purpose to offer vppe any sacrifice. Clemens Alexandrinus: Melchisedech gaue sanctified bread and wine for food and suste∣nance, as a figure of the Eucharist. Marke, He gaue, that is, to Abraham, and not he of∣fered: and the word, food or refreshment that followeth, proueth it sufficientlie. S. Augustine: He came before Abraham, protulit, he caused bread and wine to be brought, S. August. in quaest. ex vtro∣que test 109. Ambros. l. 4 de Sacram. c. 3. Tertul. aduer. Iud. Chrysost. in Psal. 110. Epiph haeres. 55. Damas. l. 4. c. 14. Thom. D. 8. l. 4 Primas. c. 7. in Ep. ad Haebr. Cassodor. in Psalm. 109. Hieronym. in Matth. c. 26 l. 4 August. de ci∣uit. Dei. l. 17. c. 17. hee offered them vnto him, and blessed him. S. Ambrose, Abraham returning a victorious conquerour, Melchisedech came before him, and offered bread and wine vnto him. Tertullian, Mel∣chisedech being vncircumcised offereth vnto Abraham being circumcised, and comming from the battell, bread and wine. Chrysostome sayeth: According to the Order of Melchise∣dech, because of the sacramentes: seeing that he offered to Abraham bread and wine. Epi∣phanius, proposuit ipsi, he set before him. To bee short, Damascene saith: Hee entertained Abraham with bread and wine. And Lumbarde is verie cleare, Obtulit Abrahae, hee of∣fered or set before Abraham. And as for those few which they alledge vnto vs, as hauing said that hee offered vnto God, as Primasius Cassiodorus, and a fewe others, stum∣bling at the naughtie and corrupt translation of the text, they cannot yet denie, but that euen these doe make the comparison to stand, not with the pretended sacrifice of the Masse, but with the Eucharist, with the holie supper: so farre are they off from hauing euer dreamed of a propitiatorie sacrifice. For as for all the rest, they haue not spoken anie otherwise. S. Ierome saith: Melchisedech had prefigured the sacrament of the bodie and blood, in the bread and wine which he offered. S. Augustine, Offertur sub sa∣cerdote Christo, quod protulit Melchisedec, &c. The same is offered vnder Christ the Priest, which Melchisedech brought forth. Where is to bee noted the difference that hee ma∣keth
betwixt Obtulit and Protulit, Saint Ambrose speaking of the breade and wine of the holie supper: Wee haue knowne the figure and shadowe of these sacramentes, since the time of Abraham. And so likewise haue others. But Lombarde thus: The Priests take the cuppe with wine, and the dish with the hostes, to the ende that they may know, that they receiue power to offer vnto God sacrifices of attonement and reconciliation: and this order descendeth from the sonnes of Aaron. And why now doe they obiect vnto vs Mel∣chisedech? Seeing also it is most certaine, that wee are to holde our selues bound by due and sounde dealing, not to allegorize so lightlie vpon these or those places, es∣peciallie against a cleare and euident doctrine, such as wee haue proued this to bee, out of the Epistle vnto the Hebrewes. Idem contra lib. Petil. c. 16. D. 9. S. Augustine saith to like purpose: Let no man alleadge vnto mee the thinges that are spoken darkelie or figuratiuelie: faith must bee builded vpon that which is cleare, and not subiect vnto diuerse interpretations. And in an other place hee saith: The things which you alleadge against me, are mysticall, hidden, and figuratiue, but I desire that you would alleadge that which needeth no interpretation, &c. And this may serue for whatsoeuer shall follow hereafter. And indeed it is not to be concealed, that there are some which doe so farre delight and sport themselues with this place, as that they let not to saye, that Melchisedech was either an Angell, or the holy Ghost, or the Son of God himselfe. Hieronym. ad Euagr. August. in quaest. vet. & Nou. test q. 209. The Passouer And in these opinions we find Origen, Didymus, and S. Augustine in a certaine place to bee: so daungerous a thing it is to speake without Scripture, and to go about to find that in it, which is not there to bee found. Now followeth the Paschall lambe, They will haue it to be a figure of Christ, sa∣crificed either in the supper, or vpon the Altar of the Masse. Wee also say and affirme, that it is trulie and indeed the figure of Christ, and of Christ crucified, but vppon the Altar of the Crosse. Iohn 1. 1. Pet. 2. Apocalyps 5. 1. Cor. 5. The scripture speaketh thus; The Lambe was slaine, did beare the sinnes of the world in his bodie vpon the tree, hath purchased vs vnto God by his bloode, &c. that is to say, the true Lambe, in steade of the figuratiue. S. Paule: Christ our Passeouer hath been sacrificed: hee saith not, must bee sacrificed hereafter from daye to daye: but on the contrary hee saith: Let vs make our feast, not with the olde leauen, but with the vn∣leauened bread of sinceritie and truth. Iohn 19. Exod. 12. Nom. 9. The conclusion according to their meaning see∣med to follow of it selfe: Let vs sacrifice him then daylie vppon the Altar. But S. Iohn in more plaine and euident manner saith: To the end that the scripture might bee accompli∣shed, that not one of his bones shall bee broken. And this was fulfilled vpon the Crosse, not at the Table, as likewise it should not bee vpon the Altar of our aduersaries: though the Canon I Berengarius, were belieued, which will that he should be broken and bru∣sed with teeth, as euerie man knoweth. The Paschall Lambe then is not properlie the figure of Christ eaten in the holy supper, but of Christ crucified: although that in the holy Supper there be celebrated the saluation which wee reape by his death, as in the feast of the Passeouer, there is celebrated and remembred the deliuerance out of Egypt. Let vs admit that the paschall Lambe was a figure of the Eucharist: what will follow thereupon? That as the Lambe (say they) was sacrificed vppon the Ta∣ble, so Christ should be vpon the Altar. But rather let vs say: The Paschall Lambe to speake exactlie, had neuer granted it the roome of a sacrifice: It had not the throat cut by the Priestes, neither yet vpon the Altar. And againe they say, when they de∣fine a sacrifice, that it is meete that Ab electo Ministro offerat ur, that it should be offered by the Minister chosen for the purpose, &c. But in this action the Maister of the familie performed that dutie, and besprinkled with the blood thereof the posts of his house, and his familie did eate it. And that this is the truth, the Iewes, wise, and well seene in the law, did not sacrifice out of Ierusalem, and yet notwithstanding, they did continue euermore in all their remouinges from place to place, August. Re∣tract. l. 8. c. 10. & de Genes. allegor. l. 1. Exod. 8. out of Ierusalem to eate the Paschall Lambe. And Moses likewise putteth a manifest distinction therein: for when Pharao permitted him to sacrifice in Egypt, hee aunswereth, that it is not wfull, and yet it was lawfull for him to eate the Passeouer there. But let vs likewise grant that it was a sacrifice, it shall then bee requisite for the accomplishing of the figure, that Christ should bee sacrificed a new. But the Apostle did not vnderstand
it so when hee saide: Our Passeouer is sacrificed, &c. It shall be requisite that his blood shoulde bee shedde: for otherwise how should a sacrifice made with the shedding of blood, become a figure of their pretended sacrifice, made without bloode? A∣gaine, it shall bee forbidden them to keepe or reserue anie thing of the Eucharist; for so did the law ordaine concerning the Passeouer. Iesus Christ likewise (a thing that cannot be vttered without blasphemie) shall either haue left this ceremonie of the law vnaccomplished, or else but sleightlie and vnprofitablie accomplished. Now in these their perplexities and cases of doubt, they haue no manner of refuge but to the Fathers: but let vs see vpon what good groundes or reasons. The Fathers (saye they) haue spoken of the Lambe, as the figure of the Eucharist: well, let it bee so. Charles the Great compa∣reth the sacri∣fice of the Lambe with the sacrifice of the Crosse. Cent. 8. pag 63 64. Iren. aduers. haer. l. 4. But what agreement is there betwixt the Eucharist and the Masse? A thankesgiuing, and a propitiatorie sacrifice? But let vs say, they haue spoken of the Lambe, for to bee a fi∣gure of Christ, yea of Christ crucified: whereupon Ireneus saith: Christus passus ad∣impleuit Pascha, Christ in suffering, did fulfill the Passeouer, &c. And againe of the Passe∣ouer, as a figure of the supper, inasmuch as the supper consisteth partlie of a thanks∣giuing for the saluation of our soules, receiued by Iesus Christ, as the Passeouer like∣wise in part doth consist of a thankesgiuing, for the deliuerance of the people out of Egypt: and so by consequent haue made a comparison not of the sacrifice, but of the eating, which was performed both in the one and in the other. Chrysostome saieth: Chrysost. in 1. Corinth. 13. The lewes did celebrate the Passeouer: but they know not the vnspeakeable mysteries contained vnder these shadowes: That the Sonne of God hauing cloathed himselfe with humaine flesh, was to bee slaine, and to set at libertie the whole worlde: That hee should giue his blood to be drunke both to the Grecians and Barbarians: That he should open the heauens to all men: That hee should aduance and lift vppe this flesh vnto heauen, and set it at the right hand of the Father, &c. Idem hom. 14. in Iohan. And in an other place: The figure saith, Take a Lambe according to your families, and sa∣crifice, &c. Christ giueth no such thing in charge, but he is become himselfe the sacrifice, offe∣ring himselfe vnto God his Father: whereby you may see how the figure was giuen by Moses, & the working Truth by Iesus Christ. Tertul. Cont. Marc. l. 4. So then the question in this place is of Iesus Christ cru∣cified. Tertullian (and yet they blush not to cite him): Our Lord hauing declared, that he was desirous to eate his Passeouer, (for it was an indignitie for the Lord to desire anet thing but his owne) gaue and distributed it vnto his Disciples, and made it his bodie, saying, This is my bodie, that is to say, the figure or representation of my bodie. So then the matter of re∣gard and note in this place, is not anie sacrificing but eating, Hieronim. in in c. 26. Matth. 1.4. but distributing to bee eaten, and not his bodie, but the figure of his bodie. S. Ierome: Our Passeouer is sa∣crificed, he saith not, prouided that wee sacrifice it againe, but prouided that wee eate it with the vnleauened bread of sinceritie and truth. S. Bernarde, The Lambe hath beene slaine from the beginning of the world: Mors eius profuit antequám fuit, his death was auai∣lable before that it was: yea, This Lambe, (saith Peter of Clugnye, Sacrificed vppon the Crosse. S. Thomas saith: And therefore let vs banquet and make a feast, Thom. in 1. Cor. c. 5. Iohn 6. feeding vppon Jesus Christ, and that not onelie sacramentally, according to that which is in S. Iohn: If you eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, &c. but also spirituallie, in imoying his wisedome. Ansel∣mus: By the sacrificing of the Passeouer, the Israelites were deliuered out of Egypte, and by the sacrifice of Christ, the christian people are deliuered from the power of the Diuell. Nicol. de Lyra. Exod. c. 12. But Nicolas de Lyra speaketh more plainelie, saying: All whatsoeuer Moses hath written, hath relation to Christ: and therefore in the sacrificing of the Lamb, there is a double sence, the one is the estate of the people comming out of Egypt, and this is the literall and first sence: the other is the foreshewing, or shadowing out of Christ, who was to bee crucified, and this is the first in intention, though it be the last in accōplishment. And this Lyranus goeth on with this comparison throughout all the parts thereof: And so also doth Petrus Alphonsus, but more particularlie, and both these were conuerted from the Iewes vnto Christ. But yet what auaileth all this that hath been said of the figure of the Paschall Lambe, for the Sacrifice of the Masse? Esaye sayeth: I will bring them into my holy mountaine, Esay 56.61.66. their whole burnt offeringes shall please me vpon my Altar. Againe, I will take of them for Priestes and Leuites: And
you shalbe called the Priestes of God. Behold here (say they) Sacrificing Priestes: behold also the ordaining of Sacrifices: for these prophesies haue relation to the newe Te∣stament, and therefore to a propitiatorie Sacrifice, for the quicke and the deade: and therefore to the Masse. How many Syllogismes had there neede to bee brought in, before that wee shall come to make this conclusion? But rather they should learne to acknowledge and confesse, that it is the custome and manner of the Prophetes, to speake of the seruice of the new Testament, in the tearmes and phrases of the olde: for else wee shoulde bee put to builde Ierusalem againe, as also the Temple and the Altar, &c. Or rather, they should bee forced to pull downe all their Temples and Altars for to make them vppe into one. Esay 60. And to this end wee see that Esay sayeth in an other place: All the sheepe of Cedar shall bee assembled thether, all the sheepe of Nebaioth shall ascend vppon mine Altar according to my good pleasure. S. Paule likewise speaking of the Gospell in the phrases of the olde Testament, saying: I sacrifice the Gospell, I sacrifice the Gentiles vnto God, &c. And S. Iohn describing the reestablishment of the Church of Christ, speaketh of Ierusalem, the Temple, the Altar, and Censers. &c. All which thinges being abolished in Christ, hee allegoricallie maketh allusion vnto in the Church of Christ. But shall wee looke a little further into these Priestes and Leuites? S. Peter telleth vs: You are a chosen generation, a royall Priesthoode: And S. Iohn, 1. Pet. 2. Apocalyps. 1. Hee hath made vs all Priestes vnto God his Father, &c. All those which wor∣shippe God in Christ. Esaye likewise in the verse going before, doth expounde him∣selfe sufficientlie, saying: The sonnes of strangers shalbe your vine-dressers and husbandmen: but you shall bee Priestes &c. putting a maine difference betwixt the Gentiles and the Christians, by opposing the one to the other. And if you aske what Sacrifices? Saint Paule will tell vs: The sacrifices of your soules, a liuing sacrifice, your reasonable seruice: And Spirituall sacrifices: will S. Peter say, Acceptable to God by Iesus Christ. The Sacrifices likewise of our Sauiour Christ vpon the Crosse, which euerie true Christian offereth to God for the remission of his sins, which the great and Soueraign high Priest of the new Testament by his intercession, applieth vnto all those which call vppon God in the power and merite of this Sacrifice. Cyp. de vnct. Chrysmat. Orig. in leuit. homil. 9. August. in Romanchoa∣tae exposit. Hieronym in Psalme 51. Idem in Es. y. 61. Haimo Halberstat. in Isay. Daniel 11.31. Whereupon S. Cyprian saith vnto vs: That all Christians doe offer vnto God a dailie sacrifice, being ordained of God priestes of holines. And Origen, All such as are annointed with the holie vnction, that is, with the spirit of Christ are made priestes. As also S. Peter sayeth to the whole Church; You are a royall Priest∣hoode, &c. And S. Augustine: Euerie man offereth to God for his sinnes, the whole burnte offering of the passion of our Lord. S. Ierome saith, Thou wilt accepte of the sacrifice, either when thou thy self doest offer thy selfe to thy father for vs, or when thou receiuest of vs thankes∣giuing and praises. But especiallie in this place, I will take Priests and Leuits from amongst them, to the end (saith he) that they may preach saluation vnto others. And thus doe all the Ancients conceiue and write of this place. But there must bee in Christian Churches a speciall and ordinarie kinde of Sacri∣fice (say they) of an other sort then all these, for Daniell saith: After the time that Iu∣ge Sacrificium, the continuall sacrifice shall bee taken away, and that there shall be set vppe the abhomination of desolation, 1290. dayes, &c. Wherefore this must bee the Masse. But before all other thinges it is to bee noted here, that the word Sacrifice is not there at all, and therfore that which is left vnexpressed, may be aswel supplied by this word Seruice, as Sacrifice. As indeede S. Ierome saith: Ablato Detcultu, the worship and ser∣uice of God being taken away. Whereby wee may plainely see that their Masse hath his foundation most vncertaine. But that Daniell meaneth the abolishing of the legall Sacrifice, appeareth by Daniell himselfe, and that in the eleuenth Chapter, The sanc∣tuarie which is the fortresse and strong hold, shall be defiled: the sacrifice or continuall seruice and worshippe shall bee taken away, and in steade thereof, there shall bee set vppe abhominati∣on, which shall cause the desolation thereof. Which place is expounded by all the olde Writers, partlie of the desolation made in the Iewish Church by Antiochus, and partly of the rooting out of the whole priesthoode of the Iewes, accomplished in the ouer throw and vtter ruine of Ierusalem: whereunto our Lord the true expounder of
the law and the Prophetes, hath referred this place in these wordes, saying: When you shall see the abhomination of the desolation which is spoken of by Daniell the Prophet, set in the holie place, (let him that readeth, take heede thereto,) Matth. 24. Orig. in Mat. tract. 29. let them then which are in Iu∣dea, flie into the mountaines, &c. Origen saith: Daniel doth signifie and note out vnto vs the seauentie yeares, after the comming of our Lord: for this weeke doth confirme and ratifie the Testament, &c. And in the middest thereof the sacrifice of the Altar was taken away, e∣uen in the 35. yeare, and so was accomplished that which had beene written, in the middest of the weeke, &c. Then also was the abhomination of the desolation, &c. when they saw Ierusa∣lem besiedged, &c. Chrysostome sayeth: The custome of the Iewes was to offer a sacrifice vnto God euening and morning, and euerie day, and they called this sacrifice , a con∣tinuall action: now Antiochus at his comming tooke away the same. And therefore they haue not as yet found the Masse here. If they oppose and bring in S. Ierome against vs, referring this place to bee vnderstoode of Antichrist, then let them continue & hold themselues to his manner of speaking: From the time (sayeth hee)  of this continuall action, which we haue translated Iuge Sacrificium, Theodor. in Daniel. Chrysost. in Ep. ad Rom. hom. 29. Origen ad Rom. l. 10. Turrian. tract. 2. c de Miss. Vea de Miss. Thes. 46. when Antichrist hauing taken possession of the world, shall haue forbidden the seruice of God, Dei cultum: and thus Theodoret, Ecclesiasticum cultum. S. Chrysostome sayeth: My priesthoode consisteth in fishing, in preaching the Gospell, this is the sacrifice that I offer. Origen also in like ma∣ner: This is a worke and dutie belonging to the priesthoode, , to publish and preach the Gospell. But how in the ende will they reconcile these contradictories? I am (sayeth Iesus Christ) with you vnto the end of the world, that is to say, sayth Turrian, in the mysterie of the Masse: And yet notwithstanding, Vega saieth, yea Turrian himselfe in an other place vpon Daniel: Gabriel that cannot lie, sayeth that Antichrist shall abolish and put downe the continuall sacrifice: and what other thing is that (sayeth hee) but the verie Masse? A Monke of Ausbourg laboured to finde out the Masse in an other place of Da∣niel: The Angels (saith he) offered the sonne of man to the Auncient of daies, &c. to offer, Dan 7.13. is taken in this place to sacrifice. If then the Angels doe offer him to God, why should not the Priestes doe it aswell? So then you cannot chuse but find the Angels themselues in the Prophesie of Daniel to haue saide Masse. What a heape of fooleries wrapt vp in one? And who shall be able to vndertake the sifting out of them all? Here in this place the Prophet maketh mention, how the Father giueth all power, rule and iudge∣ment vnto the Sonne, that the Angels doe serue him, that they bring him into the presence of the Father. What place is there, but that the Masse will bee founde in it, if it bee met withall here? They doe stifly pitch themselues vpon the worde, Obtule∣runt: The Hebrewe saieth, They caused to approach: The Greeke in like manner, Hieronim. in Daniel c 7. Chrysost. t. 5. hom. Quod Christus De∣us. . S. Ierome: This must bee vnderstoode according to the saying of the Apostle: That hee who thought it no robbery to be equall with God, did make himselfe of no account, &c. And S. Chrysostome; All people doe seruice vnto him, all principalities are of∣fered vp to him: both of them drawing an argument, not for the Masse which they knew not, but against Arrius: or and if they will hold themselues to their interli∣neall Glosse: Obtulerunt in Cruce, vpon the Crosse, not in the Masse: and moreouer it is from this onelie place so fitly alleadged, that they defende these wordes of the Canon: Iube haec perferri permanus sancti Angeli tui, Commaunde these thinges to bee carried by the handes of thine holie Angell, to be offered vpon thine high Altar, before the face of thy Maiestie, &c. Malachie sayeth: Malachie. c. 1. Euerie where there is offered and sacrificed a pure and vndefiled offe∣ring in my name, because that my name is great amongst the people: This therefore must needes bee the Masse. What will they say then vnto their Arrius Montanus, of whom they make so great account, who expoundeth the same of the Sacrifices of the Gen∣tiles? But the text indeede is thus: In euerie place incense is offered vnto my name, and a cleane offering &c. and so hath the Greeke translated it: The Chaldie Paraphrast in like manner: Your praier shall bee vnto me as a cleane sacrifice, &c. But the Prophet his purpose is to oppose and set the Gentiles against the Iewes, the Leuiticall Sacrifices,
which they had defiled, to the puritie of the seruice which shalbe at the comming of Christ, not of one people, but amongst all manner and sortes of people. If incense be taken according to the bare letter, will they say, that incense and the Masse are both one? will they bring vs backe againe to the Iewish ceremonies? or rather to the cere∣monies of the Gentiles? but if it bee taken figuratiuely, who shall better interprete the figure then Dauid: My praier commeth vnto thee O Lord as incense? Then S. Iohn, There was offered vp vnto him, (saith hee) much incense, to the end that hee might offer vp the praiers of all the Saintes vpon the golden Altar, which is before the throne. Againe, The smoake of incense rise vppe from the praiers of the Saintes; the golden viols were full of perfume, which were the prayers of the Saintes, &c. Let vs adde, that they are of iudgement, that incense carrieth not with it anie propitiation. Genebrard. in Lithurg. Dio∣ns. And if this worde Oblation or Offe∣ring bee taken literallie, can they denie that Minha, the word which the Prophete v∣seth here, doth not signifie in the whole booke of Leuiticus anie other thing then the offeringes of fruites and other thinges without life, peace-offeringes and sacrifices of praise and thankesgiuing? And what analogie or correspondencie can it then haue with a sacrifice for sin? And if it bee thus, what shall follow then, but that in the Masse there is nothing offered but bread? and for a thankesgiuing? But and if it bee taken figuratiuelie, what better interpreter can there bee found then the spirite of God, and that in the newe Testament, which speaketh not to vs but of spirituall sacrifices, of the preaching of the worde, of thankesgiuing, and of the consecrating of our selues, Tertul. a duer. Marcion. l. 4. & aduersud. &c? Tertullian saith, expounding this place: In euerie place shalbe offered a pure sacrifice, that is to say, (sayeth hee) a simple and single hearted praier, from a pure conscience. Againe, Hee addeth (saith hee) speaking of spirituall sacrifices, and in euerie place there shall bee offered in my name pure and vndefiled sacrifices. Aduers. Mar∣cion. l 3. Againe, Bring vnto God, O yee na∣tions of the Gentiles, because that vndoubtedly the preaching of the Apostles was to passe through∣out the whole world. Againe, Euerie where there shalbe offered pure sacrifices vnto my name. And what manner of ones? Hieronym. in 1. Malach. Gloriae scilicet relatio, the yeelding of glorie, blessing, praises, and hymnes: and not a worde of the Masse. S. Ierome vpon this place: Let the Iewes knowe that they are not to offer anie more goates and bulles, but incense, the praiers of the Saints: and that not in anie one prouince of Iudea, as in the onelie Cittie of Ierusalem, but throughout the whole worlde, a cleane sacrifice, as is to bee seene in the ceremonies of Christians. And again, The sounde of the Apostles is gone throughout all the endes of the worlde: Idem in Esa. c. 52. Euerie where there is sacrifice offered to God. And herein is accomplished the word of the Prophet, namelie, in that, that God is purelie preached, and purelie called vpon in euerie place. And Chrysostome after the same manner. Chrysost. t. 2. hom. 16. ex va∣rus in Matth. Euseb l. 1. De∣monst. Euang. c. 6. & 10. Eusebius in expounding this place: We sacrifice therefore and burne the memoriall of this great sacrifice, according to the mysteries which haue beene taught vs, yeelding thankes to God for our saluation, offering vnto him religious hymnes, and holy prai∣ers. We sacrifice vnto the high God the sacrifice of praise, a sacrifice full of sweete smell. Wee sacrifice the same after a new fashion, according to the new Testament, a pure offering and sa∣crifice. But in all this what matter is there concerning propitiation? Theodoret doth expounde it of the abolishing of the legall sacrifices, Theod. in Ma∣lach. c. 1. and of the seruing of God in spirite and truth, as our Lord himself auouched in the speech which hee made vnto the Samaritanish woman: and thus doth the greatest number take and expounde it. But here they replie vpon vs, all this is olde: is there no question of any thing that is newe? this may bee aunswered in a word: That the Prophet sayeth, A pure offering: and not a new offering. But let vs graunt vnto them this worde new: Ireneus will an∣swere them: Iren. l. 4. c. 34. Chrysost. cont. Iud. l. 3. Oblationes hic, Oblationes tillic, There are sacrifices, and here are sacrifices, sa∣crifices in Israel, sacrifices in the Christian church, the kinde and manner is onely changed, inas∣much as then they were offered by seruantes and bondslaues, but now by freemen: or rather to speake more fitlie, by sons and children. Chrysostome in like manner sayeth: A newe sacrifice, because it proceedeth from new hope, because it is no more offered by fire and smoke, but by the grace and spirite of God. But say they, there are certaine Doctors that haue vn∣derstood it of the Eucharist, and wee say vnto them againe on the other side, that there are other some which haue vnderstoode it otherwise, as we haue caused it appa∣rantlie
inough to bee seene heretofore. But wee contend not in this place about the Eucharist, but about the sacrifice of the Masse, not about a sacrifice of praise, but a sacrifice propitiatorie. And therefore let vs not abuse the Fathers vnder the colour of this word, seeing there is not anie one to be found, Iren. l. 4. c. 32. that hath so much as once thought vpon it. Ireneus saith: Christ giuing aduice and counsell vnto his Disciples, to offer vnto God the first fruites of his creatures, not as of anie necessitie in God, but that they might not bee vnthankefull and vnfruitfull, tooke that which by creation is bread, and gaue thanks, saying: This is my bodie &c. teaching that the sacrament of the new Testament is new. And hee ad∣deth thereto: Which the Church taking from the Apostles, offereth throughout the whole world vnto God, the first fruites of his giftes, to him that giueth whatsoeuer foode and nourish∣ment we haue. That is to say, because that the auncient Christians were wonte to offer of their fruites vnto God, as wee haue seene heretofore, by many places out of the same Ireneus: and from out of them, they tooke the bread and the wine, which were distributed in the holy Supper, the remainder being giuen to the poore, or conuerted to the necessarie vses of the Church. The question then that riseth hence, is of the sacrifice of thankesgiuing, and not of a propitiatorie sacrifice: of the sacrifice of fruits and things without life, and not of the reall sacrificing of our Lord Iesus Christ: of a solemne thankesgiuing for good thinges receiued: and not of anie attonement or appeasing of Gods wrath for sinnes committed. And indeed Ireneus sayeth in an other place; Euerie where incense & pure sacrifices are offered to my name. S. Iohn in the Apo∣calyps, hath called the praiers of the Saints, the offerings of incense. And again, In asmuch, (sayeth he) as the Church offereth in simplicitie and singlenes of heart, their offering vnto God is by good right, reputed a pure & vndefiled sacrifice, as S. Paul saith to the Philippians: I was filled, hauing receiued that which you sent me by Epaphroditus, &c. Now this was nothing else but a contribution made by them of their goods: and therefore Ireneus addeth: For it behoueth, that wee offer vp our sacrifices to God, and that wee bee found such as will ac∣knowledge and become thankefull for all thinges that wee receiue. And this offering is yet further declared and made plaine in that which followeth; We offer vnto him, not be∣cause hee standeth in need, but that wee may bee thankefull to him for his giftes, and so by this meanes sanctifying the creature. For as God hath not need of any thing that proceedeth from vs: so haue we neede to offer vnto him, according to that which Salomon sayeth: Hee that hath pittie vpon the poore, giueth vpon vsurie vnto God, &c. Now in all this place which they make such a shielde and buckler of, let them point vs out any one worde concerning a propitiatory sacrifice, yea which concerneth not on the contrary a sacrifice of praise, of thankesgiuing, and of charitie, inasmuch as that which is giuen vnto God, is giuen vnto the vse of our neighbour, and that which is giuen to our neighbour, Iust. Martyr. aduers. Try∣phon. is sacrificed to God. Iustinus Martyr saieth; Wee are truelie made the Priestes of the Lord, according to that which hee witnesseth himselfe: because that throughout the whole world, there are offe∣red vnto him pure and acceptable sacrifices. In which place hee generallie opposeth the Christians to the Iewes, according to this place of S. Iohn: Who hath made vs kinges, and Priestes, &c. But (say they) hee addeth, that these are the sacrifices of bread and wine, that is to say, of the Eucharist. Admit it so, prouided that they did not cloake or dissemble that which followeth: To render and giue (sayeth hee) thankes vnto God, aswell for that hee hath created the world, and all that is contained therein, for the fauour and louing affection sake which hee beareth vnto man, as principallie, for that hee hath deliuered vs from all the malice whereunto wee stoode subiect, and hath slaine with a perfect slaughter, the principalities and powers, which did opprese vs by him, who of his owne accorde and free will, hath giuen himselfe to suffer. But because that Langus hath not expounded this place after their manner, Index expurg. pag. 75. Chrysost in Psal. 109. it is ordained and determined by the Councell of Trent that hee should be raced. Chrysostome sayeth, The Church that followeth the steppes of Christ, whither soeuer hee goeth, is not excluded from anie place: for it hath his Altars euerie where, and his doctrine also euerie where. In which speeches hee maketh doctrine to bee a part of these sacrifices, whereof Malachie speaketh, according to that which hee sayeth in an other place: My Sacrifice is the preaching of the Gospell, &c. hee addeth, See and
be holde how well hee hath described the mysticall Table, the sacrifice without blood, &c. That is the holy Supper. But afterwarde, This is then (sayeth hee) the chiefe and prin∣cipall sacrifice that I haue spoken of before, euen this misticall and spirituall gift, whereof Saint Paule speaketh: Bee yee followers of God, as welbeloued children: and walke in loue, euen as he hath loued you, and giuen himselfe for you vnto God, for a sacrifice and offering of a sweete smell and sauour: and this sacrifice hee calleth, The gift of saluation: namelie, because thereby wee renewe the memorie of Iesus Christ sacrificed and crucified for vs: binding vs in the bondes of charitie by his owne example, towardes our breth∣ren, which are his members, and so wee are made one with him in the receiuing of this holie mysterie, that is sacrificed and crucified in him, and with him, in his death and passion, inasmuch as hee hath suffered for vs, and not for himselfe: that so also wee might rise vnto glorie with him. Saint Augustine alleadgeth this place against the Iewes: August de Ciuit. Dei. l. 18. c. 35. This sacrifice (sayeth hee) is that which is offered throughout the whole world, by the Priesthoode of Christ, according to the Order of Melchisedech, the Iewes could not deny it, and therefore why doe they waite or looke for an other Christ, &c. But wee still stande in doubte, whether this bee a sacrifice of praise, or of propitiation, except that hee can likewise ridde vs of this scruple. The church (sayeth hee) sacrificeth to God, in the body of Christ the sacrifice of praise, seeing that the God of Gods hauing spoken, hath called the earth from the Sunne-rising, vnto the setting thereof. For this church is the spirituall Israell, distingui∣shed from the carnall Israell, which serued God in the shadowes of sacrifices, in which was signi∣fied and set forth this singular sacrifice, which Israell now offereth according to the spirite, &c. Out of the house of this Israell hee hath not taken anie calues: for in it are sacrificed and offered vnto God the sacrifice of praise. In euerie place sayeth hee afterwarde, incense is of∣fered vnto my name: And Saint John expoundech it in the Apocalyps, the prayers of the Saintes. Thus now you may beholde and see what it is that these men alleadge for them∣selues out of the olde Testament, namelie, figures, allegories, and generall speeches, as also the Doctors vpon these places, by which they woulde make men belieue, that wheresoeuer they haue vsed this worde Sacrifice, they meante and vnderstoode it of their Masse. And yet the Latines themselues foure hundred yeares after our Sauiour Christ, had not so much as heard of the name. That they haue acknowledged and taught their propitiatorie sacrifice for the quicke and the dead, and yet they doe not acknowledge anie sacrifice for sinnes, but in the propitiation which wee haue in the bloode of Christ, neither yet anie Sacrifice in the holy Supper, saue onelie that there∣in wee doe celebrate the memorie of this great Sacrifice, and offer vppe praise and thankesgiuing vnto God for so great a benefite: there wee sacrifice and offer vppe our selues to his seruice a liuing sacrifice, and consecrate our selues for our brethren, the members of Christ, and of one and the same bodie with vs, in true charitie, in the beholding of the Creator and Redeemer, and the giftes which wee haue receiued from him. And now it followeth that wee make triall, if they haue anie better grounde for this their pretended sacrifice in the new Testament, wherein there re∣maineth not anie more question of shadowes and figures, and wherein if it bee nothing but a sillie sleight representation, if it be nothing but an intricate and infolded thing, if it bee not altogether plaine and cleare, assuredlie, wee may bee bolde to say, and that without any doubt, that it is but an humaine inuention, yea and therefore that it is not there to bee found at all.
CHAP. III. That the pretended propitiatorie sacrifice of the Masse hath no foundation in the newe Testament. OVr aduersaries say, Our Lord saide to the woman of Samaria: The howre is come, that you shall not worship the Father anie more, Iohn. 4. either in this mountaine or in Ierusalem: but the true worshippers shal worshippe in spirite and truth. And what proue they from thence? To adore (say they) is to sacrifice: but if they said, that it were to serue God, they said somewhat to the purpose. But yet what followeth of this? Certainelie, that the seruing of God shall not bee any more tyed to one place, but spread all ouer the worlde, according to the saying of Malachie. And as assuredlie, that in steade of the more carnall manner of seruice, wherewith he was serued vnder the law, hee shall hereafter bee spirituallie serued: and in a worde, that after the materiall sacrifices, as saye the Fathers, the spirituall sacrifices shall succeede. Saint Au∣gustine sayeth: Doest thou seeke for anie holy place? August. in Io∣han. t. 15. make thy selfe in thine inwarde partes, a Temple vnto God: for the Temple of God is holie, and that are you. Wouldest thou pray in a Temple? Pray within thy selfe, &c. chaunging all this outward and materiall seruice into an inwarde and spiritual. Cyrill: Cyrill in Ioan. l. 2. c. 93. He signifieth and setteth forth the time of his comming, which chaungeth the figures of the lawe into truth, the shadowes into a spirituall seruice according to the doctrine of the Gospell, &c. And Origen in like manner: Chrysost ad∣uers. Iud. hom. 2. Chry∣sostome sayeth: That is, there shall bee no more Sacrifices, nor Priesthoode, neyther yet kingdome in Iudea, that so they may bee wayned from the receiued custome of the necessitie of worshipping in one certaine place, and to bring them to a kinde of seruice, that is more spirituall and full of Maiestie. Idem de cruce & de spiritu hom. 3. & in hom. veniet hora, &c. In like manner expounding this place in an Homilie for the purpose, hee coulde not finde anie Sacrifice but that of pray∣er grounded vppon the doctrine of veritie, neither anie worde tending that waye. Cardinall Caietan in the same sence: In spirite, that is to saye, not in the Mountaine, not at Ierusalem, not in anie one certaine place, nor with a temporall ser∣uice, but with an inwarde and spirituall, &c. And in faith, that is in knowledge, &c. Ferus likewise, In spirite, in asmuch as they shall haue receiued the spirite of ad∣option, crying in him, Abba, Father. In truth, in asmuch as they shall call vppon him in his Sonne, which is Truth it selfe. Offering (sayeth hee) afterwarde, no more anie quicke or liue creatures, but their owne bodies in Sacrifice, a holie oblation, and offering: and not the Sacrifice of the Masse. But how will they possibly now frame themselues to make their conclusions from this place? God shall bee adored and serued in spirite, no more in one place but euerie where, no more in the sacri∣ficing of beastes, but in the sacrificing of our selues. Therefore the Masse is a sacri∣fice propitiatorie for the sinnes of men, therefore the Masse must bee saide euerie where, &c. But they come nearer vnto the point, and giue an instance from the institution of the holy supper: and this is also our proper part and possession. It is said: Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11. Doe this in remembrance of mee: and to doe in the scripture, signifieth sometimes to sacrifice. There∣fore the matter here in hand must needes bee a sacrifice. And our Lord had taken the bread and the cup, and had saide: This is my bodie, This is my blood, therefore he did sa∣crifice vnder the kindes of bread and wine, his body and his blood vnto God his Fa∣ther: and by vertue of these wordes iuioyneth all succeeding Priestes to doe the like: a worlde of errors, cauillations, and false surmises in a verie few wordes. And the long time since they were confuted and ouerthrowne, in all these their argumentes, might haue bin sufficient to haue caused them to cease from the vsing of thē any more:
Facere in Latine signifieth to sacrifice: but by an abridging of the language, to doe some holie thing: but that this is more vsuall in the writinges and workes of Poets, then of Orators, and that seldome, not often, and onely then, when the mater in question doth manifestlie appeare to be about a sacrifice: (as I say) may euidentlie bee seene, & needeth not to be gessed at. And here therefore we stand vppon the quite contrarie: As that the Greeke word , is neuer vsed to sacrifice, as far off is faire in the French tongue: but the Euangelists and Apostles writ in Greeke. So that the controuersie here is about an ordinarie or common, and not anie picked or vnwonted phrase: the contention is not euidentlie and manifestlie of a sacrifice: for it is so farre from appa∣ratiues as that the sharpest sighted Fathers did know nothing therof. And further the Hebrew word Asa, (and how much more the Greeke) doth neuer signifie to sacrifice, but when a sacrifice or oblation doth follow it: as facere haedum agnū, &c. or facere haedo agno, &c. to offer a kyd, a lambe, &c. their interlineall Glose is not acquainted with this subtill shift. Hoc facite, that is, saith it: At oft as you shal eate this bread, and drinke this cup, shew forth the death of the Lord vntill his comming. But let vs admit that it is so; Hoc facite, sacrifice this: what shall we make then of it? To sacrifice the bodie of Christ? But Christ saith; Which is giuen for you, and to giue, is not to sacrifice. Where∣fore it is not the same action which Christ performed, for a man to sacrifice, if Christ did not sacrifice. And afterwarde; Which is giuen, that is, which is now at this pre∣sent instant giuen, and deliuered vp to bee crucified for vs. The olde translation ap∣proued by the Councell of Trent, hath translated it, Dabitur, and not Datur, re∣ferring the same to his suffering vpon the Crosse, and not to the holy supper. Chry∣sostome and Origen: Dabitur, effundetur, which shalbe giuen, which shall bee shedde and offered vppe. And Chrysostome addeth the reason, how that for the comforte of his Disciples, our Lord taught them, that his passion was the mysterie of the saluation of mankind: the Masse also enemie vnto it selfe in this point, hath read it so. Let vs say then that these wordes, Hoc facite, haue relation to the institution of the supper, and that by them wee are inioyned to doe the same that he hath done, as to blesse the bread, to eate the bread, to blesse the cuppe, and to drinke the cup, to distribute them both, and to receiue them both. But as for the matter of sacrifice, there was none but vpon the Crosse: The communicating of him and his graces, and the action of thanks, is ordained & instituted to be practised at this Table, and vpon this Crosse, hee hath borne our iniquities vpon this Crosse, he hath beene broken for our sins. God forbidde (saith S. Paul,) that I should euer glorie but in this Crosse. If then this be to sacrifice the bodie, then it is not, hoc facere, to doe that which Christ hath done: who tooke the bread, who distributed it, who performed not in all this anie action of a sacrifice: but if it be thus: Do that which I haue done, then it must not bee anie worke of sacrificing, here will not bee found any sacrifice: and so there must needes follow as poore & slen∣der Diuinitie, as the Grammer or sence that went before, was poore and slender. To be short, if faire in that place, bee to sacrifice, it is saide; Doe this as oft as yee shall drinke it, &c. by which reason it should follow, that the sacrifice hath no place, but at such times as a man doth drink. And yet they say, that the Sacrifice & Transubstantiation doe goe before. And againe, if it were saide vnto all those which were sitting at the Table with our Lord, Hoc facite, then the commandement of sacrificing was generall to all: for in like manner vnto all in general, euen to all the whole Church of Corinth, S. Paul said, Hoc facite. . And the Priestes by this account, shall haue as weake a foundatiō for their places, as the sacrifice hath. But who can better expound this place then S. Paul, Do this (saith he) in remembrance of mee? And how? For as oft as you shall eate of this bread, and drinke of this cuppe, you shall shew forth the death of the Lord vntill his cōming. Not by standing & gazing on, in a fond sort, not by the means of an Enter∣lude or play, neither yet by any such apish fooleries: but by a serious & earnest, either meditation, or laying open of the horror of our sinnes, and of the mercy of God, who hath so greatlie loued the world, as that hee hath vouchsafed to giue his Sonne to the death of the Crosse, for vs miserable sinners, to the end that he that belieueth in him,
may haue eternall life. And this is the same with that which their Glose saith: Do this in remembrance of me: For saith it, the sacrament ought to be receiued in the remembrance of the Lordes passion: shew forth the Lordes death, &c. that is to say, make your account and set it down for certain, that the suffering and death of the Lord came through you. For Whosoeuer (sayeth Oecumenius) sheweth forth this death, he displayeth and maketh a shew of all manner of gifts, and of all manner of loue towardes men, yea in a worde, Oecum. in 1. Cor. 11. (sayeth hee) of the whole meanes of our saluation. Let these fellowes now draw neare, which haue the Fathers so full and so rife in their mouthes, but cannot bring foorth so much as any one, who hath founde the sacrifice of the Masse in these wordes, Hoc facite, that hath expounded this worde, for to sacrifice. And yet notwithstanding, if there were any place wherein it might be found, who doubteth, yea, or who can denie, but that of all others, that is no place for to finde it in? A great man of this time, seeing himself thrust out of this place, Genebrard. hath inuented this shift, namelie to say, that the Apostles did say their first Masse vpō the day of Pentecost. And this hee would tug out by the haire, both out of a place of Deuteronomie, where mention is made of the offering of new fruites, which then was ordained in the lawe; as also from the 2. of the Actes, where these wordes are: Act. 1.2. They did perseuere in the do∣ctrine of the Apostles, in communicating and breaking of bread, and in prayers, which wee haue alreadie sufficientlie refuted. For what agreement is there betwixt any thing therein, and the sacrifice of the Masse, for the remission of sins? And yet notwithstan∣ding, we will further take the paines to call to minde, Hugo Card. in Act. c. 2. what their Glose saith vpon this place of the Acts; Of bread, aswell common as consecrated, that is to say, aswell ordinarie, as sa∣cramentall. And Cardinall Hugo after the same manner. And Lyranus: Partly (sayeth hee) because they did communicate euerie day: partlie also, because they did eate together in common. And Oecumenius sayeth; This is for to shewe the simplicitie that they vsed in liuing and conuersing together. And the Syrian and Arabick interpreters: They receiued the Communion or Eucharist, Vcharisto. And Caietanus: This is to shewe the distribution of the meat, as it was practised from familie to familie. So that on euery side the standing of the Masse, doth still faile and deceiue it. But let vs come to other places. It is saide Actes 13. , Acts 13. as they sacrificed: Their olde translation sayeth: Ministrantibus, as they were executing their of∣fice and Ministerie. And the Glose addeth, In good workes euery man according to his charge and degree. The Syrian and Arabian: As they were in praiers: because it is ad∣ded that they did fast. Chrysostome and Oecumenius, , as they preached. Ca∣ietanus, As they preached and prophesied, that is to say, as they expounded the word. And Cardinall Hugo, Ministrantibus scilicet praedictis Prophetis. And of him wee haue spoken else where. But let vs grant them according to their owne desire, Sacrificantibus: let it bee said; As they sacrificed. Epiphanius saith concerning this place: These were chosen with Paule and Barnabas, , sacrificing the Gospell. Chrysostome saieth to the same purpose: Let him sacrifice the Gospel. But where shall wee haue a bet∣ter expositor then S. Paule himselfe? This grace (sayeth hee) hath beene giuen mee of God, that I should bee , a Minister of Iesus Christ: Let vs say a Priest if they will, towardes the Gentiles , sacrificing in very forcible tearmes, the Gospell of God, to the end that the offering of the Gentiles, , might bee well ac∣cepted of, being sanctified by the holy Ghost. In which place Theodoret sayeth, The Apostle called hit preaching , a holy Ministerie, a holy sacrifice, and a true and sincere faith, an acceptable offering. It is said, 1. Cor. 10. You cannot bee partakers of the Table of the Lord, 1. Cor 10. and of the table of diuelles. Now the Table of diuelles say they, is an Altar: and that of the Lordes is al∣so an Altar: and so an Altar doth inferre a sacrifice, and a sacrifice the Masse. So that Amensa, ad Missam, from the table we find the way to come to the Masse: I feare nothing here but least that these argumentes should bee taken for mine owne: but this is one of Bellarmine his arguments in this mater, & such a one too, as he taketh to be a goodly one: a wonder to consider that none of the old writers could perceiue
this mysterie: yea that their Glose being so new as it is, could not finde anie thing in these wordes, but our coupling with Christ, which is confirmed and ratified in the sacrament of the holie supper or Eucharist. And it is no lesse manifest and plain, that S. Paule speaketh here de Mensa, not de Missa: that hee here forbiddeth all Christians to bee at the feastes of the Idolaters, wherein they gaue themselues to sit downe and eate, after their sacrifices, the meates offered to Idols: as the words go∣ing before doe make it plaine and euident: You cannot drinke the cup of the Lord, and the cuppe of Diuelles. For there is nothing to testifie and witnes, that euer the Pagans did vse to drinke vpon their Altars, but that they vsed to feast afterwarde. Whereupon Atheneus sayeth, that it is called , as it were , because that they did drinke themselues drunke after their sacrifices. Tertul. de Spect. c. 13. Tertullian did not take this place in anie other sence, for hee saith: Non sacrificamus, nec parentamus, sed neque de sacrificio & parentato edimus: quia non possumus coenam Dei edere, & coenam Daemoniorum. That is to say, we do not sacrifice vnto Idols, neither yet vnto our Parents being dead: and as far off are wee from eating of that which is sacrificed, either vnto Idols, or for the dead, which he calleth, Idolothyta, and Necrothyta, in the same place: Because (sayeth hee) that wee cannot eate the supper (coenam) of God, and the supper of Diuelles: So that what the Apo∣stle calleth mensam, Theodor. in 1. Cor. 10. hee expresseth by the worde coenam. Theodoret in like sorte: How shall wee communicate in the precious bodie and blood of our Lord, and afterwarde at the Table of Diuels, Haimo. in 1. Cor. 10. by eating the meate which is sacrificed vnto Idols? And Haimo, Mensae Domins, to participate at the Table of the Lord, that is to say, to participate in the bodie of the Lord. In the ende they finde it, whereas it selfe can finde no place, as namely, in the Epistle to the Hebrewes, which whole Epistle hunteth and chaseth it out of the whole world: Heb. 13. Wee haue (saith the Apostle) an Altar, whereof they haue no power to eate, which doe serue in the Tabernacle. If they had an Altar, then had they a sacrifice; and what sacrifice, but that of the Masse? But by comming to the knowledge of the Altar, wee shall come to finde out the sacrifice: Beholde sayeth S. Paule in an other place: Israell according to the flesh, Those that eate of sacrifices, are they not partakers of the Altar? This is then that Israel which is according to the flesh, that is to say, the Iewes, which hee opposeth and setteth against that Israell which is according to the spirite, that is to say, against Christians, that so hee might restraine them from affecting the rites and seruice of the Iewes. Thinke not (saieth hee) but that wee haue an Altar and a sacrifice, of which, they which serue in the Tabernacle, that is, they which are giuen still to subiect and make themselues seruantes to the ceremonies of the law, haue not power or possibilitie to eate, namelie, saieth the Apostle, because they disanull the grace of God, and make the power of the Crosse of no effect: for that, If righteous∣nes be by the lawe, Christ should be (sayeth hee) deade in vaine: and this Altar is no∣thing else but the Crosse of Christ: and this sacrifice is nothing else but Christ stretched vpon the Crosse: Who hath suffered (saith hee) without the gates, to accomplish the figures of those beastes which were sacrificed without the host for sinne, who hath shedde his owne blood, for to sanctifie his people. But it behoueth vs (saieth hee) if wee will bee partakers of this Altar, and of this sacrifice: That wee goe forth to carrie his reproach & shame, that is to say, that wee cast off all manner of thinges to follow him, that wee denie our selues, beare our Crosse after him, and become crucified with him, follow∣ing that which is saide; If wee suffer with him, wee shall also raigne with him. Then the Apostle concludeth, By him therefore, by the merite of his sacrifice, Wee offer vnto God continuallie the sacrifice of praise, that is to say, the fruite of our lips, praising his name, &c. And indeede their Glose it selfe, hath not vnderstood or taken it otherwise: We haue an Altar, that is the Crosse, vpon which Christ was offered, of which such are not partakers, &c. According as it is written: If you be circumcised, Christ will not auaile you anie thing, be∣cause that such as doe obserue the thinges of the law, pointed out by the seruice of the Tabernacle, haue no part in the effectuall working of the passion of Christ. And therefore let vs offer by him, &c. that is to say, a spirituall sacrifice by Christ, which is our high Priest: And not Christ
himselfe, as our aduersaries doe pretend: and this sacrifice, that is, (saith Lyranus) almes deedes, for the comforting of the needie, &c. Oecumenius after the same manner: Oecumen in ep. ad Heb. c. 13. The Iewes will say; How say you that you haue an Altar? for what hath beene sacrificed or of∣fered vpon it? for as concerning Christ, whom thou so oft settest before vs to haue beene sa∣crificed, to haue beene offered and slaine thereupon for the whole world, hee was not sacrificed vppon thine altar, but on the contrarie, hee suffered without the gates of the citie: yea saith the Apostle, and thereupon it is, that I can proue vnto thee so much the more effectually, that we haue an Altar: for euen amongst vs, the bodies of sacrificed beasts, are not burnt vpon Altars, but without the host. Now for that cause also did he suffer without the gates, to the end that he might sanctifie, not the priestes onely, but likewise all the people. But and if hee haue beene the sacrifice for all, why hath he not also beene the Altar? And a little after: Wherefore we of∣fer by him as we did of old time by the high Priest the calues of our lips, namely, prayers, hymnes, and supplications vnto God: Not any more (saith he) any sacrifices of beastes, but the sacri∣ces, , which are without blood. The Masse will our aduersaries say here, for so they call it, Sacrificium incruentum: But he expoundeth himselfe, , sacri∣fices which are offered by the lips; , &c. in prayers, in hymnes, and supplications, &c. confessing the name of the Lord. And how? In as much (saith hee) as wee giue him thankes, for that he died for our sinnes, &c. Theoder. ad Hebr. c. 13. Thom. ad Heb. c. 13. Chrysostome and Theodoret vpon this place after the same sort. But Thomas more clearely then any of them all, saying; This is the Altar, or the Crosse of Christ, whereupon he was offered for vs, or els this is Christ himselfe, in whom, and by whom, we offer vp our praiers. This is the Altar likewise, whereof mention is made, Apoc. 8. &c. But let them tell me then in their consciences, Belarm. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 35. & l. 1. de. Miss. c. 14. if there be in all this any one word of the Masse? And in deed Bellarmine in a certain place after the man∣ner of other, would faine abuse it, but elswhere he saith, that hee will not presse this place, seeing that other good Catholike writers doe vnderstande it of the Altar of the Crosse. In the ende they come to breath life into the Masse with that which cannot but make it breathlesse, and presse it to death, euen with this Epistle, Heb. 5. v. 1. which ceaseth not to go ouer it againe and againe in a hundred places: that our priest hath fulfilled whatsoeuer was needfull for our redemption, by the onely sacrifice of the Crosse. It is written (say they) Omnis Pontifex siue sacerdos, euerie high priest or other priest taken from amongst men, is established by men, in things which are done to Godward, to offer sacri∣fices and giftes for sinnes: then it behoueth that our priestes doe offer for sinnes, and that in the new Testament. Let vs note their good dealing: the text is , euery high priest, and not euerie sacrificer, nor euerie priest. And in deed hee compareth in this place and setteth the high priest of the law against our high Priest Iesus Christ in these words: In like manner also Christ, &c. Hee compareth him I say in this, that both of them had their calling of God, he setteth downe the prerogatiue, in that the one was a seruant, and the other the Sonne, of whom it is said: This day haue I begot∣ten him. He opposeth and setteth him against him, in that he was taken from amongst men from time to time, but this our high priest vnder the Gospell is eternall without beginning, after the manner of Melchisedech. And this is the cause why the interli∣neall Glose saith: Omnis Pontifex secundum legem. And Oecumenius: By the compa∣ring of the priestes, that is to say, of Christ, and of the high priest of the law, hee would shew the excellencie of the new Testament aboue the old, &c. And Thomas of Aquin comming af∣ter all the old writers, vnderstandeth this place after the same manner. What shame∣lesse cogging and foisting then is this, to conclude from the high priest, to euerie ordinarie and inferior priest, & from the high priest of the law, to the inferior priests of the Church of Rome? And let it be said here by the way, that which is to bee held once for all: that there is not so much as any one place in all the holy scripture, where the Ministers of the new Testament are called , sacerdotes, priestes, or by any other name of equall sence and signification, (but rather all manner of Christi∣ans are called in certaine places by the name of Priestes, notwithstanding that they be qualified with diuers names, as Euangelistes, Prophets, Teachers, Ministers, Pastors
and Elders: & that for no other cause doubtles, but because the holy Ghost purposed to abolish the pedagogie and childish rudimentes of the law, that so they might not haue any place or vse vnder the Gospel. He wold also take away therby this stumbling stone which Antichrist hath very cunningly cast in the way, hauing drawne from this word sacrifice, which is to say, A holy & consecrate kind of dutie or seruice, (a phrase and tearme first vsed by Christians generally, for the whole exercise of deuotion) a Sacri∣fice properly so called, as they speake; then propitiatorie, and afterward meritorious for the remission of sinnes, and that not for the liuing onely, but also for the dead. But they go further: It is thus said at the least in place elsewhere, that it behoueth, that Iesus Christ should haue something to offer: and if any thing then himselfe, and that euery day vnto God in heauen for vs. Now without all question the Masse by this accompt is as farre from this place, as heauen is remoued from their Altar. But yet we must looke further into this their deceit & craft. It must needs be, that he haue something to offer, that is to say, that he hath offered something: and what hee hath offered, Heb. 8.3. the Apostle telleth vs in a hundred places: Hee offered himselfe once for all, & for the sinnes of the world: he hath purchased vnto vs by his blood an euerlasting redemption: by one onely offering once offered, he hath sanctified vs, and sitteth at the right hand of God his father. He doth not then offer or sacrifice any such thing vnto him e∣uerie day, as they doe falsly alleadge the text: but rather Hee appeareth before God making intercession for vs, praying and making requestes for vs by the power and vertue of this sacrifice once made, &c. The question onely betwixt vs is, whether these wordes, , ought to be expounded, Quod offerat, or Quod offerret, that is, that he doth day∣ly offer, or that he hath once offered. And the Apostle hath decided it without the helpe of any others in many places: but let vs heare what the olde writers doe say thereof. Oecumenius saith: Oecumen. in epist. ad Heb. c. 8. Because it properly belongeth to priests to offer gifts & sacrifices, , where our aduersaries woulde vnderstand for the perfecting of the sence this word , It is necessarie: we do make the supply with this word , & make the sence, It was necessarie: which agreeth better with , & it is as much as to say, that it was meet that Christ should also haue something to offer. But that which followeth doth decide the question: This was the cause (saith he) where∣fore he had his owne proper flesh, which  he hath offered. For it might haue beene said: If he bee a high priest for euer, why is he dead? wherefore? , that hee might offer himself a sacrifice, &c. And a little after: He is therefore dead, that he might offer this sacrifice; but he is risen from the dead, & ascended into heauen, to possesse & keepe the same , where it is requisite that he should exercise his priesthood. And how? Ʋerily (saith he) by making intercession to God for vs. Ambros. ad Hebr. c. 8. S. Ambrose saith: It is necessary that our sauior in the daies of his flesh should haue something that he might offer for vs, & therfore he took vpon him our flesh, Theodor. ibid. Haimo ibid. that he might offer the same. And Theodoret; This is the cause why the only begotten Son of God hauing takē our nature, did offer it to God for vs. Haimo: He took of vs that which he hath offered for vs, namely, mans flesh, euē himselfe whom he hath offered vpon the altar of the crosse, Hugo ibid. Thom. ibid. &c. being himselfe both the sacrifice & sacrificer. And thus also write Car∣dinal Hugo and Thomas: For it behoued that Christ, haberet quod offerret, might haue something that he might offer: hee offered himselfe, &c. all of them hauing relation to the thing done, and not to do. Caietan: That is, himselfe who is offered, & the Saints which are made such by heauenly grace. But what need was there of any other expositor then the A∣postle himself, when he setteth downe how that, he doth not offer himselfe oftentimes. And againe: For by one onely oblation he hath consecrated for euer those which are sanctified. They go forward: Hebr. 9. The Apostle saith: It is necessarie that the patternes or figures of hea∣uenly things shold be cleansed by these things, but the heauenly things themselues be better obla∣tions and sacrifices then these are. He speaketh (say they) in the plural number: wherefore it argueth that there are many oblations, many sacrifices: and those are our Masses. But let vs alwaies carrie in minde, that the Apostle hath infinite times said: That there is but one sacrifice, that is, Christ: and that there is but one oblation offered vppon the Crosse by Christ. And let vs also distinguish, Hostiam seu victimam, from ,
the thing sacrificed from the oblation: that is to say, from the action of sacrificing. Now the Apostle vseth in this place the word , & not , of sacrifice, not of offe∣ring, of the thing, not of the action. And what will they then inferre or conclude? that the Christian Church here opposed and set against the Iewish Church, ought to bee cleansed by many sacrifices? will they dare to bee so bold? and that seeing it is such a blasphemie? or by many offerings of this verie same sacrifice? And is not this to come all to one thing, and directly contrarie to so many places of the Apostle? And againe, it is not said in this place, Oblations, but Sacrifices. But say they it is spo∣ken in the plurall number, Sacrifices: but this is because the Apostle had spoken in the plurall number of those of the law, & so in setting downe the opposite part, doth retaine likewise the plurall number: Non quia victimae plures, sed quia in vna plures, vel potius illae omnes; because that in this onely one sacrifice all others are contained. And in deed to the end they may not find any starting holes, Thom. ad Heb. c. 9. we will not giue credite vnto any o∣thers in this point, but vnto their owne Doctors. S. Thomas: Hostus in plurali, he saith sacrifices in the plurall number: and contrarily he saith afterward, that there is but one sacrifice, euen that of Christ, for by one onely offering, he hath accomplished for euer all those which are holy and sanctified. Hebr. 10. I answere, that though it were one in it selfe, yet it was shado∣wed out by many sacrifices vnder the old law. The interlineall Glosse: Meliores hostiae, better sacrifices: namely, Christ & all those of the old law, in as much as it was signified by them all. Hugo the Cardinall: that is, the sacrifice of Christ, Anselm. ad Heb. c. 9. Caietan. by which all those of the law were signified and sanctified. Anselme: These better sacrifices are but one, that is, Christ. Caie∣tan: Christ crucified is here called the better sacrifices, because that virtualiter, that is, in ef∣fect and operation, it hath the power of all the rest. But in the end, they say, the priesthood being translated, it must needes follow that the law is translated also, Et vicissim: wherefore it must needs follow, that there must be a priesthood in the new Testament. And who goeth about to denie it them? Hebr. 7. for otherwise it should fall out, that to haue one which liueth for euer, should bee to be without a priest? and that to haue an euerlasting sacrifice, should be to bee with∣out one? And on the other side, are we not (saith the Apostle) all priests, in as much as we haue all accesse to the father through him, euen to offer vp vnto him through him our sacrifices, euen for to offer vnto him himselfe in our praiers a sacrifice for vs? But we deny that there is in the new Testament any order of people appointed & or∣dained to sacrifice him a new, and we on the contrarie affirme, that throughout the whole scriptures there is not one word spoken of any such, as likewise there is not of the reiterating of the sacrifice of Christ; neither haue any of the fathers interpreted it as our aduersaries doe at this day. We affirme also, that in all the holy scripture, speaking of the Ministers of the Church of Christ, they are neuer entitled priestes, in whatsoeuer language that a man shall take them. And that if the same holy scriptures of the new Testament doe make any mention of sacrifices, that they entitle and call them presently, for the preuenting and taking away of errour; sacrifices of the prea∣ching of the Gospell; sacrifices of praise and thankesgiuing, spirituall sacrifices, the calues of our lips, the works of charitie, &c. offered partly by the Ministers of the ho∣ly Gospel, who hold their particular place and ranke in the Church, to dispense vnto vs the word of God & sacraments, to shew forth vnto vs our destruction in our owne nature, our condemnation by the law, our grace and fauour purchased in the death of our Lord, the greatnes by consequent of our sinne, and of the mercy of God in the greatnesse of this remedie: whereupon there followeth in vs a loue towardes God, a hatred towardes our selues, &c. Partly likewise by all the Christians in whom this loue bringeth forth spirituall sacrifices: peace offeringes, in as much as we haue by this meanes peace with God: sacrifices of thanksgiuing, for that we giue him thanks in euery kind of seruice, whether of the heart, the mouth, or hands, for so great a be∣nefite receiued of his meere mercie: and let vs also say propitiatorie, in some sort by a great deale better right then in the Masse, in as much as wee confesse vnto him our sinnes with a contrite and humble heart, intreating him that the blood of our Lord
Iesus Christ his onely Sonne may procure vs fauour and mercie, by the true and one∣ly propitiation purchased by the same, Amen. CHAP. IIII. That the old fathers haue not acknowledged any other propitiatorie sacrifice, then that onely one made vpon the Crosse. THus you cannot deny (say they) that the old fathers haue called the Masse a Sacrifice: yes we haue flatly denyed them the whole, & plain∣ly proued, that the olde fathers did not so much as knowe it by name. But they reply: at the least they doe vnfold vnto vs, the celebrating of the sacrament of the Eucharist, or holy Supper of the Lord. And surely vpon good cause & warrant, seeing it is a holy & consecrate action, and that the spirituall sacrifices of our heartes are thereby sacrificed to God, vnto repentance, as also seeing that the incense of our praiers, and the calues of our lips, and the Gospell, the word of God, as saith S. Paul, is therein sacrificed, seeing that our bowels, tanquam per viscerationem, doe therein o∣pen, inlarge and spread abroad, and distribute themselues, by our almes deedes vn∣to our neighbours, seeing likewise that the death of Iesus Christ is therein declared the onely sacrifice of the Crosse; and that by the expresse commandement of the sa∣crificer. And thus, and no otherwise haue they all vnderstood it. But we denie, that e∣uer they said any thing of it, as a sacrifice properly so called of the new offering vp of the Sonne of God, to God by the priest, of his bodie and of his blood, vpon an al∣tar for our sinnes. Neither must they here go about to abuse vs with a distinction of Sacrificium cruentum aut incruentum, of a bloodie or vnbloodie sacrifice. For this distincti∣on wil not be receiued or admitted of against the vniuersal propositions of the scrip∣ture, which tell vs: that where remission and forgiuenes of sinnes is purchased, there needeth no more sacrifice or offering. Againe, that there is no remission purchased, where there is no shedding of blood. But so it is, that wee haue forgiuenesse in the blood of Christ, much more then an oblation. But so it is, that in their pretended sacrifice there is no shedding of blood: and therefore much lesse pardon and forgiue∣nesse, or any effectuall grace, that may procure vs Gods fauour. But yet it is further to be considered, that the old fathers did neuer name , bloodlesse or vnbloodie sacrifices, to make distinction thereby, betwixt the sacrifice of the crosse, and the sacrament or pretended sacrifice of the altar; but rather to set downe a diffe∣rence betwixt the sacrifices of the law, and the sacrifices of Christians. Whereupon Oecumenius saith, Oecumen. ad Heb. c. 12. , that is to say, Sacrifices without blood: those (saith he) of the lippes, as praiers, hymnes and supplications vnto God by Iesus Christ, &c. And others after the same manner, which wee shall see farre better by tracing them from age to age. Clemens Alexandrinus next succeeding the time of the Apostles saith: Clem. l. 3. Pae∣dag. c. 2. & in strom. We sacrifice not vnto God, and that vpon good consideration: for he hath no need of any thing, but hath giuen all thinges vnto vs: and therefore we do glorifie him, who was sacrificed for vs, in sacrificing & offering vp of our selues. Againe, God would be honoured, though he haue no need of any thing: and therefore doe we honour him with our praiers: and this is the best and most holy sacrifice, when wee send them vp into his presence, in iustice &c. Our Altar then is the congregation of such as are attentiue in prayers, and haue all of them one common spirit, and one common voice, &c. Againe: Our Altar, that is, one holy soule, our perfume and incense, euen our prai∣ers. So that he doth not acknowledge or make any mention of a Sacrament proper∣ly so called, when he saith: We do not sacrifice, hee acknowledgeth another manner of fashion: namely, the prayers of the faithful, the sacrificing of themselues vnto God, &c. And yet herein hee is not behind with speaking honourably of the Eucharist: For (saith he) this is that speciall good grace, whereof those are partakers, which communicate
therein in faith, and are sanctified both in body and soule. Ireneus; we haue seene heretofore how he speaketh, Iren. l. 4. c. 34. and yet you may perceiue him to deale more plainly: We must (saith he) offer vp a sacrifice to God, and in all thinges bee found to acknowledge our creator, by a pure and vpright opinion and iudgement: by faith with∣out hipocrisie, by certaine hope, by feruent loue, offering vnto him the first fruits of his creatures. And this is that pure oblation, which the Church onely doth offer vnto the creator, offering vnto him of his creatures, with thankesgiuing. Therefore (saith he) he would haue vs to be continu∣ally offering our oblations vpon the altar. And what Altar? This also he teacheth, saying: There is an altar in heauen, thither our prayers and sacrifices are directed: and in the temple, ac∣cording to that which Saint Iohn hath said in the Apocalips: and the temple of God was open and the tabernacle: For behold (saith he) the tabernacle of God, where hee will dwell with men. Here then is no sacrifice but that of man vnto God, in the acknowledgement of his benefits, by continuall prayers, as also of the first fruits of the goods, which he giueth him, and that by communicating them charitablie with his brethren. Iustinus Martyr speaketh highly & honorably in commendation of the Lords Sup∣per, he describeth and setteth out vnto vs the holy ceremony wholly & intirely: Iustin. Martyr in Tryphon. and yet not a word of the propitiatorie sacrifice in all that he saith. But on the contrarie, he saith: I dare be bolde to affirme, that there are no other sacrifices that are perfect and ac∣ceptable vnto God, then the supplications and thankesgiuing of good people, and Christians haue learned, that they are not to offer any other, &c. Againe, Idem in expo∣sit fidei. Tertul. aduers. Iud. We sacrifice vnto God without cea∣sing the sacrifice of praise, sincere praiers, and of the sweet sauour of good workes, &c. We haue heard heretofore what Tertullian hath said vpon the first Chapter of Malachie, but yet behold what he saith further: It behoued that Christ should be made a sacrifice for all the Gentiles, who was led as a sheepe to the slaughter. Behold here the onely sacrifice. Idem aduers. Marc. l. 4. & ad Scapul. Againe: The prophecies of the lawe did signifie that man otherwise a sinner, presently after that hee was cleansed by the worde of God, did offer an oblation in the Temple, that is, praier and thankesgiuing in the Church and congregation of the faithfull by Iesus Christ the catholike, that is, the vniuersall Priest of the father. Behold now and see here an vni∣uersall and onely priest, by whom wee offer vnto God our sacrifices and our prai∣ers. And therefore hee saith: Wee must not sacrifice vnto God any thing but that which is spirituall: for it is written, a contrite heart is a sacrifice vnto God. And a sacrifice to God is the sacrifice of praise, &c. Againe: Thy faith hath saued thee: because (saith he) that it hath apprehended and taken for graunted, that it must offer his sacrifice vnto the Almightie, euen thankesgiuing in the true temple, and by his true high priest Iesus Christ, &c. And againe, Wee sacrifice for the health and prosperitie of the Emperour, Idem in Apo∣log. but vnto our God and to his Sonne, and that according to his commaundement, Pura prece, by a pure and sincere praier, &c. Cypr. serm. 1. de cleemosyn. Saint Cyprian could not learne any other lesson of this his Maister: whatsoeuer some would make him to belieue. For hee saith: Rich Ladie, come you in Dominicum, to the Lordes banquet without a sacrifice, there to take of the sacrifice which some poore person hath offered? &c. Here sacrifice is vnderstood almes, or offering, because that of the fruits which were giuen by the faithful, there was so much taken as might make a sufficient quantity to distribute in the celebrating of the holy supper amongst the faithful. They obiect vnto vs his Epistle vnto Cecilius, Idem. l. 2. cp. . wherein he saith: Who is the priest of the high God, by any greater priuiledge and prerogatiue then our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath offered sacrifice vnto God his father, & hath also offered the same that Melchisedec did offer, that is to say, bread and wine, his bodie and his blood. Let vs ob∣serue, that here he compareth Iesus Christ with Melchisedec; Melchisedec the priest of the highest, saith the Apostle: but Iesus Christ is preferred, for he offered himselfe vnto God in sacrifice: & Melchisedec offered but bread and wine vnto Abraham, but our Lord offered his bodie & his blood for the faithful. Otherwise this text, contrary to the nature of the author, should haue no force or power in it. But let vs heare him expounding himself in this same Epistle, wherein he saith; In asmuch as we make mention of the passion and death of Christ in all our sacrifices (for it is the death and passion of Christ which we offer) wee are not to attempt, doe or offer any thing, but as he in giuing vs an example
hath done before vs. For the scripture saith: As oft as ye shall eate this bread, &c. you shall de∣clare and shew forth the death of the Lord vntill his comming. Then wee offer not Iesus Christ, but we offer his death and passion, we offer him alreadie slain vpon the crosse; that is, we celebrate the remembrance of his death and passion; we offer it vnto God as the meanes of the remission of our sins. And he giueth a reason thereof in another place, saying: Because the sacrifice which the welbeloued Son of God hath offred vpō the crosse, is so acceptable and well pleasing vnto the father, as that his oblation is as effectuall at this day in the presence of his, as it was the verie same day that the blood and water issued out of his side. Origen saith: The blood of Christ is so precious, as that he suffered alone for the redemption of all. Origen in cp. ad Rom. & in hom. 2. in Cant. What need then hath the Church of any other sacrifice? And as for the whole burnt offerings of Christians, Those are their praiers and supplications vnto God, &c. But yet there is more behind. For when Celsus had obiected vnto him: you haue nei∣ther sacrifice nor altars: he answereth not any otherwise, but; we haue the sacrifice of the Altar, &c. Or els, Our temples are the spirits of good people, who breath out a sweet smel∣ling incense, Idem. l. 8. con∣tra Celsum. the vowes & praiers of a good and pure conscience. To the like obiection made in the time of Arnobius and Minutius Felix, by one Cecilius a Pagan, there was sha∣ped the like answer. This was about the yeare 300. And as for the place of Tertulli∣an, Tertul. de pae∣nit. c. 9. Aris adgeniculari, &c. without troubling our selues therewith any further: Pame∣lius (as we haue alleadged before) hath corrected it by the copie in the Vatican: and hath very excellently shewed, that it cannot so stand, but that it must bee read, Caris Dei adgeniculari, &c. in so much, as that we may from hence conclude very strongly cleane against our aduersaries. They say, there were altars in the Primitiue Church: and therefore Sacrifices; and therefore the Masse. Wherefore wee, with the consent of all antiquitie, for the space of 300. yeares, do reply and crosse them, saying: there were no altars in the Churches of the Christians, neither yet sacrifices, neither yet Masses. And if we shold repeat that which hath beene said before of altars, our proofe would extend it selfe to a farre longer time. Athenagoras in his Apologie for the Christians, Athenagor. in apol. pro Christianis. hath the verie same obiection to confute, and freely vndertaketh to proue, that the sacrifice that God demandeth of vs is, that we should bee carefull to know him, and to acknowledge all the goodnesse that we do receiue at his hands. But what haue I to doe (saith he) to trouble my selfe with thinking vpon and remembring of sacrifices and burnt offeringes, wherewith God hath nothing to do? God who requireth (saith he) that men should offer vnto him , a sacri∣fice without blood, a reasonable soule, &c. His answere had beene more readie: We sacri∣fice Christ daily, &c. And let vs marke by the way that he calleth it, a sacrifice without blood: not to put any distinction or difference betwixt that of the Crosse, and that of the altar, but to distinguish betwixt the sacrifices of the Iewes, and of the Paganes, which were materiall and bloodie, and the spirituall sacrifices of the Christians. Lanctantius: Lanctan. l. 6. c. 26. Two things (saith he) must be offered, giftes and sacrifices vnto God; and they must be offered without bodily substance: for the gift, the integritie and vprightnesse of the soule; for the sacrifice, praises and hymnes, &c. who so doth this, sacrificeth vnto God, so oft as he doth a good worke, &c. And therfore vpon the Altar of God which is great in deed, and which is placed in the heart of man, so that it cannot be defiled with blood, it behoueth vs to set pati∣ence, faith, innocence, chastitie, &c. There is not any other holy seruice then this same. This man as yet knew nothing what this pretended Sacrifice meant, and as little of Altars. Eusebius hath beene cited heretofore in the expounding of the place of Malachie; We sacrifice therefore (saith he) and burne (he answereth the Paganes.) Euseb. de De∣monstra. l. 1. c. 6 &. 10. And what? some∣times the memorie of this great sacrifice, celebrating the mysteries which our God hath giuen vs, and rendring vnto him thankes for our saluation, as also offering to him religious hymnes and praiers: Idem. l. 3. c. 4. & l 4. c. 5. sometimes we consecrate our selues all wholy vnto him and his high priest or sacrificer, which is, to Christ, dedicating, I say, our selues, bodies and soules vnto this word: where wee haue to obserue, that he reckeneth vp the sacrifice of Christians, as the memorie of the passion of our Lorde, thankesgiuing, prayers, praises, and offering vppe of our
selues, &c. but of the sacrifice without blood, which they pretend, whether it bee in the Supper or in the Masse, not one word. Nowe about this time was the first generall Councell of Nyce held, Can. Nicaen wherein wee haue a Canon, all saue some little parte thereof drawne out of the Vatican librarie, the title whereof is, , of the holy table. The wordes are: Wee doe not rest and content our selues with the breade ministred vnto vs here belowe, or yet in the cuppe, but lifting vppe the vnderstanding of our mindes, wee thinke by faith, that the Lambe of God taking away the sinnes of the worlde lyeth in this Table, , sacrificed by the Priestes without being slaine, &c. Where wee obserue agreeing with the doctrine going before, that there is insinuated a certaine secrete opposition betwixt the holy table, and the Altars of the lawe: of the Lambe which taketh away the sinnes of the worlde, and the Sacrifices of the lawe which were nothing but figures and shadowes of the Sa∣crifice which was there offered, to this which is but renewed by being called to minde, and of the bodily presence and visible substance of the one, to the eating and receiuing of the other by faith. And this appeareth more euidently by that which followeth, which calleth vs cleane backe from all thinking of a sacrifice to the receiuing and communicating of a sacrament, that is; That we truely and verily receiuing his precious bodie and blood, belieue these thinges to bee the infallible signes of our resurrection. And this is the cause why wee take not much, but a little, that so wee may know, that it is not to fill vs full vnto bodily nourishment, but to further and feed the worke of our sanctification. For if hee had rested in the sacrifice, woulde that haue followed which he saith: And that notwithstanding our being present at this sacrifice, wee haue the resurrection and the life, &c. Athanas. orat. 3. cont. Arrian. Whereupon also Athanasius of the same time saith: The oblation or sacrifice of the Lord once offered did accomplish all thinges, and remaineth fast and sure throughout all times. Aaron had his successors, but the Lorde, sine transitione & successione, without any succession or change from one to another holdeth the priesthood for euer. Saint Basill: Those which were wont to be consecrated of the seed of Aaron, are excluded, Basill. in 1. c. Esa. to the end, that there might come in their roome a priest according to the order of Melchisedec: and not the sacrificing priestes of the Church of Rome. There is no more any question (saith he) of the continuall sacrifice, neither yet of these so oft reiterated and renewed sa∣crifices, &c. For there is but one sacrifice, that is, Christ, and the mortification of the Saintes, which is become famous and renowned for their confessing of him. There is but one besprinkling and cleansing with water, and that is the washing of the new birth: there is but one purgation for sinne, that is, his blood, shedde for the saluation of the world. To what end (saith the Lord) serueth so many sacrifices? he requireth but one, reiecting all what∣soeuer els, that is, that euerie man doe reconcile and offer himselfe to God, appearing before him a liuing sacrifice, by a reasonable seruing of him, and offering vnto God the sacrifice of praise, &c. Againe, Now in the end and latter age of the worlde, one onely sacrifice is ap∣proued, once offerred for an oblation for sinne. For the Lambe of God hath taken away the sin of the world, offering himselfe an oblation and sacrifice, of a smell of a sweet sauour, &c. Idem in psal. 115. And in another place: I will therefore sacrifice my soule vnto thy praise O Lord, as it were vpon some Altar: I will offer vnto thee the sacrifice of praise, which is more worth then an infinite number of others, &c. Gregorius Nazianzenus: This great sacrifice, Gregor. Nazi∣anz. in Pasch. orat. 2. which in his first nature could not bee sacrificed, is mingled with all the sacrifices of the lawe: That same I say, which is the purgation not of one parte of the worlde, nor forsome certaine time, but of the whole world, and for euer. And thus we are admonished not to seeke for any other: But (saith he) we offer vnto God vpon his celestiall Altar, together with Angels the Sacrifice of praise: let vs passe through the first vaile, and drawe neere vnto the second: let vs sacrifice to God at all times. And hee addeth: For the chiefe and principall point of wisedome is a good and honest life, purged and made cleane before God, euen that God which is
most pure, and requireth no other sacrifice at our handes, but this purenesse which the scrip∣ture commonly calleth a contrite and broken heart, the sacrifice of praise, a newe creature in Christ, &c. Eusebius Emissenus saith: Euseb. Emis∣sen. de caen. Dom. Seeing that our Lorde was to conuey vp into the heauen, beyond the reach of our pearcing sight, this his humane bodie, which he had taken vppon him, it was needfull, that vppon this day hee should consecrate for vs the Sacrament of his bodie and of his blood, that so what had once beene offered vppe for the price of our redemption, might bee honoured in a mysterie for euer, to the end, that as redemption hath his ordinarie course for the saluation of men, without any wearisomnesse: so also the euerlasting oblation & perpetuall sacrifice of this redemption might liue and continue fresh in our memorie: and that this one true and perfect sacrifice, that is to say Christ, might continually bee present in grace, which wee must iudge of by faith, and not by outward appearance, by the inward affec∣tion, and not by the outward sight. Where wee are to note, that hee saith Sacrament, not Sacrifice; and that hee opposeth the remembrance of the oblation, to the ob∣lation it selfe: the powerfull course and continuance of redemption, to redempti∣on it selfe once wrought, the presence of grace to the reall presence, and the body of Christ lifted vp to heauen, to the Sacrament of the same left remayning in the Supper. Epiphanius: Epiphanius cont. Marcion. haere. 42. & 35. Haue you offered me sacrifice (saith the Lord) fortie yeares in the wilder∣nesse? &c. To the end that they might learne, that God by the comming of his Christ, hath taken away all manner of vse of sacrifices: and that in respect of one sacrifice which hath per∣fected and accomplished all the other sacrifices that went before: The sacrifice and oblation is Christ, for Christ our Passeouer hath beene slaine, &c. Againe, Melchisedec offered to A∣braham bread and wine, Christ hauing taken mans nature, offered the priesthood it selfe vnto the father, that so he might become our priest after the order of Melchisedec, which hath no succession: for he abideth and continueth for euer, offering sacrifices and giftes for vs. And first hee offered himselfe to vndoe and loosen the sacrifices of the old Testament: he becomming the oblation, sacrifice, priest, and altar, &c. Not appointing any longer the successions of this priesthood vnto any tribe or stocke. What then? It may be making them able to succeed by the calling of priestes. Nay rather he saith: Giuing them freely to bee saued, according to that righteousnesse which is by the holy Ghost. And this is spoken generally for all Chri∣stians. Then let our aduersaries note and obserue here by this place, how ill fa∣uouredly they alleadge the sacrifice of Melchisedec, the Paschall lambe, &c. to bee accomplished and perfected in the pretended sacrifice of the Supper, seeing that vp∣on the crosse of Christ, as saith Epiphanius, both these and all others going before are made perfect and fulfilled. Chrysostome: Christ is not crucified euerie day, for hee hath vndergone but one sacrifi∣cing, Chrysost. ad∣uers Iud. at 4. Idem in Ioha. hom. 17. et. ad Heb. hom. 13. but once onely to be offered for our sinnes, but by that once hee doth continually purge and cleanse vs. Againe, If Christ be perfect, then he neuer sinneth and liueth euer, wherefore then should hee offer many sacrifices for vs? &c. There is but one sacrifice, one onely hath purged vs: besides this, there is nothing but fire and deuouring hell. Wherefore the Apostle doeth throughly view and behold the same on euerie side, alwaies saying, one priest, one sacrifice, least that any man thinking that there were moe, might grow the more secure and void of all suspi∣cion of being deceiued. And in another place; In the heauens wee haue Sacrarium, a holy and consecrated place: in heauen wee haue a priest; in heauen an oblation, where is al∣so our sacrifice. Idm hom. de cruce & spi∣rit. 3. Let vs then offer such sacrifices as may find place of receipt in this holy & consecrated place: not any more sheepe or oxen: these thinges are come to an end: but our rea∣sonable seruice. And what reasonable seruice? The thinges that are offered by the soule, and according to the spirit, Iohn. 4. because that God is a spirit: and those that worship him, must wor∣ship him in spirite and truth, &c. How farre doth this differ from the interpretation which Bellarmine doth giue vnto vs vpon this place? That is, spirituall thinges, and such as sauour nothing of the bodie; as, gentlenesse, patience, temperance, mercifulnesse, &c. Thus thou seest the sacrifices which are past away and gone, as also the others succeeding
them, and comming in their roomes, then let vs offer these. Those are of our goods, but these are of our vertues: those are without vs, but these are within vs, &c. Againe, Christ was the sacrifice and the Priest, the offerer and oblation. The Altar, that was the Crosse, not vnder any roofe, other then the whole cope of heauen, that so all the pu∣trifaction and infection of the aire might bee purged away. Behold here the one one∣ly priest and propitiatorie sacrifice of the Church. But the particular and speci∣all Sacrifice of euerie Christian, as also Sacrificer, to offer vp the same sacrifice vnto God, is euerie particular person in his place, as hee teacheth vs, saying: What is then thine Altar? surely thy spirituall vnderstandinge. And what is thy spi∣rituall sacrifice? All thy good workes. And what is thy Temple? A pure heart where∣in God taketh pleasure to dwell, &c. What then? Idem in Mat. hom. 83. Hom. 26. in ep. ad Heb. hom. 17. And saith hee nothing of the Eucharist in that place? Yes verie excellently; If Christ bee not dead (saith hee) whereof should this sacrifice bee a signe or seale? Againe: Wee offer but in remembrance of his death. And againe, That which God did long ago for the saluation of the Iewes, in bringing of his benefites to their remembraunce by many feastes and solemne mee∣tinges, the same doeth hee now, but more aboundantly in vs, by this kinde of sacrifice stirring vs vppe to a continuall thankesgiuing for his benefites towardes vs. Where brief∣ly wee haue thus much to note, that there is not any sacrifice but one that doeth really purge and cleanse vs, that is, the bloode of Christ: the Eucha∣rist, in as much as it is a sacrifice, is a pledge, a recording and a remembrance. Hom. 7. ad Hebr. Some obiect and alledge against vs these wordes: Wee offer the same Sacrifice nowe a daies that wee offered then: for it wasteth not in offering. Not an other Sa∣crifice, as the high priest did, but the same. But let vs listen a while vnto that which followeth: Or rather (sayeth hee) wee recorde and call to minde this Sa∣crifice. Cyrill handleth this matter at large. Iulian reproached the Christians, Cyril. 10. cont. Iulian. be∣cause they had no moe Sacrifices: Nay (sayth hee) wee haue farre better then yours; or then those of the law: For wee offer vnto God the spirituall sacrifices of vertues, as Faith, Hope, Charitie, &c. spirituall praises. And to this purpose hee allead∣geth Sainte Paule: Offer vppe your bodies vnto God a liuing sacrifice, &c. God (sayeth hee) hath commaunded the lambe but for a figure of Christ; but for to shew that this was a transitorie sacrifice, hee commaunded them to eate it in hast: a great oddes and difference in respect of that which our aduersaries themselues would inferre: That the sacrifice of the Paschall lambe must bee dayly and still conti∣nued in the reall sacrifice of the true lambe that is in the Masse. Idem in ep. ad Hebr. hom. 11. In another place: Art thou ignorant, howe that the whole priesthoode is giuen to the whole Church of God to all the faithfull people? Giue eare vnto Sainte Peter, who speaking of the faithfull sayeth: you are a chosen generation, a royall priesthoode, &c. Thou hast therefore the priesthoode, because thou art a priestly nation: and therefore also thou must offer vnto God the sacrifice of praise, the Sacrifice of prayers, the sacrifice of mercie, the sacrifice of chastitie, the srcrifice of righteousnesse, the sacrifice of holi∣nesse, &c. Againe, Our true high priest Iesus Christ is then as yet standing vpright, Idem in Le∣uit. l. 9. and will fill his handes with small brayed incense. Hee pondereth and wayeth what euerie Church vnder the Sunne doeth offer, how well it bestoweth and imployeth her per∣fume: how skilfull shee is in braying of the same, that is to say, how euerie one of vs doeth frame his actions, how wee doe spiritually search and wade into the secreate deapthes and wholesome streames of the holy scriptures. Where likewise he may seeme to allude to the place of the prophet Malachie, but in a far other sence then that of our aduersaries. To bee short, hee sayth: Christ is called a high Priest, sacrificing vnto God, and besides him, there is not any one to whom we do attribute either the name or the effect of priesthood: for hee was made the mediator betwixt God and men: hee hath sacrificed for vs, and not for himselfe, and that euen his owne bodie. All which arguments are grounded
vpon the qualities requisite in a priest of the new Testament, but such as men cannot attaine vnto. He calleth the Eucharist verie many times , a sacrifice without blood; Idem in Io∣ban. l. 5. c. 7. & ad Reginas de recta fide. but in the same sence that the former, by comparing of it with them of the law. Vpon S. Iohn, S. Paule (saith he) to the Hebrewes, would not take away the second, nor the third remission of sinnes, but rather the secondoblation, because that Christ hath beene offered once, and cannot be any more offered, &c. The Latine fathers did not vnderstand it otherwise. Saint Ambrose saith: In Christ the oblation or sacrifice hath beene once offered, powerfull and mightie vnto life eter∣nall. Againe, The Lord commanded the Angell to spare the people, and to offer the sa∣crifice of Dauid: For at that time there were sacrifices for sinnes, the same are now the sacrifices of repentance. Ambros. in ep. ad Heb. c. 10. Idem ad The∣od. ep. 28. Idem in ep. ad Rom. c 12. Idem ibid. Againe: The Elders did kill the sacrifice, to signifie, that men be∣cause of sinne were subiect to death: And now that men, by the gift of God are purified and deliuered from the second death, they must offer a liuing sacrifice, to the end it may bee vnto them a signe of eternall life. For the case standeth not now, as when bodies were slaine and sa∣crificed for bodies: now there is not any more question of killing of bodies, but of the vices of the bodies. Again: Is there not a celestiall altar, our faith? whereupon we dayly offer our praiers? Let vs draw neere (saith he in another place) with a true hart, & a fulnes of faith: let vs draw neere in faith, & in a spiritual seruice, from a sincere hart: for in all these there is nothing visible, neither the priest, nor the sacrifice, nor the altar, &c. In our spirits we receiue spirituall things, &c. Idem in insti∣tut. virgin. c. 2. In another place: We sacrifice vnto God the sacrifice of praise, whereupon the Apostle saith, I pray you before all thinges, to make prayers, supplications, requestes and thankesgiuing, &c. Now this is one of the places from whence our aduersaries would gather their Masse, their propitiatorie sacrifice: and see how hee expoundeth it of the sacrifice of praise. Idem epist. 28. & lib. de fuga sent. c. 8. Againe, A simple prayer is a sacrifice: the good sacrifice, that is wisedome, the good oblation, that is faith, and euerie other vertue, &c. And of all this going before we con∣clude most euidently: that he acknowledged no sacrifice for sinne, saue the blood of Christ once shed, nor any sacrifices amongst Christians, but repentance, mortifica∣tion, and calling vpon the name of God in faith, &c. But some will say vnto vs, hee speaketh now and then of the holy Supper in the tearmes of a sacrifice. But in this case I could wish such to hearken how hee expoundeth himselfe: he speaketh to the matter of the onely oblation of Christ, and saith: What then? do not we offer euery day? (for the Supper was then administred ordinarily:) We offer (saith he) but in making a memoriall of his death, and there is but one oblation, but one sacrifice, not many. One and not many (saith he) how? because that it hath beene once offered in the most holy place, and this sacrifice is the patterne of that other, &c. That which we do is in remembrance of that which hath beene done. For hee saith vnto vs, doe this in remembrance of mee, &c. Wee offer not, as the Priest did another sacrifice: but euerie daie the same, or rather wee sacri∣fice the memoriall of this sacrifice. Thus say wee (sayeth hee) to daye is the resur∣rection of the Lorde, that is to say, to day wee call to minde the resurrection of the Lord, &c. And Saint Ierome vnderstoode as little as the rest in this point, namely, that there should remaine a seruice to bee performed of Christians, Hieronim. in Esa. c. 1. which properly was called a sacrifice: Shall I eate (sayeth the Lorde) the flesh of bulles? &c. Psalme . After hauing reiected and cast away (sayeth hee) the ceremonies of the old law, hee passeth to the puritie of the Gospell: and sheweth what hee desireth in stead of them: Offer vnto mee the sacrifice of praise, Idem in psal. 26. &c. Againe, I will offer in his Tabernacle the sacrifice of ioy and gladnesse, that is to say, of full and perfect ioy: that is to say, I will ioyfully declare, that hee did vnder-go a base and lowe estate for vs, that is to say, that he did humble himselfe to aduance & exalt vs: For God taketh pleasure in such sacrifices of reioycing & ioyfull declaring of their gladnesse: for this is the sacrifice of preaching. And in another place: Idem in psal. 49. & 50. The old sacrifices are past, he requireth his sacrifice in good works and maners, a fat burnt offering: That is, that God may be praised by man whom he hath created, whom he hath redeemed, and to whome hee hath promised the kingdome of heauen. Againe, By this
place the Iewes doe knowe and vnderstand, that their sacrifices are ceased. And what then shall men haue hereafter to offer? hearken to that which hee addeth: The humbled heart and the contrite heart is a sacrifice vnto the Lord, &c. Idem. ad Da∣mas. Yea but hee sayeth in ano∣ther place: Our Sauiour is the calfe, of whose flesh wee are dayly fed, and with whose blood wee all haue our thirst quenched. This banquet is solemnized euerie day; euerie day the father receiueth his sonne; euerie day Christ is slaine and sacrificed. This is a large speech, but hee addeth yet one worde more: Immolatur credentibus, out of que∣stion not sacrificed by the Priest, but sacrificed (sayth hee) by the faithfull. In so much, as this sacrifice is dayly freshe, alwaies present, and in Gods sight, daily applyed, apprehended and taken holde vppon with great efficacie of the faithfull: as being such, Idem in Psal. 97. August quest. euangel. l. 1. as conceiue and finde their life to lie and consist in his death; and the appeasing of Gods wrath for their sinnes to rest in his bloode. This is it which hee saith in a worde elsewhere: Euerie day Christ is crucified vnto vs. S. Augustine yet more distinctly: Christ is then properly slaine for any one, when hee belee∣ueth him to be slaine for his sinnes. Saint Augustine farre exceedeth and surpasseth all: This true God and high priest, Idem de fide ad Petrum Diacon. c. 2. (saith he) which hath once entred for vs into the sanctuarie, not with the blood of goates, but with his owne blood, &c. Euen this is hee, who in himselfe alone hath accomplished all that which he knew to bee needfull for the worke of our redemption: himselfe being both the Priest and the sacrifice: himselfe being both God, and the Temple: Per quem. Quo. In quo. Idem de Tri∣nit. l. 4. c. 41. & 14. the Priest by whome wee are reconciled: the Temple, in which wee are reconciled; God, to whome wee are reconciled: and notwithstanding the alone priest, sacrifice, and Temple, and all this God, in the forme and shape of a seruant. Againe, Christ by his death, which is the onely true sa∣crifice offered for vs, hath purged, abolished, and vtterly quenched the heate of whatsoeuer sinne that was in vs, whereby the principalities and powers had power to seize vppon vs by due desert, and to hold vs, that so they might take vengeance on vs for the same, and by this release hath called vs: vs I say predestinated vnto a new life, hee hath called vs, Nos praedesti∣natos vocauit, vocatos iusti∣ficat it, iustifi∣catos glorifi∣cauit. he hath iustified vs, hee hath sanctified vs, hee hath glorified vs, &c. And how that to the end it may bee so, in euerie sacrifice there are foure thinges to bee considered: To whom it is to be offered, by whome, what, and wherefore: He himselfe the onely & true mediator, reconci∣ling vs to God by the sacrifice of peace, continueth and abideth one with him, to whome hee offered, hath performed that in himselfe alone, which was to be accomplished for them for whom hee offered; he alone was both the partie that offered, and that which hee offered. Againe, Where there is a sacrifice, there is an abolishment of sinnes, interemptio peccatorum: there also is wrought re conciliation with God: the altar of this sacrifice is verie new, euen the height of the Crosse (alluding ab Altari ad altitudinem, from the Altar to the height) him∣selfe was the sacrifice and the Priest, and the crosse was his Altar, &c. What then? Idem in psal. 94. doth there remaine no more sacrifices for Christians? Offer (saith the Psalmist) vnto God the sacrifice of praise: the old sacrifices are changed, God requireth now of his seruants the sa∣crifice of praise. We set a sacrifice vpon the altar when we praise God: and if thou seeke the Priest, hee is higher then the heauens, making intercession for thee, hauing first died the death here vpon earth for thee. Haue I any sacrifice to offer (saith he elsewhere?) Idem de ci∣uit. Dei. l. 10. c. 4. & 6. I will returne home into my selfe, there I shall find what to slay and sacrifice: there I cannot faile to finde cause, to offer the sacrifice of praise. The man dedicate and consecrate to the name of God, dying in the world to liue vnto God is a true sacrifice. The whole Church, that ran∣somed cittie, that congregation and societie of the Saintes is an vniuersall sacrifice, which is of∣fered vnto God: which is offered vnto him by this great Priest, Idem de Temp. which offered himselfe in his passion for vs, to the end that we might bee the bodie to so glorious a head, &c. But rather (saith hee) there are two Altars in vs, the bodie, and the heart, and God requireth of vs a double sacrifice, that wee should haue our bodies chaste, and our heartes pure, &c. What then? The holy Supper, the Eucharist, is not it a sacrifice vnto him? yes, but pro∣perly two manner of wayes: The one, Idem de ci∣uit. Dei. l. 10. c. 6. in as much as this is a consecrate and hallowed action, by the which Christians are linked and knit together according to the definition which hee giueth of a Sacrifice, saying: Euerie worke performed to
the end that we may cleaue vnto God in a holy fellowship, & referred to him that is our chiefe fe∣licitie, is a true sacrifice. The other in as much as therin is renewed the remembrance of the death of Christ, Idem contr. aduers. leg. & prophet. l. 1. c. 18. and a solemne thanksgiuing for the benefites proceeding from the same. And therefore he saith: The sacrifice of praise shall honour mee, Psal. 50. But where is this sacrifice better set forth then in thankesgiuing? And for what do we rather giue thankes then for the grace and fauour which we haue receiued and is purchased for vs by Iesus Christ? Idem aduers. Faustum. l. 20. c. 21. which the faithfull practise in the sacrifice of the Church, &c. Againe: The sacrifice of praise shall glorifie mee. How? Before the comming of Christ, the flesh and blood of this sa∣crifice was promised by the sacrifices of resemblance: In the passion of Christ, they are giuen in truth after his ascension, Idem de fide ad Petrum. c. 19. they are celebrated by the Sacrament of the remembring of him. A∣gaine, The onely word of God being made flesh, hath offered himselfe to God for vs in sacrifice, and for a smell of a sweete sauour. Loe here the reall sacrifice of the Church: To whome (saith he) with the father and the holy Ghost, the whole vniuersall Church ceaseth not to offer in faith and charitie, the sacrifice of bread and wine. For the figure of the flesh of Christ, which he was to offer for vs, was shadowed out in the carnall sacrifices: but in this sacrifice, thanks∣giuing, Idem ep. 23. and the renewing of the remembrance of the flesh of Christ, which was offered for our sins. And in another place there is an obiection made: Iesus Christ hath he not beene once of∣fered in himselfe? and notwithstanding, behold how that in the sacrifice he is daily, not onely in the daies of the celebration of the feast of the Passeouer, but vpon all other daies sacrificed and offered vp by the people. Note how it is said, by the people, and not by God, as S. Ierome said before, by the faithful. It is answered: And yet (saith he) he lyeth not which when he is asked, shal answer, that he is truely sacrificed: for if the sacraments had not any resemblance with the things whereof they are sacraments, they shold not be sacraments at all, &c. So (saith he) let vs say: we celebrate the feast of the Passeouer to morrow, to day the Lord rose againe, &c. And no man findeth fault with our sayings, although these thinges were ended manie yeares since, see∣ing that by the courses of times, wee come againe, and againe to the like dayes and seasons, &c. But hee acknowledgeth but one real sacrificing or offering vppe of him: for he sai∣eth elsewhere: That which Dauid offered to God, to the end that it might please him to spare the people, was a shadowe of that which was to come, by which it was signified, that by one sacri∣fice, of which that was but a figure, the liues of the people shoulde spirituallie bee spared. And that one is Iesus Christ, Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 10. c. 5. who was offered vppe and giuen for our sinnes, and is risen againe for our iustification: whereupon also the Apostle saieth vnto vs: Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus: Christ our true Passeouer was slaine and sacrificed, &c. And this is that which hee sayeth elsewhere in one word: That which euerie man calleth a sacrifice, that same is the signe of the true sacrifice. Now all of them vse these wordes, Altars, Sacrifices, and these verbes to Offer, to Sacrifice, for the considerations hereafter set downe: for these manners of spea∣king did runne verie smoothlie and pleasantlie amongst Christians in those dayes, comming either newlie from amongst the Iewes or else the Gentiles, whose princi∣pall seruice consisted in sacrifices, and yet notwithstanding, they put thereunto continuallie, if wee giue good heede thereto, such corrections as are necessarie. Whereby wee may iudge, if they had but a little foreseene, in what diuerse sortes they are now abused, the Sacrament being drawne by little and little to a Sa∣crifice: and then the worde Sacrifice drawne from his Metaphoricall sence, to a simple and proper sence, and from a sacrifice of thankesgiuing, to a sacrifice propitiatorie, what restrainte and limits they would haue closed them in withall.
CHAP. V. How and by what Degrees the sacrament of the holy Supper was turned into a propitiato∣rie sacrifice. SOme there are which aske how this did happen vnto the Church? Truelie not all at once. For wee see in euerie dayes successe, that when Sunne is set, there is a twilight, before that darknes it selfe doe come to hide and couer all thinges. So after that those great lightes of the church, which tooke their brightnes from the true light of the Gospel, had runne their course, yet there remained some glimses of that their brightnes a long time after, notwithstanding that they were smothered and stifled with the palpable fogs of blinde super∣stition, and although they were violently forced by a contrary sēce, to do the thing they were neuer ordained for. And this we see in Beda, Beda in Leui. c. 1. the grand Disciple of S. Augustine, who sayeth: Christ is offered for vs, both the Priest and Sacrifice together, and hath eaten and destroyed our sinnes, inasmuch as hee is our Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech: and in like manner the true Ministers of the Church, doe eate the sins of the people, by attributing vnto them the remission of their sinnes in the Church, wherein sinnes are forgiuen. If hee had beene of the same opinion with our aduersaries, hee shoulde haue concluded: And therefore the true Priestes do eate the sinnes of the people, when they say the Masse for them, &c. Again, We are commaunded to celebrate the feast of the Passeouer euerie daye: Our aduersaries would saye here: To say the Masse euerie daye. But hee, Idem in Exod. that is asmuch as to saye, Let vs daylie goe from euill to good, and from good to better, and let vs consecrate our first borne vnto God, euen our good workes, seeing hee hath ouercome the Diuels for our sakes. Again, The high Priest entred into the forepart of the Tabernacle euerie day, for to sacrifice. And this is to put vs in minde to offer dailie vnto God, the sacrifices of praise of hu∣militie, and of a contrite spirite, &c. Thus turning euen the propitiatorie Sacrifices of the law, into the Sacrifices of praise, those which were offered by the hand and ministerie of the Priest, to those which were offered by euerie Christian. Albinus sayeth the same, as also Charles the great. And as for the Sacrament of the Eucharist: The sa∣crament of the bodie and blood of Iesus Christ (saith Charles the great) was giuen vs, there∣by to renew the memory of his passion and our saluation. And this was about the yeare eight hundred. Bertram in the time of Charles the bald, about the yeare 900. Bertram. de corpore & sanuine Domini Heb. 7. Our Lord hath done this at once, euen in offering vp himselfe, (that is to say, sacrificing himselfe for vs:) For he was once offered for the sinnes of the people; and this oblation notwithstanding is daily celebrated by the faithfull, but in a mysterie; to the end, that what our Lord Iesus hath accomplished in offe∣ring himselfe once, might be handled euerie day by the celebrating of the misteries, of the renew∣ing of the memorie of his passion. Where it is to be noted, how he opposeth the mysticall receiuing to the reall receiuing: and the daily renewing of the remembrance, to the once offering of the sacrifice. Againe, He hath (saith he) left vs an example, which is dai∣ly offered by the faithfull, in the mysterie of his bodie and of his blood: namely, that whosoeuer wil draw neere vnto him, may know, that he must haue part in his sufferinges, the image and re∣presentation whereof is exhibited in the holy mysteries: that is to say, in the breaking of bread, the renewing of the memorie of his bodie broken, in the powring out of the wine, the shedding of his blood for vs. Haimo saith: To speake morally, Haimo in c. 5 Ose. & in c. 2 Abac. & Ma∣lach. 1. the sacrifices of the Lord are the praises vttered by the belieuers, the penance of sinners, the teares of the humble suters; whereof it is written: The sacrifice of God is a contrite spirite, &c. Againe, Prayer is a speciall sacrifice to be offered to God: and so is almes also, &c. Remig in Psal. 55. Remigius: If we will sacrifice to God, let vs not seeke out of our selues for that which wee
are about to offer vnto him: we haue in our selues the incense of praise, & the sacrifice of faith: onelie let all that which wee offer be kindled, made the more feruent and coupled with charitie. Againe, Idem in Psal. 95. There are not any sacrifices that auaile without faith: for there is no place for a true sa∣crifice out of the Church, &c. These men howbeit great and renowned for knowledge at this time, doe call the sacrament of the holy supper, as also the Masse, such as it was then celebrated, a sacrifice: but doubtles with the same mind, and in the same sence that Rabanus one of the same time with them did vse it, Rabanus de Institu. Cleric. l. 1. c. 32. Sacrificium (saieth he) quasisacrum factum: a sacrifice, as if a man would saye, a holy and consecrate worke, or action which is consecrated by a mysticall prayer in the remembrance of the passion and suffering of our Lorde, &c. Which selfe same thing Paschasius calleth otherwise: The passi∣on of Christ in a mysterie, Pasc. de corp. & Sang. Do∣mini. Theophil. in Iohan. c. 8. the calling to minde of the passion of the Lorde on the Altar, &c. Theophilact about the yeare 1000. The medicines which are effectuall and forcible doe heale euen at the first time being administred: but those which neede to bee taken againe and againe, doe argue their weakenes sufficiently, euen by that onely note: euen so it fareth betwixt the Legall sacrifices, and the sacrifices of Christ. But here riseth a question, whether that we also doe offer sacrifices and oblations without shedding of blood? vnto which wee aunswere af∣firmatiuelie, but it is in that wee renue the memorie of the death of the Lorde: and yet in the meane time it is but one sacrifice not manie, because is hath beene offered but onelie once: wee offer then daylie himselfe, or rather the remembrance of this oblation, by which hee did offer himselfe, &c. In place else where, hee giueth vs these generall rules: Where there is remission of sinnes, there needeth not anie more sacrifices: but Christ hath offered a sacrifice, seruing and standing sufficient for euer: and therefore wee haue no neede of anie other seconde sacrifice, &c. Anselmus in like maner: Ansel. in Ep. ad. Heb. c. 10 Howbeit we offer sacrifices euerie day, yet it is no other then the re∣cording & renewing of the memory of the death of Christ, & therby we offer but one sacrifice, not manie, for hee was onelie once offered, &c. Againe, All that we doe is but the renuing of the remembrance of his death. Againe, Our Lordsaide, Take, eate, and sacrifice, offer vnto God. And S. Paule to the same ende: That the Saintes were perfected by one onely oblati∣on. And this hath come to passe within this thousand yeares: so hard and difficult a thing it is, to bring the learned to speake the language of the Masse, though the abuse and mischiefe be alreadie brought in. And indeede we shall see hereafter, that it doth not speake it, it selfe. But now since the yeare fiue hundred vntill this time, it hath ouerrunne great & large Dominions, and yet by certaine degrees, and by the concurring of diuerse causes. During the feruent and deuoute zeale of the Christian Church, the holie supper was celebrated euerie Lordes day, Carol. Mag. l, 7. c. 138.182 167. yea in some Churches euerie daye, and the number of Communicantes was ordinarilie verie great: whereby wee haue seene herefofore, that in populous Churches and congregations, there haue beene di∣stributed at one time, diuerse great loaues, and diuerse great cuppes of wine. This zeale together with the time, grew luke-warme. whereupon wee see that S. Ambrose and S. Chrysostome are greatlie grieued to see: That it was their dutie to attend at the Lordes Table, and that no man hasted to come thereto, &c. Insomuch also as that exhorta∣tions manie and diuerse being vsed to draw the people thereunto, but profiting no∣thing, there were diuerse Canons made to binde and inforce the people thereunto, as also ciuill lawes, Let all the faithfull communicate and staye the Masse, without anie more bidding, L. 2. c. 45. yea, at the least, let them not faile to communicate on the Lordes daye, &c. But whether it were the obstinacie or carelesnes of the Pastors, or both, that were the cause, these Canons profited little. In the ende there was a lawe made: That such Laye people as did not communicate at the least euerie feast of the Natiuitie, Easter, Whit∣sontide, Add. 3.38. should bee held for infidels: and ratified afterward in the Actes and Statutes set forth by Charles the great: thus the Table of the Supper stoode solitary, and as a reiected and forlorne thing for the most part, at least in respect of the Laitie. The ec∣clesiasticall persons continued their communicating for some time, and so there still remained a certaine forme of Communion or Eucharist. But shortlie after loosenes
laide holde vpon them also, as it had done before of others. Whereupon we see that the Church is constrained to make Canons; That at the least three or foure should alwaies communicate with the Priestes: The printes whereof are as yet in the Abbye of Clugny, where the Deacon and Subdeacon doe receiue the Communion, as yet vnto this day, together with the Priests. But afterward these three were shufled vppe into one, this one was hee, that rung the bell, whome they called the Sexten. Camp nariū. And this coldnes did still so encrease, that Charles the great is constrained to make a lawe, L. 5. c. 93. & l. 6. c. 118. Add. 2. c 7. by which the Priest after hee hath consecrated, is bound to communicate, because that euen hee himselfe did oftentimes abstaine: and there are manie olde Canons to that purpose. Thus the vse of the Communion was lost by degrees, this Communion (I say) wher∣in Christians were admonished, and put in minde of practising true charitie, by the substance of the bread which consisted of manie cornes, wrought vppe into one loaf; seeing thy bee manie members of one bodie, liuing vnder one heade, euen Iesus Christ our Lord, and so proportionablie, the sacramentes themselues fell into a con∣sumption, as namelie, the bread from manie loaues to one, and from a great one to a little one, no bigger then would serue being deuided, onelie for three persons: and in the ende as wee now see, to breade no bigger then a penie. And the wine conse∣quentlie, so as it might fit the other, from great vessels vnto little pots, such as serue at the Masse, from manie cups to one, from a great one to a little one. And it is notwith∣standing to bee noted, that this abuse had his abode onelie in the Church of Rome; all other Churches, as those amongst the Abissines, Armenians, Syrians, Grecians, Muscouites, &c. hauing retained, and retayning the Communion, as yet vnto this daye. Now it fell out also that the people no longer communicating in the holy sup∣per, became negligent in other partes of their accustomed seruice, and particularlie, in that of bringing of offeringes, which consisted according to the Canons in breade and wine, from which was taken what was necessarie to bee imployed in the Commu∣nion: for those offerings ceasing it was a cause that the Communion also ceased. Carol. l. 1.5.94. & 152. And indeede we see that this law is oftentimes renued by Charles the Great, namelie, That the people should be warned to communicate, and bring their offeringes euerie Lordes daye. For that the one did cease to bee, because of the other, and thereupon also the reque∣sting of the one was with the more honestie, by reason of the other. Wherefore to cherish them vppe both in deuotion, as also in liberalitie, they were giuen to vnder∣stand, that the Masse did not onely benefite and serue them, by their communicating in the Sacrament in it, but that the principall point of comforte vnto them thereby, was yet behinde; namelie, the sacrifice, in the merite whereof they had part, inasmuch onelie as that they were present thereat: prouided euermore, that they for their partes brought their sacrifices, that is to say, their offeringes with them. There was also a continued course of offering vnto them the consecrated bread, which they called , as if any man would say, one gifte for an other, the better to en∣tertaine their contentation, and this they distributed after it was consecrated by a praier, whereas before it had beene giuen them for common bread. In the lawes of Charles the great, it is inioyned; That they should make the people to vnderstand, how ma∣nie waies the Masse doth profite them, aswell in respect of themselues, as of their friendes ey∣ther dead or liuing: and this they call Ʋim Missae, the force and efficacie of the Masse, and together therewithall to make them the better to vnderstand the efficacie of Memen∣to; wherein (sayeth hee) prayer is made for the Soules, aswell of them which offer, as of those, which belong vnto them: assuredly, because that otherwise the Masse would bee forsa∣ken and cast off. Where it is likewise further to bee noted, that it was not then saide in the Canon: For whome wee offer vnto thee, but which offer vnto thee: the Priestes hauing afterward taken to themselues this prerogatiue of offering, to the debarring and shutting out of all others, for hauing anie dealing in the same, whereas it was the worke of the people at the first properlie which did offer. From that time forwarde also, the office of the Priest in the Latine Church was brought to haue his Masse book much altered and corrected, that so hee might sing the Masse. And thereupon also
was the bread of the Sacrament called singing bread: and the exercise of a Christian restrained to the hearing onelie of the Masse, or else, as they say in Italie, to the seeing of it: things vnheard of, and meere strangers in the Primitiue Church, a long time after Gregorie the first, although that a great parte of the abuses may bee attributed vnto him, inasmuch as hee established the new seruice, framed and set forth by one named Scholasticus, who applied the olde seruice to a new vse, the old prayers to the abuses and corruption of the time. Now for the fortifying of this pretended sacrifice, manie thinges doe concurre. The worde Sacrifice vsed in the Church, after the manner of the olde lawe, to signifie the giftes which were offered to God by the people, as it hath beene prooued here∣tofore, for these offeringes were commonlie called oblations and sacrifices, and this is confirmed by Pope Gelasius his ordinance: That the sacrifices which shall be of∣fered by the people at the Masse, shall be distributed into foure partes, that is, for the Bishop, for the Cleargie, for the poore, and for the maintaining of the Church. Charles the Great calleth them Oblations. These offeringes were after the Iewish manner, consecrated by one, or moe prayers, which as yet are continued to bee read in diuerse Lithurgies, and in the Romish Masse also, which (as we haue seen) are wrested by a most pernicious para∣logisme, namelie, from the sacrifice, which was giuen for a name to those offeringes that were offered vnto God, to their pretended sacrifice, which the Priest consecra∣teth Ab oblatis inquam ad oblatam: and by consequent, from a sacrifice of fruites of∣fered to God by the people, to the sacrifice of the Sonne of God our Lord, whome the Priest presumeth to sacrifice vnto him vppon this Altar. Wee neede not anie other proofe of this matter, then the prayers vsed in the Masse: Wee pray thee (sayeth the Canon) that thou wilt accept of and blesse these giftes, these oblations and holy sacrifices. A∣gaine, We recommend vnto thee, those who offer them vnto thee, or (as it is read at this day) For whome wee offer vnto thee, this sacrifice of praise. Againe, That thou wouldest vouchsafe to regarde and looke downe vpon them with a milde and mercifull countenance, and accept of thē, as thou vouchsafedst to accept of the offerings of iust Abell, thy chosen childe, &c. Again, Com∣maund thē to be laid vpon thine holie Altar, by the hands of thine Angell. For in their consci∣ence, can all these prayers bee conceiued by any Christian, for the sacrifice of our Lord Iesus Christ, which their Priestes pretend to offer? For in them wee haue sacrifices, alwaies in the plurall number, where it is neuer qualified or intituled by anie other name, then the sacrifice of praise, where God should be prayed vnto, to vouchsafe to looke downe vppon his welbeloued Sonne with a fauourable eye; being one with him, and hee in whome hee is well pleased? That hee would vouchsafe to accepte of him, as of the offeringes of iust Abell; of him, in whome alone all the Fathers haue beene accepted: without whose righteousnes, the righteousnes of Abell shoulde bee pollution and filthy vncleannes: to commaund that hee should bee laide vpon the Altar by the handes of an Angell, being the eternall sacrifice, the euerlasting oblati∣on, and who found (as Iob sayth,) vncleannes in the verie Angels. And indeed this is manifestly appearing in the Lithurgie, Liturg. Clem. which they attribute vnto Clement, where∣in there is an expresse praier, Pro dono oblato, for the oblation offered: but in these tearms, That it would please our good God to receiue it vpon his Altar, by the intercession of his Christ, for a smell of a sweete sauour, &c. In other Greeke Lithurgies also, whose desert we haue heretofore examined, wherin there are cleare and euident praiers, , that is, for the oblations offered and brought; framed like vnto those aboue, where they are called a spirituall sacrifice of praise, offered without blood-shedde, &c. The name of Sacrifice now shufled and closely conueied into the Christian Church, which at the first receiued the same from the Iewes, helped it not a little to passe from the action of thankesgiuing, to a propitiatorie sacrifice; and from an action of remem∣brance, to a reall offering and oblation, being ioyned with that ignorance, which raigned after barbarisme in those ages: as also with that, which was ordinary amongst the people, and which in stead of being dispelled, and driuen away by the bright light
of the Bishoppes, was on the contrarie more ouercast and darkened. For it is open∣lie acknowledged and confessed, as a thing most plaine and apparant in the sight of such as know anie thing in historie, that the Bishoppes of that time, besides the publike and ordinarie ignorance, were altogether giuen to the minding of worldlie matters, which the lawes of Charlemaine by name doe confirme and proue vnto vs: Let them abstaine from worldly affaires, from the Court, from the warres, from hunting, hawking, playes, gaming, &c. And hereto you may also adde the corruption of spee∣ches, which was in those times by the mixture of many nations together: for of vulgar ones, they became meere barbarous, and of such as were familiarlie spoken, such as were not vnderstoode: a great aide, oportunitie and aduantage for Sathan to sowe his tares: for who woulde not otherwise haue reiected this realitie of the sacrifice, when in euerie corner of the fielde, there was heard in their seruice, Sursum Corda, , lift vp your heartes on hie: and when their currant speech and com∣mon talke was but of one Altar, and one celestiall sacrifice: when in their entrance into the celebration of the sacrament, it was saide vnto the people: Shew yee forth the death of the Son of man, and confesse his resurrection, vntill his comming? But there were two doctrines especiallie, which springing vppe in those ages, Transubstan∣tiation and Purgatorie concuning and conspiring together, esta∣blish this sa∣crifice. and prospering and growing together at that time, and that by equall degrees, did ad∣uance and set aloft this pretended sacrifice. The one, Transubstantiation: for after such time as it was taught that the bread and the wine were chaunged: that they were reallie the body and blood of our Lord; then what honour was too great to giue vn∣to this sacrifice? Who can then doubt that it should bee propitiatorie for the sinnes of all that were liuing? this sacrifice offered in the Masse, being the same in flesh and blood, which was hanged vppon the Crosse, for the sinnes of the world? The other was that of Purgatorie: for if we haue (saide they) both our friendes departing & pas∣sing out of this worlde, to abide the scorching flames of Purgatorie, and that our owne sinnes also must bee purged there, then let vs prouide a remedie, let vs goe to this Masse, which is so soueraigne and full of saluation, let vs laye good foundations, and powre out largelie for our selues and our parentes, let vs leaue grounds & goods with charge of hauing the same saide after vs. And hereto belong the lawes aboue mentioned to bee made in the time of Charles the Great, and then euery day thinges grew from ill to worse. The ignorance then of the age, the coldnes of the people in deuotion, the co∣uetousnes of the Priestes, the carelesnes of the Bishoppes, and the barbarousnes of the speech of men, begot, fostered and maintained this abuse in the Church: which ha∣uing once taken roote and growne vppe to strength, could not bee beaten downe a∣gaine but by the spirite of God, which thing also manie men of good spirits, did per∣ceiue verie well. Arnoldus de villa noua, one of the great men of that time, About the yeare 1200. helde in his positions; That the sacrifice of the Masse, was a manifest abuse, and a plaine starting a∣side from the pure doctrine of Christ. The Waldenses and Albigenses in France; That Masses whether they were for the liuing, or for the dead, were directlie against the institution of the Lord. And these resistances and contradictions did so assaulte the maintainers of this abuse, as that all Christendome was in an vprore, and not without fruite: for the spreading of them throughout all the nations of the west Church, proued a good seed sowne by God, to cause the truth to spring vp there againe in his time: but what shall wee say, if their greatest and grauest Doctors carried away notwithstanding with the streame, do likewise speake against their doctrine? Peter Lumbard saith, the Maister of the sentences, Distinct. 12. l. 4. De Consec. D. 2. Can. handleth this question aboute the yeare 1150. saying: It is demaunded of some, if that which the Priest doth, bee pro∣perlie called a sacrifice and oblation, and if Christ be sacrificed euery day, or whether hee was onely once offered? Whereunto this short aunswere may be shaped: That that which is consecra∣ted and offered by the Priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is the renuing of the memorie and representation of the true sacrifice, and of the holy oblation made vpon the Altar of the Crosse. And this hee proueth by manie places out of S. Augustine, and of S. Am∣brose,
&c. Note here, how well hee agreede with the Councell of Trent, which pro∣nounceth, If any man say, that the verie and proper body of Christ is not offered in the Masse, let him be accursed. The Schoolemen which came after him, haue beene so bold as to rob the Crosse of Christ, to hang the Iewels, euen the power thereof about the necke of their Masse, so that sometimes they break out into these speeches: That the bodie of our Lord was offered for originall sinne, but that hee is continuallie offered by them vpon the Altar for actuall sins. A cursed blasphemie, by which the Crosse of Christ is made of none effect, by which there is lesse attributed vnto it, then vnto the Table of their Altar: directlie also against the expresse Scripture, which sayeth, comparing the fall of Adam with the benefite of Christ his death; That the fault was through one offence vnto condemnation, but the gift is of manie offences vnto iustification. Againe, after hee had spoken of all manner of sinners: And such (saith S. Paule) were you, but you haue beene washed, you haue beene sanctified, but you haue beene iustified by the name of Iesus Christ, Rom. 5. 1. Iohn 3.8. &c. And to bee briefe, That the Sonne of God hath appeared, to destroy the workes of the Diuell, &c. But so the case standeth as that Thomas their chief Champiō, Thom. in Ep. ad Heb. 6. doth again in an other place agree with himself, saying; Christ was wounded for our iniquities, Esa 53. and that not oftentimes, but onely once, 1. Pet. 3 Christ hath died once for our sinnes, and his onely oblation sufficeth to drie vp the fountaine of the sinnes of all mankinde. Idem in sūma part. 3. q. 83. And as concerning the sacrament: It is but the representation (sayeth hee) of the passion of our Lord: for S. Augustine sayeth: as oft as wee celebrate the Passeouer, is Christ slaine euerie time? yea rather this is but a yearelie renuing of the memory of that which was done otherwise, thereby setting before vs such notable and famous monumentes thereof, as if by them wee were brought to the verie beholding of his hanging vppon the Crosse. Idem part. 13.3. q. 73. art. 6. And elsewhere; It behoued that euermore there should remaine some representati∣on of the passion of our Lord: In the old Testament, this principall sacrament was the Paschall Lambe: Whereuppon the Apostle sayeth: Christ our Paschall Lambe was offered. And in place thereof hath succeeded in the new Testament the Eucharist, which is a memoriall of his passion past and suffered, as the other was a prefigurer and foreshewer of his passion to come. Petrus Alphonsus at the same time, Petr. Alph. l. 2. Ep. did not acknowledge either the Eucharist, or the Masse, for any other thing then a sacrifice of praise: and this was at that time one of the questions disputed by the Albigenses, and Petrus Brutis, who was burnt aliue at Tholosa, where he taught publikelie, that it was not propitiatorie. All these sacrifi∣ces (sayeth hee) which were offered vnder the lawe, were nothing but signes of this great sa∣crifice, Idem in Dia∣log. tit. 12. which was to destroy sinne. But since the comming of Christ, we vse not any other sacri∣fice, but that of bread and wine, which hee hath ordained, and is like vnto that which. Moses in the law called  a sacrifice of praise, &c. For therein wee praise God for the benefite which hee hath bestowed vpon vs, sauing vs by his onelie Sonne, &c. Alexander Hales holdeth manie assertions, that cannot agree with the Masse say∣ing: Iesus Christ hath offered a double sacrifice, a spirituall and corporall: the spirituall, that is, a sacrifice of deuotion, and loue towardes mankind, which he hath offered in spirit: the Corporall, the sacrifice of the death, which hee vnderwent vpon the Crosse, which is represented in the sacra∣ment. Marke (represented) The spiritual prefigured by the incense and perfume, which was made vpon the inner Altar: the corporall, which hee offered in his flesh, two waies, that is to say, sensibly vpon the Crosse, and insensibly vpon the Altar: (obserue and marke again insensib∣lie,) That sensible sort being shadowed out by the sacrifiees of beastes, but the insensible by the sacrificing of thinges that are incensible, as fruites, bread, and wine, both the one and the other vpon the vtter Altar. The one of them to speake as hee speaketh, propitiatorie: for such were the sacrifices wherein beasts were offered, with the shedding of their blood for sinne, figuring out that sacrifice offered by Iesus Christ: the other Eucharisticall onelie: for such properlie were those of fruites, and such like thinges. Againe: The sacrifices of the law were signes both of the true sacrifice of Christ, Circumferi∣mus. as also of the spirituall sacri∣fices, which we shall haue to offer vnto God: That for the purging away of all our sinnes, aswell originall as actuall: & these to haue relation to the mortification of our flesh, inasmuch as we car∣rie about with vs Iesus Christ in our bodies, to the end that his life may be manifested in vs.
Lyranus handleth the matter more clearelie: Lyranus in ep. ad Heb. c. 10. That which cleanseth and wipeth a∣way sinne, must needes bee heauenlie and spirituall: and that which is such, hath perpetuall ef∣ficacie, and by consequent ought not, neither indeed can be reiterated: and this that wee say of the oblation of Christ, is because of the Godhead, being vnited and conioyned with the man∣hoode: for it being once offered ought not to be reiterated, and yet is sufficient to deface and blot out al the sins that are alreadie, or hereafter to be cōmitted. You wil say, & yet behold the sacra∣ment of the Altar is euery day offered vp in the church, &c. But the answere hereto is, that this is no reiterating of the sacrifice, but an ordinarie remēbring & calling to mind, of the only sacri∣fice, offered vpon the Crosse, wherupon it is said in Mat. 26. Do this in remēbrance of me, &c. Now manie such good people enflamed with a true zeale, had stayed the course of this mischieuous monster: but their owne infirmitie and weakenes did incumber and hinder them: tyranous rule and gouernment astonished them, and the multitude carried them away. For on the contrarie, to this error once so farre admitted of the multitude, there is added an other heape of more then good measure: Gab. Biel. lect. 26. That it is cleane an other thing to be present at the Masse, then to communicate in the holie supper: That the Masse, ex opere operato, by the worke wrought, that is to say, by being onely present, without receiuing anie thing, or yet bringing anie good motion thereunto, doth apply vnto eue∣rie such person present al the merites of Christ. Who could not now loue the Masse better then the holie supper, which requireth a serious examination and tryall of the consci∣ence, that offereth life, but representeth to the vnworthie receiuer the dreadfull horror of tormenting hell? Againe, That the Masse hath a most speciall, a most great and an indefferent or middle power and efficacie: a most speciall in respect of the Priest, see∣ing that by it hee meriteth eternall life: a most generall in respect of the Church, and all the members thereof, without anie exception: and a meane or middle, in respect of him or them that cause the same to bee saide, &c. Of the sacrament of the holie supper, the insti∣tution of the Sonne of God, of all the sacramentes together, yea or of the verie death of Iesus Christ: is there anie one of them, that hath written so high tearmes of commendation? But seeing that it hath such efficacie and vertue in it, to what end is it so oft reiterated, or multiplied so manie waies, seeing that the oft administring and taking of a medicine, as they saye themselues, is a marke and note of the weakenes of the same? But this question is not yet throughlie decided a∣mongst them, as those that haue too eager a stomacke to loose their fatte morsels. They dare not saye, that it is for anie wante of sufficiencie in the sacrifice: neither will they saye, that the vertue and efficacie thereof may bee so farre stretched and extended, as the sufficiencie thereof woulde beare. Some saye that none but Iesus Christ doth knowe, how farre it concerneth euerie man: Others that hee bestoweth the power and vertue of the Masse, according to the determination and application of the Priest that sacrificeth it. Gab. Biel. lect. 26. And thereuppon Gabriel Biel is set in a chafe, saying: I praye you, such as wauer in this sorte, and doe not so much as giue, but sell such vncertainties in the Church, and that in so serious and waightie a matter, can we otherwise call them, then most pernicious and daungerous Impostors and deceiuers? Now as all truth doth agree and hang together, That the do∣ctrine of the Masse is a∣gainst it selfe. so wee may see in this doctrine the figure of falshoode, and broad stampe of a shamefull lye, which (as his nature is) is giuen to destroye and ouerthrowe it selfe. Sometimes they say, that Christ hath offered his bodie vnto God in the supper, for the Apostles, and that in the Masse, the promises of the new Testament, euen those of the remission of sins, are ap∣plyed, and that thereby it becommeth propitiatorie; yea, ex opere operato. Other sometimes they say, that this sacrifice doth not worke sufficientlie and immediatelie, Bellarm. l. 2. de Missa. c. 4.2. Idem l. 1. c. 2. and that it is not properlie ordained of God, the instrument to iustifie, as Baptisme, and Absolution are: but that it serueth onelie to obtaine the gifte of penance, by which the sinner would drawe neare vnto the sacrament, and bee iustified by it. A∣gaine, sometime, that the Masse carrieth with it the remission of sinnes, in asmuch as Christ hath sacrificed his body and his blood for the remission of the sinnes of his A∣postles, and that in the same howre, wherein hee celebrated the supper with them,
and commaunded them to continue the same, and therefore it is propitiatorie, yea, saith Caietanus, infinitelie meritorious and satisfactorie. Sometimes they conclude, that to take it well and rightlie, Idem l. 2 de Misla. c. 2. & 4. it is not so, but onely impetratorie; for, say they, Christ a mortall man, might merite and satisfie, and this is the cause why his sacrifice is truly propitiatorie, aswell as meritorious and satisfactorie; but Christ immortall, cannot anie more merite or satisfie: so neither can his sacrifice be meritorious nor satis∣factorie, but onelie is called so, inasmuch as hee obtaineth remission for vs, whether it bee of the punishment or of the fault, or otherwise Grace to doe wel, and to merite &c. and thereuppon wee saye: If that of Christes in the supper bee propitiatorie, and yours but impetratorie, or auailable to obtaine fauour by intreatie, that then your sacrifice is not the same with Christes: but and if this bee that of Christes, then you vtter open blasphemie; because you should make that of Christes not to bee propiti∣atorie. Let vs yet goe further, wee haue by this account lesse to doe with your Masse; for shall hee bee excluded from obtaining being immortall, which hath power be∣ing mortall, to merite and satisfie by the offering of himselfe a sacrifice? And a∣gaine, this contrarietie is suted with an other: That the sacrifice of the Crosse is by consequent, more excellent then that of the Masse, as sayeth Vega, and Bellar∣mine also; Veg. Thes. 8 & 124. de Missa. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa. c. 6. That the sacrifice of the Masse, non est perfectum, neque absolutum, ne∣que redemptionis perse consummatiuum, &c. And how then can it bee as they woulde haue it, Idem subiecto, & numero? And what will become of that which they say else where, namelie, that it is, Ʋere propitiatorium pro peccatis: and certaine Schoolemen: Caietan. tract. 2. de cele. r. Miss. c. 2. q. 1. Bellarm. l. 2. d Miss. c. 4. That that of the Crosse doth not wash away anie other then originall sinne and that of the Altar actuall sinnes? Againe, If the Masse (as sayeth Caietan) bee of infinite valew and worth, because it is the power of Iesus Christ in himselfe; and by consequent, his infinite effect, as of the passion of Christ, what shall become then of Bellarmine, who sayeth that the vertue and operation of the sacrifice of the Masse is infinite? That otherwise (as hee sayeth) so manie Masses should bee vnprofitable, as likewise for one and the same effect, &c. Some saye vnto them, what then? Iesus Christ, in respect of you, is hee not reallie sacrificed in the one and in the other? and in that his bodie is glorified, should that diminish and detract anie thing from the price and worth of this sacrifice? Idem l. 2. c. 24. & 27. But here they are worse intangled then before: for sometimes Bellarmine saith: If there bee not in the Masse, a true and reall slaying of Christ, that then there is not a true and reall sacrifice: for a true sacrifice, which con∣sisteth in killing, requireth of necessitie to haue it reall and indeede. Sometimes when this sacrifice is offered of thinges without life, as breade and wine, there is no need of killing, Veg. Thes. 12 l 8. De Missa but onelie of eating, &c. And of these contrary opinions, there do al∣so rise contrary corollaries. Of some, as saith Vega, That Christ dieth mystically, & in figure vpon the Altar: but is offered vpon the same aliue: Of Others, That Christ is as truely slain and killed in the sacrament of the Eucharist, as he is truly existing & being in the sacrament, & is offered in the same, either dead, or as it were dead. Again, some∣times they say, that the sacrament is truely & really offered, when the bread & wine are consecrated by the words, Gulielm. Ala∣nus de Sacrif. Miss. l. 2. c. 9. & not before: sometimes, that it is offered really, at such time as the bread and wine are set vpon the Altar, & before the words of consecratiō. If the first be true, then the offering of the kinds, and the offering of the thing it selfe, are offered at seueral times, & so the bond of relation is broken. If the second, what followeth then, but that they sacrifice nothing but bread and wine? For what other thing are they else according to their iudgement before the words of consecration? Now of this contradiction followeth an other: Of some, which say, that the sacri∣fice is properlie accomplished by the oblation; Vega. Thes. 107. Turrian tract. 2. c. 22. Bellard. 1. de Miss. c. 27. Biel. lect. 81. of others, by the eating of the same by the priest. And Vega and Bellarmine are at controuersie one with an o∣ther. To bee shorte, if they square, and differ aboute the point, de opere operantis: neither can they better agree in that, de opere operato, by what meanes the benefite of this operation is applyed to those that are present: whereas the common opi∣nion adiudgeth according to Biel, that the onely being present at the consecration
and oblation, maketh a man capable of saluation, without anie looking for of a spirituall life, as requisite thereunto. And at the Councell of Trent, hee may seeme to holde on this side. The Cardinall Caietan on the contrarie, Anno 1518. who did his endeuour at Ausbourg, to cause Luther to retract this proposition: That faith was necessarie for the receiuing of the sacrament, commeth so farre, namelie to say, That it is a common receiued error, that this sactifice, Ex opere operato, Caiet. in quod. libel. de vsu Spirit q. 3. should haue a certaine kinde of merite, or bee able to make application of some certaine kinde of satisfaction vnto this or that person, &c. Doctrines as newlie come out of the minte, as the wordes themselues, which are such, as none of them that haue written twelue, yea thirteene hundred yeares after Christ, did euer heare of. And thus you see that these doe nothing at all agree together amongst themselues, howsoeuer they would make men belieue, that they are all as one, either in the matter, or in the forme of this pretended sacrifice, neither yet aboute his effect or ende, no nor in the sub∣stance, or circumstances thereof. Wherefore how farre more commend able had it beene for them, and nearer to the purpose, to haue kepte themselues to the insti∣tution of Christ, in the alone propitiatorie sacrifice, accomplished on the Crosse, for the declaration and remembrance, which is to be vsed, according to the institution of the Lord in the holy supper. And furthermore it is certaine, that as by the grace of God, the light beganne to rise and spring againe in the Church, notwithstanding the terror and torment of the fire, which was kindled and blowne vppe against it in all nations: so the Doctors of Papistrie grewe ashamed of this doctrine. Whereuppon wee see, that Sidonius, Faber, Zwifaltensis and others, who writte in the time of Luther; did contente themselues to call it the Sacrifice of remembrance: although vn∣der these wordes they doe not laye out the efficacie thereof so fullie and large∣lie as they might. But beholde the Councell of Trent assembled and called to∣gether, not to reforme the Church of Rome, as the Christian Princes had hope they woulde: but rather to authorize and establish, euen the most ill fauoured and deformed things that were therein, for so they prouided and brought to passe therein: If anie man holde and maintaine, (sayeth it) that the Masse is not a true and proper sacrifice: but rather a sacrifice of representation and praise, and not propitia∣torie for the liuing and the deade: for sinnes, punishmentes, satisfactions, and all other necessities, let him bee accursed. Cursing thereby in a fewe wordes the whole Scripture, and all the olde Church. And Pope Pius the fourth, (in whose time it was helde) thrust into the oath, which Bishoppes were to take this Article, in expresse wordes: I belieue that there is offered vnto God in the Masse, Onuph. in vita Pii. 4. a true, proper, and propitiatorie Sacrifice, for the quick and the dead, &c. But what? And is there such abhomination in the Masse? Let vs make a plaine and simple rehearsall of the principall errors therein, without anie making of them more heinous and grieuous, then they are indeede. The first, This pretended Sacrifice hath no institution or warrant in the worde of God: but hath it on the contrarie, directlie against it. What audacious boldenes was this in man, to dare to inuent of his owne braine a sacrifice by which God might bee appeased and made at one with vs? And what other thing is it but an , a Seruice deuised of our owne carnall and corrupte sense, and by consequent, condemned of God, who hath saide vnto vs: In vaine doe you worshippe mee according to the Tra∣ditions of men, &c. The seconde, This Sacrifice is a cleare and euident wresting and corrupting of the holy Supper, and of the vse thereof, whereby of a Sacrament ordained of God to assure vs of his good grace in Iesus Christ, there is framed a Sacrifice, whereby wee pretende to merite the same, yea and that not hee one∣lie which doeth offer the same, but those also that doe but stande by and beholde the same, and that by their meere presence, though they haue neuer a good thought or motion within them. What is this then but to abolish the holie Sup∣per of the Lorde, vnder the colour of offering of it? And who is hee that will
any longer care to come to the Lordes Supper, in the straight examining of his conscience, if by the onelie hearing of a Masse, hee may bee assured of eternall life? And againe, what presumption, to dare thus to transforme the Will and Testament of the Sonne of God, made and set downe in his holie Supper: a thing not to bee endured in the Will and Testament of anie meane or base person? The thirde, The Masse is derogatorie to the onelie Sacrifice of the Sonne of God, made vppon the Crosse, and that not onelie by putting it selfe in place thereof, but al∣so by aduancing, and setting forth of the power and efficacie thereof farre aboue the other. It is saide, There is but one oblation: the Sonne of God giuen for the sinnes of the worlde: this oblation the Masse will needes bee, and yet renued and reiterated euerie howre. Whereas there is pardon and remission of sinnes, (sayeth the Apostle) there is no more anie oblation to bee offered. And what should followe of this continuall and ordinarie repeating of this Sacrifice,, but that as yet there is no re∣mission? And that the sacrifice of Christ, is either vnprofitable or imperfect? And who doubteth but that this is the same which the Apostle called the frustrating and making of the Crosse of Christ of no effect? and what more woulde hee haue made of it, if hee had hearde the rest of their blasphemies: as that the sacrifice of the Crosse hath not purged and done awaye anie but originall sinne: but that the Masse hath taken awaye actuall sinnes, &c. and by consequent to become fellowe-worker with the same. What can this bee tearmed but to declare the Sacrifice of Christ insufficient, to renounce the power, as also the benefite ther∣of both together? The fourth, The Masse taketh awaye asmuch as lyeth in it, the onelie Priesthoode of Iesus Christ, whereof no other creature is capable: for seeing it was requisite that the Priest shoulde bee eternall, and the sacrifice in∣finite; followeth it not that one and the same was to bee both the Priest and the Sacrifice? And what other then but the Sonne of God, offering vppe himselfe once to God by the holie Ghost: and alwaies by his infinite merite, making intercession for the infinite multitude of our sinnes, vnto the infinite iustice and mercie of God? And what a blasphemie is it then to say, that anie man, yea or that anie creature is able to performe the same? And these are the abhominations which wee finde in the Masse, as they make it the pretended sacrifice of the bodie and blood of Iesus Christ, propitiatorie for the quicke and the deade: for such a one our aduersaries doe teach it to bee: the rest rising of the deprauing and corrupte wresting of the sacrament shall bee spoken of hereafter. And now wee are to goe a∣bout the finding out of the originall, and first beginning, as also of the growth and proceeding of this applying of the benefite thereof to the deade, deriued and fetcht, as one error from an other, from the opinion or rather imagination of Purgatorie. CHAP. VI. That Purgatorie the foundation of Masses for the deade, is not at all: and first that it was not knowne in the Church of Israell, or vnder the olde Testa∣ment. ONe of the great imployments of the Masse, That Purgato∣rie should haue had place in the church of the Iewes, if there be any such thing. is about the deade: & such deade, as are not in Paradice: for such haue no need of anie, neither yet for such as are in hell, for they all agree that it wold not any whit auaile them, but rather for a certain number whome they pretend to be in a certain third place, which they call Purgatory, wherein they are to purge and make satisfaction for their sins, of which when they went out of this worlde, they were not acquited & cleansed, & for the purging whereof there
is no other helpe, but that which may bee procured and supplied by a number of Masses. Surelie man was a sinner and mortall from the beginning of the world, yea, man I say, was subiect to dye in sinne, being indebted by sinne, and by consequent to incurre this penaltie of Purgatorie: God likewise from all eternitie, both iust & mer∣cifull, iust in hauing appointed this punishment for sinne from the first creation of mankinde: and mercifull, as hauing taught him from the beginning, the meanes of mitigating and remedying the same. Which doctrine proueth Purgatorie to bee no newe fiction (if so bee it may haue place,) but to haue beene euer since the foundati∣on of the worlde. Now if it bee of this antiquitie, then it will bee found mentioned & spoken of; and that in plaine tearmes in the olde church: and the remedie also of this fire, cannot but bee reuealed by God, and practised amongst his people. And so much the more, in that the mercifulnes of God in Iesus Christ, lesse shining in the first times and ages of the worlde (the onelie satisfaction for our sinnes, being couered vn∣der the vailes of the law,) made by all likelyhoode, the remedy of Purgatory to be the more haunted and practised vnder the olde Testament, as being at that time most needfull and necessarie. Heere our aduersaries make vs this answere: whence com∣meth it then, that in all the writinges of Moses and the Prophetes, there is nothing spoken of it? that amongst so manie threatninges, which are made against the trans∣gressors of the law, this should not bee so much as once touched? That amongst so manie sacrifices ordained for voluntarie, and willinglie committed sinnes, as also for sinnes committed vnwillingly, and of ignorance: as likewise, that in the mid∣dest of so manie expiatorie, and purging sacrifices, for all manner of pollutions, whe∣ther they came of sicknes, infirmitie, sinne, or of the defiling comming by touching of the dead, &c. there should not bee found anie thing appointed for sinnes after death, not anie sacrifice, not anie offering? And yet notwithstanding they died euery daye: and how deepelie engaged in sinne? There is likewise nothing founde to bee practised in the Church, in the behalfe of the dead, whereuppon a man hath not a∣ny ground either from literall or figuratiue interpretation, to proue this Purgatorie. The Patriarkes did burie their wiues and children: they were carefull of buying se∣pulchres, of mourning, and of conueying of their bones from one place to an other. Where was their pietie (if it may bee tearmed pietie) to pray for the deade? Dauid wept for Ionathan, his verie true and trustie friende: and Salomon for Dauid his predecessor and Father. If these did practise no such thing, what may wee coniecture thereof more? But and if they did practise such a thing, then whereby shall it become apparant vnto vs by anie one worde? And that notwithstanding, that Dauid haue made so manie prayers vppon so many occasions, and those both of ioye and also of mourning; and so manie kinges of Israell and Iuda, haue beene honourably buri∣ed: as also so manie Prophetes left vnto vs behinde them, their open protestations against impieties and vngodlines, and in the commendation of pietie and godlines, euerie one in his time: none of them recōmending this deuotion vnto vs for pietie, or accusing of impietie those that haue omitted and neglected it, yea no one of them authorising the same, either by precept or example? And it auaileth not to say, That there was not in the Church of the Iewes any sacrifice for the deade, because that (according to the doctrine of the Church of Rome) Paradice was not opened to the Fathers, vnto the death of our Lord. For woulde not this haue beene a refreshment and comforte vnto them, to haue beene translated from Purgatorie, into the limbes: from a place of dolour and paine, and that such as they describe it to bee, into a place of rest? And againe, what apparance is there, that they shoulde haue remained there without remedie, for the space of some three or foure thousande yeares? what inequalitie had there beene in such punishment, in respect of that which is inflicted at this daye, when as they come forth now from day to daye, whe∣ther it bee through the absolute authoritie of the Pope, by his Indulgences, or by the diligence of their kinsfolkes, not neglecting to contribute and bestowe these suffrages vppon them? In conclusion if there bee anie such thing, it is as old as the
creation, and that more clearelie appearing vnder the olde Testament, then vnder the newe: and if it bee vnder the olde, then it ought to haue had sacrifices for the deade: and that a great deale more requisite at that time, then vnder the new: but and if the lawe had no such sacrifices, neither then was there (as it followeth by consequent) anie Purgatorie; neither indeede is there at this daye. Now there∣fore let vs see if the olde Testament say anie thing of it, yea if it speake of it in plaine tearmes, as the importance of the thing doth require: if (I say) in such sorte, as it is saide to agree and stand with the iustice and mercie of God, the instruction of the Church, and the rest and consolation of poore distressed soules. Now it is most certaine, That Purgato∣rie cannot bee found in the olde Testamēt Deutr. 30. Psal. 34. & 116 Esay 57. that the olde Testament, traceth out vnto vs, onelie two waies: Blessing or cursing, Saluation or Condemnation, the death of the Saintes, as precious before the Lorde, or the death of the wicked condemned of him, as also the verie remembrance of them. And theruppon it is, that without leauing a∣ny thing coniecturall vnto vs betwixt those two, the Prophete sayeth: The iust man dyeth, and departeth hence in peace, lying himselfe down to rest in his bed. In peace, that is to saye, to speake after the manner of the Hebrewes, in all prosperitie, verie farre from the pretended horrible paines of Purgatorie. But yet let vs heare them speake, to see what they can alleadge, and let vs withall beare it continuallie in minde, that our aduersaries doe make it an Article of their faith: and so by consequent the lawe of the auncient Fathers ought here to take place: as that of Saint Ierome: That vpon obscure, doubtfull, darke, and allegoricall places of the Scripture, wee ought not to grounde a∣nie pointe of doctrine. That of Saint Augustine; That in the controuersie of religion, darke and figuratiue places must bee set aside, and those onelie helde, which are cleare of them∣selues: And that of the Schoolemen likewise: That allegoricall Diuinitie doth not proue, &c. It is saide in Leuiticus 12. Leuiticus 12. (wee will take the places in order,) Shee shall not touch anie holie thing, neither enter into the sanctuarie, vntill that the daies of her purgation be accomplished: Luke. 2. Hee speaketh of her that is deliuered of her first borne, according to the lawe, practised likewise by the holy virgin, as wee reade in Saint Luke: and the literall sence is so cleare, as that wee neede not seeke anie allegorie therein. The Glose saieth, Shee shall not come within the Court of the sanctuarie: And in like manner Cardinall Hugo. Hugo Cardi∣nall in Leuit. c. 12. What is there now in this place, that will afforde vs a Purgatory? or that the sanctuarie is Paradice, whereinto none can enter, till after they bee deli∣uered out of Purgatorie? If this bee saide generallie of all, what shall become of the exception concerning Martyrs, who doe not passe the same? and if the allegorie bee good in the wordes, Sanctuarie and Purgation, how will they bee able to make it to serue in the distinction that followeth, of her that had brought forth a sonne or a daughter? and how in the number of dayes, of the one or of the other? But the point is, that they haue neither Greeke, nor Hebrew Paraphrast, neither Iewish, nor yet Christian Commentarie, which euer could finde out Purgatorie by this text. Ori∣gen, who hath made an expresse Homily vpon this verse, notwithstanding he be great∣lie delighted in allegorizing, Orig. hom. 9. in Leuit. Ieronym in Ezech. c. 49.47. Theod. in Le∣uit. c. 12. could not perceiue anie such matter therein. And as farre off was Saint Ierome, expounding the same in his Commentarie vpon Ezechiel. Theodoret likewise, who handleth this question: Wherefore there is appointed a double time for the purging of her that hath brought forth a daughter, in respect of her which hath brought forth a sonne. Caietan sayeth verie well: From all these lawes this instruction and point of pietie, Caietan in Le∣uit. c. 12. 1. Sam. 2.6. may verie well bee drawne: That wee were borne from our mothers wombe subiect to sinne, &c. In the first of Samuell, Hanna sayeth in her song: The Lord is he which destroyeth and raiseth to life, which throweth downe into the graue, and raiseth vppe againe from thence, which giueth pouertie and riches, which humbleth and exalteth. And because that this worde  doth signifie a graue and hell, they wil haue it to signifie hel in that place, and notwithstanding that it may bee vnderstoode for Purgatorie. But this place is expounded by it selfe: for these wordes, Which throweth downe to the graue, and
bringeth backe againe, are no other thing, but according to the manner of the He∣brewes, the expositors of the former: which killeth and bringeth to life againe: as in the verse following; which humbleth and exalteth, is contained the exposition of the wordes going before, Who maketh poore, and filleth with riches, &c. Psal. 30. Psal. 71. But Dauid him∣selfe without any other will expound it vnto vs: The Lord hath lift vp my soule out of the graue, or out of hell. And in another place: Thou hast shewed me manifold troubles, but afterward thou turnedst vnto me, and hast quickened me, and brought me from the depth of the earth. But this did no man euer vnderstand to be meant of purgatorie: and the Chal∣die Paraphrast, whom they alleadge, is against them. God (saith he) carieth to the graue and bringeth backe againe, Ad vitam saeculi, to the life of this world: that is to say, to the life present, as appeareth by this word, Rursus. And Lyranus saith: There is not hell in Hebrew, but the pit, that is to say, the graue. And that it is his purpose to declare, how that he oftentimes giueth life vnto them, whom men are giuen to iudge past recouerie, as it was with Ezechias. But if wee should allegorize, their Glosse saith: Hee bringeth the obstinate Iewes to hell, in as much as he suffreth them to bee led into the condemnation thereof: He brin∣geth backe from thence the Gentiles, who did deserue it in calling them backe from idolatrie. Tertullian maketh this kind of argument: Tertul. l. de resurre &. carn. & 28. Contr. Marci∣on. l. 4. c. 34. Cyril. Catech. 6 de Monarch. Dei. Sophron. in serm. de Nati∣uit Dom. August. de ci∣uit. Dei. l. 17.6.4. That seeing it is the flesh properly which is mor∣tified, that is to say, which suffereth death, that it followeth likewise, that it shall bee quickned: namely, by the resurrection. And againe against Marcion: That one and the same Christ hath in his power the sentence of eternall death, as also of eternall life. Cyrillus Hierosolymi∣tanus reasoneth after the same manner against Manes. Sophronius Bishop of Con∣stantinople proueth the greatnesse of our redeemer, who hath turned the curse by Adam into a blessing, his death into life, and his fall into a rising againe. But S. Au∣gustine standeth more amply vpon it, and in better sort, saying: The Lord killeth and quickneth againe, &c. and this is nothing els but that which he repeateth againe when he saith: He bringeth to the gates of hell, and bringeth backe againe: He killeth (saith he) according to that which the Apostle saith: If you be dead with Christ, seeke the things which are aboue, &c. For you are dead, &c. And afterward he addeth: And our life is hid with Christ: behold how he killeth them holesomely: behold how he reuiueth and quickneth them againe. But hee brin∣geth them likewise (saith he) to hell, and bringeth them backe againe. Without doubt (saith he) this was accomplished in our head, in whom our life is hid. For he that hath not spared his owne Sonne, hath slaine him for vs: and in that he hath raised him vp againe, he hath also quickened him, brought him to hell, and backe againe, according to that which hath beene said: Thou wilt not leaue my soule in hell: and of his pouertie we are made rich, &c. By their accompt it should follow, holding the exposition of Saint Augustine, that our Lord had beene in purgatorie. Saint Gregorie, God slayeth and bringeth backe againe to life: Gregor. in 1. Reg. c. 1. and behold (saith he) the order, in as much as hee bringeth to hell, and bringeth backe againe. For in re∣spect of God to bring downe to the gates of hell, that is to strike amased the hartes of sinners with the apprehension of eternall torments, and to bring them backe from thence, that is, to relieue their astonished hearts, sorrowing and bewailing their faultes by the hope of eternall life, &c. And yet euerie one knoweth if hee fauour purgatorie or no. Hugo the Cardinall: This is a metaphoricall speech; He bringeth Phenenna, euen into extreame affliction, taking her children from her: hee bringeth againe Hanna, making her fruitfull when she was barren. And so (saith he) by hell in many places is vnderstood great affliction. Caietan. in l. 1. Reg. c. 2. Cardinall Caietan in like manner, In Hebrew (saith he) it is: He bringeth downe into the pit, and causeth to rise vp againe. And for that he vseth a verbe of the Preter-tense, and not of the future: I am constrained by the name of pit, to vnderstand in this place neither hell nor graue, but rather a prison. For from the creation, vnto the time of Hanna, there was not any that rise out of hell, none that rise againe from the dead: but God hath often caused many free and innocent persons to be put in prison, and hath brought many out from thence againe. In the last of the first of Samuel, it is said: That the valiant men of Israel, 1. Sam. the last Chapt. ver. the last. 2. Sam. 1.12. after the ouerthrow of Saule, did burie the bodie of Saule, and of his children, burned them in Iabes, tooke their bones & buried them, and fasted seuen daies. And in the 2. Sam. 1.12. that Dauid mourned, wept and fasted. And thereupon Bellarmine reasoneth
thus: He fasted, therefore he prayed: therefore he belieued there was a purgatorie. Whereas he should rather reason to the contrarie: for that the prophet in the recko∣ning vp of so many circumstances, of burnt bodies, of bones gathered together and buried, of weeping, mourning, fasting, &c. doth to the wondring of men, say neuer a word of this pretended praier, which yet had beene the principall and substance. His cloake to couer the matter withall, 2. Reg. 12. is for that in another place it is said, that Da∣uid fasted and praied for the sonne, which he had by Bersheba. Then let him call to mind withall, how that after the child was once dead, he ceased both to fast, and also by consequent to pray for him. But the historie is cleare of it selfe: Namely, that Dauid & the people acknowledging in this ouerthrow the wrath of God vpon Isra∣el, they humbled themselues before him, as may plainly bee read in the wordes as they are there expresly set downe. They fasted, saith he, because of Saule and Ionathan his sonne, and of the Lords people, & of the house of Israel, because they had fallen by the sword. And further then thus Iosephus obserueth not any thing in this storie, saue that wee haue also to note therein the whole complaint and mone that Dauid made for the death of Saule and Ionathan, in most lamentable speeches, but yet such, as whereout there cannot any tittle of praier for the dead bee gathered, neither yet any thing for purgatorie. It is said in the Psalme 37. Psal. 37. O Lord reproue me not in thy furie, neither chasten me in thine anger. That is to say, saith Bellarmine; Chastice me not in hell, neither yet in purgatory. And this sence he wold faine gather out of S. Augustine, in such maner, as that fury should haue relation vnto hell, and anger vnto purgatorie. And now giue eare and hearken to the weaknes of his interpretation. August. in psal. 6. & 38. For where S. Augustine hath put it downe to be read, furie, following the Septuagints: S. Ierome skilfull in the Hebrew (which S. Augustine was not) hath put it downe, anger, and in the place of anger, furie. Origen could not bethinke himselfe how to make any such matter when he saith: Orig. in Ezech. Numb. 1. That this furie is a kind of discipline, by which God traineth his to the thinges concerning the health of their soules, hauing too lewdly contemned his word. And yet he is one of them whom they take ordinarily to bee one of their warrants for purgatory. August. in psal. 6. & 38. And thus behold in Saint Augustine a hell, and a purgatory that do change places. But they should haue noted, that S. Augustine himselfe saith, that these are two words put for one thing  and , and that the copies do varie, the one putting Ira in the first place, and the others Furor. Againe, they should not haue concealed and kept close, how that S. Augu∣stine speaketh by name of the day of iudgement, and not of the departure out of this life. In the day of iudgement (saith he) they that haue not the foundation, that is to say, Christ, are reproued, and those which haue built thereupon, timber, haire, and straw, are corrected and amended. This his asseueration rising from an old opinion, that all the world should at that time be purged by fire, as we shall see hereafter: a thing then very farre off from the pretended purgatory, seeing it should end then, whereas this pretended one ta∣keth his beginning at the departure of men out of this life. Againe, this interpretati∣on could not but be very ambiguous and doubtful in S. Hieronym. in psal. 6. & 37. Theod. in psal. 6. & 37. Augustine, who neuer spoke but very doubtfully of purgatorie. S. Ierome hath not found it in that place, but hol∣deth opinion, that those two words expresse but one thing. Neither yet Theodoret: Correct me (saith he) as a father, & not as a iudge: as a phisition, & not as an executioner: not in reuenging my sinne, but in moderating the rigor of thy iustice. S. Basil likewise; This is as though one should say to a phisition: Cure mee not by fire, or by any cauterie, but by some more mild and gentle remedie. Chasten me not like vnto the Egyptians, by euill Angels, but with thy sauing word. Likewise, reserue me not vnto the day of thine ire, and of the reuelation of thy iust iudgement, but rather deale mercifully with mee, & correct me before the day of my departure hence, Bernard. in Cant. serm. 70. (which thing is to be noted.) And so (saith he) befell it vnto Dauid, &c. S. Bernard: Reproue me not O Lord, in thy fury, as thou didst the angels which reuolted & fell away from thee in heauen, but correct me in thine ire, as the man in paradice, that is (saith he) still remem∣bring thee of thy mercie. Lyranus in shorte wise thus: Reproue mee not in the rigor of thy iustice, but chastise mee according to the mildnesse of thy mercie. And as for the word
Fury, hee is of minde, that it is an alluding vnto the wordes in the 2. of Samuel: 2. Sam. 24. And the furie and fierce wrath of the Lord, continued to waxe hot against the house of Israel: where∣fore Dauid was moued to say vnto Ioab: go and number Israel and Iuda, &c. reprouing Cas∣siodorus: who of the litterall sence resting in Dauid, made an allegoricall, and refer∣red it to Iob: as if this Psalme had beene made by Dauid, for to represent and set out the affliction of Iob, and not because of the remorce and sence of his owne transgres∣sion, cleane contrarie to the opinion & iudgement of all the old writers, either Iewes or Christians. Caietanus of our time saith in like manner; Chastise me as a father, and not in the heate of thy displeasure, &c. a hard case, that amongst so many Doctors, where∣with they braue out their assertions, there is not so much as one to be found on their side in deed. Dauid in a psalme complaineth himselfe, that God had grieuously afflicted him, Psal. 39. but that notwithstanding he held his peace, because he knew it to be his hand: When thou rebukest, saith he, any man for his iniquitie, thou consumest his excellencie, like a moth: or according to others, Thou meltest him, or causest him to drie, like vnto a cobwebbe. Of this word melt, or drie, they conclude a fire, Hieronym in psal 39. & this fire they will needes haue to be purgatorie: whereas in the meane time S. Ierome doth translate it: Thou wastest and consumest his most precious things, as doth a moth. Now here is neuer a word either of fire or of the soule. And the Chaldie paraphrast: thou meltest away his body like a snaile. Now he findeth not here any torment inflicted vpon the soule. Orig. hom. 11, in psal. 38. And yet notwithstanding they make Origen their buckler in this conflict, whome all old writers haue condemned, for turning the scriptures from their naturall sence by his allegories. But I appeale vnto their owne consciences, whether this place make any thing for purgatorie? And why do they not rather hold themselues to S. August. S. Ierome, & Theodoret, who do not acknowledge any other thing in that place, but Dauid his humiliatiō for his sins, being cast vnder the mighty hand of God? The glose saith, Thou hast instructed my soule in infirmity and humilitie, that so it might not presume through any strength or pride: and hee compareth it to a spiders web, because there is nothing more rotten then it. Saint Ierome: Hieronym. in psal. 38. The soule melteth when the concupiscences of the flesh are repressed and snubd, when sinne is so worne away, as the threed which hath not any substance left in it, either to make it hard or thicke. S. August. ibid. Augustine: Thou hast dried it vp, through the insatiable thirst it hath after vertue and know∣ledge, thou hast caused the iniquity thereof to be pressed and wrung out of my heart, Theodor. ibid. as are the entrailes of a spider. Theodoret: In pressing and rubbing vpon the most hidden and secret cor∣ners of my exulcerated parts and inward sores, thou hast healed me, like a good phisition, rather then with great paine and griefe. Halmo: This falleth out, when as man by Gods chastisements and corrections being vpon him, doth humble himselfe and turne vnto God. Lyranus: Thou hast made my life vile and abhominable vnto me. Caietan: The moth fretteth through and destroyeth the thing whereof she is bred: and so we are pearced and fret away, through our owne concupiscences and desires. And thus he referreth this to the punishment of all mankind in the person of Adam. Of all the translations they haue made choice of that which is furthest from the sence of the text, and of so many expositions that which is furthest from the purpose: and yet they can come by nothing for their purgatorie. In the Psalme 49. God will redeeme my soule out of the hand of the graue, or out of hell, Psal. 49.16. (for the word signifieth both the one and the other) when hee shall take mee vnto himselfe. The shot is by their reckning, he will deliuer mee from purgatorie: whereas they should haue noted, that in the verse going before, it is spoken of the men of this worlde: That death shall feed vpon them in the graue, and that the vpright men shall haue dominion & rule ouer them, &c. Where the selfe same word is vsed. If the men of this world bee not threatned with any greater punishment then purgatorie, then what priuiledge or preferment haue Dauid and others, the workers of righteousnesse, in whose per∣sons he speaketh more then they? If it do signifie hell in the one verse, and in the o∣ther purgatory, then let them shew vs some reason of such diuers construing of it, that so wee may admit it. The Chaldee Paraphrast: God will deliuer my soule from hell, be∣cause he will teach me his law: and will take me to be partaker with him of the life to come. But
what will they then say to all the old fathers? S. Ierome saith: God being made man, made himselfe of no reputation, euen to death, that thereby hee might repaire the ruines of mankind: that is it which hee would say, Cum acceperit me. S. Augustine: God will re∣deeme and deliuer my soule, shall it be out of prison, from oppression, from the waues of the sea? &c. Nay rather (saith he) from hell, and this is that redemption which hee hath shewed and set forth in himselfe. Chrysost. t. 1. de Dauidicis Cant. What wee haue seene in the bead, the same shall we find in the members: he descended into hell, and ascended vp into heauen, &c. Chrysostome: And that there is a freeing from eternall death, he teacheth thee it in these wordes: God hath deliuered my soule out of the power of hell, &c. Theodoret dealeth more plainely: This certifieth and assu∣reth vs, that God doth giue counsell & consolation to the poore which are oppressed of the migh∣tie. Haimo: Out of the power of hell, that is to say, out of the power of the deuill, when he shall haue taken me, Caictan. in psal. 49. Psal. 66.11. & 12. that is to say, put vpon him my humanitie: and so Cardinall Hugo. Caietan in like maner: He wil deliuer my life from the power of hell when he shall draw mee from out of this life into eternall, into Abrahams bosome, &c. In the Psalme 66. We were, saith Dauid, entred into fire & water, Et eduxisti nos in refrigerium, and thou hast brought vs forth in∣to a place where wee find reliefe. Otherwise, , into a plentifull and fruitfull place. Yet once againe here is purgatorie, and that with an imagination, that it worketh vpon men by casting them out of an extreme heat, into an extreame cold, &c. From the fan∣sying and good liking of an allusion in Origen, Orig. hom. 25. in Numer. who yet medleth not any thing at all with this text: which besides, euen with the bare reading is easily refuted, seeing therein he speaketh simply of diuers crosses and aduersities, out of which God had extraordinarily deliuered Dauid. The old writers haue vnderstood it cleane other∣wise then they. The Paraphrast: Thou hast made the oppressor to go ouer my head: Thou hast condemned vs to the rage of the flaming furnace and deuouring water, and afterward hast set vs at libertie: herein alluding very strongly vnto the seruitude of the people of Israell in the land of Egypt. Lyranus: Through the fire made to burne brickes; through the water, which we caried to temper the matter, and make it fitte for the forme. And if wee may lawfully moralize, S. Augustine saith: Through aduersitie and prosperitie, through the scorching heat of tribulation, & the filthie puddle & stinking waters of noysome corruption, that which seemeth the least (saith he) being no lesse to be feared thē the other. Hugo in psal. 65. Hieronym. in psal. 65. And Hugo the Car∣dinall followeth his collection and interpretation. S. Ierome: Thus haue the Martyrs passed and come ad refrigerium, to Christ who is their true reliefe and rest by the crosse, by stripes, by fire, by water, and diuers punishments: and by them they haue become acceptable & well pleasing sacrifices, Hillar ibid. Chrysost. t. 2. in c. 4. Mat. no. 5. Theod. in psal. 66. Haimo in psal. 66. Bernard. de transitu S. Ma∣lachiae. &c. And S. Hilarie writeth thereupon after the same manner. Chrisost. & Theodoret do deale somewhat more simply & plainly, & take it to be vn∣derstood of the ordinary afflictions of the faithful. Haimo: Of Martyrs that haue passed through fire & water, of trauellers that haue indured the heat and cold, & yet giue not ouer their iourney. Saint Bernard: Such as die in the Lord, fellow citizens with the Saintes, and are of the houshold of God, doe sing in their psalmes of thankesgiuing: we haue passed by fire and by wa∣ter, &c. meaning that the hard measure of aduersitie hath not beene able to breake their course, by causing them to faint, neither the soft bedde of prosperitie make them to become slacke & cold through delicacie, &c, and he speaketh by name of the blessed death of S. Malachie, Archbishop of Ireland, Cassiodorus: Because a vessell (saith he) well hardned and baked in the fire doth hold water better. Another saith: As S. Laurence passed through fire, S. Cle∣ment and others through water. And let this be set as a brand vpon our aduersaries, that they alwaies take hold of the expositions that are least receiued, and of all others the worst: Caiet. in psal. 66. I could haue wished, that they would at the least haue satisfied themselues in Caietanus his exposition, saying: He comprehendeth vnder these words of fire and wa∣ter, in briefe, all the tribulations of Israel from their comming out of Egypt vnto Iordan, that is, we haue endured all manner of miseries, and in the end thou hast made vs to come ad irrigu∣am, to a well watered soile, that is to say, into the land of promise. Neither doth it auaile them, Amb. in psal. 118. serm. 3. that Bellarmine to dasle the eies of the world, doeth here alleadge S. Ambrose. For this baptisme of fire whereof he speaketh, setting the same at the entrance of Paradise (allegorizing vpon the Cherubin that kept the pas∣sage
in) is but an appendance and limme of that ancient opinion, that the world in that day (when the end and consummation thereof commeth) and all the creatures therein, euen men; and of them the most holy and sanctified, should bee purged by fire: and not in that space of time which shalbe betwixt their death and resurrection. It appeareth by these words, This baptisme saith he, shall bee after the end and consumma∣tion of the world when hee shall send his Angels to seperate the good from the euill: Then shall the fierie furnace feed vpon iniquitie, and burne it vp, to the end that the iust may shine in the kingdome of God, as the Sonne in the kingdome of his father. And in deed saith he, if that Pe∣ter and Iohn be there, they shall haue their part in that baptisme. Now in deed the truth is, that Bellarmine doth not hold or meane, that the Apostles haue passed, or at any time must passe the fire of purgatorie. In the Psalme 107. They cried vnto the Lord in their distresses, Psal. 107. v. 13. and hee deliuered them from their necessities, from darknesse, and from the shadow of death. Thus wheresoeuer they reade darknesse, the graue, fire, or the shadow of death, there alwaies purgatorie must bee summoned to appeare. This text is cleare and plaine, wherein Dauid maketh a long catalogue or repetition of all the perils whereunto the life of man is subiect, & the de∣liuerances that God giueth vnto them that call vppon him, although they should bee within two fingers breadth of death. But they wil not belieue vs. Lyranus therfore tel∣leth them: They were stricken with remorce and sorrow in their afflictions, & called vpon God who deliuered them. And these words, frō the shadow of death, August. Hie∣ron. Theodor, in psal, 106. he expoundeth them by the psalme 23. the daunger of death. As Caietan simplie vnderstandeth the same of the in∣conueniences of the prison. S. Ierome did not acknowledge any such like thing to be contained therein: but let it passe, as he declareth by that which goeth before, Et e∣duxit eos in viam rectam. Neither yet S. Augustine, who vnderstandeth it of the diffi∣culties, lets, and impediments that the regenerate find, when they should go about to do good, and that after such time as God hath opened their knowledge, Prosp. in psal. 107. Haim. in psal. and en∣lightned their vnderstanding, except himselfe doe worke in them. And thus doeth Prosper Aquitanicus also take it. Neither Theodoret, who vnderstandeth it of the darknes of ignorance, and of the seruitude of sinne. Haimo: In darknesse, that is, in ignorance, out of which no man can free himselfe, in the shadow of death, that is to say, in the vil∣lanous and loose course of life which leadeth vnto death. And Hugo the Cardinal taketh it in the same sence: Darknes, that is of ignorance: the shadow of death, that is, faults & transgres∣sions: bound, that is, the punishment, &c. Some others thus: Of such as are inwrapped in heresie, and are reclaimed by wholesome instruction. But and if they wil cleaue to the plaine literall sence, it is said: There was no man to help them. Where were then become the Masses and Suffrages? Againe, he speaketh of such as had beene rebellious vnto the word of God, which had despised the counsell of the most high: a mortall sinne, and one of the most hainous ones that can be. Now purgatorie by their owne speech, is not but for veniall ones. And yet furthermore, if wee will credite the expositions of the old writers, Dauid was but a simple fellow, and knew nothing in the matter of purgatorie. In the booke of the Preacher: Ecclesiast. 4.14 There is such a one (saith Salomon) which commeth out of prison for to raigne: that is to say, according to their vnderstanding, out of purga∣torie to go into the kingdome of heauen. In this whole booke he discourseth of the courses, alterations and changes of things happening in mans life: and that which followeth in the same verse, doth ouerthrow their mistaking: And in like manner saith he, there is such a man, as of a king becommeth poore. Now this should fall out contrarie to their owne doctrine: that those which are once glorified, do neuer fall away. If this be not sufficient, yet Hugo the Cardinall will help and afford vs some aid: This is saith he, Christ, who from the prison of Pilate, the graue and his handes, is gone vp to receiue his kingdome. Lyranus alleadgeth for an example of the one, Ioseph taken out of pri∣son to gouerne Egypt, and Sedechias pulled downe from his throne of Maiestie to to be cast into the dungeon, for the other. I am ashamed to stand vpon the refuting of these fooleries, Esay 4. & yet notwithstanding
we must go through to the end of them. In Esay: When the Lord shall haue washed away the filthinesse of the daughters of Sion, and wiped the blood of Ierusalem from out of the midst of her, by the spirit of iudgement and of zeale. This iudgement and zeale are purgatorie. Let them reade that which goeth before, and that which followeth, they shall per∣ceiue that the prophet speaketh of the desolation of Ierusalem, and of the restoring of the same in Iesus Christ. But the Paraphrast saith: By the word of iudgement, and by the word of consummation. He felt no smell of fire. And the Glosse: In the spirit of iudge∣ment, the lightest and least sinnes, and in the spirit of zeale, the more grieuous, both the one and the other by pennance. Now the truth is cleare, how that purgatorie is not pennance, as also, that it is not ordained for sinnes, but for punishment: but and if it be, as some would haue it, for sinnes, yet it is but for pettie and sleight sinnes. Ireneus saith, It is the word alone that washeth away the filthines of the daughters of Sion, that washed the feete of his disciples, and which sanctifieth their whole bodies. Clemens Alexandrinus: It is the good spirituall washing which cleanseth the soule, Hieronym. in Esa 4. whereof the Prophet speaketh: The Lord hath washed away the filthines of Sion, &c. S. Ierome expounding this place, saith in like sort: That which is but lightly foule will bee washed cleane; but that which is deeply stained and defiled by being burnt in the fire. And this is that which Iohn Baptist said: He will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: for man can giue but water, but God fire and the holy Ghost, which washeth away filthinesse, and purgeth away the deadly and haynous sins. Chrysostome: Chrysost. in Matth. hom. 5. c. 4. Cyril. in Esa. c. 4. For men are baptised with fire by temptations that are present, according to that in Esay. In the spirit of feruencie and zeale, &c. Cyrill in like manner: In the spirit (saith he) of iudgement, that is to say, by a iust sentence, according as our Sauiour saith. Now is the iudgement of this world: for hee fighteth with the world and Sathan, iustifying vs by faith, &c. And also in the spirit of zeale, by the grace of baptisme, which is not begotten in vs without the spirit, &c. For we are not baptised with bare water, but with the holy Ghost, with this diuine and intellectuall fire, which wasteth in vs the vncleannesse of our vicious nature, and melteth and burneth all the spots of sinne, Haimo ibid. &c. Haimo: The same holy Ghost is called the spirit of iudgement, and the spirit of zeale and feruencie: of iudgement, because that in baptisme Sathan is iudged, and as it were condemned, when his power ouer man is taken away from him: of zeale, because he inflameth the heartes of men with loue towardes their creator, scouring away the canker of sin, whereof it is said, God is a consuming fire, he will baptise vs with the holy Ghost and with fire, &c. And Hugo the Cardinall in like manner. And thus you may see by these ancient fathers, how they haue made a purgatorie of the holy Ghost, and of the temptations and trials happening in this life, the paines of purga∣torie which cannot be, except in the other. And Lyranus: In the spirit of iudgement; for our Lord hath satisfied for the Church by the way of iustice: in the spirit of zeale, because he hath performed it in a great measure of charitie and loue. And yet this is one of the textes whereby Bellarmine laboureth to make his cause so strong. And here we are not to forget his vnsound and vnfaithfull dealing: for that which S. Augustine hath spo∣ken expresly, De nouissimo iudicio, of the last iudgement: wherein (saith he) the daughters of Syon shall be refined: graunt it (saith he) in as much as they shall be seperated from the wic∣ked, as the pure gold from his drosse in the furnace: admit it also in this respect, for that all crea∣tures shall as then passe through the fire: and likewise all manner of soules, according to the opinion of that time: this hee turneth and wresteth to help for the building of his purgatorie, which they pretend to take place and seaze vpon men, at the time of their departure out of this life. And we are to request the reader to marke the deceit he worketh vpon the place. Peter, Abbot of Clugni, abuseth either ignorantly or impudently another place, Esay 8. Esa 8.19. Shall the people require a signe and vision of their God for the quicke and for the dead? For so he alleadgeth it, whereas the text saith: Shall not a people inquire at their God? shall they runne for the liuing to the dead? reprouing such as did runne to south sayers, & sending them backe, as is said afterward, to the law and to the testimonie, &c. In deed the Septuagints haue translated it, Shall they inquire of the dead concerning the liuing? that is to say, concerning the businesse and affaires of the liuing. And the Chaldie pa∣raphrast:
Euerie man (saith hee) inquireth and asketh counsell of his idolles: so the liuing take counsell of the dead. And Origen likewise: You to whom God hath giuen his law, will you go to inquire of the Deuils, which are in verie deede dead? Hieronym, in Esa. c. 8. And Saint Ierome vpon Esay saith: As the infidels do aske counsell at their false Gods: so the faith∣full ought to runne to the true God, and to the lawe, and to the Prophetes, inspired by him, &c. Lyranus saith as hee saith. Saint Cyrill: Cyril. in Esa. l. 5. orat. 5. Would you aske counsell (sayeth the Lord) of the dead for the liuing? you which are aliue, is there any reason that you shoulde inquire of the deade, of the bodies which lie in the graues, or of the soules, which it may bee are in hell? Nay rather (saith hee) you which are quickned by the liuely worde of God, will you go vnto sorcerers and Magicians, which are dead in their soules? Now the argument of Peter of Clugni was thus framed: There are visions of the dead, and therefore a Purgatorie: but it is grounded, as we haue seene, vpon an vnsound Grammar, or rather vpon the corrupting and deprauing of the old ex∣positor, wherein, as some note, there was as in S. Ierome, Pro viuis à mortuis, and not ac mortuis? And this is the more likely, in asmuch as for the most parte he ap∣plyeth himselfe to the Greeke text. And in deed Cardinall Hugo said, Amortuis, of the dead for the liuing, that is to say, to aske counsell of images, which are like vnto dead men, which is a ridiculous and foolish thing. Esay 9. Wickednesse (saith the Prophete) shall burne like a fire: Esa. 9.17. It shall deuoure the briars and the thornes, and shall bee kindled in the thicke places of the forrest, &c. This is one of Bellarmine his maister-pillars. There the Prophete threatneth the people of Israel; From the head vnto the taile, the boughes and the stumpe, the Ma∣gistrate and the false prophete: These are his wordes. And after that hee hath de∣nounced the anger of God to fall vppon the Magistrates, and vppon the men in authoritie, hee addeth: That it shall not stay there, but that it shall set on fire and deuoure the common sorte: which hee compareth to bushes of thornes, or to a thicke growne vnderwood. And it is made plaine by the wordes following: And the people shall bee as fewell, or a baite for the fire: no man shall haue pittie vppon his compa∣nion to spare him, &c: What agreement is there betwixt this and purgatorie: saue that wheresoeuer there is fire, there purgatory also must needes bee found? This is the same that S. Ierome saith: God will not take pittie, Hieronym. in Esa. l. 4. c. 10. either vppon small or great amongst this people: neither of the fatherlesse, nor of the widow: neither of any other person, &c. For euery mouth hath spoken follie, &c. And S. Cyrill saith: He vnderstandeth the common peo∣ple, which he calleth iniquitie, and not vniust, to shew the grieuousnes of their wickednesse. It shall burne therefore, that is to say, it shalbe fire vnto it selfe, as it fell out (saith hee) by reason of their factions in the siege of Ierusalem by Ʋespasian and Titus, &c. And after this man∣ner doe Haimo and Procopius take it. Lyranus saith: Haim. in Esa. c. 9. The impietie of the people of Isra∣el prouoked the wrath of God, and pulled it swiftly vppon them like a burning fire, to consume them euen vnto the briars and thornes, that is to say, the smallest and vilest amongst the people. And Cardinall Hugo draweth it to an allegorie: The wicked (saith hee) shall bee set on fire with an euerlasting fire: for those whome the fire of transgression hath deuoured and swal∣lowed vp, those shalbe deuoured and swallowed vp of the fire of hell, &c. vnderstanding it of eternall damnation. As colde is that which followeth, Esay 54. I haue hidde my fauour and my coun∣tenance from thee for a while, in the moment of mine indignation: But I haue had com∣passion of thee in euerlasting mercy. Here God speaketh vnto the Church, as vnto his spouse, reiected and forsaken for her sinnes, in his iust displeasure, but recei∣ued againe into grace in his mercie. Which hee saide before in the former verse: I haue forsaken thee for a small time, but I will gather thee together in great compassion and mercie. Nowe they will haue this moment of indignation to bee Purgatorie, and the euerlasting mercie to bee paradice. In steade whereof it doeth mani∣festly and plainely appeare, that hee speaketh of the scattering and dispear∣sing of Israel, gathered together agayne in the redemption purchased by Ie∣sus Christ: yea, greatlie augmented and multiplyed by the calling of the
Gentiles. And this is it that the Glose saith, I haue hid my face from thee for thine i∣dolatrie: but I haue gathered thee together againe, &c. in redeeming thee. Lyranus o∣therwise: Because (saith hee) that the tribulations of this present life (not of pur∣gatorie) are not to bee compared with the glorie that is to come. And thus Cardinall Hugo: I haue giuen thee ouer into thine enemies handes; but my mercie in freeing thee from them againe shall bee greater then mine anger hath beene in reiecting of thee. And mystically, for a little, that is in respect of the temptations of this worlde, which are no∣thing in respect of the glorie to come. In euerlasting mercie, that is, in respect of my pur∣pose to vnite and couple thee vnto my selfe in my glorie, &c. But the verse following cutteth off all the controuersie: This (saith he) shall be vnto me as the daies of Noe: for I haue sworne that the waters of Noe shall not any more ouerspreade the face of the earth: as likewise that I will not bee any more wroth with thee. Here (saith Iustine) hee compareth the redemption of mankind to that which was in the daies of Noe, &c. If this bee not enough, Hieronym in Esa. c 54. Cyrill. l. 5. orat. 2. in Esa. Haim. in Esa. c. 54. Saint Ierome interpreteth it of the multiplying of the Church by the calling of the Gentiles. Saint Cyrill of the Gentilles forsaken for a little, but espoused for euer, &c. Haimo vppon Esay taketh it in the same sence. Which saying S. Ierome layeth in ballance to weigh against the Iewes, who would haue this prophesie to belong to themselues alone. But of all these there is not one that hath taken the smallest or least sent of Purgatorie from this place. Ieremie the first: What seest thou Ieremie? J see a potte boyling, and the forepart thereof is towarde the North. Ierem. 1.13. This potte signifieth Purgatorie. The vision is expoun∣ded in the verse following: The plague shall breake out from the coast of the North, ouer all the inhabitantes of this countrey. So then this potte is Ierusalem, the fire that maketh it hotte is the king of Babilon. And thus Saint Ierome and Theo∣doret doe expound it. Hieronym. in Ierem. Theodor. ibid. August ad fra∣tres in Eremo, serm 12. Gregor. l. 33. c. 27 in Iub. l. 18. Moral. But if a man bee disposed to make an Allegorie of it, Saint Augustine saith: This potte is pride, which the Deuill bloweth vp, wherein boile and seeth all the Princes and Pastors of darknesse: as those which onely count precious and like of these temporarie goodes, honours and riches, couet the chiefe seates in sinagogues, and cause themselues to bee called Rabbi in the market places &c. Saint Gregorie: This pot is the heart of man boiling with the firie affections of the flesh &c. the North, that is, the Deuill, which bloweth vp the same. So that neither can this maister-builder of purgatorie finde any foundation to settle the same vppon in this place. No more then Cardinall Hugo could, Hugo Card. in Ierem. c 1. Orig. hom 11. in psal 38. Ezech. 11.3. & 7. who likewise in a mysticall sence, taketh the potte for the Church, or els for the sinner assailed with the temptations of the Deuill. And as for Origen, he hath no fellow or partaker with him in his allegorie. But Ezechi∣ell doth expound it most clearely: This is the caldron, and wee are the flesh: that is to say, Jerusalem set on fire by the Babilonians, and the people thereof consumed in the same, because of the murthers by all manner of calamities: and in the end of all this, forced out of the same, and led into exile. Michea the 7. Mich. 7.8. Reioyce not, neither yet comfort thy selfe in me, O thou which art mine enemie: if I bee fallen, I will raise vp my selfe againe: if I haue laiue in darknesse, the Lord will enlighten me: I will beare his wrath, because that I haue sinned against him: hee shall draw me forth into light, and I shall see his iustice. Here againe darknesse must needes signifie Purgatorie, and light Paradice, &c. But it is most cleare and euident, that these wordes proceede from the Church of God, speaking vnto Babilon, and other nations of the Heathens, that they shoulde not glad and reioyce themselues at her miseries, because God will reestablish her againe. So said Esay, 9. The people that lay in the shadow of death, a light is risen vnto them. Saint Mathew which hath cited the same, said not; This people is gone out of Purgatorie into Paradice, but rather out of the darknesse of ignorance into the knowledge of saluation, from out of the way of sinners into the way of righteousnesse in this life. The Glosse saith: Insult not vppon mee Babilon, because I sitte in darknesse, that is to say, in captiuitie, for God will haue pittie on mee and deliuer mee. Lyranus
in like manner: Reioyce not at the ruine of Iuda: I am fallen, Hieronim. & Theodor. in Mich. 7. but I shall be deliuered by Cyrus, who shall wrecke the iudgement and wrath of God vppon thee. Saint Ierome ad∣deth thereunto, that the morall sence may bee, that God woulde not the death of a sinner, but that hee should bee conuerted and liue: that God by his punish∣mentes leadeth men vnto amendment of life, &c. That this is a like speech to that of Esay 9. The people that lay, &c. Theodoret also: I shall budde and put forth againe, be∣ing relieued by the care and assistance of the name of God, he will enlighten me in my darke∣nesse, hee will deliuer mee from them which haue made warre against mee: hee hath con∣demned mee iustly, but I expect and waite for his iust iudgement and vpright sentence, in respect of manifolde wronges which they haue done vnto mee, and in respect of manifolde rightes which they haue detained and kept backe from mee. Cardinall Hugo in like man∣ner: In darknesse, that is, in the captiuitie of the Medes and Persians: And for the mysticall sence: This is Ierusalem or the penitent soule which saith: If I bee fallen through sinne, I shall rise vp againe by pennance, and after the darknesse of heauinesse, sorrow and sinne, I shall see the light of ioy and righteousnesse, &c. Namely, Iesus Christ, who was made vnto me wisedome and righteousnesse, &c. Now I would haue them to answere from their consciences, if these interpretations bee not more worth then the morall of their owne Glose, besides which they haue not any thing to alleadge: I will beare the wrath of God, that is to say, here, or in Purgatorie. For as for that which Bellarmine taketh out of Saint Ierome vpon Esay: namely, that this place was wont to be alleadged for Purgatorie: it had beene his parte to haue put in there∣withall, that it was by them who thought that the paines of hell it selfe were pur∣gatories, and should haue their ende: where also hee knoweth him to speake of Origen: But (saith hee) these are thinges that wee are to let rest, as knowne vnto God alone. And therefore if hee obstinately and stifly stand out, and maintaine that Saint Ierome did vnderstand it otherwise: yet let him giue eare vnto his owne good counsell, and for euer hereafter cease to say any thing of Purgatorie. Zacharie 9. It is said: Zacha. 9.11. By the blood of thy couenant thou hast deliuered thy priso∣ners out of the lake, wherein there was no water. The proper sence is: Because of the blood of thy couenant I will let thy prisoners out of the pitte, &c. And in deede the Chaldie Paraphrast hath read it so in plaine and euident sorte. But let vs approue and like of theirs. Now the Prophete speaketh there of the spirituall deliue∣rance by the Messias, as it appeareth throughout the whole Chapter, handling the same by way of allusion vnto the deliuerance whereby they were brought out of Babilon: and by comparing the lowest dungeon where men lie with irons on their feete, to the puddle and filthie mudpitte of the slauish thraldome of sinne. But let vs heare the fathers: Saint Augustine, August. de ci∣uit. Dei. l. 18. c. 35. Hieronym. in Zachar. c 9. by the lake vnderstandeth the deepe drinesse of mans miserie, where there is no current of righteousnesse, but a caske of cursed iniquitie. And he citeth Psalme 40. to that ende. Hee hath pulled mee out of the myre and puddle of miserie. Saint Ierome vnderstandeth it, Of the e∣uerlasting paines and punishment from which Iesus Christ hath deliuered vs by his blood. And although hee alleadge the opinion of some, that the Prophete speaketh of those which should rise againe with our Lord, yet he standeth not vpon that. Theodo∣ret; Those whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious blood, thou hast sent with these sauing testamentes, to publish libertie vnto all. And this lake (saith hee) whether a man vnder∣stand it of eternal death, or of idolatry, he shal not erre or wander far out of the way; or otherwise if it bee meant of the captiuitie of the Chaldeans, in respect of the limitation of the time: and so the Glose taketh it. Cardinall Hugo after the letter, vnderstandeth it of Christ: Hugo ibid. redeeming the faithfull by his blood: mystically, Of the fathers bought and brought by him out of the Limbes; but not out of Purgatorie: because say some: That in the Limbes there is the water of consolation, but not in Purgatorie, &c. And by this meanes the chiefest and best learned both of olde and newe writers are on our side. But what will they say against the Euangelist Saint Mathewe, who alleadgeth
this whole place for the comming of Christ, & the redemption of the Church by his blood? &c. Malachie 3. Malachie 3. Behold, saith the Lord, I send my messenger, &c. And who can endure the day of his comming? He is as one that refineth and tryeth gold, and as the fullers sope: hee shal sit as one that refineth and purifieth siluer, he shall cleanse the sonnes of Leui, &c. This place is al∣leadged by all the Euangelists of the comming of Christ, being forerunned by Iohn Baptist in his first comming, &c. and their exposition should content vs, for the vn∣derstanding of these words of the power and efficacie of the ministery of the Gospel, for the purging and putting away of sinne. The Glosse saith: He will refine them, name∣ly his elect, by diuers temptations: he wil purge the sonnes of Leui, that is to say, his Apostles. But our aduersaries would not haue any purgatory for them. August. de ci∣uit. Dei, l. 20. c. 25. What then? They wold hold themselues vnto S. Augustine his sence, who notwithstanding vnderstandeth this place of the day of iudgement. It appeareth (saith he) by this place, that in the day of iudgement, there shal some onely suffer Purgatorias poenas, certain punishments to purge them. But what is there in these words that agreeth with their pretended purgatorie, the practise & efficacie whereof is working dayly without any waiting or staying for this iudgement? And so likewise S. Ambrose. Chrysostome alleadgeth it for a proofe, that our Lord will come in the day of iudgement in fire. Chrysost. t. 5. hom. Quod Christus Deus. S. Ierome vnderstandeth the pur∣gation to be accomplished in this world so well, as that he saith: That those of Leui, af∣ter they haue beene purged as gold in the furnace, they will offer vnto God iust and vpright sacri∣fices. Theodor in hunc locum Zachar 9. Theodoret more neere vnto the text saith, The Prophet doth set before vs in this place, the Lord as it were a workman, scouring & wiping away the filthines of our sins, & deliue∣ring our soules from this venome as it were by a fire. Marke this word As: then the speeches here vsed do not deale with the fire of that materiall purgatorie. And in deed he set∣teth downe S. Cyp. l. 3. testim. aduers. Iud. c. 57. Cyrill. in Esa. l. 1. c. 4. orat. 3. Barnabas as one of this number. S. Cyprian likewise: The Lord hath reformed and amended me, not giuing me ouer vnto death, according to that which is written in Malachie, &c. For (saith he) God amendeth and preserueth his faithfull. S. Cyrill ex∣poundeth it of the operation of the holy Ghost in the regnerating and sanctifying of the faithfull, and according to the same, expoundeth the place of Esay 4. When the Lord shall wash the daughters of Sion, &c. But yet and if wee marke the text: Behold the Lord (saith he) quasi ignis, as a fire. This then cannot be purgatorie: but God which maketh this purging, and not properly a fire: but as a fire, hee meaneth doubtlesse the fire of the spirit of Christ, which purifieth our soules by his doctrine. And so S. Ierome hath expounded it. Hugo in Esa. c. 4. & in Malac. c. 3. Cardinall Hugo in like manner saith: He will purge sinnes by the fire of his passion, or of his spirit. And by this meanes we conclude, that there is no place throughout all the canonical bookes of the old Testament, from which may bee gathered or proued this their purgatorie, or any of the praiers or Masses for the dead, neither yet according to the exposition of the fathers, and that the most wor∣thie and renowned amongst them, any such torment as is giuen to them. And this is freely acknowledged by Perion the Monke, and thereof there is as yet some iarre and disagreement remaining amongst those of the Church of Rome; namely, whe∣ther there were any purgatorie in the time of the olde Testament, or not. There re∣maine the booke of Tobiah, and the second of the Machabees, both Apocrypha, which we are to examine, howbeit that wee could answere them in a word; that all doctrines that haue no other ground & approbation but in the Apocrypha bookes, must needs themselues be Apocrypha. Tobiah saith: Tob. c. 4. v. 18. Cast thy bread liberally vppon the graues of the iust, but giue nothing vnto the wicked. The Israelites had beene amongst the Gentiles, and so had Tobiah also, now the Gentiles were wont to make feastes at the funeralles of their neere kinsmen: Vnde parentare, et parentatum. The Iewes that they might not seeme to be behind the Gentiles in honouring of their parentes, distributed victualles vnto the poore. In like manner (saith Saint Ierome) they caried victualles to such as were sorrow∣ful & pensiue, and which wept about the graues of their dead: which hee gathereth out of the 31. of the Prouerbes. And Cardinall Hugo: Hee speaketh here of some fashion not
knowne vnto vs: or rather for the comforting of the kinsfolkes, hee commanded feastes to be made after the buriall, &c. This is all that can be gathered out of this place. That of the Machabees may seeme to minister vnto them some better matter for their purpose. This is (saith he) a oly cogitation to pray for the dead, 2. Micab. 12. to the ende that they may bee deliuered from their sinnes, &c. First it is pittie, that this doctrine of their pretended fire, whereof they make so great accounts, and for the defence whereof they haue kindled so many fires throughout Christendome, should haue no other foundation then one only place, and that out of the Apocripha bookes: and that the rather in as much as they haue beene acknowledged such, by all antiquitie, and by the most auncient Doctors and Councels: witnesse S. Cyprian, S. Ierome, S. Augu∣stine, S. Gregorie, &c. The primitiue Church gouerned by the holy Ghost, Cypr. in Sym∣bol. Hieronym, in lib. Sapient. August. contr, Gaudentium. Gregor. l. 8. Moralium. hath not iudged the books of the Machabees to be such without cause: if afterward they haue been permitted to be read in the Church: it was as S. Augustine telleth vs, For the example sake of vertue, and not for the grounding of any doctrines vpon them. Saint Ierome saith: They are read for the instruction of the people, and not to authorize any doctrine, &c. S. Gregorie likewise: They are not produced or alleadged for to testifie or confirme any thing as canonicall, but onely for edification. There are whole volumes to this effect. And when as the Church hath not touched or had any dealing with the reportes and narrations contained in the second booke; partly, as not agreeing vppon the same matters with that of the first, and partly for their being detected and conuinced of falshood, by the whole storie of the ancient gestes of the Iewes: as in that matter of the hidden fire of the Arke, &c. which Nehemiah and Esdras would not haue concea∣led, &c. We cannot but haue them suspected, as also it fared with Pope Gelasius, who would not admit of the first, &c. yea the Author himselfe giueth sentence of condem∣nation against himselfe, as crauing pardon if he haue written amisse. The holy Ghost who hath inspired and enlightened the authors of the canonicall scriptures, would neuer haue written so. In the second book it is certaine, that from the time of the Machabees, 2. Machab. 4.7.12. the Iewes by means of the familiaritie that they had with the Grecians, began mightily to incline to Paganisme. Now wee will shew hereafter, that this doctrine is taken from the Pa∣ganes: and it appeareth so to be by Iason, who in fauour of Antiochus, prouided an vniuersitie of paganisme in Ierusalem: by other priestes, who turned the sacrifices of the law into the manner of vsage that was amongst the Paganes, 2. Machab. 3.13. sacrificing for the idolatrous kings, for the Lacedemonians, for the health of Heliodorus, a piller and spoiler of the temple: & also by their suffering of the Paganes contrarie to the law, to offer therein, as namely vnto Antiochus Eupator, the Emperor Augustus, &c. Philo de lega∣tione ad Ca∣ium. By the historie of Razias, who laid violent hands vpon himselfe, that so he might not fall in∣to the enemies hands: the opinion of al Paganes: & yet commended by this author of the second book of Machabees. But after all this let vs come to the storie, which is the same with that which is mentioned in the 1. book and 5. chap. Ioseph the sonne of Za∣chary, and Azarias, priestes, 1. Mach. 5.57 in the emulation which the prowesse and valiantnesse of Iuda, had stirred vp in thē contrarie to his inhibition made an enterprise against Iam∣nia: but Gorgias comming out against them, discomfited them, so that there remai∣ned 2000. vpon the place. And Israel had receiued a sore ouerthrow: Because (saith he) that hee had not obeied Iuda, and that they were not of those whom God had stirred vp for the deliuerance of Israel; that is to say, because they had no calling to doe it. There the first booke stayeth without speaking of any sacrifice or praier for the deade. The second book goeth further: Iuda saith it, hauing beaten Gorgias, came to carry away the bo∣dies, , of his countrimen, which had beene slaine before for to burie them; who found vnder the garmentes of euery one of them which had beene slaine, things sacrificed to idols. Euery man iudged them worthily punished, and gaue glo∣ry vnto God, praying him that he would blot out this sinne; or rather as it is in the best copies, that they might not bee quite raced out, that is to say, that they might not bee vtterly rooted out for this sinne. But Iuda did openly make knowne vnto
the people this notable iudgement, to the end they might beware and keepe them∣selues from sinne &c. he maketh a collection of twelue thousand groates: or rather according to the Greeke, of two thousand, which he sendeth into Ierusalem, for to offer in sacrifices, for the sinne. For the sinne simply, that is to say, of the people, to the end that it might not be as that of Achan, namely, imputed to all in generall: and not for the sinnes of the dead: Biblia impres∣sa madatu Concil. Tri∣dent. ub. Sixt. 5. & Clem. 8. Missal. in an∣niuersariis de∣functorum & triginta. Missale refor∣matum Pii. 5. as our aduersaries haue corruptly & falsly turned the same in certaine of their Bibles, and those imprinted by the authoritie of the Councell of Trent: and as they reade it as yet vnto this day in their Masse bookes. Hitherto, ac∣cording to the law, Iosua 7. Deuteronomie, 21. That which followeth goeth further: that is, that it pretendeth also, that the oblation of these groates did serue for the purging away and blotting out of the prouocation of that sinne committed by the dead. But now we are to see how farre this may make for purgatorie. It appeareth that Iuda ought not to belieue or doe this, either by reason of the law, or in respect of any example of the fathers, or yet by reason of any custome receiued in the church: for it is not spoken of in all the scripture. And in deed, the Author himselfe giuing his iudgement theron, sheweth sufficiently, that he doth it by way of a particular dis∣course, , dealing verie honestly and ciuillie (saith he) in discoursing vppon the resurrection. And it is likewise as appa∣rant, that it was not in any consideration of Purgatorie: but rather (saith he) of the last resurrection. In so much as that the intention and drift of this prayer properly was, that this sinne might not be imputed vnto them in the day of the iudgement of the Lord, which shall bee at the generall resurrection: a praier which conueieth not either good or euil vnto the dead: no more then that of Paul for Onesiphorus, when hee was aliue: 2. Tim. 1. Ingolstadien∣ses. The Lord giue him to find mercie with the Lord in that day. For as for that which certaine Iesuites say, that hee speaketh of the mysticall resurrection from sinne and not of the actuall, there needes no more but the reading of the text to refute them. It appeareth likewise by our aduersaries their doctrine, that this praier and sacrifice could not be, to draw them out of Purgatory. For the sinne according to their owne distinction was mortall, being idolatrie, which is treason against the Ma∣iestie of God, & that in the highest degree. Now purgatorie is not for mortall sinnes. Againe, God say they, doth neuer punish one and the same thing twise. But it was saith the Author, for this sinne that they had beene slaine, and that euerie man did iudge it so: wherefore they were not to haue inflicted vpon them any more tempo∣rall punishment, that is to say, any purgatorie. Againe, purgatorie, say they, doth not satisfie for the fault, but for the punishment: and notwithstanding Iudas doeth there offer a sacrifice for sinne, which was neuer offred in the law, for the punishment onely, but for the fault: wherefore it followeth, that in that his action hee had no mind of purgatory, so much as to thinke once thereof, so farre was he from the thing. For the Author addeth: He considered that those which were dead in a true godly sort, could not faile to find grace and fauour: which is saith he (by a parenthesis) a sound and whole∣some thought. And so it is in the Greeke text, far differing from that which they pre∣tend: namely, that all lesse or more, may bee supposed to stand in need to bee freed from purgatorie. But say they, yet he praid for the dead: let it be so. How beit we shal see by and by, that it is but an euill argument to go about to proue purgatory be∣cause of such praiers. And on the contrary we haue reason to belieue, seeing that ac∣cording to the doctrine of the Church of Rome it selfe, this place cannot stand with purgatory, that this sacrifice hath no other end, as may appeare by the text, but to pray vnto God, that in the last resurrection he wold be fauorable vnto thē. But there is more in the matter: Iudas did it, say they, therefore it is wel done. That we deny. How many actions do we reade of in the scriptures of famous men, which notwith∣standing are not to be imitated? In the church of God, men liue by his lawes, & not by our owne examples: neither do we see in deed, since the time of the Machabees, vnto the comming of Christ, that this example was euer followed in the Church. The mourning also and lamentation made for Lazarus is contrarie hereunto. Ioh. 11. And
as concerning that the author of this booke doth approue it, so hee did the fact of Razias, who murthered himselfe. And this is the cause why S. Augustine sayeth to the Donatistes, which woulde haue made it a good consequent: That these bookes ought to be read soberlie: and the same libertie haue wee to aunswere our aduersaries af∣ter the same sort, in a different and diuerse cause, but about the same author. To bee short, this seconde booke of the Machabees doth approue prayer for the dead: but to bring them to bee allowed by the Church it is requisite, that they should first bee allowed of by the word: and all this notwithstanding, as wee haue seene, doth not make any thing for Purgatorie. Insomuch as that of so manie textes, alleadged out of the olde Testament, wee haue seene them by the confession of Perion, to haue not so much as one left them besides this same, as being put besides all holde and proofe in the Canonicall, and tyed to one onelie Apocrypha text; and that such a one as is the most Apocrypha of all the rest: and yet euen that cannot stand & match with Purgatorie. Whereupon wee conclude here: That Purgatorie hath not anie one foundation or ground in all the olde Testament, not anie one in all the Church of Israel, where notwithstanding, it seemed to haue beene most necessarie and requisite. Wherefore there is no cause why we should meruaile, if manie of the Church of Rome haue liked it better to say and hold: That there was no Purgatorie in the time of the Ie∣wish Church. CHAP. VII. That Purgatorie hath no foundation in the new Testament. IT may be that this Purgatory so famous in the church of Rome, will haue some better foundation and proofe in the newe Te∣stament: seeing that they haue made it an Article of faith: and seeing that such great buildinges, and so many foundations are laide thereupon: Which thing wee haue now to examine and trie, by taking a proof of all the places, which they alleadge for the same. In S. Mathew, 3. S. Iohn Baptist sayeth: Mat. 3. I baptize you with water vnto amendement of life, but hee that commeth after mee, is stronger then I, &c. Hee shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire. Hee hath his fanne in his hand, and will make cleane his floore, and gather his corne into his garner: but hee will burne the chaffe with vnquenchable fire. Of these two fires mentioned in this place: which of them will they chuse to make a Purgatorie of? That which shall ne∣uer bee quenched, hangeth not for their mowing: seeing they holde that by the vertue of holie water and Masses, theirs may bee quenched: It must needes then bee that fire, wherewith Iesus Christ baptizeth. Acts 15. And what sense shall wee then make of this, that hee baptizeth vs with the holie Ghost and with Purgatorie? Here wee see, water is euidentlie opposed and set against fire, and the outward washing to the in∣warde purifying. But our Lord without our further seeking of any other expounder, maketh it cleare inough elsewhere, saying, Iohn hath baptized you with water: but you shall bee baptized with the holie Ghost within these few dayes. And beholde the accom∣plishment thereof in the Actes, 2. Actes. 2. And the tongues (saieth hee) were seene vpon them clo∣uen like fire, which did sit vpon euerie one of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost. Then it followeth that the baptizing with the holy Ghost, and the baptising with fire, is all one. And that is the cause why S. Marke contenteth himselfe to say: Mark. 1.7. Hee will baptise you with the holie Ghost: The word fire adding nothing which was not contained in the former, but onelie to expresse and set out the effectuall power thereof. Hieronym. in Matth. 3. Saint Ierome vpon this place: And it is, because that the holy Ghost is a fire, Actes 1. Or it is because that in this world wee are baptized with the holie Ghost, and in the world to come with fire, 1. Cor. 3. And thus our aduersaries hauing chosen the second, (as they alwaies
chuse the worst,) they will needes haue it to signifie Purgatorie: whereas hee spea∣keth as all the olde writers doe of the last iudgement. S. Basill against Eunomius; He baptizeth with the holy Ghost, Basil Contra Eunomium. li. 5. Chrisost. c. 3. & in oper. imper. Euch. in quest. in Nou. Testa. those whome hee sanctifieth, he sendeth them which are vn∣worthie into the fire, deliuering them ouer to that euill one, being themselues Diuelles. Chry∣sostome; He baptizeth the faithfull with water, and the Infidels with fire: and in an other place, hee doth vnderstand it of temptations. Theophilact expoundeth it better; He will ouerflow vs with the graces of the holie Ghost. Eucherius sayeth: Because that sinne is burnt vppe in vs by the holie Ghost, whereby there is giuen vnto vs sanctification, whereby charitie is kindled in vs, &c. Lyranus: He saith fire, because that oftentimes in the Primitiue Church, Caietan in Math. it appeared in visible forme, as vpon the Apostles, &c. Caietanus: Where it must be vnderstood of the holy Ghost, the beginning of regeneration in euerie one; or else of tribulations, whervnto the professing of Christ is subiect. Ferus likewise: By how much the spirit is more pure then the body, Ferus in Math. and fire more actiue then water; by so much is his Baptisme more excellent then mine, &c. The sence then is: He will translate and transforme vs by his holy spirit, and rauish vs with heauenly things by the fire. And these are their best and most famous Expositors for this time, of all which not so much as one hath found Purgatorie in that place. Let vs reason after a better manner. The Baptisme of fire (say they) is Purgatorie, and none Baptiseth with this fire, but Iesus Christ; no not, Saint Iohn Baptist himselfe: No man therefore can purge vs but Iesus Christ: he alone, and not any other is our Purgatorie. In S. Mathew. Math. 5.15. Luk. 12.52. 5. Agree betimes with thine enemie, whiles thou art in the way with him, least he deliuer thee to the iudge, and the Iudge to the Sergeant, and so thou be cast into prison: Verily I say vnto thee, that thou shalt not come foorth thence, before thou hast paide the vtter∣most farthing. This prison they will haue to bee Purgatorie. Now the literall sence is verie cleare, and agreed vpon amongst all; where our Lord exhorteth the faithfull to agree with their brethren with all speede, setting before them the mischiefe and euill that happeneth or dinaril, by being obstinately giuen to goe to the law. And this is Chrysostome his Exposition in these words: Chrysost. in Math. hom. 16 Hieronim. in in Math. li. 1. It seemeth vnto me, saith he, that he speaketh of ordinarie and accustomed iurisdictions and prisons, &c. And S. Ierome likewise: The sence and meaning is manifest, namely, that our Lord exhorteth vs to haue peace with all men in this world, &c. And yet there are some, saith he, which expound it either of the flesh and soule; Hillar. in Mat. or of the soule and spirit: which cannot be maintained. And the same saith Saint Hil a∣rie, and others also, who by the aduersarie, vnderstand the Diuell: As if, saith hee, our Lord had purposed and decreed with himselfe in this place to commaund vs to be , verie watchfull and well aduised, that the Diuell doe not seduce and deceiue vs, &c. But this is too absurd. August. de Sa∣lut. document. cap. 64. Idem de Doct. Christ. l. 3, c. 10 And the same saith S. Chrysostome. S. Augustine is of the number of those that expound it of the flesh and the spirit; condemned here by Saint Ierome, and sent backe to compare his dealings with his owne Law, which is that a man should not hunt after or affect a figuratiue sence, in that which easily affordeth a literall. And yet it maketh nothing for them, seeing hee referreth the same in plaine words vnto the last iudgement. But and if we must needes fall to allegorize, yet let vs learne to do it, as our Lord himselfe, who saith: If you forgiue not men their sinnes, your father will not forgiue you yours. But on the contrarie hee will handle you like to him in the parable, whome he deliuered to the executioners, vntill such time as hee had paide the whole debt; that is to say, for euer: for he had vtterly disabled himselfe before, for paying of it. Orig. hom. 35. in Luc. But yet let vs heare the Doctors speake. Origen saith: They will exact thy debt and looke for it at thy hands, by labours and works, by paines and punishments, &c. But he speaketh after his manner, properly of hell, and not of Purgatorie. For Origen as we shall see hereafter, did not acknowledge any other paines or punishment for the Diuels them∣selues, then Purgatorie. Saint Ambrose distinguisheth betwixt S. Mathew and Saint Luke; Ambros. in Luc. c. 1. in the one vnderstanding by the aduersarie, the Law, in the other, Sinne, or the conscience, and in both, God by the Magistrate, Christ by the Iudge, and the An∣gels by the Executioners. But to cut off Purgatorie, he putteth off the execution vnto the end of the world, applying himselfe in this point to the opinion of Origen. Then
here is no Purgatorie of the Papists as yet to be found. Tertullian saith: Tertull l. de anima. That first and chiefely we must take this text in his simple sence: that is to say, that if we will, wee neede not make any Allegorie of it. And afterward he saith, The heathen man, he is the aduer∣sarie; with him we walke and haue to doe in the common affaires of this life: but wee should goe out of the world, if it were not lawfull to conuerse and haue any dealing with them. Let vs then requite them, with the goodnesse of the spirit: Let vs loue our enemies saith Christ: Let vs pray for them that curse vs: least that being prouoked by any iniuries, hee draw vs before his Iudge, and the Iudge deliuer vs into prison. Idem de Re∣surroct. Carn. c. 42. And this Allegorie swarueth not farre from the sence of the text. But elswhere hee vseth some that are further fetchte, calling the way our discipline; and this reconciliation, the entertaining of our couenant and bargaine with the Diuell; that wee should not take any thing of his, but renounce his pompe, and all his Angels. But still hee speaketh of hell: Ne inferos, saith he, expertatur. In a word, this prison is taken of some for the place, wherein the Magistrate shutteth vp malefactors, and thus Chrysostome: of others for hell, and thus S. Augustine, Hieronym. in Lamen. Ierem. Tertul∣lian, as also S. Ierome, who expoundeth it of eternall punishment. Now who is hee that dare build an Article of Faith vpon such contrarietie of Allegories? Who would not rather content himselfe and cleaue to the letter? Assuredly, their owne proper Glose saith: In prison, that is to say in darknesse, that is to say in hell: And Donec, vntill that, &c. that is to say, for euer. And hee expoundeth it by an other, Donec, Psal. 110. Hugo Card. in Luc. cap. 12. August. de 8. quaest. ad Lulcit. Vntill I haue made thine enemies thy footstoole, &c. And Lyranus, Cardinall Hugo, and Beda in like manner. As also Saint Augustine ad Dulcitium, in treating of Purgatorie, maketh conscience to apply this place for the prouing thereof, and confesseth that this Do∣nec is of the same nature with that in the Psalme 110. But Theophylact dealeth better, who not being ignorant, that this place was haled and pulled to and fro, by diuers Allegories, leadeth vs, as it were by the hand to the simple sence thereof: That wee should not goe to Law, that we shouldrather suffer iniurie, that so we may not be letted or hindred from holy matters. And Cardinall Caietan after the same manner. But Ferus a Doctor of theirs, after all the rest, dealeth better then all the rest: Ferus in Mat. Diuers men haue written di∣uersly of this aduersarie, but in the litterall sence they doe not agree. But in a word, the sence of Christ is, that in outward things, it is better, to yeeld to vniust and vnequall conditions with his aduersarie, then to goe to Law: because in Sutes there is much losse of time: we must bee subiect to the infirmities and faults raigning in Lawyers; to labour and plie the Iudges; and after all this when we are come before them, yet we stand in doubt of the euent, yea and we haue not any pow∣er to dispose, and determine of it then, though we would; but the greatest point and most worthie of consideration is, that wee loose the tranquilitie and peace of mind, as also that loue and peace which we should haue with our neighbours, &c. But let vs admit of their Allegorie, and vn∣derstand the Diuell to be the aduersarie; God the iudge; and the prison, to be Purga∣torie. Is it possible saith S. Ierome, that Christ should commaund vs, to fall to an a∣greement with the Diuell? And likewise to be watchfull and warie of him? For hee vseth the word . Yea and shall not become debters to the Diuell to satisfie his de∣mands? When as the whole Scripture doth bind vs to make satisfaction to God. And what shall the death of Christ haue auailed vs, by this Allegorie; if we stand answera∣ble for euerie farthing, either to God or to the Diuell? Out of the same Chapter, they alleadge an other place: Matth. 5.2. It hath beene said to them of old, or by them of old: Thou shalt not kill, and he that shall kill, shall be punished by iudgement: But I say vnto you, that whosoeuer is angrie with his brother without a cause, shall be guiltie of iudgement: And who so shall haue said vnto him Racha; shall be guiltie of a Counsell: And hee that shall say vnto him foole; shall be punished with hell fire. This last degree say they, is pu∣nished in hell: and therefore the two former must bee punished in Purgatorie. The sence of the text is cleare, that our Lord, (to correct the false gloses of the Scribes, who bounded the breach of the Law, within the compasse of outward actions) doth labour throughout the whole Chapter to bring them backe to the inward motions and affections, shewing vnto them, that the faults which they iudged sleight, as to be angrie with their brother; to giue crosse and reproachfull speeches, &c. doe come
before the soueraigne Iustice of God; which he signifieth by the name of , Iudgement and Consistorie, tearmes that are vsual, about the setting forth of humaine prerogatiues and Iurisdictions. Who is he then that doth wish vs to vnderstand these words of a Purgatorie? But further how can it stand and agree with their rules? Seing that mortall sinnes as they call them, haue no doore open to enter in there? But so it is that he that hateth his brother, saith our Lord, is a manslayer. Againe in Purgato∣rie there is no medling with the fault, but with the punishment. Now in this place the question is of the fault. And againe their Purgatorie is a place of executing of a iudgement or sentence; but in these speeches is contained nothing but the iudgement or sentence? Againe, Purgatorie is but one place, and here be two named: So that we are first to know of them, which they will chuse, and then what they will vnderstand by the other? But S. Ierome, Saint Chrysostome, Theophylact, and all the Fathers, which haue expounded this place in whole Homelies, had neuer any thought com∣ming into their minds of finding Purgatorie here. Lyranus also, who would moralize the same, saith: Our Lord made here three degrees of anger in the heart: Whosoeuer (saith he) is angrie: and a two-fold in the mouth, when it proceedeth to a confused and ouer whelmed plight in offering of iniuries; such as men are in when they fal to rayling and calling of their brother Ra∣cha: or else, in a formall iniurie, as he that saith vnto him, foole, &c. and these three degrees haue their punishments: Iudgement, when men are conuented before the seate of iudgement: A Councell, when it commeth to many mens voices, to determine and giue sentence, &c. And therefore the Glose saith: Reus est iudicio, that is to say, Dignus accusatione, worthie to be accused: Reus consilio, that is to say, worthie to haue sentence pronounced against him by the generall consent of the Iudges, Dignus consensu iudicum, de danda sententia in eum, &c. And Caietan commeth verie neere vnto the same. But what maketh all this for Purgatorie? Yea which is more, though some haue vnderstood it of punish∣ment after this life, as Augustine; yet neuer any man of Purgatorie. In S. Math. 12.31. Mathew 12. Whosoeuer shall haue spoken against the holy Ghost, it shall not bee forgi∣uen him, either in this world or in the world to come. Then there are sinnes which are par∣doned in the other world: and therefore this is in Purgatorie, &c. This text cannot be better vnderstood, then by the other Euangelists, and by S. Mathew himselfe. Saint Marke saith: He shall neuer be forgiuen. Whereupon S. Augustine saith: Saint Marke hath said the same in other words: Mark. 3.28. Luk. 12.10. S. Luke. It shall not bee forgiuen him: S. Mathew in the verse going before, It shall not be forgiuen. And if any man bee desirous or inquisitiue, yet to know some further meaning then this: Not in this world; where God iudgeth the sinnes of his Church, by the ministerie and order established in the same: nor in the world to come, when as hee will sit himselfe in person to iudge them: and this is all, that can rightly be drawne out of this place. And indeed the old writers are of one accord, Damasc. de Orthod. fid. li. 2. ca. 1. holding that these words, The world to come, doe either signifie euerlasting punishment or euerlasting blessednesse, and must bee taken and vnderstoode of that which followeth after the resurrection and not before. Afterward they offend against their owne generall rules: for their Schoolemen say, that there is no forgiuenesse of sinnes, but in this world; how so euer satisfaction for sin is made, according to their doctrine, in the world to come. But the question here, is of the remission of sinnes, and not of their temporall punishment. And it is not to be stoode vppon or said, that small and veniall sinnes are forgiuen there: for the comparison is made here of the sinne against the holy Ghost, with other the most grieuous sinnes that are. And a∣gaine, how can that proue a good reason or Argument, which is taken from a parti∣cular negatiue, to an vniuersall affirmatiue? The sinne against the holy Ghost is not forgiuen in this world, nor in that to come: therefore the temporall punishments of all manner of sinnes not paid and discharged here, shall bee exacted and paid in the world to come, A than. in tract. Omnis blasph. Hieronym. & Har. in Math. that is to say in Purgatorie? But Bellarmine doth here freely confesse that there is no good Art or Logicke in this conclusion. But it is certaine that the old writers did not vnderstand this place thus. S. Athanasius hath made a speciall treatise vpon this verse, and made no mention of Purgatorie. And S. Ierome, and S. Hillarie
also expounding this verie place, haue done as little. Ambros. de paenit. li 2. c. 4. & de spir. 5. c.  August. de Ci∣uit. Dei. l. 21. c. 24. Gregor. l. 4. Dial. c. 39. Neither hath S. Ambrose done any more though he haue touched it in two places. S. Augustine hath begunne, and S. Gregorie hath followed him. But if S. Augustine had thought this place so strong, hee would not haue written so doubtfully of Purgatorie in other places: and which more is, he vnderstandeth it of the day of the resurrection; and not of that space of time which is betwixt death and the resurrection, according to the opinion which was held then: That is, that at the resurrection, the soules bespotted and stained with sinnes, should be purified with a kind of fire, as it shall be seene hereafter. And in deed The world to come, as saith Damascene, signifieth eternall life or eternall punishment. Damasc. de Orth. fid. l. 2. ca. 1. Chrysost. in Math. ca. 12. hom. 43. But after all, how farre a sunder do these propositions stand? There are sinnes which are forgiuen in the world to come, and there are flames of fire in the world to come, which exact the temporall punishments of sinnes remitted in this world. Chryso∣stome therefore saith better: Some men shall be punished both in this world, and in the world to come, as those of Sodome: others in this world onely, as the Incestuous of Corinth: others in the world to come onely, as the wicked rich man: others neither here, nor in the world to come, as the Prophets and Apostles. And as concerning the sinne against the holy Ghost, it shall bee pu∣nished both in this world and in the world to come, &c. And Thcophilact dooth trace him word for word. Cardinall Hugo saith: In aeternum, for euer: And maketh a comparison betwixt it, and the sinne of the Diuell. Let vs adde also their owne writer Ferus, who con∣tenteth himselfe in a long Commentarie, to vse these words without any other thing: In saying lesse, hee vnderstandeth more; namely, that this sinne shall not onely bepunished in the life to come, but euen in this life: and accordingly giueth examples thereof. Of the historie of the wicked rich man, th cannot make their market, Luk. 16.23. Abraham saith: That this gulfe is so great, that there is no passage from the one to the other. Now they will haue it, that men after satisfaction made, doe passe out of Purgatorie into Para∣dice. Againe, the message which he would haue sent vnto his brethren, sheweth that he died without repentance, that he beggeth a little water to coole himselfe withall, argueth that hee is in a place voide of all comfort and consolation. And also it hath alwaies beene taken and expounded for Hell by all the old writers. But yet they fall to worke vpon the words contained in the same Chapter: Luk. 16.9. Make you friends of the vnrigh∣teous Mammon, to the end that when you shallwant, they may receiue you into euerlasting ta∣bernacles. In so much as that here Bellarmine, taketh vppon him to crie victorie on their side, because that Peter Martyr hath past this place without answere. Our Lord warneth vs, by the example of the vniust Steward, to make vs friends of our riches, to the end, that as hee did make him friends, that did receiue him when he was out of office and credite, so likewise we should doe the same by our Almes, that so when we shall be called from our stewardship (for wee are no better then Stewards) they may receiue vs into euerlasting Tabernacles. And this is according to that which is said in an other place: That euen a cup of cold water giuen in the name of Christ, is not without his reward. These friends, they are the poore, but together therewithall ho∣nest and vertuous: These Tabernacles are eternall life: These friends, they them∣selues doe vnderstand, that they are to die before vs; and there is not any one of the Fathers, that haue expounded it otherwise, this is verie farre from staying behind, to helpe vs with their suffrages. Or that it resteth for them to gather vs to heauen: and therefore also farre enough off, from being able to draw vs out of Purgatorie. But and if we must allegorize; to whome shall we cleaue and sticke? Tertullian saith, Tertull. de fu∣ga in persecut. that our Lord exhorted the Iewes, who had not plaid the good Stewards, with the goods that God had committed vnto them, to make them friends therewithall: De Mam∣monae hominibus, with the men of Mammon, (that is) of the Gentiles, saith he, by raysing them from the debt of sinne, that so grace wasting, they should receiue them into the Christian faith. S. Augustine and S. Ambrose doe vnderstand it: Ambros. in Luc. August. de Ci∣uit. Dei. l. 21. cap. 27. That wee must giue vnto the Saints in this world, that they maey pray for vs in the other. Who doubteth of their charitie, who liue with him that is charitie it selfe; or that they doe desire the kingdome of God, and the saluation of the elect and chosen? But what is there of all this that hath bene
said, Hieronim. ad Algas. quaest. 6 that agreeth with Purgatorie? As for S. Ierome, who handleth this question of purpose in writing vnto Algasia, after that he hath examined all the words in particu∣lar, he alleadgeth likewise a certaine Allegorie of Theophilus Bb. of Antiochia, who of this steward, maketh S. Paul, begetting and winning Christians, with the learning which he had got vnder the Law, that they might receiue him into their houses, &c. that is to say, into heauen. And in the end he commeth to this point: That wee must make vs friends of our goods, and those, not of all sorts of poore, but such as may receiue vs into heauen, that is, such as are honest and godly; to the end, that hauing giuen them a little, we may receiue much, and giuing to an other, may enioy the things that are ours; sowing blessedly and bountifully, Chrysost. in Ep. ad Hebr. Bernard in de clam. Ecce nos rellquimus omnia. that wee may also reape blessedly and bountifully, &c. Chrisostome also, who toucheth this place sundrie times, doth likewise expound it at large vpon the Epistle to the Hebrewes, but draweth no other doctrine from it. And as for Purgatorie, not a word of it. Neither yet Saint Bernard, Cardinall Hugo, Cardinall Caietan, nor Fe∣rus himselfe. Bellarmine saith: Remember me O Lord when thou commest into thy kingdome: this good man (saith he) had neuer spoken this, Luk. 23. if he had not belieued, that sinnes were forgiuen after this life. But yet what maketh this to Purgatorie? Seeing it cannot stand with the doctrine of the Schoolemen, who affirme that Purgatorie is for such, as whose sinnes are al∣readie remitted? But Bellarmine dooth except the small and pettie sinnes. But in this place the question is of the greatest. And of whome would he desire to be better assured in that respect, then of the good theefe himselfe? Who saith: Remember me when thou commest into thy kingdome: Or of our Sauiour himselfe, who aunswereth him: To day thou art not in Purgatorie, but in Paradice with me. And is hee able to name any one of the Fathers, euen of the latest, who hath gathered this doctrine hence? In the Actes 2. Acts. 2.24. Whome God hath raysed againe, hauing vnloosed the paines of hell, or of death; because it was impossible that he should be held of it. From hence Bellarmine frameth this conclusion; Christ after his death could not suffer paines, therefore this place is not to bee vnderstood of his paines, but of those of the Fathers: and not of those which were in Hell, for out of Hell there is no redemption: Neither of those in the Lymbes; for they suffered not: it remaineth then, that it must needes bee spoken of those that were in Purgatorie. The truth is that this text may bee read two manner of waies, in the most part of the Copies there is , not , the paines of death, not of hell. Epiphan. in anchorat. & in anacephal. And if Epiphanius, whome Bellarmine alleadgeth, haue read  in one place, in an other he hath read . Now this being so, he will neuer bee able to find his Purgatorie in this hell. Let vs graunt them : the word signifieth both the Graue and Hell: but without all doubt, in this place the Graue: for it is alleadged, for the resurrection of our Lord, together with the place of Dauid; alleadged by Saint Peter: Thou wilt not leaue my soule in Graue. And whereas he saith, that it cannot bee vnder∣stood of Christ, for that he indured no paines after his death; I answere that it cannot be vnderstood but of him, because it was said, that it was not possible for him to bee held either of death, or of the Graue: which cannot bee said of the Fathers, which cannot be spoken, but of our Sauiour, God and man: Seeing also that which follow∣eth: For Dauid saith of him, I saw the Lord alwates, &c. But Dauid neuer said this of any of the Fathers. So that to deliuer our selues from the doubt and difficultie, that is in the word , which may receiue a good Exposition; wee fall into such a sence and signification, as cannot by any meanes be raised or drawne from it. And as concer∣ning that we say, that the paines of death are vnloosed; not onely in that our Sauiour is risen againe; but also in as much as in his resurrection, the rule and dominion of death is destroyed and laide waste. And here it is not lightly to bee passed ouer, which hath beene obserued by the most learned, that the Hebrew words which signifie paines and bands, doe not any thing differ, Psal. 18.6. 2. Sam. 22.6. but in one small pricke. And this might verie well bee referred to that which Saint Luke saith , hauing loosed: and made an allusion to these words of
Dauid: The snares of Hell, or of the Graue, haue compassed me about. Where the Septua∣gints haue translated , the paines of child-birth. And the Paraphrast goeth not far from them: and it may bee that one and the same word, without any let by reason of scruple caused through the prickes, doth signifie them both. And this might very wel come to passe, through the custome they had to binde the bodies of their dead, ac∣cording wherunto we read in the storie of Lazarus: Wherupon our Sauiour saith vnto his Apostles, Vnloose him, &c. And it is not to bee forgotten, that neuer a one of the Fathers hath found out Purgatorie in this place, neither yet any of the late writers. Caiet. in Act. c. 2. Fcrus & Hof∣mester in Act. c. 2. Caietanus expoundeth it of the penalties (for such a word hee vseth) which the Soule of Christ suffered, being separate from the body. Ferus vnderstandeth it, of Christ his loosing of the paines of death for the faithfull; in so much as that he which belieueth in him, tasteth not of death, but is alreadie past from death to life. Hofmester, by these paines of death or Hell, all the sufferings that Christ hath indured for vs, &c. Ac∣cording to that place of the Psalme: The paines of death haue compassed me, and the daungers of Hell haue enwrapped me, &c. And these are the most noted and best esteemed Expositors amongst them. Now commeth their maine argument: No man, saith Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 3. can laye any other foundation, then that which is laid, which is Iesus Christ. But if any man build vpon this foun∣dation, Gold, Siluer, &c. The worke of euerie man shall be manifest; for the day will declare it, because it shall bee disclosed by fire, and the fire will proue what euerie mans worke is, &c. But he shall be saued, as concerning himselfe, as it were by fire. This last fire they will haue to bee Purgatorie, by which we are to bee saued. Here let vs call to mind againe, that which hath beene so often spoken of: That Symbolicke Diuinitie, or that Diuinitie which is deliuered in Similitudes doth not proue: that there is no disputation or argument to bee held from Metaphors; that no Article of doctrine is established, by darke and obscure places: For these bee the Maxims of the old writers, whereunto we doe wil∣lingly subscribe. Now the case so standeth, as that all this text consisteth of Meta∣phors; as, foundation frame, building, Gold, Siluer, &c. Wood, haye, strawe, &c. August. de fide & opcrib. c. 15. & 16. Idem in quaest. ad Dulcit. q. 1. that it is likwise obscure and difficult. In so much as that S. Augustine doth accompt it amongst those, whereof Saint Peter speaketh, saying: In the Epistles of Saint Paul, there are certaine things that are hard to be vnderstood, &c. And after that hee hath giuen his aduice and iudgement: I desire (saith he) to heare the wise and learned vpon this place, &c. This is to make way, that wee may come to this: that vpon a doubtfull and darke Exposition, we ought not to ground any certaine doctrine, much lesse an Article of our Christian faith. Idem de fide & oper. c. 16. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 3. Hieronym. in. l. 2. in Ioh. Thom. in 1. Cor. c. 3. Chrysost. in 1. Cor. c. 3. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 3. Heronym. in Esay. c. 5. Haim. in 1. Cor. 3. Greg. li. 4. dial. c. 39. August. l. de fid. & oper. c. 16. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 39. This also is the thing that hath begot so many and so diuers in∣terpretations, almost vpon euerie word. For by builders, some vnderstand all Christi∣ans, as S. Augustine, S. Chrysostome, Theodoret, &c. Other some, the Doctors and Pastors; as S. Ambrose, Saint Ierome, Thomas and others. Againe, some by the word foundation, do vnderstand true doctrine; by Gold, Siluer, &c. good works; by wood, haye, &c. mortall sinnes, as Chrysostome, Theophilact, &c. Others, the preaching of faith, wherupon euery man buildeth his expositions, some of them being Orthodox, and according to sound doctrine, and other some heretical, as S. Ambrose, S. Ierome, Haimo, &c. Others, the good workes of one part, and the veniall sinnes on the other, as S. Gregorie. Others, the good and euill hearers, as Theophilact, Oecumenius, &c. Againe, by the day S. Augustine, and Saint Gregorie vnderstand this present life, or the time of tribulation, which causeth the good to be known from the wicked: others and those in greater number, the day of iudgement: & yet differing herein, that some will haue it to be the great day of the Lord, as Theodoret, Theophilact, Haimo, Ansel∣me, &c. The others, that iudgement which passeth vpon euery person, so soone as he is dead; as Caietanus & many of this time. Againe, this fire which shall trie the worke of euerie man, by some is taken for tribulations, as S. Augustine and S. Gregorie, and by others for euerlasting fire: By some, for the consuming of the whole world by fire: By other, for Purgatorie, and by others for the fire of the iust iudgement of God, &c. who examineth and trieth, say they, but punisheth not. And in this opinion
may S. Ambros. in Psal 118. August. in Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 68. Ambrose seeme to be. And finally, by this fire whereof it is said: But be shall be saued as it were by fire. Some vnderstand the tribulations of this life, as Saint Augustine, and S. Gregorie; S. Augustine by name, who saith, that this place darke and obscure in it selfe, must bee expounded by diuers others that are cleare and plaine, in which, fire doth signifie the triall of tribulation. Others, the euerlasting fire, as Chrysostome and Theophilact; and certaine also, Purgatorie: and amongst them, some after the manner and fashion of the Church of Rome, others after a certaine particular opini∣on, such namely as was then common. Which was, that in the verie moment of the vniuersall Iudgement, euerie one without exception should bee tried and proued by fire. By these so variable and differing coniectures, euerie one may iudge with what face our aduersaries can take this place, and the interpretations thereof, for the foun∣dation of their Purgatorie: Seeing also that Bellarmine (a thing worth the noting) is constrained by reason of the absurdities, that hee meeteth withall therein, to leaue and forsake all; and to refute them, euerie one for this or that inconuenience that would insue, that so hee may lay some one particular and speciall sence, and that such as may be sound. Now we cannot better come out of this Labyrinth, then by the course of the text. Saint Paul therefore hauing spoken before, of the Doctors and Pastors that doe teach in the Church, and continuing his discourse saith: That the foundation of Re∣ligion is Christ, that is to say, the remission and forgiuenesse of sinne in him: That if those Doctors and Pastors doe build vppon this foundation, matter conformable and correspondent vnto the same, that is to say, sound and sincere doctrines and in∣structions, that then when they come to triall, they will be able to beare out and vn∣dergoe the same: whereas on the contrarie, vaine and friuolous doctrines, will va∣nish and turne to nothing as dooth the smoake in the ayre. The sound and sincere ones he compareth to Gold, Siluer, and precious stones, matters able to indure the fire: but the corrupt and vaine ones, to wood, haye, or straw, all of them being mat∣ter which doe not beare or indure the fire, yea which on the contrarie, doe serue for nothing more then to set it on flame and kindle it. Comparisons vsed elswhere in the Scriptures, Psal. 29. & 119 Prou. 8. and 16 and to the same sence. The commaundements of God (saith Dauid) are more to be desired then Gold, Siluer or precious stones. The fruit of wisedome is better then Gold, Sil∣uer, or any Iewel-house. In the Psalmes and Prouerbes the vaine opinions of men, of which notwithstanding they make great accompt, are compared to haye, that pas∣seth and withereth away; Esay. c. 40. Esay. 1. and 58 Tertul. aduers. Matc. l. 5. Dignam aut indignam doctrinam. and opposed vnto the word of God, which indureth for euer. Esay 40. dooth compare them to stubble and drie wood, Esay 1. and 58. And thus Tertullian, Saint Ierome, and Saint Ambrose doe interpret it: Bellarmine also doth not turne it into any other sence. The Apostle saith: Euerie mans workes shall bee discouered and made manifest, for the day will declare what it is. The day, that is to say, the light, opposed and set against darknesse, such darknesse, as vnder the cloake whereof, the most corrupt Marchandises are couered and shrowded: the light, which maketh them knowne to bee such as they are; Ioh. 5. according to that which is said: Who so worketh truely and iustly, let him come to the light, that so his workes may bee made manifest. Againe, That which maketh all things manifest, Ephes. 4.5. that is the light. And indeede it is not said here: The day of the Lord, but the day. And Saint Gregorie and Saint Augustine doe vnder∣stand it of this present life. And this day (saith hee) shall declare the worke vnto euerie one, because it shall bee manifested by fire; for the fire shall trie the workes of euerie man, &c. Assu∣redly no materiall fire, but a fire fitted and proportioned according to these mat∣ters: for it behooueth, that the Allegorie should hang together. Now the matters or substances are spirituall, as true, or false; sound and durable, or else vaine do∣ctrines. This fire then must be spirituall, that is, the effectuall power of the word of God, and of his spirit, vsing to accompanie the same, which pearceth euen into the most secret ioyntes and parts: before which in shorter or longer time, all false doctrines and humane traditions, not builded vpon the foundation which Christ
hath laid, will bee made vnable to stand. An vsuall Metaphor in the Scripture: The words of the Lord are as siluer refined in the fire: Psal. 19. Malach. 3. Leuit. 1.3. Amros. in Psal. 118. Ser, 13. God will purge the Sonnes of Leui as Gold: you are tried like Gold in the fire, &c. And so Saint Ambrose hath vnder∣stood it, expounding these words: Ignitum eloquium tuum, &c. Let come (saith hee) the worde of God, let it enter into the Church; let it become a consuming fire, let it burne the haye and the strawe, and whatsoeuer is therein that is not holye and consecrate vnto the Lord; let it melt this leaden Masse of iniquitie, &c. Againe, This fire, it is the word of Christ, a good fire which heateth and burneth not any thing, saue sinne. By this fire built vppon the good foundation, this Gold of the Apostles was tried by this fire, the Siluer of workes or of maners is examined and proued by this fire, these goodly buildings of beautifull Iewels and preci∣ous stones, haeue their glasse and goodly shew giuen vnto them; but the haye and the straw are con∣sumed. Wherefore this fire refineth and maketh cleane the spirit, but consumeth and wasteth errour, &c. And note, that this is hee that did interpret vnto vs this place heretofore, to be vnderstood of Doctors and doctrines: and in the same hee still persisteth and continueth, vnderstanding by Gold; doctrines, and by Siluer, workes; in that of sound or vaine doctrines, proceede good or euill workes. Hieronim. in Daniel c. 7. In Esay. c. 66. Saint Ierome in like man∣ner: God (saith hee) is called a consuming fire, for to deuour all that which is vicious in vs, as haye, wood, stubble, &c. And I suppose that this is that fire, that did sit vpon the tongues of the Apostles. And it is generally to bee noted, that not one of the old Fathers hath vn∣derstood it of their Purgatorie. And what is it that will ensue of the triall made by this fire? that if the doctrines that shall bee prooued therein doe abide the hammer; then hee which shall haue builded vppon that good foundation, shall receiue his re∣ward: but and if they burne or flie away in smoake; hee shall loose his time and la∣bour, and yet notwithstanding in as much as he hath built vpon the good foundati∣on, and hath not defiled nor ouerthrowne it, hee shall be saued; but, , as it were by fire, that is to say, as one that escapeth the fire. He that escapeth out of the fire, thinketh himselfe to haue performed verie much, in hauing saued himselfe all bare and naked. For hee ac∣compteth his life for a pray, how much so euer he loose otherwise. And this is the true signifi∣cation of the word , as it is also of sauuer in our tonge, Acts. 2. : Saue your selues from this froward generation, that is, Eripite vos. As also these words, , but so, as it were by fire, are held for a prouerbe, Cicer. de con∣sol. Zachar. 3. Amos. 4.  which wee shall not faile to meete withal in all languages, amongst good Authors: In Latine, Tanquam ex incendio effugere, vel euadere: In Hebrew,  as if a man should say in Greeke, , a brand saued out of the fire. And these Particles , that is to say, Sic autem quasi doe sufficiently shew vs, that he doth not speake of any sire here in this place, but of a power like vnto fire; and namely that fire, whereof hee spoke in the verse going before. For why shall it in that place signifie vnto Bellarmine, the seuere iudgement of God, examining and making triall of workes and doctrines, and in this place, a materiall fire of Purgatorie, which burneth not workes or doctrines, whereof the question is, but the soules of men? And in deed S. Augustine and S. Gregorie haue taken both these two fires for one; that is to say, tribulations: Chrysostome and Theo∣philact for one; that is, the euerlasting fire: and many of the late writers, for one, name∣ly, Purgatorie. The distinction came not to be knowne, vntill such time as it was espi∣ed, that the former word could not bee auouched in this signification, and therefore they haue restrained it to this latter. Now we say that this commeth to passe in many good Doctors and Teachers, who haue built and brocht many friuolous doctrines of a good intention, vpon this foundation of Christian faith, and cease not, notwithstan∣ding to be happie by the mercies of God, because they haue retained and held it fast, especially at the time of the approaching of the pangs of their death: as is recorded of many in writing, and which doe now ioy and reioyce in heauen, to see them burnt, and deuoured, yea euen this pretended fire also, by the effectuall power of the word of God, whome they see and well perceiue to bee glorified, in the destruction of their workes.
Now whosoeuer he is that shall reade this text without preiudice, wil easily rest sa∣tisfied with this interpretation. And in deed that of Bellarmines (for it doth not agree with any of the old writers) cannot free it selfe frō many inconueniences. We are very neere at agreement with him, concerning that which is to be vnderstood by the foun∣dation, builders, and that which is diuersly built thereupon. But we still differ & can∣not agree about the day of fire which trieth and proueth the doctrines, nor yet vpon the fire, from which the Teachers doe escape and saue themselues: hee confuteth the opinion of Caietanus, who vnderstandeth it to be the day of euerie particular mans iudgement, that is to say, his last day, or deathes day: And for mine owne part I agree with him therein, as holding it absurd, without bringing any further witnesse for the same. But hee would vnderstand by the same the latter iudgement, presupposing still, that it is that day of the Lord. Now the Apostle saith, that day simply. He saith also, that in that day it shall bee manifested, which side hath the truth, by the proofe and tryall which shal be made; and that before such, as it concerneth to know the same. This then shall be in this present life, as S. Augustine, and S. Gregorie doe vnderstand it. Thus far we both are agreed vppon the fire which proueth the doctrines; namely, that it is not any materiall fire, (contrarie to that which they affirme, that would haue it the fire of Purgatorie;) but the effectuall working of the Iustice and seueritie of God, in the day of iudgement: whereas we vnderstand it with S. Ambrose, of the word of God, accom∣panied with his holy spirit, exercising his authoritie & power in the Church: And this we hold to be so much the more agreable, because the triall is by nature to go before the sentence of iudgement; as also for that this triall is made for the instruction of the Church, by manifesting and making knowne, on what side the truth standeth: and therefore in this life, and therefore also before the iudgment. But neuerthelesse, Bellarmine in all this portion of Scripture hitherto hath not found out Purgatorie. About the fire from which the Teachers do saue themselues, we doe especially square and disagree, for therein he findeth his Purgatorie, but we say vnto him, that there is no apparance that from one verse to an other, this fire should suffer such an alterati∣on and chaunge in his nature, as of a spirituall, to become materiall, and of a power∣full worke of the iudgement of God, to become a reall and substantiall flame. That these words, , doe note out vnto vs a meere metaphoricall fire. That seeing as he himselfe saith, the question here is of the day of iudgement; that therefore here is no more to doe with Purgatorie: that seeing the fire of iudgement hath alreadie con∣sumed and eaten vp the wood, haye, and strawe, that there is not left behind any manner of thing to be burned in this; no not the Author himselfe, seeing that hee must by this iudgement, goe presently to life or to death eternall. For as concerning that Bellarmine saith; he shall be saued, but so as it were by fire, that is to say, he shall be saued, prouided alwaies that he must first haue passed and gone through the fire: This is the begging of the matter in question, and this is to set downe for graunted, the thing that is in controuersie. In the end he commeth to seeke his defence from the old writers: who how con∣trarie they are one to an other, wee haue alreadie seene, and it will not stand him in any seruice. Chrysostome vnderstandeth by this latter fire, the eternall fire; and to be saued, to be as much as not to be consumed in the said fire. Saint Augustine and Saint Gregorie, the tribulations of this life. Theodoret and Oecumenius, they set∣ting of the vniuersall world on fire, which shall be accomplished in the day of the last iudgement. And as concerning the place which Saint Thomas alleadgeth out of Theodoret vpon this Epistle, it is not to bee found either in the Greeke or Latine Copie: but hee affirmeth verie well, that the Teacher shall bee saued from the fire of the last iudgement, which shall goe before the face of the Iudge: Which (saith hee) will not burne the iust, Alcuinus de Trinit l. 3. c. 21 Orig. hom 3. in Psal. 26. but make them shine more cleare and bright. Alcuinus and the ordi∣narie Glose, doe iumpe together with the former sence. Origen vnderstandeth it of Purgatorie, but it is a Purgatorie of his owne deuise, in that he maketh it not to be
till after the last iudgement, and through which both Saint Peter and Saint Paul are to passe, holding that none can be free from the same but Christ himselfe, no not the Diuels, for by it hee holdeth that they shall be purged. Ambros. in Psalm. And Saint Ambrose holding the same from and with him, speaketh after the same sort: and yet notwithstanding he addeth thereunto, how that the euill Teachers shall bee for a certaine time, after the last iudgement in Hell, and yet in the end they shall be saued: To the end (saith he) that it may yet turne to some profit to haue belieued in Christ. But what proueth all this for our Purgatorie? And what will themselues say of Gregorie, Gregor. l. 4. Dial. c. 39. who durst not deale or meddle with the expounding of the place: If any man (saith hee) thinke good to vnder∣stand it of the fire of that Purgation which is to come, it is meete that hee should throughly weigh and consider of the same, &c. Cardinall Hugo likewise dooth obiect the same doubts a∣bout the same, that Saint Augustine doth vpon Purgatorie, and so keepeth himselfe, to the taking of it for the fire of tribulation, and the losse of temporall things. And in deede Erasmus of our time, hath declared in his Commentaries, that this place affordeth not any thing, that may belong either to Purgatorie, or to the veniall sinnes, Index Expurg. as they pretend. For which his plaine dealing they haue commanded the place to bee raced and blotted out. In the 1. Corinthians 15. The Apostle speaking of the resurrection, saith: 1. Cor. 15 29. Else what shall they doe which are baptised for the dead, , if the dead rise not againe? To bee baptised say they for the dead, that is to afflict themselues for them, that is to doe all such things, as may seeme to serue for the satisfying and purging of their sinnes. Wherefore they are yet in some place, where they may bee relieued and suc∣coured, Therefore in Purgatorie. Now this is nothing else, but to make themselues continuall breakers of that Rule which saith: That a man ought not to reason or ga∣ther any arguments from the places which are darke and doubtfull. Now they dare not denie, that there is any place in all the new Testament more obscure euen for the litterall sence then this. And notwithstanding they will presuppose and set downe any Exposition thereof, after their owne fantasies; whereas all the Diuines that were for the space of fifteene hundred yeares were to seeke therein. And hardly are there as yet any found that can satisfie themselues therein. For, one saith that the Apostle speaketh of them, who seeing some die without Baptisme, caused others that were aliue to bee baptised for them; so well assured they were of the resurrection. Epiphan. ad. ucrs. haeres. l. 1. tom. 2. Haimo in Ep. ad Cor. c 5. August. de Ci∣uit. Dei. l. 20. ca. 9. Chrysost. & Ambr. in 1. Cor. c. 15. Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 7 Tertull. de Resurr. carn. Chrysost. in 1. Cor. c. 15. & in 1. Cor. hom. 23 Epipha∣nius reciteth this opinion. And Saint Ambrose vnderstandeth it after the same man∣ner: and after him Haimo saith: And yet such a custome, as the Apostle onely alleadgeth without approuing it; and that onely to shame the Corinthians with their incredulitie and vnbe∣liefe. And the ordinarie Glose dooth note the same. An other saith that this is to bee vnderstood of such as were bed-rid, or sicke in their beds, and could not arise, or such as were baptised, lying vppon their death bed, or in extreame perill of their life. An other, of those which were dead and after baptised; to shew that Baptisme was not onely a signe of the resurrection of the body, but also of the soule. And thus Tertulli∣an may seeme to vnderstand it in his Booke of the Resurrection. Chrysostome refer∣reth it to the words of Baptisme, saying: If there be no resurrection, then all that wee doe in Baptisme, is but a play: Namely, because in it is contained the figure, and resem∣blance both of death, and of the resurrection together. And Theodoret after the same manner, that he which is baptised, is buried with the Lord: In vaine (saith hee) if the body be not to rise againe with him. And Saint Thomas, is not farre off from the ta∣king of it in the same sence. In a word, there are some which referre it to the cu∣stome of celebrating of Baptismes in Church-yardes; wherein the ordinarie ex∣ercises of the first Christians were wont to be kept. Out of which of these old and auncient Expositions is it, that they collect and gather this Purgatorie? Or by which of the olde writers doe they approoue their owne, these men are they whome I aske, which make such accompt of the Fathers, which thinke them all to bee on their side. So that it will suffice vs onely to denie their interpretation: Namely, that to be baptised, is to bee afflicted, is to pray for the dead, and in steade
thereof, we will hold and affirme that to be baptised, in the text of the Gospell which they pretend, is to die for the name of Christ, and to suffer Martyrdome. Chrisostome vpon these words: Luk. 12. Mark. 10. Chrysost. in Math. hom. 66 You may, saith the Lord, be baptised with the Baptisme, wherewith I am baptised, &c. Here (saith he) I promise you many good things; you shall purchase the Crowne of Martyrdome, and by a violent death, you shall depart out of this life, as I myselfe, &c. The ordinarie Glose: He speaketh here of the Baptisme of his passion. And yet notwith∣standing this is the place from whence they would drawe their Exposition. What shamelesse and impudent dealing is this, to expound, to be baptised, to signifie to be afflicted; and that to bee afflicted, should signifie to pray for the dead, and that for those dead which are in Purgatorie. Let them tell me, if this manner of reasoning can bee vsed in any good Schoole without shame? But yet after all, to what end had it beene for Saint Paul to haue attempted the prouing of the resurrection of bodies, by the soules tormented in Purgatorie? And what would his argument haue beene in the end? And why at the least did they not hold themselues, either to Cardinall Hu∣go, who saith, Pro mortuis, that is to say, for their sinnes, although verie darkly: or yet for the better, Caietan. in 1. Cor. c. 15. to the Exposition of Cardinall Caietan: For (saith hee) in that that they which are baptised are dipt into the water; it is to bee vnderstood, that they are dead vnto the world: And whereas they professe to die vnto the same, that so they may enter into newnesse of life, they represent the resurrection of the dead. The Apostle saith to the Philippians: Philip. 2.10. To the end that euerie knee may bowe, of those which are in heauen and in earth, and vnder the earth. These last are they which liue in Pur∣gatorie: for the Diuels say they doe not worship. The sence is cleare: That our Lord hauing humbled and abased himselfe to the taking of the forme not of man onely, but euen of a seruant; God hath lifted him vp on high, and giuen him a name about all names, these are the words going before, that is to say, an absolute power and So∣ueraigntie ouer all creatures, acccording to that which he saith himselfe elsewhere: All power is giuen vnto me in heauen and in earth. And in the Apocalips he addeth there∣to: Math. 28. Apocal. 5. The creatures which are in the Sea, &c. Now the question is not here of an adoration, but of a subiection; not of the confessing or acknowledging of a Father, but of a Iudge, Hebr. 1. according to that which is said: And hee hath made him Iudge of all things. They make a great matter of the bowing of the knee, and that is it which galleth them most. S. Paul to the Romaines alleadgeth Esay: I liue (saith the Lord) that euerie knee shall bow be∣fore me, Rom. 14. Esay. 45.13. and euerie tongue shall giue praise vnto God. There was greater show, why it should be vnderstood of worshipping and adoration; and yet he expoundeth it of the iudici∣all throne of Christ, Tertull. ca 17 & 1. de Trinit. Thom in Ep. ad Philip. c. 2. and of his last iudgement. And indeed Tertullian vnderstandeth it of subiection and not of adoration. The ordinarie Glose saith here: As well the Angels as men, and the Diuell. Thomas likewise: The Angels willingly and freely, the Diuels will they, nill they: That is (saith hee) according to that which S. Iames saith, that euen the Diuels themselues doe tremble. Rom. 9. S. Ambrose interpreteth it by this place of the Epistle to the Romaines: Which is God, blessed aboue all things, &c. For (saith he) there is nothing in the world, but heauenly, earthly or infernall things: and referreth it to the authoritie that Christ holdeth of the Father, Chrysost. ad Philip. c. 2. Haimo & Ca∣ict. in Ep. ad Philip. &c. Chrysostome to the glorie of Christ, vnder which, both men and Angels, and Diuels doe bow and stoupe; euen all both iust and righte∣ous, as also the sinners and rebellious. And Haimo, Hugo, and Caietan after the same manner. And in deed Bellarmine dare not vrge this place, neither yet that of the A∣pocalips; but confesseth that they proue not the matter. Neither hath it beene al∣leadged by any, certaine Monkes onely of this time and age excepted, who make vp their Purgatorie, of whatsoeuer commeth to their hands, euen as franticke men, who sansie euerie thing that is said vnto them. For how was it possible for the old writers to find it here vnder the earth, when as Saint Gregorie sought it in hotte waters, in bathes, and in the shadowes of trees? When Alcuinus seated it in the ayre betwixt heauen and earth? When the certaine place where it was, was vncertaine vnto them, vntill the time of Beda, to whome I know not what spirit did reueale it to bee vnder the earth?
In the first of S. Peter, Christ (saith he) hath suffered once for sinnes, 1 Pet 3.18. &c. being morti∣fied in the flesh, but quickned by the spirit, by the which he also went and preached to the spirits that were in prison. This prison say they, is Purgatorie. Let them reade that which fol∣loweth, and then they will vnsay it againe: Hauing beene disobedient in times past, when as the patience of God did once attend and waite in the daies of Noe, &c. The question then is about matters happening in the daies of Noe: Now they are not yet resolued that there was any Purgatorie in the time of the olde Testament: And in deed they haue euermore expounded this place of the limbes, so that by building their Purgatory vpon this place, they haue broken downe the partition wall. Againe, the Gospell is preached, to be heard, vnderstood and receiued in faith. And they themselues doe affirme that faith is not begotten, or to be come by in Purgatorie: To what end or vse then should this preaching serue in Purgatorie? Againe, to the vnbelieuing & disobe∣dient, for whome according to their owne doctrine, purgatorie was neuer builded? Now in deed the true sence and meaning is, that the spirit of Christ at all times hath called men to repentance, yea euen in the daies of Noe, those rebellious persons who abused the patience and long suffering of God, and who notwithstanding, stan∣ding out disobedient vnto the same, are therefore holden captiues in prison, that is to say, in eternall punishment. And the Greeke article leadeth vs hereunto, , as also the word  prison, when the question is of spirites, is ordinarily ta∣ken for here. In the Apocalyps, Sathan shalbe let loose from his prison: and elsewhere, Apoc. 20. 2. Pet. 2. Iude 1. The Deuils are tyed vp in chaines of darknesse, in euerlasting bondes, &c. But seeing they will not accept of our expositions: yet at the least I would haue them to stand to the fathers. Clement Alexandrine saith, Clem. l. 6 that Christ and the Apostles did preach the Gospell vnto the damned; but this hee taketh out of certaine Apocrypha writinges, attributed vnto Saint Peter, and S. Paule, who had corruptly vnderstood this place. In ep. ad Epict. Athanasius saith, that during the time that the bodie was in the graue,  the word, went to preach to the spirites that were in hell: that is to say, saith Damascene, Damasc. l. 3. de Orthod. fid. c 6. Not for to conuert them to the faith, but to conuince them of their vnbeliefe; this preaching being no other thing but a manifesting of his deitie vnto the infernall powers, by the descending of Christ into hell. S. Augustine ad Euodium, handleth this verie place, August. ad E∣uod. epist. 99. and turneth it into all the waies that it may bee taken and vnderstood, that so hee might come by the true sence, and yet hath not remembred Purgatorie in any one small word: in the end he concludeth thus; That to the end that hee may auoide the inconueniences, that follow other expositions, it must bee vnderstood not of any going downe into hell, but of the operation and po∣werfull working of his deitie, which he exercised from the beginning of the world: that is to say, that he preached vnto them, which liued here below, imprisoned in this mortall bodie by the spi∣rit of his diuine nature, sometimes by inward and secret inspirations, and sometimes by outward admonitions, proceeding from the mouth of the iust. And thus it is to bee seene, how that for Purgatorie hee vnderstandeth this present life. Thom. 3. p. . 62. art. 2. And Thomas doeth likewise ap∣proue the same, handling this question of purpose. To bee shorte, Cardinall Hugo saith: In carcere, in the prison of sinne and vnbeliefe, &c. And their Glosse: Of the dark∣nesse of infidelitie, or of carnall desires, &c. And Lyranus: Bound and chained with the com∣mon custome of sinne. And as concerning the whole place, they vnderstand it, Of the preaching of Noe, which he practised amongst the infidels of his time, Heb. 13. to draw them to repen∣tance, by the spirit of Christ: for saith he, Christ is yesterday and to day the same, and for e∣uer and euer: what maketh all this then for Purgatorie? In the first of S. Iohn: If any man see his brother sinne a sinne that is not to death, 1. Iohn 5.16. let him aske of God, and he will gine him life: to all them I say, which doe not sinne vnto death. There is a sinne vnto death, I doe not say that thou shouldest pray for it &c. From hence they in∣ferre, those which sinne vnto death, Are those that persist in infidelitie, saith Saint Augu∣stine, euen vnto death: and for such wee ought not to pray, either whiles they liue, August. de cor. & grat. c. 12. or when they are dead. For such then as haue shewed some repentance, or which haue sinned venially, wee must pray both whiles they liue, and when they be dead. But how can this be gathered out of this text? wherein the Apostle speaketh directly of
them with whom we liue, Idem in En∣chir. ad Lau∣rent. c. 82. Idem de scrm. Domini. in Monte. Tertul. l. de pudicitia. and whose workes we see, of the dead, not so much as one word. They alleadge vnto vs S. Augustine, who expoundeth it of perpetuall impe∣nitencie: let them not then dissemble, how that in another place hee expoundeth it of certaine kindes of sinnes, as also doth Tertullian. Neither would I haue them to conceale it, how that the most parte of the old writers doe dissent from Saint Au∣gustine, as Saint Ierome, Athanasius, Chrysostome, Saint Basill, Saint Ambrose, &c. all which though they vnderstand by this sinne vnto death, the sinne against the ho∣ly Ghost, yet therewithall they vnderstande, that this is not a finall impenitencie, which is not discerned but at the time of death: but an obstinate sinne which is com∣mitted in the life time, and in the course of the same. Saint Mathew saith: That this sinne is not pardoned either in this world or in the world to come. In this world, that is to say, in this life: and in this sence our aduersaries doe alledge it against vs; but they doe not remember themselues of any thing els. The Apostle to the Hebrewes saith: It is impossible that such persons should bee renewed by repentance. Hebr. 6. Then they may bee im∣penitent, yea sinne vnto death before death. But what manner of conclusion will there follow hereof in the end? Wee must not pray for such as sinne vnto death, therefore wee must pray for the deade, which sinne not vnto death? Againe, wee must pray, to the ende that life may bee giuen them, that is to say, to the ende that their sinnes may bee pardoned. Now is it not a point of their doctrine, that sinnes do not come in purgatorie, but that there is onely the punishment of sins? but and if any sinnes, yet none but those that are sleight ones? But in their conclu∣sion they except not any sinne, saue that which is vnto death. To be short, to such as well consider the text, it will appeare that they are so farre off from reasoning accor∣ding to it, as that in deed they reason directly to the contrarie. And furthermore not one of the old writers, neither yet of the newe, doeth alleadge it to this purpose; al∣though the greatest part do handle and expound the same, and that to another end. Now these are all the places of the new Testament, from which they go about to proue their purgatorie: places that are obscure and hard and diuersly interpreted by the Doctors, but either in a farre other sence then our aduersaries take them: or else mystically and metaphorically for the most part, and therefore not to be allead∣ged in any controuersie of diuinitie, no more then in anie other: for controuersies cannot bee discussed by textes in controuersie. And this is the reason why the good man Perion said: That in all the canonical scripture he knew not any place, eyther prouing pur∣gatorie, Roffensis. or praier for the dead. And the Bishop of Rochester: That of a truth there is not any place for the prouing of the same, except it bee some such as is very intricate. And Petrus a Soto after him: That there is not any cleare euidence and testimony in the scripture for Purgatorie: but that many other thinge: ought to bee belieued, which are not contained therein. To what end therefore serueth all this shamelesse dealing, thus to tumble & tosse the scripture vpside downe, thus to racke and torment all the textes one after another, seeing they know in their consciences, that the scripture knoweth not any purgatorie? But for certaine, that text which knoweth not to agree any whit with their exposition, doeth know well enough to admit and receiue ours: It doeth not know theirs, Mark. 16. being alwaies for the proofe of that third pretended place: for it saith, Who so shall belieue and be baptised, shall be saued: but hee that shall not haue belieued, shalbe condemned, Iohn. 3 &c. Againe, God hath sent his onely Sonne into the world, to the ende, that hee that shall belieue in him might not perish, but haue euerlasting life: Hee that belieueth in him is not iudged, but he that belieueth not in him is alreadie iudged, &c. Againe, He that belieueth in him which hath sent me, hath eternal life, he cometh not into iudgement, he is already past frō death tolife. And so passed the theefe into Paradice the same houre. Againe, Blessed are they that die in the Lord; Rom. 4. for from that time saith the spirit, they rest from their labours; blessed are they whose sinnes are forgiuen. But according to their owne sayings, the sins of those which are in their Purgatory, are they not remitted, & are they not dead in the Lord? And yet what time must they indure in the burning and flaming fire of this purga∣torie? And thus sayeth Saint Paule: That there is no condemnation to them that are in
Iesus Christ. And thus said our Lord to that man: Let the dead burie the dead: who would not haue hindred him from performing any worke of charitie. And S. Paule againe: Take no care for those which sleepe. All these places of scripture cannot stande with Purgatorie. But they haue very well knowne ours, euen Christ the eternall Son of God, who by himselfe hath wrought the purging away of our sinnes, Apocal. 14. Heb 1. Hebr. 9. Tit. 2. Ephes. 5. 1. Iohn 1. whose blood cleanseth our consciences from the workes of death: who hath giuen himselfe, for to purge a people pe∣culiar to himselfe, to cleanse a Church for himselfe by the washing of water in the word: who pur∣geth and cleanseth vs by his blood from all sin. In so much as that through that confidence, which we haue in this our so sufficient Purgatorie, we are able to say, without fearing any other: I desire to bee loosed and to depart from hence, and to bee with Christ. Because likewise that wee know, that if the tabernacle of this our house of earth be dissolued, Philip. 1.2. Cor. 5. we shall haue abuilding with God, and that not such a building as is made with hands, but eternally abi∣ding in the heauens. And that not after some intermission of time, but presently and forthwith, hodié inquam, to day: euen from the houre in which hee shall call vs out of this world, because that we belieue in him. And therefore also wee haue alreadie at∣tained life, yea we are alreadie passed from death to life. CHAP. VIII. That neither the Primitiue Church, nor the fathers of the same, for the space of many a∣ges, did euer acknowledge the Purgatorie of the Church of Rome. BVt say they, if we should go to it but according to mans reason, would not it giue sentence with vs, that so many persons as die so quickly, haue need of this manner of purging, their soules departing impure and vncleane out of this world, and so vnfit to be receiued into heauen with that their pollution? Where∣vnto we answere them, that the barre and iudgement seat that is directed by humane reason hath no place in the Church: that in that skill of the law which professeth the defence and maintenance of Christianitie, it is a shame to speake without testimonie and authori∣tie out of the word, and that a great deale more, then to speake in the ciuill law, with∣out law: But how much more shame is it then, when a man vndertaketh to speake for Christianitie, and holdeth a course contrarie to the scriptures. And this we haue learned from the ancient writers. Tertullian: Let vs reuerence the fulnesse of the scrip∣tures, if we will not vndergoe the woe ordained for such as adde vnto them. Basill: This is to fall away from the faith, either to cast away and cut off any parte of that which is written, or to adde any thing that is not. Chrysostome; The thoughtes of the hearers halt when they haue a doctrine deliuered them without any scripture. S. Augustine: Let vs see if this be taught in the law or prophets, or in the Gospell or Epistles. Gerson in like manner: Let vs suspect all manner of reuelations, if they bee not confirmed by the law and the Prophetes. But these an∣cient fathers here alleadged haue also belieued Purgatorie. Let vs admit that it is so, (as it is not in deed) yet we answere as we haue done before: that we do not allow of the old fathers, as lawgiuers in the Church: For there is but one law maker (saith the Apostle) euen Iesus Christ: and themselues tooke it as an iniurie offred vnto them to be so reputed: only they accompted of themselues as expounders of the law ordained by our Lord, and of the scriptures which he hath left vs. And this is the greatest ho∣nour that can be giuen them in the Church: and in this respect and consideration we honour their bookes, we weigh and ponder their expositions; where they are found to differ one from another, we endeuour our selues to make our choice of the best, e∣uen those which come neerest vnto the analogie and proportion of faith. If wee doe otherwise, if wee admit of them as authours of doctrines, and not interpretors, wee shall be in danger to bee as we said, Anabaptistes with Saint Cyprian; Montanistes
with Tertullian, Chiliastes with Ireneus, &c. In stead that wee are to abide and con∣tinue Christians with Christ, whose voice the sheepe heare: who alone hath the woraes of eternall life. Now we haue heretofore cited all the Doctors, to the interpreting of the places, produced and alleadged by our aduersaries for purgatorie, who could not see it there where they did find it; who for the most part haue in the said places found the contrarie: and yet we will proceed on further, as namely to shew, that the auncient fathers haue affirmed such Maximes, as wherewith the Romish Purgatorie cannot stand: As that when they haue at any time spoken of it, they doe it not affirmatiue∣ly, but doubtfully, and not as of an article of religion, but as of a fantasie or opinion that may bee propounded and receiued for arbitrarie: that for the most parte what they haue saide, cannot agree with that which wee are in controuersie about at this day. And finally, that if they had belieued it for a necessarie article, they had colle∣cted and gathered from thence, as from a principle of faith, such corollaries & con∣sequences as wee see at this day: which neuer came to light, till a long time after, & one long after another, and that by the succession of many ages. And to the end that this may more clearely be seene, let vs call to mind, at our entrance into the same, what purgatorie it is whereof we speake, as namely of a certaine third place, whither the soules of the faithfull, dead in the faith of Christ, go at the time of their depar∣ture out of this life, there to bee tormented with fire, before they bee receiued into the place of blisse: yea and that so long, as vntill by the praiers and suffrages of those that are liuing there be satisfaction made for the temporall punishments due for the same: and that all the spottes of vncleannesse bee purged and cleansed away: that is, for that (say they vnto vs) by faith in Christ, wee haue remission of the fault and sinne onely, and not of the eternall punishment due to the same, which by the fa∣uour and power of the keies is changed from being eternall and made temporall, and for that wee must of necessitie satisfie this temporall punishment either in this life, or in the life to come by our selues, or by some others, &c. And now behold the Maxims of the ancient fathers contrarie to Purgatorie. The propositi∣ons held by the old writers contrarie to purgatory. Basil. reg. bren. inter 10. & 13. Ambr. in Luc. l. 10. c. 22. The first: that God by Iesus Christ doth wholly and altogether deface and blot out both the sinne and the punishment. S. Basill: Thesoule wallowing in the mire of sinne, how can it approach or come neere vnto God? verily by constantly and stedfastly belieuing, that the purging and cleansing of his sinnes is accomplished by the blood of Iesus Christ in the multitude of the mercies of God, according to that which he himselfe hath spoken; If your sinnes were as red as skarlet, they shall be made as white as the wooll. Saint Ambrose: We embrace and take hold on Christ, that so hee may say vnto vs, be not afraide of the sinnes of this worlde, neither of the floodes of afflictions which vexe and besiege the bodie, J am the remission of sinnes, &c. Saint Augustine: August. de verb. Dom. ser. 37. & 31. Idem de Trini. l. 4 c. 2. Christ in taking vpon him the punishment and not the fault, hath blotted out and vtterly defaced both the fault and punishment due to the same. Againe, Wee liue not in this world without sinne, but wee shall go out of this world without sinne. Againe, What shall wee pray for in this life? verily that wee may finde remission and forgiuenesse in the worlde to come. What profiteth this pardon and forgiuenesse? it wipeth not away the staine. He that acknow∣ledgeth a wrinkle, laboureth to smooth and make it plaine: And where then are our wrinkles stretched out and smoothed? &c. verily vpon the crosse of Christ, for vpon this crosse hee hath shed his blood: and this is that whereby the Church is cleansed from all spottes and wrinkles, as a thing verie cleane and bright, &c. Againe; There is but one purging of the vniust, the blood of that iust one and the humbling of God. Chrysost. in 1. Cor. hom. 18. Saint Chrysostome in many places: That God punisheth not his faithfull children, either vpon any pleasure that he taketh therein, neither vpon any creditor-like rigour, which he exerciseth vpon vs. In that he chastiseth vs (saith he) it is rather for the admonishing of vs, then for the condemning of vs; for the curing of vs, then for the correcting of vs; for the amending of vs, then for the punishing of vs. The Apostle (saith he) saith not, 1. Cor. 11.31 if wee punish and afflict our selues, if we take punishment of our selues, but if wee iudge our selues, that is to say, if onely wee will acknowledge our sinnes, wee shall not bee iudged. Chrisost. in Ge∣nes. hom. 44. Againe, I do require (saith the Lord) but one thing, which is, that men woulde confesse their sinnes, and that they would abstaine from committing them any more, and then I
will not lay any more punishment vpon them for their sinnes. And in another place: Idem in ro∣em. in Isa. I will not (saith he) that thou shouldest say vnto me, I haue sinned, how may I be freed from so many sins? Thou canst not procure the meanes: but thy Lord is able, who will in such sort blot out thy sins, as that there shal not remaine any marke or print thereof, for otherwise then it is wont to fall out in the bodie: for in the bodie after the healing of a wound there remaineth a scarre, God bee par∣doneth the sin, God remitteth and forgiueth the punishment, God giueth righteousnes therewith∣all, he maketh also the sinner equall with him that hath not sinned, &c. S. Ierome: Hieronym. in Esa. c. 66. Idem in Dani∣el. c 7. & in psal. 31. God is cal∣led a consuming fire, to the end he way consume all the vices that are in vs, our hay, our woode, our stubble: I thinke that it was that fire that did sit vpon the tongs of the Apostles. Againe, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiuen, and whose sinnes are couered: because saith hee, that that which is hidden is not seene: and that which is not seene is not imputed; & that which is not imputed is not punished, &c. The schoolmen affirme the like. Lombard saith: Lombard. 3. D. 19. If we looke vpon and behold with a right faith, him that was hanged vpon the tree for vs, we are set free from the bonds of the Deuill: we are deliuered from sin & Sathan in such sort as that af∣ter this life there is not any thing to be found in vs to be punished: for our Lord by his death, by this onely true sacrifice hath put out and extinguished all those sins that were in vs, whereby the Deuill had power to hold & lay hands vpon vs to punish vs. Whereupon also Scotus saith: Scot. in l. sent. D. 15. Glos in c. 1. de poenit. D. No man can satisfie for sinnes, saue in the power and vertue of the passion of Christ. And the Glose of the Decree: Sinnes are not forgiuen, either for the contrition of the hart, neither yet for the confession of the mouth, but by the grace of God. And yet the contrition of the heart is a signe that the sins are remitted, & the outward satisfaction a signe of the contrition of the hart: for grace goeth before contrition, &c. Now let our aduersaries agree and reconcile these Maxims here set downe with those of purgatorie, whose foundation they will haue to be a necessitie of satisfaction, the forgiuenesse of the sin, but not of the punishment, and an insufficiencie of that purgation which the blood of Christ hath made, &c. The second, and it affordeth as little fauour to the aduersarie as the first. Iust Mart. in quaest. & e∣spons. q. 10. Iustin Martyr. The historie of Lazarus and the rich man goeth through stitch with this doctrine: namely, that after the separation of the soule and the bodie, men cannot possibly receiue any suc∣cour or reliefe by any manner of carefull prouidence whatsoeuer. The same: Quaest. 75. After that the soules are seperated from their bodies, there is presently a distinction made betwixt the good & the euill, the one to bee conueighed into Paradice, and the other into hell, &c. Iustin in Try∣phon. Cypr. contr Demetr. tract. Againe in his Tryphon: This is a sentence of Christ, In quibus vos deprehendero, in ijsdem vos iudi∣cabo. And S. Cyprian expoundeth it: Such (saith he) as God findeth thee when he calleth thee out of this world vnto himselfe, for such a one will he iudge thee. Againe, We exhort you to make satisfaction, whiles you haue any of these worldly things left you, &c. Againe, After that a man is departed hence, there remaineth no more place for repentance, there is not any further vse of satisfaction: thereupon followeth either the losse of life or the sauing of it, &c. Thou al∣though thou be vpon thy departure, vpon the laying downe of this life, pray vnto God for the par∣doning of thy sinnes, confesse them to him in faith; he pardoneth those which confesse; he letteth loose such as belieue that they may be saued; and from the path of death men passe into the place of immortalitie. What a cold comfort had it beene vnto them if he had said: Athanas. in va∣riis quaest. quae cius utulo se∣runtur. q. 19. Men ma∣king an end of this their walke, doe passe into the torments of Purgatorie? Athanasi∣us: The soules departed hence, it is a profound question and hidden from vs, to shew whither they go, and in what condition they are: for neuer did God permit it vnto any man to returne & make report of these matters: onely wee learne from the scriptures, that the soules of sinners go downe vnder the earth, into such place, as wherein they neither see the light, nor the maner of the liues of men: but that those of the iust and righteous since the death of Christ went into Paradice, which our Lord hath set open, not for the theefe onely, but for all the soules of the Saints. Basil. in Moral. reg. 1. c. 2. & 5. Gregor. Nazi∣anz in laudem Caesar. Saint Basill: The time whiles men liue here is the time of repentance: for so soone as wee bee gone hence, the time of doing well is cut off and taken from vs. Gregorie Nazianzene: The words of the wise leade me to belieue, that euerie soule that is excellent and beloued of God, so soone as it is departed hence being loosed out of the bodie, receiueth an vnspeak eable delight and pleasure of the liuely feeling of that felicitie, which is appointed for it, and betaketh it selfe with a ioyfull flight to the Lord. How agreeth this ioy with griefe and paine? this flight to God with
purgatorie? Ambros. de Bono mortis. S. Ambrose: Dauid laboured to attaine to the blessed communion of the saints, crauing by reason of the filthinesse cleauing vnto vs in this worldly pilgrimage, that his sinnes might be forgiuen him before his departure out of this life: for hee hath not obtained remis∣sion of his sinnes here, shall neuer come by it there: It will not be there at all, because that such a one shall not possiblie attaine vnto eternall life, seeing that eternall life is the remission of sinnes. Idem ibid. And therefore (he saith) forgiue me, to the end I may be comforted before I go hence and be no more. Againe, When the day shalk come (saith he) let vs go on without feare, di∣rectly to the companie of the Saintes: for wee shall go to our fathers, to them which haue instru∣cted vs in the faith; to that end, that when our workes doe faile vs, our faith might sustaine and succour vs, August. ad Maced. cp. 54. and our inheritance defend vs, &c. The Maxims of S. Augustine in like manner are: After this life euery man shall haue that which he hath purchased vnto himselfe: In this life there is place for repentance for such as indeuour themselues thereto: Idem de temp. serm. 66. Here the mercie of God doth helpe; but out of this life it serueth to no vse, &c. In such case as thy last day findeth thee, in such case shall the last day of the worlde take holde vppon thee. For as a man dieth in the one, Idem de verb. Apost. ser. 18. so shall hee bee iudged in the other. There are two places of abode, the one in eternall fire, the other in an euerlasting kingdome. The one (saith hee in another place) for the faithfull, Idem in psal. 32. Idem de pec∣cat. meritis. l. 1, c, 2, 8. Idem in l. qui ei adscribitur de vanitate saeculi. Chrysost. de Lazaro, hom. 2 Idem in Ge∣nes. hom 5. & 3. de paenit Hiero. in 13. q. 2. c. in praesent. which is the kingdome of heauen: the other for the Apostates and vnfaithful in hell: of any third we know nothing at all, neither yet do we find any thing therof in the scriptures. Againe, There is no third or middle place for any man: so that he which is not with Christ, can not possiblie bee any where els but with the Deuilles. Againe, Know this, that so soone as the soule is seperated from the bodie, either it is placed in paradice for his good workes, or else for his sinnes cast headlong into hell, in Tartara inferni: and therefore choose you to which of these you will stand, &c. Chrysostome: So long as wee liue here vppon earth we promise to our selues goodly things through hope, but so soone as we are deceased, there is no more time of repen∣ting vs, neither yet of washing away of our sinnes. For (saith he in another place) hee that hath not washed himselfe cleane from his sinnes in this life shall not after it finde any comfort or consolation: for here is the time of wrastling and fighting; there of triumphing and receiuing of giftes. S. Ierome: So long as we are in this world we may receiue aide and succour one of ano∣ther, either by praier or good counsell: but when as wee shall once come before the throne of Christ, neither can Iob, Daniel, nor Noe pray for vs, but euery man shal beare his owne burthen. But our fathers of Trent haue caused the same to be razed in the Table. Index expurg. 10. Hieronym. ad Ga. c. 6. Againe, vpon this place of the Galathians: Let vs doe good whiles it is time, &c. Here (saith he) is the last time of sowing, let vs make speed, that we may haue sowen all our fieldes, &c. Againe, vp∣on the Epitaph of Paula: All this which returneth to the Lord is accompted amongst his family: That which we make accompt of to be lost, that is it which is placed in heauen: for in that that Paula hath dwelt in this bodie, she hath beene absent from the Lord, as it were for so much time as one iourney or voiage would require, Peregrinabatur a Domino, &c. Againe he saith: Id mde obitu lesillae ad Paulam. After that Blessilla was returned to her maker, discharged of the burthen of this life, and aduanced again to her old possession and inheritance, from which she had discontinued, &c. Againe. Let vs weepe for the dead, but for him that is gone to hell, not for them who are ac∣companied with hostes of Angels; not those to whom Christ himselfe commeth before, &c. Epi∣phanius in the same sence: Epiphan. . l, 2, tom. 1. In the world to come after that man is dead, there is no succour, no place for fasting, calling to repentance, or of making any vaine ostentation of almes deeds, &c. For as after the mowing downe of the corne the graine addeth nothing to his grosnesse, neither yet is subiect to be corrupted with the wind, &c. So likewise all succour and help either by fasting, pennance, &c. after death is cleane gone and vanished. For Lazarus commeth not from where he was to the rich man, nor the rich man to Lazarus: Abraham casteth not his spoiles and boo∣tie to the poore man to inrich him: . Ide apud Tertullianum ad Scamina producete, ad Marter. c 3, & apud Ambr. l. 1. de Offic. neither yet doeth the rich man any more receiue the thing which he requesteth: how importunate soeuer he were with courteous & bountifull Abraham: For the garners are sealed vp, the time accomplished, the battell finisht, the champions their places voide and emptie, and the garlandes distributed. Such as haue fought are at rest, they which haue not excelled are gone: those which haue not striuen and fought are not any more: such as haue beene ouercome are cast out: all thinges are fully consumate and finished. Let our ad∣uersaries here againe reconcile these Maxims and their purgatorie; two places and
not one more, with a third: the immediate inioying of the heauenly life, with their darke and dolorous abode in Purgatorie, the vnprofitablenesse of all manner of sa∣tisfactions after this life, with their Masses, Suffrages, & other pretended satisfactions. Some will say vnto vs: yea but it is receiued into the Christian Churches; From whence purgatory came, and in what sence this word is vsed of the old writers. Plato de Ani∣ma & in Gor∣gia. Euseb. l. 1. de prepar. Euang. c. vlt. & l. 12. Arnob. l. 2. contr. Gentes. yea it raigneth there: yea it triumpheth there. And how then, or frō whence came it, or en∣tred it thereinto, seeing it is not of Christ? By what dore, or rather through what win∣dowes, seeing that it did neuer enter by the scriptures? verily we haue declared here∣tofore: As namely, that they that were conuerted to Christ, whether from Iudaisme or from Paganisme, did bring with them either their ceremonies, or their opinions: & this happened in this article, as in others: For Plato who liued about 400. yeares before the comming of Christ, hath this peece of doctrine so intire & whole, as that it may seeme to be nothing else then his words translated. For he maketh, and that by the report of Eusebius himselfe, in his booke of the soule, three degrees of men: some that haue liued well and vertuously, whom they conceiued to haue their abode in the Elisian fields, as accompting them for most pure places and heauenly habitati∣ons: Those whom he calleth , past hope of amendment, whome hee pla∣ceth in Tartaro, in hell, from whence they can neuer come out, and those which haue committed sinnes, but , such as are curable and veniall, whome hee casteth into burning flouds, there to accomplish and make perfect their repentance, to the ende they may bee purged therein, and after their purgation receiue absolution. And in deed he vseth these wordes , to purge and absolue. Yet notwithstan∣ding note, that Eusebius who compareth the opinions of Philosophers with the do∣ctrines of Christians, doth not make any mention therein, but onely of two conditi∣ons of men after death; namely, of the saued or of the damned. A plaine and cleare testimony, that the Church in his time did acknowledge no other but these two. Vir∣gill describeth it at large in the sixt booke of his Aeneidos: Aliis sub gurgite vasto Infectum eluitur scelus aut exuritur igni: Virgil. l. 6. Aencid. Where he may seeme to haue expressed the two verbes before mentioned, . And, Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orbe, Concretam exemit labem, &c. Wherefore S. Augustine needed not to be abashed, when he said: August. de ci∣uit. Dei, l. 21. c. 13. & 17. That Purgatorie was one of Platoes doctrines. As also, That the dead may be relieued by the suffrages & sacrifi∣ces of the liuing: in so much as that the souls which are destitute therof are stil delaied & caused in lingring manner to lie languishing in torments: Homer. Odyss. 12. Virg. l. 6. Aenei. Alcor. Azo. 10. as wee reade of the soule of Elpenor in Homer, and of Palinurus in Virgill, &c. In like manner the Iesuits do not let to con∣fesse, that purgatory is sound there. And we do further giue them to vnderstand, that it is all whole to be had in the Turks Alcoran, if that of the Paganes doe not content them. The Iewes as we haue seene, learned the same of the pagans, vpon their falling away from their maner of worship & religion: and yet not so, as that it preuailed with them to get a place in their Church: for in the time of our Lord there appeared no markes, or notes of any such thing, but rather the contrary. Paul. Fagius in Deut. c. 14. Anton Mar∣garita de su∣perstitionibus Iudaic. The bookes of remem∣brance which they vse at this day, & wherin they name three times a yere those which are dead in the yeare, praying to God that he would place them in his paradice with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, &c. are come since thē. And this is made most apparant by their order: for the extreame and deadly sicke was demanded if he did not perse∣uere to hold fast & belieue the 13. Articles of their faith, amongst the which the ele∣uenth is of the glorie to come, and of eternall death: the twelfth of their faith and beliefe in the Messias, for want whereof they say the law is vnprofitable: the thir∣teenth of the viuification or resurrection of the deade: of Purgatorie not a worde, neither yet of the Suffrages by which they should bee freed out of the same. There happeneth one to die, whereupon wee come to see all their ceremonies, euen to the least. Their neerest kinsfolkes doe rent their garmentes: they eate not for that day in the house, but without: they eate not any flesh, neyther drinke
any wine except it bee vpon their Sabbath: They neither wash nor annoint them∣selues for the space of seuen daies: They lie vpon the ground, and refraine the com∣panie of their wiues: They follow the bodie bare-footed: They light a lampe for the space of seuen whole nightes, setting it on the house floure, perswaded there∣to through a sottish and fantasticall conceipt, that the soule commeth during the same time for to seeke the bodie, &c. And this is all that humane superstition had till then inuented, the most part thereof being contrarie to the pure worde of the eternall God, forbidding them in expresse wordes not to torment themselues for their dead. And as for their praier, if you obserue the tearmes thereof, it will ap∣peare to come neerer the nature of a wish, then of a prayer: Let his soule rest, let his sleepe bee in peace, let the gates of paradice bee opened vnto him by the Comforter that is to come, &c. And what is there in all this that is common with Purgatorie? And in deed their Capitula patrum, doe not make mention of any moe then two places. But amongst Christians, the first seedes of this doctrine are contained in the bookes de∣clared to be Apocripha by the Primitiue Church, and so by consequent the doctrine also is Apocrypha, because it hath no other foundation besides them. A certaine man named Hermas in his visions asketh an old woman, if after the casting of certain stones, there remaine any more pennance to bee done, she answered, that they could not come to a certaine tower, but that they should be put into a lower roome where they are tormented vntill they haue accomplished the daies of their sinnes. A booke of the Actes of Saint Andrew prayeth vnto God for an old Pandor, and saith vnto him; Iren. l. 5. We obtaine much mercie of him for the dead, and why should we faile for this man which is aliue? But the doctrine of the Church is to bee read in Ireneus: The priestes (saith he) the disciples of the Apostles say, that those which are translated from hence are conueighed into paradice, which is prepared for iust men, and such as haue the spirit: whither Saint Paule was rauished, and where he heard wordes that cannot bee vttered, and that they abide and con∣tinue there vnto the end of the world. Index expur∣gator. p. 71. Iust. Martyr in resp ad quaest. Orthod. q. 7. And therefore vpon good ground doth Erasmus shew, that he spake as one that knew not purgatory. And this obseruation the fathers of Trent haue caused to be raced. And Iustin Martyr also, After (saith he) the departure of this bodie, there is presently made a seperation of the iust and vniust; for they are caried in∣to places worthy of them: that is to say, the soules of the iust into Paradice, where they inioy the company of Angels, & Archangels, as also the sight of our Sauiour Iesus Christ; but those of the vniust and wicked into the infernall places, &c. They will alleadge against vs Clemens A∣lexandrinus and Origen: Clem. Alex. l. 6 The one whereof laboureth to proue by the supposed A∣pocryphes of S. Peter & S. Paule, that the Saintes liuing in the time of the olde Testa∣ment were saued by the law of Moses, and the Grecians by Philosophie: That Christ and his Apostles did preach the Gospell in hell, Origen his purgatory. Orig. hom. 8. in Leuit. Hom 25. in Numer. Hom. 6. in Ex∣od. in ep. ad Rom. c. 11. In psal. 36. hom. 3. In Hierem. Bellarm l. 2. de purgat. c. 8. ¶ 8. septim. Synod. 5. c. 11. Synod. 7. ex prato spiri∣tualt. Iohan. Dia∣con. in vir. B. Greg. l. 2. c 45. thereby to conuert the damned: and that both in this worlde, as also in that to come, yea euen in hell there may bee vse and place graunted for repentance, &c. And the other building vppon this his maisters bad foundation, a great deale worse: As, that all men how holy soeuer, are to passe this Purgatorie, euery one according to his proportion, S. Peter. S. Paul, &c. the one to be purged by fire, and the other by water, more or lesse, &c. And again, that the most wicked, the most miscreants, yea the Deuilles themselues are purged, are a∣mended, yea and saued by the same. Now I desire to know of them if they will ap∣proue this Purgatorie of Origen? And if they doe not approue it, that then they would not obiect it any more vnto vs, neither yet any of those places which haue re∣lation thereunto: seeing also that Bellarmine intreating of Purgatory, doth acknow∣ledge that the fift generall Synode condemned and cursed Origen no lesse then Arri∣us and Nestorius: furthermore that the seuenth general Councell maketh mention of a reuelation wherein he was seene in hell amongst others the Arch-heretickes. And the same is likewise confirmed by Iohan. Diaconus in the life of Gregorie. But it is worth the noting, how that Origen had not as yet learned, that these punishmentes were mittigated and lightned by suffrages: for there is not found any maner of print or note of any such thing in all his purgatorie. These pollutions and sinnes go for
no better then matter for the fire and torments, without any hope of release or ran∣some. And still as these fantasies continued and abode with some curious spirites, they were condemned in the fift generall Councell by the East Church, The Apologie of the Greci∣ans presented by Michael Bishop of E∣phesus. Vincent. Lyri∣nensis. Lactan. de di∣uino praemio. c. 21. and euen in that which concerneth their false foundation: namely, that Christ hath purchased the remission of sinnes, but not of the punishment. And this appeareth to bee so by the Apologie giuen by the Greekes in the Councell of Basill. These fantasticall dreames of Origen notwithstanding, by reason of the reputa∣tion of his learning did leaue their impressions in the Latine Church: whereupon Vincentius Lirinensis had iust cause to say: That Origen his knowledge and zeale was a great temptation to the Christian Church. Lactantius saith: That men are not iud∣ged presently after their death, but that they are kept in a common prison vntill the day of iudgement, in which they are to bee tried by fire. This place is ill allead∣ged by our aduersaries: for they do not place together the good & the bad, the faith∣full and vnfaithfull, at the time of their departing out of this life: neither do they hold that purgatorie sleepeth without doing any thing, vnto the day of iudgement: for they will haue it occupied about the dead from the day of their death. Againe it is apparant, that in the time of Lactantius, the doctrine of the Church was cleane contrarie: For Eusebius, as we haue said, comparing the opinion of the Platonistes therewith, maketh but two estates and conditions after this life: whereas they made three. But let it be for the making of the comparison the more full, that hee did not altogether forget the third. But they alleadge vnto vs, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hillarie, Saint Ierome, &c. The purgato∣rie spoken of by certaine of the old fathers is not the same with that of the Church of Iome. Ambr. in psal. 118. & in psal. 36. & 2. ad Ti∣moth. 2. Then let vs see if wee shall be able to find such euidence, as may make vs acknowledge this their purgatorie in them. Verily, there is no man that can bee ignorant how greatly Saint Ambrose did esteeme of Origen, when as the most part of his expositions are translated word for word from him. And thereupon likewise his opinion touching Purgatorie, doth nothing differ, and therefore also no lesse worthy to be condemned then his: All men (saith he) which are, haue beene, or shall be, the one onely Christ excepted, shall be purged by fire: The sonnes of Leui, Ezechiel, Daniel, &c. if they be not consumed, yet at the least they shalbe fired: if they be not drowned, yet they shall bee wette and dipt in the wa∣ter: for so was Iohn the Euangelist himselfe, whom the Lord loued so much: so was Saint Peter, which receiued the keies of heauen: There is not any one but Christ onely which doeth not smel of this fire, who is the righteousnesse of God not hauing any sinne: so that in him there is nothing found for this fire to consume or burne. And this hee amplifieth by two seuerall Al∣legories: the one taken from the glittering sword which was set at the entrance into Paradise: the other from the people of Israel, which went through the red sea, &c. He addeth hereto, that this triall and proofe by fire shall bee made in the day of iudgement, by the vniuersall burning of the world, which shall vniuersally purge all men, but euery one according to his nature: euen as the fire doth melt the lead otherwise then it doth the gold, &c. S. Hillarie no lesse addicted to Origen, Hilar. in com∣ment in psal. 118. holdeth the same opinion, and proceedeth yet further, saying: If the virgine Marie, the virgin of God must also vndergo the sentence of this iudgement; (of this fire hee spake before, through which wee must all passe,) who is hee that dare desire to bee iudged of God? And in another place hee saith: Idem Canon in Mat. 3. Hieronym. Amos 3. ex A∣mo. 7.14. Ezech. 46. It remaineth that those which are baptised with the holy Ghost bee made perfect, that is to say, accomplished and fully refined by the fire of the last iudgement, &c. Saint Ierome likewise is infected with the like opinions by continuall reading of Origen: He will call (saith hee) the fire vnto iudgement, and behold it commeth at his sum∣mons, and first of all deuoureth the depth, that is to say, all sortes of sinnes, wood, baye, & stub∣ble: and afterward it eateth at once the parte and portion, that is to say, it commeth to the Saintes which the Lorde hath made choice of, to belong to him, &c. Againe, Hieronym. in vlt. cap. Esa. Euerie crea∣ture is vncleane and must bee purged by the fire of God for the Sabbath day, wherein hee shall haue eternall rest. Likewise hee meaneth, that euen wicked Christians shall bee so purged by this fire, as that in the end they shall proue and trie the clemen∣cie of God: And he alleadgeth Origen thereupon, concealing in the meane time the
rest of his opinion, for that it finally extended vnto the Deuils. But what helpeth all this for the prouing of the purgatorie whereof wee speake: which is made for the faithfull penitents, and not for them which die in their sinne: for to fulfil the punish∣ment, Sixt. Senens. l. 5 and not to cleanse or wipe away the fault where sinnes haue no entrance, much lesse merites: where the wicked haue no place, much lesse the Saints, much lesse also the Apostles, and much lesse the holy virgine: which taketh his beginning so soone as death hath made an end, and is imployed about his office euerie day without cea∣sing, and without attending the day of iudgement? And notwithstanding they are not ashamed to alleadge vnto vs these places which themselues condemne in their bookes, That it was a disputable doctrine. and which to be short cannot make any thing for them, or against vs. Yea and that furthermore this was but an opinion wherein men were let alone and left to range according to the pregnancie of their wit and capacitie, and not any doctrine receiued and admitted into the Church; it appeareth clearely: for Saint Augustine doth not faine or dissemble the gainsaying and disallowing of it, neither yet the publike confutation thereof in his bookes, and that not onely with∣out all checke or dislike, August de Ge∣nes contr. Ma∣nich l. 2. c. 10 In Psalm. 37. but with much praise, and to the good liking of men for the same. In a certaine place he suffered it to escape according to the opinion then currant: As, that after this life such as haue not husbanded their ground well are in daunger either of the fire of purgation, or of eternall fire: notwithstanding that hee vseth these wordes: Ʋideri apparere, that it seemeth to be apparant: and that these purgatorie punishmentes according to his owne iudgement, De ciuit. Dei, l. c. 10.25. De ciuit Dei, l. 21. c. 13. l. Cor. 3. are reserued vn∣to the last iudgement. But in the booke of the Citie of God, hee reckeneth vp all the opinions of Origen and others depending on him, who carried themselues in his time in the Church, as those who had founded themselues vppon the mercifull clemencie and fatherly mildnesse of God misexpounded, and confuteth them all, bringing them backe from their pretended likelihood of truth, vnto the truth it selfe, and from their conceited fantasie, to the infallible scriptures: Thou wilt (saith he) that the wicked Christians may in the end be saued by these pains of purgatorie, because that God is mercifull: it must then also follow, that the Deuils may also bee saued, that so hee may bee so much the more mercifull: for it is said equally and indifferently to the one and the other: 2. Cor 3. Goe into euerlasting fire, &c. If thou demandest the cause, this it is, (and then the which there is none more iust, neither yet more holy) namely, that the scripture which de∣ceiueth not, hath said so. Some haue abused the place of the 1. Corinth. 3. for Pur∣gatorie: but hee sheweth that this fire cannot bee vnderstood of hell: because that so it should become common both to the good and euill: but rather of tribulations and afflictions, August. de ci∣uit. Dei. l. 21. c. 16. & seq. Dicuntur. which are the exercises by which God maketh cleane his floure in this world: that after this iudgement also contrarie to Origen, there is not any paines of purgatorie. And as concerning those punishmentes and paines, which men might imagine to happen betwixt both, hee saith: If in this distance of time, which is betwixt the death of the bodie and the day of iudgement, men say, that the soules of the deceased doe suffer some such fire, Secularia ve∣nialia. August. de fi∣de operibus. Quantum ar∣bitror. Idem in En∣chirid. c. 69. Idem in quaest. ad Dulcitium. and that whether it bee there onely: or whether it be here and not there, or whether it bee here and there both, they find a fire of transitorie tri∣bulation, burning the veniall thinges of this world: I find no fault with them for such their assertion, because it may bee that it is true. And in another place hee saith: This expo∣sition (as I suppose) doth not wander farre from the way of truth. Againe, That some such thing may be after this life, it is not incredible. Againe, writing to Dulcitius, after he had handled the question: We haue written these thinges but in such forte, as that wee would not haue any canonicall authoritie giuen vnto them. Whereby wee see in the first place, that hee condemneth Origen, Saint Ambrose, and Hillarie, their purgatorie, &c. Secondly, that what hee sayeth of that space betwixt death and the day of iudge∣ment, hee speaketh doubtfully, and (as it were) interrogatiuelie affirming. And thirdly; That by the same hee doeth not vnderstande any materiall fire of the same nature with Hell-fire, as our aduersaries doe; but a fire of tribula∣tion or temptation, such as may fall out and happen in this life. And it is not
to be omitted how that the good fathers of Trent did not forget to cause to be raced out, many good places of Viues, Index Expurg pag. 38.39. August. de tempore, serm. 66. De verb. Apo∣stol. serm. 18. In ep. 80. ad Hesich. Hypognosti∣con. l. 5. Hieronym. in Ecclesiast. Olympiod. in Prouerb. c. 11. intreating of this matter in his commentaries vpon Augustines booke of the Citie of God. But in another place wee haue shewed that hee hath made but two places of abode: as in heauen, or in hell: and that hee shut∣teth out all manner of purgation after this life: and that hee cutteth it off quite and cleane: As concerning the third place, we know not any thing at all thereof, we find not any thing at all thereof in the scriptures. And what shall we say if S. Ierome speake no lesse re∣solutely? Jn what place soeuer (saith he) the tree falleth, there it lyeth, be it towards the South, or be it towards the North: In like manner looke in what place death doth take thee, in the same thou abidest for euer, be it that thy last day do find thee cruell and vnappeasable, or otherwise courteous and mercifull. And Olympiodorus doth cleare him vpon the same place: In whatsoeuer place, whether light or darke, a man is surprised and seazed vppon by death, bee hee following after vice, or bee hee following after vertue, he continueth in the same state and con∣dition, and in the same degree for euer. For either he resteth in the light of euerlasting happines, with the iust and righteous men, and Christ our Lord; or els he is tormented in darknes with the vnrighteous, and the Deuill which is their prince. They obiect vnto vs, that Saint Ierome saith in his commentaries vpon the Prouerbes: That soules are deliuered out of pur∣gatorie by Masses. But they should rather be ashamed: seeing that the worde Masse is not found, no not so much as once onely in all Saint Ierome. Seeing also that this booke cannot be his, because it citeth S. Gregorie, who liued more then a hundred and fiftie yeares after. And in deed this booke is found written by hand vnder the name of Beda: and there is neither the time, nor the stile, that are repugnant to the same. And the same is well allowed of by Marianus Victorius, Bishop of Amerin, who caused them to be imprinted amongst the works of S. Ierome vnder the name of Be∣da. And as for Chrysostome, he earst while expounded vnto vs the place of the Epi∣stle to the Corinthians of hell, and not of Purgatorie. And Marke Bishop of Ephe∣sus in his Apologie which he presented for the Greeke Churches in the Councell of Basill, auoucheth that he neuer thought of purgatorie. In like manner we haue seene here before, that he hath razed the foundations there of, partly by establishing the ful remission of sinnes in Christ, and partly in acknowledging but two places or waies to be gone after this life. But some obiect vnto vs, After what sort & maner the ancient fathers did vse o speake of a third place. that certaine of the olde fathers haue acknowledged a third place, diuers both from that of glorie, and the other of eternall condemna∣tion. Neither doe I denie it: but they must as freely acknowledge in what manner, for it hath beene a question in ancient time, whether at the time of departing out of this life the faithfull were receiued into their fullest glory, and the vnfaithful cast into the extremitie of their miserie: or els whether they were reserued in certaine places till after the resurrection: that is, the faithfull in a place of rest, where they began to tast their ioyes: and the vnbelieuers in a place of miserie, where they also began to feele their miserie. But these places were neuer imagined to put any distinction and difference betwixt faithfull and faithfull, but betwixt the faithfull and vnfaithfull. Againe they neuer meant, that the faithfull were there in any torment but in rest, not in any heat of burning fire, but in a place of refreshment, which likewise they called by the name of Refrigerium. And this place wherein they abode waiting and expec∣ting the day of iudgement, they called Abrahams bosome, the sweet rest vnder the Altar, the Paradice; alluding vnto the place of S. Luke, 16.23. and that of S. Iohn in the A∣pocalips, 6. And the place to be possessed by them after iudgement, they called The celestiall bosome, the Altar from on high, the celestiall hauen, &c. And it is to bee taken in this sence which Ireneus saith: Iren. l. 5. ad∣uers. haeres. That the soules of the dis∣ciples of our Lord, for which he hath fully accomplished the misteries of redempti∣on, do go into an inuisible place, appointed for them of God, and there shall attend the resurrection. And that which Iustinus Martyr demandeth by way of question, Iust. Mart. l. quaest. 76. q. namely, what it profited the theefe to enter into Paradice, seeing there is no crow∣ning of any til after the resurrection? & answereth: Eeuen thus much (saith he) in that he
was vouchsafed the companie of the blessed, Tertul. l. 3. c. 14 l. 4. aduer. Mar∣cion. c. 34. In Apol. c. 47. de anim. c. 7.9. 55.56. vlt. de resur. carn. 17. de iudicio Dom. c. 11. Idem de Ani¦ma passim. Nouat. de Tri∣nit. c. 1. Orig. hom. 7. in Leuit. l. . waiting for the day of reward and recompence, &c. That which Tertullian teacheth in infinite places: That the bosome of Abraham is a place of eternitie to those that are deade in his faith; if not heauenly, yet at the least higher then hell, which giueth rest and refreshment vnto the soules of the righteous, vntill the accomplishment and perfecting of all thinges in the resurrecti∣on: that heauen is not open to any so long as the earth is intire and whole: Terra adbuc salua, ne dixerim clausa: And that together with the consummation of the world, the kingdome of heauen should be opened: That in these low places, all the soules haue, betwixt here and there, the one sort their punishmentes; the other their com∣fortable refreshmentes, &c. That Origene saith: That Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, the Prophets, and Apostles, haue not yet receiued their ioyes: that they there wait and attend vs, that so they and wee may receiue them all together, soiourning in the meane time (saith hee) as in a place of studie, or instruction, in a schoole of soules, where they are taught in all such thinges as they had not seene here below, but as in riddles and figures. Ambr. l 2. c. 2. de Cain & A∣bel. Idem de bono mortis. c. 10. Chrisost. hom. 39. n. 1. Cor. & 24. Idem in hom. 28 ad Heo. & hom 7. Idem hom. ad Pop. Antioch. 33. & in Mat. 53. & in Genes. 40. Lactan. l. 7. c. 21. instit. Victor in A∣pocal. c. 6. Theod. in ep. ad Hebr. c. 11. Hom 34. auth. oper. imperf. in Mat. Areth. in Apo∣cal c. 6. Bernar. in loc. c 6, Apoc. serm. 4 in sestum om∣mū. Sanctorū. Oecum. ad Heb. c. 11. Theoph. ad Heb. Euthym. in Luc. c. 23. August. l. 1, c. 14. retract. In Psal. 36. In Genes. l. 12, c. 9. In Enchirid. c. 108. Chrysost. hom. 69. ad Pop. Antioch. Idem ad Rom. hom. 33. Idem ad Phi∣lip. hom. 4. Occan, in oper. 93. dierum. Adrian. 6. l. 4. sent. in fine, q. de Sacram. confirm. Saint Ambrose who treadeth in his steppes: That the day of iudgement is like vnto that of wrastlers, in asmuch as that in one day, the vanquished are ashamed, and the vanquishers receiue the garland and price: and that betwixt here and there the soules are in their places of receipt, waiting for the fulnes of time. Saint Augustine: That after this life wee are not in the place where the Saintes shall be, when it shall bee said to them; Come ye blessed, &c. But rather there where La∣zarus was, whom the rich man saw in rest, &c. Chrysostome, That those which suf∣fered for Christ before vs, although they went before vs in the combat, shall not any whit preuent vs in the wearing of the crowne: That the crowne is set vpon all mens heades at once, and not at seuerall times, and that after the resurrection: That be∣twixt here and there, that is, betwixt death and the iudgement, soules are reserued in a place which is ordinarily called Abrahams bosome, and sometimes , the porch of the Saintes wherein they are in rest, expecting the fulnesse of their glorie. And in reading of Lactantius, Victorinus Martyr, Theodoret, the Au∣thour of the imperfect worke vppon Mathew, Arethas, Theophilact, Oecumenius, Euthimius, and Saint Bernard also, who bare a greater stroke therein then any o∣ther man, you shall find them to haue beene of the same opinion. But what maketh all this for purgatorie? but onely that it may serue to dasle the eyes of men? For that this was an opinion at that time helde as indifferent in the Church, it doth ap∣peare, in that that Saint Augustine handling the same in his bookes of retractations, leaueth it vndecided: whereas Chrysostome in many places speaketh to the contrary, cutting all off in a worde, As, that the righteous shall see God face to face, and not a∣ny more by faith, &c. That death coupleth vs with the companie that is with Christ, where the Cherubines glorifie God, where the Seraphins flie, where we shall see Saint Paule, &c. In so much as that it was pronounced hereticall, and that by the name of the heresie of the Armenians by Innocent the third, Benedict the eleuenth, & by the decree of the Councell held at Florence, where it was said, that the soules of the saints at their departure out of this life, did inioy the presence of God: Notwithstanding that Pope Iohn the 22. had made a Decree in fauour of that doctrine: namely, that the Vniuersitie of Paris should be restrained from admitting any to proceed Doctor. or in any other degree of diuinity, which did not take an oath, that soules did not see God before the day of iudgement. And this is verified by Gulielmus Occan in his booke intituled: Opus nonaginta trium dierū. And Pope Adrian the 6. vpon the 4. booke of Sentences, both which do condemne it. And thus as hitherto they haue not any third place, where the souls are purged in the time betwixt death & the day of iudge∣ment. For that of Origen, S. Ambr. & S. Hillary helpeth thē not a dodkin: that of Au∣gustines refuteth this of theirs, and being wel looked on, appeareth to be a fire of tri∣bulation, a spirituall, but not a materiall fire, & moreouer such a one as is very doubt∣full and meere arbitrarie. Likewise these pretended receptacles of Soules, are not pla∣ces of anguish and torment, but of rest and ioyfulnesse; not of making satisfaction,
but of contentation to be receiued, by the attending and wayting for of the glorie to come, in like manner they are condemned of heresie by themselues. And therefore it remaineth, that if they will needes haue it to haue beene at this time, which is fiue hundred yeares after Christ; that yet they goe and find it amongst the Gentiles. And great in deede is the antiquitie of that; for it was before the comming of Christ many ages: and yet notwithstanding it is verie young and a meere Nouice in the Church of Christ; because it is without Christ, and out of the Church. CHAP. IX. Wherein the obiections of the aduersaries, whereby they goe about to proue their Purgatorie out of the old Fathers, are fully answered. THey say, you cannot denie, Of the satis∣factions vsed amongst them of the olde Church. but that the Primitiue Church did im∣pose great satisfactions vpon them which had failed in the professi∣on of the name of Christ. How then could they make the same, but in Purgatorie, when they were dead and had left them vndone? But wee rather argue quite contrarie. As that, if the auncient Church, which imposed these Satisfactions vpon them, that so they might let them goe to God in peace, did as ordinarily giue them absolution; then it cannot but certainely proue, that it had not learned any thing of this Purga∣torie. But the truth is, that in the times of those great and continuall persecutions, which the Christians suffered for the space of three hundred yeares, onely some little respite and rest giuen vnto them, many did renounce and belie the profession of the faith of Christ, (who before in the calme and peaceable times had giuen their names thereunto,) becomming readie to returne to Idolatrie, as the times chaunged and altered. Now against this leuitie & in constancie the auncient Church did not thinke any punishments that could be inflicted, to be too hard or sharpe; by meanes where∣of it thought to find out the sinceritie or hypocrisie of the penitents, as also their liuely, or otherwise dull and dead sence and feeling that they had for their sinne. Wherefore the end and scope of this course was to bring them to sackcloth and ashes; and to suffer them to passe many daies, in making humble petitions, to bee reconci∣led to the Church, who either had sacrificed, or burnt incense to Idols; or who had giuen the Gospels and holy Bookes to bee burned, and who were therefore called Sacrificati, Thurificantes, Traditores, Libellatici, &c. yea and which is yet more, to the end they might adde more carefull heede to such as should offer, to enter themselues into the number of the Church: there were some that would not receiue Lapsos paeni∣tentes, any more then once to the taking of penance after baptisme. And Nouatus proceeded yet further, and denied it them altogether, for the which he was condem∣ned of the Church, which also thereupon, Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 2 from that time forward began to mitigate these punishments. What then? And now if they died before the time, were they not bound by the Church? And how then did they satisfie these punishments? Idem. l. 3. Ep. 8 Serm. 5. de Lapsis. Verily the order was good, that before they had fully made such satisfaction, they were not to be receiued to absolution, or to haue any communion with the Church. But as duely was it obserued on the other side, that if they were in daunger of death, before the time of such accomplishment, that then notwithstanding they were receiued into the peace, absolution and communion of the same. Assuredly not with any purpose or intent that they should euer haue gone into Purgatorie, for they neuer thought of it: But to the end saith S. Cyprian, that dying, they might goe to the Lord in peace. Idem. l. 3 Ep. 17. l 4 Ep 4. Euseb. l. 6. c. 34 To the ende saith Dionysius, That their sinne being blotted out, they may depart , in good hope out of this life. But here withall they ioyned (say they) this condition, that if they should recouer their health againe, that then they should fulfill this satisfaction: but that o∣therwise they should haue any thing to accomplish in the world to come, not a word.
Contrariwise S. Cyprian sheweth a reason of this absolution in these words, saying: Quoniam exomologesis apud in feros nec esse, nec fieri potest: Seeing there neither is, nor can be any publike confession or acknowledgment amongst the dead. That is to say, as we haue lear∣ned to expound it of Tertullian, that these Acts of Canonicall satisfaction cannot be accomplished after this life. Bellarmine and others before him obiect vnto vs a place out of S. Cyprian in this same Epistle; Cypr. l. 4. Ep. 4. but to no end or purpose: Aliud (inquit) est ad veniam stare, &c. It is one thing to stand for pardon and forgiuenesse, and an other to come to glo∣rie; one thing to bee sent to prison, not to come out thence till the vitermost farthing be paid, and an other thing, to receiue incontinently the reward of faith and vertue; one thing to be corrected and purged a long time by fire, for sinnes, with the induring of great torments, and an other to haue all his sinnes purged, by one onely passion and suffering, &c. Which words at the first blush might seeme to make mightily for thē: but let vs reade the whole Epistle: there he speaketh of such satisfactions, as are made in the Church during this life: but not a word of any that should be made after the same. It was said vnto him: If you offer the peace of the Church vnto penitents, there will not be any moe confessors, there will not be any moe Martyrs; (for this was the glorie of our fathers.) But saith hee there will contin ually remaine a great difference betwixt the one and the other. Lapsi, saith he, such as are fallen, stand to aske pardon: they are as it were in prison, vntill such time as they haue exactly satisfied the Church: they are as it were refined by fire, through the long griefe which they indure by their penance: in a word, they suffer much, before they obtaine the peace of the Church; and in this peace, peace with God and that which followeth. On the contrarie the Martyrs and confessors abiding in peace with God, doe not passe through all these sorrowes and griefes, they passe spee∣dily into glorie, they receiue the reward of their constancie, all their sinnes are swal∣lowed vp in their suffering of death, &c. He addeth likewise that they haue this aduā∣tage in the iudgement of God, that they appeare and present themselues in the same, assured of the crowne; wheras others are in suspence, as those that expect and depend vpon the sentence of the iudge. And yet they obiect, Prayers for the dead. you cannot say, but that the Church hath belieued Purgato∣rie, seeing it hath praied for the dead. Neither doe we denie, but that this custome is auncient enough: but on the contrarie we say, how that the Church neuer praied for the dead, vnder the old Testament: not Ioseph for Iacob, who was notwithstanding verie carefull for the embalming and burying of him: 2 Kings 18. nor Dauid for Absalom, whose death so much grudged and mooued his tender and fatherly affections; nor for the child which he begot of Bersabe, but on the contrarie after that hee knew him dead, he gaue ouer his fasting and praier. And as for Machabeus, if any man obiect him vnto vs, we answere that hee was the first and the last in that action. The Church then be∣fore and vnder the Law, neere hand for the space of foure thousand yeares knew not any Purgatorie. And further wee affirme, that our Lord hath not left any thing, any word or mention of the same vnto his Apostles, but on the contrarie, that he hath left the dead to burie the dead. Act. 9. & 9. S. Paul saith vnto vs: Bee not carefull and pensiue for them which are a sleepe. Amongst so many arguments to prooue the resurrection, that is not once touched amongst them, 1. Thes. 4. which yet would haue made for the purpose. Likewise we see them wash the bodies of the dead, and burie them carefully, and to comfort one an other in the midst of their mourning, in the hope of the resurrection: but as for pray∣ing for them, they say nothing of it. Wherefore the Church of Christ from the begin∣ning, hath not knowne Purgatorie. How came they then into the Church? Verily euen through the conduite, that brought in Purgatorie; the inuention of men, and the imitation of the Gentiles, who being but slenderly and superficially instructed of the state of the soule after death, rent and launced themselues ouer the dead, made feasts vppon their graues, as though thereby they would haue recouered them and brought them againe to life, and sacrificed to the infernall Gods for their shadowes and likenesses, this humane affection and carnall loue haunted them so, as that it wrought prayers out of them, yea euen to the time of death and after also. But these
courses of afflicting themselues, in such extreame manner were forbidden the people of God, as being better instructed and taught in the holy word of God; and these hu∣mane affections also bounded within the limits of his Law. And this is the cause that kept them from falling away so lightly, to the imitation of the Gentiles. From the Gentiles, this opinion was slily and smoothly conueighed into the Apocripha books of one Clement, Abdias Babilonius, Hermas, and such like; and as it was no straunge thing to those who were drawne from their Paganisme, so was it nothing vnplausible to them, to retaine the same: the Pastors admitting it for indifferent, and nothing looking to the consequence, and that which might fall out in the end, did let it alone by sufferance. Whereas if they had seene how farre Sathan hath vndermined thereby the merite of Christ, the foundation of saluation; they would vndoubtedly haue re∣sisted and gaine-saied the same according to the necessitie of the cause, and kept themselues to the rule of the Apostle, repeated by S. Augustine, who saith: Gala. 1. If any man whatsoeuer, vpon any thing concerning conuersation or manners, doe vtter and offer vnto vs for certaine and necessarie doctrine, or for an Article of faith, August. contr. Petil. Tertull. de Coron milit. & li 2. ad vxor. Arnob. l. 2. the thing which goeth beyond the Scriptures of the Law and the Gospell, let him be accursed. In Tertullian first of all we haue: Oblationes pro defunctis; and in like manner, Oblationem pro sponsa, from the same roote; this is about two hundred and fiftie yeares after our Lord. The Paganes had accusto∣med to offer, when they were dead, as also when their kinsfolkes or friends departed and left them: now the Christians seeing the same, and being ashamed to bee behind in humanitie and naturall affection, doe in like manner offer, but so, as that they ap∣point their oblations to bee imployed to better vses, as to the feeding of the poore; following the counsaile mentioned in Tobiah: Set thy bread vpon the Graue, &c. The Pa∣gans had their yearely birth feasts; the Christians celebrated the day of their true se∣cond birth or regeneration, of the Martyrdome, confession, and death of their bre∣thren in Christ. And Beatus Rhenanus noteth verie well in this place: Index expurg. p. 82. From hence sprung the originall of the yearely remembrances and feasts: Where the Fathers of Trent haue caused Antiquitie to be put in place of the originall. Likewise Tertullian saith that this is a doctrine, neither grounded in the Scriptures, nor yet vpon any Apostolicall tradition, but onely growne vp by custome. Si legem (saith he) expostules Scripturarum, nulla legis tibi traditio pretendetur: but Obseruationem consuetudo roborauit: There is no Scripture (saith he) that can here be pretended, but custome hath giuen force and strength to ob∣seruation. And this custome taken and raised from the good intents of some faithfull persons, and not from the Apostles: For (saith hee) dost thou not thinke, that it is lawfull for euerie faithfull person to conceiue and set downe for a Law what he thinketh to be agreeable vnto God, conuenient for discipline, or furthering vnto saluation, &c. And by the like propo∣sition entred the heresie of Montanus both into his head, and after into the Church. And to be short, he setteth this custome in the ranke of many others which he recko∣neth vp there: As, to dip the child thrise in Baptisme, to take a tast of Milke and Honie before hand, which they called Infantation, to offer for birth dayes, not to kneele or bow downe vpon the Lords dayes, &c. All which are long since abolished out of the Church of Christ, and so also should this giue place by vertue of the same abolishment, as made of the same stuffe, and so also by consequent their Purgatorie. In S. Cyprian, who followeth him close at the heele, Cypr. Ep. 9. l. 1 & Ep. 5. l. 4. we haue Sportulas and Sportu∣lantes. Thus they called that which was giuen for the reliefe of the poore, either by commaundement, or in remembrance of the dead; in stead of the feast which the Gentiles accustomed to prepare and bring out to set vppon the graue. And this was continued by certaine Christians in the time of S. Augustine, not without great of∣fence taken thereat, and this he complaineth of, as likewise, August. Ep. 64 that he cannot remedie or redresse it but by force. Such is the tyrannie that custome practiseth vppon men. And of these offerings, or rather testamentarie Legacies, the Canon speaketh: C. Qui Oblati∣ones. xiii. q. 2. Such as denie the Church the offerings of the dead, ought to be held as murtherers of the poore, in as much as they rob them of their foode and nourishment, &c. Now these feasts made for the poore, were qualified with the name of sacrifices and oblations, as it may bee seene in many
places of Tertuilian, Tertull. de monog. & de cor. milit. August. Ep. 64 & de Ciuit. Dei l. 8. c. 27. Chrysost. de Martyr. S. Augustine and Chrysostome. But what maketh all this either for Masses for the dead, or else for Purgatorie? And what will this prooue to, on the contrarie side, if we show that they which offered these oblations and praiers; or to speake more fitly these memorials and remembrances in the seruice of the Church; did the same for such persons as they belieued to be already in rest and euerlasting fe∣licitie; so farre off were they from presupposing them to be in Purgatorie? Tertullian saith, that the wife offereth for the husband, and the husband for the wife, Annuis diebus dormitionis eius, &c. From yeare to yeare vpon the day of his death: And this is done in their dwelling house, with their kinsfolkes, as their owne mouthes confesse. And what hath this that is common with the Priest his pretended sacrifice? Hee saith also that they doe craue the one for the other, betwixt the time of death and the resurrec∣tion, refrigerium; and consortium in the same, that is to say: That it would please God to giue rest vnto the fore deceased; Tertull. l. 4. cont. Marcion & l. de Anima and to both, to meete in the resurrection. Who knoweth not that Tertullian calleth, Refrigerium, the place of refreshment, the bosome of Abraham, the place of the righteous where they abide, waiting the day of the re∣surrection, Wherein (saith hee) they are from their death, vnto the finall end and consum∣mation of all things: And so by consequent, that this their practise is nothing else but a continuing of this naturall affection, which cannot bee staied; and which according to the measure and quantitie, wherein it calleth them to mind, whome it loueth, can not but lay open and shew foorth it selfe by making vowes, for the procuring of their prosperitie, and will not suffer it selfe to be perswaded thereof, howsoeuer in deed it bee, neither in a manner would haue it so, to the end it may not lacke matter to doe them good, wherein possibly it can? And then, what argreement is there betwixt this refreshment and the fire of Purgatorie; betwixt Abrahams bosome, from whence the rich man craued to be cooled & refreed by Lazarus; and this fire, nothing differing (say they) from that fire wherein the rich man burned, as concerning the feruent and tormenting heate thereof, Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 9. but onely in durablenesse? S. Cyprian seemeth to speake rawly: To offer (saith he) for the dead, to celebrate a sacrifice, Pro dormitione corum, for their falling a sleepe. l. 3. Ep. 14. & 6 But he expoundeth himself, when he calleth these oblations, Liueries and contributions; these sacrifices, memorials and remembrances of the dead in the praiers of the Church. And in deed these oblations, these legacies, these sacrifices, are celebrated for the Martyrs, in ripping vp and renuing of their glorious death, and their constant suffering. If this were any thing tending vnto propitiation, how could it fit with that sentence of S. Augustine: August. de verb. A post. Serm. 17. Innoc. C. cum Marth. de cele∣brat. Miss. l. 4. Ep. 5. Who so prayeth for a Martyr, doth offer him iniurie? Which Pope Innocent the third applieth vnto all Saints. Thus S. Cyprian saith vnto vs: Wee offer sacrifices; speaking of Celerinus his kinred, all which almost was honoured with the crowne of Martyrdome; whome notwithstanding he affirmeth to bee crowned in heauen. And on the contrarie hee will not haue any mention made at the Altar, that is to say, in the publike prayers, Pro dormitione, for the rest of a certaine man named Victor; because he had, contrarie to the receiued Discipline and gouernment, caused a Priest to be charged with the keeping of a child in his nonage. Whereby we see that these prayers and commemorations, were but to put vs in mind of the vertuous liues of the Saints, and not for the making of any fatisfaction for sinnes. And this is that which Rhenanus saith: B. Rhenanus. in l. ad Martyr. Sacrificia pro Martyribus offerri, sic accipiendum, ni fallor, vt pro eis, idem valeat, quod commemoratione corum, &c. The same which Cyprian saith, to offer sacrifices for the Martyrs, that is to say, for the renuing of their memories; in at much as the calling to mind of their death and suffering, did offer matter of offering oblations. And there∣fore these were rather gratulatorie and ioyfull prayers, as by the which thankes was giuen to God, for that he had shewed such fauour vnto the Martyr; and thereupon they prayed vnto him with one consent and voice, that hee would continue to shew the like vnto his faithfull seruants that are aliue: that so the Church may sing, Gaudeamus in Domino, &c. Let vs reioyce, and be glad in the Lord, &c. In this sence hath the greatest part of the auncient Fathers prayed, Dionysi. de Ecclesi. Hie∣rat. c. 7. and that will be the more clearely vnderstood by themselues. S. Denis speaketh not of Oblations,
neither yet of yearely feasts: but how that they kisse the dead, and poure Oyle vppon his head. These diuers fashions taken from the customes of diuers Countries, doe shew the indifferencie. The prayer followeth: That it might please God to pardon him his sinnes, and to place him in the light and region of the liuing, in the place; from which griefe, sad∣nesse and sighing are banished and vtterly excluded, &c. Was this because he doubted? No, for on the contrarie hee maketh but two rankes, and so consequently but two places of abode after this life: one for the prophane, who die and depart out of this life des∣perate and without all hope, in as much as they goe hence vnto miserie; and an other for the Saints, who haue liued well, who in their death doe shew themselues , full of good hope; and dying doe require of God pardon for their sinnes. These men (saith hee) depart out of this life full of ioy, perceiuing themselues now to bee come to the end of all their fights and conflicts, and drawing neerer vnto the crowne of glorie: They possesse in hope , a rest conformable to that of Christs. Prayers doe call them blessed, and offer thankes vnto him who hath giuen them the victorie: The high Priest prayseth God, who hath ouerthrowne the rule and soueraigntie of death: The Ministers read in the assembly, in the Scriptures, the promises of the resurrection, to the end they may serue for an exhortation, to stirre vp those that are liuing to the like vertues, they recite them in the end amongst the Saints, in the commemoration which is made in the Church, as those that are alreadie partakers of the same glorie with them, &c. Is it possible that a man should belieue them, that all this is spo∣ken of a Soule in Purgatorie; or of any of whom the least doubt that is, may be made? Origen: We doe not celebrate (saith he) the birth day, Orig. l. 3. in Iob. for that it is an entrance into paine and griefe, and manifold temptations: but the day of death, as the day of the laying downe and end∣ing of all griefe, &c. And this is the cause why we vse the renuing of the memorie of the Saints, and of our kins folkes dying in the faith, as well to reioyce our selues for their ease, as for to become humble sutors for a holy finishing and knitting vp of our end in faith. Note well and obserue the end of griefes, ease and rest, the giuing of thankes for their rest and ease, &c. Againe: Wee celebrate the memorie of the dead, feasting Religious persons, together with the Priestes, the faithfull with the Cleargie, feeding the poore, the fatherlesse and the widdowes, to the end that our feast may be for a memoriall of the rest of the Soules that are deceased, whose memorie wee solemnize therein. Note here also, The distributing of almes, the memoriall of their rest, &c. Then this cannot be a sacrifice, to purchase vnto them ease or rest: and yet notwith∣standing this is that which first brought in Purgatorie; but such a one, as is not able to stand with these propitiations, seeing that it taketh no hold, but at the howre of iudgement. So vnsound and vnsure it is to reason either from Purgatorie, to the ma∣king of prayers for the dead, or from these to goe about to proue their Purgatorie. Greg. Nazian. hom. 7. Gregorie Nazianzene in his seuenth Homily: O thou which art the Lord of life and of death (saith he) receiue Caesarius; for we commit and commend him now vnto that course and order, by which thou gouernest the world, whereunto likewise we recommend, as laid vp with thee, both our owne Soules, and theirs which haue gone before vs. Now hee had said before: That he did alreadie enioy saluation, that his soule receiued the fruit, &c. S. Ambrose commeth in with these words: Blessed (saith he) are you both, Ambros. de Obitu Valent. (he spea∣keth of the Emperour Valentinian and his brother;) If my prayers (saith he) be any thing worth, for there shall not one passe from me, wherin I will not haue an honorable remembrance of you: Omnibus vos oblationibus frequent abo: I will make mention of you in all my offerings, that is to say, in all my seruices. Againe, speaking of Theodosius: Graunt rest O Lord (saith he) to Theodosious thy seruant, let his soule enter into the place, Ambros. de Obitu Theod. where there is not any sence or feeling of the sting of death. I loue this man, and will not giue ouer the following of him, into the land of the liuing, I will not leaue him, vntill my teares and my prayers haue brought him into the place, whither his merits doe call him: Namely into the mountaine of the Lord, where there is euerlasting life, without any sighing, heauinesse, or griefe, &c. And doe you tel vs still that they were in Purgatorie? Yea rather (saith he of Valentinian in the same place, wee be∣lieue and that by the testimonie of Angels, that hee is ascended and gone vp into heauen, washed from the defilements of sinne, that his faith hath washed him, &c. that hee inioyeth the ioyes of eternall life. Yea and this he saith of that Valentinian who was as yet but learning the
principles of Religon, that is to say, as yet vnbaptised; in which case Purgatorie was meetest to haue had place. And in like manner of Theodosius: He is deliuered from this doubtfull fight and warfare, he inioyeth an euerlasting light, eternall tranquilitie, &c. Hee is glorified amongst the companie of Saints; there he embraceth Gratian, he beholdeth in the king∣dome of Christ the temple of Christ, &c. And he speaketh, saith he, full assuredly and con∣fidently: For as much as they are dead in the faith of Christ, seeing the Lord was made sinne, to the end that he might take away the sinne of the world, to the end that wee might be all in him the righteousnesse of God, no more (saith he) the slaues of sinne, but sealed vp for the reward of righteousnesse. In like manner his prayers could not possibly be vnderstood of his Pur∣gatorie, in as much, (as we haue seene) as he gaue it no place, vntill the day of iudge∣ment. With the same intent and mind S. Augustine praied for his mother, saying: I pray thee O Lord for her sinnes, heare me by the medicine of his wounds, which was hanged vpon the Crosse, and sitteth at thy right hand, making intercession for vs: Pardon her and enter not in∣to iudgement with her. And I doe verily belieue that thou hast done this which I haue prayed thee for, but approue O Lord and heare witnesse with Voluntariaoris mei, the free offerings of my mouth, Epiphan. cont. Aerium l. 3. t. 1 haeres. 75. &c. This argument was more throughly canuased and hotly dealt in about the yeare 500. in the time of Epiphanius, who concealeth not or hideth the same from vs, but setteth downe the verie same wordes: That this is no commaundement of the father; but an instruction and lesson taught by the mother, that is to say, by the Church. Aerius found himselfe offended at these prayers for the dead, which passed measure. He put foorth this question: Wherefore are the names of the deceased repeated and recited after their death? And to what end doe praiers serue for those that are taken out of this life? If it be to the end that they may not suffer for their sinnes, &c. Heere verily were a place to answere him, that there is a Purgatorie: That those that are de∣parted hence, without hauing satisfied for their sinnes, are relieued by such suffrages, &c. But on the contrarie what dooth Epiphanius presuppose and set downe for the foundation of the matter in question? Verily, euen the quite contrarie: That such as the liuing pray for, are, and liue, in the presence of the Lord, and that by these prayers, such as are as yet trauelling this worldly pilgrimage, doe witnesse their hope. S. Chrysostome hath spoken of these prayers for the dead, with greater aduantage then any others: For that which Tertullian hath called Custome, Epiphanius a Decree, or Tradition of the Fa∣thers; he hath called an Apostolicall Tradition. But he is confuted in one word by S. Ie∣rome, and S. Gregorie; who saith that the Apostles vsed no other prayer in the cele∣bration of seruice, then the Lords prayer. But yet for all that shall we thinke that hee praied for soules in Purgatorie, when as hee belieued not any such thing? Nay verily, but rather for them which are with Christ: Chrysost. hom. 3, ad Philip. Idem hom. 4. ad Hebr. They are (saith he) with their king, not any more beholding him as in a mirrour, no longer loking vp vnto him by the eyes of faith; but face to face. For else what shuld be the meaning of these flaming Lamps, but that we beare these glorious Champions companie home to their houses, after their combat finished and accomplished? As al∣so what should bee the meaning of these Hymnes; but that we glorifie God and giue him thankes for that hee hath crowned the deceased? That he hath set him at libertie from all griefe and an∣guish, and that he keepeth him now euen with himselfe? These then are all of them nothing else but actions of ioy and reioycing. And if thou marke what thou singest at that time, it is Conuer∣tere anima mea in requiem tuam: Flie O my soule into thy rest; for the Lord hath dealt graciously with thee. And againe, I wil not feare the euil & wicked persons, because that thou art with me, &c. Idem hom. 70 ad Antioch. in Math. hom. 32 in Ioh. 61. In an other place: The faithfull dying (saith he) shal take his flight vp into the habitati∣on of the Angels, so that he shal not be to be found, euen at the time of his funerall. And in deed the Liturgies which they obiect so much vnto vs, should so much the more confirme them in this point. That of Saint Basil: Remember those O Lord which sleepe in hope of the resurrection. Would he in their conscience call Purgatorie a sleepe? And when hee prayeth for the liuing, he saith: For their saluation, for the remission of their sinnes. But for the dead: For their rest and ease of their soule, in a cleare and light place, farre and free from weeping and wayling, &c. And thus Chrysostome. The office of Millaine attributed to Saint Ambrose: For them (saith it) which haue gone before vs with the ensigne of faith, and
which sleepe the sleepe of peace, &c. And that which they attribute vnto Saint Iames in the same sence: For all such as haue embraced the true faith from Abell; for the Patriarkes, Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, as also for the Ʋirgine Marie, whome he calleth the mother of God, most holy, and pure, &c. And which amongst them is hee that would say that shee is in Purgatorie? But after all, Saint Ierome in the place before alleadged, cutteth off all quite and cleane: That out of this world we receiue no helpe, aide or comfort, either by the counsailes or prayers, one of another. And this is cited to the same end and purpose in the Decree. And what shall wee say of the Masse vsed at this day, Hierony. apud. Grat. c 20. in praesenti. 13. q 2. which on the contrarie praieth not for the deliuerie of soules out of Purgatorie: but out of Hell, from the darke lake, from the iawes of the Lyon, and from eternall paines? And that not for the time pre∣sent; but in respect of the iudgement to come; as likewise that that which is read of the memorie of those which sleepe the sleepe of peace, and which rest in Christ, is not to bee read in the old Masse bookes of Rome, which are written with hand, but added onely after that the Masse hath beene applied to the vse of the dead. So hard a thing it is and alwayes hath beene, to vpholde and maintaine a lie against the truth. They replie: And what then was the end of praying for the dead? In what sence they praied for the dead. Orig. l. 3. in Iob We cannot bet∣ter sound the reason of this, then by the line of the Fathers themselues which did practise it. Origen alleadgeth two reasons: We celebrate (saith hee) the memorie of their rest, partly, to reioyce for that they are placed in Refrigerio, at their ease: partly for to pray vnto God, that he would giue vs, euen vs that are still liuing, a good ende by faith &c. This then is properly for the instruction of the liuing, and not for the comfort of the dead. Saint Denis: Wherefore (saith hee) doth the Minister pray vnto God, that he will pardon the dead, Dionys. c. 7. Eccles. Hierar. and place him in the region of the liuing? For seeing that euerie man is there handled, according to his life: and that he hath now ended the same; what can such prayers preuaile and helpe him? Heere was to bee aunswered according to the doctrine receiued and taught by the Church of Rome: That this was to free him out of the paines of Purgatorie. But in deed what is his answere? That the praiers of good and vertuous men, doe neuer faile of their fruit: That God rendreth to the faithfull according to their workes; but in such sort notwithstanding, as that he blotteth out their spots and imperfections, for his mercie sake, (then it is not by the rigour and seueritie of Purgatorie:) That al∣though the promises of God made vnto the faithfull, be alreadie effected and fulfil∣led, that yet the Minister doth craue the same of God, for three reasons. First, to shew himselfe desirous, according to Christian vnitie, that gifts and good things might be bestowed vpon others, euen as hee would wish or desire them for himselfe. Secondly, to confirme and assure the hearts of such as are present, of the performance of those good things, which God promiseth in the Scriptures to those that fall a sleepe, that is to say, die in him. And thirdly, to declare vnto them the iudgement of God, accor∣ding to the charge which is giuen him from God, to bind and to loose, in admitting and receiuing of some, and reiecting of other some by his testimonie, as if he con∣ueyed and carried them , by this his praier out of this life, into that bles∣sed and happie estate; for this praier was wont of old time to bee saide, at the laying of them into the earth. S. Ambrose giueth vs other reasons: Griefe and sorrow (saith he) is oftentimes the comfort of the grieuing. And in good affections there is likewise a certaine plea∣sure in weeping: but we content and satisfie our selues in some manner, by speaking of him whome we haue lost, &c. What other thing could he say of such as he witnessed to bee dead in Christ, and by consequent liuing, and raigning with him? Nilus de Pur∣gatorio. Chrysost. hom 4. ad Hebr. & hom. 70. ad Antioch. hom. 22. in Act. hom 33. in Math. Saint Chrysostome ma∣keth two orders of the dead: the one dying in a true faith; and the other not so: and hee findeth it good to praie both for the one and for the other, but for the one, at the Altar: but not so, for the other: And these prayers (saith hee) are not,  any fained thing or counterfaite Pageant, but full of efficacie. Let vs see what manner of efficacie. Is it a Purgatorie or purging efficacie? Nay not so, for the Grecians say, that hee neuer beleeued it: Neither yet the Greeke Churches. But
(saith hee) thou callest the Priestes and the Singers, to the ende they may comfort thee, and honour the deceased. Idem hom. 3. ad Philip. hom 69. ad Antioc. hom. 41. ad Corinth. 61. in Ioh. 21. in Act. Greg. contr. l. 4 Dialog. c. 44. Bonauentur. in 4. Sen. 46. D Epiphan. hae∣res. 75. Idem aduers. Acrium. Wee come and discourse like Phylosophers of the resurrection, instructing all such as haue not as yet beene ouertaken by the death of their kinsfolkes, to beare out the same stoutly and vndauntedly, when it shall happen vnto them. But if one presse him further: These prayers, and almes (saith he) serue for them that are saued, as an increase of their glorie; and for the damned, to the mittigating of their paine, , yea (in a certaine place) to the working of a full deliuerance. Now I would know if Saint Gregorie, the Schoolemen or our aduersaries doe approoue this? Epiphanius dooth what he can against Aerius to rid him out of doubt, and to leare his intangled mind: and the doctrine of Purgatorie had beene a fit replie and for his purpose, to haue ful∣ly satisfied Aerius, who did so presse and vrge him. For (said he) if these pruiers profit a wicked man, that he shall not vndergoe the punishment deserued after death; is there any euill and wicked thing that a man will let to doe, either against God or man, being assured that hee shall not faile to haue certaine prayers offered for him after his death? But Epiphanius saith rather: The end and scope of these prayers is not that; but first, that those that are liuing, may be admonished that those that depart hence well, are not dead but liue with the Lord, that is to say, Paul ad Cor. 2.3.5. Nazianz. in hom. de Caesa∣rio, quem vo∣cat primitias.  rest confirmed in the resurrection: Secondly, that they which pray for their brethren, reape this consolation, that they are away from them, as it were for the time of a iourney, ; but (following that which Saint Paul saith, and Nazianzene hath learned of him) to soiourne with the Lord. For they that expound this pilgrimage of Purgatorie, can∣not shift themselues from the words that goe before: That the Church doth praie for them by name which are alreadie receiued vp to be with Christ. Thirdly, They praie also (saith hee) for the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, &c. To the ende that thereby, the faith full might dayly learne to make difference, betwixt Christ a man, and all other men, be∣cause he possesseth eternall ioy of himselfe, but al other by him, how iust and righteous so euer they be. And to conclude withall, vppon the inconuenience and absurditie that Aerius did alleadge: Epiphan. cont. Acrium, l. 3. c. 1 haeres. 75. What should this prooue to bee, if thereby all faultes and offences were a∣bolished? He aunswereth him: That wee must not thinke notwithstanding, that , the totall summe of crimes is blotted out: without any further declaring, how farre this abolishment dooth stretch. Our aduersaries doe here take vppon them to gesse what hee would say: That small sinnes and not great and haynous crimes are there blotted out: and we tell them, that the Schoolemen will not allow it them: And we also doe thinke that it is more seemely to rest and stay our selues, where hee hath rested, seeing hee would not say any more, but conceale the rest. And in deede Cassander in his aduise to the Emperour Maximilian, Cassand. in consult. c. de iterat. Missae. though holding parties with our aduersaries, doth freely confesse: That vntill this day it was neuer agreed vpon in the old Church after what manner these prayers did profit those which were dead, neither yet what was the state and condition of the Soules for which they prayed: but that it was a meere testimo∣nie of charitie towards the deceased, and a profession of that Article of the faith concerning the immortalitie of the soule, and of that also of the resurrection to come. Saint Augustine remaineth, who seemeth to them to bee more fauourable then all the rest: and behold the reasons that hee yeeldeth. He prayeth for his mother, though presupposing her to bee alreadie in heauen: Prayer then for the dead, being vsed in the same sence that hee vseth it, dooth not presuppose any Purgatorie. Of the calling to memorie and rehersall of the dead which was made at the Altar, that is to say, August. de Ci∣uit. Dci. l. c. 9. in the seruice of the Church, he deliuereth this as an occasion: That it was to shew the Communion that euen the dead haue in the Church, who cease not to bee members of the same, though they raigne already with Christ, and be absent from this life. Againe, that the friends of the deceased, may receiue this consolation, that they which are asleepe in Christ, how infirme and weake so euer, are not excluded and shut out from his kingdom, but receiued into eternal happines, because of the Son of God made a sacrifice for vs, whome they haue participated in the Eucharist. But as hee was vrged & drawne by the strife & contention of the time (for there was then much to do
about this Article,) whereas al the former haue made but two orders of the deceased, August. de cu∣ra pro mortuis ad Paul. Nol. c. 1.4.18. Ad Dulcit. q 2. De Ciuit. Dei, l. 21. c. 13. & 14 Idem de verb, Domini, Serm. 32. he hath made three: The good (saith hee) who haue nothing to doe but to make prayers and supplications; and these are they whome by name they dayly vsed so to praie for. The wicked, for whome no prayers or supplications could serue, if it be not, it may be (saith he) for the damned, for the diminishing and lessening of their punishment. And Chrysostome said also that they did ease their paines. And the middlemost or those betwist the other two, who haue need and accordingly ayde and succour there by; whether it bee (saith hee) that God may not deale with them according to their sinnes, or that their soules may be purged before the day of iudgement, by temporall punishment, that so they may not fall into the eternall. Finally, the prayers which are made for the good, are thankesgiuings for the wicked, such as whereby the liuing may be comforted, and for those which are betwixt both, such as are propitiatorie. Now this is the first man that hath set open this way and passage contrarie to all auncient writers, and more then foure hundred yeares after our Sauiour Christ; there hauing not beene any man before time that had so much as read any thing of prayer for the dead, or of a third place which they call Purgatorie: and this Purgatorie notwith∣standing wherof he saith elswhere in other places: That there is some apparance, that it is: That it may be that there is one: That no part of the Scripture speaketh of it: That there is not any at all. Doubtfull therefore are these prayers and oblations, euen for the mid∣dle order of the deceased, as is also his Purgatorie: Or rather none at all absolu∣tely, as neither his Purgatorie; seeing that by his confession, there is none in the Scriptures. What doe wee gather out of all this discourse? Verily, first: That these prayers haue no foundation or ground either in the olde or new Testament. Secondly, that they are proceeded partly from humane affections; and partly from the imitation of the Pagans. Thirdly, that the old Fathers vsed them for those whome they belieued alreadie to enioy eternall life; as the Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, the holy Virgine, &c. Or we may say better, according to the manner wherin they prayed in the Coun∣cell of Trent, for the Soules of the Popes, Paul the third, and Iulius the third. For those which liue and die in a most holy manner, can they possibly according to their owne doctrine abide so long in Purgatorie? Fourthly, that it was then in regard of their soules, a holy desire, and to be taken in like sence, as when we say, liue O Christ, liue O God, &c. whome wee know to raigne eternally: In regard of their bodies a prayer vnto God, that it would please him to glorifie them in the resurrection, &c. Fiftly, that they were made rather in consideration of the liuing, then of the dead, to ease them of their griefe, and confirme them in their faith: instructions that may bee taken at a better hand and warrant from the Apostle: Torment not your selues about them which are a sleepe, &c. Sixtly, that they made them not vpon any consideration of Purgatorie; seeing that amongst so many reasons of so many Doctors, liuing in di∣uers ages and places, not any one before Saint Augustine, hath alleadged Purgato∣rie. Seuenthly, that these obseruations and reasons so diuers and manifold doe wit∣nesse vnto vs, that it was at that time held as an indifferent doctrine; as also how that the greater sort doe call it a Custome, a Decree, an Institution, &c. Eightly, that Saint Augustine himselfe, who alone, after many other better reasons, alleadgeth Purga∣torie, cannot make any good proofe of the same; seeing he himselfe doth not couer or conceale what doubt hee was in whether there were a Purgatorie or not. Likewise he deliuereth contrarie assertions, whereby there is great apparance and likelyhood, that he did not reuoke or vnsay any thing, but so farre as hee was wonne, and ouer∣swayed by the headstrong conceipt of men, seming in the light of nature, to know that which they had neuer heard or seene. Finally, that the prayers for the dead, which haue no foundation in the world, ought not to haue any more authoritie in the Church, then Baptisme for the dead, practised say the ancients, but not approued from the time of the Apostles; or the Eucharist giuen into the mouth of the dead; the one and the other proceeding from the same naturall affections, and yet both the one and the other abolished, and banished out of the Church.
Now it is not to be forgotten, that that which was to be seene very weake and fee∣ble in S. Augustine, for to strengthen this new building withall, hath beene since that time, vnderpropped by counterfait and fained writings, by men willing that way to imploy their vttermost indeauour thus labouring by vntruth to establish a lie; and mans deuice and inuention, by notorious and hainous crimes. And to that end, some haue attributed vnto him the Bookes, August. de ver. & fals. paenit. c. 71. De vera & falsa paenitentia; made in deede by Monkes, though they be commonly cited in his name, where he saith: Let him that de∣ferreth to conuert and turne too long, passe through the fire of Purgatorie, which is more painefull and grieuous, then all the punishment that man can indure in this life. A Sermon also of the day of the dead, or of the remembrance of all the deceased; where they haue made him speake in the same tearmes and manner of speach. A booke notwithstanding wherein the Author himselfe alleadged S. Augustine: as also the feast, not being as yet receiued into the Church in his time; but instituted by Odilo Abbot of Clugni more then 500. yeares after. And yet which is more, there are some that haue deuised an Epistle writ∣ten from S. Cyril, Bb. of Ierusalem, to S. Augustine, for to confirme him in the opini∣on of Purgatorie: Cyril I say, whose life S. Ierome did write whiles he liued; writing to S. Augustine of the myracles of Saint Ierome after his death: In which Epistle there is mention made: How that S. Ierome appeared vnto a certaine man named Eusebius, and commaunded him to cast his sacke ouer three dead bodies which should present∣ly therupon rise, therby confounding the heresie, which denied Purgatory: That these three men thus raised againe, made their abode amongst men for the space of twentie dayes, declared how that S. Ierome had beene the meanes of their seeing of Hell and Purgatorie: That all whatsoeuer miserie all the men in this world had indured from Adam vnto that time, did not come any thing neere vnto the paines and punishment, that is therein, &c. And that had not Saint Ierome come in the meane time, they had beene neere to haue receiued the sentence of condemnation, for not hauing belieued it, &c. Thus we may see (a thing then which nothing is more naturall) the doctrine of lyes maintained and nourished by a lie it selfe. CHAP. X. What prosperous proceeding Purgatorie attained vnto in the Church of Rome, and by what degrees. IN the ende, after that our aduersaries cannot all this while make choyse of any one of the Fathers, to whose opinion they may trust and hold themselues in this matter of Purgatorie; (for wee freely permit and allow them their choyse out of them all) notwithstan∣ding that wee haue runne through the space of those fiue hundred yeares next after our Lord, Purgatorie af∣firmed and a∣vouched by Gregorie. Anno. 600. Deut. 18.11. Esay. 8.19. August. de cu∣ra pro mortuis gerend. Vpon what foundation he buildeth his doctrine. Gregor. Magn. in Dialog. they are constrained to haue recourse to Gregorie Bb. of Rome, liuing about the yeare 600, euen vnto that Gregorie, which of the custome of the Gentiles, made a Law in the Church of Christ; of Origen his curiosities, a necessarie deuotion; of the speculations of the olde Fathers who had gone before him, a grounded principle and firme Maxim; and of S. Augustines doubt, an affirmatiue doctrine: but grounded also altogether vpon other raasons, then had bene alleadged by the former, as reuelations, apparitions of spirits, and others such like delusions, directly contrarie to that which is said in the Law: Who so goeth to aske counsell of the dead, is an abhomination vnto the Lord: as also against the Maxim which S. Augustine is so carefull for to proue: That the soules of the dead inter∣meddle not with the affaires of those that are aliue. The doctrin then of S. Gregorie, in brief is: That as at the breake of the day and in a browne colour, the darke is mingled with the light (& is called the twylight,) so the neerer we come to the day of iudgement, so much the more inter-course and communitie shall there bee betwixt spirits and men. What solide or sound stuffe can hee picke out of this foundation; seeing hee presup∣poseth
and setteth downe the end of the world to bee as then? And this is the cause why (saith hee) that men doe attaine (speaking of his owne time,) to know the estate and condition of Soules, a thing lesse knowne to such as went before. Of Paschasius his soule, he learneth how that it indured his Purgatorie, amidst the scaldings of hotte waters, because that in a certaine schisme falling out amongst the Popes, he tooke part with Laurence & not with Symmachus. And thereupon he inferreth that good soules which halt and come short, be it neuer so little, in the workes of righteousnesse, are de∣tained & kept backe for a like proportion of time from the inioying of heauen. From the soule of a certaine Lord, how that it serued at the bathes to pull off the hose and shoes of all such as came to them; vntill the time that a certain Priest, to whom it made it selfe knowne, had offered two loaues, such as had beene accustomed to bee offered for it. As also from the soule of a Monke who died, hauing in store the summe of three Crownes, how, when there was a holy day kept in his name, it receiued the Commu∣nion in Purgatorie, &c. Hee inferreth, that when the trespasses are not vnpardonable, there is meanes to procure a remedy and helpe for the same, by the offering of a sacri∣fice, &c. And his Dialogues are full of such friuolous tales: Howsoeuer that Schoole∣men doe not admit into Purgatorie, any faults or sinnes how sleight so euer, but the paines and punishment only, he concludeth notwithstanding, that there is no way to be followed, but to do well, so long as we are here, without trusting to that which may be done afterward. But what manner of , what steadfastnes of faith is there in all this? Or rather what hath it but it may giue vs to belieue, that these were spirits of deceipt, watchfull and painefull in their craft and occupation, euen in perswading the world to that which might deceiue them? Tertullian saith: Tertull. de A∣nima c. 5.7. These apparitions are but the mockeries and deceits of the euill spirit, who carrieth himselfe priuily vnder the shapes of liuing men, or masked and disguised after the manner of men deceased, &c. God hath sufficiently decla∣red vnto vs, in the parable of the poore and rich man, that Hell is not open for any to come forth, &c. no not to winne credite to Moyses and the Prophets, &c. To be short, all manner of repre∣sentation or apparition of soules that is without body, is nothing else but a delusion, nothing else but witchcraft. Chrysostome after the same manner: Chrysost. hom 29. in Math. & hom. 13. Idem de La∣zaro hom. 4. The possessed with Diuels will crie sometimes vnto thee and say; I am the soule of such a one, but wilt thou belieue it? No, not so (saith hee) for this speech commeth of the fraud and deceipt of the Diuell. It is not the soule of any dead person that speaketh so, but it is the Diuell that counterfeiteth, the deepelier to deceiue and abuse the people. For of a certaintie the soule seperated from the body, goeth not vp and down wandring in these lower regions: the soules of the righteous are in the hand of God; those of the sin∣ners after this life, are quickly by force carried away: The historie of Lazarus and the rich man doth proue the same vnto vs. And againe: Wouldest thousee that the doctrine of the Scriptures and of the Prophets, is of an other manner of weight, then that of the dead which rise againe: consider and know, that whosoeuer the dead partie may be, yet he is a seruant; but as for the Scrip∣tures, it is the Lord which speaketh in them. And therefore though a dead man reuine and liue againe, though an Angell come downe from heauen, yet let vs principally belieue the Scriptures: For the Author of them is as wel the Lord of the dead as of the liuing, of men and of Angels. And therefore what the Scriptures teach vs most clearely, let vs not goe about to learne of the dead, &c. And there is an Article in the auncient Synodes: That such visions, vnder the colour of soules, are of the Diuell. But what then may we thinke that Tertullian or Chrysostome would haue said to Gregorie? Verily, that these visions had beene of the Diuell: Ve∣rily, and his Purgatorie also, a doctrine of Diuels. And againe some haue doubted of these Dialogues, that they were not his, because that in the rest of his bookes hee see∣meth to be more graue: And Sabinian his next successor, caused so many of them to be burnt, as he could. But some on the contrarie, haue sought by all the wayes they can, to make them to bee belieued, for the procuring of the greater authoritie to Purgatorie. And by name, Anno. 730. Gregorie the thirde caused them to bee published throughout all Christendome, to the same ende. Damascen, Damascen confirmeth it. if a man will lend his eare vnto them, hath not smally aduaunced this building, but alwayes with the selfe same Argumentes; for in a certaine prayer which they attribute vnto him,
S. Steuen by his prayers, saueth Falcouilla a Pagan, deceased in Idolatrie. God also made the head of a certaine Priest that was dead, and a Gentile borne (for such a one doth Durandus describe him to bee) to speake to Macarius, and declare to him, the consolations that they in Purgatorie receiue by the suffrages of the liuing. Againe, at the prayer of Gregorie, passing through Traian his Countrie, God deliuered Tra∣ian out of hell, &c. But I maruaile that they are not ashamed of these fables; or why at the least they set them not in better order? Seeing that out of hell there is no redemp∣tion? Seeing also that, according to their doctrines, the Gentiles cannot be in Purga∣torie? But it seemeth that this pretended Damascen, is ashamed of himselfe when he concludeth saying, that he speaketh not any thing that he meaneth to stand vnto; and that what hee saith, is but by way of discourse: but such is his discourse, as that they make a Creed of it. And yet it is not credible that this was his prayer; seeing that in his Bookes de Orthodoxa fide, in which it is his drift to comprise the Christian faith, he maketh no mention of Purgatorie. Anno. 750. Now this fell out about the yeare, 750. From this time forward the opinion of the sacrifice, The growth of Purgatorie, through the opinion of a sacrifice. as also that of Purgatorie be∣gan mutually & wittingly to lend their hands, the one to the other: ignorance grow∣eth grosser and grosser and that sensibly and to the sight of the eye, throughout all Christendome, and in this darknesse, the spirit of darknesse, dispatcheth and bestir∣reth himselfe about his busines. Once to looke into the Scriptures, was by no meanes to be heard of; but to hearken after myracles, was the whole imployment of the mind. One man had seene the soules tormented vpon the Gridyron, an other vpon a Spit; this man had seene them burning in the fire, that man had espied them dipt in the Ice one was hung vp to be dried in the chimney smoake; an other to vnderlay the washing raine distilling and dryuing downe a Gutter; one liuing, but in a traunce, an other re∣turning againe after death. Further more, this man had discouered one of the Gulfs in Ireland, an other that in Sicilia; and a third that in Pozzuolo, the one by the con∣duct and guidance of an Angell, the other by reuelation from the Diuell. And all the bookes of those times are full of such fooleries: other instructions then these, there was not any currant amongst the people, namely the Legends, the Lombardicke his∣torie, and such like. In a word, whereas the Fathers had practised the remembrance of the dead (as we haue seene) for the comfort and consolation of the liuing, they be∣gin to turne all to the contrarie: For those said, that they were in Abrahams bosome, in a place of blessed and happie rest, these said they were in extreame torments no∣thing differing from those of hel, &c. And in stead that those knew how to teach them to die in an assurance of eternall life, these tooke the way to make them apprehend & conceiue of death, as of the doore opening to an vnauoidable fire, if they redeeme not themselues from thence by suffrages: for now there was no more leaning vnto the mercie of God; God was become a rigorous & mercilesse tyrant and tormentor, neither was any thing to be looked for from the satisfaction of our Lord, for hee had paid no debt but what was answerable for the meere faults and transgressions: the in∣finite merite of his passion, was become vnable to satisfie for our demerits, his paines and punishment for ours. But, Aut satis faciendum in hac vita (say they) or Satis patien∣dum in altera: Either a man must prouide to make satisfaction in this life, by doing sufficiently well, or in the other by suffering sufficiently euill: So that this is nothing else but to say, let the suffrages of those that liue after vs, ransome and redeeme vs from our paines. And thereupon a man must cause great store of Masses to bee said for the dead: for them also men must found yearely feasts, Obits, Chapels, or Monasteries. And the ordina∣rie clause of these foundations is: Anno. 800. Anno. 1000. Anton. l. 15. c. 15. Violater. l. 2. Lombar. hist. l. 8. Polyd. l. 6. c. 9. We giue, bequeath, &c. such or such a thing, for the salua∣tion or redemption of our soules, of the soules of our predecessors and successors, &c. And these fashions of doing and speaking began since the yeare 800. Toward the yeare 1000. there was a vision set out to be knowne of the people: How that a man guided by an Angell had seene a number of Soules diuersly handled and intreated, some lying vp∣on Gold, some vpon Chaffe or straw, some in aboundance, some in want and penu∣rie; according as they were helped there by the suffrages of their friends, or otherwise
neglected and finding no bodie to care for them. Whereupon sprung a deuotion of ordaining, that vpon some certaine day in the yeare there should be generall prayers made for all soules: And that is it which is called, Dies omnium animarum, the day of the dead; attributed by the most to Odilo the fourth Abbot of Clugni, perswaded by the flames of the mountaine Etna in Sicilia, of the certainty of the tormentes of Purgatorie: But by other some to Boniface the fourth, a little after the time of Gre∣gory the great, after the fashion and imitation of a certaine feast of the Romaines ce∣lebrated yearely in the month of Februarie for the soules of the deceased; that is, to purchase rest for them by sacrifices, night praiers, waxe candles, Plutarch. in Romulo. Anton. ut. 13. S. I. Histor. Lombard. leg. 157. Polyd. l. 6. c. 9. Canones Re∣form. a Card. Camp. propo∣siti. Not generally & all at once. Synod. Tolet. 3 Epist. Bonif. ad Gregor. 3. & Gregor. 3. ad Bonifac. and torches light vp amongst al the people, &c. And thereupon it commeth, that Plutarch calleth the mo∣neth of Februarie , purgatiue, or purgatorie. Now in the meane time it is not to be forgotten, that in the councel of Lyon 1244. it was not receiued, hauing rooted it selfe no where else but within the Monasteries of the order of Clugni: as also that in the yeare 1524. Cardinall Campegius propounding certaine Canons of reformati∣on, was ashamed thereof, and so omitted in the twentieth Canon, to which he re∣serued the number of feastes to speake any word of this feast which is at this day gro∣wen so famous and solemne a thing. Here notwithstanding we haue two things to obserue: The one is, that these su∣perstitions were not receiued all at one blow in so large a measure. For in the third Synode of Toledo it is ordained: That the dead shalbe conueighed to the graue with singing of Psalmes onely in hope of the resurrection. This was about the yeare 650. And euen at the same time when Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, was sent by Pope Gregorie the third to reforme the Churches of Germanie after his fashion. Hee found not any of these offeringes for the dead in the countrie, but hee brought them in there by the commandement of this Gregorie. And this was about the yeare 800. Carol. Mag. l. 1 c. 83. And Charles the great to represse these beginninges, thought good to limit the same: to the end that they might not runne on to the ruine and vndoing of inheritours and other children, that were then but yong: in like manner he ordained to what vse the obla∣tions that were offered should serue, namely two thirds to be giuen to the poore, and one third to the Cleargie. Innocent. 3. in Extrauag. de Presbyt. non baptizato. The decree of Innocent the third is not sleightly here to be passed ouer, of a priest vnbaptised and yet dying in the faith of Christ, whom hee affir∣meth, Caeleste gaudium incunctanter adeptum, to haue obtained eternall life without delay or stay: ordaining notwithstanding, that praiers and sacrifices should be offered vp for him. Where we will note two things: The first, that the way to heauen by purgato∣rie, was not in his iudgement necessarie: seeing that an vnbaptised priest had no∣thing to do there. The second: That the praiers for the dead do not presuppose a pur∣gatorie: seeing he ordained them for one whom he belieued & affirmed to bee alrea∣die in Paradice. And it is not to be stood vpon here, that Panormitan saith, that hee had obtained it, Spe, non re; in hope but not in deed. Bellarm. l. 1. de eccles. Tri∣umph. c. 1. & 2 For Bellarmine himselfe alleadgeth this place against those which denied, that the faithfull departed did enioy the sight of God before the day of iudgement. Let vs adde hereunto, that in all the vigiles of the dead, there is not a word mentioned of purgatorie, nor yet of the fire or paines from which the dead are to be released by the diligence and carefulnesse of those that are aliue: but rather there is speech laying out the miseries of this life, the merciful∣nesse of God, repentance and reconciliation with him whiles wee are here by Iesus Christ: the blessed life, and the resurrection of the dead, &c. All of them lessons of consolation for such as are liuing, who were accustomed after the death of their kinsfolkes, to call the Ministers of the Church vnto their houses, to spend the night with them in these holy meditations: Playing the Philosophers (saith Chrysost.) accor∣ding to the word of God: whereupon they were called vigils, whereas they are so called now a daies, though they fall to be kept at high noone. The other is, Resistances. that these superstitions likewise were not receiued without contesta∣tion, for after the sharpe contentions which were in the Church in the time of S. Au∣gustine which wrought this effect, that Purgatorie was left indifferent: About the yeare 1200. as time grew
on; God (who neuer leaueth himselfe without testimony vnto the face of the world, that so he might make it inexcusable) raised vp some to withstand the same in diuers places, and at diuers times. In the East, the fift generall Councell which quenched and quite put out the fire of Purgatorie in the East Church, & that almost at the same time that Gregorie did blow it vp in the Latine, and that after so sure a maner, as that it was neuer able to recouer either heate or light since then in those Churches. Nilus de purg. And this appeareth by the Apologie put vp by the Greekes in the Councell of Basill, and by a treatise of purgatorie, made by Nilus Archb. of Thessalonica. And in the West Churches the disputation held by Claudius Archbishop of Turin, in the time of Le∣wes the Gentle, against the superstitions of the Church of Rome, and particularly a∣gainst this same, Anno 900. about the yeare 900. The lectures and publike sermons of Peter de Bruits, and Henrie his successor at Tholosa, who taught for the space of thirtie yeare throughout all Languedoc and Guienne: That Christ was not sacrificed a new vppon the Altar in the Masse: That this oblation was not offered for the saluation of soules: That the Masses, praiers, & other works of the liuing for the dead, were vnprofitable, foolish, Petr Clunia∣cens. l. 1. & impious. And these things we shuld not know how to come by, to haue vn∣derstanding of the same, but that Peter Abbot of Clugni reporteth the same vnto vs, who no doubt forgot not to darken and ouershadow their doctrine so much as lay in him. And it is to be noted, that this Peter was in the end burned aliue: and not∣withstanding Henry continued aliue and tooke his place. Anno 1100. This was about the yeare 1100. The bookes of Arnoldus Villanouanus, a Spaniard by nation, excellently lear∣ned in the languages, Hebrew, Greeke, Latine & Arabicke, a great Philosopher and Diuine, in which there is set downe amongst diuers others this generall Proposition: That we must not either make satisfaction or offer any sacrifice for the dead. This was about the yeare 1200. Anno 1200. At the same time the Waldenses in France taught: That the true and onely purgatorie was in this life, in the precious blood of Iesus Christ, and not elsewhere: That the Masses were sacriledges and not sacrifices, which rob and steale away the honour due vnto the merit of our Sauior, &c. who after they had maintained their doctrine in many Sy∣nodes in Languedoc and Guyenne, as appeareth by the very histories of the aduersa∣ries, were in the ende oppressed and borne downe by force of armes: the Christian forces leuied against the Turkes and Sarasins, being set on worke to do this feat. And notwithstanding they were not so wholly extinguished, but that their ashes sowen by the prouidence of God throughout all Europe, did afterward stifle and choake these abuses of our age throughout the better part of Christendome. Now when the field might seeme to be wholie left wast and emptie for the Deuill, he contented not himself to walke the broad & high way. An exceeding great increase. Questions of Purgatorie. And thereupon taking pur∣gatory for granted they begun to reason in the schools: Whether the suffrages made for many together haue as much efficacie, as when they are made for one alone: Or els being made for one alone, whether they bee of force for all those that are in pur∣gatory. A certaine Praepositiuus answered affirmatiuely: For (said he) it is like a can∣dle which giueth light vnto many: and as a lecture which teacheth many, and that without do∣ing of any wrong or iniurie vnto one by helping of another. The schoolemen then and the Monkes foreseeing that the whole trade and trafficke of Masses was lost and gone, if this resolution tooke place, doe consequently muster and band themselues toge∣ther with all their might against the same: They dispute and argue, that the suf∣frages are specially of force for them for whom they are made, and not other∣wise: That of two condemned to bee either of them a hundred yeares in purga∣torie, the one by multitude of suffrages may come forth the first day: and the o∣ther for lacke of them shall there endure and finish his appointed tearme. Magist senten. l 4. D. 45. Bernardin. in Rosario. Albert. Magn. de Off. Miss. c. 15. t. 3. K. And the same thing is taught by the Maister of the sentences. And thereupon their Monkes crie aloude and say: That then it is a worthie thing to haue them that shall suc∣ceede in the inheritance verie deuout, and such as will come off readilie and liberal∣ly for the ransomes of their deceased kinsfolkes, &c. And that then the Condi∣tion of the rich is a great deale better then the condition of the poore in Purgatorie, &c.
a point of diuinitie vnknowne vnto all former ages, and farre off from that of our Sauiours. O how hard and difficult a thing it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen! Another question followeth, whether the suffrages made for the dead, Other questi∣ons. by men which haue committed mortall and deadly sinnes can help them. And herein many were moued to belieue that they could not. Where it is to bee noted, that the laitie were wont vntill now to make these suffrages by prayers, beades, rosaries, &c. And for this inconuenience they found a verie safe conueyance: namely, that all men are sin∣ners; that Nemo sine crimine viuit, &c. And that therefore it was the surest course that these suffrages should be made by the mouth and ministerie of the priestes, who al∣though they were sinners, yea and that hainous sinners as the rest of other men yet they were not considered & accompted of as the lay men, according to their priuate demerites, but as aduocates and dealers for the Church, according to the desert of the vniuersall Church. And againe vpon this resolution great aduantage doeth rise vnto the Priestes, viz. a notable multiplying of Masses for the dead. Neither is there in all this any let, but that the Canonistes may set the wethercockes vpon the highest pinacles of this building, brought to his present hugenesse by another inuention, which is, that there are in hell certaine that are not extreame wicked ones, whose paines and torments may be mittigated and much eased by such suffrages: and this in the end hath brought them beyond any limitable point. And for the confirmati∣on thereof, they would gather it out of a place in Augustine his Enchiridion hereto∣fore alleadged: but they cannot agree with the schoolemen. The fire of purgatory blowne and stirred toge∣ther by the Mendicant friers. Now the Mendicant Friers, assoone as they were once receiued, did husband this doctrine more thriftily then all the rest, drawing all men, euen against their willes to the deuotions of their order. The Gray friers, to the end that they might haue men deuoted to them, begin to preach, that S. Francis descended once euery yeare into purgatorie to free and set at libertie such as did affect his order: The Iacobines after the manner that is vsed at Portsale, proclaime how that S. Dominicke performeth this worke euerie moneth: The Carmelite, or white friers, that the virgin Marie, for whose sake they looke to be accompted and held for famous and renowned, did the same euerie Saturday. The Augustines contradicted all the other, shewing by the scriptures against S. Augustine himselfe: That who so belieueth in Christ commeth not into iudgement, but passeth readily from death to life, according to that which the Lord had said to the theefe: To day thou shalt bee with mee in Paradice. Thus were Christian soules distracted and drawne into vncertainties, by these varieties, not knowing any longer to whom they ought to acknowledge as due the worke of their saluation. And amongst all the opi∣nions then broached, none but that which was true in deed was held for heresie. So deeply had deceitfull errour rooted it selfe, and so largely had it ouerspread the world, being borne vp by the authoritie and power of man. Dominc. And yet Frier Dominick a Soto durst say within the memory of this age: That it is not credible, seeing that purga∣torie is not for any but the faithfull, that God should leaue his friendes so long a time in the fire: and that he thinketh that there is not any one that abideth there twentie yeares. A great crack in the groundworke and yearely funerall feastes of the Church of Rome. Bellarm. de purgat. l. 2. c. 9. But Bellar∣mine with as much speed as may be, buckleth himselfe to the repairing thereof, by goodly and glorious reuelations: Nay (saith he) it appeareth plainly by such and such, that such a thing there hath beene these hundred, two hundred, fiue hundred, yea these nine hun∣dred yeares. And such a thing there will be euen vnto the day of iudgement. Now the Churches of Fraunce and Germany haue propounded within these 200. yeares many articles to the Popes, which they called Grauamina, wherein they com∣plained themselues grieuously of these abuses, which notwithstanding they haue not regarded to make any redresse therein, in as much as the landes and liuinges of the Cleargie resteth principally vpon this protended fire; a fire as wee haue a little seene without any ground or foundation either from the scriptures or in the auncient Church. In so much as that the Monks began to preach in the beginning of the age
wherein we liue: That the soules which were there did leape at the sound of the money when it was cast into the basen for them: That there was no so grieuous or hainous a crime, no so great abhomination, no so heauie or rigorous punishment, from which men were not acquit & freede thereby, &c. Against these enormities many great persons haue beene moued to ring the popes such round and loud peales, as that they haue thereby beene almost shaked besides both seat and sea; and therevpon it is, that euerie one of them hath not cea∣sed, neither doth as yet, to labor and do his vttermost endeuour by a thousand wiles, and as many shiftes to nestle and settle himselfe both sure and fast, without retracting or departing from any thing of all that whereof he is become seazed and possessed. So farre is it off, that he should grow ashamed of any of his iugling trickes and cosenages how open soeuer they be laid, The doctrine of purgatory, the marke of Antichrist. to the sight and view of the world. In this point also he beareth a speciall marke and note of Antichrist: namely, in the stealing away of the merite of our redemption, so much as in him lyeth, from Iesus Christ our Lord: Howbeit that the Churches of the Abyssines, Armenians, Muscouites, and Grecians, do not acknowledge this Purgatorie. For whereas they would make vs belieue, that the Greeke Church doth auouch & allow of the same in a Councell held at Florence, in the time of Pope Eugenius, Anno 1439. when as the Emperor Paleologus pressed of the Turke, came for succour and aide to the Princes of the West: it is all in vaine, false and no∣thing worth, seeing that the Bishop of Ephesus principall deputed, did protest and openly disclaime the same, before the whole Councell assembled: and for that the Greeke Churches disauowed that which had beene done by the others, whom they affirmed to be manifestly wonne by the Pope, as in deed part of them did continue and abide with him. And thus we haue no Purgatorie, and by consequent no Masses or sacrifices for the dead: Purgatorie in his fall drawing the Masse after it into an vn∣auoidable ouerthrow, according to our aduersaries their owne doctrine. But it is now high time to passe to some other matter. CHAP. XI. That the inuocating of Saintes hath no ground in the holy Scriptures of the olde Te∣stament. IT may seeme to the purpose, that together with the considering of the Masse in the nature and qualitie of a sacrifice; we should consequently examine, that which it teacheth vs of the Saintes deceased, and enioying eternal life, inasmuch as they are there inuocated and praied vnto, in as much as they are acknowled∣ged there to be intercessors vnto God: in that their merits and sufferings, are presented & set before him for a satisfaction for our faults: and likewise because that this pretended sacrifice is made in their names, &c. For after that wee haue handled that which they pretend that we haue to performe for the dead: what can better follow then to take a viewe and consideration of that which they vnderstand and hold, that the Saintes deceased doe for those that are aliue? Now this is a cleare and euident doctrine throughout the whole scriptures of the old and new Testament: That God alone will be inuoca∣ted and praied vnto, prayed vnto through one onely Iesus Christ his welbeloued: and in the vertue and power of his only sacrifice accomplished vpon the tree of the crosse. If this doctrine stand, all the Masses which are made in honour of the Saintes for the liuing, do fall to the ground: euen as likewise in quenching and putting out of pur∣gatorie, all those are extinct and made nothing worth, which are performed and pra∣ctised by the carefull diligence of the liuing for the dead. God onely will be praied vnto, God alone wil be praied vnto Psal. 50. Esay. 42.8. for he hath said it: and whom shal we belieue con∣cerning that which is his will besides himselfe: Call vpon me in thine aduersitie: J will deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, &c. I am the Lord (saith he) I will not giue my glory
vnto another. There is not (say the Prophetes) saluation in any other but in him, Esa. 45. Osce. 13 4. 2. Paral. 20. Ezech. 14. There is no God that can saue but he, &c. When wee know what to doe, there remaineth nothing for vs but to haue recourse vnto him, for we haue no other aid or succour but him, &c. And there∣fore Dauid in so many his prayers, in so manifold and diuers his matters and affaires betaketh not himselfe to any, saue onely him: His refuge (saith he) and his force, Psal. 46.13.14 3.36.6. &c. his protector, and his defender, his peace and his warre, his counsell and his armie: Because (saith he) that power is of him, and of him also is mercie: that is to say, the desire, and the abi∣litie: the authoritie to commaund, and the practise of the commandement. Againe, because that his Maiestie descendeth mercifully in his bountiful kindnes for to heare vs, and graunt our petitions, and to doe vs good, &c. And S. Paule striketh the mat∣ter dead at one blow: How (saith he) shall they call vpon him on whom they do not belieue? But doe we onely belieue in God, the father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost? then must we onely pray vnto him, as well as onely belieue in him, that is as well as put our trust and affiance in him: with what boldnesse then (for it cannot be any point of humilitie) shall we dare to giue vnto Saints that which appeartaineth vnto God: e∣uen that homage, which he hath required of vs his creatures, and which he hath ma∣nifestly reserued to himselfe alone? And as he will be praied vnto alone, so he will haue it to be by one onely: And by one onely. The father by the Sonne God and man, mediator betwixt God & men, the high and one∣ly priest betwixt the iustice of the eternall father, and the sinnes of his people. And we know him, for the father hath annointed him for the onely and one alone priest; hath made him as such a one to sitte in the throne of his maiestie, to intreate and sue for vs, hath said vnto him, Thou art my sonne, to day haue I begotten thee, Heb. 8. in whom I am wel pleased, &c. The Sonne also; No man commeth to the father but by mee: whatsoeuer you shall aske of my father in my name, I tell you verily he will giue it you: And I will do it to the end that the father may be glorified in the Sonne, &c. Therefore, Mat. 12. Come vnto me all ye that be oppressed and troden downe, and I will ease you. And the holy Ghost in like manner by the mouth of the Apostles: There is but one God, 1. Timoth 2. and one mediatour of God and men Iesus Christ our Lord. If any man haue sinned, we haue an Aduocate with the father, 1. Ioh. 1. Hebr. 7. Iesus Christ the righteous: In belieuing on him we haue libertie & accesse vnto the father in all confidence: Accesse I say in all confidence vnto the throne of grace, to obtaine mercie and find grace, &c. And it is his will and pleasure, For this Bishop, Heb. 4. this high priest is such a one as is touched with the sence and feeling of our infirmities, hath beene tempted as we in all things, sinne excep∣ted. And he is of power and abilitie: Hebr 4. & 8. For he is set at the right hand of the throne of the ma∣iestie of God, mightie to saue them which come neere vnto God by him, euerliuing for to make intercession for them with him. After these so expresse commandementes, Rom. 8. what excuse remaineth for vs, that we should betake and commend our selues to the Creator, by the creature? The creature whatsoeuer or whosoeuer it be that cannot moue him, li∣uing here below, saue onely to wrath, otherwise then in that he hath beene vouchsa∣fed grace in Iesus Christ: and who likewise when he is exalted and taken vp into hea∣uen, acknowledging no glorie due to him, saue in that that God is glorified, cannot but take it an iniurie doue vnto him when any thing is attributed vnto him, and can∣not but bee readie to say as the Angell said vnto S. Iohn: Apocal. 19. & 22. Beware and looke well to thy selfe, I am thy fellow seruant: pointing also out vnto vs, with Iohn Baptist, the greatest that euer was borne amongst the sonnes of men: and saying, Behold the lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world: the propitiation for our sinnes is onely in his blood: turne and betake your selues to him. And moreouer our God will be praied vnto in his onely begotten, In that grace and fauour purchased through that sacrifice of the Crosse. in the vertue and power of his one onely sacrifice made vpon the Crosse: for as much as it is hee onely that may and hath power to be both the sacrifice and the sacrificer together: all the sacrifices, washings, & purifying of the law, hauing relation to no other but this of his, which was without spot or blemish: all their blood to his blood, and all their deathes, to that one death and passion of his: who likewise alone could, as being God and man, suffer and ouercome, cast downe himselfe into the center of the earth,
and raise vp himselfe againe farre aboue the heauens, be a curse and a blessing: and finally laid prostrate by death, and raised vp to life all at once. And therefore is it said by the Prophet Esay 53. Esa. 53. He hath offered his soule an oblation for sinne. The good will and pleasure of the Lord shall prosper & preuaile in his hand: He was pearced for our mis∣deedes: Esa. 63. He hath taken vppon him our iniquities, &c. Againe, He alone hath trod vppon all our enemies in his wrath: No one of the people hath helped him: he was alone, to treade the wine-presse, Heb. 10. Hebr. 9. 2. Ioh. 1. &c. And he did it saith the Apostle: When in the fulnesse of time he abolished sinne, by the offering vp of himselfe; He was made a propitiation for our sinnes: Hee hath san∣ctified vs by the oblation of his bodie, once offered, and hath consecrated for euer those whom he hath sanctified. Which thing all the blood of all the Saints, from righteous Abell vnto the last Martyr, could neuer haue accomplished: No not though it had beene but for the sinnes of one onely man: no not for the least sinne of that man: not although this bloode had risen to the hugenesse of a great floode: seeing there is no remission but in the blood of the Sonne of God: and to seeke it any where else, is to shed his blood againe, Act 4.12. is to hold the same shed in vaine: and this is to be guilty of it. For S. Peter saith: There is no saluation in any other: There is not any other name giuen vnto men by which they may be saued. That the fa∣thers of the old Testament neuer sought for helpe or succour by praier, but at the hands of the one onely God. Eckius in En∣chird. And therefore we see proportionablie to this doctrine, that the fathers of the old Testament did neuer offer vp or direct their prayers vnto any but to one God alone. And this our aduersaries subscribe vnto: for so also was it held for a point of sound diuinitie amongst them, that seeking of helpe at God by prayer was a part of his ser∣uice and worship due vnto himselfe alone. They say, that this was for feare that the people, who otherwise were readie and apt enough of themselues therevnto, should turne aside vnto idolatrie: but this is to gesse and not to answere. But at the least they confesse, that this is the way to slippe into idolatrie. The rest say, That the fa∣thers prayed not vnto the Patriarkes and Prophetes, because they were as yet in the Limbes: But this is a thing to bee disputed and debated by vs, if here were any place. But at the least there were Angels, and those oftentimes conuersing and kee∣ping companie with men, and hauing therewithall the charge of countries and na∣tions: Henoch and Elias also had beene rapt and caried aliue vp into heauen, and the latter of them in the sight of Elizeus. And yet notwithstanding we do not reade that any people or particular man in so many ages did euer pray vnto any Angel, or made choise of any to make intercession to God for him. No more then euer Noe or his Sonnes did to Enoch, or Eliseus to Elias: the sonnes to the father, or the disciples to their maister: albeit (as we know) Eliseus were zealously affected to Elias: My father, the chariot and horsemen of Israel. In the new Testament God alone is prayed vnto. In the new Testament likewise as little; notwithstanding that they hold, That the fathers by the descending of Christ into hell, were deliuered out of the limbes, and caried vppe into heauen. Fit matter for the children of Abraham, the father of the faithfull, to flie vnto him, to call vpon him for aide and succour, and so of the rest. Notwithstanding also that many of the Apostles and disciples suffered presently af∣ter for our Lord, as Iames, Steuen, &c. during the life time of Saint Peter, Saint Paul, and Saint Iohn. Matter sufficient to serue that it should not bee kept close from vs, that besides Iesus Christ wee haue them for our aduocates with God: and for inter∣cessors by vertue of their sufferinges and merites. And the same may bee said of the holy virgine, whome Saint Iohn ouerliued many yeares, the aduocate at this day (if wee will belieue them) of the Church of Rome: who at the least should haue beene excepted from these generall rules. And here againe they say, that the Apostles fea∣red that this might be held for arrogancie in them. And why on the behalfe of the Saintes of the old Testament, and of the holy virgine? Againe, That they stoode in doubt least the Gentils should returne againe to their idols. But that there might not so many duties of deuotion be lost and let slip, could they not make some maner of dispatch or dispensation? could they not deuise some way to cure and remedie the same? And would they that these babish excuses should passe for currant reasons
with vs, and that against so expresse textes of the scripture? What then say they, doe you make no more accompt of the saints, of those which haue suffered here on earth for the name of Christ, and which now are ascended tri∣umphantly with him vp on high, &c? The honour that is due vn∣to the Saints. 1. Cor. 12. Gal. 2. 2 Cor. 3. Act 9. & 14. Tim. 4. Yes verily we honour them more then our ad∣uersaries: for we praise and honor the Lord in his saints, glorifying his name for the singular graces which he hath bestowed vpon thē for the edifying of his Church, ac∣knowledging the meruailes that hee hath wrought by his power in the weaknesse of their ministerie, hauing chosen them, base and vile that they were, for instruments of his power of his wisedome, & of his goodnes, to carrie his name amongst the people, hauing assisted them in their trauels, deliuered them from infinite tribulations: and in the end of their course, crowned them with glorie. And afterward wee praise and magnifie themselues, in the gifts which it hath pleased God to distribute vnto them of his grace and fauour: and specially that hee hath shewed them this fauour to vse them for the setting forth of his glory: Math 25. Heb. 3. for that hauing well imployed their talentes giuen them of the Lord they are entered into his ioy: for that they haue beene faith∣full in the house, so that they haue not loued or spared their owne liues, Apocal. 12. euen vnto the death: whereby they haue receiued of his liberall mercie the white garment, &c. And from thence wee are led along to a third honour, that is, to set them before vs as patternes of our life, to pray to God to vouchsafe vs the fauour that wee may fol∣low their vertuous steppes, their holinesse, their humilitie, zeale and constancie: fol∣lowing the exhortation of the Apostles: Bee ye followers of me, Rom. 15. Hebr. 12. as you haue vs for a pats terne and example. And in another place: Be ye not slothfull, but followers of them which by faith & patience haue receiued the inheritance of the promises. After this fashion say I, ho∣nor we the Saints, praising God in them, praising them in God, and conforming our selues vnto thē by his grace. And all this according to the precepts & examples which we haue in the scriptures wherein their liues & their deathes haue beene set out vnto vs to those endes: whereas our aduersaries haue made them ridiculous by their de∣uised and faigned legendes, and still doe make the name of Christ in stead of being glorified, to be blasphemed by these their fooleries which they deliuer to the poore people for their principall instructions: whereas for fiue hundred yeares after our Lorde they were condemned to be false, Gratian. D. 15. ex Gelasio. and by the Bishops of Rome themselues re∣iected as thinges inuented by such men as were either heretickes or infidels, subor∣ned thereunto by the malice of the Deuill himselfe to discredite the name and faith of Iesus Christ. But rather wee denie with the scriptures, that we ought either to flie vnto them for succour, or els worship them: For these seruices are due vnto God alone: and to take them as intercessors betwixt God and vs, is not belonging to them, it is the of∣fice of our onely Mediator Iesus Christ our Lord: Neither yet ought we to make any imployment of their merites, or workes of supererrogation, eyther to appease the wrath of God, or to supply our vnworthinesse, or else the passion of our Lorde: for this were to annihilate, and make of no effect his perfect sacrifice. And this is that which wee haue to condemne in the Masse in this place: wherein the Priest contrarie to that which hath beene tolde vs so oft, namely, that God is the onely searcher of heartes, doth confesse his sinnes to the Angelles, to the virgine Marie, to the Saintes and Saintesses, and prayeth them to bee intercessors for him vnto God: wherein hee prayeth God to pardon his sinnes, not by the merite of Christ, nor by his blood, but by the merite of all the Saintes, and specially, Of those whose relickes are vnder the Altar, &c. And wherein the sacrifice, as they pretend of Christ, is offered to God in the honour of the virgine Marie, and of the men saintes, and women saintes, &c. And these thinges we affirme to be directly against the word of God, against the analogie of faith, and against the vnitie of the auncient Church. Now let vs consequently heare if our aduersaries haue any thing to say to the contrarie. In Genesis 41. Iacob blessing the children of Ioseph, vttereth these wordes: Gen. 18.15.16. The
God that fedde mee euer since I was vnto this day: the Angell which hath beene my prote∣ction from all euill blesse these children: And my name and the name of my fathers A∣braham and Isaac bee called vppon (or cryed lowde vppon) by them, &c. Out of this place they gather, that the Angels and Saintes ought to bee called vpon and prai∣ed vnto. But as concerning the Angell whereof hee speaketh, it appeareth that it was no created spirit: for then Iacob would not haue ranked him and made him e∣quall with God: neither had hee praied vnto him, or done other like thinges, and vsed the verie same tearmes which are belonging to the Lord: This Angell then is he of whom the Prophet Malachie speaketh: Malach. 3. the Angell of the couenant, the Sonne of God himselfe, the Mediator of the old and new couenant, in the beholding of whom the Patriarkes found grace with the Lord: Eoxd. 10.19.13 21 & 14.24. That Angell which is sometimes by Moses in Exodus called an Angell, sometimes Iehouah, & that in like tearmes of speech, & alluding vnto these; that is then when there is any speech of the conduct and guiding of Iacob, that is to say, of the people of Israel, of his Church. And thus haue the olde writers spoken. Tertul. de Tri∣nit. c. 15. Tertullian expounding this place, saith: As hee hath not doubted or made any scruple in calling Christ an Angell: so let no man be afraid or sticke to call him God, seeing hee vnderstandeth here, that in the blessing of his children hee is God, and called vppon, and likewise an Angell. But and if that any hereticke, shoulde obstinately sette himselfe against the truth, that here is properly spoken of an Angell; in this let him bee conuin∣ced by the force and power of the truth, &c. Saint Hillarie alleadgeth it in the same sence vpon Psalme 123. Hilar. in psal. 123. Chrisost. in Genes. c. 48. That wee ought to owe and ascribe all our graces, prosperi∣tie and deliuerances vnto the one onely God. And after the same manner Chryso∣stome. And as for that which is said of the name of Abraham being called vpon by his children, it is a common and accustomed speech of the Hebrews, vsed when they will speake of those men or women which are ingrafted into a familie: Esay, 4. as in Esay, se∣uen women desire of one man, that his name may bee called vppon by them; that is to say, that they may bee called by his name, or held for his, &c. And in this place is plainly deliuered the adopting of the two sonnes of Ioseph, which Iacob reputeth and holdeth to bee by place and right as capable of inheritance in the parting of the land as his owne sonnes: as in deed they drew lots for two. But and if they belieue not vs, yet let them at the least belieue their owne writers. Cardinall Hugo saith: To the end they might haue tribes, as the sonnes of Iacob had. And in the same sence hee ex∣poundeth this word, Esay 4. Lyranus, Et inuocetur, &c. quia vocati sunt; because they are called the adopted sonnes of Iacob, and are become heades of two tribes, after the manner of his owne children. The annotation also of their Fonseca vpon Caietan: This is a phrase of speech familiarly vsed of the Hebrewes, that the name of this man is called vppon by that man, when their meaning is, that that man is called by this mans name. And thereupon he alleadgeth the fourth of Esay, and Daniel 9. Let them also remember themselues of their owne doctrine; How that the fathers were in the Limbes, that in the Limbes they did not see God, neither by consequent know the affaires of men: whereupon it followeth by their owne sayings, that they could not be called vpon. And yet not∣withstanding Bellarmine in the time of the cleare light of learning, is not ashamed to alleadge this place. Eliphaz saith to Iob: Iob 5. Call now and see if there be any that will answere thee, and turne thy selfe vnto some one of the Saintes, &c. Which place other expositors doe reade with an interrogatiue point. And the summe of the text is; That no man when he is chasti∣sed of God, can say that it is any wrong or iniustice, seeing hee hath found, as hath beene said before, matter of reprehension euen in his Angels. And how much more (saith hee) in them which dwell in these houses of clay? &c. And thereupon hee ad∣deth: Cast thine eies round about, and see if thou canst find any amongst the most holy, who hath beene punished causelesse. But and if they will haue it, that by Saintes the Angels are vnderstoode: besides that it standeth not with the scope and purpose of the text, it is as quickly denied as affirmed: and such figures doe not proue or con∣clude any thing. But and if they simplie take it to bee vnderstoode of the
Sainte, then so much the lesse: seeing that they in the Limbes could neither heare norse, according to their owne doctrine. And certainly, S. Ierome if he be the au∣thor of those commentaries, was not aduised of this doctrine, notwithstanding that he three handle this verse by name. In the Psalmes (saith Cocleus) it is said: Psal. 32. Pro hac orab ad te omnis sanctus. The Hebrew saith: For this shall euerie holy man pray vnto thee, &c. The Chaldie: For this shall euery good man pray vnto thee in time conuenient: that is, Because thou art readie to forgiue them which confesse their faultes. And so S. Paul hir selfe doth expound it, Romaines 4. But in euerie place where they find the name Sait, there they will find inuocation or intercession of the Saints. August. Hie∣ronym. & Theodor. in Psal. 32. But without any longer staying vpon the matter, Sant Augustine intreating vpon this place saith, Eue∣ry holy man shall pray vnto thee because of impietie, and for the remission of sinnes, because thou fgiuest them, and otherwise no holy man would pray vnto thee. And when? In due and con∣enient time: when the new Testament shall be come, when the grace of Christ shall be manife∣ted, when in the fulnes of time God shal haue sent his Sonne to redeeme them which were vnder the law, &c. And this is spoken (saith he) of all Christians, of Saint Paule himselfe, who being prickt with the sting of the law cryeth vnto God, wretched man that I am, who shall de∣liuer mee from the bodie of this death? Saint Ierome saith: The Saintes doe pray in this life for the remission of their sinnes, & seeing the most holy are not exempted: now is the conue∣nient time for to obtaine. Theodoret in like manner: I will not pray vnto thee alone for mine impietie: but all those that shall haue the knowledge of thee shall make the same prayers vnto thee: Seeing (saith he) that vnder the new Testament, Haimo in Psal. 32. Bernard. serm. 73. in Cant. the faithfull by sea and by land shall praise God by the singing of the Psalmes of Dauid, &c. Haimo, The remission of iniqui∣tie is good: and for the obtaining thereof, euerie holy man will pray vnto thee in a time conue∣nient, that is to say, in this life, in which alone prayer can obtaine the same. Saint Bernard: For this (saith he) &c. Seeing (saith he) that the Saintes haue need to pray to God for their owne sinnes to bee saued by his mercie, they being nothing able to trust and leane to their owne righteousnesse, &c. And againe: Pro hac orabit O misericors, &c. Idem in ep. ad Henric. Se∣nens. Archiep. Euerie Saint whosoeuer (saith hee) shall pray vnto thee O most mercifull father, for his iniquitie: becomming a hum∣ble suter for the sence and feeling of his sinne and miserie: and yet notwithstanding a Saint, for that he consenteth not vnto it, in that be delighteth and taketh pleasure in the law, according to the inward man, &c. And Cardinall Hugo saith, For all the Saints and holy men haue need to pray vnto God for the remission of their owne sins, &c. And in a couenient time, that is to say, in this present life: according to that which is said, labour whiles it is day, &c. Farre enough off then from the exposition of our aduersaries; That the saintes deceased doe pray for vs. And Lyranus followeth Saint Ierome, Cardinall Caietanus and Arias Mon∣tanus translate it: Super hac, not Pro hac, that is, saith Caietanus: That euerie Saint shall pray vnto God for to obtaine the blessed fauour of his diuine righteousnesse, &c. Here is no question then of praying for another in an other life. And as little proofe is there to bee gathered out of Psalme 121. Psalm. 121. I haue lifted (saith Dauid) mine eies towardes the mountaines from whence succour shall come vnto me, &c. By the hils they will vnderstand the Saintes: This is a figure. And by these hils some vn∣derstood the scriptures, as Saint Augustine: others the heauens, as Euthymius: some the Saintes, as Casiodorus. Of such sortes of speaking there followeth no good ar∣gument. But let vs take them in whatsoeuer sence they will. If it bee to the Saintes, they were according to their owne doctrine in the Limbes: and therefore in vaine: & for that purpose they had more need to haue cast downe, then to haue lifted vp their eyes. But they should at the least haue considered, what followeth: My succour com∣meth from the Lord who hath made heauen and earth. And then not from all or any of these creatures, bee they neuer so high and eminent. And this is that which Saint Augustine saith: No man can vnderstand by these mountaines great personages; August. in psal. 121. And amongst men who was more great then Iohn Baptist, of whom the Lord saith: amongst those that are borne of women, &c. Thou seest then this great mountaine to shine: but heare his confession, We haue, saith he, all receiued of his fulnes, It is then from him of whom they haue receiued, that we must looke for our succour, and not from these mountaines: from Christ the Sonne of the most
high and soueraigne father, &c. And if thou lift not vppe thine eyes by the scripture thou shalt not bee admonished and taught how to bee enlightened of him. Saint Ierome: haue lifted mine eyes, Hieronym. in psal. 121. the eies of my spirite vnto the toppe of the bookes: that is of the la and the Prophetes, from whence I see comming vnto mee my Lord, my aide and my helpe, that is, Christ: and so Saint Augustine vpon S. Iohn doth expound it of the scriptures. I an other place Saint Ierome ioyneth these two places together to the same end: August. tract. 1 in Iohan. Hieronym. in Esa. c. 52, l. 14. I ue lifted mine eyes vnto the hils: and I haue lifted mine eyes vnto thee which dwellest in the a∣uens: opposing and setting them against the ordinarie intention and drift of the e∣uill, who would curbe and keepe in our soules vnder the slauerie of these inferior p∣wers. Theodoret: Being compassed and set about with calamities, say the captiues of Ba∣lon, Theod. in psal. 120. we haue cast our eyes on euery side, but we know that there is no help of man that can do  good: we rest in the good pleasure and will of God, &c. Saint Bernard likewise speaking of Christ persecuted in the Church, and in his members, saith: Who is hee that without teares can see the teares of Christ, Bernard. in ep. ad Simonem Abbatem. S. Nicol. lifting his eyes from the deepe pitte of mire and elay, vnto the mountaines from whence help and succour is to come vnto him, &c. And surely then not from the Saintes, for they know themselues to stand in neede to bee helped of Christ; but rather saith he, From the Lord which hath made heauen and earth. Caietan also most fitly, and for the purpose saith: This is here as a dialogue betwixt the people and the Pro∣phet; shall I here stand and waite for my helpe from the mountaines? from the princes and po∣tentates of the earth? nay rather from the Lord, &c. In the Psalme 134. it is said: Iudicabit Dominus populum suum, & in seruis suis depreca∣bitur. Psal. 134.14. Of a bad and naughtie Grammar construction, they make a bad piece of diui∣nitie: He shall bee prayed vnto (say they) in his seruants. But the Hebrew saith: Hee shall repent himselfe, or he shall be appeased towarde his seruantes. And so haue Caietanus, Pag∣nin, and Arias Montanus their interpretors translated the same: And the Chaldie Paraphrast in like manner, that is, That God according to his mercie will be appea∣sed towards to his people. At the least they should haue kept themselues vnto their Glose, which from a badde translation hath notwithstanding gathered a good doctrine: Deprecabilis (saith it) efficietur seruis suis exaudiendo, seruis suis placabilis fiet: hee will bee intreated at the prayers of his seruantes: and in the same manner Haimo. But let vs heare the fathers. Haimo in psal. 134. Saint Augustine hath read it: Et in seruis suis adorabitur: and expoundeth this place of the casting off of the Iewes, and calling of the Gentils, comming into the Church on euerie side. Saint Ierome: Consolabitur: and gathereth the former sence thereof also: That the Lord shall bee comforted in the incredu∣litie of the Iewes, and in the faith and beliefe of the Gentiles. But Theodoret commeth more neere vnto the purpose and scope of the Prophet: For (saith he) Thou O Lord seeing vs assailed by enemies wilt not cast vs off, neither wilt thou chasten vs according to our sinnes. And thus likewise Caietanus. But say they, doth not intercession presuppose inuocation? Now the fathers of the olde Testament haue caused the names of the Patriarkes to steppe in to helpe their prayers. If intercession presuppose in∣nocation. Genes. 32. Exod. 32. Deutr. 9. Psal. 131. Exod. 6.5. & 32.13. Leuit. 26.42. Dan. 3. Deut. 8.26.34 1. Kings, 8. Psal. 89. Iacob said: The God of my father Abraham and Isaac deliuer mee, &c. Moyses: Call to minde thy seruantes, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. Call to mind thy seruant Dauid and his afflictions, &c. But assuredly, they do plainly enough expound themselues in the same places: To whome (saith Moyses) thou hast sworne by thine owne selfe, I will multiply their seede and giue vnto them this lande. And Salomon: Per∣forme vnto thy seruant Dauid that which thou hast said: the couenant that thou hast as∣sured and confirmed vnto him, &c. And the Lord himselfe: I haue remembred my coue∣nant made with your fathers: and not your fathers, not their merites: to witte, they all alleadging to God, and God vnto them the whole cause and reason of the graces and deliuerances that they craued at his hand, or that hee performed vnto them, to be the free promise which hee vouchsafed to make to the Patriarkes, to Dauid, to his people, &c. and not their merites: which as wee shall see hereafter, are none at all at Gods hand. And this is the same which the Glose saith in the like places: Fir∣miter promisisti, non licet mutari: Thou hast infalliblie promised, and it is not lawfull for thee
to reuoke or change thy promise. But whereas they go about to deriue and find the origi∣nall of intercession, these places cannot serue for an example. For by their owne coafessions those that were in the limbes could not be intercessors. And that wee may not need to bee still repeating the same thing, let this which hath beene saide, serue and be vnderstood of all such like places. In Iob 33. Iob. 33.23. Elihu after he had shewed by how diuers sortes and waies God chasti∣seth men for their amendment, hee addeth these wordes, according to the old tran∣slation: If there bee an Angell speaking for him, one of a thousand to declare of the equitie of this man: Then will he haue mercie vpon him and say, deliuer him, for I haue found where∣fore to bee reconciled vnto him, &c. Thereupon they infer, that Angels do make interces∣sion for vs. But according to the Hebrew, the truth of the word translated Angell, is ambiguous, and may be taken for a messenger: and seemeth also presently after, that it ought to be vnderstood for a prophet or interpreter of the will of God: as in the booke of Iudges, 2. Chap. And that because of the worde which followeth , that is to say, an Interpreter. And hee saith not for him, but with him,  let him make God acquainted with the vprightnesse of the man: but vnto man his dutie: that is ac∣cording to this sence, That when God afflicteth vs, it commeth well to passe for vs to haue, bee it an Angell, or be it a Prophet, that may cause vs to vnderstand, that it is for our sinnes, and may exhort vs to repentance and newnesse of life, to the ende that God may deale mercifully with vs. Which thing Elihu also may seeme to speake of purpose concerning himselfe and his companions; to the end that Iob may take in good part their admonitions, & make his profit of them. But in as much as they bee more freely giuen to belieue the old writers, S. Ierome alleadgeth for an example of this place, Esay praying vnto God for Ezechias when he was sicke. For as concerning his cōmentaries vpon Iob, men are of opinion that they are not his. And S. Gregorie expoundeth it of the Angell of the great Councel, Iesus Christ, the Mediator, God & man like vnto vs, in consideration of whō God became fauourable vnto men. Where it is to be noted, that in stead of Millibus, both the one & the other hath read it Simi∣libus, which could not be of S. Ieromes doing, who vnderstood the Hebrew tong, and was sufficient to trip & find out the weaknes of their exposition. The Glose saith: This Angel it is Christ that speaketh vnto the father for vs, shewing himself to him to be like vnto vs, in one onely thing of a thousand, that is in his humanity. And his speech, that is to shew himselfe a man vnto God, besides whom ther is not one which is found iust, Hugo in Ioh. c. 33. 2. Sam. 14. & which being without sin may make intercessto for sinners, &c: & Cardinal Hugo expoundeth it after the same maner. Absalom, say they, reconciled vnto his father Dauid, might not yet come to see his face, but by the meanes & intercession of Ioab: wherefore wee must haue a Ioab a saint of authority in heauen to draw neere vnto God for vs. And what saint wil they haue of more authoritie then the Son himselfe, Eph. 5. Rom. 5. seeing by faith in him we haue accesse vnto the father, & to his throne of grace with all assurance & boldnes. Adonias also to obtain Abisaeg to wife of Salomon, commendeth his sute to Bathseba Salomons mo∣ther, saying with himselfe, he cannot denie her any thing. And so now must wee vnto the virgine Marie, &c. But where find they that our Lord hath diuided and giuen a∣way any part of his royall dignitie with her? And let them not run or rather rush any further forward in their Allegorie: for Salomon refused to make any graunt, and was also moued to wrath and indignation, and that so far, as that it cost his brother Adonias his life. But in these things how far more sure is it for to hold our selues to Christ? Heb. 7. Rom. 8. Whosaueth (saith the Apostle) those which come vnto God by him which maketh in∣tercession for vs, & that so effectually, as that none shal haue whereof to accuse, much lesse to con∣demne vs. Ieremie: Though Moyses & Samuel stood before me, Ieremie. 15.1. yet should not my affection be moued toward this people. Now in deed they might haue better a great deale drawne the contrarie consequence. But the summe is, that God hath forbidden Ieremie to pray for the people, as hauing resolued to lay his rods vpon them, their wickednesse being growne to the height. And thus S. Ierome expoundeth it: And to the end (saith Theodoret) that hee might not trke at it, as though it were done by reason of him: Though
saith he, these two were in thy roome and place, yet should they not any more moue or pretaile with me. Hieronym. in Ietem. c. 15. l. 3 & in Ezech. l, 5. c. 20. Theodor. in Ierem. Gregor. l. 9. c. 9. Chrysost. ad Thess. 1. c. 1. hom. 1 zech. 14. These two, saith Saint Ierome and Gregorie, Who sundrie times had beene in∣tercessors betwixt the wrath of God and the sinne of his people: yea and betwixt God and his open enemies, Pharao, Saule, &c. at such times as his iudgementes were ripe and readie to fall vpon them. And Hugo & the Glose in like maner, adding moreouer these words; This is the true & proper sence of this place. And in deed Chrysost. gathereth a cleane contrary conclusion out of this place: That we are not to trust or leane vnto the praiers of Saintes, but rather to finish and make sure our saluation with feare and trembling, &c. In Ezechie there is the like place; If these three men, Noe, Daniel, and Ioab, were in the midst of the Citie, they should in their righteousnesse escape with their owne liues, &c. but as for the land it shall surely become desolate and lie wast. Hee speaketh then as though they were still li∣uing in the world, and euerie one of them in his former state and condition. And so in Ieremie of Moyses and Samuel, as also Saint Ierome, Chrysostome, and Thomas of Aquine doe expound the same vpon Ieremie: and vpon Ezechiel Theodoret in these wordes: Though these three persons, Noe, Daniel, and Iob, were found altogether in the midst of them, &c. that is, that God speaketh according to the state wherein Moyses and Samuel were in this life. Otherwise if they will vrge it, as vnderstood of the o∣ther: then I woulde haue them once againe to remember and thinke vppon their Limbe. Of the same nature is that which followeth in Ezechiel: Ezech. 22. I haue sought a man (saith the Lord) that should make vp the hedge, and stand in the gappe against me for this land, to the end I might not destroy it; but J haue not found him: that is, as it is saide of Dauid, a man according to mine owne heart, which might stand betwixt mine anger and this people: as Abraham for Sodome, and Moyses for Israel. Saint Ierome: I haue sear∣ched for a man amongst them, which could resist and withstand mine anger, as Moyses, Aaron and Samuel. Note by the way these wordes, from amongst them. And yet Theodoret dealeth more plainly, who expoundeth it by the place of Ieremie aboue expounded, c. 5. Looke about you in your places, and see if there bee any that executeth iudgement, and seeketh after faith, &c. and I will be fauourable vnto him, that is to say, (saith he) amongst your princes, your priests, &c. But what is there in all this that hath any thing to doe with the inuocation of Saints deceased. For want of matter and proofe in the Canonicall scriptures, 2. Macha. c. 15. they runne in the end vnto the Apocrypha bookes: Onias and Ieremie, saith Iudas Machabeus, appeared vn∣to him in a dreame, praying for the estate of the people of the Iewes: And seeing that they prai∣ed, they may be praied vnto: notwithstanding they see, that in this hard distresse of theirs the Israelites did no such thing. And as for the strength of this argument wee shall better examine the same elsewhere: but the storie is; That Iudas to incourage his soldiers, being vppon the point of entering into a great fight, acquainted them with this vision that had appeared vnto him. But either it was a reall action, or a likenesse and representation onely. If it were reall and in deed, where is then their Limbes become? For they all agree, that in the Limbes they can make no intercessi∣on, neither be inuocated. If representatiue or figuratiue, then let them heare the ex∣position of their owne Doctors, Gloss. in 2. Machab. c. 15. That in Onias is represented the order of the priesthood: and in Ieremias the Propheticall order: and in the one and the other Iesus Christ the high priest and Prophet, of whom Moyses hath said: I will raise vp vnto you a Prophet like vnto mee: of whom S. Iohn likewise saith; If we haue sinned, we haue an aduocate with God, Iesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sinnes. Baruch, Baruch. 3.14. 3. It is said: Lord heare now the prayer of the dead of Israel, and of their chil∣dren which haue sinned before thee. Now it is to be known whether this word dead be ta∣ken for such as were dead in deed, or else for a people brought vnto such an extremity as did threaten death vnto them euery moment. Now the verse going before seemeth to make for the latter: For (it saith) we perish & are destroied for euer. But let vs take it according to their own sence. Lyranus giueth them the repulse & ouerthrow: He spea∣keth (saith he) of the praiers which the Patriarkes & the Prophets had made whiles they liued,
for the good estate of their posteritie. And their opinion also of the Limbes doth debarre them of the benefit of the place in their owne sence. But what agreement hath this praier and intercession of the liuing Saints with that of the dead? Those being commanded, with promise to be heard; these not men∣tioned in the Scripture, but subiect vnto that great Woe so oftentimes repeated: Woe to them which adde therunto. Saint Paul prayeth for them that were in the same Shippe: he praieth also the Romaines to pray for him. But did he allow them to call vpon, or to pray for aide vnto him; or did hee himselfe inuocate the Romaines. And therefore if we from these mutuall praiers of the faithfull that are liuing, rise vp to the inuoca∣tion of the Saints that are dead, what shall let vs then, but that from the inuocation of the dead, wee shall descend by consequent to the inuocating and adoring of those that be aliue, to make vowes and offer vp our oblations vnto them, to erect and build Churches and Altars in honour of them; to burne sacrifices and incense vnto them, and finally to reuiue the whole Masse of Paganisme, for them which are as yet vppon earth, as wee haue alreadie done for them which are in heauen? And thus much for that which they can say, as well for the inuocation, as for the intercession of the olde Testament. CHAP. XII. That the inuocation of Saints hath not any foundation in the holy Scriptures of the new Testament IN the new Testament they alleadge, that S. Paul ordained, 1. Tim. 2. Rom. 15. Collos. 4. that in∣tercession shuld be made in the Church for all men; that he praieth the Romaines and Colossians to pray for him; that he hoped to be offered in the praiers of the Saints: that S. Iames saith; Pray yee one for an other, to the ende that yee may bee saued, &c. What are all these places, but the praiers of the Saints liuing, and not of the Saints deceased? whereupon there is not any thing further to bee inferred, then what concerneth the dutie of charitie amongst the liuing, and from which there wil not any old writer be found to gather the inuocating of Saints which are in heauen? But we see that the rich man in the other life, Luk. 16. praieth Abraham that his punish∣ment may be mitigated: and why not as wel here below? What maner of argument is this; concluding that what is done in Hel, may be done here on earth? And that what the damned doe, the same also may the faithfull doe? And what Diuinitie is this, bor∣rowed from the damned; from the damned, feeling in themselues the vnappeasible wrath and anger of God, as not being able to comprehend him otherwise then as an angrie iudge; for vs which haue accesse vnto his throne by Christ, which is both the Porter and the gate; which are led vnto the throne of his grace, by the hand of his Sonne? And what wilfull blindnesse is it to oppose vnto the cleare light of the Scrip∣tures, outward darknesse; to the intercession of our Lord full of power and efficacie, a parabolicall praier of a wicked rich man, repelled and cast off by Abraham, for the impertinencie thereof? And no lesse impertinent, and farre from the purpose are those places elsewhere, Math. 27.47. as that of the crie of our Lord vpon the Crosse, Eli, Eli, my God, my God, &c. The soul∣diers had thought that he had called for Elias: Let vs see (say they) if he will come: This was then say they, a familiar thing to call vpon the Saints. But I should bee ashamed to confute it, if they had any shame to alleadge it. For what is this? To learne the faith of the Church of Pilats souldiers; the faith of Israel, at the hands of the Gentils which are in garrison in Ierusalem, which haue heard speech amongst the Iewes of one Elias, that should come at that time; which were trained vp in Paganisme, to praie vnto as
many Gods as they could dreame of or deuise; to hold for Gods all those, from whom they expected any good, or feared any euill? Which, by reason of the ignorance of the tongue, did suppose that our Lord called for Elias? S. Ierome vpon this place: I thinke that they were the Romane Souldiers, who vnderstood not the propertie of the Hebrew tongue, and thereupon did thinke that he had inuocated, or called Elias. But if we vnderstand and take them to haue beene Iewes; then it was nothing but their ordinarie practise, to speake reprochfully of the Lord, accusing him of weaknesse and infirmitie, and therby driuen to pray vnto Elias. And the Glose and Caietanus haue vnderstoode it of the Romaines and of the Gentiles. In S. Iohn 5. Thanke not (saith our Lord vnto the Pharisies) that I am to accuse you vnto my father: Iohn. 5.45. Moyses in whom you haue your hope, he it is that will accuse you. Thereupon they conclude; that it was a doctrine amongst the Iewes, that Moyses tooke the mat∣ter vppon him before God, whether it were to accuse or defend them. And still they forget, that this dutie, could not be exercised in the Limbes. Wheras the text is plaine enough to those that haue any eyes. Moyses, that is to say, the lawe and doctrine of Moses doth accuse vs, is the sentence of condemnation against vs, when we infringe and breake it, when we reiect and cast of that which it offereth vs: and particularly it condemneth the Pharisies, for that they denie Christ promised in the law. Moyses on the contrarie, that is to say, this same doctrine dooth iustifie vs, worketh with vs vn∣to saluation, when we embrace Christ, at whome it altogether aimeth: according to that which is said afterward: If you belieue Moyses, you will also belieue me, for it is writ∣ten of me. Iohn. 5.39. And the Pharisies hoped in him, that is to say, in this doctrine: according to that which hee said in former times: Search the Scriptures, for you thinke to haue eternall life by them &c. And in the same sence Abraham aunswered the rich man: They haue Moyses and the Prophets. Not Moyses in the flesh, not Moyses in the soule; but Moyses (as likewise the Prophets) in the doctrine. What should then the question of the in∣tercession of Moses doe here? Origen: To belieue Moyses, that is to say, the writings and workes of Moses. Orig in Ep. ad Fom l. 4 c. 4. Basill. de Spir, Sanct c. 14. Cirill. in Ioh. l 3. c. 8. And by consequent to be accused by Moses, that is to say, by the law giuen by the Ministers of Moses. S. Basill: It is the custome of the Scripture, to vnderstand vnder the name of Moyses the Law, as when it is said, they haue Moses and the Prophets. Cyril more clearely intreating vpon this place: When as (saith he) all others did hold their peace, the Lord said, that Moyses law alone, did suffice to condemne the incredulitie of the Iewes. Cardinal Hugo: Moyses, that is to say, the Scripture or Law giuen by Moses. Caietanus go∣eth yet further: Caiet in Ioh. c. 5. The Iewes are accused by Moyses for that his writings, declare them worthie of punishment, in not belieuing in Iesus: the Iewes also are said to hope in Moses, because they ge∣nerally hoped in the promises contained in the said writings, but they acknowledged not the ful∣filling of the same Iesus. In the 2. Peter 1.15. I am (saith he) shortly to goe out of this my Tabernacle, as our Lord himselfe hath declared vnto me: 2. Pet. 1.15. but I will doe my indeuour that after my departure also, you may continually call to mind these things; that is, pietie, charitie, brotherly loue, &c. Here they affirme, that this shall be by his intercession in heauen: But we, that this shall bee by his diligence, in instructing them well, before that he goe out of this world, that is, as he hath said in the former verses: By continually bringing it to their remembrance. And the text is verie cleare and plaine for the same, for he doth not say: Dabo operam post obitum meum vt possitis, but, Vt possitis post obitum meum; , and not, , that is to say, I wil haue care that after my death, you may remember your selues, and not, I will haue care after y death, &c. That which followeth teacheth it: For we haue not taught you the power and comming of our Lord in the deceitfulnesse of fables, &c. The Glose saith: Jnterim dum venio, dabo operam, &c. As long as I liue I will giue order; or, I will doe my endeuour, &c. And as for the allead∣ging of Oecumenius, saying that certaine would collect heereof by the figure called Hyperbaton, that is to say, a long draught of words, the intercession of Saints; it had beene their dutie in like maner, for the discharge of a good conscience to haue added, that which followeth: That others which handle the same more simply, do vnderstand it thus: That wheras he so carefully laboureth to imprint this doctrine in them, it is not for that he doub∣teth
them to be egnorant, but to the end that they might abide the more firme after his death. Caiet. 2. Pet. 1. At the least they should haue held themselues to Caietanus: I wil giue order, that is in my life time, that you may haue after my death, books which may put you in remebrance of this doctrin. In the Apocalips, 5. Apocal. 1.8. the foure beasts and the foure and twentie Elders haue harps in their hands, and Viols of gold full of perfumes: Which are (saith S. Iohn) the pra∣yers of the Saints: therefore they must be imployed as intercessors for vs. Now it is not called in question, whether they pray or praise God, or no: but, if they make inter∣cession to God for the things, which wee particularly and by name, pray vnto them for; and againe, if we may and ought to imploy them for intercessors with God for vs. And this cannot be gathered out of this place: but rather that they praise God and pray vnto him. And this praier, without any further gessing of it doth follow in the next verse: Thou art worthie to take the booke and to open the Seales thereof, &c. for thou hast bought and purchased vs to God by thy bloud, out of euerie tribe and language, &c. And then, not to imploy their merits with God for vs, in stead of that of the Lambe: but rather to acknowledge the bloud of the Lambe; imployed for themselues. And that maketh yet lesse for them, Apocal. 8.3. which they further alleadge out of the fore part of the eight Chap∣ter, where the Angell standeth before the Altar, with a Censor of gold; wherein there were many perfumes giuen vnto him, either to offer vp with the praiers of all the Saints; or rather according to the Greeke, to adde it to the praiers of the Saints, vpon the Altar of gold which is before the throne. For this Angell (saith their Glose) is Christ himselfe, offering vnto God his father, the petitions of the faithfull, which are acceptable and well pleasing to him, for his sake. S. Ambros. Aug. Primas. & An∣draeas Caes. in Apocal. Ambrose expoundeth this whole place of the teachers of the Church, euerie man in his age: That Christ openeth then the booke, when by his holy spirit, hee manifesteth vnto them the sence of the Scriptures: that they fall downe before the Lambe, when they are raised to the meditation of his mysteries; and by consequent are humbled in themselues: that these odors are their praiers, whereof the Psalmist speaketh: Let my praier ascend vp vnto thee, as the perfume of incense, &c. And vpon the eight Chapter, he taketh Christ for the Angell, Ambros. in A∣pocal. c 8. the Church for the Altar, &c. and maketh many sorts of incensings & praiers of the Saints: For (saith he) the faithfull pray, when they aske forgiuenesse of their sinnes: when they giue almes; when they forgiue their neighbours; when they obserue and keepe the commaundements of God, &c. August. Pri∣mas. Andr. Caesar. Thom. Aquin. in Apoc. c. 5. l. 8 And not a word of the praiers of the Saints that are dead for vs, or of vs praying to them. And as little in S. Augustine, Primasius, Andreas Bb. of Caesarea, Thomas Aquinas, and all the rest. And these are in summe, all the places that I know, whereby they would proue and allow, the intercession of Saints. If this were not, that wee haue to adde thereto the blasphemie of the Archbishop Antonine: Let vs drawe neere, saith the Apostle vnto the Hebrewes, vnto the throne of grace, &c. That is to say of the Virgine Marie which is the throne of Christ, wherein he hath rested: to the end wee may obtaine mercie, and find grace for the obtaining of helpe in due time, &c. Which is manifestly spoken of Iesus Christ our Bishop. And therefore it is no maruaile though Eckius doe freely and boldly say: That the holy Ghost, Eckius in Ench hath not appointed or ordained by the expresse Scriptures, the inuocation of Saints, ei∣ther in the old or new Testament. And Petrus a Soto: That it is not manifestly taught there; but onely insinuated, and the Iesuites themselues, that it is not clearely giuen vs there, but as in a mysterie, and by a certaine consequence. And on the contrarie a great maruaile, that a doctrine amongst them of such moment, should not bee con∣tained in the holy Scriptures, but by the way of a lame and pretended consequence. As in deed the Councell of Trent hath not found it in the Scripture, but in auncient vse and custome, in the consent of the Fathers, and in the Decrees of the Councels. Which we will examine hereafter. A third point remaineth; That the mo∣rite of the Saints, hath no ground in the Scripture. that they are as weakly and slenderly grounded in the Masse, for the offering vp of the merits and passions of the Saints vnto God, for the satisfying of their sinnes, in stead of the infinite merite, of that one onely sacrifice, that the Sonne of God hath offered vpon the Crosse: whether we consider the suffici∣encie
of that only one, or the insufficiencie of all the rest, how many and whatsoeuer they be. The sufficiencie, for it is the Sonne of God, eternal and infinite; the sacrificer and the sacrifice, whose sacrifice hath by consequent, an infinite and eternall efficacie; as the Apostle doth largely handle the same in the Epistle to the Hebrewes. The insuf∣ficiencie of al other, because that they are the works of the creatures, & by consequent finite and imperfect: and of men, and by consequent subiect to sinne and sinners, and those the most, who presume not to bee at all: according to that which is said vnto vs in S. Iohn: Jf we say (he putteth himselfe in the number) that we haue no sinne we deceiue our selues, and the truth is not in vs. That then, that all the Saints haue not beene con∣demned; it was in the mercie of God by Iesus Christ, the holy Virgine her selfe, whom hee hath vouchsafed to regard in her base and low estate; being so much the more bound, by how much the more shee hath receiued, and so much the further off from meriting, by how much the more it hath pleased him the Almightie and soueraigne Lord (if it be lawfull so to speake) to merite at her hands. That they are raigning in heauen, a botomlesse depth of his goodnesse, an inheritance of the children, and not any pledge or badge of seruants, in as much as in his welbeloued sonne it hath plea∣sed him, according to the riches of his grace, of vnprofitable and peruerse seruants to adopt them Sons, yea, coheires with his Christ: according to that which is said in so many places: Ephes. 2. You are saued by grace, by faith in Christ, and not of your selues: For this is the gift of God, not by workes, to the end that no man may boast. Againe, We are iustified by grace, that we may bee his heires, Tit. 3. in hope of eternall life. And of grace: For we are all conceiued in originall sinnes. And all the water of humane merits, cannot wash them away; though they should amount vnto the measure of a mightie floud: it must of necessitie bee the worke of the bloud of Christ, washed likewise by that bloud, yet the remnants of that naturall corruption, doe continually abide and dwell with vs; that so we may ac∣knowledge his grace in our infirmitie: whereas our first father lost the same by a pre∣tended incorruption and impossibilitie for his nature to sinne. And therefore wee haue to say with Dauid: If thou enter into iudgement with thy seruant who may abide it? With Salomon: Psal. 143. Ecclesiast. 6. Iob. 15. There is not a righteous man vpon the earth that doth good, nay, which doth not sinne. With Iob: The heauens are not pure in his sight, no not the Angels: how much lesse man, vnprofitable and abheminable; which drinketh iniquitie like water? Whereupon it fol∣loweth likewise, that if God should haue giuen vnto man, euen him that is the holiest of all the rest, a thousand Paradises, (if it could bee done) for an inheritance, yet so gracelesse he is, as that he should not be able to keepe one of them, without his grace, for quickly would hee loose them, by reason of his sinnes and transgressions, the ri∣gour and seueritie of his iustice taking the balance once in hand. And how should he purchase it then by his own power? And yet further how shuld he leaue a remainder, to be husbanded for others? Some say, if they haue lost them by their falles, as Saint Peter by hauing denied Christ, and S. Paul by persecuting of his Church; yet they haue recouered them, by the confession and Martyrdome, which they haue made and suffered for his name, and that so aboundantly, as that they haue left an ouerplus. But O horrible blasphemie. 1. Cor. l. 30. S. Paul and S. Peter say not so: They doe not glorie in any thing, but in the Crosse of Christ, but in his sufferings, but in his stripes, not in their owne righteousnesse, not in their owne holinesse, but in him which was vnto them from God, wisedome, righteousnesse, sanctification, redemption, &c. So farre off are they from being of that mind, that in respect of them, he hath suffered in vaine. Like∣wise the bloud of the creature, hath no part in making of the recompence or paimēt, with or in stead of the bloud of the Sonne of God, of the Creatour of the world, to whom, as he is the Creator, we are alreadie indebted, euen to the summe of our liues; to whome, as a iust iudge we stand bound for our sinnes, in the summe of a thousand deaths. And therefore, as vnto our redeemer and that in the price of his bloud: Our redeemer, not to ransome vs, but for to crowne vs; not to draw vs from euill, but to draw vs to all goodnesse; not to deliuer vs from the tyrannie of hell, but to cause vs to raigne and triumph eternally with him. Here let vs enter into our owne consciences,
how shall our bloud and life be able to ascend vp thither? And therefore the Apostle said; All accompts cast, the sufferings of this present world, Rom. 8.18. are not able to counteruaile the glo∣rie that is to come, and which is to be reuealed in vs. But in the meane time they are not ashamed, to oppose vnto so cleare a doctrine so plainly handled by all the Apostles, by Saint Paul in all his Epistles, a place of Saint Paul himselfe: I reioyce (saith he) now in my sufferings for you, Coloss. 1.24. and fulfill the rest of the afflic∣tions of Christ in my flesh, for his body which is the Church. Whereupon it followeth, say they, that men by their afflictions, and sufferings, may satisfie for the sinnes of others. And we will obserue by the way, that it is in Greeke : Tertul. aduers. Marcion. l. . c. 19. Timo. .15. which Tertullian and S. Ambrose translate with vs, Reliqua, the rest; and not that which lacketh. But here a∣gaine, what will they dare to say vnto vs? That S. Paul by his afflictions, hath satisfied for himselfe? Not so: For it is a sure thing (saith he) that Iesus Christ is come into the world to saue sinners, whereof I am the chiefest. Againe, To shew in me the chiefest, all manner of cle∣mencie, for an example to them, which shall belieue in him vnto eternall life, &c. I doe (saith he) the ill I would not, but the good that I would, that I doe not. Philip. 3.6. Notwithstanding that I find not my selfe guiltie of any thing, yet know I that I am not iustified thereby. Howbeit, that accor∣ding to the righteousnesse which is in the Law, J am vnreproueable, yet I haue accounted all this to be losse vnto me: I haue accompted it as dung for the loue of Christ; that is, to be found in him, not according to mine owne righteousnesse, which is of the Law, 1. Cor. 2.2. but according to that which is of the faith of Christ. And of Christ, saith he elsewhere crucified. What hath hee in these speeches, that may sauour of pharisaicall righteousnesse? That dooth holde any thing of the doctrine of our Masters, concerning supererogation? Againe, the words of the place it selfe are repugnant thereunto: For it saith, In my sufferings for you, in mine afflic∣tions for the body of Christ, which is the Church. What then? Shall he haue satisfied for an other? For the temporall punishments of the Colossians? For the Church of Christ? And how should he possbly doe it for an other, when he findeth not himselfe able and sufficient to pay his owne debt? And that not in the way or words of Christian mo∣destie or humilitie, but in good sooth & earnest? Philip. 3. 1. Cor. 15.. Who haue whereupon to boast (saith he) in the flesh, more then any other; circumcised the eight day, of the race of Israell, of the Tribe of Beniamin an Hebrew, borne of the Hebrewes, a Pharisie in Religion; vpright according to the Law: and after all this, called of Christ to bee an Apostle, and yet notwithstanding as one borne out of time, and notwithstanding an vnprofitable seruant? And how then for the Colossi∣ans? Reconciled on the contrarie (saith he) in the body of the flesh of Christ, by his death, Coloss. 1. & 2. when they were enemies and straungers, redeemed by his bloud, for the remission of their sinnes, quick∣ned by his grace, when they were dead in their iniquities, by the blotting out of the Obligation of eternall death, which was betweene them, fastning it with him vnto his Crosse. But how in the end for the body of Christ, which is the Church? Which God (saith he in an other place) hath purchased vnto himself by his own bloud: reconciling to himselfe the world in Christ, Acts. 20.28. 2. Cor. 5. in not imputing vnto it her sinnes: making the Church one bodie wherof he is the head; gathering and ioyning together into this bodie vnto God, many nations by his Crosse, &c. If they say, that the sufferings of S. Paul do supply the want of that of Christs: but dare they say it? And what shal that be I pray you that shall fulfil & become a sufficient supply of that which of it selfe is infinite? Shal man become the supply to the Son of God? Ephes. 2. Falsehood & vn∣truth, vnto verity; sin vnto iustice; mans infirmitie, vnto the power & might of God vn∣to saluation? &c. Nay verily not so, S. Paul did neuer thinke of that: but saith he, I am a Minister of this Gospel, by which you are reconciled vnto God. And notwithstanding that I must suffer much in my ministerie for you; yet I reioyce neuertheles in my sufferings, Philip. 2. partly because that I suffer for the name of Christ. As he saith in an other place: If it be requisite that I be offered vp a sprinkling vpon the sacrifice; I reioyce together with you, &c. Partly because he himselfe suffreth in me, who vouchsafeth to allow our afflictions, as his own, for that we are his members. And therfore he saith in an other place: Ambros. in Epist. ad Colo. As the sufferings of Christ abound in vs so likewise our consolation by Christ, &c. And this is it likewise which the old writers haue deliue∣red vpon this place, altogether otherwise then our late writers. Saint Ambrose: He confesseth,
(saith he) that he reloyceth in his sufferings, because he seeth the belieuers profiting in faith, &c And these sufferings (saith hee) he saith that they are Christs, Hieronym. in Ep ad Colos. Chrysost. in Ep. ad Coloss. c. 1. & in 2. ad Cor c. 1. ho. 1. because it is his doctrine which they persecute. And S. Ierome by the sufferings of Christ, vnderstandeth the sufferings for Christ, &c. Chrysostome: The Apostle (saith hee) seemeth to haue spoken something arro∣gantly, but it is nothing else, but an exceeding great measure of good will that he beareth towards Christ. That which I suffer, saith he to the Collossians, J suffer it for him: and therefore it is not to me that you owe any thankes, but vnto himselfe. Theodoret: Because that hee suffereth for the preaching of the Gospell vnto the Gentiles, Occumen. ex Photio. procuring their life by the same, &c. Oecu∣menius: All that we suffer (saith he) is , a rest or remnant, farre differing from the suffe∣rings of Christ. For how should it possibly bee matched and fulfilled? A master his suffering for his seruant, by a seruant his suffering for his master? What equalitie is there therein? Or any thing neere thereunto: He who is without sinne, suffering for sinners? And those , obstinately set against him? How will it bee made vp by a sinfull people, suffering for their bene∣factor, and the same without sinne, &c? Far differing from the arrogancie of our aduersa∣ries; who will that S. Paul did merite by his sufferings, and that both for himselfe and an other, and for the Church also, &c. It is sufficient therefore, that hitherto we plainely and clearely see; that inuocati∣on, intercession, and the imployment of the merits of the Saints which are with God, haue not any foundation in the Scriptures. Whereby for certaine we get as much ad∣uantage at the least, Ioh. 4. against our aduersaries, as the Iewes against the Samaritans: That we worship that which we know, euen God who hath vouchsafed to manifest himselfe vnto vs in his word: They worship that which they know not; namely the Saints, for the inuocating of whome, there is not any thing deliuered or declared vnto vs in the same. But they will deriue and fetch it from certaine places, The consuta∣tion of certain places wrong∣fully applied. as consequently following vpon the same; and these are now to be examined of vs. For say they, those which liue here pray vnto God one for an other, and doe vse the praiers one of an other vnto God; wherefore should such as liue in heauen aboue, lesse performe the same for such as are liuing heere below; and those below, make lesse vse of such as are abiding on high? The oddes and difference betwixt the one and the other doe furnish vs with store of answeres. And first; we haue an expresse commaundement, to pray one for an other here below, and a promise accompanying the commaundement, and so conse∣quently a blessing, when these our praiers are made in faith. Which falleth out con∣trarie, in the matters of pietie and seruice of God, exercised without any foundation in his word; for so it falleth out to bee an vncertaine worke: and therefore without faith, and therefore also sinne, and by consequent, displeasing vnto God. Secondly, we belieue that the Saints in heauen are inflamed with charitie towards the Church, neither do doubt of their hartie desire of the good of the same, as vnto the bodie, for the glorie of God, and to euerie particular, as they are members of the same, for their saluation. And to proceed thus farre, is not beyond the bonds of pietie, so that a man learne to stay himself there. But we denie that they either see our necessities, or heare our sutes and complaints: affirming that this should make them like vnto God, the onely searcher of hearts; and our aduersaries themselues dare not say it. They answere that they see our thoughts, not as they are in our spirits, but in God. And we answere them, that this is a deuised fantasie without any foundation: and that the created spi∣rit doth not pearce or enter into the spirit not created, but on the contrarie, that if it were otherwise, that then the Angels should know all things in God, as wel the things to come, as those that are present, seeing that with him euerie thing is present: Now there are many things vnknowne vnto them; for the mysterie of our saluation was hid from them before: and now at this day, they are still ignorant when the day of iudge∣ment shall bee, Luk. 15. &c. But they say, that the Angels reioyce in heauen at the conuersion of sinners, &c. And therefore they are able to know it, and wee doe not denie it. But by meanes that it is their office and dutie, to bee imployed and set on worke of God
for to serue the faithfull, whereupon the Apostle calleth them , Hebr. 1. Pal. 34. Psal. 91. Act. 13. mi∣nistring spirits, to whome God committeth, saith the Psalmist, the care of his seruants: He maketh them to pitch their tents round about them, &c. But there is no such thing said of the Saints: no not of Dauid himselfe, who after he had serued in his generation, by the wil of God, was laid vp with his fathers. And againe, that praier, which is of such im∣portance vnto Christians, must not bee grounded vpon the subtile deuises of mans braine, but vpon the soliditie and soundnes of the word of God. For certainly, God can reueale what it pleaseth him, either vnto the liuing or vnto the dead. But wee are not to make a common rule of his miracles; neither any commaundement of his reue∣lations vnknowne vnto vs: from his power saith Tertullian, the Diuine dooth neuer reason to his will, but rather from his will vnto his power: and that by a more forci∣ble reason, seeing the holy Scripture doth teach vs the contrarie. 2. King. 22.20. God saith vnto Io∣sias: I goe about to gather thee vnto thy forefathers, and thine eyes shall not see the euils which I will bring vpon this place. The people of Israell saith also in Esay: Thou art our father, Esay, 63.16. August. de cu∣ra pro mortuis gerenda c. 13. not∣withstanding that Abraham know vs not, &c. And from these two places Saint Augu∣stine gathereth, that the Saints know nothing of all the matters that happen vnto men, in these words: The dead and deceased doe not meddle with the affaires of those that are liuing, neither to know, nor yet to helpe or further them: They are in rest, and as for the troubles and turmoyles of them that are liuing, they doe not disquiet them. God promiseth to Iosias, that he should die before, to the end that his eyes might not see the euils: the spirits then of the decea∣sed are in aplace, where they see not what is done in this life, &c. Adde thereunto, that the greater part of the other fathers, as we haue seene before, haue taught: that the Saints at their departure out of this life, doe not inioy the sight of God, but are in a place of rest expecting and waiting for the resurrection, that so they may receiue the ful∣nesse of their glorie. Now those which held this opinion, could not approoue the reason which our Aduersaries alleadge for the inuocation of Saints, that is, that their soules and spirits doe see euerie thing in God: nor by consequent this inuocation, if so bee it doe depend and follow thereupon. Saint Paul saith, Rom. 8.26. Hee that soundeth the heart, dooth know the affection of the spirit. Salomon vppon the subiect and matter of prayer, how in our afflictions wee must haue recourse vnto God: 1. King. 8. For (saith hee) thou alone knowest the hearts of all the Sonnes of men. This reason should haue no force, if these two generall propositions were not true together: That man is not to praie to anie but him that knoweth all things: And that God is hee alone which knoweth all things. But where the word of God faileth them, they forge humane reasons, A confutation of their human reasons. and those a great deale more vnmeete to bee admitted in Diuinitie; as that which intreateth of God; then those of the Ciuill Law, to bee admitted in Physicke; or on the contrarie, because also that, that in hauing an infinite subiect, which is not knowne, otherwise then as it pleaseth him to vouchsafe to reueale himselfe, is infinitely and beyond all proportion, exceeding all others. In the Courts of great Princes, say they, there is not any man that goeth directly to the King: hee hath need to make waie for the same, by the fauour and mediation of some great Lord, who is imployed neere a∣bout his person. And not without cause say wee, because that the Prince is some∣times disdainfull, and sometimes shunneth, and seeketh to auoide occasions of bu∣sinesses. But in God which is altogether infinite, what place or reason can this reason haue: whose power and wisedome cannot be ouercharged with the managing of the whole vniuersall world; whose goodnesse reacheth and extendeth most liberally and freely, euen vnto the least and smallest things: nay rather, who standeth more readie and willing, assaith the Psalmist, more neere vnto the afflicted heart, and more readie continually to heare vs, then wee are to call vppon him, infinitely more readie to bow and stoupe vnto vs in his bountifull kindnesse, then wee are to arise and lift vp our selues vnto him in our praiers? Nay, saith he, O fraile and vaine man that thou art,
measure not me according to the shalownes of thy capacitie: Esay 55. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither my waies your waies, they are as much surpassing & ouerreaching yours as the heauens do the earth: And his thoughts are manifested vnto vs from himselfe; that he alone will be called vpon: and that, if there be any question made of an intercessour, he hath ordained his one onely Sonne: and therefore they are to vnderstand that to speake after the maner of the Court, it is a high displeasing of the king, that any shuld be sued vnto besides himselfe. Now in deed this was the reason that the Gentiles vsed against the Christians in the time of S. Ambrose: for their doctrine & reasons for the defence therof, August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 8. are both taken from one head and spring. And S. Augustine saith, that the Schollers of Plato taught, that there were Gods, intercessors betwixt the high and soueraigne God, and the requests of men, that conueied the same vnto him; God bee∣ing most worthy to haue the hearing of such matters; Ambro. in Ep. a  Rom. c. 1. tom. 5. but we most vnworthie to come neere vnto his Maiestie. But what answere dooth S. Ambrose make them? When (saith he) they are ashamed of hauing neglected God, they are accustomed to vse a certaine pitifull ex∣cuse, saying, that they had accesse vnto God by these Gods, as by the Lords or Earles about the Court. Subiects haue accesse vto the king. But I beseech you, is there any man so foolish, and so rechlesse of his owne preseruation, as that he will giue that honour vnto any such Earle, which is due vnto the King, seeing that to intreat such a man onely, is a point of treason? And these men, shall not they thinke themselues guiltie of hauing transgressed, who giue to the creature the honour due to God alone, and which forsake him, to adore and pray vnto their companions, with seruice as though besides that, there were nothing reserued for God? For verily, in that men make way to haue accesse to Kings by Tribunes or Earles, it is because the King is a man, and knoweth not to whome to trust in matters concerning the Common-wealth. But to make God readie and fauourably inclined vnto him, from whom nothing is hid, who knoweth what euerie man wanteth and wisheth, a man needeth no other supporter or mediator, then a deuout spirit: for in what place soeuer he would speake with him, hee is readie there to giue him an aunswere. Origen likewise hath aunswered the verie same to Celsus, Orig. aduers. Cell. l. 8. Chrysost. in Math. hom, 2. in and about the same mat∣ter: from whome Saint Ambrose doth willingly borrow, and that word for word, not failing any thing at all. And Chrysostome, who is nothing behind in speaking for the practise of Christians, sheweth vs, that we may by as good right, vse the same answere against our aduersaries. Tell me woman, speaking of the Cananite: Who hath made thee so bold, (wicked and sinfull wretch that thou art) to approach and come so neere vnto the Lord? I know (saith shee) what I haue to doe. See the wisedome of the woman: shee praieth not vnto Iames, shee beseecheth not Iohn, neither doth shee turne her selfe to Peter, no, shee betaketh not her selfe to all the whole companie of the Apostles, shee seeketh not for any Mediatour: shee goeth right forward vnto the fountaine. And wherefore? Of a certaintie saith hee in the verie same Homely: Because that hee vnderstandeth in what place so euer thou art, in what place so euer thou callest vpon him: Thou needest not any, either porter or mediator, neither yet any one of the family to bring thee in: thou needest not, but onely to say, Lord haue mercie vpon me, &c. And againe, When we haue any matter to obtaine at mans hand, wee seeke the fauour and helpe of Ʋshers. Chrysost. de paenit. hom. 4. To whome then wilt thou haue recourse? To Abraham? He will not heare thee. But he onely is to be praied vnto, which can blot out the hand writing of condemnation that is against thee, and quench the burning, &c. But say they, God dooth better accept of those praiers that are made vnto him in humilitie: and doth not this appeare more fully and manifestly in them that seeke to haue accesse vnto him by the Saints, then in those that dare bee so bold, as to goe di∣rectly to him? But in deede the greatest point of humilitie is obedience, which the Lord loueth better then sacrifice: And this is also mans humilitie, to confesse him∣selfe lost in himselfe, and in all the nature of man: and contrarily, pride to seeke in himselfe, or in any other man whatsoeuer, that which cannot be found but in God onely. By this note of proofe and tryall did the Lord himselfe iudge the Pharisie to bee proud, namely in alleadging mens workes: and the Publicane humble, who durst not lift vp his eyes vnto heauen, and yet notwithstanding said confidently:
God bee mercifull vnto me a sinner: and this man hee iustified, but not the other: For whosoeuer (saith hee) doth exalt himselfe, shall bee brought low; and hee that humbleth him∣selfe shall bee exalted. And this therefore is humilitie in our praiers, to renounce and forsake al our owne natures, and to betake and lift vp our selues to God. And beware thou blaspheme not hereafter the manner of some: that Christ is more rigorous and more hard; but the Saints more milde and fauourable: Nay saith he, to all the Saints: Hebr. 2. Hebr. 4. Learne of me that I am meeke and humble of heart. And the Apostle saith: He was made like in all things vnto his brethren, to the end that he might be a high Priest, mercifull and faithfull in things belonging to God. Tempted (saith he) to the end that he might succour such as doe fall into temptation, subiect vnto all our infirmities, sinne excepted, to the end he might know how to haue compassion. And therefore he saith, Come vnto me all you that are laden, that is to say, you which feele your burthen, euen the heauie load of your sinnes, &c. And therefore also saith the Apostle: Let vs approch with boldnes vnto the throne of grace, &c. And no cause is there why his being lifted vp in Maiestie, should either make thee ashamed, or cause thee to be cast off, and to take the repulse. For in that he is exalted, it is to draw thee vnto him, and after him: that he is at the right hand of the Father, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. it is to make intercession for thee: that he sitteth vpon the throne of Maiestie, it is for to make thee to raigne. The obiection, that new honours vse to make men to bee hardly drawne to easinesse or familiaritie (what grosse and friuolous toyes) cannot bee alleadged a∣gainst this partie; for to speake properly, hee hath not receiued any increase, nothing more then his owne is growne due or come vnto him: from before all eternitie hee is glorious, yea and by that same glorie, which he inioyed eternally with the father: Fa∣ther (saith he) glorifie me with thine owne selfe, with the glorie which I haue had with thee, be∣fore the world was made. And that such a glorie as did not hinder him, Ioh. 17.5. Philip. 2. from making him selfe of no reputation, nor from taking the shape of a seruant, nor from humbling him selfe for our saluation, euen to the death of the Crosse: a glorie likewise for certaine, that cannot hinder him from graunting the things necessarie for our infirmities, nei∣ther yet from inclining his eares in most bountifull manner vnto our requests, that so he may carrie and faithfully report them to the Father: For, for that cause hath hee humbled himselfe, euen to be like vnto vs: To the end (saith the Apostle) that hee might be mercifull and faithfull, in that which is to be done with God for vs. CHAP. XIII. That the inuocation of Saints was not taught in the Primitiue Church: and of the growth and proceeding thereof. HOw then did this doctrine enter into the Church of Christ, and how came it to be made a law? Verily, euen as all other humane inuentions, by many steps, and by tract of time after many ages. Day by day errour was increa∣sed, whiles men pleased themselues in their inuentions: whereas know∣ledge should haue abounded, if they had kept themselues to the word of Christ. Many ages passed and were expired, without any inuocation of Saints: seeing it slipt in amongst the multitude of Gentiles, in such maner as that no man regarded the same to marke and obserue it in the beginning: and it hath caused some to wonder exceedingly, how it should already be come to haue a party so throghly wonne vnto it amongst the people, by the blunt & blind aide of the ouertaken with forestalled em∣bracing of Paganisme; seing the most sincere & vncorrupted Doctors, did their whole indeuor to driue it out. But this shal be made to appeare more clearely in the handling of the maner of the growth & proceeding thereof; howbeit for the better vnderstan∣ding of the same, we must here set before our eyes, how they practise this article at this day, in the Church of Rome; in Inuocation, Adoration, Pilgrimages, Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and in all the rest of the duties, seruices & honours, that belong vnto God,
and are not to be giuen vnto any other, and how they would gladly couer and colour the same vnder the shadow of some Apostrophe or Prosopopie framed and applied vnto some Saint; or of some Panegyricke, deuised in the honour of some Martyr, or from some priuate opinion, left free and indifferent, not of the Church onely, but of euerie Christian. As for the holy Scriptures, wee haue seene that it hath no foundation in them: on the contrarie, that part or portion therin which speaketh so honourably of the Saints whether liuing or dead; of Angels likewise & of their ministerie which they performe, for our saluation commeth short, Rom. 1. when once we goe beyond our bounds and limits. They haue (saith S. Paul speaking of the Gentiles) honoured and serued the creature, , more then the Creator, and therefore God hath giuen them ouer to their brutish af∣fections, &c. And when as men doe goe beyond their compasse, bee it neuer so little, in that the honour due vnto man for Similitie sake, may not proceed by little and little vnto that which is due to God onely, the Saints and Angels doe vse to restraine them, and plucke them backe, yea euen before they be come so farre as they lawfully might: S. Act. 10.26. Act. 14.15. Apocal. 19.22. Peter saith to Cornelius, who fell downe at his feete: Rise vp for I am a man; and the Angell vnto S. Iohn, too well instructed and taught of the Sonne of God to worship a∣ny creature: Refraine thy selfe & doe not so, for I am thy fellow seruant, and one of thy brethren, which haue the testimonie of Iesus. And the Disciples of the Apostles, and their first suc∣cessors had not forgot these admonitions. It would be too long and tedious a thing here to recite all those places of the first Fathers, prouing the inuocation of one onely God, by one onely Iesus Christ: besides that in the praiers of the Christian Church, Clement. strom. l. 7. Iust Martyr. Apol. 2. Tertull. in Apol. whereof we haue the patterns in Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustinus Martyr, Tertullian, &c. God is onely called vppon through his Sonne; without any mention at al made therein, either of Angels or of Saints. Againe, the ordinarie disputations that these of the first age had with the Gentiles, were vp∣on this point, for that they called vpon the Gods and others, who for their excellen∣cie in vertue were held for halfe Gods; tearming it by the name of Idolatrie. Whereas the subiect or matter it selfe did carie thē on rather to say vnto them, that it was much better for them to giue this honour vnto Saints and Angels, as our patrons and aduo∣cates vnto God in heauen: and yet not a word thereof. On the contrarie, Polycarpus the Disciple of S. Euseb. l 4 c. 15 Iohn, in his last praier which he made vnto God, being now fastned to the stake to be burned aliue, calleth vpon God feruently, and calleth him: The God of Angels, the God of all the righteous that liue before his face. This was enough, and the ra∣ther being in that his perplexitie & distresse, to haue put him in mind of these patrons if he had so reputed them: but he remembreth not, neither yet maketh mention of a∣ny but one Bishop and mediator Iesus Christ. Irene. l. 2. c. 58. And Ireneus the Disciple of this Poly∣carpus saith: Those which are the true Disciples of Christ, receiuing grace from him, accomplish and fulfill in his name, the benefits which they doe vnto others, according as euerie man hath re∣ceiued the gift from him. From him they haue power ouer diuels; from him the knowledge of fore∣telling things to come, as also their visions and prophesies, as well as the gifts of healing, &c. In all this there is not a word of hauing these giftes, either of Saints or Angels: but on the contrarie, this doctrine was then noted, to be the doctrine of heretickes, as of the Ba∣silidians and Ophites, &c. Who praied vnto Angels in their workes and that by set formes of praier, Idem. l. 1. c. 23. & 35. which Ireneus rehearseth: O tu Angele ab, a, te, or, opere tuo, &c. And these had likewise their pretended Saints, Iudas, Cain, &c. Against whom Ireneus doth not oppose either Abell or S. Peter, but onely Iesus Christ our Lord. But in the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, Idem in Ep. ad Synens. apud Euseb. l. 4. c. 15. we haue this whole question handled: the Martyrs were much honoured in the Church; and they deeply condemned that did not honour them, and not without cause, being vessels chosen of God to seale and assure by their testimonie, the resurrection of the Lord. But how far did this honour extend? They were buried with great regard; and there is made yearely a rehersall of their martyrdome, vppon a certaine day: the day of their death is celebrated and solemnized by the name of the
day of their natiuitie; in stead of the Paynims their Genethliacks, or birth-daies: the Church commeth together into the common place of buriall, there to praie vnto God; that by the sight of their bones, they may be stirred vp to the like constancie: for at that time they had not yet any Churches. Now in respect of any of al this, may they iustly be said to haue either worshipped or praied vnto them? Nay rather saith this E∣pistle: The Iewes and the Gentiles came to intrcate the gouernour, that the body of Polycarpus might not be deliuered to the Christians, least they should honour it in stead of Christ. But how doth the Church defend it selfe? They are abused through ignorance, (saith it) for we can ne∣uer forsake Christ, who hath suffered for the saluation of all them, which are to bee saued in the whole world; neither can we euer , colere, honour any other. And note how it vseth the word, which cōprehendeth the seruice, which was accustomed according to godlines, to be giuen vnto Christ; that is to say, the seruing of him in calling vpon him, & seeking of our saluation in him. But some said vnto them; so greatly do you honour your Mar∣tyrs. Yea (saith the Church of Smyrna) but we worship Christ as the true and naturall Sonne of God, and we loue the Martyrs as his Disciples and followers: and not without good cause, for the incomparable loue which they haue borne to their king & Schoolemaster, we our selues greatly longing and earnestly desiring to become their companions and Schoole fellowes, &c. Finally, We celebrate the natiuitie, that is to say, the day of the death and Martyrdome of Polycarpus, , in remembrance of them that haue finished the combat before vs, , and for the preparing and exercising of them which are to come thereto, that is to say, to stirre vp such as are present, to the like constancie for the name of Christ. Who giueth vs the grace, (say they and not the Martyrs) to bee partakers of the like crowne, Tertull. in Apol. &c. And this Epistle was written about the yeare, 160. Tertullian saith: J pray not to any but him of whome I know that I may obtaine, because it is hee onely which doth and giueth all things, and I am one that haue need to beg and craue, his seruant, to honour him alone, and to offer vnto him, the best & fattest sacrifice, as he hath commanded, euen a praier and supplication which proceedeth from a chast body, an innocent soule, and a holy spirit, &c. And in the booke of the Trinitie he yeeldeth a reason why hee praieth vnto him alone: It is not proper or pertinent to any but God to know our secrets: but Christ knoweth the secrets of our harts. Jt belon∣geth not to any but God to forgiue sins, but Christ forgiueth sinnes. Reasoning from his all-see∣ing knowledge, and from his Almightie power, to proue his Deitie & Godhead, and frō the Godhead to the seruice of inuocation. Againe: Else, how should a man be sought & sued vnto in our praiers, as our mediator, seing that the inuocating of one only man, is without any power or efficacie to saluation: seeing also it is said; cursed is that cōfidence, that is put in man, &c. To that aboue said, they oppose and bring a place of Ireneus, Obiections; where there is com∣parison made betwixt Eue and the Virgine Marie. As Eue (saith he) was seduced by the words of an Angell, that is a wicked Angell, to runne from God by transgressing of his word: so the Virgine Marie receiued ioyfull tidings, by the word of an Angell, that is a good Angell, to heare God by obeying vnto his word. And as the first was seduced, and drawne away to runne and flie from God: so the second was perswaded to obey him; to the end that of the Virgine Eue, the Virgin Mary fieret aduocata, might become say they, the aduocate. Here saith Belarmine, what can be more cleare? Yea rather say we vnto him, what can be more obscure? That the Virgine Marie should be Eue her aduocate with God, being borne 4000. yeares after Eue, and receiued likewise a long time after her into heauen? when as likewise we shall haue regard to their opinion of the Limbes? But in deed that which goeth before, as also that which followeth, sheweth clearely that Ireneus had no other drift, but to op∣pose the good that came to mankind by the meanes & ministerie of Marie, to the ma∣ladie and mischiefe wherwith the same became infected, by that transgression of Eue. And as for the word Aduocate, some are of iudgement, that Ireneus was translated out of Greeke into Latine: for we haue great peeces of him as yet in Greeke, and further it cannot possibly bee, that euer any Latine writer would haue written in such a stile. 2. Cor. 7. & passim, Ioh. 16 And in other places also, hee is verie absurdly translated by his interpreter. Now the case so standeth, that in the Greeke, one and the same word dooth signifie both an aduocate and a comforter, that is, , and one and the same Verbe to comfort
and to exhort; as is often and commonly to be seene in the Scriptures. So in S. Iohn, that which is translated in the Gospell, Comforter, according to the old translation, speaking of the holy Ghost, the comforter of our soules, is interpreted Aduocate in the Epistle of S. Iohn, 1. Ioh. 2.11. Tertul. de Tri∣nit. c. 29. speaking of Christ the mediatour. Likewise Tertullian, where he speaketh of the holy Ghost, translateth it Aduocatum: so indifferently hath it beene taken either for the one or for the other. And so the sence is as if Ireneus should say, that as Eue was the ruine and ouerthrow of mankind, so the Virgine Marie was for his comfort and consolation, yea and that amongst the rest vnto Eue her selfe which had sinned, in as much as God had chosen this vessell to beare and bring forth the com∣fort of mankind, from the first man, euen to the last. They abuse in a higher degree of vnfaithfull dealing a place in Iustinus Martyr. Iustin. Martyr. Apol 2. The Gentiles reproach the Christians, saying that they were Atheists, that is to say, without God. The Christians answere: Yea without Gods, whom you take to be Gods, but not without the true God. For as concerning him we worship him, that is the father and the Son, which is of him, (who is come and hath taught vs these things, and all the host of good Angels that follow him) and the propheticall spirit: that is to say, we worship the father, the sonne and the holy Ghost. Now these words, which yet are not found in many copies, must vpon euident and apparant necessitie be read with a Parenthesis: for there he al∣ludeth to that, Ephes. 3.10. which S. Paul saith to the Ephesians, That the mysterie of our Redempti∣on, which was hid from all time in God, was manifested vnto principalities and powers in hea∣uenly places, &c. Otherwise what should this meane: We worship the father, the Sonne, the Angels, and the holy Ghost? And the holy Ghost himselfe after the Angels? And by this meanes, to saue the Saints, they make no conscience to blaspheme the holy Ghost. But in the meane time this is the Monke Perion his translation: and from thence this errour hath beene dispersed into many bookes in these daies. Origen commeth, About the yeare, 260. Hieronym. ad Pammach. & Ocean. Epiphan. t. 2. l. 1. haeres. 63. hauing a bold spirit. Whome I loue (saith S. Ierome) as hee is a translator, but not as he is an author of straunge opinions, for his spirit and ingeniousnesse, but not for his faith, because his writings are venemous, without any warrant of Scriptures, and offering violence vnto the same, &c. And of this iudgement is the whole Church. After this then to whome may he not iustly be suspected? For as heretofore he laid the foundations of Purgatorie, vpon the opinions of the Platonists: so from the same he gathereth the first stone, wherupon afterward was laid the inuocation of Saints. The Platonists said, that the vpper and higher things must bee ioyned with the inferiour and lower by a middle comming betwixt both; God with men by Angels, that is, by their mediation and comming betwixt. But Christians must not lend their eares to this, as those that haue a far deeper secret and mysterie reuealed vnto them, hauing giuen them his Son, God and man, and ioyned together in one person, for the saluation of mankind, that which was farre remooued and set asunder by our sinnes, so that the Platonists could not comprehend or conceiue the same. Notwithstanding wee see that mans inuenti∣ons do commonly please vs better, then the reuelations of God, and flesh and bloud doth more freely and willingly imbrace them; because it smelleth and findeth some∣thing of it owne therein. Euseb. e pre∣parat. Euang. l. 12. & 13. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l 8. c. 14.18.20, 22 23.25.26. Now the summe thereof was, that betwixt the greatnesse of God and the infirmitie of man, there were two orders of Mediators; the blessed spirits or the separated intelligences; and the soules of the blessed, (wee call them in our Christian language, Angels and Saints:) That these Angels offer vp mens suites and petitions to God, in reporting them vnto him, and obtaining a graunt thereof, by their intercession, &c. That for this cause, we must praie vnto and honour them; part∣ly, as Aduocates; partly, as more excellent in their merits then men: And that such also do the same, who for their merits, (being men whiles they were here vpon earth) haue beene exalted and extolled as Gods in heauen; such a one was Aesculapius, who wrought the same effects in heauen by his Diuinitie, which he wrought here below by his Art: such a one also was Hermes which succoured and conserued, generally all those, who directed their praiers vnto him, &c. Who is hee that cannot behold and clearely perceiue the opinions of the Church of Rome in these points of Paganisme?
Now they did not all enter with a full sea into the Christian Church: but for certaine it is, that the Gentils which were receiued into the same, being seasoned with this do∣ctrine, could not be so little cherished and vpheld either by being winckt at, or other∣wise by the sufferance of the Pastors, but that they by and by tooke great footing, and that in a small time. What is it then that Origen saith? Origen hom. 3 in Cant. The Saintes (saith he) which are departed out of this life, bearing stil their wonted loue and charitable affections to such as remaine behind in the world: if any man say that they are carefull for their saluation, and that they helpe them with their praiers and intercessions towards God: he doth not runne into any inconuenience: for it is written in the booke of the Machabees: This same is Ieremie the prophet of God that prayeth daily for the people, &c. Marke: There is no inconuenience in it. And further, some are of opinion, & those also of the learned, that these Homelies vpon the Can∣ticles were made by some latin writer, and not by Origen. Vpon Iosue: Ego sic arbitror; I am mightilie drawne to be perswaded, that all the fathers which haue fallen asleepe before vs, doe still in part beare some portion of the combat with vs, and doe helpe vs with their praiers: & thus much I haue heard said of some of our old maisters. Vpon the booke of Numbers he groweth more hot: for saith he, Quis enim dubitat, who doubteth but that they helpe vs with their praiers, and confirme vs by their examples? &c. Where it is to bee considered, how that he speaketh doubtfully of this opinion, & that he which had the scriptures at his fingers ends, if hee had had in store euer a place to haue confirmed and setled it vpon, he would neuer haue had recourse to an Apocrypha place of the second booke of Machabees, neither to the report of his old maisters. But yet moreouer it appea∣reth by Origen himselfe, that this was but a discourse of his: and not the faith of his time: If (saith he) the Saintes that haue left this bodie, and are with Christ, do any thing for vs after the manner of Angels, that take charge of our safetie: let it be accompted amongst the secrets that are hidden and kept close by God, and are not to be intermedled withall by any wri∣ter; that is to say in a word, inter Apocrypha: for , or  in Greeke doeth not signifie any other thing. But of this priuate discourse of this pretended secret misterie, that the Saints pray for the faithfull, gathereth he this consequent: it is meete and conuenient therefore, that Christians doe pray vnto them. And did the Church of his time the same? Nay but cleane contrarie. Celsus a Pagan obiecteth vnto him, That it cannot be displea∣sing to the high God, that men should make vowes and supplications vnto the Gods, as vnto his louing friendes, which helpe men forward in the thinges which they pray vnto him for &c. He answereth him, that he acknowledgeth no such Gods, but ra∣ther the holy Angels, the seruants of God, and the blessed ones whom hee vouchsa∣feth to call his friendes. And the drift of the disputation required, that if he had be∣lieued any such thing, that he should haue added: To whome God is well pleased, that men should make their vowes and praiers, and not to your Gods. But what saith he? We offer, saith hee (and speaketh no more there as hee was Origen, but as a Syndicke of the Church of his time) in all humilitie our vowes vnto God, who sitteth as chiefe Iudge and go∣uernour ouer all, by his one onely Sonne Iesus Christ, in whom we put vp our supplications, in as much as he is the propitiation for our sinnes, and that as a high priest, hee offereth our praiers vnto God, &c. For God (saith he afterward) must alone be worshipped, and the word his one onely Sonne and first borne of euerie creature, must be alone praied vnto, as the head and chiefe, to the end that he may commend vnto God our praiers which shalbe come vnto him, &c. But if wee desire, saith he furthermore, that the companie of Angels should helpe vs in procuring his further fauour and readie inclination to doe vs good, (and here should he take his oportu∣nitie to counsell vs to pray vnto them) let vs know that the Angels will loue and affect those whom they shall know to loue God, to serue him, and hartily to call vpon him, euen as they them∣selues doe pray vnto, and worship him, &c. For is it not better (addeth hee) to commit ones selfe, and to trust to God, which ruleth ouer all thinges, which bringeth this doctrine vnto vs by Iesus Christ, and to aske of him such assistance and protection as may bee ministred vnto vs, both from Saintes and Angels? &c. But if Celsus or rather our aduersaries taught by
Celsus, should replie vpon him: But doth it not well to haue friendes in the Court? And why then also should it not doe as well to haue friendes with God in paradise? &c. Verily (saith he) although this life bee full of examples, how to winne the great and mightie, & afterward by them the kings themselues: yet notwithstanding we haue but one God to pacifie and appease, and he is pacified with godlinesse and vertue. And as the shadow doth follow the mouing of the bodie: so in like manner doe all the inferiors attend and waite vppon him which is the superior. For who so hath God his friend, hath also by consequent all those friendly to him, that are Gods friendes, whether they bee Saintes or Angels, which without being praied vnto, do pray with him, and for him, and assist him euery manner of way that they are able, &c. And herewithall as when the Canonical scriptures do faile them, they are accusto∣med to haue recourse vnto the Apocrypha: so likewise the true books of Origen, not contenting or satisfying them, they betake themselues to such as are falsely attribu∣ted vnto him. Origen (say they) praied vnto the Saints: You Saints of God (saith he) I pray you that you would prostrate your selues before the seat of Gods mercie, for me a miserable wretch. But herewithall I could haue wisht them not to haue concealed, how that this booke called the lamentations, Gelas. Decret. 15. or penitential worke of Origen, are declared by pope Gelasius to be counterfeit & fained. Vpon Iob likewise they say, that he saith, O Saint Iob pray for vs miserable sinners, to the end that the mercy of God may deliuer vs, &c. But it were to be wished that they had the shame to blush, for fathering this shamefull thing vpon Origen, for attributing to him this whole booke, which is not his in the least tittle thereof, being stained with Arrianisme, and that in such deep & horrible man∣ner, as that it calleth the holy Trinitie, a sect, an heresie, & infidelitie, the three persons the three hornes of the Deuill. And in deed it was attributed to the Bishop of the Ar∣rians, called Maximinus, against whom S. Augustine hath written. And let them re∣member also that he speaketh therein of the Manichies, of Lucian the Martyr, & of the heretikes Homousioi, all which rose & sprung vp a long time after him; which is also confessed by themselues: as likewise the Homilies of the said author, in diuersos. Let them also learne of S. Origen, that he would haue his works read, as the works of a man, and not of an Angell: Consider and take good aduise (saith he) that so thou maist be able to iudge if that which we say may be made to agree with the scripture: I suspect it, it is my coniecture, but trie and see if it may be so, &c. But so it is, that he hath onely said this & nothing further: namely, that it is credible, that the saints retaining as yet their cha∣ritable and louing affections, do hartily desire all maner of good vnto men. And now let vs see how far he was off from looking to enter into Paradice by the merites of the Saintes? Origen. hom. 17. in Luc. What thinke we then (saith he) that all the Apostles were offended in our Lord, and that not so much as his mother was exempted? Yea, saith he, if she had not beene offended at the death of our Lord, Iesus had not beene dead for her sinnes. But if all haue sinned, and stand in need of the grace of God, and are iustified and set at libertie by his grace, verily Mary her selfe for a time was offended: And it is the same which Simeon prophesieth, when he saith: Be∣hold a sword shall pearce through thy soule, euen thine who knowest thy selfe to haue brought forth a childe without the companie of man: yea euen thee who hast hearde of Gabriel: The holy Ghost shall come vppon thee, and the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee: shall the sword of in fidelitie wound with doubtfulnesse and vncertaintie, as with a pricke, for that di∣uers thoughtes shall distract and teare thee in peeces, when thou shalt see him crucified and put to death, whom thou hast heard called the Sonne of God? Saint Cyprian passeth on a little further, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 1. a Cornel. and yet not to a flat inuocation or cal∣ling vpon Saintes deceased: but rather to the stirring of vs vppe to pray vnto them whiles they bee aliue, that they would remember vs when they be in heauen. And it is in this sence that he saith: Let vs bee mindfull one of another; let vs pray one for ano∣ther euerie where: And those of which shall first be called away hence, let them continue their amitie and loue without ceasing in the presence of God: let their prayers neuer cease for their brethren and sisters, crauing in their behalfe the manifolde mercies of the fa∣ther. That is, Saynt Cyprian extending and stretching the care that the Saintes
deceased should haue, not vnto the Church in generall onely, but by a continuance of holy affection vnto them whome they had loued in Christ here vppon earth. And this although it haue no example in the scripture, yet it is far off from our aduersaries their doctrine: for he prayeth to the liuing, and not to the dead. Now the contro∣uersie or question betwixt vs is not, if they pray, and to what end: but if wee ought to pray vnto them at all, I know well what they haue to alleadge out of the sermon of the starre, and the wisemen of the East: As that the infantes slaine by Herode are made Senators in Paradice, and obtaine grace for them which doe not merite it, &c. But they are not ignorant, that this sermon hath by themselues beene alwaies num∣bred amongst the deuised and faigned ones. As likewise that which they bring out of the booke of S. Cyprian his penitentnes; How that he had beene a Magician, and that by the help of the Deuils hee would haue assailed the chastitie of a maide: and that she calling vpon Iesus Christ her husband, and afterward the virgine Marie, was deliuered: and thereupon also S. Cyprian conuerted. But with what face? seeing S. Ierome telleth vs, that S. Cyprian was a Rhetorician, and wonne vnto Christ, Hieronym. in epist. ad Paul. & in Comment. in Ionam. c. 3. Cyp l. 2. ep. 2. Gelas. D. 15. c. Sancta Rom. partly by the familiaritie he had with Caecilius, whereupon he was surnamed the Cecilian: and partly by the reading of the Prophete Ionas. And seeing that S. Cyprian in set∣ting downe his owne conuersion, saith not a worde of all this: And as little is that which commeth to light by Pontianus his Deacon, who hath written his life. But which is more, seeing that Pope Gelasius at the verie same time, when the inuocation of Saints had rooted it selfe verie deeply, did pronounce and affirme vnto them, that this booke was Apocrypha. And yet they are still abusing the common people with the name of the fathers. For as concerning the sermon of Gregorie Nazianzene, Marulla hath very well obserued, that he hath made Cyprian of Damascus, and Cy∣prian the Carthaginian all one; whereas the first suffered in the time of Valerian, and the second vnder Dioclesian: And it hath beene noted by many others before and after him. We are now in this place to bring in Dionysius the pretended Areopagite: for hee cannot be so auncient, (as we haue proued) as they would make him: Dionvs. eccles. Hierarch. c. 3. and this we say and affirme by the way, that we need not doubt, that the miracles which God wrought vppon the establishment of the Church, at the sepulchers of the Martyrs, made many to looke downe and to fixe their eyes vppon the Martyrs, whereas they ought to haue lifted them vp, and to haue caused them to looke vpon God alone: and that so much the more because it was called and accompted to be the honouring of God in his Saintes, as also for that it seemed to bee an instigation and pricking of men forward to suffer for the name of Christ. Whereunto also you may adde as ano∣ther cause the want of a Paule or Barnabas at the corner of euerie fielde, to represse these disordered and vnruly deuotions of the people; Actes 14. and to cause them to leaue the creature, to betake themselues to the liuing God. But so it is, that this Denys rehear∣sing the causes for which he made mention of the Saintes in the seruice, speaketh not but of those that follow: To the end (saith he) that those that liue may learne by these ex∣amples to liue and die well in God: and that they might bee admonished and taught, that those that die in him, doe liue out of this life in a better: That God hath them in his remembrance ac∣cording to that which is said: God knoweth those that are his: The death of the Saintes is pre∣cious before God: That they are also one with Christ by an indissoluble vnion and bond that can not bee broken: which are the causes (saith he) that this mention or rehearsall is made at the time of the celebrating of the Sacrament, the Sacrament of the coniunction and vnion of Christ and his members: That is, to shew vnto vs, that those that bee not the greatest parte in this world that yet they cease not to be a part of the Church. The contention raised about the Arrians, was a cause that for a certaine time men did speake without fault. The Christians reasoned: Christ is truely God, for we are all agreed to pray vnto him: but we pray not vnto, neither call vppon any but God. This argument had beene of no force, if the Church at that time had vsed the inuoca∣tion of Saintes, for the reply had beene verie readie: But tell mee how many Saintes
doe you pray vnto, Hillar. in psal. 129. which you know to be no Gods? And although S. Hillarie doe playe the Philosopher as others before him, vppon the mediation of Angelles, the protection of the Patriarkes and Apostles, &c. yet he reserueth inuocation for Christ alone: Idem in Psal. 123. Because (saith he) that he belieueth that he is very God; that he is present by his na∣ture when he is faithfully called vpon: and for that he is present with him that belieueth in him, &c. Idem. c. 27. in Matth. Athanas. orat. 2. cont. Arrian. Idem de incar∣nat. verb. But in regard of the Saintes, The virgines (saith he) doe answere, that they cannot giue any oile: because it behoueth euerie one to buy for themselues, and that none doe expect & trust to be helped by the merites and workes of another, &c. Athanasius in like manner: The Saintes (saith he) doe not craue any helpe of the creatures: but they crie and call vnto Christ in their necessities; He is not therefore a creature, hee is verie God. Againe, If thou worship (saith he) Christ as he is man, because the word dwelleth in him, then worship the Saintes, be∣cause that God hath a little house, or dwelling place in them, &c. which thing hee proueth to bee absurd. What force should such a reason haue had if the sermon intituled of the virgine, the mother of God were his, wherein he praieth vnto her for succour, by the names of Ladie, Mistresse, Queene, &c. But the learned know, that the greatest part of the third and fourth Tome of Athanasius are suspected of vntruth: as Nanni∣us likewise hath confessed, being publike professor in the vniuersitie of Louaine, and hee that did translate them. And this is one speciall marke thereof, for that the word  was not receiued into the Church in Athanasius his time, howsoeuer it be out of doubt that they had the doctrine. And now we be come to the time of the first Nicene Councell: Anno 350. the word of inuo∣cation of the Saints hauing neuer beene heard of in the church of all that time: which by this meanes had beene without this doctrine more then 4000. yeares, as likewise neere hand 400. Tertull. aduer. Praxeam. yeares after the incarnation of Christ; a manifest signe and token that it was neuer his, but that it came from the Deuill, according to the rule which Tertullian giueth vs, to try the doctrines of the church: That that which is the ancientest is the truest, and that what is come in since then, is false and counterfeit. Or els according to Lyrinensis his rule, That which alwaies hath beene, and euery where, and amongst all men. The first notwithstanding that brought it in might be led thereunto by a good inten∣tion; and those which suffered it might happily not see to what abuse it was likely to come, the qualitie and nature of superstition being such, as the Phisitians deliuer the Hectike feuer to consist of, which is in the beginning very hard to bee knowne or dis∣cerned, but easie to be cured: whereas in progresse & tract of time it becommeth ve∣rie hard to cure, and very easie to be knowne. The praiers of the Saintes deceased for the liuing, were the particular opinions of Origen and Cyprian, The bringing in of this a∣buse, by a Rhe∣torica. l figure. founded vpon a likelihood, and fostered in the solitarie celles and cloisters of Monkes, vntil such time as they brought forth the offering vp of prai∣ers from the liuing vnto those that were dead. And breaking out of the cabins of the Monasteries, they beganne to pearch in the pulpit, vppon that great increase of the Church that followed the empire of Constantine, and his successors; and yet all this while carried more like vnto a Rhetoricall figure or flourish, then anie article or graue pointe of Diuinitie, and deliuered in their Panegyrickes. And Saint Basill and Nazianzene, Anno 370. who brought the Monkes out of Egypt and Syria into Greece, were the promoters and furtherers thereof, being the most famous Orators of that age: an age verily wherein the Church grew and prospered greatly for ho∣nour and wealth, by reason of the protection of the Empire: but therewithall grow∣ing heauy and laden with the errours of Paganisme slipping into it, together with the multitudes of the Gentiles: the Church in the meane while being busied in beating down the heresies raised about the trinity, they being thē in their chief strength: The quickest sighted, conceiuing that they had gained no small matter, when they had turned the Gentiles from their Gods to Angels, Basil. in Gord. Mart. & de Martyre Ma∣nante. and from their halfe Gods to the Saintes of the Christians, and from the seruing of the one, to the louing and imita∣ting of the other. Saint Basill therefore speaking of the Martyr Gordius, celebrateth his feast, rehearseth his life, and exhorteth the people to follow him: and all this ac∣cording
to the order of the Church. But in the praier that hee made of the Martyr Manans, he went beyond the bounds of the order and obseruation of the Church, & falleth into the superstition of the common people: Call to your remembrances (saith he) how oft you haue seene him in a dreame, and how oft he hath ministred help vnto you in your praiers, and in your iourneyes, &c. This passeth the limits both of the scriptures, as also the decrees and ordinances of the Church: and it had beene better that he had kept himselfe to the rule which he himselfe elsewhere doth giue vnto vs: As, That to depart from the scriptures is to fall away from the faith. But yet our aduersaries not contented with this, will make him say more then he would. He saith in the Panegyricke of the 40. Martyrs: He that is in affliction goeth vnto these 40. and hee that is in ioy runneth vnto them, &c. the wife praying for her husband, and the mother for her children, &c. that is to say, thus did the common people practise. Bellarmine giueth our aduersaries more aduantage: Let him that is afflicted go vnto them, &c. as though hee would prescribe and appoint them to doe it. And hitherto haue the Panegyrikes brought vs. Nazianzene against Iulian: Heare all ye people, tribes, tongues, and ages; that is, Nazianz. in o∣rat. 1. in Iulian. all ye which are aliue at this day, or shall be borne hereafter: Hearken O yee hostes of heauen and companies of Angels: heare likewise O thou soule of the great Constantine, if thou haue any sence in thee, and you O ye soules of the rest of the Christian Emperors. Againe vpon the passe∣ouer: O thou great and sacred Passeouer (saith he) the purgation of the whole world, I am purposed to speake vnto thee as if thou hadst a soule, &c. Idem in orat. Sanct. Pasch. Who seeth not that this is the ve∣rie same which the Rhetoricians call Apostrophe? For and if this were a formall and orderly inuocation, would hee haue applyed the same so confusedly to euerie thing both liuing and not liuing? as well to the wicked as to the good & godly? to things without life, as well as to things hauing life, to the liuing as well as to the dead? And as for the dead, would hee haue prayed vnto them in such vncertaine and wauering sort, and with so little faith? , the verie fashion and manner of speaking vsed by the Pagans: If you haue as yet (saith he) any sence or feeling in you. In orat. de Basil. And yet in cer∣taine other places he waxeth more feruent and hot: And in his Panegyricall oration which he made of S. Basill, so far as to say that he is in heauen, and that he sacrificeth & prayeth for the people: yea so farre, as to say vnto him: Behold and looke downe from heauen vpon vs, represse and plucke out the pricke of this flesh by thy praiers, &c. Idem in orat. de Athanas. & Cypr. And likewise in that of Athanasius: Direct this people, guide and furnish them in this combat and spiritu∣all warfare. And in that of S. Cyprian after the same manner. But that we may more clearely see, that this was a priuate opinion which the Pa∣stors held rather in respect of the peoples deuotion, Idem in epi∣taph. patris. then the people from the instru∣ction of the Pastors, let vs alwaies obserue these words,  as I thinke, , as I perswade my selfe, , if it may be spoken without arrogancie, &c. Againe, , if they haue any sence or feeling left them, I am constrained to speake vnto them as though they were present and heard: I aduise and counsell you to behold and looke vpon him, as if you saw him, and he you. And yet more plainly in the funerals of his sister Gorgia, Idem in suner. Gorgon. after many such flourishes hee checketh and represseth himselfe: If thou hast any care or re∣gard (saith he) of these honours, if this honour be bestowed by God vpon holie soules in recom∣pence: if they discerne, vnderstand, and approue these thinges: vnderstand and know also our purpose and speech, &c. All of them being phrases of speech that are full of doubting, and by consequent a praier without faith: whereas in matters as certaine as the Ar∣ticles of our faith, the Church is accustomed to say: Fidelis sermo, firmissimè tene, & nulla tenus dubites; This is a true and trustie speech, a doubtles faith. And who so desireth to see further, how farre they were carried with the streame of their Rhetoricke, let him reade the Monodie of Nazianzene, vpon the life of S. Basill: for there hee ma∣keth a comparison with Adam, Henoch, Noe, Abraham, Isaac Iacob, Ioseph, Moses, Aaron, Iosue, Dauid, Salomon, and Elias: euen to the preferring of him alone both before euery one of them in particular, and all of them in generall: but vnto S. Iohn Baptist and the Apostles in these wordes: That he was sent an Apostle to reestablish faith in the world. A charge and burthen (saith he) so much the more difficult and waightie, by
how much to settle a thing againe, is ordinarily more laborious & painfull, then to worke it new. And let this one tast of the feruencie of their speech serue as an admonition, with wis∣dome and discretion to reade the like. But let vs heare what was said at the same time, The opinion of the church∣men, and not of the commō people. Theod. in ep. ad Colos. 2.18. not by any particular person, but by the generall voice of the Church assembled in a Synode at Laodicea vppon this matter: and that not in any Rhetoricall figure; but in a well scanned Canon, and that set downe in plaine tearmes. Theodoret expounding these wordes of the Epistle to the Colossians: Through humilitie and worshipping of Angels, they (saith he) which defended the law, perswaded them to serue Angels; alleadging vnto them, that the law was gi∣uen by them. And this vice continued a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia: In so much as that the Synode assembled at Laodicea, the chiefe cittie of Phrygia, did forbidde them by an expresse law; Ne colerent Angelos, to worship Angels. And as yet there are to be seene the Chappels of S. Michael, amongst their bordering neighbours. Now this their counsell was couered with the cloake of humilitie: for they alleadged that the God of the vniuersal world is inuisible, incompre∣hensible, and not to be approached: and therefore of necessitie man is constrained to vse them to the procuring of Gods fauour. And this is it which S. Paul calleth through humilitie and wor∣shipping of Angels. And he addeth, practising or intruding himselfe into matters: which hee hath not seene: that is to say, vsing his owne conceipts. And in the third Chapter: S. Paul commandeth, that they giue thankes to God the Father by Christ, and not by his Angels: But the Synode of Laodicea following this law, laboured to cure this old disease, and therefore ordained that they should not pray vnto Angels, Niceph. l. 7. c. 50. neither yet cast off Christ. And of these Chappels of S. Michael, Nicephorus speaketh also according to his time. Now what is it that they can say to so cleare a testimonie? Verily the wrangling and ouerthwart spirit giuen to crosse and gainesay, Tom. 1. Concil. Lao∣dic. c. 35. is neuer to seeke. In the Councels which are come to our hands, the Canon is laid downe in these tearmes: Non oportet ecclesiam Dei relinquere & abire, at Angelos nominare, (alias angulos) & congregationes facere, quae interdictae noscuntur. Si quis igitur, &c. that it to say, if you reade Angelos, Angels; We must not forsake & leaue the Church, and go away and nominate, and call vpon the Angels, and gather vnlawfull and forbidden asemblies. And therefore if any man be found worshipping according to this hidden and secret idolatrie, let him be accursed, because he hath cast off our Lord Iesus Christ the Sonne of GOd, and giuen vp himselfe vnto idolatrie. But & if you reade it, Angulos: that is to say, Corners or angles, you must not withdraw your selues into corners, &c. And yet notwithstan∣ding there is no man that doth but once looke vpon this Canon, but he may perceiue that some haue had a delight to corrupt it. But by conferring of it with Theodoret, it is made cleare and plaine: That is, that the question is not, De angulis, but de Ange∣lis, not of certain angles, but of Angels. For how should it be to the purpose to be an ido∣later, to be accursed for seruing God in some corner: seeing also that it is said, When thou art disposed to pray, betake thy selfe into thy priuate closet, &c. Neither doth the Synode forbid to name Angels, for what offence were it to name them? But of , that is to say, to call vpon them, they haue made , that is to say, to name them. For why should that be accounted to cast off the Sonne of God, and to giue ouer himselfe to idolatrie? The Breuiarie of Fulgentius and Ferrandus saith: Ʋt nullus ad Angelos congregationem faciat. And that of Cresconius intituleth this Canon: De his qui Ange∣los colebant, that is to say, Of them which doe any manner of worship vnto the Angels. And this the Greeke Canon calleth , To doe the seruice vsed of the Church in honor of them. And thus they thinke themselues to haue auoided the places which are a∣gainst them. Epiphanius and Chrysostome principall Bishops of the East Church, do yet yeeld vs a clearer testimony how they belieued in their time concerning this article. Epi∣phanius I say, who vpon occasion of certaine women in Thracia and Scythia, which offered a cake to the virgine Marie, which he calleth , found cause to reproue and conuince not onely that particular abuse, but all others of the like quality, which were then suffered in the church vnder the shadow of deuotion, and vnder the cloake of certaine famous persons: And he goeth so farre (what would he haue said of these
times) as to condemne them of heresie: Let the Saintes be honoured, Epiph. cont. Antidicoma∣rionitas, contr. haecresp & aduer. Hyndi∣anes. (saith he) and their rest glorious, but we may not honour them more then is meete and conuenient, but wee must ho∣nour the Lord for them. And to the end we may not doubt what he meaneth by hono∣ring: Of the saintes themselues (saith he) we learne what honour is due vnto God, and what vnto them: but we may not giue them the honors after their death, which liuing they themselues did giue vnto God: for feare (saith he) that veritas abeat in errorē, the truth be turned and changed into error: that is, for as much as that which is performed duely vnto God, can not chuse but be misplaced & vnduely bestowed when it is performed vnto creatures. Now these honors, such as is adoration, as also inuocation, are parts of that which he calleth Latria. For so he expresseth his meaning to be by the examples which he men∣tioneth of them in Ieremie, that honour the hoasts & Queene of heauen: of Noe gi∣uing thanks for his deliuerance, by a sacrifice; of Iacob, crauing aide of the Lord in his necessity, in powring the oile vpon the stone, &c. And whereas the abuse did grow more plausible, by reason of the name of the virgine Marie: There are some (saith he) which do not honor her sufficiently; & there are some that glorifie her too much. The Deuil vn∣der the colour of doing good entreth into the spirits of men; deifieth the nature of man, to cause thē to worship the dead, &c. But although the bodie of Marie were holy: yet notwithstanding it was not God: she was a virgin to be honored and reuerenced, but not to be adored & worshipped: she her selfe falling downe & worshipping him, that was borne of her according to the flesh: whereup∣on he saith vnto her, What haue I to doe with thee O woman? for feare that any man admiring too much her excellencie, might fall into heresie. These are the reasons hee vseth in all this disputation. In the first place; It is not spoken of in the scriptures: Where is (saith he) the scripture? where is the Prophet that hath spoken it? And for the second, Rom. 1. It is an old error which must not rule ouer vs, to forsake the liuing, and to worship that which he hath made: accor∣ding to that which is written: They haue worshipped the creature more then the Creator, &c. And therefore neither Helias, nor S. Iohn, nor Thecla, nor Marie. For if it be denied the Angels, why should it be granted to the daughter of Hanna, that is to say, Mary? And afterward also whole pages to the like purpose: Let Ieremie saith he, hold in these sillie & simple women, that they may not trouble the whole world, that they may not haue any more to say, we honor the Queene of heauen, &c. What other thing should he heare at this day in the deuotions of the Church of Rome? Then he concludeth: And this wee haue written for their sakes that are desirous to attaine the truth of the scriptures: But & if there bee any man that liketh better to heare the contrarie, (for this superstition did not want Monkes to support it,) he that heareth, let him heare, & he that is disobedient, let him be disobedient, &c. Chrysostome may seeme to haue taken to taske the pulling downe & subuersion of this abuse: he taketh such paines by all maner of meanes, to vndermine the very foun∣dations thereof. Hee saw that the people were more inclined to receiue helpe from the suffrages of another, then to amend their owne liues: Therefore hee impugneth this opinion Nay, (saith he) We are a great deale more assured & certified, Chrysost. hom, 5. in Matth. by our owne suf∣frages, thē by the suffrages of an other: neither doth God so soon grant our saluation at the praiers of another as at our owne. For by that meanes was he moued to pittie the Cananitish woman: by that meanes also he gaue the harlot to belieue: thus also did the thief obtaine paradise, there being neither aduocate nor mediator to moue him to any of these by intercession. But, Idem. hom. 12. in Matth. Thou saist I haue no good works, I cannot trust to my good life: hereupon it is, that we are to betake our selues to his mercie: the calme and quiet hauen of sinners, where iudgement ceaseth, & wherein consisteth vn∣speakable safety, according to the example of the Cananitish woman, who neither went to Iames nor Iohn, nor Peter, &c. But in stead of all these, she embraced as her dearest companion, vnfai∣ned and hearty repentance, and it was also vnto her as her aduocate, going on her behalfe direct∣ly vnto the soueraigne head and fountaine. And wherefore said she is he come downe to take hu∣mane flesh vpon him. & why is he made man, but that I may speake vnto him? In another place, Idem hom. de prof. Euang. Wilt thou see (saith he) what more we do for our selues by our owne praters, then by those of an other? when the Apostles pray for the Cananitish woman, they are repelled: I am not sent but to the lost sheepe of Israel, &c. But when shee pleadeth her owne cause by prayer, how great a sinner soeuer shee were, euen then it was that shee obtained grace: euen then it
was that the Lord did graunt her petition. Yea, but the scripture commandeth vs to pray one for another: Other mens praiers therefore are not vnprofitable. Admit it, yet it must be by the Saints that are aliue, and not by them that are dead. And of this in∣tercession of the Saints it is that he speaketh, and not of that of the Church of Rome: When we offer (saith he) altogether vnto God, Idem. hom. 44 in Genes. 1. Idem. hom. 5. in Mat. Idem. hom. in 1. ad Thes. Genes. 18. Ierem. 7.16.11.14. that which commeth from our selues, and the intercession of the Saints is ioyned therewith, it doth greatly profite vs. For (saith he in ano∣ther place) the praiers and supplications of the Saints are of great force & power on our behalfe, and therefore let vs not neglect them, but rather let vs pray them to pray for vs, and to lend vs their helping hand. But what Saintes? euen those that are liuing: and wee know them by the examples and patternes that he giueth vs of them: As of Abraham making in∣tercession for Lot: and of Ieremie, whom God forbiddeth to pray for the people: and many o∣ther. Where in the meane time wee haue to obserue and note the faithfull and good dealing of the Doctors of the Church of Rome, who alleadge the same of the Saints deceased, and not of the faithfull liuing, which are in all the scipture commonly cal∣led Saintes. As concerning the Saints deceased, he sometimes speaketh of them according to the common opinion, Idem in Basil. Martyr. especially in his Panegyricks: That the magnanimitie and vn∣daunted boldnesse of the Martyrs is a terrour vnto the tyrantes, the deuils, and the Prince of the deuils: That they pray to God with confidence, as soldiers are wont to shew their wounds vnto their Prince: Idem in Iu∣uent. & Max∣im. That if S. Paule haue loued men here below, he hath also in heauen, a more feruent loue towards them; but that this neuer reacheth either to praying vnto Saintes, or vnto Martyrs: on the contrarie, in all his praiers, we doe not heare of any other but onely God. But haue they not purchased Paradise by their sufferings and merites, and not for themselues onely, but for those also that call vpon them? Not so, for they are farre off from that. On the contrarie, saith he, God alone is without sinne: Idem hom. 40. in Genes. & 49. Idem in hom. 45. in Mat. Idem hom. 20 in Iohan. and to the end that he might bee without sinne, he permitted Abra∣ham to sinne by infidelitie, Moises by ingratitude, the virgine likewise the mother of Christ in his passion by doubting: Animum matris gladius dubitationis pertransijt, &c. The sword (said hee) of doubting or diffidencie pearced her soule. Likewise saith hee, Sometimes by ambition, by vanitie, and by the forgetting of the diuinitie of the Son, &c. As if of purpose he would preuent or represse the abuse which sprung vp then, and grew stronger after∣ward by the inuention and industrie of the Monkes about the infinite merites of the holy Virgine. What haue they to oppose and set against this? The Liturgie of Chrysostome? but we haue heretofore auouched for a certaine truth, that it was compiled & made more then 500. yeares after him. An homelie of the natiuity of S. Peter and S. Paule, wherein they make him say: Peter and Paule pray for vs without ceasing; for you haue pro∣mised so to do. And where? You Paule, when you said, Venite mecum, & bonis ne defici∣amur: and you Peter, Studebo post meum obitum, &c. But the best learned haue beene ashamed to giue it place amongst his workes. Idem in hom. post reditum ab exilio. But doe they make no conscience to make him to alleadge the scripture so falslie? In that which he made returning from exile: I haue inuited and bid you to supper (saith he) with the Apostles: let vs come to Timo∣thie, to Andrew, &c. Therefore hee teacheth them say they, to haue recourse vnto saints. Whereas he rather discourseth in that place, to what persecutions the saintes are subiect, and sendeth them to consider the examples of those aboue named, to the end that they might not be strange or vnacquainted with any thing that they should find. Idem hom. 5. in Mat. Neither is that worthie better to be trusted, which they alleadge out of the fift homelie vpon S. Mathew: That which we say is not to be denied, that we ought not to pray vnto the Saintes. For his wordes are: And we say well; not that we denie, that the Saintes ought to pray for sinners: that is, as we haue before shewed, the saints aliue. And like∣wise all this homelie maketh for the contrarie. And in deed Bellarmine hath beene ashamed to alleadge the places aboue named, holding himselfe to one onely in the threescore and sixt homelie vnto the people of Antioch. The Emperour (for so they make him to say) is there himselfe with his purple, to beseech the Saintes to make intercession
vnto God for him. He praieth vnto a maker of tabernacles, and a fisher, as his protectors. But it is to be noted, that the same words are read in a sermon attributed vnto S. Augu∣stine, De Sancto Paulo: and the Canon Garet doth alleadge them of one Theodoret Daphnoipatus of farre latter time. So little certaintie is there, whether it be S. Augu∣stines or S. Chrysostomes, being also directly contrarie to the whole bodie and scope of their doctrine. And thus we see how Epiphanius and Chrysostome do agree toge∣ther in this truth, notwithstanding the sharpe contentions, which were in other pla∣ces betwixt them. Cyrill Patriarke of Alexandria followeth them neere by, both for the time and do∣ctrine. His Maxims are: None commeth to the father but by Christ: The Sonne was made the dore and the way to reconcile men vnto the father, and he himselfe doth distribute and giue grace together with him, &c. He is the Mediator, the high Priest, the Comforter, that is to say, the Aduocate. Iohn 2. Hee giueth entrance and accesse for our praiers vnto the father. He giueth vs free libertie and boldnes with him, &c. Yea (saith he) in as much as God gran∣teth the praiers of such as doe worship him, (that is to say, of such as call vpon him:) for with whom doth it agree better to graunt vnto holy men their earnest requestes, then with him who alone is naturallie and truely God? But as concerning the Saints, as much honour as you will; but without all manner of adoration and worship, without any inuocating of them, which are the chiefe and principall part: although that in his time the priuate superstitions of men had preuailed euen so farre. Iulianus the Emperour reprocheth him, you Christians ye worship a man: Yea, Cyril. ad Reg. de rect. fid. (saith he) but such a man as we acknowledge and confesse to bee both man and God together. But at the least the Martyrs: Nay not so (saith he) as that we hold them for Gods: we doe not adore or worship them: wee praise their constancie, in hauing hated their lines for the truth, &c. And he telleth vs wherein this ho∣nor consisteth: In a remembrance (saith he) which withereth not, euen of their excellent and exceeding fortitude. He forgetteth not in the meane time to describe how many waies the Greekes honoured their Gods, euen betaking themselues vnto them, as prote∣ctors and gardiantes of such as were aliue. And this was the place, & here the opor∣tunitie for him to haue said; And what you do vnseasonablie and without any proofe of dutie vnto them, the same doe wee duely and of required dutie vnto our Saintes: Cultores. but hee is flatte to the contrarie; But we (saith he) doe not any thing at all. Not therefore as the Grecians, the proper worshippers of men, who without consideration haue attributed the glorie of God to whom they please, &c. For the scripture (saith hee) doeth not preach vnto, or teach vs any moe Gods then one: neither haue we any custome to worship any other besides him. And the Saintes (saith hee in another place) haue also obtained the gift of God by his grace, Idem in The∣saur. l. 4. c. 2. and the mutuall praiers of others: but they cannot imparte it vnto others at their pleasures: whereas the Sonne, as the fountaine of holinesse, doth sanctifie his disciples by his owne power: Receiue, saith he, the holie Ghost, &c. The Conclusion of Cyrill, in the end, after all this disputation, is: Therefore we must praie in the name of the Sauiour, if we will be heard of the father. And notwithstanding some are growne to that impudencie, contrarie to the opinion of all ancient writers, as to impute and ascribe vnto him a little booke imprinted in times past in Paris. The liturgie and houres of the virgine Marie. As for Theodoret, we haue seene heretofore what he said vnto vs of the Councell of Laodi∣cea: and yet further we must not forget what he saith vnto vs of the wordes of Saint Paule to Timothie: One Mediator of God and men, &c. Theod. 1. Tim. c. 2. If (saith he) as saith Ar∣rius and Eunomius, the Sonne be not partaker of the substance of the Father, how shall he be an intercessor, &c. And therefore the Saintes by the same accompt, no Gods, no intercessors.
CHAP. XIIII. Of the continuance of the purenesse of doctrine concerning Inuocation, and of the growth and proceeding of the corruption of the same in the Latine Church. LEt vs here againe returne to the rest of this doctrine in the West Church, proceeding where we left to speake of the same. S. Hil∣larie tooke vp his standing at this point; That notwithstanding that the Angels and the Saintes do continue their charitie towardes vs, that yet we must call vpon one onely God by Christ, it being expected that hee should be alone, and onely one which knoweth, and can doe all things. And now let vs a little looke ouer S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and Saint Ierome in the Latine Church, and examine their opinions: the first of them answering within a little, the time of Basil & Nazianzene: the other two the time of Epiphanius and Chrysostome in the Greeke Church. S. Ambros. in su∣nere fratris Sa∣tyr. Ambrose verily in like manner as S. Basill, wanteth no store of Rhetorike, such as the time afforded. In the funeralles of his brother Satyrus he is vehement: Well (saith he) go thou first into this common house, & that which now is more desired and wished for of me then any other thing: make readie there for vs our bed chamber, leaue mee not to lan∣guish and mourne any long time after thee; Call vpon me if I be too slow, and helpe me to make more hast, Ambr. in Luc. l. 10. &c. And in another place: From whence shall I cause thee to come, Peter, that thou maiest tell me what thou didst thinke when as thine eies distilled teares? shal it be from hea∣uen where thou art in the companie of Angels; or els from the graue? &c. Who will not ac∣knowledge in these words the Rhetorical Apostrophes so familiarly vsed of Orators? In his booke of widowes, he is carried away a great deale further in a Declamation: When (saith hee) Peter his mother in law had a feauer, Andrew and Peter praied vnto the Lord for her: And thou O widow, hast so many neighbours that pray for thee: the Apostles, the Martyrs and the Angels: therefore thou must pray vnto them, for they can pray for our sinnes, seeing that they are washed from theirs by their owne bloud, seeing also that they are be∣holders of our actions. Againe, Is she lesse fit to pray because of her sinne, or lesse fit for to aske and obtaine? let her vse the benefite and helpe of others which doe pray, &c. Who is hee that may not iustly be offended with these loftie and hyperbolicall speeches, with this exceeding ryot & lauish laying out of such high mounted speeches, directly con∣trarie to the doctrine of Christ & his Apostles? Of Christ, who calleth the repentant vnto himselfe, they being so much the more fit to come vnto him, by how much the heauier they feele themselues laden with the burthen of their sinnes; Come vnto mee (saith he) all you that labour & are heauie laden, &c. Of the Apostles, who teach vs, that the sins of the Apostles themselues were washed away in the blood of Christ. As also against the doctrine of his dearely beloued Origen: That the virgin Marie hath need to be washed, to be sanctified, and to haue a part in the redemption purchased by this blood. But now let vs heare him like some still brooke, or little riuer gliding smooth∣ly along some plaine channell, all his heate of Rhetoricke laid aside, and expounding the scriptures according to their bare meaning and sence: & that verily in a far other sence. The Gentiles said to him (as we haue seene before;) It is needfull to haue ac∣cesse vnto kings by the mediation of great personages: so we must looke to approch vnto the high God by inferior and pettie Gods: & so say our aduersaries by the saints. And what answer doth he make them vpon the Romaines? Ambr. in epist. ad Rom. c. 1. But saith he, and that in many words: With God thou needest not any other intercessor then a deuout spirit: It is high treason against him to make way to come to him by his creatures: whereas in deed it is good for kinges, who know not whom to trust in their common wealth: but not in respect of God who knoweth all things, Id de Iscac. & Antma. who vnderstandeth the value and worth of euerie man, &c. But wouldest thou haue a Mediator? looke vpon him whom he giueth vnto thee: Iesus Christ him∣selfe
(saith he) is our mouth by which we speake vnto God; our eye by which we see the father: our right hand by the which we offer vnto the father; and if that hee make not intercession for vs, neither we nor any of the saintes haue anie part or portion in God. And elsewhere; Idem l. 3. de Spir. Sanct. c. 12 Wee must not worship (saith he) any thing but God, as the scripture saith: Thou shalt worship one onely God: The holy Ghost likewise must be worshipped, seeing that wee worship him who after the flesh is borne of the holy Ghost. But no man must draw or applie this to the virgine Marie, she was the temple of God, but not the God of the temple, &c. And if any man reply and say that he speaketh of adoration, and not of praier, he ouerthroweth the question: for in vaine is it to pray, where wee put not our affiance. But (saith hee) the Almightie power of Christ was declared and manifested; in that we know that it is hee alone in whom wee must haue our affiance, &c. Coloss. 1. In so much that if any man thinke that he ought to frame his deuo∣tion, either to some one of the Angels, or els to some one of the superiour powers; bee it knowne vnto him that he is in an errour: for he that humbleth and casteth downe himselfe before the subiectes, is altogether out of the way: he cleaueth not fast vnto the head; he is without a head, Truncus est. &c. And this is according to the scope of the place in the Colossians, expounded heretofore by Theodoret, & of the Canon of the Councell of Laodicea. In the time of S. Ierome this inuocation did insinuate it selfe more and more a∣mongst the people: in so much as that it was come to an open offence and contro∣uersie. And this is proued by the disputation betwixt Saint Ierome and Vigilantius: Hieronym. contr. Vigilant. whether it were that on the one side Vigilantius did not speake honorably enough of the Martyrs: or that Saint Ierome doth wrongfully so charge him: proceeding here as in other places, from wholesome admonition and reproofe, to hot and distempe∣red choller, (a man for that cause certainely vnworthy to bee admitted into any disputation concerning religion:) But of all Vigilantius his Theses, (because his bookes are not to bee come by) we are onely made acquainted with so much as Saint Ierome maketh mention of. It is manifest likewise, that the Church of Fraunce did not allow of this superstition; in as much as that French Bishoppe, of whome Saint Ierome speaketh vnto Ripacius, a holy and reuerent man, did hold the opinion of Vigilantius: according to that which Ireneus saith; That the French men and Ger∣maines held and kept so fast what they had first receiued of the Apostolike faith, as that they shutte their eares vnto whatsoeuer departed and swarued from the same. Vigilantius saith by the report of Saint Ierome; That wee must not worship or adore the Martyrs, nor the deceased Saintes. And who can denie that which hee saith of worship and adoration? But for the honour due and of right to bee giuen in the re∣membring of the Martyrs and Saintes, by the acknowledging of the giftes of God in them, and the imitation of their constancie; who is hee that would contend or striue against it? But you say that in this honour inuocation is included: which thing Vigilantius denyed. Let them shew vs then in all this disputation, how hot soeuer S. Ierome be, any one word of the inuocation of saints or of Martyrs? or any one proofe or allegation that he maketh for the same, either out of the scriptures, or the fathers, the Councels or the Liturgies Greeke or Latine? Howsoeuer notwithstanding the case so standeth, as that he could not bee ignorant of that goodly Masse of S. Iames at Ierusalem, if so be it were at that time, for to haue proued thereby the interces∣sion of the virgine Marie and of the Saintes. For as concerning that which he saith: If any man come to pray ad memorias Martyrum: it is well knowne, that that was for no other thing but to point the place, where had beene accustomed for a long time the meetinges of the Christian assemblies, to stirre vp thereby those which were pre∣sent to the like constancie. Origen was the first that said, though doubtfully, and ambiguously; That the blessed soules do pray in the other world for the Church. Vpon this stone men haue laboured by degrees to found and settle this inuocation. Vigilantius doth take oc∣casion by this foundation, and denieth it, adding, that here we ought to pray one for another: & that there is not any place for this action elswhere. S. Ierome striueth for this proposition of Origens, as for an article of faith; Vigilant. gainsaith it, as contrary
vnto faith: but of them passing beyond their bounds, seeing that this proposition, if a man stay there and go no further, is indifferently to be borne with of the Church. But S. Ierome gathereth therevpon this conclusion. The Saintes pray vnto God in heauen for the Church: therefore the Church here vppon earth must not onely pray vnto God, but vnto the Saints also. Superstition said: But wherefore shal we not pray vnto them, seeing that they pray for vs? For is there not appearance, that they ioyne their praiers vnto ours, when we pray vnto them at their graues? &c. Vigilantius aunswereth; No, for they doe not meddle any more with humane affaires: So far is it off that their soules should keepe about these graues. Apocal. 14. S. Ierome thereupon cryeth out: Wilt thou chaine vp the Apo∣stles? wilt thon make a law for God to keepe? Do they not follow the lambe wheresoeuer he go∣eth? &c. But the question is not here of the power of God, but of the nature which he hath giuen for a law, to all thinges. Tertullian had said vnto him: That it was no good diuinitie, Chrysost. hom. 20. in Mat. Idem de La∣zat. & Diuite. August. de cu ra pro mort. erend. Idem de G. Virg c. 27. Hieronym. in Epitaph. Ne∣potian. To reason from the power of God to his will, or to the effect. And S. Chryso∣sostome, That the soules seperated from the bodies haue not their abode in these regions: That the soules of the iust are in the hand of God. And S. Augustine had proued it vnto him by scripture, That they are not any more dealers in the thinges of this world. That in the same place: To follow the Lambe is to follow the footsteps of Christ. Not (saith he) in respect that he is the Sonne of God, by whom all things were made: but the sonne of man, who hath shewed vs in himselfe what we ought to doe. But S. Ierome, doth he say the same vnto vs, that they of the Church of Rome say: That they know all thinges in the seeing of God? Then they reade in God, that which is in our hearts, in our thoughtes, &c. No but cleane contrarie. In the Epitaph of Nepotian: All whatsoeuer I can say to him seemeth to mee to be no more then a dumbe shew, because that he heareth not. Againe: Let vs not wearie our selues with speaking to him, with whom we cannot speake any more. But he ceaseth not to vse his Rhetoricall figures, his Apostrophes as the others do: in the Epitaph of Pau∣la whom he had so entirely loued, and in his speech of the death of Blessilla; wherein hee speaketh vnto them, and causeth them to make answere; the dead and deceased daughter to comfort her mournefull and sorrowing mother, &c. But in his Commen∣taries his choller and languishing mind is laid aside: Idem in Ezech. l. 4. c. 14. tom. 5 If we be to put our confidence in any, let vs trust in the one only God: For cursed is the man that putteth his confidence in man, though they were Saintes, yea and though they were Prophets. We must not trust in Principibus ec∣clesiarum, in those which are the chiefe and principall of the Churches, who how vpright and righteous soeuer they be, shall not deliuer any but their owne soules, not so much as the soules of their owne children. And to the end wee may not conceiue him to haue spoken of any but such as were liuing, writing vpon the Epistle to the Galathians, vpon these words; Euerte man shal beare his owne burthen: Idem in ep. ad Galat. l. 2. c. 6. see what he saith vnto vs, Wee learne though some∣what darklie, by this little sentence a new doctrine, which is hid and secrete, that so long as wee are in this present world we may be helped by the praiers and counsels one of another: but when as we shall be come before the iudgement seat of Christ, neither Iob, nor Daniel, nor Noe can pray for any man, but euerie one shall beare his owne burthen, &c. Which may seeme to bee a retractation of that which he had stifly maintained against Vigilantius. For out of this text are gathered two propositions together: Gra. Cin prae∣senti 13. q. 2. Hieronym. de Assumpt. Ma∣riae virg. tom. 4 that is, That the prayers of the li∣uing serue not to any vse for the dead, neither the praiers of the dead for the liuing: and this place is inserted into the Decree. Of the virgine Mary likewise hee sayeth: Thou hast worshipped God a child with the wise men: The virgine Marie hath no other honor but when he is by good right and for iust cause honoured, who hath vouchsafed to be begotten and borne of her, &c. S. Augustine taketh great paines against the abuses of his time, and doth often∣times complaine of the presumptuousnes & preiudicate opinions that had taken so deep root in men: but yet he striueth so much as his naturall modesty will well agree and stand withal against the streame of superstitions. August. ep. ad lanuar. um. It is great pittie (saith he) to see how presumptuousnes doth eurey where ouerflow, that is to say, preiudicate opinions, threatning the oppression of the truth it selfe: I see many things that I dare not so freely reproue, for auoiding of
giuing of offence to some persons, wherof some are holy, and other some troublesome & contentious. As if hee should say, that the good deuotion and holy intention of some may craue pardon for their errour, whereas the same is supported by pride and insolencie in o∣thers. Againe, to the end he may manifest his iudgement vnto vs, that so we may dis∣cerne the sincernesse of his opinion: It is one thing (saith hee) which we teach, and an other thing which wee maintaine and support: one thing which we are commaunded to teach, Idem contr. Faust. and an other thing which we are taught to amend, and constrained notwithstanding to tolerate, vntill that we haue amended it. Now these rules should serue to cleare our sight in distin∣guishing of his doctrine. But more particularly it seemeth that hee would point out vnto vs with his finger this abuse here in question, when he saith: Many things, Idem de Ciuit. Dei, l. 10. c. 4. which are properly belonging to the seruice of God, haue beene vsurped and transferred to serue to set out the honour of men, either by too much humblenesse of mind, or else by the pestilent botch of flatterie: but yet in such sort a that they haue euermore beene taken but for men; but why doe we say, that we must worship then, that we must honour them: adde neuer so little more to it, and then say also we must adore them. So farre as that the Councell of Carthage (where hee was present,) for the repressing of the multitude of Altars, that were builded vnder the colour of Martyrs and their apparitions, ordained verie well, that those where the Martyrs had not beene buried, should bee pulled downe, but it was with this clause: Concil. Car∣thag. 5. c. 14. If there be no daunger toinsue, by any vprore or insurrection of the people: So far had the rage of Idolatrie preuailed, that it began to shake the Councels with feare. To come therefore vnto the point, August. Ep. 121. ad Pro∣bam viduam. let vs see the Maxims and generall rules which he giueth for to direct vs in the way of praying well: Whosoeuer (saith hee) saith in his praier, any thing that is not contained in the praier of the Gospell, that is to say, in the Lords pra∣yer, either he prayeth carnally, or else vnlawfully. Psal. 24. Wherefore we must pray vnto one onely God; for thereis no mention made of Saints. But Dauid said: I haue lifted vp mine eyes vnto the hils. And Origen and S. Hillarie did differ and varie thereupon; vnderstan∣ding it sometimes for the Propheticall bookes, and sometimes for the Angels, whose ministerie God vseth, for the safetie of his children. On the contrarie you will say that he hath vndertaken the rooting vp of that. August. l. de Pasto. Looke then (saith he) that thy hope be not in the hils and mountaines: for Dauid saith, my helpe is of the Lord, who hath made heauen and carth. And thinke not for all this that thou doest iniurie vnto those holy hils: for these are the hils themselues, which sing of him vnto thee. S. Paul, which is one of these hils, and which crieth vn∣to thee; I vnderstand that there are schismes amongst you, I am of Paul, and J of Apollos, and J of Cephas, and I of Christ: lift vp thine eyes vnto this mountaine, heare what it will say vnto thee and there stay thee. Was Paul crucified for you? So, when thou shalt haue lift vp thine eyes vn∣to the mountaines from whence thy helpe is to come, that is to say, towards the writers of the holy Scriptures; heare them attentiuely, which crie vnto thee from the depth of their bones, from the bottomes and innermost parts of their marrow; O Lord, who is like vnto thee? &c. To the end, that without all feare of doing iniurie vnto these bils, thou doe freely say, My helpe is of God which hath made heauen and earth. And then feare not that they should or would doe thee any harme: Nay, they doe loue thee so much the more, nay they will become the more fauourable vn∣to thee: if on the contrarie thou put thy trust in them; thou makest them heauie and sad. An An∣gell that hath shewed vnto a man marueilous great and diuine things, is worshipped and adored of this man: from this hill, whether he lifted his eyes, he calleth him backe vnto God; farre bee it from thee saith he, that thou shouldest euer doe it, worship God and adore him: for J am thy fellow seruant, and one of thy brethren, &c. And in an other place: When thou shalt find a holy man, Idem in Psal. 95.96. Colere. aseruant of God, and that thou wouldest worship or adore him for God, hee will staie and keepe thee from doing it: for he will not be vnto thee in stead of God, but rather with thee vnder God. And thus did Paul and Barnabas, &c. And feare not (saith he) least thou shouldest grieue them, if thou dost not honour them: for it is their whole and hartie desire, that the one only God be wor∣shipped, that he alone be serued and adored. Thus doe all the Saints and Angels desire and wish; they seeke the glorie of this one onely God, whome they loue: they studie not any other thing, but to increase our loue and Zeale, and to draw vs as by force to serue him, to call vppon him, Ad eius oratio. nem. and to looke vp vnto and behold him. And note these words to call vpon him, for hee maketh it a
part of adoration. They are as much mooued to anger, when they are honored as the diuels are, when they are not honored, for they preach God vnto men, and not themselues: and so are the An∣gels, that is to say, messengers,) the Diuels on the contrarie seeke their owne glory. They answere, We do not worship the Diuels but the Angels, the powers and Officers of the great God. I would to God that you did serue them, for so you should soone learne of themselues, not to worship them. Will you heare an Angell for your teacher, who sought nothing but the glorie of his God: Arise, saith hee, what doest thou? I am thy fellow seruant, &c. When as therefore thou goest about to worship them, then it is that the good Angell is displeased with thee, &c. And in an other place; That which the greatest of the Angels doth worship, Colere. Idem de Vera relig. c. 55. tom. 10. the same is that which is to bee worshipped of the most base and meanest of all men: for, because of fayling toworship it, the nature of men is become the last and worst. For the Angels are not become either wise and vnderstanding, or true and iust by any other then man: but euen from one and the same wisedome, and from that one and the same immutable veritie. Euen the truth and wisedome of God, of the same sub∣stance with the Father, which hath thought good to take vpon him the nature of man, to teach vs thereby, that man hath no other to worship and adore, then him which is adored and worshipped by euerie creature indewed with vnderstanding and reason. Seruitute. And le vs know and belieue that the good Angels are also of the same mind, that wee should worship with them, one and the same God: and therefore we doe honour them with brotherly loue, but not with diuine worship or ser∣uice, neither doe we build any Churches vnto them: and that because that Religon doth bind and restraine vs to the one onely Almightie God, &c. And thus you may see one of the founda∣tions of Inuocation irrecouerably vndermined by this, that we are not to adore any but the one only God, that the Angels and Saints take it for offered iniurie, when we doe otherwise. That Inuocation hath an interest in Adoration, as apart thereof, &c. And now behold here an other: Idem in Psal. 29. That there is not any mediatour but one onely: that this one onely God will not bee called vpon and praied vnto, but by this media∣tor. If thou consider (saith he) the Diuinitie of our Lord Jesus Christ, wee find not in it, either matter, place, or affection for praier: For, in the beginning was the word, &c. But hearken to that which followeth after: The word became flesh; thou hast herein a Maiestie wherunto to pray, and an humanitie, that praieth for thee. For this was spoken by the Apostle, and that after the resur∣rection: Who sitteth, saith hee, at the right hand of God, and maketh intercession for vs. In as much as he hath vouchsafed to be a mediatour, betwixt God and men. And what is this God? The Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost. And what are men? Sinners, wicked and vngodly, mortall. Betwixt this Trinitie, and the iniquitie and infirmitie of men, was a mediatour made, euen a man. But it may be that this man is not placed & ordained al alone, for the exe∣cuting of this charge & office; Non est quo eas nisi ad me. Non est qua cas nisi per me In Iohan. tract. 22. Idem de Relig. Serm. 55. tract. 10. Praeteripsum. Idem in Psal. 109. but heare yet further: Behold what thy Sauiour saith vnto thee: Thou hast not whether else to goe besides me, thou hast not whereby to goe thither, but by me. Walke by Christ, & so thou commest to God, thou goest by him, thou goest to him. Seeke not wher∣by thou maiest come to him, otherwise then by him. He was made the way, by which thou hast to come. I say not vnto thee, seeke the way: he, that is the way, is come vnto thee, arise & walke; walk by good manners, walke on foote: Whosoeuer runneth out of this way, the more hee runneth, the more he wādreth, because that he draweth the more backward out of his way. And for as much as praier is the meane, by which man approcheth vnto God, he explaneth himself the more carfully: Ther is not (saith he) any righteous praier, but by Christ. Again that praier, that is not made by Christ, is sin. Let his praier (saith he) be turned into sin. And wherefore? Because it was not made by the mediatour of God & men, Iesus Christ the man. What then? the Saints Martyrs, Apostls, & angels, cannot they be mediators, cannot they be our aduocates? Let vs heare him. Idemontra Parmen. l. 2. c. 8 S. Iohn saith not (saith he) you haue an Aduocate, as seperating himselfe from amongst sinners, as though forsooth hee had had no more need of the propitiation which is made by the Mediator, sitting at the right hand of the father, & making intercession for vs, for then he had spoken arrogantly and falsely. And if he had said; you haue me for a mediator with the father, I obtaine pardon for your sinne (as Parmenian who set the Bishop in the place of the mediator be∣twixt the people and God) it had beene yet worse. Exoro. Who would haue taken him for an Apostle of Christ? Yea, who wold not on the contrarie haue taken him for Antichrist? To the end therfore that Christians may keepe the vnitie of the spirit in al their praiers, let thē be assuredly perswaded
of one onely mediatour. For Christians doe recommend one an other in their praiers: but he alone is the true mediator which maketh intercession for all, and for whome no man praieth. So Paul though a principall member vnder the head, but yet notwithstanding a member, recommendeth himselfe to the praiers of the faithfull: he maketh not himselfe any mediatour betwixt the people and God; but he praieth that all the members of the body of Christ would praie for him, &c. For if Paul were a mediatour, then all his fellow Apostles should be so likewise: Non constaret ei ratio. Idem in 1. Ep. Ioh. And if that there should be any mediatour, then Paul himselfe should misse in his accompt, when as hee saith: one God, one mediatour of God and of men, &c. In an other place: We haue an aduocate, &c. Be∣hold and marke Iohn, (the same that dranke vpon the Lords breast, &c.) He saith not, you haue, but we haue: and he saith not, you haue me for an aduocate, but you haue Christ. And he chu∣sed rather (said hee) to put himselfe in the number of the sinners, that he might haue Christ an aduocate, then to set himselfe downe for the aduocate in the place of Christ, and to be found con∣demned amongst the proud and arrogant. He that hath held this, hath not spotted himselfe with heresie, hath not fallen into schisme. For hence it is that schismes arise, when men say, we are iust and righteous; we sanctifie the vncleane, we iustifie the wicked, we praie, we obtaine, &c. And the Saints then (saith hee) doe they not pray for vs? And the Bishops doe not they pray for the people? Read but the Scriptures and you shall see, that the Bishops doe recommend themselues vnto the people. The Apostle saith, praying alwaies for vs: the Apostle for the people, the people for the Apostle: you for vs; wee for you: all the members one for another, the head for all, &c. And then the Saints liuing, and not the dead: for heere were the place to speake of it, if he had belieued otherwise. Not the Angels themselues: Idem l. 10. con fess. c. 42. For (saith hee in an other place,) How shall I find one that may reconcile me vnto thee? must I goe vnto the Angels? But with what praiers? With what Sacraments? Many indeuoring to return vnto thee, and not being able of themselues, haue, as I vnderstand, assaied this way, and haue beene deceiued by vaine illu∣sions, as they deserued, &c. But the true mediatour hath appeared betwixt mortall men, being grieuous sinners, and the immortall iust one, euen Iesus Christ, man, &c. In him is my hope, hee maketh intercession with thee for vs. Otherwise I should flie, and hide my selfe from before thy presence, but thou hast staied and kept me backe, saying: Therefore is Iesus Christ dead for sin∣ners, &c. Behold therefore Lord, I cast my whole care vpon thee, and I shall liue. And now after that he hath laid these Maxims, behold how cunningly he indeuo∣reth to stop and turne the course of the presumptions of his time. It was now growne to an inueterate opinion: that the Church triumphant, or already gathered into hea∣uen, had care of the militant, or that which was warfaring here vpon earth, hee stan∣deth not obstinate and wilfull, as Vigilantius, against it on the contrarie: Idem de prae∣dest. sanct. c 14 Idem confess. l. 9. A great com∣panie (saith hee) doe wish vs in heauen, being alreadie assured of their owne saluation, but yet standing in some doubt of ours. Againe: Now Nebridius is in Abrahams bosome: hee greedily powreth downe full draughts of wisedome, and yet I cannot be perswaded, that he drinketh him∣selfe so deepely and deadly drunke therewith, as that hee forgetteth vs: seeing that thou O Lord, who giuest him to drinke, vouchsafest to haue vs in remembrance, &c. In a certaine place hee cannot containe himselfe from desiring and wishing that S. Cyprian would praie for him. Behold (saith he) S. Cyprian disburdened of this bodie, Idem contr. Donatist. l. 5. c. 1. who seeth the truth more cleare∣ly: let him helpe vs with his praiers in this our fraile and mortall flesh, as in a darke and gloomie cloud, to the end that by the grace of God we may follow him, &c. This is a wish and not a set praier or purposed inuocation: on the contrarie, after hauing discoursed vppon the question: Whether the Martyrs doe intermeddle in humane affaires, Idem de cura pro mort. a∣gend. 10. & 13 and if they ap∣peare in dreames and visions, &c. and the same argued and disputed euerie manner of way, he protesteth that, The thing passeth his vnderstanding, that he is not able to reach so high, &c. And notwithstanding setteth downe his opinion according to the Scrip∣tures: Let euerie man (saith he) take that which I shall say, as it pleaseth him, if the soules of the dead should be found dealers in the affaires of them that are liuing, my good mother would not leaue me or forsake me any one night: but certainly that which the holy Psalme doth sound out so shrilly is true: My father and my mother forsooke me. And if our parents haue no care ouer vs: what other amongst the dead, are there that either know what wee doe, or what we suffer? Esay saith, Thou art our father, for Abraham hath not knowne vs, Jsraell is ignorant of vs. If
then these great Patriarkes were ignorant of that which befell this people, sprung and risen out of their loynes, how shall the dead haue any dealing in the affaires of the liuing to helpe and fur∣ther them? And how shall wee say, that it was prouided that such as are departed out of this world, 2. King. 22. 2. Paralip. 32. before that the euils which followed their transgressions, (he speaketh of Iosias,) should fall, to the end that they might not be grieued at the sight thereof? And the conclusion is: The spirits therefore of the deceased are in a place, where they see not what is done, or what acci∣dents fall out in the life of man. August. de cu∣ra pro mort. c. 13.14.15.16. And vpon the obiection of the wicked rich man, He had as much care and consideration of the liuing, as we haue of the dead: we know not what the dead doe, neither did hee regarde whether the liuing did sinke or swimme. Now if you take a∣way this knowledge from the dead, what shall become of the praiers made vnto them by the liuing? In the meane time, Miracles at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs. the common people say, wee see miracles at the graues of the Martyrs. But, to the end that they might not conclude or gather therevpon any in∣uocation or praying vnto them, as holding such a good fauour to come from them, he leadeth them to the consideration of other causes. Jt is God (saith hee) that dooth this thing by himselfe, in this wonderfull manner, so that, although he be eternall, yet it is hee that worketh these temporall things: and hee bringeth them to passe either by his Ministers, or else, the same which he doth by his Ministers, he effecteth likewise somtime by the spirits of his Mar∣tyrs, as though they were done by men still dwelling in their bodies: or else hee bringeth all these things to passe by his Angels, the Martyrs obtaining by earnest sute that the same may be done, though they bee no Actors in the same: or finally by some incomprehensible manner, past the reach of mortall men, but yet such as may vndoubtedly confirme vs in the resurrection vnto eternall life. Who seeth not in the reckoning vp of o diuers causes, that he would pull them from one; and in that hee concludeth that the cause is incomprehensible, that hee would breake off both their manner of reasoning, and the consequences which they gather thereon? But in the Maxim which hee setteth downe in an other place, that he would draw them from the Martyrs vnto God, August. de Ci∣uit. Dei, l. 10. c. 12. when he saith: That all the mi∣racles which are done, whether it be by Angels, or any other manner, doe not recommend vnto vs any other Religion, deuotion or worship then that of the one onely God, in whome alone consisteth the blessed and eternall life. But to what ende and wherefore then was it that they praied and worshipped, (which they cal also by the name of sacrificing, Ad memorias Martyrū, at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs? Verily we haue said, that before that Christians had Churches, and du∣ring the times of the persecutions of the Church, they met with one consent in their burying places, for the cherishing of their zeale, by the example of the Martyrs: and this custome was still retained for a long time after. But was that which they called sacrificing to the Martyrs, the action of inuocation, or praying vnto them? God for∣bid. Idem de Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 10. We build saith S. Augustine, no Churches vnto our Martyrs, as vnto Gods, but for me∣morials, as vnto men that are dead, whose soules liue with God. Neither doe we prepare any Al∣tars, to sacrifice vpon, vnto our Martyrs: but we offer a sacrifice, vnto the one onely God, both our God and the God of the Martyrs, in which sacrifice the Martyrs are named in order, (for the number is read, ex diptychis) as men of God, which haue ouercome the world in confessing of him, but they are not praied vnto by the Minister which saith seruice: for hee sacrificeth to God and not to them, notwithstanding that hee doe it, In memoria corum, (non in memoriam) in the place of their Graues or Sepulchers, and not for their Sepulcher or Graue. Where it is to be no∣ted, that he plainely opposeth vnto their particular deuotions, Precem Canonicam, the forme of praier vsed in the Church. An euident testimonie, that in the seruice of his time, the Commemoration of the Saints, had not as yet proceeded vnto inuocation: and by consequent ought to cause vs to suspect a place alleadged of our Aduersaries, out of Cyrill the Bishop of Ierusalem his instructions concerning the interpretation of mysteries, Gesner. in Bib lioth. August. de Ci∣uit. Dei l. 8. c. 27. wherin are these words: When we offer the sacrifice, we make mention of the Saints which are deceased before vs, to the end that God by their praiers may receiue our praiers, &c. And indeed these bookes are found in Greeke, written by hand, in some Libraries, vn∣der the name of one Iohn, who liued not till many yeares after. In an other place
Saint Augustine: Wee honour the memortes of the Martyrs, as well to bee thankefull to the true God, in these solemne Assemblies, for their victories, as for to bee exhorted thereby, by the renuing of their memories, to imitate them in praying vnto the same God for our aide and succour. And by this meanes, ad Sepulchrum aut memoriam Petri supplicare, Idem Ep. 42. is not to praie vnto Saint Peter, but to praie vnto God, in remembring our selues of the place, of the Martyrdome of Peter, and that it would please him to giue vs the like constancle, that hee gaue vnto his Apostle Peter. And this is the cause, why in the time of Saint Augustine, in the third Councell of Carthage, and in the Mile∣uitaine there were Canons made of purpose, forbidding that any thing should bee rashly chaunged in the praiers of the Church: Concil. Car∣thag. 3. c. 23. but obserue and marke notwithstan∣ding what followed. The former saith: When a man is at the Altar, let his praier be direct∣ed euermore vnto the father: and to whatsoeuer praiers a man betaketh himselfe, let him not vse them, before he haue first conferred, with the best instructed of his brethren. The latter: Concil Mile∣uit c. 12. That no praiers, petitions, or Masses, (that is to say Collects) Prefaces or recommendations, bee made in the Church, except they haue beene approued in the Councell, for feare (saith it) that there bee mixt something amongst them, that is contrarie to the soundnesse of faith, either by ignoraunce, or else by vnaduisednesse. And S. Augustine by name did sit in this Councell. August. Ep. 43.44. The Gentiles obiected vnto the Christians, and a certaine man named Madauren∣sis vnto S. Augustine: And well, VVhat doe you lesse then we? Wee call vppon the powers of God vnder many names; we make our supplications vnto them after diuers sorts: Piis precibus a∣doramus, We adore and worship them by our holy praiers, (for it is to bee noted, that inuo∣cation alwaies in the old writers is taken for a part of Adoration: And wherein are the Christians behind the Pagans, when in stead of Iupiter, Iuno, Minerua and Ʋenus, habent & colunt, they haue and worship the Martyrs of Africke, as Mygdor, Sananes, Naupsion, and Lucitas, &c. But doth S. Augustine confesse it? On the contrarie, Nullum eoli mortuorum. how doth he take it in the matter of honour? Be it knowne vnto you (saith he) that no Christian Catholike doth worship or adore any of the dead: that nothing is worshipped with the worship of the Deitie, that hath beene created of God, but the onely God, that hath created all things. To Faustus the Manichee in like manner: You haue (said he) chaunged the Idols into Martyrs, Quos vo∣tis similibus colitis: which you worship with like vowes. Where the word of Vowes is taken as in the Greeke, for Praiers. And the Gentiles knewe well inough to say, that they did not worship their Idols as Gods, but as mediatours vnto God. Nay, saith he: We honour the Martyrs, with the honour of loue and fellowship, August. contr. Faust. l. 20. c. 22. as we shall doe to the people that are good and vertuous here in this world; saue that we performe that we doe to them with greater de∣uotion, as being alreadie become conquerours. But with that manner of worship, which is called , it is not for any to be worshipped, but the one onely God: and because that oblations and Sacrifices belong vnto him alone, we teach that neither they nor any other such thing can bee gi∣uen to Martyr or Angell. Let our Aduersaries, who are continually saying of Masses, their pretended sacrificings of the Sonne of God, in honour of the Saints and An∣gels, wash their hands of this place. Let them answere vs also how they may pray vn∣to them; seing that they cannot sacrifice vnto them: and that because that praiers are the sacrifices of Christians, as wee haue shewed at large both by the Scriptures, as al∣so by all the old Fathers: and themselues cannot denie it. Idem de Vera religione. But how much better should they doe if they would conclude with S. Augustine: Non sit nobis Religio, cultus mortuorum: Let vs not make a Religion of the worshipping of the dead. The honour that is to be giuen to them, consisteth in imitating of them, and not in a deuout adoring of them. If they liued godly, they doe nothing affect any such honour, but their desire is, that wee should honour the one onely God: and so doe likewise the Angels. Now it is sufficiently apparant by that which goeth before, what S. Augustine his opinion was concerning this Article: and we need not doubt, but that if he had had but a little the vpper hand and aduantage against the streame of the time, hee would haue made it seene. In the meane time as false doctrin cannot stand but by falsehood, Serm. 2. de Annunt. & Assumpt. our Aduersaries haue mingled with Saint Augustine, certaine Homelies of Fulberts, Bishop of Charters, who liued not till almost sixe hundred yeares after S. Augustine,
wherein hee saith: Sancta Maria, succurre miseris, &c. Sentiant omnes tuum leuamen, &c. The Chanon Garet hath dealt more faithfully, for hee alleadgeth them vnder the name of Fulbert. And after the same manner they alleadge the bookes of Meditati∣ons, which they know likewise not to bee his, &c. But S. Augustine did neuer thinke to winne heauen by any other meanes, then the merite of the onely Christ: for his Maxim is vniuersall: August. ad Hieronym. de natura & origi. animarum. Idem in quaest. veter. & Nou. test. q 73. That there is not any one soule, in all mankind (thus hee writ vnto S. Ierome) for the deliuerance whereof, the Mediator of God and men, Iesus Christ the man, is not requisite and necessarie. Not so much as the Virgine Marie excepted: seeing that he saith after many of the fathers going before: That the Virgine, in whome was wrought the my∣sterie of the incarnation of Christ, did doubt as much in the death of our Sauiour Christ, as shee was confirmed by his resurrection. What doe we get by this discourse? Verily that vnto the time of S. Chrysostome and S. Augustine, that is to say, neere hand fine hundred yeares after the death of our Lord, there was no Inuocation of Saints in the Christian Church, nor any mention of the same in the seruice of the Church: that it was practised onely by the particular deuotions of some few, which they had learned for the most part out of the Schoole of the Gentiles, and that there were great personages at those times, that laboured to represse them, by the opposing and setting of the pure doctrine against them, as wee haue seene by their disputations. And if that they did speake so, at such time as those myracles, which it pleased God to worke for the confirmation of the faith, and the approuing of his Martyrs, were most fresh and new, what would they haue said of that which we see at this day, when wee pray not vnto God, as then, in the burying places of the Martyrs; but vnto the Martyrs themselues: yea and to all the sorts of pre∣tended Saints; both directly, & as the authors of good things, and without any men∣tion made of God, and in their images? And whereas they scrape together here and there some places, that seeme to make for them, some of them being true, but ill tran∣slated, some manifestly fained and deuised; and some drawne from Rhetoricke, to make proofes and reasons in Diuinitie, what other thing may they seeme to be here∣by, but Spiders, which out of most wholesome hearbs doe sucke poyson, whereas the Bees doe gather sweetnesse out of the most bitter? And here withall let vs not forget to obserue and note, that at this time, and ma∣nie ages after, it was indifferent in the Church: whether the faithfull departing out of this world, were by and by gathered vnto God, and inioyed his presence: or else, that they continued expecting the day of the resurrection, in the bosome of Abraham in a place of most blessed rest, from thence to bee receiued into heauen all together. Which is more, Ireneus, Iustine, Tertullian, Origen, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Chrysostome, Bernard. Serm. 4. in sest. om∣nium Sanct. Idem Serm. 3. Theodoret, &c. yea Saint Barnard no lesse then all the rest, doe incline to belieue rather, that they are reserued vnto the resurrection, without the inioying of the presence of God. Now the case so standeth, that the Inuocation of Saints, is grounded vpon intercession; and their intercession vpon the sight and pre∣sence of God, according to our Aduersaries their owne doctrine. Whereupon it fol∣loweth, that the Inuocation of Saints could not haue any ground to grow vpon in the Church all this time; neither yet shall hereafter in any sure or certaine sort, according to Saint Barnard his iudgement, who liued not aboue three hundred yeares since: seeing he stood more vppon this opinion then any other; the Inuocation of Saints beeing such as could not match with this doctrine.
CHAP. XV. Of the growth and proceeding of the corruption of Inuocation, both in the Greeke and La∣tine Churches. NOw when these great lights of the Church, S. Ierome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostome, Epiphanius and such like were put out, there is no cause why we should maruaile, if the Prince of darknesse, The procee∣ding of the a∣buse in the Greeke church did thriue & prosper mightily in a short time, as also by the assistance of the ignorance, which was brought into Europe at such time as the barbarous nations did o∣uerrunne and swarme in the same. In the East Church they had beene drencht with the Apostrophes of Basill, Nazianzene, Ephrem and others: but the Inuocation of Saints was not yet entred into their seruice, onely they had receiued the Commemo∣ration of them, the prints and footesteps whereof remaine to be seene in these words: In Liturg. Ia∣cobo, Basilio, Chrysost. at∣tribut. In calling to our minds the holy Virgine, Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, &c. We re∣commend them and our selues and our whole life, vnto God, &c. Speeches so farre from bea∣ring any inuocating of them, as that they comprehend and include them in the same recommendation, as also in the same worke of the grace of God, with our selues, fol∣lowing that opinion which they had currant amongst them, that they were not as yet receiued into perfect blisse. Likewise we haue a Church rule in S. Basill, Basil. in asce∣ti. c. 40. free from the fierie heate of his boyling Rehetoricke: When (saith he) the Christians come to the Sepul∣chers of the Martyrs, or into the adioyning places, it must be looked vnto, that it bee to no other end, but to pray, Idem hom. 19 and to bee stirred vp to the imitating of their constancie by the recording and calling of them to mind. For (saith he in an other place) by the calling to mind of their good deedes, there ariseth profit vnto vs, as of the vsing of an excellent parfume, a good smel. Anno. 500. Niceph. l. 15. c 18. But now one Petrus Gnapheus Bishop of Antioch, ordaineth, that in all publike praiers in his Church, (and note that his Patriarchall prerogatiue extended verie farre) the inuoca∣ting of the Virgine Marie should bee vsed. And this Peter was a most pernicious here∣ticke, condemned in the fift generall Councell held at Constantinople, for the here∣sie of the Theopaschites, whereof hee was the Author, teaching that God himselfe, euen as hee was God, was crucified, and did suffer vppon the Crosse. The mischiefe, whose nature is neuer to bee idle, went forward with speed: The second Councell of Nice, about the yeare eight hundred, establishing the worshipping of Images, ordai∣ned the Inuocation of Saints. And it is likewise much about the same time, that Eua∣grius the Monke, brought in the King of Persia, praying vnto Saint Sergius in these words: That he and Syra his loue did hope in his power and belieue in him. Damascen about the yeare eight hundred, praieth himselfe vnto the Virgine Marie: I shall (saith he) be saued by hoping in thee: and hauing thee for my defence, J will not feare any thing: In thy Al∣mightie helpe, I shall put mine enemies to flight: thou art the saluation of mankind, open vs the doore of mercie, &c. And thus the puritie and sinceritie of Religion, was carried awaie downe the water, by the streame of superstition, there being neuer any other Epipha∣nius or Chrysostome to set his shoulder to, for the supporting of the same. And yet notwithstanding in the inquisitions of Emericke, he quoteth amongst the errours of the Grecians which they hold: That we must not pray vnto the Saints, neither yet vnto the Virgine Marie, but one onely Christ the mediator: That to offer oblations vnto them, is to sacri∣fice vnto the diuell, &c. Which he shuld haue said of certaine nations of the East church, whether this abuse was not as yet come. But in the West Church according to the speciall priuiledge thereof, The manner of the growth of this abuse in the Latine Church. Cyrill. l. 6. contr. Iul. it grew yet worse: for to the Rhetoricke of vaine declaimors, was ioyned the loose licentious∣nesse of Poets. One Prudentius an elegant Poet, but an ill Diuine applieth to the Saints, that which prophane nations had wont to applie to their Gods, following the saying of Cyrill, Patriarke of Alexandria: That this yearely setting foorth of the
Martyrs their praises, Theodoret. l. 8. de Martyr Concil. Aftic. c. 28. was after the manner of that which the Grecians had ordained for them, which were dead in the battaile of Marathon. As also Theodoret, and the Councell of Afrike cease not to lay open and to shew, that all their solemnities which they obser∣ued therein, did spring from Paganisme. He saith therefore of the Virgine Marie: Ser∣uat salutem virgo Quiritium; Shee continueth and conserueth the safetie of the Romanes and of the Saints. Poscunt, litantur, iudicant; They are required, sacrificed vnto, and made acquain∣ted with the euils that haunt and hang about men, and no man returneth frustrate of his ex∣pectation, &c. Pontius Paulinus in like manner, speaking of Saint Faelix, Petat omne, quod audet: Let him aske by so good an Aduocate, whatsoeuer he dare: by his good merites, hee exceedeth and goeth farre beyond our misdeedes, &c. And marke the mans good Diuinitie: That the Epistles of Saint Paul applied to diseases, doe heale them. Fortunatus speaking of Saint Martin: Dulcis adorande & mihi pectore, voce colende, whome I must worship, whome I must honour, both with heart and voice. Againe, Inter me & Dominum, Mediator ad∣esto benigne: Hieronym. ad Ripa, Pres bit. Idem contr. Vigil. Be thou a Mediatour betwixt God and me. Directly against Saint Ierome: That we must not colere, neque adorare, Worship nor adore the Cherubins, nor Seraphins, An∣gels, Archangels, nor any name that is named, least we should worship the creature and not the Creator. And what sottish and sencelesse fellow is this, saith hee likewise against Vigi∣lantius, Which neuer hath worshipped the Martyrs, nor any of their relickes, &c. And what haue they left now either for God or Iesus Christ? And who seeth not that they plai∣ed (if we may so speake) the opinions of the common people in verse? And what may we thinke that Epiphanius, Chrysostome, and Saint Augustine, would haue iudged hereof? &c. The Monkes come after and turne the same into prose, namely, Maxi∣mus, Gregor. Magn. l. 12. Ep. 22. Leo, Euthymius, Fulgentius, and Gregorie, and that so farre as to say: We hope in God his power and might, and in the helpe of Saint Peter, &c. And yet notwithstanding there was not any thing of all this, that was practised otherwise then in priuate pray∣ers, and this may appeare to bee true, by the eldest Collects gathered out of the most auncient Liturgies, in these words: Graunt vs grace to be inflamed with the examples of such and such Saints, in such sort as our hearts are reioyced and delighted with their vertues, to vtter their Faith with our tongues, to expresse their liues in our manners, and to profit in the example of their constaneie, &c. Speaking of the Martyrs and Saints in generall: parti∣cularly in the remembrance of Saint Laurence: As thou hast giuen vnto him, to ouercome the flames of the torments, so giue vnto vs to ouercome the heate of our vices. Of Saint Steuen, Let vs learne to loue our enemies, as he hath praied for them that persecuted him. Of S. Iohn Baptist: As thou makest his birth day honourable vnto vs, so graunt vnto thy people, the grace of spirituall ioyes, and direct the spirites of all thy faithfull seruants into, and in the way of eter∣nall life, by thy Christ. Of the Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul: Graunt to thy Church to follow in all things their instructions, by whose ministerie it hath taken his beginning, by Iesus Christ our Lord, &c. All them being praiers, directed to God the Father by his Sonne, tending to the obtaining of grace to imitate and follow them: not any one of them directed vnto them, nor from them, not any one of them for to attaine to any grace, by their grace. But now behold commeth Gregorie to the Bishoppricke of the See of Rome, Gregorie ta∣keth them out of priuate pra∣yers, and min∣gleth them a∣mongst the publike. Gregorie chan¦geth Comme∣moration into Inuocation. who casteth all the formes of the seruice vsed in the Church into new moulds, as the pub∣like praiers, the Letanies, yea and the Masse also. He findeth the people all readie tilled & husbanded fit for the receiuing of such seed; throughly prepared by their customes taken from Paganisme, and by the instructing of the Monkes, to approue this change and alteration. He then turned the Commemoration of the Saints in the Masse, into Inuocation, and put by name into the Letanie, Sancta Maria ora pro nobis, Saint Marie pray for vs: he ordained and caused the Masse to bee celebrated vpon the bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul, and finally openeth the Sluce to all manner of superstitions, which therupon flowed in at once, and that with a ful streame: whereas the Fathers that were before him, had taken great paines to turne them away and keepe them backe. This before deliuered, appeareth true, by the Liturgies which they alleadge themselues: Of S. Iames, where the Priest confesseth himselfe to none but God, and
craucth pardon of him by his Sonne. Of S. Clement, wherein one onely God is pray∣ed vnto, by one onely Iesus Christ, without any mention at all made therein, either of praying to the Virgine Marie, or to the Saints. Of that which was vnder S. Augu∣stine, by the allegation which he made himselfe, that the Martyrs are mentioned ther∣in, but not praied vnto: and that of S. Ambrose, could not be any other at that time, seeing hee was before S. Augustine, August. de Ci∣uit. l. 22. c. 10. and thereby likewise it appeareth that it was cor∣rupted afterward. Likewise, he that shal well consider the Communicants of the Romane Liturgie, will confesse that the clause which is in the ende, Quorum meritis & precibus concedas, Vnto whose praiers may it please thee to graunt, &c. is a praier translated thither, not hauing beene from the beginning belonging thereunto. For hauing said: In com∣municating and worshipping the memoriall of the holy Virgine, of such men Saints, and women Saints, &c. it followed that the Priest said some thing, and he cut it off al too short, lea∣uing the sentence imperfect and hanging in suspence, for this cause & consideration, that he might make an end with a praier which he linked thereunto, and it is attribu∣ted by some to Pope Siricius, & by others to Gregory. Of the Letanie, altogether after the like manner: for it was a generall praier, which was made into Articles, for all the necessities of the body of the Church, and of the members therof, yea for the estate of the world, &c. And at the end of euerie Article, the Cleargy and the people were wont to answere, , Lord haue mercy vpon vs; a thing as yet practised in the refor∣med Churches of England. And in al the Liturgies aboue named, all these Articles are craued of one onely God by Iesus Christ. Likewise that of Clement the Pope, Pro su∣perna pace Deum oremus, pro salute animarum nostrarum, pro prosperitate sanctarum ecclesia∣rum, pro clero & populo, pro magistratibus totius mundi, Let vs pray for the peace that is on high, for the saluation of our soules, for the prosperitie of the holy Churches, for the Cleargie, for the Co∣minaltie, for the Princes of the world, &c. And to euery Article that the Deacon pronoun∣ced, the people and the Cleargie answered: Lord haue mercy vpon vs. But for as much as the third Councell of Carthage had said, that all praiers should be directed & made to God; those who had resolued to thrust in the Inuocation of Saints, began indirectly: O Lord, heare vs by the intercession of the Virgin; Lord, doe thou prepare and guide our waies & pathes by the praiers of thy Saints, &c. But Gregorie proceedeth further, euen to a direct praier; Saint Mary, pray for vt, &c. And to the end that this might find a more gracious intertainment & welcome, it was said, that there were some that had heard the Angels in the celebration of a certaine solemne Letanie, crying: Regina coeli laetare; Reioyce thou Queene of heauen, &c. Gregor. l. 12. Comment. in Iob. c. 13. As also to establish this doctrine vpon a more durable and firme foundation, Gregorie laboured to race and blot out as much as hee could that which had gone before. For S. Augustine had said & proued by the Scriptures, that the Saints did not intermeddle with humane affaires. Gregorie to the contrarie; Those that see (saith he) the charitie and tender loue of Almightie God, it is not possible, that they should be ig∣norant of any thing. And this fell about the yeare 600. Towards the yeare 680. the sixt generall Councel was held at Constantinople, wherein was condemned the heresie of the Monothelits. They cite against vs out of this Councell these words: After the wor∣shipping of the one onely God, let men pray vnto the Saints, to become intercessors vnto his Ma∣iestie. The East and West Churches were already become corrupt inough, euen in their being come to that state. But when we bring that Councell against them in an other instance, then they haue learned to say, that there were no Canons made in it, and that those nine which stand in the Tomes of the Councels are fained. Damasc. l. 4. de Oithod. fid. Damascen about the yere 800. mult plied & enlarged this opinion, and that so far as that he taught that we ought to adore & worship the holy Virgin, calling her the Queene of al creatures, and the Saints the friends of God, to the erecting of Churches vnto thē, directly against S. Augustine; & Beda his fellow in time did the same. For how could it be that the Saints should be lesse pried; when as the second Councell of Nice, had ordained at the same time, that their Images shuld be worshiped? But behold at the same time, Claudius, B. The doctrine of Inuocation of Sainth, op∣posed. first of Auxer, & afterward of Turin; (the same with Adalbert the Scot, reestablished the vniuersity of Paris in the time of Charls the great) did oppose himself therunto: Return
hee) you that are so blind vnto the light, Claudius Tau∣rinens. aduers. Theod. Abba. which inlightneth euerie man that commeth into the world, to that light that shineth in darknesse, and so, as that the darknesse cannot comprehend or put it out. What is the meaning of this, though Noe and Daniell, and Iob, were in the midst of you; but to the end, that no man shuld trust either to the merit, or to the intercession of the Saints? Because that if we haue not the faith, the truth and the righteousnesse that they had, we cannot please God. Heare then O you which are so foolish, amongst the people, which runne to Rome, which seeke at Rome the intercession of the Apostle, heare I say, that which S. Augustine hath so often pronounced against you? &c. But Ionas Bishop of Orleance, answered him after his death; neither in deed haue we any part almost of the writings of this Claudius of Tu∣rin, more then is by him alleadged. But so it is, that it was not growne to any worse condition, either with Charles the great, nor with the Emperour Lewes the Gentle, his Son, neither yet with the French Church of his time. A manifest testimonie there∣of appeareth, in that the holding of the contrarie to the Inuocation of Saints was not accompted heresie. Synod. Paris. sub Lothar. And in deed this Synode of Paris which wee haue alleadged here aboue, hauing to proue that Images, Non sunt colendae, ne{que} adorandae, ought not to be wor∣shipped or adored, prooued by the Ancient Fathers, that the Angels and Saints, are not to be worshipped or adored. Now Inuocation is a principal of the true Adoration, of the true worship. In like manner the Letanie was not then come to the point, that it is now, but comprehended and contained more of the calling to remembrance, then of the inuocating of the Saints: For there is a Letanie to bee read in an old booke in the Abbey of Corbee vpon Weser in Germanie, which is of the yere 900. or there about, as it seemeth, by the mention which it maketh of the Emperor Arnulph; and of Pope Ste∣uen, Bauo Abbas Corbiensis, sub Arnulph. apud Krantzium in Metto. l. 2. c. 10 that should bee the seuenth. Wherein the Deacon contenteth himselfe with the naming of the Saints: and the people and the Cleargie in stead of answering, Ora, or Orate pro nobis, that is to say, Pray thou, or Pray yee for vs, doth answere throughout, Exaudi Christe, Heare vs O Christ; O thou the redeemer of the World, help them, &c. For example the Deacon said; Arnulpho regi vita & victoria, God giue life and victorie to Arnulph the king: The people answereth, O Sauiour of the world, aide and assist him. Afterward the Deacon nameth, The holy mother of God, S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, and S. Iohn: The people answereth O Christ heare them, Anno. 1000. &c. In the yeare 1000, wheras it had beene accustomed to denounce their Excommunications in the Church, in the power and authoritie of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, they began to mingle therewithal the Vir∣gine Marie and the Saints. And this is apparant by the Councell of Rhemes, C. 12. By the authoritie (saith he) of the Almightie God, Concil. Rhe∣mens. c. 12. &c. and by the mediation of the Virgine Mary, &c. We Excommunicate, curse & condemn, &c. In Germanie notwithstanding this forme was not as yet receiued; as is to bee seene in that which Barnard Bishop of Halberstat pronounceth against the Emperour Otho, neither yet in the other agends of the same age and time. But afterward, all the Saints were put into it, and so it passeth for the common and ordinarie forme. The absoluing likewise of penitents, by the loosing key as they cal it, Anno. 1100. Anselm. in lib. de excellent. Virg Mar. was conceiued and vttered in these tearmes, to wards the yere 1000. The passion of our Lord Iesus Christ, the merits of the blessed Virgine of S. Peter, of S. Paul, and of all the Saints, and furthermore, whatsoeuer good thou shalt doe, or whatsoeuer ill thou shalt suf∣fer, worke and procure the remission of thy sinnes. About the yeare 1100, Anselme reasoned strongly, in a treatise made of purpose of the excellencie of the Virgine Mary: Christ (saith the Apostle) is the power and wisedome of God, in him are all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge: but Christ is in Mary, therefore all the treasures, &c. are in Marie. And by the same argument may be concluded the verie same of all the faithfull, for hee is said to dwell in the belieuers. In the meane time, it is from hence, that hee gathereth all these goodly consequences: Quòd Domina, quòd Mediatrix, quòd Saluatrix: That shee is the Ladie of heauen and earth, in the right of a mother, Queene of Angels, the repairer of mankind, and by consequent the Mother, as God is the Creator, & by consequent the Father. And it was at this time also that Hermanus Contractus, Conte of Vringhē in Germanie, did make the Salue Regina, which notwithstanding was not receiued into the church of Rome, Anno. 1250. til about 150. years after, in the time of Pope Gregory the ninth.
But would we see in the meane time a memorable example, The Inuoca∣ting of God a∣lone by Iesus Christ, retai∣ned in the cō∣forting of the sicke and neere vnto death. Anselm. in Epist. manu∣script. shewing that these a∣buses came not in all at a blow; how this Inuocation of the Saints insinuated and crept into the Masse, was not as yet growne to the corrupting of that consolation which men had, that were in the extremitie of death, and how God mercifully spa∣ring his people, after all these impieties, reserued and kept vntoucht their consolati∣on in their saluation, by one onely Iesus Christ, to be soundly taught and deliuered vnto them, at the howre of their death? It is found in the Epistles of this Anselme, that there was a forme of comforting the sicke, which I haue thought worthie to bee set downe here euen whole and intire such as it was. Doest thou reioyce and cheare vp thy selfe (saith the Priest to the sicke partie) that thou diest in the faith of Christ? The aunswere, yea. Doest thou confesse that thou hast liued so wickedly as that nothing is due to thy deserts, but euerlasting punishment? A. yea. Art thou hartily sorie and grieued for the same? A. yea. Doest thou belieue that our Lord Jesus Christ died for thee? A. yea. Doest thou giue him thankes for the same? A. yea. Doest thou belieue that thou canst not bee saued but by his death? A. yea. Wherefore then, whiles thou possessest thy soule, repose thy whole saluation in this his only death, put not thy trust and confidence in any other thing, trust and commit thy selfe wholly to this death; couer thy selfe with it onely; with it onely wrap thy selfe all ouer. And if the Lord God would iudge thee, say vnto him, Lord, I set the death of Jesus Christ our Lord, betwixt thee and my demerits: I offer and tender vnto thee his merites, in stead of that which ought to bee in me, and is not. If hee yet further replie vpon thee, saying that he is angrie with thee, say vnto him, Lord, I set the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, betwixt me and thine anger. And this being en∣ded, let the sicke partie say three times; Lord, I commend my spirit into thy hands. Of the same veine is the difference which we obserue betweene the life, Bernard. in paruis Ser. 23. Idem Serm. 15. Psal. 91. & the ex∣treame sicknesse of S. Barnard. He saith verie excellently well sometimes: He that will come, let him come after me; let him come by me, let him come to me. After me saith the Lord, for I am the truth: by me, for I am the way: vnto me, for I am the life, &c. Againe: I will de∣liuer him, because he hath trusted in me: Not (saith hee) in Sentinels or Nightwatches, not in man, not in any Angell; but in me, expecting good from none, but me onely. For preseruation and deliuerance must not onely be of me, but from me. And of the Virgine Marie hee saith: Idem Ep. 174. She hath no need of false and counterfeit honour, being, as shee is in the midst and vpheaped mea∣sure of true and sound honour: It is not to honour her, but to take her honour from her: The feast of the Conception was neuer well instituted, &c. But it is as true that in other places hee helpeth forward and setteth vp this abuse, euen so farre as to say: Thou hast O man a sure accesse to God, where the Mother is before the Sonne, the Sonne before the Father, the Mo∣ther shewing vnto the Sonne, her bosome and her brests, the Sonne shewing to his Father, his fide and his wounds. Vpon the point of death notwithstanding, seeing himselfe drawne be∣fore the iudgement seate of God, and Sathan before him his accuser, he remembreth not any thing but the wounds of the Sonne; hee hath quite forgotten the bosome of the mother. Gothfrid. in vita Berr ard. l. 5. I confesse (saith he) that I am not worthie by my merites to obtaine the kingdome of heauen, but my Lord doth hold it by a double title, both as his inheritance from his Father, and as his purchase, by the price and merite of his death and passion: he will content himselfe with the one, and bestow the other vpon me: And so by vertue of this gift, I giue it to my selfe, I am not confounded. As likewise he hath said verie excellently in an other place: I seeke my salue, in the wounds and stripes of my Lord, my merites in the mercies of my God. The Breuiarie of Premonster And likewise we reade furthermorein the Breuiarie of the order of Premonster, which was instituted in his time, these Latine rimes, in the Liturgie vpon all Saints day. Adiuuent nos corum merita, Quos propria impediunt scelera? Excuset eorum intercessio, Quos propria accusat actio? At tu qui eis tribuisti Caele stis palmam triumphi, Nobis veniam ne deneges peccati.
Shall we (saith hee) be helped by their merits which are hindered by their owne grieuous crimes? Excused by their intercession, who are accused of their owne actions and workes? But thou O Lord, which hast giuen them the ensigne of celestiall triumph, denie not vnto vs the par∣don of our sinnes, The Valesi∣ans opposing themselues. &c. But whiles the abuse in the meane time was master of the plaine and open field, there was raised new forces by the Waldenses and Albigenses, which gaue a sharpe assault, with great heate incountering the same, euen to the drawing of the matter to such a dispute and parle, as required for an indifferent hearing of the same, an assembly of many graue and learned men in an open Councell; and not stay∣ing there, proceeded euen to the filling of a great part of France so far with the fauo∣ring and good liking of their matter, as that til all maner of fraud and force did ioyne and couple it selfe together, they could neuer be perswaded to abandon and banish it out from amongst them; yea which more is, to the giuing of it such deepe roote (as the Histories of that time, as well as the enemies themselues doe witnesse) as that it ouer∣spread and flourished in all the nations of Christendome. Therefore amongst their Articles we reade this for one: That there is but one media∣tor, and that all inuocating and worshipping of men is but Idolatrie. And the foresaid histo∣ries doe further adde, that the doctrine of the Waldenses was no new thing, but such as had continued euer since the time of the Apostles, at the least euer since the time of Pope Syluester the first, that is to say, that the chaunge beeing come by succession of time into the Christian Church, they should haue retained the puritie of the same a∣mongst them. Histor. Vetus de Waldensib. And in deed a certaine booke of this date, saith: That it was for three re∣spects, more daungerous then any other sect: The first, quia diuturnior, because (saith it) it was of longer time, for some are of iudgement, that it hath continued euer since the time of Pope Syl∣uester, some there are likewise that say euer since the time of the Apostles. The second, because it is more generall, Quia generalior, for there is not almost any Countrie or nation, wherin it hath not seated it selfe. The third, because that others by being blasphemous against God, doe make men afraid of them: whereas this hath great apparance, that it proceedeth of pietie, in as much as the fauourers thereof liue iustly before men, doe easily belieue that which concerneth God, and the whole Creed, cleauing fast only to the Church of Rome, &c. And thus spake their enemies al∣so: and this being once said, I would haue to serue without any further repetitions. Now it is not credible, how this abuse holding by open force, the vpper hand of the truth, Lombard. l. 4. d. 55. did in short time become horrible & fearefull. Lombard from hence forth, doth put it downe for a sentence, That the Saints make intercession for vs, and that both by their merits, because they fulfill wherein wee come short: as also by their affection, because they ioyne themselues vnto our vowes. This hitherto had not beene vttered in any sort so hard∣ly to be disgested. And furthermore from henceforth al the Schoolemen doe not on∣ly follow and approue what he hath said: but doe labour to make it to be valewed still at more & more. As Alexander Hales, Bonauenture, Thomas, &c. And their reason is, That Ʋltima reducuntur in Deum per media, That the extreames cannot come to God but by meanes & things of a midle qualitie. The very same reason that the Platonists did alleadge for the intercession of their Gods & Semi-gods. As concerning the question, whether the Saints do know the affaires of men or no, that also they take vpon them to deter∣mine, That they know all things in as perfect sort as the Angels, in the beholding & seing of God. The same that S. Gregorie had said as it were by the way. But what will they doe with S. Barnard, who maintaineth that the Saints are not receiued to inioy the presence of God, vntil the resurrection? And to Pope Iohn the 22. whom W. Occam saith, to haue so resolued him, Thom. Sum. q. 57. art. 5. & 12 art. 8. as also to haue laboured to cause him to sweare therunto at Sorbone. And finally, to S. Thomas who teacheth, That the Angels by naturall knowledge doe not vn∣derstand the mysteries of grace; and that by that which they haue in the seeing of God, they do not know any more then it pleaseth him to reueale vnto them: & that for other matters, they know not either those that are contingent, neither yet the thoughts of harts? Being notwithstanding the ordinarie subiects, according to the doctrine of our aduersaries, both of the inuocati∣on of men, and of the intercession of Angels. But seing they haue brought vs to speak in their tearmes, ab extremo, ad supremum, per media, behold & see the extremities wher∣vnto
they lead vs. Antoninus Archb. of Florence, teacheth: Anton. part. 3. Sum t. 3. & 12. Idem part. 4. t. 15. 1. Ioh. 2. That Saints must be both in∣uocated & adored of all: that all those vpon whom the Ʋirgine Mary casteth her eyes, are neces∣sarily iustified & saued: that Christ is ouer rough, in as much as he is both aduocate & iudge to∣gether: & for that God hath prouided vs of an aduocatesse, in whō there is nothing but mildnes. So that what is said in S. Iohn: If we haue sinned we haue an Aduocate, &c. he turneth it in plaine words to be vnderstood of the Virgin Mary: Heb. 4. and that which the Apostle to the Hebrews saith vnto vs of Christ the high priest, Let vs draw neere vnto the throne of grace, &c. he will haue it to be vnderstood of her: For Marie (saith he) is the throne of Christ, Genes. 2. &c. What shall I say more? The Seraphins (say they) would haue retained Marie as shee ascended vp to heauen: No (saith she) it is not good that man should be alone: (speaking of the eternall sonne, sitting at the right hand of the father) I am giuen vnto him for a help in the worke of redemption by suffering with him: and in the worke of glorification, by making in∣tercession, to the end, that if he should threaten to drowne the world, as in the deluge, I may ap∣peare before him as the rainebow, to the end that hee may remember him of his couenant, &c. And when shall we see an end of these blasphemies? Bernardine in his Mariall goeth yet more boldly to worke, Bernard. in Marial. as if it were to make it worse: God (saith he) said vnto her in her birth; I haue giuen thee for a light vnto the Gentils, to the end that thou mightest be our saluation to the end of the earth, a light for a reuelation vnto the Gentils, &c. The Prophet Esay, or Simeon did they euer dreame of this? Again, All the graces that distill and drop down from the father and the Son vpon vs, are deriued and con∣ueighed by the virgin the Mediatres betwixt God and men: There is no grace commeth from heauen but through her hands: All maner of graces do enter into her, & come forth of her: They are in Christ, Tanquā in capite influente, as in the head which doth instil them: & in Marie, Tanquā in collo transfundente, as in the channel which doth distribute them: she is the Me∣diatresse of saluation, coniunction, iustification, reconciliation, intercession, and communica∣tion; &c. To be briefe, the heauenly father hath giuen her the halfe of his kingdome; as was sig∣nified in the persons of Assuerus and Esther; he hauing retained and kept iustice to himselfe, to bestow and distribute, but leauing his mercie with her to exercise the same: In so much as we may appeale à foro iustitiae Dei, frō the seat of Gods iustice, to the court of the virgin Maries mercy. And what shall wee say then of her Letanies, of her Psalter, and of her howres? Of her howres, wherein she is named, The Queene of mercie, wherein she hath broken the head of the serpent: which was spoken to our first parentes, of the onely Sonne of God; wherein she alone hath rooted all heresies out of the world: where she is called, The repairer and sauiour of mankind: wherein is asked of her generally whatsoeuer can and ought to be asked of the one onely God by Iesus Christ, as vtterly denied vnto all o∣thers: Impetra nobis veniam, applica nobis gratiā, praepara nobis gloriā, the grant of forgiuenes, grace, & glorie, &c. I haue trembled and stood all afraid at the consideration of her Psalter, wherein all that which Dauid hath spoken of God, the Father, the Son, & the holy Ghost, is applied vnto her, & that without any maner of exception, throughout, euen from the beginning vnto the end, changing only Dominū into Domina, the Lord into the Lady. Blessed is the man that loueth Marie, that feareth her, that praiseth her name, that trusteth in her, that hopeth in her, &c. The heauens declare thy glory, the earth is thine, Psal 19.24.31.51.52.53.56, 59.67.71.91.93.94 98.109, 111.131. &c. & the fulnes thereof: thou raignest with God for euer: blessed are they that cherish thee, for thou wilt wash away their sins in thy mercies: haue pittie vpon me O mother of mercy, & according to the tendernes of thy mercies, wash me from all mine iniquities. Thou wicked spirit why boast est thou thy selfe? bow downe thy neck vnder Maries feet: O Lady breake him to peeces with the po∣wer of thy foot: Cast him downe into the bottomles pit by thy might: saue me for thy names sake, & deliuer me frō mine vnrighteousnes: haue pittie vpon me for my hart is prepared to receiue thy will: Thou hast cast vs off O Lord for our sins, & hast had pittie on vs again for the virgin Ma∣ries sake. Let Mary arise & al her enemies shalbe scattered: Lord giue thy iudgement vnto thy Sonne, and thy mercy vnto the Queene his mother. O Ladie saluation and life are in thy hand, &c. O how kind and good is God vnto those that worship his mother. God is the God of ven∣geance, but thou art the Queene of mercie: Come and let vs worship the Ladie: let vs praise the virgin that hath saued vs, let vs worship her, and let vs confesse our sinnes vnto her, &c. The Lordraigneth, Marie sitteth vpon the Cherubins on his right hand. He that dwelleth vnder her
wing, is vnder a good protection, &c. The Lord hath said vnto my Ladie: Sit mother at my right hand, thou hast delighted in goodnes and holinesse, and therefore thou shalt raigne with mee. Remember Dauid O Ladie, and all those that call vppon thy name. Praise the Lorde for he is good, and his mercie is distributed by Marie, &c. And when should I haue done, seeing there are not so many wordes in it as blasphemies? They haue corrupted and marred after the same manner the songs of the Prophets, of Simeon, of the holy vir∣gine and the songs also that are attributed vnto Athanasius, and S. Ambrose, which are called by their first wordes, Quicun{que} and Te 'Deum. My heart is reioyced in my La∣die, because that he that is mightie, hath done great thinges for me, by Marie his mother, &c. My soule magnifieth my Ladie, &c. Let now O Lord the seruant of Marie depart in peace, because mine eies haue seene the saluation of Marie, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people, a light to be reuealed vnto the Gentiles, &c. Whosoeuer will be saued, let him know before all things, that which he must firmelie belieue of Marie. Te matrem Dei laudamus, We praise thee O mother of God, Doctrix. mother of the diuine Maiestie, Ladie of Angels, the Spouse & mother of the eternall king, the promised by the Patriarkes, the truth of the Prophetes, the tea∣cher of the Apostles, the mistresse of the Euangelistes, the Ladie of the world, the Queene of hea∣uen, and therefore saue thy people, &c. And as concerning the Letanie made of purpose for her; she is therein praied vnto by all these names and many other: so farre as that she is therein called, The true saluation, and the true blessednesse, the length of charitie, the breadth of pietie, vnto whom the Angels obey: she is praied vnto to giue all blessings, as God: as also to preserue the Church, and Christian people. And in these wordes, Te rogamus, audi nos, we pray thee to heare vs. Of pardoning sinnes, Propitia esto, parce nobis Domina, bee fauourable and gracious vnto vs, spare and paraon vs O Ladie, &c. Of turning and putting away of euils, whether they concerne punishments, or faults: any manner of sinnes, any manner of afflictions, Prouerb. 8. yea hell it selfe, in these wordes: Libera nos Domina, Deliuer vs our Ladie, &c. Likewise in certaine prose that is sung vnto her, she is summoned to command the Sonne of God, in the authoritie of a mother: O pia paupera, pians scelera, iure matris impera redemptori: Command in the authoritie of a mother the Redeemer. To bee briefe, for an vpheap of all abhomination, they haue attributed vnto the virgine that which the holy Ghost had said of the eternall Son of God, of the eternall wisedome; The Lord hath possessed me in the beginning of his waies, Prouerb. 8. before euer he created any thing, I was ordainea euerlastingly, &c. And it is read in this sence in the Romish Missall, vpon the day of the Natiuitie. Leo 10. in ep. 17. Anno 15 4. And Pope Leo the tenth in his Epistles written by Cardinall Bembo his Secretarie for them, calleth her Deam Goddesse; a title neuer heard of in any of the former ages: thereby to adde vnto all this masse and huge heape this one thing which was wanting, vz. the weathercocks. And these are the goodly doctrines, contained in these goodly bookes, whereof all maner of Couents were full: Marialia, Rosaria, Hortulus animae, Promptuarium discipul. &c. Let vs come vnto the Saintes. Alexander Halez and Bonaduenture haue taught: That they are Mediators of our saluation, that although they be sufficiently rewarded for their merites, and not any more in case to merite: yet for the manifold workes of Supererogation which they haue done, they haue purchased so great a place, as that they haue not onely merited blessednesse and glorie for themselues, but also are able to relieue, and make supplie for others: in such sort, as that they which before were vnworthie, are likewise verie speedily made worthy by their intercession. Now what is it that they haue builded vpon this foundation? Verily, the verie daughter and full representation of all Paganisme: if so be it be not some worse thing. Euerie nation, towne, village, and familie is come to haue his Saint: euerie estate, condi∣tion craft, and diease, is become beholden and bound vnto one or other. Thereby also they are come to the canonizing of their Saintes, imitating therein the Pagans, & by so doing as much as lyeth in them they go about to make Gods of men, & to dei∣fie them, deifie I say, for they are their owne phrases: They canonize them whom they vnderstand to be worshipped and praied vnto. Anton part. 5. Summ. t 12. c. 8 This is the definition that they make of their Saintes. Againe: There belong seuen things to a canonized Saint: The first, to bee publikely
held for a Saint: The second, to be inuocated in the praiers of the Church: The third, to haue Churches and Altars: The fourth, an office and sacrifice in honour of him: The fist, a fest iuall day: The sixt, an image with lightes, in signe of glorie: The seuenth, relikes and shrines. Adde also, that they pray vnto them directly by the Lords prayer it selfe, being directed and framed for God the Father: And yet they say, that this is not idolatrie: That this is nothing els but Doulia, and thus they thinke to pay God with their distinctions. But I could wish them, that they would at the least bethinke themselues and call to mind at the least, that which is said vnto them by their Pope Innocentius, Innocent. l. 5. c. 4. Gulielm. Du∣rand. epist. Mi∣matens. That there are two sortes of worship, Latria and Doulia: the former proper vnto God the Creator: the latter for the creatures: but that to the first do belong Churches, Altars, sacrifices, feastes, and ceremo∣nies, &c. And Durand hath said the same: wherefore by their owne reckning, it must needes be idolatrie. And what shall wee say in the end of their Frauncis and Dominicke, Francis. Anno 1200. in whose per∣sons they haue delighted and pleased themselues to abolish and vtterly extinguish so much as lyeth in them, both the merite and the name of Christ? Barthol. de Pi∣sis l. conformit. Frauncis (say they in their booke of Conformities) is a more worthy person then Iohn Baptist: Iohn was a prea∣cher of repentance; Frauncis both a preacher and an ordainer of the order of Penitents: Iohn a forerunner of Christ; Frauncis both a forerunner, and a standerd bearer: Iohn receiued the word of repentance of Christ; Frauncis both of Christ, and of the Pope: quod est plus; which is more: Iohn his father had reuelation from God by an Angell, concerning him euen what he should be; but of Frauncis it was declared both to his mother and his seruantes by Iesus Christ himselfe what he should be: Iohn was the friend of the bridegroome; but Frauncis like vnto the bridegroome himselfe: Iohn a rare and singular man in sanctimonie, and Frauncis in conformi∣tie: Iohn lifted vp and set amongst the Seraphins; Fol. 39. Frauncis in the same order and manner with Iohn, but set moreouer in the place from which Lucifer was throwne, &c. Againe, hee is better then all the Apostles: for they forsooke nothing for Christs sake, saue some little ship; Fol. 66. but hee left and forsooke all euen to his hosen. The virgine Marie and the other Saintes in heauen go in procession euery one in his order; but this man is lodged within the side of Christ: He commeth forth by his wound with the banner of the crosse in his hand, for to conduct & guide them: This man is a Iesus typicus, a figuratiue Sauior, a crucifixus singularis, a singular crucified man; who in sight hath receiued the verie same wounds that Christ, & suffered the same pains: This is he that is via vitae, the way of life: abusing that which our Lord said of himselfe: I am the way, the truth and the life. This man is the image of Christ, as Christ is the image of his Father, &c. And what more? Christus orauit, Franciscus exorauit, Christ did but pray, but Frauncis prated and obtained. Happie is he that dieth in Domino, in Christ: yea he that di∣eth (say they) in the habite of S. Frauncis, yea if he haue but his hand in the sleene of it, he is happie. Baptisme doth wash away originall sinne: the hood of S. Frauncis much more: as oft as you shall resolue to continue the wearing of it, it is worth as much vnto you as a new baptizing: yea rather it is a new abolishment, not of original sin onely, but of all manner of actuall sinnes. In a word we haue seene written ouer the gates of the gray friers of Bloys: Quaeretur pec∣catum illius, & non inuenietur; his sinnes shall be sought for, but they shall not bee found. The same that the Apostle hath said of one onely Christ: and that the Prophete hath said of the abolishment of sinnes in his blood. Neither can they excuse these matters, in saying that they are but some particular mans opinions, and not approued of the whole Church of Rome: For the Popes, Gregorie the ninth, Alexander the fourth, and Nicolas the third, doe ordaine to bee belieued of all the faithfull, vpon paine of being condemned as heretickes, the scars and printes of S. Frauncis. And Pope Be∣nedict the twelft ordained that the day whereupon he receiued them, should be kept holy. And Alexander the fourth in particular, Anton Archi∣ep. tit. 24. S. 10 Math. Paris Monach. Al∣banens. in hist. Anglic. in Henric. 3. doth take into the protection of the Church of Rome and his, Montem Aluerniae, the mountaine wherein this thing was said to be done. And here it is not to be forgotten, that Bonauenture saith, that when he was dead, these scarres and printes were seene and acknowledged by many, in so much as that some of them put nailes into them. And Mathias Paris on the contrary, a Monke that liued at the time of his death, of a longer standing and more auncient by fortie
yeares then Bonauenture writeth in his Chronicle, that there was not any manner of print to be seene after his death. And yet the man was not to bee suspected for the matter, Dominick. for he speaketh as superstitiously as any of the rest. And haue they said any lesse of Dominick? Nay rather it belonged to them to incroach dayly, & enter deeper into blasphemy. And so much the more, because of the emulation raised betwixt these two orders; & because that Dominick, who was the formost in time, seemed to come last in reputation & account, Anton. Archi∣cp. in tit. 23. c. 11. the Archb. Antonine therefore that was of this order, peiseth his miracles, not against those of S. Frauncis, but against the miracles of our Lord, & giueth them the start & prerogatiue both for number, & for greatnes. Christ (saith he) raised but three from death at all; Dominick at Rome onely raised as many; and 40. neere to Tholosa, which were drowned on horsebacke in the riuer Garona, besides infinite others. Christ after his resurrection went in to his disciples the dores being shut: Dominick whilet yet he bare about this mortall bodie, which is much more, went into the temple, the dores being fast. Now by the way let vs note, that this was by their owne speech, either by the proprie∣tie of a spirituall and glorified bodie, or els by an Almightie power. And thus he go∣eth through all the miracles of our Lord, alwaies preferring and giuing S. Dominick the vpper hand. To be short, Christ said after his death: All power is giuen to me in hea∣uen and in earth: and verily (saith he) this power was not in a small measure communicated & bestowed vpon Dominicke ouer all things in heauen, earth or hell, and that euen in this life: for he had Angels to attend vpō and serue him, the elements obaied him, and the deuils trembled vn∣der him. And this he laieth downe in many examples. He addeth further, that at Rome there were two images, the one of S. Paul, and the other of S. Dominick: & that at the feet of the former was written: Per istum itur ad Christum; by this men go to Christ: and at the feet of the latter: Facilius itur per istum, but more easily and readily by this man, that is to say, by Dominicke. That is, saith Antonine, Because that the doctrine of Paul and the Apostles induced and persuaded men to belieue: but Dominicks to obserue and keep the councels, Which is a shorter course and cut. And thus you may already see, that he was more then S. Paul and all the Apostles. But what shall we say now of that which followeth? Quia (saith he) Domino nostro similis est, Dominicus aptissimé denominatus est, verie fitlie and rightly was he called Dominicke, because he was like Domino, to our Lord. And he was pos∣sessiuelie in possession, that which our Lord was authoritatiuely in authoritie: for the Lord said, I am the light of the world; and the Church singeth of Dominick, you are the light of the world. The Prophets beare witnesse Domino, vnto the Lord, and to Dominicke also. Zacharie 11. I haue chosen me two roddes; the one I haue called Decorem, beautie; that is to say, the order of Saint Dominicke: the other Funiculum, a corde or band, that is the order of the Gray fri∣ers: (thus they abuse the scripture) Dominus, that is to say, our Lord, was borne on the bare earth, but the virgine for feare of cold laid him in a manger: Dominicus from his swa∣thing clothes, abhorring the pamperinges and tender delightes of the worlde, was found often∣times by his nurse, lying all naked vpon the bare earth. For our Lord there appeared a starre in beauen, in token that he did lighten the whole world: In the forehead likewise of Dominicke, as he was baptised the Godmother espied a star, signifying a new light to be borne into the world, &c. The praier of our Lord was euer more heard when he would: for in the garden, that which he asked of a fleshlie desire hee would not obtaine according to reason: But Dominick neuer de∣manded any thing of God which he did not whollie enioy according to his owne desire. Dominus that is, our Lord loued vs, and washed vs from our sinnes in his blood: Dominicke through a perfection of charitie, tooke euerie daie three disciplines or corrections from his owne hand, not with a corde, but with an iron chaine, euen to the causing of his blood to runne downe: One for his faults, though they were verie small; another for those that were in Purgatorie; and the third for them that liued here in the world, &c. And thus this Archbishop Antonine draweth this comparison through all the parts of the life of our Lord. In a word our Lord be∣ing to depart out of this world, promiseth the Comforter vnto his disciples: And Do∣minick saith vnto his; Be not grieued, for I wil do you more good in the place whither I go, then I haue done here: for there you haue me a better aduocate then any other that you can haue there, &c. And what shall now become of that which S. Iohn saith vnto vs: If we haue sinned,
we haue an aduocate euen Iesus the righteous? &c. And notwithstanding these blasphe∣mies are authorized by the Church of Rome, for the good establishment that they haue procured vnto the Popes their authoritie: for Gregorie the ninth, canonized Dominicke in the yeare 1223. & ordained a festiual day to be kept vnto him, authori∣zed also his rule and order, and bestowed priuiledges vppon the same: (Now hee that writ these thinges was an Archbishop of Plorence, high accounted of amongst our aduersaries. Albert. Krant. in hist. Saxon. l. 9. c. 7. Abb. Trithem. in Chronic. Hirsaughtiens. But in the meane time they are warie enough not to tell vs any thing amongst the rest of their miracles, of that which Krantzius reporteth vnto vs: That one Bernard a Iacobine, Confessor and Chaplen to the Emperour Henrie the 7. did poison him in the host. Whereupon saith Trithemius the Abbot, Pope Clement the fift inioyned them for a marke of reproch and ignominie, that the Priests of their or∣der from thence forward should neuer receiue or deliuer the communion but with the left hand. An example for the Popes of these times to ordaine, by the same reason that they should as yet be restrained from the vse of their right hand, in detestation of the murther committed by frier Clement a Iacobine, vpon the person of K. Henry the third. In a word, to come to our purpose.) Bullae fraterni∣tatum ordinis Francise. & Dominic. To euerie one that would ioyne them∣selues, not with the Couent, but to be of the fraternitie onely of S. Francis or S. Do∣minicke, &c. For to merite the kingdome of heauen, for to be able to ransome & redeeme their owne soules, and the soulet of their friends: (for these are the expresse tearmes of the Bull:) There are Bulles of fraternitie giuen vnto the Prouinces, by which they are made ca∣pable, as well in life as in death of the merites of the whole Couent, and of all the fri∣ers in the prouince, purchased by their Masses, praiers, sermons, fastinges, contem∣plations, vigiles, abstinences, Cloister disciplines, deuotions, singinges, lessons, la∣bours, &c. About this time also there was in England one Thomas Becket, who was slaine, for hauing traiterously attempted to haue withdrawne the Cleargie from their obedience vnto the king. It was concluded by the full Colledge of Sorbone at Paris, that he was worthie of eternall death: the Cleargie notwithstanding caused him to be canonized, by Alexander the third. And in derision of the blood of Christ, he was there praied vnto in these words: Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te impendit, Fac nos Christe scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. That by the grace & fauour purchased by the blood of Thomas, hee would make vs ascend whither Thomas is ascended, &c. & this was about the yere 1220. And who can then but be ashamed for their sakes, for that as yet in the time of so great light they are not ashamed themselues? verily it is not to be concealed or hidden: that there haue been some that might seeme to haue blusht in their souls, as being able to haue taught bet∣ter things, if they durst. Alex. Halez. q. 91. Alexander Halez & Bonauenture likewise after all their wan∣drings, turne backe againe to our Maxims. Alexander: We must not inuocate or adore any but one God onely, &c. The Saints ought rather to be reckned, ex parte orantiū, quàm illius qui oratur, as assisting our praiers by their owne, & not to be praied vnto themselues. Bonauent. in l. 3. Sentent. Anno 1360. Bonauē∣ture likewise, We must be warie in our large setting forth, and commending of the excellency of the mother, that is of the holy virgin; least we impaire and diminish the glorie of the Son: and by so doing prouoke her to anger, seeing she delighteth more to haue her son praised and magnified then her self, she being but a creature, and he the creator. And whereas there were some that replied vpon him, that the honor of the mother returned to the honor of the Son; But therefore (saith he) we ought not to giue vnto the mother all that which is due vnto the son, &c. And this was much spoken of both in his time, & in the Couent of S. Francis. Wicklif. apud Thom. Wal∣dens tom. 3. tit. 12. c. 121. & 124. Iohn Wicklife shortly after went further: for amongst many abuses of the Church of Rome, he condemned this openly by the scriptures, and maintained the same with the peril of his life, against all those of the facultie of diuinity in England. His wordes are: This is and seemeth to be a sottishnesse, to leaue the fountaine which is more ready to our handes, to seeke the troubled brookes, and those further from vs, &c. Againe: Who would make I know not what Scurram, knaue (that is the Latine of the time) his Mediator, when hee may freely speake vnto the King? And yet notwithstanding his thus writing
he ceast not to be verie well intreated of king Edward the third, and after some small time of his liuing an exile in Bohemia, to die an old man in his owne house, leauing behind him a number of disciples of euerie estate & condition in England, Anno 1416. in whom his doctrine liued after him, vntill such time as things grew to that extremitie where∣in they now stand. We may say the same of Iohn Hus, and Ierome of Prage, put to death contrary to the promise made them of safe conduct, by the Councell of Con∣stance; wherein the good fathers in stead of being inuited and won to the reforma∣tion of the Church, both by the truth of their doctrine, and the constancie of their faith; did thinke it better to haue them the heraldes of their condemnation by the iust iudgement of God, then of their repentance before men. And further as if they would worke a further despite, they turned in the same Councell that goodly hymne which the Christian Church had made for the holy Ghost to the virgine Marie: and in stead of Ʋeni sancte spiritus, &c. they made it, Ʋeni mater gratiae, &c. wherein they call her, the fountaine of mercie, the light of the Church, the saluation of those that call vpon her, the Mediatrix betwixt God & men, the port of S. Peters ship, the death and destruction of heresies, &c. But in the meane time, as in this age wherein we liue, men begin willingly and wit∣tingly to cast out this dung and filthines, with others such like, the stinke whereof groweth so strong euen vnto themselues that haue made it, as that they are constrai∣ned to stop their nose, and to endeuour themselues to couer it as much as lyeth in them. Viues in Au∣gust de ciuit. Dei. l. 8. c. vit. Viues that famous Spaniard had rather to cause them to be detested, then co∣uered and smoothed ouer in saying: That he could find no difference betwixt the opinion that the Christians haue of their saintes, and that which the Pagans haue of their Gods, when as they giue them the same honour that is giuen vnto God himselfe. And if there had beene a∣ny number found of the same zeale with him at that time, he could haue hoped wel to haue obtained a remedie against idolatrie. But certainly the greater part had rather against their owne consciences of a carnall wisedome runne and betake themselues to disguise and smooth ouer the matter. Some saying that we ought not to pray vn∣to saints, to obtaine any help of them, or yet any mercie, but onely to bee assisted by their praiers to obtaine them of God. And this was in one worde to ouerturne all their Howres, Psalters, Letanies, and praiers before alleadged, which were directly made vnto the virgine Marie; and that, that she might not onely procure, but giue the things praied for. Wicelius. Other some more boldly; That wee ought not at all to pray vnto them, inuocation being an honour due vnto God alone: but onely Compellare, to so∣licite them that they would remember vs vnto him, as wee vse to stirre vp the liuing to succour and help vs with their praiers. And other some do yet go further, That this inuocation was nothing but a figure of Rhetoricke, by which wee were admonished, that the saintes deceased, as triumphant members of the Catholicke Church, haue care in heauen on the members which are as yet warfaring here below: after the manner spoken of in the song of the three children in the furnace: Daniel 3. ex Graeco. Ye spirits and soules of the righteous, blesse ye the Lord, &c. All these false couers and colourings notwithstan∣ding being euident testimonies, not so much of an vnwillingnesse to come to refor∣mation, as of a shamefastnesse to be ouertaken and detected of this spirituall whore∣dome. Cassander therfore and Hofmeisterus more freely, if so be they had but practi∣sed it in the Church, as they belieued & held it in their harts: Cassander verily, who after hee had excused the Church of Rome to Maximilian the Emperour as much as he could euen vpon this article, that Orate was as much as, Ʋtinam oretis, Pray ye, that is, I wish and desire that you would pray, saith notwithstanding; That he maketh not in his owne behalfe any praier but vnto God by Iesus Christ: and that he accompteth that the most infallible way. Hofmeister, who after he had gathered whatsoeuer hee could out of the old writers, August de vis∣tt. infirmotu, si eius est. l. 1. c. 2. concludeth with these words of Saint Augustine: I shall speake more boldly and ioyfully to my Iesus, then vnto anie one of the holy spirits of God, &c. But what do our fathers of Trent say here: after the long looking wherewith they haue made vs to looke for reformation? Do they allow at the least these expositions,
these mitigations? or do they bring some better of their owne? Neither, but on the contrarie they institute and ordaine, that we should call vpon the Saintes by praier to help vs, Suppliciter, humblie beseeching them vpon our knees: and that we should betake our selues, not to their praiers onely, but to their helpe and succour, declaring all such as haue any other opinion, to be wicked & impious. And the Catechisme made by the authoritie of the said Councell, saith plainly, Christians worship Angels, but not as God is worshipped: we must pray vnto the Saints, in as much as by the grace and merit purchased by them, God doth deale wel with vs &c. And Cardinal Hosius a man approued of them; Rom. 8. to such as alleadge S. Paul; (That we cannot call vpon any but him in whom we belieue) answereth lustily; That we must also credere in Sanctos, belieue in Saints. What reforma∣tion can there be from thē, who after such enormous faults laid open & discouered by the light of Christendome, doe wilfully make themselues blind, and yet will not haue themselues accompted of, as hauing failed in any point? And yet furthermore they ioyne thereunto another notorious pranke of maliciousnesse: which is, their causing to bee raced out in good bookes, Index pag. 8.10.24 25.30.31.36.38.47.49.50. whatsoeuer might checke or controll their procee∣dings, for so they haue resolued and set it downe, as appeareth by their Index Expur∣gatorius. As for examples: The place where S. Augustine distinguisheth betwixt the honour due vnto God, and that of Saints, the interpreter hath giuen this note: This, that is to say, that which is to be reserued to God alone, is now giuen to all the Saintes; Delea∣tur, let it be raced and put out. In the Tables of S. Augustine, S. Chrysostome, and S. Ie∣rome their works, there were many places noted, which directed vs vnto such sayings in their works, all speaking against the inuocation of Saints: vpon the heads whereof were set, Deleantur. In Erasmus and Faber Stapulensis, famous & worthy men in their profession: when they say, Deum solum omnis oratio & adoratio decet, Ʋnto God alone belon∣geth all praier and worship: is it not written, Torcular calcaui solus, Index pag. 49.50.55.59.61.255. I haue troden the wine presse alone: All the Saints are nothing, if the question bee once of true worship: all our owne workes and those of our fathers, from the beginning of the world are no better, &c. Deleantur. And Cassander likewise, where he sheweth how the old father did vse the words, Me∣rite, and to merite: That, When they said, Orate, this was as if they had said, Vtinam ore∣tis, &c. Deleatur. But what reasons will there satisfie these men, if they need not any other answer to them, but the racing and vtter blotting of them out? or what witnes∣ses, if there be nothing but away with them to burning? CHAP. XVI. That man cannot merite eternall life for himselfe, much lesse for another: where the con∣sideration is first of mans state before regeneration. OVr aduersaries, as they say, do pray vnto Saints, because they make intercession for them vnto God: but we haue alreadie destroied this foundation. And they make intercession for them, say they, by the power of their merites, and that not onely for the procu∣ring of them gifts and graces in this life, but also eternall happi∣nes in that to come. For which cause wee haue next to shew vnto them, (that so we may not leaue any thing doubtfull:) That no man can merite with God, not eternal life, or rather not the least grace of this fraile & transitorie life, not for any other man, no not for himselfe. And this we will deale in according to the three estates of man, Man in his first estate could not me∣rite. Genes. 1. Ephes. 4. Colos. 3. Psalme 19. his integritie or innocen∣cie, his fall or transgression, and his regeneration. Of his integritie it is said: That God had created him, according to his own image: and S. Paul expoundeth it to consist, in righteousnesse, holinesse, and the knoweldge of God, &c. That he had placed him in Paradise, in a place abounding with all felicitie: which Dauid calleth, placed in honor. In so much that he held & had both his being, his graces and his glorie, at the good pleasure of his Creator, of his meere, free, and vndescrued
goodnes. The abilitie to merite might haue beene great; the good deeds only conside∣red: but then what abilitie or power can there be to merite of him, of whom he hol∣deth all, of him, for whom a man can do nothing? Let vs admit then, that our first fa∣ther had vsed all these graces perfectly well; that he had possessed them in such feare  awe as he should; yea and that he had fulfilled the law, as naturally he might, yet had he beene able to say after all this (but with the same pride which cast him down from his high & glorious estate it selfe alone) I haue deserued that God should yet further giue me this; yea, that he should continue vnto me, what he hath alreadie giuen mee? If we do not wrongfully name and call our merit, that pleasure which it pleaseth God to take, in adding and bestowing graces vpon his, euen grace for grace, and glory for glorie, to deserue well of vs, if I may so say, and that so exceeding bountifully and li∣berallie, as that we are not able to merite any thing of him? So then here is place for that, Iob. 41.1. which God saith in Iob: Who is it that gaue me first, & I wil repay him againe? The same also which S. Paul saith; What is it that thou hast, which thou hast not receiued? And if thou hast receiued it, 1. Cor. 4.7. why boastest thou thy selfe, as if thou hadst not receiued it, &c. And the second Councel of Orange, held about the yeare 450. doth conclude in these words: Mans nature, Concil. Arans. c. Can. 19. Man a great deale lesseable after his fall. euen in his integritie, could not keep his integritie, without the help of God, &c. But after he had fallen and corrupted his waies, being the second state that our first father fell into, we became in farre worse and harder case. Man euen in his integrity could not in respect of God merite or deserue any good thing: but now in the daies of his corruption, hee cannot chuse but merite, yea he cannot merite any thing but the wrath of God, his curse and eternall death. For being become sinne and trans∣gression, it hath corrupted the most noble partes, both of his humane bodie and di∣uine soule; making the will to bee the slaue of vnbridled appetite, vnderstanding of imagination vnto all euill, and both of them faultie and corrupted in themselues, the will estranged from the loue of God; and the vnderstanding from the hauing of the knowledge of him, both the one and the other carried from their naturall and one onely good state, to the contrarie, with all their power and abilitie, euen to will and know that which is displeasing vnto him, and hurtfull to themselues. Man now in this estate, what can he doe? what can he but do amisse? And notwithstanding this is the state of all men in themselues since the fall, no man to be excepted. God pronoun∣ceth this generall sentence in Genesis; Genel. 6. Iob. 14. Psal. 51. All the thoughtes of the heart of man, are set vpon e∣uill continually. The most holy do most freely confesse it: Iob, Who can draw any thing that is pure, from that which is defiled? Not one. Dauid, Behold I was begotten in iniquitie, and my mother hath conceiued me in sinne: and therefore he prayeth vnto God to cre∣ate in him a new hart. Ioh. 3.6. Christ in the Gospell; That which is begotten of flesh is flesh, and that which is begotten of the spirit is spirit: If a man be not borne againe, hee cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen. Rom. 7.18. 2. Cor. 3.5. Ephes. 1. And Saint Paule expoundeth it: Because that in the flesh dwelleth no good: seeing that the naturall man doth not comprehend that which is of the spirite of God: And because, That we are naturally deadin sinnes, our workes then are both dead and deadly: and to bring vs to bring out any other, it cannot bee without the working of a miracle: Ephes. 2.5. Rom. 6.8. it is requisite that wee should bee raised againe: And it is God onely that must doe this. Because, saith he moreouer, that We are children of wrath: That, All the desires, and all the vnderstanding also of our flesh, (which we make so much of) is enmi∣tie against God. Prou. 10. And without exception: For, There is no man (saith Salomon) that can say, Rom. 5.17. 1. Cor. 15. My heart is cleane: I am without sinne. And the Apostle more expresly: All men haue sinned and are dead in Adam. By a man sinne entred into the world into all men, and by sinne, death, &c. Yea, into Moyses the meekest of all other men: Thou hast sette before thy face, Absconditum nostrum, our sinne that was hidden from vs. This na∣turall viciousnesse, which like vnto a naturall disease is hidden from vs, is lesse perceiued or felt of vs. P l. 51. Psal. 116. Rom. 7. & 14. re. 23. And into Dauid, a man according to Gods owne hearte: Create (saith hee) in mee a new heart: Because the hearte of man is altogether per∣uerted; Ab occultis meis mundame; Cleanse mee from that which is hidden from mee. And into S. Paule an elect vessell of God; The law (saith he) is spirituall, and I am carnall,
sold vnder sinne: I see a law in my members, fighting against the law of my vnderstanding, and leading me captiue to the law of sinne, which is in my members. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? &c. Into S. Iohn Baptist, Luke 2. the greatest amongst them that are borne of women, who saith vnto our Lord; I haue need to be baptized of thee: that is to say, to be washed, to be regenerate by thy spirit, &c. And into the ho∣ly virgin likewise: for she acknowledged her low and base estate, she magnified no∣thing but the onely mercy of God; she placed her selfe amongst them that being hun∣grie are filled with good things: she reioyceth in God which is her Sauiour; so farre is she off from disclaiming her parte in the saluation promised in Iesus Christ, the au∣thor of the saluation which is in her. And in deed the Apostle to the Hebr. Hebr. 7. hath not seperated or excepted from sin any besides Iesus Christ alone: The holy virgine like∣wise was subiect to the law of purification ordained in the Church, a signe of the in∣ward purification which God requireth in all our actions, Rom. 11.32. to the end that this word may abide true: That God hath shut vp all vnder sinne; That no man also should thinke to be excluded from that which followeth: That he hath notwithstanding shewed mercie vnto all: That this, that all the Saints haue beene saued, euen the virgin Marie her selfe, commeth of his free grace, of the riches and bountifulnesse of his great mercies. Now our aduersaries that will not be called Pelagians, How the ad∣uersaries do extenuate ori∣ginall sinne. doe agree in outward shew vnto this corruption of mankind, but when we come to lay the sore open and naked, they are as it were afraid of taking some harme: they make the maladie as light and little as they can, fearing to be too much bound vnto God, not considering how that for a man to lay open his wounds before him, is to heale them; to confesse our sinnes freely and franckly to him, is to haue them quit & forgiuen: whereas the hiding and couering of them doth make them mortall: to denie, conceale, or smooth them o∣uer, is to cast himselfe prisoner and captiue into hell, and eternall fire, vntill hee haue paid the vttermost farthing. Pighius therefore letteth not shamelesly to say, Albert Pigh. de peccat. orig. that the punishment of Adam seized vpon all his posteritie, as one bond man begetteth ano∣ther, but that his sinne was not transfused and conueighed into his children. What is there more contrarie vnto the whole scripture then this? Yea how is it possible, that this man should haue so little profited in the knowledge of himselfe? Andradius a true interpreter of the ambiguities and doubtes arising in the Councell of Trent, tea∣cheth; That concupiscence is in nature corrupted, altogether such as it was when na∣ture was in her integritie, saue that in the state of integrity it was repressed by a super∣naturall gift of originall righteousnes, which did represse & keep it vnder, which God hath taken away in the first man, & so from all other men in him, as a punishment of his sinne: in such sort as that this concupiscence is not sinne in men, because it is not against any law of God: or if it be, that it is the least of all other sinnes, in as much as it is onely some small disorder in nature. But how can this fancie agree with Saint Paule? with this law of the members which maketh vs seruants of sinne? Sinne, whose wages is no other then eternall death. But there is some pleasure (in respect of these different opinions) to heare what the olde fathers say handling this question, a∣gainst the hereticks of their times, as those who are by so much the lesse to be suspec∣ted in this cause, by how much they haue beene the more renowned & testified of for their godlinesse, and yet haue not ceased to acknowledge the infirmities of their hu∣mane nature. Testimonies out of the fa∣thers. Ambr. in epist. ad Rom c. 5. tom. 5. Idem de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 3. tom. 2. Idem in Apol. Dauid. c. 11. Notet Pighius. S. Ambrose: It is most plaine and manifest, that all haue sinned in Adam, as in the Masse: by him therefore we all become sinners, euen as we do all come of him. He hath lost the benefite and priuiledge by sinne, &c. Againe, Before we be borne, we are defiled by contagion: before we enioy the light, we receiue the losse of our original goodnesse, in as much as we be conceiued in sin, &c. And if the child that is but one day old be not without sin, much lesse the daies of the mo∣thers conception. We are all therefore conceiued in sin of our fathers and mothers: we are borne in their trespasses, and euen the very infant beareth about it his pollutions. And if thou doubtest from whence this commeth so to passe, he maketh it manifest. Hence it is (saith he) that wee are mortall; from hence springeth not so much the multitude of our miseries, as of
our hainous sinnes and crimes; our faith to bee lost, our hope farre remoued, our vnderstanding blinded, and our will captiuated. And what becommeth then of the power and vertues of the not regenerate, of such as continue still and dwell in the corruption of their nature? Without the worship of the true God (saith he) euen that which seemeth vertue, is vice: without God it is not possible for any man to please God: And he that pleaseth not God whom can he please but the Deuill? But to come as neere to the quick as may be is there any remainder of goodnesse abiding in man, whereby hee may relieue and raise vp himselfe againe? Idem Ambros. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 5. Opere suo, o∣pus suum re∣parat. Nay, nay, but on the contrarie; No man (saith he) is found hauing any thing in himselfe, whereby he may recouer his former place and excellencie: Man will neuer be able to turne backe againe to God, if God himselfe doe not turne and conuert him. The grace of our Lord by his worke, that is to say, by the operation thereof repaireth his worke: The will of man hath nothing left of all the powers thereof, saue only a power and readie inchnation to de∣stroy it selfe, periculi facilitatem, &c. Gregorius Nyssenus; Gr. Nyss. l. de oat. Man forsooke and reuolted from him, who had made him, and be∣tooke himselfe to the enemies side, that is to say, to the Deuil: whereupon his freedome and power changed of themselues, and his wicked and vngodly will into a grieuous and dangerous seruitude and thraldome vnto sinne: Then insued the abolishing of the image and figure of God, which was before imprinted, euen from our first creation in vs: Adde hereto the losse of the groat. By which the scripture doth teach vs, that there is not of all the men that are so much as one to bee found that liueth one onely daie without spot. And this is the cause, why wee pray, forgiue vs our trespasses: although he were a Moises or a Samuel, seeing that the same speech of repentance that agreed with Adam, is common to all: to the end that the Lord may saue vs by grace, in graunting vnto vs the blotting out and abolishment of our sinnes. And we need not for the fin∣ding out of the same, enter into the consideration of nature in generall: for euerie man entring into his owne censcience, may find how needfull a thing it is to craue merci. Chrysostome: Chrysost. in Genel. hom. 29. tom. 1. The first man by the decree of God, by his sinne did incurre and draw vp∣on himselfe the sentence of death, and hath past it ouer and conueighed it to his whole posteritie, &c. The second man is come downe from heauen, he alone abiding without sinne, and not owing any thing to death, that so he might be free amongst the dead, and that death might be condem∣ned in his death. Againe, The nature of this pestilence tooke his beginning from one bodie, & hath now spread it selfe all ouer into euerie man. Idem in M. om. 33. tom. 2 And if thou demande what manner of plague it is: When sinne entred (saith he) then came the downefall of our libertie, for it cor∣rupted the power giuen vs by nature, it brought in seruitude and bondage, &c. Euen such a pe∣stience. as that such as are infected therewith, are not able to doe any thing that is ought worth. em m. 6.  & a . Fla.  de  Idem l. de na∣tur & grat. c. 3 de id ad Pe∣tum, c. 23. Idem pasim. Ie cp. 107. Idem contr. Iul. Pelag. l 4. For saith hee in another place: The heathen though they wrought good workes, yet they wrought them not truely good, because they did them not in anie consideration that they had of God, but for to be reputed, or because that goodnes is good, or for the conseruing of hmane societie, &c. But Saint Augustine against the Pelagians hath handled this matter, and ript it vp to the bottome, as the thing (saith he) wherein consisteth the summe of all Christian religion: Hold fast (saith he) that euerie man which is conceiued by the carnall comunction of man & woman together, is borne in original sinne, subiect to wickednes & villanic, and subiect to death, and by this nature the child of wath, &c. And therefore this nature of man from the time of his birth hath need of a Phisition, because it is nothing sound, &c. But mortally peste∣red, as is to bee seene in the beadroll of euils, which he attributeth vnto it; That is, the losse of free will, thraldome by sinne, ignorance and maliciousnesse, banishment from the kingdome of heauen, and the decree of eternall death. Whereupon he saith; We annot be relieued, if by grace we bee not borne againe in Christ. What then? and what shall become of so many goodly vertues of the Pagans? Let it neuer be imagined (saith he) that there can be any true vertue in him that is not iust: let it neuer bee imagined that there is any truely iust, if he liue not ex fide, by faith. Fabricius his torments shall be more easie then Catilines, not because he was a good man, but because he was not so wicked. Without faith it is impossible to please God: but they haue not expressed anie faith in their workes, neither therefore had they anie in their heartes, &c. The man saith he in another place, must first be changed
before his workes be changed. Antequàm iustificetur impius, quid est nisi impius? Idem serm. 12. de verb. Dom. Idem cp. 106. Be∣fore the wicked man bee iustified, what is hee but a wicked and vngodly man, &c. Can there then be any thing in man, whereby he may help himselfe to come vnto God, except he bee first changed and regenerate by his spirite? And where becommeth then our free will? Hearken: Man (saith he) abusing his free will, Idem in Enchi∣lid. c. 30. hath lost both himselfe and his free will, for as he which killeth himselfe, in killing of himselfe liueth no more, nor hath any po∣wer to raise himselfe to life againe, hauing once slaine himselfe: so man in sinning by his free wil; and sinne becomming conqueror, hath lost his free will: For of whom a man is ouercome, his ser∣uant hee is: and therefore man cannot be free and at libertie to worke iustly, if he bee not de∣liuered from the thraldome of sinne, and made the seruant of righteousnesse. But how shall this libertie be purchased and restored to man againe, being solde, giuen vp, and captiuated, &c. if he be not ransomed by him who hath said: If the Sonne deliuer and set you free, you shall be truely free, that is to say, if he cast you not in a new mould by his grace, to be new creatures in Christ? Idem de spirit. & liter. tom 3. Tu non pou∣sti in te, nsi perdere te. Idem ad Bo∣nif. l. 1. c. 3. Idem de fide, ad Petr. Diaco &c. And therefore these are his ordinarie Maxims: Free will auaileth vs nothing, ney∣ther standeth it vs in any stead, it hath no power at all, except it be to sinne. Thou hast nothing resting in thee, but the meanes of destroying thy selfe, neither doest thou know to finde thy selfe, except hee that made thee doe seeke thee vp. Yea (saith hee) if he doe not draw thee, that is to say, if he giue thee not to belieue in Christ, a power that hath no iotte of free will; a power which is not but from God alone. For hee concludeth in another place: Euerie man is borne in originall sinnne by consequent the child of wrath: and from that wrath no man can be saued but by the faith of the Mediator: And no man can repent himselfe here, if God doe not inlighten him, if by his free and vndeserued mercy he do not conuert and turne him vnto him. Prosp. Aquit. ad Capitul. Vincent. Prosper Aquitanus, By the wound of originall sinne the nature of all men was corrupted and killed in Adam, whence is sprung out the disease of all concupiscences and lustes, and against the which there is no other remedie but the death of Christ, &c. Yea (saith he) a disease that he would needes haue, and which by him was needfull for vs. For (saith hee) to him, not to sinne, was no other thing then not to be willing to sinne: Idem de vita contemplat. c. 2. but it is not enough for vs to be willing to liue without reprehension, our will being vicious, and hindered by our feeble and faint possibili∣tie: that which was in him of pleasure & choise, is become to vs a necessitie, euen to sinne. And if you say any thing to him of the workes of infidelles, hee aunswereth you in these verses. Idem in epi∣gram. 81. & in l. de ingrat. & passim. Per omnes calles errat sapientia mundi, Et tenebris addit, quae sine luce gerit. This light which he calleth faith when he saith in another place: Omne etenim probitatis opus, nisi semine verae Exoritur fidei, peccatum est, ni{que} reatum Vertitur; & stirilis cumulat sibi gloria poenam. Cyrillus Alexandrinus; He that is become thrall to the seruitude and slauerie of sinne, al∣though that he haue cast himself of his owne free wil into this miserable slauerie, cannot notwith∣standing shake off this yoke when he pleaseth, he must seeke deliuerance in another, that is, in the Sonne of God. Let vs neuer make triall of, or attempt any other way for the recouering of our libertie, for by him alone is graunted our full freedome from sinne; to the ende that sinne may not rule or raigne anie more in our mortall bodies, and that in the world to come it may not find any place in vs. From whence in two wordes, wee gather thus much; That in our owne nature we are the seruants of sinne; That it raigneth in vs without any gainsay, to the procuring of the punishments that are after this life, if we bee not renewed in Christ. Petr. Diac. &c. Episc. Orient. ad Fulgen. &c. Episc. Afric. Damnatur mortis paena. Petrus Diaconus ad Fulgentium: Adam hauing willingly transgressed the law of God, is by his iust iudgement condemned to suffer the punishment of death; and is all holly & through∣ut, that is to say, both in bodie and soule, changed into worse; and hauing lost his owne free∣dome, is become a slaue to serue the filthie drudgerie of sinne. Thereupon it is, that no man commeth into this worlde free from the bondes of sinne, except hee who for the vn∣loosing of these bondes, was begotten after a new kinde of conception, the Mediator of God and men, Iesus Christ. For what can base and vile man beget, but that which is base and vile?
And therefore as euerie man is of Adam, oret Pighius. so by Adam euerie man is the seruant of sinne, Rom. 5. &c. And such deceiue themselues as say, that death but not sinne hath passed throughout man∣kind; when as there is not one of all the sonnes of men which is deliuered from this damnation & death, but by the grace of the redeemer, &c. without this grace a man might think and desire hu∣mane things; but he could not either thinke of or haue any will vnto the things concerning God. For the first & principall foundation thereof, is to belieue in the Lord of glorie crucified. This commeth not from the libertie of our free will, or naturall will: for flesh and blood doe not reueale the same, but the heauenly father, to whom he will, drawing him vnto this true libertie, not by a violent necessitie, but by a gentle infusing of his holy spirite, by which wee belieue and say, that Iesus Christ is the Lord: which no man can say by the libertie and freedome of his will, but one∣ly by the holy Ghost, &c. This is the same with that which the Bishops of the East did write vnto the Bishops of Africke. S. Barnard; Bernard. de grat. & liber. arb. Libertas a pec∣cato. In the fall, Adam fell from his not being able to sinne, to his not being able to doe any thing but sinne, hauing altogether lost the libertie of taking aduise and counsell, &c. as also that which he had of forbearing to sinne. And this losse happened vnto him by the abusing of the libertie of his will, &c. Being fallen from his will, it is not still remaining free for him, to raise vp himselfe againe by the same. For although at this day be would doe it, yet the case so standeth with him, as that it is not in his power not to sinne. It must be Christ that must inspire and indue him with new vertue by his restauration: that the Lord may transforme vs into this image; howbeit euen then our perfection commeth not in this life, but in the life to come, &c. And he is full in all his bookes of such places, which shal hereafter be seene, as better opportunitie serueth. Peter Lombard saith: Lomb. l. 2. d. 25 After sinne, till there be a restauration by grace, man is ouercome and pressed of concupiscence, and hath infirmitie to doe euill, but hee hath no grace to doe good: And therefore he can sinne, but he cannot cease to sinne, and that damnablie, &c. Againe, In that Adam hath sinned of free will, and that sinne hath ouercome him, he hath lost his free will. Libertatem inquam à peccato, the libertie that hee had to keep himselfe from sinning, where∣of the Apostle speaketh, whereas the spirit of the Lord is, there is the libertie and truth of the Gospell: If the Sonne deliuer you not, you cannot bee free, &c. And this libertie consisteth in being free from sinne, for to serue and obey vnto righteousnes, &c. which thing they haue attained onely, and not any others, whome the Sonue hath repaired by grace, &c. And therefore Anselme said, Anselm. in 14. ad Rom. as Lombard doth alleadge him: The whole life of infidelles is nothing but sinne: For there is no goodnesse or felicitie to bee found, where the chiefe good∣nesse or felicitie is wanting, Thom. in 2. sent. dist. 31 32 &c. Thomas likewise layeth vs downe these Maxims: The person of Adam hath infected nature, and nature now infecteth the person: the bodie infecteth the soule, not by working vpon it, but by receiuing from it: for the soule is the proper subiect of originall sinne. Idem l. 1. d. 41. Originall sinne is indifferently in all, and the punishment thereof is likewise in all: no man can satisfie for it, but God onely making himselfe man. No man can forsake or shake it off of himselfe: for from the estate of nature to the estate of grace no man can passe, either by free will, or by merite, but per appositionem gratiae, ex mera gratia, by the adding and applying of grace, &c. It may be, Not one to be excepted, no not the holy virgine. August. de nupt. & con∣cupise. Idem de per∣fect. iustit. Idem contr. Iul. l. 5. c. 9. that they haue excepted some persons from this common and generall condition; at the least the virgine Marie. Let vs heare then Saint Augustine: All flesh that is borne by the carnall copulation of man and woman, is sinfull flesh: That onely which was not so begotten is without sinne, that is to say, the humane bodie of our Lord. Againe, Whosoeuer thinketh that there hath beene anie either man or woman, (for in Latine he com∣prehendeth both the sexes) except the alone Mediator of God and men, to whom the remis∣sion of sinnes is not needfull: he is contrarie to the holie scripture, wherein the Apostle saith, by a man sinne is entered into the world, &c. Yea (saith he in another place) hee is an here∣ticke; For if (as without all doubt it is) the flesh of Christ bee not sinfull flesh, but like onely to sinfull flesh, what remaineth but that it onely being excepted, all other humane flesh is sinfull flesh? &c. Then he concludeth, And who so denieth this i a detestable hereticke. Yea the flesh of the virgine: For (saith he,) It appeareth that concupiscence which Christ would not haue to beare any stroke at all in his conception, hath caused the propagation of euill into
all mankind. For the body of Marie, although that he did spring from thence, did not notwithstan∣ding transfuse any part of the same concupiscence into the body of Christ, because shee did not con∣ceiue thereby. And it is not here to be obiected, which he speaketh of in an other place, that it is not his purpose to speake of the mother of our Lord, when the question is of sinne: Idem de natu. & grat. c. 6. Because shee hath had greater measure of grace giuen her to ouercome all the parts and parcels of sinne. For in that he saith, to ouercome, it presupposeth a combat with sinne; for the ouercomming whereof shee had need of new grace. To which purpole wee alleadged Origen heretofore: Whereas, if she had not beene redeemed, iustified and sanctified by the blond of Christ, then shee had not beene it at all. S. Ambroe saith, Ambr. in Luc. Immaculat. Partus noui∣tare. Idem in Esay. Our Lord Iesus is he alone of all those that haue beene borne of women, which hath not felt the contagion of earthly in∣fection, and that by reason of the new and extraordinarie manner of his conception and generati∣on which was without spot or touch of sinne. Againe; Euerie man is a lyar, and no man without sinne, except God alone. It is therefore to bee obserued, that not one that is of man and woman, that is to say, of the coniunction of their bodies that is without sinne: Anselm. l. 2. Cur deus hom. c. 16. & in 2. ad Cor. c 5. as also that he that is with∣out this sinne, was also begotten without this manner of conception, &c. Anselme, I would know (saith he) how, of this sinfull lumpe of this mankind, altogether infected with sinne, God should draw foorth a man without sinne, Tanquam azymum de fermento; being as much as if a man should go about to make a Loafe of vnleauened bread, out of a lumpe that is nothing but leauen. For although that the conception of this man were pure and vndefiled, yet the Ʋirgine out of whose wombe he was taken, was conceiued in iniquitie, and her mother conceiued her in sinne; and therefore also borne with originall sinne, for shee likewise hath sinned in Adam, in whose per∣son all haue sinned. Rom. 5.12. Whereby we may see the impudencie of our aduersaries, who vpon the second to the Corinthians where it is said: All are dead in sinne, without the exception of any; as in the place aboue, they haue added: Dempta virgine Maria, Ex∣cept the Virgine Marie. And Petrus de Natalibus hath beene as impudent, in daring to attribute vnto her the feast of the Conception. S. Barnard speaking of S. Iohn Baptist, Bernard. de ex∣cel & sanctir. Ioan Bapt. & Serm. 75. in. Cantic. in the Sermon of his holinesse: All we which come into the world, doe bring with vs a great band of originall sinne, be onely that hath not done any sinne is excepted. Againe, intreating of the Conception of the holy Virgine: Christ the man onely excepted, that which a certaine man humbly confesseth of himselfe, (that is to say Dauid) respecteth all men in generall; I am conceiued in iniquities, and my mother hath conceiued me in sinne. Yea and he goeth further, euen to the kindling and mouing of his choler: Idem Ep. 174, ad fratres Lug∣dun. Potho Pruni∣en Presbyter. l. 5. de statu Do∣mus Dei. The virgine Marie which is vp heaped with true honours, needeth not any false and counterfetted ones, for that is not to honour, but to dishonour her: The seast of the Conception ought not to bee instituted, it is neither according to the custome of the Church, nor according to reason, nor yet from any tradition: there was none but our Lord onely that was conceiued without sinne, wherefore shee will willingly forgoe this honour, whereby we either honour a sinne, or falsifie and belie a holinesse, &c. And Potho about the yeare 1200. doth speake of the same. Lombard said: It may be said and belieued, Lombard. l. 3. d 3. according to the attestations and testimonies of the Saints, that the verie flesh of the word, should haue in times past beene subiect to sinne, as all the flesh of the holy Ʋirgine: but that it was kept pure and cleane by the operation of the holy Ghost, in such sort as that it was vnited and ioyned to the word, free from all manner of contagi∣on. And thus you may see the opinion of the Church vnto the yeare 1200. and more. As for that which may follow after, what authoritie, or what credite is it worthie to haue? Lombard vpon a good intent began to say: That it was to be belieued, that shee was purged from originall sinne, when shee conceiued our Lord. Some others would adde thereunto; that she should haue beene conceiued in originall sinne: but that shee should be borne without sinne, hauing beene sanctified in the wombe of her mother. But Occam restraineth the matter to this head, Occam. l. 3. sentent. q. 2. as that shee should not bee able to sinne but venially. Scotus more boldly, that shee should be conceiued without origi∣nall sinne: contrarie to him are Thomas, Bonauenture, Gregorie de Rimini, &c. And for want of proofe out of the Scripture, they caused the Proteuangile of S. Iames, an Apocripha booke to make the supplie, and for want of the reuealed will of God in his word, his Almightines, and in stead of the truth a likelyhood: in so much as that the
Councell of Basil determined, Concil-Basil. Sess. Anno. 1439. that euerie good Catholike ought to belieue that shee was conceiued without originall sinne: and that hee ought not to preach or teach to the contrarie. In the end Pope Sixtus the fourth, seing that the contentions and con∣trouersies would not be appeased, Anno. 1483. tooke vpon him by his authoritie to ordaine, That the opinions both affirmatiue and negatiue should passe as indifferent, (what became then of the authoritie of this Councell?) And that without the staine of heresie to be imputed to ei∣ther of the sides; Anno. 1466. because the holy See had not as yet determined the controuersie. Shewing not∣withstanding that he inclined more vnto the affirmatiue, for that a litle before, he had ordained the Office of the feast of the Conception, and for that hee graced it with as many and as great priuiledges, as the feast of the Sacrament: and the Councell of Trent rested thereupon. Now hereby wee see, how in a short time abuses grow to an extremitie after that the word of God is once cast behinde vs, and our owne carnall and corrupt sence set in the throne and Chaire of gouernment. But this is our conclusion in the end, of the consideration of our estate after the fall, and that with the consent and agreement of all the old Church; that this fall was mortall, both according to the first and second death: That it corrupted all mankind, in such sort as that blindnesse and peruersnesse seased vpon the vnderstanding: Ephe 4.5. Ephe. 2. according to that which S. Paul saith: You haue your vnderstanding ouershadowed with the clouds of darknesse, you were also darknesse: And bru∣tishnesse and concupiscence vppon the will, Rom. 8. following that which is said; Doing the will of the flesh, and of their fantasies, &c. So long as that all their wisedome became enmitie a∣gainst God. That abiding in the state of nature our condemnation was certaine, from which condition and estate, it is not notwithstanding in the power of nature to de∣liuer her selfe, neither yet as it followeth by consequent, from eternall condemnati∣on: in as much as it is not so much a fire, which beeing blowne vp, breedeth to such a diease, as it is not able to cure vs of againe, as a heape of dead ashes, a soule, in re∣spect of spirituall parts, without a soule, that is to say, which hath lost all whatsoeuer it inioyed of the spirituall life, and seperated from God, which is the life and spirite thereof: and which hath therefore by consequent more need of the powerfull hand, and soueraigne grace of the Creator then Lazarus, who had beene foure dayes dead; (for at the least hee resisted not) or yet that confused Chaos, before that things were reduced and set in good order, that is to say, of a new fire, which he kindleth, euen whether it will or no, in it; and of a newe spirit, which by a new grace, hee sheddeth abroad into our hearts. Whereupon Saint Paul saith: When you were dead in your sinnes, hee hath quickned you by Christ. Ephe. 1. Coloss. 2.3. Againe, You were darknesse, but now you are light in the Lord, &c. And we may see hereupon, how that there is not any one creature able to recouer himselfe of his fall without a new infusion of the grace of God, and the same beeing of his meere grace, that no creature what goodnesse so euer hee practise after this grace, can boast himselfe before God, neither yet alleadge any merite, either for himselfe, or for any other, it being no other then that pretended merite, whereof the Apostle will alwayes bee saying vnto him, Ephe. 4. & 5. What hast thou that thou hast not receiued? &c. And which likewise is not able to be an equall match for proportion, much lesse in comparison for the reward it challengeth, seing it is of too short a time, to counter∣uaile eternal life, and of too shallow and short a measure, in respect of infinite blessed∣nesse: yea though it were the merite of the holy Virgine, and that conceiued or not conceiued, (be it as you will) in originall sinne. For if shee were conceiued in origi∣nall sinne, shee is freely redeemed, as well as any other, and regenerate and borne againe, of meere grace, as well as any other. But and if shee were not, (which yet the holy Scripture denieth,) that was also of the worke and operation of the same grace, and furthermore the greater shee is, the deepelier is shee bound vnto God, and the further off from merite, as also from hauing any occasion to be proud, beeing on the contrarie so much the more to carrie her selfe in a greater measure
of dutifulnesse and humilitie, in respect of so rich and aboundant mercies bestowed vpon her so freely and vndeseruedly, by the high and mightie God. According to that which is said: Vnto whome much is giuen and committed, Luk 12.24. of him shall so much the more bee re∣quired againe, &c. CHAP. XVII. That the Regenerate man cannot merite eternall life either for himselfe or for anie other. LEt vs come to the condition of the regenerate man, to the state of grace, Proofes out of the holy Scrip∣ture. as it is called: and let vs see if any one standing in that state before God, can merite of him by his workes, either his owne saluation, or an other mans. The Scripture speaketh verie highly of mans Regeneration: it setteth him before vs, as a man new moulded and cast by the effectuall power and working of the holy Ghost, in all and euerie one of his parts and members. Now what better way to comprehend and conceiue the fall and ruine, then by the reedified & repaired parts. Coloss. 1.3. Acts. 15. Ephe. 1. Coloss. 2.13. Gala. 5. Rom. 6. Coloss. 7. Rom. 8.14. For the spirit of Christ deliuereth vs from the power of darknesse: being dead, as we were in sinne, he quickneth and maketh vs aliue: he purgeth our hearts by faith: he inlightneth the eyes of our vnderstanding, by the knowledge of God: He destroyeth the bodie of sinne: He mortifieth, yea crucifieth the old man, with all the diseases, concupiscences and affections of the flesh: He maketh vs the children of God, and as we are such to crie Abba, that is to say father. But dooth it fol∣low of all this, that after Regeneration we are either cleane from all sinne, or that we can attaine vnto it in this world? Such as doe flatter themselues in making their sinne small; should therewithall thinke that a small thing should repaire and make vp the breach. But what then will they say, when as of necessitie for the sauing of this mise∣rable flesh the word must be made flesh? When for the deliuering of vs from the ser∣uitude of sinne, hee must needes become sinne himselfe, who had neuer knowne any sinne? Or will they thinke that the flesh bee it neuer so wholly and throughly regene∣rate, will bee able to doe all things? Or would they flie vp with their owne wings to heauen, without Iacobs Ladder, the helpe of the Lord, or his merite? More readie as yet by their pride, to loose the benefit of Regeneration, then our Father was to loose the excellent gifts he had by his Creation, at the suggestion of the woman. But let vs heare how the Scripture speaketh: J am (saith S. Paul) crucified with Christ, I liue, Gala. 2.16. no more I, but Christ in me: and the life that I liue now in the flesh, I liue by the faith of the Sonne of God, who hath loued me, and who hath giuen himselfe for me. What could he haue spoken of more excellencie? And where is that regenerate man that can vtter any thing more boldly then hee hath done this? And yet therewithall heare him comming from the setting foorth of the praises of the grace receiued by God, to the consideration of his owne infirmitie: I see (saith hee) an other Law in my members, Rom. 7. fighting against the Law of my vnderstanding, and making me captiue to the law of sinne, which is in my members, &c. That is to say, I feele concupiscence the bud of the flesh, &c. And this Lawe, this concupis∣cence if thou be in doubt, doe not thinke that it is good: For, I know (saith he) that in me, that is to say, in my flesh, there dwelleth no good thing. To will well is readie with me, but J doe not find the meanes to performe or doe it. Nay, this concupiscence is euil: for he addeth thee hereunto; The euill is readie with me and fast sticking vnto me: I doe the euil that I would not, euen the euill that I hate, that is to say, which I condemne in my mind: and such e∣uill as is repugnant vnto the Law of God, which cannot be called any thing but sinne, according to that which S. Iohn saith, , All whatsoeuer is against the Lawe is sinne, euen to the obeying of my flesh, and not the Law of my God, which J consent vnto, and agree to be good, but vnto the Law of sinne, which I condemne and dislike of in my spirit. And againe, This sinne is sinne in such a manner and degree, as that it forceth me to confesse that it is sinne in deed. For if the Law had not said: Thou shalt not lust, I had not knowne sinne, but now I knowe
it: And it hath such a deepe roote in me, as that I am constrained to crie: Miserable man that J am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death? Yea and it hath fruit also which it beareth and bringeth forth in me: Sinne dwelleth in me, euen the sinne which begetteth death, which hath no other wages but death: which also in stead of being brought vnder by the Law of God, is lifted vp by the nature thereof and armed to rebell against it, taking occasion from the same to multiplie and increase. Rom. 8. Gala. 5. Coloss. 3. Ephe. 4. It is prouoked and enraged like a maligne Vlcer against the salue. Thus speaketh S. Paul of this sinne, and not as it is in the Infidels, but as it is in the regenerate; and those not of the weakest sort of the regenerate, but as it was in himselfe, concluding generally and euerie where; that he hath need to spoyle, destroy, kill and crucifie the same; and that yet notwithstanding all this, doe what he can, 2. Cor. 4.10. it will not all be vanquisht and subdued at one blow. For, Howbeit (saith he) that our outward man be decaied and cast downe, yet our inward is renued euerie day. And yet not∣withstanding not in any such measure of perfection, as that any man can vaunt or boast himselfe, to haue wholy put on the one, and put off the other in this world. For, In this world wee shall neuer grow vp together and become perfect men, Ephe. 4 13. according to the mea∣sure of the perfect stature of Christ: Wee shall haue euermore need to say: Forgiue vs our trespasses. And the Apostle himselfe hath a pricke dwelling still in his flesh, for to hum∣ble him withall: 1. Cor. 12.7. because that The grace of God is sufficient for vs, his power is perfected in our weaknesse. What is then the priuiledge, or what is the prerogatiue of the regenerate? Great verily, euerie manner of way: for sinne dwelleth, but raigneth not in them, for that the old man liueth yet in them, but cannot kill them, but himselfe rather is mortified and slaine euerie day: for that they haue an assurance against the reward of sinne; for their sinnes are forgiuen them in Christ: and therefore blessed, and assured of eternal life. For there is no condemnation to them which are in Iesus Christ, which walke not after the flesh, Rom. 8.2. but after the spirit: in as much as the Law of the spirit of life, which is in Christ Iesus, hath freed them from the Law, sinne, death, &c. Saint Augustine intreating vppon this question of purpose, Testimonies out of the Fa∣thers. August. de peccat. merit. & remiss. l. 2. c. 7. hath not said any o∣therwise. Let vs not thinke (saith he) that presently vpon the baptising of any man, that all his old and accustomed infirmities are wasted and vanished, seeing his renuing or Regeneration, be∣ginneth at the remission of all his sinnes, &c. Otherwise (saith hee) the Apostle would not haue said, although that the outward man die, the inward is renued day by day. But it may be that this concupiscence after Baptisme is indifferent either to couet good or euill: This is it which Iulianus the Pelagian did so vehemently auouch vnto him: Idem l. 6. c. 6. contr. Iulian. Nay (saith he) if I had thought so much, I had not said vnto thee, that it is euill and wicked, but that it had hen: for thou speakest as those that would say, that it should haue beene sanctified in Baptisme. But wee say that it is wicked, and that it ceaseth not so to continue in those that haue beene baptised. But saith Iulian, Reatus eius, his sinne is absolued and forgiuen. Not his sinne, saith S. Au∣gustine (for it is no person:) but rather sinne as it made man originally guiltie, is remitted and made voide of all such force: As when any man is absolued of manslaughter, thou saist not that the crime of manslaughter is absolued; but the man from the crime. But it is not it may be so bad as men report it to be; and that there is a heauier punishment laid vppon it then the fault deserueth. Idem contr. eundem l 6. c. 5 Nay, saith he againe: This is so great a mischiefe, as that it would hold vs in death, and draw vs into the last death, if the bonds thereof were not vnloosed or bro∣ken in the generall pardon of all our sinnes, which is sealed and assured in Baptisme. And al∣though that sometimes according to the common custome, hee call sinne, Non ipsum concupiscere, sed post concupiscentias ire; Not the blossome or bud, but the fruite that commeth therof: Rom. 7. yet the saying of S. Paul doth alwaies remaine out of all doubt; I had not knowne lust to haue beene sinne, if the Lawe had not said: Thou shalt not lust, &c. And in deede S. Augustine proueth it to Iulian, August. contr. Iulian. l. 2. by all them which haue gone before. By S. Ambrose, who calleth it iniquitie: Because (saith he) it is vnrighteous, which the flesh lusteth after a∣gainst the spirit. Malitiam per conditionem originis. Againe, A delight contrarie to the Law of God. By S. Hillarie who calleth our bodies; the matter of vices, and the euils within vs, an originall malice, inherent euen from our first framing, &c. Whereupon (saith hee) we doe not retaine any thing that is cleane,
vndefiled, or harmelesse: No not the Apostles themselues, in whome (saith he) after they were washed & sanctified by the word, there remained as yet a malice, Per conditionem communis ori∣ginis, By the condition of the common beginning. Which thing our Lord teacheth vs, saying: Idem contr. eundem, l 5. c. 4.5. & l. 2. If you which yet are euill, &c. And as consequently following of all that hath gone be∣fore, S. Augustine teacheth; That concupiscence is an euill, not such a one as men are to suffer and beare by patience, but such a one as those are which men must bridle and suppresse by abstay∣ning from committing of them; that is to say, an euill of fault and not of punishment: that it is a vice that must be fought against by vertue, which is remitted and pardoned, but not finished, not extinguished by Baptisme. Idem de pecc. merit. l. 1. c. 3. tract. in Ioh 4. Not in such sort (saith he) as that it should not be any longer inherent in man, for the rest of the time that he liueth; but to the end that it should not hurt him after his death: that it is an infirmitie that is troden downe by the Lawe of God, a griefe and wearing dis∣ease, that striueth against our saluation. In a word; That it is both a punishment of sinne, as also a cause of sinne, a punishment (saith he) in as much as it is repaid for the merites of disobedience, Idem contr. eundem l. 5 c. 3 Aut defuncti. one consenti∣entis, aut con∣tagione nas∣centis. Idem in Iohn. 4. Criminibus & querela. a cause, for that man is either polluted with it in his conception, or else is drawne to consent to sinne, by the default thereof: Yea a verie sinne it selfe, in as much as it is a disobedience, rebelling against the rule and gouernment of the vnderstanding, a desire against which the good spirite co∣ueteth and desireth, that is to say, the spirit of man, regenerate by the spirit of God. But in one place after many solemne protestations, he handleth the whole question: The regene∣rate (saith he) are deliuered from sinne. But how? They are deliuered (saith hee) in as much as they are both without crime and sorrow: but this is a libertie onely begun and not accompli∣shed, not altogether absolute, not as yet pure and vnspotted, because that I see an other Law in my members, &c. Againe, All our sinnes and trespasses are blotted out in Baptisme, and yet is it said, that if iniquitie bee defaced, there remaineth no infirmitie? Ʋerily, if there were no rem∣nants of it behinde, we should liue without sinne. If therefore, thou serue with thy flesh, the Lawe of sinne, doe that which the Apostle saith, Let not sinne raigne in our mortall bodies: It is not said, let it not be there at all, but, let it not raigne, because that as long as thou liuest, there must of necessitie be sinne in thy members: but at the least let it haue his kingdome taken awaie, that so it may not bee obeyed in that which it commaundeth. Yea such a sinne as is hated of God, abiding still in the regenerate, and yet notwithstanding the same, hee loueth them. For saith he, There is not any one sinne that God iustifieth and aloweth, he hateth them all: but by his grace he causeth sinne to bee consumed in vs, in as much as it is wasted somewhat, and diminished in the liues of such men as profit, but consumed in the liues of such, as haue attai∣ned to perfection, that is to say, after this life. And this he maketh plaine in an other place by S. Hillarie: There is not (saith he) in this life any purifying and cleansing away of all sinne, Idem l. 2 cont. Iulianum. and yet hee hopeth to attaine humane perfection, that is to say, a nature perfectly cleansed in the last resurrection. Which thing our Lord, if so be that our Aduersaries would haue belie∣ued him, hath said in one word vnto his Apostles, You are now cleane because of my word: And yet hee had said: My father cleanseth you, and purgeth you euerie day, that so you may beare more fruit, &c. If then sinne do still dwell in the regenerate; and that such sinne, as begetteth infinite other sinnes in vs, and these sinnes, death; yea so many deathes, so many hels doe we purchase vnto our selues, as we commit sinnes: and therefore farre off from meriting of life for an other, seeing we cannot doe it for our selues. Neither haue wee any other exception to alleadge against it but this: There is iust cause and matter in vs to condemne vs, yea and more then inough: but praised be the grace of our God: That we are in Christ, &c. That there is no condemnation to such as are in him. But if they say to vs, that euen as the flesh worketh sinne in vs vnto condemnation, if grace doe not preuent: euen so the regenerate spirit worketh good workes vnto saluation, yea sufficiently, yea aboundantly, &c. We answere: That the beginning and originall of good workes is altogether of God, whereas the beginning and originall of sinne is of our selues, so that in deed damnation doth belong to vs, and saluation to God: as also that these good workes proceeding from a heart, not perfectly regenerate, haue alwaies a spice of euill: euen of the euill that is in and of vs, and that sufficeth to make them displeasing vnto God, saue that he beareth with them, through his mercies ex∣hibited
in his Sonne: the goodnesse which we cannot make our accompt and recko∣ning of before God, seeing it is his. It is generally therefore said of all men, (but this word is expresly and properly appointed and directed to the regenerate, to the end, that in their miserie and mis∣deeds they may seeke and search for the remedie, which God hath prepared for them in Christ;) Eccles. 6. Prou. 10. Iob. 15. Psal. 143. that all are sinners: There is not a man vpon the earth that doth good: No man can say, I am cleane from sinne: yea euen amongst his Saints God cannot find any that are able to abide the triall: And if we say (saith the Apostle) that we haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues, and there is no truth in vs. On the contrarie, it standeth vs vpon continually, To craue pardon, Psal. 19. because we are continually euen euerie houre sinning: and pardon, Ab occultis nostris, From the sinnes that we neither see nor perceiue: We are so seared, in respect of the sence and feeling of sinne. And of all this it followeth, that as God hath shut vp all vnder sinne; so likewise vnder condemnation, the same extending and stretching it selfe also vnto vs, if he had not shrowded vs vnder the protection of his grace. As con∣cerning our good workes: Without me (saith the sonne of God) you can doe nothing, no not so much as thinke a good thought: Iohn 15.6. 2. Cor. 3.5. Acts. 16.14. Psal. 119. Philip. 2.13. Iam. 1.17. but in that you are any thing fitted thereto, it is of God: of God, that openeth our heart, that inclineth it vnto his lawes, and which strengthneth it in his waies; that accomplisheth in vs both the will and the worke, according to his owne free∣will and good pleasure: Of God the father of lights, from whome euerie good gift commeth, &c. But principally the gift of faith, without which neither we, neither any thing of ours can please God: Math 16. the faith I say of the Sonne of God, Which flesh and bloud do not reueale, but the father that is in heauen. And what should God be bound and indebted to vs, for that which he himselfe worketh in vs of his meere grace, & for these pretended good workes? Osce. 13. Nay, let vs say rather with the Prophet: Israell thy destruction is of thy selfe. And thou must impute and lay it to no other but to thine owne selfe. But, thy saluation is of me: Thou hast not any thing then to reproach or accuse. But how will the case stand, if these verie workes, weighed in the balance of iustice, bee found to be sinnes? And so much the rather and more likely, because that thou dost make accompt of them for holy and sanctified deedes: as also so much the more cursed and damnable, by how much the more thou accomptest of them for meritorious. The Sonne of God said vnto his Apostles, When you haue done all that is commaunded you, say, we are vnprofi∣table seruants. Luk. 17.10. But how farre off are we? And next, what meaneth this, To do that which we ought. But to doe it as we ought, and to that end that it ought to be done, &c. And who is he, that is able to obserue all that, and if it were but in one onely action? And that I may not presse them withall, how would he bee able to doe it for Gods glorie, &c. without making some mixture for his owne interest, as either for his owne pro∣fit or honour? &c. But as for sinne and that which is euill, what is it that wee are not cunning inough in, to doe verie well: and on the contrarie, where is that good thing, that fadgeth not, and falleth out most ill fauouredly in our hands; and that in diuers respects? So then we must say with the Propht: All our righteous deedes are as a stained cloath. Our righteous and best deeds, saith he, and not our vnrighteousnesse: for in all our workes how good so euer they seeme to bee, there doe iumpe and meete toge∣ther something that is of the spirit, and something that is of the fleshe, as they are more or lesse strong in vs: according to the saying of Saint Paul, who teacheth vs not to flatter our selues: When I would doe the good; as if hee said; euen when I buckle my selfe about it with all the power within me, Rom 7. Philip. 3. Euill is readie with me: to will is present, but I cannot find the meanes to doe and performe it, &c. And for the proofe hereof wee neede no other proofe, but to consider and looke into our selues, and our best actions, as into our praiers, with what an infinite number of imaginations they are crossed: or into our zeale, which if it be according to knowledge, yet is it delayed with coldnesse, and beeing more feruent, then commonly it is without knowledge: into our brotherly loue, which is more for a shew, then in deed, and more for that regard wee haue of men, rather then for the awe of God: into our faith, which is either little, or else wa∣uering; farre lesse then a graine of Mustard seede, farre off from remoouing of moun∣taines:
Finally, into our whole life, which being examined according to the summe of the Law, of the perfect loue of God and our neighbour; will not afford vs so much as one action answerable thereunto, but rather such as are contrarie thereunto, and that euerie day, yea euerie houre. And what shall wee find in our wordes, nay rather in our thoughts, all which are knowne vnto God, and must vndergoe the rigour of his iudgement? Now we haue heard the old Fathers, How far con∣cupiscence worketh in the regenerate, ac∣cording to the old Fathers. Tertul. de prae∣script aduers. haeres. Probatus ali∣quis. August. de fid. Orthod. c. 49. Idem ad In∣no. Pap. Ep. 95 vppon the concupiscence that remaineth in the regenerate: but it may be, that we may thinke, that in some it breaketh not out in∣to actuall sinne, which they call sinne: But let vs heare what they say. Tertullian saith: Is it such a maruaile, that an approued man should come to fall? What say you to Saul, whome hatred ouerthrew: Nay, Dauid a man according to Gods owne heart, by murther and Adulterie: Salomon indued with wisedome from God, drawne by women to I∣dolatrie: because it was reserued to the onely Sonne of God, to abide without sinne. Saint Augustine; There is neither Saint nor righteous man that is without sinne, and not∣withstanding they cease not to bee Saints and righteous, because they haue their affections still set vpon holinesse. And therefore the Saints are truely declared to be sinners, &c. Againe; O death where is thy victorie, where is thy sting? The sting of death is sinne. And there haue beene some men who haue thought, that there might bee some men liuing in this life without sinne, though not from their birth, yet at the least from the time of their conuersion from sinne vnto righteous∣nesse, and so they would vnderstand that which is said: That Zachare and Elizabeth walked in all the wayes of the Lord, Sine querela, vnrebukeable: But they should haue considered that Zacharie was a Priest, and that the Priestes were bound by the Lawe of God, to offer sacrifice, chiefely for their owne sinnes: And secondly are we not all conuinced of sinne, in that we are all commaunded to say: Forgiue vs our sinnes, &c. For, saith he in an other place: It must con∣tent vs, that there is not so much as any one man found in the Church, how excellent, righteous, or well profited so euer he be, that dare say, that hee hath not any need to praie and say this pray∣er: Forgiue vs our sinnes, &c. For this should bee as much as to say that he had no sinne, and so by that meanes deceiue himselfe, not hauing any truth in him, although that hee liued, Sine quere∣la, without giuing of iust cause to anie to complaine of him. Againe; Yea, seeing all the Saints, Ep. 9. if they should be asked together, if they had any sinne, would aunswere: If we should say that wee haue no sinne, the truth is not in vs, &c. But saith he, Idem de per∣fect. Iustit. & in Enchirid. c. 33. Idem Serm. de temp. Domi∣nic. 4. post Oct. Epiphan. Idem in Ep. 54 ad Maced. Idem dc Mar∣tyr. Hieronym ad∣uerf. Pelag. Although the Apostle doe openly con∣fesse, that both he and all the Saints are tied to this necessitie of sinne, yet hee boldly affirmeth that none of them are subiect to condemnation, when hee saith: There is then no condemnation vnto them that are in Christ, &c. You will say: But behold the one hundred fortie foure thousand in the Apocalips, which neuer defiled themselues with women, they are vnreproueable, there hath not any lie beene found in their mouthes, &c. And knowest thou wherefore? Ʋeri∣ly because they haue confessed their sinnes, for that they became their owne accusers, &c. Other∣wise the truth had not beene in them, and where truth had not beene, lying had beene, &c. And this he said speaking of the Martyrs. Saint Ierome: The Phylosophers, the chiefe begetters and patrons of heretickes, defiled the puritie of the Church by a peruerse doctrine, raised by their being ignorant, how that it was spoken of the frailtie of man: Dust and ashes, whereof art thou proud? Seeing also that the A∣postle saith: I see an other Law in my members. Againe; I doe not the good that I would, but the euill that I would not, that I doe, if hee doe that which he would not, how can this stand which is said; That man if he wil, may be without sinne? And how can he be that which hee will, seeing that the Apostle affirmeth, that hee cannot accomplish that which he desireth? When as therefore J shall thinke my selfe to haue attained the end of vertues, Idem ad Ru∣stic. then I am but in the begin∣ning: for their is no other perfection in men, but to knowe themselues imperfect. In an other place: There dwelleth no good in our flesh: the spirit willeth one thing, the flesh is constrained to do an other. There is not any man cleane from sin, though his life haue bene but a day long. The very stars are not pure in Gods sight. And if there be sin in the firmament, how much more in earth? If in thē that haue no bodily temptatiō, how much more in vs, compassed about with this fraile flesh, who crie with the Apostle: Miserable man that I am, who shall deliuer me from this mortall bo∣die?
&c. Idem ad Pe∣lag. & Ep. 9. ad Saluian. But Saint Paul saith: We which are perfect, accompt that, &c. Then there is some perfection in this world. Nay rather (saith he) to the end that thou maiest see, that the per∣fect perfection of the gifts of God is not here, he addeth straight after; Not because that I haue alreadie receiued, or that I am perfect. Then he was perfect, through the hope that he had of the glorification to come: imperfect through the burden of corruption and mortalitie: perfect through his wayting for the reward: imperfect through his fainting and being wearied in the fight: perfect in that he knew that God was able to performe whatsoeuer he hath promised vnto his: imperfect in that God had not as yet performed to his all that which he hath promised them. In a word, im∣perfect, thinking vpon that which he wanted vnto perfection: perfect in that he is not asha∣med to confesse his imperfection, and that he might come thither, he traueleth thitherward like a good traueller, Prosper Aquit. in Psal. 105. & 142. &c. Prosper Aquitanus moueth a question to this purpose: wherefore the iust are called sinners: for if they bee iust, how are they sinners? And if sinners, how are they iust? Not one of them (saith he) that liue in this mortall bodie, can say that hee is without the contagion of sinne: no not those excellent leaders of the flockes of Christes sheepe, seèing that he hath enioyned euen them to say: Idem in Epi∣gra. 46. & in Psalme 129. Forgiue vs our trespasses, &c. Not any one of the Saints how well and commendably so euer hee liue in this world. But (saith hee in an other place) those are called iust, because that sinne is dayly taken away and diminished in them (that is by the growth and proceeding of regeneration:) but these are called sinners, because that it in∣creaseth in them dayly (that is, by the increase of the proceeding of their corruption,) &c. As also we alleadged heretofore out of Saint Chrysostome: That God to shew that he is only iust, and all the rest of the iust and righteous sinners, suffered euen the best and most approued to fall, &c. as Dauid, Abraham, Peter, &c. In so much as that the exception would not ex∣tend vnto the Virgine Marie, Orig. hom. in Luc. 17. whome sometimes hee taxeth for her ambition, and sometimes for weakenesse of faith, &c. And Origen goeth further: If (saith hee) shee had not taken offence at the passion of the Lord, the Lord hath not died for her sinnes. And, if all haue sinned and stand in need of the grace of God, being iustified and redeemed by his grace, then Marie also, as who for a time was also offended, &c. We cease here to repeate many o∣ther, for that they are before alleadged. Wherefore without exception wee are all sinners: but from these sinners, hauing sinne proceeding and springing from them to the meriting of condemnation, can there also proceed workes meriting life and saluation? Let vs heare them yet further. Origen expounding these words of Saint Paul: To him that worketh, the reward is not accompted for grace, but for a debt, &c. But I (saith he) cannot be perswaded that there is any worke, that can craue recompence or reward of God, as a dew debt, &c. And hee rendreth a reason: Idem in Ep. ad Rom. 4.4 August de verb. Apost. Serm. 31. Idem Ep. 54. ad Maced. Idem in psalm 142. For the wages of sinne is death, but grace, is eternall life. Saint Augustine: Wee are not in this world without sinne, but wee shall goe foorth of it without sinne. Againe: Who so saith that he is without sinne, is not in the truth: and who so saith, that in any worke that is ve∣rie well done, he is without sinne, he deceiueth himselfe. For, saith hee: Neuer did man any good worke with that charitie that he might and ought: and therefore euerie man remaineth vn∣iust: now the vniust and vnrighteous cannot but sinne, in a iust and righteous worke. And to be short, saith he, Charitie is a vertue, whereby we loue that which ought to be beloued: In some greater, in some lesse; and in some not at all: and in no man, growne to such perfection, but that it may increase and grow in him, as long as he liueth. And that lesse measure that any man hath, then he should, euen that is a vice: and such a vice as that it causeth, that there is not a iust or righteous man on the earth, not one that doth good, nay, which sinneth not: Such a vice, as that man whiles he liueth, cannot be iustified before God: A vice whereof it is said, if we say, that we haue no sin, &c. by reason whereof we are to say, how well so euer we haue profited; Forgiue vs our sins, &c. Where we see that S. Augustine maintaineth that the want of charity continu∣eth alwaies here, being of it selfe sufficient to make insufficient, that which we take to be the most sufficient of all our workes. Idem Ep. 30. ad Hieronym. In a word, he cleane cutteth off all: Who are they that are blessed? Not those in whome God findeth no sinne: for hee findeth sinne in all, &c. Not those that doe good workes: for all thy workes (saith he) are viewed, and found to bee wic∣ked. And if there should bee giuen and rendred to thee according to that which is due to thy
workes, without doubt hee should condemne thee: for the reward of sinne is death. And what is due vnto wicked workes, but condemnation? But they are blessed, whose sinnes are remitted: God heapeth not vpon thee the punishment that is due, but bestoweth grace & fauor vpon thee, which is not due or deserued. Saint Ambrose saith, I hold it for good and sound, Ambros. de Iacob. that we are not iustified by the workes of the Lawe: then it must follow that J haue nothing, wherefore I should boast my selfe in my workes; but rather in Christ. J will not glorifie or boast my selfe as though I were iust, but be∣cause J am redeemed: because I am disburdened and deliuered from sinne; but because that my sinnes are forgiuen me: not because that I haue helped my selfe therein, or yet any other for me, Quia profui. Idem de voca∣tione Gent. l. 5. c. 5. but because I haue an aduocate with the Father, &c. Againe, As there is no action so wicked, as that it can hinder the gift of grace, so there are no workes so excellent, as that they may chal∣lenge as their due recompence, that which is freely giuen: For otherwise the redemption of Christ should grow base and contemptible, and the prerogatiue of the workes of man, should not yeelde and humble it selfe vnder the mercie of God, if the iustification, which is wrought by his grace, were due vnto precedent merites: For so it should not be any more the gift of one that giueth, but the wages of one which laboureth, &c. To bee briefe, mans merites, whether past or to come, are not to make vp any part of the price in this purchase. Saint Ierome saith; What vprightnesse, Hieronym. in Prou. 20. & in Eccle. c. 7. Gregor. Nyss. l. de orat. Bernard. Serm. 50. what cleannesse can there be in the liues of the righteous? The workes that wee discharge by the ministerie of our bodies, are alwayes mingled with some errour. Againe; We are (saith Grego∣rius Nyssenus) taught by the Scripture, that there is not any one amongst men to bee found, which can passe ouer one day without spot or staine. But Saint Barnard, though hee liued in an age full of all humane presumptions, did notwithstanding hold fast this puritie of doctrine: If there be (saith hee) any righteousnesse in vs, it may bee vpright and honest, but it can neuer be pure: If so be that we will not thinke better of our selues then wee doe of our forefa∣thers; all which haue confessed no lesse truely then humbly; That all our righteousnesse is as the menstruous clothes of a woman, &c. For, where shall bee that pure righteousnesse, when trans∣gression and some default cannot bee shut out from it? But it seemeth to vs, that the iust and righteous dealing of men, may be vpright and honest, when it yeeldeth not so farre vnto sinne, as to suffer it to raigne in the bodie, &c. Againe; The Lord is hee that iudgeth me, Idem de verbo Originis. for I cannot auoide his righteous sentence: yea, and if I were iust, yet would I not lift vp my head, because that all my righteous actions are as a stained cloth, seeing that before God, no man can be iustifi∣ed, no not one. CHAP. XVIII. That the Law was giuen man, to conuince him of sinne, and to cause him to looke for his saluation in that grace which is by faith in Christ, according both to the Scriptures and the fathers. FOr what vse then will some say, doth the Law of God serue vs, The end of the law according to the holy Scriptures. if we can∣not fulfill the same? Verily, that by it thou maist know the difference that is betwixt the righteousnesse of God, and that pretended righte∣ousnesse of thine owne, and that thou maist knowe, that thou art not a∣ble to doe it. As certainely also, that thou maiest bee conuinced in thy pride, condemned in thy righteousnesse, and bound and beholden to his mer∣cies. And all the Pedagogie thereof, Deut. 9. all the discipline and instruction contained in the same, if thou consider it, is no other thing. Moyses saith: Say not in thine heart O Israell; This is because of my righteousnesse, that God hath brought me into this land, it is not by reason of the vprightnesse of thy heart, for thou art a stif-necked people, &c. And then how much lesse, into the true land? Into the heauenly Chanaan? The whole seruice of the Lawe consisteth altogether in washings, altogether in bloud, and in killing, which aunswere fitly to our vncleannesse, sinnes, crimes, accidents, and happes,
yea to our verie ignorances, to our faults known and vnknowne vnto vs, and they were renued Euening and Morning, and were continued perpetually: and therefore also both an ordinarie and continuall charge and accusation of our whole liues, and of all that which is within vs, Psalme. or that commeth out of vs. Whereupon Dauid saith: If thou markest our iniquities O Lord, who shall abide it, who shall indure thy stroke? And where∣as he speaketh of his righteous workes, he saith: Thou art the Lord, my goodnesse reach∣eth not vnto thee. The Prophets likewise doe neuer speake vnto vs, but of a circumcised heart, of a new heart, of a hart of flesh; in stead of our vncircumcised, and stonie harts, to the end that wee may know where the disease holdeth vs, euen in our most noble part, and that it lyeth not in vs to reforme the same, that it hath need, to be quite fra∣med anew, by the operation of the Creator himself, by his holy spirit: and in the foun∣taine or spring head, are all the waters issuing from thence condemned, in the tree all the fruites thereof. In the originall of motion, all our motions; and in the workman all the workes which he hath wrought. Whereupon S. Paul also the true interpreter of the Law, leadeth vs continually, from workes vnto faith, and from the Law, to grace. The Law (saith hee) giueth knowledge of sinne, Rom. 3. the Law maketh it to abound, the Law worketh wrath, the Law is the ministerie of death: by the workes of the Law no man is iustified, for no man can fulfill it. And yet in the meane time, Cursed are they that abide not in all the words of the same. And what shall we doe then? But (saith he) the iust shall liue by faith: he shall be iustified by faith, without the workes of the Law, iustified freely, by the grace of God, by the re∣demption made in Iesus Christ: Rom. 4 That grace, which superaboundeth, whereas sinne hath aboun∣ded: That faith, which applieth vnto vs this grace, which is imputed vnto vs for righteousnesse, in as much as we belieue in him, that hath raised Christ from the dead, slaine for our sinnes, and raised for our iustification, Rom. 11.5. &c. And, If it bee of grace (saith the Apostle) then it is no more by workes, otherwise, grace were no more grace, otherwise workes were no more workes. And yet in the meane time faith the gift of God; Faith the gift of God. and grace, that is to say, the re∣mission of sinnes, the gift also of God: and the hand to receiue the bountifull kind∣nesse and free liberalitie of our God in Christ, & this free mercy also the gift of God. Faith, Ephes. 2.8. Rom. 5. for you are saued (saith the Apostle) by grace through faith, and that not of your selues, it is of God. Grace the remission of sinnes, in like manner: For (saith hee also) if by the offence of one many die, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, &c. hath abounded on many. Rom. 6. Againe, The wages of sinne is death. Our aduersaries would say: and the wages of good workes is eternall life: Nay, saith our Apostle: But the the gift of God, that is to say, Rom. 5 the gift of righteousnesse, the aboundance of grace, is eternall life by Iesus Christ. And this gift notwithstanding is called an inheritance, the inheritance of Children, and not the wages of seruants. And yet an inheritance, which wee although adopted for chil∣dren, doe loose and forfait euerie day, as much as in vs lyeth by our sinnes, if God euerie houre, in the obedience of his Sonne, did not restore it vnto vs againe, and that of his free gift. Ioh. 1. Rom. 8. For, saith Saint Iohn: He hath vouchsafed vs the honour to be made the chil∣dren of God. And, If (saith Saint Paul) you bee Sonnes, you are also heires, yea fellow heires with Christ. Such is the paines that the Apostle taketh to weede and destroy out of vs this roote of Pharisaisme, of pretended merite, sometimes making vs heires, some∣times Donatories, or rather heires Donatories, in as much as it is giuen vnto vs to be children, which naturally we were not. But what child is hee that can be indured, or thought worthie to be maintained, if hee say, that he deserueth and meriteth at his fathers hands, and that of his father of whome hee holdeth and inioyeth but this mortall life, and that rather but as the instrument, then the author thereof? Some in like maner asked the auncient fathers: The end and scope of the law, according to the olde wri¦ters wherefore serueth the law of God, if we cannot performe it? And behold now what was their answere. Saint Ambrose: The Law worketh and causeth wrath, Adam fell to offend by disobedi∣ence, and to commit a fault by insolencie. But in as much as pride was the cause of the fall; and the prerogatiue of innocencie, the cause of his pride, there was iust cause giuen for the making of a Law, which might make him subiect vnto God: For without the Lawe, sinne was not
knowne: whereas now there is no man that can excuse himselfe by ignorance: Ambros. l. 9. Ep. 71. wherefore it is made: First, for to take away excuse: Secondly to humble euerie man before God, by the sight and knowledge of his sinne. Sinne did superabound through the Law, and began to be offensiue vnto me for to know it, as being a thing, which by infirmitie I could not auoide: for it causeth a man throughly to know that, from which no man can keepe himselfe, and which cannot but hurt him. The Law then is turned vpside downe, except that euen by the verie increase of sinne, it become profitable vnto me, by the meanes of my hauing beene humbled, &c. In the end, trans∣gression increased by the Law: and in like manner pride was abated, being the originall of trans∣gression; and this turned me to profit: for as pride deuised and found out transgression, euen so transgression hath wrought and brought foorth grace, &c. Againe; Sinne hath shut out the na∣turall Law, yea and almost quite abolished it: and therefore this Law succeeded, to conuince vs by written testimonies, to shut our mouthes, and to humble the whole world before God: To humble it, for as much as by the Law wee are all cast and conuict persons; and for that by the workes of the Law, there is no man iustified, that is to say, that by the Law sinne is knowne, but the offence is not pardoned. It might haue seemed then, that the Lawe had brought dammage and hurt with it, in that it hath made vs all sinners: but the Lord comming, hath with vs gi∣uen sentence against the sinne which wee could not auoide, and hath cancelled our bill of debt by his bloud, &c. Ep. 73. The Law therefore (saith hee) is a Schoolemaster that leadeth vs vnto our Ma∣ster, which master is Christ. Saint Augustine: The letter of the Law, which teacheth that wee ought not to sinne, August. de spirit & liter. if the quickning spirit doe not accompanie the same, doth kill vs: For it hath done more for vs to bring vs to the knowledge of sinne, then to the auoiding of the same: for euerie way wee stand in need of an absolute righteousnesse, when as yet the case so standeth, as that there is no man without sinne, him onely excepted, which is not onely man, but God by his nature, &c. Thus (saith hee) the righteousnesse of God is manifested, but not without the Law: for by the Law hee hath shewed vnto man his infirmitie, to the end that returning by faith, and hauing recourse vnto his mercie, he might be healed, &c. Againe; The vnrighteous haue a lawfull vse of the Law, as of a Schoole∣master, for it is vnto them beeing vnrighteous: a iust terrour, the iust doe vse it also, and yet are not iustified by it, but by the Law of faith. The Law of workes is in Iudaisme, the Lawe of faith in Christianitie, &c. By the Law of workes God saith: Doe this that I commaund you: by the Law of faith, we say to God: Giue and inable vs to doe that which thou commaundest. For that which the Law commaundeth, is, to make vs vnderstand what the Law doth. Idem de verb. Apost. Ser. 13. What is it then (saith he in an other place) lawfully and rightly to vse the Law? It is to learne what our sick∣nesse and disease is by the Law: The law is a Schoolemaster, a guide and gouernour of children: the Tutor dooth not giue directions and instructions to the child how to come to him; but to his Schoolemaster, but to his Master, that is to say, to Christ. In an other place; Who is that (saith he) that can accomplish the Law, Idem l. 9. re∣tract. so much as in one point besides him, who is the author of all the commaundements of God, that is to say, Christ? For likewise in these commaundements we are to pray thus: Forgiue vs, &c. Which the Church is to continue vnto the end of the world. But (saith he) all the commaundements are said to bee fulfilled, when that which is not fulfilled, is pardoned. Thou saiest: Idem de per∣fect. Iustit. Wherefore then should hee haue commaunded that which could not be fulfilled? Nay rather (saith he) what could he doe more for the good of man, then to commaund him to walke vpright, to the end, that when hee should be brought to confesse and acknowledge that he could not, hee might haue recourse vnto the remedie? And this is it which hee toucheth in briefe, Idem in Iohn. c. 3. by way of recapitulation in an other place: Seeing that they could not fulfill the Law by their owne power and strength, being become guiltie of the Law, they haue craued the helpe of the deliuerer: To bee conuicted of the Law, Reatus legis. wrought spite and maliciousnesse in the proude: and this spite in the proude, brought forth con∣fession in the humble: so that now the sicke and diseased, doe confesse themselues sicke and disea∣sed: Let the Phisition come (saie they) and heale our diseased and sicke people: nowe the Phy∣sition is our Lord, &c. The Demi-pelagians, and amongst other of them, the Monke Cassianus, put foorth this question to Prosper, that great Diuine of Fraunce:
And what is then the vse of the law? Prosper Aquit. in sentent. 42. & 44. In Epi∣gram. 43. in Psal. 118. Verily (saith hee) that we might seeke for grace; euen that grace by the which the Law is fulfilled: The law (saith he) which could not bee fulfilled, and that not through it owne default, but through ours, and our fault was necessarily discouered by the Law, that so it might be cured by grace: Otherwise the Law doth rather increase sinne, then diminish or cut it off, in as much as to concupiscence it addeth disobedience. And in an other place in one word; Chrysost. in Ep. ad Rom. hom. 5. & 17. Idem in 1. Tim. hom. 2. Transmittit. ernard. in Cantic. Serm. 50. Jndex peccati, lex est, &c. Saint Chrysostome saith, The Law would iustifie man, but it cannot, for neuer did any man fulfill it: and no man can be iustified thereby but in accomplishing of the same, a thing which is not possible for any man. What doth it then? It straineth it selfe, it doth his dutie, to send vs to him that is able to doe it, and the same is Iesus Christ, (saith he) if thou belieue in him. And this is the same also that Saint Barnard hath so excellently said: God in commaunding vs impossible things, hath not properly made men sinners, but hath made them humble: For in re∣ceiuing the commaundement, and espying the default, we will crie to heauen, and God will haue pittie on vs: and then also in that day we shall know, that it is not by the workes, that we shal haue done, that we shall be saued, but by his mightie power, &c. Now these which haue so well instructed vs in the office and ministration of the Law, The law lea∣deth to faith, and the iustice of God to his grace. cannot possibly faile, by consequent to explaine, and lay open vnto vs the bene∣fite of grace; leading vs from Moyses to Christ; from workes to faith; and from death, wherein wee stand naturally, euen from the time of our conception, and whereinto also euen after the time of our regeneration we runne and cast our selues continually, by our faults and offences, vnto our life and righteousnesse which is hid in Christ. We cannot liue by the Law, for we cannot fulfill it: wherefore we must haue recourse vn∣to his grace: His grace, that is to say, the mercie of God freely exhibited in Iesus Christ, who hath fulfilled the Law by his obedience, and which hath borne our trans∣gressions vppon the Crosse: but for such, as to whome God hath giuen by the same grace, to feele the sentence of condemnation due in themselues, and assuredly to be∣lieue their saluation in him. And this is the cause why these two points, are ordinari∣ly conioyned and coupled together, both in the Scriptures and holy Fathers, euen grace and faith, opposed to the Law and workes: namely, that grace, that is to say, that gift which God hath bestowed vppon vs, by the righteousnesse of his onely be∣gotten Sonne, yea of his Sonne, and all that which hee possesseth, for the abolishing of our sinnes; that faith, that is to say, that abilitie and power which hee giueth vs by his holy spirite, to receiue in humilitie, and yet with all assurednesse and certaintie that incomparable good thing, which hee bestoweth vpon vs here below, as a pledge and earnest pennie of those, which hee will consequently giue vs to possesse with him in the highest heauens. Origen expounding these words of the Apostle: Orig. in Ep. ad Rom. l 3. c. 3. Where is thy glorying? it is shut out, &c. He saith (saith he) that the iustification which is of faith onely doth suffice, although that the belieuer haue not wrought any worke. And for an example wee haue the theefe, for whose onely faith Jesus said vnto him: This day thou shalt be with me in Paradice, &c. And so like∣wise the woman in the Gospell, Luke the seuenth. The Pharisie said, Jf he were a Prophet, he would know what shee is: but for her faith onely, Iesus said vnto her, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, &c. And for this cause the Apostle doth not boast himselfe of his owne righteousnesse, chastitie, wisedome, &c. But of the Crosse of Christ, in the Lawe of faith, which is in Iesus Christ, &c. Saint Ambrose saith: Ambros. de Virgin. l. 3. Christ hath not redeemed thee with siluer nor gold: haue thy siluer readie, thou art not arrested euerie day though thou be in debt. He hath paid his bloud for thee, thou art indebted vnto him this bloud, for we lay pawned in the hands of a wicked Creditor: We haue beene the cause of the bill of our owne blame and guiltinesse by our sinnes: Idem de fide l. 3. c. 3. wee owe for the punishment of the same, our bloud, the Lord Iesus is come, hee hath paid his bloud for vs, &c. Againe; Our redemption is by the bloud of Christ, our forgiuenesse and pardon by his power, and our life by his grace. Idem de bono mort. c. 2. & Ep. 72.73. Againe, Eternall life, that is the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and the Lord Iesus is come to fasten our sufferings to his Crosse, to forgiue vs our sinnes, to nayle
to the crosse our obligation; and to wash all the world in his blood. Otherwise, Idem de Iacob. & beat. vita, l. 1. c. 5. Psalme 118. (saith he) where∣fore should the Prophet haue said; Haue mercie on mee, if he had trusted vnto his owne righte∣ousness; if there be any thing but mercie, which deliuereth from sin? But hee that hath need of mercie is a sinner: and therefore what soeuer good commeth to vs, let vs impute it to the righte∣ousnesse of Christ: It is the mercie of the Lord, that remission of sinnes is freely and liberally gi∣uen vnto vs: Let no man glorie or boast himselfe, that he hath a chast hart, &c. Againe, Idem de fide l. 3. c. 3. My wisedome, that is to saie, the crosse of Christ; My redemption the death of Christ. Again, By the disobedience of one man, many are made sinners: & by the obedience of one man many are made righteous. Againe, God hath taken vpon him our flesh, to abolish the curse of our sinfull flesh: Idem de fuga saecul. c. 7. Iudicato. he was made a curse for vs, to the end that the blessing might swallow vppe the curse; integritie, sinne; grace, the sentence of death; and life, death it selfe: for he likewise hath vndergone death, to fulfill the sentence of death, and to satisfie the iudge, for the curse lying vppon sinfull flesh, Faith receiueth and taketh hold of grace. Idem de pae∣nit. l. 2. Ex Syngrapha. Idem in ep. ad. Rom. c. 3. & 4 euen to the death, &c. And here behold the poole of grace, the fountaine of life freely set open, who shall put vs into the poole? who shall draw for vs out of that fountaine? verily, verily, no other helping hand saith the Apostle but faith: yea, Onely faith (saith Saint Ambrose:) Let vs hope and looke for (saith he) the pardoning of sinnes by faith, and not as by debt or merite; faith will obtaine it for vs, as by vertue of couenant vnder writing, (that is to say) of the promises of God, by the which he hath bound himselfe vnto vs: Praesumptio propior est arroganti, quàm roganti, &c. Presumption (that is, that ouer high cou∣ceipt we haue of our workes) is more incident to such as arrogate and challenge for their owne, e∣ternall life by their desertes: then to such as acknowledging themselues to haue no parte there∣in as of themselues, doe humblie craue the same by praier, &c. Againe, They are iustified freely, because they are iustified without doing or working for the same, and because they giue not any thing in exchange for the same, they are iustified by faith alone, by the gift of God, &c. The wicked man, impius, is iustified before God by faith alone, &c. For, Idem devocat. Gen. l. 2. c. 8. He that dare (saith he) preach, that the grace of God is giuen according to mens merites, preacheth against the catholike faith, &c. Let no man therefore glorie in his workes, for no man shall be iustified by them: He that is iust he hath it of gift. Tertullian calleth it Donatiuum: for hee is iustified by being washed: It is faith that deliuereth vs by the blood of Christ: Idem ep. 71. Blessed is he whose sinnes are re∣mitted, and hath his pardon granted, &c. Againe, By the sinne of one all haue deserued to bee condemned, sinning alike: for in the righteousnesse of one all shall be iustified, credentes, that belieue. If hee had taught as our aduersaries doe, should hee not haue put downe in stead of his Antithesis or contrarie assertion which he bringeth in; In meriting alike, Idem ad Rom. c. 8. by working that which is good, as he himselfe doth? &c. Here it were requisite that we should bring in the whole and intire speeches of S. Augustine, but we will content our selues with his ordinarie maximes; Death could not be ouercom but by death: Christ hath taken vpon him to die, that his vniust & vnderserued death might ouercome ours that was iust and deserued; August. serm. 10. de temp. Idem serm. 141 de Temp. and to the end that he might deliuer the guilty iustly, being himselfe slaine for them vniustly. Christ in bearing the punishment being guiltles, hath paid the punishment and satisfied the offence: His resurrection hath paide or broken the bandes of our double death: and hath in like manner framed and procured our twofold resurre∣ctions, &c. Our righteousnesse notwithstanding that it were true, yet is it such in this life, as that it consisteth rather in the forgiuenes of sinnes, then in the perfection of vertues. Idem serm. 18. de Temp. Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c. 27. & l. 2. c. 29. Idem de verb. Domim, serm. 61. Idem de verb. Apost. serm. 6. Idem in psal. 30. Idem in psal. 70. Our sanctuarie and cittie of refuge, our enfranchisement is the remission and forgiuenes of our sinnes, &c. If our righteousnes be not in Christ, then it is no righteousnes at all. Our righteousnes is he which goeth vnto the father, whereas notwithstanding we are not seperated from him, in as much as he is one with vs, euen with his bodie, which is the Church. Our righteousnes is the righteousnes of God & not our owne, which we haue in him, and not in our selues: The law cannot be accomplished by thee, it hath beene accomplished by Christ, &c. And therefore saith the Psalmist; Deliuer me in thy righteousnesse: for if thou shouldest looke vpon & behold mine, thou wouldest condemne me. Now this is that iustice of God which is made ours when it is giuen vnto vs. Againe, I know no righteousnesse in my selfe; I do not call to mind any other then thy righteousnesse: deliuer me, by thine and not by mine owne: for if I haue no better to saue me by then mine owne, I shall be numbred amongst them, of whome it is written; That the not knowing the righteousnesse of
God, Rom. 10.3. but seeking to establish their owne, did not submit themselues vnto that righteousnesse which is of God: that is to say, to the righteousnesse which is of faith, exhibited by grace: Which (saith he) raiseth vp those that are cast downe, August. contr. aduers. legis. Idem de Tri∣nitate l. 13. whereas the law casteth downe them that are raised vp, bestoweth good things vpon man, where as the Law doth nothing, but commaunde goodnesse: that is, in as much as it doth iustifie vs by the bloud of Christ. And what is it (saith he) to be iustified in the bloud of Christ? The father being angrie, seeth his Sonne dead for vs, Idem de grat. Christ l. 1. c. 48 and so becommeth appeased toward vs. Whereupon we shall be saued, not in our selues, but in God; not by our selues, but by Jesus Christ. And not in our owne righteousnesse, but in his. For the Apostle S. Paul saith verie wel, that he is vnreproueable, according to the righteousnesse, which is of the Law; but this righteousnesse he accompteth as dung and losse, in respect of the righ∣teousnesse which we hope for: Idem in Psal. 31. & in Psal. 138. and which we ought to thirst after, &c. Because (saith he in ano∣ther place) that the one causeth vs to loose the other. For, Si vis alienus esse à gratia, (saith he) if thou wilt haue no part in grace; then boast thy selfe of thy merites: All wholly is imputed to the grace of Christ, and not to our merites: Blessed are they not in whome there is no sinne found, but vnto whome their sinnes are forgiuen, Idem in Psal. 142. Idem in Psal. 142. &c. In an other place: Heare me in thy righteousnesse & not in mine owne: if he should say, Heare me in my righteousnesse, he should call it his merit. Yea but he calleth it in some places his righteousnesse: But when he speaketh of his owne, he vnderstan∣deth, giuen: as when we say, Giue vs our bread, &c. But hee speaketh in a more reformed manner when he saith; Idem Serm. 49 de Temp. Idem in Psal. 142. In thy righteousnes. Again; Thou shalt quicken me in thy righteousnes, not in mine owne; not because that I haue merited that thou shouldest so doe, but because that thou hast pittie vpon me. They whose sinnes are couered, for they are couered, they are abolished and blotted out. If God haue couered our sinnes, Voluit auertere; he would turne aside and not see them; and if hee would not see, Noluit animaduertere; hee would not take acknowledgement thereof; neither yet (saith he) by consequent punish them: Idem tract. 3. in Iohn. Noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere; he would not appoint any punishment for them; he had rather forgiue them. For what other thing can it be to see them, but to punish them? &c. The body of Christ, that is to say, the Church is not iustified in it selfe, but by grace: And all the members thereof, euen all those that are iustified by Christ, are iust; and that not in themselues but in him. This grace exhibited and powred abroad in Christ, this righteousnesse of Christ which must go in paiment for ours: Idem de spir. & lit. c. 8. how shal we come by it? By the merit of our works or by the meanes of faith? Ʋerily (saith he) by faith. By faith (saith the Apostle) euery man is iustified: but hee addeth: The righteousnesse of God is manifest: He saith not, the righteousnesse of man, or of his owne will, but the righteousnesse of God: and yet hee meaneth not that essentiall righteousnesse, of which God is called righteous, but that wherwith he clotheth & couereth man, when he iustifieth the wicked. The righteousnesse of God notwithstanding by the faith of Christ, that is to say, Idem Ep. 106. by the faith, by which we belieue in Christ. Againe, The law, according to which the Apostle, a most constant Preacher of grace saith, that no man shall be iustified, doth not consist onely in circumcision or other the Sacraments of the same, which hath figuratiue promises, but also in the workes thereunto belonging, and which who so performeth, liueth iustly, that is, in the Law of the ten Commaundements, &c. This is far off from that which our Aduersaries an∣swere: That the Apostle in that his whole discourse doth meane nothing but the cere∣moniall law. And the doers of the law shal not be iustified, that is to say, shal not be made righ∣teous, shal not be held or reputed for righteous. But (saith he) Iustification is obtained by faith: In tantum iustus, in quantum saluus: In as much as thou art saued, in as much as thou art righteous. but by faith thou obtainest saluation, &c. Againe; The law saith, thou shalt not couet; faith saith, heale & cure my soule: Grace saith, Behold thou art made whole, &c. More plainly; Righteous∣nes is by faith, by the which we belieue that we are iustified, that is to say, made righteous, by the grace of God by Iesus Christ, in such sort as that we are found in him, not hauing the righteous∣nesse which is of the law, Idem in Serm. 237. de Temp. Idem in Psal. 123. Idem in Ioh. tract. 50. & 53. but that which is by the faith of Christ. And againe: If the righteous∣nes of God be a worke, in that we belieue in Christ, name the worke: To belieue therfore in Christ, is called faith, &c. And by it (saith he) the iust man liueth: Now it is hardly seene that hee li∣ueth ill, that belieueth well. Againe: How (saith he) shall I possesse and inioy Jesus Christ being absent? How shall I put vp my hand into heauen there to take hold on him where hee sitteth? Reach thither thy faith and thou hast holde of him. The faith of Christ is to belieue in him, which iust ifieth the wicked: to belieue in him the mediatour: to belieue in him the Sauiour: Such
as are desirous to establish their owne righteousnesse, cannot belieue. Idem de pati∣ent. c. 21. & Psal. 104. And therefore saith hee in another place: All the old righteous men, euen those which were before the incarnation of Christ, were iustified in this faith of Christ, in that true righteousnesse, which Christ is to vs, in that they belieued, that that should be fulfilled and done, which we belieue to be fulfilled and fi∣nished, &c. And neither before nor since this incarnation was there euer any man found recon∣ciled to God, but by this faith, &c. Cyrill saith: Faith bringeth saluation, grace iustifieth, and the worke of God, that is, Cyril. in Ioh. l. 3. c. 31. in The∣saur. l. 12. c. 1. Idem in dial. de Trinit. l. 5. Idem in Ioh. c. 14. Hieronym. in Psal. 31. faith in Christ, &c. Againe, We are iustified by faith, not by workes, nor yet by merites. Againe, Faith maketh vs familiar with the Father, and by the Sonne it setteth and establisheth our abode neere vnto him, and wee are saued by faith and not otherwise: according to that which is said, The Lord is my light and my saluation, &c. Saint Ierome: Ʋnto that part of the syllogisme here propounded: If righteousnes bee by the law, then Christ died gratis, that is to say, for nothing, or in vaine, for our Assumption we must take that which followeth, and which cannot be denied; That Christ died not in vaine, &c. And thereupon conclude; Righteousnes therefore is not by the law. But rather saith hee in ano∣ther place: Our righteousnesse consisteth herein, Ad Galat. 12. in as much as that that which is hidden is not seene, and that which is not seene is not imputed; and that which is not imputed shall not bee pu∣nished, &c. And this is the exposition of the Psalme: Blessed are they whose sinnes are re∣mitted, &c. Saint Basill, What is our righteousnes? Listen and giue eare: Basil. serm. de Bapt. c. 2. & hom. 29. & in Moral. regul. 1. c. 2. & 5. & regul. breu. Inter 10.13. Idem hom. de humil. animi. Idem in ep. 7. Chrysost. de fide in Psal. 50 Idem in Mat. hom. 33. Blessed are they whose sinnes are remitted. Againe, Man must acknowledge that he is destitute of true righteousnes, and that he is iustified by faith alone in Christ. For O man (saith he afterward) boast not thy selfe in thy righteousnes: All that thou art to boast thy selfe of is in God: without him thou hast nothing to boast thy selfe of, but rather thou hast cause to kill and mortifie, whatsoeuer is of thy selfe, that so thou maiest seeke the life that is to come in Christ: whereof we do alreadie inioy the first fruits, liuing altogether by grace, and of the gift of God. Chrysostome: No man euer attained life without faith, and faith alone saued the thiefe. And what brought God to the sauing of this thiefe? verily, remission of sinnes. And what brought the thiefe on his owne behalfe? The faith of his Confession, which by the greatnes and height thereof, reached euen to heauen, &c. Againe, He that said in S. Mathew, I haue kept all these thinges, made no question of that which he was to belieue, nor how; but what he was to doe, that be might inherite euerlasting life: because that the faith of the Iewes (that is to say of that time) was in their workes. But saith he in another place; Idem hom. de fide. Neuer was there any man iustified by workes: It is in this as it is in a lampe, whose oile doth not giue the light, but feede it: so likewise faith is not begotten of workes, but is nourished thereby: faith must go before works. I can point you out a faithfull man without workes, the thiefe: but life eternall was neuer besto∣wed of any destitute of faith. Workes would not bee able to saue: faith must breake forth and shine before workes: workes must be content to follow and come after, as handmaides. Idem ad Ga∣lat. hom. 3. In ep. ad Rom. hom. 5. & 17. In an o∣ther place: J liue in faith, that is to say, I liue by the faith that I haue in Christ: if lesus be dead, it is verie manifest that the Law cannot iustifie. On the contrarie, saith he to the Romans: So soone as a man belieueth, so soone is he iustified. Epiphanius in Anchorato, in a few words: Christ was made righteousnesse vnto me, Epiphan. in Anchorato. in as much as he hath loosed the bands of sinne: and sanctification, in as much as hee hath deliuered me, that is from the seruitude and thraldome of the same: and redemption, because that by his bloud I haue remission, &c. In the Realme of France, about the yeare 500. this matter was debated, and as it commeth to passe that the light and truth breaketh out, by the holding of argument in matters of controuersie, so it was that no man in these contentions did cleare and make plaine this matter better then Prosper: The Law hath shewed vs our disease, Prosper ad Capitul. Gall. c 7 in lib. de ingrat. and grace in Iesus Christ is laid open and brought to light for the healing of the same. Is this grace in such sort necessarie, as that no man can otherwise be saued, how holy or excellent so euer he be? Verily saith Prosper, answering to the head points of the Frenchmen: Bee it knowne vnto you, that neither before nor since the Lawe, was euer any iustified, but by this grace, but by this same faith in Christ. And he repeateth and goeth ouer the same in many
places. Idem in sen∣tent. 315. & in lib. de ingrat. And this grace, how are we made partakers of it? May we attaine it by nature? Nay (saith he) as they which would be iustified by the Law, are fallen from grace: to whome the Apostle saith: If the righteousnesse of the Law, then Christ died in vaine: so say we vnto them that call nature the grace, which the faith of Christ receiueth, if righteousnesse bee by nature, then Christ is dead in vaine: For Christ came to fulfill the Law, which man could not fulfill, as also to saue and restore nature, lost and spoyled in it selfe: according to that which is written: That he is come to seeke vp that which was wandred and lost; and to saue that which was spoy∣led. And in the verie same tearmes speaketh the second Councell of Orange. How then? And what is the meanes to come by it? Let vs confesse, saith hee to the French∣men, Concil. Arans. 2 Canon. 21. Prosper ad Capit. Gall. ouect. 8. & in de ingrat. Idem deivocat. gent. l. 1. c 24. Idem de vocat. Gent l. 18. Idem in Ep. ad Demetriad. that no man can runne vnto this grace, but by grace. All that my father giueth me, com∣meth vnto me, and they come vnto him by faith. Per ipsam nisi curratur, non itur ad ipsum, &c. Vnto God (saith he in an other place) no man can goe, but he that hath his guide and direction from God: send downe the light and truth, and they shall lead me into thy holy mountaine, and in∣to thy holy Tabernacle. Yea without any manner of precedent merits; or yet without all other precedent cause, saue onely the good pleasure, saue onely the good wil of God. In as much (saith hee) as the cause in vs, for which we receiue and obtaine grace, is this good will, in which and with which is hidden the reason of our election, our merites beginning with this grace, which we haue receiued without merites. Otherwise, it should not be said, if man bee not regenerate and borne againe of water and of the spirit, hee cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen: But well, if man be not iust, &c. And this therefore (saith hee in an other place) is the mercie of God, that maketh vs seeke for his mercie; and which draweth vs as it were by maine force vnto this mercie. That is, because that he calleth vs first, and giueth vs to heare and to belieue him, he loueth vs first, and giueth vs to loue him, by the infusing of his spirit into vs, &c. And this he handleth at large in whole bookes. Now this particular grace, which fit∣teth and prepareth vs for the vniuersall, Idem de vita contempl. c. 21 to the fountaine of grace, is called faith: Faith (saith he) the foundation of righteousnesse, before which there is not any good workes, but from, and of which all that are good doe come, which purgeth vs from all sinnes, illuminateth our vn∣derstanding, reconcileth vs to God, associateth and coupleth vs to all them that are partakers of the same nature; breatheth into vs the hope of the reward that is to come, increaseth in vs holy vertues, and confirmeth vs in the possession of the same. And the same the meere gift of God, contrarie to that which Vincentius obiected; That faith to belieue, proceeded of man: but that though man did thus come by faith, that yet it must bee God, that should adde thereto his spirit: Idem ad ob∣iect. Vincent. ad Dubium. 1.2.. Idem in Ep ad Euin. Otherwise (saith he) grace should be no more grace, if it were preuen∣ted by any thing, in respect whereof it should be giuen. For, saith he vnto Rusinus: Man did not deale righteously, whereupon righteousnesse was added and giuen vnto him, and in that hee did not walke with God, his course and wayes were strengthned, and for that hee did not loue God, his loue and charitie was inflamed. Nay (saith he) but he was without faith, and by con∣sequent, wicked; and therefore and thereupon it was giuen him to receiue the spirit of faith, and so by it was made righteous: he was blind and dead, and therefore had it giuen vnto him to receiue both life axd sight. Idem in sen∣tent. 374. & l. de ingrat. And therefore (he saith in an other place) it is not said: Euerie man that heareth my voice is of the truth, but on the contrarie: Euerie man which is of the truth heareth my voice: because that man is not of the truth, because he heareth the voice, but rather he hea∣reth the voice, because he is of the truth, because he hath receiued this gift of him, which is the truth. And what other thing is this gift, but to belieue in Christ, by the grace of Christ, by the gift of Christ himselfe? Inspirata sides. And therefore they are in as great an errour, which attribute the infide∣litie of the wicked vnto God, as they which would haue any other to bee the author of the faith and righteousnesse of good men, but God himselfe. For he that hath once lost that which he had receiued, cannot resume and take againe the same, after that he hath lost it: but he must seeke to recouer the possession of it againe, from whence he first had it, hauing now suffered it to be lost: To be briefe (he saith) to be able to haue faith, Idem in sent. 316. and to be able to haue charitie, that is to say, to bee capable of these graces, is of, or in the nature of men; but to haue faith, or to haue charitie, com∣meth from that grace, which is giuen to none but to the faithfull: That is, God giueth and dealeth freely, where it seemeth good vnto him. But notwithstanding the Aduersarie obiected vnto him, I see S. Paul; who praiseth the faith of the Romaines, Corinthians
Ephesians, and Philippians: and wherefore should he praise it in them, if it bee the gift of God, if it be not their owne and of themselues? Nay (saith hee) to the end that thou maiest not imagine, that it is an argument that it was not giuen them, Idem aduers. Collat. c 36. because it is praised in them, read somewhat further, how hee praiseth God for the grace which was giuen them in Christ; how in all things they are made rich in him; how hee hath giuen vnto them faith, which worketh by loue; how he hopeth and trusteth that hee which hath begun the good worke in them, will finish the same, from the first day, vnto the day of Christ. And therefore conclude the ra∣ther, saith hee to them of Genua, That faith whether young and newly begun, Idem ad ex∣cept. Genuens. Idem de vocat. l. 1 c. 23. Concil. Arans. 2. c. 5. or old and growne perfect, are both the gift of God: That the beginning of faith, vnto the consummation and full accomplishment of the perseuerance of the same, is of him, &c. Which the second Councell of Orange resolued vpon in these speeches: If any man say that the verie begin∣nings of faith, Et ipse credulitatis affectus, by which we belieue in him which iustifieth the wic∣ked, and not the growth and increase onely, are not the gift of grace, by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, calling and reclaiming vs from infidelitie, to faith, from impietie and vngodlinesse to pietie and godlinesse, &c. Let him bee accompted of as an enemie of the doctrine of the Apo∣stles, &c. Thus Prosper handled the matter, reasoning and arguing the same amongst our Frenchmen: and this same controuersie or the like, was stirred againe by one Abai∣lardus, a long time after, against our Countrie man S. Barnard; Barnar. Dom. Serm. 1. (for the vnreclaima∣ble pride of man, when all other things yeeld, will still stand out and bee last in the field) who though he be of the last and newest, yet is hee not the least worth or com∣ming behinde the rest for the well handling of this matter. God (saith he) hath washed with the water of an other, those who had beene defiled by the sin of an other: And yet not in such sort altogether an other mans, but that it was our owne withall; for otherwise it had not polluted and defiled vs: but thus an other mans for that wee haue all sinned in Adam, ours, because that we our selues also haue sinned. And howbeit that wee haue sinned in an other, yet it was imputed vnto vs by the iudgement of God; a iust iudgement and sentence, though secret and hidden. And yet notwithstanding O man, thou hast no cause to complaine thy selfe, for in stead of Adam his disobedience, thou hast the obedience of Christ freely giuen vnto thee, &c. Idem Serm. 4. in fer. hebdo. Of Christ (saith he) who is come freely to iustifie sinners, to make seruants his brethren, and slaues, fellow-heires with him, and banished men, kings. He hath said, Consummatum est, All is fulfilled and fini∣shed, there is nothing left vndone, that ought to bee done, &c. And how was this done? Jn this (saith hee) that he was made sinne: all manner of sinne, as well originall as personall hath beene defaced, yea euerie single and particular sinne hath beene banished and cast out: shall mans miseries then ouercome Gods mercies, or rather the mercies, the miseries? And he hath not one∣ly taken vpon him the forme of a seruant, to be made subiect; but of an euill seruant to bee beaten, and of a seruant of sinne, to pay the punishment, he himselfe notwithstanding being the partie, in whome there was no fault, &c. Let not therefore, the name of holinesse astonish thee: Idem Serm. 3. ad fratres. Propositum. Idem in fest. Sanctor. For God cal∣leth not Saints according to merite, but according to his owne ordinance and decree; that is to say, according to his purpose: not according to their affections, but according to his owne intention. And he rendreth a reason in an other place: For saith he; What can our righteousnesse bee before God, but a menstruous cloth, as the Prophet saith? All our righteousnesse, to be short, but vnrighteousnesse? And then, by a stronger reason, what shall our sinnes be? And therefore let vs haue recourse with the Prophet, vnto mercie alone, for it is that alone, that is able to saue our soules: and only that mercie extended and exhibited in Iesus Christ alone. Idem de sepul∣chro ad mili∣tes. In Christ alone (saith he) who taking vpon him the burden of the punishment, but being nothing possessed of the fault, hath merited life and righteousnesse for vs with God: In Christ alone, who dying for sinners, hath remitted the sinne; whereby it commeth to passe that there (saith hee) remaineth no more place for merite, and yet notwithstanding our debt is paid: In Christ alone in whose death, death is hunted and chased away, and his righteousnesse imputed vnto vs. But, VVhat a peece of Iu∣stice is it wilt thou say, that the innocent and guiltlesse, should die for the transgressor and guiltie person? Yes: And not iustice onely, but a worke of mercie also, &c. But againe; How may the gutltie be iustified by this death? Nay, why may or should hee not? One shall haue sinned and all shall be guiltie? Now then, should the innocencie of one extend and bee imputed but to one? The
sinne of one, hath brought death vpon all: And the righteousnesse of one should it restore life but to one? The sinne of Adam shall bee imputed vnto me, and shall not the righteousnesse of Christ appertaine vnto me? The disobedience of one hath spoyled me; and shall not the obedience of the other doe me any seruice, Multo germa∣nius. Idem in Psal. 91. Serm. 14. Idem in Cant. Serm. 13.14.22.23. Illibata. &c? Nay rather (saith hee) we are borne of God, according to the spirite, both more naturally and lawfully, then of Adam according to the fleshe, &c. And therefore (saith hee) Iesus Christ hath power to forgiue sinnes, as God; and to die as man, and in dying to acquit the debt of death, in that hee was iust: and himselfe to bee sufficient for vs all, both vnto righteousnesse and vnto life, &c. Jn this righteousnesse (saith hee) thou art saued gratis, and for nothing in respect of thy selfe: but in respect of him, not altoge∣dound, without any touch or stroke of man therein, as hauing alone triumphed ouer the enemie, alone deliuered the sillic captiues, alone encountred, and alone ouercome, &c. For such as will establish their owne righteousnesse, which iustifieth not but accuseth, there can no better fall out vnto them, then that they should be giuen ouer to their owne righteousnesse, which will ouerset and ouerwhelme them, in stead of iustifying of them, &c. But on the contrarie, O Lord, the sweete smell of thy righteousnesse, is so large and farre and wide spread euerie where throughout, as that thou art knowne not onely to bee iust and righteous, but iustice and righteousnesse it selfe, euen that righteousnesse which iustifieth the sinner, &c. And it is (saith hee) in this righteous∣nesse, that I am iustified and made righteous: For inlighten thou mine eyes, and I become prudent and of good vnderstanding, remember not the sinnes of my youth, and then I become iust, guide me in the way and then I become holy: but if thy bloud doe not sue for me, I doe not attaine sal∣uation: But blessed, and not iust alone is hee, to whome sinne is not imputed, &c. It is sufficient therefore for me and in stead of all righteousnesse, Indulgen. Dei. Idem Serm. 61 to haue him fauourable and mercifull vnto me, against whome alone I haue sinned: All that, whatsoeuer he hath appointed, not to bee imputed vnto me, is as if it neuer had beene: The righteousnesse of God is, not to sinne, the righteousnesse of man, is Gods pardon. Hitherto we see, how this holy person cannot satisfie himselfe, or thinke that he hath sufficiently set out this doctrine. My merite (saith he) is no other thing then the mercie of God: I am not poore or spare of merites, vntill such time as mercies be∣gin to faile. I will sing eternally: And what? Of mine owne righteous workes? Nay, O Lord, I will call to mind thy righteousnesse alone: for euen it also is mine: For thou art become and made righteousnesse vnto me from God. Should J feare that it will not be sufficient for both? Nay, this is no short cloake, Idem Serm. 67.68. that is not able to couer two: Thy righteousnesse is righteousnesse and indureth to all eternities: This large and long lasting righteousnesse shall couer both thee and me for euer, and in me a multitude of sinnes, Idem Ep. 190. contr. A bailar. &c. On the contrarie saith he; Whereas merite hath fore∣stalled and setled it selfe, grace cannot find so much as a doore or any other place to enter at: All that thou attributest to merites, belongeth vnto the grace of God, &c. The children new borne, stand not in need of merites, for they haue the merites of Christ, &c. For (saith he) where as man wanted righteousnesse of his owne, Aliunde. the righteousnesse of an other was assigned vnto him: Man was indebted, and man paid the debt, the satisfaction of one is imputed vnto all: the head hath satisfied for the members, Colossians 2. &c. And what reason should there bee, why our righte∣ousnesse should not come from elswhere, then from our selues, seeing that our sinne came from else∣where? And should sinne be inherent in the seede of the sinner, and righteousnesse separated from the bloud of our Sauiour? Nay, but as they died in Adam, so they shall be quickned in Christ: J am defiled of the one by the flesh, but I take hold of the other by faith. And if thou obiect vnto me the sinfulnesse of my birth and generation, I set against it, my regeneration; my spiritual birth, against my carnall birth. Idem de Cae∣nacmni. Idem l. degrat. & liber. arit. He that hath taken pittie vpon the sinner, will not condemne the iust: And righteous I may be bold to call my selfe, but by the righteousnesse of Iesus Christ. And what manner of righteousnesse? The end of the Law is Christ, in righteousnesse to all them that belieue; seeing he is made righteousnesse vnto vs, from God the father. Now if hee haue beene made righ∣teousnesse vnto me, is not it mine? The righteousnesse then of man, consisteth in the bloud of the redeemer, &c. So farre forth as, That it is impossible (saith he) that the least sinnes should be washed away, otherwise then of Christ and by Christ, &c. And who is he that iustifieth himselfe, but he that presumeth of other merites then his grace? Incentura. And this also is properly to be said to be he that knoweth not the righteousnesse of God; it is hee onely that doth meritortous workes, which
hath made them vpon whome he may bestow them. That which we call merites, Via regni, sed non causa regnandi. is the nurcerie of hope, the matches and matter to make charitie shine out, the signes of a secret predestination, the forerunners of a future felicitie, and the way whereby to enter into the kingdome, but not the cause of raigning, &c. In as much verily, as the kingdome of heauen is an inheritance, but the way to come thither, is the feare of God, manifested saith the Apostle in good workes, which God hath prepared; to the end that we should walke in them, &c. Whereby wee may iudge how farre Saint Barnard his doctrine is off from that of our Aduersaries in this point, and yet it is not passing three hundred yeares since he writ, when as he acknowledgeth no righ∣teousnesse able to iustifie a sinner, but the righteousnesse of Christ, imputed to the sinner; continually vsing this word of imputation, whereat they stumble, and where∣to they oppose and set themselues so much: He acknowledgeth not, I say, any merit, but the merit of Christ, nor any satisfaction, but that which he made for vs vppon the Crosse. And he maketh al this to be ours by faith alone, Idem in Psal. 91. Serm 9. Idem Serm. 10 & 15. as appeareth by that which follow∣eth: Let him (saith hee) that will, pretend his merit; it is good for me to put my hope in God. God will saue them saith the Psalmist: By what merits? Heare, what cōmeth after: Because they haue hoped in him. Hereby then consider their righteousnesse, euen that which is of faith, and not that which is of the Law. Faith saith, Great good things are prepared for the faithfull: Hope, These good things are reserued for me: Charitie; I runne thither ward, as fast as I can, &c. In a word, all the merit of man, is that he haue his hope fixed in him, which hath saued euery man, &c. Idem in Can∣tic. Serm. 24. Epist. 190. Who∣soeuer findeth in himselfe remorce and compunction for his sinnes, hungreth and thirsteth after righteousnesse: Let him belieue in thee O Lord which iustifiest the wicked, and he shall haue peace with God. Being iustified (saith he) by faith onely: For (saith he) the end of the Law is Christ, vnto righteousnesse (saith the Apostle) vnto euerie belieuer, &c. CHAP. XIX. That good workes are the gift of God, and therefore cannot merit, and to what vse or ende they serue according to the holy Scriptures and the fathers. WHat then? Are our workes vnprositable? God forbid. Whereunto good workes serue. They are vnprofita∣ble to iustifie thee before God; and yet no doubt profitable to iustifie, that is to say, to testifie thy faith before the Church: vnprofitable, to make thee a Sonne, to make thee an heyre, but profitable liuely to set forth and true∣ly to point out a Sonne, a child of the promise; in as much as thou liuest according to God, in that thou indeuorest to edifie his elect and chosen. For (saith the Apostle) wee are created in Christ vnto good workes, which God hath prepared, Eph. 2 2. Cor. 5. 1. Pet 2. to the end that we might walke in them. He is dead: he is risen againe for vs: but it is to that end that wee may liue vnto him, that we may die vnto sinne, and liue vnto righteousnesse: Hee hath deliuered vs from the seruitude of sinne, and from the power of darknesse: Rom 13. Iam. 2. 1. Timoth. 5. Rom. 8. but to the end that we might serue vnto righteousnesse; that we might renounce the workes of darknesse, and put on the armour of light. Be cause that, Faith without workes is dead: Because that, Who so saith, that he know∣eth God, and doth not his commaundements, is a lyer: And because that, Wee are debters to liue according to the spirit, and not according to the flesh. And therefore if we haue not loue, The loue wee beare to God must not con∣sider there∣ward, but our obedience and dutiful regard. Iohn 3. we haue not faith, we are not of God; we haue nothing to pretend, wherfore we haue any right or part in his inheritance. But certainely that which we doe, if we bee the true children of God, we doe it not for the inheritaunce: that were in some sort too seruile a thing: but rather in consideration of the great bountifulnesse and louing kindnesse of God, who hath so loued the world: yea which hath in particular so lo∣ued vs, as to haue giuen his onely Sonne vnto death, to the end that belieuing in him, we might haue eternall life: Who furthermore hath manifested this secrete vnto vs, hath giuen vs to belieue therein, hath iustified vs in his Sonne, and hath sanctified vs by his holy spirit: because that this great loue and fauour of God, towards vs most
miserable wretches, ought to beget a loue in vs, which may mak vs to loue him alone, and that for himselfe: which may cause vs to renounce our selues for him, and which may make vs loue our neighbours, in him: Not to procure vs thereby the celestiall Paradice; but for the loue of himselfe: Nay, to loose a Paradice for him; if we cannot haue it but without him. Such ought to be our loue towards God, as that it ought to bee intirely and wholly set on him, and cleane and free from all respect of reward or punishment. As likewise the good child obeyeth not his father, because he is the heire, this were an euill signe: but naturally because he is a Sonne. Neither is he heire because he obeyeth, but because he is a child: a child, who by obeying cannot merite this inheritaunce; for it is his part and dutie: who notwithstanding by disobeying, might loose it, and that euerie houre; in as much certainely as the inheritance depen∣deth vpon the father, and that grace is lost by ingratitude, if it be not renued & sup∣ported by the goodnesse of the father: a bountifull goodnesse, descending more free∣ly from the father to the Sonne, then it ascendeth from the Sonne to the father. And this againe is the cause, The loue of God, the gift of God. wherefore it is a gift of God, that this loue of God, which worketh good workes in vs: this loue of God, which hath begotten vs for chil∣dren to him in the bloud of Christ: euen that this same loue should giue vs to be true children, and should giue vs to loue God, by the operation of his spirit. This free loue I say of the Lord, which hath iustified vs in his bloud, and sanctified vs by his spirit: in as much as the merit of Christ worketh not only to the obtaining of the remission of our sinnes, A double or two fold righ∣teousnesse, but both of them the gift of God. Rom. 6. in that we die in him; but also to the giuing of his holy spirit vnto vs, which renueth the spirit of our vnderstanding, to the end that wee may liue to him. And yet in the meane time both the one and the other gift, is called righteousnesse: the for∣mer, that is the imputation of the righteousnesse of Christ, for the remission of our sinnes, when it is said: Abraham belieued, and it was imputed vnto him for righteousnesse: The latter, that is the operation and working of his holy spirit, renuing vs from daie to day, from the outward man to the inward; and from the old to the new, when it is said: 1. Ioh. 2. That we are freed and set at libertie from sinne, to serue vnto righteousnesse. Againe; Who∣soeuer worketh righteousnesse, is borne of God, &c. But these two sortes of righteousnesse, though they both proceede from one and the same fountaine of liberalitie, are farre differing the one from the other: That, as which is able to stand out against the an∣ger of God at all assaies, because it is the righteousnesse of Christ imputed to euerie faithfull man, by the which he is iustified, that is to say, quit before God: not as one that hath paide the full paiment, but as one that hath obtained an acquittance and absolute discharge, and that by hauing seene the hand writing defaced, and the Bill of debt cancelled, and therefore he is called, Blessed, to whome sinne is not imputed, &c. This, as which can neuer make it selfe able to discharge vs of our debt toward God, as making vs day by day more indebted vnto him, by reason of that contradiction be∣twixt the fleshe and the spirit, and by the making heauie and sad of the spirit of God within vs: Wherupon also the Apostle crieth out of himselfe, Who shall deliuer me from this mortall bodie? &c. And this little righteousnesse notwithstanding, as also sanctifi∣cation, which appeareth in our workes, is euermore the gift of God, grace for grace; in as much as those whome he hath iustified, 1. Cor. 9. he hath also sanctified: hee hath giuen vs faith and the spirit, and both to belieue and to do: Wherupon the Lord againe thus setteth vpon vs and saith: What hast thou that thou hast not receiued? Who hath giuen vnto me first, and I will repay it him againe? &c. You are not your owne: For you are bought with a price, &c. Why it is cal∣led a reward. The word Me∣rit vnknowne to the Scrip∣ture. Eccles. 16. And notwithstanding, in as much as Godlinesse hath the promises of this life, and of? the life to come, God vouchsafeth sometimes to call it hyre, which hee giueth vs of his free promises: hyre promised by him, but not deserued by vs; a reward, whereof he is become debter vnto himselfe, that so he might crowne his own gifts, vnto the faith∣fulnesse, I say, of his owne promises, and not to the sufficiencie of our merits. For as concerning the word Merit, it is not to bee found in the whole Scripture: the word it selfe is no lesse new, then the doctrine that followeth vpon it. In Ecclesiast. 16. whence
they alleadge: Euerie man shall find according to the merit of his workes: Hebr. 13. Their Glose hath noted. Placetur Deo. To the Hebrewes likwise where they Translate, Talibus hostiis promeretur Deus, by such sacrifices God is meri∣ted; that is by giuing and distributing of their goods, the Greeke saith, , God is well pleased. But let vs yet further heare the testimonies laide downe in the wri∣tings of the fathers. The Lord Iesus saith Saint Ambrose, Is come to fasten our sufferings to his Crosse, Thus haue the old writers spoken. Ambros de In∣cob. & vita beata l. 1. c. 5. and to forgine vs our sinnes; In his death we are iustified, &c. Now as our sinnes are forgiuen vs in his death, that in his death also the passions & sufferings of our flesh might die, that they might bee nailed to, with his nailes: Let vs liue and conuerse with Christ, let vs seeke and search with Christ, the things that are heauenly. Wee are renued in the spirit: let vs walke in the spirit, let vs not cast our selues into new billes of debt, by committing new sinnes: Let vs put off the old man &c. But saith he, The ransome of the bloud of Christ should bee too much abased, Idem de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 5. if the iustifi∣cation which is by grace, should bee due vnto precedent merits: But neither precedent, neither yet subsequent ones, can come in for any paiment in this accompt. But rather (saith hee in an o∣ther place) seeing that we being quickned in Christ, are dead vnto the world; Idem de suga. Secul c. 7. wee are not any longer to serue the world; wee are not any longer to liue according to our former liues, but accor∣ding to the life of Christ, euen the life of innocencie, of chastitie, and of all other vertues. We are risen againe with Christ, let vs liue with him: let vs ascend to him: let vs ascend and goe vp on high in him: And let vs prouide that the Serpent may not henceforth find euer a heele about vs to trip vs vpon, or to bruse, by not finding vs any more ouertaken and carried away, with these earthly things. Now what is all this but the same which Saint Paul said: That faith cau∣seth loue, that hauing receiued life by the faith of Christ, we would liue hencefoorth in Christ? And this is the same that wee said, that hee which hath iustified vs by his spirite, hath sanctified vs also by the same spirite, vnto the renuing of the inwarde man, &c. Saint Augustine in like manner. We say that workes iustifie the faith, August. de spir. & lit. c. 18. De fid. & ope∣rib. c. 1.4. Ep. 105. ad Sixt. and the faith the Christian, that is to say, that the truth of his faith is proued by them: Saint Augu∣stine his words follow: No man doth a good worke but he that is alreadie iustified: but iusti∣fication is obtained by faith. And these Maxims are ordinarie with him: Opera sequuntur iustificatum, non praecedunt iustificandum: Workes follow him that is iustified, they doe not goe before him that is to be iustified: The merits of the righteous doe serue for vse, Idem ad Sim∣plic. l. 1. q. 9 11 Idem de spir. & li. c. 10. Idem de pa∣tient. c 21. Lib. 1. ad simp. q. 11. Idem de fid. & operib c. 4. Idem Serm. 181. de temp. de fid. & oper. Idem quest. 23 because that they are righteous, but not to make them righteous: Workes doe not beget grace, but grace workes: Grace is freely giuen vnto vs, not because we haue done good workes, but to the end wee may be able to to doe them. Workes doe not preuent the mercie of God, but follow it: Againe, They cannot bee, if grace haue not preuented them by faith. And good workes are by him sometimes called; The workes of righteousnesse: because (saith he) they follow righteousnesse, that is to say, iustification. And thus you see, that workes are the touchstone of faith; yea the inseperable effectes, necessarily following where faith is. For (saith he) to be∣lieue in him, that is to loue him: but this can neither the wicked, nor yet the Diuels doe: but Christians onely, because that faith without loue is nothing worth. And it is (saith he) of that health fall faith of the Gospell that the Apostle speaketh of, from which workes proceede by this loue: For that which bringeth forth none, Saint Peter calleth a dried fountaine: Saint Iude a cloud without water: Saint James a dead faith, &c. And Saint Paul (saith hee) is expounded by Saint Iames, namely, that he vnderstandeth not, that hee that belieueth, Non finitur is not bound to doe well, but rather that he knoweth that he is not come to the gift of iustification, by the merits of his precedent workes, neither yet by those that follow, because it is not permitted in this life. For be that is iustified by faith, how can he but afterward walke righteously? &c. One man therefore (saith he) praiseth the faith of Abraham, and an other his workes: Idem in Psal. 31. Ex side. Idem in Psal. 30. Confesss. l. 12. and yet they bee not contra∣rie. Great is the worke of Abraham, but as it commeth of faith: J see the foundation to bee faith: and I praise the fruite of the good tree: but in faith I knowe the roote to bee neither bar∣ren, nor withered, &c. Whereupon hee concludeth: Let not a man boast of his workes before faith, neither let any man neglect them after hee hath once receiued grace to beleeue, &c. And as our Sauiour Christ doth liue in thine hart, so let him also remaine and dwel in thy
mouth: Concil. Arans. c. 12. so also in thy deedes and actions, &c. This is that which the Councell of Orange doth hold vpon this question: To loue God, is a gift of God: Hee hath vouchsafed ma to be beloued; himselfe hauing loued, without being loued: He loued vs, when we displeased him, to the end that he louing vs, we might please him: for he hath shed loue into our hearts, &c. To be briefe, these good fathers say: Wee begin not in any good worke, but afterward God helpeth vs to make an end: Nay, hee without any precedent merits, inspireth into vs his faith and his loue, &c. But it may be at the least, you will say, that man may merit afterward. Nay saith hee: Prosp. de vo∣cat. Gent. l. 1. c. 23. & l. 2. c. 8. What hast thou that thou hast not receiued? &c. And Prosper Aquitanus who was of the same time: Vnto euerie man (saith hee) is giuen, Sine merito, vnde tendat adme∣ritum: without merit, where by he may take the way to merite, and it is giuen before any paines or labour taken, to euerie man, for which he is to receiue a reward according to his labour, &c. And then you wil say, yet loe here both merit and reward; but then againe behold and marke how hee expoundeth it: If God find in vs what we haue committed in our selues, we cannot but be condemned: Idem sentent. 126. but if be find in vs, what he himselfe hath wrought, we shall bee crow∣ned: Because (saith he in an other place) all our merit from the beginning vnto the end, is the gift of God; all our workes otherwise, tending to nothing but condemnation. Which thing ee setteth downe in these verses against the vnthankfull. Nam meritum ad mortem subeundam sufficit vnum; Ad vitam, Idem contr. collat. & contr. ingrat. nisi quod donarit gratia, nullum. And therefore concerning the iustice imputed vnto vs, he saith: Our righteousnesse consisteth more in the remission of our sinnes then in the perfection of our vertues. And that same remission consisting also in the righteousnesse of Christ: for from that commeth our righteousnesse, in as much as wee are renued: Ipsa (inquit) virtutum gaudia oul∣nus habent: Idem in sent. The greatest ioyes that their vertues can moue in them, haue their pearcing wounds and scorching Corasiues: Wee haue not any reward, but that which is bestowed vppon vs in our free pardon. Saint Barnard saith in one word; Bernard in Psal 91. Serm. 9. & 15. De Sepulch. Idem in Cant. Serm. 22. By faith Christ dwelleth in our harts, and as for works they giue testimonie vnto our faith, how that it liueth. Againe; The fruit of the knowledge of God, is the strong crie of prayer, &c. Death being dead, life is restored into his place: & in like manner sinne being taken away, righteousnesse succeedeth it, &c. And how? Because (saith hee in an other place) they that are iustified from their sinnes, desire and resolue themselues o embrace and follow holinesse, without the which no man shall see God: For they heare the Lord, who cryeth, Be holy, &c. But, All these workes (saith he) all these pretended merits, Sunt vi regni, non causa regnandi: They are the way to raigne, but not the cause thereof. But as we said before, these two righteousnesses are verie much differing; namely, that which approueth and iustifieth our faith, from that which iustifieth our selues: that, burning and beeing consumed at the onely appearance of the shining bright∣nesse of the face of God, this beeing of proofe, against the Cannon shot of Gods wrath and Hell it selfe: that being the worke of the newe man, which is renued but slowly in vs, this of the eternall God himselfe, who hath giuen himselfe wholly and intirely vnto vs. And therefore all that righteousnesse before this is held for nothing by the Apostle himselfe, for worse then nothing, that is for corruption and filthi∣nesse: so farre off is it from meriting any thing. And this also euen with the little goodnesse that it hath in it, is the gift of God, and the worke of God, working in our hearts by his spirit, which saith vnto our pride: What hast thou, that thou hast not receiued? That which is most rife in thee, is the worke of Adam, more weightie or∣dinarily then the rest, and which concludeth against him: Who can draw that which is cleane, out of that which is foule and filthie, &c. For how should a perfect worke spring from an imperfect faith? A sound fruie from a diseased tree? But the case so stan∣deth, as that wee dayly crie here on earth: Increase our faith, strengthen it, purge it from all diffidencie and distrust: And notwithstanding wee admire heere the goodnesse of the mercifull God: in respect of that which hee hath giuen to him whome hee hath iustified, by the gift of faith, and by the gift of righteousnesse: hee
will haue it called a reward; but verily such a one as groweth due vpon free promise, and not by purchase. And thereupon our pride hath set in foote, to build the mat∣ter of merit; a word not heard of throughout the whole Scripture, a word condem∣ned throughout the whole Analogie of faith, which setteth before it, no other thing then the merit of Christ, according to the free promise of the eternall father. In the meane time, where so euer there is Merces, The abuse of this worde Merit. Ierem. 31.16. Thom. l. 2. q. 114. art. 2. a hire or reward promised of God: the pride of man hath caused them to find out the merit of men. Ieremie saith to the Church of the Iewes, assuring them of their reestablishing: They shall returne from the Countrie of the enemie; Thy worke shall haue his reward. From thence Thomas ma∣keth an argument to proue their merit, notwithstanding that there is properly hand∣led the estate and condition which was to befall them in this world, and not in the kingdome of heauen: but hee concludeth notwithstanding, that reward and merite cannot be but improperly spoken betwixt God and men, betwixt whome there is no maner of equal proportion: that is, (saith he:) That man obtaineth of God, as in the nature of a reward, it is because that he hath giuen him power and vertue to labour. Quasi merce∣dem. Hieronym. in Esa l 15. c. 95. Mat. 5.22. Luke. 6.23. Ambr. in Luc. l. 5. c. 6. But Saint Ierome hath spoken better, alleadging this place: That this reward is, their inheritance which serue God. In the Euangelists oftentimes: Reioyce yee, for great is your reward in heauen, &c. Ambrose verily wheresoeuer there is this word Merces, interpreteth it praemium: he causeth it to be attributed to the mercie of God, and to be receiued by a Christian faith: and in like manner all the rest, as we shall see. And as for that which Thomas argueth: That that which is giuen according to iustice, may seeme to be a condigne and worthy reward: But the Apostle saith; 2. Timoth. 4. Ambros. in 2. Tim. c 4. Amplissima praemia. The crowne of righteousnesse is reserued and laid vp in store forme, which the Lord the iust Iudge, will render vnto me in that day, &c. Verily he should haue called to mind, that Saint Ambrose expounding this place, saith: Because that God giueth exceeding great gifts to them that loue him, that is, worthie of his greatnesse, and not of our merits. And the ordinarie Glose: Seeing that faith is grace, and eternall life grace: it cannot be but that he hath giuen grace. But Saint Augustine, August in hom. 50. Idem hom. 14. as we shall see more largely and fully hereafter: Nay (saith hee) Paul, if he had giuen thee that which was due vnto thee; he should haue bestowed punishment vpon thee, &c. Pardon me, Apostle, I doe not see any thing, that is properly thine, except euill: and this is thine owne doctrine that thou hast taught vs; That when God crowneth thy merites, he crowneth nothing but his owne gifts, &c. And Thomas himselfe likewise may seeme to come neere to the same, Thom. l. 2. q. 114. art. 3. when hee saith: That our workes considered as proceeding from our free will, cannot merite, but rather as proceeding from the grace of the holy Ghost, giuen vnto vs. And in deed what man shall bee so proud as to dare to say: That Abraham merited God by his workes; vnder colour of those words which God saith vnto him: I am thy reward? Abraham, saith the Apostle, To whome faith was imputed for righteousnesse. Now it were to be desired, that the old writers had vsed this word more sparing∣ly, although their intention and drift be sufficiently cleare and manifest. And whence it sprang. But the truth is, that that which the Greekes call , dignitie or worthinesse, the Latines haue trans∣lated Merit: and consequently that which they call , to be made or reputed wor∣thie; they haue expounded mereri for want of an other verbe, to expresse it in one word. And in deed the old Glosarie saith; , mereri, to bee made worthie, is ex∣pounded by this word, to merit: And it may be verified by many places. In the dispu∣tation that fell betwixt the Orthodoxes and the Donatists, in the time of Saint Au∣gustine, this word was ordinarily vsed in this signification: Proponant, Collat. Car∣thag. 1. & 3. qui ista elicere meruerunt, saith Petilian the Donatist; that is to say, obtinuerunt: for there he speaketh of his Aduersaries. Emeritus the Donatist in the same sence, Quis supplicauit, quis le∣gem meruit, quis iudicium postulauit? Inferring, that seeing the Orthodoxes had ob∣tained and procured the Decree of the conference; that it also belonged vnto them, to begin the first. More plainely in the Oration and speech made by one Habet-deus a Bishop: To say nothing (saith hee) of the Christian bloud shed by Leontius, Ʋrsatius, Ma∣carius, Paulus, &c. and other executioners, Quos in Sanctorum necem, a Principibus seculi meruerunt, Whome the common people obtained and procured from the Emperours or secular
Princes, to murther the Saints. And further euen in their own praiers it cannot be other∣wise interpreted or maintained; Excita Domine, potentiam tuam: subueniat misericordia tua, vt ab imminentibus peccatorū nostrorum periculis, te mereamur veniente eripi, aut saluari: A wake O Lord and stirre vp thy power, let thy mercie succour vs; to the end that by thy com∣ming, we may merite to be deliuered from the daunger at hand procured by our sinnes, &c. To merite, to be deliuered or saued by the mercie, or by the power of God, can it bee o∣therwise meant, then that they might be made worthie in that powerfull mercie? In some others: Graunt vnto vs to come before Christ with righteous workes, to the end that wee being set as fellow companions on his right hand, we may merite to possesse the kingdome, Te lar∣giente, &c. Graunt vnto vs to be his fellow companions in the kingdome of grace, as we haue me∣rited to haue him to participate our nature in the wombe of the Virgine. Is there any man, that can make any other sence of this praier? An other somewhat further fetcht: Graunt vnto vs that wee may sensibly perceiue the holy Virgine to make intercession for vs, Me uimus. by whose meanes we haue merited to receiue the author of life. How can wee merite by our workes, the incarnation of the Sonne of God, whether it were before hee came, or since his comming; if we doe not take the meaning according to , to bee reputed wor∣thie? Saint Ambrose likewise, speaking of the water of Baptisme: O aqua quae Sacra∣mentum Christi esse meruisti; O water which hast desirued to be the Sacrament of Christ, &c. And how can this bee vnderstood any otherwise being spoken of a creature without life? Infinite such other places may easily bee cited of vs, out of the fathers. And in deed in certaine Collects, Cassand in Hymn. Eccles. f. 4. Index Expurg. f. 36. & 38. in stead of Meruimus, there is put Valeamus, that is to say, We may. And Cassander confesseth that it must bee so vnderstoode: but our Fathers of Trent haue therefore caused it to haue a dashe too many with the Penne, in all his bookes. But in nothing is their mind and meaning better manifested, then in the interpre∣tation, which they giue both to the word Merite, to proue no meriting, as also to the word Reward, Hillar. Can. 20 in Math. super illud. Idem in Psal. 51. Donauit. Idem in Psal. 142. Basil in Psal. 7. August in Psal 109.118.102. to proue that it is not but of grace. Saint Hillarie: The verie workes of righteousnesse would not suffer a man to merite perfect blisse, if the mercie of God, should not fur∣nish and fit him for the same. Againe; Wages cannot come in the nature of a gift; they are due for worke wrought: but God hath giuen vnto vs all, of meere gift and free grace, by iustification which is of faith. And againe; Remission of sinnes is not a merite of honestie, but a pardon and fauour flowing from a free will, &c. But in the meane time the wages of the good are cal∣led a retribution. Yea (saith Saint Basill) but according to the custome of the Scripture, which saith  for , retribution or recompence for a gift: and he retributeth or recompen∣seth, that is to say, giueth. Saint Augustine: In the way of faith, such are held for no sinners, to whome their sinnes are not imputed. God is made our debter, not in receiuing any thing from vs, but in promising so great things vnto vs. Idem de verb. Apost Ser. 22. Let vs be glad and reioyce, for wee haue ouercome: be∣cause that we are ouercome in our selues; because that we haue ouercome in him. Him saith hee, which crowneth thee, because he crowneth his gifts, and not thy merites: yea hee crowneth them saith the Psalme, In miseratione & misericordia; In compassion and mercie. And not in thee on∣ly, O man wosoeuer thou art: But, in thy selfe also O thou Apostle, how great so euer thou maist be. Idem hom. 50. hom 14. I haue fought a good fight saiest thou, &c. The Lord which is a iust and righteous iudge, shall render me a crowne: he is indebted the same. What shall he render or repaie vnto thee? He shall render me it, for he is a iust iudge: He cannot refuse to paie any man his wages and hyre, hauing perused and taken a view of the worke. I haue fought a good fight; that is one worke: I haue fini∣shed my course, thats one worke: and kept the faith; that is a worke: Jt remaineth that I should receiue the crowne of righteousnesse; that is the wages. Nay (saith he) for the wages, thou hast no power to commaund the same at all; and in the worke thine owne power goeth not alone: The crowne belongeth onely vnto him, to giue where it pleaseth; the worke is of thee, but not without his aide and helpe. When as therefore thou saiest, he recompenceth good deedes: this is as if that he hauing preuented himselfe in giuing of good things, should retribute and make recompence for the same, with other fresh and new good things. He retributeth them, but vnto such good things as he hath alreadie giuen, to the good fight, to be finished course, and to the faith kept. For if he haue not giuen them: 1. Tim 4. wherefore then saiest thou I haue trauelled more then they al? And yet not
J, but the grace of God in me. And if he haue not giuen thee to finish the race: wherefore is it againe, that thou shouldest say, it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth; but of God that sheweth mercie. And if he gaue thee not the grace to keepe the faith; is it not in vaine for vs to keepe and indeuour to watch and keepe ward, if God doe not gard and keepe? &c. Beare with me O Apostle; I see not any thing of thine owne, but that which is euill and naught: Pardon me, Apostle; thus we affirme and speake, because thou hast so taught: I beare thee confessing and ac∣knowledging Gods goodnesse, I doe not heare thee vnthankefull; I do not see thee to haue any thing that thou hast prepared and gotten of thy selfe, but what is euill; And therefore when God crow∣neth thy merits, he crowneth nothing but his owne gifts, &c. Now if the merites, for which the wages are pretended as due, be gifts: then by a stronger reason, the wages giuen to these merites which are gifts, must needes be a gift. Idem in Serm. 141. de Temp. Psal. 16. As God cannot giue any thing againe to vs, (because he cannot haue receiued any thing from vs) neither certainly can we retribute or giue any thing againe to him for his gifts: for our goodnesse doth not extend or reach to him. Thou hast nothing (saith he) to giue againe vnto him, for thou expectest and lookest to receiue all from him. Dauid sought on euerie side and looked diligently about him, what he might retribute and giue vnto the Lord, and what found he? I will take (saith he) the cup of saluation. Thou thoughtst to haue rendred and giuen; but behold thou takest more and more: and if thou take, then thou in∣wrappest thy selfe in deeper debt; how long then wil it be before thou become fit to retribute and to recompence? &c. In an other place; Grace goeth before thy merite, for merit is of grace, and not grace of merite, for if thou hast purchased grace by thy merit, Idem de verb. Apost. Ser. 15. then thou hast it not free∣ly: But it is said; Thou shalt saue them for nothing. And what is this, for nothing? That is thou findest nothing in them to saue them, and yet thou sauest them. Thou forgiuest them freely. Thou sauest them freely, thou goest before all merits, to the end that thy gifts may purchase thine owne merits freely: and because thou knowest no matter to saue, but much to condemne, &c. This is the burthen of Saint Augustines song in all his writings: Idem in sent. 95. No man ascendeth vp into the heauenly Ierusalem, that declareth not manifestly that it is not of his owne worke and doing, but of the gift of God. Otherwise (saith he) it should be a debt, it should be a hire and deserued wages, it could not be well called grace. Grace is not giuen to merits, but merits are giuen by grace: shake off and cast away all thy good merites, and thou shalt find nothing but my free gifts: And there∣fore verily euen in thy wages, nothing but my graces. And therefore saith he: Idem de verb. Apost. Serm. 2. & in Psa. 51. & Ep. 105. Eternal life it selfe, which is the certaine wages of good workes, is called by the Apostle, the grace of God: For, saith he, death is the reward of sinne, but the grace of God is eternall life, &c. And the me∣rites of a good man are the gifts of God: whereunto eternall life being giuen, what can this bee, but grace for grace? Barnard de Serm. Sepulch. Saint Barnard: God hath chosen vs in his Sonne, by the spirit which is of God, charitie is spred and shed into our hearts. But this spirituall birth and generation, is not felt or perceiued in the flesh, but in the heart: and that by them onely that can say with Saint Paul: But wee haue the sence and feeling of Christ, &c. And therefore saith he: Idem Serm. 30 in Cantic. When we are busied in our hearts about euill and wicked matters, they are our owne thoughts: but when about good & godly mat∣ters, it is the word of God. And therefore God speaketh in vs, peace, godlinesse, and righteous∣nesse, and these things we thinke not of by our selues, we heare them in vs: but the blasphemies, the murthers, &c. those wee heare not, but we vtter, &c. But it maketh no great matter for vs to know, how it commeth to passe that such wickednesse is in vs, prouided alwayes, that we know it to be there, &c. Or rather that there is matter of errour, and that such as is damnable, if we at∣tribute and giue to our selues, that which is of God in vs, thinking that the visitation of the word, that is to say, of the eternall word, is our owne proper thought. Proles Cordis. Idem Serm. 67 68. Wherefore the sufficien∣cie of the heart, is of the grace of God, and whatsoeuer good thing wee thinke, it is the voice of God and not any birth begotten of our owne hearts, &c. Againe: I conceiue and take that which is mine to be mine owne: for it is grace that maketh me freely iustified, &c. Thy merit, saith the Lord, had no stroke in the matter, but it was my good will and pleasure. The Church hath bene preuented by a former grace, and after it commeth yet an other grace, &c. Neither hath the Church any neede to take care for merit, seeing it hath wherein more certainely to glorie, Idem Serm. 13 in Cantic. In pro∣posito Dei, in the purpose, that is to say, in the decree and sentence of the Almightie, who saith: I will doe it for mine owne sake, &c. And from whence (saith he) commeth thy glorying, rotten
and stinking dust that thou art? Idem delib. arbitr. Quid praemii. From thy holinesse? But it is the holy Ghost that sanctifieth thee; thy holinesse is of God, and not thine owne, &c. Againe; How (saith he) may J commend the grace of God (may some man say) vnto me: If God doe all, what recompence doest thou looke for? I answere: He hath giuen me to will; let him also giue me the abilitie to performe the worke. And where are then our merits saith he? Giue eare: Not workes, saith the Apostle, &c. For what our will or desire was, that came through belieuing grace: that it became better and amended, that also was the effect of grace, &c. And we must not (saith he a little after) seeke or search after merits: for mercie alone doth saue: Saluation is of the Lord: Saluation, that is the Lord: The way to saluation, that is the Lord: Tam nostra opera, quàm eius praemia sunt Dei munera, Both our workes and his rewardes and wages, are the giftes of God, &c. who worketh in vs all our good thoughts, good desires, and good deedes. But where shall bee then according to the old fa∣thers, either merit, properly so called, when the good worke is of God, or else the re∣ward, seeing the euill commeth of vs? And who seeth not that which wee haue obser∣ued heretofore, in many other points, that the pride of man, which puffeth vp it selfe and swelleth as bigge as it can, of an ill Grammer construction, to haue made in this point a peece of worse Diuinitie: louing rather to exact eternall life of God as a hire∣lings wages, then to receiue it at his bountifull and liberall hand, for an inheritance, after the manner of a Sonne? But say they, Assurednesse in the mercie of God is hu∣militie and not pride. your selues are the proud persons, which dare bee so bold as to pre∣sume of this assurance of your iustification, and being of the children of God, &c. We are so: But a word of the pride of Abraham: Who belieued (saith the Apostle) vnder hope, against hope: And he was not weake in faith, neither doubted hee of the promise of God, through distrust, knowing certainely that he which had promised, was able to performe. And of the pride of Dauid, Psal. 23.26.30. &c. Rom. 8. who saith. God is my saluation, whome shall I feare? Not (saith he) the shadow of death: I shall neuer bee shaken, neuer confounded. And of the pride of Saint Paul. Rom. 8. Who shall accuse vs, who shall condemne vs? Who shall separate vs from the loue of Christ? Math. 6. & Luk. 14. Nay (saith he) I am fully perswaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor prin∣cipalities, &c. can separate vs, (he speaketh of all the faithfull and not of himselfe) from the loue which he hath shewed vs in lesus Christ. A pride well pleasing and acceptable vnto God: which this doubtfull and wauering faith of our Aduersaries cannot bee as ap∣peareth in that he reproacheth his Apostle therewithall, : O thou of lit∣tle faith, why doest thou doubt? As neither that spirit houering in the ayre, which he for∣biddeth them in these words, , &c. And that in such things, as for which they had no such expresse promise? Namely, in as much as it was humilitie in Abra∣ham, to submit himselfe and all his reason to the will of God, how contrarie so euer it might seeme to him, to be vnto the promise, as it is likewise in euerie Christian, to as∣sure himselfe both of the remission of his sinnes, as also of the kingdome of heauen, by the free goodnesse of God manifested in his word: whereas on the contrarie it is a pride borrowed from that first in the fall of man, rather to belieue the doubts of the flesh or of the creature, then the word of the Creator, as also to goe about to attaine the least thing that can be, by all our merits, and then by a stronger reason, to pretend to be Gods, without God: as our first father did. And sutable vnto the same is that which we learne of the same fathers. Hillar. in Mat. c 5. S. Hillarie: The Lord would haue vs to hope for the kingdome of heauen, which hee hath declared to consist in him, without any ambiguous doubting of any vncertaintie, that can be in his will: For if faith become doubtfull and wauering, there is no iustification insuing such a faith. And therefore S. Cyprian said: Cypr. de mort. Why should wee stand perplexed or amazed? Who needeth to tremble and be sad, but he whose hope and faith doe faile him? It is fit for him to feare death, who will not goe vnto Christ. And to be vnwilling to goe vnto Christ, belongeth to such a one as belieueth not, that he shall begin when he is dead, to raigne with Christ: For it is written: That the iust liueth by faith. If therefore thou be a iust man, if thou liue by faith, if thou belieuest truly and verily in God: why doest thou not imbrace death, it being so certaine a thing, that thou shalt abide with Christ, and beeing so sure to inioy the promise of thy God? &c. This is (saith he in an other place) not to know God: This is to offend Christ the master of the belieuers, by the sinne of incredulitie: This
is not to haue in the house of faith, the faith which is est ablished in the Church. August de verb. Dom. Serm. 28. But is not this then ouer weening? Heare Saint Augustine: Presume (saith he) but not of thy workes, but of the grace of Christ: for you are saued by grace, saith the Apostle. To preach that which thou hast receiued, is no arrogancie, it is faith and faithfulnesse, it is not arrogant ouer weening, it is deuotion. But we are vnworthie, we are weake in faith, &c. Idem in Psal. 88. Yea (saith hee) but God hath said it, but God hath promised it: and if all this may yet seeme little vnto thee, then hee hath sworne it vnto thee. Seeing then (saith he) that the promise of God is not firme according to our merits, but in respect of his mercie; no man ought to preach with a trembling doubtfulnesse, that which he cannot any way doubt of. But must wee not all appeare before the tribunall and iudgement seate of Christ? Idem tract. 22. in Iohan. Iohn 5.24. And how darest thou promise thy selfe (saith hee) that thou shalt not come into iudgement? Nay, God forbid saith he, that I should be so bold as to promise my selfe that: but I belieue him that hath promised it: Who so belieueth on him that hath sent me, hath eternall life, and shall not come to iudgement, that is to say, to haue the sentence of condemnation pronounced against him; for he is alreadie passed from death to life. And this is brought to passe by his promise, not by my presumption, that I come not vnto iudgement. And this is the same that Saint Barnard argued against Abailardus: Bernard. in Ep. If faith (saith he) doe wauer, it is nothing worth, as also our hope is in vaine, &c. Who so speaketh that, hath not as yet receiued the holy Ghost. But Saint Augustine better: Faith consisteth not in opinion, neither yet in coniecture, it is fast placed in his heart that hath it, and that from him, of whome it springeth: but Certae scientiae acclamante conscientia, Of certaine knowledge, the conscience te∣stifying thereunto. This is the substance of things to be hoped for, and not a fantasie gathered vp∣on coniecture: By the word substance, there is set before thee a certaine and stable thing. Faith then is not an opinion but a certaintie. But; Who art thou (saith hee?) Aestimatio. Idem de srag∣mentis septem Serm. 3. Fiducialiter. And how great is this glorie? And by what merits dost thou hope to obtaine it? I consider saith he three things, wher∣in my hope consisteth: The loue of Adoption; the truth of the promise; and the power of the deliue∣rance: As for any other thing let my foolish reason murmure and repine, as much as it will; I aun∣swere confidently and boldly, I know whome I haue belieued, and am throughly assured, because he hath adopted me in the aboundance of his loue, because hee is true in his promise; and because he is of power and abilitie to exhibite and effect the same. This is that three-fold band, that is so hard to breake in peeces, the which hath beene reached and conueyed vnto vs from our natiue Countrie, from on high into this prison: Let vs hold fast by the same, to the end that it may lift vs vp, that it may drawe vs; yea that it may attract and hale vs to the presence of the glorie of the great God, &c. The Disciples say: Who can bee saued? The Lord answereth them: Idem Serm. 5. dedicat. Jt is impossible with men, but not with God. Wherefore wee are assured of his power: but where are we so of his will? For who knoweth, say they, who is worthie of loue, or of hatred? This is it which Abailard did obiect vnto him of Salomon, and our Aduersaries vnto vs. But saith he: It is here that faith must helpe vs, that the truth must succour vs, to the end that that which is hidden from vs in the heart of the father, may bee reuealed vnto vs by his spirit: And that this spirit, that beareth witnesse vnto, and perswadeth our spirits, that wee are the children of God, doth perswade vs of it, in calling of vs, and in freely iustifying of vs by faith, &c. CHAP. XX. How the doctrine of merite entered into the Church, after what manner it grew and in∣creased, and how it hath beene resisted and withstoode in all ages, euen vnto the time of Saint Barnard. SEeing then that this doctrine of free iustification, opposite and quite contrarie to the merite of workes, is so cleare and manifest in the Scrip∣tures, so euidently and plainely taught, and of such continuance in the Church; from whence possibly may this doctrine of merit at this day taught and held, take his beginning? And what may be the meanes that
it hath prospered and so well succeeded? And how is it come to occupie the roome of the bloud of Christ? And how hath such deepe presumption seazed vppon vs, as not onely to arrogate vnto our selues an abilitie to fulfill the whole Law of God; but fur∣thermore to worke an infinite sort of workes of Supererrogation, and those more me∣ritorious then the other of the Law? Not seruing onely to saue our selues, but others also: and that so farre forth, as that we should bee bold to say, no more with Dauid: Saluation is of the Lord: but my saluation, yea, and thy saluation is of me. But and if we stand in need to search out the antiquitie of this opinion, where shall we rather find it then in the mouth of the Serpent? Gene. 3. ay. 4.24. In the eare of the woman? Yea which is worse, in the hart of our first father: You shall become as Gods, you shall bee like vnto the most high and So∣ueraigne Lord? &c. In like manner the whole Scripture aymeth and tendeth to the rooting of this pe∣stiferous weede out of the heart of man: ope and  the  Scrip  to hum∣ by  of his sinne, thereby ining him to see the ne∣cessiue of the merit of christ. Ezech. 16. The Law as wee said, and all the pedagogie thereof, teaching and training vs vp, to see our infirmitie and want of abilitie: The Prophets controlling and reprouing vs of the same continually, and that both gene∣rally and particularly. In generall, God by his Prophets saith vnto his Church, Thou tookest thy beginning from out of the land of the Cananites: Thy father was an Amorrhite, and thy mother an Hittite: In the day that thou wast borne, thy nauel-string was not cut: Thou wast not washed with water, nor salted, nor wrapped in swathing clothes: Euerie man was afraid of thee; I alone stoode forth to take pittie vpon thee, I saw thee defiled in thy bloud, I caused thee to liue in the same, I cast the lap of my garment ouer thee, I couered thy nakednesse, I entered into league with thee, I washed thee, I annoynted thee with oyle, I clothed thee with imbroidered worke, I caused thee to grow vp and raigne: then didst thou put thy confidence in thy beautie, and hast plaid the harlot, by reason of thy fame and high renowne, &c. What other thing can bee made of all this throughout this whole growth of the Church, but that there is nothing in her as of her selfe, but pollution and imperfection? And that the whole matter of her being, and felicitie is onely of God? That her vncleanes and disloyaltie, proceedeth from her trusting in her beautie, notwithstanding that it proceede not from her selfe? Esay. 64 In particular hee saith of the most righteous and iust, the Prophetes themselues being reckoned amongst the same: You are all as a polluted thing, and all your righteousnesse as a filthie cloth; your iniquities haue carried you all away as a wind: neither had you any manner of remedie left, but onely to flie and haue recourse vnto me, who deface and blot out your offences; Idem. 43. Idem. 53. and that for mine owne sake, who am not minded to call them to remembrance; and through the attonement made by Christ, vpon whom is laid the chastisement of your peace, who is wounded for your sinnes, and in whose stripes you are healed, &c. All which notwith∣standing did it let or hinder this people consisting of men, these men tainted and stai∣ned with this first and capital pride of man from hasting and endeuouring from time to time continually to returne to this pretended righteousnes, which is euer floating and swimming vpon our hearts? In the time of our Sauiour Christ, Merit amongst the hereticall wes. we see two sorts of people to bee infected with this poyson: the Essees which would be so called, as doers and fulfillers of the Lawe, (accusing the Pharisies to bee no better then bare teachers of the same) whose will worship is taxed of the Apostle, as deuotion of their owne deuise, as also their super∣stitions: Tast not, touch not, &c. wherein they laid the foundation of their merits. And the Pharisies, who taught that it was in the power of man to fulfil the Law; hauing also these same workes of supererogation, whereof the Prophet speaketh saying; Who hath required this at your hands? Of these, according to the diuers obseruations which they had tied themselues vnto, the Thalmud maketh seuen sects; but one especially which had this name: What ought I to doe, and I will doe it? And of these we haue an example in him that is spoken of in the Gospell: All these things haue I done euen from my youth, &c. Both the one and the other being verie vnfit to cast and repose themselues vpon the rest of grace; and by consequent enemies of our Lord, who reckoneth more base∣ly of these sorts of people, then of the Publicans and harlors. And heereupon hee breaketh out to the denouncing of diuers curses against them; as such as would not
onely not receiue the kingdome of God themselues, but hindered the people also by their interpretations and constructions to receiue the same; that is to say, remissi∣on of sinnes in Christ. Whereupon S. Iohn Baptist, preparing the way to this king∣dome, to vnbewitch them, beginneth his Sermons at that point: Repent, the kingdome of beauen is at hand, &c. So then some of the circumcision that receiued Christ, brought this errour into the Church of Christ: as also they which did obstinately cleaue vnto Iudaisme, had not any other ground for the same, then the righteousnesse purchased by the Law; and the workes thereof, in which their course they are crossed by the E∣pistles of Paul written to the Romaines and Galathians: for in them he opposeth and setteth against their righteousnesse of workes, that which is of faith and grace; giuing them to consider the enormitie of sinne, and the soundnesse and sinceritie of the righ∣teousnesse of God: In summe he bringeth them backe, to the seeking out of their sal∣uation in the Crosse of Christ; their blessednesse and righteousnesse, in that that he is made a curse and sinne for them. And yet notwithstanding this doctrine, being of the nature of that old Serpent, cannot be so cut in peeces by the sword of Gods word, but that it taketh hold againe and knitteth together. And so much the rather, Merit main∣tained by the Philosophers, brought into the Church. by how much the flocking of the Gentiles into the Church was the greater, to whome it was plausible, as agreeing with the Philosophie of the world, and their free will, the foun∣taine of all mans presumption and ouerweening; beeing admitted into the bodie of Diuinitie by the Greeke Doctors, who sprung out of the same Schoole, more easily then was either meete or needfull. Now the chiefe brocher of the same, was one Pe∣lagius a Briton borne, about the yeare 400. in the Latine Church, who had beene a Monke in Syria, and had many other Monkes his followers. Merit of workes confu∣ted. But God raised vp vnto vs also in those times, to withstand this doctrine, Saint Ierome, Prosper Aquitanus, Fulgentius, Primasius, and other great persons, who sharply confuted and gainesaid the same; and aboue all, one Saint Augustine, Resistance and head made a∣gainst the same who ouerthrew all the foundations of the same: who also tooke occasion by this stumbling stone, to plucke vp by the rootes all manner of presumption and preiudicate opinions, which in the former times had crept into the Church, by the meanes of Circumcision, Paganisme, the Law or Philo∣sophie. What followed hereupon? He should haue rooted out men and all: so deepe∣ly had this sprout taken roote in man. For no sooner was Saint Augustine departed this world, but this heresie sprung vp a new in a Monke called Cassianus, meanely learned, taking his beginning, to the end hee might find a more easie and plausible entrance) at a third Assertion, consisting of a meane or middle nature betwixt the doctrine of Saint Augustine and Pelagius: and by this meanes preuailed and was ap∣proued of verie greatly in our Countrie of France: who yet found presently there to withstand and refell him the foresaid Prosper Aquitanus, and certaine others. This man at that time taught, that many attained grace, without grace, by the only power of free will: That man crauing the same of himselfe, it was giuen him, and afterward grew and increased, according to the proportion of his merits: That as fully, there might be certaine men found, who, how vnwilling so euer they might be, were not∣withstanding made partakers of this grace, through pure and meere grace. Thus ma∣king two sortes of Christians, one saued by free will, and the other freely by grace: That it was in the power of man after his fall, of himselfe to doe good workes: yea to merit eternall life. But what saith Prosper thereupon vnto him: Who (if any others) was mightie in the Scriptures? And here it stood him vpon, to haue alleadged him wholly: Verily, that it behoued him to haue firmely held the doctrine of Saint Paule, being most excellently expounded by Saint Augustine, and accordingly hee draweth our Countrie men thereunto most learnedly: That no man obtaineth grace, but of pure and meere grace: That they that flie thereunto through the feare of death, and those which runne thereto with a ioyfull hope, are helped and assisted thereunto, by one and the same grace: That man in Adam hath lost all the meanes of comming vn∣to eternall life, all the seedes of pietie and vertue: That who so attributeth our merits vnto any other then God, or vnto man any other thing but his deserts, doth greatly
erre, and speake against the scriptures; were he a Iob, a Prophete, or an Apostle, the law hauing beene giuen to no other end but to condemne vs, and consequently to make vs to be altred and chaunged by grace. And yet notwithstanding all this, this said heresie and naturall claime of nature against grace, doth not cease continually to returne and swimme aloft, being relieued by the Monkes, the Pharisies of these latter times, blowen vp and kindled by the common people, who willingly hold and suffer themselues to be perswaded, that their saluation is of themselues, neglected by the succeeding Bishops, the most part of thē being ignorant, maintained by the grosse & palpable darknesse, which for a long time vnder the ouerflowing of barbarisme, did couer all the world: God notwithstanding not suffering this truth of saluation in the saith of one only Christ to be chooked & extinguished, as is easie to be verified by the writings of the most famous & renowned that haue liued heretofore. For Greg. saith: We are redeemed by grace: Anno 600. Gregor. in c. 28 Iob. l. 18. c 22. Non nostri Conaminis, sed diuinae dignation is. who so should giue but their right vnto all our good workes, in stead of giuing vnto them Christ, should giue vnto them sharpe and seuere punishment: For it is one thing that man meriteth by righteousnes, & an other thing which he receiueth by grace. Again, It resteth not in our power to attaine and come by the inwarde light; but herein, euen for that God hath vouchsafed to bestow it vpon vs: For how oft doe we begge and craue it with inward sighes and gronings? Et in eius amaenitates recipi non meremur, neither doe wee deserue that is to say and affirme with a witnesse, Wee are not reputed or thought worthy to receiue it at his pleasure, and at another time all at a blow the grace of God will assist and help vs, &c. Againe, Without him there should some become Saints and holy men, if a man with∣out the gift of the onely begotten Sonne, Idem in 3. cap. Iob. l. 5. c. 8. could possiblie attaine the gift of sanctification: But who is he that dare build himselfe as on a certaintie vpon men, when hee cannot possiblie doe it vppon Angels? Againe; Our righteousnes being examined with the righteousnes of God, is vnrighte∣ousnes: In destructio∣ne iudicis. Looke what is glortous in the eye of the workman, is nothing but dirt and dung being tri∣ed by the Iudge. And therefore Saint Paule hath said: I find not my selfe greatly guiltie in a∣ny thing: but by and by he addeth: and yet am I not therefore iustified, &c. And againe, I am restored to life, Idem in cap. 9. Iob. l. 2. c. 11. & in c. 28. l. 18 c. 22. Idem in can∣tic. canticor. not by hauing merited, but by being pardoned. And as for them which boast themselues of being saued by their merits, they are contrarie vnto themselues: for whiles they desire to be innocent and redeemed, they frustrate and make of no value the redemption in them. But saith he in another place: Notwithstanding that the soule of the holy man do wander out of the way of righteousnes: yet if it lay fast hold by faith on him which iustifieth the sinner, and bewaile vncessantly the sinnes committed in the time of this faith, by such his continual washings, it retaineth and kepeth stil his righteousnes. And of faith he hath these Maxims verie ordi∣narie and samiliar: Idem in Ezec. l. 1. hom. 9. & 7. In Ezec. hom. 19. In Euang. hom. 29. l. 3 indict. 12. Ep. 27. All the Saints before the comming of Christ were saued by faith: let vs not put our confidence in our teares and mourning, neither yet in our deedes, but in the interces∣sion of our Aduocate: faith goeth before brotherly loue and charitie: It must bee first preached and taught, thereby to raise vs vp vnto good workes: vertues bring vs not to beleeue, but faith bringeth vs to a vertuous life: True faith is that which saith it, and harboreth not any condi∣tions or manners contrarie vnto the same; we hold fast the faith, and therewithall wee exercise it in good workes. What is all this, but the same which we affirme and say: That the iust man liueth by faith: that his faith sheweth it selfe aliue by his workes. In the same sence dooth also Cassiodorus, Olympiodorus, Orgelitanus, and others of the same time, verie often speake, although not altogether so properly in certaine places. The ages following hold of the night shut in, Anno 700. The procee∣ding of the a∣buse. and yet so as that there shined forth some little glimces of star light. Then in stead of the teaching of one onely remission of sinnes, in the onely bloud of Christ, and that in such sort, as that it was famous and reuerently receiued throughout al the time that the purer antiquitie continued; Gre∣gorie and Cassiodorus had begun to teach: that sins were remitted and forgiuen by martyrdome, almes deedes, forgiuing of our brethren, reclaiming of a sinner, &c. ac∣knowledging notwithstanding, that nothing of all this stood good, otherwise then in faith; but contrarily that it was continually euill, and against true and liuely faith. Such as followed after, as Cesarius, Adelhelmus, and others, doe reckon vnto vs twelue deedes which do iustifie vs: Baptisme, Charitie, Almes-deedes, Teares and lamen∣tation,
confession, affliction, correction, intercession of the Saints, mercie, the conuerting of a sin∣ner, the forgiuing of our brethren, and the suffering of martyrdome. But as for faith, which is the onely and alone meanes, they negligently cast it behinde them. This was the re∣mainder of Pelagius his opinion, which (as our aduersaries) they thought that they had well and sufficiently qualified when they said: That the first grace was of God, the first remission and forgiuenesse of Baptisme; and as for all the rest, Anno. 800. we ought to seeke and search for it in our selues, & by our works. Now the inuocating and praying vnto Saints, iumping and falling in togither with the same, about this time, did fortifie and adde more force to the error. And it is to be noted, that as in the change of the winds, we see the cloudes in doubtfull sort to wauer, and as it were stagger, before they re∣solue vpon, and take the direct course before the winde: euen so it fared with the an∣cient writing of those times, Beda in Psal. 24. & 31. before that they wholy and altogither inclined vnto this corruption. For Beda doth cleane and wholie cleare and free the whole matter: For∣giue me my sinnes, not for my merits, but for thy goodnes sake: for there is no merit, that is a suffi∣cient price or raunsome for eternall blessednesse: there is nothing but the meere grace of God, that bringeth saluation, yea grace freely giuen, no regarde had either to merit precedent or such as may after insue. And by faith, by the alone righteousnesse, (saith hee) of faith, Idem in Psa. 77 Idem l. . in Marc. c. 2. & 4. Idem l. 1. in Luc. c. 1. & 2. Idem l. 4. in Luc. c. 11. Idem in Ioh. c. 6. Albin. l. 3. de Trinit. c 1. & 7 Idem in Psal. 4 & 20. paenit. & in 7. In Ioh. l. 1. c. 1. Bed. l. 3. in Iob. c. 1. Anno 900. Haimo in Ep. ad Rom. c. 1. & 4. Impertiendo. Idem in Ps. 84. Idem in Ps. 26 Idem in Mich. c. 6. Idem in Zach. c. 3. Idem in Can∣tic. Cant. c. 4. Consortium Diuum. Idem in Epist. ad Rom. c. 10. Idem in Ep. ad Heb. c. 5. & 9. Idem in Ep. ad Rom. c. 6. Adelbert. in altercat. Theophil. in Ep. ad Tim. c. 1 Anselm. in Ep. ad Rom. pas∣sim. which onely hea∣leth the inwarde man, which onelie forgiueth sinnes, which onelie saued them which liued in the time of Circumcision, and that without their offerings and sacrifices: and which alone ad∣opteth vs the children of God, &c. which is the life of our soule, yea which sheweth forth his life by good workes, &c. And Albinus writeth in like manner: Wash mee, O Lorde, from the spottes of mine vnrighteousnesse, by the gift of thy mercie: I am verie able to pollute and defile my selfe, but I haue no power to cleanse my selfe: there is no man iustified in thy sight, but by thy grace, by thy mercie, in the name of the Sauiour, and not by his merits. And this grace is distributed and giuen vnto vs, by the meanes of faith in Iesus Christ, &c. and the same the gift of God, &c. Neither yet haue these famous men so written, but that withall there haue escaped and slipped from them, some places verie different and vnlike; (such was the contagion of the time;) as, that we are iustified by humilitie, patience, virgi∣nitie, &c. Notwithstanding that they euermore ioyne faith therewithall. Haimo Archbishop of Halberstat saith: The righteousnesse of God, that is to say, the iustification by which hee iustifieth them that belieue in him, is manifested in the Gospell, when the Lord saith: He that shal belieue & be baptised shal be saued, that is to say, shall be righteous. This is that righteousnesse by which all those that belieue are iustified by the gift of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost, which is called the righteousnesse of God, because that hee in making the faithfull partakers of the same, maketh them righteous, &c. and it is called the righteousnesse of faith, by which Abraham was iustified, &c. And Christ is the Author of this righteousnesse vnto vs; For before the world was framed (saith hee) God decreed with his Sonne to saue mankind without any precedent merites: for euen man was not as yet, &c. This Sonne which hath giuen remission of sinnes, and all other benefites of his onely and meere mercie: Which is vnto vs the foundation of all righteousnesse: In whose onely bloud it resteth for vs to be saued, in as much as there can nothing come out of vs, that can make God fauourable and mercifull vnto vs. In whose passion iniquitie was remitted, and righteousnesse restored all in a day, and that not onely vnto iustification, but euen to the meriting, (that is to say, to be re∣puted worthie) of the companie of God by them. And this is to be vnderstoode, so farre forth as we belieue, and as his obedience is sufficient for all belieuers vnto eternall life, the same be∣ing perfectly washed, into the remission which is in his bloud. But and if you aske, to what end then serueth the Law, seeing that it doth not iustifie? Haimo aunswereth: Not to take away sinnes, but to shew and point out the same. Hincmarus; It is because of transgressi∣ons, and for the hardnesse of the people. Adelbertus: To teach vs our concupiscence, and to learne vs to knowe and vnderstand what is due vnto vs for our sinnes, to the end that thereupon wee may seeke for grace. Theo∣philact: To conuince vs of sinne, and to bring vs to Christ. Anselme: To shewe in what Chaines and bandes of sinne, such were held as presumed of their power to accomplish and
make perfect their righteousnesse by works, that so they might perceiue the poyson, though thereby they could not take it away, and to the increasing and augmenting of sinne, not to the cleansing or wiping of it away. Radulph in Leuit. l. 20. c. 1. Gysilb. in alter. But what, doe wee not accomplish it then? Radulphus saieth: What man is he vpon the face of the earth that is able? verily not one. And Gisilbert: So nei∣ther hath it brought any thing vnto perfection: it hath laid open the woundes, but it hath not cu∣red them. Theophyliad Rom. c. 3. Anselm. in. 7 ad Rom. Haimo in Psal. 118. & in c. 6 ad Rom. & passim. Otherwise saith Theophilact: We had not had neede of Christ. And Anselme; What is the law but a letter for them that knowe to reade it, and cannot accomplish or fulfill it? And therefore it hath onely led vs, as by the hand vnto grace. But againe concerning this grace, who hath mooued the Lord to doe so much for vs? Verily saith Haimo, The onelie goodnesse which is in him: and therefore let no man presume of his merits, but of the onelie clemencie of our Sauiour, who (saith the Apostle) hath saued vs freelie, that is to say, without anie precedent merits; who saueth vs (saith hee) by his preuenting grace, and iusti∣fieth vs by his subsequent grace. Eternall life is giuen to none as a thing of due, but by free mer∣cie, Remig in psa. 19.21. & 32 & 70. &c. And S. Remigius: Adam made the olde people; but our Lorde Christ the newe, in asmuch as he hath freely iustified the same, without anie precedent merits: For wee haue made our selues sinners, but his onely mercie hath made vs righteous: yea (saith hee) it hath made of vs that were wicked and vngodly, godly ones: of seruants, free men: of condemned ones, such as are to be receyued into the kingdome of heauen. Theophyl. in. Ep. ad Tit. c. 3 Anselm. in c. 5. ad Ephes. And Theophilact: Hee hath saued vs euer∣lastinglie, not by the workes of righteousnesse which we haue done, but by the operation of his one∣lie clemencie, &c. And Anselme: This hath come to passe through the great and vnspeake∣able loue of God, that the onely begotten sonne hath deliuered himselfe ouer vnto death, the mai∣sler for the seruant: Cur Deus. ho∣mo. c. 2. the Creator, for the creature: that hee hath said vnto man, Take my onelie sonne, and giue him for thee: that the sonne hath said, Take me, and redeeme thy selfe, &c. And all the same treatise handleth no other thing. And againe, howe doe wee receiue this grace? Haimo in c. 9. ad Rom in c. 3 ad Galat. su∣per Euang. in Oct. Pasch. Remig. in Psa. 10. & in 18. & in 19. Haimo saith: Of faith, and by faith wee are iustified, heires through faith, and not through the lawe: by grace, and not by merit: to the ende that the promise made vnto the seede of Abraham may abide and continue firme, &c. Remigius: All my faith is in Christ, I belieue my selfe in him onely to be iustified & saued: This is my mountaine; This is my refuge, &c. The heauens sing of the glorie of God. And what manner of glorie? verily (saith he) for that we are not saued by our workes, but by his mercie. And this is the great glorie of God, that all hauing sinned, and all hauing need of this glorie, namely to be freely iustified, euen in the mer∣cie exhibited by the Sonne, Gisilb. in alt. c. 1. & 13. &c. Gisilbertus: Faith went before the law, and without the law hath iustified the faithfull. Our father Abraham pleased God by faith, rather then by circum∣cision. Many haue perished notwithstanding circumcision: and many before that it was, haue beene iustified by faith alone: Christ is the inheritance of the faithfull, whome they receiue by faith, Theophyl in Abac. c 2. &c. Theophylact: The righteous man worketh by faith vnto life, whether it bee that which is to come, or be it righteousnes it selfe: Faith iustifieth in as much as it vnlooseth sinnes: The law would iustifie men, but it hath not the power: faith therefore hath done it, which iusti∣fieth, Idem ad Rom. c 9 Idem in c. 3. ad Gal. Haimo in c. 1. & 3. & 4. ad Rom. and not workes: yea (saith he) Faith iustifieth onely, and not workes. The law curseth vs, but faith blesseth vs, &c. But to be iustified, is it not to be made righteous? And then with what manner of righteousnes? Ʋerily saith Haimo, with the righteousnes of Christ, by the which he maketh the faithfull righteous, in bestowing the same vpon them: and there∣fore it is called the righteousnes of God: And the same is applied vnto vs by the gift of God: that is to say, by the redemption which is in Christ, and not by the workes of the Law, &c. Whereby it commeth to passe, Idem in Psal. 83. Gisibert. in al∣terc. c. 8. saith he, that to shew mercy, is not onely to pardon and forgiue the sinnes, but also to gine righteousnes. Gisilbertus saith, This righteousnes of God, is not the same with that, by which he is righteous: but that wherewith he clotheth the righteous, when hee freely iusti∣fieth the wicked. And it is to this righteousnesse, that the Law and the Prophets beare witnesse. The Lawe, for in that it commaundeth and threateneth, but iustifieth not anye man: it sheweth sufficientlye, that man is not iustified, but by the gifte of GOD, by the quicke∣ninge Spirite. The Prophetes, in asmuch as the comminge of Christ hath fullfilled that, which they haue foretolde. Anselm in 1. Cor. 11. And Anselme, The righteousnesse of God is by fayth, by the which wee beleeue in Christ: And it is called the faith of Christ, after the same manner that righteousnesse is called the righteousnesse of God: by which we are iustifyed. And they
are said to be of God and of the Lord, because that both the one and the other are the giftes of his bountifull liberalitie. Againe; And by this faith wee are iustified, not by the workes of the Law, neither of nature, neither yet by the power of free wil; for iustification is obtained by faith: Idem in c. 10. ad Rom. and thus by the righteousnesse of faith, is accomplished the true righteousnesse of the Law: yea saith he, notwithstanding we be iustified by faith, yet it is gratis: for euen faith it selfe is a franke and free gift, proceeding from aboue, &c. Againe; Idem in c. 5. ad Rom. My impietie (saith hee) meriteth not this benefit: but what is it then which the pietie of my redeemer meriteth? Neither yet my vnrigh∣teousnesse, maliciousnesse or pride: but what is it then that on the contrarie his righteousnesse, goodnesse, and humilitie cannot effect and bring to passe? Yea what is not the punishment of the Crosse able to preuaile in against the kingdom of death? Or the Son of God made man, for the re∣demption of man; especially seeing that with him and in him, al our sinnes are pardoned and for∣giuen vs, and all his graces giuen vnto vs? This faith therefore which iustifieth, shall it goe bare, naked and vnaccompanied? Shall it not carrie with it good workes? Yes ra∣ther it will appeare and shine out more euidently by workes; but not therefore iusti∣fie vs by the workes thereof. Haimo saith: From faith man commeth to workes, Haimo in c. 11 ad Rom. but not from workes to faith: faith is conceiued in the heart, vttered and confessed by the mouth, and garnished by good workes: and by this faith liueth the iust and righteous man vnto eternall life: but as for that which is without workes, it is dead. Idem in c. 1. & 4. Now if Abraham himselfe had beene able to haue beene iustified, without being assisted by the grace of God, then the gift of iustification, should not haue beene reckoned as a gift, but as a thing of dutie: and then Christ should haue died in vaine. Ausbertus: We must first belieue, for after that a man belieueth, he loueth: Ausbert. l. 2. c. 2. in Apocaly p. Theophyl. in c. 6. ad Ephes. An Ielme in c. 1. ad Rom. Ausbert. in A-Apocaly p. l. 10 c 22. Radulph. l. 1. c. 1. in Leuit. and faith and loue do make vs doe good workes. Theophilact, Charitie without faith profiteth no∣thing, yea, which is more, without faith it cannot be. Anselme, By faith the soule beginneth to liue, being before dead by infidelitie: And faith by which a man liueth, worketh by loue: because that faith without works is dead. But Ausbertus saith: How holie and righteous soeuer a man may be, yet he is alwaies in such case, as that he may still grow and increase in vertue: whereup∣on the Psalmist saith: Lord, shouldest thou forget to take pitie vpon me? &c. And Radulphus, Hardly can a man doe anie good worke, without the cleauing thereto of some sinne, and therefore it is to be feared, that so long as we expect and looke for the recompence of perfect deuotion, God still exacteth the penaltie of the sinne, which wee haue mingled therewith. And Anselme, Anselm. de mensur. crucis. If a man should serue God a thousand yeares, and that with great zeale and feruencie, hee should not merit, ex condigno, to inherite the kingdome of heauen one halfe day. For saith he in another place: Workes are by grace, and not grace by workes: Idem in c. 2. ad Galath. and therefore no man by anie meanes can be iustified by workes, but onely by faith, which proceedeth of grace. And yet herewithall I am not ignorant, that sometimes these selfe same Doctors doe attribute much to workes. As when Haimo following Cesarius his trace, Haimo super Euang. in oct. Pasch. setteth downe seuen waies for the obtaining of remission of sins. And when Rabanus recommendeth to the same end, fasting and almes deedes: and yet rather as themselues say, To enter into a cer∣taine kind of recompence for their veniall sinnes (which notwithstanding is contrarie to their owne Maxims) then to merite & rather thereby to shew forth some tokens of repentance, then to make vp any worke of satisfaction, &c. Then thus it behoueth, namely, that their Maxims stand firme and immoueable, and that what they say more, bee squared and bounded by them; and that so much the rather, because such Maxims are vttered by them, at such times as when they speake not after the conceipt of their owne corrupt and carnall sence, but as searchers and seekers out of the true and proper sence and meaning of the word of God. And yet notwithstanding all this, we are farre off from those kindes of doctrine, which came to bee preached in the beginning of this age, wherein we liue, namely; That workes without faith do merite to receiue and haue faith gi∣uen: That the works of the faithful do merite & deserue eternall life: That Christians are able to merite the same, not only for themselues, but also for others, &c. And thus we are come to the yeare 1100. But this was the mischiefe, that that which was preached ordinarilie to the people by the Priestes, whether couetous or ignorant could, more preuayle to leade them out of the way, then the other which was written by these Doctors,
who were not but for the learned, could worke to reduce and bring them into the way. And on the other side, that the soile whereinto this euill seede fell, was verie apt to receiue and intertaine this abuse; namely, the naturall pride and presumption of man. And yet further we are to note and obserue, that which wee haue seene, intrea∣ting of the inuocation of Saints: that in the Catechisme of the sicke, or rather such as draw neere their death, Anselm. in Ep. manuscript. drawne out of the Epistles of Anselme, they were daily taught to oppose and set against the reprochfull checkes of Sathan, and the deadly accusati∣ons of their owne consciences, nothing but the onely merit of our Lord: and against the wrath of God for sinne, no other thing then his righteousnesse. And for a fur∣ther proofe, by a place out of Anselme; a sufficient scantling and taste whereby wee may see what consideration all the holy men of the same age, Anselme in medit. bad of this matter. My life (saith he) doth astonish me; for when I haue well and throughly sifted it, I find it either wholly sinne, or else nothing but barrennesse. But and if there appeare any fruit, it is either coun∣terfeit or imperfect, or else corrupted and spoyled, in such sort as that it cannot possibly please God, yea that it cannot possibly but displease him. In summe, either it is wholly inwrapped in sinne, and thereupon damnable: or vnfruitfull and thereby contemptible. But what cause or neede is there, that there should a difference be put betweene vnfruitfull and damnable? For be∣ing once proued vnfruitfull, is it not by and by damnable? Seeing that euerie tree, that bringeth not foorth fruit is good for nothing but to bee cast into the fire? Thou therefore O withered and vnfruitfull stocke that thou art, worthie of eternall fire, what wilt thou aunswere in that daie, when an accompt shall bee taken of thee, euen in the twinkling of an eye, of all that time which thou shalt haue spent? What will bee the distresse, that will then come vpon thee? When sinne shall accuse thee, and righteousnesse astonish thee, the gulfe of Hell vnder thee, the hea∣uenly Iudge in heauie wrath and indignation ouer thee: within thee, a conscience that boyleth thee: and without, the world which setteth thee on fire? And seeing that the righteous man is scarcely saued, the sinner when he is come vpon and taken at vnawares, what hole or corner will hee seeke out to shroude himselfe in? When it shall bee impossible for him to hide himselfe, and intollerable to appeare and stand foorth in sight? Whence shall I borrow counsaile, and where shal I find saluation and deliuerance? Except it bee from the bosome of that Angell of the great Councell? Euen from my Iesus, who is saluation it selfe? And yet also that Judge, vnder whose hands I tremble and shake. Recouer thy selfe and take better hold O sinner whosoeuer thou art: despaire not: hope in him whome thou fearest; flie vnto him, from whome thou didst flie and runne away. Say vnto him: O Christ, for the loue of thy name, deale and doe with me accor∣ding to thy name: looke downe vpon me miserable caitife calling vpon thee. Bee thou vnto me a Iesus for thy name sake: If thou receiue me into the large and spatious bosome of thy mercie, there shall not remaine any more straightnesse or anguish through my miserie for me. And although I confesse that my conscience hath merited condemnation, and that my repentaunce cannot suf∣fice vnto satisfaction: yet am I certaine that thy mercie is aboue all whatsoeuer manner of offen∣ces, &c. The age also following might seeme rather to haue amended then impaired the premisses: Lombard. l. 3. dist. 27. at the least if the time be considered in the things then written. Lombard propoundeth a question: Wherefore the perfection contained in the Lawe, should bee com∣maunded and giuen in charge to man: seeing that in this life no man can attaine thereunto? And aunswereth; Because that no man runneth right, if hee know not whether he must runne: and how should wee know that, Ruper. in Ioh. c. 1. l. 2. Hildeb. Ep. 43. Rupert. in A∣bac. l. 1. c. 1. Idem in Ioh. c. 11. if it were not shewed foorth vnto vs in these commaundements? Ru∣pertus saith: To shewe thee thy sinne, but not to take it away. And Hildebert Bishop of Manie: To the end it might bee a caueat for the time to come, and not a cure for any trespasse al∣readie past: That is (saith he) a preparatiue to the receiuing of grace. Seeing then the righte∣ousnesse of the Lawe cannot bee found in vs: and that we are not to appeare before the eternall God without righteousnesse, what other shall wee haue? Ʋerily (saith Rupertus) the righteousnesse of faith, which lieth in the promise of the comming of Christ: wherein Abraham belieued, and it was imputed vnto him for righteousnesse: Who (saith hee) iustifieth vs, and teacheth vs that we are iustified by faith, and not by the workes of the Lawe.
And Honorius of Auston: It is in Christ, that all men before and vnder the Law, Hono. in spec. Eccles. Ser. de natiuit. Dom. Rupert. l. 11. c. 13. in Ioh. l. 1. in Leuit. c. 17. in Psal. 17. Idem in Ioh. l. 7. c 7. Hyldebert Ep. 3. as also vn∣der grace haue beene saued. And in him, that is to say, in his bloud, in which onely lieth the remission of sinnes. For saith Rupertus: If Christ had not washed his welbeloued from their sinnes in his bloud, neither Peter, nor any one of the rest had had any part with him: but in his bloud is washed away from vs not onely originall sinne, but also all our actuall sinnes: in such sort as that his passion and resurrection, is the summe of our saluation, and the ground worke of our faith. Againe; We are washed, sanctified, and iustified in the name of Christ, and by the spi∣rit of God. And Hildebert applieth it verie confidently vnto himselfe: I am not troub∣led or disquieted within my selfe about the matter of my redemption: J haue beene once redeemed by the bloud of Christ; I haue no cause to busie my selfe, in studying how it may bee brought to passe againe: this bloud is my ransome: this bloud is my price: it should proue and appeare an vn∣seemely thing, that I should goe about to redeeme my selfe with a price: Yea me, whose price and ransome is incomparable and vnprizeable, euen Christ. And this Christ giuen vnto vs, Honor. in Psa. 5. & 6. Idem in Dial. de predest. & libero arbit. Praemium. Rupert. in Io. l. 2. c. 1. & l. 1. c. 1. for a ransome for our sinnes, by the meere and free mercie of God: For saith Honorius; The faithfull O Lord, are thy mercie: They are saued not by their merits, but by thy grace: and the kingdome of heauen giuen vnto them, according to thy grace; and not according to their me∣rits: for what can be mans merits or deserts, but the reward of euill? And for what merit can be expect or looke for recompence at Gods hand? And Rupertus; The grace of the holy Ghost, is the true and onely remission of sinnes: Wee haue receiued grace for grace, the grace of eternall saluation, for the grace of present faith: vnto the which faith wee are freely called, by the prea∣ching of his word, without any precedent merits: and iustified by the free remission of sinnes. Grace freely giuen, is freely bestowed vpon vs, by the onely grace of Christ, euen to vs all which are re∣conciled vnto God by him: By the same grace alone, are we directed vnto the heauenly life, which we cannot possibly purchase or attaine vnto by any merits of workes. I am not more righteous then any other such like man, Idem in Ioh. l. 5. c. 5. saue onely through the free mercie of him who calleth and iustifi∣eth whome he will, &c. And this grace is receiued of vs by faith, yea by faith onely. Ru∣pertus; Those that are deepely sunke downe into the pit of death, in as much as they are runne backward and turned farre aside from the liuing God, &c. shall yet escape the daunger of eternall death, due and deserued, either for originall or actuall sinnes, yea they shall be brought vnto the fort of saluation, in confessing that one little word of faith. Againe; Idem in Ioh l. 7. c. 7. Idem l. 10 c 19 in Apocalyp. In Christ there is neither Circumcision, nor vncircumcision: faith onely is requisite, faith is the chiefe and principall iu∣stification, it is the fountaine and welspring of iustification. And in an other place: Magnilo∣qui dicuntur, &c. Such (saith he) are rightly called the greatest brauers, who put their trust in themselues as being righteous, and thereupon presume of the workes of the Law. As on the con∣trarie, those are called, and are truely poore, which know themselues sinners, and perceiue that they can no way be iustified but by the faith of Christ. And therefore (saith he) it is requisite that this conceitednesse of thinking to be saued by workes should be laid downe. Idem in Soph. l. 2. c. 3. Idem l. 2. in Genes. c. 3. Idem in Esa. c. 8. Without faith it is impossible to please God, it is in like manner impossible, but by faith: Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, &c. were not saued any otherwise. For righteousnesse is Ex fide, in fidem; of faith, and vnto faith: Of faith that is of him who hath promised, who hath sworne: Vnto faith, that is of him, who hath belieued in him that promised, and giuen credite to him that swore, &c. But as for such as are not true Israelites, they haue no such faith, for in seeking and searching after their owne righteousnesse, they could not stoope vnto or vndergoe this of faith: but haue toyled them∣selues by seeking the same from workes to workes: as if Abraham had beene iustified by workes, when as the Scripture testifieth of him, Idem de Vi∣ctor. verb. Dei, l. 4. c. 21. that he belieued and it was imputed vnto him for righte∣ousnesse, &c. Verie excellently therefore is it said: From faith to faith, for in that the Sonne of God is come, &c. this proceedeth of the faith fulnesse of God, of whome it is written: God is faith∣full, &c. Namely herein, that Dauid and others moe haue not pearced him through with their sinnes; and that he accomplisheth by his exceeding great faithfulnesse what hee had promised of his exceeding great grace. And this righteousnesse tendeth in fidem, vnto an other faith, be∣cause it is not possible, that any man should be iustified before him, by his workes, but by faith: Idem in reg, l. 2. c. 39. According to that which is said: If thou obserue and marke mine iniquities, O Lord, &c. And to be briefe, he oftentimes vttereth these words: The onely faith of Iesus Christ is able to iustifie, &c.
Lombard likewise; Lobard. l. 3 d. 19. & 25. We are iustified by the death of Christ, that is to say, cleansed from our sinnes, by faith in his death. Beholding him by faith, after the manner of the brazen Serpent, we are deliuered from the bands of sinne and the Diuell; in so much as that he is not to demaunde or looke for any thing at our hands. Without faith in this Mediatour, no man hath beene saued, either before or since; no man was euer deliuered from that condemnation that came by Adam, otherwise then by faith, Idem l. 3. d. 26. Rupert, in Ioh. c. 1. Impraegnatam mentem. Lombard. l. 3. d. 23, Honor. in Spe∣cul. Eccles. Richard in Apocal. l. 1. &c. And this faith (saith he) is of God, according to that which Saint Augustine saith: The mercie of God shall preuent me, the mercie of God shall follow me, &c. That is saith Rupertus: Because that to belieue, is to haue conceiued the seed of the word of God with loue in his heart, as also to haue his mind and spirit conceiued and laden with the same. And Lombard: To loue God, is by belieuing in him to cleaue vnto him, and to be incorporated into him: by such faith the wicked is iustified, inso much as that from thence forward, faith worketh in him by loue: for there are no good workes but those which are done by the loue of God; and this loue is the worke of faith. Honorius; He is most happie in deede, that belieueth right∣ly, and that together with this beliefe liueth well: but faith is the foundation, and the loue of God and our neighbours is grounded vpon the same. And Richard; Of faith proceedeth chari∣tie, and of charitie, doe good workes spring and growe. And what is all this, but the same which we affirme daily: that faith cannot stand without charitie, any more then fire can without heate. That the life of faith, euen as that of trees, is knowne because it bringeth forth fruit. In a word, that wee are iustified by faith onely? And yet such a faith, as is neuer alone, but which containeth in it a certaine heate, which is naturall vnto it, alwayes acting somewhat, neuer idle, continually bringing foorth, as a foun∣taine of water, the effects of loue, which it beareth towards God, and the good works it performeth vnto neighbours. But Saint Bernard, whome we haue so oft heretofore cited, goeth further then all the rest: For there was in his time a certaine man named Petrus Abailardus, a verie Pelagian, who durst say: That whereas Christ had abased and humbled himselfe euen vnto the death, &c. that it had not beene, but to haue left vs a patterne of liuing well, and that our saluation consisteth not in his death and passion, but in the growth and proceeding of our good conuersation. Whereupon he is not content to giue him to vnderstand, that this his as∣sertion is the same which the Apostle calleth, the making of the Crosse of Christ of none effect: but taketh his occasion and proceedeth further; and hauing taken the beasome once into his hand, he sweepeth not onely this filth out of the Church, that caused him to take it into his hand, but withall he applieth himselfe all vnder one to sweepe away, whatsoeuer the Iew, Gentile, Philosopher, or superstitious Monke, had brought and shuffled thereinto with their vncleane feete, or else was negligently loo∣ked vnto, or tolerated by the sorenamed, it hauing fallen out then, as it doth often∣times vnto vs now, who are not moued or stirred vp to remoue & put away the thing that is euill, be it neuer so great. And therefore reprouing the waies that S. Augustine did walke in, hee dealeth vpon the true iustification in the bloud of Christ by faith, more exactly then all the rest. Our master (saith he) knew well that the Law did require more then was in our power, Bernard. in Serm. 50. super Cant. Idem Serm, de verb orig. Idem Serm 38 super Cantic. Idem Serm. 11 in Annunciat. Mariae. Idem de milit. templ. c. 11. Idem Ep. 99. Idem Serm 22 super Can. fu∣sissime. but notwithstanding he would giue it vnto vs, that we might be admonished of our insufficiencie: and that such and so great (saith he) as that we are neuer able to render vnto God, that which we owe him: in such sort as that if we should teare and pull our skinnes from off our backes, yet are we ne∣uer able to satisfie for our sinnes. But wee haue recourse vnto the voice of the bloud of Christ, which hath cried farre lowder then the bloud of Abell, which proclaimeth in the hearts of the elect, the remission of their sinnes. Ʋnto the Lambe (saith he) without spot or blemish, that bea∣reth the sinnes of the world, alone righteous, and by consequent, alone fit and meete to enter into the holy of holies. Now if he onely enter thereinto, hee entereth all whole without any faile, not one of his bones shal be broken. The head shal not enter without the rest of his members, his faith∣full ones, Cohaerentes fide, conformes moribus, which are fastned vnto him by faith, and made conformable vnto him in their manners. And they shall enter thereinto couered, and clo∣thed with his righteousnesse: For saith he, He hath giuen it them, it is imputed vnto them: he is made vnto them righteousnesse from God, yea sufficient righteousnes. And seeing he is made
righteousnesse vnto vs, it is ours, &c. And as for all our owne, it is nothing but vnrighteousnes: Idem in Can. serm. 73. Idem Serm. 1 in Natal. Dom Idem de pl. miseric. Dei. Idem de sept. miseric. Idem Serm. 3. de Aduent. Dom. Idem Domi∣nic. 1. post oct. Epiph. Idem Serm. 1. de Annunt. virg. Mar. Initiat. For there not the most holy that are, but they stand in need to pray for their sinnes, to the end that they may be saued by mercie: Noe, Daniel, and Iob, must repaire vnto this fountaine, Pari vo∣to, with the same request, desire and thirst, that all others. For euen the sinnes that we daily com∣mit, and which we accompt but sleight, are such as presently receiue the sentence of condemnation without any delaie. And mine owne soule (saith hee) of it selfe, if God had not sustained me, I both doe and will confesse, was readie and prone to fall into all kind of sinne. But (saith hee) be∣hold and see his grace, he hath iustified vs freely, to the end that his grace might be the highlier esteemed of vs. And this grace doth not onely pardon and forgiue vs our sinnes, but giueth vnto vs his merits. For, to the obtaining of remission of sins, it is necessarie to haue indulgentiam Dei, Gods pardon, and it is impossible to haue any good worke, if he himselfe doe not giue it: but yet much more impossible to merit eternall life, by any workes, if it be not freely giuen, &c. Where∣vpon the Prophet saith: Blessed are they, to whome the Lord imputeth no sinne, &c. And there∣fore (saith hee) we haue neede of a threefold grace, a conuerting grace, a grace assisting vs in temptations, and a rewarding grace. The first doth rough hew vs, as being that whereby we are called: The second, doth set vs forward as by which wee are iustified: The third doth perfect vs as by which we are glorified. And the first is called the good pleasure of God: The second merit, (but note by the way in what sence and signification he taketh it:) And the third, prae∣mium a gift, wages, recompence, and all three graces. Of the first it is said: Idem Serm. 5. de Assumpt. beat Mar. Wee haue all recei∣ued of his fulnesse: of the others, grace for grace: the gift of eternall life, for the merit, that is to say, for the gift of temporall warfare. And this grace of iustification, sanctification, and glorification is receiued in the Church by faith in Christ. For saith he; The misled and vnaduised Sinagogue, which hath despised the righteousnesse of God for to establish her owne, was reiected and cast off; but vnto the spouse of Christ, vnto the true Church, it is said; Desponsaut te mihi in fide, I haue betrothed thee vnto me in faith, iudgement, righteousuesse, mercie, and com∣passion. Neither must thou say, that thou hast chosen me, for I haue chosen thee: and for to moue me to make thee my choice, I did not find in thee any merits, but it was of my selfe, who preuen∣ted thee: And therefore I haue affianced thee in faith, that is to say, not in the workes of the Law, and in righteousnesse, but that which is of faith and not of the Lawe. It remaineth then for thee to iudge betwixt me and thy selfe, seeing I haue affianced thee, not according to thy me∣rit, but according to mine owne good will and pleasure: Wherefore let it bee farre from thee to ob∣iect vnto me either thy merits, or the workes of the law, or yet the heat of the day, or the scorching heate of the Sunne, which thou pretendest to haue indured: but rather acknowledge that thou art affianced vnto me, both by faith, and also by the righteousnesse of faith, in mercie and compassi∣on. For the true spouse acknowledgeth both the one and the other grace: namely, the preuenting grace, as also that which followeth and commeth after it. And what he saith of the Church, he saith of the faithfull; as he doth of the members, that which he saith of the bodie. Idem Serm. 67. super Cantic. It is sufficient (saith he) to merit, to know that merits are not sufficient. And not to presume of merits, is to merit; and yet not to presume vppon them, is to presume after a farre more sure and certaine way: for we haue large matter to glorie of, euen the ample mercies of the Lord, Idem Serm. 68. super Cantic. and his truth which indureth for euer: That is to say, faith in his promises. For is there not sure and certaine matter for vs to glorie in, when mercie and truth doe meete together for vs? &c. And al this by faith. Belieue (saith he) that thy sinnes are forgiuen thee by him, against whom alone thou hast sinned, and who alone is able to deface & blot them out: and thou doest wel. This is the testimonie which the holy Ghost beareth vnto our hearts, saying: Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. Whereupon the Apostle saith, that men are iustified freely by faith: Idem Serm. 1. in Annunciat. Mariae. Idem super Cant. 22. Ep. 77. Yea (saith he) by faith one∣ly: And so Saint Ambrose vnderstandeth him, in his booke of the death of Valentinian. And with such I am willing either to erre or to bee wise, belieuing that man may be saued by faith a∣lone, yea without the receiuing of the Sacrament, (for Valentinian died whiles hee was of the number of the Catechised) prouided that hee haue a desire to receiue it. And this it may be, was the cause (saith he) that our Sauiour hauing said: Who so shall belieue and be baptised, shal be saued, in that which followeth, saith onely; He that shall not belieue, shall be condemned, &c. To shew that onely faith is sometimes sufficient vnto saluation, & that without it nothing auai∣leth. But this faith by which the iust man liueth, doth truely liue it selfe: for otherwise,
how should it quicken and make aliue? For by this faith (saith hee) the heart is cleansed: And God cannot bee seene, Idem l. 5. de confider. that is to say, knowne, but of him that hath a pure and cleane heart. Neither is this faith any doubtfull beliefe: On the contrarie opinion, when it is growne to a constant assertion, doth become fool-hardie; and faith, if it become wauering, is infirme and weake. And therefore it appeareth by his effects, and sheweth foorth the life that is in it. The life thereof (saith he) is Christ dwelling in our hearts: Idem Serm. 1. in Oct. Pasch. Idem ibidem. and of a certaintie, looke where he dwel∣leth, he dwelleth not without loue, sanctification and good workes. The life thereof is loue, and charitie: These are the life of faith, as faith is the life of our soules. For saith he, If thou deuide, actum a fide, action and working from faith, thou makest an vnlawfull diuision, and kil∣lest faith: Idem Serm, 24 in Cant. Ep. 107. Idem Serm. de resurrect. Domini. 2. Idem de Serm. omn. fester. for faith is dead without workes. And wilt thou offer vnto God a dead sacrifice, a faith without loue, a bodie without a soule? &c. Nay (saith hee) workes doe testifie the life of faith: Our life is knowne by mouing, and that of faith, by good workes. Now we reason thus: Man liueth not, because hee is moued, but he is moued, because hee liueth: and then the faithfull is not iustified, neither inioyeth he the life of his soule, because he doth good workes: but because hee is iustified, because his soule inioyeth life in Christ by faith, he doth good workes: These good workes notwithstanding are such, as if the righte∣ousnesse of God bee considered, are by him compared vnto the most filthie thing in the world: and such notwithstanding as they bee, if you consider them according to that small quantitie of goodnesse which they containe, they are of God, and not of our selues: Idem Serm. de Annunciat. Mariae. the fruit no lesse then the tree. For saith hee, It is meete that the holy Ghost should testifie vnto thee, that thou hast them not but of him, he is the author, the rewarder and the whole reward: This soueraigne good thing, is a twofold cause of good things vnto vs, the ef∣ficient and the finall. And yet further hee saith: Without grace wee are not sufficient, onely to thinke a good thought. Idem Serm. 9 in Psalm. 91. & Serm. 32 In so much as that speaking of his owne workes, hee attributeth them vnto God: As in that his soule hath not beene giuen our from the beginning vnto all sinne, in that it hath beene changed from bitternesse and vexation into ioy and comfort, in that it hath repented after a sound and profitable sort, Idem de Sept. misericord. contrarie to the repentance of many others, in that hee hath obtained free remission, in that he hath beene kept from falling backe into his for∣mer sins; in that he hath profited in abstaining from euill, & accustomed the practise of that which is good; and in that he hopeth and looketh for a better estate in the world to come, &c. Now then what remaineth for to attribute vnto man? In stead that of our aduersaries we say, what reserue they then as a remainder for God? For if we owe vnto God, that which we pretend & challenge to merit by; namely a faith working by charitie, which is our pretended merit: (for what owe we not to him, of whome we hold all that we haue?) What hire can we pretend for a thing that is not our owne, but only his mercy, which hath made it ours, and which himselfe, according to the riches of his grace, will bee ours? And this is that, which this our good and bountiful father left vs by testament: I know well (saith he) that I haue not any merit, In t. Bernar. to bring me to heauen; but my Lord doth pos∣sesse it by a double title and claime; namely by nature and obedience: hee is himselfe content with the one, and giueth me the other, &c. CHAP. XXI. How the doctrine and opinion of merit prospered, proceeded, and went forward, from the time of Saint Barnard, vntill these our daies. And what contradictions and resistan∣ces were made against it, vntil the time of the full springing vp againe of the Gospell. BVt let vs now drawe neere vnto the yeare one thousand three hundred, wherein Christendome felt a notable change in doctrine generally, but es∣pecially in this article. Therein at that time Philosophie began to raigne and ouertop the sacred profession of Diuinitie, by the introduction and bringing in of Schoolemen; so that Aristotle got the vpper hand of Saint Paule: Sound and grounded dealing melted into fine and filed subtiltie, curiositie and te∣meritie:
the later enuied the former, and that consequently from one to another, euen to the memorie of our age. This scholasticall dealing fell amongst the Monkes; who added Pharisaisme vnto Philosophie; seeking how to make themselues highly reue∣renced amongst the common people, yea, and to make God himselfe bound & behol∣den vnto them, by reason of their austere and stoical obseruations, deuised and affec∣ted of their owne voluntarie inuentions. They ingrossed for good debt which God should become answerable vnto them for, all their Masses, praiers, fastings, sermons, contemplations, watchings, abstinences, and the discipline and correction vsuall in their Cloisters, &c. And that to the making of them auailable, not onely for thēselues, (for they were not vnprouided of a remanet) but vnto so many as became benefac∣tors vnto their fraternities and couents. And to the common people they assigned them for readie money, therewith to pay for and discharge their sinnes, to satisfie the wrath of God, and obtaine eternall life. Mightie therefore was the growth & increase of this abuse, when once such multitudes of people, tanquam agmine facto, lent their helping hand therunto. And that so much the more, for that they being mendicant & begging people, had their maintenance assigned them vpon the pretended merits of the cōmon people, which also that they might the better attaine and come by, they as∣signed vnto them eternall life, to be receiued vpon the reckoning of their deuotions. And here we are not to forget the maner and forme of their donations & gifts, Bulla fraterni∣tatum Domi∣nicanorum, & Franciscanorū. which were passed at this time to Monasteries, which was, as foloweth. Euery man must deeply weigh and consider, how swiftly this present life doth passe away, and that other approch and come on: and by the same meanes thinke and consider with himselfe, if there be any thing in his posses∣sion, to giue vnto worshipfull places, for his soules health, that so hee may merite to inioy eter∣nall rest in Paradise, with saint Peter, and saint Andrew: because that they by giuing their goodes, haue purchased the kingdome of heauen. The kingdome of God is woorth as much, and according to that which thou possessest. For what is there, that is more cheape when it is bought, or more deare when it is possessed and obtained? &c. This was the declaration and maner of speech vsed for the moouing of their affections, whereupon insued their maner of giuing and disposing; vpon this promise then, which was made vnto them by the Monkes, I, N. carefully tendering the good of my soule, doe giue and deliuer vnto the Mo∣nasterie or Couent of, &c. such a peece of ground, &c. And we haue further seene vpon the poore mens boxes in Cathedrall Churches, within the time of our owne memo∣rie these verses. Hic datur exponi Paradisus venditioni, &c. Here is power and authoritie giuen to set Paradise on sale, &c. But yet there are euerie where manifest signes of the degrees of the growth of this abuse to be seene, which we accordingly will point out in that which foloweth. Alexander Ales. p. 3. q. 28. membr 1 art. 5 & q. 60. mem. 10. art. 1. Thom. 1. 2. q. 55. art. 3 2.2. quest. 184. art. 1. Alex∣ander Ales, and Thomas Sage, verie well: That the law is the ministerie of condemnation, not that it selfe is euill, but for that it sheweth forth that which is euill. But Thomas breaketh loose in a certaine place, and against all antiquitie saith, that the law perswadeth not any impossible thing, but draweth vs on vnto perfection: in so much, saith he, as that it seemeth that man is able to fulfil it. And yet to accomplish and fulfill it, Non optimo modo, saith he, sed in fimo: not after the best maner, but at the least in the simplest and weakest maner. And he giueth an example for proofe thereof: Behold (saith he) the least and simplest maner of fulfilling the commandement of louing God, is this, not to loue any thing more then him, con∣trarie to him, or inequall maner with him. There are other more perfect degrees of louing him, but he that can attain vnto them is no transgressor. Now to insist in the same example, I de∣maund, who is there, or euer hath beene in the world, that was able to attaine there∣vnto? that hath not set himselfe downe a great way short on this side? And whether this be not in plaine and proper tearmes, to come to one and the same point with the Pharisie, I haue fulfilled and kept all this from my youth? &c. Alexander Ales. p. 3. q. 1. memb. 6. art. 2. q. 28. memb. 2. art. 1. Againe, Alexander and Thomas do teach very excellently; that the sinne of man, in re∣spect of God, against whome it is committed, is infinite, and could not be sustained or vndergone, but by the word made flesh, that is to say, by God himselfe. Thereupon then they were to
conclude, that no man was able to find any means of pardon or righteousnes in him∣selfe neither yet how to come by them, Thom. in Summ de ve∣rt. mater. 28 Idem 3. Sum. q. 68. art. 1. Idem in Apoc. c. 1. & n sam. de verit. mater 29. q. 7. Idem in Apoc. c. 3. but in the Mediator: for what is there more repugnant vnto the pretended merit? For indeed they affirme, that before the com∣ming of Christ, no man had power to be saued but by faith alone in Christ. And then not by the accomplishment of the law, but rather of meere grace, as they say some∣times. That remission of sinnes is giuen freely: That what we haue by the efficacie of Christes merit, is freely bestowed, &c. But behold again how Philosophie carieth them away from vs, after the free-will of Aristotle. Fiue things (sath Thomas) are to be considered in iustifi∣cation: First, Dignatio Dei, the clemencie and bountifulnesse of God, by which he vouchsafeth to rouse and awake the sinner: Secondly, the consent of free-will, disposing him: Thirdly, the in∣fusion of grace iustifying the soule: Fourthly, the merit of the iustified, profiting in grace: Fift∣ly, the nourishment of consolation, which refresheth the soule. Wherein he maketh the free∣will of man a ioynt-worker in the matter of his saluation, with the first grace: and by that meanes meriting the infusion of iustifying grace, and thereby afterwarde the in∣crease of grace, Idem in Apo∣cal. c. 7. & 12. &c. euen to say, That man ioyntly working with the grace of God, by contri∣tion, confession, satisfaction, &c. doth wash himselfe: and that the diuell is not onely ouercome by the passion of Christ, but also by the merits of the righteous, &c. And after this manner doe Albert, Alexander, and others speake now and then, giuing out their lessons by which they teach, what works inable a man to discharge himselfe of his sins, at the least such as are veniall. Albert. in Luc. 11. As Albert; That veniall sinnes are raunsomed, by beating vppon the breast, Pa∣ter-nosters, making of signes of the Crosse, holie water, confession, &c. deuiding the worke of our saluation betwixt God and vs Grace, and Free-will: wherevpon such as followed after, did knowe verie well to drawe to themselues the better part. But let vs a little examine and see the coherence of this, with other of Thomas his principles, and let vs note in him, that which elswhere we haue said of Philosophers, namely, that often∣times they grow deafe, Thom. aduer. Gent. c. 44. l. 1. and cannot heare their owne voyces. To be saued (saith he) or to be damned commeth not of the diuersitie of merits, but of the principall intention of the first Agent, that is to say, of God, who (saith he) of meere grace, hath from all eternitie purposed to let some to fall, and faile, and to succour and assist others, to the ende they may not faile or misse, to the ende that he may shew in the one the power of his grace, and in the other the defect of na∣ture: Idem in l. 1. Sent. d. 40. & 41.45. no man being able by merits, to come from the state of nature, to the state of grace, but one∣ly by the grace of God, which he is not drawne to giue, either for anie sight of precedent merites, nor yet through foresight of anie manner of merits in vs to come. On the contrarie, we see in man, a merit and desert, whereby to harden his heart: but for any merit tending to the moouing of mer∣ce, wee finde none: No not for the grace which is giuen him vnto iustification, and then much lesse vnto predestination: for hauing chosen from before all eternitie, those whom hee pleased, what manner of merits could there possibly be to mooue him thereunto? Now this is Thomas which speaketh: And I demaund how these Maximes, which hee groundeth so surely and sub∣stantially, can agree with the merit of eternall life? the beginning whereof is giuen and granted from eternitie: and the end whereof is likewise from eternitie ordayned, without any regarde or consideration of merits. It may be they will say, the meanes which come betwixt this eternal decree, and the finall execution thereof, are of our selues: at the least wee merit them in some part, by the concurrence and iumping togither of our free-will. Nay rather this is against na∣ture, that he which hath fore appointed, and resolued of the ende of a thing of his meere and free grace, before that he caused it to be of nothing, should not giue vnto the same thing, Idem in Serm. de verit. ma∣ter. 27. by the same grace, the meanes to cause it to become and prooue such. And therefore (saith he) Man is not onely said to haue the grace of God, because he is beloued of God vnto eternall life; but also because he giueth him a gift, by the which he maketh him wore thie of eternall life, which we cal, gratiam, gratum facientem: Grace which maketh a man accep∣table: that is to wit, this faith infused by the holie Ghost into our hearts: by the which (saith he) all the fathers of the olde Testament became acceptable to God, and iustified, and whereby wee also are deliuered from sinne, and death. And this fayth (saith hee) quickeneth the soule by grace, Galat. 2. It purgeth it from sinnes. Actes 17. &c. It giueth righteousnesse vnto the
soule, Rom. 3. It betrotheth and affianceth vs vnto God. Osee. 2. Iden in 1.2. q. 102 art. 5 Idem in expos. 1. Decret. In offic. de corp. Christ. In Hymno. Tert. summ. q. 4.49. arr. 1. AEgid. Fom. c. 12. l. Examer. & l. 2. c. 4. It adopteth men to be the sonnes of God. 1. Iohn. 2. It causeth vs to approch and draw neere vnto God. Heb. 11. Finally, by it men attaine the hire of eternall life. Iohn. 6. &c. Againe, To establish and strengthen a sincere heart, onelie faith sufficeth, &c. By faith the passion of Christ is applied vnto vs, that so wee may be able to receiue the fruits thereof; Rom. 3. It is vnto vs, both the beginning and cause of righ∣teousnesse. Rom. 8. That righteousnesse which is by the faith of Christ, &c. Yea and yet Aegi∣dius saith further: That all our good workes are the workes of God: Thou hast, O Lord, saith Esai, wrought and brought to passe our workes: And wee are not sufficient (saith the Apostle to thinke anie good of our selues; it is he which maketh vs righteous, and which effecteth in vs the workes of righteousnesse. Nowe were it not better to holde him to these Maximes, and to the conclusions necessarily insuing heereof, as that wee owe vnto the infinite grace of God our iustification, to the perfect and absolute righteousnesse of Christ, our righteousnesse, to God by Iesus Christ, the beginning, middest, and ende of our saluation, according to the Scriptures, then (according to the curious Meditations which happen vnto the most excellent wittes, when the drie and barren veine ouer∣taketh them) to seeke our saluation in our selues, in whome there is nothing to bee found but destruction, or for any thing wherewith we may pay God, or wherewith we may purchase eternall life, both for our selues and others, out of our owne stocks and prouision. In the meane time, wee see howe the succeeding ages learned to build vpon these strawie, and stubblie foundations. Thomas had said: That free-will mooued by the grace of God, proceeded vnto good workes, and became fellow-worker with his grace. These men say, That free-will of his owne nature, dooth such workes as that they merit, that God should illumi∣nate the worker with his grace, giue him faith, &c. In such sort as that the vnbeleeuers doe merit of God by their workes: not any more the gift of faith and righteousnesse, but faith and righteousnesse for a hire, which they call, Meritum de congruo, as a man would say, of well beseeming: meaning thereby, that if not for righteousnesse, yet at the least for seemli∣nesse sake, God is bound to giue them his grace. See I pray you how this matter agreeth with the Scripture: Whatsoeuer is done without faith cannot please God: With Saint Augustine, The workes of all vnbeleeuers considered in them, are sinnes: As also with Thomas: Whereas God is mooued to distribute his grace, it is not in consideration of ante merits gone before, or to come, but of his free grace and good will, sed ex mera gratia. And this is the same likewise which the Schoole-men say in their dunsicall doctrine: That man by his naturall power, doing that which is in himselfe; without faith, and without the holy Ghost, is able to merit, de congruo, that God should giue him grace. And Gabriel Biel expoundeth these woordes: Gab. Biel. in 3. sent. d. 27. In 4. Sent. d. 14 q. 1. d. 14 l. 3. q. 2. That which is in himselfe, louing God (saith he) aboue all things. And this he affirmeth that, Man may doe of his owne naturall power, Whereas notwithstanding in deed the case stan∣deth thus, that loue proceedeth from knowledge: and that imperfect knowledge can∣not beget perfect loue. Yea hee passeth further: for (saith he) as no subiect receiueth anie forme, except it be prepared and fitted thereunto: euen so it is requisite, that our soule should bee prepared for the infusion of grace, which is our formall righteousnesse before God: and this it com∣meth to be by the meanes of free-will, which maketh a man to know his sinne, and to be displea∣sed with himselfe for the same, which he calleth, dispositionem praeuiam: after which he resolueth to loue God aboue all, which he calleth, dispositionem concomitantem: which maketh the soule apt to receiue the stampe and marke, namely the infusion of his grace, by this act so meriting the same: euen so farre foorth as that grace of necessitie, and that verie speedilie is infused into it. Neither more nor lesse (saith hee) then in naturall things, vltima & immediata dispositio necessitat ad formam: Which is as much to say in plaine English, as that our free-will dooth not onely merit grace at Gods hande, for seemelinesse sake, but euen of necessitie and perforce. Quite contrarie to that which Saint Paule repeateth so often times, By grace. Thomas likewise: Mera liberalitate, meragratia, &c. As also cleane contrarie to that, that hee maketh Grace the beginning of our saluation, in intention: and the effectiue in the execution, &c. Thomas againe had saide: That free-will deliuereth by the grace of God, and worketh
certaine actions, auailable to the purging and taking away of veniall sinnes, as also to the stir∣ring vp of the increase of grace. But such as come after staie not there: For this infused grace of God, by the merit of the free-will of man is turned by them into a state and disposition of the spirit, made conformable to the Law, and will of God: by which, Man (saith this Gabriell also) is not onely deliuered from bond of damnation, but also is made worthie of life and eternall glorie: And the soule (saith he) informed and taught by this grace, by an action drawne partly from this grace, and partly from a mans owne will, doth me∣rit eternall life, not any more de congruo, that is to say, of congruitie, or for seemelinesse sake, but de condig no, for hauing done a deed worthie of the same, that is to say, by righteousnesse. For euen so doe they define it: That the workes of the regenerate done in charitie in this life, de∣serue eternall life; in as much as it is to be rendred and giuen to good workes, by the dutie of the righteousnesse and iustice of God. Rom 8.18. Cleane contrarie to that which Saint Paule saith: But eternall life is the grace of God, &c. The miseries of this life, that is to say, the tortures and torments, that we suffer for the name of Christ, Are not worthie, Non sunt condignae of the glorie which is to come, &c. As if they would vse this word (Condignum) of purpose in despite of the Apostle. Durand. l. 2. D 18. q. 4. art. 12. Arist. 8. Ethic. And Durand likewise saith in plaine tearmes: That no man can merit: Decondigno, according to the iustice of God, either commutatiuely or distributiue∣ly: That such merit hath his place in the dealing betwixt man and man, but not with God: that the Philosopher teacheth vs, That in things that concerne God, Fathers and Mothers, there is no equiualencie or equalitie: That to gainesay the same, cannot bee without temeritie and blas∣phemie: That though God should not giue eternall glorie to him that should die in grace, yet hee could not be called vniust; no not though hee should take it away from him that had it. On the contrarie, that God might say vnto him, that which is in the Gospell: May I not doe with mine owne, as best liketh me? And what should such a partie haue to replie, but onely the saying of Iob: The Lord gaue it me, and the Lord hath taken it away from me, &c. Jn as much as euerie good thing whatsoeuer, is of the free gift of God, &c. Afterward, Thomas had said: That there was some manner of meanes for man to fulfill the Law, although not in the highest degree and most absolute manner, yet after a meaner and weaker fashion. But these men say much more: That it may not onely bee perfectly fulfilled, but things much more difficult; as namely, some such as whereunto wee are not any way bound, and therefore bee called and are workes of Supererogation. And that as by the fulfilling of the Law, wee purchase eternall life vnto our selues; so by the working of that which is ouer and a∣boue the Law, we purchase the same for others: In which ranke, the traditions of men are recko∣ned and placed, Deut. 12. Numb. 15 Esay. 1.29. Mat. 15. as also their voluntarie deuotions, afflictions, affected fastings, whippings and beating, &c. Of all which things God hath said vnto vs: Doe not that which seemeth right in your eyes, but that which I haue commaunded you. Who hath required such things at your hands? It is in vaine that you worship me according to the precepts of men, &c. To bee short, a graie Frier became so shamelesse, in the Councell of Trent, as to declaime, ex∣pounding the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Romaines: That those who had liued before the Lawe, had obtained eternall life, without the faith of Christ. And wee reade in a booke, intituled, Flosculi B. Francisci: That all those that were come into the world since the time of Saint Frances, calling vpon him, were saued by him. And wee haue seene it, that to weare his hoode, was held for a second Baptisme; to die in his hood, or to put his hand onely in the same at the time of death, with an intent to weare it, as worthie a worke as to suffer martyrdome. And what shal we say, when as yet to this day, to beare about blessed graines, cast Pictures, and such other the Romish marchandise, are ac∣compted to be as so many steps to lift a man vp into Paradise, Romish cere∣monies. or to bring him backe out of Purgatorie? When as also their Agnus Dei are consecrated with this blasphe∣mie: That they may haue the same power to deliuer vs out of the power of the Diuell, that the Sonne of God, the vnspotted Lambe, slaine and offered vpon the Altar of the Crosse, had to blot out our sinnes, to obtaine our pardon, and to relieue vs with grace: and that such grace, as where∣by we may both merit, and receiue eternall life? We were come then so farre (neither can we yet get out) that we would not be any more indebted vnto God; and withall we had robbed him (if it had bin possible) of
the honour of our creation. So mightily had pride (masked vnder the shadow of hu∣mility) wrought in vs, as that we failed not willingly to arme our selues with our owne righteousnesse, and therein to wrastle against his: whereas indeed our miserie should haue brought vs on our knees, and haue taught vs to implore and sue for his mercie. Yet all these monstrous blasphemies were not vncontrolled: For as S. Paul opposed himselfe to them of the Circumcision, S. Augustine against Pelagius, and S. Bernard a∣gainst Abailardus and others of his time: so in this age wherein the Schoolemen and Mendicant Friers stept foorth for the vpholding and fortifying of the same, the Wal∣denses and Albigenses, did oppose themselues thereunto, of whose Articles this was one: That euerie belieuer is iustified by onely faith in Christ, &c. Wickliefe in England in the yeare 1400. in the open Vniuersitie: Profess. fidei Waldens. ad Vladislaum reg. Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prague in the yeare 1415. in the Councell of Constance: and Ierome Sauonarola in the yeare 1490. or there about, whose bookes are so full of most excellent places for the prouing of free iustification, against the pretended merits of whatsoeuer Saints or Martyrs; as that it would beseeme vs to set them downe here word for word, and the rather because hee was a man so highly esteemed of in Italy, Tota meditat. in Psal. 5 1. as that the Counte Picus Mirandula called him the holy Prophet, and tooke vpon him boldly to defend him in a booke written to that purpose, against the Pope. And what shall we say, Adrian. 6. in 4. Sent. when they themselues in our time, vpon the beginning of the reformation of Religion, were euen ashamed there∣of? Certes, Adrian of Vtrecht, who was afterward Pope Adrian the sixth, saith plaine∣ly: Our merits are a staffe of Reede: whereupon if a man leane, it breaketh, and the shiuers ther∣of runne into his hand: Our righteousnesse a defiled cloth; vpon this cloth of a good life, which we haue a purpose to weaue vp with the workes of righteousnesse, we continually distill and let droppe, Clithou in Cant. the purulent and filth matter of diuers crimes, &c. And Clithouius said at Paris: Our me∣rits are none before God, vnto whome wee owe all: our good workes, if there be any such, are not good vnto him, but through his goodnesse: our righteousnesse is nothing but filthinesse, &c. In like manner Iohannes Ferus a graie Frier, whom they haue in our daies tearmed to be the chiefe and principall Preacher and Doctor in all Germanie, is censured by Domi∣nicus a Soto a Iacobine and Spaniard, in 67. places, but principally for hauing spoken euill of this Article, according to their intention, in his Commentaries: In whose de∣fence one Michael Medina a Spanish gray Frier, hath purposely written and put forth a booke. The truth is, that he teacheth; Ioh. Ferus in Mat. l. 1. In Ioh. c. 1. v. 4.13.17.19. That all our old birth (for so hee calleth the man not regenerate) and all the powers of our nature are condemned in the Scriptures: that wee are nothing but sinne and darknesse: that our thoughts, speech, reason and will, are accursed: that our light, if the same be not inlightned by the word of God, worketh nothing in vs but errour and going astraie: that euen the Law, howsoeuer good in it selfe, without grace, begetteth nothing but hypocrites: that without faith there is no good workes; and that none but such as belieue can worke them: that in the regenerate, not onely after Baptisme, Idem in Ioh. c. 13. v. 10. &c. 14 v. 16 &. c. 16. v. 9. but euen after they become to an actuall faith, there abideth continually a remainder of originall sinne, which bringeth forth sinne in vs; whereupon it must consequently bee auouched, that no man is without sinne; and notwith∣standing that such as belieue doe not cease therefore to be cleane, that is in as much as they be pu∣rified by faith, and by the same ingrafted into the body of Christ, participating his holinesse, and possessing himselfe: according to that which S. Paul saith: But you are washed, but you are sanc∣tified, &c. And that notwithstanding that considered in themselues they are nothing but sin: yet there is no condemnation for them with God, who doth not impute vnto them any their sinnes & vncleannesse, but rather reputeth them for pure & cleane, because of their faith in Christ: More∣ouer, that this faith which iustifieth vs, is not any other thing then the free mercie of God: forgi∣uing sinnes for his Christs sake, which only is requisite in vs vnto saluation, &c. and it worketh in vs a certaintie of the same, so farre foorth, as that it leaueth vs not without a pledge and earnest penie of eternall life: that by the only merits of Christ we are saued, & made partakers of the same merits by faith alone. In all which points he doth verie notably agree with vs, that is to say, with all antiquitie; and consequently is condemned by the Councell of Trent, in diuers Canons in the sixth Session. Now of all this discourse wee gather: that this doctrine of free iustification in the
bloud of Christ, by faith hath beene of a long time kept & maintained in the Church in his puritie, howsoeuer deadly assailed by Sathan, and that at diuers times in diuers depending points, as the See and seate of our saluation. That notwithstanding it hath beene subiect to manifold & diuers great alterations and changes, through the proud and presumptuous nature of man, through the doctrine of Philosophers, through the subtilties of the Schoolemen, and the Pharisaical hmuour of the Monkes: In so much as that (notwithstanding the couragious defence of the same by diuers worthie and great personages, holding vnto the yeare 1200. & more, for the grace of God against the ingratitude of man,) the said Pharisaicall doctrine did preuaile and get the vpper hand: and yet not so absolutely, but that at the same time it was still impugned and confuted, almost throughout all the nations of Christendome, by many good people, and that euen to the suffering of death for their confession: being also mightily and soundly crossed by their Maxims, by whose fine conceipts and subtile deuises, it had beene chiefely established: that in it there is hapned vnto vs, as it falleth out in the Countries farre North, wherein the brightnesse of the two twilights, doe happen and fall out so neere together, as that the day is no sooner dead and departed on the one side, but it quickneth and reuiueth againe on the other: This Article hauing beene no sooner shut in and couered with the darknesse which had ouer-spread and ouer∣shadowed the Church, but that wee might see it incontinently after, more splendent and glorious then euer it was before. Wherein we may note the singular goodnes of God towards his Church: for in as much as iustification is that point of Christian doctrine which ioyneth man & Christ together, which maketh the proper difference of the Church, from all other sortes of assemblies: and of a Christian from all other men, as being that, without which no man can bee a Christian: with which alone well vnderstood, we retaine both the name and the effect: and to be short, which may bee called by good right, the life of a Christian, the soule of the Church, the bond of the mariage betwixt Christ and his Church: it was surely verie necessarie (seeing that God according to his promise cannot destroy his Church:) that this article should be con∣serued in the same: that such Eclipse as should couer the face therof, shuld be but short, to the end it might returne vnto his former brightnesse and light. In a word, (as Phi∣sitions say, that the heart is the first liuing, & last dying part in man:) That this heart also of the Church, by which it began to liue, (notwithstanding first assailed and set vpon by the venimous poyson of Sathan,) was the last that was mortally wounded and striken, and the first againe recouered: as for certaine it is come to passe in our daies, wherein God (making his Gospell as it were to liue againe, after so long a time of death and darknesse) would of his incomparable grace, that this point should bee the first restored into his former estate and perfection by them, whome he had raised for the restauration of his Church. Now in this third part we haue entered into the consideration of the Masse, A briefe re∣hea.  of that which hath beene said before this third book. in the qualitie of a Sacrifice: so it remaineth for our better comming to our selues againe af∣ter so long a discourse; that we briefly repeate the same, which we meane to performe, in manner as followeth. The Masse is properly a corrupting & adulterating of the ho∣ly Supper of our Lord: and the Supper of our Lord was not ordained for a sacrifice ta∣ken in his proper signification, but for a Sacrament. Neither can it be called a sacrifice except for that it is a holy action, or else because it is a commemoration of the sacri∣fice of our Lord once made vpon the tree of the Crosse for our sinnes: or thirdly, for that it is a thankesgiuing for the benefits receiued by him. Wherefore the Masse can∣not properly be called a sacrifice, and much lesse a propitiatorie sacrifice: in as much as the whole Scripture, and all antiquitie do teach vs, that there is not in the Church, any moe sacrifices truely propitiatorie, then one, euen the bloud of our Lord, shed for our sinnes, represented and shadowed out vnder the Lawe, by all the sacrifices then in vse: and fulfilled in the time of grace, in one onely, which ought not, nei∣ther can bee reiterated, without sacriledge. From this pretended Sacrifice of the Masse, haue beene deriued and drawne Masses for the deade, through such an
abuse much like to that which is condemned by diuers auncient Councels, namely, the giuing of the Eucharist vnto the dead. Withall wee haue shewed that there is no Purgatorie: that the old and new Testament did neuer acknowledge it, as neither the first and most auncient antiquitie, if so bee they take it not from the heathen: as also that those which haue spoken of it, did not meane the same, which our aduersaries embrace & maintaine; but rather that this is an opinion, which cannot by any meanes stand and agree with that of theirs: and how that hereby Masses and Suffrages for the dead, swarme vpon the face of the earth. From this pretended sacrifice likewise haue proceeded and sprung the Masses said in honour of Saints, in which they were both praied vnto and worshipped, yea euen to the offering vp in sacrifice, in honor of them, of the Sonne of God himselfe, if one would belieue them. Further wee haue shewed that the inuocation and worshipping of Saints, is condemned throughout the whole Scripture, old and new, and by all true antiquitie: that the beginning of this doting madnesse, was taken vp by the imitating of the heathens in their Paganisme; shewing further the manifold contradictions, that were maintained against the same, for a long time: and thus the whole seruice of Saints, a great portion of the Papists doctrine falleth downe to the ground. And for as much as Inuocation is grounded vppon the merit of Saints, and this Merite oftentimes alleadged in the Masse, and that euen in their speaking to God, for the remission of sinnes; wee haue verified and auoucht it, that there is not any maner of meriting at Gods hand, allowed or taught either in the Scriptures, or in the auncient writers, neither yet in the purer sort of the new & latter writers; except such as they themselues are at this day ashamed of. In summe, that there is neither sacrifice, name, nor merit, which euer saued the dead, or which euer was able to preserue the liuing; but the onely name, merit, and sacrifice of one onely Iesus Christ, God and man, dead for our sinnes, and risen for our iustification: To whome with the Father and the holy Ghost be honour and glorie, for the riches of his grace eternally, and euerlast∣ingly, Amen. The end of the third Booke.
The fourth Booke. Wherein the holy Supper of our Lord is handled and intreated of as a Sacrament, and consequently of the Masse, and it is a treatise of Transubstantiation. CHAPTER. I. What a Sacrament is, and wherein it consisteth: And of the difference betwixt the Sacra∣ments of the old and of the new Testament, where are set downe certaine rules of the old writers, for the vnderstanding of them. HItherto wee haue intreated of the Masse, as it is a corrupting of the holy Supper of our Lord, in the qualitie, or vnder the name and nature of a sacrifice, it followeth now that we examine it, as a counterfeit of the same in the qualitie of a Sacrament; a mat∣ter intreated of so exactly by many great personages of this time, as that it may seeme a verie vnaduised and needlesse thing after them to enter into the same matter, not treading the steps wherein they haue gone before. Notwithstanding because this worke would remaine lame & vnperfect, if it should want this part, I will deale there∣vpon, but so briefely, as possibly may bee, standing not so much vpon the matter of dispute, as the course of the storie: to the end that that which seemeth at the least to haue his stay and maintenance from auncient writers, may be confessed and acknow∣ledged, not to haue any manner of recommendation at all, more then that which it reapeth from the verie newest and latest writers, that haue sprung vp in the Church of Rome. The Lawe was no sooner giuen to man, but sinne insued thereupon: neither was sinne so soone hatched, but that presently thereupon, man receiued the writ of con∣demnation, and sencibly felt the punishment thereof: whereupon likewise the Gos∣pell was preached vnto him, Gene. 3. by Gods owne mouth: namely, in the promise of the holy seede, which should bruise the head of the Serpent: and in the incarnation of the Sonne of God, for the redemption of mankind, for the remission of our sinnes. And this Gospell is the reconciliation of God with men, by the bloud of our Lord, shed effectually before the foundation of the world, in as much as from the same, he hath wrought the saluation and redemption of the Patriarkes and Prophets: and to bee short of al them which haue bene saued either without the Law, or vnder the law: shed
notwithstanding naturally in his appointed and determined time, euen when our Sa∣uiour hauing taken our flesh, was stretched vpon the tree of the Crosse for vs. Man in the meane time in his blindnesse and peruerse nature became vnable ei∣ther to see or belieue this excellent mysterie, if God had not reuealed it vnto him: The necessity of the sacra∣ments. but able on the contrarie, quickly to forget it, according to our ordinarie negligence and carelesnesse in heauenly things, if it had not beene represented and set before his eyes continually. And afterward, what apparance or likely-hood could there be conceiued of sinfull man, vnthankfull to God, and condemned and cast away in his owne cons∣cience; that God would vouchsafe to be his God; that hee would reconcile himselfe vnto a vile and vnprofitable creature; that hee would make a league with dust; giue himselfe to him for a perpetuall inheritance, and deliuer his onely Sonne, to suffer a shamefull and ignominious death for him? All of them beeing workes of a bottome∣lesse depth of mercie, towards a most miserable creature, who waited and looked for nothing else, in the guiltinesse of his owne conscience, but a bottomlesse Sea of wrath and indignation. This therefore was the cause why God, our Creator, the beginning, middle and end of our saluation; not content to haue promised and giuen his Sonne to our first parents, vnto reconciliation and redemption, and in their persons vnto their true po∣steritie, which is the Church, doth renue from time to time this Gospell vnto his chil∣dren, this glad tidings of the league and couenaunt made with his faithfull ones, for their saluation; giuing them sometimes Prophetes to preach his Christ that was to come, and sometimes Apostles, to testifie and beare witnesse vnto him, alreadie come in the flesh, dead, and risen for vs. This is the ministerie of his holy word, euermore continued in his Church. He furthermore ordaineth for them, Sacraments of this co∣uenant, made and accomplished; earnest pence and palpable pledges of the certaintie of his promises, testimonies of his faithfulnes, and remedies of their distrust and dif∣fidencie: which speake and testifie outwardly, both vnto their eares and eyes, by the analogie and agreement of their nature, and inwardly to their vnderstandings and hearts, by the working of the holy Ghost accompanying them: namely, that this co∣uenant is certaine, that they in particular are comprehended and contained in the same, &c. And which more is, they worke within, a faith of the free promises of the Creator, of the remission of sinne in his Sonne, &c. a confirmation of that most neere coniunction, that is betwixt the faithfull and God, an vnion with Christ, by the bond of his holy spirit: such as the members haue with the head, from which they draw sal∣uation and life. Whereupon it followeth, that they are made new men, for so much as the power and efficacie of the spirit of Christ, dooth conuert and turne them into his nature, draw them from their owne, regenerate and cast them anew by little and lit∣tle, and that both in their affections, as also in their actions, to put their trust in God, through Iesus Christ, to renounce and forsake themselues, for the loue of him, and to wish well and doe well vnto their neighbours, but especially to the members of the same bodie, both in him and for him. Now therefore this is the office and part of the Sacraments: What a sacra∣ment is. and thereupon a Sa∣crament to define it properly, is a holy ceremonie instituted of God, added to the promise of grace made in Iesus Christ; to be an earnest penie and certaine testimonie, vnto all the faithfull, that this promise of grace, expounded & explaned in the word of God, is particularly exhibited, ratified & applied to him, vnto saluation. And such were amongst the old people, from the time of Abraham and Moyses, vnto the com∣ming of our Lord, Circumcision and the Passe-ouer, instituted of God to such end; in stead wherof there were ordained for vs by our Lord holy Baptisme, and the holy sup∣per, to continue to the end of the world. It consisteth of a signe, a thing and the word. Genes. 17.10, 13. Rom. 4. Of these Sacraments the Scripture speaketh after this sort. Of Circumcision: It shall be vnto you (saith the Lord) for a signe of the couenant, betwixt me and you, and my coue∣nant shall be in your flesh, for an euerlasting couenant. Thus of the signe. And S. Paul: Abra∣ham (saith he) receiued the signe of the Circumcision, , the seale of the righteousnesse
of faith. And we know that the righteousnesse of faith is that which is freely promised & giuen in Iesus Christ our Lord. Now behold the effect, and so by consequent a per∣fect Sacrament: Deutr. 10. o. 2 28. Exod. 12. according to that which Moyses saith, Circumcise the foreskinne of your heart. And S. Paul; Circumcision is not that which is made in the flesh; but of the heart; in the spirit. Of the Passe-ouer: The bloud of the Lambe, is vnto you for a signe, in the houses where∣in you shall be: 1. Corinth 5. I will see this bloud, and passe ouer. But this bloud, saith the Apostle, is the bloud of Christ: Christ our Passe-ouer was slaine for vs, &c. Behold here againe both the signe and the thing: and both the one and the other by the word, that is to say, by the institution of Christ, who hath ordained the signe for the thing, and giuen the thing with the signe; otherwise naked and vnprofitable, not answering the effect, that is ex∣pected thereof. This word in the Circumcision is this: I am the Lord Almightie, &c. I will set my couenant betwixt thee and me, Genes. 17. Exodus 12. &c. In the Passe-ouer; The tenth day of the month, let euerie man take a Lambe, &c. In which places God instituteth and ordaineth these Sacraments; and giueth them by his institution, perpetuall power in his Church: as by these words once spoken; Increase and multiplie, he hath giuen for euer his blessing vnto holy marriage. The same is that of the Sacraments of the new Testament. Baptisme receiueth vs into the couenant of God, in stead of Circumcision: the holy Supper, in stead of the Passe-ouer, dooth nourish and maintaine vs therein: whereupon the one is properly called Regeneration; as a man would say, a new birth: and the other, The communion of the bodie and bloud of our Lord, to our nourishing vnto eternall life. In Baptisme water is the signe; the bloud of Christ is the thing signified: water, which washeth away the spots of the body; bloud, which cleanseth and wipeth away the sinnes of the soule, namely by the mediation of the word, or institution of God, accompanied with his holy spi∣rit which giueth efficacie and power vnto the Sacrament. Of the signe S. Iohn Bap∣tist saith: Mat. 5. Act 1. 1 Cor. 12.13. Coloss. 2.11. Rom. 3.. Galat. 3.27. Tit. 3 5. I baptise you with water; but as concerning the thing; Hee will baptise you with the holy Ghost, namely the Lord. Of both together, the Apostle saith: Wee are baptised into one spirit, buried in baptisme, into the death of Christ, and raised againe into his resurrecti∣on, and saued by the washing of regeneration, and of the renewing of the holy Ghost. In so much as that the word, that is to say, the institution of the Lord, added to the element of water, worketh supernaturally in our soules, by the holy Ghost, the same that water doth in our bodies, by his naturall propertie: Baptise yee in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, &c. And we shall say the same hereafter, but more largely of the holy Supper, The new Testament of the Lord in his bloud: Which, being instituted to the same end, is also of the same nature with the other Sacraments: the bread & wine, for signes and tokens most fitly agreeing with the true and perfect nourishment of the faithfull, that is in Christ; a foode and nourishment that cannot better be expres∣sed, then by that of our bodies, which turne into their substance, that which they eate and drinke: saue onely that the communion of the body and bloud of Christ, hath this ouer and aboue, because of his power which is infinitely more mightie then that of ours, namely, that it conuerteth and chaungeth vs into his substance, maketh vs flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: and causeth vs to liue in him and by him, &c. Whereas our bodies being stronger then the thing which they eate, doe cause and make the same to liue after a certaine manner in them, turning it into their substance. The signes therefore, are bread and wine; and by that name, they are continually called of S. Paul, and that euen after the words, as they cal them of consecration: The thing, that is the Communion of the bodie of Christ broken for vs, and of his bloud shed for our sins: 1 Cor. 10. & 11. The word, that is the institution of the Lord; which commeth there∣unto: Doe this in remembrance of me, shew forth the death of the Lord vnto his comming, &c. This is the same that the old writers say; that Christ is the onely saluation of the Church, The Israelites were partakers of one and te same thing with vs. in all the seuerall tearmes and times of the same, whether before the Lawe, vnder the Law, or vnder the time of grace: that hee is figured in all the sacrifices, and exhibited in all the Sacraments, as well old as new: as they which are at all times vn∣profitable without Christ, and which cannot be fruitfull, but in Christ, who onely, is
both the foundation and the substance. Saint Paul said to the Corinthians: J would not (saith he) that you should be ignorant, &c. that our Fathers haue all eaten of the same spiri∣tuall meate, and all drunke of the same spirituall drinke: 1. Cor. 10. for they drunke of the spirituall rocke which followed them, and that rocke was Christ. The Apostle expressing by the words of eating and drinking, the communion which they had in Christ; euen Christ slaine, sa∣crificed, & crucified who otherwise did not profit either them or vs. But some make answere: that S. Paul meaneth, that they did verily eate amongst themselues of one & the same meate, &c. but not of the verie same that we. This is the thing that wee must see and trie. Certainely the scope and drift of the Apostle is plaine, as to shew vnto the Corinthians, that they deceiued themselues, to put their trust in the vse of the Sacra∣ments, not ceasing in the meane time to prouoke God by their abuses. But saith hee, our Fathers had Sacraments as well as we: they eate and drunke the same meate and drinke; and notwithstanding, such of them as prouoked God, could not put off or a∣voide their destruction. If S. Paul had not meant it by way of comparing of the Chri∣stians with the Iewes; what should the force of his argument haue bene? And had they not libertie to haue replied, they did not eate Christ as we doe? &c. But the old writers shall decide vs this controuersie. Tertullian; This water (saith he) which distilled and ranne from the rocke, Tertul. de Bapt & aduer. Marcion. l. 0. which followed the people, was Baptisme: for if the rocke were Christ, vndoubtedly we see that Baptisme is blessed through the water in Christ. Againe; Marcion hath striken himselfe against the rocke, whereof our fathers drunke in the wildernesse, &c. Origen; The same which the Iewes call the way and passage through the Sea, S. Paul calleth Baptisme: and that which they call the cloud, Orig. in Exod. c. 7. hom. 5. he taketh for the holy Ghost, and would haue it to be vnderstood according to that which our Lord saith in the Gospell; If a man be not borne againe of water, and of the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God. Againe; the Manna which the Jewes tooke for carnall meate, is called by him a spirituall meate, &c. And he goeth ouer it againe a litle after in the same Homely. S. August. in Io∣hannem tract. 45. Au∣gustine: The times are changed, but not the faith: in diuers signes is signified one and the same faith, as in diuers words, they belieue the same things to come afterward, which we belieue to be alreadie come: and therfore saith the Apostle: they haue drunke one & the same spiritual drinke: yea spiritual not corporal, for they drunke of the spirituall rocke: and the same was Christ: thus you may behold one self-same faith, but diuers signes. There Christ is the rocke, vnto vs Christ is that which is set vpon the Altar. And they for a great Sacrament of the said Christ, did drinke the water that ran from the rocke. But as for vs, the faithfull know what we drinke: if thou regard & looke vpon the outward forme which is visible, it is an other thing, but if thou looke vpon the in∣uisible signification, they haue drunke the same spiritual drink, &c. And in another place; They haue eaten the same spiritual meate. What is this same, but that which we our selues do also eate? Idem de vtilit. paenit. &c. Certainely I know not what should be the meaning of the same meate, if it be not that which we our selues do eate. For there were some that tasted Christ in their harts, more then the Man∣na in their mouthes, which made a spirituall construction of this visible meate, &c. and did hun∣ger and thirst after it, &c. Againe expounding this place of S. Iohn, This is the bread that came downe from heauen, &c. The Manna (saith he) the Altar of God, &c. Idem in Ioh. tract. 26. & in Psal. 77. Epiph. l. 1.3. haue signified this bread: These things were Sacraments, diuers and dislike in the signes, but like and the very same, as concerning the thing signified. Giue eare to the Apostle; now brethren, I would not haue you ig∣norant, &c. Epiphanius reasoneth after the same manner that Tertullian dooth against Marcion. They did eate (saith he) the same meate, and drunke the same drinke, euen Christ: and in truth saith the Apostle, and not in shew or appearance onely. They obiect and alleadge a∣gainst vs in this point Saint Chrysostome, who in truth speaketh of the Manna and water, as figures of our Sacraments. But so as that he addeth these words: Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 10. Idem in Homil. Nolite ignorate fra∣tres. Howsoeuer these things were sensible, yet in deede the truth is that they ministred vnto vs the apprehension of spirituall matters: not by the consequence of nature, but by the grace of the gift, and nourished the soule with the bodie, inducing and perswading them vnto faith, &c. Likewise expoun∣ding this place elsewhere, in an Homely for the purpose, he findeth therein, in diuers considerations, an equalitie: and in deed the argument of the Apostle dooth other∣wise lose his force. Likwise the similitude that Chrysostome vseth, in the same homely;
That one and the same king is delineated and drawne, with a former and sleighter draught, and afterward set forth in liuely colours, and yet is euermore the same king. So Christ in the two Testaments, Bed. in 1. Cor. 10. and in their Sacraments, &c. Beda vpon this place, vseth the verie words of S. Augustine, without changing any thing therein at all. Ber∣tram a Priest, in the time of Charles the bald: Thou askest (saith hee) what same meate? Verily, Bertram. in l. de corp. & sang. Dom. that same which the belieuing people of these dayes doe eate and drinke in the Church: for it may not be permitted, that diuers things should be meant and vnderstood, seeing it is the same Christ, that in the desart fed at that time with his flesh, and gaue his bloud to drinke, vnto the people baptised in the cloud and in the Sea, and which now feedeth in the Church, the belee∣uing people with the bread of his bodie, and giueth them to drinke of the water of his bloud, &c. And if thou obiect vnto him: But how? Seing he had not as yet taken vpon him mans flesh; and seeing that as yet he had not tasted of death, for the saluation of the world? &c. Ʋerily (saith hee) this same Almightie power, which turneth spiritually the bread and wine at this day, into the flesh of his bodie, and into the drinke of his bloud, did also then inuisi∣bly, make the Manna giuen downe from heauen, his bodie, and the water which flowed from the rocke, his bloud. It is verie true in deed that our Fathers of Trent had prouided, not a daintie dish, but a blacke dash, for the same in their Index expurgatorius: ordaining of their wonted faithfulnesse and true dealing, that these places should bee razed out of Bertram. Index expurg. p. 11. Paschas. Ra∣per. decorp. & sang. Dom. c. 5. Hug. de S. Vi∣ctor. in 1. Cor. & q. 80. Anselm. in 1. Cor. c. 10. Paschasius, Rapertus, Abbot of Corbie, in the yeare nine hundred, or there about: and Hugo of Saint Victor, about the yeare a thousand one hundred, did teach the same, though somewhat more harshly then others, that haue dealt in this matter. And these are the tearmes they vse: Non materia, sed significatione: The same meate, not in matter, but signification: Idem significantem, velidem efficientem: Jn as much as it signified the same thing, or wrought the same effect. For say they; That meate was of the same efficacie with this. Anselme; They did eate in their Manna, the same meate that we doe in our bread, and drunke the same drinke of the bloud of Christ from the rocke, that wee drinke from the Cup. And by that meanes, did eate the same spirituall meate that wee, though it were of an other bodie: because they did vnderstand the visible meat spiritually, hungered spiritually, & tasted spiritually, that they might be spiritually satisfied and refreshed, &c. And therefore (saith he) it is not said, The rocke signified Christ, but the rocke was Christ. For so the Scripture is ac∣customed to speake, calling the things signifying by the name of those that are signified, &c. And thus speaketh the most part of the Schoolemen. Gratian. C. In∣quit. C. in Illo. c. 10. Thom. Aquin. in 1. Cor. c. 10. Hugo ibid. Gratian in his Decree, fetcheth two expresse and euident Canons out of Saint Augustine, touching this point. The ordi∣narie Glose likwise saith: They did eate Manna and drunke of the rocke, &c. Signes of Christ which wrought the same effect in the belieuers. And this was (saith it) the same faith. Tho∣mas, The same spirituall meate with vs: but an other corporall, namely the Fathers which be∣lieued in Christ. And Cardinall Hugo verie openly, The bodie of Christ, the bloud of Christ; and thereupon produceth the place of Saint Augustine, Beleeue, and thou hast eaten. But some man may obiect: Wherein our Sacramentes excell. What is then the prerogatiue of a Christian? What is there more in our Sacraments, then in the old? The answere is cleare and plaine: the word Propheticall and Apostolicall are of one efficacie, Christ is in the one and in the other, equall and like vnto himselfe euerie where: so farre as that our Lord speaking of the Propheticall Scriptures, saith, Examine them, for you belieue to haue eternall life in them. Thus it is with the Sacraments of the old and new people: and notwithstanding the word and Sacraments of the new, are not without their prerogatiues, not in sub∣stance, but in circumstaunce, not in kind, but in degree. They agree in this, that they shew forth, promise, signifie and exhibite the same communion of Christ, by faith and the holy Ghost, by the which the elect, since the time of Adam, euen to the last man vpon the earth, are to be saued. For without this communion, there was no saluation, either in the old or new people. They differ, for that vnder the old Testament, our Fa∣thers had this communion in Christ to come; and therefore the worke of grace was the more obscure vnto thē: but we haue it in Christ come in the flesh, &c. and therfore the same grace more bright & cleare. Againe, they agree, in that they seale vp saluation
and grace to all them in generall, that doe receiue them in faith: They differ herein, that the old ones were not properly ordained, but for the posteritie of Abraham: but these latter and new ones, for all the nations vppon the face of the earth, that are in∣grafted into the Church, and in the Communion of Christ, in the faith of Abraham. To be short, they agree, in that they seale vp vnto vs the couenant with the same God, through the same Christ, for the same reconciliation; whereupon followeth the same fruite, euen the remission of sinnes and eternall life: They differ in this, that God which hath of old spoken by his Prophets, hath now vouchsafed to speake by his own Sonne; in so much, that wee may say with Saint Iohn: That that which was from the be∣ginning of the word of life, we haue heard with our eares, seene with our eyes, and touched with our hands, &c. And wee haue also greater helpes, to raise our faith vnto a further assu∣rance of grace, by how much the accomplishment is more then the promise; the ex∣hibiting of him in the flesh, of more efficacie to moue vs, then the expectation there∣of; and for that amongst the sences, one is more quicke and certainely prouing then the other; and that which is perceiued many waies more perswasiue, then that which is comprehended but one way: and that which is knowne of the goodnesse of God, in the sending of his Sonne crucified before our eyes, more strong to beget in vs an assurednesse of his mercie, and by consequent of his loue towards vs, and our in∣lightning with him, then that which hee had spoken vnto vs by his Prophets, or figu∣red by his sacrifices in all the times that went before. And yet in the meane time the old Sacraments cease not to be figures of ours, as Circumcision, of Baptisme; and the Passe-ouer, of the holy Supper. But certainely, antitypes rather then types, and cor∣respondent figures, not bare and naked figures; figures, which contained the verie same thing, although not in the same manner, although not in the same degree of clearenesse and amplenesse. Chrysost. in hom. Nolite ignorare. And heere it is that Chrysostome his similitude taketh place: The Painter (saith he) that goeth about to draw the counterfeit of a king, layeth the first lineaments and draught therof in colours that are more darke and shadowie, wherein notwith∣standing is well perceiued the Kings proportion and physnomie: but when he hath laid his liueliest colours, and hath fully finished it in all points, then it is altogether an other manner of thing, Idem hom. 17. in Ep. ad Haeb. and yet notwithstanding it is the same thing. And this likewise is in handling the place of Saint Paul. So say we of Circumcision and Baptisme, the one and the other doe graft vs in∣to the Church, and seale vp vnto vs our new-birth: Coloss. 2. in so much as that Saint Paule cal∣leth Baptisme Circumcision, and Circumcision Baptisme: When you haue put off (saith he) the bodie of the sinnes of the flesh, in the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptis∣me. They differ notwithstanding both in ceremonie and clearenesse, because that he in whom they haue their power is come, & was to come: and in their large & wide reach, rather thē in any their greatnes, in as much as Circumcision was ordained but for the posteritie of Abraham, and that also but for a time, whereas Baptisme was ordained for all nations, and that to continue vnto the end of the world. Which thing S. Ambros. in 1. Cor. c. 10. August. de nupt. & con∣cupisc. ad Va∣lerium. Bed. in Luc. Am∣brose acknowledgeth, when he saith: That the people of the old world were baptised in the Sea, that is to say (saith hee) that they were throughly purified, and that their sinnes were not imputed vnto them. Saint Augustine; That by Circumcision they were deliuered from originall sinne. And Beda: That in respect of remission of sinne, Circumcision differed not from Baptisme. And the master of the sentences, That it had power to forgiue sinne, And after him all the Schoolemen. He addeth, but not to conferre grace: But verie foolishly, for what is remis∣sion of sinnes, but grace, and great grace, and meere grace? Wee shall say the same of the Passe-ouer, and of the holy Supper. In the one and in the other are signified the offering vp of our Lord vpon the Crosse, and the shedding of his bloud for our sinnes: but in the Passe-ouer, such sacrifice and shedding to be done, in the holy Supper such sacrifice, and shedding of bloud alreadie done. Both in the one and the other, are ea∣ten and drunke the bodie and bloud of our Lord: in the one the thing giuen with the figure, no lesse then in the other the figure giuen with the thing. And euerie where it is spoken of by the tearmes of eating and drinking: and euerie where by the name of celebrating a memoriall: as also euerie where by the name of a Testament and of a
couenant made in bloud: So farre foorth as that Saint Paul calleth the meate of the one and the other, the same meate. The fathers our Supper, by the name of Passe-ouer; and the Iewes Passe-ouer, by the name of Supper. The difference is, that the true Lambe hath beene crucified, which was to bee crucified; whereupon our Sacra∣ment is the more cleare and plaine: giuen for the sinnes of the world, and not of the posteritie of Abraham onely, and hereby also it is the more famous and renowned. Finally ordained to be continued, euen till the comming of the Lord, and therefore permanent and vnchangable. This is that which Saint Augustine saith: Testimonies of the Fathers. August. contr. Faust. l. 19 c. 16 Ritus Prophe∣ticus. It sufficeth to shew vnto Faustus the Mani∣chee his ignorance; and to make him see how deepely they dote, who thinke that for the chaun∣ging of the signes and Sacraments, the things might become diuers: namely, those which the propheticall seruice hath declared to be promised, from those which the Euangelicall seruice doth witnesse to be accomplished. Againe, The flesh and bloud of this sacrifice were promised before the comming of Christ, by the similitude of sacrificed beasts: in his Passion it was expressed by the same truth; and after his ascention it was celebrated and spread abroad, by the Sacrament of his memorie. Againe, Venturus, & venit, diuersa verbasunt; He is to come, and he is come, are diuers words, Idem in Ioh. tract. 26. l. 20. c. 21. but the same Christ. The Sacraments were diuers in signes, but alike in the thing: to such as hoped not for, neither yet belieued in him, it was Manna and water; but vnto them that belieued, the same Christ which is at this day. And notwithstanding saith he; Ours are more easie, Idem in Psal. 73. fewer in number, more reuerens and more blessed. More easie for certaine, for the vnderstanding and conceiuing of things alreadie come, is euer more easie, then of those that are to come: fewer in number, for in stead of so many sacrifices and Sacra∣ments, figuring out Christ, S. Augustine dooth not acknowledge any moe then these two Sacraments: more renowmed; for they are, spread abroad with the Church, euen to the ends and vttermost corners of the world: more blessed, for by them wee are freed from the waightie yoke of ceremonies. And notwithstanding the spirit of God is shed forth more aboundantly in the new Testament, then in the old, in as much as the spring-head and fountaine is broken forth by the comming of the Lord, vpon all people (whereas it was hidden or sealed vp for the most part;) that they themselues to whome it is opened, may draw out thereof aboundantly; in as much as of a more cleare knowledge, springeth a more powerfull faith; and faith is the hand and vessell, by which we receiue the graces of God, whereof wee draw out of this fountaine, and that more mightily and aboundantly, according to the measure of our knowledge and faith. We haue handled this matter somewhat the more largely, because that the de∣monstration of the matter we haue in hand, dependeth in part on this proposition: for the better vnderstanding wherof we haue also to presuppose certaine other Max∣ims, held of the auncient writers which doe follow. And this shall stand for the first, That Christ is the substance of all the Sacraments, as well of the old as of the new Testament; and that in them he was receiued, yea drunken and eaten, that is to say, most neerely communicated, as the Apostle hath told vs. The second, that they teach vs. is; that the same Christ which is receiued in the Sa∣craments, Christ recei∣ued in the word, in such sort as he is in the Sacramēts. is also receiued in the word, yea drunken and eaten in the same: in as much as the Gospell is the power vnto saluation, vnto all belieuers, the word of recon∣ciliation, which regnerateth vs of an incorruptible seede, forgiueth vs our sinnes, im∣puteth vnto vs righteousnesse, maketh vs one with Christ, and finally worketh in vs the same that the Sacrament. And this doctrine is not ours, but the doctrine of the fathers. Orig in Leuit. hom. 9. Origen saith; Sit not downe to rest thy selfe in the bloud of Christ, but learne rather, and take hold vpon the bloud of the word: and heare him which saith vnto thee: This is my bloud which shall be giuen for you, for the remission of sinnes: For hee that is seasoned with the know∣ledge of mysteries, Hieronym. in c. 3. Ecclesiast. knoweth both the flesh and the bloud of the word of God. Saint Ierome: For as much as the flesh of the Lord is verie meate, and his bloud verie drinke in deed, Iuxta , in a more high and mysticall sence, we haue onely this good thing in this world, to be fed with this flesh, and to haue giuen vs to drinke of his bloud: not onely (saith hee) in a mysterie, that is
to say in the Sacrament, but in the reading of the scriptures: for the true meat, & the true drinke, which is receiued of the worde of God, is the knowledge of the Scriptures. And therefore sayth S. Augustine, That Iesus Christ is preached by tongues, by Epistles, and by the Sacraments of his bodie, and blood, &c. That is to say, that the Sacrament is a dumme worde or, as hee himselfe calleth it, a visible worde: the worde, a speaking Sacrament, a Sacrament re∣ceyued by hearing: that is to say, Christ; and life by Christ, in them both. The third, that euerie Sacrament consisteth in three things: in the signe, A sacrament consisteth of the signe, of the thing, and of the word. in the thing signified, and in the worde and institution of God: The signe giuen by the Pastor, and receiued by the hand of the faithfull, which goeth into the stomacke: the thing giuen of God, and receiued by the faith of the faithful, which goeth vnto the soule, and that by the mediation of the worde, and working of the holy Ghost, which accompanieth it, which goeth together with the thing signified, in the signe, and yet not changing it in his nature, but rather making it of a bare Element a Sacrament; of a common crea∣ture, a sacred; and of an earthly, an heauenly one: to be short, the instrument of our regeneration, coniunction, and vnion with Christ, wherein lieth our life. The signe which is visible: the thing, that is to say, grace, which is inuisible, the operation of the worde, and of the spirit, incomprehensible. And againe, the signe, which hath proper∣ly his analogie and proportionall relation to the outward man: Grace, that is to say, the thing signified, to the inward man: inasmuch as he is renued, nourished, and foste∣red by the spirit, in his spirit, vnto which the Sacrament is properly offered: vnto the soule, I meane, not vnto the bodie: vnto the inward spirit, August in serm. ad Infant ad alt. de sa∣cram: Idem de cruit.  10. c. 5. Idem in Quaest. super Leuit. q 84. Idem de Corp. Christ. Chrysost. hom. 83. in Mat. Anno 900. Raban. l. de Sacr. Euchar. c 9. Pach. de Corp. & Sang. Christ. Lombard. l. 4. d. 1. Bernard in Serm. de Caen. Dom. The signe cal∣led of the Fa∣thers by the name of the Sacrament. Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 4. Hilar, de con∣secr. d. 2. Chrysost. in Mat. hom. 83. August in Ioh tract. 26. Idem apud Grat. exsenten, Prosper. Rom. 2. and not to the outward senses. And this thing also we shall be throughly instructed in by the fathers. S. Au∣gustine saith: A Sacrament is a visible signe of an inuisible grace: a signe of a sacred thing, wherein is seene one thing with the outward sense, and an other thing is vnderstood of the spirit. Againe, The Lord sanctifieth by an inuisible grace, by the holie Ghost, and there lieth the whole fruit of the visible Sacraments: without this what are men able to profit? &c. Againe, A Sa∣crament is a ceremonie, wherein, vnder the couert of visible things, the diuine power worketh more secretly, and priuily our saluation. Chrysostome: Christ hath giuen vs insensible things insensible ones. Rabanus: A sacrament is called all that which by the ordinance of God is gi∣uen vnto vs for a pledge of our saluation: when the thing visibly done, doth inuisibly worke with∣in vs all maner of other things, &c. And Paschasius, & Lombard in the verie same tearmes. And Saint Bernard intreating vpon this matter, giueth vs an example. A Sacrament, saith he, is a sacred signe. A Iewell may be giuen onely for a Iewell: but it may bee giuen also to inuest and set a man in possession of an inheritance. And then we say the Iewell is of small value: and that it is the inheritance that we looke and seeke for. And thus (saith he) our Lord drawing neere his death, had care to inuest his elect, and put them in possession of his grace: for which cause this inuisible grace was giuen vnto them by some visible signe, &c. Where we are to obserue, that the worde, pledge, and the similitude of the Iewell, or ring, are of antiquitie. And this for our definition. That which we call the signe, the fathers do sometimes call the Sacrament: how soeuer ordinarily this whole holy action is so called: As whē they say, That the Sacrament is diuerse and differing from the thing of the Sacrament, that is to say, that the thing is one, and the Sacrament of the same another: that is to say again, that the signe is one thing, and the grace which is the thing signified, is an other. The figure is one thing, (saith Tertullian) but the thing of the figure another. The figure is one thing (saith Saint Hillarie) and the truth another. The figure that which is seene without, the truth is that which is belieued within. The sensible thing (saith Saint Chrysostome) is one thing, and the in∣telligible another. The Sacrament (saith saint Augustine) is one thing, and the power of the Sacrament another. The Sacrament of the thing (saith he) is that which some take & receiue to life, others to destruction. The thing, that is to say, grace, whereof the Sacrament becommeth a Sacrament, that is to say, a signe, that no man doth communicate to his ruine and destruction, but euerie man to life and saluation. And hereof we haue examples. In Circumcision, vn∣der which many had the signe and not the thing: wherupon we see that the Prophets call the Israelites; Of vncircumcised hearts. And saint Paule saith, That Circumcision be∣came to them vncircumcision. And in the Manna, wherein some (saith saint Augustine)
did eat nothing but Manna alone; but others did tast and feed vpon the bodie of Christ. In Bap∣tisme, which he saith, that Simon the Magitian receiued without th iuisible grace, the signe without the thing. The signe and the thing notwithstanding, The neare cō∣iunction be∣twixt the sign and the thing. (for asmuch as they cannot be conside∣red the one without the other, being correlatiues, and so the one presupposing the other, are so conioyned and coupled togither, that the one is oftentimes named for the other: wherein the fathers do solemnly forewarne vs, to take good heed that wee take not the signe for the thing nor the thing for the signe. For the signe is the signe of the thing signified: for, but in regard thereof, it cannot be a signe: and on the con∣trarie, it cannot be both the signe & the thing togither, neither in whole, nor in part; no more then a sonne is not a sonne, but in respect of a father: and cannot notwith∣standing be a sonne and a father at once, in one and the same respect: so Circumcision the signe of the couenant, is called the Couenant, and the Passage, or Pascal Lambe, the Passeouer, or Passage; the rocke Christ, and the water of Baptisme, Regeneration, &c. All of them being but signes or remembrances of the couenant, Circumcision of the heart, communion with Christ, Regeneration of man, &c. which could not be, both the signes and the things at one and the same time. August. ad Bo∣nisacium. Ep. 23. And therefore saith Saint Augustine, The Sacraments, that is to say, the signes for the similitude and likenesse which they haue with the things, doe take the names of the things themselues. And he giueth this example: To morrow shall be the pas∣sion of our Lord; to day Christ is risen againe; we are buried with Christ by Baptisme, &c. In like maner, he saith not (saith he) we signifie the buriall: but plainly, and absolutely, we are bu∣ried, calling the Sacrament of the thing, (that is to say the signe) by the name of the thing it selfe. Againe, Idem in Leuit. l. 3. q. 7. & cōt. Adimant. c. 12 Ep. 102. The thing which signifieth, hath bin accustomed to be named by the name of that which it signifieth: As, the seuen eares, are seuen yeares; hee saith not, signifie: the rocke was Christ, hee saith not, signifieth Christ; as though it were that in substance, which it is not but in signification, &c. Which thing Theodoret calleth a commutation of names, of the signe or Sym∣bole, to the thing: Seeing (saith he) that God would that those which receiue the diuine my∣steries, should not rest and content themselues with the things which they see, but that they should beleeue, through the change of names, the transmutation that is made of grace: Not (saith he) that the nature is changed, but that grace is added thereunto. That which is brought in, as said by Saint Gregorie, Gregor. in Di∣al. l. 4. may we also say together with him: That in the celebration of the Sacrament, the high and heauenly things are ioyned to the low and earthly, and the visible to the inuisible, &c. But Saint Augustine giueth vs a rule, which wee are not to exceede or passe: August. in doct. Christ. l. 3 c. 5. It is (saith he) a miserable seruitude and slauerie of the soule, to take the signes for the things, This is Carnaliter sapere: not to taste any thing but flesh, to be carnally wise, which is the verie death of the soule, &c. The Iewes did obstinately pitch and rest themselues vpon the signes: Christian libertie reuerenceth not a profitable signe instituted of God: but that whereunto such signes are to be referred, &c. that is to say, for that the signe and the thing are Correla∣tiues. And, as (saith he) it is a slauish weakenesse, and a point of seruile infirmitie to take the signes for the things signified; Idem de Trin. l. 9. quaest ex Nou. Test. c. 59. Idem cont. Maxim. l 3. c. 22. Idem in 1. Cor. c. 10. Idem in 2. Cor. 3. Tho. in tract. de differ. verb. diuin. & Lum. Summ. q. 1. art 6. vbi allegat, Petra erat Christus. so it is a verie deepe deceipt and errour, to interpret them vnprofi∣tably. And by name he taketh for an example the Sacraments of the Christian Church, especially Baptisme, in an other place: We see therein (saith he) water, but the spirit which is not seene, worketh therein, which washeth away the sinnes of the soule: and as visible things becom profitable to such as are able to see: so the spirit to the spirituall, &c. And in another place; In the Sacraments we are to regard, not that which they are, but that which they signifie: sunt enim signa rerum (saith he) aliud existentia, aliud significantia: for they are signes of things, which are another maner of thing in themselues then that which they signifie. And Anselme in the same sense: The holie Scriptures call the things signifying, as the signified: for that the signes seeme to make representation of the things they signifie: whereupon it is said: The rocke was Christ, which was onely by the way of signification, and not of substance. And in another place: It must bee carefully anoyded, that a figuratiue speech, be not expounded and taken according to the letter: for this were carnaliter sapere, to haue a carnall taste, &c. and Thomas in like maner; And indeed the difference betwixt them is so great, as that they cannot be made one. For Saint Augustine saith oftentimes: God onely giueth the thing: but both the good and the
euill may giue the signe. And Chrysostome; When thou art baptised, August. contr. Maxim. l. 3. c. 22 in Ioh. tract. 5. & con. liter. Petil. l. 3. c. 4.9. Chrysost. in Mat. hom. 51. Le de Nati∣uit. serm 4. it is not the Minister which baptiseth thee, it is God himselfe who holdeth thy head, by an inuisible power neither An∣gell, nor Archangell durst once touch thee therein. And Leo the first, Christ gaue to the water, the same which hee gaue to his mother, the same that made her to conceiue the Sauiour; name∣ly, the operation of the holy Ghost, giueth the power of the regenerating of man, vnto the wa∣ter, &c. And Anselme, who is not one of the oldest writers: Wherefore dooth God alone (saith hee) giue the thing, and men the signe? Ʋerily, because that without the me∣diation of his worde, the signe is a meere naked and bare signe: yea it ought to loose and forgoe the name of signe, in as much as the thing whereof it is the signe, cannot bee ioyned thereto. So the Circumcision of the Turkes is nothing: for it is without the institution of the Lord; and as little is that of the Moores worth, notwithstanding they be Christians: and yet the signe is there intire; the ceremonie, intire. And so although that Manna should raine downe to morowe, yea and albeit water should gush out of the rocke, yet this should be but Manna and water; this should not likewise bee to Christians the partici∣pating of Christ: it was that vnto the Iewes. In the apple which Adam did eate in the Garden, there was no venime, and notwithstanding it was deadly vnto him: for that the transgressing of the word of the Lord doth beget and bring forth death. In these Sacraments, how precious so euer they be, there is no gaine or good to bee got, with∣out the institution of God; for his word is the life therof. And this is that which S. Au∣gustine saith: The signes of diuine things are visible, wherein we honour the inuisible things: Signacula. August. de Catech. rud. c 26 and yet notwithstanding we must not hold the kind which is sanctified, by the blessing thereof, as that which is of common vse: for there must regard and consideration be had, what the word doth sig∣nifie, which hath beene pronounced vpon it, as also that which lieth hidden in the same, and wher∣of it beareth the similitude & likenesse. Iren. likewise; Iren. l. 4. c. 34. The bread hauing receiued his stile of the word of God, is not any more common bread, but it becommeth an Eucharist, which consisteth in two things, the one earthly, and the other heauenly. And the same had beene said by him of all the Sacraments. S. Ambrose; What hast thou seene in the mysterie of Baptisme? Water: but not bare water. The Apostle hath taught thee not to behold or looke vppon the things which are seene, but those which are not seene: thinke that the Diuinitie is present therin. Wilt thou be∣lieue the operation & effectuall power thereof, and not the presence? &c. The water, without the preaching of the Crosse of Christ, is of no effect vnto saluation, &c. And S. Augustine againe; August. in Io. tract. 30. You are cleane, by reason of the word that I haue told you. Wherefore (saith he) did hee not ra∣ther say, by reason of the Baptisme, wherewith you are washed, if it be not this, that it is the word that washeth in the water? That Baptisme is consecrated and hallowed by the word? Take away the word, and what is the water but water? The word is put vnto the Element, and it is made a Sacrament: for this is also a visible word. From whence commeth this great force & power to the water, that it should by touching of the body wash the soule, but in that the word maketh it such? And that not because it is spoken, but because that it is belieued: for in this same word, the sound which passeth and goeth away, is one thing, and the sound which abideth & staieth within is an other thing. Reade the Apostle, and see what he addeth therto, to the end that hee might sanctifie the same, making it cleane by the washing of water, in the word: washing should not be attributed vnto this liquid and fluent Element, if there had not beene added thereto; In the word. And notwithstanding, al that which God setteth before vs in the Sacraments, Faith receiueth and taketh hold vpon the Sacrament. san∣ctified through his word, is vnfruitfull and vnprofitable vnto vs without faith, for by faith alone, it is made appliable & apt to be receiued of vs. Whereupon also wee said: that the grace offered to vs therein, is receiued by the faith of the faithful, as the signe is receiued of his hand. For the Sacramēts giue not faith: faith receiueth them, & they increase it. Euē as the word of God being outwardly heard, giueth not faith, but faith receiueth & nourisheth it: faith, I say, begotten in vs by the word, not that which bea∣teth our eares, but by the inward, which knocketh at the dore of our heart, in the effi∣cacie and powerfull working of the spirit. So was Circumcision giuen to Abraham, not to the end hee might haue faith: but, for a seale of the righteousnesse of faith (saith the Apostle) which he had had in the time of vncircumcision. And S. peter, Repent & be baptised, Rom. 4. for the remissiō of your sins. And the litle children, or their fathers for thē answered ther∣in, Credo: for that the Sacramēts are ordained for the faithful, not to the end they may beleeue,
but because they do beleeue; not to the end they may bee receiued into the co∣uenant of God, but in token that they are receiued thereinto already: as meate vnto men, August. Sen∣tent. 338. & in Ioh. tract. 26. de cruit. Dei. l. 25. c 25. not to the end they might learn to eat, but to the end, that eating they might be fed & nourished. This is it which S. August. saith, That for to be a receiuer of the thing, that is to say, of the grace of the Sacrament, it behoueth to dwell in Christ, and to haue Christ dwelling in him: It is requisite to be members of his body, that is to say, incorporated into him by faith: that whoso disagreeth, or is at discord with him, though he should daily receiue, receiueth not any thing but the bare signe: Sacramento tenus (saith he) non re vera, sacramentally, not really, the Sacra∣ment, Chrysost. in r. Cor. 11. and not the thing of the Sacrament. And Chrysostome; The more he receiueth the signe, so much the more he purchaseth to himself condemnation: As (saith he) the condemnation of men is growne hereof, namely, that God hath manifested himselfe vnto them in the flesh, &c. And S. Basill: Basil. in psalm 33. August. cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. 22. That the changing of the names maketh no change in the signes. The inward man hath also his mouth, by meanes whereof it is fed and refreshed, by recei∣uing the word of life, the bread that came downe from heauen, &c. And S. Augustine giueth vs the reason thereof: Because (saith he) that men giue the Sacrament, but God the only sear∣cher of the heart giueth the thing of the Sacrament. The fourth: That this commutation and exchange of names, doth not force vpon the Sacraments, a commutation of the signes or elements in their nature, but only in their vse: Otherwise, contrary to the doctrine of thee fathers, they should be the same thing vnto all men, as well the miscreant and vnbeleeuer, as vnto the faithfull, and to the hypocrite, as vnto him that truly repenteth, &c. It being impossible that Christ, the truth and substance of the Sacraments, should be receiued but vnto life: although the Sacrament, that is to say, the signes, may be receiued of many vnto cōdemnation. And indeed, none of the fathers euer said, that Manna was conuerted and turned in∣to the flesh of Christ: or the water of the rocke, yea the water of Baptisme, into his bloud: notwithstanding that Saint Paul hath said: That our fathers did eate the same meate, and drinke the same drinke that we, that is to say, Christ: That the first of the olde writers haue acknowledged that the true Israelites did eate the flesh of Christ in their Manna, and drunke his bloud in the rocke: That wee all agree togither, that in Baptisme we are washed from our sinnes in the bloud of Christ, no lesse truly then our bodies are washed with water. August. in ser. ad Infant. citatur a Bed. in 1. Cor. 10. Theodoret in Dial. 1. And likewise that S. Augustine saith: That we must not doubt at all, that the faithfull in Baptisme, are made partakers of the bodie, and of the bloud of our Lord, notwithstanding that they depart this life, before they haue eaten the bread, or drunke the Cup, &c. Because said Theodoret heretofore vnto vs: That this commutation of names, is to point out vnto vs the truth of the Mysterie; not for that there is anie change made there∣fore in the nature of the signes, but because that grace is added and put to them. And this is the cause why the ancient fathers, The difference betwixt myste∣ries and mi∣racles. do call the Sacraments Mysteries and not Miracles. In diuine Mysteries, the grace of God is hidden: in Miracles, it is manifested and reuea∣led. Miracles are wrought to moue the vnbeleeuers, to conuince them in their owne vnderstanding, and (verie often) to leaue them vnexcusable, through the clearnes and euidentnes thereof: Mysteries are reserued for the faithfull, at least for those that are reputed such, to seal vp vnto them their saluation, to stir vp their faith, & to raise them from natural sense and vnderstanding to the spirit; from an opinion to faith; and from the earth vnto heauen, &c. And therfore we see not, that euer the Scripture doth lead vs to obserue and marke any miracles in the signes of his Mysteries, notwithstanding that it is a dutie to be most carefully discharged, to publish & set forth the maruailous works of the Lord in the church. It teacheth vs the famous and worthie passing of the destroying Angell ouer the houses of the Israelits, without touching of thē. The lamb was the memoriall therof, and that so cleare and euident a one as that it was called by the name of the Passouer it self. In this passing ouer then, ther is pointed out vnto vs a miracle, namely in the difference which the Angel made betwixt the Israelits and the Egyptians: and in the lambe it recōmendeth vnto vs a mysterie. So likewise of Manna, & the rock: in that the one was rained, & the other dissolued into water, it is a miracle: but in that they feed & quēch the thirst of the true Israelits spiritually, there lies a my∣stery. And of the water conuerted into wine in Cana, S. Iohn maketh mention vnto vs
of a myracle: Of Iorden turned dayly into bloud, by reason of so many persons, as daily confessed their sinnes, and were baptised, how much more famous had it beene and worthie of renowne? And yet this was no myracle, but a misterie. Verie excellent∣ly thereforefore hath a certaine Schooleman said: That wee must not looke for myracles, Aegyd l. 2. exa∣mer. c. 13. but where they are: That where and so oft as euer we can discharge and free the holy Scriptures, by the things that we naturally see, that there and so oft, wee ought not to haue recourse vnto the power of God, nor vnto myracles. Now we may free them most easily, when wee vnder∣stand misteries, mistically; Sacraments, Sacramentally; figures, figuratiuely; Chrys. in Ioh. c. 6. om. 46. spiritu∣al things, spiritually, &c. Chrysostome saith; What is it to vnderstand things carnally? Simp∣ly, according to the letter, without conceiuing and taking any further thing to be meant and con∣tained therein. But it is requisite (saith hee) to consider and looke vpon all misteries, with in∣ward eyes, that is to say, spiritually. And as we conceiue them spiritually, euen so wee re∣ceiue them in like manner, namely, by faith. For saith he, Idem in c. 11. ad Hetr. hom. 21 Theophyl. ibid. Theod. dial. 1. Tho. 3. part. summ. q. 78. art. 2. We thinke that the things that rest in hope, are without substance: but faith giueth them a substance; and yet not as though it gaue them any thing more, but because it becommeth vnto them, their verie essence and being, &c. Theodoret; The things that are misticall, are spoken mistically, and the things which are not knowne vnto all, are openly declared. Thomas likewise; The word of Christ worketh effec∣tually, and Sacramentally: Sacramentally, that is to say, (saith hee) according to the force of the signification. CHAP. II. That the doctrine of the holy Supper must be examined by the rules aboue handled, as also all that which is deliuered of all other the Sacraments, as well of the old as of the new Testament. NOw wee are for the most part of this mind; that the rules aboue named, may be practised and vsed in other Sacraments: but our Aduersaries wil not agree that they are so, in the explication and vnfoulding of the doc∣trine of the holy supper: and therefore wee are consequently to see, if the holy Scriptures and the writings of the Fathers doe tolerate and ad∣mit: yea or rather necessarily presse and vrge, that the doctrine of the holy supper be examined and tried by these same rules: which wee reduce into a few words, in these manner of tearmes: That a Sacrament is a visible signe of a thing, that is to say, of an inuisible grace: That the signe and the thing are Correlatiues, and that therefore the one is not the other: That the signe is giuen by the Minister or Pastour, but the thing by God alone: That the signe is receiued by the hand, both of true belieuers and hy∣pocrites, but the thing by faith, of the belieuers onely: That the likenesse, that is be∣twixt the signe and the thing, hath caused the name of the one, to be attributed vnto the other, that is to say, the name of the thing to the signe, but that thereis not ther∣fore any changing of the one into the other, neither by way of myracle, nor yet of any supernaturall worke, &c. but onely of names, the more plainely to point out the my∣sterie: That Sacraments and misteries haue one proper stile, which must bee vnder∣stood, mistically and Sacramentally, &c. which hath beene verified and approued, in all the other Sacraments, as well of the old Testament, wherof the Apostle saith: That our Fathers did eate the same meare, and drinke the same drinke; as also in Baptisme, a Sacrament of the new Testament. Let vs come therefore vnto the holy supper of our Lord. We belieue that in it, In what sort ad manner the faithfull communicate and receiue the Lordes supper. the belieuer receiueth, drinketh & eateth, not only bread and wine, but also the verie flesh of Christ, and the true & verie bloud of Christ: the flesh, giuen for the life of the world; the bloud shed for the remission of our sinnes. That it is not more true, that the bread is broken, and the wine powred out, or that they become nourishment vnto our bo∣dies, for the sustaining of this fraile and brittle life, then it is true, that the flesh of our
Lord is broken, and his bloud shed for vs, and that they become nourishment for our soules (drie and barren that they are of themselues, but watered and altered by his righteousnesse) to nourish them vnto eternall life. Much more then whereas the bread and wine are turned into our substance, by the operation of our naturall heate, to bee incorporated into vs; doe the flesh and bloud of our Lord, by the operation of the ho∣ly Ghost, incorporate vs more and more into him; wee communicate his substance, and in the same, his life, and all his benefits, as members of Christ, bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, to be crucified, iustified, sanctified, and glorified in him, insomuch that our heat being more strong then the bread and wine, doth turne and alter them into our substance; the holie Ghost being stronger and more mightier then we, doth conuert and turne vs, both to him, and into him. And by that meanes wee receiue not onely Christ, really and substantially in the holy Supper, celebrated according to his institution, but we are wrought into one bodie, more and more amongst our selues, of which body he is the head, and we the members: the faithfull I meane, that draw their spirituall life, the sense, motion and spirituall action of their soules from him, a liuely and quickened body by his spirit, one togither by him, one by his grace, with him. And thus haue both the holy Scriptures, as also the olde writers spoken and written. Our Lord saith, According to the holy scrip∣tures. He that commeth to me, he that beleeueth in me, he that eateth me, be that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me and I in him, he hath eternal life: he liueth through me; I will raise him vp againe at the last day. &c. This maner of communication & participation, ceaseth not spiritually to be performed and effected without the Sacra∣ment: but our Lorde, as helpes vnto vs against our infirmitie, hath prouided and ap∣pointed these Sacraments for vs: in the eating and drinking whereof, it pleaseth him to set out vnto vs the certaintie of this spirituall life, which is in his bodie and bloud: and that as verely as the corporall consisteth in the bread and wine. And as for the bread he hath saide of it, Iohn 6. This is my bodie: But my bodie (saith he) which is giuen for you: That bodie whereof hee had saide in Saint Iohn: My flesh is meate in deed: That flesh whereof he had saide: The bread which I will giue you is my flesh, and this I will giue for the life of the worlde. For this bodie, this flesh, doe nothing auaile vs, saue in that they are giuen and deliuered for vs, for the remission of our sinnes, and for the redemption of our soules. And therfore he expoundeth himselfe vnto the Capernaites. The flesh profi∣teth nothing: the wordes which I speake vnto you are spirit and life. Of the Cuppe also hee hath saide: This is my bloud, the bloud of the newe Testament, &c. And in another place, This Cup is the new Testament in my bloud: Not of his bloud onely, but also of the Cup, to the ende wee should not stay our selues, or rest in the elements of this Cuppe in deede, which he was to drinke for vs: euen in the elements of that bitter death, where∣of hee had saide: Let this Cup passe from me: For this Cup, this Passion, is the newe Te∣stament, the newe couenant of God with vs. And in my bloud (saith hee) which is shed for you. For the bloud of our Lorde entereth not into our stomackes, neither yet is it shed or powred into our bowels and entrailes: for to what ende should there bee any such thing done and acted in this Sacrament, where the question is of the nourish∣ment of our soules, and of a feeding vnto eternall life? This bloud likewise simplie considered, maketh not for the profite of our soules: neither as it is bloud, neither as yet, in that it is the bloud of Christ: but herein onely, for that it is the bloud of Christ crucified for vs: the bloud of the sonne of God shed for the remission of our sinnes, and for the saluation of our soules. To eate this flesh, to drinke this bloud, is to draw by faith, our spirituall life, out of the fountaine of his flesh broken for vs: of his blood shed for vs: of Christ the sonne of God crucified for vs. This is to liue by him; this is to liue in him; this is to be with him; that is to say, to liue by his righte∣ounesse, whereas wee die by our owne sinne: by the redemption which hee hath wrought, where as wee lay in bondage and thraldome: and finallie to bee iusti∣fied by him, and sanctified in him, that so wee may bee quickened and glorified also in him.
Neither haue the ancient fathers otherwise vnderstoode this communicating of Christ. Saint Cyprian; Our coniunction with Christ doth not make any mixture of persons, According to the old writers Cypr. de Caen. Dom. it vniteth not substances: but it effecteth a fellowship and correspondencie in affections, it bindeth the willes togither by a firme and faithfull league, &c. He had said, that if wee eate not his flesh, &c. we shall not haue life in him. Teaching vs by a spirituall instruction, and opening vnto vs the spirit, to the conceyuing of so hidde and secret a thing, to the ende that wee might know, that our abiding in him, is an eating of him: and our incorporating into him, a drinking of him. And all this is wrought by our submitting of our selues in obedience, ioyning of our selues vn∣to him in will, and vniting of our selues vnto him in our affections. Wherefore the eating of this flesh, is a greedinesse, or a feruent desire to abide and dwell in him. As by eating, and drin∣king, the substaunce of the bodie liueth and is nourished: euen so the life of the spirit is nourished by this proper nourishment. For looke what eating is vnto the bodie, the same is faith vnto the soule. And looke what meate is vnto the bodie, the same is the worde vnto the spirit, accompli∣shing and working for euer, and that by a more excellent power and efficacie, that which carnall nourishment woorketh but for a time, &c. And again, In the celebrating of these Sacraments wee are taught, to haue the Pascion alwayes in our remembrance. Again, Wee are made of this bodie, that is to say, of the bodie of Christ, in asmuch as by the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament, wee are ioyned and knit vnto our head. Nowe it is most certaine and true, that such doe liue, as touch the bodie of Christ. Saint Hillarie, These thinges taken and drunke, Hylar. de Tri∣nit. that is to say, the bread and wine, doe cause and bring to passe, that Christ is in vs, and wee in him. Not verilie, as he there teacheth, that his bodie entereth into ours, but by a si∣militude drawne from nature: for that wee are ioyned together, as members to the heade, to his humaine bodie, holie and glorious. And this vnion is wrought by the faith of the death and passion of the Lorde, in his spirit. Saint Augustine: August. Ep. ad Iren. De Consecr. D. 2. Christ is the bread, whereof who so eateth, liueth eternally: and whereof hee hath saide: And the bread which I will giue, is my flesh, which I will giue for the life of the worlde. Hee determineth and setteth downe howe hee is bread; not onely according to the worde, by the which all thinges liue: but according to the flesh, taken for the life of the worlde. For man which was dead in sinne, be∣ing vnited and made one with the fleshe which is pure and vndefiled, and incorporated into the same, doth liue by the spirit of Christ, as a bodie liueth by his soule: but he that is not of the body of Christ, doth not liue by his spirit, &c. Of this body Christ is the head: Idem Ep. 57. ad Dardan. the vnitie of this bo∣die is recommended vnto vs, by this sacrifice, &c. By our head we are reconciled vnto God: be∣cause that in it is the Diuinitie of the onely begotten Sonne made partaker of our mortalitie, to the end that we might also become partakers of his immortalitie. Again, Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c 25. Compage. He that is in the vnitie of this bodie, that is to say, in the coniunction and setting together of the members of Christ, of the Sacrament of whose body the faithfull in communicating, are accustomed to receiue from the Altar, may truely bee said to bee such a one, as eateth the bodie of Christ, and drinketh his bloud. And those on the contrarie, that are not his members, cannot eate him. For hee hath said: He that eateth my flesh, & drinketh my bloud, he dwelleth in me, and J in him. Who so ther∣fore dwelleth not in me & I in him, cannot eat my flesh, nor drink my bloud: he eateth it, Sacramē∣to tenus, and not re vera, that is to say, he taketh and receiueth but the signe, and not the thing. For saith he, They which abide not in him, are not his members. And in an other place, See∣ing he hath recommended vnto vs the eating of his flesh, &c. that is to say, our abiding in him, Idem in Ioh. tract. 27. and his in vs; now wee abide and dwell in him, when we are his members, and he in vs when wee are his temple. Which thing is much more clearely laid out by Christ himselfe; I am the vine and you are the branches, &c. The branches sucke their life out of the Ʋine, not to the end veri∣ly, that they may be branches; but because they are such alreadie, and yet in so sucking, they be∣come more faire and beautifull braunches: euen so the faithfull doe eate Christ in the Supper, not to the end that they may become his members, but because they are his members alreadie: and to the ende, that in deriuing and sucking their life from him, they may become the better growing and thriuing members. Saint Chrysostome: The bread which wee breake, Chrysost. in 1. Cor. c. 11. is it not the Communion of the bodie of Christ? Why did not the Apostle as well say, participation? Because that he would declare and point out some further matter, and shew the great and close
coniunction. For we doe not communicate onely, for that we receiue and are made partakers; but for that we are vnited and made one: for as this bodie, which he hath once taken vpon him, is v∣nited vnto Christ; so by this bread we are vnited and made one with him, &c. For (saith he) what signifieth the bread? The bodie of Christ. And what are they made which doe re∣ceiue it? The bodie of Christ, &c. Whereby wee learne, that the Communion is not a carnall eating, but a coherence and vniting of the faithfull vnto the bo∣dy of Christ, which could not be better represented, then by eating, which is the most strict and vnseparable way, Leo. ad Cler. & pleb. Con∣stant. whereby one nature may naturally be ioined vnto another. Leo the first to the same sense; This is so currant in all mens mouthes, as that the verie chil∣dren cease not to speake amongst the Sacraments of our common faith, of the truth of the bodie and blood of Christ: seeing that in the mysticall distribution of the spirituall food, it is both giuen and taken: to the end that receiuing the efficacie & power of the spiritual meat, we may be trans∣lated and changed into his flesh, who became our flesh, &c. that is to say, let vs be fed of him, as it hath beene said; as flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, &c. Wherefore to eate the flesh and to drinke the bloud of Christ, is to fetch and sucke our spiritual nourish∣ment from him; and that from him dead for vs: to the ende that the similitude may haue his full course, as the corporall man draweth not forth the meanes of the main∣tenance of his life from things, any otherwise then by the dying for the same. To bee bidden vnto this banket and eating, is to bee exhorted to maintaine and cherish our coniunction with Christ, and our life in Christ by the continuing of this nourishment: and this coniunction with Christ worketh a coniunction amongst our selues, as mem∣bers of one and the same bodie, The coniunc∣tion and vnion of the faithful amongst them selues in the holy Supper. 1. Cor. 10. which is more and more neerely and closely wrought in the holy supper, which S. Paul expresseth in these words: We which are many, are one onely bread, and one onely body, for we are partakers of one and the same bread, &c. that is to say, sucking the iuice of life from one and the same Vine, we are quickned by one and the same spirit, &c. which is the second end of the Lords supper, but yet depending vpon the first, in as much as we cannot be ioyned by faith to Christ, except we be also vnited and ioyned by loue and charitie vnto our brethren. Ignatius making this con∣iunction plaine, saith: There is but one flesh of our Lord Iesus, and one bloud of his shed for vs, one bread broken for all, Ignat. ad Phi∣ladelph. Iren. l. 3. c. 10. and one Cup of the whole Church. Ireneus; The Lord promiseth to send the comforter, that is to say, the holy Ghost. For as of drie Corne there cannot bee made any paste, neither yet any bread without licour, so we cannot of many be made one in Christ, without that water which is from heauen. Saint Cyprian; Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 6 ad Magn. & l. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecil. When as our Lord calleth his body bread, made into dough by the mixing together of many graines, he sheweth that our people, the image whereof hee resembled, is vnited together and made one. And when he calleth the wine his bloud, pressed out into one from diuers Grapes, be signifieth in like manner our flocke ioyned together and made into one by the mixture, Adunate multitudinis, of an vnited multitude. Now this vnion said Ireneus, as it is spiritu∣all; . August. de Consecr. D 2. c Qu a passus. Ep. 57. ad Dar∣dan. so it is wrought by the spirit. S. Denis: The Minister (saith he) vncouering the bread that is couered and vndiuided, and parting it into many peeces, and distributing the Cup vnto all, multiplieth and distributeth the vnitie mystically, &c. Saint Augustine; And you (saith hee) are there at the Table, and in the Cup you are with vs. Againe; Christ is the head of this body: This is the communion which the members haue with the head: The vnitie of this body is recommended vnto vs by our sacrifice: this is the communion of the members amongst themselues. Being the same that the Apostle hath signified, saying; We are all one bread and one bodie, &c. Chrysostome; What doe I speaking of Communion: wee are the body it selfe. For what is the bread? Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 10. the body of Christ. And what are they made which receiue the same? The body of Christ: not many bodies but one body. For as the bread is made into one lumpe, by the kneading of many graines together, and that in such sort as that they are not apparant, or to bee discerned, notwithstanding that they be there, neither yet any manner of distinction to bee made of them, by reason of their incorporation: euen so are we all incorporate, both amongst our selues, as also with Christ: for wee are not nourished and fed, this man of one bodie, and that man of an other, but all ioyntly of one and the same. These are then the two principall endes of the Sacrament, euen the growth and helping forwarde of our vnitie with
Christ our head; and of our vnitie with the brethren, which with vs doe make one body in him: which cannot bee accomplished more effectually, then by the remembrance of the death of Christ, which stirreth vp in vs a loue towards him, who hath loued vs so much, as to giue himselfe to death for vs: euen that death which was due and iustly belonging to sinners, &c. So that wee not being able either to liue or die for any his emolument or profit, (for what good can there arise from vs to him?) we are incited and stirred vp to liue and die for his body which is the Church: and not to spare any thing that is in vs, no not our owne bloud, for the edifying of the same, or for the good and saluation of our brethren, either begotten of, Basil. de Bap∣tis. & in Mo∣ral. or redeemed by the same bloud. And this is the cause why Saint Basill saith: What profit is there in these words, Take, this is my body? To the end that drinking and eating, we may euermore bee mindfull of him, which is dead and risen againe for vs: Who so calleth not to mind this remem∣brance, is said to eate vnworthily, &c. And in another place; What is the dutie of such as eate the bread, and drinke the Cup of Christ? Verily (saith he) to keep the remembrance of him which is dead and risen againe for vs perpetually, &c. Seeing, saith likewise S. Ambrose: Ambros. de iis. qui myst. in∣tiantur. c. 3. That the Sacrament serueth not for any vse vnto saluation, without the preaching, that is to say, the re∣membrance and commemoration of the crosse of Christ. And hitherto it may be, that both wee and our aduersaries are of one mind, in as much as we, both the one and the other say: That the bodie and bloud of Christ are in the Supper, celebrated according to his institution: and are truly and verily drun∣ken and eaten in the same, by the faithfull members of Christ, in assurance of remissi∣on of sinnes and eternall life. But the difference and disagreement betwixt vs is: Wherein the maine diffe∣rence lyeth. for that wee say, that they are receiued in the supper of the Lord, with the Sacraments of the bread and wine: They vnder the accidents of the whitenes, roundnesse, &c. of the bread; and vnder the rednesse and moysture, &c. of the wine: the substance therof be∣ing (at the verie instant of the vttering of the words by the Priest) quite vanished and become nothing, that so there may be place made for the bodie and bloud; yea, con∣uerted and turned into the bodie and bloud of Christ, which they call Transubstanti∣ation. Againe; that wee say, that the bodie and bloud of Christ, the nourishment of our soule, which is spirituall, are communicated with vs by the efficacie and power of the spirit of God, and receiued of vs, in like manner spiritually, and by faith: They, that they are giuen by the hand of the Priest, vnder the accidents of bread and wine, and conuerted into flesh & bloud, by the pronouncing of the words, which they call Sacramentall; receiued into the mouth, and swallowed downe into the stomack cor∣porally, and really, &c. and that not of the faithfull onely, but of all both good and bad which receiue them, &c. So that the question or controuersie betwixt vs is not: Whether there be a communicating of the body and bloud of Christ in the holy sup∣per: but How. And this (How) is not raised by vs, It proceedeth of the curiosi∣ty of our ad∣uersaries. neither yet by our incredulitie or curiositie, but by our aduersaries, who in stead of resting themselues in the simplici∣tie of the old writers, haue so curiously pried into the same, as that they haue wrapt themselues in an infinite sort of absurdities; thereby causing doubts to arise: yea and doubting themselues also of, (If) in stead of making it plaine vnto themselues and o∣thers, of the manner How. Verily Saint Cyprian saith: That it is an Apostolike thing, and appertaining to the sinceritie of the truth, to declare how the bread & wine, are the flesh & bloud of our Lord. Saint Augustine likewise feareth not to demaund, How the bread is made the bodie of Christ, seeing that our Lord in the day of the Ascention, caried vp his bodie into heauen. But he hath also giuen vs rules, by which these kinds of speeches ought to be expoun∣ded. But this holy scanning and sifting out of the truth, is verie farre from the pro∣phane curiositie of our aduersaries: they seeke the deciding of the matter, in the na∣ture of the Sacraments, by comparing of Scripture with Scripture, and by the analo∣gie of faith, and of the Creed; according to the true and vndoubted rules of Diuini∣tie: but these our aduersaries by destroying of the Sacraments, the nature of Christ, and the Articles of our faith, our onely Diuinitie; by destroying also the Lawes which God hath set in nature, by a false kind of Philosophie. So deeply haue they delighted
and rooted themselues in an opinion, contrarie to faith in the flesh, which profiteth nothing, contrarie to the word, which is spirit and life, and in the letter which is dead and killeth, contrarie to the spirit which is liuing and quickning. They say; The literall sence neither can nor ought to be followed alwayes. what is there any thing more cleare or plaine: This is my bodie; this is my bloud? But againe, is there any thing more plaine, The rocke was Christ? And of cir∣cumcision, This is my couenant? Againe, The Lambe is the Passeouer? These bones are the house of Israell? Iohn is Elias, I am the true Ʋine, I am the bread of life, which came downe from heauen? &c. And if the plainnesse and clearenesse of places should bee tied vnto the words, and not to the sence and meaning; then what clearer places can there pos∣sibly be then these: Let vs make man according to our owne image and similitude? And the Anthropomorphites haue heereupon concluded that God hath the shape of a man. Genes. 1. Luke. 22 Who so hath not a sword, let him sell his Coate and buy one: And what then saith Origen; Shall the Bishops put their hand to the sword thereupon? I and my Father are one: And Sabel∣lius hath concluded thereupon; that the Father hath suffered in the flesh. I am the bread of life: August de ci∣uit Dei. l. 21. c. 25. he that shall eate this bread, shall liue for euer. And in S. Augustines time there were that taught hereupon, that if a man had communicated at the Lords supper, how be it he should afterward renounce the Christian profession, yet hee could not possi∣bly perish and fall away for euer. Wherefore as oft as euer wee shall reade such places, we ought alwayes to remember and call to mind these rules: The good and prudent Rea∣der (saith Saint Hillarius) doth looke for the vnderstanding of that which is said; Hilat. de Trin. l. 1. Hieronym. in Mat. not by fetch∣ing it from any preiudicate opinion of his owne, but from the cause of that which is said. And S. Ierome; The discreete Reader is verie carefull to keepe himselfe euermore from all manner of superstitious vnderstanding: he frameth and squareth his sence and vnderstanding according to the Scriptures, August. cont. aduers. leg. & Prophet. l. 2. c. 9. and not the Scriptures according to it. And Saint Augustine handling this same matter; One peece of Scripture must be expounded by an other: and all the holy Scriptures according to the soundnesse of faith: if we expound any thing done or spoken figuratiuely, it stan∣deth vs vpon to see that such expositions be drawne wisely and not negligently, from other things and words, which are contained in the holy writings. But aboue all wee haue to consider in the matter of the Sacramentes, what a Sacrament is, and in the matter of the holy supper, that therein is handled the most excellent of all the rest, that is to say, a great mysterie, a profound and high secret: and that so soone as wee heare the word Sacra∣ment, wee must lift vp our spirits from the beholding of these outward things, to the apprehending of inward things from the skin to the marrow, and from of the earth vp vnto heauen: obseruing the nature of the misterie, the signification of the word, and what the thing doth permit & suffer; what the letter saith, and what the meaning of the spirit is. Thus, These words, This is my bo∣dy, cannot bee interpreted without a figure. This is my bodie, according to their sence and construction, what shall it sig∣nifie? Hoc, this; If it be meant of the bread, then it must be thus taken: This bread is my bodie. But this is not their meaning: for they confesse that it cannot bee two substan∣ces at one and the same instant. And when two chiefe and primarie substances, that is to say, two Iudiuidua, as the Logicians call them, are called the one by the name of the other, there must of necessitie be included a figure: but this they wil not yeeld vn∣to. Furthermore they doe not pretend that it is the body vntill the last word be vtte∣red: and wee are as yet but in the verie first. And in the meane time then, shall it not be the same which our Lord tooke, blessed, brake, and gaue to his Disciples, that is to say, bread? What shall then this hoc make? The accidents of bread without the sub∣iect, namely, whitenesse, roundnesse, &c? And what manner of speech were it to say? The accidents of bread are my body, which is giuen for you: or else their Indiuiduum vagum, and vage determinatum: This I cannot tell what, in the ayre, which they can neither name nor point out so as that it may be comprehended: How it may bee bread in the begin∣ning of the vttering of the words, and his body in the end. What a number of ob∣scure and straunge figures: to how many contradictorie designments and deuises are they driuen, and all to auoide one cleare and manifest figure, and that such a one as is verie often and familiarly vsed in the Sacraments? Afterward, This is my bloud. What
shalbe the meaning of this Hoc in this place? It is said, that taking the cup, he blessed it and said; Drinke ye all, Bibite ex hoc omnes. This Hoc then is the cup whereof he saith, This is my bloud. But can it possibly be, that the cup should be called blood without a figure? seeing that according to their owne assertions, it is the wine and not the cup? It followeth, Est: This is (say they) a verbe substantiue. Let it bee granted, but is it therefore a verbe transubstantiue? This is my bodie, that is to say, This is made my bodie: It is substantially turned, it is transubstantiated into my bodie and bloud? This is their meaning, and they call this word in their affected tearmes and gibberidge, an operatiue and practicke Est. But if it be vnderstood of the bread, then what figure is it? And how will their fond deuised fantasie stand, sith they hold, that the bread is not changed or turned, but becommeth nothing, to the end it may giue place to the bo∣die? And what shew of any figure will there then be here? Hoc est, that is to say, this Vagum Indiuiduum, which hath no name, is transubstantiated into his bodie. And if it bee wandring and vnstable, it is not , it hath not any substance: Or els, This bread is become nothing, to giue place to the bodie, &c. But this word, Est, may it bee expounded by the word Fit, factum est, conuertitur, transubstantiatur, it is made, turned, transubstanti∣ated? Yea and also by Fiat, conuertatur, transubstantiatur; that it may be made, turned, & transubstantiated, without a figure? yea and which is more, without any contradicti∣on? And of the cup particularly, without acknowledging that it is transubstantiated? But this they do not admit. Let vs proceed: Take, eate, but what? Accidents? but they are no proper obiects for the teeth to be occupied about. The bodie of Christ then? But as they say themselues, it is not as yet there. And then it is not chewed there, it is not there broken. What shall then the meaning bee of this word eate? But to en∣deuour to eate, to make semblance of eating? &c. But how much better had it been to haue expounded this place by the nature of other Sacraments? whereof it is said: This is my couenant: as here, This cup is the new Testament in my blood; This is the blood of the new Testament, &c. all comming to the same sence. Againe, The rocke was Christ, I am the bread of life: as here, The bread is my bodie, the cup is my blood. To expound it I say by Iesus Christ in S. Iohn: My flesh is meate in deede, and my bloud is drinke in deede: Where in plaine tearmes he referreth vs vnto his death, when hee saith: Which I will giue for the life of the world: As also here, Which is giuen, which is shed for you. But, saith he to the Capernaites; The words that J say vnto you are spirite and life. And therefore some are of iudgement, that this whole speech of his was nothing else but a resolued and purposed Commentarie, and a preparatiue to the right vnderstanding of the ho∣ly supper. And finally to haue expounded it by Saint Paule: Who giueth vnto vs, that which he had receiued of the Lord. But what? Accidents? No, but bread; As oft (saith he) as you shall eate of this bread, and drinke of this Cup, &c. And he goeth ouer this word bread fiue times, and that after the words of Consecration as they call them: and yet notwithstanding, The body of the Lord, &c. For, Whosoeuer eateth (saith he) of this bread vnworthily, eateth his iudgement, is culpable of the body and bloud of our Lord, &c. As if a man should say, Reus Maiestatis, guiltie of high treason against the body of Christ, because he hath abused his Sacramēts vnto death, which were ordained for him vnto life. And what is there more ordinarie in the Scripture, then to vse the words of eating & drin∣king spiritually? As where wisedome it selfe saith: Such as eate of me, Ecclesiast. 14. Iohn 7. shall further hunger after me, and they which drinke of me, shall still thirst after me: Where our Lord the true and essentiall wisedome crieth; Jf any man thirst, let him come vnto me and drinke. And parti∣cularly in the Paschall Lambe, a figure correspondent to the holy supper, were not these verie words which they call Sacramentall; Ʋerba inquam concepta: This bread is the bread of miserie, which our Fathers did eate in Egypt: He that is hungrie, let him come and eate &c. But the absurditie of this pretended literall construction, and yet altogether fi∣guratiue, improper and verie straunge, shall be better knowne by the touch and triall of the same, where wee shall see, how that it destroyeth the nature of all the Sacra∣ments; of those of the new Testament, yea euen the supper celebrated by our Lord with his Apostles: how that it destroyeth the humane nature of Christ, and offereth
violence vnto his diuine nature, and in a word how that it ouerthroweth the analo∣gie of faith, the consent of the holy Scriptures, the Creede of the Apostles, together withall the rest of the most firme and infallible points of Diuinitie, which we purpose to handle briefely from point to point. CHAP. III. That the interpretation and Exposition which our Aduersaries make of the words of the holy Supper, doth ouerthrow all the foundations of the Christian faith, as also the na∣ture of Christ and of his Sacraments. FIrst and principally, That Transub∣stantiation doth destroy the nature of euery sacra∣ment. Transubstantiation destroyeth the nature of euerie Sacrament: for euerie Sacrament consisteth of a signe and a thing signi∣fied, both which abide and continue whole and intire, in such sort as that it is not possible, that the one can be the other, neither any part of the other: and notwithstanding they depend the one vppon the other; they cannot bee well weighed and considered the one without the other. But it de∣stroyeth the nature of the bread, In the signe. the signe and seale of his bodie; the nature of the wine, the signe and seale of the bloud of our Lord, either by changing and altering of them; or else by making them nothing worth; or by reducing them, as others say, in∣to the first matter, from substances into accidents contrarie to all nature, yea contra∣rie to the Law of the Sacraments it selfe, which made choice of signes, proportiona∣ble to the things signified: as they rained Manna, to the bread of life which came downe from heauen: Water which washeth away corporall spottes, to the righteous bloud, which cleanseth and taketh away the spirituall; bread and wine which nourish and maintaine this life, to the body and bloud of Christ, which doe sustaine and feed vs vnto eternall life. Roundnesse, whitenesse, moystnesse, and rednesse, which they giue vs for signes, what analogie haue they with the spirituall nourishment? Or the accidents with the substance? And in stead of deeper and deeper setling vs in faith: what is it that they are able to beget in vs but new forged opinions, and vaine fanta∣sies? Let vs take from Baptisme, water, the signe of this liuing water of the holy Ghost, which washeth our soules: Mich. 7. yea, saith the Prophet, which drowneth and swalloweth vp our iniquities, and what maner of doctrine remaineth there behind. Take away bread in the holy supper, Nehem 9. Psalme 70. Iohn 6. Apocal. the signe of that bread of heauen, of the bread of life, which gi∣ueth life vnto the world: Wine, the signe of the bloud of the Lambe, wherein wee are to wash our garments, wherewith wee likewise comfort our soules, both the one and the other signes of our vnion, in as much as they are made of many cornes, kneaded and troden out into one, and what doctrine or instruction will there bee then left for vs behind? What proportion is there betwixt these accidents and our life? Not that verily of our soule onely, but that also of our body? In the second place, In the thing. what shall I say of the thing signified? How doe they handle it? The thing signified, is the body & bloud of Christ, it is Christ himselfe. But where∣fore was hee giuen in the holy Supper? Verily saith he, To giue life vnto the world. And to what world? Verily, vnto them whome hee hath drawne out of and saued from the world: To them saith hee, Which belieue in him, which abide in him: To them saith the Apostle, In whose hearts he dwelleth: To them saith S. Augustine, Which are his members, and not to any others. What iniurie then and wrong dooth Transubstantiation offer vnto our Lord, vnto this precious pearle of the Gospell, which giueth the same to hy∣pocrites and vnbelieuers, which casteth the same to Dogges and Swine, in such sort as that they regard or looke after nothing else, but that they haue a mouth to cast it into, and a stomacke to swallow it downe into? Can these courses bee maintained ei∣ther by the scriptures, or yet by the old church? wee say of euery Sacrament, that the signe which is called ordinarily the Sacrament, may be receiued of all, but the thing
of the Sacrament, res Sacramenti, of the faithfull and beleeuers onely. And as for that due regard and consideration which is to be had of the holie Supper, the word of the sonne of God, is expreslie laide downe concerning the same. This is my bodie which is giuen for you, my bloud which is shed for your sins. He giueth them not for meat and food, but to such as for whome it is shed, as for whom it is broken, that is to say, which are effectually redeemed, and by consequent his members. And thus saith Origen; Orig. in Mat. c. 11. That of this true and verie meat, of this word made flesh, no wicked or vngodly man can eate: because (saith he) that it is the worde, and the bread of life: because that hee that eateth this bread, li∣ueth for euer. Saint Cyprian: Cypr. l. de Caen. Domini. August. tract. 26. in Ion. That although that the Sacraments bee suffered to be taken and handled by such as are vnworthie, yet they cannot bee partakers of the spirit, that is to say of grace. And Saint Augustine: That the signes are common to the good and euill, but the thing proper vnto the faithfull alone: That although they shut vp within their teeth tantae re Sacra∣mentum, that is to say, the signe of so excellent a thing; Idem de ciuit. Dei. l. 21. c. 25. In sent Pros∣per. 318. tract. 59. in Iob. yet they eate but their owne condemna∣ion: That none abide in him, but such as beleeue in him, that such as abide in him, eate him, that the rest eate Sacramento tenus, non re vera; the signe, not the thing: That the Apostles did eate panem Dominum, the bread which was the Lord: but Iudas the bread of the Lord against the Lord, &c. Although Saint Hillarie say, that he communicated not at all: and the Ca∣non Qui discordat, drawne out of Saint Augustine is cleare and euident therein. Wher∣as on the contrarie, it should proue most plain and manifest, that if their opinion take place, that the vnbeleeuers and hypocrites shall receiue the bodie of Christ, Christ shal dwell in their bodies corporally such as are dead in their sinnes, shal receiue the bread of life, and in it eternal life? Thus then they destroy the Sacrament of the Supper, both in the thing, and in the signe, prostituting holinesse and sanctimonie, vnto the pro∣phane, casting the childrens bread vnto dogges; and bestowing the spiritual life vpon the vnbeleeuers. In the signes causing them to cease to be substances, and signes of a most substantiall substance, turning them into vaine and imaginarie accidents: acci∣dents subsisting without any subiect, and yet hauing taste, and apt to feed and sustaine, and to beget excrements and wormes, that is to say, substances: yea and to be turned into ashes, that is to say into matter; (doe we consent and agree vnto the contradicti∣ons contained in these things?) yea and to be brused and broken in peeces. For if this be not bread which is broken, shall it be the bodie? They are not able to affirme it: Iohn 19. Exod. 12. The scripture is verie cleare and plaine: His bones shall not be broken. Thus then you see how they go about to make them accidents without any bodie. Thirdly, the nature of one Sacrament is vnderstood by the other. It destroyeth the conformi∣ty and corres∣pondency that is betwixt the holy supper and the other sacraments. We haue affir∣med it heretofore out of the old writers with the Apostle; That in the Sacraments of the old Testament, the fathers receiued the same meate and the same drinke: (and yet notwith∣standing without transubstantiation) euen Christ. And namely in the comparing of the holy Supper they haue o vnderstood it. S. Augustine, The same faith abideth, but the signes are chaunged: There the rocke was Christ; here that which is set vpon the Altar: There they drunke the water that ranne out of the rocke; and we, the faithfull know that which we drinke, &c. And Bertram: They did eate and drinke the same meate which the people of the beleeuers doth eate and drinke in the Church, euen the flesh and blood of our Lord: and infinit others. Let vs speake now of those of the new Testament. Of Baptisme it is said: Bee baptised in the name of Christ for the remission of sinnes. Of the Supper: This is my bodie which is broken, my bloud which is shed for you, for the remission of sinnes. Of the one: If a man be not regenerate and borne againe of water and of the spirit, hee cannot enter into the king∣dome of God. Of the other: If you eate not the flesh of the Sonne of man & drinke not his blood, you haue no life in you. In a word it is said, that in the one, We put on Christ, we are bapti∣sed into his death, established and ssured into his resurrection, regenerate, renewed, saued, &c. That in the other; We dwell in Christ, and that we are in him nourished vnto eternall life, &c. And Saint Paule seemeth to haue ioyned them together in one verse: 1. Cor. 12.13. We were all bap∣tised into one selfe same spirit, and we haue all drunke of one selfe same spirit, that we might be∣come one and the same bodie, &c. For the like effects proceeding from the same po∣wer, and tending to the same end; wherefore then wil we in these Sacraments find out
diuerse natures? Tit. 2. 2. Pet. 1. And why dooth water continue still to be water, and neuerthelesse, the sprinckling, saith the Apostle, of the bloud of Christ, washing vnto regeneration and remission of sinnes, and to saluation, by the operation of the holy Ghost: when as the bread and wine, by the verie same, cannot become instruments to nourish our soules with the bodie and bloud of Christ, but that it must first come to passe, that they be made of no reckoning: that the bodie and bloud doe enter into, and take posses∣sion of their places; and that the nature of all, both wordes and things, holie and not holie, be turned topsie turuie? As though the power of God were weaker in the one then in the other. And it is likewise most certaine, that there is nothing more familiar amongst the fathers, Epiph. cont. haeres. l 3. c. 2. & in Ancho∣rat. Chrysost. in Mat. hom 83. August. in Io. tract. l. 25. & 26. Euseb. Emiss. then to reason from Baptisme vnto the Supper of the Lord. As when Epiphanius saith; That the strength of the bread, and vertue of the water, are made powerfull in Christ, &c. And Chrysostome speaking of the Supper, The Lord (saith hee) hath not giuen vs here anie sensible thing: wee must see and looke vpon the same with the eies of our vnderstanding, &c. And thus (saith hee) by the water in Baptisme, which is a sensible thing, he hath giuen vs regeneration, which is a gift apprehended by the vnderstanding. And S. Augustine vpon the same matter; The Christian is made fat inuisibly, namely in the holie Supper: as also he is begotten and borne againe inuisibly, namely in Baptisme. And Eusebius Emissenus labouring to declare and shew what manner of change it is, that is made in the bread and wine, laieth out the same in plaine sort, by that which is wrought in the regeneration of man, saying; which continueth, idem & idem, the verie same: and yet not∣withstanding quite another maner of man, through the growth and increase of faith. Damascene also in like maner, Damasc. l. 4. c. 14. D. 2. C. Quia corpus de con∣secr. & C. vtrū. though one that hath written after the grossest sort in this matter. Gratian likewise in the Canon, Ʋtrum, which is taken out of Saint Augustine, and ma∣nie other. Certes the Councell of Nice saith of Baptisme: Our Baptisme is not to be considered with the eies of the bodie, but with the eies of the spirit: and so of the Supper. Let not your eies stay themselues vpon these signes, but lift thē vp on high, &c. And he letteth not to say of Bap∣tisme: Seest thou water? consider and beholde therein the diuine power, which is hid in these wa∣ters, full of sanctification, full of diuine fire: that is to say, full of the holie Ghost, full of his effectuall working, and yet not changed into fire, nor into the holie Ghost: and verily euen as little the bread and wine in the holy table, either into accidents, or any other substances; whereof the same Councell saith: That we must vnderstand by faith, that wee do truly and verilie receiue the bodie and bloud of our Lord, and that they are tokens and pledges vnto vs of our resurrection vnto eternall life. Ambros. de lit qui mistie. init. c. 3 & de spir. Sanct. l. 3 Saint Ambrose also is farre of from admit∣ting anie change or alteration of the water in Baptisme, and therefore ceaseth not to say: Thou seest water, and doubtest thou of the mysterie? Thou beleeuest the operation, and wilt thou not beleeue the presence of the diuinitie and Godhead? From whence should the operation & effectual working of the same proceed, if it were not by vertue of the diuine presence? Againe, Be∣leeue not alone the eies of the bodie: that which is not seene at all, is most apparant & clearly seene, in asmuch as that is temporall; but this is eternall, &c. And therefore S. Augustine saith not; Take away this water, August. tract. 80. in Ioh. that the bloud of Christ may take the place, and enter in steade thereof: but rather, Take away the worde of God from the water, and then there remaineth nothing but common water: adde the worde thereunto, and it will become a Sacrament. And in like manner Tertullian: The holie Ghost commeth downe and sanctifieth the water. Saint Basill: The kingdome of heauen is there opened. Saint Chrysostome: I beleeue in baptising the purgation of the soule, Answere to the obiection of omnipoten∣ty by the working of the spirit, &c. And all these notwithstanding, with∣out any the least presupposing of the changing of the water. In the meane time these fellowes haue nothing to obiect, or cast in our way, but the omnipotencie of God, and that when as the question properly is not of his Almightinesse in a miracle, but of his will and pleasure in a mysterie. Thus said Praxeas vnto Tertullian: Wherfore could not God be father and sonne also? Tertul. cont Pra. Is it not said, I and the father are but one, &c? Vnto whome hee answered: The mightie power of God is no other thing then his will: and the vnabilitie of God his vnwillingnesse: he could haue made and framed man to flie, after the maner of a Kite, but hee hath not done it, &c. And this his will we come to vnderstand by his worde, whereof it
is said: Heauen and earth shall passe; but the word of God endureth for euer. Our Lord hath said: That of stones he is able to raise vp children vnto Abraham. And who can doubt here∣of? And yet notwithstanding I wil not therefore belieue, if it appeare not vnto me out of his will, that such or such are raised vp or begotten of stones: Neither yet if thou shouldest shew me a stone, that it is any child of Abrahams: whē as I see not any other thing in it, then the naturall shape & figure thereof, neither yet by touching it feele a∣ny thing but the hardnes, heauinesse, and coldnesse of a stone. For, saith S. Augustine: August. in Ench. ad Lau∣rent c. q. de ci∣uit. Dei. l. c. 10. God is properly called Almightie, because he doth whatsoeuer he will, and because that his wil is not crossed, either by the will or power of any other whosoeuer. But the will of our Lord mani∣fested in his word, is to feede the faithfull with his flesh & bloud in his holy supper: I will firmely and steadfastly belieue that he doth it, and will not thereupon goe about to remoue or alter either the predicables or predicaments, but will be readie with all humilitie to subiect & applie my reason to his promise, by an obedience of faith. Our aduersaries cannot conceiue, how he should feede their soules, if he come not nie vnto their bodies, if he be not in their mouthes: And how doth the Sunne, which is a crea∣ture, bring forth, quicken, heat and inlighten things, and that so far off? And he which feedeth vs in S. Iohn, without Sacraments, & without signes, Ioh. 6. why should he come short in the signes & Sacraments? Seeing they afford reliefe & helpe for the vnderpropping of our infirmity, not diminishing or any thing impairing his power? and he that dwel∣leth continually in the hearts of his children: why should he not manifest the same on some one day more plainely and plentifully? Seeing it is hee for certaine which hath ordained it, & seeing also that his lodging is therein the better prepared, by our faith by our zeale, and by our repentance. It is a point of deepe incredulitie & vnbeliefe in vs, not to trust him any longer thē he is at hand and neere vnto vs: and that he should not bee able to doe it but by being neere and at hand, should argue a certaine kind of impotencie & weaknesse in God. And this is that which S. Augustine saith: August. in Ioh. tract. 10. To the ende that no man should deceiue himselfe, in going about to adore the Head in heauen, and to trample vpon his feet here on earth, he hath declared and told where his members be: The Head being to ascend vp into heauen, hath recommended vnto vs his members here on earth and so is departed and gone hence, &c. He said from on high vnto Saule: Wherefore persecutest thou me? I ascended vp vnto heauen, & notwithstanding I am yet vpō earth: here I sit at the right hand of my Father: there I doe as yet indure and sustaine, hunger, and thirst, I am a stranger, &c. The head although it be not in the feete, doth yet minister vnto them the power of mouing: and the Sonne of God the Head of the Church, shal he not bestow as much vpon his members? Fourthly, Transubstantiation taketh frō vs this consolation: Transubstan∣tiation depri∣ueth vs of the meanes of do∣ing that which the Lord hath done. that our Lord vouch∣safeth to continue vnto vs in his Church, the same misterie, which he celebrated with his Apostles: according to that which he said in expresse and plaine tearmes: Doe this in remembrance of me. The efficacie of which words must be perpetuall in the Church: That is, that celebrating the same action, and in the same sort, wee communicate like∣wise & are partakers of the same grace, & in the same manner. But if a contrary course be taken, and that to the obtaining of an other kind of grace, and after an other man∣ner, in stead of comfort and consolation, we fall into a doubtfull labirinth: for where is there any institutiō besides? And where is the word? where is the promise? And what maketh the Sacrament but the word? Wherby are we made partakers of the fruit and effect but by the promise? If we receiue not the same thing that the Apostles receiued, & after the same maner, to what end then shold these words of the Lord: Doe this, &c. as also those of the Apostle, I haue receiued of the Lord, that which I haue giuen vnto you, serue? And what other places are there, whence we ought to learne & take knowledge of the same? But & if it be the very same thing, performed in the same maner: then let vs cal to mind, that it is a spiritual thing & not a carnall, and to be done after a spiritu∣al & not a carnal sort, by faith and not by the mouth: for he speaketh to them of a bo∣dy broken for thē, which yet was not broken: and of bloud shed for them, August. in Psa. 33. De Consecr. d. 2. C. hoc. est. v∣bi Glosa. which was as yet in his veines: and therfore they did eate & drink, as the Patriarks and Prophets had done before thē, spiritualy & by faith. And this is it which S. August. saith, That e sus Christ giuing the Sacraments of his body & bloud vnto his Disciples, did carie quodammodo,
after a certaine maner himselfe. If he had done it really, the quodammodo had serued to no vse: for quodammodo (say the Schooles) is terminus diminuens, a word of restraint denying the truth of the reall presence. August Ep. 23 ad Bonifac. And then if this be quodammodo, it is that which he saith in another place, secundum quendam modum, that is saith he, By the similitude that the signes haue with the things: not in very deede saith the canon, but in signification: not verily & truely saith the Glose, but improperly, that is to say sacramentally. And indeede that which he saith in one place, He caried himselfe after a certaine manner in his handes: hee speaketh thus in another place, Idem de verb. Dom. in E∣uang. Mat. Serm. 33. Hug. Cardin. in Mat. c. 26. & in Marc. c. 14. He caried the bread in his handes: in as much as he exhi∣hibited and offered himselfe vnder these Sacraments for a spirituall meate and drinke vnto his disciples &c. And the Glose expounding the wordes of the Supper, saith, Accipite, comedite, Take, eate: Intelligite, fide comedite, vnderstand, eate by faith &c. Car∣dinal Hugo likewise, Take, that is to say, belieue with your harts, and confesse with your mouthes &c. In the mean time they goe about to graunt vs a larger priuilege then euer the Apostles had, as though wee should receiue the body of Christ glorified and im∣mortall, whereas they receiued it as it was subiect to the death and passion. But wee verily content our selues to receiue it as the Apostles did, not aspiring after any more high and excellent manner; that is, therein to receiue the body broken and the bloud shed for vs: for the Sonne of God properly doth quicken vs, in that he is eternall; but in that he hath made himselfe mortall, neither doth he glorifie vs, in that he himselfe is glorious, but in that he hath abased himselfe, taking vppon him the forme of a ser∣uant; and being made subiect vnto the ignominious death of the Crosse. Therein I say to receiue it after the same maner, the bread for a signe and certaine pledge of his bo∣dy; and yet notwithstanding at the very same instant also to receiue his body: the wine a signe and infallible token of his bloude; and notwithstanding at the very same in∣stant to receiue his bloud, by the inward efficacie of the holy Ghost: and both the one and the other, for the remission of sins, and vnto the resurrection to life: seeing that Christ is dead for our sinnes, and risen againe for our iustification, &c. And in verie deed the auncient Fathers haue not otherwise vnderstood the holy supper of Christ with his Apostles. Tertul aduer. Marc. l. 5. c. 40. & l. 1. c 14. Ambr. de iis qui myster. init. c 9. & de Sacr. l. 4 c. 5. Hieronym l. 2. aduers. Iouini an. & in Mat. c. 26. August. contr. Adaman. c. 12 Idem in Pro∣log. super ps. 3. Macar. hom. 27 Theodor. in Polymorph. seu. Euarist. Dial. 1. Tertullian; He made the bread which he tooke and gaue to his disciples, his body, that is to say, the figure of his bodie. And in another place, The bread by which he represen∣ted his body. S. Ambrose; The Lord himselfe crieth, This is my body: Before the blessing of hea∣uenly words an other kind is named, after the consecration, the body of Christ is signified. And in an other place more clearely; The same which is (saith hee) the figure of the body and bloud of our Lord. S. Ierome; He offered not water but wine, for the figure of his bloud. And in ano∣ther place speaking of bread and wine: Representing (saith he) the truth of his body and of his bloud. S. Augustine; The Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gaue the signe of his body. Againe; He hath recommended and giuen to his Disciples the figure of his bloud. An∣titypes saith S. Macaire, an Aegyptian, Exhibiting the flesh and bloud of Christ. Theodoret; He that hath called his naturall body, wheat and bread, and which hath named himself a vine, hath honoured the markes and signes which are to be seene, with the name of his body and bloud, not in changing the nature it self, but in adding grace vnto nature. Eusebius Emissenus, Seing that our Lord must carrie vp into heauen, the body which he had taken vpon him, it was needfull that in the day of the supper, he should consecrate for vs the Sacrament of his body and bloud: to the end, that that which was once offered vp for a ransom, might continually be honored by miste∣rie. And here we must shun the confounding of these two words, Truly, & carnally or re∣ally, the one with the other, being such as the old writers accompted of, as much diffe∣ring, Cyril l. 3. c 24. in Ioh. Orig. in Gen. hom. 1. c. 1. Hieronym. ad Gal. c. 4. and carefully to be distinguished: For Iesus Christ calleth himselfe the true Ʋine: And Cyrill calleth him, the true Manna: And Origen, the Apostles, The true & very hea∣uens: And S. Ierome the faithfull, one true bread: Whome it had beene verie hard to haue made to belieue, that Christ had beene really the Vine, or the Manna; the Apostles, the heauens, or the faithful one loafe, &c. And thus you see what manner of holy supper it was, that was celebrated & kept of the Apostles: and I verily belieue, that there is not any true Christian, that wisheth or desireth any other. Fiftly, Transubstan∣tiation destroy eth the hu∣maine nature of Christ. Heb. 2 it destroyeth the humane nature of Christ, for the truth whereof all the old Church hath so mightily striuen against the heretickes of that time, and in the truth
whereof likewise resteth the consolation of mankind, the onely meanes of our saluati∣on: In as much, saith the Apostle, as That he hath not taken vpon him the Angels, that is to say, the nature of Angels; but the seed of Abraham, that is to say, the nature of man, taking part with flesh and bloud, &c. to destroy the kingdom of death, by his death, &c. For in presup∣posing without the word of God, that this body may be in a thousand places at once, they conclude against the word of God, that this body hath not that which is of the very nature of a body: against that which our Lord said after his resurrection, repro∣uing the vnbeliefe of S. Thomas; A spirit hath neither flesh nor bone, &c. and against that which all antiquitie teacheth: That what he once tooke vpon him, he neuer leaueth or casteth off: That in putting on glorie, he did not put off either nature, or yet the conditions and qualities of nature, &c. Christ verily in taking our nature, hath taken both our flesh & our bloud and this bloud distributed throughout his veines, &c. What doth then this Transub∣stantiation, which shutteth vp this his body by it selfe, vnder the accidents of bread, and his bloud by it selfe, vnder the accidents of wine? He hath taken likewise, both our flesh and our soule: and shall then a corporall substance bee turned into a spirituall? The bread into the soule of our Lord? &c. Or if it bee not changed thereinto, shall it remaine a body without a soule? And if this body which was giuen to the Apostles, were liuing, was not then this bread changed into a soule? But they denie it. And if he were dead then; should he not be dead and liuing both at once? Dead and inuisible as he was giuen, but aliue and visible as he did giue and distribute it? And how many are the absurdities begotten of one absurditie? And who seeth not how the auncient he∣retickes, which called in question the truth of the humane nature of Christ, did not a little ground themselues and their assertions vpon these Maxims? Verily, Iesus Christ our Lord after his resurrection, That Christ is absent accor∣ding to his humaine na∣ture: but euery where present as concerning his diuine na∣ture. According to the scriptures Iohn 7 Iohn. 3. Mathew 26. Mark. 6. Luke. 24. Acts 1.3. ascended in his body into hea∣uen, and left this world vntill the time of his comming againe to iudge the world, ac∣cording as he did instruct his Apostles; as hee had made them visible to behold & see, and as they in like maner after him did aduertise and teach vs: You shall not haue me al∣waies with you: I am here for a while: It is expedient for you that I goe: I am come into the world, and againe I leaue the world, I goe to him that sent me, from whome I am also come, and if I goe not, the comforter will not come. You shall seeke me, but as I haue said vnto the Jewes, whither I goe, they cannot come; And now also I tell it you: that is to say in one word; looke not for me any more hereafter in this humane nature. And in deed, hee blesseth them, with∣draweth himselfe from them, and is taken vp on high into heauen, and set at the right hand of his father: From whence he shall come againe, say the Angels, euen as he was seene to goe vp into heauen. And it must needes, be saith S Peter: That the heauens doe containe him, vnto the time of the restauration of all things. And yet notwithstanding hee saith; I will not leaue you orphanes: I am with you vnto the end of the world, I will send you the comforter which shall teach you, &c. Likewise whensoeuer you shal be two or three gathered together in my name, I will be in the miast of you: that is according to my diuine nature. And thus haue al the auncient Fathers spoken. Origen; It is not the man, that is euerie where, According to the Fathers. Orig in Mat. tract. 33. where two or three bee gathered together in his name; or yet alwaies with vs vnto the end of the world; or which is in euerie place where the faithfull are assembled: but it is the diuine power which is in Iesus. Athanasius; I goe to the Fa∣ther: But doth he not fill all things, euen heauen, earth, and hell? And did he neuer withdraw him selfe from the Father? And to goe and come, are not these properties belonging to such as are finite and limited within their lists and bounds of time and place, by departing from the place where he was not, to the place where he was? &c. But saith he: This is because he speaketh of the humane nature which he tooke vpon him, in which it behoueth him to goe vnto the father, and come from thence againe, to iudge the quicke and the dead, &c. S. Augustine in an infinite sort of places, and that very largely: You shall haue the poore alwaies with you, &c. Let not good men (saith he) be troubled: In respect of his maiestie, prouidence, grace, &c. it is fulfilled which he said, I am alwaies with you, &c. In respect of the flesh, which the word tooke vpon it, August. in Ioh. tract. 0. as also in respect that he was borne of the Ʋirgine, apprehended of the Iewes, fastned to the tree, taken from off the Crosse, wrapped in linnen, laid in the Sepulchre, manifested at the resurrection, it is the same which is
said; You shall not haue mee alwaies, &c. The Church inioyed him but a few daies, in respect of his bodily presence, but now it possesseth him by faith, & seeth him no more with these bodily eyes, &c. Idem ad Dar∣dan. Ep. 57. What then? Said one vnto him: is he not euerie where? Yes he is euerie where (saith he) but as a man is soule and flesh: so Christ is the word, that is to say, God, as also man, and wee must alwaies distinguish in the Scriptures, that which is spoken of the one, from that which is spo∣ken of the other. By reason of the one he is the Creator; and in consideration of the other a crea∣ture. In the one, he was here vpon earth, and not in heauen when he said: No man ascendeth vp into heauen, &c. In the other, he was in heauen, notwithstanding that he was not yet ascended vp into heauen, notwithstanding that he was yet conuersant and abiding here vpon earth, &c. And therefore stand fast and irremoueable in thy Christian confession: That hee is ascended vp into heauen: That he sitteth at the right hand: That from thence, and not from elsewhere, he shal come to iudge the quicke and the dead: and that in the very same forme and substance of flesh: whereto for certaine (saith he) he hath granted and freely giuen immortalitie, and yet hath not bereft it of his nature. And according to this nature, we must not make accompt, that hee is shed abroad euerie where; but rather beware, least we in such sort establish the Diuinitie of the man, as that we destroy and take away the veritie of the body: For it is no good consequent, that all that which is in God, Idem in Iohn. tract. 78. is euerie where, as God is, &c. And in an other place vppon these words; Vado & Venio ad vos: He went (saith he) as man, he staied behind in as much as he was God: hee went in as much as he was but in one place, he staied and abode still, in as much as he was euerie where. Againe; Idem de verb. Dom. Serm. 60. & de Tem. Serm. 40. It is expedient for you that I goe: although (saith he) that he bee alwaies with vs by his Diainitie: But and if hee had not gone away from vs corporally, we should haue seene him daily with these carnall eyes, and should neuer haue belieued in him spiritually, &c. And for this cause hee hath absented himselfe in body from all the Church, to the end that faith might bee edified and builded vp. Cyril. Alex. in Ioh. 9. c. 21. l. 10. c. 39. S. Cyrill; It is meete that all the faithfull belieue, that howsoeuer our Lord bee absent in body, yet he is present by his power to all them that loue him, &c. And reciprocally no man doubteth, seeing he is ascended into heauen, but that he is absent in the flesh, though present in body, &c. What is this then; I will not leaue you comfortlesse? That is, how that after he is as∣cended into heauen & risen from the dead, Idem l. 6. dial. de Trinit. he is in vs by his spirit, &c. And againe, what is the meaning of this, I am in the midst of two or three assembled in my name? Verily (saith he) when as man, he was conuersant here vpon earth, he filled notwithstanding the heauens, not leauing therfore the companie of the Angels. And on the otherside likewise, where as now he is in hraue, Idem l. 11. c. 3. li. de Incarn. c. 21. Fulgent. ad Thrasimund. l 2. he ceaseth not to fil the earth with his power, &c. He appeared for vs on high before the fa∣ther, and he ceaseth not to dwel here below in the Saints by his spirit, &c. being absent according to his humanitie, but present according to his Diuinitie. Fulgentius; One and the same Christ (saith he) is a locall man, that is to say, tied to one place, in as much as he was borne a man, that is to say, of the Virgine; and notwithstanding God infinite, that is to say, without limitation of place, measure or bounds, in as much as he is of the Father: according to his humane nature absent from heauen, when he was vpon earth, and leauing the earth when he ascended into heauen: according to his diuine nature notwithstanding, not leauing the heauens, when hee descended; nor the earth when he ascended into heauen, Vigil. l. 1. cont. Eutych. &c. Vigilius, B. of Trent, It is expedient for you (saith he) that I goe, &c. And how will he goe (saith he) vnto the father, who neuer is from him? He which is all in all with the father, and of whome all things are full? &c. But saith he; This is because he ca∣ried out of this world, his humane nature which he had taken of vs, &c. He is then gone from vs, according to this humanitie; but in respect of his Diuinitie hee saith vnto vs, I am with you vnto the end of the world. Idem l. 4. But againe, now the daies will come, that you shall desire to see the Sonne of man, and shall not see him? &c. Verily, because he is after a certaine manner both absent from vs and present with vs: By the forme of a seruant which he carried from vs into heauen, he is absent from vs: and by the forme of God, which remoueth not from vs here on earth, hee is present with vs, Circumscribi loco. and so by this meanes, he but one & the same, becommeth present with vs, and absent from vs, &c. But seeing (saith he) that the word is euery where: wherefore is not the flesh also euery where? These certainly are things very diuers & different, to be limited & bounded within one place, and to be euery where. The Son of God had a beginning, as cōcerning the nature of his flesh: but he had not any, if you consider the nature of his diuinitie: In regard of that he is a creature: but in regard of this the Creator: In respect of that he is a subiect to be contained in one place, but in respect of this it is not possible for him to be contained in any place, &c. And this is the Catholike faith &
fession, which the Apostles haue deliuered vnto vs, which the Martyrs haue confirmed and ra∣tified, and which the faithfull haue conserued and maintained, euen vnto this present, &c. And that in such sort, that although the founders of Transubstantiation haue laide such doctrines, as are contrarie to the succeeding ages; Bed. in. hom. Paschah. Bernard. in 1 Serm. de Caen. Dom. serm. 6.9.10. Hugo. part. 8. c 13. memit. theol. Cyril. 9. in Io. c. 21. yet this foundation hath alwaies remained firme. In Beda; Christ ascending vp to heauen after the resurrection, left his Disci∣ples corporally, how be it the presence of his diuine maiestie did neuer leaue them. In S. Bernard; I goe from you saith the Lord, according to my humanitie, but I do not goe away from you accor∣ding to my Diuinitie: I leaue you without my corporall presence, but J arde and assist you, with the presence of my spirit. And thus haue all the old Schoolemen spoken: so farre, as that he which hath said otherwise, hath beene reputed for an Eutichian, or Nestorian, ac∣cording to the saying of S. Cyrill: Ne quis in duos filios Christum diuidere auderet: To the end that no man might be so bold, as to diuide Christ into two Sonnes, &c. And of such like pla∣ces a man might make vp a whole volume. But followeth it, that to the end it may retaine the humane nature, that the bodie of Christ must needes bee bounded, and made subiect to one certaine place? What o∣ther thing is it that all these Doctors haue said, in their making of it a locall and cir∣cumscriptible bodie, and subiect to locall motions? &c. S. Ambrose saith: Ambros. Ep. 22. & l. de In∣carn. Domini. & de spir; sanct. There was in Christ the same truth of body that is in vs. Againe; Euerie creature is bounded within cer∣taine limits of his nature, and that, that hath not a bounded and limited power, cannot be called a creature. If then thou consider the Son of man as man, why doest thou not leaue him that which belongeth vnto man? If as a creature (for so we call him, according to the phrase of antiquitie, in as much as hee is man) what doest thou cal in question his cir∣cumscriptiblenes, if thou be not purposely minded to confound the Creator with the creature? And not any more to diuide and seperate with Nestorius, but with Eutiches to confound and couple together the two natures? In like maner S. Ierome, Didimus. l. 1 de spir. sanct. or rather Didimus translated by him, goeth further: Yea if the holy Ghost (saith he) were a creature, euen he should haue a circumscriptible substance, that is to say, a substance restrained & kept with∣in certaine limits. Yea saith S. Cyril; The Diuinitie could not possibly auoid limitation, Cyril. de Tri∣nit. c. 2 if it were within the reach of any quantitie. And then will the fathers exempt and except his glori∣fied body from these rules? Can you once thinke how, seeing they do not exempt the Diuinity it self, if it were possible for it to come vnder any presupposed quantitie? Theod. Dial. 2 Ve∣rily, not Theodoret, who saith: It is glorified with diuine glorie, adored of the celestial powers, but notwithstanding a body, but notwithstanding subiect to that limitation, which it was before, &c. I heard the Lord who said: You shall see the Sonne of man comming in the clouds, &c. But I know that that which is seene of men is finite and limited, August. ad Dard. Idem ad q. 35. q. 65. & 20. Idem de di∣uers. quaest. q. 83. & Ep. 6. Idem in Ioh. tract. 30. de Consecr. d. 2. C. prima qui∣dem. Idem ad Dar. Ep. 57. & ad Consent. 46. Nazianz. ad Theod. dial. 1. Concil. Chal∣ced. apud. Da∣masc. l. 3. c. 3. & Euagr. l. 2. c. 4 Concil. Con∣stant. aecume∣nic. 6. for neuer could any man see that nature which is infinite and vnlimited. Not S. Augustine: For (saith hee) take from bodies, space of place, and so you shall make thē not existant: and if not existant, then not to be any thing at all. A∣gaine, Euerie body is locall, and euerie locall thing is a body: whatsoeuer is locall is in one place, and not in many, and it occupieth with his least part, the least place, & with his greatest, the grea∣test, &c. Againe, The Lord is on high, but the Lord which is veritie and truth (that is to say, in as much as hee is God) is also here: It must needs be that the body, wherin he rose againe (marke how he speaketh of his glorified body) should continue in one place, albeit that his truth bee dispersed and shed abroad euerie where. Againe, Let vs not be so insolent as to say, that the body hath not onely put off mortalitie and corruption, by the glory of the resurrection, but also that it is now become spirit, where it was a body. For I belieue and esteeme it to be such a one in heauen, as it was here on earth, when he ascended into heauen, &c. For a spirituall body is that, which is al∣readie immortal with the spirit, but not that it is changed into a spirit, &c. Not Gregorie Na∣zianzene: We teach (saith hee) the same Christ, consisting of a circumscriptible body, and of an incircumscriptible spirit, of a body which may be contained in a place, & of a spirit, which no place is able to contain, &c. Not the Orthodox, and purer Church in the Councels of Chalce∣don & Constantinople III. The two natures after the vnion, haue verily their owne natures, & their naturall properties: for either of thē doth retaine his natural property, so as that it cannot possibly be changed. But in the meane time we haue here to obserue, that the heretickes of that time, against whom the fathers disputed, doe not aleadge for themselues any
thing of transubstantiation: but is not the bodie of Christ in diuers places at one & the same time in the holy supper? and then is it not either changed or cōfounded with the diuinitie, or the properties of the one nature become communicable with the other? which no doubt they would not haue forgotten, if the Church of that time had taught either transubstantiation, or any doctrine which had come neere therto. They obiect; yea but our Lord came forth of the virgins wombe, Tertul. de car. Christ. c. 4. 20. 23. & aduers. Marcion. l. 3. c. 11. l. 4. c. 21. l. 5. c. 19. Quod com∣muni parefa∣cti. corporis le∣ge pepetit. Orig. in Luc. hom. 14. Ambr. in Luc. l. 2. Hieron. ad Eustoch. de cast. virg. Luke 2. Durand. l. 4. in l. 4. Sent. D. 44. q. 6 Nu. 21. Leo 1. ad Epis. Palaest. Hilar. de Trin l. 3. & ad Con∣stant. August. Hieronym. ad Pammach. Iustin. Martyr in quaest. q 120 Cyril. Alex. in Ioh. l. 12. c. 53. that was closed and shut vp; he rise againe the sepulcher fast; he went into his discipls the dores made, &c. Wherfore there is a penetrating of dimensions, and a concurrence of bodies in one and the very same place, &c. Tertullian, Origen, S. Ambrose, and S. Ierome did answere them; That Christ being borne did open the wombe of the virgine. And S. Luke alleadgeth the law to this purpose; Euerie male opening the matrix, shalbe holy vnto the Lord, &c. Out of which Theophilact gathereth altogether an other manner of doctrine: For (saith hee) this law properly hath beene accomplished in Christ alone, who onely opened the wombe of the virgin: for as concerning other mothers, their husbands and not their children doe open them. And Du∣rand likewise is farre from finding this miracle. To the stone rolled vpon the sepul∣cher, Iustinus Martyr would tell them: That the diuine power caused it to make way for him, or that the Angell rolled it away. And Pope Leo the first likewise; That Christ rise a∣gaine the stone of the sepulcher being rolled away. And S. Hilarie in generall, That all closed and shut thinges are open to the power of God. S. Ierome, That the creature giueth place to the Creator, &c. But yet his entrance the dores being shut is vnanswered; Iustinus Martyr answering purposely this verie question: This was not (saith he) by chaunging his bodie into a spirit, but by the same reason, that our Lord walked vpon the sea, causing by his diuine power the sea to befit to walk vpon, which of it owne nature was not so: in so much as that it did not onely beare vp his bodie, but that of Peters also. The miracle then was in the sea, not in the bo∣die: in the dores which opened by a speciall power, and not in the subtlenes (as they speake) of his bodie. Then he addeth; For this is the same with the walking of his body vp∣on the sea, without being chaunged; for euen so without any manner of change in his bodie, he en∣tred in at the dores being shut. And therefore he would (saith he) that his disciples should touch him, to the end that they might know, that he entred not by changing of his bodie into a spirite, but that by diuine power, which bringeth thinges to passe, beyond the course of nature, this bodie of his consisting of grosse parts, was entered and come into them. Saint Cyrill: The Lord went in to his disciples the dores being shut: and that by surpassing (through his omnipotencie) the na∣ture of things. And therefore let no man trouble himself with seeking out of the cause, but let him rather consider that the question is not here of a meere man, like to our selues: but of the Almigh∣tie Sonne of God, to whome whole nature is subiect. This was therefore after the same manner, that his walking vpon the sea was, which naturally is not giuen to beare vp our feet, (and note that this was before his bodie was glorified) and therefore when thou readest this, beware that thou be not turned aside, to forsake the true faith, &c. And if thou bee not able to compre∣hend the same, blame the defects and wantes of thy spirit: and say rather: That whereas hee thus entred in at the dores being shut, it is because he is God: and yet not any other then he was at the time of his being conuersant as men amongst his disciples before his passion. And in deed the better sort of their expositors of the later writers do not abuse these places, to the prouing of the said pearsing through of dimensions, imagined and deuised by our aduersaries, which maketh that two bodies should occupie but one place. The dores (say they) were opened: Ferus in Ioh. c. 20. and why not after the same manner that God caused the earth to open? and swallow vp Dathan and his confederates: the sea to make way for the Israelites, and to drowne the Egiptians: or the gates of the prison, for the deliuerance of his Apostles? And if God (say they) were able to bring them out of a prison fast shut, mortall and corruptible men at they were, why should he not himselfe be as able to go in, the dores close shut? The miracle euer∣more proceeding by this meanes from the diuine power, vnited vnto his humane na∣ture, and not from any change made or pretended in the same: and the change al∣so whensoeuer any is, resting in the things which suffer and obey this power, without any extending of it selfe by any manner of way vnto the person. Durand: That our Lord went in the dores being shut, by some other priuie & secret place: but not through the dores
shut, &c. But if any one amongst so many haue found out this denne or lurking hole; wherefore of so many sundrie expositions would they haue vs to make choise of that which is most harsh and obscure? And when all is done, what hath this to doe with the Sacrament of the holy Supper? But we answere them two thinges. In the first place; That in the matter of the Sacraments, as also of this same, (as Saint Augustine hath taught vs before) there is no question to be made concerning any miracle. And in the second place: That this Maxime abideth euer firme; that in God there is not yea and no toge ther: and therefore that no miracle how great soeuer can imply any contradiction. For the one S. Thomas telleth vs: That a miracle commeth of admiration, Tho. in 1. par∣te Summ. q. 105. art. 7. & that admiration falleth out when the effects are manifest, but the cause hidden & secret. But here we all agree, that the effects are hidden & secret, wherupon they are called myste∣ries. And hereupon also S. Augustine doth roundly cut off all the controuersies, say∣ing: That the Sacraments are things of great note & estimation amongst men, August. de Trinit. li. 5. c. 10 & that they may be reuerenced as religious things; but that they ought not to worke any admiration in vs, as if they were miracles. And by name, he speaketh there of the holy supper: As in deede there was neuer any miracle read of, whose effectes were not cleare and manifest to the sences. And to the second S. Thomas telleth vs: God is not Almightie in respect of the things wherein there is contradiction, because that they cannot be accounted of as possible things. Thom. 1. p. Summ q. 25. art. 3. & 4. & aduer. ger. t. l. 1 c. 84. & l. 2. c. 25 August. de Trini. l. 15. c. 14 And he layeth downe for an example: That he cannot make one thing, and that which is contrarie to the definition of the same, as a man vnreasonable; a triangle, and not three angles or three lines, &c. Because saith he: This should be to haue them, and not to haue them. And to speake in better tearmes with Saint Augustine; Because that, This shoulde bee an vnablenesse and want of power: for great is the power of the word, (sayeth hee) in that it cannot lie, for that therein there cannot bee Est & non est, but Est, est, Non, non, &c. But are wee not in Saint Thomas his tearmes, when there is made and set before vs a bodie without quantitie; a quantitie without dimensions: and a locall thing without any place: a quantitie therefore without quantitie; a bodie without a bo∣die? And thus then they destroy the humane nature of Christ, wherein lyeth the principall consolation of mankind; the article also of his ascention into heauen, of his sitting at the right hand, &c. that is to say, euen our Creed. In the sixt place, let vs see how they deale with his diuinitie. Transubstan∣tiation iniuri∣ous to the di∣uine nature of the Sonne of God. It is a rule amongst all the ancient fathers, as we haue seene; that men should distribute the Sacraments, that is to say, the signes: but that God alone is the giuer of the thing, but more particu∣larly in this, wherein it pleaseth the Sonne of God to giue himselfe vnto vs, his flesh and his blood for our nourishment vnto eternall life. But with what reuerence can we say, that another giueth it vs, and that in such sort, as that it dependeth not vpon the institution of the Sacrament in it selfe, neither yet of the vertue of the wordes which they call sacramentall: but (as in the workes and feates of Magicke, in which strong imagination worketh the effect) of the intention of the priest which vttereth them? Whereupon it followeth, that God must needs haue tyed his grace to the in∣tention of the confecrating priest: and not to his owne institution, accompani∣ed with his holy spirit? And the Sonne of God shall not be ours, that is to say, the life which is in him shall not distribute it selfe vnto the faithfull, further then the dis∣cretion of this intention shall extend? And it shall bee in the power, or rather in the weaknes of the Priest, to frustrate and send away emptie, a whole assemblie and com∣panie of Christians, gathered together in the name of Christ, feruently desiring in a true faith, and longing after his grace, which hee hath included in this precious gift, which he hath vouchsafed freely to bestow vpon them of himself, in stead that he hath so graciously declared his good will vnto vs saying: When two or three of you shall be ga∣thered together in my ame, J will bee in the midst of you, &c. Yea to frustrate and disa∣point them euerie manner of way, whether his purpose and intention stand good or not. For if he be nothing bent that way, then according to their doctrine, hee con∣secrateth not, neither is the Sonne of God communicated. And neuerthelesse if he do consecrate, yet they doe not communicate therein, for they are alwaies subiect to
doubt whether hee had any purpose and intention, or not. And whereas there is doubting, there is no faith: and where there is no faith, there is nothing but sinne. Now themselues are of this iudgement, that hee cannot receiue the bodie of Christ, which doth not belieue in him. Now then what priuiledge hath the vertuous and godly man more then the wicked, seeing that the intention or not intention of the Priest, transubstantiateth or leaueth vntransubstantiated; seeing that both the one & the other are subiect to doubt of the intention, & therefore of the effect; & seeing that both the one and the other, whether doubting or assured thereof, do equally receiue or not receiue? Likewise what shall become of their doctrine, De opere operato; That the thing profiteth and is auaileable, in asmuch as it is onely performed and done; & not in regard of the person which doth it, seeing that this whole mysterie dependeth now, Ex opere operantis, of the working and operation of the sacrificer? Moreouer, where shall the excellencie of this Sacrament aboue all other Sacraments bee found: if the rest depend vppon the grace of God, without any such necessitie of the intention of him that consecrateth: as the greatest part of them doth hold of baptisme, and of that pretended Sacrament of mariage? &c. On God I say, whose intention and purpose neuer halteth or faileth, neither yet by consequent, the obiect of our faith: the same (not to speake any thing more sharpely and grieuously of the infirmity of man) being subiect to faile euerie moment? But further I would know what shal become of their priuate Masses: Bonauent. in Comp. Sacr. Theol. rubr. 11. l. 8. Gabr. Biel. lect. 6. lit. C. seeing that Bonauenture & Biel hold: That besides the intent of him that consicrateth, there is required the intent and purpose of him that instituteth and ordaineth: that it is not sufficient for the Priest to haue an intent to consecrate, if hee follow not the intent of Christ in this sacrament? But Hugo and Biel & the most part of the school∣men are they not of iudgement, that priuate Masse, wherein there is no publike re∣membrance made of the death of Christ, doth nothing at all agree with the mind of the institutor? what consolation then can they of the Church of Rome haue in the Sacrament, when in stead of nourishing of their faith, they maintaine and feed doubt and vncertaintie: when as after they haue beene well prepared, they know not what they receiue: the efficacie of the consecration being vnable to penetrate and pearce according to their doctrine in the Sacrament, without this intention and purpose: the man likewise not being able to pearce and see into the intent of the consecrating Priest by any meanes? Thus in seeking to giue too much to the worthinesse of the Priest, they haue taken away the effect of the Sacrament from God, who onely wor∣keth the same: and from the people the profit and fruit which should come to them thereby, Stella clericorū. and for which it was ordained. And all this, that they might be honoured in the dispensation of the mysteries of God, more then God himselfe, more then the Creator: whose Creators and makers, since the time of the entring of the doctrine of transubstantiation, they haue not beene ashamed to professe themselues to be. Now the old Church had neuer any such doctrine: they did not at any time once thinke of calling of Christ out of heauen by multitude of wordes: What is meant by consecra∣ting they did attribute the com∣munion of the bodie of Christ, to the institution of our Lord, to the operation of the holy Ghost, and to the faith of the faithfull. To consecrate in their language was to sanctifie that is, to blesse: that is, to change a thing from the common vse, to a holy: and from a profane, to a sacred: which is accomplished by the word, that is to say, by the institution of the Lord, which giueth it his efficacie. Thus speaketh Saint Cypri∣an ordinarily: That the bread and the wine of the holy Supper are sanctified by the word. And S. Augustine expoundeth it saying: Not for that it is spoken, but for that it is belieued: not the sound that fleth away, but the permanent and abiding power, that is to say, the operation of the spirit of God, &c. After the same manner haue all the ancient fathers written: as S. Hillarie, Isidor. l. 6. Ambrose, Ierome, Gregorie, &c. Isidore in like sort: By the commandement of Christ we call his bodie and his bloud, that which is sanctified of the fruites of the earth, and made a Sacrament by the inuisible operation of the spirit of God, &c. In which sence the pro∣phane Authors vsed also the word Consecration. Promiscui vsus. Cornelius Fronto saith, Consecrated, that is, that which is made holy, or turned to a holy vse, being before prophane, that is to say, of a common vse.
But God forbid that our Lord should make the communion of his bodie which he offereth vnto vs, subiect either to the sound of words, or to the intent & mind of him that vttereth them. The ministers as were also the Apostles, are made for the church, & not the church for them: yea they are the ministers, and not the Lords thereof: they are not dispensers of their owne mysteries, but of Christs; & yet which is more, not of Christes mysteries, but of the signes of his mysteries onely: 1. Cor. 13. no more then they are of faith, which commeth of the hearing of the worde, notwithstanding that they mini∣ster the word to vs: God hauing reserued vnto himselfe the gift of faith to worke the same by the effectuall power of his spirit, as a dispensation only from his grace: being no more depending on him that ministreth, then tied to the signes which hee mini∣streth, &c. God verily saith to Moses: And thou shalt sanctifie it, &c. Leuit: 3. August. in quaest. in Leui. But he saith also in another place: I am the Lord which do sanctifie it. S. Augustine demandeth thereupon: How can it be that both the Lord and Moses should do it? Verily (saith he) Moses by the visible sacraments, by his ministerie: but the Lord by his inuisible grace, by his spirit, as that wherein li∣eth all the fruit and benefit of the visible sacraments. So Iohn Baptist, the greatest amongst those that are borne of women, saith the Lord, baptised with water, but the gift of the spirit was of Christ. And by the ministerie of Paul and Apollos many belieued, but the gift of faith, by which man belieueth, saith S. Paule himselfe, is of the Lord. 1. Cor. 3. Canon. vtrum de consecr. d. 2 Which thing the Canon also concludeth in expresse words: That the sacrament is not of the me∣rite of him that consecrateth, but of the word of the Creator, & of the power of the holy Ghost bringing all things to passe, &c. Seuenthly, It destroyeth the analogie & coherence of the holy scriptures: It destroyeth the analogic of the scriptures & faith. for how can it come to passe by taking that course, that after the example of Esdras, we should come to expound scripture by scripture; & by that key which S. Augustine giueth vn∣to vs to open the same: as to expound one place by many, and not in such a sence as is contrary to many: one obscure and dark place by many cleare ones: whereas the stic∣king to the words of one place, do ouerthrow the cleare doctrine of many others: and from this one also do gather nothing but contradiction and darknes. He that giueth vs his body, giueth vs also his bloud, the body and bloud alike precious; both the one and the other the price and ransome for our sins: and therefore the one & the other giuen in the same sence. Now the truth is that it is thus said of the bloud: Luk. 22. This cup is the new testament in my bloud: and this cannot be vnderstood of the cuppe but of the wine; namely, as S. Mathew reporteth and setteth it downe: This is my blood, Mat. 26. the blood of the new Testament, &c. If then there be a most apparant figure in the one, it cannot be excluded from the other. And as the one is resolued into these words: This, that is to say, this wine is my blood: So the other in these, This, that is to say, This bread is my bo∣die. And as it is said of the wine or cup: This cup is the new testament in my blood: So it may be said of the bread; This bread is the new testament in my body, &. And seeing again that according to their own sayings, the bread canot be the body, nor the wine the blood really, because they are two Jndiuidua (as the Logicians speake) predicated, and spokē the one on the other, we wil expresse them by the words of S. Paul, who hath not giuen any other thing vnto vs then that which hee hath receiued; neither yet taught vs any thing but that which himselfe had first learned of the Son of God: 1. Cor. 10. This bread is my body which is broken for you, that is to say, This bread which I breake is the cōmunion of my bodie: this cup or this wine which I blesse, is the cōmunion of my blood, &c. And if we yet doubt: but what maner of cōmunion is this? and how is it brought to passe? & how is this eating and drinking? &c. we must haue recourse to our Lord for answer and resolution: Ioh. 6.50. This is the bread that came down from heauē, to the end that if any man eat thereon he might not die; a liuing bread, a quickning bread, a bread of God which bringeth eternal life: My flesh saith he, & my blood are truly meat, truly drinke, which I haue giuē for the life of the world: & be it is that eateth & drinketh therof, that cōmeth to me, which belieueth in me, which dwelleth in me, &c. If this should offend you as it did the Capernaits, then learne & vnderstand, That it is the spirit that quickneth, & that the flesh prositeth nothing, that my words are spirit & life, &c. Neither is there any cause why it should be obiected here that S. Iohn speaketh
of the spiritual eating, How S. Ioh. c. 6 must be vnder∣stood. & not of the sacramental. For notwithstanding that he speake here of the spirituall, yet he ceaseth not to declare vnto vs the maner of the sacramen∣tall, to wit, vnder the Sacraments, the obiectes of our sences, the helpes of our faith, & yet spiritual. And thus haue the ancient fathers euermore vnderstood it, & haue serued themselues with this place of S. Iohn, as a Commentarie vpon the rest of the Euange∣lists; which haue collected and gathered the necessitie of the expounding thereof si∣guratiuely: also that the faithfull alone are partakers of the thing of the Sacrament and not the wicked and vngodly. But as the authors of transubstantiation did after∣ward more and more embrace the carnall presence, & consequently, that the wicked and vngodly did eate Christ, so began they lesse and lesse to admit in this matter and question, the authoritie of this sermon made by our Lorde: a sermon verily made some yeare or thereabout before the institution of the Supper: but as is manifest, an intended preparatiue vnto the same: euen as the talke and communication which our Lord had with Nicodemus concerning baptisme, was a preparatiue to Baptisme. There our Lord said: Iohn 3. If a man be not regenerate, that is to say, borne againe, hee cannot enter into the kingdome of God. And here: Jf a man eate not my flesh and drinke my bloud, hee can not haue life in him, &c. There Nicodemus was offended: And how can a man that is old be borne againe, can he enter into his mothers bellie, &c. And here the Capernaites: This is a harsh speech who can endure to heare it? And how can this man giue vs his flesh to eate? And many of his disciples alo, and that so greatly as that they went from him there∣fore. And there hee expoundeth his meaning to Nicodemus: Man must bee borne againe of water and of the spirite: That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that which is borne of the spirit is spirit, &c. And here in like manner to the Capernaites: It is the spi∣rit that quickneth: the flesh profiteth nothing, &c. Now Baptisme was formally institu∣ted after the speech had by Christ with Nicodemus: the signe added to the thing, the water to the spirit. &c. and yet notwithstanding the water did not change his na∣ture. This text likewise serueth not a little to the plaine laying out of the doctrine of baptisme. And in like manner after the sermon of our Lord to the Capernaites, the holy supper was instituted, the elements of corporall nourishment, ordained for Sa∣craments of the spiritual, &c. And then why should these signes change their natures? And why shall it not be lawful to alleadge this place, as well in the matter of the Lords supper, for the cleerer vnderstanding of the same, that so we may be enlightned, and made to discerne where our spirituall nourishment lyeth? And seeing that the insti∣tution of baptisme comming after, hath not at all made regeneration to be carnall, by the adding of the element therunto: why should the putting of the element to the eating and spirituall communicating of Christ haue made it carnall? Saint Augustine demandeth: The fathers. August. de consen euang. l. 3. c. 1. Seeing that S. Mathew, S. Marke, and S. Luke doe all of them make mention, how our Lord tooke the bread, blessed it & gaue it to his disciples, saying vnto them: Take eate, this is my bodie; how commeth it that S. Iohn maketh no mention thereof in this place? that is to say, in the rehearsing of that which goeth before the passion of our Lord? Verily saith he, It is a testimonie that our Lord hath spoken of that point a great deale more largely elswhere: and where then but in this sermon of Capernaum? Chrysost. in Mat. hom. 83. And Chrysostome saith: How came it to passe, that his disci∣ples were not much troubled when they heard this? Namely, these words: This is my bodie, &c. Verily saith he, Because he had handled the great and waightie points of this thing be∣fore hand, he laboured not to confirme that which they did alreadie vnderstand, &c. And a∣gaine; And he drurke (saith he) himselfe, least the hearing these words should haue said, what then? Doe we drinke blood, and eate we flesh? &c. For when he first spake of these things, ma∣nie were offended, onely for the wordes sake: to the end therefore that this might not come to passe againe, he first performed the action himselfe, that so he might take away whatsoeuer might trou∣ble their spirits, or perplexe their mindes in the communicating of the misteries. Whereby it appeareth, that those excellent olde fathers haue referred the place of S. Iohn to the interpretation of the holy supper instituted afterward: that is to say; that the eating which is ordained in the vse of the sacrament in the holy supper, is the same that with∣out
the sacrament is declared in that place: If then it bee spirituall here, let it bee so likewise there? And therefore let vs heare what the fathers say vpon the same. Ter∣tullian: Notwithstanding that he saith, That the flesh profiteth nothing; Tertul. de re∣surrect. carn. wee must gather the sence from the matter of that which is spoken. For in as much as they accounted his speeches to be harsh and intollerable, as if he had determined in deed to haue giuen them his flesh to eate, to direct and bring the state of their saluation, to the spirite hee did set downe aforehand: It is the spirit that quickeneth. Marke that he saith Ʋerily, which cannot be expounded and ta∣ken there for Ʋisiblie, but for Carnally, &c. Athanasius p∣on this place, Whosoeuer shal haue spo∣ken a word against the Son of man. De peccat. contr. spirit. whereunto by consequent we haue to op∣pose Spirituallie. Athanasius: The Lord disputing in S. Iohn of the eating of his bodie, and seeing that many were offended, said vnto them; what will this bee then, if you see the Sonne of man ascend and go where he was before? &c. It is the spirit which quickneth, &c. For be hath spoken there both of the one and the other; of the flesh and of the spirit: and hath distinguished the spirit from the flesh: to the end, that belieuing not in that onely which appeareth to the eyes, but also in the inuisible nature, wee may learne that those thinges which hee spake, are not carnall but spirituall. For to how many men should his bodie bee able to be sufficient meate, that so it might bee the foode and nourishment of the whole worlde? But to draw them from vnderst an∣ding of him carnally, he made mention of his ascention: and to make them to vnderstand after∣ward, that the flesh whereof he had spoken was a spirituall meate, and heauenly food, that he was to giue it them from aboue: For the thinges saith he, which I haue told you, are spirit and life: As if he said: My bodie which is shewed and giuen for the world; is giuen for meate, to the ende that it may be giuen spiritually to euerie one, and that it may become a defensatiue and preserua∣tiue to all in the resurrection vnto eternall life. S. Augustine expounding these wordes, August. in psal. 98. The wordes which I speake vnto you are spirit and life, bringeth in our Lord expounding those of the holy Supper in these tearmes: Vnderstand (saith he) spiritually that which J haue said: You shal not eate this bodie which you see, you shall not drinke that blood which they shall shed that shall crucifie mee: I haue recommended vnto you a certaine Sacrament, which spiritually vnderstood will quicken and make you aliue: Idem. tract. 27. in Ioh. and if necessitie require that it be visiblie celebrated, yet it must be vnderstood inuisiblie. Againe, What meaneth this saying, They are spirite and life: that wee may vnderstande them spirituallie, they are spirite and life: hast thou vnderstoode them carnally? they are notwithstanding spirite and life, but not to thee. And spiritually, that is to say, figuratiuely, mistically. Carnally, is as much as to say, literally, really. For saith he, Thou hast to obserue this rule: Idem de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16 If in the scripture a word or phrase of speech doe for bid thee some vile and wicked thing, or command thee some honest and good worke: that then it is not figuratiue: but if on the contrarie, &c. thou must then make account of it to be figuratiue. If you eate not the flesh, &c. it may seeme to command a trespasse, &c. it must needes then be a figuratiue speech, a phrase and manner of speech com∣manding vs to be partakers of the death and passion of our Lord; Cyril. Cateches. mystag. Idem in Leuit. l. 7. and sweetly and profitablie to call to our remembrance; that his flesh was crucified and pearced through for vs. S. Cyril Bishop of Ierusalem: If you eate not, &c. Not vnderstanding these things according to the spirit, they went away offended, supposing that he had inuited them to a banket of mans flesh. Saint Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria: If you eate not, &c. But if you bee the children of the Church and in∣structed in the mysteries of the Gospell: If the word which is made flesh dwell in you, &c. know that the thinges which are written in diuine bookes are figures, &c. For there is also in the new Testament and Gospels, the killing letter, &c. as he shall find that doth not spiritually apprehend the thinges that are there spoken, &c. and hee bringeth forth this place for an example. Theoph. in Ioh. c. 6. Whereupon also Theophilact though he were of that time wherein transubstantiati∣on was set vp, saith vpon this place: In as much as we vnderstand it spiritually, wee are no prophane deuourers of flesh, but rather we are sanctified by this meate. Againe, For that they vnderstood it carnally, he saith vnto them: That which I tell you must be vnderstood spiritually, and that is the way to profite thereby: But to expound and take them carnally, that profiteth no∣thing, but turneth into matter of grosse offence. Therefore he addeth: The words that I say are spirit, that is to say, spirituall: and life, that is to say, which haue not any thing to doe with any carnall thing, but bring eternall life. And if then with the consent of all the fathers this place of S. Iohn do expound &
make plaine the doctrine of the holy supper, and must be vnderstood spiritually: then also must those wordes of the institution be so vnderstood if we mind not to cause the scriptures to disagree and fight against scriptures, and one place thereof against ma∣ny places, yea and that one against it selfe: if wee will not violently go about to esta∣blish quite against all analogy of scripture the matter of transubstantiation, which yet is not of bread, into a bodie, but of I know not what, (as that which hath no name) into a bodie: not of wine into bloud, but of wine or rather of the cup into bloud, or rather into the new testament in bloud. If likewise wee will not haue the bread and wine abased or turned into nothing in S. Mathew, in S. Marke, and in S. Luke, after the wordes: and yet continue in their sound and perfect natures in S. Paule after the verie same: that is to say; If wee will not ouerthrow for the retaining of the litterall sence of one only word, the spirit diffused throughout the whole scriptures, and make the sacraments of the Church of Christ by the hardnes of our expositions more rawe and carnall then all those of the Iewish Church. These are the absurdities which accompanie the expositions of our transubstantia∣tors, whereas ours doth retaine the nature of all the sacraments, the agreement of the old with the new; of holy baptisme with the holy supper; of the supper of the Apostles with that of the Christian Church: and aboue all, the principal end of the same, which is the nourishment of the soule vnto eternall life by that consunction of the faithfull with Christ, as also of the faithfull amongst themselues, which it fostereth and cheri∣sheth, &c. It conserueth in like manner the truth of the humane bodie of our Lord, which the other destroyeth: the excellent dignitie of his diuine nature, which that abaseth: and all this by keeping the Analogie of the faith of Christ, and the harmony of the holy scriptures. CHAP. IIII. That the Fathers knew not Transubstantiation, nor the reall presence in the signes: And this is prosecuted vnto the time of the first Nicene Councell, the same contayned therein. NOw it is also very certaine, that such as hath beene the doctrine of the Church, not Primitiue onely, but also for a long time after, euen when corruption had entered this noble and worthie parte of the Church not hauing beene touched or defiled by the first: which thing wee shall bee able to proue from time to time by the Fathers: saue that we will not repeate diuers places before alleadged, as the course of our treatise hath caused vs to produce and cite the same. Saint Clement Bishop of Rome, Clem. Rom. constit. l. 6. c. 6. in the mysticall thanksgiuing that followeth the consecration: Father we giue thee thanks for the precious blood of Iesus Christ which is shed for vs, and for his precious bodie, whereof we make vp and finish these counterfeites and resem∣blances. l. 8. c. 17. Marke this word counterfeits, that is to say, correspondent figures: and that after the consecration; Himselfe hauing ordained it for vs, to the end that wee might shew forth his death, &c. Againe, in his liturgie after the consecration: We offer vnto thee O king and God according to thine ordinance this bread and this cup, l. 5. c. 61. &c. And in another place: The counterfeites (saith he) and mysteries of his bodie and blood, at which (say the Apostles, as the report is set downe by Clement) Iudas was not present with vs. l. 2. c. 61. And yet notwithstan∣ding such, because of the holy mystery whereunto they are consecrated: That he exhor∣teth men to come vnto them, as into the presence of a king. If this had beene the reall bodie of our Lord, would he haue made any other comparison then from himselfe? would he not haue said, that it was requisite to worship it as God? Ignatius: Ignat. in ep. ad Philadel. There is one flesh of our Lord, and one bloud shed for vs, one bread also broken for all, and one cup for the whole Church. How was it possible for him better to distinguish
betwixt the signes and the things, then by these foure wordes: flesh and bloud, on the one part, and bread and cuppe, on the other? Bellarmine would haue him to signifie by these wordes, flesh and bloud, his bodie stretched out, and his bloud shedde vpon the crosse: and by the bread and cup his bodie broken; his bloud shed in the holy Supper. But do we then eate in the holy supper an other body, then that which was stretched? and drinke we another blood then that which was shed vpon the crosse for vs? What other thing is this, then to take from vs all our consolation, all our glorie? And did not then the Apostles communicate Iesus Christ crucified? And what becommeth of the glorie of that great Apostle, who would not know or glorie in any other thing but him crucified? And what other thing els is this, but in most outragious manner to abuse the scripture? That he did not speake in the supper of his bodie broken with griefes vpon the crosse: but of his bodie broken vnder the Accidents of bread, not of his blood shed for our sinnes, but taken and powred out of the cuppe vnder the Acci∣dents of wine? which notwithstanding to be so, is proued; for that whereas it is said in S. Luke, shed for you, it is in S. Mathew, shed for many: for this cannot bee referred to the breaking or powring out, which is in the celebration of the holy Supper, but to that which was really made vpon the crosse. The same father also vndermineth and o∣uerturneth the very foundation of transubstantiation, by the nature of Christ: Ignat. cp. 8. ad Polycarp. Here below (saith he) is the race, but the crowne is laid vp in heauē: Christ the son of God, euen he who is not temporarie, that is to say, not subiect to any time, in time; inuisible by nature, visible in the flesh, impalpable, and such as cannot be felt with handes, and yet notwithstanding for the loue of vs, become corporall and palpable, &c. Iustinus Martyr compareth the bread of the Eucharist, Iustin. in dial. cum Tryphon to the cow which was sacri∣ficed in the old law, for them which were purged of the leprosie: He hath giuen vs (saith he) to celebrate the Eucharist in remembrance of his death (note remembrance) which he suffe∣red for them, whose spirits are purged from sin, to the end that we should render thanks vnto God. Again, He hath giuen the bread (saith he) to the end that we should beare in remēbrance, that he was made a bodie for such as do belieue in him; the cup to the end, that we shold yeeld him thanks, calling to mind the shedding of his blood. And in the second Apologie, Idem in A∣pol. 2. after he hath descri∣bed the whole ceremony of the holy supper; This meat (saith he) is called the Eucharist, wherof no man is to be permitted to be partaker but those which belieue that which we teach, &c. For we receiue not these things as common bread and drinke, &c. But as our sauiour hauing ta∣ken flesh by the word of God, hath both flesh & bloud for our saluation: so we are taught that this meate sanctified of him by the word of prayer, wherewith our bloud & our flesh are nourished by changing & alteration, is the flesh and bloud of the same Iesus Christ made flesh, &c. But Bellar∣mine doth arme and fortifie himselfe with this place; and let vs see how, This is not (saith he) bread nor common drinke. And who doubteth thereof, seeing it is sanctified by the institution of the Lord? But so it is, that it is bread & drinke, which is not become an accident, but continueth a substance: and therefore hath only changed his vse; and not his nature: It is sanctified from God by the word of praier: This is not then by the fiue pretended words of transubstantiues, but by the ordinary & common maner of pray∣ing made vnto God, according to his institution, & thereto all the people answered, Amen. And with this meat sanctified, Our flesh & bloud are nourished by mutatiō & change. Now it must needs follow, that this is either really or sacramentally. Really, dare they say so of the flesh & bloud of our Lord? And that sith Bellarmine himselfe denieth it. For thereupon saith he, it would follow, that the Eucharist should be the nourishment of the body, & not of the spirit, thē which there is nothing more absurd. It remaineth then that it is sacra∣mentally, & to giue place to his similitude; That as our flesh & bloud are nourished by the alteration of sanctified bread & wine turned into our substance: so are our soules by the flesh & bloud of Christ made flesh and bloud for vs, & communicated vnto vs, vnto a spirituall life by the operation of the holy Ghost, Idem expurg. p. 75. at the same instant that the signes are cōmunicated. Note that the Index hath not forgotten to note, that what∣soeuer Langus hath writtē vpon these places must be raced, because that he doth not therein acknowledge the doctrine of transubstantiation: And yet hee is a professed Romish Catholike.
Ireneus, Iren. l. 4. contr. haeres. c. 34. The earthly bread receiuing the name whereby God calleth it, is not any longer common bread, but the Eucharist, composed of two things, an earthly, and a heauenly: and thus our bodies receiuing the Eucharist, are not any longer corruptible, hauing the hope of the resur∣rection. Let vs ponder and weigh all these wordes: The bread taketh his calling of God; that is to say, by his institution, of common is made sacred: it is made the Eu∣charist, the same compounded of two things, an earthly, and a heauenly. Not then of the accidents of one earthly thing, and one heauenly thing: but both the two must remaine: the earthly, that is, the sanctified bread, appointed to a holy vse, and the heauenly, that is, the bread of heauen, the liuing breade, &c. that liuing breade, which of corruptible ones, maketh vs incorruptible, by the faith of the resurrection, & notwithstanding we as yet creepe vpon the earth here below, subiect to corruption: after the same sort verily, that the earthly bread becommeth heauenly, becommeth li∣uing vnto vs, not by any reall change that is made in his nature, but by the faith, in which wee receiue it, and by the vocation which it hath receiued of the institution. Whereupon Ireneus doth not doubt to say, speaking of the Marcionites, heretickes of his time; Idem l. 4. c. 34 & 57. How should our Lord haue iustly confessed, (that is to say, declared,) the bread, huius conditionis quae est secundum nos, of this earthly nature and condition, his body, & tempe∣ramentum caliis, that which was in the cup his bloud? Namely, if our Lord were not verie man? Againe; Taking the bread which is a creature, the Lord said, that it was his body, the cup his bloud, &c. And we say the same also, that is, sacramentally: And as for our aduer∣saries, Thom. p. 3. q. 75. art. 8. if they will haue it to be really, let them remember themselues of Thomas his Maxime; That it cannot be auouched in sound Diuinitie, That the bread is the reall bodie of Christ: but that it is an assertion of their owne, That the Catholike Church did neuer speak so, &c. For as concerning that which Bellarmine alleadgeth out of Ireneus against vs, How will they say, Rlatm. l. 2. c. 5. & 6. that the flesh falleth into corruption, and receiueth not life, which is nourished of the bodie and bloud of our Lord? taking it in such grosse manner, hee ought to call to his remembrance that which he said, handling the place of Iustine: That there is not a fowler errour, then to say, That the bodie and bloud of our Lorde; ordained for the nourishment of our soules, do turne and worke to the nourishment of our bodies. Clement of Alexandria; Clem. Alex. in edag. l. 1. The flesh and bloud of Christ, that is, the nourishment of faith & of the promise. Againe, That that which was blessed was wine, (and not Accidents,) he she∣weth it saying, I will not drinke any more of the fruit of this vine, &c. And againe, There is a double bloud of Christ, Hoc est bi∣bere, &c. the one carnall, by the which wee are redeemed, the other spirituall, by the which we are annointed. And, This is to drinke the blood of Christ, to be partakers of the incor∣ruption of the Lord, &c. Tertullian, Tertul. l. 4. ad∣uers. Marcion. c. 40. He made the bread which he tooke and distributed to his Apostles, his bodie, saying, This is my bodie, that is to say, the figure of my bodie. Where we haue to note, that by this Hoc, this, he vnderstandeth not an Indiuiduum vagum, as our aduersaries doe, but the bread: and not a bread either vanished away of it selfe, or transformed into an other nature, but a bread of a sacramentall condition and qualitie, in that it is the signe of the bodie of Christ, yea the signe of a true bodie, saith he: For there could not possibly bee any figure, if there were not a true bodie. And from thence he reasoneth against Marcion, which denyed the truth of his bodie. Againe, Come, saith Ieremie, let vs cast the wood into his bread, verily into his bodie, for God hath so reuealed it in our Gospell, (that is to say, Idem ibid. l. 3. c. 19. Idem aduers. cund. l. 1. c. 14. the Gospell of Saint Thomas) calling the bread his bodie, to the ende that from thence thou mayest know, that hee hath giuen the figure of his bodie in bread, &c. In bread (saith he elsewhere) Quo ipsum corpus suum representat, whereby he representeth his owne bodie. And not, In quo, as Bellarmine woulde haue it, which shoulde bee after his sence, Idem de resur∣rect. carn. Wherein he giueth his bodie present. He obiecteth a place like to that of Ireneus, The flesh is nourished of the bodie and blood of Christ, to the end that the soule may bee fedde or fatted of God: An ordinarie argument amongst the fathers to proue the resurrection; That God hath euidently shewed, that hee woulde saue the soule and the bodie, when as in the principall ceremonies of the Church, hee hath alwayes ioyned
them together, as in the Eucharist; giuing the Sacrament to the bodie, & the grace to the soule: and sometimes they speake hyperbolicallie. But let him here againe call to minde that which he lately said, That to take it so, would make a maruellous grosse error. And then that he must vnderstande it sacramentally; which is as much as to say, ex∣pounding Tertullian by himselfe, by these words, contained in the same booke; Idem ibid. c. 37. Al∣though our Lorde saide, that the flesh profiteth nothing, yet wee must bee carefull to make the sence answerable to the matter there spoken of; for they accompted his wordes hard, as if hee had verily determined to haue giuen them his flesh to eate: To the end therefore, that he might settle the estate of saluation in the spirit, he hath mentioned before, how that it is the spirite that quic∣keneth, &c. Verily, saith Pamelius, that is to say, rawlie. From what place may not a man bee able to escape and defend himselfe from, if such figures be receiued in dispu∣tations? Origen giueth vs these Maximes, which doe quite ouerturne transubstantiation; Orig. in Mat. c. 15. That which is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, doth not sanctifie of it owne nature him that vseth it, Againe: This meate also thus sanctified, as concerning his materiall portion, go∣eth downe into the bellie, and from thence into the draught: according to that which our Lord hath said: That which entreth in at the mouth goeth downe into the bellie, and is cast out into the draught, &c. What can a man imagine that may be spoken more cleare∣ly? If as some doe, a man would say that hee speaketh not of the Eucharist; it appea∣reth to the contrarie by these words taken out of Saint Paule, handling this matter a∣gainst them which, did abuse it: And therefore many are weake amongst you, &c. 1. Cor. 11. If any man say with Bellarmine, that by the matter which goeth into the draught, is vnder∣stood the accidents, what Grammer, or what Rhetoricke did euer teach this figure, which taketh the matter for the accidents? What is it then (saith hee) that profiteth in this meate? Ʋerily, not the matter of bread, but the word spoken ouer the same, to him that ea∣teth it worthily: And these thinges are spoken of his figuratiue and symbolicall bodie, &c. Of this meate which whosoeuer shall eate, he shall liue for euer, which no wicked man can eate, &c. Againe, Wee drinke the blood of Christ not onely in the ceremonie of the Sacramentes, Orig. in Nu∣mer. hom. 16. In Mat. c. 26. but al∣so when we receiue his wordes, wherein life consisteth: according to that which himselfe hath said: The wordes that I haue said vnto you are spirite and life, &c. And expounding the same wordes of the holy Supper, This bread which the worde of God confesseth to bee his bodie, is the nursing worde of our soules, &c. But saith Bellarmine, Idem in Exod. hom. 13. Idem hom. 5. in diuers. euang. loc. So that wee take heede (saith he) that wee let not any part of the consecrated gift to fall. And what is that which wee doe not our selues for the reuerence due vnto the Sacramentes? And that re∣ceiuing the breade of life and the cuppe, wee ought humblie to cast downe our selues, and say with the Centurion: Lord I am not worthie that thou shouldest enter vnder my roofe, &c. This roofe I aske them in conscience what it is? whether it be our bellie or our soule? seeing it is our soule and not our bellie, that must be humbled. Saint Cyprian: The Lord calleth his bodie, bread made vp of many cornes: and his blood, Cypr. l. 1. ep. 5. wine pressed out of manie grapes: Then Hoc, that is to say, This bread, this wine, against our aduersaries. And in another place he yeeldeth the reason: Idem de vnct. Chrismat. Idem l. 2. cp. 3. Because that in the ta∣ble of the Lord, the thinges signifying, and the signified, are called by the same name. He saith not because, that the signe is transformed into the thing, or that the thing taketh the place of the signe. Againe, The bloud of him by whome we are redeemed and quickned, can not bee seene, seeing the wine is not in the cuppe by the which the blood of Christ ostenditur, is shewed. A little after he saith, Exprimitur, is expressed: which is declared by the testimony and sacrament of all scriptures. Hee disputeth against them which vsed not anie thing but water in the Sacrament: contesting and solemnely affirming the necessarie and vnauoidable vse of wine: because that the proportion of the life and corporall sustentation, compared with the spirituall, is not otherwise well signified and re∣presented therein. And how then shall the argument bee able to maintaine it selfe, if there bee nothing but Accidentes? In his sermon of the Supper, (yet some doubt that it was not his,) Before these wordes this meate was not commodious for anie other thing, then to nourish the bodie: but after that the Lorde had sayde, Doe this
in remembrance of me; This is my flesh, this is my bloud: As oft as it is celebrated with this forme of wordes, and substance of faith, this substantiall bread, and this cup consecrated by a solemne blessing profiteth vnto life, and to the saluation of euerie man; the whole together be∣ing a medicine to heale infirmities, and a burnt sacrifice to purge iniquities. Note first, that he attributeth not the consecration to the fiue wordes, but to the institution. Se∣condly; That the wordes themselues, which they call Sacramentall, are not those which they determine of and affirme to bee; but, Haec est caro mea, hic est sanguis meus: In the third place: That faith is necessarie thereunto. Fourthly, That it euer con∣tinueth to bee bread, and the cuppe, blessed and consecrated, not transubstantiated. And fiftly, That they doe not chaunge their nature, the signes still continuing their power and vertue to nourish the bodie; and grace accompanying the same by the operation of the worde, to nourish the soule. This is that which hee vnfoldeth and layeth open in the same treatise in other wordes, which they faine would, but can not abuse to make for their purpose. The bread (saith he) which the Lorde set before his disciples, chaunged not in his figure, but in his nature, by the omnipotencie of the worde is made flesh. They stand and pitch themselues vppon the worde Nature, as if it were a substance, and not a propertie: and vpon these wordes, Is made flesh: whereas they ought to remember themselues, that this is contrarie to their owne doctrine, that the bread should be made flesh: but this matter shall bee made more cleare hereafter: As in the person of Christ, (saith hee) the humanitie was to bee seene, but the diuinitie did con∣ceale and hide it selfe; so into the visible Sacrament there is infused by an vnspeakeable man∣ner, the diuine essence. The diuine essence saith hee, and not the humane nature; the spirit then and not the flesh. And this vniting of the signe and thing doth not proceed, (saith he) to the consubstantiating of Christ, that is to say, to the making of him the same substancet but, vsque ad societatem germanissimam eius, but to a most strict and neere bond of societie. And then not to the working of any consubstantiation, neither yet transubstantiati∣on; but to a sacramentall vnion, which exhibiteth to euerie faithfull receiuer grace with the thing, the spirit with the flesh, the heauenly with the earthly, &c. so straitly linked, as that The thinges signifying and signified, as hee saith in another place, haue the same names. Bed. in Oct. Epiphan. Cyril. in Ioh. l. 2. c. 4. Ambros de iis  myster. . c. 4. & 9. sil. de spir. ct c. 15. m 6. According to that which Beda said a long time after him; That the nature of the bread and wine is translated into the Sacrament of the flesh and bloud of Christ, by the vn∣speakeable sanctification of the holy Ghost. And so speaketh Cyrill of the water in bap∣tisme, That it is reformed, and as it were moulded againe by the operation of the holy Ghost, in∣to a diuine nature. And Saint Ambrose, I know not therein the vse of nature, but the excel∣lencie of grace. And thus they all agree, that there is no transubstantiation in the wa∣ter of Baptisme; except, as saith Basill: Ex presentia spiritus, by the presence of the spirite. And Saint Ambrose, By the preaching of the crosse of our Lord, &c. And if as yet we stand in doubt of his intent and purpose: The Maister himselfe (saith hee) hath declared it: These words are spirit and life, the carnall sences cannot pearce thereinto, if faith come not there∣vnto; Christ calleth sometimes the Sacrament, that is to say, the signe, his bodie; sometimes his flesh, and his bloud, sometimes bread, &c. Bread in respect of the resemblance it hath in nouri∣shing: Bloud, by reason of the quickning effect: Flesh, in regard of the properties of his humanitie which he tooke vppon him, &c. Namely, for as much as common bread changed into flesh and bloud, procureth life, & the growth of our bodies: by the which effect so ordinarie vnto vs, the in∣firmitie of our faith is holpen: and taught by sensible argument, that in the visible Sacramentes is shadowed out and assured vnto vs the effect of eternall life, and that wee are not so much vnited vnto Christ by any corporall passing of his bodie into ours, as by the spiritual. And he expresseth this coniunction diuers waies: It mingleth not (saith he) the persons, it vniteth not substan∣ces, it associateth affections, & linketh wils together. Our Maister (saith he) hath taught vs to care the flesh, and to drinke the blood: and that by abiding in him, this abode is an eating: this dwelling in him, is a feeding: this drinking is an incorporation: this incorporation is an vniting of willes and affections vnto his obedience. As meate is to the flesh, euen so is faith vnto the soule, the worde vnto the spirite, &c. And therefore wee doe not sharpen our teeth to eate, but with a sincere faith wee breake the holy bread, and distribute it; wee distinguish and put
difference betwixt the diuine and humane nature, and notwithstanding we ioyne them together, confessing one onely God and man, as also being made his bodie, wee are coupled and vnited vnto him, both by the Sacrament, as also by the thing of the Sacrament, &c. And to conclude, Ambros. in ser. de Chris∣mat. In this table (saith he) whereat our Lord made his last feast with his Apostles, he gaue vnto them with his owne handes the bread and the wine: but hee deliuered his bodie into the handes of the soldiers, to be pearced through vpon the crosse; to the end that the true sinceritie and sin∣cere truth, being the more deepely imprinted in the Apostles, they might declare vnto the Gen∣tils, how the wine and the bread are the flesh and the bloud, and by what manner of meanes the causes agree with the effects, & the diuers names or kindes are reduced to one & the same essence: and the signifying and signified thinges are called by the same names: Censentur iis∣dem vocabulis shewing thereby that the bread and wine distributed in the holy supper, tooke their effect from the bodie deliuered ouer to the soldiers to bee crucified, according to that which our Lord said in giuing the bread; This is my bodie, that is deliuered for you. There falleth into this time the first Nicence Councell, out of which, The Councel of Nice Ex Bi∣biotheca Vati∣ana. procured out of the Popes librarie, there is one that citeth this Canon; In this diuine table let vs not be tied here below vnto the bread and wine set before vs: but lifting vp our vnderstandinges, let vs know by faith, that the lambe of God which taketh away the sinnes of the world, is set vpon this table, offered by the Ministers without any offering: and that wee receiuing truely his precious bodie & bloud, doe belieue that they are , the badges, markes, or ensignes of our resurre∣ction. And this is the cause why wee take not much, but a little; that we may know, that it is not for to fill our bodies, but to sanctifie vs. This Canon is intituled, Of the holy Table, and of the mysterie of the bodie and blood of our Lord, which is celebrated in the same. Now the holy Table is the holy Supper, which consisteth of the signe and grace, wherein hea∣uen and earth are ioyned and coupled together: and againe euerie mysterie must bee mystically expounded. In this table then saith he, that is to say, in the holy supper, we haue bread and a cuppe. But let vs not (saith he) settle our eyes thereupon; It is too base a thing for the faithfull: but let vs haue our mindes and spirites carried vp on high, that is to say, from the signes to the grace, and from the minister to God. Vpon the materiall Table, wee see nothing but bread and a cup, and the bread, true∣ly bread, a cup, and that truely a cuppe: but vppon the table of the Lord, that is to say, in the holy supper wee are to exercise our vnderstanding by faith, that is to say, not to see, but to belieue: That the lambe which taketh away the sinnes of the worlde, is there offered, is there eaten: Offered saith he, without being offered, that is to say, as the Canon expoundeth it selfe mystically, for the Table is mysticall: C. iteratur. C. Hoc est. D. 2. de consecr. Non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio: And therefore eaten without being eaten: and yet truely sacrificed and truely eaten: in asmuch as wee beleeue, and call to minde there, that hee hath beene sacrificed for vs, in as much also as we are certaine, that we are partakers of this sacrifice which is ours, that his flesh is our meate vnto our re∣surrection vnto eternall life: for he hath said vnto vs, that he hath giuen it for vs. The Councell therefore hath saide, truely, because there is nothing more true, then the promise of God, nothing more certaine, then his effect when it is receiued in faith: and notiwthstanding that the bread and the wine are but tokens or signes, to the ende that following the exhortation accustomed in the olde liturgies, Sursum corda, , Life vp your harts on high, &c. We may waite and looke for the receiuing of our spirituall food at the hand of God, and not at the hand of man: yea we lift them vp verie high, and farre aboue these signes and this table: before which if the doctrine of our aduersaries at that time had had any place, the Councel should haue said vnto vs, as they say at this day: Cast your selues downe before this table; settle and fixe your eyes vpon your God, that descendeth & commeth downe vpon it, see that you kneele downe vnto and worship him there. Saint Athanasius, which was of this time, Athanas. de verbo. quicun∣que dixcrit. &c. will manifest and make cleare the pur∣pose of this Councell: I haue seene (saith hee) the like Character in the Gospell of Saint Iohn, where the Lorde entreating of the cating of his bodie, and seeing that manie were offended thereat, speake in this sorte: Doth this thing offend you? what will you say then, if
you see the Sonne of man ascend and go vp to the place where he was afore time? It is the spirite which quickeneth, the flesh profiteth nothing, &c. For hee hath spoken here of the one and the other: of his flesh and of his spirite: and hath distinguished the spirite from the flesh, to the and that beleeuing not onely that which appeareth vnto the eyes, but the inuisible nature also, wee might learne that the thinges which hee spoke, are not carnall but spirituall. Where wee shall marke, that hee expoundeth these wordes of the Councell: Let vs not settle our minds vpon the signes set before vs, but let vs vnderstand and know by faith, &c. By these, That we beleeue not that onely which appeareth vnto the eies, &c. Hee addeth, For to what an infinit multitude of men should his bodie haue become sufficient meate, being ordained to bee the foode of all the world? shewing thereby that wee must alwaies iudge and make ac∣compt of the bodie of Christ, as of a true bodie. And in this sence the Councell said: This is the cause why wee receiue in a small quantitie, &c. Seeing the scope and drift of the action is the sanctification of the spirite, and not the filling of the bodie. And afterward, And therefore he made mention of his ascention into heauen; thereby to draw them backe from vnderstanding of him corporally; and to the end, that from thence forwarde, they might learne, that the flesh whereof he had spoken, was a heauenly and spirituall meate, which hee must gie them from aboue. Whereby wee learne, that this eating must in such sorte bee vnder∣stoode, as that it euermore include the truth of Christes bodie, and of his locall as∣cention: For (saith he) that which I haue spoken vnto you is spirit and life: as if he said; This bodie which is shewed and giuen for the world, shall bee giuen for meate, to bee attributed to euerie one spiritually, and to be made vnto them a defensatiue and preseruatiue, vnto the resur∣rection of eternall life. Setting against the badges and notes which the Councell had spoken of, the spirituall distribution of this celestiall meate, that is to say, the thing it selfe. And this is the cause why in another place he calleth it, The mysticall table, as the Councell, The holy Table. At which saith he, Who so is partaker doth enter into the companie of God: that is, such as receiue the thing signified by the Sacrament, that is to say, the inward grace. The thing then contrarie to the doctrine of our aduersaries, is not receiued by the wicked and vngodly, as those that neuer come in the company of God: neither then is it receiued, by the hand either of the faithfull, or of the mi∣nister, incorporated with the signe, &c. For as concerning the place, that Bellarmine alleadgeth of Athanasius, Thedor. dial. 2 ex orat. Athan. de fide. cited by Theodoret, where he saith: That it is saide of the true bodie, Sit thou at my right hande: Likewise, This is my bodie which is deliuered for you, and that by this bodie, he was made our high priest, &c. It is to good purpose against those hereticks that denie the truth of the humane nature of our Lord: but not against vs, as also it is still to this day, against the maisters of transubstantiation, which destroy the same. S. Hillarie, In C. Corpus Christi de con∣secrat. d. 2. Bishop of Poictiers of the same time, cited by Gratian; The bodie of Christ which is taken from the Altar, is a figure, in that the bread and wine are seene outwardly: but truth, in that the bodie and blood of Christ are receiued inwardly in truth. Others attribute this to Hillarie Bishop of Rome. Againe, We doe verily receiue vnder a mysterie, the flesh of his bodie; and therefore we shall be one with him. And, To the end that he may be belieued to be in vs by the mysterie of the Sacraments. And againe, There is no place to doubt of the truth of the bodie and blood of Christ: for both by the profession of our Lorde himselfe, and by our faith it is truelie flesh, and truely blood, which being eaten and drunken, doe bring to passe, that Christ is in vs, and we in him. Now wee are to note the figure opposed and set against the truth: the mysterie against the reall presence: & the profession of our Lord ioyntly with our own faith, for the making of vs partakers of this truth, being the effect which followeth of the coniunction of the partakers of this truth with Christ: from which coniunction the wicked are excluded: and therefore also from the receiuing of this truth, Hilar. in Mat. c. 30. & l. 8. de Tri∣nitate. which is accomplished by faith: & therefore the reall chaunge can take no place there. And in deed, elsewhere he saith plainly; That Iudas did not sup with our Lord: For (saith he) he could not drink there with him, which should not drinke with him in his kingdome, seeing that he promised to al thē that drunk then of the fruit of this vine, that they should drinke afterward with him. The same that S. Clement hath said vnto vs before, from the report
of the Apostles. Note, of the fruit of this Vine; & not of the accidents of wine, & not of the bloud of Christ really, but Sacramentally. But they obiect a place vnto vs, where∣in I heartily wish more conscience in them, and vnto the Reader, that he would take the pains to reade it through, for the better obseruing of the rule of this same Doctor therein: That the things which are said, must bee vnderstood by the causes that mo∣ued and procured such things to be said. So (saith he) the word was truely made flesh, Idem ibid. and we as verily and truly doe receiue the word flesh, by the meate of the Lord: How can we but iudge that he abideth naturally in vs? Where they vnderstand, by Cibum Domini, The meate of the Lord, the Eucharist; and by abiding or dwelling naturally in vs, to receiue the bodie of Christ really at our mouthes. And these are the points which we are to examine. Saint Hillarie dealeth here against the Arrians: The Father (saith S. Hillarie) and the Sonne are one. Euen so said they, but yet so one, as we are one with Christ. Now that we are one with Christ, it is of his free will, not of our nature: and in will, not in nature, the Fa∣ther and the Sonne are also one. Saint Hillarie then to proue vnto them, that the Fa∣ther and the Sonne were one in nature; proueth vnto them that we are one in nature with Christ: and he handleth it after this sort: First, that there is the same humane na∣ture in Christ and in vs, by the incarnation of the Sonne of God, which he calleth the Sacrament of perfect vnitie, the Sacrament of flesh and bloud; and by which, Natura∣lis communionis propriet as nobis indulgetur, The propertie of the naturall communion is giuen vnto vs by our Lord: Vsing the word Sacrament, for the Mysterie in the worke of the in∣carnation; as it is his ordinarie vse to doe: a manner of speech, verie familiar at that time, as we reade in the conference betwixt the Catholiks and Donatists; where Mar∣celline, who did sit as President and chiefe Iudge for the Emperour Honorius, doth sweare, By the misterie of the Trinitie, and by the Sacrament of the Lords incarnation, &c. In the second place; that besides this nature, which the faithfull and vnfaithfull are alike partakers of with our Lord, there is a special and more particular coniunction, which is wrought by the spirit of Christ dwelling in the faithfull, which regenerateth, quick∣neth, sanctifieth, maketh them conformable vnto him, and transformeth them into him: for proofe whereof he alleadgeth the 6.14. and 17. of S. Iohn, which our aduer∣saries will not denie to belong to the spirituall eating of the faithfull onely. And this he maketh more cleare when hee addeth; that the cause of our life, is by Christ dwel∣ling naturally in vs, by his fleshe vniting vs vnto himselfe, and by himselfe vnto God the father: That Christ is in vs, by the truth of his nature: that hee dwelleth in vs na∣turally, we being made by this most strait bond of vnion, flesh of his flesh, sucking our life from his spirit. And this he further declareth by sundrie sorts of speeches, tending all to one sence and meaning: That we communicate his flesh: To mingle in vs the nature of his flesh: To be naturally in vs and we in him. And this our aduersaries themselues wil con∣fesse, that it cannot be said of the vngodly, and by consequent that it cannot apper∣taine to the Sacramentall or orall eating, that is to say, to the eating of the mouth. Ad hereunto: that he which saith, that he is naturally in vs, saith also; Hilar. de Tri∣nit. l. 8. That we are naturally in him. But naturally we are not in him, as being in him carnally or really, but as graf∣ted by faith into his body: so neither is Christ by this argument, carnally and corpo∣rally in vs. Thirdly he alleadgeth vnto vs as a testimonie of his holy vnion, the supper of our Lord when he saith, that we receiue verily and truely the word flesh, Cibo Domi∣nico, By the meate of the Lord, that is to say, the flesh of the word, the word incarnate, the flesh of the Sonne of God, by the instrument of the bread of the Eucharist, that is, be∣cause it is a Sacrament exhibiting this flesh, exhibiting the grace represented by the signe, which consisteth in this vniting of vs with Christ. The same which he calleth, Sub mysterio, Christi carnem sumere, To receiue the flesh of Christ in a misterie; that is to say, signified in this misticall pledge. And thus all this maketh nothing for the matter of bread, or the Indiuiduum vagum, transubstantiated into the body: For otherwise it would fall out that throughout all Saint Hillarie his discourse, Christ should be auou∣ched and taught to abide in the bread naturally and corporally. And if corporally and naturally; then verily contrarie to the nature and properties of a body; yea contrarie
to the cōdition of those which S. Hillarie acknowledgeth to be in the body of Christ. For saith he in an other place: He taketh away the foolish & sottish rashnesse of some, who con∣tend that our Lord was seene in the flesh, Idem in Psal. 137. in the shape of a counterfeit body, &c. Not remembring themselues, that after the Resurrection of the body, it was said to the Apostles, who thought it had beene a spirit: See my hands & my feet, &c. And by a false or counterfeit body he meaneth one, that hath not all the ordinarie conditions of a body: For in an other place ex∣pounding these words: The Sonne of man which is in heauen, &c. hee euidently putteth difference betwixt the natures in Christ; Idem de Tri∣nit. l. 10. Idem in Psal. 14 & l. 8. de Trinit. by finite and infinite, being in one place, and being euerie where, &c. That he is the Sonne of man (saith he) it is of the birth and bringing forth of that flesh, which he tooke of the Ʋirgine: That he is in heauen, and yet neuerthelesse vpon earth, it is through the power of that nature which abideth for euer. Againe; Hee is present to them which call vpon him faithfully, but by his diuine nature, and spirit that pearceth and containeth all things: He is in vs, but we haue to vnderstand that this is by the holy Ghost, &c. And after the same manner hee expoundeth the place: I am with you vnto the end of the world, &c. And thus wee are come without any Transubstantiation or doctrine comming neere therunto, euen to the time of the first generall Councel of Nice, including it within the same. CHAP. V. The continuance of the beliefe of the Fathers of the Church, in the matter of the holy sup∣per, from the first Nicene Councell, vnto the time of Gregorie the great. LEt vs proceede according to the order of time, and succession of the Fa∣thers. Dionvs. Hie∣rarch. l. 3. Saint Denis pretended the Areopagite, (for we haue said, that he may seeme to haue liued about this time) did not otherwise vnderstand it. After (saith he) that the Bishop hath declared the workes of Iesus, for the sal∣uaetion of mankind, according to the good pleasure of his father, &c. and that hee hath preached the reuerend contemplation of the same, which is apprehended by the vnderstan∣ding, he taketh his way to the Symbolicall administration of the same, and that according to the holy institution of God: whereupon first crying vnto him: Thou hast said it, Doe this in remem∣brance of me: he administreth the sacred things, and setteth in open sight, the things whereof hee hath preached, by the pledges presented there in holy sort, &c. Againe; By these venerable and reuerend signes (saith he) Christ is signified and receiued, &c. Where we may briefely note: That the holy supper is celebrated, according to the institution of the Lord, and in remembrance of him: That this is a Symbolicall, that is to say, a shadowing and figu∣ratiue administration of the redemption of mankind, represented by the signes of bread and wine, the tokens of his bodie broken, and of his bloud shed for vs: That this institution is not tied to the fiue words, where to our aduersaries would referre it: for hee maketh mention by name of others: Thou hast said it, &c. And that these signes doe signifie Christ vnto vs, and neuerthelesse exhibite him vnto vs, that is to say, his grace. Nowe what is there contained in all this, tending to prooue any car∣nall eating? They fortifie and beare themselues stout vpon Saint Cyrill, Cyril. Cate∣ches. mystag. 4. &. 5. Bishop of Ierusalem: but let vs see vpon what ground: If you eate not my flesh, &c. The Iewes (saith hee) were offended, because they did not vnderstand those things according to the spirit, thinking that he had inuited them to a banket of mans flesh. This should suffice to raise and lift vp our minds a∣boue the reall transmutation: but this that followeth, seemeth to them to proue their opinion very strongly: Let vs holde it for a most vndoubted truth, that the bread which we see, is not bread, although the taste thereof bewray it to be but the bodie of Christ, and the wine, in like manner, &c. And why do they not call to minde and bethinke themselues well, at the least of their owne Maximes: That the Catholike Church neuer saide: That the bread was the bodie of Christ, &c. And therfore if they will haue S. Cyril a Catholike, they
must not haue him taken according to the bare letter. But yet let vs admit him to bee the expounder of himselfe: Consider it not (saith he) , as meere bread: for it is the body and bloud of Christ. And how? Verily (saith he) according to the words of our Lord, &c. And how so euer our sences may goe about to informe vs otherwise, yet let faith confirme vs therein; Iudge not of these things according to the taste, &c. Then it is bread and wine, and not accidents: but not naked and meere bread and wine, for they are Sacraments, and sanctified instrumentes of God, indowed & clothed with an other qualitie, that so they might cloth vs with Christ: And what they are more, that we receiue by faith: and that grounded vpon the words of our Lord: Namely, that his words are spirit & life. But haue they then either lost or chaunged their substance? Marke him yet further. Veri∣ly not any more then the water in Baptisme, wher of he speaketh in the same tearmes: Thinke not of this water as of bare and meere water: Namely, Because it is not any more wa∣water for drinke, saith Chrysostome: But the water of sanctification, &c. Chryrost. in Psal. 23. Cyril. Catech. 3. No more also then the vnction, or oyntment, whereof Cyrill saieth: You are annoynted with an oynment, be∣ing made partakers and companions of Christ. But beware that thou accompt not of it as of a meere oyntment: for as the bread of the Eucharist after inuocating of the holy Ghost, is no more common bread, but the body of Christ: so this holy oyntment, is not a bare or common oyntment, after that it is consecrated, but it is a benefit of Christs, which by the comming of the holy Ghost, hath a vigour and power of his Diuinitie. Doest thou then doubt, what this should meane to be no longer bare and meere bread? It is as much, as not to be any more common bread: it is as much as to say, consecrated bread. Doest thou doubt how farre this chaunge extendeth it selfe?  & si fiat : The oyntment, although it bee an instrument of the grace of Christ, is not changed in his nature: No more is the bread and the wine of the Eucharist, in theirs: though instruments sanctified of God, and exhibiting his grace. Idem Catech. 5. For (saith he further in an other place) this holy bread is called su∣persubstantiall; in as much as it confirmeth the substance of the soule: It descendeth not into the bellie, it goeth not into the draught, but it is distributed thorough out thee, throughout the whole man, for the saluation and profit of the body and soule, &c. that is to say, it goeth not in at the mouth of the body, but it is receiued by the mouth of the soule, distributed through all the veines of the same, vnto the resurrection of life. And againe, Idem Catech. 4. Drinke this wine in thine heart, namely this spirituall wine, &c. Saint Ambrose; This oblation is the figure of the body and bloud of our Lord, &c. This is not the bread that goeth into the body, but the bread of eternal life, which strengthneth our soules. 1. Cor. 11. Againe; Seeing we are deliuered by the death of our Lord, in remembrance thereof, in eating & drinking: we signified there, the flesh & bloud of our Lord, which haue beene offered for vs. Now what should this be, To be a figure, to signifie, to make mention of, or to haue in remembrance: but the same which we say, That the bread is Sacramentally the body of Christ? Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4. And that which hee saith himselfe, In the Sacrament is Christ? But some obiect from an other place, Peraduenture thou wilt say (saith hee) my bread is vsuall, (that is to say, common bread) know, that this bread is bread before the word of the Sacraments: but after the consecra∣tion of bread, it is made the flesh of Christ, the body of Christ, &c. Namely, by the consecration of the heauenly word, &c. What is there (saith Bellarmine) more cleare then this? But and if it bee so cleare a case, let him answere vs, why Thomas of Aquin, Thom. part. 3. Summ. q. 75. art 8. and all those after him, condemne this Proposition of Saint Ambrose: That the flesh or body of Christ is made of the bread: It being obserued saith hee, That it cannot be properly said, that of a not essence, an essence may bee made? &c. And if it cannot be said properly, must it not then needes be improperly? And who can or ought to make this impropernesse, proper∣nesse, better then himselfe? Therefore he addeth: But seest thou the efficacie of the word of Christ? And if then it haue such vertue in it selfe, that the things that were not, doe thereby beginne to be, as namely in the creation: Vt sint quae e∣rant, in aliud commutentur. How much more effectually shall it worke and bring to passe, that things be againe, that which they were before, and that they may bee changed into an other thing? Now then what meaneth this, To be that which they were, but to conti∣nue in their nature? And by consequent, To be changed into an other thing: but to change their condition & vse? Bellarmine taketh himself to haue plaid the tall fellow, when
he aunswereth, that Saint Ambrose vnderstandeth that they are the same that they were without, but not within. And is it enough to say so? But Saint Ambrose him∣selfe easeth vs of all these cauils in an other place: Ambros. de iis qui myster. initiant. The true flesh of Christ (saith hee) is that which was crueified and buried: Of this true flesh the Sacrament is a Sacrament, and our Lord doth proclaime it: This is my bodie, before the blessing of the heauenly words, an other kind is named: after the consecration, the bodie of Christ is signified: and before the consecration, ano∣ther thing is said: after the consecration it is named bloud. What is that then in Saint Am∣brose, by Saint Ambrose himselfe: The bread by the consecration, to bee made the bodie of Christ, the Cup his bloud? Euen to be made Sacraments, to signifie, to point out the bo∣die and bloud of Christ. But he must not plaie the wrangler here and say: That by the word Kinds, he vnderstandeth the apparant accidents of bread and wine, as the tran∣substantiators haue afterward said. For when he saith: Before the blessing of words, ano∣ther kind is named: by kinds, he cannot but vnderstand the substances of bread & wine: for are they not as yet, according to their owne speeches bread and wine? And againe this age of the world had not yet learned, that Accidents are called Kinds. But he doth yet further explaine himselfe, Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c 4 by the comparison of Baptisme: Peraduenture thou say∣est, I see not the kind of bloud: But (saith he) it hath the resemblance of it. And what manner of resemblance? For euen as thou hast receiued the resemblance of death, Viz. in the dipping that is in Baptisme: so hast thou drunke the resemblance of his precious bloud, to the ende that there may not remaine any horrour of bloud, and notwithstanding that it worketh the price of re∣demption. Againe, Thou thy selfe wast, but thou wast an olde creature, after thou wast conse∣crated, thou didst beginne to become a new creature, &c. Now wee are of this iudgement with our aduersaries, that there is not any Transubstantiation in Baptisme, neither in the water which washeth, Idem de sacr. l. 6. c. 1. nor in the creature that is washed. And this is the same, that is said in an other place: Thou tookest the Sacrament for a similitude or resemblance, but thou inioyest in truth, the grace and vertue of the nature: I am, saith he, the bread of life, that came downe from heauen, but the flesh is not come downe from heauen: Hee tooke flesh in earth, of the Virgine, Idem in 1. Cor. 11. &c. Againe, The Testament is ordained by bloud: bloud is the restimonie of the graci∣ous worke of God; for a figure of the same, we receiue the misticall Cup of bloud, &c. Saint Basill, What doe these words profit vs: Take, eate, This is my bodie? To the end that eating and drinking, Basil. de Bap∣tis. & in Moral we should remember our selues of him, who is dead, and risen againe for vs: And he that recalleth not to his memorie thus much, is said to eate vnworthily. And he maketh mention againe of the same in his Morals. In the Lithurgie attributed vnto him; like∣wise after the consecration: We draw neere (saith he) with assured confidence, vnto thy ho∣ly Altar, and setting thereupon , the resemblances of the holy body, and bloud of thy Christ; we praie thee, that it would please thee of thy mercifulnesse and great bountie, to cause thy holy spirit to come downe vpon vs, and vppon the gifts there vnfolded and laid open, and the same to blesse and sanctifie, &c. Now they could not before the consecration bee called resemblances, or figures; for they were but common bread and wine: wee are of the same mind, and further that they are so also after the consecration. And neuerthelesse they are so called by Saint Basill: Wherefore they are not really the body and bloud. Bellarmine of three aunsweres made heereunto, reiecteth two, and cleaueth to the third; That the body and bloud in the Eucharist, are signes of the body & bloud vpon the Crosse. May we iudge that Saint Basill had euer any such intent, that hee euer cal∣led the accidents, Gifts vncouered and laid open; that hee praied to GOD in the same tearmes, to haue him to send downe his holy spirit vpon the assistants, and vpon the bodie and bloud of his Sonne, and that hee would blesse and sanctifie them by him? &c. Is it possible without blasphemie? And after all, was it not more readie for him, to say simply: Wee set before thee the holy body and bloud of thy Sonne, &c. They obiect these words vnto vs; Basil. de Spir. S. ad Amphi∣loc. Who is he amongst the holy Fathers, that hath left vnto vs in writing the words of inuocation, at such time as the bread of the Eucharist and Cup of blessing are shewed. Men praied vnto them saith Bellarmine, and then they are not figures. But hee saith not, that they were praied vnto; but rather that God was praied vnto, at such time as men prepared themselues to be receiuers of the Sacraments: Namely, to this
end, that he wold giue vnto them, to present thēselues to the same, with reuerence, hu∣militie, repentance, an approued faith, &c. And frō this place they should rather haue learned: that after the consecration it is euermore bread, it is euermore a cup. But say they: wherfore should it be accompted rashnesse to touch thē there? For S. Basil saith: If such as present themselues rashly to the participating of things sanctified by men, Idem Serm. 2. de Baptisme. c. 3. lie open to such great and grieuous threatnings, what shall we say of him, that sheweth himselfe rash, and vnad∣uisedly carying himselfe against so great a misterie? Verily wee will say with Saint Paul; That he eateth and drinketh his owne condemnation, not discerning the Lords body. But wee may learne of the said Saint Basill in the same place; that such touching is not meant of the body, but of the soule. For saith he, By so much the more, as he is greater then the Temple, &c. so much the more is it to be feared, to approach & rashly to touch with an impure and filthy soule, the body of Christ, then to come neere vnto sheepe and Oxen, &c. Out of Gregorius Nyssenus the brother of Saint Basill, they cite a place, Gregor. de vita Mosis. but it maketh nothing at all for them; for hee intreating of the Manna, saith; The bread that came downe from heauen, which is the true mate, which is signified in this historie, is not a thing without a body: For how should a thing without a body, become foode and sustenance to a body? This would be to purpose against such as should denie the veritie of the body of Christ; and further can it not serue. But and if they should gather from it: that com∣mon bread, by consecrating may be made the heauenly bread; and the heauenly bread a body, to nourish our bodies, they should sinne many waies against themselues: for they will not graunt, that either the bread may bee made a body, neither yet that it entreth into the nourishment of the body: whereupon it remaineth that wee vnder∣stand this place, by the Councell of Nice: That the Sacrament, to become profitable both to soule and bodie, is made vnto vs a seale of the resurrection, &c. But will wee plainely know this Fathers meaning? The bread (saith he) in the beginning is common, Idem de Bapt. but the misterie hauing made it sacred, it is called, and is the body of Christ, and so the wine: and beeing things of small accompt before the blessing, after the same, which proceedeth of the spirit, they worke excellently. What then is there any transmutation of the substance? Thus (saith he) by the newnesse of the blessing, the same power, that is to say, of the holy Ghost, maketh the Minister reuerend, and seperated from the vulgar sort: for of one of the multitude of the people, which he was yesterday, he is sudainely become a Master and teacher of pietie, and a super-intendent of the hidden and pro found misteries: and al this without any maner of change made either in his body or forme. Thus againe the Altar is holy, and yet it is but a common stone, not differing from others that walles are made of; but this commeth to passe, by the dedicating of it to God. Let vs reason from thence; therfore neither the bread nor the wine are chan∣ged in themselues, neither in their bodies or formes, but onely in that of common ones, they are made sacred, and sanctified instruments of God, to exhibite vnto vs his grace, &c. Gregorius Nazianzenus; Eate the body and drinke the bloud without beeing confounded and doubting, &c. and denie not faith vnto the things, which are named of the flesh and Passion of our Lord, &c. that is to say: Bee not offended as are the Iewes and Gentiles, at the Crosse and infirmities of Christ. But say they, hee calleth it, Eating and drinking, &c. And who will doubt of that? We doe not contend about the thing but the manner. Verily (saith he) let vs become partakers of the Passeouer, and yet notwithstanding spiritually: Greg. Nazi∣anz. in orat. 2. de Pasch. although this Passeouer bee more manifest then the old: For the Passeouer of the Law, I speake it boldly, was a more obscure figure of a figure, &c. And then ours also is but a figure; but yet a more cleare and plaine figure. And in the funerals of his sister Gorgonia: Idem in fune∣re Gorg. If (said he) her hand had in any part clasped, and laid close hold vppon any thing of the representations and resemblances of the precious body or bloud of Christ, &c. Then they continued resem∣blances, that is to say, figures after the consecration. For otherwise who would be∣lieue, that these holy persons, more zealous verily, and bearing more reuerence vnto sacred things, then they of this age, would haue permitted these women to touch them thus with their hands, and so to carie & traile them vp and downe their houses.
Optatus doth agrauate the furious outrages of the Donatists in these words: Optat. aduers. Parm. l. 2. You haue broken downe the Altars, whereupon heretofore you haue offered, whereupon the vowes of the people, and the members of Christ haue beene carried, from whereof many haue receiued the pledges of eternall saluation, the protection of faith, and the hope of the resurrection: you haue broken the cups, the bearers of the bloud of Christ, &c. The Altar which is the seate of his bo∣die and of his bloud, &c. Who seeth not that all this must be figuratiuely taken; and that the first figures doe binde vs to the others? Verily, after the same manner that the members of Christ, that is to say, the faithfull and their vowes, haue beene carried vpon the Altar, that is to say, in spirit, in the same, the body and bloud haue beene set there also, the Cups haue beene the bearers, &c. And in like maner when he saith, The pledge of eternall life, the hope of the resurrection, what other thing is this then that which the Councell of Nice said, Pledges of our resurrection? And at the least of that which he saith afterward: What offence hath Christ done you, whose body and bloud at cer∣taine moments, dwelt in these Altars? They should haue learned, that this could not bee spoken or vnderstood, but of the vse & celebration of the holy supper, and that at that time they had not kept them in a tabernacle vpon the Altar, that they might be there still resident, and worshipped continually. And as little dooth that proue, Ephrem. l. de natur. Dei. ni∣mium scrutan∣da. which they alleadge of Saint Ephrem: Why seekest and searchest thou (saith he) for things that are past finding out? Thou wilt leaue off to be faith∣full any longer and fall to becurious. For whome may this saying better fit, then the em∣bracers of transubstantiation, for they haue vndertakē to examine these misteries, by Auerrhoes and Aristotle? But rather (saith hee) be faithfull and innocent, be partaker of the immaculate bodie of thy Lord by a most euen faith: Assure thy selfe that thou eatest the same Lambe whole and intire, &c. These things surpasse all admiration, he hath giuen vs fire and spi∣rit to eate and drinke, that is, his bodie and his bloud, &c. Fire then and spirit, which are not laid hold on or taken with the hand, but spiritually; but as hee hath said, with a most euen and vpright faith, &c. Epiphanius, Epiphan. in Anchorato. . We see that which our Lord tooke in his hands, as the Gospel reporteth it: That he rise vp at supper, that he toke these things, and how that after he had giuen thanks, he said, , this is mine, and this, and this: And we see that it is not either equall or like, either to the Image and similitude in the flesh, either yet to the inuisible Deitie, or to the lineaments of members: For this is of a round fashion and insensible as concerning power. There hee reaso∣neth how man hath receiued the image of God truely; but yet not according to the proper nature of the Diuinitie, but by grace, and hee alleadgeth for proofe thereof, the example of the Sacrament. Now then, how and in what manner is the Sacrament the body of Christ? Verily (saith hee) he would haue said, by grace: This is mine, this and this, &c. And no man doubteth of this speech: for who so belieueth not that the same is true, as he hath spoken it; he is fallen from grace, and from saluation. Where wee are to marke that Bellarmine leaueth out these words, As he hath spoken it, that so hee may applie them vnto the thing, and not to the speech. The reason then standeth, Man is the Image of God, not according to the proper nature of the Diuinitie, but by grace: so the bread is the body of Christ by grace, and not by nature: and man is regenerate in the image of Christ, not by ceasing to be any more man, but by being sanctified in Christ; so the bread is made the body of Christ, not by ceasing to bee bread any more, but by being no more common bread, by being made holy, by being made a Sacrament, &c. And this he declareth more plainely by the similitude of Baptisme: For (saith he) the vertue of the bread, Ephran. cont. haeres. l. 3. tom. 2. and force of the water, are made strong and powerfull in Christ, to the end that not the bread, but the vertue of the bread, might be made vertue vnto vs, and the bread is meate, but the vertue which is in it, is vnto vinification: So as water dooth not onely wash and make vs cleane, but is further made vnto vs, the perfecting of our saluation by faith, &c. Where he compareth the water of Baptisme, with the bread of the supper. Now in the water there is no chaunge or transmutation: And hee setteth the force and vertue thereof, against the element, and faith against the washing: that vertue which offereth the
grace vnto vs, that faith which receiueth it in vs, in whose soules the mysterie is made perfect, for it is made for them, and not in the Elements, which are made for vs. Chrysostome hath very loftie and hyperbolical speeches: Chrysost. hom, 60. & 61. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom in Mat. 14.83. In Encaeniis de Euchar. De S. Philog. Idem hom. 51 in Matth. Esay. 6. Hom. 83. in Mat. but we can haue no bet∣ter expounder of the same then himself, in examining the places, either in themselues or by comparing them one with an other: He saith therefore, Thou seest him, thou tou∣chest him, thou eatest him, thou settest thy teeth in his flesh, thou receiuest him into thee. Yea, but something then of the maner how I see him: Now, he is inuisible vnto me: How I touch him: Now, This is (saith he) with a pure and cleane heart: How I receiue him: Now this is, In my soule, how I set my teeth in him: Now these are the teeth of faith. No master of transubstantiation should bee so bold as to speake otherwise. After the same manner then I eate him, that is to say, Sacramentally, spiritually by faith. The hand of the Mini∣ster (saith he) giueth thee not the body, it is the hand of Christ that giueth it thee: It is not a man, it is a Seraphim with a pinsers, such as Esay saw: Suppose that it is the bloud that runneth out from his side: Draw neer then therunto with pure lips, &c. Yea again, but this then is that bodie and that bloud, in the same maner, that he which giueth them vnto me is a Seraphim, or Christ himselfe, after the same manner, that the burning cole is made vnto mee in this example the propitiation of my sinnes. There is no chaunge made in the person of the Minister, nor in the nature of the cole, neither therefore in the bread: And not∣withstanding we receiue the body, the assurance also of the remission of our sins: but after the same manner that Christ is giuen vnto vs, that is to say, spiritually and vnder a mysterie. And oftentimes he compareth the supper with Baptisme: with Baptisme I say, wherein by the agreement of both sides, there is not any transubstantiation. Hee hath said (saith he) this is my bodie: let vs belieue him without doubting or wauering, and let vs behold and looke vppon him with the eyes of our minds: for Christ his gift is not to be discerned with the sences, &c. So by the water of Baptisme which is sensible, he hath giuen vs regeneration, which is a gift to be receiued with the vnderstanding. And he addeth the reason: For if thou werst without a body, then would hee haue giuen thee these gifts bare and naked without a bodie, but seeing thy soule is ioyned to a body, he giueth thee to apprehend his giftes, by sensible things. But handling this matter of purpose, and that in these verie places, where it hath his proper seate, he is well furnisht and prouided to expound himselfe verie sensiblie: Idem hom. 46. in Iohan. My words saith the Lord are spirit and life, that is to say: We must vnderstand them according to the spirit, mistically, spiritually, and not carnally: And carnally (saith he) that is to say, simply, accor∣ding to the bare letter: Spiritually, that is to say, Idem hom. 17. ad Hebr. & hom 83. in Mat. Idem hom. 20 in Mat. by considering the Sacraments with the eies of the spirit. Againe; This sacrifice is the marke, signe, and figure of him, who was hanged vppon the Crosse: God hath prepared this table, to shew continually the bread & the wine in the Sacrament, according to the order of Melchisedec, for are semblance of the body and bloud of Christ. As our forefathers celebrated the Passeouer in remembrance of the myracles done in Egypt, so shall you celebrate this in remembrance of me. That bloud was shed for the saluation of the first borne, this for the sins of the whole world, &c. And as Moyses saith, this shal be an euerlasting remembrance vnto you, &c. So I, you shall doe this in remembrance of me, &c. I haue desired to keepe this passe∣ouer with you to make you spirituall. Therefore he drinketh with them, to the ende that they may not say, shall we drinke the bloud of a man? &c. Againe, Where the carrion shall bee, Idem. hom. 24. in 1. Cor. c. 10. thither will the Eagles resort: The Eagles (saith he) to shew, that it greatly standeth him vpon, that wil come neere to this body to pitch his flight in the highest and loftiest degree, and that he haue nothing to doe with the earth, that he looke vp vnto & behold the Sun of righteousnes: And that he haue the eye of his vnderstanding verie quicke and sharpe sighted: for this table is a table for Eagles to feed vpon, and not the Crowes. They are to thinke, saith he in an other place: Idem hom. 60. ad Pop. Anti∣och. Idem in Psal. 144.133. & in Mat. hom. 7. & 90. Idem in Ep. ad Caesar Mo∣nach. Idem in oper. impers. hom. 11. in Iohan. That they taste and feed on him, that is set on high & worshipped of Angels: They are to rise vp to the gates of heauen to looke vpon him, he filleth the spirit & not the belly: He distributeth the holy things vnto them that are holy: Thou maiest imbrace him, but it must be with a pure conscience, touch him, but by rising in thy spirit, & soaring aboue the heauens. But what is there in all this, that maketh for the transubstantiators? In the Epistle to Caesarius, ther is a doubt put, & yet it is an old one, The bread (saith he) before it be sanctified is called by vs bread, but after that it is sancti∣fied, by the grace of God, &c. it is thoght worthy to be called by the name of the body of our Lord, notwithstanding that the nature of bread doe still abide in it, &c. And in an other place; If it be daungerous to conuert sanctified vessels to priuate vses, there being not in them the verie bodie
of Christ, but the misterie of his body, then how much more the vessels of our bodies, which God hath prepared for his owne habitation? &c. Whether Chrysostome, Maximinus or some other were the Author of this booke: so it is that he speaketh, as was then the vse and custome, and according to the faith receiued in the Church. For as concerning that which Bellarmine saith, that a certaine disciple of Berengarius did insert it, it is as ea∣sie for vs to denie, as it is hard and difficult for him to proue. Saint Ierome speaketh not any otherwise: Hieronym. in Mat. 26. After (saith hee) that the Passeouer was accomplished, and the flesh of the Lambe eaten with the Apostles: he tooke bread which comfor∣teth the heart of man, and passeth forward to the Sacrament of the true Passeouer: to the end that as Melchisedec, Gods high Priest offering for a presiguration of him, had done; he also might re∣present the truth of his body. Bellarmine laboureth in this place to turne represent into present or offer: Idem ad He∣d. but S. Ierome will expound himselfe. If (saith he) the bread which is come downe from heauen, be the body of Christ and the wine his bloud shed for manye, for the remis∣sion of sins &c. let vs ascend with the Lord into this great hall, &c. and let vs receiue of him there on high, the cup of the new Testament; and there celebrating with him the Passe-ouer, let vs bee drunken with him, with the wine of sobrietie, &c. Then it is here below that it doth repre∣sent him, and on high, that it presenteth and offereth him. They replie: If saith he; The bread which he brake, and gaue to his Disciples be the body of our Sauior, then our Lord himselfe est conuina & conuiuium, both the guest and the feast; he which eateth & he which is eaten, &c. Not verily after the letter, for Belarmine would be loth to blame S. Ierome of heresie, and this is their heresie: That the bread may be the body of Christ. And therefore in a my∣sterie, Idem in 1. Cor c. 11. in a figure, for a remembrance, for a pledge, &c. And he himselfe also doth vse al these words: Hee tooke the bread (saith hee) and blessing it, as he should suffer, left it to vs, for his last remembrance; as he which goeth into strange countries, leaueth some one or other to∣ken of remembrance with his friend, &c. which he can hardly looke vpon without weeping. And this is in handling the matter of the supper. Idem aduers. Ioum. l. 2. C. de hac. quidem. de Consecr. D. 2. In an other place: He offered wine for a fi∣gure of his bloud, &c. for a figure of his Passion, to approue the truth of his body. And vpon Le∣uiticus: Of this oblation (saith he) which is maruelously made, for a remembrance of Christ, it is permitted to eate; but it is not permitted to any according to his own sence, to eate of that which Christ hath offered vpon the Altar of the Crosse. What becōmeth then of that which they say, that the very same is taken in of men at their mouthes? And what distinction shall it be possible for S. Ierome to make therein; But that that, that is to say, the Sacrament is taken and receiued with the mouth; but this, that is the thing is receiued by faith? And this is the same that he saith in an other place; In Ep. ad He∣dt. In Eccles c. 3 Idem in 1. Cor 11. In Esa. c 66. That all those that haue put on Christ in Baptisme, doe eate the bread of Angels: that we are fed with his flesh, both in the Sacraments, as also in the Scriptures: That they which haue had the same in such sort, as to bee fed therewith must haue a cleane and a new spirit: Comparing the receiuing of Christ in the supper, with that receiuing of him which is in Baptisme, and in the word. Againe; That the flesh of Christ is vnderstood two waies: Either spiritually and diuinely, whereof it is said; My flesh is truely meate, &c. Or for that which was crucified and pearced with the Souldiers speare. That then is the Sacramentall, that is to say, the Eucharisticall bread so called; for the straite vnion of the Sacrament and the thing, &c. And this the real, into which we are grafted and implanted, by the vertue of the holy Ghost, & crucified in it, to be glorified with it, &c. For as for that which our aduersaries say, that that is his flesh which cannot suf∣fer: and this his flesh that is subiect to suffering: they should remember themselues, how that this is spoken many ages after our Lords glorification, whose flesh, as they themselues hold, cannot any more become subiect to suffering. S. Idem ad Eph. c. August. q. 7. In Leut & ad Eund. cont. Maxim. l. 3. c. 22. Idem Ep. 23. ad Boac. Augustine commeth. We haue seene his Maximes heretofore, as so many prepa∣ratiues to the deciding of this matter: Hee said vnto vs: The fathers haue eaten the same meate that we in the Sacraments: and he gaue vs the holy supper for an example. Againe; The signes of eatimes take the name of the things signified, the Doue of the holy Ghost: the rocke of Christ, &c. He also giueth vs now the holy supper for an example: As (saith hee) secundam quendam modum, After a certaine manner, the Sacrament of the bodie of Christ, is the bodie of Christ, and the Sacrament of his bloud, the bloud: so the Sacrament of faith, is saith. Note; After a certaine manner (that is to saye) Per modum Sacramenti, suo
modo, sub mysterio; in manner of a Sacrament sacramentally, vnder a mysterie. If it had beene reallie, hee would not haue so spoken. And this is according to that which he saith in another place: That in the sacraments men are to regard, not what they are, Idem cont. Maxim. Ep. l. 3 c. 22. but what they demonstrate and signifie, because they are one thing, and do signifie another. Then they are al∣waies the same that they are, & for to signifie another thing, that which they are doth not vanish, neither become any other thing. And hereof hee taketh for example in S. Iohn, The spirit, water, & bloud. 1. Ioh. 5.8. And this is the cause why he admonisheth vs hereto∣fore to look wel to our selues, & beware that we take not the signes for the things sig∣nified, & that in the matter of Baptisme & of the Lords Supper, which he toucheth ex∣pressely & by name saying, Wherein we must obserue, what they haue relation vnto, August. de doctr. Christ. l. 3 c. 5. & 9. the more to reuerence them, not with a carnall seruice, but with a spirituall libertie. But seeing that we could alleadge & bring to this purpose all S. Augustine, we will content our selues to stand vpon those places that seeme most proper, & comming neerest to the purpose, Idem cont. Admi. c. 12. & in Psal. 3. In senten. Prosper. aswell for the one part, as for the other. The Lord (saith he) hath not doubted to say, This is my bodie, in giuing the signe of his bodie: He admitteth Iudas to the feast, wherein he recommē∣deth to his disciples the figure of his bodie and bloud. The heauenly bread which is the flesh of Christ is called suo modo, after his maner, the bodie of Christ, although in deed it be but the sa∣crament of that bodie which was nailed vpon the crosse, &c. Not (saith he) by the truth of the truth of the thing, but by a signifying mysterie. And to children, August. in ser. ad infantes. That which you haue seene is the bread & the cup, & your eies declare the same: but that which your faith (which is to be in∣structed) demandeth: the bread is the bodie of Christ, the cup is his bloud. And this notwith∣standing is the Proposition which our aduersaries do so deeply condemne. You wil say, yea but we know wel enough from whence he tooke his flesh, &c. He was crucified, &c. He sitteth now at the right hand of the father, &c. How thē is the bread his bodie, the wine his blood? These things brethrē, are called sacraments, because that in them one thing is seene, & another vnder∣stood? that which is seen hath a corporal figure: that which is vnderstood hath a spiritual fruite, &c. Wilt thou vnderstand what this bodie of Christ is? Listen & giue eare to the Apostle, saying, to the faithfull, you are the bodie and members of Christ, &c. And to communicate thereat, Idem de do∣ctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 26. Idem in Ioh. tract. 25. & 26. to eate the same, what shall we prepare for our selues? Not the teeth (saith he) & the bellie: Prepare the hart & not the mouth: beleeue and thou hast eaten. To beleeue in him, that is, to eate the bread of life, that is, to eate with the hart, & not to grinde with the teeth: He that beleeueth in him eateth him, he is inuisiblie fatted, seeing also that he is inuisibly borne again: (let vs alwaies note how he compareth eating with regeneration) then is the bodie and bloud of Christ life vnto euery one, Idem de verb. Domini in Luc. Serm. 33. Idem de verb. Apostol. Scrm. 2. Idem de Trin. l. 3. c. 10. when that which is taken visiblie in the sacrament is eaten & drunk spiritually, in the truth of the thing, &c. To eate, that is to be made againe: but thou art made a∣gaine, by making that againe which is not wanting in thee. Eate life, drinke life, thou shalt haue life, & euē that life which ceaseth not to be wholly vpright. And yet he saith in another place, That the bread that is ordained for this action, is consumed in the receiuing of the Sacrament. This bread then that is receiued in the holy Supper, is not that life: this bread is no∣thing els but the Sacrament. And again, This bread is eaten of many which do not eat life. Life then lieth not in this bread: it is from elsewhere, according to that which he saith, He in whom Christ dwelleth not, eateth him not: Idem in Iohn tract. 26. notwithstanding that he do shut vp within his teeth the sacrament, &c. but rather he eateth his owne iudgement, because of his rash presuming to approch vnto the Sacraments of Christ, being vncleane. Which thing we haue sufficiently handled before. Thus saith he, That the Christian soule heareth not in vain, Sursum corda, Idem Ep. 1 56. let your harts beset on high: neither doth it answere in vaine, That it hath it in the Lord. These were the words vsual in the seruice, & preparatiues to the receiuing of the Sacrament: Idem Serm. 152. de Temp. contr. Faust. l. 33. c. 8. Idem in Ioh. tract. 50. Idem de verb. Domin. in Luc. Serm. 18. & 33. & 64. Hee toucheth Christ, that beleeueth in Christ. He is come neere vnto, not with the flesh, but with the hart, not by anie bodily presence, but by the power of faith: send faith & thou hast hold of him: Thou canst not look for him any more at hand, for he is in heauen: look for him by faith, &c. It is not that which is seene, that nourisheth, but that which is beleeued: This is not that bread which goeth into the body, but the bread of eternal life that sustaineth our soule. Our eies are fed with the light; the eye of our hart with God, neither can the multitude of eies diminish or make him lesse. In like maner of Christ in the supper. If ther were great prouisiō & store of meat allowed thee for thy dinner,
thou wouldest prepare and make readie thy bellie: Thou art allowed, thou art esteemed of God: prepare thy soule. Now so many places, so plaine; and many more in the places from whence these are taken, shall they be deluded and defeated by some pettie and friuo∣lous distinction? They obiect these words in S. Augustine, Christ was caried in his owne hand: when hee saith recommending his body vnto his Disciples: This is my body. Let them put thereto that which is said afterward: Idem in Psal. 33.1. & 2. Ierm. And how was he carried in his own hands? Because that recommending his body & his bloud, he took into his hands that which the faithful know; that is to say, the bread and the cup, and so he carried himselfe after a certaine maner, saying, This is my body, &c. Now let them expound vnto vs, what is the meaning of this, Quodammodo, C. Hocest quod. De Consecr. D 2. Idem Ep. 118. c. 3 after a certaine sort, except it be Sacramentally: Or as the Canon saith, Im∣properly, not in truth but in a misterie: To the end (saith he) that the sence may bee. It is called the body of Christ; that is to say, it signifieth it. He compareth, say they, the deuotion wherwith it ought to be honoured, to that of the Centurion, who said vnto our Lord, I am not worthie that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe, &c. But to what purpose if we re∣ceiue but the signe? Where as we take the thing by faith, and the signe with the hand. As the Centurion receiued the Lord corporally, vnder this roofe, and spiritually and by faith in his soule: and corporally without faith vnto condemnation, spiritually by faith vnto saluation: according to that which Saint Augustine saith in an other place: That the Virgine is not vnhappy, Idem in ps 98. because shee did conceiue and beare our Lord in her wombe, but by faith in her soule. But he hath said, say they; Worship his footstoole, and thereby he mea∣neth his flesh. And of his flesh he saith: That no man doth eate it, that hath not first worship∣ped it. This is not then the bread. And who doubteth, that wee ought not to worship the flesh of Christ, vnited hypostatically to the Deitie? And that no man can eate it, which doth not belieue it, and that no man can belieue it, which doth not worship it; and that no man can truely worship it, except that hee belieue it? And is not this same against our transubstantiators, which teach that the wicked eate it? Of those I speake, which can neither worship, nor belieue it? But to worship it, is to worship it in heauen, and not in the bread: lifting vp our spirits on high, and not casting downe our eyes vpon the earth. And this is it that wee dispute: Not (saith S. Augustine) the signe that is seene, Idem de doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 9. and which goeth away, but that whereunto it ought to bee referred. But let them blush and bee ashamed, that they haue not added there to that which followeth: Vpon what ground so euer thou fallest downe to worship, looke not down vnto the earth, but vp to the holy one, whose foot stoole it is, Idem in Psal. 98. that is to say, the humanitie of Christ: And when thou worshippest him, let not thy thoughts rest in the flesh, and without being quickned by the spirit, for it is the spirite that quickneth, &c. And this is the cause why our Lord said to the twelue, &c. Ʋnderstand spt∣ritually that which I haue said: you shall not eate this body which you see: neither shall you drinke this my bloud, which they shall shed that shall crucifie me: I haue inioyned you by commandement to vse a certaine Sacrament, which spiritually vnderstood will giue you life, &c. Had it not therfore beene better for them, that they had left this place vnremembred? They cite an other place: That which is taken from the fruits of the earth, (saith hee) consecrated by misticall prayer, let vs take for the spirituall saluation, in remembrance of the passion of our Lord, Idem de Trin. l. 3. c. 4. &c. it is not sanctified to be so great a Sacrament, but by the inuisible operation of the holy Ghost. And what is there heere for any man to doubt of? As though there were no o∣ther operation of the holy Ghost but Transubstantiation? For is not regeneration in Baptisme, a marueilous worke also of the holy Ghost? Wherein notwithstanding the water in his substance receiued not any chaunge. But as for that which hee saith of the fruites of the earth, and that they are made a great Sacrament, they should haue learned, that for to continue Sacraments, they also continued fruites of the earth: and for to continue fruites of the earth, they did also continue Sacraments, that is to say, sacred signes of the grace of God. And such like, and lesse forcible to proue any thing, are these places following: It is one Passeouer which the Iewes celebrate as yet with a lamb: idem contr. li. Pet. l. 2. c. 37. It is an other which we receiue of the body & bloud of our Lord. And who denieth it? & euen since the true Lamb, which hath caused to cease the tipical or figuratiue; and which hath take frō it both the thing, and
also the Sacrament? Againe, In stead of all the old sacrifices, the body of Christ, Idem de ciuit Dei, l. 17. c. 20 is offered and administred to them which are partakers thereof. Or who doubteth of this point? And how oft hath it beene told them, that the question is of the manner? And in the end, Idem apud Y∣uon Carnut. Serm. ad Neo∣phyt Idem de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 16 they would find it in a place cited by Yuon Bishop of Charters: Take and receiuean the bread, that which was hanged vpon the Crosse, and in the Cup, that which issued out of the body of Christ. And what is this but the same that he said to the children, as here hee speaketh vnto Nouices, or new conuerted Christians? These things are called Sacraments because that therein one thing is seene, and an other vnderstood: Communicate in the passion of our Lord, and keepe fast in your memories, that his flesh was crucified and pearced through for you. And yet this place is not found in his workes, but alleadged by the said Yuon of Chartres. Let onely the sound Reader iudge here, what swaie or force these places can afford, amongst so manie others, by which they are most clearely and planely ex∣pounded. Cyrill, Patriarke of Alexandria, giueth vs these Maximes: Cyril. Ant. 12 Our Misterie is not an Anthropophagie, that is to say; consisteth not in eating of mans flesh: we must not set the spirits of the faithfull in the scrole of these grosse conceites; beeing occupied in things, that are receiued by a pure, exquisite and onely faith, &c. Christ entreth into vs by faith, and dwelleth in vs by the holy Ghost: for the holy Ghost is not separated from the Sonne, &c. Cyril. 3. c. 24. l. 11. in Ioh. Idem in Leuit. l. 7. Idem in Ioh. l. 3. c. 24. If thou stand perswaded according to the letter, in that which is said; If you eate not the flesh, &c. this letter dooth slate thee: but if thou be perswaded to vnderstand it spiritually, there is the spirit of life to bee found therein, &c. The only begotten Sonne of God, is the true bread, which giueth life to euerie thing. As the earth∣ly bread sustaineth the weaknesse of our flesh, so he quickneth our spirits by the holy Ghost, and de∣liuereth the body from corruption; that is to say, according to that which hath beene said so oft; to make vs partakers of the resurrection of life. Againe; This flesh, Idem l. 4. c. 14. & 16.17. or this body is made a∣liue, because it is by a certaine vnspeakable maner ioyned to the Sonne of God, by whom al things are quickned & made aliue. And hereupon when we eate this flesh, we haue life in vs; in as much as we be ioyned vnto him, in that we are the body and members of Christ; in that by the blessing of the misterie, we receiue the Sonne of God himselfe. And it is necessarie, if any man receiue the flesh and bloud of Christ, that he bee so coupled to him, as that Christ be found in him, and hee in Christ, &c. To eate then the flesh of Christ, with S. Cyril, is to belieue in Christ, it is to haue him dwelling in him, liuing in him by his spirit, to bee a member of Christ, and one with Christ, &c. And he that hath not Christ in him, doth not eate his flesh, neither yet drink his bloud, &c. How can this agree with the pretended eating of the mouth? They obiect vnto vs that he saith vpon S. Iohn; Idem in Ioh. l. 11. Wee are vnited and made one with God the Father, by the mediation of our Sautour: for wee receiue corporally and substantially the Sonne of God, naturally vnited to the Father; and thus we are glorified, beeing made partakers of the su∣preme nature, &c. which is properly spoken of the incarnation, which he calleth a mi∣sterie; as S. Hillarie a Sacrament. And withall let them not dissemble and passe ouer S. Cyril his Exposition vpon this sentence: I am the Ʋine and you are the braunches: which is in such sort as S. Hillarie hath expounded it before, and to the same sence: That the drift that Cyril shoteth at is very cleare and euident to them that will reade the place: And that as to be vnited to Christ according to the spirit, is to haue the spirit of Christ regenerating his: so to be corporally vnited vnto him, or according to the body, is to bee ioyned to his body, and to become members of his body, made conformable to him in this life, by the beginning of sanctification, and spirituall life, waiting and at∣tending till we bee perfected in him, that is to say, glorified in the celestiall life. Now saith hee, this vnion is made by faith, and cherished and strengthned by the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his bloud: and that he that eateth and drinketh them, is in Christ, and Christ in him, &c. Hee vnderstandeth then that this corporall and substan∣tiall vnion is wrought by a spirituall eating, by that pure and exquisite faith, which he requireth: and not by the corporall, which is common to vs with many drie & rotten members, euen the vngodly & infidels, of whom it cannot be said, that Christ is in thē, or they in Christ. And in deed he hath ther to deale against heretiks, which pretended Christ was not called a Ʋine, according to his humanitie, but according to his deitie:
He holding on the contrarie: that the faithfull are made partakers of the nature of Christ, as the braunches doe communicate with the Vine, by the participation of his spirit, Affii. &c. And this is that which he saith: That they are fastned to Christ, as the braunches to the Ʋine, firmely and substantially ioyned and glued to him by his spirit: That they are made braunches, in as much as they are regenerate, and in as much as the roote doth impart vnto them his qualities: They bring foorth fruit, in as much as they hang vppon the Vine, ioyned to the same by faith and holinesse, Idem in Ioh. l. 10. c. 13. and nourished and fed vp to eueie vertue, by his holy spirit, &c. In a word, altogether as he saith: That Christ is corporally in vs, in like manner saith he, as wee are corporally in Christ: Now our bodies are not corporally in Christ, but wee are grafted there∣into by faith: neither then is the body of Christ corporally in vs, but spiritually receiued by faith. Now of conscience, can this be vnderstood of an eating which is made by the mouth, or that can be done, but by those that are truely faithfull? So that in Cyrill to be cor∣porally ioyned, is not after the manner as they are wont vsually to take it in the Schooles, Ratione modi, sed ratione obiecti, that is to say to bee conioyned by the meanes of the body, but to be ioyned to the body. And in deed he declareth this con∣iunction by a place in the Corinthians, where the faithfull are called the members of Christ, that is to say, inseparably ioyned to the body of Christ: and not verily by the body, but saith he, by the mediation of his spirit: As also by that place of Saint Iohn, where wee agree, and are of iudgement, that it is spoken of the spirituall eating and not of the corporall. But I would intreate the Reader, to reade the whole place, that hee may the better iudge of counterfeited and cloaked dealing. They obiect in the meane time the Synod of Ephesus, wherein Cyrill was president: We come (saith hee) vnto the misticall blessings, and are sanctified, being made partakers of the holy body and preci∣ous bloud of Christ, &c. not receiuing it as a common flesh, which God forbid, neither yet as the flesh of a sanctified man, &c. but as that which is become the verie flesh of the word, or eternall Sonne of God. And who would haue them to doubt of this? But the question is not of the obiect of our Communion, but of the manner. And behold thus he expoundeth it: When (saith hee) they had heard: If you eate not my flesh, &c. they were troubled, &c. Be∣cause (saith he) they had not as yet bene made acquainted with the forme and most goodly admi∣nistration of this misterie: Idem in Ioh. l. 12. c 58. That is, as he saith to Euoptius: That we must not handle or deale with that which is not gotten but by pure and onely faith, according to the conceipts of mans braine: That the bodie of our Lord is not common, although the nature of the diuine word bee not eaten: That the participation of this misterie, is a true confession and remembrance, that the Lord is dead for the loue of vs, and that he is risen againe for vs, and that by occasion thereof, he filleth vs with his diuine blessings: Finally, that the operation of the Sacrament, is not wrought in the bread, Idem in Leuit. 15. or wine, but in vs, but in our soules. For (saith hee in an other place) the Lord saith: Take, eate, and not keepe it, reserue it till to morrow, &c. (And this is to bee noted a∣gainst hereafter, and for that there bee some that alleadge it vnder the name of Ori∣gen:) And that the effect thereof, is the dwelling of Christ in vs by his spirit: But (saith hee) he entreth into vs by faith. Theodoret, Theodor. dial. 1. who was present at the Councel of Ephesus and Chalcedon, decideth this question, dealing against the Eutichians, saying: Our Lord giuing the misteries, cal∣led the bread, body, and the wine wherein the sop had beene dipped, bloud. Then the Ortho∣doxe brought in, in that Dialogue yeeldeth a reason to the Erranist, that is, to him that disputed with him and maintained the errour, saying: Verily hee chaunged the names, gi∣uing to the body the name of the signe, and to the signe the name of the body. And that in the same manner that he called himselfe a Vine; he called the signe bloud. And againe hee giueth the reason: To the end (saith he) that they which are partakers of the diuine misteries, doe not rest themselues vppon the nature of things which are seene, but that because of the chaunge of the names, they belieue the chaunge, which is wrought by grace. For he that calleth his naturall body, corne and bread, &c. hath honoured the visible notes and signes, with the name of his bo∣die and bloud, not by chaunging their nature, but by adding grace to their nature, &c. Which is as much, as if he should say vnto vs; that, This is my body, This is my bloud, should be expounded by these wordes of the same our Lord: I am the bread of heauen: I am the
stocke of the vine, &c. In an other place; Idem Dial. 2. The mysticall signes (saith the Orthodoxe) which are offered to God by the ministers of God are the signes of the bodie and bloud of our Lord. But saith he to the Erranist, Thou hast entangled thy selfe in thine owne snares, for they forsake not their owne natures after the sanctification, but abide in their first substance, figure & forme, palpable and to be felt as before, &c. And he that shall compare Bellarmines answeres by his sensible Accidentes with the text of Theodoret, which is worthie the reading throughout, shall find them altogether fond and friuolous. In the meane time, we con him heartie thankes, Gelas. de duab. natur. in Christ. for that he so freely confesseth that Gelasius, whether hee were Pope, or Bishop of Cesarea, is of the same opinion with Theodoret, as he was also liuing in the same time: Certainly (saith hee) it is a diuine thing, as also the Sacramentes of the bodie and bloud of Christ which we receiue, for thereof and by them, we are made partakers of the diuine nature; and notwithstanding they cease not to bee the substances of bread and wine: And verily the image and semblance of the bodie and bloud of Christ are celebrated in the action of the Sacraments. Note Image and semblance, that is to say, The figure and not the thing. Againe, Which abide in their first substance of bread and wine. Is it enough to say, that by the word substance, he vnderstood accidents? Leo the first, Bishop of Rome; Leo 1. ep. 23. ad Cler. & pleb. Con∣stant. In the mysticall distribution of the spirituall food that is gi∣uen, that is taken, to the end, that receiuing the vertue of this celestiall meate, we might be tur∣ned into his flesh, which is made our flesh. Looke how many words there be, so many brea∣ches are there made vpon transubstantiation. Mysticall distribution, that is to say, sacra∣mentall: Spirituall food, the vertue of the heauenly meate, to bee turned or chaunged into his flesh, which is made our flesh. For this is not wrought by any disgesting of the flesh, as they pretend. They obiect againe (for the rest will carrie the question away,) Idem serm. 6. dereiunio. 7. mens. That is receiued in at the mouth, which is belieued by faith. And therefore say they, it is receiued in at the mouth: whereas wee on the contrarie expound him by S. Augustine; Thou takest the bread of the Lorde in at thy mouth, if thou belieuest with thy heart: Thou takest the bread of the Lord to thy condemnation, if thou belieuest not. And thus that which thou be∣lieuest by faith, thou receiuest at thy mouth; be it vnto thy condemnation, or be it vn∣to thy saluation. Hesychius; If his bodie had not beene crucified, we should not haue eaten him, Hesychius in Leuit. l. 1. c. 2. l. 2. c. 8. l. 6. c. 22 for the meat that we now eate, is that wee receiue the memoriall of his passion. Againe; Hee forbiddeth vs once to thinke or conceiue any earthly or carnall thing of the holy thinges, and commandeth vs to receiue them diuinely and spiritually, &c. And it was a custome in his time as he himselfe testifyeth, To burne all that which remained of the Sacrament in the fire. An argument that they had not receiued any such opinion in the Church then, as is at this day. But they haue a conceipt, that they shall reape a better crop out of Eusebius Emis∣senus; not that Greeke of whome S. Ierome speaketh: for seeing he speaketh of the Pelagians, it cannot be he: but the author of the sermon, De corpore Domini, a Latine no doubt whome some take to bee Faustus Rhegiensis: others Caesarius, and the later writers; some one, some an other: but both of them Abbots of Lirin. Let vs heare him: Let all doubting or wauering of faith depart far away from vs. Herein we agree, C. Quia corpus de consec. D. 2. This sacrifice must be in deed by faith, not by the outward appearance; by the inward affection, not by the outward sight. And in that also. But say they; The inuisible Priest chaungeth his visible creatures into the substance of his bodie and bloud by his word, by a hidden and secret po∣wer. Marke, the inuisible Priest, and not the visible, or minister. But so it is say they, that he chaungeth it, euen in conscience, taking these wordes after the letter, would they subscribe vnto them? could they approue them by their owne Maximes: That it is an errour, yea an heresie to hold, that the bread may be made the bodie of Christ, that it may be turned into the bodie of Christ? Against their Glose also vpon the word Conuertantur, which expressely condemneth & disaluoweth this proposition, De paue fit corpus Chri∣sti, and alleadgeth the inconueniences thereof, &c. Let vs then expound him by him∣selfe, and not by our preiudicate opinions. In the Sacrament (saith he) seeing that our Lord remoued his bodie farre away from our eies, it was necessarie that he should consecrate the Sacrament of his bodie and bloud, in the day of the Supper: To the end saith he, that Colere∣tur
iugiter per mysterium, C. Semel. Christ. de con∣secr. D. 2. that might be continually celebrated by a mysterie, which had beene once offered for the price of our redemption: and that as the redemption being perpetuall, went for the saluation of all, that so also the oblation of that redemption should stand perpetuall: (that is saith the Glose, Gloss. ibid. the preaching of this onely sacrifice, after which there is not any other to come:) And that this perpetuall sacrifice might liue in our remembrance, and might alwaies be present with vs in the grace thereof: Asacrifice (saith he) which must be iudged of by faith, and not by the outward appearance or kind, by the inward affection, not by the outward sight. Here now you may behold a manifest opposition, of the mystery against the realitie; of the remembrance against the presence; of the presence of grace, against the reall presence; of faith, against apparance; and of affection against sight. But notwithstanding say they, there is a change. And what change? verily such a one as hee there describeth and setteth downe: for he compareth the change that is made therein, first with the creation: For as (saith he) in the twinckling of the Lords eyes, there were incontinently sub∣sisting and extant, the heauen, the sea, and the earth, although of nothing: by the same power al∣so in the sacramentes, whereas this vertue commandeth, the effect doth incontinently follow. Now would they say, that by the consecration Christ was created anew? And to bring forth nothing, is this to chaunge and turne, is this to transubstantiate? And what can they then inferre, but that the same spirite, which made the heauen and the earth, doth conioyne and vnite them together in the holy supper, as we haue diuerse and sundrie times said? And secondly, with the change which is made in vs by our regeneration in Christ; into which saith this Eusebius, Non viuendo sed credendo transi∣liisti; we enter not by liuing, but by belieuing: we are made of the children of perdition, the adop∣ted children of God, by a hidden and secret purenes, continuing and abiding, idem atque idem, one and the same in substance, but otherwise much altered and chaunged by the proceeding and growth of faith. Changed saith Bellarmine, accidentallie, and not substantiallie. And therefore the bread & the wine in the holy supper, in like maner changed, said Theo∣doret in a word, Not in their nature, but by addition of grace, &c. And how then shall wee there receiue the bodie of Christ? verily in a manner proportionable to this change, and correspondent to this obiect. When (saith he) thou commest to the altar, to be fed of these spirituall meates, looke by faith vpon the bodie and blood of thy Lord, touch him there with thy mind and spirit, mente continge, take him by the hand with thy hart, drinke him hau∣stu interioris hominis, with the full and large draughtes of thy soule, & with all thine inward man, &c. And yet this is the man amongst all the rest, by whom they take themselues best vnderpropped. Procopius Gazaeus saith also, Procop. Gaze∣us in Genes. c. 49. Macar. Egypt. Anachor. The Lord gaue the image, figure or tipe of his bodie to his disciples, not admitting any more the bloudie sacrifices of the law. Macarius an Egyptian more clearely, saying: That there ought to be offered in the Church bread and wine, the re∣semblances and representations exhibiting the bodie and blood of Christ: the fathers of the olde Testament knew it not; how that they that should receiue the inuisible bread, should also spiritual∣lie eate the flesh of Christ, &c. Figures then euermore, and types and representations of the bodie and bloud, which forbid and exclude all manner of realnesse in the kinds: as likewise all change in the substances, in that they alwaies call them bread and wine, &c. And thus wee are come to the time of Gregory the first, about the yeare of our Lord, 600. CHAP. VI. That of a long time also after Gregorie, transubstantiation was not knowne: And further that all the most famous liturgies receiued of our aduersaries, are repugnant thereunto. NOw Gregorie 1. Anno 600. Gregor. dial. 4. c. 58. Et in registro. had not as yet beene infected with this errour, howbeit he had inwrapped himselfe in many other. Who is there (saith he) of all the faith∣full, that doubteth, that at the houre of the sacrifice, at the voice of the minister, the heauens are opened, or that the heauens are ioyned to the earth? &c. and we will bee readie to tell it them at all times, if they will heare: And heauen is not onely ioy∣ned
to the earth, but God to man, and righteousnesse to a sinner, &c. They say that this is vnder the Accidentes of bread, wee in the nature of our soule. Which is the more beseeming diuinitie? But when S. Gregorie saith; When we take the bread, whe∣ther it be heaued vp or not heaued, we are made one bodie with the Lord our Sauiour: To what end should he say, heaued or not heaued, if there be nothing but accidents? And is there not any great difference whether we our selues be made the bodie of our Lord; or els the bread and wine; the Indiuiduum vagum, accidents hanging in the aire? Idem hom. 22. in Euang. But saith he; The bloude is sprinkled vpon the two postes, when it is not taken of the mouth of the body onely, but also with the mouth of the heart: That is to say, say they, when it is taken also in at the mouth of the bodie. But we say, that this is according to the rule aboue speci∣fied; which giueth to the signe the name of the thing; That is, that the sacrament is taken in at the mouth of the bodie, the thing by the mouth of the soule: and in the faithfull the one with the other. Which S. Gregorie layeth open elsewhere in these wordes, speaking of the vngodly; Howbeit, Idem l. 2. ex∣pos in l. 1. Reg. c. 1. that they receiue the Sacrament with their mouth, yet they are not replenished with the vertue of the Sacrament. And therefore say wee, they did not take the flesh and bloud: For he that receiueth them saith the Lord, hath e∣ternall life. Beda followeth S. Augustin step by step, Bed. 1. Cor. 10. and it may be that Bellarmine for the same cause hath left him out. He teacheth them, that the sacramentes of the old and new testament are the same in substance: That in all sacraments the sacrament is one thing, and the vertue of the sacrament another: and particularly in that of the holy Supper, that that which is seene hath a corporall figure, but that which is vnderstood, a spiri∣tuall fruit: That the bread is said to be the bodie of Christ, after the same manner that we are called his members, &c. To be short saith he, The creature of bread & wine, Idem in Luc. l. 6. c. 2. by the vnspeakeable sanctification of the holy Ghost, is translated into the Sacrament of his flesh and bloud. Into the sacrament saith he, not into the thing it selfe: that is to say, of ele∣ments they are made Sacraments; they are made instrumentes of the holy Ghost, for our spirituall food: that is, for the analogie that is in them: In as much (saith he) as the bread strengtheneth our flesh, & the wine maketh bloud in the flesh, the one referred mystically (he saith not transubstantiated really) to the bodie of Christ; the other to his blood. And in deed saith he in another place. No vnfaithfull person eateth the flesh of Christ. Againe, Idem in Exod. c. 12. & in 1. Cor. 10. If you be the bodie of Christ and his members, your mysterie is set vpon the table of the Lord, you receiue the mysterie of the Lord, &c. And this is about the time of Charles the great, that is to say, neere 800. yeares after Christ, who likewise saith in his booke against ima∣ges, That our Lord hath not left any other image of himselfe, then the holy Supper. Carol. Mag. de Imaginibus. No transub∣stantiation to the time of Charles the great. Albinus also vnder him; That he that abideth not in Christ, (namely by faith) although that hee fa∣sten his tooth vpon the Sacrament, yet he eateth not the bodie of the Lord. And wee may af∣firme it with a good conscience, that hitherto there could not bee learned out of any of the bookes of the fathers any doctrine that tended to the teaching of the transub∣stantiation of the Romish Church, but to the contrarie. Which thing the liturgies and ecclesiasticall prayers, which they make reckning of as most ancient, can witnesse vnto vs. In that which they pretend to haue beene S. Iames his liturgie, Further proofe by the lithur∣gies. That which is attributed to S. Iames. hee speaketh of the Sacrament in these wordes: A diuine and celestiall mysterie, a spirituall table, wherein the Sonne of God , is mystically set before them: He craueth of God by praier, To declare , manifestly, that which he there maketh shew of , in signes; Hee exhorteth the people , To lift vp their harts on high: He rehearseth the in∣stitution of the holy Supper sincerely: after which the people answere: Wee declare the death of the Lord, and confesse his resurrection, &c. He prayeth likewise a long time af∣ter that the words are pronounced; That it would please God to send his spirite vppon those giftes: that is to say, vpon the bread and wine, which he calleth notwithstanding, Ho∣norable, reuerend, renowned, &c. And vpon them that are to be partakers of the same, to the end that they may be sanctified vnto them, and made the bodie and bloud of Christ. Of Christ saith he, Which is diuided and distributed vnto them, that is to say, in the Sacrament, And
which yet notwithstanding is not diuided, nor distributed; that is to say, in himselfe. With whom all this doth well agree, howsoeuer it doth no whit agree with the power and efficacie of the fiue wordes, or with any parte of all the fantasticall deuise of transub∣stantiation? That which is attributed vnto Clement Bishop of Rome, The liturgie of S. Clement. . calleth the bread and the wine after the consecration, Figures, as we haue said: and the words there are worth the consideration; We beseech thee O Lord, that thou wouldest vouchsafe to looke downe vpon these gifts here set before thee; and that it may please thee to send downe thy holy spirit vpon this sacrifice, (note after the consecration) the testimonie of the sufferings of our Lord Iesus, to the end that he may manifestly shew, that this bread is the bodie of thy Christ, and this cuppe his blood, to the end, that they which receiue it, may be confirmed in pietie, hauing remission of their sinnes, &c. If the gifts and the sacrifice be one selfe same thing, and the one and the other Christ reallie, with what mouth can they pray vnto God, that he would vouchsafe to looke downe vppon them, and to send his holy spirit thereinto? &c. And how doth the bread become a witnes of the passion of Christ? yea Christ himselfe? And why doth he pray vnto God, That he would manifestly shew, how that the bread is the bodie of his Christ alreadie, as our aduersaries hold, transubstantiated into Christ, by the consecrating wordes which went before? And that which he saith; To the end, that they which receiue it, &c. which in the Greeke cannot be referred to any thing but the bread and cup. And how commeth it, that it is not ra∣ther referred to the bodie? &c. We haue alreadie spoken of that which is attributed to Saint Basill: The liturgie of S. Basill. he calleth the bread and wine after consecration, , that is to say, figures: hee prayeth God to send both vpon them, as also vpon the communicants, his holy spirit for to sancti∣fie them: The bread to be the body of our Lord, &c. The communicants to be vnited together a∣mongst themselues, and vnited vnto the bodie and bloud of Christ, in such sort as that they may haue him dwelling in their harts. And the exhortations that go before are, That no man shold think that there is any earthly thing: that there is any word of any mortall flesh: the Lord is offered for the faithfull, &c. Again, how wil any of all this agree with carnall transubstan∣tiation, linked to the wordes that do not consecrate? Or how will this agree being communicated with the infidels, with that wherein they haue no part: or as it is refer∣red to the elements, which are not otherwise to be considered of, then as instruments of our coniunction and coupling with Christ: not to the end that we may haue him to passe through our mouthes; but to the end wee may possesse him dwelling in our harts by his spirit. The Preface of S. S. Ambrose his liturgie. Ambr. l. 4. c. 5. de Sacr. Ambrose his liturgie beginneth as all the rest, Sursum corda, the minister praieth that it would please God to accept of the oblation that is offered vn∣to him, The figure (saith he) of the bodie and bloud of Christ. And this word, figure, is by name in his booke of Sacraments, where it is whollie recited, being maliciously de∣faced and put out of the Masse, published in the name of S. Ambrose. The institution of our Lord followeth, wherein are the wordes which they call consecrating: and not∣withstanding after the same pronounced, We offer vnto thee this host or oblation without spot. And which? The holy bread (saith he) and cup of eternall life: and wee pray thee, To receiue it vpon thine altar, by the hands of thine Angels, as thou vouchsafedst to receiue the gifts of thy child Abel, and the sacrifice of the Patriarke Abraham, &c. I referre it vnto them euen on their consciences, if this can be referred to the true bodie, & true blood of our Lord, being aliue and not subiect to any passions by the hands of the minister? Againe, that which followeth, Thy bodie is broken O Christ, thy cup is blessed, let thy blood be to vs vnto eternall life. Can this be spoken and that in their owne iudgementes, but of the bread, and not of the bodie? seeing that in the bodie they do not allow of any breaking? And in deed he calleth the kinds after the consecration, Creatures, in these words, Per quem haec omnia Domine, semper bona creas, sanctificas, viuificas, &c. By whom O Lord thou createst all these thinges, as also sanctifiest and quickenest them, &c. But the praiers which are said after the communion, which they call Post-communions, will witnesse with vs of the intent of the Church, We which receiue the pledge of eternall life, doe humblie
beseech thee, that this which we haue toucht by the image of the sacrament, may be receiued of vs by a manifest receiuing, &c. Againe, Hauing beene refreshed with celestial meat & drinke, we pray thee that we may be made strong through this prayers, in remembrance of whom we haue receiued these things. Again, That we may receiue the sauing effect, the pledge whereof we haue receiued by these mysteries. Note, Pledge, Image of the Sacrament, communication, mysteries, &c. which they also commonly call; Commercia sacrosancta redemptionis nostrae; The sa∣cred trafficke of our redemption; Celestiall gifts, the celestiall Table, celestiall sacraments, spiri∣tuall nourishmentes, which are receiued by the spirit in visible mysteries, but by an inuisible ef∣fect, &c. Now followeth that which is attributed vnto Chrysostome, S. Chryso∣stomes litur∣gie. but with what appa∣rance of truth we haue shewed before: for it cannot bee of fiue hundred yeares after. The prefaces therein are customarie: There is something said of change, but by the inuocating of the name of God, and by the power of the holy Ghost, not by the pro∣nunciation of wordes, and not in the nature of the elementes, but in the vse: for like∣wise after the blessing there is a prayer, For the precious giftes sanctified: And the bread is called Holy bread, which is distributed vnto those that are present in these wordes; The Lambe of God, the Sonne of the father, is distributed and not diuided, daily eaten, and ne∣uer consumed: but he sanctifieth them which are partakers thereof. Can this be any other∣wise spoken, then figuratiuely? They obiect vnto vs, that it is there said: That Christ is present there, That he is there toucht with the hand, and seene with the eye, &c. And would they haue all this vnderstood according to the letter? How then is it said both before and all with one breath; Christ is there inuisiblie: It is not incident for him to bee discerned there by our sight? &c. And how will these contradictions in one & the same Periode a∣gree & stand together; but only thus, by vnderstanding the signe to be spoken of in the one, & the thing in the other? Can they any way relieue themselues still holding their opinions, without falling as saith the Canon, into greater & more dangerous heresies then euer did Berengarius? But verily Chrysost. hath spokē thus elswhere, Christ is cru∣cified before your eyes, his bloud runneth downe from his side, &c. And S. Paul likewise to the Galathians, Christ is crucified before your eies: As in S. Ierome, Hyeronym. in Psal. 85. Tertul. de baptism. Our faces in baptisme are marked with the bloud of Christ: In Tertullian, We are washed in the passion of our Lord, &c. In S. Barnard: Washed in his bloud, in Baptisme, &c. And all this without any reall trans∣mutation in the elements. In the Masse also vsed at this day, The liturgie of the Latines. although that it haue beene ouertrimmed againe and againe, wee may find sorne traces and footinges thereof: for the bread and the wine are there called, Dona, Munera, giftes, offerings: and the same gifts after consecra∣tion, are called Creatures: Per quem haec omnia semper bona creas, &c. Whereas the mas∣sing Priestes would haue vs belieue, that after they haue once gone ouer them, that they become the Creator himselfe. And they pray vnto God, That he would vouchsafe to accept them as the offeringes of Abell, &c. If it were Christ himselfe, with what face could this be done? Furthermore, there are as yet many Post-communions carrying S. Ambrose his stile: As this, Pignus vitae eternae, &c. the pledge of eternall life. Again, Quod specie gerimus, rerū veritare capia∣mus. Lord let thy Sacraments accomplish in vs that which they containe, to the end we may receiue in truth that which we handle in figure. Otherwise, how wil they expound this without a figure, That the bodie that I haue taken, and the bloud that I haue drunke cleaueth vnto my entralles: if we vnderstand it not of the entralles of the soule, and by consequent of the mouth of the same: according to the words which follow, That so there may not remaine any spot of mine iniquities in me? &c. They think themselues to haue done a great act against al these so euident proofes, when they can but obiect against vs, That our Lord had told his disciples, that hee would not speake any more vnto them in similitudes: and that the question is here a∣bout a Testament, wherein euerie thing must be plainely set downe. But is there any that do both wittingly and willingly make the same more obscure and intricate then they doe? which of them or vs doth admit therein both moe figures, & more strange figures? But we say, that there is something to be said betwixt parables, and figures:
and that figures are giuen to make cleare and plaine, & not to make obscure & darke. And that more is; there is not any place in the scripture without speaking either of their figures, That the whole dis∣course of the holy supper is full of figures. or our owne, wherein there are so many figures to be found: Father let this cup passe from me: Let a man sell that he hath to buy him a sword: This cup is the new Te∣stament, &c. I will not drinke any more of this fruit: Behold thy mother, &c. Are these fi∣gures? And is there not also both before and after the passion, not onely figuratiue speeches, but also figured deeds? The washing of the feet of the Apostles: The sop giuen to Iudas, &c. The breathing vpon the Apostles, &c. in these words; Receiue the holy Ghost, &c. And yet these figures (whether those concerning actions, or those concerning wordes) such as both expressely signifie, as also giue much light to that which is in∣tended to bee deliuered, yea more then many other wordes would haue done. For what store & number would haue sufficed to lay open the duetie that our Lord would that S. Iohn should performe to the virgine? or the humilitie which hee recommen∣ded to the Apostles? or to haue set forth the presence of the spirite, which he was as certainely to send vnto them, as they had sensiblie felt the breath which went out of his mouth? CHAP. VII. That the old Church did not belieue or teach Transubstantiation, seeing it neither did nor obserued in respect of the kinds, or Sacraments, that which is practised at this day. BVt doe we desire to bee yet more fully satisfied in this point? If the olde Church had belieued or taught transubstantiation, it wanted not either knowledge to discerne that which is meete and conueni∣ent for the seruice of God, nor yet conscience to practise it, nor zeale or deuotion to procure it: and then would it haue put in practise that which the Church of Rome did afterward: and which it cea∣seth not as yet to doe. Now it did not forbid the touching of the sa∣craments, it did not heaue them, it did not worship them, it did not make any store or resecruation of them, that the people might worship them, it called them not, My Lord and my God: as they doe at this day. And therefore it did not belieue then as they doe at this day: and therefore also it did not acknowledge them for any other thing then instruments of the grace of God, &c. And all this hath beene alreadie suffi∣ciently proued before, or els may very easilie bee proued by the testimonie of all an∣tiquitie. The sacramēts were handled in the old time Tertul. ad vx∣orem. Gregor. Nazi∣anz. de Gor∣gon. Euagrius. Concil. Altisi∣od. c 35.37. All the faithfull did touch the Sacraments, yea the women: The truth thereof is ma∣nifest, for we haue seene it giuen into their hands: That it hath beene said vnto them, accipite, take: That the women in Tertullian and Nazianznee, are said to locke it vp, to carie it away with them: That the remainder was wont to be giuen to children that went to schoole: That the forbidding of women to touch them with their bare hands was not till about the yeare 700. and that but by a prouinciall Councell hol∣den at Auxerre: And the custome of giuing it them into their mouthes, was but two hundred yeares after that. Likewise the wine was caried about in glasses, & the bread in ordinarie chestes, as it is read of Exuperius Bishop of Tholosa. The feare of shed∣ding them was not entred before that time, because they were reputed and taken but for Sacraments: that is to say, signes: and which more is, they were not any longer so reputed and taken, then the verie time of their vsing. They were not heaued or eleuated to make the people admire & wonder at them: That they were not he∣ued. They were not shauen at all ouer the head: but on the contrarie men lifted vp their eyes and harts on high, being taught thereunto by this notable preface, Sursum corda: Men were pluckt from off the earth by the Canon of the Councell of Nice: Fixe not your eyes on the things here below, &c. Where as if there had beene any Deitie betwixt
the handes of the Minister, men would haue addressed themselues thereunto: Dionys. Hie∣rar. c. 3. men would haue learned to content and rest themselues there. They bring forth a place out of Saint Denis: , he bringeth into open view, the giftes which bad beene couered and wrapped together till then. And this is that which Pa∣chymeres expoundeth in these words, , he setteth in sight. Let them not then forget, that this is after that they haue sundry times called them , that is to say, signes, representing, say I, the body and bloud of Christ, , made conformable to our nature. Againe, That where he saith, , hee setteth in open sight: hee addeth without any interruption or breache, , the thinges signified by the signes: that is to say, but carefully expoun∣ding them vnto those that are present. But the custome was: That the giftes and of∣feringes were brought and offered by the people: And that of those offerings, there was bread and wine taken for the Sacramentes; That they stoode couered with a white linnen cloth, till such time as they came to the communion, and then they were vncouered: And this he calleth , &c. This is that which the expositors of Saint Denys doe say: Pachymeres, After prayers, the holy giftes are vn∣couered, and vnwrapped, hauing stoode couered vnto the time of the communion. Maximus addeth; That the cuppe was also couered, but he saith that it was not obserued in his time. It is further to be noted, that it was a great loafe that was cut into many peeces: where∣upon Saint Denys saith, And opening the loafe that is couered and vndiuided, and diui∣ding it into many peeces, and distributing vnto all the vnitie of the cuppe, that is to say, one onely cuppe: He accomplisheth symbolicallie or figuratiuely the vnitie, that is to say, hee teacheth them, that they are all one in Christ: one amongst themselues, nourished with the verie same bread: quickned with the verie same spirite. This was not then any bread eleuated and held to bee seene ouer the head, that it might bee worship∣ped; but to aduertise the people, to the ende they might prepare themselues to the communion, in these wordes, which were then vttered; , holy things to them that are holy: by which they were put in mind not to worship the Sacraments, but rather to refraine to come thereto, except they came with faith and repentance, resolued to liue according to Christian vnitie and charitie, &c. This is that which S. Chrysostome saith, The Minister speaketh these words, to the end, Chrysost. in cp. ad Hebr. hom. 17. that if any man be not ho∣ly, hee may not approach or come neere the same. And in the liturgie attributed to him: Approach (saith hee) in the feare of God, faith and loue. Cabasilas, Draw neere, that ye may communicate, behold here is the bread of life, but not except ye be holy: And yet (saith he) not that it is required that wee should bee perfect, but tending and striuing to perfection, &c. And as the Christian Church beganne to multiply, they had a vaile in their Churches, which made a partition betweene the holy table and the bodie of the Church, and this was drawne at what time the people came vp to the communion; whereof wee haue spoken heretofore: And whereof we reade in Chrysostome, Cum vela diducuntur, Chrys. in ep. ad Ephes. hom. 3 when the vailes are drawne together, &c. Apuleius also maketh mention thereof in the mysteries of the Gentiles. But they stand vppon this worde, , Hee lifteth it vp on high: which Maximus a late Greeke writer doeth vse: and they will not see, that in the same Liturgies, the Minister , lifteth vp, the Gospell that is to say, shew∣eth it vnto the people. Was this then to the ende that they should wrrship it? Was this as though there had beene a God really in that booke of the Gospell? or as though that booke were God? But here is to bee noted; that out of all the La∣tine Church which is made the mother of all these goodly ceremonies, they cannot bring forth any thing for their purpose, and therefore are constrained to runne to the Greeke Church. They doe likewise agree and consent, that in the Churches of Ethiopia (in which there is neuer any seruice done without a communion,) Aluares in the historie of E∣thiopia. there is not vsed any eleuation at all. But the truth is, that this bread did not begin to bee thus eleuated amongst themselues, before such time that two foule abuses, transub∣stantiation, & the alone eating of the minister, did iumpe & fal out together. For then as we shal see hereafter, they began to bend themselues to feed the eies of the people,
in stead of their spirites and soules. Durand. l. 4. in 6. parte Can. Ioh. 12. Leuit. 7. In the meane time Durand ceaseth not to bee so shamelesse as to apply those words of our Lord in S. Iohn, to that end; When I shall be exalted or lifted vp, I will draw all men vnto me: this being spoken of the lifting vp of our Lord vppon the crosse. In another place with some more probabilitie he saith; That this custome was taken from the eleuation and shaking of the offeringes that was made in the Ie∣wish law: as we haue touched in his place. Now it is also certaine, that the Sacraments were ordinarily taken of the offerings of the people. That it must not be wor∣shipped. Of adoration wee say likewise: That the commandement of God is most plaine and expresse; Thou shalt worshippe one onely God: The difference also from elsewhere is found so great, being from a bread dedicated to the seruice of God, to God himselfe, as that there is no apparance, but that if it had beene our duties to haue worshipped it, the holy scriptures woulde not haue concealed the same from vs: And the daunger also so great, either to do it, with∣out subiect; for that were idolatrie: or to omit it, the subiect being there: seeing this might grow to a contempt of God. Seeing then the Euangelistes; seeing Saint Paule, who is so carefull in exhorting vs to proue our selues, and who reproueth the Corin∣thians so sharpely, for that they did not tarrie one for another, saith not one worde thereof vnto vs: seeing further that no old writers rightly vnderstood, doe speake of any worship to be giuen to the Sacraments, as no more vnto the bread or wine of the holy Supper, then to the water in baptisme: what followeth to bee concluded vpon, but that it was because transubstantiation was not knowne? For who can in any Chri∣stian sort doubt, that Iesus Christ is to be worshipped, where he is both with that ho∣nour that is due to God, and also to the vttermost of mans power, by deed, word, and thought? Who seeth not also what a strong and mightie argument this had beene for the Orthodoxes against the Arrians and Arrius himselfe; when to proue the eter∣nall diuinitie of the Sonne of God, they gathered all the places where it is said, that hee was worshipped: if they had beene able to haue alleadged vnto them, and that from the vse or tradition of the Church, That this is true we proue, because we worship him, yea both you and we in the Sacrament, vnder the Accidentes of bread and wine, &c. To the Arrians I meane with whom we reade not that there was any disagreement for the Sa∣crament? And on the contrarie what a prize had it beene for Eutyches against the Orthodoxes: seeing he vndertooke to maintaine, that the humane nature of Christ is confusedly mixt with his diuine, if he had beene able to say; And that it is true, wee worship the bodie and bloud, &c. in the Sacrament: which thing ought not so to be, if they bee not really there, and there they cannot be, if they be not in all places: and to bee in all places, is an incommunicable propertie of the diuine nature, &c. I leaue to speake, how that the ho∣ly Supper was wont of old to be celebrated after the manner of a banquet, wherein they vsed to sit: where we see againe a barre crossing the Mandatum of the Monkes of the order of Saint Bennet: According to that which Saint Augustine telleth vs: That many euen in his time vpon the day that the Lord made his Supper, did celebrate the same, wherein they did one feast another, to shew forth the death of the Lorde, and to testifie their vnion: Not in a temple, not vppon an Altar, but in a priuate house, vpon a table: nothing the lesse holy notwithstanding, seeing this gift, that is to say, this action, sanctified the Altar. Now herein wee agree: That Christ, God and man must bee worshipped euerie where: That at the name of Iesus euerie knee must bow: That euerie tongue must confesse, that hee is vnto the glorie of the father: wee ho∣nour his holy worde, his holy Sacraments: wee heare him with all attention: and wee draw neere vnto him with reuerence: let our aduersaries call it honour, wor∣shipping: yea and adoration if they will, prouided that we be agreed vpon the thing. But we say: That we must put a difference betwixt the Sacrament, and our God him∣selfe: That the same honour is not due to the one, that is due to the other: That that same which we giue to the Sacraments, is for that they bee instrumentes and vessels of his grace: and not because of themselues, not vpon any consideration of their be∣ing reallie and substantiallie himselfe: not, saith Bonauenture, As though they did con∣taine grace, but for that they signifie and set it out.
They alleadge vnto vs againe their pretended Areopagite: Answere to the places obiec∣ted out of the fathers. No inuocatiō. Claud. spens. de ador. Eu∣chat. l. 1. c. 2. . Donys. Hier. c. 3. vbi & Pa∣chym. . He (say they) doth inuo∣cate and pray vnto this sacrament; for he saith, O holy and diuine ceremonie shew vnto vs openly, that which is concealed and kept close from vs in these obscure and enigmaticall signes, &c. Replenish the eyes of our spirites with a singular light, &c. But let them listen a lit∣tle to his expositor Pachymeres thereupon: Hee speaketh vnto this ceremonie, (saith hee) as if it had a soule, and that not without apparance: as Gregorie the diuine saith, O holy and great Passeouer: For our Passeouer and this holy ceremonie is our Lord Iesus, vn∣to whom he directeth his speech: Our Lord, verily, which is the substance of the holy Supper, as hee was of the Passeouer: as hee is of Baptisme: and as hee is of all the Sacramentes. And if thou wouldest further knowe, where hee seketh him; Verily in heauen, not vpon the table; for he called them signes and said vnto vs a little before. Let vs passe from the effectes, to the causes, &c. And then when Saint Ambrose saide to the water of bap∣tisme: O water which washest the worlde by the bloude of Christ; which hast merited, that is to say, hast beene made worthie, to bee a Sacrament of Christ, &c. shall hee be thought to haue adored, shall he be iudged to haue transubstantiated it into Christ? And when their pretended Amphilochius crieth: O worshipfull and reuerende concep∣tion, meaning of the virgine, make vs inheritors of eternall life, preserue thy people and thine heritage, &c. shall hee haue crowned this conception with the Godhead? And when themselues say to the oyle: Aue sanctum oleum, sanctam Chrisma, I salute thee O holy oyle, or holy vnction. To the Crosse: Aue Rex noster, due spes vnica; I salute and pray God blesse thee, O our King, our onelie hope: shall they bee thought to haue really tran∣substantiated him? Nay rather let them acknowledge, that this place concludeth no∣thing, Epiphan. in Anchor. let them remember that Epiphanius did heretofore name this mysterie vnto vs, An insensible thing, that Pachymeres compareth it, to Nazianzene his Passeouer: And therefore that this manner of speech is an Apostrophe, a Rhetoricall figure, that in other points they do not agree amongst themselues, as whether the body of Christ be there dead or aliue; hauing a soule, or not hauing a soule; sensible, or insensible, &c. And therefore that they are first to agree themselues, before they go about to forti∣fie themselues from this place. Origen; When saith hee, thou eatest and drinkest the bodie and bloud of our Lorde, Orig. in diuers. euang. loc. hom 5. the Lorde entereth in and commeth vnder thy roofe: and therefore humble thy selfe with the Cen∣turion, &c. Hee meaneth then that the Sacrament is adored: and then he meaneth also that wee adore the Saintes, that is to say, vertuous people, when they come to see vs. For hee teacheth in the same place, two waies by which Christ entreth into the faithfull: the one when the Minister of the Church visiteth them; the other when they receiue the incorruptible meat of the Sacrament. And this is that which he saith else∣where; That God is in vs by the preaching of the Apostles, and by the Sacrament of his bloud. Idem Lom. . And that this visitation is wrought in vs by the word and spirit: he declareth and ma∣keth plaine there also, Speake onely the word (saith he) come onely with thy word: Thy word is a looking glasse, it is a perfect worke: shew forth in this thy bodily absence the power of thy spi∣rit, &c. If then according to Origen, wee ought to adore the Sacraments and mini∣sters: then with as good right such men as are godly and vertuous: but if these, then it must be onely with a ciuill worship and adoration, and so must that wherewith wee worship the other. And if the adoration due to God alone, being giuen to good men maketh idolatrie: then also if it be giuen to Sacraments or ministeres, or els this place concludeth nothing. Chrysostome; The wise men worshipped this bodie in the manger: Chrysost. in 1. Cor. 10. they worshipped it with feare and trembling: Let vs at the least follow these barbarous and rude men, wee which are ci∣tizens of heauen. He speaketh of the bodie of Christ, represented in the Sacrament, and exhorteth the people to come thereunto with reuerence. But the wise men ve∣rily did not worship him as God; but as a king. And therefore this is but to returne to that which Saint Clement sayeth: Clem. l. 2. con∣stit. Draw neere vnto this Sacrament with the same re∣uerence that you would doe vnto a King: that is to say, vnto some honorable person. He
addeth: Thou seest him not in the armes of a woman; but thou seest the Minister present; the spirite aboundantly shedde vppon this sacrifice: The Priest verily with the eyes of the bodie; but the spirite with the eyes of the spirite. For was it not more readie o∣therwise, if hee had had any such purpose, to say, as following the opposition; Not in the armes of a woman, but in the handes of a Priest: Not the spirite shedde vppon the thinges set before them, that is to say, vppon the Sacraments: But Christ sacrificed him∣selfe. But the coherence and scope of the matter doth carrie vs to conceiue; That Chrysostome laboured to raise the heartes of those that were present, from base and lowe thinges vnto high and heauenly thinges, when hee saith vnto them, That there are not anie but Eagles that approach and come neere vnto this bodie: Those (saith hee) that haue nothing to doe with the earth, that haue the eyes of the vnderstanding, sharpe, clearely seeing, and bent vpon the Sunne of righteousnesse: Hee transporteth and con∣ueigheth them as much as in him lyeth, aboue the heauens: when hee sayeth vn∣to them also: Wee must with the wise men worship this bodie: This bodie verilie, which is no more on earth, but on high at the right hand of God. And then verilie, af∣ter all these Hyperboles, in spirite and not in bodie: that is, saith hee, In as much as this mysterie causeth that the earth is a heauen vnto thee: that the gates of heauen are open vnto thee; that thou hast accesse and entrance thereinto, &c. And afterward how? Ve∣rily, In purging thy soule, in preparing thy spirite, to receiue these mysteries, to see, touch, and eate this bodie. After the same manner verilie, that Saint Ierome saide of Pau∣la: Thou hast offered by faith the same offeringes that the wise men did offer: thou hast wor∣shipped with them God in the cribbe, Chrysost. in Lithurg. &c. But say they, hee prayeth vnto him in his Liturgie (I meane that which is attributed vnto him:) as Christ truely, and not the Sacrament: Heare (saith hee) O Lorde, from the seate of the glorie of thy kingdome: which art set with the father, who aidest, succourest, and relieuest vs here be∣low inuisiblie, &c. O Lord haue pittie vppon mee poore sinner, &c. Here I appeale to their owne consciences, whether hee frame this his prayer vnto God, or the Sacrament? Is this to draw vs to gaze and looke vpon the Altar, or to raise vs vp vnto the heauens of heauens? Saint Ambrose, Ambr. de spi∣rit. sanct l. 3. c. 12. Psal. 95. & 98. Worship his footstoole: that is, the flesh of Christ, (saith he) which we worship in the mysteries, which the Apostles worshipped in Iesus, &c. And Saint Augu∣stine in like manner: No man eateth this flesh, except hee haue first worshipped it. Who doubteth that wee ought to worshippe the flesh of Christ? Christ inseparablie God and man? Who doubteth likewise, that no man can eate this flesh, if hee haue not first worshipped it? worshipped it by a true faith: worshipped it with heart and af∣fection, &c. But wee worshippe it after the same manner that wee eate it: Wee eate it as wee take it, and wee take it as wee touch it: In truth, but in spirite; in spirite, but in truth: And God forbid that Christians should not haue anie other meanes to touch Christ, but with their handes: or to eate him, but with their teeth: seeing that the virgine is not blessed for hauing conceiued him in her wombe; nor Simeon, for hauing receiued him into his armes: but rather by hauing belieued in him. What shall wee say then to these good Fathers? Verily, the same that they say vnto vs themselues, Ambr. in serm. 58. de Mar. Magdal. & in Luc. l. 10. c. 24 Augu. de cog∣nit. ver. vit. c. 40. Wee worshippe Christ as wee touch him: And, Wee touch him (saith Saint Ambrose) not with a bodily touching, but by faith. After the same manner (sayeth hee) That Saint Stephen on earth saw and touched Christ in heauen. Yea saith Saint Augustine, Hee saw him being vnder the roofe of the seate of iudgement, which hee pearsed through (saith hee) and the heauens aboue the same: and therefore with the eyes of the spirite. Wee worshippe him in the mysteries, but not the mysteries: in the Sacrament, but not the Sacrament: the Creator in the creature sanctified, but not the creature. For Saint Ambrose which calleth it a creature: Thou hast seene (saith he) the Sacraments vppon the Altar: Chrysost. in Marc. hom. 14 Ep. 120. c. 21. Psal. 21. Thou hast admired this creature, howbeit a wonted and well knowne crea∣ture, &c. had neuer counselled vs to worshippe and adore the creature. So likewise sayeth Saint Chrysostome: That wee worshippe Christ in the Sacrament of Baptisme.
Saint Ierome; That Paula had worshipped him in the cribbe: was it euer in these mens mindes to say, that they had worshipped the water or the cribbe? Or would they haue said therefore, that either the water or the cribbe were transubstantiated into Christ? But they ought therefore to haue added that which followeth in S. Augu∣stine, Worship him for he is holy. And who is this that is holy? Euen he, saith he, for whose loue and sake thou worshippest the stoole, &c. that is to say, the flesh of Christ, the humani∣tie of Christ. And when thou worshippest it, rest not thy thoughtes vppon the flesh, least then thou shouldest not bee quickened by the spirite, &c. And this same good and sound faith is set forth in another place of Saint Augustine which they alleadge, and that some∣what more commendablie. For in the place where it is saide, Rich men were brought to the table of the Lord, they tooke the bodie and bloud: But they did but onely worship: they were not filled full, &c. that is, because they contented themselues to make profes∣sion of his name, without conforming of themselues vnto Christ: And this he de∣clareth by these wordes, Non saturati sunt sicut pauperes, vs{que} ad imitationem: They were not filled and fedde full as were the poore, to the conforming of themselues vnto him. They are not ashamed to adde, Illud, that so they may make him say: Hardingus. That they worshipped the bodie and the bloud: and not simplie, They worshipped. And some one amongst them hath added as drawing the text to a further length: They haue acknowled∣ged that Christ was there present. The same impudencie shoulde thrust him for∣warde, and cause him to adde; Reallie, corporallie, and Per modum transubstan∣tiationis, &c. They would faine bee beholden to Theodoret: and as we haue seene, there is not any one more against them: for he hath told vs, That the signes are not changed: that they continue in their nature and substance, &c. And their greatest Doctors are of iudge∣ment, that there cannot be had any adoration without transubstantiation. He saith therefore, And yet notwithstanding these same signes of breade and wine, which retaine their first substance, are vnderstoood, belieued and worshipped, as though they were the things which they are belieued to be. Worshipped therefore, as they are vnderstoode, and as they are belieued: that is, Ʋt Antitypa, ratione prototypi, as signes in respect of that which is signified: As the Councell of Nice II. speaketh of images, no respect being had to that which they are, but to that which they represent. For likewise Theodoret calleth them Images, in the words next ensuing: Compare (saith he) the patterne with the person, and thou shalt see therein the similitude & likenes: for it is requisite that the figure should resem∣ble the veritie. Now the images of any thing whatsoeuer, are not worshipped with that worship, which is due to God: and by consequent to adore or worship in Theodoret, can not be any other thing, then to honor, reuerence, & receiue with reuerence, which we most willingly yeeld vnto the Sacraments. Proofes out of the fathers. Clem. Constit. l. 2. c. 6. August de Trinit. l. 3. c. 10 De catechism. rud. c. 26. Idem de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 9 And of a truth this is the same that the fa∣thers teach vs. S. Clement (if those be his books) That all do take in order the precious body and bloud of our Lord, drawing softly thereunto with feare & reuerence, as to the bodie of a king. S. Augustine, The sacraments may be honoured as religious things. And in another place: As visible signes of diuine things wherin the inuisible things, are honoured and not as common things, seeing they are sanctified by the blessing. Againe, He that worshippeth a profitable signe insti∣tuted of God, and whereof hee vnderstandeth the power and signification, doth not worship that which is seene, and passeth away: but rather that vnto which all such things ought to be referred. Where it is to be noted, that he vseth the words of adoring & reuerencing indifferently, that he referreth them not to the signes, but to the things signified? And a little after he giueth for an example, the sacrament of Baptisme, Idem de bono perseuer. l. 2. c. 13. & the celebration of the bodie & bloud of our Lord: and of this by name he saith; That that which is said: Sursum corda, is, to admonish vs to pray vnto God, that he would lift vp our harts to ascend and taste the things that are on high, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of God: Not the thinges that are vppon earth: God (saith hee) to whome wee must render thankes for so great a thing, &c. And when likewise it shall haue at any time escaped any of the fathers, to say altoge∣ther rawlie, (which yet hath not at anie time,) J worshippe the excellencie of the
Sacrament. What other thing should this bee, but of the same sence with that which Tertullian saith; I adore the fulnes or sufficiencie of the scriptures? Of the scriptures, be∣cause there God speaketh vnto vs, giueth the effectnall working of the spirit, &c. And yet they are not God: neither are they adored, or worshipped as God. Of the Sacra∣ment then in like manner, seeing it pleaseth God therein to giue and in a neere and straite manner to communicate himselfe with vs, and yet not therefore God, but the instrument of the grace of God, to be reuerenced because of his blessing of it: but not to be adored or worshipped as his essence or proper person. In like manner none of all the East churches did euer admit adoration; neither those that are vnder the go∣uernment and iurisdiction of the Patriarke of Constantinople, Aluares. nor those vnder the iurisdiction of Antioch. And the Abyssines also at this day do receiue the communi∣on standing, though that with great reuerence: and besides, though they bee of the same iudgement with vs in the adoration and worship due to our Lord: whom S. Iohn (say the fathers) worshipped and adored, being as yet in the virgines wombe: whom (saith a certaine writer) if the doctrine of transubstantiation had place, the Church should haue in like manner worshipped in the stomackes of the Ministers and faith∣full people; and euery man in his neighbour. But this thing neuer came into the mind of any man once to thinke or imagine. What shall we say, The old wri∣ters did not call the Sacra∣ment their Lord. Cypr serm. de laps. when furthermore they labour to bring credite vnto the same from antiquitie, as though the old writers had called the Sacrament, Their Lord and their God? But let vs see with what pretence or shadow of truth. S. Cyprian reporteth, that it came to passe in his time, that a certaine man, who had renounced God, for feare of persecution, taking the holy communion in the companie of Christians, opening his hand, found the sacrament turned into ashes. This miracle (saith he) may be a lesson vnto vs, that the Lord withdraweth himselfe, when men denie him: that is to say, that he forsaketh them which renounce him. They gather notwithstanding, that the Lord of whome he speaketh, is the Sacrament. The Lord verily forsaketh such a one as denyeth him. Is it then the Sacrament which hath denied him, or man? Verily man, and not the Sacrament. And God then doth not here forsake the Sacrament, but man. But God for an euident signe that he hath forsaken man, doth also leaue him destitute of the Sacrament. Paul. Diacon. l. 15. So as Deuterius an Arrian Bishop would haue bap∣tised a man after his manner, the water dried vp sodainly in the font. Saint Cyprian might here haue said as before; That God did teach vs thereby, that he did withdraw himselfe; that is to say, that he would take away his grace when we abused it: but he had not therefore gathered thereof, that the water was God, because he had shewed his wrathfull indignation in drying it vp. Cypr. in orat. Domin. Again, We beg and craue saith S. Cyprian, that our bread, that is to say Christ, may be giuen vs euerie day. And who doubteth that Christ is our bread, the bread come downe from heauen, which giueth life to the world, that he may be our life, our way? &c. But S. Cyprian saith not that the Sacrament is Christ: but the wordes that follow doe make him plaine; To the end (saith hee) that wee may dwell and liue in Christ; and that we may not at any time seperate and put our selues farre away from his sanctification and bodie. But this abode and dwelling, as he told vs, is made by faith: This coniunction is not a mixture of substances, Idem serm. de caena Domin. Se infundit. Tertul. de bap∣tism. but an agreement of wils, &c. But they yet set his words further on the racke, causing him to call it God: For (say they) hee saith; That by an vnspeakeable manner, the diuine essence is infused into the Sacrament. Therefore it is God. And then also we will call the water in baptisme God. For Tertullian saith; That the holy Ghost descendeth from the father, and resteth himselfe vpon the waters of bap∣tisme. Saint Ambrose: That the whole Trinitie sanctifieth them. Paulinus in his verses: That this water doth euen conceiue God, Augu. de bap∣tism. cont. Do∣nat l. 3. c. 10. & l 1. c. 19. Cpr. de vnct. chrysmat. or by God. Saint Augustine, That God is present with his word and Sacraments. And there is not one amongst vs that doubteth thereof: & yet what one amongst them all is there, that wil say, that the water is God? What is meant then by that which S. Cyprian saith: The diuine power is shed vpon the visible Sa∣crament? Verily, the same which he saith in an other place; In the Sacramentes the di∣uine
power doth worke most mightily and powerfully; the truth is present with the signe, Adest signo. and the spirit with the Sacrament, &c. Chrysostome; Let vs draw neere vnto the body of our Lord with honor and cleannesse: And when thou shalt see it proposed or set vpon the Table; say  (saith he) and not, ; in thy selfe, and not to the Sacrament, (not to that which thou seest set before thee, for the Grammaticall construction will not suffer it,) because of this body, I am not any more earth and ashes, &c. Of this body, towards whom he exhorted vs in the sentences going be∣fore to flie vp on high, after the manner of Eagles: Of that body then, which is at the right hand of the father, not in the hands of the Minister: Of that body in a word, which is not inclosed in the bread, but signified by the bread, whereof hee hath said vnto thee before: What signifieth the bread? The body of Christ. And indeed he speaketh vnto thee to come vnto the Sacrament with reuerence: but to GOD with feruencie of loue, and firmenesseof faith. And that thou shouldest set before thy selfe in the same at that instant, thine owne miserie, and his mercie, that so thou maist bee a worthie partaker of this misterie: Thy myserie, in that thou art nothing but earth and ashes, his mercie, in that hee vouchsafeth to raise these ashes vnto glorie: Thy miserie, in that thou art nothing but sinne and corruption, his mercie, in that hee hath made his owne Sonne sinne for thee, in that hee hath giuen his body, to bee broken, and his bloud to bee shed for thy transgressions. And therefore comming vnto this Sacrament of the remembrance of his death, August. aduer. Iudae. c. 1. thou oughtest of good right say vnto him: Because of this body, I am no more earth and ashes. But to approach or drawe neere thereunto (saith Saint Augustine) is to belieue: The true and proper approaching is per∣formed by the heart, and not by the flesh: by the power of faith, Idem de pec∣cat merit. l. 1. c. 18. and not by the presence of the bo∣dy, &c. As likewise to vs of Baptisme: We are carried to Christ our Physition, that wee may receiue the Sacrament of eternall saluation: that is carried to Christ in Baptisme, after the same manner, that wee approach and draw neere vnto God in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; who also saith the same vnto vs in the hearing of the word: Chrysost. hom. 12. de mulier Cananaea. Draw neere vnto him which is preached vnto you. And concerning this drawing neere, Chrysostome saith vnto vs in an other place: There is no need why thou shouldest passe from one place to an other, to draw neere vnto him, hee is daily at hand vnto thee. And the Apostle in the same sence: Let vs draw neere vnto the throne of grace, &c. The sound notwithstanding which ring∣eth lowd in Sermons, and the water which is sprinkled in Baptisme, August. de Vnico. Baptif. contr. Petil. c. 5 Ambros. de iis qui initiant. myst. c. 9. was neuer called God. Saint Augustine on the contrarie saith: One God is more then one Baptisme: for Baptisme is not God but a Sacrament of God. Of the same consequence are these that fol∣low. Saint Ambrose saith of this Sacrament: Taste and see that the Lord is good. Verily, as he that distributeth his graces vnto vs in this Sacrament: as hee, that therein offe∣reth vs his flesh and his bloud, &c. And there also he saith: The body of Christ is signifi∣ed: It is become, not a corporall, but a spirituall meate. Hee speaketh therefore of our Lord, and not of the Sacrament of him, of whome hee addeth, Blessed are they, that put their trust in him. Saint Augustine vpon Beda: Who shall dare to bee so bold, as to eate his Lord? Deverb: Dom. secund. Luc. Serm. 19. Hieronym. ad Pammach. August. ad In∣fantes citatu a Beda in 1. Cor. Idem in Ioh. tract. 7. But much more, say we so: for he saith, It is bread, and it is bread, and it is bread: God the father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost: God, who, whatsoeuer he giueth thee, giueth thee nothing better then himselfe. But verily, it is that heauenly bread: of whome S. Ierome saith: The Saints and holy men are fed with this bread: they are filled full with euerie word of God: they haue one and the same, both for their Lord, and for their meate: Of whome Cyrill saith; This flesh hath the diuine word, who naturally is life. And of whome Saint Augustine saith in like manner: Euerie belieuer is made partaker of the body and bloud of our Lord, when he is made a member of Christ in baptisme, &c. He is our meat, but so as that we haue our mouth and taste in our hearts, &c. Wherefore they should rather haue pitcht and grounded themselues vpon these generall propositions, so expresse and plainly set downe in the fathers. Chrysostome; Chrysost. in oper. imperf. hom. 11. The word of God, is nothing lesse then the bodie of Christ. Saint Ierome; I hold that the Gospel is the bodie of Christ: And although (saith he) that these words: He that eateth my flesh, &c. may be vnderstood of the mystery, yet it is more truly meant of the word of the Scriptures; name∣ly;
Seeing that the word and the Sacraments are instruncents, Orig. in Exed. hom. 13. Ambr. de Be∣ned. Patriarch. wherein it pleaseth God to lay open his graces. Origen, Doe you make accompt that there is lesse daunger in neglecting the word of God, then in neglecting of his body? Who doubteth but if that the Sacrament had beene verie God, but that they would haue spoken otherwise? Saint Ambrose saith; Hee gi∣neth vs this day the bread, which the Minister daily consecrateth by his word: that is meant of Christ. We may also take the Lord himselfe, who saith, I am the bread of life. Epiphanius; This bread is of a round fashion, insensible, &c. Our Lord all sense, wholly sensible, whole God, wholly mouing, &c. Origen; This bread sanctified by the word of God and praier, in regarde of the materiall parts that it hath, passeth into the belly, and so goeth into the draught, &c. Is not this plainely to distinguish the heauenly bread, that is to say, Christ, from the sancti∣fied bread, that is to say, the Sacrament? The creature, from the Creator; and that which goeth into the stomacke, from that which pearceth into the soule? Who is hee then that can any longer indure, that such blasphemies should be fathered vpon anti∣quitie, Stella clericor. Serm. Discipu∣li. Serm. 3. Creatur a vo∣bis mediantib. vobis. That nothing was reserued. Clem. Ep. 2. Idem in Li∣thurg. Apul. Meta∣morph. l. 11. Ruf Eccles. hyst. l. 2. c. 23. Gloss. antiqua apud Turneb. Orig. in Leuit. hom. 5. Hieronym. in 1. Cor. 11. Hesych. in Le∣uit. l. 2. c. 8. Euag. l 4. c. 30. Niceph. l. 17. c. 25. Concil. Matisc. 2. c. 25. Concil. Turo∣nens. making the same to call the creature, God; yea or rather, which is a great deale worse, that it should haue called God, a creature? For they are not ashamed to vtter it in their words and writings: That their Priest is the Creator of his Creator: He that crea∣ted you, hath giuen you power to create him: He that hath created you without your selues, is cre∣ated by you, by the meanes of you. And surely, let vs further adde this one thing: That if the Fathers had had any such opinion, they would not haue vsed that which remained of the Sacrament in such sort, as wee reade they did. Their pretended Clement I. saith: After that euerte man hath taken it, the Deacons set vp the rest and carrie it, in pastophoria, that is to say, into the Ministers their lodgings or Chambers. And thus also it is called by Apuleius and Ruffi∣nus, in the description of the Temple of Serapie, &c. Thinke with your selues whe∣ther the poore Christian Martyrs in the time of Nero, had had any leasure as then, once to dreame of this goodly frame and workmanship? Origen; The Lord said vnto his Disciples of the bread that he gaue them: Take, eate, he did not post them ouer to eate of the same afterward, neither did he commaund them that it should bee kept vnto the next morning. Saint ierome; After the Communion, they that did eate the supper together in the Church, did make an end of all that which was remaining of the sacrifices. So that out of that sacred vse, they did eate it as common bread. Hesychius; We see how they vse to burne in the Church, all that which is not consumed. According to Euagrius and Nicephorus: They were giuen to the little children, that were in the Schooles, to cate them the same hower. And the Councell of Mascon, II. haue ordained and decreed that it should be so. That of Tours, about the yeare 813. held vnder Charlemaine, addeth thereto: That it be done with discretion. Likewise Cardinall Humbert a Burgundian writing against Nicetus, Blameth the Greekes, for that they did not burne it. But it is for certaine, that it was not kept, eleuated, or shut vp close in a boxe, to be worshipped of the people. We reade rather that it was sent to the sicke, and such as were absent: that Bishops in token of their Christian vnitie, and that they were all one bread, did mutually send this sancti∣fied bread, Concil. Lao∣dic. c. 14. one to an other, &c. The Parishes likewise at Easter, one to an other. Which thing was forbidden in the Councell of Laodicea, Can. 14. And therefore, there was but a little kept, because that in the feruent zeale of those times, the holy supper was celebrated almost euerie day: and that a great deale lesse, then the water of the Fonts, which for all that was neither transubstantiated, nor worshipped. And this was the custome of the Church. Some of superstition carried it into their houses; and some women would wrap it vp in their handkerchefs, lockt it vp in their Coffers, and eate it at their owne houses, &c. Now let men iudge, if the first ages of the Church did e∣uer take the Sacrament to be God; if it would haue suffered these prophanations? But these examples are worthie to be as much accompted of in the Church, as theirs that vsed to put it in childrens mouthes, abusing this place: If any man eate my flesh, &c. or of others, who would put it in the mouthes of those that were dead, &c. being practi∣ses that haue beene condemned by many Councels. And they are happily vanished and worne away of themselues, howsoeuer they were grounded vppon verie auncient
tradition, euen since the time of Tertullian and S. Cyprian, as also by the ordinance of Charlemaine: That the Ministers should haue the Eucharist consecrated euerte day, L. 1. c. 161. for children: Because they had no other staie or foundation, then the Scripture misunder∣stood. The custome likewise being, not of keeping it, but of giuing it to them which were in extremitie, grew hereupon, that many sinking and shrinking away vnder the heate of persecution, they were excluded and put from the Sacraments, by the seue∣ritie of this first discipline, and that euen to the hower of death, whereto the famous storie of Serapio is to bee referred: And then that they might be comforted, by their being receiued into the peace and Communion of the Church, hauing giuen tokens of repentaunce; the Ministers of the Church accompanied with their friendes, did communicate vnto them the holy Supper, and oftentimes also did communicate with them. Againe, wee reade not in all those 800. yeares, The questions moued in these latter ages, were not heard of in the first, no not of 800. yeares af∣ter Christ. which fall into the time of Charle∣maine, in any of the bookes of those graue and holy Doctors, any of the questions wherewith the Schooles were afterward filled. The people which read and heard the word of God and his seruice, in their owne language; was wonted to the phrases and manners of speeches vsed in the Scriptures: the sheepe of the Lord, did heare and vn∣derstand his voice, and rested contented and satisfied therewith. Barbarisme brought into the Church, did beget these barbarous Expositions; and consequently these blasphemous questions, not as they are barbarous: If our Lord do leaue heauē to come into the place of bread: If in comming thither he passe through the ayre: If he doe forsake the same a∣gaine so soone as the kind is striken vpon with the tooth; or else if he goe downe into the stomacke: and being in the stomacke whether he rest therin altogether; and how long staying in the stomack; whether he waite and attend there, till the forme of the bread at the least bee disgested, whether he chaunge himselfe at such time into the soule, or body of the Communicant, or whether he va∣nish into nothing, or else returne to heauen. Whether the accidents of bread and wine doe cleaue vnto him, or else abide hanging in the ayre: Whether the Priest in remouing the host, doe remoue the body of Christ, or the accidents onely: Or rather whether the Priest remouing the accidents, God do fit and accommodate the bodie of Christ to this mouing. Againe; Whether the thing nou∣rished (or rather poysoned, as it is to be seene) become a new substance, which God createth in the stomacke, and whereunto they fasten themselues: Whether the body of Christ bee whole and all in euerie part of the host, or at the least in those parts, which are to be seene, by an indif∣ferent and meane sight; as also the bloud, in any the least drop. Whether he be there alwaies stan∣ding, his head turned toward the Priest, &c. Or else after the same manner of position and pla∣cing, that he is in heauen; set, or otherwise; and whether hee be there clothed or naked. Whether the Priest be able to consecrate all the bread and wine of the world, or that onely, which is before him: And whether that which he seeth onely, or that also which he seeth not, prouided that hee be equally distant from the one and the other: Whether the words become of sufficient power, be∣ing spoken once or many times, to consecrate many hosts: And what the words must bee; whether those that our Lord spoke, when he blessed the signes, which we know not, or those fower, Hoc est corpus meum: Or whether Enim, bee requisite and necessarie thereto or not: Or else, Quod pro vobis datur, &c. Whether the intent of the Priest bee requisite, if not actuall, yet at the least ha∣bituall, or inclining or disposed: Whether that Christ bee entred into the bread, after this word Hoc is spoken, or after Est, or the whole fiue words. Whether he enter into the same, seeing, hea∣ring, speaking & doing all that which he seeth, heareth, &c. in heauen; or else blind, deafe, dumbe, &c. and a thousand such like which we shall see hereafter. Questions, such as we shall not find any step or trace of, in all the writings of the reuerend old Fathers; as neither of their doctrine: Whereat these good fathers, would bee afraid and ashamed if they should liue againe; and which verily, I should haue made conscience to haue vttered, if conscience did not bind me to discouer and vnfold the absurdities whereinto one falschood once receiued, hath cast and plunged vs: beeing also such, as Dame impu∣dencie her selfe would blush at: howsoeuer that strumpet clothed with Scarlet, died in the bloud of the Martyrs of Christ, doe not blush thereat at all.
CHAP. VIII. What hath beene the originall, proceeding and increase of the opinion of Transubstantia∣tion, vnto the yeare 1215. And how it was ratisied and established by a decree in the Councell of Laterane. THus then we see, what the opinion was, not onely of the first old wri∣ters, but of all almost the later, concerning the holy supper; and how far off it was, from that which is receiued at this day: And now it onely remaineth that we see, how it is transubstantiated, by what degrees & manner of proceeding: The originall of Transub∣stantiation. which worke wee will frame and applie our sclues, in these our next labours, to set downe. Now it is a fresh to bee set before our eyes, that the first zeale of Christendome beeing decaied and dead: Christians came but fewe and seldome, to the receiuing of the holy Sacrament, in so much as that we haue heard those good Fathers complaining of the same in their Ser∣mons, and forced to implore and craue the aide and authoritie of the Emperours, whose Lawes to that effect are extant with vs: That euerie person should communicate eue∣rie Sabboth, after that at the least thrise a yeare, vpon paine of not being held any more for Chri∣stians. The Ministers thē that feared, that their offerings, which were at that time their principall staie and maintenance, (for there were not as yet any personages, or foun∣dations of Masses, or priuate seruices) should come to be dried vp, were constrained, as we haue seene, to teach the people, that although they communicated not, it wold not faile to yeeld them great aduantage & furtherance to the saluation of their soules, if they would but onely bee present at their seruice: And the more easie to perswade them the same, as wee say before, they did suggest into them by little and little: That there was not handled a Sacrament onely, but also a sacrifice: So that though they did not communicate in the one, yet at the least they were partakers in the other. A doctrine plausibly imbraced of the most part of those, which had learned the mea∣ning of the trying and proouing of themselues, which is required in the receiuing of the Lords supper; not comming to the same, but with feare and trembling: and which on the contrarie did see, that there was nothing more easie, then to bee present at this pretended sacrifice, the profit whereof was so highly commended to them, and also vnderpropt, as we haue seene heretofore, by the Lawes of the Emperours. And to make the same to be the more reuerently thought of, they applie thēselues the more freely to deceiue, (the present age being now ouer-shadowed with ignorance, and the people brought to entertaine a seruice which was done altogether in an vnknowne language: by meanes of the alteration of languages, which hapned almost through∣out al Christendome:) with diuers discourses and sundrie speeches taken out of those godly Fathers: a thing vnpossible for any man to haue effected in their time, the peo∣ple being then seasoned with the doctrine of Christ, by the reading of the Scriptures; the preaching of good Bishops: the frequenting of their Sermons, and the Ecclesiasti∣call seruice, which euerie where was done, according to the rule of the Apostle, in the vulgar tongue. And yet wee are not to imagine, that this monster was perfected by such increase and growth all at once. For first it found such as by whome it was con∣ceiued, and after, some to beare it: others to bring it foorth, others to receiue it vpon their laps, others to nurse it, and others to like and beautifie it: Many were the ages that ouer-passed, before it came to any certaine forme or shape: and hardly hath it as yet attained an assured and secure estate, as we shall see, when as the most learned and soundest part of Christendome, hath condemned & smothered it right out some∣times, by the spirit of the mouth of the Lord. Damascen about they yeare 800. was the first that remoued the markes of the an∣cients, concerning this matter: prouing also a patron of many other superstitions in
his time, but particularly of the adoration of images. Out of this man our aduersa∣ries alleadge these words: The bread and wine are not figures of the body & bloud of Christ: L. 4. c. 14. God forbid; but it is the verie deified body of the Lord; the Lord himselfe saying: This is my bo∣by, not the figure of my bodie, &c. directly contrarie to Tertullian, Saint Ambrose, and Saint Augustine; The Lord hath not doubted to call the bread his bodie, althogh it were but the figure, and signe of his bodie, &c. Againe, Damascen saith: If any man haue called them re∣presentations, , as Basill, it is before their sanctification. Whereas we are of iudge∣ment with Bellarmine, that before the same, they could not be called by that name: and in deed it is after. But of what force can these his speeches be, if he agree not, ei∣ther with our aduersaries, or with himselfe? Thou demaundest (saith he) how the bread is made the bodie of Christ, &c. I answere thee, the holy Ghost worketh these things, farre sur∣passing speech and vnderstanding, but the bread and wine are taken. Then they retaine their substance. Againe; God stooping to our wonted vse and custome, worketh the things that are a∣boue nature, by the things that are accustomed vnto nature: As in Baptisme hee ioyneth the grace of the holy Ghost, with the oyle and water; and hath made the same the washing of regene∣ration: So, because it is an ordinarie thing for men, to eate bread and drinkewine, hee hath ioy∣ned to these things his Diuinitie, and hath made them his bodie and his bloud, &c. Then the bread and wine do continue in the holy supper, no more transubstantiated, then the water and oyle in Baptisme. And declaring this coniunction afterward: Esay (saith he) saw the coale, not altogether simple: but made one with the fire: so the bread of the Communion is not altogether simple, but ioyned to the Diuinitie: But yet not without the abusing of the comparison vsed of the auncient writers, for the representing of the Vnion of the hu∣mane nature with the diuine in Christ. Now the burning cole abideth still a cole, in Esay: and notwithstanding a propitiation for his sinnes. How doth al this agree with that deified bodie, that he spoke of a little before? With that which they say at this day, that came after Thomas: That the bread is not the bodie of Christ: That the essence of bread goeth not into the essence of the bodie, but that it giueth place to the bodie, but that it vanisheth away, &c? And who seeth not, that these are patches, ill fauouredly set together by a Monke, which knew not whereunto to hold himselfe? Apon. l. in Cant. & l, 5. sub fine. Aponius (a great man in his time) dealeth somewhat better: Christ, according to the place, time, and cause, is become the meate and drinke of the Church, by the Sacrament of his bodie and of his bloud. And in an other place, he calleth this Sacrament, Desponsationem annuli, & traditionem osculi, The ring and the kisse of the affiancing of Christ vnto his Church: that is to say, the certaine pledge of the coniunction of the faithfull with Christ. And now consider the doctrine of the Church in the VII. generall Councell, Citatur in Nicaen. Syn. 2. art. 6. held at the same time at Constantino∣ple, vnder the Emperour Constantine V. wherein all Images of Christ were condem∣ned, this onely (for so the holy supper was there called) being reserued: All those (saith he) doe glad and reioyce themselues, which bring to the saluation of the spirit and bodie, the true image of Christ, which our high Priest, taking wholly vpon him our fleshly masse, when hee drew neere vnto his Passion, gaue vnto his Ministers and Disciples, for a figure and remembrance of exceeding great efficacie: for hauing freely and willingly offered himselfe to die, hee tooke bread, blessed it, &c. and said: Take, eate, for the remission of your sinnes: This is my bodie, &c. Doe this in remembrance of me: as not hauing there any other kind that hee had made choise of, nei∣ther yet figure, wherein his incarnation might be represented. Behold then the Image of his quick∣ning bodie, which is honourably and gloriously exhibited, &c. But this Councell was after∣ward condemned by the second Nicene Councell, which established the adoration of images: And without all doubt, not without the shaking (by that meanes) of the truth of this Article; as it will be seene in that which Theophilact writeth. But that second of Nice was also condemned, by that of Francford and of Paris, as we haue seene be∣fore, held vnder the authoritie of Charles the great, Lewes and Lotharius: which may bee the cause that our French Doctors should as yet hold the same firmely, Anno 900. Theoph. in Marc. c. 14. & in Mat. 26. . for true and sound doctrine. Theophilact therefore about the yeare 900. to sute Damascen: The bread is not the figure, or any kind of paterne of the bodie of our Lord, but the bodie of Christ is turned into it.
Or else in an other place: In Ioh. c. 6. The bread , is turned into the body. Againe; It is not onely a certaine figure of the flesh of our Lord, but the verie flesh of our Lord, &c. Verily, no more constant or assured then Damascen, seeing that he saith in the same places: God stooping downe and applying himselfe to our infirmitie, doeth keepe the figure of bread and wine. He saith not the accidents: He transformeth and chaungeth them into the power and vertue of the flesh and bloud. He saith not into thy flesh and bloud. And it is not here to be for∣gotten, that in diuers Copies these words are not to be found. Againe; Wee celebrate an oblation without bloud, the remembrance of an oblation which he hath once made, &c. The remembrance, how can that agree with the real presence? But when he saith, Transfor∣meth or chaungeth from one element to an other: who shall better interpret him then Saint Augustine, that it is chaunged from an element to a Sacrament, by the power of the word, that is to say, by the institution of Christ? Otherwise, if a man should goe a∣bout to take it literally, our aduersaries, who allow not of this proposition, The bread is, or, is made the bodie of Christ, could they admit of this of Theophilacts; The bodie of Christ is turned to vs into bread: The bread of the Altar is transformed and chaunged into the bodie of Christ? And what exposition will they giue then thereunto, except this, he is become our spirituall foode and nourishment? Seeing that he saith in an other place: That there is not any carnall thing: In a word, that the bread, as we say, with all the ancient writers, is Sacramentally the body of Christ. Now in the life time of Charles the great, Iohannes Eryngerus, Scotus, a Monke of the order of Saint Bennet, companion to Alcuinus, and Schoolemaster to Charles the great, had written a booke of the holy Supper, wherein hee dealeth against this abuse, touching it, euen from the conception thereof: a certaine argument and proofe of that which the worthie Beda had taught, for as much as hee was his Disci∣ple. The occasion of which my speech ariseth vpon certaine places in Beda his works, which some haue corrupted; in like manner vpon Saint Mathew, which Auentinus witnesseth that he found out, by comparing together the old Copies, which are kept in the auncient Monasteries of Germanie, In Biblioth. Passaulensi & Waltfacrens. to haue beene falsified, by some such like faithfull and vpright Catholike dealing, as our fathers of Trent haue vsed in their In∣dex Expurgatorius, deuised and ordained in that Councell, against all the most nota∣ble writers that haue written, since the yeare 100. But of this Scotus his workes wee haue nothing, for his booke was burnt in the Councell holden at Verseillis by Pope Leo the ninth, more then two hundred yeares after his death; at such time as Beren∣garius was there condemned. But so it is that we haue Bertram his booke, who was a Priest, and writ the same to king Charles the bald, brother to the Emperour Lotharius; how this controuersie grew hotter and hotter in Fraunce, and how there were two questions consulted vp∣on by the said Charles: The first was; Whether the bread and wine taken by the mouthes of the faithfull, be the bodie and bloud of Christ in deed & verily, or mistically and Sacramentally: The second; Whether it be the same bodie, that was borne of the Virgine Marie, &c. sitting at the right hand of the father, &c. And of this booke there is mention made by the Ab∣bot Trithemius, Trithem. de doctorib. eccle. & Chron. Hirtsaugien. who calleth it, Opus commendabile, a laudable worke. As also of his per∣son, whose rare gift both in diuine and humane learning, as also in soundnesse of life, hee much praiseth and commendeth. And his resolution, which hee gaue to King Charles, debated and argued from the testimonies of all the old writers, it was this in summe: S August. S. Hieronym. S. Ambros. &c. That the Fathers vnder the Law in their Sacraments, did eate the flesh, and drinke the bloud of Christ, as wee doe: That the eating in the holy supper is accomplished after the same way and maner, that regeneration in Baptisme: that the visible elements are Sacraments, signes, mysteries, and similitudes or resemblances, which are taken by the mouth and hand: That the inuisible things, that is, the flesh and bloud of Christ, are receiued into the soule, and taken by faith: That the sanctified Elements continue and abide still in their first substance, and yet exhi∣bite vnto vs, by the institution of the Lord, that which hee hath promised by his word: The fruit whereof is, to be ioyned to Christ, and made fellow sufferers with him in his sufferings, the image and remembrance whereof is celebrated in this mysterie. I would intreate the Reader, not
not to grieue to reade this book, because it is learned, and setteth forth in verie liue∣ly sort, the opinions of the Fathers: pressing and vrging the places of Scripture, and of the fathers; and as it were foreseeing all the cauils of the masters of Transub∣stantiation. But let him that buyeth or readeth it, see, that it be of those that were Im∣printed before the Councell of Trent; because that in signe of their perseuering in their honest and faithfull course, they ordaine and appoint in their Index, Index. pag. 11 that what∣soeuer it containeth to their dislike, should bee either chaunged or quite raced out: that is to say, the greatest part of the booke. Their maner of correcting and interpre∣ting, is no grosser, but to turne the affirmatiue into a negatiue, & so on the contrarie: as for example: For visibiliter, to put inuisibiliter, for substances, accidents: for temporall, eternall, &c. And this is further to be noted therewithall, that he was not taxed of he∣resie for the same: & that the Abbotte Trithemius, which forgot not to set the brand vpon others, when there was cause, hath not once pointed at any such thing in him. Haimo, Bishop of Halberstat, and one of Alcuinus his hearers, Haim. in 1 Cor. 11 &. in Sabbarh. post Iudic. who was Schoole∣master to Charlemaine: This is my bodie (saith he) that is the bread, that Christ gaue to his Disciples, and to all the predestinated vnto eternall life; and that that which the Ministers do consecrate daily in the Church, by the power of the Diuinitie, which filleth this bread, is the bo∣die of Christ. Now I would know if they wil approue of this Proposition: That this, hoc, is the bread? Then it is not their Iudiniduum vagum, nor yet their accidents. Giuen to the elect or predestinated: not then to the wicked and vngodly; and not by the mouth. Filled with the diuine power: not then with Christ really, who is that fulnesse. And in the end: This bread, the body of Christ: And how, according to their owne speeches, without here∣sie? How then, but Sacramentally, by the neere cōiunction of the thing with the signe? Againe; The flesh that Christ tooke in vnity of person, and this bread, are not two bodies but one. And how can this be otherwise then by this Sacramental vnion? The one then, as saith the Canon, In truth, the other in a mysterie. Againe; At the same instant that this bread is broken and eaten, Christ is offered and eaten; whole notwithstanding and liuing. Then it is the bread that is broken and not the body, and not the accidents. And therefore accor∣ding to that which he saith afterward, Hoc facite, Sanctifie this body, in remembrance of me in remembrance (saith hee) of my passion, of your redemption, that I haue redemed you with my bloud. He addeth, The Lord therefore hath left this sauing Sacrament to all the faithfull, that so he may imprint in their harts, that he died for their redemption. So some man being about to die, leaueth vnto his friend a gift, and saith vnto him; keepe that in remembrance of me, & he is hea∣uie and pensiue when he seeth it: and we when we are partakers of this eternall gift in the Sacra∣ment, must come to it with reuerence, remembring our selues, with what loue he hath loued vs, gi∣uing himselfe a ransome for vs. The bread therfore is a Sacrament of the gift; and not the gift it selfe, (and that vpon far stronger reasons then any hee toucheth) which assureth vs more and more, of the reall possession of our life & nourishment in Christ: In whom (saith he in an other place) to abide and dwell, is, to eate him is to liue by him, is to be bone of his bones, flesh of his flesh, and one with himselfe. Rabanus Maurus, Archbishop of Maguntia: The creator of things & redeemer of men, Raban. in eccl. l. 7. c. 8. making of the fruits of the earth, that is to say, of Corne and wine, a fit and conuenient mysterie, turned them to Sacraments of his bodie & bloud. He saith not into his body and bloud. Idem l. 1. c. 5. de proprie: rerum & verb. He would (saith he in an other place) that these Sacraments should bee receiued into the mouthes of the faithfull, and become their foode, to the end that by the visible worke, the inuisible might be shewed, that is to say, by the true corporall eating, the true spiritual eating. What is now be∣come of our accidents? For euen (saith he) as the materiall meate doth nourish & refresh the body outwardly: so the word of God doth comfort and nourish the soule inwardly, &c. Where he layeth downe before vs the agreement and analogie, which once comming to cease, as in deede it ceaseth by Transubstantiation, there followeth the destruction of the Sacrament. Some obiect: But are they not the bodie and bloud? Let vs heare him: Because that bread dooth confirme and make strong the bodie, it is verie fitly called the bodie of Christ: and the Wine, because that it maketh the bloud in the fleshe, is referred to bloud. Note also, That they are named. But when they are sanctified: then by the holy Ghost,
they become the Sacraments of the diuine bodie. Idem de sa∣crm. Euchar. c. 10. & 41. And then, not into the verie thing of the Sacrament: Which (saith he in an other place) hee hath left vnto vs, because it must needes be, that he should ascend vp into heauen; to the end, that they might bee figures & Characters of his flesh and bloud vnto vs, and that our spirit and our flesh, might bee by these things the more aboundantly nourished, to the receiuing by faith, of the things that are inuisible and spirituall. So by this it appeareth, that the thing of the Sacraments is spirituall, and receiued by faith, that is to say, spiritually. And so in deed it is not receiued, but of the faithfull, euen by such as haue the spirit of Christ dwelling in their hearts. For saith he; The Sa∣crament is one thing, Idem de prop. Serm l. 5. c 11. Idem l. 1. c. 3. and the power and vertue of the Sacrament is another thing: The Sacra∣ment is taken in at the mouth; but the vertue of the Sacrament by the inward man: The Sa∣crament is turned into the nourishment of the bodie, but the vertue of the Sacrament worketh in vs vnto eternall life: The Sacrament by some is taken to their destruction: but the thing al∣wayes vnto saluation. If they say, that the wicked in the Sacrament doe receiue the bo∣die of Christ, but not the power and vertue of the same: how can they without blas∣phemie, seperate the bodie of Christ from his soule? Or the one or other from his Diuinitie? From his spirit? And who can receiue that, but to his saluation? They re∣plie againe: It is as he saith; That the figure and Character is verily the same which it is out∣wardly perceiued to be: Idem de Sacr. Euchar. c. 14. but that which is taken inwardly, is altogether truth without any shad∣dow. And without doubt also we say, and himselfe dooth lay it open: We participate the flesh of Christ which was crucified for vs, verily and truely: and the Sacraments of the same in deed, are there: And thus there is truth and veritie in euerie thing, whether it bee the thing, or else the Sacrament of the thing. Paschasius, Pasch Ratpert. de Corp. & Sang. Domini c. 1.19. & 50. Abbot of Corbie in Saxonie, held the contrarie opinion: for the Schooles and Monasteries were diuided concerning this point. And yet, so new was this doctrine, as that we may see, that he was not able to vtter his mind, or to speake what he would seeme to meane, in the booke which he made. He saith: The Lord hath done in heauen and in earth whatsoeuer he would, and that because it was his will: where he ta∣keth for graunted, the thing that is in question: Although it bee the figure of bread and wine, notwithstanding after the consecration, we must altogether belieue that it is the body and bloud of Iesus Christ. And al his arguments are drawne from the omnipotencie of God; without any proofe of his will. But would the masters of Transubstantiation approue and like of these words; Paschas. ad Prudeg. The bread and wine are the flesh and bloud of Christ? And yet not∣withstanding he is much troubled in himselfe, when hee considereth: That there must be in the Lords supper the figure, and notwithstanding the truth: And how the one may bee without the preiudice of the other, &c. In so much as that he is forced to say: That it is no maruaile, if this mysterie be a figure, and if the wordes thereof bee called figures; seeing that Christ himselfe is called an ingrauen forme and figure, Ide de Corp. & Sang. Dom. l. 4. euen hee which is the truth it selfe: That we belieue that that is done spiritually, and that we ought so to belieue it to be: That he is offered for vs mystically: That wee walke by faith, and not by sight: That our Lord hath left vs these visible figures, ascending vp to heauen, to feede our spirite and fleshe, by faith in spirituall things, &c. Neuerthelesse, notwithstanding the resistances and oppositions of the most lear∣ned, the abuse ceased not to spread it selfe further into diuers countries abroad: be∣cause that the ignorant people, who haue alwaies the stronger side, did perceiue and see, that both authoritie and profit would grow vnto them therby. We read by name, that in England there rise a great schisme betwixt Odo Archbishop of Canterburie, assisted by the meaner and inferiour sort of Priestes, being the parties affecting Tran∣substantiation, and the most learned of his Cleargie. To whose arguments and pla∣ces alleadged out of the Fathers, hee opposeth authoritie and force: And secondly to winne the Idiots and simple people, he vseth illusions and false myracles; whereof these ignorant ages did neuer want good store. This was about the yeare nine hun∣dred and fiftie. But in Fraunce, Berengarius, Deane of Saint Maurice of Augiers, a∣bout the yeare 1050. Anno 1050. Lauranc. con. Berengar. displaieth againe the ensigne of truth, and writeth a Treatise of the Lords Supper: whereof wee haue nothing more then it pleased Lanfrancus
his aduersarie, to cite in his writings against him: And yet notwithstanding such as that thereby he doth neither iniurie the truth, nor his good name; although he make it euident and apparant enough, that hee hath not forgotten to weaken and detract from the force of his reasons, so much as he possibly could. This Berengarius there∣fore writ priuily to Lanfrancus, a Millaner, then Abbot of Bec-Heloin in Norman∣die, what hee thought of the holy supper: Lanfrancus being absent, his Canons did open the letter and sent it to Rome: In it he praised the booke of Iohannes Scotus, written in the time of Charlemaine. The letter is made knowne in a Synod holden at Rome and condemned, the Author being neuer heard. Lanfrancus is inioyned to re∣fute it, if so be he would cleare himselfe of all suspition of hauing any part in that pre∣tended errour, which was so much the more, because of such intelligences as did in verie familiar sort passe betwixt him and Berengarius: Scotus his booke was burnt two hundred and fiftie yeares after his death. Berengarius continueth his vertuous course, and had for his Disciples and followers diuers great personages in Fraunce: amongst others, Freward and Waldus, Knights, &c. A thing verie likely, seeing that the Popes, otherwise more curious and carefull about worldly complaints, then stu∣dious in questions of Diuinitie, did so much molest and trouble them. Leo the ninth therefore called a Councell at Verscillis in Piemont, and came thither himselfe in person: Berengarius durst not appeare, but sent thither onely two of his friends to tender his reasons; who were easily made afraid. The Councell of Rome thereupon became the more emboldned: and gaue order notwithstanding that the French Church should assemble a Councell at Towrs, to cause Berengarius to stoope and be∣come subiect. This was in the time of Pope Victor the second, and there was Hilde∣brand (afterward Gregorie the seuenth) on his behalfe, the most violent and head-strong Prelate that euer liued. There appeared Berengarius, who declared vnto them: That he did not teach bare and naked signes in the Eucharist, but that the bread and wine there vsed, were most vndoubted pledges and seales of the reall Communion in the true bodie and bloud of our Lord, which all those haue, and, there receiue which take these signes with a true faith: That the bread and wine notwithstanding doe not chaunge their substances: but rather, of com∣mon ones are made holy ones, of elements, Sacraments, &c. And that to conclude, hee held for o∣ther matters, as all the auncient Fathers haue written, and according also to the sence and mea∣ning of the Lithurgie ordinarily read in the Church, &c. Thus the Councell rested satisfied at his hands. But Pope Nicholas II. perceiuing that this doctrine was on foote againe, cited Berengarius to Rome the second time, to appeare in the Consistorie of Lateran, and thither hee came being drawne and allured by faire and flattering speeches. The first argument that was framed against him, was, that if he did not retract his former opi∣nions, he should be burnt: and thereupon Humbert the Burgonian, afterward Car∣dinall, drew a reuocation, such as we reade in the Decree: That hee doth confesse, C. Ego Beren∣gar. de consec. d. 2. that after the Consecration, the bread and wine, are the verie bodie and bloud of Christ: That they are there sensibly and in truth handled with the hands of the Priests: broken and brused with the teeth of the faithfull, &c. And that hee curseth all them which doe iudge otherwise, &c. that is to say, the whole Romish Church at this day, which holdeth these propositi∣ons for hereticall: That the bread is the bodie, that the bodie is brused with the teeth, &c. Lanfranc. de Sacr. & Alger. Where it is also to be noted, that he saith: Of the faithfull, not, of all those that are par∣takers thereof: a remnant and small parcell of the pure doctrine, and a signe of the as yet imperfect deliuerie and teaching of the impure and corrupt. And therefore the Glose of the Decree addeth thereunto: Beware, least thou shouldest not rightly vnder∣stand that which Berengarius saith here, and so shouldest fall into greater and more grosse here∣sies, then euer he did: And the Glose vpon the Canon, Vtrum, hath these words: C. Vtrum. de consecr. d 2. ex August. vbi Glos. It is not lawfull to eate Christ with the teeth: Berengarius (saith hee) said the contrarie, but hee spoke hyberbolically, and went beyond the listes of the truth. And by consequent, Pope Nicholas and the Councel of Rome, consisting of 114. Bishops, and the whole Romish Church,
mentioned in the Canon, Ego Berengarius. So slenderly was this Beares whelpe as yet licked. In the meane time this goodly recantation is sent throughout all Christen∣dome; and Prouinciall Synods assembled in euerie nation, to cause it to be receiued. But Berengarius returneth into Fraunce, refuseth it, and publisheth the cruell and violent dealing wherewith he had beene tormented by the Church (as hee calleth it) of the malignant, Ecclesia Ma∣lignantium. Auersanus E∣piscopus. the Councell of vanitie. Then beginne Humbert, made Cardinall vpon that occasion; and Guitmond, of a Monke of the Crosse Saint Leuffroi, made Bishop of Auers, to write against him. This was towards the yeare 1059. In the end Beren∣garius died in Fraunce: the fierie and terrible threatnings of the Pope, according to his former practise, still perseuering: And he had an Epitaph made him by Hildebert, or Fuldebert Bishop of Mans, Epitaph. Berē∣gar. per Fulde∣bert. Episc. Ce∣noman. apud Mamelsbur. vel per Hildeb ex Gaguin. such as hee could, for the greatest and most holy per∣son of that age, which beginneth: Quem modo miratur, semper mirabitur Orbis, &c. Wherein hee extolleth his pietie and wonderfull learning, both for the benefite of those of his owne time, as also of the posteritie, wherein hee bewaileth his death, as threatning a ruine to the whole Church, in as much as in him resteth the hope and glorie of the Cleargie: wherein hee saith that enuie her selfe which did oppresse and beare him downe, dooth weepe ouer him, &c. Afterward hee concludeth with a verie feruent desire, and wish that hee might lie downe and liue with him: that his estate and condition at the time of his departing out of this life, might bee no better then his, Mamelsbur. l. 3. c. 58. &c. But it is more to the purpose, to see it in Mamelsburiensis, who reciteth it wholly. And Platina likewise the Popes their Historiographer, in the life of Iohn the fifteenth, dooth giue an honourable testimonie of him. Some adde, that dying hee should say: To day Christ will appeare vnto me, according to my penitentnesse, as I hope vnto glorie, or because of others vnto paine. The most sound interpretation whereof is, that he did repent of hauing yeelded or turned aside from the profession of the truth, and that he feared that he had offended his brethren through his infirmities. And it is to be noted herewithall, Lanfrancus & Guitmond do not speake as our aduersa∣ries. that Lanfrancus, Alger, and Guitmond doe not yet vse such tearmes and speeches as these dayes are full of. But they beginne to call the bread and wine Kinds, after the consecration: where the Fathers called them by this name before the same, vnderstanding by this word, Substances, and not appearances or fanta∣sies onely: as those of this time. Againe; they beginne to say, that the bodie and bloud inuisible in the Kindes, are Sacraments of the visible bodie and bloud, for feare that mans infirmitie should be offended and surprised with the horrour of the thing. But they as yet, had not beene to learne their lesson at Sorbone: As, that the substaunce of bread and wine doe vanish: that the accidents abide hanging in the ayre: and yet notwithstanding are remooued by the hand, and are brused with the teeth of the Priest, &c. Neither had they as yet intituled this their carnall fantasie, and called it by the name of Transubstantiation. But after the consecration they retained the name of signes and markes. Lanfrancus saith oftentimes with the fathers: The Sacrament of the Al∣tar, is the figure of the body and bloud of our Lord, &c. And what shall we say more; Pope Gregorie the 7. his stan∣ing in doubte of the truth of Transub∣stantiation. enno Card. in Gregor. 7. when as Benno Cardinall of Hostia, and Deane of the Cardinals, doth make mention in his Historie, that Pope Gregorie the seuenth called Hildebrand, who had beene present at the Councell of Tours, as Legat from Pope Victor II. against Berengarius, is in such distressing doubt, as that hee sendeth two Cardinals, such as were his trustie and faithfull Agents in matters of weight, Acto and Conno, vnto S. Anastasius, to the end that they should fast three daies with Suppon, arch-priest of that Parish, singing three dayes the Psalter and the Masse, to the ende that God would shew vnto them by some signe, which was the sounder iudgement, that of the Church of Rome, or that of Berengarius: And notwithstanding all that (saith he) there came nothing of it. Not yet satisfied hee inioyned the whole companie of the Cardinals to fast for the same end and purpose. And when as Iohannes Portuensis, to whome he committed all his secrets, (euen he that first said Masse in Latine at Con∣stantinople, according to the maner of Rome) said after his death, Ex ambone B. Petri,
from out of the Chaire or Pulpit of Saint Peter: in the hearing of all the people and Clear∣gie; Hildebrand and we haue done a deed, for which we ought to haue beene burned aliue: Be∣ing about to say, saith Benno: That he had consulted with the Sacrament, as with an ora∣cle, against the Emperour Henrie his enemie: and that afterward hee cast it into the fire, in the presence, and against the good liking of certaine Cardinals which then were there with him. This Hildebrand I say of whome they cannot sufficiently content themselues with saying, and that for good cause; Ʋir Pontificatu dignus, &c. A man worthie of the Popedome, &c. Wherfore the Decree of Pope Nicholas II. could not so quickly root out of the harts of men, the old and ancient truth: but that the traces thereof, might as yet be seen in such as were most deuoutly addicted vnto the Romish Church. Anselme, Lanfrancus his Disciple and successour, as well in the Abbey of Bec-Heloin, as in the Archbish-oppricke of Canterburie; teacheth conformably to the Fathers: That the Fathers vn∣der the Law, did eate the same spirituall meate that we; euen the body and bloud of Christ: That in the Sacraments, they signifying things, that is to say, the signes, do take the names of the things signified: And thus (saith he) the rocke was Christ: That the breaking of bread was a signe of the breaking of his bodie, which should be done at his Passion: that to eate him vnworthily, is to eate him with the mouth of the bodie worthily, with the mouth of the heart, &c. Saint Ber∣nard, intreating vpon the supper: A ring is absolutely giuen for a ring, and it carrieth no further signification with it: It is also giuen to aduance a man to some place of honour and digni∣tie, or else to set one in possession of an inheritance: in so much as that hee which hath receiued it may say: The ring is nothing worth, but it is the inheritance that I seeke and aime at. After the same manner our Lord drawing neere to his death, had care to set vs in possession of his grace; to the end that his inuisible grace, might be giuen vs by some visible signe. And for that are all the Sacraments instituted: for that cause also the Eucharist and Baptisme, &c. What will they here say, which blame and are offended with vs, for that we call the Sacraments a ring or pledge? In an other place he putteth downe this comparatiue speech: Idem in Cant. serm. 33. Men vse not to take with like chearefulnesse the crust of the Sacrament, and the finest of the flower of the Corne, faith and riches, remembrance and presence, eternitie, and a stinted time, the face, and the Glasse, the Image of God, and the forme of a seruant. Againe, Idem de S. Martinio, ser. 21. The true substance of the flesh is exhibited vnto vs in the Sacrament, but spiritually, not carnally. And what is the meaning of this spiritually? Verily, saith he in an other place, expounding these words: Noli me tangere: This touching from henceforth, seeing Christ is gone vp into heauen, is done by the affection, not with the hand: with the desire, not with the eye: by faith, not by feeling. Thou shalt touch him with the hand of faith, the finger of desire, the fierie flames of deuotion, and with the eye of the vnderstanding, &c. To belieue him, is to haue found him. Hug. erud. Theolog. trac. 6. c. 7. Summae Senten. & de sacr. l. 2. p. 8. c. 8. & 13. The faithfull knowe that Christ dwelleth by faith in their hearts: what can there be more neere? Hugo of Saint Victor; This visible kind is named flesh, by the custome of the Scripture, which giueth to Sacraments, the names of the things whereof they are Sacraments. Againe, The bread is proposed and set be∣fore men, that in it may be taken, and by it may bee signified, the truth of the bodie and bloud of Christ. And againe, The receiuing of the Eucharist, is the Sacrament and image of the parti∣cipation of Iesus: For this his Sacrament, which wee take visibly, is the signe, that we ought to be vnited vnto him spiritually. In a word, It is better for thee (saith he) that Christ should en∣ter into thy vnderstanding, then into thy belly: This meate is for the soule and not for the bodie. Which beareth in a word this lessō with it as we take it: That the bread is the body of Christ Sacramentally in signification, and in figure: exhibiting notwithstanding vnto our soules, the thing in truth, spiritually & by faith. And Berengarius doth interpret it in the same words, cited by Lanfrancus. Now I am not ignorant that these same Do∣ctors haue in other places spoken altogether as properly: but so it is that Barbarisme had not as yet choaked & suppressed the old language of the Church, notwithstāding that persecution was euerie where intended against them, that would speake it freely. Oppositions. Peter de Bruits a famous Doctor at Tholose, who taught that the transmutatiō of the kinds was contrarie to the word of God, Petrus Clunia∣censis, l 2. being followed of a great number of people in the Prouences of Dolphinie, Prouence, Languedoc, and Guien, was burned aliue:
And Henrie his fellow Scholler, did not shrinke to take his place vpon him in most couragious sort & maner as also diuers others with him. An Abbot rose on the other side in Fraunce, who preached the verie same doctrine: an other in England, holding disputation, Panem esse Sacramentum, non rem Sacramenti: That the bread is the Sacrament, and not the thing: but this man was oppressed by Malachias Bishop of Ireland. In Grae∣cia likewise they disputed and reasoned sutably to this doctrine: Whether the bodie of Christ, Nicetas. after it is taken, bee corruptible, or incorruptible. Nicetas taketh the one part, and Humbert the Burgonian the other, men agreed vpon, as contrarie one to the other in all things. Thus, by these friuolous and fantasticall questions, turning into cruell contentions, the true body of Christ was rent in peeces, and his very bloud contemp∣tuously shed and spoyled; whereas it was instituted for the vnion and knitting toge∣ther of the Church. Now come in Gratian and Lombard Friers, patrons and protectors, the one of the Canonists, the other of the Schoolemen: the one a compiler of the Decrees: the other of the sentences: Anno 1200. The Canons. the greater part whereof is taken from the Fathers, but some∣times not according to their true sence, the rather to fit them thereby to their times. And hereby we shall still be able to perceiue and see, that the truth thereof cannot bee hid or concealed. Let vs begin with Gratian: The Canon Inquit is verie plaine and manifest: Gratian. Cnqt. 80. De Consec d 2 C. Quia passus 3. c Consec. c. 2 &  Null . C. um. Quid 43 c. occr d 2. & b. Gl. & C. Non hoc. 4 ibid. That the Fathers of the old Testament, did eate the same spirituall meate that wee, &c. The Canon; Quia passus: That euerie faithfull person, is partaker of the bodie and bloud of Christ, of his bread and Cup in Baptisme: Maxims altogether contrarie to those of the transubstantiators: And as concerning the Eucharist; the Canon, Prima quidem saith, You shall not eate this bodie which you see, you shall not drinke the bloud which they shall shed that shall crucifie me: I haue recommended vnto you a certaine Sacrament, the same spiritually vnderstood doth quicken you. And the Glose; You shall not eate this bodie, &c. that is in this sort and greatnesse, but in the Sacrament. Which is directly against that which they teach: That the same body which was crucified, is eaten in the Eucharist. Now to the end they may loose themselues out of this snare, they patch it vp with these words. Ipsum & non ip∣sum; That is the same, and not the same: the same inuisible, not the same visibly, &c. But the Canons; C. Dupliciter. 2  est quod 4 d. ead &  Gloss. Aust in psa. 98. Tom. op. 58. c 19 C. de hac quidem. 75. d. 2 vbi Hieron. C. Hoc Corpus 27. de consecr. d. 2. Dupliciter, and hoc est quod doth quite breake off whatsoeuer hold they might seeme to haue; The flesh and the bloud of Christ are taken two waies: either as they are spiritu∣all and diuine, of which the Lord saith: My flesh is truely meate, &c. Or for the flesh which was crucified, and the bloud which was shed with the speare, &c. Now Saint Augustine meaneth that it is this, that is neither eaten nor drunken. Againe, by the Canon, De hac quidem; It is not permitted (saith he) to any man to eate of the host, that Christ hath offered vpon the Al∣tar of the Crosse: but rather of that other which is admirably done in remembrance of it. Then there is nothing left for vs to eate but the remembraunce and memoriall onely, &c. Againe; The heauenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, is called the bodie of Christ; suc modo, after a sort: though notwithstanding so it be, that it is the Sacrament of the bodie of Christ: that is of that which beeing visible, palpable and mortall, was fastned vpon the Crosse; and that this offering vp thereof is called passion, death, &c. Not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mysterie, &c. In the Glose, It is called the body of Christ, that is to say, significat, it signifieth it: The heauenly Sacrament, which truely representeth the flesh of Christ, is called the bodie of Christ; but improperly, &c. Thus then according to the Canons, we eate in the Eucharist, the flesh of Christ, &c. spiritually, not carnally. Now it followeth that we looke a little about vs, C Quia corpus 34. C Qui man∣ducant 57. C. Vt quid. 46. C Credere 18. C. Tuncs. 89 C Non iste pa∣nis. 55. De Consecr. d. 2. to see, whether it be by faith, or with our mouthes. The Canon, Quia corpus saith, The Lord hauing to ascend vp into heauen, did consecrate vnto vs, in the day of the Sup∣per, the Sacrament of his body and his bloud; to the end that that which had beene once offered for payment and satisfaction, might be continually honoured in a mysterie, and that this perdurable offering might stil liue and abide in remembrance, which must be waighed and considered of, fide, non specie: By inward faith, not by outward appearance, and pondered by the inward affection, not by the outward sight. The Canon: Qui manducant: That which is taken in the Sacra∣ment visiblie, is in truth eaten and drunken spiritually: That, which is seene, is the bread
and cuppe, &c. That wherein it is needfull that the faith should be instructed, is, how that the bread is the bodie of Christ, &c. And they are called Sacraments, because one thing is seene, & another vnderstood: That which is seene hath a bodily shape, but that which is vnderstood a spirituall fruit. The Canon, Ʋt quid, whereto doest thou prepare thy bellie and teeth? beleeue and thou hast eaten. The Canon, Credere: to beleeue in Christ is to eate the bread of life. The Canon, Non iste panis: It is not that bread which goeth into the bodie, that feedeth the sub∣stance of our soule; but the bread of eternall life. The Canon, In illo, Christ is in that Sacra∣ment: not therefore a corporall meate, but a spirituall. And againe the aboue said Canon; C. Quia cor∣pus. 34. d. 2. de Consecr. Quia corpus: when thou goest vp to the Altar, to be fed with spirituall meates, behold by faith the holy bodie of thy God; touch him with thy vnderstanding; lay hold vpon him with the hand of thy hart. Against all these they haue but one onely miserable Glose to obiect, which saith; So soone as the kind is touched with the teeth, Glos in C. Trib. de con∣secr d. 2. C. Qui man∣duc. 57. & Mis. in sequent. C. Vtrum{que} 71. C. vt quid. 46, Cmutat. 69. A sumente nonconscissus, non confra∣ctus, non diui∣sus, integer capitur. Ioh. 19. Gl. in C. Ego Bereng. 41. & in C. vtrum. so soone is the bodie of Christ rapt and con∣ueighed with speed into heauen, &c. And yet it is diuersly canuased and tossed by the Canonistes and schoolemen. Of eating with the mouth should follow the chawing of it with the teeth. But these Canons are contrarie to that. The Canon; Qui manducat; When we eate it, we make not any morsels or bittes thereof: The faithfull know how they eate the flesh of Christ. It is eaten by partes in the Sacrament, that is, in the signes, but it is all whole in thine heart. The Canon, Vt quid; whereto doest thou prepare thy teeth? The Canon, Ʋtrum, It is not lawfull to eate him with teeth. The Masse likewise in the sequences and conclusions following thereon: He that taketh him, cutteth him not, bruseth him not, nei∣ther yet diuideth him into morsels, &c. Contrarie to this ancient truth is only that Canon, Ego Berengarius, (made by the Cardinall Humbert, as it were in despight of all anti∣quitie) which saith; That he is broken and brused with the teeth. But without alleadging against him the Gospell, which saith, Not one of his bones shall bee broken: we will onely lay down the words of two Gloses, which proclaime for hereticks, both Pope Nicho∣las II. as also the whole Church of Rome of that time: The Glose of that same Ca∣non which saith, Referre all to the kinds, for we make not any part of the bodie of Christ: o∣therwise, thou shalt fall into a greater heresie then Berengarius: And the Glose of the Ca∣non, Ʋtrum, vpon these wordes: Is is not lawfull to eate Christ with teeth, Berengarius, (saith the Glose) saith the contrarie: (that is to say, Cardinall Humbert in the retra∣ctation which he drew for Berengriaus;) but he spake hyperbolically, and so exceeded the bondes of the truth. Of the eating of him with the mouth, it would follow that the wicked and vngodly should eate the bodie of Christ. The Canons againe are contra∣rie thereunto. The Canon, Qui discordat, Hee that is at strife with Christ, C. Qui discor∣dat. 64. C. Qui man∣duc 57. C. Quia passus 35. C. Christus 56. Fidelium denti∣bus atters. C Prima qui∣dem aeres 43. d. ead. C. Non opor∣tet. 3. C. Panis. 38. C. Hoc est quod dicim. 47. C. Ante benedict. 39. C. Panis est 54. eateth not his flesh, neither yet drinketh his blood, although hee should euerie day take the sacrament of so high and great a thing, as a iudgement of his destruction. The Canon, Qui manducant, They that eate and drinke Christ, eate and drinke life. The Canon, Christus, Christ is the bread, of whom who so eateth shall liue for euer. Likewise the Canon, Ego Berengarius, attributeth it as proper to the faithfull, to eate him with teeth. In briefe, vpon the question also of transubstantiation; If the bodie of Christ, after the words spoken must be sought for in heauen, or in the hands of the priest: and if of the wine & bread there be nothing remaining but the Accidents: Christ (say the Canons) is in heauen vntil this world shall be consummate and finished. The bodie of Christ must be in one place, but the truth is spread a∣broad euerie where. And as for the kinds: Wee must not offer any other thing in the Sacra∣ment, then wine, water, and bread, which are blessed in the figure of Christ: Before the blessing one kind is named, but after the blessing the bodie is signified. The bread and cuppe are a nouri∣shing of the resurrection, by the mysticall consecration, that is, by the efficacie of the worde and institution of Christ. That is, saith the Glose: A spirituall refreshing of the soule, which ray∣seth vs vp againe from the death of sinne. Againe, The bread and the cup (saith he) continue the thing that they are: & yet notwithstanding they are turned into another thing. Note, They continue the thing that they are. And he expoundeth it by way of consequence: For as thou hast taken the similitude of death, so also dost thou drinke the similitude of bloud. Then not the bodie reallie, nor the bloud. But the Glose saith, In as much as they signifie them. In briefe, The sacrifice of the Church consisteth in the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament,
as Christ consisteth of God and man, Constat ex Deo & ho∣mine. &c. Seeing that euerie thing containeth the nature and truth of those things whereof it is made. Now then reason thus: Christ to bee God, cea∣seth not to be man: neither therefore the bread and wine to be bread and wine, not∣withstanding that they bee Sacraments. And thus you may see how by the decree it selfe, made by Gratian the Monke, and authorised by the Popes; there cannot bee a∣ny transubstantiation. Let vs come to Peter Lombard, Lombard. commonly called the Maister of the Sentences: How oft is he troubled to shift himselfe of the fathers? And so much the more hard∣ly, because he would needes broach his owne opinion; whereas Gratian for the most parte contented himselfe to report what other men thought. To the ende therefore that he may establish the receiued opinion of his time, he cutteth off by the founda∣tion, Idem l. 1. d. 2. that which the first and ancient ages had embraced and allowed: concealing & keeping backe such parte of that which he alleadged out of the fathers, as might hurt him; August in psal. 73. not making mention of any thing, as farre as in him lay, saue that which hee thought might serue his turne. First, S. Augustine had said in a hundred places, after S. Paule; That the Fathers vnder the law had eaten in their Sacraments the same spiri∣tuall meate that we doe eate in ours: He teacheth that those did onely signifie and shadow out saluation, but that these do giue it: alleadging a lame and maimed place out of Saint Augustine, which he ordinarily expoundeth by these words: That they were Sacraments of Christ to come, and ours of Christ alreadie come, &c. Secondly, S. Augustine after Saint Paule hath taught vs; That we put on Christ in Baptisme; That therein wee are made partakers also of the bodie and bloud of Christ: And all the fathers were wont to rea∣son from Baptisme, to the holy Supper; from the water, to the bread and wine, ac∣knowledging the power of the holy Ghost alike in the one and in the other: Lom∣bard perceiuing how this might seeme preiudiciall vnto him in the pretended tran∣substantiation, more sparingly and pinchingly; Baptisme (saith he) washeth vs: the Eucharist doth perfect vs in goodnesse, Lombard. l. 4. d. 3. &c. euen so farre, as that he letteth not to preferre and set confirmation before it: Thirdly, the Fathers had not acknowledged in the Sacrament, any thing besides the signe, and the thing of the Sacrament in the holy Supper, namely, the bread and wine sanctified for signes, and the bodie and bloud for the thinges. Now Lombard against the nature of a Sacrament, acknowledged in all other Sacraments, to lay the foundation for his transubstantiation, acknowled∣geth therein a double signe, and a double thing. The double signe, The kinds which he calleth bread and wine before the consecration: And after the same, The inuisible bodie and blood, signes of the visible bodie and bloud of our Lord: And for the double signes: One contained and signified: that is, the flesh of Christ, which he tooke of the virgine, and the bloud which he did shed for vs: and another not contained, and notwithstanding signified, the vnitie of the Church, and the coniunction thereof with Christ, which hee calleth the mysticall flesh of Christ: C. Non hoc. C. Dupliciter. directly contrarie to Saint Augustine, and the Canon which saith: You shall not eate the flesh which the Iewes shall fasten to the crosse: neither shall ye drinke the bloud which they shall shed, &c. Fourthly: All antiquitie did tell vs, that the signes abide in their nature, Saint Augustine and S. Ambrose in speciall: After the consecration they are the same that they were, Lombard. l. 4. d. 8. Lombard subtillie, They retaine the names of that which they were be∣fore: Contrarie to the Canons, Non oportet: In Sacrament. Cum omne: Panis, hoc est, quod dicimus, &c. Fiftly, The Fathers by consequent did teach; That the faithfull re∣ceiued Sacramentum, De consecr. d. 2 & rem Sacramenti, the signe and the thing: the vnbelieuers the Sa∣crament onely: He then that maketh a double signe & a double thing, & the thing which he calleth contained and signified, a signe after the consecration of the signi∣fied and not contained, that is to say, the bodie and bloud of Christ inuisible, vnder the appearances of bread and wine, signes of the visible and sensible bodie of Christ, teacheth, as it were by the spirit of contradiction, That the wicked eate the thing of the Sacrament, and not the Sacrament. They eate not the Sacrament: (so did the Fathers call the bread and the wine:) for according to Lombard, there remaineth nothing but Accidents, which are not subiect to the teeth: And notwithstanding our Lord hath
said, Take, eate. And the Apostle. He that shall eate of this bread, &c. And notwithstan∣ding if we beleeue him, they eate the inuisible bodie and bloud of Christ, but with∣out being partakers of the visible bodie and bloud, whereof it is the signe: Against the Canons, Qui discordat, Christus: Qui mandacant, &c. And that which is worse, a∣gainst the Sonne of God himselfe, who saith vnto vs; He that eateth my flesh & drinketh my bloud, he dwelleth in me, and I in him, he hath eternall life, &c. Take this for remission of your sinnes, &c. Whereas certainly he doth not distinguish by inuisible and visible: And against the true Diuinitie also, which teacheth vs; That the flesh and bloud of the Sonne of God are not without his soule, without his spirit, or without his diuinitie. Neither then without eternall life, or without nourishment to them that receiue him, and that vnto life, & to the resurrection vnto life. And this is it that Lombard saith in these words, Lombard. l. 4. d. 9. The wicked receiue sacramentallie, that is to say, vnder the sacrament, that is to say, vnder the visible kind, the flesh of Christ, taken of the virgine, &c. but not the mysticall, which is not recei∣ued of any but the good: that is to say, the vnitie which is betwixt Christ and his mem∣bers: that which they call the proper and naturall bodie: this the spirituall bodie: whereas the old Church did neuer know in our Lord any moe bodies then one: and that a verie, true, and naturall bodie. And also he hath not a little to doe to cleare & quite himselfe of Saint Augustine, yea and when he hath done his best, yet hee seeth not how to shift him off, but by falsifying and corrupting of him. Sixthly, The Fa∣thers neuer acknowledged after the sanctifying of the kindes any moe changes of names then one: as the giuing of the name of the thing vnto the signe: and they cal∣led these substances by the name of kindes, both before and after: Lombard vnder∣standeth by kinds, The accidents onely, as whitenesse, taste, weight, &c. He disputeth, whe∣ther this change be formall or substantiall. In the beginning he saith, That he cannot decide the question: Afterward he is more bold, Affirming resolutely, that it is not formall, for the qualities still remaine. And can these qualities remaine without matter? Some say, sub∣stantiall, that is to say, that the substance of the bread, is turned into the bodie. And what then (saith he) should the flesh of Christ grow and increase continually? Others, That the bodie and bloud doe take the place of the substances of bread and wine. And what becommeth then (saith he) of the substances of bread and wine? Doe they passe into the matter lying there in open sight, or do they vanish into nothing? &c. Others, That the one and the other abide together, the one for the signe, the other for the thing. Now there is not any one of these questions to bee found in the Fathers, as neither those which follow: What foundation the Accidents doe rest vpon: vpon some subiect, Idem l. 4. d. 12. or without a∣ny subiect: whether the bodie and bloud do there take their forme, or whether our Lord be such a one there, as he shall appeare in iudgement? Whereto for a conclusion Lombard addeth this: Whether he be there broken in deed, or seeme onely so to be? &c. And here againe hee is in a foule pussle, how to ridde himselfe of the Canon, Ego Berengarius: which not∣withstanding hee concludeth on the contrarie: That there is not any thing but the shew, that is to say, the similitude or apparance, broken, &c. Now thus many opinions and so di∣uers, and yet notwithstanding vncondemned, being left as problemes and free for e∣uerie one, doe proue vnto vs, that these good men were not as yet perswaded to what side to bend, and that this doctrine was yet but verie new and raw to the Church. For if it had had any long standing: who doubteth but that so many worthy personages, during so many ages, would haue become resolued and resolute long before? But it is about this matter that all the schoolemen doe busie themselues from this time for∣ward, some of them taking the one side, and others the other, vntill the time of the Councell held at Lateran, wherein the question was decided: though afterward they could not rest resolued, so many were the doubts and scruples that crossed that vaine and idle vision. In the meane time it happeneth that Lombard should make a scope, and say, That Christ is not sacrificed or offered in the Masse in effect and in deed, but in a my∣sterie: And that the Masse is not properly a sacrifice, but a representation and remembrance of of a sacrifice. Let vs reason thereupon; If he be there, then there also is a sacrifice, yea there is a reall sacrifice: but if there bee no reall sacrifice, if there bee nothing made
but a remembrance, then is there no host offered, nor yet the bodie and bloud of Christ, reallie in the host. Now in the yeare 8215. C. firmit. credi∣mus de summ. Trin.t. & fid. cathol. The establi∣shing of tran∣substantiation. In Concil. La∣teranens. l. de fid. cathol. S. vnt. Pope Innocent the third, in the Councell of Lateran pub∣lished his decree, We do constantly and firmely beleeue, &c. which determineth the forme and manner of this pretended transmutation, and giueth the name to this monster in these words; That in the Sacrament of the Altar the bodie and bloud of Christ are truely and verily contained, the bread being transubstantiated into his bodie, and the wine into his bloud, by the diuine power. And euer since that time it hath beene so taught in the Church of Rome. But iumping together at the same time wee haue the Albigenses in all these Prouinces, as Dolphinie, Prouence, Languedoc, and Guien, which being offended hereat, do rise against the Church of Rome. The Pope more sharply bent vpon their subuersion, then conuersion, sendeth on the one parte Dominicke, to preach vnto them; but Leopold Duke of Austria, and Simon Counte of Montfort, in deed to force them by their great power and armies: He bent and imploied against them the Croi∣sade, euer before that appointed to go against the Turkes: In a word, hee filled all these Prouinces with flames of fire, and streames of bloud, and spread them here and there in scattering wise, cleane contrarie to his mind, throughout all the parts of Eu∣rope. And the Chronicles of England doe testifie, that there were some of them that fled thither for the same matter. And Vincentius saith, that they were burned at Pa∣ris by Dozeus. And if we doubt whether it were for the same faith; the confession of the Waldenses, Confessio fra∣trum Wal∣densium. will make the case cleare and plaine vnto vs: which we intreat the rea∣der to take the paines to peruse; because that all the argumentes of the Patrons of transubstantiation are therein verie soundly confuted, according to the time; and the puritie of the doctrine agreeablie laid downe. The summe whereof is, That in the Sup∣per the faithfull doth receiue the verie bodie and bloud of Christ; That the bread and wine doe neither change their nature nor substance: because that if the element should cease to bee, there should not be a Sacrament any longer; That as concerning the rest, the bodie and bloud of Christ ought not to be sacrificed, nor yet eleuated, that it may be adored, but receiued by the faithfull, &c. And this is added, because that at that time the doctrine of a sacrifice had pro∣ceeded verie farre, and that there was a like endeuoure for the mutuall establishment of transubstantiation and the sacrifice; the one without doubt being a great deale the more recommendable by reason of the other. CHAP. IX. What hath beene the manner of the proceeding & growth of Transubstantiation since the Councell of Lateran, vnto the time of the Councell of Trent: and the absurdities and contradictions proceeding of the same. WHerefore euer since the time of the decree of Lateran, the Schoolemen haue occupied themselues in the defending of Transubstantiation by Philosophie: Brutish que∣stions procee∣ding of tran∣substantiation, which the fa∣thers neuer knew. Innocent. l. 4. c. 19. Lombard. l. 4. d. 13. Ioh. de Burg. de custodiend. Euchar. c. 10. whereas such as had beene before them, could not grow to a resolution about the manner of the change. And now the Doctors handle no other matter, but whollie giue themselues to find out rea∣sons for the maintaining thereof, and the Popes altogether occupied about the deuising of ceremonies, for the honouring of it, as God himselfe. Innocent III. a great promoter of this monster, moueth this monstrous and bru∣tish question; What eateth the Mouse when she gnaweth the sacrament? Lombard hath an∣swered, God knoweth. And notwithstanding towards the end; It may be safely said, that the bodie of Christ is not taken by beastes. But the schoole of Sorbone hath noted, Hie Magister non tenetur; Other follow not the iudgement of the maister of the sentences in this point. Iohannes de Burgo, verie grossely; The Mouse doth take the bodie of Christ: Inno∣centius more subtillie, The bread passeth away miraculously when the bodie commeth: and
the bodie passeth and getteth it selfe away when the Mouse draweth neere, Alex. p. 4 q. 45. membr. 1. & the bread commeth into his place againe. Alexander Hales; The bodie of Christ is euen in the bellie of the Mouse, and yet no disparagement to the bodie of Christ, nor yet to the Sacrament: in the bodie in like manner of a dogge or hogge, &c. Bonauenture verily dealeth more honestly, The Mouse cannot eate it: God forbid it should euer come to that. And what would the Fathers say con∣cerning these absurdities, which teach vs, That no bodie receiueth the bodie of Christ, that hath not first worshipped it? And that many worship it, which doe not receiue it? And what vne∣quall dealing is this here, to eleuate and hold vp on high a peece of bread for the bo∣die of Christ; to call it our Lord, to adore it, and belieue it to be God; and after this eleuating of it, to debase it so farre, as to make it subiect to the filthie vomiting of men, and deuouring guttes of greedie beastes? And this may serue for a scantling of the goodly diuinitie proceeding from this deuise of transubstantiation: and their bookes are full of the like. Their contrarying and crossing one of another, is a thing no lesse worth the noting. The contrarie∣ties which they haue vttered, in the deciding of the former questions. Gl. in C. Tri∣bus. Durand. in Rational. l 4. c. 41. Aftesa. in Sum. 4. part. tit. 17. Richard. 4. d. 9 q. 1. Bonau. 4. d. 9. q 1. Thom. 3. q. 80. art. 3. C.S. quis per ebrietatem. & ibi. Gloss. Caiet. tom. 2. tr. 2. c. 3. & 5. Thom. opusc. 58. c. 13. The first, Is the bodie of Christ taken in at the mouth? passeth it into the stomacke? To the first they answere, yea: At the second they are astonished. Gratian his Glose saith; So soone as the tooth toucheth it, it is swiftly conueighed vppe into heauen. Durandus, From the mouth, it passeth and goeth forward vnto the hart: that is to say, into the soule: And then there ceaseth to be any corporall presence, the spirituall onely remaining. Another; Yea it go∣eth downe into the bellie, prouided that the kind haue not beene changed in the mouth. Others, it passeth downe thither, and there abideth vntill the kindes bee consumed. How much better had it beene for them to haue held themselues to the Fathers, The heauenly bread which nourisheth our soules, is not that which goeth downe into the stomacke, &c. And in deed Car∣dinall Caietanus was ashamed of the contrarie, saying: That it is most false to affirme & hold, that the bodie of Christ is taken corporallie: for it is taken spiritually in the Eucharist, by be∣leeuing, and not by receiuing. Againe, He that eateth not, cheweth not the bodie of Christ, but the kinds: but the spirituall eating, which is performed by the soule, obtaineth the flesh of Christ which is in the Sacrament, &c. Secondly, The bodie of Christ at such time as it is taken in the Eucharist, is it in heauen, or not? Thomas answereth, Jt is visiblie in heauen in the shape of a man: but his diuinitie & his bodie, is vpon euerie altar sacramentallie. If hee vnderstood this word as Saint Augu∣stine doth, we shall agree together: but hee vnderstandeth it by an inuisible bodie. And what shall then become of that which all the Fathers say vnto vs, As he is God, he is infinite, he is euerie where: but as hee is man, he is finite, limited, and abiding in one place? Whereunto they bring forth this goodly distinction: but let him proue it that can, The bodie of Christ is in a place, but not locally: It is quantū, but not after the manner of a qua∣litie: that is to say, it is a bodie, but not corporally, &c. Thirdly, What becommeth of the substances of bread and wine in this change. Gl. in C. speci∣es de consecr. d. 2. & in C. firm. ext. de Sum. Trinit. Caiet. in Tho. Thomas saith after Lombard: That they are turned into the substance of the bodie and bloud of Christ. Gratian his Glose, and the extrauagants, That they vanish to nothing. And Pope Inno∣cent the third in like manner: Scotus thereupon refuteth Thomas: and Caietanus refuteth Scotus. Likewise they are not agreed vpon their propositions: for diuers let not to say after all the Fathers: The bread is the bodie of Christ. Scotus to the con∣trarie saith, That it cannot be said so: and as farre off is that, Panis fit corpus Christi, The bread is made the bodie of Christ. But rather: Of bread, the bodie of Christ is made, &c. C. Non oportet & ibi Gloss. de Consecr. d. 2. C. Cum Mar∣tha S. Verū de celebr. Miss. Thom. 3. q. 14. art. 8 Durand. l 4. c, 42. Scot. in Rep d, 2. & 3 & d. 10 q. 1. And how much shorter had it beene for them, to hold themselues to the fathers; The bread is the bodie of Christ, is made the bodie of Christ, Per modum Sacramenti, after the man∣ner of a Sacrament? Fourthly, What becommeth of the water in this change? who is it that bringeth it to nothing? That transubstantiateth it into bloud with the wine? And into Christs vitall humour? &c. Thomas more subtilly turneth it, From water into wine, and after from wine into bloud? Durandus dealeth more so berlie, Who dare bee so bold to decide the question? And what shall become then of their Allegorie; That the water signifieth the Church; the mingling of the water with the wine, the coniunction of the Church with Christ? But Scotus after all this, giueth the crosse blow vnto all these pretended
changes, The first opinion (saith he) was, that the substance of bread did abide: the second, that it did not, but that it vanisheth into nothing, or is resolued into the first matter: the thirde, that the bread is turned into the bodie of Christ, &c. But I say, that althogh the substāce of bread shal abide, yet is shal not take away our worshipping of it, & yet shall not be any cause of idolatrie: and that the substance of bread doth more fitly represent the bloud of Christ, then the accidents alone, Petr. de Allia∣ci. l. 4. Sent. d. q 6. seeing there is more resemblance betwixt substance & substance, then betwixt a substance and an accident. And the Cardinal of Alliaco hath followed his steps: The maner (saith he) that admitteth that the substance of bread abideth and remaineth, is not repugnant vnto rea∣son, nor vnto the authoritie of the Bible: on the contrarie, it is more easie to vnderstand, and more reasonable, and doth not admit of Accidents without any subiect: which is one of the diffi∣culties that is therein to be found. Make these and transubstantiation agree. Fiftly, If the substances be not any more there, then what will ye make of the whitenesse, and roundnesse? Lombard, l. 4. d. 12. Aimoinus. ex Adem. l. 5. c. 19 Platin. in vit. Clem. 5. Thom opuse. 59. & q. 3.79 Durand in Ra¦tion. l. 4. c. 41. &c. These accidents in a word, and whereupon founded? Some of Lombard his time said, That they are in the aire. Lombard, That they are without any subiect. And Thomas after the same manner. Some replie, But we see that they nourish. As for ex∣ample, King Lewes the gentle (saith the Monke Aimoinus) who for the space of fortie daies did not eate any other thing: and an Emperour, Henrie the fourth, as saith Platina, was poi∣soned in the host, &c. Wormes likewise are begotten therein. There, of one pretended miracle they make a hundred. Thomas saith, That they are accidentes notwithstanding, but such as are able to nourish: That the wormes in that which remaineth are engendred of the demensiue quantitie. Others, Of the substance of bread. And others, Of the next aire. What millions of absurdities doth one absurditie beget? Sixtly, This miracle, in summe, that bringeth forth so many, By what wordes is it done? If it be by these words, Hoc est corpus meum: wherefore then doth the Priest say afterward, Iube haec perferri. Command that these gifts, that is to say, the Sacraments bee laid vpon thine heauenly Altar, Lombard. d. 13 l. 4. G. of in C. Vtium in V. Perfer. decons. d. 2. by the handes of thine Angell? &c. And in deed Lombard is not farre off: And many collect thereby, that the consecration is made in heauen by the ministerie of the Angels. And if it be not by these words, why then do they so de∣light themselues to insist vpon them? And then also by what others? And where is the end, where the beginning? Here lyeth the great controuersie. And in the meane time you will say, if you should heare them speake, that they are all of one iudgement, and that they make not any question of any thing be it neuer so small. What will they say vnto vs then? Durand in Ra¦tional. l. 4. c. 41 Lombard. l. 4. d. 2 Thom. opusc. 59. & 3. q. 78. Hug. Card. in Luc. c. 26. & in Marc c. 4. Scot. in Rep. d. 8. q 2 Christ (saith Durand) consecrated by the word Benedixit: And his reason is, because that our Lord brake the bread before the words, Hoc est corpus meum. Tho∣mas is thought to go about to draw his necke out of the collar, by saying, That the E∣uangelistes haue not kept any order therein. Hugo the Cardinall deliuereth foure sortes: And notwithstanding saith he, There is but one true sort to become by. And who is it then, that shall be able soothly to declare the same? Scotus saith very ingeniously and free∣ly. That he is wholly ignorant in this point: and that this is a lawfull ignorance, and that he that thinketh himselfe to know what and how forcible wordes are requisite thereunto, is deceiued: And further, that the Grecians, which tie not themselues to these words, do not therefore faile to consecrate. Is not this to say plainely enough with the fathers, that the sanctifying of the Sacraments doth not depend vpon certaine words, Thom. l. 4. sen. d 8. art. 6. Innoc 3. de Offic. Miss. p. 3 C. 6. & 14. Scot. in l. 5. Sent. d. 2. q, 3. as magicall workes do; but vpon the Lords institution? Afterward, Hoc, what shall it be vnto vs? With Thomas hoc is as much to say, Hoc contentum, that which is contained vnder these kinds or accidents is my bodie. To Innocent the third, this hoc is not any word tending to consecration: is bringeth not thereunto either yea, or nay. And thus also saith Scotus; and it signifieth an Indiuiduum vagum, whereof Christ pronounceth, that it is his bodie, alreadie con∣secrated already made by the blessing going before; whereof it is said, Benedixit, &c. And Durandus swarueth not far from the same sence, Durand. l. 4, when he saith that by hoc there is nothing signified: but that it is put downe, materialiter, &c. To Bonauenture, hoc meaneth the bread, Gerson cont. lor. l, 4. the substance of bread. Gerson taketh it so also. And Gardiner liuing within our remembrance, hath followed him. But this proposition; The bread is, or is made the bodie of Christ, is holden at this day to bee hereticall. And there∣fore
they say; The formes or the Accidentes of bread shall not be any lesse: for how shall either one substance become another: or the Accidentes a substance? To Occam, Hoc is as much to say, as Corpus Christi, the bodie of Christ. Ocem. in 4. Sent. d. 13. q. 6. & 7. Betr. de Alliac, ibid, And what shall then the meaning of this bee; The bodie of Christ is the bodie of Christ? And thus wri∣teth Petrus de Alliaco. A proposition saith Holcot, Ʋaine and fond, for it is idem per idem. And because hee cannot bee there till all the wordes bee vttered; Iohannes de Burgo addeth thereunto, Hoc, That which is here present vnder this kind, or which verie quickely shall bee there, is my bodie. Holcot. in 4. Sent. q. 3. And Holcot to get himselfe out of the bry∣ers, It signifieth something that is common to both tearmes, termino a quo, & termino ad quem: But he telleth not what. And how much better had it beene for them to haue kept themselues to the exposition of the Fathers; This is the figure of my bodie: you are my bodie in a Sacrament and mysterie? As also vnto the olde Canons; This signifieth my bodie, &c. Vpon the rest of the wordes they doe not agree any bet∣ter. Est to some of them is a verbe Substantiue: Others disallow of them, and will haue it to bee a verbe operatiue. And of these fellowes that holde of opera∣tiue, some will haue it expounded by Fit, is made: Others by Conuertitur, is chaun∣ged: Others by transubstantiatur, is transubstantiated, &c. And they will againe, that Fit bee as much as Fiat: And Conuertitur, conuertatur, &c. that is to say, This may bee made my bodie, This may bee chaunged into my bodie, &c. And againe, some will, that as soone as it is spoken, all is finished: Others are of mind, that the fiue words must bee fullie finished: And others, all that which followeth, Which is giuen, or which is shedde for you, &c. And who shall bee able to gather together eyther all their fri∣uolous questions, whereof the Fathers neuer knew one: or yet all their contradi∣ctions, infallible sequences, both of the vncertaintie of their doctrine, as also of the spirite of lying, raigning amongst them? In the meane time heare them speake: They iarre about a controuersie which is betwixt Luther and Caluin, thinking to cloake and conceale such a multitude of contrarieties as are amongst them∣selues. And thus when they haue cast about euerie way, The Schoole∣men shew that they are forced by the authority of the decrees of Lateran. Hugo Card. in Mat. c. 26. & in Marc. c. 14. & in Luc. c. 26 now at the last they breake out and say, that it is the Councell of Lateran, or rather the tirannie of the Pope, that tyeth their tongues like prisoners, and not the concluding of their pretended reasons. Cardinall Hugo in his perpetuall Postill, swimmeth betwixt the truth and the errours of that time, as well as hee can, Hee blesseth sayeth hee: but hee sticketh long in the bringing forth of the wordes of blessing, as hauing purpo∣sed to accommodate himselfe to the opinion then receiued: to which ende hee bringeth forth foure constructions of this texte, and those verie diuerse. Fregit, hee brake: that is to say, Frangendum in cruce signauit; hee signified, that his bodie should bee broken vpon the Crosse. Accipite, take, that is, (said hee) by belieuing with the heart, and confesting with the mouth. Comedite, eate, that is, by ioyning your selues to him in loue and vnitie. This is my bodie, this is my bloude: that is, that I haue giuen you for meate, which I haue giuen you for drinke: according to that (sayeth he) which hee sayeth in Saint Iohn 6. My flesh is truely meate, and my bloud is truely drinke. Now it is so that our aduersaries vnderstand it of the spirituall eating. And afterwarde saith hee, To whome giueth hee it? Ʋerily, vnto his disciples: His disciples and not o∣thers haue right to eate and drinke it, they which go and sitte downe in his schooles, that ru∣minate his lessons of humilitie, of mildnesse, gentlenesse, charitie, &c. And yet in the meane time hee letteth not after all this to winde himselfe here and there within the er∣rours of the time. Thom. 3. p. Summ q. 76. art. 1. Damasc. l 4. c. 4. Thomas after hee hath spent all his breath about the prouing of the doctrine of Transubstantiation, turneth backe at the last to approue of Damas∣cen his opinion: The coale is not of simple woode, but it is vnited to the fire: so the breade of the Communion is not simple breade, but bread vnited to the diuinitie. And wee agree to him, if hee meane a Sacramentall vnion; if hee meane, that it is said of the breade, This is my bodie which is giuen for you. In like manner as it is saide of the
cole: This hath touched thy lippes, therefore thine iniquitie shall go away, and propitiation shall bee made for thy sinnes. For hee woulde not haue it meant of any hypostaticall thing. Bonau. in l. 4. Sent. d. 8. & d. 1. q. 3. Bonauenture doth flatly deny euerie part of Thomas his exposition: That the bread was the bodie of Christ, at such time as our Lord vttered these wordes, This is my bodie. Againe, they hold it for an errour; That grace is essentially contained in the Sacraments, as the medicine in the boxe: but they hold, that it is in them in as much as they do signifie & shadow it out. Now the bodie of Christ, vpon their consciences, is it without grace? That grace notwithstanding is in them, if the default be not on the behalfe of the party that communi∣cateth. Could he deliuer his mind in better tearmes, that the bodie of Christ is not receiued but by the faithfull? And his conclusion vrgeth the matter yet further; Thus vnderstanding (saith he) that the grace is in the soule, and not in the visible signes: that is to say, that the effect of the Sacrament is wrought in our soules by the operation of the holy Ghost; and not any miracle in the substances of the bread and the wine. The same vppon the worde, Eate: Eating (saith hee) is properly found to haue respect vnto corporall thinges, and from thence is translated vnto those that are spirituall: And therefore if we will take well the right spirituall eating, it is necessarie that wee should go from the proper sig∣nification of the word, Idem in l. 4. d. 9. q 1. Scot. l. 5. Rep. in 4. Sent. d. 10 q. 1. vnto the borrowed and translated. And so by this meanes he acknow∣ledgeth a figure therein. And note, that hee was both a gray fryer and a Cardinall. Iohn Duns, saith Scotus, neere hand 100. yeares after the Councell of Lateran, durst bee so bold, as to call the matter in question againe, If the bodie of Christ bee really con∣tained vnder the kindes: and reasoneth by argument that it is not. And his groundes are, Idem d. 11. q. 3 That the quantitie cannot suffer it: so neither the localnesse and circumscription of place which go inseperablie and naturally with a true and naturall bodie, such as is the bodie of our Lord: that as a temporall thing cannot bee at diuers times together, no more can a locall thing be in diuers places together. And therefore that the opinion which holdeth, that the bread and wine abide in their substance, Idem d. 2. & 3 & 104.20. seemeth vnto him the more probable, and no lesse worthie to bee embraced, &c. Notwithstanding, that hee holdeth himselfe to that which the Church or∣dained in the Councell of Lateran: Because it is said, that Saint Peters faith shall not faile, &c. Although (saith hee) that the wordes of the scripture might bee maintained and de∣fended by a more easie exposition, Occam. in centilog. theol. concl. 25, 26. &c. and in all likelihood more true. Occam durst propound and set downe, That the bodie of Christ is euerie where, as God is euerie where: and that if there were an host that did fill all the world, the bodie of Christ might bee together with euerie part of the same, when it should bee consecrated. Directly against the Councell of Ephesus, which concludeth that euerie nature should retaine such his properties, as could not become really communicable from one to another. And from him the Vbiquitaries of this time may seeme to haue drawne their fountaine & water spring. But in another place hee holdeth, Idem l. 4. q. 6. that the opinion which setteth downe, That the substance of bread abideth, and that the bodie of Christ is coexistant with it, is most proba∣ble, and least subiect to inconueniences, not repugnant to reason, neither to the authoritie of the Bible: notwithstanding that hee keepeth himselfe vnto the determination of the Church, and such opinion as is most commonly receiued. Durand. de S. port. in l 4. Sent. d. 11. Gulielmus Durandus of Saint Poursain, whome the vniuersitie of Sorbone calleth Magister, by the way of excellencie, and the most resolute Doctor: and that more wisely: It is rashnesse (saith hee) to say, that the bodie of Christ by the diuine power and vertue cannot bee in the Sacrament in a∣ny other manner, then by turning of the bread into him, &c. For this is a harde and harsh speech, and may seeme to derogate from the Almightinesse of God, &c. And what nowe will they haue to say vnto vs, which alleadge nothing for themselues but his om∣nipotencie? On the contrarie (sayeth hee) it being granted and set downe, that the substances of breade and wine doe remaine, there can not but a difficultie must needes arise; namely, that two bodies are together, but yet not too great, or such a one as is vnaunswerable. But the contrarie being graunted, there followe manie: namelie, howe the Accidentes can nourish, bee corrupted, howe there can any thing bee ingendred in them: seeing that there is nothing made, but there is presupposed or thought to bee a mat∣ter:
and therefore it seemeth that men should rather holde them to this former, &c. And yet notwithstanding these Patrons of transubstantiation do not let to shuffle vs vp to∣gether two bodies in one and the same place, in the stone of the graue, Holcor. in 4. sent. q. 3. in the dores that were shut, &c. and consequently one bodie in a thousand places, according to Holcot: If there had beene (saith he) a thousand hostes in a thousand places, at the same time that Christ did hang vpon the crosse, Christ had beene crucified in a thousand places, &c. In the end, whereas Scotus did shift out himselfe by the Church, this man will come to the scripture: We may not (saith he) here heape one difficultie vpon another, Idem in d. l 4. d. 11. q. 3. num. 5. but rather according to the doctrine of the scripture, doe our indeuoure to cleare and make plaine the thinges that are obscure and darke: And therefore when there is found out one course and meanes that is eui∣dently possible, and that may be vnderstood, and another that cannot be conceiued or vnderstood, it seemeth that the former in all likelihood should be chosen and retained, &c. As for example, It is most clearely to be vnderstood, and in all probabilitie possible, that the substances doe abide and continue: and contrarily, for the contrarie. The Cardinall of Alliaco told vs; Card. de All. in 4. Sent. q. 6. Biel. in Can. lect. 40. This opi∣nion which setteth downe and graunteth, that the substance of bread remaineth, is not repug∣nant vnto reason or the scriptures, but is both more easie and also more reasonable. Gabriel Bi∣el more boldly, Whether it be by changing or without changing, there is nothing expressely found in the Canon of the Bible. To be briefe, in the Canon of Lateran, Pope Innocen∣tius the third did not curse those that held the contrarie opinion; namely, That the substances of bread & of wine do still remaine: although he make mention there all along; that it is the stile and ordinarie course of Councels, to set downe and allow of the one, and to curse the other. And if Wicklife in England about the yeare 1370. had kept himselfe onely to that point, without seeking to remoue the Popes power and autho∣ritie, he should neuer haue beene molested: notwithstanding he died in peace in his owne parish, and his bones were not burnt till a long time after. Concil. Flor. Sess. Vit. But yet there is more behind: for in the Councell of Florence, which was held in the yeare 1439. vnder Eugenius the fourth, where the Pope and the Emperour of Constantinople were in person: as the Grecians & Latines could not agree vpon the matter of tran∣substantiation, as it is recorded at large in the Actes of the said Councell; this contro∣uersie did not let or hinder, why there should not bee an vnitie signed betweene the said Greeke and Latine Churches, which beganne, Exultent coeli, &c. That Tran∣substantiation was no Article of faith vntill the Councell of Trent. a most euident signe, that the opinion of transubstantiation remained as yet disputable, and that the contraie was not held for heresie: So farre was it off, from holding the place of an article of faith, as it doeth at this day, and that by vertue of the Councell of Trent, which did first pronounce and ordaine it so to be: If any man say, that the substances of bread and wine doe still continue, &c. let him bee accursed. So young and new is that pre∣tended antiquitie of transubstantiation. And therefore a daughter begotten, not of the Apostles, nor yet in the ages next following them: not of the Fathers of the first fiue hundred yeares, or of the second, or yet of the third: but to speake properly of those Fathers which we dayly see, & whose fathers also we haue beene able to behold and looke vpon: begotten in the verie declining & extreame old age of the Romish Church: and borne in a most corrupt age, whether you take it for doctrine, or for manners. For if Saint Ierome said of his time, as bewailing it, that it was as the lees & dregs, in respect of the purenesse of the former times, what would he haue said of the present, but haue called it, Ex faece Tartarum, the verie grossest parte of the lees, euen the Tartar it selfe. Now as concerning that scruple which remained from time to time amongst the most learned, as a thing that they cold neither disgest nor conceale, The Popes their decrees for the hone∣ring of Tran∣substantiation as we haue found out by their writinges: The Popes according to their pretended omnipotencie in the Church, (for therein lyeth the foundation thereof, and not in the diuine omni∣potencie) doe not make any bones at all to leape ouer it, letting it alone: for it did so much import them to see the stablishing of it, for the authorizing of the sacrifice of the Masse, and the making of the same to be worshipped of the people: from whom
the ordinarie communicating of the holy Supper had beene taken, and restrained to one onely priest, from whom likewise at such time as it came there to be receiued but once a yeare, they had also taken the cup. Now therefore the question is of honou∣ring of this new doctrine: and behold how it hath proceeded. In stead that it had beene accustomed to hold vp the offerings which were conse∣crated to God for the poore; The eleuation of the bread or host. whether it were done in the imitating of the Iewes, or for the stirring vp of the people vnto the like charitie; the priest beginneth to eleuate the host, that is to say, the bread, which of a great one which it was wont to bee, able to haue fedde many persons; and by consequent to haue beene distributed in the holy Supper to a great multitude, is brought downe and rebated by little and little, as it were to nothing, seruing in deed but for one alone, that is to say, to that which they call a singing bread, Durand. in Rational. l. 4. at the least saith Durandus, of the greatnes of a pennie. And we haue a decree from Honorius the third, about the yeare 1220. after the Councell of Lateran in these wordes: Let the Priest oftentimes teach his people reuerently to bow themselues when the wholesome and sauing host is eleuated, L. 3. decret. de Celebr. Missar. Blond. l. 7. dec. 2. Thom. Canti∣pratensis. & Iacob. de Vi∣trito. Gerard. Lorich l. 5. prtuat. Mss. C. Tribus gra∣dib. de cons. d. 2. Innoc. 3. l. 3. de r. tit. 44. & in Conc. Late∣ranens. c. 20. &c. Gregorie the ninth, about the yeare 1230. addeth thereunto, a little bell, to giue euerie man warning to fall downe vp∣on his knees. The which is done, saith Durandus, That the people might be forewarned of Christes comming downe vpon the Altar. And this is the cause why Gerardus Lorichi∣us in his booke of the Masse inferreth of this eleuation, That the Masse was not lawfull, if it were not done for the publike vse of the Church, the people there taking the Sacrament, or els celebrating the sacrifice of praise: and by consequent, that the priuate Masses that are made without the people in generall, are rather abhominations then oblations. Vnto the time of Clement the third, about the yeare 1188. we see that the Eucha∣rist had not any peculiar place in the Churches where it was kept and worshipped: For he ordained, That there should be so much bread set vpon the Altar, as the people could make an end of, and that what remained, should be made an end of by the Clearkes. Innocent the third therefore after the Councell of Lateran, about the yeare 1215. after that he had brought to passe, so farre as in him lay, that transubstantiation should go for an article of faith; commanded that in all the Churches there should be made a coffer, wee call it the boxe wherein the Sacrament is kept, or , as Saint Mathew, who putteth vs in mind thereof, wherein the Eucharist, that is to say, this host consecra∣ted by the priest, may bee kept vnder key. And because that this ordinance was not well obserued, it was shortly after renewed by Honorius the third, about the yeare 1220. Honor. l. 3. Decr. de ce∣lebr. Miss. Also these words were ordinarily written in Cathedrall Churches vppon the boxes, or tabernacles made for the hostes, in great letters; Hic Deum adora, here honor God: or else, Flecte genu, lapis hic honorabilis hospite Christo, &c. Bow the knee, this stone is worthie honour, because that Christ lodgeth in it, &c. What is this but a cleare and plaine exposition of the place of Saint Mathew; Mat. 24. ecce est in . nolite credere. If they say vnto you, behold he is in the secret pla∣ces, &c. beleeue them not? The same Honorius ordained, That the Priestes should ca∣rie the host honorablie, when it should bee taken out of the boxes, to bee carried to the sicke; whereas the old Church did send them the Sacraments of the assemblie, e∣uen the Sacrament of the faithfull, as we haue seene in Iustinus Martyr. And at this time there was a Councel held at Colen, vnder the Emperor Radulph of Hapsbourg, the chiefe of the house of Austria, where we note how much the Church had profited since the Councell of Lateran: for it is there, that we doe first of all reade these good∣ly and wholesome Canons, whereof the old fathers neuer tooke any manner of no∣tice: That the Priest should make choise of a verie sound cuppe, and such a one as had a fast and sure foote: That the pottes should bee marked, that so he may not take water for the wine: That he looke well to it, that his host bee whole, sound, and not ouer old: That hee put not aboue two or three drops of water: That he make as quicke dispatch in the pronunciation of the words of the Canon, as possiblie he can, that so he may not be tedious vnto those that are present, & auoide other inconueniences; That the eleuation be done after the words Hoc est, &c. And that the little bell be rung thrise, that so they may come from euery part & corner to adore & worship: That if
there fall any small thing of the bodie or of the bloud vpon the pall of the Altar: In piscinam. that then the stone bee cut and burned, and the ashes put into the holy place, or cast into the fish-poole: if it be any part of the shrowde, it must be washed, and the water drunke fasting by the Priest: If it be vpon the stone, or vpon the ground, let the Priest licke it vp, then let it be scraped afterward, and the scrapinges put into the holie place, or into the holy fish-poole: if that a spider or a flie bee fallen into it; let them be taken out warily, and burnt ouer the fish-poole: Caute. let the priest haue a boxe of gold, siluer, Iuorie, or at the least of copper, to keepe it in, &c. That when hee goeth to carrie the host vnto the sicke, hee say the Letanie and other prayers at hee goeth: and let him go with the little bell, and the waxe candle burning: let such as shall accompanie him reuerently going and comming, haue ten daies pardon: let such as meete it, if they bee on horsebacke light downe, that they may kneele vnto it, let the priest demand before that any man do communicate, if he doe not belieue, that vnder the forme of bread is the bodie of Christ, borne of the virgine Marie, crucified, risen againe, &c. If a man should vomit it vp againe, that the peeces be ga∣thered vp, and that they be giuen to a faithfull man to take and eate: and that the rest of the vo∣mit be burnt, and set neere vnto the Altar, &c. And this I thought necessarie to set downe at length in this place, to the end that euerie man may know, that all these inuenti∣ons are of the appendances and begetting of transubstantiation: And therefore it cannot bee but new in the Church, seeing they are so new and so lately entred there∣into. But the abuse stayed not here: for in the yeare 1264. The feast-God Petr. Praemon∣strate. sis, & Arnold Bosti∣us. Bull. Vrban. Pap. ad Euam. reclusam, data apud vrbem veterem, 6. Id. Septemb. an∣no Pontif. 3. Platim. in vit. Vrb. 4. Naucl. de Tho. Vrbanus the fourth institu∣ted and ordained the celebration of the day, which they call the feast-God, with his Octaues: and that vpon the pretended reuelation of a certaine woman of the coun∣trie of Luke called Eue, shut vp in a Monasterie, whom he had knowne before his Pa∣pacie. We haue as yet his letters written to the said Eue, which beginne; We know holy daughter, that thou hast des that there might bee instituted a solemne feast of the bodie of Christ in the Church, &c. Then follow these wordes more then blasphemous, which turne the song of the holy virgine, to be applied to this silly woman, and to this idol; Magnificet animatua Demmum, let thy soule therefore (saith he) praise the Lord, &c. Be∣cause thine eies haue seene thy saluation, which we (that is to say, the Pope) haue prepared be∣fore the face of thy people, &c. By the same meanes he sendeth vnto her, Quaternum, in in quo officium continetur, a scedule or booke of the office: which some hold to haue beene composed by Thomas Aquinas, a great defender of this new opinion; & to haue had giuen vnto him therefore for a gift from the Pope, a Doue of siluer: whereupon it commeth, that being painted, he is alwaies set forth with the picture of a Doue at his right shoulder: And namely, he turneth the hymne, Pange lingua gloriosi, which Fortu∣natus had framed about the yeare 600. vpon the passion of our Sauiour, to the honor of this feast. But because as saith the Glose of Decretals, In Decret. de reliquils & ve nerat. Sanct. v∣bi Gloss. Clem. l. 3. Pomerius. De reliquiis & veneratione san∣ctorum, that this constitution was not receiued in euerie place; about the yeare 1311. that is to say, some 50. yeares after, Clement the fift ordained in a Councell holden at Vienna, that it should be obserued of all: And about the yeare 1360. beganne the Processions and Tabernacles at Pauie, the patterne whereof was recommended to all Christendome. For in deed in that of Clements, there was not as yet any mention made of bringing it forth in procession, and offering of it in the streetes to worship; for in it there are onely these words; That this feast was ordained for the preparing of euery one to the better receiuing of him, &c. In like manner, there is euery where mention made of two kinds. But in despight that Berengarius, who had striuen against and beaten downe transubstantiation, was Deane of S. Maurice of Angiers: hee was recommen∣ded vnto this same Cittie, that he might in most singular and solemne sort celebrate this festiuall day: And hence sprung the originall of the solemnities of Angiers: more execrable, cursed, and in derision of our Lord, then it was euer in any other place. Since, Pope Martin the fift, and Pope Eugenius the fourth, after the yeare 1400. redoubled the pardons againe: so far forth, as that those of the day of the Oc∣taues, calculated and reckned by Pomerius, doe amount to fortie foure thousande daies of true pardon: and that as well on his part and behalfe that looketh on, as on
his behalfe that communicateth. And this is the goodly diuinitie of Popes vpon the holy Supper of our Lord. The pompe of Rome. L. 3. Ceremon. eccles. Romā. Let vs adde hereunto the pompe of Rome; for it is yet come in of a later time, & after the other: In the middest of the same a little before the Pope, there is ledde a white ambling gel∣ding, which beareth the pretended Sacrament, shut vp close and fast in a boxe. This ambling gelding hath a little bell of a verie good sound hanging at his necke: a sumpter-cloth is spread o∣uer it, Lib. Pontifica lis. sect. 1. 2, 5. 12. l. 1. & 3. de offic. sacrist. wrought with the Popes armes; twelue lustie cutters or ruffians walking before, &c. Sometimes also if the Pope go into the fieldes, they send it with traine and baggage. And hee that is desirous to know yet further, let him reade the Pontificall bookes, wherein they intreate of Processions through the Cittie, of the Pope, or of the Empe∣rour his coronation. But this is a thing for vs to marke and proue, namely, what a∣greement there is betwixt these inuentions and deuises of Popes, and the institution of our Lord: Take, eate, do this in remembrance of me, &c. As also what meanes there are for them to excuse this idolatrie, There can no excuse be made for their idolatrie. Summ. Angel. Euchar. c, 26. according to their owne Maximes. They hold that, If the Priest haue not had an intent and purpose actuall, as some say: habi∣tuall, as others, to consecrate; that then he doth not consecrate. That likewise if he had not any further purpose then to consecrate halfe a bread; that then the other halfe is common breade. Those then that worship, if he haue not had any purpose to consecrate, what do they worship, but the creature? And with what faith, seeing when as he hath had a purpose, they are not able to sound the truth and find it out? Thom. Salis∣buriens. de art. predican. c. 25. Wherefore it will behoue men to haue recourse to Thomas Salisburiensis his consideration; as, To worship vpon condi∣tion, that euerie dutie and thing required to the action, be well and truely done? &c. They hold also, That the intent of him that consecrateth is not sufficient, if his also that did institute the same doe not concurre: Bonau. in Cò∣pend. sacr. the∣ol. l. 6. rub. 11. that is to say, that the Priest haue an intent (saith Bonauenture,) if he worke not according to the institution of Christ. To worship then in a priuate Masse, is it not idolatrie, seeing that Hugo of S. Victor, Gabriel Biell, and Gerardus Lorichius, their great Maisters of transubstantiation doe openly hold and maintaine, That the priuate Masse wherein there is not made any remembrance or publike Communion, is against the institution of Christ? And further seeing there is such an infinite number of cases, & such as are verie ordinarie, Thom. p. 3, q, 13. Ioh. de Burgo. Pupilla. c. 3. Gerson. contr. Florent. Extr. de celeb. Miss. and notwithstanding not perceiued of those that are pre∣sent, wherein the priest doth not consecrate at all; As, If hee forget to put wine into the cuppe: if the bread be made of any other then wheate flower: if there be more water then wine, if the wine be eager and sharpe; if of seuen leaues moe or lesse, he did thinke but of sixe: if he haue omitted but one worde. Of those wordes say I once againe, whereupon they are not agreed amongst themselues, &c. who shall assure their faith that are present there∣at, of the consecration; and by consequent, warrant their consciences against ido∣latrie? How that ma∣ny notable personages of this time haue beene asha∣med of the doctrine. Pic. Mirand. in Thesi. se∣cund. Thom. & Scot Idem in Apo in disput. de Euch. Now it is verie certaine, that manie in these our daies and times haue beene asha∣med of this doctrine. Iohannes Picus Counte of Mirandula, durst dispute publikely at Rome against transubstantiation. And his Theses are; That the true bodie of Christ is locally in heauen, and sacramentallie at the Altar: That these wordes also, Hoc est corpus meum, doe not consecrate, if the former be not expressed, that is, Pridié quàm pateretur, &c. That is to say, that the institution lyeth not in certaine wordes, but in the institution of Christ: That the foure words, tenentur, materialiter, non significatiuè. Likewise he de∣liuereth a particular manner of eating the flesh, and drinking the bloud of Christ in the holy Supper: Sine conuersione panis in corpus Christi, vel paneitatis adnihilatione: without chaunging of the bread into the bodie, and the reducing of the bread into nothing: that is (saith hee) in as much as God can quamcunque creaturam suppositare, chaunge or vnite himselfe hypostatically vnto any creature whatsoeuer, &c. In which meane time (saith hee) The breade shoulde continue breade, and the bodie should bee with the bread, &c. And yet notwithstanding this his Chymera and monstrous broode, hee was not published an hereticke: Card. Caiet. t. 2. tr. 2, c. 3. & 5 because that euerie one was as yet admitted and suffe∣red to bring his determination and conclusion concerning the same. The Car∣dinall Caietan clearely and plainely: It is a most manifest and notorious vntruth, that
the bodie of Christ may bee taken corporally: but in deede Diuines teach, that hee is taken or receiued spiritually, and yet not by taking or receiuing, but by belieuing. Fisher Bishop of Rochester, otherwise called Roffensis, writing against Luther: Ioh. Fisher. cont. Captiuit. Babilonie. Hitherto (saith hee) S. Mathew speaketh, who alone hath spoken of the new Testament: Neither hath he therein any one word, by which it may bee proued, that in our Masse there is wrought a true presence of the flesh and bloud of Christ. Nay, saith he a little after, It cannot bee proued by any part in all the Scripture. The Cardinall Contaron, in the Colloque of Ratisbone, in the yeare 1541. vpon this, that the place of Pope Gelasius was alleadged vnto him: That the nature and substance of bread and wine continue in the Sacrament, was not able to answere any thing to the contrarie. In the Colloque of Poissi in this Realme, holden in the yeare 1561. betwixt the Bishops and the Doctors of the Church of Rome, and the Ministers of the reformed Churches, it was agreed vpon in these words: We confesse that Iesus Christ in his holy supper, dooth set before, giue, and exhibite vnto vs verily and truely, the substance of his bodie and bloud, by the operation of his holy spirit: and that wee receiue and eate Sacramen∣tally, spiritually, and by faith, that verie body which aied for vs: to bee bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, to the end we may be quickned, and apprehend all that which shall bee requisite for our saluation. And for as much as faith resting it selfe vpon the word of God, effecteth and maketh present the things that are promised; and that by this faith, truely and in deed wee take the true & naturall body and bloud of Iesus Christ, by the power of the holy Ghost: In this respect we confesse the presence of the body and bloud of the same Iesus Christ in the holy supper. But the Vniuersitie of Sorbone at the Cardinall of Tournon his prouoking and pricking of them forward, did disclaime and disauow such as did speake for them; (onely to the end that they might not giue this aduantage, namely, to haue failed by any maner of meanes:) Notwithstanding that those which had beene chosen for the conference, and which had giuen their consent to vndertake this incounter, were the most fa∣mous and notable men of the Cleargie; as Charles, Cardinall of Lorraine: Cass. in co n∣sult. the Bi∣shops of Valence and Sees, and the Doctors, Salignac, Bouteiller, and Despense. Cas∣sander in his consultation to the Emperour Maximilian the second, vpon the contro∣uersies of this time, acknowledgeth: That Transubstantiation both in name and effect, is new, and that it had beene better to haue held the auncient tearmes of the fathers: And that al∣so the abuses therein were come to that head, as that they were verie neere vnto Idolatrie. And in other of his writings, hee deliuereth his mind to the like effect. Index expurg. p, 36, 37. 38. It is verie true that the fathers of Trent did appoint, that all such should be raced out and defaced, as did displease them. To be short, the Popes Legates, from the time of Luther his first pro∣testations, being sent at sundrie times into Almainie; Campegius, Contaren and Ca∣ietan, did make open profession of their dislike of this doctrine, both to the Emper∣our and to the Princes, as also in their conferences, saying: That things were miscari∣ed both in this Article and in many others. Onely, the Councell of Trent, that is to say, the Pope in that Councell, to make quicke dispatch, and to the ende that there might not be any thing found, that stood in need to be reformed, would not haue it, that there was any thing therein amis: doing herein, as in al other things cleane con∣trarie to Saint Peter, (who knowing, acknowledged his fault:) and shewing himselfe most euidently thereby to bee the Sonne of perdition, as one that in the brauerie of his mind would himselfe become a reprobate, and draw all the world after him vnto destruction: knowing it in the eminent and high place, wherein he is, The Doctors of this time do not agree a¦mongst them∣selues. Bellarm. l. 1, de sacr. c. 18. & l. 1, de Euchar. c. 10, & 11. Turrian. sibi ipsi contrar. 1, c, 22. tract but not ac∣knowledging it. What then? From the time of the holding of this Councell, haue they agreed to∣gether and haue beene of one iudgement? The Iesuites, the stighlers of this doctrine; yea amongst themselues? This is the only thing, which remaineth for vs now to looke vnto. They stand exceedingly vpon these words: Hoc est corpus meum: and yet they are not agreed either amongst themselues, nor euerie man in himselfe. Bellarmine in one place, calleth them, Principtum productinum, the producing principle: Namely, the body of Christ, of bread. And in an other place hee will not that Hoc, should signifie the bread, but the body of Christ, by an identical proposition, by a fond and foolish con∣sequent.
But how can this thing be, if he bee not hatcht, but by the vertue of these words? And not as he saith, by the beginning, but by the end of them? Againe; Hoc est, Bellarme. l. 1 de Euch. c. 11. is a word operatiue: It followeth then, that Hoe est, is as much as to say, hoc fiat, this is, that is to say, This may bee made my bodie: And yet for all this they will not graunt that it is any figuratiue speech, neither yet will they, that Est dooth signifie, fiat, but Est simply. Who seeth not then, that it must be a simple Enunciatiue: and not a prac∣ticke, as they speake, or operatiue any longer? Againe, who saith, that Hoc doth sig∣nifie the bread or the Cup: Scarg. l. 1. c. 5. pro sacrat. Eu∣char, Veget. de Miss. f. 13. thes. 23. & fol. 7, thes. 11. Bellarm, l, 3 Euchar. c, 18 Veg. de re ali praesent. thes. 133. Scarg. art. 7. Turr. tr. 1. c, 22 Bellarm. l. 3. de Euch, c, 15, & l. 1, c. 2, & l, 3. c, 20. & l, 3, c. 6. Turr, tr, i. c. 18. & who on the contrarie saith, that it signifieth that which is secret and hidden vnder the formes thereof. What difference is heere betwixt the forme and the body, the substance and the accidents? Againe, some say that the bo∣dy of Christ is made of the bread, and his bloud of the wine, as of his matter: others denie it. And Bellarmine doth affirme and denie both together. Againe, sometimes vrged out of Tertullian and Saint Augustine, they acknowledge that there is a figure, and sometimes they doe wholly and flatly denie it, &c. And they speake as vncertain∣ly of the chaunge and transmutation. Sometimes Bellarmine saith that the substance of bread is turned into whole Christ, body and soule, God and man: sometimes in∣to the body onely, &c. And sometimes that hee is there hypostatically or personally, and as he speaketh with his personalitie, that he may not fall into Rupertus Tuitien∣sis his errour: sometimes that hee is not. And there are that say, that the substance of bread is turned into the truth of the body: and others, into the power and vertue of the same onely. Besides others, which in diuers places, affirme sometimes the one, sometimes the other. Now what becommeth of this body afterward? Their answeres herein, haue no lesse vncertaintie and ambiguitie; For one saith, after that the kindes be altered and corrupted, it withdraweth it selfe: Nay, saith an other, it still continu∣eth and abideth there, Idem tr. 1, c, 19 Veg assert. 205 Bellrm. l, 3, de Euchar. c. 10 & 24. & l. 1 c. 14 Veg. de rel. Praesent. c. 58 Turr. tr. 1 c, 11 & 19 Scarg art 12 pro sacratiss Euchar. c 6. &c Cont. Vel. Vega de Miss. fol. 11 thes, 19. & 20. Idem de real praesent thes. 84 Scarg. in art. 11. Turr. tr. 1. c. 7 tr. 2. c. 11. & 8 Stel. Clericor. for an incorruptible seede of the resurrection, and that if not in substance, yet in power and effectuall operation. Let vs reason thus then: If the ef∣ficacie and powerfulnesse be sufficient for the seede of the resurrection and incorrup∣tion: Wherefore the body in our body? And wherefore doe we admit this absurditie, of hauing so many bodies within our bodies, a thing contrarie to reason, nature, and all Diuinitie? An absurditie, wherein as yet they infold and wrap themselues. For if the glorified body, be supernaturally euerie where: wherefore say they that he com∣meth downe vpon the Altar, and why doe they say, that hee departeth and goeth his way, in respect of his body? If he come downe, if he goe vp, why doe they say, that he is not circumscript and tied to place, and that he is corporally euerie where? Againe, sometimes they say: We set our teeth in the flesh of our Lord, wee deuour and feede vpon him with our teeth, &c. We chew him, wee breake him, &c. And sometimes they are angrie, that one should obiect it against them as their reproach: they vexe themselues, they denie it. To bee short, (for we should neuer haue done, if wee should goe about to gather together all their contradictions, and this shall suffice for a taste,) when shame seaseth vpon them, they are offended, that a man should laye it to their charge that they haue saide: That the Priests are creators of their Creator, &c. And by and by, they come againe to their mutuall byace, and doe freely vtter it: That the Eucharist is no creature: That it is the Creator himselfe: That it is an Hypostaticall grace: That it deserueth to bee adored and praied vnto, &c. And yet the same neuerthelesse (say they) that dependeth vppon the intent and purpose of him that consecrateth. Now wee haue finished the whole historie of the doctrine of Transubstantiation taught in the Church of Rome: The compa∣ring of the ho∣ly supper and the Masse to∣gether. But how farre is it off from the auncient simplicitie of the Christian Church: and how farre from the institution made by our Lord, of the holy supper? The Summe wherof is thus: That in the holy supper we are seriously ad∣monished of our bond and obligation vnto our Lord; and of our dutie towards our neighbour: likewise nourished and strengthned in our coniunction with Christ our head; whereupon dependeth our true life, which approueth and maketh it self mani∣festly knowne, (as the soule doth it selfe by his motions) by our zeale towards God, and our behauiour towards our neighbours. Therein we cal to mind our obligation,
when we remember according to his commandement, the death and Passion of our Lord: That we were dead in our sinnes, dead verily and eternally; seeing it was requi∣site and necessarie, that the eternall Sonne of God should expose and giue himselfe to death, euen to the death of the Crosse, to redeeme and set vs free from that death: therefore eternall death. And thence is that action of praise and thankesgiuing that followeth, solemnely obserued and performed in this action, and perpetuall in our soules, if we be truely faithfull: For hee that willingly belieueth this great and vn∣speakable benefit, how can he possibly forget it? How can it possibly be, but that he should occupie and as it were powre forth himselfe in a continuall exercising of praise and thankesgiuing? Seeing I say, he sinneth euerie moment, he cannot bee without matter to humble himselfe euerie moment, and to haue his eye both vpon death and also vpon hell; and accordingly againe he hath matter euerie moment to raise vp him selfe againe in hope, by the remembrance of this eternall Sacrifice, vpon the menti∣on that is made, namely in this Sacrament: How that the Sonne of God hath giuen his bodie for him, hath beene broken with cares and griefes; and how that his bloud was shed for the remission of his sinnes. And this is the cause why this Sacrament is called, both a remembrance and an Eucharist, or action of thankesgiuing: For of the remembraunce of this benefite, of this gift of saluation (and by this vnspeakable meanes) there followeth in euerie Christan heart, a serious and heartie Eucharist or thankesgiuing. But this effect by name, is wanting in the Papists their Masse: For this remembrance is not practised in it at all: the death of the Lord is not shewed foorth there at all vnto the people: This is, in steed of whatsoeuer it should bee, a heape of words, and a varietie of gestures, neither the one nor the other vnderstood. Wee are taught likewise in the holy Supper, our duties towards our neighbours: for wee are not only created of one and the same Masse; but regenerate and begotten again, but redeemed and bought with one price, euen bloud; but made members of the same bodie: and quickned by one and the same spirit, but liuing, mouing, and feeling, from one and the same head: One with him, through the grace of his good pleasure and will: One therefore amongst our selues, both by his commaundement, and by natu∣rall dutie. And if the head, the eternall Sonne of God, haue giuen his life for vs, to make vs I say, his members: what do there members owe, yea what doe they not owe one to an other? Seeing also, that this head most liuely feeling all that which these members doe or suffer, doe not disdaine to declare and manifest vnto vs: that what is done or denied vnto the least, is done or denied vnto himselfe, and from him hath either reward or punishment? And this is the cause why the Fathers haue called it , an assemblie, a Communion: And this second fruit and effect is also wanting in the Masse; where there is no Communion betwixt the members, nor any significati∣on of this coniunction of Christ with vs, of our selues together, all men vsing of so many cornes to make but one Loafe and one wine; and al of vs sucking life out of the same death: nourishment from the same meate, of the fleshe and bloud of our Lord: But particularly, in respect of our selues, we being members of Christ, and quickned by Christ, are there nourished and strengthned both in Christ and of Christ. And it is not more sure, that the Minister doth giue vs the bread and wine, that wee take them with our hands, that we eate and drinke them, that they are conuerted into our sub∣stance, and become nourishment for our bodies, to maintaine and strengthen this life, then it ought to be sure and certaine to euerie Christian, that our Lord in the ho∣ly Supper celebrated according to his institution, dooth giue vnto vs at the same in∣stant, his flesh and bloud: That we take them by faith, that we eate and drinke them, that they are turned into the life and substance of our soules, becomming the foode of the same, to maintaine and strengthen vs vnto eternall life. Yea, and which more is, that by the predominant and ouer-ruling power that they haue, they turne our soules both to Christ, and into Christ, vniting them vnto him, and making them one with him: and our bodies, consequently and proportionablie after the manner of our soules, doe make vs bones of his bones, flesh of his flesh, members of that head,
gouerned by his spirit: and one with him; to raise againe one day our bodies and soules: to be glorified and raigne with him. And this fruit also of the holy Supper is lacking in the Masse of the Church of Rome, wherein there is not any thing at all re∣presenting this straite and neere coniunction with Christ, or that true eating, by the which it is cherished and maintained, wherein such as are present, doe neither eate nor drinke corporally nor spiritually, wherein they become all together idle gasers and starers vpon the Priest, which eateth and drinketh, and vpon a pretended myste∣rie both deafe and dumbe: and wherein, in a word, there is not any one action, which stirreth vp their consciences, nor any manner of instruction to helpe forward and ad vnto their knowledge. These are the principall ends, for which our Lord instituted his holy Supper, and whereof wee haue beene altogether destitute vnder the Church of Rome, which in steed of this sacred meate, which we were wont to eate at our Fathers table, hath fed vs with huskes, apish toyes and mummeries: intertaining in stead of all that which was the old fashion of Rome, the poore people, with vaine pompes and ceremonies; and therefore famished with the want of the grace of God. From that farre countrie, whether our humane fancies had transported and led vs, wee are put in mind of our Fathers table, and become resolued to returne againe home vnto him; from these a∣buses and deceits, so farre differing from his institution, to his truth; and from our sinnes to his grace, and that by his grace. Father (haue we said) We haue sinned against heauen, and against thee: we are not worthie any more to be called thy children. And hee hath according to the same, euen his wonted mercie, put a ring vpon our finger, cloathed vs with Christ, and caused vs to eate his flesh and his bloud. They were dead (hath hee said) but they are returned to life: they were lost, and they are found againe, &c. To God bee praise and glorie for euer, by the same his Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Let vs now runne ouer and briefely rehearse againe, all that which we haue handled and in∣treated of in this whole worke. In the first Booke we haue handled the rearing and raising vp of the Masse, A briefe re∣hearsal of the whole worke. from time to time, and from parcel to parcell: we haue shewed that the old seruice did con∣sist of a publike confession of sinnes, in the reading of the old & new Testament, and that of whole bookes of the same, in singing of Psalmes by the whole Congregation, in a Sermon vnto the people, which was made by the Bishop or Pastor, expounding either some place, that had beene read, or some such other as hee iudged fit for the edifying of the Church: in offerings, which were offered by the people for the poore and other vses of the same: in a generall praier, for all the necessities of the Church & state: in the institution of the holy Supper, taken out of the Gospell, or the Apostle: in a witnessing of the sincere loue of the faithfull, one towards an other, before they should draw neere vnto the holy Table: and in a denunciation vnto such as were not of this number, to the wishing of them to abstaine: in the distribution of the holy Supper, vnto all the people, vnder both kindes: during the time of which action, they ceased not to sing Psalmes, or to read the Scriptures: and finally in a solemne thankes∣giuing for the benefit receiued, as well in the death and Passion of our Lord, as in the Communion of his body and bloud in the holy supper. Which done, the Bishop or Pastor sent the people away with a holy blessing. And it is not to be forgotten, as we haue seene, that all this was done in an vnderstood and knowne tongue. As for pray∣ers for the dead, praying vnto Saints, the Canon of the pretended sacrifice, and all the parts whereof it is framed, wee haue seene them brought in many ages after, and that at seuerall times, and great distaunces betwixt one and an other, and still impairing and growing worse from time to time. Retaining therfore, for our seruice, that which we well perceiue to bee truely auncient, and reiecting that which is notoriously new: what shall such seruice bee, to speake according to a good conscience, but the same, that is now vsed in the reformed Churches? In the second Booke, we haue compared the circumstances of the old seruice, and those of the Masse: First, we haue found the Church vnder persecution: without pub∣like
places, to call vpon the name of God in. Afterward wee did see Churches built for the same, but without any manner of Images, with tables (let vs call them if you will Altars) for the communicating of the holy supper: but without Lampes, burning of Incense, Consecrations, Dedications, &c. We haue obserued the lawfull election and calling of the Bishops vnto the holy Ministerie, by taking due examination of their liues and doctrine; administring the word of God and the holy Sacraments in the vulgar tongue, heard and vnderstood of euerie one, wearing such apparell as was modest, but ordinarie, not tied vnto a single life, but rather bound vnto an exempla∣rie chastitie: not called Sacrificers, except in that they sacrificed the Gospell: and to say no more, without annoynting, or any other character or marke of the beast. All, whatsoeuer is more, was brought in a long time after, and by degrees; sometimes by a foolish imitation of some point of Iudaisme; and sometime by the importunate cu∣stome of Paganisme; as namely, by Images, Altars, Lampes, burning of Incense, Vncti∣ons, Consecrations, Dedications, whether it bee of liuing persons, or things that are dead, vowes and characters; Barbarisme in seruice, and such like things, &c. Cutting off them, and casting away this new deuice, and holding our selues to the olde, in all these circumstances, of places, times, persons, and all the rest of that sort, shall we not see that which the reformed Churches haue alleadged: namely, the seruice of God purged from Idolatrie, superstition, vanitie, and so many foolish ceremonies, and the Cleargie also, from all their pompe whether Iewish or Heathnish, wherewith they be∣witch the silly vulgar sort? Yea that more is, from that loathsome impuritie of life, which maketh them offensiue, yea which maketh them to stincke throughout the whole world; and lastly the people from being holden and kept vnder Barbarisme, sottishnesse and grosse ignorance, namely, of their owne saluation, and that which is onely necessarie for them. In the third and fourth, wee haue intreated of the auncient doctrine of the holy Supper, comparing it with that of the Romish Masse. And first, as concerning the Sa∣crifice; it is manifestly shewed, that the Church did neuer either know or acknowledge any moe then one onely propitiatorie Sacrifice: euen Christ nailed vppon the Crosse for our sinnes, the remembrance whereof is commaunded in the holy Supper: for the which also, there are solemne actions of praise and thankfulnesse performed in the same: That these Masses or Sacrifices, whether they be for the quicke or the dead, were not knowne amongst the auncient writers, no nor yet Purgatorie it selfe, where vp∣on they are founded: No more were the Sacrifices in the honour and inuocation of the Saints deceased, as vnto whome there was neither Adoration nor Inuocation as∣signed: whose merit also was neuer imployed by the Fathers: either for ransome, or remedie for sinnes, but that onely one of the alone mediatour, the Sonne of God our Lord. And as concerning the Sacrament: that the auncient Church followed therein the institution of the Lord, in the simplicitie thereof: administred it vnto the faithful people, after the holy seruice, distributing vnto them the bread & wine, assured pled∣ges and seales of the flesh & bloud of Christ, which they receiued at the same instant in a true faith, by the operation of the holy Ghost, vnto the nourishing of their soules, and their assurance of resurrection vnto eternal life: not imagining notwithstanding for all this, that there was any chaunge in the nature of the signes, but onely in their condition and vse: And therefore it did not eleuate, worship, locke them vp, carrie them in procession, or call them God, or Lord, &c. as they vse to doe at this day, and yet there raigned therein both more feruent zeale, and clearer knowledge. That all this on the contrarie is verie new, brought in not aboue three daies agoe, Heri aut Nudiustertius, as the Scripture speaketh, condemned of it selfe by the onely date of their instituting thereof, being in the times of most grosse and palpable ignorance, ioyned with lesse religiousnesse and greater store of corruptions, then euer had haun∣ted the Church of Rome before. Let vs then take away the propitiatorie Sacrifice and Transubstantiation: and what remaineth but the Sacrifice of thankesgiuing? The Sa∣crifice of remembrance, and the Eucharisticall sacrifice, which wee acknowledge in
the holy Supper? As also that straite and neere Communion which we haue therein by faith in our Lord, that we may be redeemed by his obedience, and liue by his righ∣teousnesse, to be one with him: and by consequent, one with our brethren. And thus euerie thing deducted and rebated: noueltie renounced, and antiquitie embraced: we renounce and quite disclaime the Masse of the Romish Church, but we most willingly and ioyfully receiue the Communion of the reformed Church. For that which is more in substance, we may speake it with a good conscience: either it is of the vanitie of man, or of the peruersnesse of the diuell. Might it therefore please God, for his holy mercies sake, to open all our eyes to know his waies, but principal∣ly to moue our hearts, and to direct our feete to walke therein, and therein to conti∣nue and goe forward: that so wee may escape the penaltie of the Lords sentence pro∣nounced with his owne mouth: If you were blind (saith he) you should haue no sinne: He that knoweth his Masters will and doth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. And to God Almightie, the onely author and ordainer both of Sacrifices and Sacraments: To Iesus Christ our Lord, our onely Sacrificer and Sacrifice, our life and spirituall meate: and to the holy Ghost, the true inspi∣rer of this life, and distributor of this nourish∣ment, bee honour, glorie and Empire for euer. AMEN. FINIS.
Faultes escaped. Page. Line. Faults in the Preface Corrections. 1. 14 then they 3. 1 prouided that it be although 3. 26 word wood 4. 26 will willeth 4. 34 whatsoeuer which also 6. 6 through the sight out of the sight 6. 24 not by nūber, not by succession of Bishops not by succession not by nūber of Bishops 8. 35 sonne perdition sonne of perdition 8. 38 insufficiencie sufficiencie 9. 39 Cyprian Cyrill 30. 3 bolted bolstred 11. 36 they there 12. 25 profoundly plainly or simply 14. 29 that what they haue said of such what they would say of such 15. 39 of the Masse of the Masse is to be built? 17. 9 his principles her principles 17. 11 his her 17. 30 fit sit 19. 5 we should wound the bodie of Christ not being subiect to paine we should make the body of Christ vnca∣pable of grief of pain 19. 10 with lesse thēnothing in a moment 22. 5 familiarly doctrinally 23. 21 typo typho 23. 36 an old man an old woman 24. 11 it serueth not anie more either for seed, graine or grasse it is not in the seed or but peeping aboue the groud or in the blade 24. 33 that should haue cosi∣selled you to flie from the plague into your towne, frō the wolfe into your sheepefold, & from fire into your barne that should haue told you of a plage in your citie, of a woolfe in your flocke, and of a fire in your barne Faults in the text of the booke. Page. Line. Faults. Corrections. 3. 22 changed and altered of righteousnesse thirstie after righte∣ousnesse 4. 34 Lord of Escales Lord Scaligers 5. 53 celebtated celebrated 6. 39 6. 45 he serued they serued 7. 4 8. 8 breads loaues 9. 27 cōmended vnto them commaunded them 9.47 (51. l. 5 sonne summe 10.49. & 11. l. 20 11. 22 not only receiued not receiued 11. 22 aswoll as the substāce and doctrine, but al∣so grounded in ex∣presse and plaine sort vpon the word of God. although the substāce and the doctrine was not onely receiued in the Church from the beginning & natiuity thereof, but expresly founded on the word of God, 12. 46 is are 13. 44 so much as the Lords prayer any thing but the Lords prayer 14. 43 misticall diuinitie misticall diuinitie, of Dionysius Areopagita 16. 11 written to Euaristus written by Euaristus 16. 12 to by 19. 34 excepted one that vnlesse it were that 21. 22 ad and 21. 23 Trire Treuers 21. 46 there was a place wherein they vsed to speake of the prea∣ching then was there place for a sermon which was commonly taken out of them 22. 4 Prebats Prelats 22. 24 to certaine signes of the crosse with certaine signes of the crosse 25. 11 they should aske counsell at those whom they follow: wherefore if in the sacrifice which is they should aske thē, whom they haue fol∣lowed; forasmuch as if in the sacrifice which is 26 2 Minister Priest 26. 54 27. 16. & 31.36 Damascene Damasus 31. 22 of reading of lesson or the order of reading 31. 24 thinke not that it is not to the thinke not that it is to the 31. 48 Homilia tractare, Homilia, tractare, 31. 48 Tractatus Sermo Tractatus, Sermo, 33. 46 (p. 82. l. 37 Sancta victoria Sanclo Victore 34. 46. & 74. l. 27 . 36. 9 whole lumpe whole Masse 37. 7 39. 21 prices peeces 42. 33 was this man his shot was made & framed by him 44. 5 in the time from the time 44. 30 vnde memores vnde & memores 44. 35 per me pro me 44. 36 409 490 44. 50 that Councell a Councell 47. 41 Caspergillum Aspergillum 49. 16 deriuing bringing back 51. 9 52. 1 in the meane in the meane time 54. 9 of gesture and matter of maners & doctrine 54. 16 54. 41 thou sonne of God thou only son of God 55. 3 55. 53 Archbyshopricke Popedome 60. 17 as yet the Masse is called as it is yet in the Mis∣sall or Masse-booke 63. 1 Pastors Priests 63. 2 Priests sacrificing Priests 63. 30 officij, &c. officij comburere, &c 64. 49 of diuerse to diuerse 65. 1 Gregorie the 3. com∣meth after & walketh as crookedly as the crab Gregorie the 2. Gregorie the 3. fol∣loweth the wayes and treadeth in the steps of Gregorie the 2. 65. 23 whereupon may whereupon it may 66. 3 reprouing the wayes of Pope Gregorie the 7 following the steppes of Pope Gregorie the 7. 67. 55 aswell as the Catho∣like Romish although Catholike and Romish 69. 10 witnesse to all witnesse all 69. 38 as the Moone when she is past the chage Dele. 71. 30 by hy his by his 74. 28 can it by heart could say it by heart 76. 6 diposed disposed 76. 7 though they might enuy me for the same though it bee but a trouble vnto me 76. 27 Elder Priest 76. 43 vu communicationis ius communicationis 78. 14 there is no mention made of the commu∣nion of the bodie there is no mention made but of the com∣munion of the body 79. 52 applied vnto the par∣ties receiuing, & not to the parties distri∣buting applied rather vnto the parties receiuing then vnto the parties distributing 80. 11 what is it (saith he) that you haue not yet learned of the bloud of the lambe, in hea∣ring of it as also in drinking of it: which bloud That this is nothing but the bloud of the lambe, you haue not onely now learned it by hearing it so cal∣led, but by drinking also: & this very bloud 80. 34 see Iesus saw Iesus 81. 34 where we are when we are 83. 34 480. or 560. ounces 60. or 70. ounces 83. 49 Transubstantiotion Transubstantiation
83. 52 ouermeasures Corollaries 84. 25 in stead of the cutting of the kind in stead of the cuppe which was the kinde taken from them 84. 40 though it may seeme to receiue but one kind though it be sufficient to receiue but one kind 85. 30 some certaine yeares som hūdreds of yeres 86. 35 way well may well 87. 32 Doctor of Traunces Exstaticall Doctor 88. 29 Was there There was 91. 3 that is done that is due or fit to be granted 93. 53 Maister or Pastour Chiefe-Pastour 95 8 thirst, teares, incarna∣tion, &c. thirst, teares, &c. 96. 22 96. 40 & that which is more although 96. 40 hath very litle autho∣ritie may verie well 98. 8. & 28 Elders Priests 98. 49 accipiant, ne ex ijs accipiant, but with this prouiso ne ex ijs, 99. 4 of ministerie of being a Priest 100. 14 & 39 a Minister Priest 100. 54 102. 1 that the infidell can thence play the di∣uine that the infidell or vnbeleeuer cā deuine or gesse what they are doing 102. 20 if he may lawfully be so called if a man may so say 103. 5 for them or him for him 104. 22 defendeth the exer∣cise of religion forbiddeth the exer∣cise of religion 106. 4 at such time as Chri∣stians fell to gratifie and temporise with Paganisme at such time as the Christians came to haue the vpper hand of the Pagans 106. 8 106.46. & 107.4 was were 108. 19 haue hath 109. 17 & 18 at the Lordes table and at of the Lords table & of 109. 42 breake did breake 110. 24 Pastor Priest 114. 21 It is a folly to pray vnto images that do not know the gods It is a follie for him to pray to images that knoweth not the gods 118. 12 God Gods 118. 24 or for Nicholas the Patriark of Constāti∣nople who was more then 700. yeares after deleautur haec verba 118. 51 Athanasius Epiphanis 120. 37 in good earnest verie faithfully 121. 6 his there 122. 30 concerning wherfore wherefore 126. 2 Zonera Zonaras 126. 14 which had bin at the 6. generall Councell dela 127. 20 gardeāt to her soune gwardian to her son Constantine 127. 24 maintained the abo∣lishing of images maintained the abo∣lishing of images by the word of God 130. 48 Ias of Orleance Ias Bishop of Or∣leance 138. 54 we must honor them we must honor them for themselues 139. 7 What will nowe be∣come of Thomas his ordering of the con∣trouersie betwixt Sco¦tus & Bonauētura &c where is now the de∣cisiō of Thomas, Scot, or Bonauenture, &c? 140. 12 do foresee that it is good, that they shold haue no other but la∣tine inscriptions haue yet no other but Latin inscriptions 141. 19 lumpe lambe 141. 42 Sylua Sylxa 142. 46 would neuer consent would neuer consent saith Aluarez 143. 18 in a small chest in a litle basket 146. 54 are as as are 147. 32 Latine a Latinist or one that speaketh Latin 147. 39 the Minister Priest 147. 46 Pastor Priest 148. 4 Pastor Priest 148. 21 prayers publique prayers 150. 34 ci l. 153. 29 might be saued, might be saued, in any language 159. 39 the Pastors Priests 160. 11 Ministers Priests 161. 19. & 29 Elders Priests 162. 7 Maximilianus Maximianus 162. 40 the Bishops had not a∣ny more to do to giue orders then the Priest the Bishop had no∣thing but the colla∣ting of Orders more then the Priest 163. 11 Creame de Chrismate 163. 34 apparell of a Minister apparell of a Priestor of a Minister 163. 54 of silke veluet 164. 41 & 42 Elders Priests 165. 11 no prescription no prescription saith the law 167. 11 woman wife 168. 54 iudgement against iudgement subtiltie against sub∣tiltie 170. 12 173. 37 wast want 174. 43 who had bin alwayes maried who was neuer mar∣ried himselfe 175. 54 generall Councell 1. generall Councell 176. 47 aforesaid foretold 177 12 Synecius Syricius 178. 20 great resistance great resistance in France 178. 31 Elder Priest 183. 5 Bishop Archbishop 183. 10 the whole seruice of the Church the whole seruice of the Church through∣out Christendome 184. 25 the second time afterward 188. 25 but we heare Salui but let vs heare Saluiā 191. 29 making the world be∣leeue that this Coun∣cell was held at two seuerall times dissembling this that this Councell was. 191. 44 Againe the words Again that the words 198. 27 towards a mās neigh∣bour towards a mās neigh∣bour Ecclesiast. 35 199. 29 Whereupon it is said Now if they reply 200. 10 Now we are of iudge∣ment now we agree with them in this 201. 37 this is not the true this is the true 202. 11 as accessary and priuy to that which went before it as an accessarie to that which went be∣fore it 206. 9 they should be forced they shuld be forced according to the law 207. 18 my priesthoode con∣sisteth in fishing; in preaching the Gos∣pell my Priesthood consi∣steth in preaching that is in declaring & setting forth the Gos∣pell 207. 51 of the Gentiles of the Gentils, & that during the time that they were Gentils 208. 10 they are of iudgemēt they do agree 211. 26 He could not finde a∣ny sacrifice but that of prayer grounded vpon the doctrine of veritie, neither anie word tēding that way He could not finde there but one onely prayer founded vpon the doctrine of truth; of the Sacrifice not so much as one word 212. 9 it is so farre from ap∣paratiues it is so farre from be∣ing apparant 213. 22 as consecrated as holy 213. 36 And of him And of this place 213. 49 and that of the Lords is also an Altar: and so an Altar doth in∣ferre a sacrifice and a sacrifice the masse and so by a consequēt the table of the Lord is also an altar, now if there be an alter, there must needs be a sacrifice, & if a sacri∣fice then the Masse
215. 51 215 54 Euangelists, Prophets Apostles, Euangelists, Prophets 216 49 be better by better 217 27 it should fall out should it fall out 218 23 Sacrifictum cruentum aut incruentum Sacrificij cruenti, aut incruenti 218 7 know it by name know the name ther∣of 218 46 Sacrament Sacrifice 219 33 & taken for graunted and learned 220 8 in the presence of his in the presence of his father 224. 44. & 26. l. 4 Psalme 50. Psalme 49 226 30 And that one For that one 227 48 the penance of sin∣ners the penitencie or re∣pentance 228 27 Take eate, and sacri∣fice, offer vnto God take cate, and not sa∣crifice or offer vp vn∣to God 229 45 of Memen of their Memento 230 19 to their pretended sa∣crifice to the hoste 232 22 setting before vs ingendring in vs 232 23 monuments thereof motions 132 31 Brutis bruits 232 45 sacrifiees sacrifices 233 14 there is added ano∣ther heape of more then good measure there followed these Corollaries or addita∣ments 233 50 penance repentance 234 10 by intreary, by intreatie onely 234 27 is infinitie is finite 234 28 Some say vnto them a man may say vnto him 234 41 Sacrament Sacrifice 245 3 will you go to inquire of the deuils will you go to idols, will you run vnto de∣uils 247 14 penance repentance 248 28 regnerating regenerating 248 39 my such torment as is giuen to them though a man should racke their sayings neuer so hardly 249 24 who would not ad∣mit of the first who wold not admit of any but the first 252 20 where either 252 34 and others also of others also 252 35 verie watchfull and well aduised, that the deuill do not seduce and deceiue vs to be friends & wish well to the diuell lest he might seduce and deceie vs 253 19 for euer nunquam neuer 253 39 to be watchfull and watie of him to be friends and at one with him 255 23 that cannot make their market they cannot helpe themselues 256 36 258 46 vnto euery one of euery one 259 18 that fire, that did sit that fire, to wit the holy ghost that did sit 259 28 his life for a pray his life for a pray saith the Prophet 261 51 or by which of the old writers do they approue their owne, these men are they whom I aske, which make such accompt of the fathers, which thinke them all to be on their side. So that it will suffice vs onely to denie their inter∣pretation by which of the an∣cient writers wil they proue their Purgato∣rie, I meane they which make so great accōpt of the fathers, and thinke they haue them al on their side If they cānot alledge so much as one it will suffice vs onely to de∣ie their interpreta∣tion 162 22 the diuels say they do not worship the diuels, say they, did not worship him 263 19 263 20 or here for hell 264 53 what time must they indure in the burning and flaming fire of this Purgatorie what blessednesse or happinesse is there to be found amidst the burning and fla∣ming fire of this Pur∣gatorie 265 9 we are able to say we are able to say with S. Paule 266 32 his sinnes her sinnes 268 3 he hath not he that hath not 268 7 shalbe come shall come 269 18 269 49 the law all the law 269 37 is sound there is found there 269 29 274 26 276 34 grudged grieued 280 1 vnbaptised before Baptisme 280 10 as he gaue it that he gaue it 280 54 for then for them 281 29 do neuer faile of their fruit do neuer faile of their fruit at what time so euer they be made 281 33 the Minister the Minister or high Priest or Bishop 283 10 prayers which are made for the good, are thakesgiuings for the wicked prayers which are made for the good are thankesgiuings; for the wicked 282 6 282 18 287 15 to which he reserued the number of feastes to (where he goeth a bout to restraine the number of feasts) to 289 24 euen against their wils to the deuotions of their order after them with emu∣lation vnto the deuo∣tion of their order 293 51 vnitie of the auncient Church custome of the 295 28 becoming a humble uter for the sence & feeling of his sin and miserie suing vnto thee as of∣ten as he shal feele or finde within himselfe the sence of any eui or grief whatsoeuer 296 27 towards to his people towards his people 299 37 or vs to vs 300 48 enio viuo 300 44 301 33 Bishop Archbishop 301 48 found it founded it 303 41 many nations all nations 308 14 for similitie sake for Ciuilities sake or in a ciuill maner 311 30 it is meet is it meet 312 1 to haue friends in the Court to haue friendes in the Court when a ma hath any sute vnto the king 314 11 because the word dwelleth in him because the word of God dwelleth in him 315 40 Gorgia Gorgonia 316 26 at Angelos nominare at{que} Agelos nominare 316 44 colebant colunt 318 48 is not to be denied is not to denie 319 23 we do not adore or worship them we do not adore or worship them, onely we honour them 321 23 to hot and distempe∣red choller (a man for that cause certainly vnworthy to be ad¦mitted into any dis∣putation concerning religion) to hot & distempered cholle (which is vn∣worthy to haue any place in disputation of Religion 322 1 but both 325 18 praying alwayes praying also 327 18 named Madaurensis named Maximus Ma¦daurersis 327 37 neither they neither this 329 39 supporting of the same supporting of the cō∣trarie opinion 330 6 iudicant indicant
331 19 336 19 length greatnesse 341 11 by the light in the light 341 28 And Cassander In Cassander 341 44 no not for himselfe but for himselfe 342.47. 346.49 By a man By one man 344 11 repaireth his worke he repaireth his work 348 25 in as much as it is not so much a fire, which being blowen vp, breedeth to such a di∣sease, as it is not able to cure vs of againe, as a heape of dead ashes in as much as it is not a fire which needeth onely kindling, or a disease that wanteth onely remedie: but it is indeed as a heape of dead ashes; 349 43 thee hereunto thereunto 350 40 But it is not, it may be so bad as men report it to be But it is not (it may be) so bad as men re∣port it to be 351 2 a malice malice 354 23 any righteousnesse in vs any pettie kinde of righteousnesse in vs 356 34 the the gift the gift 360 49 name the worke it giueth the denomi∣nation vnto this work 362 20 But will But well, 366 4 but for the loue of himself: Nay, to loose but for the loue of him & our selues: nay, to loose 367 1 of his workes; To the of his workes, the Greeke text readeth it plainly according to his works; To the 367 52 let not a man let no man 368 2 this is that which the Councell of Orange doth hold vpon this question This is that which the Councell of Orange saith, which was held about this question 369 38 sparingly circumspectly & wise∣ly 370 10 Graunt vnto vs to be Graūt vnto vs to me∣rite to be 370 52 he retributeth them He retributeth then 372 5 Not workes Not by workes 372 21 but a word of the pride But in a word of the pride 372 31 374 41 Essees Esseans Iewes 375 33 meanly learned reasonably well lear∣ned 376 26 I finde not my selfe greatly guiltie I finde not my selfe guiltie 376 33.34 his her 377 2 As faith As for faith in Christ 380 36 there shall not re∣maine any more streightnesse, or an∣guish thorough my miserie for me It shall be neuer a whit the straicter for me 381 1 Honorius of Auston Honorius Augustiū mē∣tis 382 38 reprouing the wayes treading in the same steps 384 36 will be ours willeth to be ours 385 38 Thomas Sage Thomas say 385 53 is infinite, and could not is infinite, and there∣fore cannot be satis∣fied, but by an infinit punishment, which could not 386 8 sath saith 388 16 Des condigno de condigno 388 19 That in things , that in things 390 6 hmuour humour 391 11 of the sonne the sonne 397 36 and was to come which was to come 397 36 and in their large & wide reach, rather thē in any their greatnes and in extension ra∣ther then in intentiō 400 30 That which is broght in as said by S. Gre∣gorie may we also say together with him Which thing caused S. Gregorie to say; & vs with him 401 1 Minister Priest 401 34 in it in him 407 1 the brethren our brethren 409 17 transubstantiatur transubstantietur 411 17 whereas on the con∣trary, it should proue, &c Notwithstanding all this, is it not cleare, that if their opinion take place, that vnbe∣leeuers & hypocrites do receiue the body of Christ, that Christ must needes raigne in them corporally? That such as are dead, &c 412 45 in Baptising in Baptisme 412 47 chāging of the water changing into water 414 2 denying the truth abating somwhat frō the truth 414 18 For the sonne of God properly doth quickē vs in that he is eter∣nall, but in that he hath made himselfe mortall For the sonne of God to speake properly, doth not quicken vs, in that, &c 415 23 did not a litle ground themselues might verie well haue grounded themselues 416 20 alwayes with vs alwayes with vs pre∣sent 416 32 whereas now he is in heauē, he ceaseth not to fill the earth with his power whereas now he is in heauen in bodie, he ceaseth not, &c. 417 4 not any more to de∣uide & separate with Nestorius, but with Eutyches to confoūd and couple together the two natures not any more to de∣uide & separate with Eutyches, but with Nestorius to confoūd &c 417 29 if it were within the reach of quantitie if it were made quan∣titie 418 7 the dores made the dores made fast 419 23 this should be an vn∣ablenesse, and want of power this should be an im∣potencie and not an omnipotencie 422 10 so began they lesse & lesse to admit so would they not any longer admit 422 47 the hearing they hearing 423 41 if you eate not, &c if you eate not, &c. If thou take this accor∣ding to the letter, this letter will kill thee, &c. But 424 37. & 42 counterfeits and re∣semblances symboles and signes 426 1 receiuing the voca∣tion of God receiuing the vocatiō power or inuocation of God 428 23 vniting of the signe & thing vniting of the signe with the thing 428 28 the heauēly with the earthly heauenly bread with the earthly 429 28 Ministers Priests 431 6 So saith he If saith he 431 8 cibum Domini cibum Dominicum 431 30 faithfull onely faithfull onely; & not to the Sacramentall eating, which is com∣mon betwixt them & infidels. And this, &c 433 2 as meere bread as meere bread or as bare wine 433 19 power of his diuinitie power by his diuinitie 434 45 that he prayed if he had prayed 437 20 after the same maner that Christ is giuen vnto vs after the same manner that Christ giueth them vnto vs 439 50 Thou canst not looke for him any more at hād, for he is in hea∣uen, looke for him by faith Thou canst not touch or reach him anie more with thy hand, touch him or reach him vnto thee by the hand of faith
440 19 That the virgin is not vnhappie That the virgin is not happie 442 1 partakers of the na∣ture of partakers of the hu∣mane nature of 443 23 for the rest will carrie the question away for the rest is of no great consequence 443 26 thou takest the bread of the Lord thou takest the bread the Lord 443 39 others Caesarius, and the later writers, som one, some another others Caesarius a la∣ter writer then either of them both 443 42 This sacrifice must be indeede by faith This sacrifice must be esteemed and mea∣sured by faith 444 39 The fathers of the old Testamēt knew it not how that they that should receiue the in∣uisible bread, shold al∣so spiritually eate the flesh of Christ, &c the fathers of the old Testament knew it not; and that those which receiued the visible bread should spiritually eate the flesh of our Lord, &c 446 1 With whom all this doth well agree, how soeuer it doth no whit agree with the power and efficacie of the, &c How doth all this a∣gree or rather not disagree with the power and efficacie, &c 446 27 that there is anie earthly thing that here is, &c 448 16 Chap. vj Chap. vij 453 39 That all do take in order Let all in order take 455 4 saith he and not 455 40 S. Augustin vpō Beda S. Aug. as we reade in Bede 456 51 if any man eate my flesh if any man eate not my, &c 457 2 Ministers should haue the Eucharist conse∣crated Priests, &c 457 20 these blasphemous questions not as they are barbares these no lesse blas∣phemous then barba∣rous questions 457 22 so soone as the kinde is stroken vpon with the tooth so soone as the kinde or peeces of bread is touched of the teeth or receiued into the mouth 458 41 in the vulgar tongue in the vulgar and knowen tongue vn∣derstood of the peo∣ple 462 21 whether it be the thing or else the Sa∣crament of the thing whether it be in the the thing or else in the, &c 466 13 Gratian & Lombard Friers Gratian & Lombard brothers 470 3 in the yeare 8215 in the yeare 1215 470 20 by Dozeus by dozeins 474 19 Iohn Duns saith Sco∣tus Iohn Duns called Scotus 474 50 that there cannot but a difficultie then there followeth but one difficultie 475 18 in the Canon of Late∣ran in the Coūcell of La∣teran 476 37 lapis hic honorabilis lapis hic venerabilis 477 3 shroud corporall 477 23 countrey of Luke countrey of Liege 478 7 twelue lustie cutters or ruffiās walking be∣fore twelue Sergeants, or Bedels, or fellowes with tip staues as it were walking before, 478 43 that the institution that the consecration 479 49 yea amongst them∣selues at the least amongst &c 480 34 and that he is corpo∣rally and that he is not corporally 480 42 mutuall byace vsuall byace Marginall faults in the Preface. Page. Faults. Corrections. 3 Orig. in Ier. Orig. Hom. 1. in Ierem. 4 Chrys. in 5. Mat. in S. Mat. 4 Hom. 33. 13 6 Cypr. de simpl. Pontif. Cypr. de simplic. Praelat. 7 Amb. l. 1. de poenit. c. 9 c. 6 9 In Acta Hom. 32 33 11 Es. c. 1 c. 2 Marginall faults in the text of the booke. Page. Faults. Corrections. 4 Marke. 24 14 6 Actes. 23 13 13 Distich. Dist. 17 Christians Iewes 20 Ephes. 18.19 Ephes. 22 Walafr. 22 2 25 Serm. Serm. 6 26 e. vasa c. vasa 33 De temp. De temp. 237 34 Amb. l. 5. ep. 8 l. 5. ep. 33 35 Iren. l. 34 c. 32 39 Amb l. 4. & 6 l. 4. c. 5. & 6 42 Catech. Catech. 5 42 Retr. l. 22 l. 2. c. 2 42 Aug. ep. 50 ep. 59 42 Aug. l. 20 Aug. l. 20. contra Faustum 79 Polyd. c. 21 c. 11 49 c. sui, &c c. fui. &c 49 Cyrill. 6 l. 6 50 art. 42 4 59 Greg. 71 17 63 Gen. 22. fol. 44 21. fol. 94 67 Greg. 3 33 70 gestu gestis 70 l. 7. c. 90 l. 7. c. 94 70 161 167 74 gerer gener 77 Amb. l. 2 l. 1 79 D. Can. 2 D. 2. Can. 2 81 Ser. 5 9 82 se Epis. vocal. Cenom. Euesque 85 l. 4. c. 51 c. 61 62 q. 12 q. 2 87 c. 23 c. 35 94 Is. 58.43 58.4 95 11.12.13 11.12.23 95 Act. 2.24 Act. 2.20 98 Q. con. Q. 7. con. 99 Apoc. Apoc. 2 103 13 13. 18 104 c. 42 c. 2 106 c. 49 26 109 11. 1. & 18 11. &. 8 110 1.10 T. 10 115 Ps. 65 95 115 c. 1 c. 2 122 l. 20 l. 10 126 1.14 T. 14 135 8 28 145 8.8 8.3 145 suck Luke 149 Marmiculus Marm. Siculus 150 c. 10 c. 20 154 & q & 9 155 ep. ad ep. 1. ad 157 Anomantas Anomanitas 161 1. Cor. 83 11 161 8 18 161 l. 4. l. 5. 162 D. 12 D 21 163 Strabo Strab. c. 25 169 d. l l. 1 170 vir vtr. 183 c. 146 c. 46 183 1.2 T. 2 184 Greg. 7 Greg. 3 185 Titanum Trianum 202 c. 146 c. 13 203 Veg. Verg. 207 c. de c. 22. de
209 Ps. 109 Ps. 95 213 Act. 1 2 222 At. 4 Orat. 4 225 c. 41 c. 1 225 l. 10 l. 1.10 232 Part. 13 3 233 c 4 c. 2. & 4 233 l. 1. c 2 l. 2. c. 2 238 c. 49 c. 47 258 Ps. 118 Pf. 118. conc. 20 258 Ephes. 4 Epes. 5 263 3. p. q. 62 3. p. 52 263 de cor & grat. c. 12 266 l. 4. c. l. 4. c. 267 l. sent. l. 4. sent. 267 tract. tract. 1 267 resp q. 10 resp. q. 60 268 c. 2, 8 c 28 270 in Hierem. in Hirerem. Hom. 13 272 l. c. 10.25 l. 10. c. 25 272 de fide operibus de fide & operibus 273 Pag 3.8 pag. 38. 281 Hom. 22 Hom. 21 282 l. c. 9 l. 1 c. 9 284 Ps. 8.10 Es. 8.19 285 de anima. c. 5.7 c. 57 289 Dominic. Dominic. à Soto in 4 Sent. d. 19. q. 3. art. 2. 301 Apoc. 1.8 Apoc, .8 305 de cura pro mortuis ge∣renda de cura &c. c. 13 317 Haec. resp. haeres. 318 Hom. in Mat. hom. 1. in Mat. 323 Ps. 95 Ps. 96 326 Paralip. Paralip. 32 327 de vera relig. De vera relig. c. 55 330 c. 27. c. 28 333 Ps. 91 in Psal. 91 341 Ps. 19 49 342 Conc. Arans. Conc. Arans. 2 342 Gen. 6.5 8.64 342 Rom. 6.8 Rom. 8.6 347 Serm. 7 78 348 Col. 2.23. Col. 2.13 349 Luk. 12.24 12 48 351 In Iohn. 4. tract. 41 FINIS.
