19307 99845922 10854
THE PENNILES PARLIAMENT OF Threed-bare Poets: OR, All mirth and wittie Conceites. PRINTED At London for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shoppe in Gratious streete neere Leaden-hall gate. 1608.
Heere beginneth the Penniles Parliament of threed-bare Poets. FIrst of all, for the increase of euery Foole in his humour, wee thinke it necessarie & conuenient, that all such as buyes this Booke, and laughes not at it before he hath read it ouer, shall be condemned of Melancholy, and be adiudged to walke ouer More-fieldes twise a weeke in a foule Shirt, and a payre of Bootes, but no Stockinges. It is also agreed vpon, that long Bearded men shall seldome prooue the wisest; and that a Niggards purse shall scarce bequeath his Maister a good Dinner: and because Water is like to prooue so weake an element in the world, that men and women will want Teares to bewayle their sinnes, wee charge and commaunde all Gardners to sow more store of Onions, for feare Wid∣dowes should want moysture to bewayle their Hus∣bandes Funerals. In like maner we thinke it fit, that Red-wine should be drunke with Oysters: and that some Maydens shall blush more for shame, then for shamefastnes: But men must haue care, least conuersing too much with Red-Petticoates, they bannish their Haire from their heads, and by that meanes, make the poore Barbers beggers for want of worke.
that shall know his owne father. I shall be lawfull for some to haue a Pale in their  such , as they shall have more then  they  Pay for , as they shall  in other  Wife from their  some such a stopping in their Hearts, as they shall be vtterly obstinate to receiue Grace: some such a  in their  as they shall be enemies to good counsell some such  Moses, as no Feast shall escape without their Compa∣nies: and some shall be so Needy, as neither Young Heyres shall get their owne, nor poore Orphans their Patrimonie. Also, it is  and Decreed, that some shall be so , as they cannot Step but  some so consed in , as they shall keepe neuer a good thought to blesse themselues: some so disguised in purse, as they  it fatall to  one Penny to buy their dinners on Sundayes: some so , as they cout wrong fast eaing the  of their occupation. But amongst other Lawes & Statutes by vs heere establishes, we thinke it most necessary and conuenient, that Pou shall kill  Poultry by cu∣stome, thou their.  Mayes can sell with a Good Conscience: also it is ordered and agreed vpon, that Bkes, Woodmongers, But thers, & Breers, shall fall to a mighty Conspiracie, so that no Man shall
either haue Bread, Fire, Meat, or Drinke, without c∣dite or ready Mony. Sicaphants by the Statute shall haue great giftes, and Good and Godly Labours shall scarce be worth thanks: it is also thought necessary, that Maides about midnight shall see wondrous visions, to the great hart-griefe of their Mothers. Furthermore it is marked & set downe, that if Law∣yers plead poore mens causes without mony, westmin∣ster Hall shall grow out of custome, to the great impo∣vershing of al Nimmers, Lifters, & Cutpurses. Those that sing bases shall loue good drinke by authority: and Trumpeters that sound trebles shall stare by custome: Women that weare long Gownes, may lawfully rayse oust in March: and they that keepe a Temperate Dyet shall neuer die on surfets. In like manner it shall be Lawfull for Saylors and Souldiers, to spend at their pleasures, what they get by their Sword: and if the Treasurer pay them any thing beyond count and reckoning, if they buyld not an Hos∣pitall therewith, they may Bestow it in Apparrell by the statute. It is further established and agreed vpon, that they that drinke too much Spanish Sacke, shall about Iuly be serued with a Fiery faces: but Oh you Ale-knightes, you that deuour the Marrow of the Mault, and Drinke whole Aletubs into Consumptions; that sing Queene Dido ouer a Cup, and tell Strang Newes ouer an Ale pot: how vnfortunate are you, who shall Pisse out that
It is further agreed vpon and establish, that many strange euents shall happen in those houses, where the Mayde is predominant with her Maister, and wants a Mistresse to looke narrowly vnto her. Also we thinke it conuenient, that some shall take, their Neighbours bed for their owne: some the seruant for the Maister: and (if Candles could tell tales) some will take a Familiar for a flea. Also we thinke it meete, that there should be many Fowlers, who in stead of Lackes will each Lobcokes: and many for want of wit shall sell their Freehold for Tabacco pipes, and red pet∣ticoats. Likewise we thinke it conuenient that there should be many Takers; some would be taken for wise men, who indeed are very Fooles: for some will take crake Angels of poore debters, and a quart of Malmesie when they cannot get a pottle. But stay a while, whether are we carried, leauing the greatest Lawes vnpublished, and establishing the lesse; therefore we enact and ordaine as a necessary Statute, that there shall great contentions fall betweene Soul∣diers and Archers, and if the fray be not desided at a pt of Ale and a blacke Pudding, great bloodshed is like to ensue: for some shall maintaine that a Turke can be hit at twelue score Pricks in Fiendsbury fields, Ergo, the bow and shafts wan Bullen: other shall say that a Pot∣gun is a dangerous weapon against a Mudwall, and an enemy to the painters worke: amongst these controuer∣sies wee will send forth our commission to God Cupid, being an Archer, who shall deside the doubt, and prooue that Archery is Heauenly, for in meditation thereof, he hath lost his eyes.
Oh gentle fellow Souldiers, then leaue your con∣trouersies if you loue a Woman, for I will proue it, that a Mince Pie is better than a Musket; and he that dare gaine-say me, let him meete me at the Dagger in Cheape with a Case of Pewter-Spoones, and I will answeare it: and if I proue not that a Mince-pie is the better Weapon, let me Dine twice a Weeke at Duke Humpheries table. It is furthermore established, that the foure  at the Cardes, shall sodainely leape from out the bunch, and Desperately Pranke about the new Play-house, to seeke out their old Maister Captaine Crop-eare: also it is thought meete, that some men (in these daies) shall be polliticke beyond reason, and write more in one line, then they can proue in an age. Furthermore it shall be Lawfull for some to Study which way they may walke to get them a Stomacke to their meat, whilst other are as carefull to get meat to put in their bellies: likewise there shall be great perse∣cution in the Common-meale of Kitchin-fees, so that some desperate Woman shall boyle, try, and seeth poore tallow to the generall commoditie of all the whole com∣pany of Tallow Chandlers. Alas, alas, how are we troubled to thinke on these dangerous times? for Taylors, by Act of Parliament may Lawfully inuent new fashions: and he that takes Irish Aquauite by the Pint, may by the law stumble without offence, and breake his Face: and it shall be thought conuenient, that some be so desperat bent, as
they shall goe into my Lord Maiors Buttery when all the Barrels be full, without either Sword or Dagger about them: many Men shall be so Ventrously giuen, as they shall go into Petty-coate lane, and yet come out againe as honestly as they went first in. In like manner it shall be lawfull for Tems Water to Clense as much as euer it did in times past: and if the Brewers of London buy store of good Mault, poore Burgemen at Queene-hiue shall haue a whole Quart for a penny: Saint Thomas Onions shall be sold by the rope at Billinsgate by the Statute: and Semsters in the Exchange shall become so Contionable, that a man without offence, may Buy a Falling Band for twelue pence. It shall be lawfull for Smithes to loue good Ale, and if it be possible to haue a Frost of three weekes long in Iuly, men shall not be afraide of a good ster at Mid∣sommer: Porters Baskets shall haue authority to hold more then they can Honestly Carry away: and such a Drought shall come amongst Cans at Bartholmew Faire in Smithfeeld, that they shall neuer continue long filled. The Images in the Temple Chuch (if they rise a∣gaine) shall haue a Commission to digge downe Cha∣ing Crosse with their Fauchions: and Millers by Custome shall haue small mind to Morning Prayer, if the Winde serue them in any Corner on Sundaies: Those that goe to Warres and can get nothing, may  Home Poore by Authority: and those that Play
fast and loose with womens Apron-stringes, may chaunce make a iourney for a Winchester Pidgion: for preuention thereof, drinke euery morning a draught of Noli me tangere, and by that meanes, thou shalt bee sure to escape the Physitions Purgatorie. But amongst all other Decrées and Statutes by s héere set downe, wée ordaine and commaund, that thrée thinges (if they bée not parted) euer to continue in perpetuall amitie, that is a Lose in an olde Doublet, a painted Cloath in a Painters shop, and a Foole and his Bable. Furthermore it shall be lawfull for Bakers to thriue by two thinges: that is, Scores well payde, and Millers that are honest. Phisitions by other mens harmes, and Church∣yardes by often Burials. Also, wee thinke it necessarie for the Common∣wealth, that the Sammon shall be better soulde in Fish-stréete, thou the Beere shall be at Willinsgate. And Hartes-ease amongst the company of Hearbe∣wines, shall be worth as much money as they can get for it by Statute. It is further enacted and agreed vpon that thse that runne foure score Myle a foote on a Winters day shall haue a sore thirst about seauen of the clocke in the euening.
And such as are inclined to the Dropsie, may be law∣fully cured, if the Phisitions know how. Also wée ordaine & appoint, that (if there be no great store of Tempestes) two halfee-peny loaues shall be sold for a penny in White-chappell. Chaueers Bookes (by act of Parliament) shall in these dayes, prooue more wittie then euer they were be∣fore: for there shall so many sodaine, or rather sodden Wittes steppe abroad, that a flee shall not friske foorth, vnlesse they cemment on her. O what a detestable trouble shall be among women about foure score and ten yeares olde, for such as haue more Téeth about them, then they can well vse, shal die for age, if they liue not by miracle. Also it shall be lawfull for Bées, if the Sommer shew not, to goe on Pilgrimage, and fly so farre in one day, as who so sets vp a land marke wheye the first light, shall come to vs and haue a pound waight of Gold for his dili∣gence and labour. Moreouer, wee thinke it necessarie, that those that haue two eyes in their head, shall sometimes stumble: and they that can neither write nor read may as boldly for∣sweare themselues, as they that can. And it shall be lawfull for Almanacke makers, to tell more lyes then true tales. And they that goe to Seas without Victuals, may
suffer peunurie by the Statutes. In like manner, it shall be lawfull for any man to carry about him more Golde then Iron: if hee can get it? But they that are giuen to sullen cōplexion (if they be Females) must be more circumspect: for if they repent their hidden sinnes too much, they may chaunce catch heauen for their labour. Therefore let Maydens take heede how they fall on their backes least they catch a fourtie weekes fauour. And he that hath once married a Shrew and by good chaunce burie her, beware how hee come into the stocks againe. Further it shall be lawfull for those that be Rich, to haue many Friendes: And they that bee Poore, may by authoritie kéepe Money, if they can get it honestly. Also, wée commaund and charge all such as haue no Conscience, to doe their worst, least they die in the Diuels debt: As for the rest they that haue more mo∣ney then they néed may helpe their poore Neighbours, if they will. In like manner it shal be lawfull for such as are sub∣iect to het that Rewmes to drinke cold drinke. And those that haue a minde to inrich Phisitions, to be neuer with∣out diseases.
Also, Souldiers that haue no meanes to thriue by playne dealing, may by the Statute swallow downe an ounce of the strro of Suttletie euery morning: And if they cannot thriue that wayes, wée thinke it necessarie, that foure times in the yeare, they goe a fishing on Salis∣burie plaine. Furthermore, for the benefite and encrease of foolish Humours, wee thinke it necessarie, that those our deare friends which are sworne true Seruitours to womens Pantables, should haue this order set downe, that you suite your selues handsomely against Goose feast: and if you meete not a faire Lasse betwixt Paules & Stratford, that day, wee will bestow a new suite of Satten vpon you, so you will beare all the charges. But as for your deare firendes and Schollers, thus much wee fauour you, for you shall dine vpon Wit by authoritie: and if you pay your Hostesse well: it is no matter though you score it vp till it come to a good round summe. In like manner, it shall be lawfull for Maydes milke to be good Phisicke for b'd heeles: and a cup of Sacks to bedward, a present Remedy for the Rhewme, Such as are sicke in the Spring, may take Phisicke by the Statute: And those that are cold, may weare more Clothes, without offence. It is best to ride, in long iourneyes, least a man bee wearie with going a foote: And more comely to goe in broken stockings, then bare legged.
Further it shalt be lawfull for some to be leaue, be∣cause they cannot be . Some by the Statute, shall loue  pssing well, because they can come by no other meales and other some super it with an Egge at dinner, that dare a manfully set vpon a shoulder of Veale in the after. Some shall be sad when they want Money: and in loue with Widowes rather for their wealth, then their honesties. It is also thought necessarie, that some shall suspect their Wiues at home, because they themselues play false abroad. And some loue Bowling Allies better then a Ser∣mon. But aboue all other thinges, Spirits with Aprons shall much disturbe your sléepes about midnight. Furthermore, it shall be lawfull for him that mar∣ries without Money, to finde foure bare Legges in his Bed: And hée that is too prodigall in spending, shall die a begger by the Statute. In like manner wée thinke it necessarie, that he that is plagued with a curst wife, to haue his pa broke quar∣terly, as he payes his rent. Likewise, hee that delights in subtiltie, may play the Knave by custome: And hee that hath his complexion and
courage spent, may eate Mutton on Fasting dayes by the Lawe. And to conclude, since there are ten Precepts to bee obserued in the Arte of Scoulding, wee humbly take our leaue of Duke Humfries Ordinarie, and he take vs to the Chappell of Ill Counsaile where a quart or two of ne Trinidado, shall arme vs against the Gun-shot of Tonge-mettle, and kéepe vs safe from the assaults of Sir Iohn Find-fault, Vale, my deare Friends, till my next returns. FINIS. Imprinted at London for W. Barley, and are to be solde at his shop, in Gratious streete. 1608.
