19450 99857122 22799
THE First parte of Pasquils Apo∣logie. Wherin he renders a reason to his friendes of his long silence: and gallops the fielde with the Treatise of Reformation lately written by a fugitiue, Iohn Penrie. Printed where I was, and where I will bee readie by the helpe of God and my Muse, to send you the May-game of Martinisme for an interme∣dium, betweene the first and seconde part of the Apologie. Anno. Dom. 1590.
THE FIRST PART OF PASQVILS APO∣LOGIE. IF it be a vanitie and vexation of hart, for a man to toyle in hys life to gather-treasure, when he knowes not whither he be wise or foolish that shall inherite it: we may thinke the sweat of our spirits to be somewhat friuolous, which write & print, when we cannot tell whether they will prooue sober or fran∣ticke to whom we leaue the possession of our labours. It is nowe almost a full yeere, since I first entred into the lystes against the Faction, promising other Bookes which I keepe in yet, because the opening of them, is such an opening of waters, as will fill the eares of the world with a fearefull roaring. Were I but a dogge, wise men would suffer me to bay in the defence of mine own maister, but being a liuely stone, squared and layd into Gods building, by the hands of many excellent work∣men in the Church of England, when I see the theefe, and the sente of Church-robbers is in my nosthrils, shall I not lay out my throate to keepe them off? I know, that since the beginning of all these broyles in our Church of England, not onely the L. Archb. of Canterburie in his learned works, but many other reue∣rende,
religious, and worthy men, both at Paules-crosse, and the Pulpits in Cittie and Country, haue with great skill and sobrietie, toucht euery string of the holy scrip∣tures, and warbled sweetlie, to cast out the foule spirit of the Faction with Dauids harpe: but their madnesse on the contrarie part hath so encreased, that their attempt is still to nayle our best men to the wall with the speare of slaunder. By these euents you may easily perceiue what suc∣cesse they are like to haue, that deale with so leaden and sandie braines, he that hazards his time and cost to teach them, aduentures to waken the drowsie out of a dreame, their heads fall downe the lower for the lifting vp, and they defile vs with dust when they snake themselues. I could for my part be well contented, to throwe my selfe at their feete with teares, and entreatie, to stop their course: that the weake (for whom Iesus Christ hath dy∣ed,) may not see vs runne one at another like furious Bulles, foming, and casting out those reproches, which heereafter we shall neuer be able to wipe awaie; and when we should ioyne to encounter the common ene∣mie, the first view of each other, wil enforce vs to braule againe. But seeing sobrietie will doe no good, let them be well assured, that if I catch such a brimse in my pen as I caught the last August, I will neuer leaue flynging a∣bout with them, so long as I finde anie ground to beare me. Contention is a coale, the more it is blowne by dys∣putation, the more it kindleth, I must spit in theyr faces to put it out. Euer since the last Michelmas Tearme, many thou∣sands of my freendes haue looked for me, whom I am loath to enforce to loose their longing: and though in silence I gloate through the fingers at other matters, yet am I not carelesse of the quarrell nowe in hand. The peace of Ierusalem, which the faithfull are bound to pray for, is the onely thing that hath brought me to thys long
and quiet pause; wherein I haue set the example of Da∣uid before mine eyes, seeking with my hart a surcease of Armes, euen of those that hated peace, and prepared themselues to battaile when I spake vnto them. The case so standing, I trust I am worthy to be held excused, if I muster and traine my men a newe, that the enemies of GOD, and the state wherein I liue, may be stopt of theyr passage and driuen backe, or vtterly foyled in the field and ouerthrown. My labour in this peece of seruice will be the lesse, because the byshop of my soule, my L. Archb. of Cant. strooke off the head of the serpent long agone, it is no∣thing but the tayle that mooueth now. Some small rubs, as I heare, haue been cast in my way to hinder my com∣ming forth, but they shall not profit. It is reported, that a student at the Lawe, hath vndertaken to be a stickler betweene vs all, his booke is not in print, and I came a day short of the sight of the coppie of it. For any thing I heare, he quencheth the strife with a pinte of water and a pottle of fire. I little thought his leysure would haue suffered him, to haue any more then a common kinde of knowledge, in matters so farre remoued from the course of his studie, place, and calling. They that are most conuersant in the Scriptures, finde the booke to be shut with many seales, it is not for euery finger to breake them vp; the word is a treasure kept vnder many locks, which are not to be opened with euerie key. He onely that hath the key of Dauid, hath graunted out a commission to the lippes of his Priestes to come within it. So that if I doubt of any matter there, I may not knocke for it at the Chamber-dore of a com∣mon Counseller, but haue recourse vnto them, whom God himselfe appointed to teach Iacob before any Inne of courte was reard. I can tell him that M. Bucer, Peter Martyr, and that auncient Entellus of the Church of England the B. of Sarisburie, haue trauast our Church
with as graue a gate as he, and founde nothing in it to stumble at. Therefore what I say to him, I say to the rest of our Reformers, whose tongues are so busie to licke out the moates of their bretherens eyes, if they haue a∣ny wisedome in theyr vessels, let them be carefull howe they lende it out, least that when the suddaine shoute of the comming of the Bridegroome shall be giuen, and e∣uerie virgin would be glad to trime his owne Lampe, there be not enough for them and others. Some other things there are that made me looke backe, and measure the rase I had runne alreadie, before I bid any man the bace againe. To this I was stirred vp, by the dislike that some had of the ierke which I gaue to Fryer Sauanarol: ô quoth one, he was the first that in∣uented our Religion; this fellow seemes to haue a Pope in his bellie as bigge as Alexander, he would make you beleeue, that our Church hath borrowed the light of her Torche at a Fryers Taper, which is far otherwise. Our Religion in England is no newe excrement of the braine of man, but drawne out of the fountaine of all trueth, God himselfe, who spake in olde time to our fa∣thers, to Adam, to Enoch, to Noah, to Abraham, and so downward, to the Patriarches & Prophets that were all vnder the clowde, and sawe the promise a farre of, which was in the latter daies made manifest to vs in Ie∣sus Christ. Our fayth and Religion, is the fayth and Re∣ligion of our father Abraham, fulfilling the prophecie of Zacharie, who told vs before, that all nations should take holde of the skyrte of a Iewe, and say, we wyll goe with thee, we haue heard that God is with thee. Consi∣dering what was the hope of our fathers, and the hope of vs, what was preached to them, & what to vs, our Re∣ligion may say with the Sonne of God; I came out of the mouth of the most Highest. I tooke another nybling like a Minew about Bezaes Icones, where you shall finde commendation is giuen to
Sauanarol, and the fishe that was strooken with Bezas hooke, is Perceuall the plaine, but because his hande so shooke when he carried his coppie to the Presse, that he crost his accusation out againe, I will sheath euery wea∣pon I had drawne in my defence. Onelie I will giue the Readers to vnderstand, that the commendations which eyther M. Foxe, or M. Beza do giue to Sauanarol, are to be attributed to the best parts that were in him, that is, to the glimmering he had of the face of God in so darke a time, wherein he inueighed against the pride of the Court of Rome, a matter that Petrarche the poeticall Priest touched as well as he; I can shewe you euen by the Sermons that spunne him a halter to stop his breath, he was no Protestant. For in some of them he taught the popish distinction of veniall and mortall sinne, in some he preached merit, in some the reall presence in the sa∣crifice of the Masse, and in the ende of his fixt Sermon made in Florence, vppon the finishing of Noahs Arke, consider what he sayth. Io vi voglio riuelare vno secrete: che insino a qui, non ho voluto dirlo: perche non ho haunto tanta certezza, come ho haunto da diece hore in qua, ciascu∣no di voi credo che conoscesse el conte Giouanni della Miran∣dola, che staus qui in Firenze: et e morto, pochi giorni sono. Dicoui, che l'anima sua per le orationi difrati, & anche per alcune sue buone opere che fece in quest a vita, et per altre o∣rationi, e nel purgatorio. Orate pro co. &c. I wil tel you (saith he) a secrete, which to this day I haue refused to vtter, because I had no great certaintie of the matter vntill within these ten howres. I think euery one of you knew the Countie Iohn Mirandola, which liued here in Flo∣rence, and died within these fewe dayes. I tell you that his soule, by vertue of the prayers of the Friers and of some good works he did whilst he liued, together wyth some other prayers, is now in Purgatorie, pray for him. See heere how many blaines breake out of the Fryer in a little space. A reuelation concerning merit, pur∣gatorie
and prayer for the dead. Therefore as S. Ierom commendeth Origen for his memorie, labour, and sharp sight into many places of holy Scripture, yet reproueth him for his errors: so I thinke well with M. Foxe and M. Beza of that which was good in Fryer Sauanaroll, though I compared him with Martin for hys factious head, pleading in Florence as Martin did in England for a newe gouernment, at such a time as Armes and inua∣sion clattered about their eares. It may be I am of some better sente then you take me for, and finding a Machi∣auellian tricke in this plot of innouation, I was the more willing to lay Sauanarols example before your eyes, that hauing recourse vnto Machiauell in whom it is recor∣ded, you might see Machiauels iudgment vpon the same. His opinion is, that when such a peaze may be drawne through the noses of the people as to beare a change, the Maisters of the Faction are most happie, they may doe what they lust without controlment. I heard a byrd sing more then I meane to say, but riddle me, riddle me, what was he that told a very freend of his, he would owe neuer a pennie in England in one halfe yeere? His liuing considered, though it were fayre, the sale of all he possessed would hardly doe it, the time was so busie when he spake it, that no such largesse could be looked for at the hands of her Ma. who had requited euery penni-woorth of duetie with many a pounde of fauour long before: no fingring of Spanish coyne mought be mistrusted: & the Philosophers stone to turne mettles into gold, is yet to seeke; I cannot de∣uise which way so rounde summes could be so readilie compast, but by the spoyle of Bishopricks, Deaneries, and Cathedrall Churches, which very shortly after were stoutly pushed at. Credit me, hee spake somewhat neerer the point then himselfe was ware of, for if his soule be gone the way of the iust, his debt is already can∣celd. Let him goe, let him goe, I could tell you myste∣ries,
but there is a whole Chamber full of sentences in the land, the very painting of the walles is wisedome, whence I learned this lesson. Acerbum est ab eo laedi, de quo non poteris tuto queri: it is a shrewde matter to be wrunge by him, against whom a man cannot with anie safetie open his mouth to make complaint. Sure I am that by practises and pollicies, the garment of Christ is torne in peeces, and the Church is ouertaken with such a flawe, that it is high time euery fugitiue of the faction were hurled with Ionas into the Sea. They thunder their sentence out of the clowdes, and contrarie to the rule of Gods Apostle, they take vpon them to iudge men before the time. Whosoeuer readeth the Epistle and treatise of Iohn Penrie concerning Reformation, shal discouer thys swelling and sawcie humour in him against her Maie∣sties right honourable priuie Counsell. I remember the wisedome of the land in a graue O∣ration deliuered in the Starre-chamber, compared our Nobilitie and men of marke, to the flowers that stand a∣bout the Princes Crowne, garnishing & giuing a grace vnto it, to deface any one of them, is an open iniurie of∣fered to the Crowne it selfe. Howe Penrie or any Puri∣tane, that reacheth at the ornaments of the Crowne, can be faithfull or dutifull to her Maiestie, I leaue it to the iudgement euen of the meanest that is but indued wyth common sence. I will let passe the graue testimonie of so graue a Counseller, and set the axe of the word to the roote of this withered tree. The great commaunder of the world, hath appoin∣ted certaine boundes and land marks vnto our lips. Exo. 22. 28. Thou shalt not raile vpon the Iudges, nor speake euill of the Ruler of thy people. You may resolue vpon this, that there is no time of the Moone sette for vs to open the Maister vaine. To charge her Ma. right honourable priuie Counsell, with insolencie, iniustice, murther in the highest degree, yea more, the very killing and cru∣cifying
of Christ a fresh, is nothing els but to remoue the Land-marks and lymits by God prescribed, that neuer a a subiect heereafter might knowe his duetie. I warrant you the cunning Pap-maker knewe what he did, when he made choyse of no other spoone than a hatchet for such a mouth, no other lace then a halter for such a neck. Yet is Penrie become a man of law, he can frame an In∣ditement out of the Psalmes, against such as sit & taunte at theyr bretheren in euerie corner, when the plea may be turned vpon himselfe, in that none haue giuen theyr mouth vnto euill so much as he. Let me deale with him for it by interrogatories. Who had the ouersight of the Libell at Fawslie? Iohn of Wales: Who was corrector to the Presse at Couentrie? Iohn of Wales: Who wrote the last treatise of Reformation so full of slaunders, but Iohn of Wales? Is it so brother Iohn, can you byte and whine? then heare thy selfe indited againe by Pasquill. Thou hast railed vpon the Iudges, and spoken euill of the Rulers of thy people: thou hast ascended aboue the clowdes and made thy selfe like to the most High. What sentence shall we looke for against him now? I must set the trumpet of Esay to my mouth, and deli∣uer him nothing but points of warre. Thou that hast sette thy throne aboue the starres, shalt be brought downe vnto the graue, the Princes shall sleepe in glorie, euery one in his own house, but thou shalt be troden as a carcasse vnder feete, & euery one that beholdeth thee shall say, is thys the iollie fellow that shooke kingdoms▪ Hauing giuen many hisses of the old serpent against his betters, in the Epistle to the treatise, in the treatise it selfe he begins to rolle vp his head within his scales, and would fayne proue that Puritans be no Traytors. Wyll you see his reason? Because in the treasonable attempts against her Ma. these 31. yeeres, no one Puritane can be shewed, saith he, to haue had any part in them. Is thys the best proofe he can affoorde vs? I am so sicke in the
stomache when I reade it, that if some of my freends did not hold my head, I shold cast euery minute of an houre; Hath the Toade no poyson before he spits it, and the Scorpion no sting in his tayle before hee thrusts it out? Be there no more Traytors in England then be taken? And is it such a matter as cannot be found, that euer a∣nie Puritane became a Traytor? Without doubt he speakes like an Iland man, that imagins there be no more beastes abroade, then such as graze vpon the Mountains of Wales at home. You that are Oxford men, enquire whether Walpoole were not a Puritane when he forsooke you? and you that haue trauailed aunswere for me, whe∣ther he be not now a Iesuite, in the Italian Colledge of Iesuites at Rome? a sworne seruaunt to the Pope and counsel of Trent, reade the oath in the end of the booke you that haue the Counsel, and then resolue me whether no one instance may be giuen of any Puritane, that in all these thirtie one yeeres hath become a Traytor? I could reckon vp vnto him nowe, what excellent hope the English Cardinall conceiueth of a Puritane; he that hath such a dubble quartane of curiositie before he comes amongst them, will prooue passing trecherous, and passing superstitious as soone as he is burnt with the sunne of the Alpes. But giue me leaue a little, to search what treason may be laid to Puritanes at home. Popish traytors hold, that they may excommunicate their King, if he hinder the building of theyr Church, and he being excommu∣nicate, they say they are discharged of theyr obedience. If such a priuie Fistuloe doe not eate into the hearts of Puritans at home, I refer you to the Phisitians that dys∣couered thys mischiefe before I was able to espie it. You shall finde such a matter in the Appendix to the first treatise of the Aunswer to the Abstract. They pitch Pag. 194. 195. themselues vpon a Law of Tenures for vassals & Lords, and would draw it out like a wier from subiects to Prin∣ces,
from which they are roundly beaten by a learned Ciuilian in the land. Aboue all other, reade the defence of the Aunswer to the Admonition, in the whole Trea∣tise of the Princes right in matters Ecclesiasticall, begin∣ning Pag. 694. My L. Archb. of Cant. hath so brused the Faction, and cut them in the skull, that they haue lyen groning and panting, breathing and bleeding euer since; many as blinde a Chirurgion as Penrie, endeuou∣ring to close vp their woundes hath made them wider, and left them all desperate vpon their death hed. Con∣sidering how weake his Purgation is, let vs examine his Reformation, and try whether that be any stronger. The first petition he makes, is for a preaching Mi∣nisterie, he comes in very late with this request, we haue thys alreadie. Thousands of able Ministers in the Church of England, number for number, no kingdome vnder heauen can shew the like. Neuerthelesse, because the reading of the word hath his place in our Church as well as preaching, it is vineger to his teeth, and maketh him very sawcie with his g. of Cant. He callengeth the Archb. for affirming reading to be preaching, wherein my Reformer doth nothing but play the Iugler, he packs vnder-boord, and shewes not how farre forth the Archb. hath affirmed it. Preaching, saith the reuerend father, is taken two waies in the holie Scriptures. Generally, as it signifies euery kind of instruction by the word. Acts. 15. 21. Where it is said, that Moses is preached in the Cit∣ties euery Sabboth, when Moses is read in the Citties e∣uery Sabboth. Particularly, strictly, and vsuallie, prea∣ching is taken for expounding the Scriptures, and ap∣plying the playster vnto the sore. He neyther sayth that reading is expounding, nor that reading is preaching, in respect of him that readeth, but in respect of Gods spy∣rite, which watereth the word, and makes it fruitfull to conuersion in vs when it is read. For proofe wherof the testimonies of S. Cyprian and Ma. Foxe are there pro∣duced,
together with the example of S. Augustine, who was conuerted by reading the latter end of the 12. chap. to the Romains. Cyprian saith, that God himselfe speakes vnto vs when the Scriptures are read; and Ma. Foxe gy∣ueth in his euidence of many that in the infancie of our Church, were brought out of darknes into light by rea∣ding, and hearing the newe Testament in the English tongue. Penrie speakes not one word of all this, because he was built but for a Flie-boate, to take and leaue, when the skyrmish is too hote for him to tarrie, he may sette vp his sayles and runne away. It is a wonder to see with how terrible an out-cry he takes his heeles, charging the Archb. to be a deceiuer, to haue his right eye blinded, and to deserue to be condemned for an Haeretick. Tan∣tara, tantara, is he fled indeede? let me sende a Sakar af∣ter him. Is the holy Ghost a deceiuer, that saith Moses is preached when Moses is read? Is the right eye and vn∣derstanding of God put out, because he commaunds the message of Ieremie to be set downe in writing, and to be read vnto his people? Are Christ and the Apostle to CAP. 36. be condemnd for Haereticks, because the one stoode vp in the Synagogue on the Sabboth day to read, the other LVKE. 4. 16. chargeth Timothie to giue attendance to reading till he com? Was the reading of the word when there went no 1. TIM. 4. 13. preaching with it, no better then Swines blood before the Maiestie of GOD? Howe commeth it to passe then that God would haue it so? and why doth he attri∣bute an effect of preaching vnto reading, Iere. 36. 2 af∣firming that by this meanes the people may heare and repent, and he may forgiue them their iniquities? I wyll thresh at his shoulders before I leaue him, let him make his complaint to his Maister Cartwright, and let him dresse him, if he please, when I haue done with him. It is not his emptie reply of emptie feeders, darke eyes, ill work-men to hasten the haruest, that shall stop
my mouth. I looke for scholasticall graspes, and aun∣swers to so graue and weightie arguments; he may not thinke to beguile mine appetite as women do their chil∣dren that cry for meate, when they giue them a bable to play withall. As a man comparing the ioy of heauen with the painfulnes of feare, cannot say there is feare in heauen: yet as feare is taken for a reuerence, and admira∣tion REVEL. 15. 3. 4. of the works, the wonders, the iustice, the trueth, and maiestie of God, it is no hard manner of speech at all, to say there is feare in heauen, feare in the holy An∣gels, feare in the bosoms of the blessed: so if you com∣pare the exposition and application that are in prea∣ching, as preaching is strictly taken, with the barenesse of reading, in respect of the person of him that readeth, you cannot say there is preaching in reading, nor that reading is preaching, without derogation vnto prea∣ching: yet as preaching is taken in holy Scriptures for euery kinde of instruction by the word, the speech may be swalowed with ease enough, to say there is preaching in reading, and reading is preaching, as the Aunswer to the Admonition teacheth you. Though they grinne with the mouth, grinde with the teeth, stampe with the feete, and take stones with the Iewes to hurle at me, this truth shall be defended a∣gainst them all. Neuerthelesse, I wyll not be theyr vp∣holder which lye sleeping and snorting in their charges, vnapt or vnable to stand in the breach, or to run between the wrath of God and the people when the plague ap∣procheth, for I wish with my heart that euery Parrish had a Watch-man, who with the tongue of the learned might call vpon them: but this is such a matter as can∣not by all the Bishops in the land be brought to passe. For suppose that all they who cannot preach could be remoued, where will you finde sufficient men for so ma∣nie places as would be voide? If you goe to our Vni∣uersities, they cannot affoord you one for twentie, which
matter T. C. saw well enough, when he had no other shift to aunswer this, but to say he looked for help from the Innes of Court. No doubt manie excellent learned wits, and religious mindes are nursed there, and sup∣pose the Gentleman whose vnprinted booke I spake of, could find in his hart to make such an honorable change of life, as to forsake the barre to pleade for GOD, I doubt how many hundreds would follow him. The Church of the Lande beeing still vnfurnisht, what shall we doe? I know what morsels Penrie would haue before he gapes, he will cry, let them be restored that are put to silence. If we should yeeld so much vnto him, (though the number of them also would not fill vp the emptie places) yet they must be examined by the Apostles rule of cutting and deuiding the word a right, and not one of them should be admitted, that hath not a steddie hand to cleaue iust where the ioynt is, where would they stande trowe you, which in stead of sound doctrine to feede our soules, haue giuen vs the wine of giddines to turne our braines? I wil not trouble them at this time with their triall by the touch-stone of Contra∣dicentes redarguere, for then I should find them so ill ap∣pointed, that they must be throwne ouer the Pulpit as thicke as hoppes. Therefore Penrie began to gather his wits vnto him, when he limitted his Petition to certaine bounds: he would haue able men in euerie Congrega∣tion within England, as farre as possibly they might be prouided. Heere his wit is at the fullest, and presentlie it beginneth to wane againe, fore-seeing the matter, though possible with God, impossible with vs, it is ve∣rie boldly doone of him, before he knowes the waie of his own spirit, to iudge the spirite of another man, and pronounce condemnation to a Bishop, before the tribu∣nall seate of God, where he must stand to receiue sen∣tence vpon himselfe. What a watch had S. Ierom before his mouth, when
writing against an erroneous Bishop (which neither all Warwicke, nor all Wales, shall euer be able to prooue by the Archb. of Canterburie) with great humilitie and humblenes of spirit, he sayd, that if the honour of the Priest-hoode, and reuerence of the very name of a Bishop did not with-hold him, and but that he called to minde the Apostles aunswer, I knew not that he was high Priest: he confesseth with what out-cryes and heate of tearmes he could finde in his heart to inueigh against him. If so learned a Father as S. Ierom, to whom Cart∣wright and Penrie may goe to schoole, had such a respect to the place & person of the Bishop of Ierusalem, euen then when he was suspected of the haeresies of Origen and Arrius, & refused personally to appeare in a Coun∣sell to cleere himselfe, what a reuerend regard ought e∣uerie one of vs to haue of the Bishops of Iesus Christ, which are and haue beene the very hands, whereby God hath deliuered his truth vnto vs? He that receiueth and honors them, receiues and honors not them so much as him, whose Bishops vndoubtedly they are. Heerein neighbour Cartwright I challenge you of a daungerous Angina in your throate, how durst you presume to make so lowde a lie as to say the B. of Sarisburie D. Iuell, cals the doctrine of the holy Ghost wantonnes? You would Pag. 91. sect. 1. make vs beleeue, that if humanitie stayed you not, you could breake vppe his graue and bite him beeing dead, whom you durst not looke in the face whilst he liued. That Bishop hath a great many learned sonnes, first taught by him in his house, afterwardes maintained by his purse in the vniuersitie, they are all of the nature of the Elephant, the more they see the blood of their Mai∣ster shed, the more their courage increaseth, and they breake with the greater force into the battaile. They haue all vowed to hale thee out of thy trenches by the head and eares, Pasquill is the meanest of them. Moreouer brother Penru, I challenge you, and the
whole rabble of your confederates, for all your malepart, murderous, and bloodie rayling, against the Archb. of Canterburie, one of her Maiesties right honourable pri∣uie Counsell, against whom it appeareth your tongues are bent, to shoote still in secrete, and not to cease tyll sathans quiuor be spent, and no venim left, for any Hae∣reticke to vse that shall come after you. Assure your selfe, the more you reuile him, the grea∣ter will his honour be, the world sees it wel enough, and such as are not able to reade his works, may iustly ima∣gine by the course you take, that whom you cannot conquere by learned writings, you goe about to kyll with words. What is this, I pray you, but to fall groue∣ling to the earth in the questions and controuersies scand betweene vs, and beeing downe, to vse the last re∣fuge to kicke and spurne. As for the reuerende Bishops of our soules, they know it better then I can tell them, that this is the waie, through which the Apostles of God were led, through good report and euill, as deceiuers and yet true; They are no better then the Prophets, which dwelt as it were in a nest of Hornets; They are not so good as their Ma. Christ, they must feele the scourge of euill tongues as he hath doone. And though in this dogged generati∣on and age of ours, wherein both Prelats & Princes are depraued, they liue euery day in danger to haue theyr skinnes torne, yet God for his Churches sake sprinck∣led ouer all the kingdoms of the world, shall giue them a bodie of brasse to withstande the enemie, and make them a patterne to other Nations. The second venue the Welch-man hath bestowed vpon vs, is a wipe ouer the shinnes of the Non Residents, which me thinkes might very well be returned to the brother-hood of the faction in Warwick-shire, of which I haue seene more then I meane to name, mounted vp∣pon their dubble Geldings, with theyr Wiues behinde
them, ryding and iaunsling from place to place, to feaste among the Gentlemen of the Shyre, and retyre to theyr charge when the whole weeke is wasted in pleasure, to preache to Gods people vpon a full stomach. These be the fellowes that cannot away with a virgin Priest. Goe to, goe to, but for Cholericke diseases this scorching wether, I could point you out one by one, with a wette finger. Yet because that by the length of other mens frailties euery man may take the measure of himselfe, I will carrie my mouth in my hart, and let them passe, and though there be a pad in the straw that must be rousde, I haue taken out this lesson from the VVise; there is a time for speech, and a time for silence. I will not flie from the cause to the person of men, but grapple with the Reformer hand to hand. He giues vs a voley of Scriptures against Non Residents, not one of them proouing the matter he takes vpon him. The places shall be singled out, that you may see howe his wits wandred one from another when he quoated them. Rom. 10. v. 14. The Apostle sayth, we cannot call vpon God without a Preacher. I graunt it. Nowe because we cannot worshippe him, before we haue learned howe to worship him, shall we say we cannot doe is when we haue beene taught it, except we haue a Preacher conti∣nuallie present with vs? I denie it. Tis to reason thus, Mystresse Penrie cannot call vpon GOD without the presence of a Preacher, ergo, she cannot pray in her bed without the presence of a Preacher. He coucheth that in the Scriptures which the Scriptures neuer meaned. To the next, to the next, more sacks to the Myll. 1. Cor. 9. v. 16. Paule confesseth he must of necessitie preach the Gospell, woe is him if he doe it not. And 1. Cor. 4. v. 2. The Minister must be faithfull. Transeat, for this concludeth nothing, but a necessitie of teaching before learning, and in them that teach, a right cutte of the worde, without gigges or fancies of haereticall and
newe opinions. Thys tieth not a Preacher to one place continuailie. Forwarde Sir Iohn, you must change your argument. 1. Thes. 2. v. 10. The Thessalonians were witnesses of Paules behauiour among them. And 2. Thes. 3. 10. He desires to see their face. Giue me thy hande, this makes for me. When he was among them, then he was Resident, when he did long personally to be with them againe to teach them farther, then he was absent. ô Paule art thou guiltie of the blood of the Thessaloni∣ans? if not, woe be to that wretched mouth of Wales. These places are too short in the waste to serue hys turne, he will be with vs to bring anone I doubt not. 1. Peter. 5. v. 2. The Minister must feede his flocke wil∣lingly. What of this? ergo he must neuer be away. Hoe Ball hoe, I perceiue the fellowe is bird eyed, he startles and snuffes at euery shadow. Is his braine so bitten with the frost, that no better proofe will bud out of it? Yes I warrant you, either we goe to the wall nowe or neuer. Acts. 20 v. 18. 19. 20. Paule tels the Church of Ephesus, that he had beene among them at all seasons, and taught through euerie house. All seasons, and Euerie house. How like you this? A rodde for the Grammer boy, he dooth nothing but wrangle about words. What a stur haue we heere with All and Euerie? The word All, is taken som∣times in the Scriptures for all sorts, or all maner, as Luk. 11. v. 42. The Scribes and Pharisies are saide to tythe Omne olus, that is, all sorts, and all manner of hearbes, Minte, Cummin, Anise and the rest. Sometimes the word All in the Scriptures is taken for Manie. Rom. 10. v. 8. By the transgression of one, all are damned (as the Apostle there teacheth vs,) but by the benefit of one, all are saued, that is, Manie: for so he expoundeth himselfe in the next verse folowing, where he saith: that as by the first man Adam, there be many slaine, so by Christ there be many saued. To the poynt now, Paul was among the Ephesians at all seasons, not that he was neuer absent
from them, for howe coulde he then haue preached in Macedonia and other places after he had preached at E∣phesus? It falleth out answerable to this distinction, that his conuersation among them at all seasons, was all sorts of seasons, all manner of seasons, earely, and late, & ma∣nie seasons. In his absence from Ephesus, it may be that he lost some of his sheepe among the Ephesians, as he did among the Galathians, yet when he comes to Ephe∣sus to see them, (determining to goe from thence to Ie∣rusalem, concerning his former absence past, and his lat∣ter absence to ensue,) he washeth his handes from the blood of them all, and saith he is guiltie of none of them, in respect he had deliuered them al the counsels of God before. People may not looke to lay all vppon the Par∣sons shoulders, but they must search, and haue recourse vnto the Scriptures, which are able to make the man of God perfect. By the end I haue giuen the Welch-man to his All, he may stitch vp his Euerie when it pleaseth him. Iohn. 1. v. 9. The Euangelist declareth Christ to be the true light, which lighteth euerie man that commeth into the world. Hath euery man that is borne the light of Christ? happie were it then with Turkes Infidels, Atheists, and happie were it then with Penrie, for he should see, how vnto this day he hath reeled vp and downe like a drun∣ken man, hauing no scriptures at all to stay himselfe vp∣pon. When the Apostle saith he taught the Ephesians through euerie house, he makes a difference betweene his publique preaching and priuate counsell, whereby when any were sicke or weake, or occasion required to giue them priuate exhortation, he went vnto them, to binde vppe the broken, and bring them into the folde, not that he did thys euerie day, or that he set his foote o∣uer euerie threshold that was in Ephesus? And thys is performed by our Ministers, which in visiting the sicke
and breeding of peace betweene man and man, haue oc∣sion sometime to goe from house to house. Heere the Reformer beeing falne into the nette, and fearing it wold be some bodies chaunce to take him vp, tumbling and strugling to gette away, he curseth all those that goe about to aunswere him, neyther conside∣ring that the curse which is causeles shall not come, nor remembring the Apostles counsell, who exhorteth vs all to blesse, and not to curse, because we are the heyres of blessing. Thys is but a stone, throwne vp with furie into the ayre, and is likelie to fall vppon his owne pate, Motus in autorem redit. To be aunswered by distinctions, that Chawlke may not beare the price of Cheese, nor copper be cur∣rant to goe for paiment, he thinks to fore-stall or to dys∣courage vs, by terming it a scornefull reiecting of godly examples, and a matter altogether childish and vnlear∣ned. Wherein you may behold, what violence he offe∣reth to the holie Ghost, to the Apostle Paule, and to S. Augustine. Is the holie Ghost a scorner? Is Paule chil∣dish? Is Augustine that famous piller of the Church vnlearned? The distinction wherewith I haue shaken off his proofe, is taught me by the holy Ghost and the Apostle in the places cited, and by S. Augustine, Enchi∣rid. cap. 13. De correp. & Gra. cap. 14. and 4. Cont. Iul. cap. 8. Other excellent points I could presse and pinch him with to the like purpose, were I not contented to strike the winge, and come downe to his capacitie, whom I pittie to see so bare a schoole-man. He hath no way now to slyppe out of my handes, but to take sentrie in the Hospitall of Warwick, with this or some such like shift of descant; That Paule was an Apostle, who had the whole fielde of the world to tyl, Apostles are now ceased in the Church, and euerie Minister is tied to a perticu∣ler plow-lande, from which he may not be absent, as
Paule was, from the places where he had planted. He perceiueth not in all this, that I haue his leg in a string still, though I suffer him to flye to make me sport, I can pull him in againe when I lust. Indeede, the immediate calling of the Apostles, theyr working of myracles, theyr commission to quarter out the world, is ceased, but in re∣spect of preaching the word, in any place of the domini∣on wherein the Preacher liueth, though he haue a par∣ticuler plow-land of his owne, Apostles cease not, but continue still in the Church, & shall doe vntil the com∣ming of Iesus Christ. Ephe. 4, 11. The place is plaine. He gaue some to be Apostles, for howe long I pray you? vnto the measure of the age of the fulnes of Christ. Let them take heede how they deale with this authorite, for thys beeing a place vppon which they haue built theyr Pres∣biterie, if they pull but one straw out of the nest, al their egges are broken. How lawfull a matter it is for a Minister to be from his particuler plow-lande, when it tendeth to the com∣moditie of the same, by his conference abroad with bet∣ter learned then himselfe, or when it redowndes to the benefit of the whole Church of the kingdome wherein he liueth, or when he is called forth by the authoritie of his superiours, is so soundly prooued, in the defence of the Aunswere to the Admonition, by my L. Archb. of Cant. that I reioyce to trace after him aloofe, with reue∣rence and honour vnto his steppes. To be short in thys poynt, and shut it vp, that I may the better withdrawe the Welch-man from seeking any succour of T. C. con∣cerning the two points alreadie handled, I wyll shewe you three pretie brawles betweene them, and so leaue them close together by the eares. Cartwright and Penne, both at buffets. Pag. 126. line. 14. Iohn Penrie, in his treatise of Reformation, sayth preaching is the onely ordinary meanes to worke fayth in the peoples harts. Tho. Cartwright saith, it is the most ordinarie meane, and most excellent, therein confessing
a lesse ordinarie, and lesse excellent meane then preach∣ing is. Againe, Iohn Penrie, tyeth the Minister to a con∣tinuall feeding, vntill his Maister come, that his Maister MAT. 24 45 46. may find hym so dooing. Wherein he considereth not, that the Pastor eyther preaching sometimes in another place out of his charge, continewes feeding; or confer∣ring with the learned prouideth foode to be giuen to his fellow seruants in due time, and there-withall, hauing put out his talents to vse, and encreased them, shal at the last enter into his Maisters ioy. T. C. looseth the corde, Pag. 49. sect. vlt. and lets it out a great deale farther, for he holdes, that a Pastor may be absent from his Parish vppon occasion of necessarie worldly busines, it may be he meaneth about purchasing, as he hath doone. Last of all, Iohn Penrie, to snatch vp the cord again, and tye him shorter, telleth vs that a Minister may put no Substitute in his roome, and so consequently cannot be absent. His proofe for it, is in Ezechiell, Where the Priestes are reproued for appointing others to take the 44. 8. charge of the Sanctuarie vnder them: a common faulte of his, to alleage Scripture before he vnderstandeth it. That place is not vnderstoode of euerie Substitute, but of vncircumcised Substitutes. T. C. seeing well enough though he say nothing, that litle help could be gathered out of this place, teacheth vs, that a Pastor may prouide another in his absence if he be an able man. In these three assertions where the one of them dasheth out the o∣thers teeth, T. C. is the wariest of the two, for he treads nicelie, as one that daunceth vpon a lyne, mistrusting euery foote an ouer-turn: the Welch-man leapes blunt∣lie into the bryars with a leafe on his shinne, caring not much whether head or heeles goe formost. The last poynt of Reformation to which the treatise leadeth me, is a desire the Reformer hath, that the Bi∣shoppes of the land should be throwne downe, and the Iewes Synedrion set vp. And why? because from the be∣beginning
of the new Testament to the latter end of it, there is not a word spoken of a Lord Archbishop, nor a Lord Bishop. Will he neuer leaue to play the lubber? what a lazie, lowtish kind of argument is this, to reason ab authoritate negatiue? it is condemned and hyssed out of all Schooles of learning▪ had it beene a matter of sal∣uation, I could haue borne with him to heare him rea∣son negatiuelie from the authoritie of holy scriptures, and all Schooles of Phylosophers shoulde haue vailed the bonet vnto GOD; the case standing as it dooth I cannot but draw my mouth awrie. Not satis-fied wyth the slippe he hath giuen the Vniuersities and Lawes of learning, he is as bolde with the Scriptures and schoole of Angels. Bishops, sayth he, pollute the Church two wayes, the one is by theyr dealing in ciuill matters, the other, by theyr superioritie ouer inferiour Ministers. I might iustly scorne to looke vpon so foule a vomit, were I not perswaded, that the poyson beeing tasted before, the drinke I must giue you, will be the better welcom. His proofes for these two points are these. Math. 10. 24. 25. The Disciple is not aboue his Maister. &c. Which les∣son our Sauiour giueth his disciples, to encourage them to beare the persecution, hatred, nyppes, taunting, and euill speeches of the wicked, according to the patterne he had giuen thē, inferring vpon it, that if they called the Maister of the house Belzebub, much more they would doe so to the seruaunt, and they must looke for the lyke intreatie. You see there is no such matter as the Refor∣mer would force vpon vs. But you may imagine what a terrible burning fitte he is in, by his tossing and turning from place to place to recouer rest, though it torment him much the more. From the tenth of S. Mathew, he thrustes himselfe into the 18. of S. Iohn. v. 36. My kingdome (saith our Sa∣uiour) is not of this world, if it were, my seruaunts woulde
fight for me. There was an accusation framed against our Sauiour to put him to death, the maine poynt whereof was this, that he affected the Scepter, and sought inno∣uation and change of the present state, whereupon Pi∣lats interrogatorie ministred vnto him was, Art thou the king of the Iewes? Christes aunswere vnto him cleeres him of it. They might see by his proceedinges that he had no such pretence, for then he would haue sought it by Armes and inuasion, as they that hunt for kingdoms doe. No brovles nor commotion beeing made by him, or by his followers, they might perceiue he was wrong∣fully accused, to seeke any subuersion of the state. Thys is Caluins iudgment vpon that place. Had he founde it to make against mingling of Ecclesiasticall and ciuil au∣thoritie in one person, I dare auouch he wold haue bent the nose of this Canon vpon vs presentlie. But when Christ saith there, His kingdome is not of this world, he takes it to be spoken in respect of the tran∣sitorinesse of worldly kingdoms, that must passe ouer the stage with all theyr pompe, and come to a winding vp at last, when his kingdome shall haue no end. They that abused thys place, to prooue out of it, that the cause of Religion ought not to be defended by sword, though it be by sword inuaded, had a little more tincture from hence to lay vppon theyr opinion, than Penrie can haue, yet both are from the meaning of the texte. The other quotation of Iohn. 6. v. 15. helps him as little as this. Christes hyding himselfe out of the way when the people went about to make him king, was be∣cause he came to suffer, not to raigne: and to shew them theyr error, who thought it was in theyr power to make a king, the setting vp of Princes, pertaining not vnto them, but vnto God. To gather from thence, that a Mi∣nister may not deale in ciuil causes, is to reason as I heard an Ironmonger did in a Pulpit the last Summer, Moses refused to be the sonne of Pharaohs daughter, ergo, a
Minister may not meddle in ciuill causes. Bounse, thers a gunne gone off, doe not the Bishops quake at thys? ô that I could drawe him out of his hole, to print me the poynts which he hath preached, the spirite of the Pro∣phets being subiect to the Prophets, and his spirite and doctrine examined by the spirite and doctrine of the Church of England, you should see me so clapper-claw him for it, that he should haue no ioy to runne into Re∣formation, before he be better learned. The pearle of the word, must not be weighed in those scales that men commonly vse to weigh their yron, it is a nicer work. Now me thinkes the Reformer should smell ere I goe any further, that the rest of his reasons haue taken water, and are rotten before they come to shore. I see not one of his prooues that will abide the hammer, they are so beaten to powder by the examples of the old and new Testament. In the old you shall finde, that Melchi∣sedeck, Aron, Eli, and Samuel, were both Priests & Iud∣ges, they both offered Sacrifices, and sate vpon ciuill causes. In the newe Testament, Christ who refused to be made King of the Iewes, tooke vpon him to ouer∣throw the tables of the money changers, and whipt the buiers and sellers out of the Temple. Paule also reque∣sted Timothie as a Iudge, to receiue no accusation a∣gainst an Elder, but vnder two or three witnesses. Thys authoritie beeing receiued from the Prince, vnder whom we liue, and being exercised in the Church vnder her. The B. of Sarisburie iudgeth to become Ec∣clesiasticall, in that it serueth to the furtheraunce of the Church. The matter hauing beene so well debated, and resolued vpon by so reuerend learned men, as with great studie and trauaile haue run the race before vs, to teache vs that come after howe to vse our weapons; I wonder how these seelie snayles, creeping but yesterdaie out of shoppes and Grammer-schooles, dare thrust out theyr feeble hornes, against so tough and mighty aduersaries.
Moreouer, it is very strange to consider howe many ga∣shes the Faction haue giuen vnto themselues, in deny∣ing this iurisdiction vnto our Ministerie, and seeking it vnto theyr owne, wherein they will haue some of theyr Elders to be gouerning and preaching Elders, to handle the word and the sword together; and whereas our Bi∣shops receiue their authoritie from her Maiestie, exer∣cising it in her name and vnder her, Tho. Cartwright would haue his authoritie to be aboue her, in the ruling of the Church, and her Maiestie to be fitted vnto him, and to his Alder-men, as the hangings to the house. Looke what a pittifull Megrim it is, that troubleth them in this poynt, the like God wot maketh theyr braines to crow in the superioritie of Bishoppes aboue theyr bretheren. Are all Ministers I beseech you of e∣quall authoritie? Howe then commaundeth Paule Ti∣tus and Timothie, and they obey him in the matters he giueth them in charge? Is he that is directed and com∣maunded, equall with him that directeth and commaun∣deth? Theyr crosse-blowe of Fellowe labourers, will not saue theyr ribbes, if they be no better Fencers. The Archb. and inferior Minister are both equal, in respect of theyr fight in the Lordes battailes, as the Ge∣nerall of the fielde and the common Souldiours are, but not in respect of ordering and disposing of the fight, when euery Souldiour is appointed to his place. Thys equalitie beeing hatched by Aerius, it is well prooued by Ma. Doctor Bancroft in his Sermon at Paules crosse, both out of Epiphanius and S. Augustine, to haue beene condemned for an haeresie, with the consent of the whole Church. When S. Ierom heares of such a matter, he wonders at it. For the Bishop of Ierusalem beeing requested to appeare in a Counsell, and refusing it, sent one Isidorus a Priest in his stead, a Bishoppe was looked for, a Priest came, who to couer the Bishops absence, had nothing to
alleage but that it was all one, and the authoritie of the one, as great as the other, because he was a man of God that sent, and a man of God that came. Nihil interest in∣ter Presbyterum et Episcopum, eadem dignitas mittentis et misse: hoc satis impe, in portu vt dicitur naufragium. Ep. ad Pam∣mach. What, saith S. Ierom, is there no difference betweene a Priest and a Bishop? is the dignitie of him that is sent, as great as his that sendeth him? This is spoken with∣out wit or learning, and this is euen at the first putting into harbour, to east away the shyp. The first lifting vp of a Bishop, as S. Ierom noteth, was the very phisicke of the Church against Schisme, least euery man drawing his owne priuate way, the ioynts of Gods house should be puld one from another, and so the building fall. The weakest sight in the worlde may well discere, that this busie seeking of an equalitie among the Cler∣gie, is the practise of Nahash with the men of Iabesh when they were besieged. He would admitte no conditions of peace with them; except he might thrust out theyr right eyes, and bring a shame vpon all Israell. Bishops were lifted vppe into the highest places of the Church, as the right eyes of the people of the Lorde, to keepe watch against Schisme & Haeresie; no peace, no truce, no silence, no agreement will be gotten at the handes of the Faction, except we suffer them to bore out these eyes, that a shame and reproche may be brought vppon all Religion. Thys is the conclusion of Penries prayer in his Epi∣stle to the Treatise, that the Bishoppes may be thrust as one man out of the Church, and the name of them for∣gotten in Israell for euer. Nowe is the broode of hell broken loose, the Church is a besieged Iabesh, the deuill hauing whetted the sword of Spayne against it, & find∣ing open force to be nothing worth, he cals out his Pia∣ners, and sets Martin and Penrie a worke to vndermine
it. But heere is our comfort. As the spirit of God came vpon Saul, and stung him forward, to put to sword, and to scatter the hoste of Nahash in such sorte, that there were not two of them left together; The spirite of the Lord shall come vpon her Maiestie, and kindle her sa∣cred hart with a newe courage to strike home, that there may not one couple of the Faction be left together in the Realme of Englande, not so much as to binde vppe each others woundes, nor one to be-mone another. What is it els to desire this equalitie, but that euery man might be his owne iudge, and reach what he wyll in his owne charge, when he hath no Bishoppe aboue him to controll him? Howe dangerous this is in the high and hidden misteries of the worde, a man may per∣ceiue by experience in common matters, for euen in things dailie subiect vnto our sences, a mans owne ad∣uice, is commonly the worst counseller he can haue. Sa∣lomon who was a great deale wiser then any Sect-master euer was, or wyll be, hath giuen vs warning, That if a man beginne once to be wise in his owne conceite, there is greater hope of a foole then of him. And I dare a∣uouch, that whosoeuer is possessed with an ouerwee∣ning, or giues two much credit vnto himselfe, needeth not to be tempted of the deuill, because he is a tempter, and a deuill vnto himselfe. At the deliuery of the Lawe in Sinay, GOD com∣maunded EXO. 19. his people to be folded vp, and to stand with∣in the barres, vppon-paine of death; At the deliuerie of the Gospell, our Sauiour branded his sheepe with these two marks, hearing, and following. They must harken to IOH. 10. 3. the voice of him that teacheth, and followe the trace of him that leadeth; they may neither commaund, nor goe before. When they beginne to snuffe vppe the winde in theyr noses, like the wilde Asse in the Wildernesse, which tyreth all that follow her; when they stande vpon the pinacle of euerie Tower & Castle, built in the ayre
by theyr owne conceite, and say to the Bishoppes as the people did to Ieremie, What soeuer commeth out of our own mouth, that will we doe, then they are verie easie to be de∣ceiued. And then it fareth with them, as it did wyth the Disciples of our blessed Sauiour, he appearing vnto them vpon the Sea, they tooke him for a spirit, and ima∣gining theyr Maister to be a bugge, they grewe verie fearefull of a great benefit. Such a dazling it is that afflicteth the eyes of our Reformers, our Maister Iesus offereth himselfe vnto vs in thys excellent gouernment of the Church, by graue and learned, Lorde Bishoppes, but they mistake it to be Satanicall, and tremble and quake at theyr own com∣moditie. But to come to anker, if they be of one fayth, and one hope with vs, let them helpe to twine vppe a three∣fold corde, and become of one hart with vs. Let witte, which is windie obtaine the lesse, that Charitie which edifieth may gaine the more. No doubt but our Saui∣our had an especiall care of the vnitie of his Church, both when he made his request vnto his father, that we might be one as the father and he are one, and when he tooke his leaue of his Church with so kinde a farewell, My peace I giue you, my peace I leaue vnto you If this peace wyll not be had at theyr handes, that haue so long troubled the Church of GOD among vs I cast then my Gauntlet, take it vp who dares, Martin or any other, that can drawe out any Quintessence of villanie beyoynde Martin, the cause shall not want a Champion. I haue nowe gallopped the fielde to make choyse of the ground where my battaile shall be planted. And when I haue sent you the May-game of Martinisme, at the next setting my foote into the styroppe after it, the signet shall be giuen, and the fielde fought. Whatsoeuer hath beene written to any purpose of eyther side, shal be
ledde out into the plaine, the foote men and horse, small shotte and artilerie shall be placed: euery troupe, wing and squadron ordered, and the banners displayed. Ther∣withall I will make both Armies meete, and the battaile ioyne, bullet to bullet, staffe to staffe, pyke to pyke, and sworde to sworde; the blowes dealt, and the breache made vpon the Puritanes shall be discouered, you shall see who be falne and who be fledde, what Captaines are slaine, and what Ensignes taken. It shall be shewen howe like a good Generall the Archb. of Canterburie hath behaued himselfe with his battle-axe, and howe the braynes of Tho. Cartwright flye thys way and that way, battered and beaten out, e∣uery bone in his bodie pittifullie broken, and his guttes trayling vpon the grounde: heere a legge, and there an arme, of his followers shall be gathered vppe, and the carkases of the deade, like a quarrie of Deare at a gene∣rall hunting, hurled vppon a heape. Wherein my Sup∣plication shall be to the Queenes most excellent Maie∣stie at the end, that our Conquerors returning from the chace, may by vertue of her highnesse fauour and au∣thoritie, holde still the honour which they haue wonne, and well deserued, in the seruice of GOD, and the crowne of England. Therefore as the Reformer hath made proclamati∣on for Armour and Munition, desiring you to help him to a booke of Church discipline, which he sayth was written in the dayes of King Edward the sixt, the Au∣thors whereof, he sayth, were M. Cranmer, and Sir Iohn Cheeke. The like proclamation make I in his behalfe, be∣cause mine, peraduenture, will come to more handes then his. Furnish him I pray you, the better he is pro∣uided, the greater honour it will be to ouerthrowe him. I would be glad he should haue it, (if there be any such) and sette downe what he can ere I come foorth againe, that I may driue all before me, and roote out the verie
name of a Puritane from vnder heauen. In which exployt, as Berzillai the Gileadite, refu∣sed to courte it in his age, resining that place to hys Sunnes, as fitter for younger yeeres; So, I beseeche all our Bishoppes, Doctors, and auncient men, vpon whose siluer heads the Almond-tree hath blossomde; to giue vp this taske to me, and fitte and iudge of my labours. The spirite of the Lord assisting me, opportunitie, and other circumstaunces concurring with it, I trust they shall see me pricke it, and praunce it, like a Caualiero that hath learned to manage Armes. From my Castell and Collours at London stone the 2. of Iuly. Anno. 1590. FINIS.
