20092.5 23946721 26997
¶A true Reporte of the taking of the great towne and Castell of Polotzko, by the King of Polonia. VVith the manner of the Assaults, Batteries, Vndermininges, Skir∣mishes and Fyreworkes, that were there vsed, from the 11. of August to the .30 of the same Month. 1579.
¶ A true Reporte of the taking of the Towne and Castell of Polotzko, by the King of Polonia, the 30. of August 1579. THe last of Iune the King of Polonia beinge at a Towne called Wilde, brake vp his Siege and came to Sue∣rum, to muster there: in whiche place, his Maiestie called toge∣ther his Lordes and Captaines and men of warre, to know after what order they should prouide for the safegarde and defence of their Countrey, and how for to keepe the enimie, which was the Moscoue furre from them, and
there his Maiestie agreed to be∣seege the Citie of Polotzko, be∣cause that Towne lyeth in the border of the great Dukedome of Litto, and principallye of the Towne of Villo, and there lyeth no Fortresse betweene that and the Wilde, and if he had not ta∣ken the waye to the same Citie, he should haue geuen his enemie waye to haue entered into the Dukedome of Litto, and also to the Wilde: and therfore his Ma∣iestie found it needefull to looke to, because he tooke this war in hande, not onelye to recouer that same Towne to the Crowne of Poland againe, as it hath beene in times past: but to withstand ye enimiy, & to keepe him back. In his Country, the winter is very hard, with verye great raines, snowes, fogges and continuall
trostes: and therefore very peril∣lous to make war, in which the king of Poland hath found verye daingerous in passing from the VVilde to the saide Cittie of Po∣lotzko, by reason of the clammye ground, with the great thawes and caines, and deepe ryuers, with the great trouble of his ca∣ryage, of his great ordinaunce, powder, shot, munition, and all o∣ther kinde of artillerye, with the losse of his horses and other bea∣stes for want of sustenaunce tra∣uailing those barrame wildernes and heigh mountaines: yet no∣thing could discorage this migh∣ty prince frō taking of this enter∣prise in hand, although manye of his Noble men and wise Captai∣nes did show what perill it were for him to passe with so great an Armye, and telling of him the
strength of the Towne and the Castell with all other inconueni∣aunces: yet could hee not be per∣swaded from his opinion, but rather the more encouraged, ga∣thered his people together: and hoping that if hee could take that Towne, it would be a great dis∣couragement to his enimies and a great incouragement to his owne Soldiors: because this Ci∣tie is the strongest and greatest in all his Dominions. And his Maiestie did send out of Suero, the honorable Nicolaum Radzi∣nil, chiefe Gouernour of the To∣wne called the Wilde, with a cer∣tain nūber of Horsemen & Foote∣men with a certain nūber of Hun¦garians: with the Honorable Cas∣per Bekize to ye Citie of Polotzko, to stoppe the high wayes, that there might com no succour from
ye Prince of Muscoue. And for al that he tooke great paines for to be sodenly there: yet the wayes was so fowle, and the passages so crooked, that it was long or euer that they could come there. And because that the King of Po∣lon had sent defyaunce to the Muscouo King: hee doubting of the besiege of them of Polotzko, sent yde to them of Polotzko, which came two daies before the Honorable Nicolaue came there: but hee comming thither did so stoppe the passages, that he could send no more succoures thether. And immediatlye after the King of Polon with his whole campe ordinaunce, bag and baggage, with great paines, hauing fowle wayes, with ye continual raine yt fell and the fowle wether, was constrained to make very small
irneyes: and in the meane tyme his forewarde tooke three Ca∣stels, called, Cosianua, Crasne and Situo, in their iorney, which they quickly spoyled and burnt. And the 11. of August, his Majestie with all his power came neere to the Tower of Polozko, and pyt∣ched his Campe not far from the Walles of the Towne: and then his Maiestie caused his Campe in three places to bee intrenched against the Towne. And as the Towne being very strongly fen∣ced with very strong Bulwarks and other Fortresses, and being very well prouided of all manner powder shot and other Engines, and putting great confidence in the Castell which stoode without the Towne: issued out of the To∣wne, and forced the king of Poon to withdraw him selfe from that
parte of the Towne where the Subbers were, in which place the Castell stoode: but in the end the Polanes had the victorye, and chaeed the Moscoes into the To∣wne & the Castell, & set the Sub∣barbes a fyre. And in shorte time wholly destroyed it. And after this they did dayly vnder minde the ground, till they came vnder the cheefe gate of the Castell: but the almyghtye God at this time shewed his mightye power, for manye dayes, without ceassing, we had great raynes: so that all laboure and diligence of the Sol∣dior was hindered: yet for the de∣syre that they had to ouercome their enimyes nothing could dis∣courage them: but dayly they did their endeuor against the towne and Castell. And those within the Towne and the Castel, although
their enimy with out was fearce and daily did shoot at them with great ordinaunce, and neuer ca∣sed daye nor night shooting and throwing of wilde fyre into the Towne, and although their hou∣ses were couered with strawe and reede, and such thinges apte to take fyre: yet they nothing dis∣mayde, did daylye defende them selues with making prouision with raw Hydes and other thin∣ges fit for yt purpose, for to with∣stand the violence of the fyre: and verye valiantlye defended both the Towne and Castell, and as fast as anye was stroken downe, an other would steppe ouer him, and fyght stoutly in his roome: wherby it is seene that the Mos∣coues are verye valiaunt in kee∣ping of a Holde: yet at the length GOD of his mercy shewed vs a
fayre day. For the 29. of August, our people with great diligence, and no small perill, waded tho∣rough the ryuer, carying wilde fyre in one hand, and their wea∣pon in the other, and manfullye runne vp the Hill, and made an assaulte to the breces of the Ca∣stell, & set thē on fyre, and so with the shooting of the ordinaunce on the one side, & the casting of ye fyre on the other, the enimie was for∣ced to forsake the Bulwarke, and to retyre, which gaue our Soldi∣ors such courage, that they did follow the enimye thorowe the fyre, and thought to winne the Castell: but they did fayle of their purpose, because the force of the fyre was great, and the force of the enimy greater, they were for∣ced to retyre with the losse of 27. of their menne, and verye manye
wounded: And of our enimyes were slaine 200. The verye same daye the enimy did make a sygne as though hee would haue yeel∣ded, but they ment nothing lesse: For they had prouided new Bul∣warkes, and blinded our menne with the flames of fyre: therefore the Kinges Maiestie was fullye bent to show the vttermost that he coulde doe, because the enimye shoulde haue no tyme to fortifye him. And therefore the next daye beinge the 30. daye of August, he caused all his armye, aswell Horsemen as footemen, to make an assault to the Town: and cau∣sed certaine Horsemen and Foot∣men to make an assaulte to an o∣ther parte of the Towne, where they had vndermined the Wall, and throw downe a great peece of it, and set fyre one parte of the
Castell: and the place where they were the day before they recoue∣red, where they found the Musco digging and defending of him selfe: but the Polon droue him backe, and had him wholy in his power: and so the king of Polon being mooued with pittye, lo∣thing to shed any christian blood did giue pardon to all them that he found in the Castell, and them that would serue, hee tooke into seruice, which was a great num∣ber, because they would saue their goodes, & they that would, hee gaue them safe conduct to go into Moscoui, and those yt would not yeelde wer these: the honora∣ble Basilius Iuanowitz, Telateuski Nicolēski Demetrius Michalowitz Schitbathi, Oholeuski, Matthe In∣anowitz: Rzowki. Iwan Hrecho∣riowitz, Susin, Petrus Inanowitz:
VVolenski Lutzian, Tretiakow, Kakouse: whiche were all Cap∣taines and Officers in the town and Castel, and therfore the king tooke them forceablye prisoners, and garded the Towne and Ca∣stell with his owne Soldiors. The nūber of the Moscoues that defended the Castell, were 6000. which moste parte was slaine and found dead in dyches, and of them in ye Towne, there was no certaine number known, because a great number fled. And also there was found within yse town and Castell such store of ordi∣naunce, with powder, shot, and lead, and all other kinde of Artil∣lerye, that there was thought there was not the like Towne nor Castell in Christendome. And therfore his Maiesty seeing that GOD hath geuen him such
victory ouer his enimyes, more then he deserued or looked for, gaue commaundement tho∣rough all his Realme, to geue God praise and thankes. FINIS. ¶ Imprinted. 1579.
