21537 99846247 11203
PANS PIPE, Three Pastorall Eglogues, in English HEXAMETER. WITH OTHER POETICAL Verses delightfull. Parue nec inuideo, sine me liber ibis in arua, He mihi quod domino non licet ire tuo. For the further delight of the Reader, the Printer hath annexed hereunto the delectable Poeme of the Fisher-mans Tale. Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, at the signe of the Rose and Crowne, neere to S. Andrewes Church in Holborne. 1595.
To all youthfull Gentlemen, or Apprentises, fauourers of the diuine Arte of sense-delighting Poesie. GENTLEMEN, expect not in this my slender volume, amorous passions of some Courtly Louer, graced (as the custom is, with super fine rethoricall phrases: look not here for some melodious ditties, de∣scended from the wel-tuned strings of Apollos sweet-soun∣ding Cittern: here plainly haue I presented vnto your view rusticke Tyterus, rehearsing in rude countrey tearmes to his fellow Thirsis his happy blisse, and luckie fortune in obtay∣ning the loue of his desired Phillida: Or clownish Coridon, one while taking and giuing quaint taunts and priuy quips of and to his froliking Copesmates: One while againe con∣tending for superiority, in tuning rurall ditties on Pans pa∣storall pipe. Now Gentlemen, if with Coridon, you shall find me not to play so well as the rest of my fellowes, my sole and humble request is, that you would not foorth with proceed in condigne iudgement against me, but with wise Faustus concale your opinion, which doing, you shall ani∣mate, otherwise altogether discourage a yong beginner. Yours euer in curtesie. . S.
AVTHOR AD LIBRVM. VAde liber, rus dulce subi, pete pascua lta alba vbi depascurt agmina mille gregum Te lacta accipict pecorum Benefldia diues, adnies gratus montibus ipse suis. Vis vbi pastorum gelidis numerosa sub vmbris sistula arundinea cartatna loeta canit, Ibit  Coridon te complexurus▪ Alexis accipiet, Thirsis te leget are rudi. Laudabit doctus Dominum tibicine faustus. hunc hedera dignum Thestilis ore canet. Heu si forte via rocta peregrinus aberres & Domino sumas orbus in vrbe locum Ridebit ciuis te, nescit rustica ciuis, rustica t cantas, rusticus ergo legat. Formido nimium ne Momus itinere cernat mordebit dominum ferra ltngua tuum, Quam potes excusa▪ dic est herus exul, amica non datur huic requies, fert iuga, vade liber.
Pans Pipe. IT was in the moneth of May, All the field now looked gay: Little Robin finely sang, with sweet notes ech greenwood rang. Philomene forgetfull the, Of her rape by Teres done. In most rare and ioyfull wise, Sent her notes vnto the skies: Progne with her bloody breast, Gan in chimney build her neast. Flora made each place excell with fine flowers sweet in smell. Violets of purple hue, Primroses most rich in shew: Vnto which with speedie flight, Bees did flie and on them light▪ And with Thyme loding their thyes, Did it caric to their hiues. Some it tooke, which they had brought, And in combs it rarely wrought. Fish from chrystall waues did rise, After gnats and little flies: Little Lambes did leape and play, By their Dams in Medowes gay. And assoone as Lucifer
Had expelde the lesser starres, Tyterus and Thirsis hight, Through a lettice-seeing light, Which did come from Ecus bright. As they lay in drowsie beds, Vp did lift their sluggish heads: Hasting Sheep from fouldes to let, Sheepe which bleated for their meate. Sheepe let out from place to place, Greediie did plucke vp grasse. And by chance as heards did meet, Shepheardes did each other greete, Thirsis looked verie sad, As he some ill fortune had: Tyterus first gan to speake, And his mind in this sort break.
Eglogue first. Tyterus. Thirsis. THirsis what mean these heauy looks? thy face so besprented with tears, shews il news, why? thou wert wont to be mery Wont on a pipe to play, to grace our ioyfull assemblies, With merie iests and sports, tel me why art thou so pensiue? Th. Ah Tyterus, Tyterus, how can I cease to be pensiue? One o'mine ewes last night, hard fortune, died in aning, One o'mine ewes, a great ew, whose fruit I chiefly did hope of, Eaned a tidie lambe, which she no sooner had eaned, But the Foxe did it eat, whilst I slept vnder a thicket: Thus haue I lost mine Ewe, my lamb the Fox thus hath eaten: Ah Tyterus, Tyterus, how can I cease to be pensiue? Tyt. Hard fortune neighbor, but what? wil heauines help you? Wil griefe get your sheep againe? cast care away therefore, Shun dolor, vse patience, patience in miserie profits: To smile is wisdome when waspish destinie thunders. Th. Good counsell Tyterus, but not so easily follow'd, Man is borne in griefe, and grieueth at euery mishap. I thinke we shepheards take greatest paines of all others, Sustaine greatest losses, we be tyred with dayli labour, With colde in winter, with heat in summer oppressed, To manie harmes our tender flockes, to manie diseases Our sheepe are subiect, the thiee praes ouer our heardlings, And worse then the thief, the Fox praies ouer our heardlings, Thus we poor heardsmen are pincht and plagu'd aboue other. Tyt. Truth, but I know not why, we do not only deserue it, But lets be content, sith Fortune hath so prouided.
And rather heark to my tale, sith vnder this shadie valley Either of vs do sit, sith both our flockes be together, Lets now tell our ancient loues, least sleepe crpe vpon vs, And the craftie Foxe, who priuiliy lurks in a thicket, Or in these huge holes, our lambes should greedilie murther: Better is it to wake, then sleepe, what thing euer happens. Th. Content, yet fro my mind this griefe yet cannot  banish, Begin first your selfe, you first made mention of it. Tyt. Wel, e now begin, Venus aid me, sweet Venus aide me, Ayd me Cupid once my friend, the prosperous euent Of my loue to rehears. Not far from hence in a village Was I borne, in a merrie towne rich in shadie valleyes, Rich in grounds, in soyle fertile, in cattell abounding: With my father I liu'd, he was calde rich Melibeus; Rich Melibeus was my Sire, olde Mepsa my mother. Long time single I liu'd, long time vnmaied I was: He would oft to me say, when shall I be called a Grandsire, She would oft to me say, when shall I be called a Grandam: Flora doth hope for thee, the lusty daughter of Aldus, Ians hopes thou shalt be to his daughter an husband: I despising loue, hating the name of a woman. Would them both desire to let me single abide still, For loue I did detest, I did hate a lbidinous Hymen. But marke how't fell out, I ed my sheepe in a pasture Neere to the wood, twas summer time, and I very wearie, Downe all alone me laid, no sooner downe had I laid me, But sleepe shut mine eyes, neere to this wood abode hunters, Hunters, who let slip at an hare, the groue she recou'red, And got away, the dogs returnde, and ran to my cattell: My sheepe from them ran, geat harme they did to my cattel: They did a Wether kil, they kild a douty good Ew-lambe. Vp I rose, my sheep I mist, and nought but a carcasse Of my Wether I sawe, the clawes and skuls of an Ewe-lambe. Out alasse I cride, I am vndone, spoyled and vndone,
Long time amazed I stood, one while false destinie blaming. And drowsie sleep, who closd mine eies whilst merciles hūters Suffered hounds my sheep to deuoure, like Mercury sometimes On's sleep-aluring pipe who plaid, while he murthered Argus, Argus set with an hundred eies: or like to the Fouler, Who on a whistle playes most sweetly, whilst hee deceiueth Foolish birds: thus standing amaz'd, my neighbour Alexis Came to me, crying out, stroken also with the same arrow▪ He made doleful mone, seuen of mine Ewes be deuoured, And the rest are strayed away, sweet Tyterus help me, Help me (saith he) to seeke them againe, I laboured also Of the same disease, we two went sadly together Through desert mountaines, large fieldes, and arable pastures, Seeking our chac'd heards: at length in a brierie valley, Between two forrests, some of Amintas his heardlings Found we lying downe, and seeking still for his other, Vnder a shade by chaunce he saw Galatea, he saw her, And burnt in her loue, poore vvretch he cried, he sighed, Making skies resound his sad and pittiful ecchoes, And vnmindfull quite of his heardling, he wholly delighted In talking of her, and passing by her, I wild him To reiect this loue, which would bring beggery with it, He with a sigh gan strait exclame, O happie, thrise happy Should I be if when, the fates, and destinie cals me, In her lap mine head might lie, and her pretie fingers Might close vp my key-cold ees: O wood-mightie Syuan, Keep I beseech thee all sweet hearbs, let not greedy cattell Plucke them vp, reserue them til my Ladie be buried: Then let al the ground be straw'd with fauouri blossoms, And write vpon her tomb, Here lieth a maide, which a goddess Would haue bene to her Loue, had she not bene oer-anstere, Loug thus he liu'd ie deep despaire, al companie shunning: And at length (poore wreth) his daies in misery ended. Back againe I return'd in an other field then I sought them.
Like one half mad I ran, I found some hard by the milhedge, Some by the forrest side, my notted Ram stil I missed: Him I sent my boy to seeke, he wandered al day, In shady woods till night, and wearie thought to returne him. But twas darke, and making hast, a trench he fel into, Made to deceiue wild beasts, and could by no means get away thence, Thus my boy was in hold my Ram was caught in a thicket, Vp next morn I rose, musing where Willie remained, Forth I went, twas holie-day, I asked of ech one, If they saw my ram, and if they saw little Willy, Willy no wher was found, I sought him through shad'y moun∣tains Through vast caues and wood, I cride, I shouted, I hollow'd, But twas all in vaine, at length a stranger I met with, Into the pits to looke, who was new come to the forrest, Him did I aske also, but he saw not my little Willie: We two together walkt, when we came neere to the pitfall, Hearing vs two talke, like a mouse in a cheese he did exclame, Into the trench we look'd, who could not laugh to behold it, A Fox falne therein did stand with Will in a corner: Will did feare the Fox, the Fox did feare little Willy, Out we pluckt him first, his fellow prisoner after. Glad was Will he was out, and I was gladder I found him, Home we returnde, and as we returnd, loe destiny fawning, Found I my Ram in a thicket tyde, I greatly reioyced: Summer it was, it was midday, the Sun was at highest, Will led home my Ram, I softly followed after, Will went through the fields, but I went through shady pastures Shunning Titans beams, but ah vnfortunat Heardsman, Shunning an outward heat, a fire I purchased inward▪ Vnder a tree, by Damons cloase, very many resorted, Maids and men did thither flocke, there merily piped. Lucidas on his new bagpipe, then Pollio danced, Ianus leapt and skipt, then thy young vncle Amintas Daunc'd I remember with many moe too long to repeat nowe.
Here I staid, this rue I viewd, I spied Alexis Daunce with a Lasse, a gallant Lasse, me thought she did exce All the rest in beautie, in shape, in comlie behauiour: Phillida was her name, I thought each ioynt of her heauenly: Looke what parts lay hid, those I far fairer imagin'd. Ah, how she pleasde my mind, her cheeks wer ruddy like apl, With red streames besprent, her hair as browne as a berrie: Black were her eies, her hands did shew as was a good huswife, No want in her I saw, for where she squinted a little, That did grace her I thought, thus was I caught on a sudden▪ Ah, how oft I wisht my selfe in place of Alexis, He to dllie had learn'd, to daunce I neuer had vsed, And then I sham'd to begin. But marke what followed after▪ Codra to daunce did come, the lusty daughter of Aldus: Her when Alexis espide, he with all speed Phillida leauing, Caught he by the white hand, at this my Phillida frowned, She did Alexis loue, bt Alexis Codra desired: In stept I to her strait, I wild her not to be sorry, I will be thy loue (said I) care not for Alexis, I will a woing come, from me she flang in an anger, And with a scornefull looke, wl (saith she) some body loues me▪ Home then I went dismaid, and sik, my conntenance heauie, Sotted were my sences all, my mind vrie pensiue, One while I laid me downe, of such idle fantasies hoping, That sepe would me depriue, therein was I greatly deceaued. No sooner had sleep closde mine ies, but Phillida foorthwith Into my mind did come, still I thought she daunc'd with Alexis: Ah how my mother gree'd▪ when she did see me so pensiue? She fetcht milke and ale, and for me she made a posset: She fetcht flower and gs, and for me she made a pudding But no meat would downe with me, my father as heay, Vnto the wise-man went, he was a physition also, He said I was in loue, some deuil had told it him, I think, Then to me forthwith he came, he charg'd me with it, he prad me
To disclose my mind, and he would do what he could do: Then confest I my loue, tis (said I) Phillida father, Philida, Damns daughter it is, whose loue thus I burne in, Be content, my father said, her loue will I su for, Well doth Damon know Melibeus chests be not emptie, At this I comfort tooke, rose, went int' field to my cattell, Both full of hope and eare. To Damon went Melibeus▪ Tolde him all the tale, and for his daughter he prayed, I giue my consent, but I feare, quoth he Phillida wil not, She shall like and loue, for she hath very may reiected. These newes brought to me as I sate alone by mine heardling▪ Sonne, saith he, go thy selfe, speake to Philida, Damon Will giue his good wil, if thou canst also get her loue. Home foorthwith I went, my self I finely bdcked, Comb'd mine head, I washt my face, my spruse lether ierkin▪ On did I put my ruffes, my yellow-lether galigaskins, Then sull of hope and feare I went, my Phillida spinning, Sate by the doore, I went vnto her, I colde her, I kist her, Proferd her many gifts, but she refusde many profers: Crau'd of her, her good will, but she did flatly deny me, Wild me leaue my sute, and not proceed any further. Impatient of repulse, her three times after I wooed: Gifts many pence me cost, three times againe she repeld me: Desperate altogether then with bewitched Amintas, Into the woods I went, and merrie company leauing, In vncouth mountaines, in deserts and shady valleyes, All my delight I tooke, I neuer look'd to my cattel: They for a pray were left to the Fox, to the wolse to the Lyon, And had I not bene helpt, I should haue dy'd with Amyntas. But now Fortune smilde, with Alexis Phillida dayly▪ Vsde to sport and play, vnto him she dayly resorted, She brought him conserues, she brought him sugered almonds He not louing her, but with her flattery mooued, Lay with her, and in time with childe poore Phillida prooued:
He then fearing least he should her marrie by constraint, Fled from his Vncle in hast (for he remain'd) with his vncle) Phillida fearing least, she should be mocked of each one, Look'd more blyth on me, as I sate vnder a Mirtle, She past by, me thought, and smyled vpon me▪ Her lookes fauour shewed, then againe my sute I renued, Went and woed her againe, and far more tractable founde her: Next day to Damons house I went, and with me my sire, There were cakes and ale, and each one greatli reioyced: Then we were made sure, and wedding day was appointed, Which at length did come, the time long wisht for approched; We twaine were conioynd, that day we merrily passed, Great good cheare we made, Licida and Pollio piped, All th'whole countrie daunc'd: with credit thus was I wedded: Which when Alexis heard, with all speed home he returned. And see Thirsis, I pray, what a quiet wise haue I gotten, She yet neuer scowl'd she neuer frown'd on Alexis, But look'd mildly on him, though he so greatly abusde her, Heele now come to my house, and sit with me by the fire, Heele now sit by my wife, whilst I goe looke to my cattel: We two be great friends, and to thee (Thirsis) I tel it, Thee for a friend I take, to my biggest boy is he father, But verie few do it know. A large ground now haue I plowed, And tis more than time to vnyoke my wearied horses: Thirsis, I haue to thee now declarde the history pleasant Of my loue: Rehearse yours, as you promised erewhile. Th. Wel. I begin to declare't: OP an melodious help me: But see neighbour I pray, Tyta is caried headlong Into the sea, see, clouds covnite, a storme is a breeding: And pitchie-night drawes on apace, lets hastily therefore, Deuide our cattell, to the cotes lets speedily driue them. Tyt. Let's run apace, til again we meet you shal be my debter.
GLomie Winter raign'd as King, Hoarie frost did nip each thing: Fields look'd naked now and bare, Fields which like a Chaos were. Earth of grasse was now quite voyde, Boras each thing destroyd. Leauelesse trees seem'd to lament, Chirping birdes were discontent: Seeking foode in vncoth lanes, Where they caught their fatall banes. Philomene did now recant Wofully sharp winters want: Progne fled to place vnknowne, Somewhere making doleful mone. Tereus pincht with want did crie, Iustly plagu'd for villany, Fish in deepe themselues did hide, Daring not in foordes abide: Cattel bleated for their meat. Cattell found no foode to eate. Titan had his head lift vp, Lulde a sleepe in Thetis lap. When two Swaines were newly gone. Melibeus and Damon, Hungrie flocks to let from folde, Flockes half staru'd with want and colde. Heards had caten mornings baite, Shepheards met together strait. Melibeus, men report. Spake to Damon in this sort.
Eglogue second. Damon. Melibeus. GOodmorrow Damon. Da. Goodmorrow good Melibeus. What? your comely daughter, whose loue so many desired Is now wedded I heare to a Citizen, is she so dainty, That none but Citizens will please her? or are ye so wealthie, That you scorne vs Heards, your mates and fellowes? I ear me, Once before she die, sheell wish she had wedded an heardsman. Mel. Peace Damon, content your self, first heare the desendant, Ere you giue iudgement, lets sit down friendly together On this suny bank, whilst Tytans fiery glances Warm our limbs, and melt hory snowes, Ile tel the beginning And end of their loue, end, midst, and originall of it. When my girle was young, to Cupids fiery weapons And not yet subiect, then had my neighbour Alexi, A little sonne, both borne in a day, th'one loued ech other: As brother and sister, as twaine of one issue begotten: And as children vse, they two would dallie together, Sport & play, both went to the school, as yeares came vpon thē: So their loue encreast, yeares made this amitie greater: Age made loue inrease, and stil my neighbour Alexis (As most men are woont) esteeming worst of his owne arte, Set his sonne to the schoole, to scooles of Apollo: Wholly in oy he liu'd, what sportes, the cuntrey did affoord, What playes, what pastimes, those he vsde, al labor abhorring, Time brought choise of sports, each quarter sundry pleasures: In spring time when fields are greene, when euery bramble Looketh fresh, when euery bush with melodie soundeth, Of little birds rising, before bright Tytan appeared, Into the fieldes did he goe, which then faire Flora bedecked, With redolent blossoms, O how grateful to the sences Were th' odorifferous smels which when Aurora to Phbus
Gan to set ope her gates, the fragrant flowers affoorded, O how to heare did he ioy the musicall harmony, which then Each little bird did make. He would go then with a spud staffe Vnto the leauie vvoods; the dens where Connies had hidden Their yong ones to seeke, to find ong birds he delighted: Greatly now did he ioy, the lightfooted hare to run after: With may yelping hounds, the swift-foot  by the forrest, To pursue with dogs, with an hauke to encounter a partridg At this time the top, the tennis ball was a pastine: At this time no smal delight he toke in a foteball: When Lodi Ver had run her race, and Phebus ascending Vnto the highest, began to scortch vvith iery glances Flors fruites, and Vers gay giftes, when Rie with a sickle Down to be cut began, and emptie barnes to be filled. Then to the Chrystall lake and siluer riuer of Alphus Vsde he to goe(Good Lord) how greatly to bath him he ioyed In his running stream, what pleasure companie meeting, Took he to sport on's reedy banks: somtimes with an angle, And false shew of a bait glittering fish craftilie taken: (them Wold he twitch frō his waues, with nets oft times he deceu'd Now by the mountaines high, and forrests leauy to gather Stawberies and Damasens no smal delight did he count it. But vvhy recite I to thee these sports, thou these mery pastimes Knowst wl ynough, thou knowst what ioies the cuntery yieldeth. Wnter & autum brought not a few ripe apples in autum Peares and nuts to gather he vsde, all which he reserued, Winters want to releeue. When gloomie Winter appeared, When hoarie frosts did each thing nip, vvhen Isacles hanged on ech house, with milk-white snows whē th'earth was al hiddē Forth vvith a fouler he vvas to the vvelsprings & to the foun∣tains & to the running lakes, vvhose euer mooueable vvaters Frost neuer alter could, therefor the long-billed hernshue, And little Snype did he set snares, vvith tvvigs craftily limed▪ Pitfals novv for birds did he make, the musicall Ovvse,
The little Robbin and the Thrush now greatlie bewayling, winters want with doleful tunes did he strike with a stone-bow. Cardes and dice brought now great sport, sitting by the fire, Bowles ful of ale to quaffe off, ripe peares and mellowed apples To deuour, to cracke small nuts, now he counted a pleasure. But what need many words, least ouer tedious I should Vnto thee bee, many playes, and pastimes here I will omit: I will omit his gun, I will not speak of his hand-bow: Which with a twanging string, he so many times hath bended But to be briefe, his life, his greatest toyle was a pleasure. And might I speake as I thinke, I would say boldly that he liu'd More in ioy than Gods, sprong of celestiall issue. But Fate is peruerse, Fortune a friend to none alwaies: This merie life the gods, the country gods which inhabit Earthly seats did note,(for to them Ioue in Olympus, Yet vouchsafes not a place) they saw't and murmured at it, Each one did complaine that he so merilie liued▪ Each one did complaine that he them neuer adored. Not far from thence in a wood, in a vast and briery forrest, There is a famous groue, with Oaks and pine trees abounding which neue axe hath tucht, whose tops the clouds cut asunder These no star could pearce, no sun-beam could euer enter: Heere nere came Borea, heere nere came fiery Tytan. Temperature here alwayes abides, the temperate aire Causeth a dayly spring, here blossoms dayly do flourish: Hearbs are green, which a lake, & chrystal stream by the forrest: With myld-sliding waues doth nourish with liquid humor, In midst of this groue the mild Creatresse of all things; Hath by woondrous arte a stately pallace erected: And from craggie rockes, great seats hath wisely created: God Sylnanus his haule, it need no carued vpholders, Nor stately pillers to vnderprop, his gorgious hanging Nought but heauen ouerhangs, Atlas himselfe doth vphold it. Hither al the Gods, hither al the progeny rurall
In came, each tooke a seat, each ate by Syluan in order, At the higher end of the haule in a chair with gems very costly With leauy wreaths on his head sat great Syluanus adorned. Next ate rustick Pan, next him sate beautiful Alphus. Alphus a riuer god, next him God Baccbus, all hanged with red-streamed grapes, next him Lady Ceres arrayed With ary wreaths of wheat: next her dame Flora bdecked With sweet-smelling hearbes: then sat nymphs, Fayries & half∣gods Syluans, Satyrs, Fauns, with al the rustical ospring, Now giuing statutes, now rebels sharply reforming: And checking sinners, at length they found them agreeued With sweet Alexis son, that he them neuer adord, Despisde their Dities, their gifts that he dayly abused: Foorthwith each god agreed to banish him from his empire, And kingdome for a time. Saith great Syluanus, he neuer Til seuen yeares be past, my fragrant empire hereafter, Shall by my leaue sport in, thus am I fully resolued Neither saith God Pan, my realmes and flourishing empire Where many flocks do feed, til seuen yeares fully be passed: Shal he come in by my leaue, thus am I fully resolued. I banish him also fro my banks so redy, saith Alphus, And I (saith Bacchus) fo my faire and beautiful Orchards▪ And I (saith Ceres) fro my fields and corn-bearing empire▪ And sul this seuen yeare shall he be (saith Flora) depriued Of freedome, and shal beare the seruile yoke of a maister, And dearly shall he smart for these his wanton abuses▪ This the gods decreed, thus firmely was it enacted: And a day was set. They now inspired Alexis, And mooued him to send his son, his sonne little Fausus, Vnto the citie to learne a trade, this he fully beleeued, Was done for his good. Th'appointed time now approched, Now the day was at hand, good Lord what pittifull howling, Made that house, when he did depart, his father Alexis, Now gan sad looke, and at this his heauy departure,
These most woful words with an hart most sorowful vttered. THy dayes greene blossoms, thy yeeres yong plants doe re∣semble, but my time imitates Swas white and hoary feathers, To labor and take pains, thy years do wil thee, my white haires forewarne that death is readie to strike daylie: Now therfore, O my son, these words I charge thee remember, Which to thee thy father, so duty binds me speaketh, Like litle Bees fro their hiues nowe must thou bee banished of Bees and ants learn, they wil teach thee, my son, to labour: They will teach thee to worke,  the Bee, she gathereth hony, and th'Ant corne▪ winters pennure wisely fearing. So must thou take paines, whilst time willet thee, for old age thy body, though now strong, wil very quickly weaken, A raynie day wil come, crookedage wil (I say) creep vpon thee▪ nemies vnto worke, enemies vnto profit. A trade thou must learne, now must thou dwell in a cittie, which hath both vertues, and manie vices in it: These thou must schew, these must thou geedilie follow, these bring perdition, those redit and great honour: Bu first thy maker see that thou serue aboue all things, serue him, he made thee, loue him, he will thee gouerne: Be loy all and gentle, to thy maister trustie, thy dutie so requires, be to al aable, lowly, louing: And marke this one thing, detest euil companie chieflie: for it wil doubtlesse lead thee to follie: shun i. Shun womens faire lookes, Venus is faire but to be shunned: Shees hurtfull, of her slatery see thou take heed: As to the net with a call smal birds are craftily allured, with false shew of a baite, as little fish be taken: Euen so womens looks entrap young nouices oft times, see thou beware they be naught, she thē I warn thee, fly them To know mens desire medle not, but speak wel of each one, so shalt thou get same, and loue of all thy neighbours:
Shun playes and theaters, go to sermons, here many vices: there thou shalt learne to magnifie God thy maker. Both mony and counsell I thee giue, set more by my counsel, Than mony, thou shalt be rich ynough if thou do thus: More precious it is then gems which Tagus affoordeth, then golden fleeces which Phasis Ile hap  it. So fare well my sonne, God blesse and keep thee, remember these things, and God wil surely preserue thee▪ Farewell. THis once said, he shed many teares▪ his mother as heauy, Skreeking out, did bid him adue, my daughter Alind Seemed half mad with grief, she skies with dolorous ecchoes Made to resound, amōg many words, these sadly pronouncing I will with thee goe, I wil be banished also, Ile take also part of thine hard destiny, Faustus, But now must he depart, time vrg'd his heavy departur: Now needs must he go hence, farewel to the watery riuers, Farwel he said to the fields, to the woods, & greenleaued forrest And to the town whō he thought surely he shuld neueragain see Now was he gone quite away, and at length came to the cittie, Where great god Thamasis, with an huge & horrible murmur Guideth his vncoth waues, here was the place where he rested, Here was he forste to abide the seruile yoke of a master, Here what euils he abode, what miserie sufferd, I need not Tel thee: needlesse twas to tel thee' Damon, imagine That many grifes he abode, much toyle and slauery suffred, Many reproches he bore, oft times my daughter Alinda Set priue gifts vnto him, he greeted her oft with a token, & which was most rare, their loue which whē they wer infants First began, neither ire of Gods, time an eater of all things, Nor proud wapih Fate, able was any whit to diminish, But the more fate, fretting time, and gods cruel anger Sought by threatning force, the same to cancell or alter, More greater it did waxe, she sent, I remember a napkin
With needle wrought vnto him, wherin this posie she eined, Though time fret, gods chafe, and peruerse destinie thunder, her mind yet neuer shall thie Alinda varie. This gift he reciu'd, and opportunity chauncing a thing to him rate, this wofull letter he framed. Faustus to his loyall Alinda. FAustus, infaustus, forsaken, banished, exilde, in these sad writings, sendeth Alnda greeting. Soone my dear-loue each stare which shines in Olympus, each litle sand maist thou count by the watery sea-shore: Each bird which flyeth, each leafe in woods shady growing, each sealed fish which swims in a frothy riuer, Then halfe the miseries which thy poore Faustus abideth: Ah, but I feare too much, least thou be grieed at it. What ioy? what comfort haue I wretch▪ tis all in Alinda: Oh but that name oft much dolour also causeth: No sooner its named, but ioy of sence me depriueth, no sooner its named, but teares fro mine eies doe trickle. Ioy in that thou standst in such aduersitie stedfast, teares in that from thee, destnic me so withholds, But yet though fate frown, though gods pursue me with anger though Fortune plague m, penuri pinch me dayly: Greeue not Alinda for it, when I was exiled, imagine then that I died, I say, greeue not Alinda for it: And if in hope thou lin'st, say dearth shl neuer herafter take fro me a second loue, still will I liue a widow, And it may fall out, gods taking pittie, that once I shal to both our contents vnto the safclie returne: Then what thing mortall, what thing celestiall each where, shal ioyful Fausts from his Alinda detaine it: Not golden apples, which rich Hisperia Yeeldeth, not little gems where with Tagus in Id floweth,
How many mo miseries, poore wretch, how many Caribdis, hoping to inioy thee, would I not easily go through. Be stable and constant, whatsoeuer destinies happen, thy Faustus wil stand, be stil Alinda stable: No gem I send thee, yet a costlie iewell I send thee, that which I want my selfe, farewel I send thee my Loue, THis to my daughter he sent, and opportunitie fitting, She this epistle framed, and to him priuilie sent it. KNow'st thou my Fastus, by the superscription, or seale who to thee this dolefull and heauy dittie frameth: Tis thine Alinda my loue, which in this dittie saluteth▪ her Faustus, whose griefes are to thy sorrowes equal. But feare not Faustus, liue in hope, Ioue doth not all times▪ thunder, delay wil gods cruel anger abate: In time the Lyon his fierce seuerity leaueth, soft drops of water mollifie craggie pibbles: In time the heifer to the yoke is easly reduced: the stiffe-neck'd colt doth yeeld to the rusty bridle: Then feare not Faustus, liue in hope, frost doth not at al times each thing nip, time wil gods cruel anger asswage. The troian Captain, Venus ofspring, faithles Eneas, in time out wore th'ire of great and angry Iuno. Ile be Penelope, be thou my loyal Vlysses, Ile be Perilla, be thou my trustie Naso. And be most certaine, my mind I wil neuer alter my fate whoseuer, Destinie please to varie But fire and water, cold, heat, loue and enuie, desire and hate shall first and sooner agree together. Stream-hounting fishes forsake their waterie channels, and in greene pastures, and shadie medowes abide Earth shal beae starres, heauen shal be cleft with a coulter, then any but Faustus shal his Alinda cour▪
Faustus adue, to the gods, thy trustie and faithfull Alinda, for thy safe returne prayes dailie. Faustus adue. This he receiu'd, and now the griefes and sorrowes he suffred▪ though greater and manie mo, yet now far lesser he deemed. TIme now past on apace, hope was their anhor & hauen, And though great distance of space detaind them asunder: Oft times in letters yet they twaine pruile talked: And last month his time was spent: to his father Alexis And to his frinnds he returnde, oh how my daughter Alinda Ioy'd at this, amongst friends, as his heauie departure, Each thing seem'd to lament, so each thing ioy'd his arriual. Now pry thee tel me Damon, who now so sharply reprouedst Should I remooue her loue, who was more trustie to Faustus, Then was Penelope the loyal wife of Vlysses. Da. O rare idelitie, O faith immooueable, worthy, Worthy to be rehearst to all posterities after: Shouldst thou remooue their loue, I tl the friend Melibeus, If thou shouldst, thou hadst deseru'd with Tantalus endlesse Paines to receiue. But loe, the withered grasse is all hidden With hoarie nowes, our sheep want meat. Mel. Let's hastilie therfore Go ftch them fodder, which bleat so grdlie for it.
VVInter now wore away cold with his hoary frosts, And now sharp Boras was made a prisoner: Now brought in Ladi Ver smels odoristerous, And with blasts verie calme Zephirus entred, Each bird sent merrily musicall harmonie: The Cuckow flew abroad with an ode vniforme, This time euerte thing merily welcomed, Swains with their silly truls sat by their heards feeding, One while telling of ancient histories, Now playing on a pipe rusticall harmony, And the ruddie Goddesse, her manie colloured Gates had scarce on a time to Titan opened, When three Swaines Coridon, Thestlis, and Damon, Hauing new sro the fieldes▪ their greedy flockes let out, Met by chance on a time vnder a shady tree, And who neere to the tree stood with his heard alone, Faustus an aged man, master of harmony, These three mates when he saw speedilie came to them. Vp then rose Coridon, Thestilis and Damon, And prayd this aged heard to sit vpon a turse. He sate, they sate againe, Thestilis and Damon, And clownish Coridon, each held a pipe in hand, Th'old man left at home his musical instrument And he much reuerenc'd for his age of the rest, First of all merily spake to the companie.
Eglogue third. Faustus▪ Coridon, Thestilis, Damon. VVHat great thanks, neighbors, to the gods celstiall owe we which such goodly weather haue sent for our ewes that haue eaned Se neighbors ech one, how finely Aurora saluteth Her louing Tytan, how pale and ruddy she looketh, Our weaklings doubtlesse this day wil mightily strengthen Co. O, tis a fine weather, a trim batling time for our heardlings, And lesse I be deceiu'd, this day will prooue vere faire too, What great thankes therefore to the gods celesall owe we? Fa. Yea, Coridon for many mothings we be greatly beholding Vnto the gods, I my self haue seen a time when as heardsmen Could not vse their pipes, could not as we do together Sit thus far fro the flocks, the Wolfe which priuly lurked In these woods, the Beare which crastily croucht in a thicket, Both sheep & heards wold thē deuour, yea oft frō our herdlings We by force were pluckt, & wretches vrg'd to be souldiers, Seldom now doth a Wolf, the beare exilde fro the mountains, Doth neuer hurt our flocks, the gates of peaceable Ias Be now barred fast, we heed not eare to be souldiers, Nor feare souldcrs force, we may now merrily pipe here. Co. Faustus tels vs troth, shy sire and grand-site oft time Told me the same, with many mo things, more mercy the gods Pan doth fauor his herds, we may nowe merily pipe here. (shew Th. Yea Coridon thou maist securely kisse. Galatea, Vnder a shade, yea and more than that, if no body see thee. Co. My Galatea no doubt, before your withered Alice Shal be preferd, she lookes like an olde witch scortch'd in a Kil. Da. Wel Coridon, boast not too much of your Galatea, house. Shortly your ewes wil (I fear) take you for a Ram, not a keeper, Th. No, Coridons sweet pipe, which such braue melody maketh Nill on's head suffer Actons hornes to he ioyned. Co. Ich wil pipe with you Damon or Thestlis ither.
And let Fausts iudge whose pipe best hatmony sendeth. Fa. These reprochfull tearms should not be rehearsed among you, You should not haue told him of his wife Galatea: You should not haue told him of the deformity of his wife, But let these things passe, Coridon euen now made a challenge Wil ye with him contend, I wil giue reasonable iudgement. Both. We be agreed. Fa. Begin Coridon, you first made a challenge. Coridors Sonet. CVpid took wings, and through the fielde did flie, A bow in hand, and quiuer at his backe: And by chance proud Amintas did espie, As all alone he sate by his flocke. This sillie swain so statlie minded was, All other eards he thought he did surpasse. He hated Loue, he hated sweet desire, Equall to him no wight he esteemed: Manie a Lasse on him were set on fire, Worthy of his loue, yet none he deemed. Out from his sheath he pluckt a leaden dart, Wherewith he smote the swain vpon the hart. Forthwith he rose, and went a little by, Leauing his heard, for so wold Cupid haue: Faire Galatea then he did espie, Vnder a shade with garland verie braue. Straitwaes he lou'd, and burn'd in her desire, No ease he found, the wag had made a fire. He sigh'd▪ he burn'd, and fryed in this flame, Yet sillie wretch, her loue he neuer sought, But pinde away, because he did disdaine, Cupid him stroke with that vnlucky shaft
Long time he liu'd thus pining in dispair, Til's life at length flew into th open aire. Cupid abroad through shadie fieldes did flie, Now hauing stroke proud Aminta with his shaft: Poore Coridon by chance he passed by, As by his heard he sate of ioy bereft. Sicke, very sick was this lowly swain, Many that he lik'd, all did him disdaine. Cupid him saw, and pittied him foorthwith, Chose out a dart among a thousand moe: Than which a luckier was not in his sheath, Wherewith he gaue the swaine a mightie blow. Strait rising vp, Galatea he espide, Foorthwith he lou'd, and in desier fride. Ah how she pleasde, pale and red was her face, Rose-cheek'd as Aurora you haue seene: A wreath of flowers her seemly head did grace, Like Flora faire, of shepheards she was Queene▪ He passed by, and deemed that she laught, Her verie lookes did fauour shew, he thought. Therefore in hast with rude and homelie tearmes, He did her woo, her hoping to obtaine: First she denide, at length she did affirme, She would him loue, she could him not disdaine. Thus di'd Amintas because he was so coy, Poore Coridon his loue did thus inioy. Fa. Wel, Coridon hath done, lets heare your melody Damon. Da. Help me my chearful Muse, O Pan melodous helpe me, And wise Apollo to un the stately progeny of heardsmen.
Damons dittie. WHen Ioue first broken had the Chaos ancient, And things at variance had set at vnity: When first each element, fire, aire, and water, And earth vnmooueable were placed as you see: A plow-man then he made, he made a sheep-feeder, The plow-man he made of stoni progenie, Rebelling to the plough, like to the flinty field, Hard-hearted, full of hate: The noble sheepfeeder He made of a milde and lowlie progenie, Gentle, and very meeke, like a sheep innocent, Oft times he to the Gods sacrifice offered, One while he gaue a Lambe, one while a tidy calfe, Since that time sillie swaines and noble sheepseeders Haue bene much visited and loued of the gods. Go to my merie Muse, found out vpon a pipe Shepheards antiquities, and noble progenie, A shepheard was Abra, Lot was a sheep-keeper, Great Angels, from aboue came many times to these, Yea Ioue omniregent leauing his heauenly seat Talkt with thē, men affirm, as they sate by their heards Of them sprung valiant and noble nations, Go to my merie muse, sound out vpon a pipe, Heardsmens antiquitie, and noble progenie, Paris sate with his flocke, in Ida redolent, When he was made a Iudge to Venus and Iun, And Pallas beautiful three mighty goddesses. Go to my mrie muse, sound out vpon a pipe Herdsmens antiquity and noble progenie. Dauid sate with his heard, when as a Lyon huge And eke a Beare he slew, this little preti swaine Kild a victorious and mightie champion, Whose words did make a king & al his host to feare And he ul many yeares raign'd ouer Israell.
Go to my merie Muse, sound out vpon a pipe▪ Heardsmens antiquitie, and noble progenie▪ Moses fed sillie sheep, when like a fiery flame Iehouah called him out from a bramble bush, O what great monuments and mightie miracles In Egypt did he shew, and to king Pharao▪ Iordans waues backe he driue, Iordan obeyed him. Go to my merie muse, sound out vpon a pipe, Heardsmens antiquitite, and noble progenie. Angels brought (men afirm) to busie sheepfeeders, In filds of Bethlehem newes of a Sauiour, Before Magicians and noble Emperours, Th'infant laid in a crib, Ioues mightie progenie, Mankinds ioy, life, and health cuntrie swains viewed: Cease now my mery Mnse to tune vpon a pipe. Heardsmens antiquitiy and noble progenie. Fa. Damons dittie is done, begin you Thestilis also, Th. Aide me, my pleasant muse, O Pan god musicall aid me. Thestilis Ode. A Stately scepter in a soyle most famous, Where siluer streaming Thamasis resoundeth, A Princesse beareth, who with urduring vertues aboundth. ¶With this pipe in her land, O muse, a famous Dittie recte thou: she deserues a Dittie: Her praises ecchoes do resound, and tel through euerie cittie. ¶Nymphs from strange countries, water-haunting Naydes Leaue their faire habits, to behold her honour: We swaines thinke our selues to be blest, if we can but looke vpon her. ¶In her land nymphs by Helicons fair fountaines, Make Odes: on Citterne her Appollo ceaseth
Not to extoll▪ Pans pipe by the shady mountaines, Her daylie prayseth. ¶Abroad once walking with a traine like Phe, They say that Tytan stood as one amazed, And as when faire Lencothoe hee viewed on her he gazed. ¶Then also Iuno, Venus and Minerua. Seeing her walking with a troupe so statelle, Each did her chalenge, she by right is mine, saith each noble Ladie. She's mine, quoth Iuno, she's a Queene most royal, She's mine (quoth Pallas) sh'ath a wit notable: She's mine, quoth Venus, Paris her wil giue me, She's amiable. ¶Palls at this chaft, Iuno fretted and sware, In heauen proud Paris shal a udge be no more, He loues faire Hellen, which he loues, he therefore beautie will adore. ¶At which wordes Rose-cheek'd Citherea smiled, Her face besprenting with a sanguine colour: Then let oue saith she, be the iudge, thine husband, and noble brother. ¶With al speed therfore, to the skies thē they posted And to oues chrystal seat in heauen approching: Thus spake great Iuno to the mighty Lord and maker of each thing. ¶O Ioue, for doubtles many times thou hast view'd Albions Princesse, sweet Eliza, we three Contend whose monarch she may be, she's thou know'st wise, noble, comelie. ¶Iupiter hereat was amased and said, To iudge this matter is a thing not asie, But yet needs must it be resolued, or ye will Fall out I feare me
¶My sister Iuno, thou my daughter Pallas, And Venus kinned to me three waies, She's not thine Pallas, Iuno she's not thine, nor thine Citherea. ¶But Iuno, Pallas, Venus and each goddesse hath her indifferent, ye do claime her vainly▪ This is my iudgment, sweet Eliza, Ladies, shall be mine onlie. ¶O what great and huge miracles Iehouah Aiding, she hath wrought here, many yeares which prest vs, From Romish Pharaohs tyrannous bondage, she safely releasd vs. ¶Since that bright day-star shady night expelling, Which hath brought day light ouer all this Iland: That Moses which her people through the sea led, As by the drie land. ¶From craggie mountaines water hath she made With manna, nectar, manie yeares she fed vs: Thus hath she long time, noble Ioue assisting, mightily led vs ¶O from what Scillas she preserued hath From spanish armies Ioue hath her protected, Thy force O Romish Prelate, and wiles hath she wiselie detected. ¶Her realme in quiet many yeares she ruled her subiectes saftie verie much regarding, Punishing rebels, she reformeth vices, Vertue rewarding. ¶The plow-man may now reap his haruest in ioy, Each man may boldly lead a quiet life here We shepheards may sit with our heard in field, and merilie pipe here. ¶A Phoenix rare she is on earth amongst vs, A mother vs her people she doth nourish
Let vs all therefore, with one heart, pray Ioue that long she may flourish. FAustus, our Odes are done, you must giue reasonable iudg∣ment, But speake as you think: who made best harmony, Faustus? Fa. Ye haue pip'd all well, and I think, had sacred Apollo Heard you, he would haue praisde your tunes melodious also: But which of you made best harmonie, for me to tell you, Were but a needlesse thing, t'wold breed but brauling among you Thē let this suffice, you haue al three pip'd very wel now Co. Wel then I see you feare to offend this company Faustus, Had Coridon pip'd worst, Coridon should heare it I know wel. Fa. Nay not so, but I oue to shun contention, I would Haue you agree, for if I should Thestilis harmony commend, You would at it chafe, and Damon also, so should I Get me surely two foes, but rather harke to my counsell, Lets to breakfast go, and lets drinke friendlie together, So this strife wil end, very bad is hatred amongst vs Co. I am agreed. Th. And I. Da. And I wil not say against it. Parcite Pierides, iuueni concedite vestr non valet ad varios vnus arator agros: Musa vale, iuueni{que} faue, domino{que} placere, & tibi, non valeo, Musaiocosa vale. FINIS.
