21828 99852012 17309
THE RELATION OF a Wonderfull Voiage made by WILLIAM CORNELISON SCHOVTEN of Horne. Shewing how South from the Straights of Magelan, in Terra Del-fuogo: he found and discouered a newe passage through the great South Sea, and that way sayled round about the world. Describing what Islands, Countries, People, and strange Aduentures he found in his saide Passage. map showing new passage through the great South Sea south of the Straits of Magellan in Tierra del Fuego LONDON Imprinted by T.D. for NATHANAELL NEVVBERY, and are to be sold at the signe of the Starre, vnder S. Peters in Corne-hill, and in Pope-head Alley. 1619.
TO THE RIGHT VVOR∣SHIPFVLL Sir THOMAS SMITH Knight, Gouernour of the East Indian Companie. &c. THIS Treatise of the Description of a Voyage, made by VVilliam Cor∣nelison Schouten of Horne, by a newe vnexpected and neuer heretofore discouered Passage, by him found out in Terra del-Fuogo Southward, from the Straights of Magelan, into the great South sea, and that way into the East Indies, and so round about the World: comming to my hands I iudged no man more fitte (for the protection there∣of) then your Worship, not onely because of the great desire you haue, and paines you dayly take to aduance such trauels: but also in regard of your place of Go∣uernour of the East Indian Company, whom this Voy∣age specially concerneth. If it please you to accept it, I shall thinke my paines well bestow'd in the translati∣on thereof out of the Dutch, wherein it was written: wishing it a meanes to further and aduance your trade in India: and to your Worship health in this worlde, and eternall felicitie in the world to come. Your Worships to command, W. P.
THE PRFEACE. THE generall States of the vnited Netherland Prouinces, hauing granted their Letters Pattens to the East India Company resident in the sayd Prouinces, to trafficke into the Indies, and none others but they onely, with a stricke prohibition vnto all other Marchants, and In∣habitants of the sayd Countries, not to sayle or trafficke Eastward beyond the Cape de bona espe∣rance, nor through the Sraights of Magelan Westward, ei∣ther into India, or any other vnknowne or not discouered coun∣tries. Isaack le Maire a rich Marchant of Amsterdam, dwel∣ing in Egmont, hauing a great desire to trafficke into strange and farre Countries, and William Cornelison Schouten of Horne, (a man well experienced in Seafaring, who before that time had sayled thrice into most partes of the East Indies, for Maister, Pilot, and Marchant) and yet verie desirous to sayle into and to discouer new and vnknowne Countries, oftentimes speaking and conferring together, reasoned among themselues, whether they might not enter into the great South sea, by an o∣ther way, (then through the same wayes which in the East In∣dian Companies Letters Pattents are formerly forbidden & prohibited.) There to discouer great and rich Countries, where they might lade their ships with rich wares and marchandises,
whereof the sayd le Maire, affirmed he had some knowledge, and that if it did not fal out as they desired, yet that they might passe through the afore said great South seas, into the East Indies, and there trafficke freely with great profite: vpon which conference at the last they agreed together, to make a discouery through the South vndiscouered and vnknowne part of the World, South∣ward from the Straights of Magelan, to seeke out a passage in∣to the sayd South Sea, which they thought very likely to be per∣formed: for diuers circumstances and reasons to them knowne and by others at sundry times found about the sayd Straights of Magelan. And to that end agreed, betweene them to enter∣prise such a Voiage, taking order that Isaac le Maire should prouide the one halfe of the money, and William Cornelison Schouten the other halfe, to furnish the said Voiage, by the help and furtherance of their friendes, the care whereof, and to make prouision for the sayd voyage being referred to William Cor∣nelison Schouten, who to effect the same, procured Peter Clementson a Brewer, an ancient Burger Maister of Horne, Iohn Ianson Molenwerf one of the Schepen, Iohn Cle∣mentson Keis Senatour of the sayd Towne, and Cornelius Segetson a Marchant of Horne, to contribute in the same with them, and they together with the aforesayd William Schouten, Isaac le Maire and Iacob le Maire his Sonne, in short time prepared so much money, as they thought conueni∣ent and sufficient for the sayd voyage, not once making knowne to the owners of the ships, what their pretence was touching the sayd voyage, but kept that secret to themselues that disbursed the money for the same. And to finish the sayd voyage, the Marchants aforesayd pre∣pared and rigged a great and a small ship of Horne, The great ship called the Vnitie, of 360. tuns whereof William Corne∣lison Schouten was Maister and cheife Pilot, and Iacob le
Maire Marchant and principall Factor, in it hauing 65. men, and 19. great peices, and 12. slings, with muskets and other munition for warre proportionably, with a Pinnace to sayle, an other to row, a boate, and a Scute, anekors, cabells, ropes, sayles, and all other necessaries belonging thereunto. The lesser shipp called the Horne, of 110. tuns, whereof Iohn Cornelison Schouten was Maister, and Aris Clawson Marchant, in it 22. men, 8. great peices, 4. slings, and other furniture as neede required, and was necessary for such a voyage. And for that they would not make knowne to any man as I sayd before whe∣ther they meant to goe, they hyred all their men, both common Saylers and Officers to sayle vnto euery place whether the Mai∣sters and the Marchants would goe, which made the common saylers and people to speake and gesse of that voyage diuersly, and at the last gaue them the name of the gold finders, but the Mar∣chants named them the South Company. The ships being rea∣die, vpon the 16 of May 1615. the men were mustred by the Scout and Schepen of Horne, and the 25. of the same moneth the Vnitie set sayle, and arriued at the Tessell vpon the 27. The 3. of Iune, the lesser departed from Horne, and the next day came to the Tessell: What further happened and fell out vnto them during the sayd voyage, is in this Booke at large set downe, and declared from the reportes and writings of those that saw and tryed the same, and which in the same voy∣age were the cheife and prin∣cipall persons.
THE RELATION OF A Wonderfull Voiage made by VVILLIAM CORNELISON SCHOVTEN of Horne. Shewing how South from the Straights of Magelan, in Terra Delfuogo: he found and dis∣couered a newe passage through the great South Seaes, and that way sayled round about the world. Describing what Islands, Countries, People, and strange Aduentures he found in his saide Voiage. VPON the 14. of Iune 1615. wee sayled out of the Tessell, and the 16. of the same month, being in sight of Dunkerke, past between Douer and Callis: the 17. anko∣ring in the Downs, William Cor∣nelison Shouten went on shoare at Douer to gette men to bring vs fresh water, and the same day set saile from thence, about euening by the Shingles meeting with a great fleete of Holland Ships laden with salt. The 21. and 22. hauing a great storme wee put into the Isle of of Wight, where our Maister would gladly haue hyred a carpenter but could not. The 25. we set sayle from Wight, and vpon the 27. en∣tred at Plimmouth, where the Maister hyred a carpenter of Maydenblicke. The 28. we leaft Plimmouth and sayled with
a north north east wind and faire whether, and the 29. the Maister and Marcnt of the Horne came abord the Vni∣tie to agree together about order to be taken vpon the 4. of Iuly, for sharing of our victuales, according to the man∣ner and custome vsed in shippes that sayle long voiages, where they deliuer the saylers their meate and drinke by waight, and measure, to euery man alike and according to his qualitie. The 4. of Iuly, according to the aforesaid resolution, it was ordred that euery man should haue a can of beere a day, 4. pound of bisket, and halfe a pound of butter (be∣sides sweete suet) a weeke, and fiue cheeses for the whole voiage. The 8. being vnder 39. degrees and 25. minutes right against the Bassels, our carpenters Mate dyed. The 9. and 10. with a north and north east winde and a stife gale, the 11. we had a sight of Porto Santo and Ma∣dera, and held our course east. The 12. in the morning we saw the Saluages, which we leaft on backe-bord about 2. leagues from vs. The 13. in the morning wee saw the Ilands of Teneri∣fa, and great Canaena, and the same day about noone wee sayld betweene them both with a stiffe north north east wind, and a swift streame. Betweene the 14. and the 15. with the same wind and streame we passed Tropicus Cancri. The 16. in the morning, with a Northeast wind, we found very hollow water, at which time the boate that was drawne at the Vnities stearne was full of water, and therewith the rope brake, and the boate sunke and was lost, which till that time we had drawne after the ship without any danger: about noone the same day we were
vnder 20. degrees and 30. minutes. The 17. and 18. with faire weathe and an indifferent wind north and northwest, we sailed west and by south, and on the 19. in the morning were vnder 14. degrees and 45. minutes. The 20. on the morning we fell on the north side of Cape Verde, and had 8. fathome deepe when wee first saw the land, sailing along by the coast, and at Sunne-ri∣sing the Cape lay west and by south from vs, so that with a north northeast wind we could not get beyond it, and were forced to ankor at 32. fathome deepe: that night it blew hard, with a great storme of raine and thunder. The 21. in the morning the wind south southeast, and after Sun-rising variable, we set saile with our course to to Seaward, first west and by north, then northwest, and that whole day sailed not aboue 6. leagues. The 22. we lay driuing all day long with a calme, and no sailes vp: then Cape Verde lay east from vs: about euening we saw a ship southward, that held her course northwest. The 23. in the morning hauing a South wind, wee could not reach aboue the Cape, but were forced to an∣kor, by reason of the streame, about noone wee set saile, with a west wind, and got beyond the Cape, and that euening ankored within the second Island, in the ordi∣nary roade, at 10. fathome deepe. The 24. it rained sore, and we made ready to fetch fresh water from the land. The 25. the Alkaire, or gouernour came aboord our ship, with whome wee agreed for eight states of Iron; that wee should peaceably fetch fresh water from the
shore. The 26. it rained, and the weather very darke: the same day we saw a ship that sailed towards vs, and an∣kored two leagues from vs, vnder the land being a ship of Rotterdam, that came thither to trafficke along the coast. The 28. and 29. we fetcht water, meane time the Horne hoysed saile, and went to the place where the ship of Rotterdam lay, in a Bay called Refresco, to see if wee could there find any Limonds, but came againe in the euening, and could get none. The 31. there came a French ship and anchored by vs. The same day we had stayed a Negroes ship, who at night shewed vs a fit place to fish in, and our men carrying their nets on the firme land, tooke as many fishes of diuers sorts, as both our ships could eate in two dayes. The first of August in the morning we set saile from Cape Verde, with the Rotterdamer, who at noone time left vs and set his course for the Salt Islands: all that time we had faire weather, and a fine gale of wind out of the north, our course southwest. The 2. we had faire weather, with a fine gale of wind, at which time we klled a little calfe, and a goate that we gotte at Cape Verde, which serued all our men in both ships, for a whole dayes meate. The 3. we had but small wind, and that night faire weather, but when day appeared, it was thicke and clou∣die, with thunder, raine, and lightning. The 4. about noone, we were vnder 12. degrees and 12. minutes, with very faire weather and a good swift gale, as also the 5. day. The 7.8. and 9. it rained fast, but yet with an indiffe∣rent
gale. The 10. it rained, with a small wind that night we saw a Spanish Barke vnder saile. The 15. we had a reasonable fresh winde, and good weather, and made indifferent good way: then we saw great store of birds called Rabos forcados, and tooke a Do∣rado. The 16. about noone we were vnder 7. degrees and 40. minutes, with faire weather and a good winde, as afore. The 17. at noone we were vnder 7. degrees 12. mi∣nutes, with faire weather, and an indifferent coole gale southwest: that day we tooke many Bouetes and Corret∣ters. The 18. and 19. we lay by the wind, resoluing to hold our course for Sierra Liona, there to refresh our selues, be∣cause many of our men had a great scouring, all that day we had a stiffe contrary wind, and were forced to lie by the weather, it being then too late to go speeedily vnder the Line: and at the Cape we got but little refreshing, at that time about noone we were vnder 7. degrees and 55. minutes. The 20. in the morning we were vnder 7. degrees 45. minutes, with faire weather, and a good gale of winde out of the South, wee helde our course East, and East and by North; at which time we saw great store of land fowles, and change of water: about euening we cast out the lead, and found 30. fathome sandie ground, and had land almost 40. leagues nearer then we gessed it to be, the same night we anchored at 16. fathome, and were vpon the west end of the Baixos, or shallows of S. Anna Island.
The 21. in the morning, by Sunne rising we set saile, and saw the high land of Sierra Liona, about 6. Leagues from vs Northeast and by North: wee likewise saw the Islands of Mabrabomba, which lie on the south point or corner of the high land of Sierra Liona, north from the Baixos, or shallows of S. Annas Island. Sierra Liona is a very high land, there is no land so high as it betweene Capo Verde, and the coast of Guinea, whereby the poynt is most easie to bee knowne: that day wee laboured as we could to get to land, for the most part hauing stormie weather, running to the point, and ouer the Baixos, or shallows of S. Anna, at 10.9.8.7. and 5. fathome water, and as wee sayled northward, the water waxed deeper, but eastward shallower, so that about euening we ancho∣red with a high water, at foure fathome and a halfe soft ground, and in the night time we had but three fathome and a halfe, but it was fine cleare weather. The 22. in the morning at Sunrising, William Schouten went aboord the Horne, and sayled in it before vs, the great ship following, holding our course north northeast with a northwest winde, and an ebbe vnder the bough, and so got off from the Baixos, to 18. fathome water, and from thence to the Islands of Mabrabomba, which are ve∣ry high, and lie all three on a row, southwest and north∣east, halfe a league from Sierra Liona to seaward, there we had shallow water at fiue and foure fathome, soft muddy ground, we anchored about a league from the land, and going on shore found no man dwelling therin, but per∣ceiued the foote-steps of many great beastes, but all the land lay wast like a wildernes, with low marshes or bogs, and high hils. The 23. in the morning, Iacob le Maire went aboord
the Horne, and from it with both the boates on shore, where hee found a Riuer, at the mouth thereof hauing many cliffes, sands, & rockes, whereby no ship could goe into it, but within it was very deepe, and broad enough for ships to turne and wind, there they could perceiue no people to dwell, but saw three wilde Oxen, and a great many Monkeis, and some birds that barked like dogs. They rowed at least 3. leagues vp into it with the floud and there found a wilde Palme tree, but in the euening came aboord againe, and heard of no people, neither found any fruit that might serue their turne to eate. The 24. both our Scouts went on shore againe to seeke for men or some refreshing, each of them in a seuerall Ri∣uer, at least 5. leagues into it: Aris Clawson the Marchant of the Horne, with one of the Assistants into the one, and Claus, Iohnson, Ban, with our masters mate in the other, and the 25. in the morning came on boord againe: The Marchant of the Horne had beene in a salt riuer, and brought with him 5. or 6. wilde Palmites, Claus, Iohnson; and Ban, had beene in a fresh riuer, and there found a place wherein there grew 8. or 9. Limond trees, which they shooke, and got about 750. Limonds, most ripe, rea∣dy to drie. There also they saw great store of Tortoyses, and some Crocodiles, but no people. We determined to trie if wee could get into the fresh Riuer with both our shippes, therein to make prouision of fresh water and Li∣monds, and to that end set sayle, but found the water so shallow, that we were forced to anchor at 6. fathome. The Horne anchored before the Riuer, on the lower land, but there found shallow water, by meanes of the point of the Baixos, or shallows of S. Anna Island. Iacob le Maire and Aris Clawson, the marchants of the Horne and Vnitie,
went with the boate vp into the riuer. The 26. we had a stiffe gale of winde South southwest, so that wee could not saile, yet the Horne beate on the south point of the bay, which is about fiue leagues broad from the north to the south side. The 27. in the morning we hoyst anchor to sayle to the Horne, and about noone time the Horne boate came with Iacob le Maire on boord againe, bringing with him about 1400. Limonds which they had found in diuers places here and there in the riuer. In the euening we got to the Horne, and there anchored at three fathome and a halfe, soft ground. The 28. our master went vp the riuer, before the which we lay with both the boates, and about euening came a∣gaine, and found no good land to goe vpon, nor any signes of men, but onely a Bull with a Calfe, all the ground being marshie and full of trees that stood in the salt water. The 29. perceiuing that we were not in the riuer of Sierra Liona, we determined early in the morning to set sayle, and to goe northward of the high land, and about noone wee got aboue the Islands of Mabrabonda, west∣ward, along towards the north part of the high land, till we had 12. and 15. fathome water, and in the euening got about the point, where we anchored at 15. fathome deepe. The 30. in the morning, we hoysed anchor, and draue with the streame, and a south wind before the village, in the right roade of Sierra Liona, where wee anchored at 8. fathome, sandy ground, about a musket shot from the land, there we saw 8. or 9, houses couered with straw. The Moores called vnto vs in their Language, to
fetch them aboord our shippe, and because they had no Canoes we sent our boate on land, which presently came backe againe with 5. Moores in it, whereof one was their Interpreter: but before they came, they desired that we would leaue some of our men, to stay with them as pledges, for that not long before there had beene a French ship there, which had taken and carryed away 2. of their Moores. Aris Clawson the marchant that went a shore with the boate, staied there with them, and haue∣ing certaine beades, he there bartered them for 700. Li∣monds, most ripe, and two bunches of Banauas almost ripe also. The Interpreter spake all kind of Languages, one with an other. In the meane time, our men hauing faire weather, laded fresh water, which is there easie to be had, by reason it falles downe out of the hill into the roade, so that we held the barrels vnder the shore, or fall of the water, and filling them put them straight into the Scute, the water was very good. The 31. when we had fild our vessels full of water, and that morning Iacob le Maire, Aris Clawson, Claus Iohnson, Ban, and all the assistants went on land, and bartered for about 25000. Limonds, for a few beades, and some slight Norremburgh kniues, wee might haue had 100000. Li∣monds there at the least, if we would, for there they grew by whole woods full: the same night we bartered with the Negroes for a shole of Fish. The first of September we hoysed anchor, and draue before the streame, and that euening anchored at the mouth of the Sea, before a small Riuer. The 2. we set the Horne vpon the Strand to make her cleane, hauing a god place to doe it, for there the water falles 7. foote vp and downe, in the euening our men
came on boord againe, and brought a little beast na∣med an Antelop, which they found in a wood, in a net or snare set there by the Negroes, and some Limonds, and after that the boate went out to fish, and got a greate number, and some Palmitas, which they had not cut downe in the wood. The 3. in the afternoone, the Horne being made cleane vvas lancht into the water againe, and our master went out to fish, in the euening bringing a great shole of fish with him, in fashion like to a shoemakers cutting knife, and euery man 150 Limonds for his part. The 4. early in the morning, we hoysed anchor, and set sayle out of Sierra Liona, with an indifferent winde, but in the euening hauing contrary winde, anchored a∣gaine at 14. fadom, good anchor ground. The 5. In the first quarter, we hoyst anchor againe, and sayled with a calme, but in the third quarter ancho∣red againe, at 14. fadome, sandie ground. The 6. In the first quarter, we set sayle againe, but the winde contrary, were forced to anchor at 12. fadome, sandy ground, there we could still see the land of Sierra Liona, in that place there went a strong streame. The 9. Wee set sayle, but the wind contrary, vve an∣chored in the euening, at 32. fadom sandy ground. The 10. in the first quarter, hauing a southwest wind, we set sayle, but the weather being calme, we let anchor fall, with our sayles still vp, and not long after, the wind beginning to rise we hoyst anchor, but in the third quar∣ter in a calme, anchored againe, at 29, fathom: the last quarter the wind beginning to blow, we set sayle, but doe what we might we could not goe forward. The 11. we set sayle, but anchored againe in the se∣cond
quarter, by reason of the calme, there the streame went northward. Not long after we hoysed sayle againe, with some small wind, but it calmd againe, and the wea∣ther waxed very thicke. The 12. Wee were vnder 9 degrees and 20. minutes, at euening we anchored at 17. fathom. The 15. We set sayle with a west northwest wind, all that quarter it rained, In the meane time, the Horne, in a thicke mist sayled out of our sight, and we shot two pee∣ces, an houre betweene each shot, to call her, and about 10. of the clocke shee came againe. The 16. and 17. the vvind was variable, we an∣chored at 15. fathome, with rainie weather, yet the vvind blevv hard. The 18. about noone vve set sayle, the Horne lost an Anchor and Cable in the vvinding, the vvind blevv hard, and the vvater vvent somevvhat hollovv. The 19. Hauing contrary vvinde, and vve being very weary, by reason the vveather vvas rainy and stormie, vvee determined to goe backe againe to Sierra Liona, to refresh our selues, and take in fresh vvater, but after noone hauing a good northvvest vvind, vve changed our course southvvard againe, and vvent forvvard. The 20. vvith a good vvinde vve sayled southvvard, and vvere vnder 8. degrees 30. minutes. The 21. and all that month out, vve had varia∣ble vvindes, vvith calmes, and euery day great store of raine, and vpon the 30. day vve vvere vnder 5. degrees In the beginning of October, vve had variable vvindes, and some calmes, vvith great store of raine, night and day.
The 5. vve vvere vnder 4 degrees 27. minutes, the same day about noone there vvas such a noise in the bough of our shippe, that the Maister beeing behinde in the Gallerie, thought that one of the men had fallen out of the fore ship, or from the boesprit into the sea, but as hee looked out ouer the side of the ship, he savv the Sea all red as if great store of bloud had bin povvred into it, vvhereat he vvondred, knovving not vvhat it ment, but afterward he found, that a great fish or a sea monster hauing a horne had there vvith stricken against the ship, vvith most great strength, for vvhen vve vvere in Porto Desire, vvhere vvee set the ship on the strand to make it cleane, about 7 foote vnder vvater before in the ship, vve found a horne stick∣ing in the ship, much like for thicknesse fashion to a com∣mon Elephants tooth, not hollow but full, very strong hard bone, vvith had entered into three planckes of the ship, that is 2 thicke planckes of greene and one of Oken wood, and so into a rib, vvhere it turned vpvvard, to our great good fortune, for if it had entered betvveene the ribes into the ship, it vvould happely haue made a greater hole, and haue brought both ship and men in danger to be lost, it stucke at least halfe a foote deepe into the ship, and about halfe a foot vvithout, vvhere vvith great force it vvas broken of, by reason vvhere of the great monster bled so much. The 6.7.8. variable windes and some raine, the 10. we tooke great store of fish, and were vnder three degrees 30. minites, with South and variable windes for certaine dayes. The 15 we were vnder 2. degrees 35. minutes that day we tooke 40. Bouets. The 16. we were vnder one degree 45. minutes, that
day wee tooke great store of fish, and saw many whales. The 19. and 20. about noone we past the equinoctiall line, and had a south east and a south southeast winde vn∣till the 24. and then an east south east winde and held our course south. The water being so hollow, that our blind saile was stricken in peeces with the sea, that day at noone we were vnder 3. degrees 43. minutes southward of the line. The 25. the winde continuing, we held on the same course, vntill that time we had sailed, and no man in our ship, (vnlesse it were the master, William Cornelison Schou∣ten, and Iacob le Maire our Marchant) knew whether wee should go, and then they told vs what voyage they inten∣ded, which was, to seeke by an other way then the straights of Magelan, to enter into the south sea, there to discouer new countries in the South parts, where they thought to finde great riches, and that if it fell not as they desired and pretended, then that they would saile along through the great south Sea, southward to the east Indies. This being knowne, our men were very glad and reioy∣ced, hoping euery man for his part, to benefit by that vio∣age, to their aduancement. The 26. we were vnder 6 degrees, 25. minutes with faire weather and a good gale, and all the rest of that moneth for the most part sayling southward, with an east, and a northeast winde, we were vnder 10 degrees and 30. minutes. The first, of Nouember wee past the sunne, whereby at noone time, it was North from vs. The third we were vnder 19 degrees 20 minutes, then we saw some blacke birds and two or three foules called sea mewes, and after noone, we had a sight of Martin vads
Ilands called Ascension, which lay southeast and by east from vs, vnder 20 degrees, there we found our compasse to varrie Northeastward 12 degrees, The wind being North northeast, as the day before, and held our course South, That day our men had double allowance of wine, because we had past the dangerous sands called Abrothos. The day ensewing to the 10. wee held our course for the most part, south and Southwest and were vnder 25 de∣grees 33. minutes. The 11, we found our compasse to varie 17, degrees northeastward, and with a south wind, held our course West and west and by south. The 12 with a southeast, and by east, and an east winde we sayled south southwest and southwest, and were vnder 26 degrees 45 minutes. The 13, 14, and 15, wee sailed south, and southwest, with an east winde. The 16, 17, and 18, the winde south, we held for the most part west south west, and were vnder 34, degrees 15. minutes, and saw much Walschot driue. The 19. with a north and northeast wind, wee sayled south south west, and perceiued that the streame draue vs much to the south. The 20. we were vnder 36. degrees 57. minutes there wee saw many Quallen driue, and a great number of sea lice, which are a kind of lice for greatnesse like to small flies. The 21. we were vnder 38 degrees 25. minutes, and had alteration of water, there wee cast out our leade but found no ground, the compasse then varied 17, degrees northeastward, that morning wee saw the new Moone being 21. howers old.
The 22 it was ordered by our master and his counsell, that one man should haue a cup of sacke euery day, and a measure of oyle weekely, our french wine and butter be∣ing all spent. The 23. we saw many Whales, and white water, and were vnder 40 degrees 56. minutes. The 24. we saw many more great fishes, and much Odenkwos driue, the water very hollow out of the west and saw many birds. The 30. we had white water, as if we had bin hard by the land, and were vnder 46. degrees 15. minutes, and saw many birds. The 2. of December being vnder 47. degrees 45. minutes we saw much Steencrosse driue. The 4. we still saw Steencrosse white water, and many birds and were vnder 47 degrees 25 minutes, and 16. de∣grees northeastward variation of the compasse, then wee cast out our lead and found 75 fathom sandy ground. The 5. wee cast out our lead and had 65. fathom, savv many birds and Steencrosse then we were vnder 46, de∣grees 25 minutes, and had 54. fathom, that night wee saw many Whales. The 6. in the morning vve had 46 fathom vvater and vvith a northvvest vvinde sayled vvest southvvest, and at noone vvere vnder 40 degrees 37 minutes and had 42 fa∣dome vvater, about 4 in the after noone vvee savv land not very high, but vvhite and some vvhat flat, vvee fell (according to our desire) on the north side of Porto Desire and at night anchored at 10 fathom deepe, a∣bout a league and a halfe from the shoare vvith an ebbe that ran Southvvard, as strongly as the sea runs betvveene Flushing heads.
The 7. in the morning vve hoysed anchor, and sailed South, vntill noone, then vve vvere before the hauen of Porto Desire, lying vnder 47. degrees 40, minutes, and made towards the entrie thereof, where we had very high water, so that the cliffes (wherof Oliuer van Noort writeth, vvhich sayling into that hauen must be left northvvard from vs,) were cleane vnder water, but on the south point there lay certaine cliffes open, which we tooke to be those, and therefore went southward on, but sayled southward of the right chanell into a crooked bay, and there at high water anchored at foure fathom and a halfe, and when the water was low, wee had but 14. footwater, whereby the Vnitie lay with her stearne fast on ground, it being ful of cliffes, the wind was west from the land, & smooth wa∣ter to our great fortune, for if wee had had an east vvinde, vvith any gale, for certaine, vve had lost our ship: vpon the cliffes vve found many eggs, and tooke great mustles and other fish, and among the rest smelts of 16 inches long, and for that cause vve called that place the Smelt bay, our Shallop vvent to the Pinguijns Iland, lying east southeast tvvo leagues from Porto Desire, and came aboord againe late in the euening, bringing 2 sea Lyons, and 150 Pin∣guijns, vvhich vve eate the next day. The 8 in the morning, vvith the land vvind vve sayled out of the Smelt bay, and anchored right before the ha∣uen of Porto Desire, and sent our Shalop out to sound the depth of the channell, and found 12 and 13 fathom, en∣tering in after noone vvith a high vvater and a northeast wind wee set saile, the Horne first, and so entred into the hauen. When wee had sayled about a league and a halfe into the riuer the winde turned, and we anchored at 20 fathom: there the ground vvas slippery stones, for
about halfe an houre after, the winde blowing hard north west, both our ships lying with 2. anchors a peece out: presently draue vpon the South shoare, for there 25: anchors could not haue holden them, so that wee verily thought both our ships would there be cast away. The great ship sat with herside vpon the cliffes, and shoke with the falling water, some what lower, and still kept stanch, but the Horne fell vpon the cliffes, so that the water went cleane from it, whereby at low water a man might haue gone drie foote vnder the keele, right against the maine mast, the keele was aboue a fathom out of the water, feare∣full to be hould, but as the winde blew hard northwest, it kept it from falling ouer, which appeared to be so, for that when the winde ceased, it fell from the land against the winde vpon the side, at least three foote lower then the keele, whereat we were all abasht, thinking wee had surely lost her, but when the floud came with still weather it rose vp againe, whereat we all reioyced. In the morning with calme weather we wound of from the wall, and the same night the Horne came to vs. The 9. in the morning, we set sayle againe, and went further into the riuer, and came to the Kings Island so called by Oliuer Van Noort, the Horne went behinde it, and there anchored, but we could not get in with the Vni∣tie, because the winde was contrarie, our men went on shore into the Island, which was almost couered ouerwith eggs, for a man standing still on his feete; with his hands might reach to 54. neasts, each hauing 3 or 4 eggs a peece much like (but some what greater) then Sea-Mues eggs, the birdes were blackish Sea-mewes wee carried thousands of them on board and eate them. The 10. our boate vvent on the north side of the riuer,
to seeke for fresh vvater, but found none, for digging holes of 14. foote deepe, they found brackish vvater, both on the high hilles and in the valleys, and returning on boord againe, brought great store of birds and egs vvith them. The 11. the boate vvent lovver into the Riuer on the south side, to seeke for men and vvater, and found no∣thing but brackish vvater, there they savv some Estriges, and beasts like Harts, vvith very long neckes, vvhich vvere afrayde of vs. Vpon the highest part of the hilles vve found some burying places, which were heapes of stones, and we not knowing what that meant, pulled the stones of from one of them, and vnder them found mens bones of 10 and 11 foote long, they buried the dead vpon the top of the hilles, flat on the ground, & couer them al∣so with stones, which keepes, them from being deuouered by beasts or birdes. The 12.13.14.15. and 16. our men went continually on land to seeke for water, but found none, euery day bringing good store of birdes and fishes on boord. The 17. We layd our shippe within the Kings Island on the wall, with a high water, to make it cleane, where it was drie that wee might goe round about it drie foot. The 18 the Horne was also layd on shore about 2 mus∣ket shot from our ship, to make it cleane. The 19. as we were busie about both the ships to make them cleane, and burnt reeds vnder the Horne, the flame of the fire sodainly got into the ship, and presently tooke such hold thereof that in the twinckling of an eye, it was so great that wee could by no meanes quench it, by rea∣son it lay 50. foot drie from the water side, and by that meanes we were constrained to stand still, and see it burne
before our eyes, not able to doe any thing to saue it. The 20. at a high water we lancht the Vnitie, into the wa∣ter againe, and went to the Horne & quencht the fire, but the ship was burnt cleane downe to the water. The next day when we had cast the water out of that part of it that was left, we saued all the wood, iron-worke, anchors, or∣dinance, and what else that was to be gotten and put it into ourship. The 25 our men found certaine hols full of fresh wa∣ter which was white and very thicke, from whence some of them daily fetch water, in litle rondlets on there shoul∣ders some went armed with muskets to defend them, o∣thers fetch birdes, & egges, and young sea Lyons which we eate, and are of a reasonable good tast. The sea Lyons are a kind of fish, as big as a litle horse, with heads like Ly∣ons, and long rough haire about their neckes, but the she Lyons are without haire, and not halfe so great as the hee, we could not kill them but with musket shot either in the brest or the paunch, for though we gaue them 100. blowes with staues and other things, and made the bloud run out of their mouthes and noses, yet they would run away: while we lay there in the riuer, we had great windes and some times much raine, and stormes. The 9. of Ianuarie, 1616. we left fetching water into the ship, and the 10. wee set sayle, to goe on our voiage, but the wind comming out of the sea, we were forced to an∣chor againe by the Lyon Island, and that day got great store of fish and birdes. The 12 our Pinnace rowed to the Pinguijns Island, to fetch Pinguijns, but the weather was so foule, that they could not get a boord againe that day, but lay all night in the Smelt∣bay and next morning came to vs laden with Pinguijns,
but by reason of the great number of them, they were spoyled, and we cast them ouer boord. The 13 about noone, we sailed out of Porto Desire, but the sea being calme we anchored before the hauen, and when the winde began to rise, hoysed anchor and put to sea, The 18 we saw Sebaldes Islands south east from vs about 3. leagues, they lie, as Sebald Dewert writes, distant from the straight, east northeast, and west southwest, about 50. leagues, then we were vnder 51. degrees. The 20 vve saw Steencrosse driue, and perceiued that we had a great streame that went southwest, then vve vvere vnder 53 degrees, & gest that vve vvere about 20 leagues south ward from the straights of Magelan. The 11 vvee vvere vnder 53. degrees. The 23 in the morning vvee had a South vvinde, and about noone it vvaxt calme, then the vvinde blevv vvest, and vve had ground at 50 fathom blacke sandy, with smale stones, after that the winde turned north, with smooth water and faire weather, The vvater shewed as white as if wee had beene within the land, wee held our course south and by west, about 3. of the clocke after noone we saw land west, and west south west from vs, and not long after that vve savv it also in the south, then ha∣uing a north winde we went east southeast, to get aboue the land, it blew so hard in the hollow water, that wee were forced to take in our top sayles. The 24. in the morning, wee saw land on starre-boord not aboue a great league distant from vs, there wee had ground at 40. fathom, and a west winde, the land strecht east and south, with very high hills, that were all couered ouer with ice. VVee sayled along by that
land, and about noone past it and saw other land cast from it, which also was very high and ragged. These lands as wee gest lay about 8. leagues one from the other, and seemed as if there were a good passage be∣tweene them, which we were the better perswaded vnto, for that there ran a hard streame Southward betweene both those lands. Then about noone wee were vnder 54 degrees 46. minutes and after noone wee had a north winde and made towards this opening, but about euening it calmed and that night we draue forwards with a hard streame, and little winde. There we saw an innumerable num∣ber of Pinguijns and thousands of Whales, so that wee were forced to looke well about vs, and to wind and turne to shun the Whales, least we should sayle vpon them. The 25 in the morning we were close by the east land, which was very high and craggy, which on the north side reacheth east south east, as farre as wee could see, that land we called States land, but the land that lay west from vs, wee named Mauriceland. We perceiued that on both sides thereof, there were good roades, and sandy bayes, for on either side it had sandy strands and very faire sandie ground. There are great store of fish, Pinguijns and Por∣pesses, as also birdes and water enough, but we could see no trees, wee had a north winde in the entrie and went south southwest, with a stife course, at noone wee were vnder 55 degrees 36 minutes, and then held our course south west, with a good sharpe winde and raine, and a stife gale: we savv the land on the south side of the pas∣sage vpon the vvest ende of Maurice van Nassawes land, reach vvest south vvest and south vvest, as farre as wee could see it, all very high and craggie-land. In the euen∣ing
the vvinde was South West, and that night vvee went south with great waues or billowes out of the south∣vvest, and very blew water, whereby wee iudged, and held for certaine that we had great deepe water to loef∣ward from vs, nothing doubting but that it was the great South sea, whereat we were exceeding glad, to thinke that wee had discouered a way, which vntill that time, was vnknowne to men, as afterward wee found it to be true. There we saw extreame great Sea-Mewes, bigger of bo∣dy then Swannes, their winges being spread abroad, were each of them aboue a fathom long. These birds be∣ing vnaccustomed to see men, came to our ship, and sat thereon, and let our men take and kill them. map showing new passage through the great South Sea south of the Straits of Magellan in Tierra del Fuego
The 26. we were vnder 57 degrees, with a flying storme out of the West and south west, the whole quar∣ter, with very high and blew water, vve held our course Southward, and in the north west saw very high land, in the night we turned north west ward. The 27 we were vnder 56. degrees 51, minutes, the weather very cold, with haile, and raine, the winde West and West and by south, and we vvent Southward and then crost northward with our maine sailes. The 28 vvee hoysed our top sayles, then vvee had great billovves out of the West, vvith a West vvinde and then a northeast, and therewith held our course South, and then West and West and by South, and were vnder fiftie six degrees and fortie eight mi∣nutes. The 29, wee had a northeast vvinde, and held our course south west and saw two Islands before vs, lying West southwest from vs, about noone wee got to them but could not sayle aboue them, so that wee held our course north, about them they had drie gray cliffes, and some low cliffes about them, they lay vnder 57 degrees, southvvard of the equinoctiall line, vvee named them Barneuells Islands, from them we sayled West north west: about euening we saw land againe, lying north vvest and north northwest from vs, which was the land that lay South from the straights of Magelan which reacheth Southward, all high hillie lande couered ouer with snow, ending with a sharpe point, which wee called Cape Horne, it lyeth vnder 57. degrees and 48. minutes. Then vvee hadde faire weather, and a North vvinde, with great Billowes out of the West, we held on
course west, & found a strong streame that can westward. The 30. vve still had great billovves out of the vvest, vvith hollovv vvater and a strong streame that vvent vvestvvard, vvhich assured vs that vvee had an open vvay into the South sea, then vvee vvere vnder 57. degrees, 34. minutes. The 31. vve had a north vvinde, and sayled vvest, and vvere vnder 58. degrees: then the winde turning west, and west southwest, somewhat variable, we passed by Cape Van Horne, and could see no more land, and had great billowes out of the west, and very blew vvater, vvhich then fully assured vs that vve had the broad south sea before vs, and no land: the vvind vvas very variable vvith greate store of hayle and raine, vvhich forced vs of∣ten times to vvinde to and fro. The first of February, vvee had cold vveather, vvith a storme out of the South-vvest, and sayled vvith our maine sayles, lying northvvest and vvest northvvest. The 2. the vvinde vvest, vvee sayled southvvard, and vvere vnder 57. degrees 58. minutes, and found 12. de∣grees Northvvarde variation of the Compasse. That day vve savv many great Sea-mevves, and other birds. The 3. wee were vnder 59. degrees 25. minutes, with indifferent weather, and a hard west winde, and gessed that we were that day vnder 59. degrees and a halfe, but saw no land, nor any signe thereof in the South. The 4. we were vnder 56. degrees 43. minutes, with variable windes, most southwest, and wound to and fro as the wind blew, with 11. degrees northeastward varia∣tion of Compasse. The 5. wee had a strong streame out of the west, with
hollow water, whereby wee could beare no sayle, ut were forced to driue with the winde. The 8. the winde was south, and wee held west, and the winde blowing northwest, we turned southward, be∣ing vnder 59. degrees, little lesse: the wind being stiffe northwest and north northwest, with mist, colde, hayle, and snow, vvee had our maine sayles out, and held our course west. The next day, it was very cold, raw, moist and mistie vveather. The 12. our men had each of them three cups of vvine in signe of ioy for our good hap, for then the Sraightes of Magelan lay east from vs: the same day by aduice of all our counsell, at the request of our chiefe Marchant, the new passage (by vs discouered betweene Mauritius land and the States land,) was named the Straights of le Maire, although by good right it should rather haue bin called William Schoutens Straight, after our Maisters Name, by whose wise conduction and skill in sayling, the same was found. During the time that wee passed through that Nevv Straight, and sayling southward about that New found land, till we got to the West side of the Straights of Ma∣gelan for the most part we had a very strong streame, hol∣low vvater, continuall raine, mists, moist and thicke wea∣ther, with much hayle and snow: whereby wee endured much trouble, misery and disease. But in regard that we had so luckily discouered that Passage, and hoping that the places which we were yet to discouer would likewise fall out well; wee were encouraged, not once thinking vpon our former hard passage, with assured mindes de∣termined to goe forward on our voyage.
The 13. we still had much raine and misty darke wea∣ther, and saw many birds and Porpesses. The 14. We were vnder 51. degrees 50. minutes, with misty darke and moist weather, as also the 15. but slight water, being vnder 51. degrees 12. minutes, the winde West, holding our course north, and found that the streame there, ran north. The next, the wind still held northwest, north north∣west, and west, to the 23. day, then we had the generall South winde, and good weather, with hollow billowes out of the southwest and were vnder 46. degrees and 30. minutes, The 24. Wee hoysed our vpper Ordinance out of the hold, and placed it aboue vpon our decke. The 25. of Ianuary, vve hoysed all our sayles, because we entered into a peaceable Sea, and had past all stormes and hard weather. The 27. We hoysed vp our second tyre of Ordinance, and placed it in our second Orlope, for in Porto Desire wee had layd it downe in the hold, and all thinges that might hinder the wind, and then were vnder 40. degrees with faire weather, a south, and south southeast winde, and a good gale, as the day before, and held our course northward. The 28. our counsell and the foure Masters determi∣ned to sayle to the Isles of Iohn Fernando, there to refresh vs, because some of our men by meanes of the great paines and labour taken by them were extreame weary, and some had the flux: that day wee were vnder 35. de∣grees 53. minutes. In the euening wee bare but small sayle, fearing to fall vpon the land by night, and because we would not passe bey ond it in the night, vvee sayled
northeast. The first of March in the morning we saw the Islands of Iohn Fernando, right before vs, north northeast, with a south winde, faire weather, and a good gale. About noone wee got to them, vnder 33. degrees and 48. minutes. These are two Islands, both of them very high land: the smallest lying most westward, is a very dry bare Island with nothing in it, but bare hilles and cliffes, the grea∣test (lying eastward) is also full of very high hilles, but hath many trees, and very fruitfull. Therein are ma∣ny beastes, as hogges, and goates, vpon the coast admi∣rable numbers of good fish; which makes the Spanyards often times come thither to fish, and in short time fill their ships and carry them to Peru. We went on the west side of those Islandes, which was not well for vs, for there we must haue gone about eastward to get into the Road, which lyeth on the east point of the greatest Island, for going about on the west side behind the land, we should haue gotten vnder the land in the calme water, because the land there is high and calme, so that we could not get to the land to anchor with our shippe, and therefore sent our boate out to sound the depth, which came a∣boord againe in the the euening, and told vs, that close by the land wee had 40. and 30, fathome sandy ground, which still lesseneth till it come to 3. fathom good to an∣chor in, besides a faire greene valley, full of greene trees, pleasant to behold, but because of the shortnesse of the time they went not on shore, and in diuers places saw fresh water in great streames run downe off the hils, they likewise saw many goates and other beasts vpon the hils, which they could not well know, being so farre off: they
had also in short time taken a great number of good fish, for the hooke was no sooner in the water but presently they tooke fish, so that continually without ceasing, they did nothing but draw vp fish, most of them being Corco∣bados, and Steenbrasses, and saw many sea Wolues: these newes cheared vp our men, specially those that were troubled with loosenesse hoping there to refresh them∣selues: that night it was calme weather, so that the streame draue vs somewhat backeward. The 2. day we were with our ship close vnder the land againe, but could not get so neere (what meanes soeuer we vsed) to finde ground, wee once againe sent our men on land, some to fish, and some to seeke for cattell, they saw many hogs, goates, and other beastes, but by reason that the woods were thicke they could not get them: and the while that some of them fetcht water, they that were in the boate had taken almost two tunnes of fish, all with hookes, and so we were forced to leaue that faire Island, and could get nothing else there. The 3. we draue at least 4. leagues beneath the Islands, notwithstanding that all that quarter we did the best vve could to saile neere to it, vvhereof at last being vvearie, (seing it vvas vnpossible to be done) vve determined to leaue them, and to hold on our course, to performe our voyage, euery day hauing a good fore-vvinde, to the great griefe of our sicke men, vvho thereby vvere cleane out of comfort, but God holpe them. These Islands are vnder 33. degrees 40. minutes: this resolution taken, vvee set our course northvvest and by West, vvith a good South gale of vvinde, and fayre vvea∣ther. The 11. vve past Tropicus Capricornus the second time,
vvith a south east vvinde, our course northvvest, there vve had the generall east and east southeast vvinde, and held our course north north vvest to the 15. till we were vnder 18. degrees, then vve changed our course, and went vvest, and made our rovving Shullop ready, to vse it vvhen vve came neere any land. The 17. vve vvere vnder 19. degrees, and held our course West northvvest. The 20. vve vvere vnder 17 degrees, vvith very high bil∣lovves out of the south, the vvinde southeast as before, we held our course West northvvest, our Compasse then be∣ing halfe a Strike variation north westward, euery day we saw many Pilsters, & other birds, Pilsters are white birds, with red billes, and reddish heads, and long white clouen tayles, of two or two foote and a halfe long, they are to be seene in all parts of the world, wheresoeuer we sayle, and are as big as a common Sea mew. The 24. we were vnder 15. degrees, and held our course west, euery day hauing hollow billowes out of the south, and continuall stiffe cold winde east southe ast, and still went forward, with a good gale. The 3. of Aprill being Easter day, we vvere vnder 15. degrees 12. minutes, at vvhich time vve had no variation of Compasse, for the needle stood right north and south, then the flux began much to trouble our men, for at times, halfe of them at the least had it. The 9. Iohn Cornelius Schouten that had beene Master of the Horne, (William Cornelius Schoutens Brother, our Master) died, when he had lyen sicke a moneth. The 10. In the morning after vve had prayed, his dead body vvas throvvne ouer boord, and presently after vvee savv land northvvest and northvvest and by north, about
three leagues from vs, a low Island, not very great, there also wee saw great numbers of Sea-mewes and fish, and set our course to the Island, thinking to haue some refreshing, whereof in regard of the flux wee had great neede. About noone wee got to the Island, and cast out our lead, but found no ground, and therefore put out our Shalop, to see if we could finde any ground, the Shalop returning, they told vs that they found ground at 25. fa∣thom about a small musket shot from the land, they sayd also that they had seene many Hayes and other fish, such as we found about Iohn Fernandos Islands, but we durst not goe with our ship so close vnder the land, fearing some danger. Then our Shalop went to the land againe to see what they might get there, but comming neere to the Island they could not get to the strand with the shalop the water rusht so hard against the shore, which our men perceiuing, leapt into the water and swam, and drew one another to land, leauing the shalop fast with a drag, about euening they came on boord againe, and could get no∣thing, but onely some greene he arbes, which tasted like vnto Holland Tuinkars, they said, that there they had seene three Dogs, that neither barkt, nor made any noyse, and in it found some places full of raine water, that had fallen that day. The Island as wee perceiued, seemed at high water for the most part to be ouerflowne, it had nothing about it but a kinde of wall like a ditch, full of greene trees, pleasant to behold, and in the middle of them and else where, much salt water. It is vnder 15. degrees twelue minutes, distant from the Coast of Peru by our estimation nine hundred twenty & fiue leagues. That quarter the winde was North, and wee held our
course West, to wards the Islands of Salomon, and called that Island Dogs Island. In the night it blewer hard, with a great showre of raine. The 14. the winde east and east southeast, wee sayled West and west and by north, with winde and weather a∣fore sayd, and saw much fish, and many birdes: after noone vve saw another low Island North vvest from vs being very great, and reached northeast and southvvest, wherat vvee reioyced, hoping to get vvater and some refreshing there, and made to it, holding our course northwest. About euening, being with our ship about a league from the land, there came a Canoe to meete vs, with 4. Indians in it, al naked, of a reddish colour, very black long haire: they kept a good way from our ship first calling to vs, making signes to haue vs come on land, but we vnder∣stood them not, nor they vs, not withstanding that we an∣svvered and called to them in Spanish, Molucus, Iauan, and our owne Netherland speech. About euening at Sunne-setting, we got to the land, but found no ground, nor no changing of water, al∣though we were so neere to the shore, that with a musket we might shoote into it, and therefore put to Sea againe, and the Canoe to land, vvhere a great many Indians stood vpon the shore to watch for them: not long after againe there came another Canoe from the Land to our shippe, but would not (as the first) come aboord, they called to vs, and vvee to them, but vnderstoode not one the other, at last their Canoe ouerthrewe in the water, but they soone turned it vp againe, and leapt quickely into it, they shevved and pointed
to wards the land, and wee the like to them towards the shippe, but they would not come, wherewith we held on our course and left the Island, sayling South and south∣west to get aboue the land: the Island was not broad, but somewhat long, and full of trees, which as wee gessed were Palmitas and Cocus trees, it lies vnder 15. degrees 15. minutes, hauing white sand ground, that night wee saw fire vpon the land in diuers places. The 15. in the morning, hauing in the night sayled a∣bout ten leagues south southwest, wee sayled close along by the land, where we saw many naked men standing on shore, calling and crying (as it seemed) to bid vs come on land, and then again there came another Canoe from the land towards our ship, with three Indians in it, which also called to vs, and would not come aboord, but rowed to the Shalop, and went close to it, our men shewing them all the friendship they could, giuing them some beades and kniues, but they vnderstood not one another hauing beene a little while by the Shalop, they left it, and came so neere to our shippe, that we cast out a small rope to them, which they tooke, but would not enter in∣to the ship, but went into the Shalop, which came backe from the land without doing any thing, and hauing bin a good while in it, at the last one of them came into the gallerie, and drew our the nayles of the windowes in the marchants and Masters Cabines, and taking them away, hid them in his haire, they were desirous of Iron, for they ventured to pull out the bolts with their hands, and to earry them away, we sought to keepe one of them in the ship and to send one of our men with the other two in their Cano to land to make friend∣shippe with them but they would not, they were very
theeuish people, all naked, only a peece of a mat hanging before their priuie members. Their skin was marked with diuers figures, as Snakes, Dragons, and such like things vvhich shewed very blew, as if they had bin burnt thereon with gun-powder, we gaue them wine, as they sat in the Canoe, but they would not giue vs the cup againe. We sent our Shalop once againe to the land, vvith 8. musketiers, and 6. men vvith svvords Claus Iohnson our vnder Marchant, and Arice Clauson the Marchant of the Horne, vvent vvith them, to see vvhat vvas to be gotten in the Island, and to make friendship vvith them. But as soone as they vvere by the strand and the men vvent on shore, there came at least 30 Indians out of the vvood vvith great Clubs or Cudgels and vvould haue taken our mens armes from them and thought to dravv the Shalop vpon the land, ventred to take tvvo of our men out of the Shalop, thinking to carrie them into the vvood, but our musketiers, hauing their muskets ready, discharged three of them amongst them, and verily thought that they either killed or sore vvounded some of them. They likevvise hadde long staues, vvith very long sharpe things at the endes thereof, vvhich (as vvee thought) vvere sinnes of blacke fishes, they also cast stones vvith stings, but (God be thanked) hurt none of our men, bowes they hadde not, as farre as wee could see. Our men saw some of their women, that cryed and claspt their men about the neckes, but knew not vvhat they meant, but thought they did it to get them from thence. That Island (by reason wee could there finde no ground to anchor) we called the Island without ground. On the out side it was low plaine ground, full of palme trees, but within full of salt water.
At last when wee saw that there was nothing to be gotten we determined to leaue it, and with an east vvinde held our course VVest to seaward. There we had slight wa∣ter and no billowes as the day before we had out of the South, and therefore we gest that Southward there was more land, it is vnder 15 degrees, about 100 leagues distant from Dogs Iland. The 16. in the morning betimes, wee saw an other Island, North ward from vs, which we made to, but found it as the other, without anchor ground, within also being all drowned land, yet on the sids it was full of trees, but no plume nor Cocos trees. Wee put out our Shalop to sound the depth, but, going to the shore, found no ground, and therefore came a boorde againe, without doeing any thing, or seeing any men. Wee sent our Shalop once againe to see if we could get any refreshing or water vpon the land, who returning againe tolde vs that they hadde found fresh water not farre from the shore, in a pit or keele, which they might bring with buckets to the strand, but hard to get into the shippe, for the Shalop, by reason of the billowes, lay fast at a dreg, by which meanes the men were forced, to draw one an other vvith a rope on land, and in like sort on boorde againe, so that it was very troublesome and dangerous to goe on the land, and therefore fetcht but foure small fats of wa∣ter. There also vvee found such herbes as vvee hadde in the Dogs Island, vvhereof vve brought a sackefull a boorde, and some crabs as also some shels, and hornes, that had fish in them of very good tast, That euening we held on our course Westward, with an east winde, and an in different gale, rainie weather and smoth water.
The same day wee were vnder 14. degrees 46. minutes. That Island was 15. leagues distant from the other, we cal∣led it the water Island, by cause there we got some water. The 17. wee gaue our men six cups of water, and sod a great ketle with pottage made of the greene herbes that wee had in water Island, which did our men some good and eased them of their loosenesse. The 18. in the morning, wee saw an other low Island south west from vs, lying West north west, and east south east, as farre as wee could see, at the least twentie leagues, distant from the other. Wee made to it, and being hard by it, sent out our boate to sound the depth they told vs they found ground by a point of land, from whence there came a streame at twentie, twentie fiue and fortie fathom, running softly downe, about a musket shot from the land, whereupon wee sent the boate with our emptie caske thither, hoping to finde vvater. When it came to the land, they let the Schut lie fast at a dreg in the water and drew one an other with a rope though the water, to land as they did before, there they sought a good vvay vvithin a vvood for fresh vvater, but because they had no armes with them, and savv a vvilde man, vvho as they thought had a bovv in his hand, they turned presently backe to the Shalop, and came aboord againe vvithout doing any thing, and lying a good vvay from the shoare, there came fiue or six vvild men to the strand, vvho seeing that our men were gon, went backe againe into the wood. Vpon that Island there were great store of greene wild trees, being also full of salt water with∣in. When our men came into the shippe they were couered all ouer vvith flies, in such abundance that we
could not know them, their faces, hands, and Scute and all full, and the owers also as farre as they were out of the water, were couered ouer with blacke flies, wonderfull to behold: those flies came with them aboord our ship and flue so thicke vpon our bodies and in our faces, that vve knew not how to shun them, for wee could hardly eate or drinke, but all was full of them: vve still wipt our faces and hands, and made flaps to kill as many as wee could, this continued two or three dayes with great trouble vnto vs all: at last wee had a good gale of winde, where∣by, and with continuall killing them, in the ende when three or four dayes were past we were rid of them, wee called that Island, the Flie Island, and therewith set for∣ward from it, and had some raine, as also the next day, whereby wee gathered so much water, with clothes and sayles that it holpe vs well, in the night wee made no great way but often times let the ship driue, that wee might not by night fall vpon such low Islands, and spoyle our ship. The 23. wee were vnder 15. degrees 4. minutes, and then againe had great hollow bill ovves out of flie south, which the next day also continued, the winde vvas north east and most part east, and east and by south. There they sayd that Terra Australis which we sought for, lay yet 250. leagues further. The 25. wee filled foure vessells full of raine water; and still had hollow billowes out of the south, as we com∣monly haue in the Spanish seas out of the north west. The 3. of May the winde was still east, and wee say led West, and at woone were vnder 15 degrees, 3 minutes, That day we saw many great Dorados which were the first that wee had seene in the south sea.
The 9. Wee were vnder 15. degrees 20. minutes, and at that time as wee thought were 1510. leagues distant from the coast of Peru and Chili. About noone wee saw a sayle, which as wee gessed was a Barke, comming out of the south, and went northward towards vs, we presently made towards it, and as it came neere to vs, wee shot at it with one of our peeces right ouer her, to make them strike, but they would not, then wee shot againe, but yet they would not strike, with that we put out our Shalop with 10. musketiers in it, to take her, which calling to them wee shot another peece, yet without any intent to reach or to hurt them, but they would not strike, but sought as well as they could to get away from vs, and got to loofeward of vs, but our Shalop being too crafty for them rowed to them, and being about halfe a musket shot from them shot foure muskets one after an other, as they drew neere to her, and before they could reach her some of her men in great feare leapt ouerboord, whereof one of them had a little child, and another was hurt, and had three holes in his backe, but not very deepe, for it was hayleshot, those we fetcht out of the water a∣gaine: they also threw much of their goods ouer boord, and amongst the rest three Hennes, our men leapt into their ship, and carryed them into our ship, they not once resisting, for in truth they had no armes, when they were in our ship we fetcht two men more that were left in theirs, which presently fell downe before vs, and kist our feete and hands, one of them was a very old man, the o∣ther a young man, wee could not vnderstand them, but vsed them kindely, and presently the Shalop rowd to fetch those that leapt ouerboord, to saue their liues, but they gotte but two of them, that droue vpon one of their oares, and pointed to our men
with their hands to the ground, as much to say, that the rest were drownd: one of those two that was hurt, whom wee drest, had long yealowish haire. In that shippe there was at least eight women, three young sucking children, and some of nine or ten yeares old, so that we made ac∣count they were three and twentie in all, cleane naked prople, both men and women, onely something han∣ging before their priuie members. About euening vvee set the men on boord their shippe againe, that were wel∣come to their wiues, which claspt them about the necks and kist them. Wee gaue them beades, (which they hung about their neckes,) and some kniues, and shewed them all the friendhip we could, and they the like to vs, giuing vs two fir Matiens, and two Cocos nuts, for they had not many, that was all they had to eate and drinke, and they had drunke out all the vvater out of the nuttes, so that they had no more drinke. Wee saw them drinke salt vvater out of the Sea, and gaue it also to their young children, to drinke, which vvee thought to bee against Nature. They had certaine clothes, vvhich they vvare before their priuie mem∣bers, and therevvith couered themselues against the heate of the Sunne, of a yealowish colour. They vvere reddish people, that annoynted themselues with Oyle: the Women had short hayre, like our men in Holland: Mens hayre vvas long, curled, and very blacke: their ship was of a strang fashiō: It was made of 2. long faire Canoes with a good space betweene them, in each Canoe about the middle thereof, there lay two whole broad planckes of fayre redde vvood, to keepe out the vvater, and diuers planckes layd crosse ouer, from the one Canoe to the other, which were made fast together, and hung
a good way ouer on both endes, without the Canoes, very close aboue to keepe out the water, before at the ende of one of the Canoes, on starre-boord, there stood a Mast, at the end thereof hauing a forke, whereon the yard lay. The sayle vvas made of mats, and as the vvinde blovve they sayled, without Compasse, or any Instruments for the Sea, but hookes to fish withall, whereof the vpper part was stone, the other blacke bone, or Torroyses shelles, and some of them vvere mother of pearle. Their ropes were very fayre, and al∣most as thicke as a Cable, made of such stuffe as the figge frayles in Spayne are. When they sayled from vs, they hold their course southeast. The tenth, We had the vvinde South southeast, and southeast and by South, and held our course West, and southwest In the morning after breakefast, we saw very high land on backeboord, lying Southeast and by south, about eight leagues from vs: vve made to it, and sayled all that day with a good gale, but could not reach it, and therefore held off in the night, in the euening wee saw a sayle a great may beneath the land, and presently after another also, a great deale be∣low they often wound to and fro and in the night they made fires, and drew neere one vnto the other. The eleuenth in the morning, wee vvere neere a high Island, and about tvvo Leagues southvvard from thence, an other long low Island, that day vvee sayled ouer a banke of foureteene fathome deepe, stony ground, lying about tvvo Leagues from the land, and as soone as wee were ouer it, wee could finde no more grounde. One of the Shippes aforesaid came to vs, and wee cast out a rope at our sterne think∣ing
they would take it, and draw themselues by is aboord our shippe, but they could not gette it till one of our men leapt ouer boord, and holp them to take it, which they vntyed, and tooke it into their shippe, and tyed two Cocos nuts, and 3 or 4 flying fishes to the rope, and so let it go calling aloud to vs, but we could not vnderstand them, but we thought their meaning was, that we should pull the rope on boord againe: they also carry a Canoe in their ship, which what time soeuer, they can put out: and are very good Sea men. Their ships were of the fashion a∣soresayd, with good sayles, and are so swift of sayle, that few ships in Holland can out sayle them. They steere be∣hind with 2. oares, on each Canoe a man, & sometimes row, with their oares before, when they will wind, the ship also windes of it selfe, when they pull the oates out of the water and let it goe, or alone with the winde, vvee put out our Shalop to sound, vvhich came and told vs that they had found ground at 15.14. and 12. fa∣thome, sheluie ground, about a canon shot from the land, wee presently made to it to anchor, and tooke in our sayles. The Negroes seeing that, made fignes to vs to goe to the other Island, and sayled thither before vs, but wee anchored at the ende of the Island, at fiue and twen∣tie fathome sandie ground, a great Cannon shot from the land. That Island is a high hill, almost like one of the Molucos Islandes, full of trees, most Cocos trees, therefore wee called it Cocos Island. The other Island is much longer, but lower, lying East and West. As soone as wee were at an anchor, there came three small shippes, that sayled vp and dovvne a∣bout our shippe, and at least nine or ten Canoes boorded vs, some from the lande, and some out of the little shippes, among the which, tvvo of them put
out litle white flags in signe of peace, and wee did the like. Their Canoes, which had 3. and 4. men a peece in them, vvere flat before and sharpe behinde, hewed out of a whole peece of reed wood. Wherewith they could row exceeding swift, and when they came neere the ship, they leapt into the water, and swam to our ship, with their hands full of Cocos nuttes, and Vbes rootes, which they bartred vvith vs for nayles and beades, whereof they were very desirous, they gaue foure or fiue Cocos nutts, for one naile or a small string of beades, so that the same day wee bartered for 180. Cocos nuttes, and at last there came so many on boord, that wee scarse knew how to bestirre our selues. We sent our Shalop towards the other Island, to see if there vve could not lie better, for there we lay in the open sea, but the Shalop was no sooner off from our ship, rowing a∣long by the land, but it was enclosed round about by 12 or 13. Canoes of the other Island, and still more came to them, the people within them shewing as if they vvere mad, hauing certaine staues of hard wood in their hands, like Clubs, sharpe at the point, and a litle burnt. They boorded our Shalop, and thought to haue taken it from vs, but our men being thereby constrained to de∣fend themselues, let flee three muskets among them, whereat first they laught and mockt, thinking it but a sport, but the third time one of them was shot into the brest cleane through his body, which his fellowes see∣ing went presently to helpe him, and finding him to be so sore hurt, all of them kept of from the Shalop, and went to one of their small shippes with sayles, and calling to it would haue hadde them to ouer row the Shalop, as wee gest, but they would not, for their Canoes had bin aboord our ship, where they had beene well vsed, and
friendly delt with all. Those people were very theeuish, for in our sight they stole one of our leads wherewith our men vsed to sound, and whatsoeuer they saw, they would steale and swim away with it as some of them did. that stole avvay one of our mens pillovves and couerlet. others tooke kniues and vvhat else they could finde. Wherevvith they presently leapt ouer boorde, and svvam avvay, so that in the night vvee vvere forst to take in our Shalop, least they should cut the rope, and carrie it avvay, they vvere exceeding desirous of iron, looking round about vpon the nayles and bolts of the shippe, thinking to pull them out and to steale them avvay, but they vvere to fast in the vvood. They vvere lusty men vvell proportioned, and of great stature, and vvent all naked and vnarmed onely their priuie members coue∣red. Their haire vvas drest after diuers fashions, some short and some finely curled, some had long haire bound vp in plaits in seuerall manner, they vvere notable svvim∣mers. That Cocos Island lyes vnder 16 degrees 10 mi∣nutes. The twelfe in the morning after breake-fast∣time, there came more Canoes a boorde our ship with Cocos nuts, Bananas, Vbas rootes, and some litle hogs, and some vessels full of fresh vvater, that day vvee bar∣tered vvith them for one thousand two hundred Cocos nuts, vvee vvere 85. men aboord and euery one had tvvelue nuts. They stroue vvho should get first aboord and those that could not get to the shippe, leapt out of their Canoes, and diued vnder the other Canoes, to get to the shippe to sell their vvare, holding Vbas rootes, and bunches of Cocos nuts in their mouthes, and climed so many, and so fast vp to the shippe, that vvee vvere forced to keepe them downe with staues. When they had sold their wares, they leapt out of the
ship and swam to their Canoes againe. They won∣dered at the greatnesse and strength of the shippe, and some of them crept downe behinde at the rother, vnder the shippe, and knockt with stones vpon the bottome threof, to proue how strong it was. There came a Canoe from the other Island, that brought vs a young black wilde hog, which the king sent vs for a present, wee vvould haue giuen the messenger some∣what for it, but he would not take it, making signes that the king hadde charged him not to take any thing. At noone the king himselfe came in a great shippe with a sayle, of the fashion aforesayd, like an Ice Slead, with at least thirtie fiue Canoes to accompany him. This king was by his men called Latou, wee receiued him with Drummes and Trumpets, where at they wondred, because they neuer hadde scene nor heard the like before, They shewed vs great ho∣nour and much friendship outwardly, with bowing their heades, clapping their fists together ouer their heads and other strange ceremonies. When hee was a litle way from vs hee beganne to call and to crie out alowd, as if hee hadde prayed after his man∣ner, all the rest of his men did the like, vvee not knowing what it ment, but gest that it was in steed of a welcome. Presently thereupon the king sent vs a Matien by three of his men, to whom wee gaue an old hatcher, a few beades, some old nayles, and a peece of linnen cloth, which hee willingly receiued, laying it three times vp∣on his head, and bowing it, in token of reuerence, or thankes, and curtesie. Those that came into our ship, fell on their knees, and kist our feet, and wondred much at our shippe. Wee could not know the king
from the other Indians, for he was likewise cleane naked, but onely that they shewed him reuerence, and hee com∣maunded ouer his men. Wee made signes that the king should come aboord of our ship, his sonne came aboord, and wee intertained him well, but he himselfe durst not, or would not come, but they altogether made signes to haue vs come to the further Island, with our ship, where there was enough of all things to be had. Among other things we bartered with them for angles of haire, that were made of reed, as in Holland, but some what thicker, with hookes of mother of Pearle. The kings sonne went to land againe, and the Canoe where in he went had a great peece of wood on backe∣boord, wherewith it kept vpright, vpon that peece of wood their angle lay, ready to take fish. The 13. in the morning, there came at least 45. Canoes aboord, to trafficke with vs, with an armado of 23. small shippes, made like ice sleads, each of them one with an other, hauing 25 men a peece in them, and euery small Canoe 4 or 5 we not knowing what their intent was. The Canoes deait with vs bartering Cocos nuttes, for nayles, and made show, as if they were our great friends, but afterward we found it otherwise: all of them made signes to vs to sayle to the other Island, the king who the day before had beene at our shippe, came likewise in his shippe with a sayle to our ship, and all of them made a great noyse. Wee would gladly haue hadde him aboorde, but he would not, where with we suspected treason fearing some mischiefe, and the rather, because all the shippes and Canoes kept close round about our ship, and that the king went out of his ship into a Ca∣noe, and his sonne into an other, and presently they stroke vpon a kinde of drumme that was in his shippe,
whereat all the Indians began to crie out alowd, which we esteemed to be a warning giuen vnto them, altogether to fall vpon vs, to take our shippe from vs, and then the ship wherein the king sayled before hee went out of it, boorded vs, comming so hard vpon vs, as if it would haue suncke vs, but it strucke against our ship with such a force that the two heads of the Canoes before brake in peeces, wherewith the men that were in it, (among them hauing some women) leapt into the water and swam to wind ward, the rest began to fling great number of stones at vs thinking therewith to feare vs, but we shot at them with muskets and 3 great peeces (laden with musket shot and old nayles) wherewith all they that were in the ship and Canoes that lay about our ship, leapt into the wa∣ter, we made reckoning that some of them hadde forgot∣ten the way to goe home againe, and that diuers of them o were sore wounded, and therewith they went backe: they knew not what such manner of shooting ment, but yet when they saw how we had handled them with our shot, they kept aloofe out of the reach of our peeces, and wee hoysing anchor, set forward againe on our voyage, holding our course west, and west and by south. VVee were of opinion that the king at that time, hadde assem∣bled all his forces, for he had at the least 1000. men, or rather more, among them wee saw one that was cleane white. When wee were about foure leagues off from the Islands, many of our men would haue had vs goe backe againe to the Islands, by force to goe on land, to refresh our selues, in regarde that wee had but litle water, but the master and the Marchant would not. The first Island that was so high, wee named Cocos Island, and the other that lay a league distant from it, wee called Traitors
Island, because the most part of the Indians that sought to betray vs, came from that Island. The 14. in the morning, we saw another Island right before vs, about seuen Leagues distant from vs, which seemed to be round, and as wee gest was thirty Leagues distant from the Islandas, foresaid. That Island vvee cal∣led the Hope, and made towards it, hoping there to gette water, and better refreshing, but comming to it, could find no ground, and therefore put out our Shalop, to sound a long the shoare, which about a musket shot from the land, found ground at fortie fathom, small blacke, and soft stonie grounde, sometimes also they had twentie and thirty fathom, but as soone as they were a Shalops length or two from it, they had no ground againe. Then ten or twelue Canoes came to our shippe, but wee would not let them come aboord, but shewed them friendly countenance, and bartered with them for foure flying fishes, for the which wee gaue them some beades, which wee let downe by a rope at the sterne of the ship, and they taking them tyed the fishes to the rope, and wee puld them vp, in the meane time our Shalop sounded along by the land, which they in the Canoes seeing, presently made towards it, and being close by it, at first spake vn∣to the men, but withall compast them about with foure∣teene Canoes, and therewith some of them leapt ouer∣boord, thinking to fall vpon the Shalop, or to draw it away with them, which our men perceiuing, shot with their Muskets among them, (there being six Muskets, and other armes. Courtelasses and Pikes in the Shalop) and therewith kild two of the Indians as they sat in their Canoes, whereof one presently fell dead ouerboorde, the other sate still with his hand vviping off the bloud vpon his breast, but at last fell likewise ouer boord:
the rest in the Canoes, were thereat in so great feare, that in all hast they made away, at which time wee saw many men standing vpon the shore, that cryed and made a great noyse. But for that wee there could finde no fit anchoring ground, we tooke our Shalop in againe, and went forward on our voyage, holding our course south∣west, the better to get to the south, hoping there to find firme land. And it was so rough neere to the Island, that it was a very bad place for a boate to goe on shoare. The Island was all full of blacke cliffes, greene on the top, and blacke earth, and was full of Cocos trees, and greene herbes. Wee also saw many houles along by the Sea side, and clofe by the strand there was a great Village, the land was hilly, but not very high. The fifteene wee were vnder sixteene degrees twelue minutes, faire wether, the winde southeast, our course west, and west and by south. The 17. the winde being Northeast, wee went west and by south, but the two last quarters, wee saylde west north west. That day it was agreed among vs, because our victuales beegan to waxe scant, that in steede of breakfast, wee should giue our men, halfe a cuppe of sacke. The 18. being vnder 16. degrees, 5. minutes, wee had variable west windes, that day wee cald our Coun∣sell together, to whom William Cornelison Schouten our Maister shewed, that then wee were at the least one thou∣sand sixe hundred leagues, eastward from the coast of Pe∣ru, and Chili, and had not discoured any part of Terra Australis, as our intent was, that there was not any ap∣pearance to discouer any thing to our contentments that wee also had sayled further westward, then wee intended, that sayling foreward in that maner, without all doubt
wee should fall southward vpon Noua Guinea, and that if there wee should finde no passage or way to gette through, (it being very dangerous, vncertaine and not knowne) that then both shippe and goods would be lost, and wee our selues likewise should perish, it being vn∣possible to come Eastward backe againe from thence, by reason of the steadfast East vvindes, that in the vvest parts continually blow, that we also had but small store of victuals, and saw no meanes as yet to encrease them, and therefore asked their counsell, whether it was not their best way to alter their course, and to sayle north∣vvard, thereby to get northvvard to Noua Guinea, and so to the Molucoes, which they considering of, and vvell weighing found his reasons to be true, and thought it necessary to be done, and therefore all with one con∣sent agreed to sayle Northward, not to fall southward vpon Noua Guinea, being an vncertaine way, but rather Northward, to holde a certaine course, which was pre∣sently put in effect, and we set our course north northwest The nineteenth, the winde South, and our course North, at noone vvee saw two Islandes, Northeast and by East, about eight leagues from vs, which seemed to lie about a Cannon shot distant one from the other. Then wee went northeast, to sayle about the land, with faire weather, but no great gale. The 20. The wind was northeast, and we did the best by labouring to get to the land. The one and twentieth, the winde was East, with a small gale: and when wee were about a league from the land, there came twentie Canoes to our ship, to whom wee shewed all signes of friendshipp, but one of them with a wooden Assagay (sharpe at the poynt) in his hand, threatened to shoote at one of our men, and cry∣ed
alowde, as they did in the other Island, vvhich vvee thought was a signe among them, to fall vpon vs, where∣vpon we discharged two of our great Peeces, and there∣withall some of our Muskettes, whereby two of them were hurt, and the rest presently made away, as they fledde throwing a shirt overboord, which they hadde stolen out of our gallery. After that, some of them tooke courage againe, and came once more with certaine Ca∣noes to our shippe, and wee sayling closer to the land because we had no ground, put out our Shalop to sound the depth, with 8. musketiers in it, but they found no ground, and when they thought to come backe againe to the ship, 6. or 8. Canoes boorded them, thinking to enter the boate, and to take their armes from them: wherewith to defend themselues they were forced to shoot with their muskets among them, and kild six, and hurt many of them, for when they fled our men rowed to one of their Canoes, that had no man in it but one that lay dead, whose leggs hung still in the Canoe, they threw his body into the Sea, and brought the Canoe aboord their Shalop, wherein they found a Club, with a long staffe like a halfe pike. In the night time our men came againe to vs and could find no anchor ground, and therefore that night we held off and on close by the land. The 22. we did the best we could to get to the land, and comming to it, sent out our Shalop to sound along by the shore, that found ground at fiftie fathome, sheluie ground about a Cannon shot from the land, which still lessened and waxt shallower to 30. and 35. fathome and vvee anchored at 35 fathome, sheluie ground, till vvee could find a better place. Our shippe master rowed with the Shalop and our boate to sound euery where, and found a fit place to lay the shippe in, which was close
by our shippe, in a creeke, hard by a litle freshe riuer, whereunto wee presently sayled, and for that the winde was contrarie, wee sayled into it, so that being in the bay we lay a stones cast off from the shoare, in the creeke at nine fathom water sheluie ground. There we made our ship fast with foure ropes, in smooth water, and the fresh water ranne downe out of the hill into the sea, right against the place where our shippe lay, whereby while our men fetcht water, or did anything vpon the shoare, if the Indians hadde set vpon them, wee could beate them off with our ordinance. The same day there came diuers Canoes to our shippe, bringing some Cocos nuttes, and Vbas rootes, others brought a liue hog, and two rosted hogs, for the which wee bartered and gaue them slight kniues, beades, and nayles. Those people al∣so were theeuish, and would swim and diue exceeding well, as those in the other Islands could doe, their houses stood along the strād which were round & made of leaues sharpe on the top and close like a paint-house, to let the water fall downe, about fiue and twentie foote in compas, and ten or twelue foot high, with a low hole to goe in stooping, in them there was nothing to bee seene, but some dried herbes, like haye, to sleepe vp∣on, and an angling rodd or two, and in some a wod∣den club or staffe, that was all their house-hold stuffe, both the best and worser sort, for the king himselfe had no more. The 23 we bartered againe for more Cocos nuts, and Vbas rootes, which the Canoes brought to our ship, that day there came a great number of men downe to the strand, which as it seemed came from all places of the Island, wondring to see our ship. The 24. Aris Clauson, Reymie Simonson Snocke, and Cor∣nelison
Schouten went on land to bee hostages, to make friendship with the Indians, and for them wee had 6. of their principall men in our shippe, whom wee vsed friendly, giuing them meate and drinke, and some pre∣sents, as they did to our men, giuing them Cocos, and Vbas rootes to eate, and water to drinke. The king shewed our men great reuerence, and gaue them foure litle hogs, that day our men fetcht fiue fats full of water peaceably with out quarreling, for when any of the Indi∣ans came neere our boate, the king himselfe came the∣ther and draue them thence, or sent one of his men to doe it. His men were very obedient vnto him: for as it chanced that one of our coutelasses was stolen away from vs, and wee told one of the kings gentlemen thereof, hee gaue some of the Indians charge to fetch it againe, and presently he that had taken it, was sought for, and although hee was gone a good way of, they brought him backe who being come, the coutelasse was layd downe at our feete, & he was beaten with staues, they making signes vnto vs with their fingers vpon their throates, that if the Herico (that is the king) knew of it, his head should be cut off, and after, that wee had no∣thing stolen from vs, neither on the shoare, nor in the shippe, nor else where: neither durst they take a fish that wee angled for. Those people were very fearefull of our shooting, for when we shot off a musket, they all ranne quaking and shivering away, and wee put them in more feare, when wee shewed them that vvee could shoot with the great peeces, which the king desired vs once to doe, which being done they were all so fearefull and abasht thereat, that all of them as also the king, (sitting vnder his Belay, or canopy, notwithstanding all that we could say or doe to perswade them,) sore ama∣sed
ranne into the woods, and left our men sitting there alone. But not long after they came againe, scarse halfe well assured. The 25. Aris Clawson, Claus Iohnson, and Daniel le Maire, went on land againe, to barter for hogs, but they would not barter. But after the king hadde sayd his prayers, (which hee vsed to doe euery time that wee went on shore,) shewed vs great friendship, and we the like to him. The 26. Iacob le Maire our Marchant and Aris Claw∣son went on shore but could get no hogs of the Indians, because they themselues hadde great neede of them, ha∣uing litle else to eate but Vbas rootes, Cocos nutts, a few hogs, and some Bananas, our men were very wel∣come vnto them, and hadde great reuerence shewed them, for they trod vpon mats, and the king and his lieutenant gaue them their Crownes, which they tooke of from their owne heades, and set them on their heads, in recompence whereof, Iacob le Maire gaue them some presents of litle worth, wherewith they were very well pleased. The crownes were made of long small white feathers and vnderneath and aboue mixt with some red, & greene feathers, for they haue many Parrots, and some Doues, whereof they make great account, for euery one of the kings counsell had a doue by him sitting vpon a sticke, those Doues are white on their backes, and all the rest blacke sauing their brests which are reddish, all that day wee fetcht water, and bartered for good store of Cocos nuts, and Vbas rootes. The 27. and 28. wee got all our water into the ship, then William Cornelison Schouten our master, and Aris Clawson went on land with the trumpets, which the
kings tooke great pleasure to heare, and with much a∣doe got two hogs. That day the king of the other Island came to visit the king of the Island where wee were, who after great reue∣rence and wonderfull ceremonies vsed one vnto the o∣ther, gaue each other certaine presents, as roots and o∣ther things, at last making a great noyse, as we gest, because the king of the other Island desired to try if he could take our shippe, and to keepe our men there, which the other king would not consent vnto, fearing some hurt might happen vnto them. The kings Lieuetenant or his Sonne came once aboord our ship, whom we vsed in good sort, and wondred much to see it: that euening our men daun∣ced with the Indians, wherat they much reioyced, marue∣ling that we were so familiar, & behaued our selues so cur¦teously among them, we were there as free & friendly as if we had beene at home in our owne houses. The nine and twentieth, in the morning, Iacoble Maire, Aris Clawson, with Claus Iohnson, Ban, and one of our Pi∣lots went on shore, and being there, went into the land, and climed vp vpon a hill, to see what fruite grew there∣on, and to behold the cituation of the Island, and being vpon the hill, the old king and his brother came thither to beare them company: there they saw nothing but wil∣dernes, and some valleys that were all bare, by reason of the great store of raine that had fallen, they also found some red colour, wherewith the women colour their heads and faces, and when they saw that our men were weary with going, they made signes vnto them to goe downe to the shippe againe, and ledde them by a good way, to a place where there was some Cocos trees, full of nuts, there they made our men sit downe, and the kings Lieuetenant putting a string about his feete, or
his hands, climed quickely vp a smooth high tree, and in a trice fetcht downe 10. Cocos nuts, which at one crush with a sticke or a piece of wood, he so soone open∣ed, that our men wondred to see it, They told vs that they alwayes had warre with the men of the other Island, and shewed vs many holes and caues in the hill, and bushes and groues in the way, from whence they issued out, and spoyld and killed each other: and would gladly haue had vs goe with our shippe, to the other Island to helpe them there, to fight against those Indians with our Peeces, but it being no profit vnto vs, vvee refused it. About noone our men came aboord againe, bringing with them the young King and his brother, that dined with vs, and while he sate at the table, we told them that within two dayes we would goe from thence, where∣at the young Kinge was so glad, that for Ioy, hee pre∣sently leapt from the table, and going into the Galle∣rie, cryed out, and sayde, that within two dayes wee would be gon. They were in great feare of vs, (although we shewed them all the friendship we could,) and doub∣ted that we would take their Country from them. Hee promised vs that if we would goe thence in 2. dayes, hee would giue vs 10. hogs, & a great number of Cocos nuts, which they called Ali. When we had dined, the old king came aboord our ship, who after their manner was a state∣ly seemely person, about 60. yeares of age, bringing with him 16. of his counsell: we receiued and welcomed him as well as we might. When hee entered into the ship, he fell downe vpon his face, and prayed, then we ledde him into the hold, and there againe he prayed, he wondred much at that hee saw, as wee also did at his behauiour: his men kist our feete, and tooke them in their handes, and laid them on their heads and their neckes, in signe
of submission. The King looked into all places of the shippe, both before and behinde, and lookt as if he had beene in a dreame, but specially hee wondered at the great Ordinance, for 2. dayes before he had heard them shot off, to honour him. When he had seene the ship in euery place he desired to goe on land againe, and vvent away with great reuerence made vnto vs. Our Marchant went with him, till he came to his Belay, where he ordi∣narily sate, and then went out to walke with the young king, and about euening came aboord againe. In the eue∣ning with moone-shine, Aris Clawson went out to fish, and hauing taken a great shole of fish, went to the king, there he founde a number of young wenches dauncing before him, one played on a hollow piece of wood like a pump, which made a noyse, whereat the young wenches daun∣ced after their maner, very finely, and with a good grace, according to the measure of the noyse of the Instrument. Our people wondred to see those wilde people daunce in that sort, and in the night they came on boord againe. The 30. In the morning, the king sent vs 2. little hogs for a present: the same day, the King of the other Island came to see the King of that Island, & with him brought 16. hogs, and 300. men in his company, all of them ha∣uing certaine greene hearbs hanging about their midles, whereof they make their drinke. When the Kinge was neere vnto the other King, hee beganne a farre off with strange ceremonies and reuerence to bow downe his bo∣dy, falling with his face vpon the ground, & praying with a great noise, and much zeale, as we thought. The other king went to meete him, and likewise with a great noyse and strange gestures, vsed him very reuerently, and after much adoe, they both rose vp on their feete, and went and sate together vnder the kings Belay, and there were
assembled together at least nine hundred men. When they went to sit downe they prayed againe, according to their maner, hanging downe their heads, and bowing downe to the ground, holding their hands one in ano∣ther, which wee admired. After noone, Aris Clawson being on shore, Iacoble Maire, Claus Iohnson Ban, were sent for, who went a shore, with foure trumpets and a drumme, to the two kings, there the trumpets blew, and the drum playd before them, wherein they tooke great pleasure: after that came a company of Pesants, bringing with them a quantity of greene hearbs, which they called Caua, such as the 300. men aforesaide had about their midles, and all together at once began to chaw the herbs in their mouthes, which being chawd they tooke it out of their mouthes, and laid it all in a wooden vessell, like a tray, or trough, and when they had chawd a great deale, they poured water into it, and so stirred and prest it toge∣ther, and gaue the liquor thereof to the kings to drinke, who dranke thereof with their gentlemen: they also pre∣sented that notable drinke (as a speciall and a goodly present) to our men, but they had enough, and more then enough of the sight thereof. They also brought a great number of Vbas rootes, which they had rosted, and sixteene hogs that were onely ript, and the guts ta∣ken out, but all bloudy, and not washt, and hauing cer∣taine hote stones put into their bellyes, and outwardly their haire singed off by the fire, were wel rosted after their maner, and they eate them as sauourely and with as good an appetite, as wee could doe when they are well sodden or rosted after our manner. Those people yeeld great reuerence and respect vnto their Kinges, for all the meate vvhich they brought before their King, (who in their language they call Herico) they laid it vpon their
heads, and kneeling on their knees, set it downe before the king. Of those 16 hogs aforesayd, each king gaue vs one, presenting vs therewith in this sort, first they layd them vpon their heads, and kneeling layd them with great humilitie at our feet, and with them gaue vs 11. litle liue hogs, and some indifferent great. And wee gaue them 3. copper beakers, 4. kniues, twelue old nailes, and some beades, where with they were well pleased. This feast, and meeting, our men saw with great delight & ad∣miration, which done about euening they came aboord. The 31. in the morning, the kings of both Islands came aboord our ship, with their troupes of gentelmen, after their manner. The chiefe of them hadde greene Cocos leaues about their neckes, in signe of peace. We receiued them (as they had done to vs) with great reue∣rence, and led them into the Cabbin, and into euery place of the shippe, and when they hadde seene all, they gaue vs six hogs. Both the kings themselues layd them first one after the other vpon their heads, and then downe before our feet, with great humilitie, bowing their heads downe to the ground, meane time while wee tooke a∣way the hogs, we led them into the cabbin againe, where wee gaue them two bundels of beades, and each king two kniues and six nayles, and there with they friendly tooke their leaue of vs, and went on land. Iacoble Maire our Marchant beare them company to the shore, to whom they gaue three hogs more. Which hee brought aboord the shippe, and then wee prepared our selues to set sayle, to the great contentment of the Indians of that Island, because as long as wee were there, they alwayes feared we would kil them, and take their country from them. Those people were men of good vnderstanding, and of great sta∣ture, for the least man of them was as big as the tallest
of vs, and the tallest of them was farre higher then any of vs, they were strong men, and well proportioned of bo∣dy and limbs, they went very fast, and swam and diued vn∣der the water excellent well, their colour was altogether browne yealow, they were very curious in the dressing and trimming of their haire, some hadde it curled, some frizled, some ware it bound vp in long foldes 4.5. or 6. together, as our women doe in haire-laces, and some (which was strange to see) had their haire standing vp∣right vpon their heads, about a quarter of an elle long like hogs bristles. The king had a long locke of haire on the left side of his head, that hung downe beneath his hipps, bound vp with a knot or two. His gentlemen hadde two such lockes, on each side of their heads one, they went naked all alike both men and women, onely some litle thing handsomely tyed before their priuie mem∣bers. The women were very vnsightly both in face and body, of small stature, Their haire cut close to their heades, as our mens in Holland, their brests long hang∣ing downe to their bellies like lether satchels, they are very lecherous, for they suffer themselues to be vsed by their men openly in all mens sight, and in the kings owne presence, onely vnder a mat. We could not per∣ceiue that they worshipped God, or any Gods, or vsed any deuotion, neither the one nor the other, but li∣ued without care, like birdes in the wood. They had no skill of buying or selling, but with flaggs they deliuered vs some what, and vvee in like sort to them againe. They neither sowe nor reape, nor doe any worke, There the earth of it selfe yeeldes all that they neede to sustaine their liues: as Cocos, Vbas, Bananas, and such like fruit. When the water falles. The women looke vpon the shoare on the sea
side for fishes, and when they will, they take them with their hookes, and eate them raw, so that there men may plainely behold and see the golden world, whereof the Poets vvrite. When vvee left that Island, vvee called it Horne Island, after the name of the towne from whence vvee came, and the bay vvherein vvee anchored, the Vnities bay, after our shippes name: that day for the most part, vve were busie to get out, and to hoyse vp our an∣chors, one of our cables vvas fretted in peeces with the sharpenesse of the ground where it lay, so vvee lost that anchor, then wee drew vp an other anchor, and the cable fretting vpon a cliffe, brake as wee wound it vp and lost that anchor also. This bay lies on the south side of the Eye land, in a docke, on the one side their is a sand, which at low water is dry, on the other side, the firme land but yet foule vpon the Shore. There vve lay with foure anchors and foure cables out, at 10. fathom sandy ground, about a musket shot from the litle riuer from vvhence the fresh water ran. Wee might vvell haue lyen with the ship in the litle riuer without danger, in the place vvhere vvee lay vve could not stirre, because it vvas so narrovv: about noone vve vvere vnder sayle, and ranne West south vvest till euening, to get into the broad sea, after that vve held our course vvest, vvith an east vvinde, glad that vve had eased and refreshed our selues so vvell at that good Island, and vvere so vvell prouided of good vvater, some hogs, Vbas rootes, and a great number of Cocos nuts, and Bananas: the place vvhere vvee lay, is vnder 14. degees 56. minutes. The first of Iune, about noone we were vnder 13. degrees 15. minutes, the vvinde east, our course North. The next day the vvind still continued easterly, and vve went northvvest and vvest, and most part northvvest and by
vvest, with a hard course, vve vvere vnder 14. degrees 45. minutes, then wee savv great store of birds, and held vvest, and vvest south vvest, with hollow billowes out of the south southeast. The 20. the winde northeast, wee vvent vvest, and in the euening saw land, all that night driuing without sayle, to keepe off from the land, and then were vnder 4. degrees 50. minutes. The 21. the winde east, vvee made towards the land, that was very low and going neere vnto it, found many sands which strecht northvvest of from the land, there were 3. or 4. Islands, all very small but full of trees. There a Canoe boorded vs, being of the same fashion as afore, but some what greater, able to hold 5 or 6 men. The men in all respectes as the former, and spake the same lan∣guage, but some what blacker hauing some thing before their priuie members. Their armes vvere bowes and arrowes, which were the first bowes that wee saw a∣mong the Indians in the south sea, wee gaue them some beades and nayles, but they pointed towards the West to tell vs that there was more land, where their king dwelt, and many things to be hadde. Therefore vve held our course vvestvvard againe, finding no fit place to anchor in. This Island lay south southvvest, and vvest from vs, vnder 4. degrees 47. minutes. The 22. the winde east south east, wee sayld west, and vvest and by north, vnder 4. degrees 45. minutes, that quarter wee hadde a good gale of vvinde, and faire wea∣ther, and that day saw at least twelue or thirteene Islands, one close by an other, vvest south vvest from vs, reaching southeast, and northvvest about halfe a league, but sayled along by them, leauing them on backeboord. The 24. the vvinde south, at noone wee saw land on
back-boord, being 3. low Islands, that lay southwest from vs, very greene and full of trees, two of them were 2 miles long a peece, the third very litle, the shore was hard cliffie ground, there likewise we could find no anchoring: wee called them the Greene Islands. We also saw a high Island that had 7. or 8. houels forth right, lying west & by north from vs, in the night we held off and on, staying till day. The 25. in the morning, as wee were sayling by the a∣foresaid Island, we saw other land before vs, in the south∣west, which was exceeding high, which we thought to be the poynt of Noua Guinea, we made towards it, leauing the other high Island that lay westward, which we called S. Iohns Island, because it was S. Iohn Baptists day. About noone wee got to it, and sayled along by it with an east southeast wind, but could find no anchor ground, we sent out our Shalop to sound the depth, that went along by the shore betweene the ship and it; and being somewhat neare the shore, there came 2. or 3. Canoes to it, with blacke Indians in them, all naked, without any thing be∣fore their members, which fiercely cast stones at our men with slings, but as soone as our men began to shoote at them they fled away. The Shalop came on boord againe, without finding any ground, telling vs that the peoples language was cleane contrary to the former, we sayled a∣long by the coast, which was very high and greene, plea∣sant to behold, there we saw much land as it had bin hou∣ses, at euening we got about the point into a bay, there we anchored at 45. fathom, vnfit and vneuen ground. The same euening there came 2. Canoes to the ship, and spake to vs, but we vnderstoode them not, all that night they held watch against vs, with fire all along their coast: we lay about a Cannon shot distant from the shore, against a run∣ning riuer: that night it was very still calme moone-shine
weather, the wind on the land, there came some Canoes close vnder the gallery of our shippe, from whence wee threw them some beades, shewing them all the friend∣ship wee could, withall making signes vnto them, to bring vs some Cocos nuts, hogs, oxen, or goates, if they had any, but they stayed still most part of the night by vs, crying and hollowing after their manner. They were wilde blacke and rude men. This land as we gest, lay di∣stant from the coast of Peru, 1840. leagues. The 26. In the morning, there came 8. Canoes about our ship, whereof one had 11. men in it, the other 4.5.6. and 7. men. They rowed close about our shippe, and were well furnished with armes after their manner, as Assagayes or Clubs, wooden swordes and slings, we shew∣ed them what friendship we could, and gaue them beades and other trash, making signes to them to goe on shore, to setch vs hogs, hens, Cocos nuts, and other fruite, such as they had, but they had another meaning, and all together began fiercely to sling with their slings, & other weapons, thinking to master vs, but we standing vpon our guarde, shot with our muskets and great shot amongst them, and slew at least 10. or 12. of them: They left the great Ca∣noe, and 3. other, and leaping into the sea, swam to land, we put out our Shalop, and rowed with it among those that swam away, and slaying some of them, brought three of them prisoners into our shippe, that were sore wounded, and 4. of their Canoes, which we hewed in peeces, to make fire for the Cooke. The hurt men were cured, but one of them dyed, about noone our men row∣ed with the 2. wounded men to the land, along the shore, there the prisoners cryed to their fellowes to bring vs hogs, Bananas and Cocos nuts, wherewith one Canoe came aboord, that brought a little hog, and a bunch of
Bananas, wee set one of the men at ten hogs ransome, the other that was sore hurt, we let goe in the Canoe, because we doubted he would not liue, those men had 2. holes bored in their noses, on either side one, wherein they ware rings, strange to beholde. There we saw an o∣ther Island, lying North from that great Island. The 27. VVe fild our empty vessels full of water, and that day we got a hog from the land, and there saw di∣uers red birds. The 28. there came certaine Canoes aboord our ship, but brought nothing with them, neither would they ransom their man, therefore we let him goe on shore a∣gaine. Wee thought those people to be Papoos, for all their haire was short, and they eate Betell and Chalke mingled with it, that night wee hoysed anchor, and set sayle, with a small gale of winde. The 29. the wind was variable, and our course was northwest, and northwest and by north, with faire wea∣ther till noone, then it calmd. At euening we were still in the sight of the poynt of the Island, and yet we sayled a∣long by the land, which reached northwest, and north and by west, with many bayes and crookes. The same day vve savv three high Islands more, that lay northward from the great Island, about 5. or 6. miles. Then wee were vnder 3. degrees 20. minutes. The 30. in the morning, driuing in a calme, diuers Ca∣noes with blacke Indians came aboord our ship, who in signe of peace, as they entred, brake their Assagayes ouer their heads, they brought vs nothing, but desired some∣thing of vs. They seemed to be better and friendlyer peo∣ple then the other for they couered their priuie members with leaues, and had better kind of Canoes, set out before and behinde with some carued workes, they are
very proud of their beades, which they paint with chalke and the haire of their heads also. Vpon the three or foure Islands, from whence those Canoes came, there was great store of Cocos trees: they brought vs nothing, how earnestly soeuer wee vrged them, that wee had neede of victuales: There they stayed till euening, and then went on land againe. The first of Iuly in the morning, after wee had dri∣uen all the night in a calme, before the streame about two leagues, wee anchored betweene an Island of two miles long, and the firme land of Guinea, about noone there came 25. Canoes toward our ship, with many men, well armed: being the same people who the day before brake their Assagaies ouer their heads, and made a friend∣ly shew vnto vs, but with intent to abuse vs, as after it appeared, who seeing vs to lie in a calme, thought to take our ship from vs, we had 2. anchors hanging out before at the bough, a litle puld vp, whereon they sate, on each anchor a man, with a Pingay or girdle in their hands, wherewith they vse to hold or draw forth their Canoes, and so thought to draw the ship to shore, the rest hung fast vpon the ship, we still standing vpon our guarde: at last, they began fiercely to throw at vs with stones, and other weapons, and thereby hurt one of our men, being the first that was hurt in all our voyage, but while they were busie to assaile vs, thinking they had got the vpper hand, we shot among them with our Muskets, and with our vpper tyre of Ordinance, and kild at least 12. or 13. of them, and hurt many more: and while they fledde away, our men rowd with the shalop, (well armed) after them, and tooke one of their Canoes with 3. men in it, whereof one that was dead they threw ouer-boord, the other 2. leapt into the water, but one of them being kild by one of our
men, the other yeelded himselfe prisoner, being a yong man about 18. yeares old, whom wee named Moses, after our mans name that was hurt. Those people eate bread made of rootes of trees. After this fight we saild all along by the land, with a good gale, west northwest, and northwest and by west. The 2. we were vnder 3. degrees 12. minutes, and that day saw low land on backe-boord, and also a great high hill, and right before vs a low Island, we sayled softly west northwest, with slight water east northeast. The third vvee saw high land againe, west from vs, about 14, leagues from the other Island, vnder 2. degrees and 40. minutes. The 4. as vve vvere busied to passe by the aforesayd 4. Islands, vvee saw at least 22 or 23. others, great and small, high and low, which wee left on starrboord, onely two or three on larboord. They lay close one by the other, some a league, or a league and a halfe, and some more then a Cannon shot, distant one from an other, vnder 2. degrees 25. or 30. mi∣nutes litle more or lesse. That euening wee hoped to finde a road, but were forced to holde because night came on. The same time vvee savv a sayle come toward vs from one of those Islands but because it was night, it boorded vs not, and in the morning the wind falling contrarie, we left it, and yet were close by it. The 5. the winde being south east, and east southeast, and our course south and by west, and south west, vvee hadde much thunder and raine, and were vnder 3. de∣grees 56. minutes. The 6. sometimes wee had a hard vvinde, and some times calme with raine, lightening and thunder, and be∣fore noone saw a verie high hill being southwest from vs
which we sayled vnto, our master was of opinion that it was Banda, by reason it was very like to the hill called Geomenapi in Banda, and very like for height, but going neere vnto it, wee might see two or three hills more like vnto it, that lay on the north side of the first hill, about 6. or 7. leagues distant, whereby we knew that it was not so. Behind that hill, wee saw very much land east and westward, which vvas so long, that on either side wee could see no ende thereof, sometimes high, and then low, reaching east south east, whereby vvee gest it to be Noua Guinea, and for that night came vpon vs we held off from it. The 7. in the morning, before day we wound againe towards the high hills, which was a burning Island, ca∣sting fire and flame from the top thereof, and therefore we called it Vulcans Island, the winde then was south west with faire weather. This Island was vvell inhabited, and had many Cocos trees in it, the people came with some Ca∣noes to our ship, but were very fearefull of vs, they called vnto vs, but we vnderstood them not, neither could our blacke Moses tell what they sayd, they were all naked, onely their priuie members couered, their haire some short, some long. There we found no ground, and so could not anchor. In the north and northvvest, wee savv more Islands, at which time, wee went north vvest and by vvest to a low Island, that vve savv before vs, which in the euening we got vnto: Then we tooke in our sayles, and let the ship driue. There we found diuers colours of water, greene, white, and yealow, which we gest to be water com∣ming out of riuers, for it was sweeter then the sea wa∣ter. There many trees, leaues, and boughs draue in the wa∣ter, whereon some birds and crabs sat. The 8. the winde being variable, wee held our course west south west, and vvest north vvest, vvith faire wether
and a reasonable gale of winde, hauing on starre-boord a high, and on larboord a low Island, reasonable high, vve made toward the land, which about euening vve got vn∣to, and found good sandie ground, at 70. fathom deepe, about a cannon shot from the land. There certaine Ca∣noes came to vs, with a kind of ill fauoured people, all Papoos, their haire short, and curled, hauing rings in their noses and eares, and strings about their heads or armes, and hogs teeth hanging about their neckes, for an orna∣ment. They also eate Betel, and were all defectiue persons some great legs, others swolne armes, and so forth, where∣by it is to be thought, that there about it is vnwholesome land, & the rather, because their houses stood vpon stakes, about 8 or 9. foote from the ground, there vvee had 3. de∣grees 43 minutes and found a litle shew of ginger. The 9. in the morning, lying at anchor, our Shalop rowed to looke for a fit place to anchor the ship in, and re∣turning told vs, that they had found a fit bay, where vnto we went, and anchored at 26 fathom good. sandy ground mixt with clay. There about stood two small villages, from whence there came many Canoes aboord our ship, that brought a fevv Cocos nuts, but they esteemed them very deare, for 4. nuts asking a fathom of linnen cloth. Whereof they were very desirous, they also hadde some hogs vvhich they held at a deerer rate, and what neede soeuer vve sayd vvee hadde thereof and made signes to to them to bring vs some, they would not doe it. That day euery man in our ship had allowance of 5 pound of bread and a measure and a halfe of oyle a weeke, a cup and a halfe of Sacke a day, and a Niperkin of aquauita all our pottage, as pease, beanes, gurt: and our flesh, bacon, and fish being spent, and vve knew not where vve vvere, be∣ing vncertaine whether vve were far or neere to the Indian
Islands, as also what place vve vvere in, though vve sayled continually by the land, not knowing vvhether it was Noua Guinea or no, vve onely gest at it, for all the Cardes that vvee had, did not agree, nor were not like to the land that vve saw. That euening vve had great store of raine, vvith thunder and lightening, which held all night with very darke weather. The 10. there came at least 20. Canoes, on boord of our ship, with men, women, and children in them, all na∣ked, only their priuie members couered, but brought no great matter with them. The 11. in the morning vve put to sea againe, and held our course north vvest, and by west, and west north west along the coast, with the land alwayes in sight 3.2. and a league and a halfe distant from it, and at noone past by a high point. That land of Noua Guinea for the most part reacheth north west and by west, sometimes some what more vvesterly, and sometimes againe more norther∣ly. The 12. we sailed stil west northwest, along by the coast with faire wether, and without sun shine, at noone being vnder 2. degrees 58. minutes, with help of the streame, that set vs about the west, as it did all along the coast of Noua Guinea. The 13. and 14. Wee sayled along by the aforesay de coast, sometime by high and then by low land. The 15. We had the winde, and held our course as afore sayd, along by the coast, with good wether, after-noone we came to 2. low inhabited Islands, about halfe a league from the maine land, which stood full of Cocos trees. We made towards them, and there found good anchor ground, at 40.30.25. and 20. to 6. and 5. fathom deepe, and there anchored at 13. fathom good ground. The master rowed with the boate and the Shalop well armed,
to the land, thinking to get some Cocos nuts, which there vvere vpon the land in great aboundance: but going on shore, the Indians lay in a bush right against the place where wee came to land, and watching for vs, shot so fiercely at vs with their bovves, that they hurt at least 16. of our men, some in the arme, others in the leg, necke and hands, and other places. And we shot at them with muskets and slings, but at last by reason that the Indians shot so thicke we vvere forced to retire, there vve vvere vnder. 2 degrees 54. minutes. The 16. in the morning vvee sayled in with our shippe between both the Islands, and anchored at 9 fathome, where vve had good lying, after noone our boate and Shalop rowed to the lesser Island, to fetch some Cocos, and burnt 2 or 3. of the Indians houses, whereupon they that dwelt in the other Island began mightily to crie and make a noyse, but durst not come to vs, for with our ordinance we shot along the shore, and into the wood, that the bullets entered into it with thundring noyse, whereat the Indians fled, and durst not once looke out, about euening our men came aboord againe, and brought so many Cocos nurs, that euery one of vs had three nuts for his part. That night there came one of the Indians aboord our shippe to make peace with vs, with him bringing one of our mens caps with before fell off his head in the skirmish. Those people are cleane naked, their priuie members and all. The 17. in the morning, there came 2 or 3 Canoes towards our ship, and threw Cocos nuttes into the water making signes to vs to fetch them, whereby they sought to be friends with vs, Wee made signes to them to come aboord, at last taking better courage, they came close to the shippe, and brought vs as many Cocos nuttes and
Bananas as we desired, which wee drew vp by ropes into the gallery, giuing them old nayles, rustie kniues, and beades in barter, they also brought vs a litle greene gin∣ger, and yealow rootes which are vsed in steed of Saffron, bartered also with vs some of their bowes and arrowes, so that at last we were great friends with them. The 18. we bartered still for Cocos nuttes and Bananas and some Cassauie and Papede, which is also to be had in east India. There we saw some Potteysen which as wee thought came from the Spaniardes. Those people were not so inquisitiue to looke into our ship, as others were, for they knew what shooting with great peeces ment, and cald the Island wherein they dwelt, Moa, which lay most easterly, the other ouer against it they called Iusou, and the vtter most (being a very high Island) lying about 5 or 6. leagues from Noua Guinia, they named, Arimoa. The 19. our men went to the greatest Island to fish, There the Indians shewed vs great friendship, and holpe our men to draw vp their nets, and gaue them as many Cocos nuttes as they desired, There wee saw a great number of Canoes comming towards vs out of the east, from other Islands lying castward, whereof some were indifferent great, Therefore wee called our fishermen on boord, The Indians that were by vs, made signes to vs to shoot at those Canoes, and our men made signes againe that they would, if they shot first at vs, but they came peaceably aboord, and brought vs as many Cocos nuttes and Bananas as we desired, so that euery man had 50. nuttes and two bunches of Bananas. Those people vse Cassauie for their bread, but it is nothing like to that of the vvest Indies, they bake it also in round cakes. The 20. In the morning wee set sayle, after wee had againe bartered for more victualls, they made signes to
vs to lie still, and they would bring vs more. The 21. we sayled along by the land West northwest, and at noone were vnder 1 degree 13. minutes. Then wee savv a number of Islandes, whereunto the streame draue vs, and about noone wee got to them, and an∣chored at 13. fathom. That euening we had much raine, thunder, and lightening. The 23. in the morning we set sayle, with good vvea∣ther and a good gale, and being a litle from the land, 6. great Canoes follovved vs, (and yet, vve savv no men on land) bringing dried fish, (which vvee tooke to be Steen∣brasses,) Cocos nuts, Bananas, Tabacco, and some small fruits like Prunes. There also came some Indians from on other Island that brought vs some victualles, that also had some Chinay porceline, for we bartred for two dishes whereby we were perswaded that many Christian shippes had bin there, for they wondered not, as others did, at our ship. They were another kind of people then the former, of a yealower colour, and greater of body, some of them hadde long haire, some short, and also vsed bowes and arrowes, whereof wee had some in barter. They were very desirous of beades, and iron worke, and had greene blew, and white glas rings, sticking in their eares: which we gest they had from the Spaniardes. The 24 we were vnder halfe a degree, with a litle gale, and sayled north west, vvest and south west, along by a faire great Island, very greene and pleasant to behold, which wee called William Schoutens Island, after our ma∣sters name, and the vvest point thereof, the cape of good Hope. The 25. we saw much land on larboord lying south southwest from vs, some very high, and some very low. The 27. wee saw three Islands more, the coast reacht,
Northwest and by west. The 27. we were vnder 29. minutes southward of the line, and saw much land southward from vs, some high, and some very low, and past vvest north west along by it. The 28. and 29. the wether was variable, that night we hadde an earthquake, which made our men for feare to run out of their cabbins, our shippe seeming as if it stroke against the ground, but wee cast out our leade, and found no ground. The 30. vve sayled in a great bay or hollow place, so that wee seemed to be round about in closed with the land, we did our best to finde an opening, but could not, and therefore sayled northward againe, that day it thun∣dred and lightened so sore, that our shippe shooke there∣with, and sometime seemed to be on a light fire, where∣with wee were in no small feare, and after it, ensued so great a shower of raine that wee neuer had seene the like before. The 31 we perceiued that we were entred into a place where we had the land round about vs, therefore we held our course north, and that euening past the Equinoctiall line the second time, and being closed by the land, an∣chored at 12. fathom good ground, about a Cannon shot from an Island, that lay close by the firme land, but there wee saw no men nor any thing growing. The first of August, wee hoysed anchor with great la∣bour, for it lay vnder a cliffe, but at last we got it vp, we were then 15. minutes northward of the line, in the euening with the hard streame, we went close to the land and by reason it was calme, anchored in vneuen ground, and not deepe. The 2. it was very calme and we draue with the streame west and west and by north, with rainie weather.
The 3. vve held our course as before, with a calme, and found a bancke, so farre in the sea that wee could scarse see the land, in some places being 40. in an other 20.15. and 12. fathom sandy ground, wee anchored at 12. fathom, because it waxt night, and the master desired to see how the streame went, it was west southwest. The same day we were vnder 35. minutes northward of the line, and savv many Whales, and Tortices. Wee gest by the height that wee were at the ende of the land of Noua Guinea, hauing sailed along by the coast 280. leagues that day wee saw 2 Islands more westward from vs. The 4. the winde variable, our course was south west, then it rained much with cloudy weather, there the streame went hard west, that day we savv 7. or 8. Islands as we thought, and there in the night lay aloofe, to keepe off from the land. The fist in the morning, wee draue in a calme, with a variable winde, our course south and south east, with rainie weather and a little gale, but the winde being a∣gainst vs, wee made towards the land, which the day before wee tooke to be Islands, but comming to them found no ground, and therefore put out our Shalop to sound, and found ground at 45. fathom, close by the land. As our Shalop rowed to land, wee saw first 2. and then 3. Canoes more come of from the land, and made towards our Shalop, and being hard by it, put out a flag of peace, and our men the like, and then went a∣boord, the Canoes followed them and also came aboord, they brought vs nothing but a muster or shew of Indian Bonties, and Erties, with some Ryce, Tabacco, and two Paradice brids: wee bartered for one of them that was white and yeallow. We could vnderstand them reasonable well, for they spake Tarnata words, and one of them spake
good Malaian, which language Aris Clawson our Mar∣chant could speake well, some of them spake some Spa∣nish, and among them they had a Spanish felt. They wore faire clothes, about their middles, and some hadde silke breeches on of diuers colours, some also had wreaths about their heads, which they say, were Turkes or Moores. They ware gold and siluer rings vpon their fingers, their haire was all coale blacke. They bartred their ware with vs for beades, but rather desired Linnen: They were very warie and fearefull of vs. VVe askt them what the name of this countrie was, but they would not tell vs, but by many circumstances wee Iudged, and verely beleeued, that we were at the east ende of Gilolo, on the midlemost point of the land, (for Gilolo reacheth out with 3. pointes to the east) and that they were men of Tidore, friends to the Spaniards, as we also found it so to be, which made vs all reioyce that after so many windings and turnings, and troubles endured, we were come to the place which wee knew, and hoped in short time to come among our country men, a thing which vve so long, and so much had hopt for and desired. Then wee had a small gale of winde, and anchored vnder the land, a Cannon shot from the shoare, at 40. fathom, where they brought vs Cocos and other fruit to buy, they told vs that vvee lay not vvell there, and it was true, for in the euening vvee had a good gale and draue through. That night the Canoes vvent avvay from vs, promising the next day to bring vs home, that day wee were the third time right vnder the Equinoctiall line. The 6. in the morning, they came againe from the land, aboord our shippe, and brought some Tabacco, and porceline and some other things: but vve hauing a good gale, south south east, and bad lying there, hoyst an∣anchor
to goe on our voyage to the Moluccos, and held our course north, with a good gale to goe north, about the north point of Gilolo. The 7. it rained, and we savv the north east point of Gilolo, called Moratay, vvhich lay south east from vs. The 8. about noone vvee vvere vnder 4. degrees 3, mi∣nutes northvvard of the line, that night it rained hard vvith thunder and lightening, there vve found the stream to goe northward. The 9. and 10. the vvinde vvas variable, vvith rainie vveather, and vvere vnder the heigh of 3. degrees 50. mi∣nutes. The 11. in the morning, wee sawe the land of Gilolo called Moratay, againe on the northeast point of Gilolo, wee did the best wee could to reach it, but the streame put vs of from the land towardes the north, and coulde not reach it that day. The 12. and 13. we were vnder 2. degrees 58. minutes, with variable windes, and much raine, and the like, the 14.15. and 16. The 17. with great labour and much trouble wee got vnder the land, late in the euening, and draue along by the coast with faire wether, that night we saw many fires vpon the land. The 18. it was still wether, and we draue along by the land, about noone two Canoes came to vs with a flag of peace, from the Village called Soppy, they were Tarna∣taens, with whom wee could speake well, and some of them were of Gammacanor, they shewed vs that a Pinnace of Amsterdam had laine there three months to lade Ryce, and that about a moneth or two before, also an English ship had beene there. How glad we were then when we were so well assured, that wee were come to so good and
long desired a place, after so much paine and trouble that we had endured, with 85. sound men, vvhen vvee had spent all our victuals, euery man may iudge that hath proued the like aduenture. There vve vvere vnder tvvo degrees, 47. minutes, and anchored at 28. fathom, some of those men stayed that night vvith vs, the next day to bring vs to the road of Soppy. The 19. vvee sayled into the bay, and there anchored at 10. fat hom sandy ground, about a Cannon shot from the shore. That day we bartered for some Sagovv, some Hennes, 2. or 3. Tortoyses, and a little Rice. The 20. wee bartered for a great deale of Sagow and some Ryce, for Linnen, Beades, Kniues, Glasses, and Combes. While wee were there, a Correcor came thether to prouide Ryce and Sagow for the King of Tarnata, who told vs, that there was at least 20. ships, Hollanders and Englishmen round about the Island of Tarnata that lay there: and that there was 8. ships at the Manillas, whereof foure were English and foure Dutch: There we got good store of fish. The 21.22.23. and 24. we still bartered for Sagow and Ryce, by the small measure. The 23. our men made an end of their wine. The 25. in the euening, we set sayle, after we had laden 4. Tunne of Rice, and good store of Sagovv. The next day to the 5. of September, we still had con∣trary and variable vvindes, vvith calmes, and sometimes great billovves, and much raine, so that with great labour and trouble vvee sailed along that coast, oftentimes tur∣ning and winding to and fro, anchoring diuers times in a day, and setting sayle againe, but the great hope that we had, soone to get to Tarnata to our Countrymen, made all our labour light and easie.
The 5. vvhile vvee lay before the coast of Gilolo at an∣chor, our men vvent out to fishe, and vvhile they vvere dravving vp their net, there came 4. Tarnatans leaping out of the vvood, each of them vvith a svvord and target in their hands, thinking to kill our men, but the Surgion crying out Oran Hollanda, they presently forbare to assaile them, throvving vvater vpon their heads and said, that they thought our men had beene Spaniards, our men brought them aboord our shippe, and gaue them some beades, for the vvhich they promised to bring vs that we needed. They told vs that they came from Gammaca∣nor, from whence by their saying, we were as then at least 5. or 6. leagues distant. The 6. and 7. we still had calmes, and contrary winds, often hoysing our anchors, and setting saile many times, winding and turning to further our voyage, but to no effect, so that wee were forced to attend the time, with litle furtherance. The 8. wee still lay at anchor, with contrary windes, meane time our chiefe Marchant and the Marchant of the Horne, with the Shalop well armed, went to Gamma∣canor, thinking there to get some refreshing. The coast from Soppy to Gammacanor reacheth southwest and north∣east, with many bayes and creekes. There the streame ran northward. The 9. and 10. Wee still lay at anchor with contrary wind, as also the 11. then our Shalop came againe, and had not beene at Gammacanor, because it was too farre distant from vs, and they were vnprouided of victuals, but had beene in a village called Lolola, about 10. leagues distant from the place where our ship lay, where they one∣ly got some Bananas, which were there to be hadde in great abundance. The inhabitants told them that the
Dutchmen and the Tarnatans had taken an Island, called Sianno, lying vpon the passage of the Manillas, and that there lay 13. ships in Tarnata. The 12. our Master and Aris Clawson with 18. men well armed went to Tarnata, from whence (as we gest) we were distant at least 25. Leagues, and we lay still at anchor with our ship in a calme. The 13. the calme stil held, and our men going out to fish, there came 3. Pesants or country people out of the land to them, and brought them 3. hogs, indifferent great, which they sayd they had taken with dogs, for the which we payd them to their contentment. The 14 about noone, wee set sayle with an indifferent gale, but yet twas calme, so that in the same quarter we got but 2. leagues and a halfe forward, and that with great labour. The 15. it blew a litle gale, and in that quarter we got about 4 Leagues further, with faire weather. The 16. wee past by Gammacanor, and saw Tarnata and Tidore, lying close one by the other vpon 2. high hilles, south from vs, about 12. leagues distant. The 17. we had a good gale, and did our best to get to Tarnata, that morning betimes we savv a sayle to loofe∣ward from vs, which also made towards Tarnata, being the Morning Sarre of Rotterdam, of 300. Tunnes burthen, hauing in her 26. great pieces. At noone our Shalop came from that ship, where she had lyen 3. nights, they being in the Creeke of Sabou, found there the Adminall Verhaghen there, in one of the Admirall Speilberg his ships, by whose men we vnderstood, that Speilberg being in the Straights of Magelan, (which he past in 2. Monthes) had lost his smallest Pinnace, and that in the riuer of Spirito Santo, on the coast of Brasilia, hee had lost 3. boates with
men in them, that he had spoyled the towne of Payta, and had fought with 8. Spanish shippes, whereof he had suncke three, viz. the Admirall, the vice Admirall, and an other, without any great hurt, onely the losse of some men, and got nothing. That he had bin at Lima, and searched many creekes, where the Spanish ships lay vp: and in one, wherein there was 40. shippes, but did nothing, and that he sayld along by the coast of Noua Spania, through the Manillas to the east Indies being from thence gone home∣ward with Iohn Cornelison Meuscheater with 4. ships: their names, the Amsterdam, the armes of Amsterdam, Zeland, and Midleburgh. They also told vs, that there were 10. ships well furnished at the Manillas, their generall being Iohn Dirickeson Lam of Horne, to set vpon the Spanish fleete, that were comming to Tarnata. We also vnder∣stood that Peter Bot sayling home with 4. Ships, was cast away, vpon Mauricius Island, with 3. ships, by meanes of a storme that cast him vpon the cliffes, where many of his men and himselfe also was drowned, the 4. ship scapt. The same euening we anchored before Maleye in Tar∣nata, at 11. fathome sandy ground, with great Ioy that we were come among our Countrymen: our Master and the Marchant went presently on shore, to speake with the Generall Laurence Real, who was come thither in the place of the deceased Generall Gerard Reynsts, where they were well entertained by him, as also by the Admirall Stephen Verhaghen, and Iasper Ianson Gouernour of Am∣bona as likewise of the whole Counsell of India. The 18. our Master and the Marchants went on land, and sold our two Shalops, foure great peeces of the Horne, some Lead, two great Cables, nine anchors and other things, for the which they receiued a thousand three hun¦dred and fifty Ryals of eight.
The 19.20.21.22. and 23. we lay at anchor in the same place. The 24. eleuen of our men and foure boyes prayed our Master William Cornelison Schouten to discharge them, desiring to stay a while there in India, to serue the East Indian Company, which our Master graunted, at the re∣quest of the Generall Real. The 26. we tooke our leaue of the Generall, who most friendly welcomed and shewed vs great fauour, accom∣panying our Master and the Marchant with Auncients displayed, to our ships, whereof the one was the Mor∣ning Starre, which the 22. of September came thither in∣to the road by vs, intending to sayle to Motir, but we to Bantam. We tooke the Marchant of the Starre, and one of the Generals men with vs to Bantam, at the Gene∣rals intreatie. The 27. wee past by Tidore, there the Morning Starre left vs, and made towards Motir. The 28. wee past Motir and Makian. The 29. Caiou, and Bakian, and that day past the fourth time vnder the Equinoctiall Line. The 2. of October we sayled by Loga, Combella, and Manipa in Zeira, and the 3. by Burro. The 6. we past by Button, and Cabessecabinco, and the seuenth by Cabona. The 8. we past the point of Bugarones, betweene the south poynt of Celebes and Desolaso. The 13. about euening, we had a sight of the Island of Madura. The 14. In the morning, we saw Iaua, and that day sayled by Tuban. The 16. about noone, we came before Iapara, where we anchored in the Road, and there found the ship cal∣led
the Holland of Amsterdam, which lay there to lade Ryce, to carry it to Tarnata. At Iapara there is all kinde of victuals to be had in great aboundance, and good cheape. There wee bought much Ryce, Arack, Flesh, Fish, and other victuals, wherewith we meant to sayle home. The 23. we set sayle, and the 28. went by Iacatra, where wee anchored without the Island, there wee found three shipps of Holland. The Horne, the Eagle, and the Trou, and 3. English shippes. The next night, one of our men died, which was the first man that died that voyage in the Vnitie, besides 2. more that die in the Horne, the one Iohn Cornelison Schouten, our masters brother, In the south sea, by the Dogs Island, and one about the coast of Por∣tingale, so that vntill then, there died but 3. men in both the ships, and then we had left 84. men liuing, all indif∣ferently well. The 31. the shippe called Bantam, with Iohn Peterson Koeuen of Horne President of Bantam, for the East India company, came before Iacatra. The 1. of Nouember, the President Iohn Peterson Koe∣uen sent for William Cornelison Schouten our master, and the Marchants to come on land, where being come, (in the presence of his counsell there assembled) he told them in name of the east Indian Company, that they must leaue their shippe and goods their and deliuer it vp into his hands: and although our master shewed him many rea∣sons, to perswade the contrarie, saying that they did them great wrong, they were forced to doe as the President ap∣pointed them, who told them, that if they thought they did them wrong, that they should right themselues in Holland: and so our ship and goods was stayed, and atta∣ched there. To receiue the ship and all her furniture, the
President appointed two masters of shipps, and two Mar∣chants, which was deliuered by inuentory vnto them, by our master and the Marchant. This was done vpon Mun∣day the first of Nouember, after our reckoning but vpon a Tewsday the second of Nouember, by our countrimens reckoning there. The reason of the difference of the time fell out thus, as we sayled westward from our owne coun∣trie, and had with the sunne compassed the Globe of the world, we hadde one night, or sun-setting lesse then they: and they that come out of the west and sayle to the east▪ thereby had one day or sun-setting more then we, which make a quarter difference, and so as we made our recko∣ning of the time then with our selues, and did the like with our countrimen, that weeke we lost the Twesdaie, leaping from Munday to wednesdaie, and so hadde one weeke of 6. dayes. Our ship being in this manner taken from vs, some of our men put themselues into seruice with the east Indian company. The rest were put into two ships, (that were to goe home into Holland) called the Amsterdam and the Zeland: their generall, being George van Spielbergher, The master William Cornelison Schouten, and Iacob le Maire, 10. of our men, went with the generall in the Amsterdam, The masters name Iohn Cornelison May, alias Meuscheater, and Aris Clawson and the Pilot Claus Peterson with 10. o∣thers in the Zeland, the masters name Cornelis Riemlande of Midleburgh, which set sayle from Bantam the 14. of December. The 32. our Marchant Iacob le Maire died. The 1. of Ianuary 1617. Wee lost the sight of the Ze∣land. The 24. Wee were vnder the Island Mauriciuus at an∣chor, where wee refresht our selues, and the 30. set sayle
from hce. The 6. of March, as we ges, we past the cape, but saw it not. The 31. Wee were vnder the Island of Saint Helena. Where we found the Zeland, which arriued there certaine dayes before vs. The 6. of Aprill after wee had refresht our selues, and taken in freshe water, both our ships set sayle, and the 14. of Aprill saw the Island Ascention. The 23. we saw 2 ships to loofeward from vs vnder one degree, southward of the line, but because wee could not reach them, we held on our course. The 24. in the mor∣ning, wee were the fift time vnder the Equinoctiall line, and the 28. we saw the north starre, which wee had not seene in 20. monthes before. The 1. of Iuly we came with the Amsterdam into Zeland, where the day before, the Zeland likewise was arriued: And so performed our voyage in two yeares, and eighteene dayes. FINIS.
