22453 99852583 17910
A PASTORALL CALLED THE ARCADIA. Acted by her Majesties Servants at the Phaenix in Drury Lane. Written by Iames Shirly GENT. LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Iohn Williams, and F. Eglesfeild and are to be sould at the signe of the Crane in Pauls Church-yard. 1640.
The Persons of the Comedy. BAsilius King of Arcadia Musidorus a Prince disguisd as a shepheard, lover of Pamela, Pyrocles a Prince disguisd as an Amazon, lover of Philoclea. Evarchus father to Pyrocles 3. Arcadian Lords. Calander Philonax Simpathus Caladolous servant to Musidorus, Dametas a Rustick shepbeard and Guardian to Pamela and Philoclea. Cupid. Masquers. Thumbe a miller Captaine of the Rebells. Rebells. A Messenger Gynecia the Queene. Daughters to Basilius and Gynecia. Pamela Philoclea Miso wife to Dametas. Mopsa daughter to Dametas and Miso. The Scene Arcadia.
A PASTORALL CALLED THE ARCADIA. Actus Primus. Enter Basilius, Philonax and Calander. Philon. SIr yet be gracious and heare them pray That beg not for their owne, but for your safety And honor of your state which eclipse In your long darke and melancholly life, We want you at the helme. Our duties bind us tell you tis unnaturall To bury your selfe alive, the people call For their owne King to governe, the'ile forget To pray for you if you continue thus A stranger to em Cal. Or if not for them Which every good king makes his care as being A steward to provide them all earthly blessings,
Yet for the other part of you, our Mistris That sleepes within your boosome, and not made For such a conversation, returne And warme your thoughts agen, about which all Your servants like so many pictures gaze At one another, but want motion, and take up Roome ith Chambers of your Court, like Arras Philon Have a compassion to our daughters sir Kill not your hopes in their restraint Cal. What cage Can please the birds Created for skie freedome? Philon. How can you see your eldest child Pamel Spend her best part of time with such a rude And ignorant hinde as the unbred Dametas? A Lady of a high and active soule, Bas. No more Philon. Our duties bids us tell you this. Bas. Hast thou forgotten Philonax, or made a better glosse upon the Oracle? Should we remaine in Court and let our daughters Be in the sight of the admiring world Reade that paper, and be not partiall Philonax Philonax reads Thy eldest Care shall from thy carefull face By princely meane be stolne and yet not lost The younger shall with natures blisse embrace An uncoch love, which nature hateth most Both these themselves unto two such shall wed That at a Beere, as at a barre shall plead Why ile thee a living man they have made dead, In thine owne seate a forralgne state shall sit And ere that all these blowes thy head shall sit Thou with thy wife adultery shall commit. Bas. Canst blame me now? I should reioyce to see My daughters happy mothers, but since their Fate must be ripened with my blood, their pride Rooted in my grave, and that untimely, tis
Wisdome to keepe 'em vrigins. I me resolu'd Enter Gynaecia, Philoclea and Pyrocles. Cal. Your queene and Ladies Bas. Vanish all discontent, Madam this place Is emptie of all royall entertainement Your worth may Challenge, but since fate allowes not A Courtly life which best may answer your High birth spirit, let your vertue guide you To accept of what we tender, Pyr. This my Lord Exceeds all merrit heere, it was the blisse I aimd at to be acquainted with your goodnesse I am your humble servant Bas. Such a title Would rather become me, call me so Lady And stile me above Kings, while I write yours Philon. If your grace Could call him from this life you'd melt the hearts Of your subjects into prayers for you Gyne. I thanke your care but hees mexorable Cal. Alas deere princesse can you brooke these grove: Has not a pallace something more of pleasure? Phi. This shall be so to mee while tis ny fathers, Cal. I ha not seene a goodlier person, how Came she admitted▪  gracious with the king Phi. She has a charme to win from all the world Philon. I have read the Amazons discrib'd so Pyr. Good my Lord. Bas. These lippes had he that robd the dragon of The golden Apples, but once seene he would Ha wish'd to ha gatherd fruit heere, and esteemd The gaine of one sweet kifse reward sufficient For all his twelve hard labors Pyr. Sir your grace Is pleasantly dispos'd to make my person The subject of your mirth Bas And had those Creatures, Booke blinded men, that dreame of other worlds
Tell of Elizian blessings, know the joyes Are in your love they would have lost themselves As I have done in speculation Pyr. You make me blush to heare you Bas. Theres no action Dares so affright your blood, to talke, why Lady There be those men and women great and good Have found no shame in telling of their loves Nay in the acting Pyr. Give me leave to tell you You are not modest if I understand you A King give breath to such foule thoughts, Your every action should be a starr To guide your subjects, if you loose your piety What wickednesse have they not heence for If the devotion of your service be To such a friend as Lust (as what name else Can it deserve) let those whose hearts are lost In sinne be tempted to dishonor, I Abhor the thought, pardon me royall sir I hope these are but trialls, if I thought There had been such a levity in men Thus to provoke you Bas. Smooth thy brow agen Or I shall neede no other punishment Theres death too much in that; Philocle Pyr. That name sounds all my comfort, and I must Dispaire to tell her so, I was to blame To be so peremptorie, would I were agen; To shape my answer Bas. Noble Lady. Pyr. Sir Bas. That smile has put me out, oh looke thus ever I was studying a new complement to begg Thy excuse Pyr. If you brought no offence there needes none sir I must suppose your love, love is noble chaste Bas. You will finde that hereafter, oh Zelmane.
Would thou couldst tell the meaning of my sighes Pyr. You can expresse them. Bas. Not I Pyr. Choose another to speake them for you And yet I want an or at or to tell you What I would say, how ere I seeme Bas. Dost blesse me Pyr. Theres something wants a tongue, but for your passions I should not thinke they would carry so much discord To any virgin care delivered by a woman There is a Way to meete a gentle audience. At least not harsh disdaine, did your faire daughter Philolea the volume of all sweetnes Pleade halfe your suit, altho it borderd on Something not altogether just, her tongue Might perchance guide it, but I am confident Your ends are noble Bas. Theres a lightening yet Of comsort, happiest Lady I will study. How to be worthy of this grace, Gyne. You are expected at the pastoralls Philon. We take our leaves my Lord againe beseeching Your pardon for our bouldnesse to reduce you To your owne spheare of greatnes Bas. Doe you continue Faithfull to your employments, and deserve of us And of your Country; come Zelmane There are some sports which you must grace Pyr. I waite a servant to your commands Gy. Come sweete Zelmane Pyr. Come sweetest of thy sex Phi. Tis pittie nature. Made thee not a man, this complement Would then become you Exeunt▪ Enter Pamela and Mopsa. Pam. Mopsa you are to coy in my opinion Tho I confesse your beauty may deserve As much as any; Dorus tho he be
Your fathers servant, hee's a hansome shepheard And not to be dispised. Mop. Dispised, cannot a virgin love a young man I pray but she must dispise him. Pam. You should then with some smiles encourage him. Mop. Smoyles, let me alone to smoile, and something else when we are alone; if I thought he did not love me, I know What I know Pam. Alas poore man he cannot sleepe for you he saies, Mop. Nay and I were a bed with him he should not sleepe so long as his eyes were open, I'de watch him for that, but doe you thinke my father would let us couple in matrimony as they say, he has never a sonne but I and I am his onely daughter. Pam. Make no scruple of that, if you can finde in your heart to love him, in the name of upid goe together, for ought I perceive your father houlds a good opinion of him, marry I know not how your mother is inclinde Enter Musidorns. Mop. Whoope my mothers a scould Pam. Heres your sweete heart▪ Looke you make much of him, poore Gentleman How love is abie to transport, who could Expect so rich a guest in that poore dwelling Oh how ere the windes compell him, or the streame Into whose troubled waves he has launch'd forth This way he steeres his love, yet I seeme ignorant. Mus. My deerest Mopsa Mop. Deere; I never cost you anything Mus. I know not At what expence of fortunes were I able I should be willing to make purchase of you But I'me sure you have already cost my heart And yet I find yours made of Marble Which neither pitty nor my prayers can soften, Sweete Madam pleade for me, one gracious word From you would make me happie, let one beame Shoot fro your eye, and it will strike a spring Into that frozen peece of earth, and make it A bower for love to spo in, 'tis in you
To unarme her noble heart, there's too much steele And gentle love in vaine attempts to fasten The softer blowes. Pam. Mopsa take heed, your Shepheard can speake well And if he be honest Menalcus brother And heire, I know no reason why you should Thinke scorne of him. Mop. But for all his queint speeches Ile keepe my honestie close enough I warrant you Mus. Why should you be so cruell, nature made Your face the onely object of mans wonder Mop. Does my face looke like a flapiack? Mus. Is't possible there can be a soule so hard So vnrelenting dwell in that faire body? If you knew the truth of my affection and with what Religion it lookes upon your vertues. 'T would teach your eye compassion, gracious princesse Let the distressed Dorus gaine this mercy From you that with the blessednes of your White hand reaching to Mopsa this poore toy Which late I found my love may cherish hope At last to be accepted Mop. Oh fine what's that Madam? Pam. You must yet be a little coy to receive it Mop. I wonot have it, and he woud give it me Pam. A rich Iewell the figure of a Crabfish Mus. The trew emblem of my loves pace which lookes another way To that it moves, she cannot but distinguish Whether I would direct my heart, her eyes Are fixt upon't, and my poore soule could heere Star-gaze for ever Pam. By force not choyce—all his desire is Mopsa Tow in your grace by my presenting it Mop. Ile take it for your sake, I wonot thanke him Mus. She has no apprehension, with what A calme and carelesse temper does she give it Enter Dametas Dame. Madam Pamela, oh are you there, tis well Pam. Whats the matter?
Dame. I me out of breath, let me walke my selfe a little Pam. What haste does tire you? Dam. Tire me, I am no woman, keepe your tires to your selfe Nor am I Pericles prince of Tyre. Pam I doe beleeve it, heaven make you an honest subject, For a wise one, I dispaire to see you. Dam. Am I the subject of your talke? But I give you leave to use your tongue, y'are a woman, Dorus what make you ideling heere? is the field dung'd as I gave Directions, and the Calfe with the white face brought home to execution? Mus. I was carefull in my dutie. Pam. Beleeve me governor there is much hope of your servant, Dam. I, governour becomes you, I like it well when you carry an M vnder your girdle, our govern, he will do pritty well in time, when I have taught him the manners of the Cart, he begins whistle in tune already, and can curry favour with the horses, but now I remember my selfe I forgot what I came hither for, oh dee heare tis the king your fathers pleasure and mine, that you make haste to the lodge. Pam. Ile attend Dam. There will be gambolls to please my Lady Salamandor. Pam. Zelmane you would say. Dam. I care not what you say, but if you meane to heare the Dances and see the fine songs you must make haste; Dorus you shall have leave to shake your heeles, looke you be mannerly, and shew a cleane calf, Mopsa whats that you ha got there? Mop. A fine thing our man Dorus game, he saies tis a fish Dam. Tis a Codds head ist not, much came how you by this Mus. Following the plow I found it. Dam. Would all my acres were sowne with such, vmh dores he throw his stones at thee already, well set forward, if thou diest before me Dorus Ile make some body mine heire; if I out live thee, I wonot say what legacie I meane to bestow upon hee, Continue thy dutie Dorus and follow me with a re∣verence. Exeunt Enter Basilius, Gynecia, Pyrocles, Pamela, Philoclea, Mopsa, Musidorus, a Shepheards. Bas. Ladies our revells wants the state and glory
With which the Court delights might charme your senses Our sceane is naturall but interpret fairely 'twas meant A cure for times sicke feathers, and your mirth, Gy. Virtue will prompt you to Accept what was intended for your service Yet 'tis within my wishes to salute you With other testimony of your welcome. Pyr. I kisse your white hand, Gy. Every touch conveies a firce spirit through my blood I shall betray my suffering, and through my eyes Let out my heart, Philoclea sit Phi. Wilt please you rest your selfe? Pyr. Dwell heere for ever I am now but one degree from heaven, Phi. Since you imagine you are so neere, it is no sin I hope to entreate you staie with us a little, I would Wish tho to make you blest with too hastie a remove▪ Pyr. You are all goodnes, oh that I durst but give Some liberty to my imprisoned thoughts Gy. Philoclea you hinder the faire stranger. Pyr. Pardon me that am her trouble rather Bas. She should want vertue to call you so, but they begin Dametas is the steward for this dayes mirth I see. Enter Dametas And meanes to bring in the first course. Dam. Cupid is blind some say but there are lyes Abroad, for Cupid never wanted eyes He is a Deity with bow and arrow And he can pirce with it the very marrow And never hurt the bones, ist not a wonder. That flaming Ice should cut mans heart in sunder, Enter Cupid Shepheard Musedo. Mopsa and Miso: Behold the Dandiprat that liv'dat Court. But is come hether to make country sport A wooddy god; but yet a very Coult Among the maids who feele his furious boult. Now Cupid speake thy selfe or while they play Sing if you please I ha'not more to say.
Cupid. Tell me tydings of my mother. Shepheards, and be Cupids brother Downe from heaven we came together With swanns speede came she not hither? But what Lady have I spyde. Iust so was my mother eyde Such her smiles wherein I dwelt In those lips have I been felt Those the pillowes of her brest Which gave Cupid so much rest. 'Tis she 'tis she make holyday Shepheards Carroll Dance and play 'Tis Venus it can be no other Cupid now has found his mother Gy. This was your poetrie, Zelmane You are beholding to him, he would make You another I see, Bas. Gynecia Gy. I am silent—Philoclea is too neere I am not well'oth sudden, breake off your mirth Bas. What ayles Gynecia? Gy. My heart is sicke Pyr. Forbid it heaven Bas. Retire, come my Zelmane Pyr. I attend Bas. Looke to your charge Dametas Exeunt. Pam. I have a pretious time; will you pace it governor? Dam. Trot, amble or gallop Ile runne in your hand Lady. Exit. Mop. Come Dorus Mus. Your humble servant Exeunt. Pyr. Thou art cruell. To an innocent bosome love, there is no way Within thy power to save me, oh Philoclea Where shall I coole my heart, oh if there be One shaft can kill, good Cupid ayme at me. Exit.
Actus Secundus. Enter Gynecia and Miso. Mi. I warrant you Madam they shall have good lucke if they whisper together in my hearing, Gy. Where is Zelmane? Miso. In some of the Arbours, she tooke a Lute abroad with her but I left Philoclea with her father Gy. Prithee be carefull and watch them well good Miso Miso. They shano't scape me, Ile watch their waters narrow∣lie I warrant you. Exit. Gy. I see through his disguise 'tis so, and love Hath put this shape on him for Philoclea, In what a miserable flame I burne! Zelmane thou hast stolne. My vertue from me, I ha'not power to thinke A harmelesse thought, ha Musique, Musique. Song Pyrocles sings Enter Pyroclos. From whence breathes that sound? it is Zelmane. Pyr. What miserable accident brought her? Gy. Zelmane Pyr. Madam I hope you'l pardon The trespasse of a rude hand and voyce, I meant not This for your curious care Gy. 'Twas harmony Pyr. It was no light aire I'me sure Gy. Indeede it carried something me thought Of sorrowes descant, I heard love i'nt too Who is so happie to deserve a memorie But in your sigh, come whoe's your servant? Pyr. I have no servant. Gy. Nay then I see you can dissemble, my husband Py. Madam I hope Gy. Nay I am so farre from Iealosie I should not Be angry to see you both a bed together Pyr. How Madam Gy. Why I can love you too, come thou sha't be my bed-fellow
Pyr. I am not worthy Gy. Beleeve me I could take as much delight In thy imbraces as my husbands, why Are we so nice to one annother, I Am a woman, are not you so too? Why should we not be bould then, I have a mind To call thee Mistris, Yes and Ile disguise. My selfe in some queint shape to court thy love: Pyr. Disguise Gy. Nay do not blush: thou shalt be a man Pyr. Your discourse appeares. Strange to me Madam. Gy. As you would to me And yet you may as easily perceive Gynecias mindas I distinguish you Through all your clouds, Cupid doth dictate rarely. To those that come to schoole to him, instruct With hansome shaddowes to deceive the eye But cannot change my substance, I have a sense Can looke beyond the superficiall barke Come y'are transparen't Pyr. Madam what dee meane? Gy. What meanes Zelmane to be igonrant When a Queene pleads for love, my heart will not Allow more circumstance; doe not question How you became reveald, but pitty her Whose boosome is tormented with those fires Thy smiles the only greater flame can quench. Pyr. Pray heaven, you have your perfect senses. Gy. Then I must be plainer, and be witnesse love I am compell'd, be witnesse modesty, I now must blush for thee more then my selfe, A man, and be so cruell to a Lady Zelmane either give consent I shall be welcome to thee, or I vow by heaven To tell Basilius what thou art, I have Patience to let him court thee as a woman But when he see's his love abuse his privacie
And daughters so dishonor'd hadst thou a thousand Lives they were all forfeited by this So desperate in trusion, thinke uppon't A woman I have lost thee, wheither will Thetempest of my fate inforce my tongue Yet be thou kinde Zelmane if thou takst A glory in my suffering, Philoclea Does that name startle you? Philoclea My rivall now Pyr. Your rivall Gy. Come I am familliar with every thought Your deere saint shall repent it, for this hand Shall take againe the unluckie life I gave her: Turne not Gynecia fury Pyr. I am lost In the same minute I am found, I prithee Doe not forsake me heart, I never had More use of thee, great Queene can you forgive? Gy. And aske thy pardon, but beleeve me t'was Your strangenes did compell me to this language Py. I never thought that pitty of annother Could be a reason to betray my selfe But you have throughly charm'd me, and I must Deliver up my thoughts, the truth is Madam I am a man, and if you dare beleeve me A prince, I must confesse beside Gynecia Since I came heither I have had some sprinckling of I know not what affection to Philoclea For how could I imagine such a blessednes From you, but if you mocke not Gy. Ioyes reward your pittie Oh pardon the over chardg'd Gynecia Whose error may be yet made more excusable By the immortall name of love Pyr. This grace is worth more then Zelmane, and yet I Have nothing but my selfe to give you for it A small but free guift, bestow me as you please Gy. My soule is narrow to receive this wide blessing.
Pyr. But me must be wise It were not safe to be observ,'d stand I Discover'd to none else? Gy. To none Py. Then know I want no apprehension of what True lovers would desire, but your honor is My owne, if shortly to secure 'em both You let me study an opportunity Ile bring your wishes home, and blesse my starrs That pointed me the glorious fate, we are Already interrupted Enter Basilius and Philoclea. Bas. Doe this my deere Philoclea, and leave My cares to thee, Ile call Gynecia Away, and leave you both together, how Faireth the best Zelmane? Pyr. Still your servant Bas. Gynecia. Pyr. I cannot rule my eyes they will betray My cunning to Gynecia if she goe not Hence quickly Phi. How is it with my vertuous Amazon? Gy. Philoclea Bas. Let her alone, they have some busines sweete Gy. What busines can they have together? Bas. Why art thou troubled, thou would'st be jealous Of me I see, were I in privat with her, Come let 'em alone a while Gy. Stay you and spare not I would imploy Philoclea Bas. You shall obay me now, I prithee walke Exeunt. Phi, My father sweete Zelmane to whose command I owe my life Pyr. First let me give my life Vp to these lips, and take a new one from This kisse, oh deere Philoclea containe All other breath I know thy fathers minde Already, and must now beseech thy patience
To a short story which I must deliver Or dy before thee, if it be within My desteny to be condem'd by you At least know whom you sentence; I am Phi. What? I feare not well Pyr. Cannot your eyes discover me, have I a shrowd To hide me from Philoclea? did the kisse I gave thee last convey no secret to thee? There was a spirit in my lip assur'd me. To save the tedious trouble of my language. I heard it whisper something, did it not? I would be fraine undone Phi. Good heaven forbid Pyr. You wonot understand me yet Philoclea Then Ile undoe my selfe, I am not what I seeme Zelmane; but— Phi. What? P. A thing not worth the name, if you frowne on me, a man Phi. A man, good heaven Pyr. I have tould you all the worst If it be no offence to name a prince Whose memory your owne breath oft hath sweeten'd I dare be call'd Pyroclos of Macedon Transform'd by loving your faire selfe to this Feminine shape, if now I have not sinn'd Above forgivenes. Phi. Oh Philoclea Come not too neere I charge you; I would chide. But dare not, would you had not tould me this Indeed you were to blame, I must not heare you Excuse your selfe Pyr. She must not leave me thus But she returnes Phi. I have lost my selfe already, And love is but a blinde guide to direct My virgin steps, I faine would reply something But feele a tremblinge in my voyce, Zelmane My father, what account shall I give him Enter Basilius
I have said nothinge he commanded Bas. She smiles Pyr. My Lord I see you can use the advantage And I did arme you against my selfe; I did not Thinke when I advis'd you make Philoclea Your advocate, she could so much have wonne Vpon me, but my counsell has betray'd me, Pray thinke me not immodest, if my words Doe fall too rudely from me, your faire daughter Whose tongue would lay a charme uppon the gods, Hath gain'd all this. Bas. The gods reward her for it Phi. Was this his plot? Bas. A thousand blessings overtake my child But not a word, not a word Philoclea To thy mother Phi. I have learnt my duty sir Pyr. Beshrew your haste Bas. Remove, convey thy selfe away deere girle, Ile follow Phi. My heart is full, and tho my tongue denies Him farwell, he may reade it in my eye. Exit. Bas. I knew thou couldst not choose at last but give My heart an audience; I am not my selfe With the imagination Pyr. Of what? Bas. Of any thing; come I allow thee modest, it is not fit we should say our pleasures, sweete but act them Pyr. You are to violent my Lord, I shall Repent my freedome, if you give no limit To your desires, if you doe love your servant, Husband your flame that it may last Bas. It shall Pardon me deere Zelmane, I have a stock Of blood, tho you may thinke it could is high And active as the veynes of promising youth I weare this snow but a disguise Pyr. Poore winter, Bas. My haires are black at roote, and shall grow up
Faire as the Ebony and curle themselues Into a thousand pretty caves for love It selfe to sit that best delights in darknes Pyr. This will be strange. Bas. 'Tis you that worke these miracles Vpon Basilius, as I came heither I felt a score of yeares drop off, which hung Vpon my locks Pyr. A score of haires you meane: tis molting time Containe your selfe a while, you have A jealous queene, and yet it goes against my Conscience To wrong so sweete a Lady, pray my Lord Thinke better ont Bas. This Does inflame me more Be not so cruell to remember her Thou must preserve my life. Py. Well I ha thought a way Shall perfect all without suspition There is a cave hard by which nature made Intending well to lovers, thether will I With licence of your grace pretending To exercise a few dayes some devotions We Amazons have obligation to At some convenient houre. Bas. May I come to thee Pyr. Ile give you notice in some evening Bas. Zelmane now thou dostravish me Py. You may with ease secure all at the lodge Bas. Most excellent Pyr. I imagin sir the rest but doe not come till I desire you Bas. Be not tedious then, I will prepare all this Pyr. I hope you doe not Conclude me impudent that I encline To doe this for you, by my hopes of a blest Eternitie nor love nor lust ere tempted My thoughts to yeild thus much to any man Be carefull of my honor. Bas. Oh devine Zelmane keepe my soule. Exit.
Pyr. Philoclea mine Enter Musidorus Mus. Oh my deere Pyrocles Pyr. How ist deere Cozen Mus. Never till now could you salute me happy The gods have beene propitious Pyr, Will she know thee yet? Mus. There's nothing wants to make me perfect blest But to heare thee pronounce thy love as fortunate The envious clouds which interpose themselves Like a darke Curtaine ore Pamelas face. Are drawne away and I enjoy her smile She does beleeve my proofes, sweetely excusing Her long neglect, and promiseth as much As I dare aske: sheel' trust me with her person I want but opportunity to deceive Our waking Dragons;—and in good time Dametas. Enter Dame Away you shall know all my fate hereafter, Pyr. I joy in thy successe, pray thou for mine. Exit. Dam. Where is this rascall Dorus Mus. Whether were I best to tell the King ont first or seeke out Dametas, hee'l never be able to spend it, there may be gold Enough to purchase halfe Arcadia Dam. Vmh, what's that? Mus. Ile seeke him out at all adventures; oh sr, pray is this Gold—and this and this? Dam. Ha gold, yes very good gold, where hadst it Mus. You shall heare more hereafter Dam. Dorus, honest Dorus, put on thy hat, where where, hadst it Mus. Did you never heare of one Aristomines? Dam. He was banish'd Arcadia Mus. Was he rich Dam. Infinite rich, so rich Mus. 'Tis so, belike he there had all his treasure Dam. What treasure, where i'st honest Dorus tell me Mus. You are my Master and may be my Father Dam. My sonne Dorus, Mopsa is thine, and she were made of as pure gold as this, thou shouldst touch her, and melt her Mus. Well I see it was ordained to make you rich
In dutie Ile discover it, and yet— Drm. Out with it good Dorus Mus. Well—sitting beneath an oake that shall be namelesse I chanc'd to turne up some turff with my mole-spade Dam. With thy mole spade, what then Mus. I saw a yellow brightnes peeping out oth' ground, which when I came to examine I prv'd this mettall, I this was the first, y'are sure 'tis gold, you shall pardon me for the rest but if these will do you any pleasure, or twentie more Dam. Nay good honest Dorus proceede. Mus. Why the truth is I suspect where a great treasure has been Long buried, these it seemes were scatter'd when the rest Went to the pit-hole. Dam. But where is this place good Dorus? thou hast no more About thee Mus. No but if you please to furnish me with tooles Ile trye The bottome; I digd till I came to a stone, whose inscription Promis'd something worth a mans labour Dam. Did it sound Mus. Melodiously a goulden tune Dam. Where, where, thou maist tell me thou knowest I Am secret Mus. For Mopsa sake I will reveal't, you know▪ The oake where you first met me Dam. Ha very well Mus. On the right side of that same spreading tree Lies all this riches Dam. As th'art honest Mus. As I hope to be deere Mopsa's husbad, Ile get strong tooles And bring you better proofe Dam. Stay Dorus stay, let me see As I intend to be your father Dorus And so in Mopsas name make you my heire Of all my wealth, good Dorus I am yet Till things and things be done your Master Dorus Beside that ground is mine, the Oake is mine Where under lies this treasure, I am Lord Lord of the soyle my Dorus, of the soile
I am content to be a ground for you To build to hopes on Dorus, but my ground No man shall dig or build on but my selfe On such as this, be there a myne Of Coyne or vncoyne mettall it is mine All may be yours annother day my Dorus. Mus. I know my duty sir and cannot thinke The gods had ere a lotted my free mind To serve you but for some strange end Dam. In this thou shewst it, keepe all close, not a word Dorus, I take no leave be carefull my good Dorus of my young Madam, 'tis a charge I turne over to thee, over looke her well. Mus. I meane to doe it doubly Dam How, ha you a duble meaning? Mus. I meane with double care Dam. Honest Dorus 'tis the last service I shall put thee to Mus. I hope so to Dam. Now to the Oake my golden land marke Mus. Load a horse with tooles sir Dam. Mattocks and shovells Mus. Hookes and ladders. Dam. Spade and Pickaxes Mus. Ropes and daggers; youl have no helpe Dam. No no, a mans owne toyle Sweeter the profit makes in his owne soyle. Exit Mus Goe thy wayes for the Lord a'th soyle Theres one blocke out a'th way the golden flie, Has caught this trowte, my jealous Mistris I Hope she ore heard not Mis. Oh that my eares had beene long enough to have heard some of there pretious Knaverie Mus. It were but charitie to tell her on't, little does my Mistris Thinke what a flesh flie my Master is, Mis. What saies the Knave Mus. Tho she be a little stricken in yeares she is hansome enough For as good a man as Dametas, and he to runne neighing A this fashion after a blowse, and then put me to make excuse
For him, 'tis not right. Mis. Oh fidious Rascall, I thought there was some roguerie, Dorus as thou com'st of a woman tell me Mus. What forsooth Mis. Oh naughty man to vse an honost woman the wrong way thus, have I beene married so many yeares, and carried my selfe like his lawfull wife uprising and downe lying as they say, so even and jumpe with his desires to be thus handled, but Ile be reveng'd it shall fall heavie vpon his head for this I warrant him, nay I did alwaies suspect him for a cot Mus. What meane you forsooth, Mis. Come I ouer-heard somewhat to my griefe, and therefore leaue your bogling and your trim tram tricks you must not flap me oth mouth with fleering and with flams whilst he Mus. Claps vp another betwixt the—a ha mistris mistris but you say you overheard, and therefore if you know whether he is gone you may come two houres hence time enough to prevent the blow. Mis. If thou lookest to have my daughter with, marke what I say Mus. With fathers marke and mothers marke, and every mark about her Mis. If you conceale any thing in this case, thou knowst no case of her, nay tho thy teeth water out the liquor of thy life, thou shouldst not get a bit, the worst bit of her. Mus. Be more charitable Mis. Or if thou chance to get her gainst my will ile teach her a tricke of the mother shall make thee curse her and all the brood she came one, Mus. What is Charita to me, I know you heard him name her. Mis. Charita. Mus. I will discharge my conscience and yet if you over∣heard us without my telling, you know where hee appointed to meet her this evening at Mantinea at her fathers in Ondemi∣on streete, Mis Ondemion street? Mus. I doe not betray him now if you provide so happily to take em at it mistris at it.
Mis. I at it, how I itch to be at it Mus. Saddle your mare. Mis. They shal not scape with halfe an eie betwixt them. Exit. Enter Pamela and Mopsa. Mus. I have given her the bells and she will flye to the de∣vill —here comes the tother I ha given her phisicke already fit for her constitution and now it works. Pam. How comes it Mopsa that you are so taken So lifted up with high conceit? Mop. Who I Pam. Yes Mapsa you, dee thinke I cannot Iudge By outward gestures and your lookes what joy Doth inwardly possesse you Mop. Who me Pam. Yes you againe, and it were not over bouldnesse To request some knowledge of the cause Mop. Rest you content; you are a Princesse borne I might have beene so to, some body may be a Queene before you, make what you can of that Pan. Oh fate how's this Mop. There is a tree, and there is things worth wishing, and some may wish and wishes may be had make what you can of that too Mus. To my wish it workes Pam. But Mopsa may I not beseech a word That may be to my understanding Mop. You may know more hereafter, but till then I must pre∣sume upon your Princely patience to keepe your Chamber, it is now my raigne and doe not dare to follow Pam. Not I, when you are drawne up to majesty I can but wish you graciously would then Remember the obedience of your handmaide That first submits her selfe to your Command. Mop. I faith I will Pamela, and reward it, goe in sweete Lady, on my Royall word I will, Exit Pamela. Mus. She has spide me Mop. Happy Dorus Mus. What will my Mopsa say when she has climb'd
The tree of happines? Mop. I I the tree, when I climbe that tree, hony Dorus tell me it over agen, my deere bird what did Iupiter to Apollo. Mus. Vpon some falling out I tould you Jupiter threw Apollo out of heaven and his deitie taken away he was faine to live upon the earth and keepe Admetas Cattell, in the time of his service being sent to fetch abreede of beasts out of Arcadia, in this very desart he grew fainte and wearie; and would needs rest himselfe in the boughes of an Ashen tree. Mop. The tree we wot of; on sweete bird Mus. Apollo in that tree calling to minde his quarrell with Iupiter became very sorrowfull, and pittifully complayning to his father, asking him mercie for having offended him was from that tree receiv'd into his golden spheare, and made a god agen Mop. Oh brave Mus. Having the perfect nature of a god Never to be ingratefull he then granted A double life to Admetas, and because That tree was chappell of his happy prayers To it he gave this quality Mop. Now it comes Mus. That whosoever sat downe in that tree In like estate and sort as he did then Mop. Oh now now now. Mus. Should forthwith have there their wish Mop. Oh the tree, the tree, the tree Mus. The king vnderstood thus much by Oracle; and tried himselfe but being neither heardman as then Apollo was, nor of the race which is necessarie, delivered this secret to your father but made him sweare to wish by his direction; for his owne bene∣fit Dametas tould it me, and is now gon to furnish himselfe with a scarlet Cloake for in that he must be mufled just as Apollo was, I might now prevent'em all and be king my selfe, but what have I to wish more then the love of Mopsa which since without more charming force you yeild me; Ile fit you with a cloake and then wish what you will your selfe Mop. Ile be Queene or Apollo shall never looke me in the face agen, quickly sweet Dorus, come muffle me I long to be Queene,
and my father shall aske me blessing. Exeunt Actus Tertius. Enter Rebells and Thumbe Cap. COme my masters let us be resolute, is there any man That will justifie himselfe to be sober amongst us? 2. No hang sobriety Cap. We must be valiant, the King I say agen has left us, and since He scornes our company for my part I scorne to be his subject 3. I I scorne subjects, Ile be an Emperor 2. It is time to looke into the government, none but Gentle∣men are of his Counsell, I see no reason since the Countrie is 'ours but we should have a stroake in the state. Cap. That was bravely spoke my bully, stroke, heby Mars his Gauntlet spoke like a souldier, I doe not like the Carriage of the secret Counsells 3. Nor I nor any body Thu. Take heede my Masters 3. Lets heare Thumbe the Miller Thu. We met together to drinke in honour of the Kings birth∣day and tho we have tickled the Cannikins, let vs be merrie and wise that's my opinion, no treason, the King is an honest Gentle∣man, and so is the Queene. 3. Very wisely spoken. Cap. But shall be govern'd by Philonax': 2. Who knowes but he has made away the King Th. Made away the King, who honest Basilius, aske the King who has made him away, by this hand if I thought they had made him away I would make some body away, tho I hang'd fort, but neighbors for my owne part I will joyne with you in any thing that is honorable, dee marke honorable; but I say still I am cleare of opinion it is not a misse to be merry and wise Gentlemen, my name's Thumbe,
3. I Tom Th. And Ile be a your side howsoever 3. A great spirit Cap. Shall I speake for you Omnes. I I agreed you shall be Captaine Cap. Why then let me alone; I will know a reason why hee has left the government without our consents to depose him, 'tis wisely spoken mybrave men 'oth common-wealth, we will have other lawes and the old shall be executed 3. I I hang the old ones 2. 'Tis a discredit for any subjects as we are to have a King as if we were not able to governe our selves Cap Stroake up thy forehead thou wert borne to be a statesman, Be rul'd by me and weel have no justice in Arcadia 2. How Cap. No justice, why should we loose our liberties, and being free men, upon any occasion suffer our selues to be bound over Th. Gentlemen Citizens it were very good you would take into your consideration the statute against drunkennesse Cap. It shall be lawfull for any man to be drunke without forfeiting or paying anything to the poore Th. Very good, every man drinke away his estate, and then charity begins at home, Cap. No man shall marrie 2. That's worse then the statute against two wives Cap, For every woman shall be common 3. Every woman common, what shall we doe withall the proper women in Arcadia Cap. They shall be common too 3. Oh'rare, and what shall we doe withall the prisons Cap. Set'em a fire 'twill warme the Citie when there is cold doings 2. What with the prisoners Cap. Put'em in possession of their creditors lands, they are the only men fit for authority; for no men are us'd worst, and they will know the better to domineere, nay weel have admirable lawes, but who shall be this Embassador to the King 4. Me me choose me Captaine,
Th Choose you Captaine, Haberdasher of small wares, choose you a Capon, Ile be the Embassador, ever while you live let a bould man be embassador, and one that has a braine, I will not be mealc mouth'd. 3. Well said Miller Cap. And because we will be wise Th. I I be merry and wise, ever while you live be sober and discreete. Cap. Say weattend heere to do our duties 3. Duties oh base Cap Say so we must, heel not come forth else 4. What if I could his highnes there was a dance to be pre∣sented we are furnish'd with our noise still Th. I I, I doe love this noise withall my heart 2. Excellent, get you behind the trees with your instruments, and tune 'em ready, the new friske we danc'd at Enispies to day will serve rarely as the Prologue, away; but Captaine what shall we doe with the Kings daughters Cap. Ile have one 3. And Ile ha the tother our Captaine shall ha the Queene 2. And what shall we have. Cap. Thereare Ladies about the Court will content you Thu. I will have both the Kings daughters, and he that speakes against it— They fight Cap. Thumbe valiant Thumbe, all spirit no mutinie no mutinie all of a faction together by the eares for a peece of venison Th. I will have both the Kings daughters or else I shall not be satisfied. Cap. First let vs know the Kings resolution, and if we like not our conditions, the hares a foote; and every man take what course he please in my Lords Parke Enter Basilius, Gynecia, Pyrocles, and Philoclea. But stay the King vmh 2. Speake Captaine Cap. If it please your Maiesty, what was it resolu'd upon 3. Hees out, let me come to him, prithee doe thou tell him thy minde, that delicome wench has made my teeth water 2. And drown'd thy tongue, a Company of bashfull shrimpes;
if I but open my mouth, I say no more Th. King, by your leave; which is the King, my eyes twinckle, we have beene playing the good fellowes to celebrate your majesticall birth day, will your grace see a song 3. A dance Th. Or a dance, alls one, our seete are in tune, strike up behinde the tree, you are the King and I am the Miller, ther's all the difference, sweete Ladies my name is Thumbe Bas. This is rudenesse Gy. Pardon their simplicity Th. Ile have that wench she lookes like Hercules, Omnes, Stand Cap. We have intorrogations points to put to you Bas. Treason, treason, Pyr. Barborous Villaines Basilius runnes in, a bell rings, Philoclea, and Gynecia hid themselves, Pyrocles fights with them, Basilius comes in with a two handed sword, after some skirmish Enter Philonax and Calander with a guard the Rebells beaten off. Pyr. Where is Philoclea Phi. Heere art thou not hurt Zelmane. My soule at every stroake made against thee Was leaving my palebody Py. Deere Madam are you safe Bas. I thinke I ha pepper'd some of 'em, Philonax 'twas not amisse you came, but Zelmane and I should have made a shift Pyr. You alone my Lord, were an army against such reeling vallors, I did not thinke you could ha bestir'd your selfe so well Bas. And I were in an other place alone with thee I could best my selfe better Cal. I would you would consider yet to quit This dangerous kinde of life Phi. Had not the valiant Amazon it seemes, defenc'd your person Ere the troopes ariv'd, it might have prov'd too fatall Gy. He plaide the man indeede, the King is troubled And thinks me Iealous of him, lasse old man
Bas. No more Waite upon our Queene and daughter, weel follow Exit. I am wounded Pyr. How Bas. By thee Zelmane Pyr. I see your passions are the same and I This might resolue to waite for you in the Cave If you when your Gynecia is a bed And fast a sleepe, (be sure of that) will please To put your selfe to a short travell, I Shall not expresse your welcome, but Bas. Deere as my soule I apprehend my comfort One kisse in earnest of the million Thou shalt receive, but carrie it close Zelmane Exeunt Enter Musidorus, and Mopsa. Mus. This is the Tree Mop. Oh let me kisse it toes Mus. Best loose no time Mop. Haile upon haile sweete tree, Crowne thee and all thy wishes, Oh Dorus up womee Dorus, up womee, up womee, up womee Dorus, teach mee to clymbe the right way prithee Mus. You must be muffled in the cloake, so now remember your instructions, make first your invocation to Apollo as I tould you, which being done, imploy your minde withall devotion to his deity, untill you heare a voyce call three times on you by your name, tho you should thinke your father mother Pamela or my selfe talke to you answer not they are spirits that would delude. Mop. Vnder three Mopsas Ile not talke to 'em, Ile not be cozend Mus. Hold there and youl' be happy Mop. Ile aske a king to my husand, and thou shalt be he Mus. Your invocation. Mop. Into the greate eares of Apollo Now let my invocation hollow Oh thou that lightest all the day For some to worke and some to play By owle light now Incline a gracious eare to me
Thus▪ muffled in thy wishing Singing whoope whoope who And pardon this my subtilty That I deceive the passers by I in this bough Doe use the accentes of that fowle Because I would be thought an Owle With whoope whoope whoee Enter Pamela. Mus. She has done her invocation Pam. Can she not heare us Mus. She shall heare us, but I have taken order with her eyes and understanding too, sheel not beleeve us, thou lovely bird Madge howlet Mop. That's a spirit in the voyce of Dorus, but Ile not answer. Mus. See Dorus and Pamela both are heere Whilst old Dametas Miso, and their deere Daughter are stragled forth, they both together Are taking now their flight, and who knowes whether Pam. This is too plaine Mop. Oh cunning Divells, but Ile not heare nor speake a sillable Mus. If thou canst finde a tongue to tell Dametas, Make knowne unto his wisdome he is gull'd Take courage Madam the way lies faire before us And abarque already prepard cries come a bour'd Farewell Howlet Exeunt Musidorus and Pamela Dametas sings within Mop. Whoope whoope whooe—Hey I heare another singing spirit in my fathers voyce, bee't Apollo himselfe, under three Mopsas Ile not speake Enter Dametas Dam. This is the tree, and heere the earth is broken The certaine signe left by my trusty Dorus The mouth of the rich treasure I salute thee And kisse the hole from whence shall come my gold Which being done blithly to worke I fall My hand is in the moone-shine, and up goes all
Mop. Whoope whoope, whooe Dam, What's that; an Owle, good Misis Margerie I am busie Art thou poore and wouldst thou be advanc'd by wealth to Dignity doe not thinke it then vnmeete to stoope with hands beneath thy feete 'Tis not with hand over head to be found no o thou must stoope though thou holdst up thy poope and grable for't in ground Ha what's this, my hand is in the Hony pot I thinke, vmh vmh I doe not like the softnes, I did groape for harder stuffe, if this be gold 'tis liquid, and yet too thicke to be potable as they say, it has a kinde of weft me thinks if I have not lost a sence upon the sudden, I smell, call you this gold finding Mop. I have an extreame list now so I have saving your pre∣sence, divell would restore your sence Dam. What's this, a written parchment this may be the inven∣tory of all the treasure. Who hath his hire hath well his labor plac'd Earth thou didst seeke, and store of earth thou hast Howe's this Mop. Whoope whoope whooe Dam. As sure as this is my owne nose, I am stinkingly abus'd Mop. Ha ha ha, Dam. Can Madge Howlets laugh, that laugh was like my Daughter Mopsa Mop. There's one time, againe againe sweete Apollo Dam. 'Tis her voyce what makes she there, now the dread vengeance of my deere fatherly curse, light over th'wart thee thou aukeward helding Mopsa Mop. There's two times, Mopsa once more and 'tis Apollo
Dam. Will you not answer in the Divells name Mopsa I say, oh are you come he strickes she falls. Mop. Yes yes divine Apollo Dam. Ile unhoode yee wheres Pamela Mop. Thanke your Deitie Dam. Speake now and tell me Mop. Answer my wishes as 'thou art Phebus, as thou art Apollo tho in the likenesse of the Clowne my father, grant me my wishes first, I aske a King to be my husband. Dam. What talkest thou of a King; the King will hang thy father if Pamela be gon Mop. Let him be hang'd I care not, but let Dorus be a King, and let him be my husband good Apollo Dam. Shee's starke staring mad, hast thou forgot thy father, where is thy wit Mop. I doe not aske for wit, I tell thee, let me have a sufficient husband and let him be a King Dam. Thou shal't have thy bellifull of husbands Mop. Oh that, that, that Enter Miso Miso. Ile at you both thou ribald villaine and thou harlot Dam. Miso my spouse falne mad too Thou wot not beate thy mother Miso. Oh me Mop. I defie her and thee and thou beest not Apollo, Dam. Oh who has gulled us all, deere Miso, tender Mopsa heare me, before I open my mouth, art not thou Miso, and thou my daughter Mopsa, oh we are all vndone we are all vndone Mop. Are not you god Apollo Dam. No as ever I hope to see him or any of his fellowes in the face againe, I am mortall Dametas and I thinke thy fa∣ther, I am sure I am by thy mothers side, where is Pamela all this while, whoes at home. Mop. As sure as you are my father and you my mother, theres No body at home Dam. Shee's gon, shee's gon Mop. Dorus and Pamela, or two feends with their voyces pastby whilst
I was in Apollos tree Miso. Apollos tree Dam. Cast off your wonder I am not such an asse, but I perceive We are gull'd Mop. So Divell Dorus tould me Miso. Oh me they are gon, was this your care Mop. Nay then where was your owne. Dam. Fall not at odds bout that, but goe with me And helpe me to scape the gallow tree. Exeunt▪ Enter Gynecia and Pyrocles, with a Taper. Gy. Did I not counterfeit an infirmitie Pyr. Rarely, how love will prompt his votarie The King suspects not what we purpose Gy. Las poore man, how carefull he seem'd of my health And councell'd me to bed Pyr. I smil'd to see it Gy. So soone as he is a sleepe expect me Pyr. Stay, oth suddaine I ha thought upon a way Blessed blessed minute. Gy. What's the device Pyr. You shan'ot goe to bed Gy. Not I Pyr. God Genius I will not trust our worke to fortune if You should want cunning in your passions Or he should wake unhappily and finde You absent, all were lost, to prevent this You shall not come to me if there be danger 'Tis fit I be expos'd Ile take your place And disaray me for Basilius bed. De'e marke, muffled up for your suppos'd Distemper, let me alone to counterfeit Dulnes, and when his sences are chain'd up In sleepe, I will come downe toth cave to you But take my mantle if any of Dametas People meete you Gy. I will visit bu my Closet And follow thy instructions, Exit.
Py. If there be any starrs are kinde to love This night shoote forth your golden heads, be thou Bright moone propitious; on all eyes that would Betray our flight, cast out a fullen mist And hide thy silver cressent in a cloud, But to our passage be a gentle goddesse And borrow of thy brother yet more light The day may spare it, Musidorus is Enter Gynecia with a golden Violl. Embark'd already with his Mistris, If I obtaine Philocleas consent Gy. Zelmane now I am prepar'd Pyr. Haste to the Cave, expect, Your servants visit Gy. And my happines Exit. Py. How rudely vice becomes us, here's a Lady Whom never fame yet blemish'd, now the example Of Cupids tyranie, love transformes us all And fooles our understandings, I pittie her▪ Now are Basilius thoughts in motion And hurry him to the same licentiousnes. There is warme snow I see, he delaies time. In hope to finde his Queene asleepe, whose place I must assume for once, love dwells upon A cliffe and all the waies to our enjoying Are difficult and ragged, But I forget, Basilius, I must Compose me for his bed, I shannot be Much troubled, good old King he wishes me Lutes Recorders Exit. Good rest I know, and secure dreames, oh see Philoclea what waies I come to thee Enter Basilius. Bas. These sounds may charme her into slumbers sweetly Oh steale into her, hang upon her heart, Come fixe your gentle raptures in her soule That it may take delight to be orecome And never wake the body, till Basilius Returne with happy Conquest from Zelmane Or if there be a leaden god of sleepe.
Heere let him shake his wings and then dispatch A Herrald to the silent house of dreames To bring one hither happier then the rest Enter Philoclea To entertaine my melancholly Queene; oh Philoclea Thy mother will excuse thee this nights dutie Doe not disturbe her, yet your voyce and Lute 'Ith next Chamber may procure her sleepe That done without more ceremony goe Exit Philoclea To bed, so so my bloud begins to move Shee's fast, I heare her, and the musique ceast, Now to Zelmane. Agen loude Exit. Enter Philoclea. Phi. I'me troubled, and dare not goe to bed There's some thing whispers to my soule this will Will be a fatall night, my mother is not well I must needs see her—ha, the gods protect me Enter Pyrocles Pyr. If there were any treason meant against Philoclea her prayers were vainely offerd, Since hr owne innocence is protection As powerfull as the Gods, I bring no horror To fright your blood, dee not know me Lady I was Zelmane, Phi. Was Pyr. I have been So watched by your Ielous mother Phi. Ha. Pyr. But I forget Phi. What meane you? Pyr. To make fast the doores If I could barre all the aire out saving what Your breath should draw, for should I live by that You would not chide my care Phi. You make me tremble. Pyr. If you cannot forgive me punish pray This rudenes with my death; I prostrate to Your feete my sword, and call you to my brest To meete your anger, at this distance beg I may behould you, but when you shall finde
In the dissection of my heart, whose name Hath fill'd it, and with what religion there My thoughts adore your memory, too late It may invite your teares, can faire Philoclea Thinke I have a soule that dare be wicked to her? Such lookes would charme a ravisher, and throw Ice through a Satires blood, but a man chaste Already it drawes up to the simplicitie And nature of an Angell, oh Philoclea I am so farre from being ill my selfe In such a sensuall way, that although time And this faire opportunity might tempt And excuse wanton heate, I should repent Forget to, love your selfe, if you but with One thought so treacherous to your virgin honor Should give consent to enioy you, it hath snow Vpon my blood Philoclea, whose flowings Are Chast as Christall: dare you trust me yet To kisse your hand, my lips shall gently touch it Nor will I leave a breath to staine the whitenesse Pray be not fearefull. Phi. Sin did never yet Prophane that voyce. Pyr. When it sounds lustfully Your hate, a punishment next the wrath of heaven Strike my heart dead—be pleas'd to rest a little And if you dare vouch safe me to sit so neere you▪ I have much to tell you Phi. I know not what to say, where is my father I had a mother too, this Chamber they Vs'd to call their's Pyr. They are safe Philoclea, Let not your cheeke looke pale, their absence wrought For such a minute doth encourage me To tell you now or never you must shew There dwells a pittle in you, oh looke smooth On him whose life and fortunes you may now Advance or ruine ever, if you can
Remember who I am, and what your vertue Hath made me suster, thinke me worthy of A life, let it begin from your consent To love poore Pyrocles, 'tis in your power To be no more a prisoner to this rude And solitarie dwelling, such a brightnes Is lost in caves, extend your arme and reach A throane where seated with becomming greatnes You may disperse with moving of your eye An influence beyond the starrs, and quicken A world that waites to be your creature Phi. Pyrocles For so you call your selfe, and such I dare Beleeve you are, for falsehood cannot dwell A neighbor to that tongue although I might Demand with reason, and my dutie first What does concerne my parents, such a truth Shines in your language, and such Innocence In what you call affection, I must Declare you have not plac'd one good thought heere Which is not answerd with my heart, the fire Which sparkled in your bosome long since leap'd Into my brest and there burnes modestly It would have spread into a greater flame But still I curb'd it with my teares, oh Pyrocles I would thou wert Zelmane agen, and yet I must confesse I lov'd thee then, I know not With what propheticke soule but I did wish Often, thou were no man, or I no woman Pyr. Thou wert the comfort of my sleepes Phi. And you The object of my watches, when the night Wanted a spell to cast me into slumber Yet when the weight of my owne thoughts grew heavie For my teare dropping eyes, and drew these Curtaines My dreames wert still of thee, forgive my blushes And the imagination thou wert then My harmelesse bed fellow
Pyr. I arive too soone At my desires, gently oh gently drop These joyes into me, least at once let fall I sinke beneath the tempest of my blessings And you swell my heart too fast Phi. If yo be Pyrocles You will rest satisfied with this confession You onely shall obtaine my love Pyr. Although my soule acknowledge this a blessing Such as no service can reward enough There remaines something, something which your honor May easily consent to in this absence Of both your parents whom with severall promises Of my returne, I have already sent To 'th Cave where they in vaine this night expect me We must for sake this place, I have provided For our conueiance to my fathers kingdome If after all these arguments of love You dare trust Pyrocles to convey you thether, Phi, I dare give thee my life, but pardom me This is not safe, thus seeking to assure. You may vntimely happen loose Philoclea My dutie binds me not to rob my parents, Such a departure may undoe their comfort As y'are a prince perswade me not commit So unnaturall a trespasse, weel expect And satisfie our young desires till time Mature our joy, I could content my selfe To looke on Pyrocles and thinke it happines Enough, or if my soule affect variety Of pleasure every accent of thy voyce Shall Court me with new rapture, and if these Delights be narrow for us there is left A modest kisse, whose every touch conveies Our melting soules into each others lipes, Why should not you be pleas'd to looke on me To heare and sometimes kisse Philoclea
Indeed you make me blush Pyr. What an Ecclips Hath that vaile made, it was not night till now Looke if the starres have not withdrawne themselves As they had waited on her richer brightnes. And missing of her eyes are stolen to bed, What world of beauty is behinde that cloud But keepe it still conceal'd, and let the creatures When they shall misse day (for the same without Thine eyes will glimmer like a petty taper) Feare to be lost in darkenes, and expect No light to follow, but from those wide flames Which heaven hath threaten'd to destroy the world, When thou hast frighted us renew againe Our state and cure againe the fainting vniverse One looke restores all—ha, Philoclea. Phi. There's something that sits heavy on my forehead I know you cannot but be noble, pray A little sleepe, if I exceede three minutes Prithee wake me Pyr. Ha, I doe not like Her sences should be snatchd away so strangely 'Tis an ill omen, I should trespasse much Gainst manners, to disturbe her, beside she Did make it her request whose will is sacred, Then gently may she sleepe, and yet if she Draw out this slumber to any length my hopes Are blasted, if I loose this opportunitie Of flight, no hope hereafter can releeve us We are both undone, she sleepes still, I was not Quicke enough to perswade her resolution So necessarie, yet looke up Philoclea, No, then enjoy thy dreame, and let us try The kindnes of our fate, pitty a harsh Sound should disturbe thy oft repose, I would But dare not steale a kisse for feare to wake her, And yet my loude voyce may be more offensive Our soules are knit I see into one love
Then 'tis but reason they should exercise Both the same act, why doe not I sleepe too The mist is falne already, if I but dreame of her My slumbers shall be happy he sleepes Enter Damtas as from a Vault. Dam. There be more wayes to the woode then one, she may be in her sisters Chamber, I may thanke my acquaintance with the Buttery and a trap doore for this passage; shee has shut me out of doores of all: vmh a sword I had rather it were Pamela naked, I durst undertake to handle her with lesse feare; vmh Philoclea; 'tis she and this is-no—this is not Pamela, she was a woman, unlesse she be crept into breeches since I left her, no 'tis a man, heere is no tarrying for me; and he were not soundly a sleepe, my smell were enough to wake him;—treason treason Exit. Py. Ha, what voyce is that, who cryes out treason? Phi. Pyrocles what's the matter? Pyr. Nothing Within. Treason, treason. Pyr. Harke, ist not treason, my sword, my sword Is gon, we are betray'd, some theefe has been Within the Chamber, yet the doores are safe▪ ha Lets see, search every where, alas Philoclea If now I must be ravisht from thee, how Can there be charity enough on earth To pitty me, they die but once who still Dispaire of blisse; but the Fares twise destroy A lover whom they kill so neere his ioy. Exeunt. Actus Quartus. Enter Rebells. Cap. COme my bloods since there is no hope of our pardons let us be honest out-lawes one to another, and doe all the mischeife we can, we are Masters of the Woods, and we will domineere like Lords of the soyle; I say we will live, we will eate and we will drinke.
3. Would I were at my forge againe Cap. Arcadia shall be thy Anvile smith; and thou maist live to beate Great men to dust 2. Some of them are so rotten they will save us a labor Cap. Be resolute and strike the iron while it is hot, where is the little miller 3. Thumbe the miller is cut off Cap. Who can helpe it, be not crest falen, but shew your selues Cockes of the game, weel make the state send for us home, and agree to our own conditions, let vs therefore play the theeves manfully 3. And so be hang'd honorably Cap. Hang hang ng, we defie the lawes and we will execute when we list in our owne quarters we will rob man woman and child 2. Do you fight with the men, and let me alone with the women. 1. And Thumbe had he beene alive he had been a fit match for the children Enter 4. Rebell. 4. A prise a Captaine, I see a Gentleman and a Lady strike into a grove hard by, their horses are for their better be∣havior, already bound to a tree, follow me and Ile conduct Cap. Without noyse or tumult lets steale upon them Enter Musidorus and Pamela. Pam. This grove is all one bower, nature her selfe Must be delighted to dwell heere, the Sunne Can shoote no beame upon us through this Arbe Tho he does rage abroad Mus. The heate betrayes The Sunne is angry Madam to see you Whose brightnes takes all wonder from his shine And leave him a pale starr. Pam. You complement. Mus. Are you not weary Madam Pam. I shall never In thy societie, yet we may ret A little in this shade, oh M He should be enemy to vertue now
To cherrish one suspectfull thought of thee Some wild licencious Prince had now  me And carelesse of his owne ruin'd my honor. Mus. It were not simple theft but Sacriledge To rob you of one peacefull thought, if any Service already have obtaind so much Trust I am so familliar with mine owne Desires, that hereafter Ile deserve to keepe Your faire opinion of me, lust could never Intrude himselfe a guest heere, I should not Love mine owne eyes, had they been but tempted To see an unchast picture with delight Pam. What's that behinde the trees? Mus. Nothing, the birds are dancing on the leaves Call'd heither by the musique of your tongue Those that are silent doe but listen to Your voyce to mend their singing Pam. Still methinkes I heare annother noyse Mus. It is your feare Pam. There's some thing whispers Mus. Shall I tell Pamela Pam. Pray if you can Mus. It is the winde that would Steale through the boughes to give you more refreshing Whom the trees envie, I doe heare it murmer To be kept from your lips which it would kisse And mixing with your breath catch odors thence Enough to sweeten all the wood, there can No other danger enter heere The Rebells cease upon Pamela Pam. We are betray'd helpe Mus. Ha, villaines, y'ad better lay violent hands Vpon your mothers Cap. Let your courage coole, and heare us you were best If you doe love this Gentlewomans life. Put up your toole, dee see this bdkin sir With it, Ile punch her heart, if you but offer A blow at any of my traine, Ile doo't As I am true Rebell and for the more security
Deliver up your whinyard to our use Or Ile make an oylet-hole presently Pam. Doe not resigne your sword but use it. Mus. Hold heare me Pam. Let us both die with honor, doe not give Your strength and trust t'the mercy of those slaves In humane villanes to us Mus. But thy life,—as you are men but heare me Cap. Drop your steele quickly, or Mus. Alas she is my wife 2. Your wife, if you love her be not troublesome I tell you againe Pam. Pamela bids thee fight, feare not for me If I die I shall not be dishonord And thou shalt take a brave revenge on them, Pitty not me to loose us both, weel meete Again in death and love eternally Mus. My soule's devided, shall I venture her? Cap. Ile stay no longer Mus. Hold and take my sword But sweare by some religion you will use No violence to her 3. We sweare Cap. So first and formost throw his sword out of the way, we have no vse on't, secondly bind him to a tree Mus. Set her at liberty And use what cruelty you please on me Kill me, and Ile forgive you. 3. Forgiv'e us, heaven forgive thee, say thy prayers Mus. I see there's pittie in you, if your wants Councell you to this sinfull trade, we both Will freely give our wealth, we have some Iewells Of valew to redeeme you all, and make You rich if you dare first be so in goodnes And exercise no tyrany upon Our bodies, what a misery it is Such spirits as you are should not have fortunes High as your thoughts, when every dunghill fellow
Surfets with honors and estates, and vomits In Taverns what would keepe your families, But 'tis the times disease, when merrit thus Disgrac'd and unrewarded by the state Makes subjects desperate 3. He says true Mus. I prithee take my cloathes, would they were rich And worth your pillage, and will serve me 3. Alas good Gentleman, let e'en strip him Cap. None dare to take a skirt Mus. Perhaps for some offences you are banish'd Your houses and estates 2. For nothing but being drunke 3. And offring to kill the King 4. He will not live amongst us as a good King ought. Mus. Alas good men, I doe presume you, would not have kill'd the King in any malice to him 3. I love the King withall my heart, and a pox take him that does not, would he would but pardon us 1. There's no hope now, we have submitted our selves too often Mus. Yet let him heare well of you, and tho Necessitie compell you to be theeves, Be honest theeves and ravish no body. And this report ariving at his eares It inclines him to have pittie on you And call you to his favour Cap. Vnhand the Gentlewoman, he that offers her But a wry looke had better eate my sword 3. Or my scabbard tho it have been pist in 2. Faith Captaine he hath given us good councell let us deale Honestly, if we take away but all they have they will Have more cause to speake well of us Cap. Vnbinde the malefactor 3. Shall I give him his sword? Cap. His sword thou ignorant theefe no so he may chance to aske us againe for his Iewels; take thy Penelope sweete tong'd Vlisses; and on the next back smother her in kisses—farwell Mus. Oh, my Pamela.
3. Captaine captaine comebacke he calls her Pamela that should be the Kings daughter, Cap. How, vmh; now I looke better on her I have seene that face in a maske before now Mus. We are lost agen Pam. I am the same Pamela 2. What ha we done, here are all your Iewells not a stone deminish'd 3. If there be let me be gelded Pam. I easily forgive all and will be So far from a complaint that Ile pleade for Your pardons to my father, and he sha' not Be able to denie me Omnes A pardon, a pardon, if it please your highnes weel goe backe with you Pam. Not with me Cap. As we are true men and theeves Madam Pam. We are undone agen Mus. At our returne Ile ioyne with her 3. Returne, why whether are you going so farre from the lodge this is the way to the sea Cap. Vmh, I guest treason, are not you an't shall please your Ladyship running away with this Gentleman 2. He said she was his wife 3. I doe not like him Cap. Lay hands on him agen, well thought upon you shall Iustifie your selves before the King Mus. Dare you goe to the King without a pardon 2. 'Tis the only way to procure one Mus. Rather goe with us, and, as I am— 3. What are you Mus. I am—I know not Cap. Weel teach you to know your selfe; away with 'em we are all made Mus. Villaines and Rebells. Exeunt Enter Basilius, and Gynecia. Bas. Zelmane has abus'd me Gy. Chide not her 'Twas mine owne plot to trie your constancie.
Death cease upon Zelmane for his comming But I will be reveng'd, when did I fall From my high birth; in what lascivious action Lost I my fame, that this Basilius should wrong his owne Gynecia Bas. I am asham'd, I prithee chide no more. She gave me sure some philter to betray My bloud to this dishonor. Gy. Tho your lust Mist the enjoying him for whom your heart Grew wanton, yet the sin cannot be purg'd They are adulterate sheetes, and those embraces Which lock'd mine armes thy guilt, not one warme kisse But was intended for Zelmanes lips Oh my fate Bas. Prithee forgive Gy. The silence which I vs'd I wish'd might save my modesty a language To accuse you now; indeede you have done ill Touse me thus Bas. My love to thee hereafter Shall redeeme all, wound me no more I prithee Gy. If vice have so possest you that my bed Is now growne hatefull, make me not the scorne Of all your kingdome, send me home agen To Argos to weare out my life in weeping My Lord has quite forsaken me Bas. Not for The crownes of Greece, and all the world deere deerest Gynecia pardon thou hast sau'd mine honor Destroy me not agen, on what a rocke (Had not thy goodnes rescued me) had I Been ever ship wrack'd, take me to thy love, A sad man for my fault, never, oh never Shall such unworthy thoughts corrupt my heart To leave a chaste wife Gy. I doe freely pardon this error Bas. Then I am straite agen
Gy. But Zelmane shall accompt Deerely for this unlesse he satisfie My furious bloud, new welcome to my bosome Bas. A cup of wine would crowne our reconcilement As I remember in the cave I saw A golden bottle Exit. Gy. Your Majestie may taste on't, but I meant it A draught for false Zelmane, it being virtuall To increase affection, to me a guift My mothers love bestow'd when I was married To Basilius if ever he grew cold Enter Basilus To quicken his desires, I never yet Made tryall Bas. It is the gods Nepenthe, or a drinke more precious I prithee giv'ta name, and if my kingdome Afford th'ingredients let me tast it often; Ha Gynecia where am I? Gy. Here my Lord Bas. I thinke I am deceiv'd, my tongue oth sudden drawes backeward; and my limbes grow very feeble Ha, oh-farwell. Falls Gy. My Lord, my Lord, Basilius, oh hee's deade If he be poyson'd I have made faire worke Deere husband, then for ever mourne Gynecia The gods have punish'd thy lascivious heate With hastie justice, hath my care so long Almost religiously preserv'd this drinke To kill thus in a minute; oh my soule Doth feele a scorpion, and my lust appeares Enter Dametas and a Shepheard Circled with thousand furies Shep. Treason treason Dam. Doe set out your throate here; and let me alone to rore treason in the eares of my Lord Philonax—I should ha'beene the towne cryer Shep. Make hast. Dam. Oh yes treason, Gy. When you have spent your voyces, let your eyes
Speake a more killing language Dam. Ha, the Queene, Madam Pamela, is gon Gy. No matter for Pamela, looke here shepheards Herelies the King Dam. No matter for Pamela? I am glad of that Is his majestie a sleepe Gy. Never to awake, hee's deade poyson'd by this violl Dam. Oh base violl, why here is more treason then we look'd for, this is admirable, did he dye against his will, or was he kill'd a naturall death let vs sit upon him Gy. For beare, I can direct you to the murderer Looke heere you shepheards, it was I that kill'd him Dam. You, your Majestie is very merry Gy. Will you not trust me Dam. Yes for more then I am worth, but if you kill'd him your selfe, your majesty must pardon me for that, I have nothing to say to you but, treason treason; Exit. Gy. Yet flie Gynecia and save thy life, Betray not thine owne, life; why doe I talke Of safety, can there be in all the World A consort, when my honor and Basilius Have both forsaken me Enter Philonax and Dametas with a guard. Philon. Pamela gon, how does the King take it Dam. The King, would he could take it any way, good gentle∣man hee's in a pittifull taking himselfe Philon. What sales the screech-oule Dam. The truth is, he is sent of an errand to Erebus hee's dead, and for my Lady Philoclea, whom I suspect Philon. Ha Dam. And you make hast you may take her napping, there is a thing in the likenes of a man with her, whom very valiantly I dis-arm'd, and brought away his naked weapon Philon. What traytor? didst disarme him? Dam. Did I and there had been twentie of 'em I would not have car'd a rush though they had been as valiant as Hector, had I not treason a'my side so soone as I came in Philon. Thou dost amaze me what said he?
Dam. Never a word, my friend quoth to his sword Philon. Ideot didst speake to his sword? Dam. Why he was fast a sleepe my Lord, And never so much as dreamt of me Philon. A sleepe, we loose time goe you along with Dametas, seize upon that Traytor, oh I am rent with sorrow Dam. Come my Masters be not afraid as long as I have a sword You shall goe before, and follow my example ther's the King my Lord Exeunt Dametas and guard, Philon. Madam Gy. Oh Philonax Philon. Be comforted Gy. You shannot neede to mocke me, when you know By whom he dye'd thou wilt call in thy charity And curse me, it was I that poysoned him, Philon. Good Madam speake that I may understand, You poysoned him? he was Basilius Your husband and your King, it cannot be You are the Queene his wife Gy. His murderer The horror of my sinne dwells round about me I neede no more accusers then my Conscience. Doe with me what you please, the wicked reasons That mov'd me to it you shall know hereafter Philon, Blesse me eternitie, Ile not beleeve That any woman after this can love Her husband, oh my Lord, mercilesse woman For heere all other titles lost away With her, see her lodg'd within the Castle. Enter Dametas and a guard with Philoclea and Pyrocles at one doore, at the other Enter the Rebells with Musidorus and Pamela. Dam. Heere they are my Lord Cap. Where is the King? Philon. New uprores. Dam. My charge, 'tis Pamela, my Lord Philonax 'tis Pamela Philon, Pamela and Philoclea Cap. Yes my Lord we suspected they were running away
together and therefore in hope of his maiesties pardon Py. Musidorus and thy sister under guard? Mus. Pyrocles and Philoclea prisoners too? Philon. Looke heere unnaturall children, for I cannot pronounce you Innocent, this circumstance betrayes your guilt, see where your king and father lyes a cold patterne for a tombe Pam. Dead? Phi. Oh we are miserable Pyr. Basilus dead? Mus. Slaine Philon. He was murder'd, and you are accessaries Sure I have seene your face; were not you call'd Zelmane the Amazon? Pyr. I was. Philon. Disguises, injurious villaine Prophaner of all hospitable lawes Pyr. I am not loose to answer thee Dam. And this was my man Dorus my Lord, a ha have I found you sirra, you sent me abroad to be a gold-finder. Philon. You have done service worthy all your pardons. Now in my rage I could prevent the Law And sacrifice their treachrous bloods my selfe To this reverend hearse. Mus. You are transported Philonax But that I have compassion for the death Of that good King I could laugh at thee. Philon. Hence, load them with Irons, Ladies you must both Be patient to be confinde untill You cleere yourselves. Pam. What sawcie fellowe's that? Meant you me Philonax, vnhand those prisoners Philon. Away with'em I command Pam. Yet stay and heare me As you did love Basilius heare his daughter, This insolence doth interupt the teares Due to my deere dead father, and inforces Me, since he thus forgets, to declare to you With confidence who I am, I am Pamela The eldest daughter of Basilius Your Queene if I mistake not, since my father
Is dead, to whose memorie these pious dropps Fall as the tribute of my griefe, who then Shall be obay'd, he that was trusted with My fathers power, which in his death is cancell'd Or I your naturall princesse? Dam. Vmh, my charge speakes to the purpose. Pam. Have you found so much sweetenesse in the raigne You borrowed of my father, that you would Vsurpe now he is dead? I have not signed Any commission for your office, how Dare you then in my presence command any To prison, nay like a bould insolent traitor Talke of confining me? we are mercifull To let you keepe your proud heade on. Reb. What will be come of us? Dam. You shall have cleane halters. Pam. But in the justice to my royall father, Snatch'd hence untimely from us, since you attempt To charge them with his death, we give you space To live and to accuse them, they shall be Our prisoners, ith meane time t'will become Your person to goe home and study how To play the Advocate when you are call'd By us, and the grave lawes, you are dismis'd. Philon. I am astonish'd, doe you not wonder with me To heare the daughter of our late good King Lost to her filiall pietie, this comes. To neere apracide Pamela. Contrie-men It is apparent they have all conspird The death of the old king, me thinks I heare His groanes confirme it, if you suffer such A treason passe Arcadia will become The scorne of all the world, nor ever shall Any good prince; trust his life amongest you, For my Ambition, all the angells know How tedious the houres have beene, since I Was forc'd to take this kingdomes weight upon me. But let not ceremony to the daughter.
Whose title I dispute not shame our duties To him that was her father and our Master. Poyson'd, yes poyson'd by those men that have No names, and will betray in our remisnes The honor of these Ladies and our countrie As they have done his pretious life already, As you are good men let them be arraign'd If they be innocent their goodnes will Protect them, but if guilty let them dye Like slaves unpittied. Reb. A Philonax, a Philonax Pam. Dare ye all be traytors then? Philon. This your great love reviues me, then convey All to the Castle, but command these two As traytors to be made safe, the ladies shall Be vnder mild restraint. Pyr. Villaines Mus. You lives shall deerely answer this. We must obay the tyrant, were our hands At liberty, and arm'd with our good swords We should not off so tamely. Exit. Dam. Come away traytors. Philon. Well remember'd you. Are not to be discharg'd, lodge himsafe too. Dam. Who I, he does not meane me, my Lord these fellowes. Phi. Take him a way, a traytor with the rest, Enter Messenger. Dam. Away away Reb. So you must sir Dam. Would I might never see my wife and children in my right wits, if I be a traytor that's enough my Lord, the'il carry me away too. Reb. De'e remember a cleane halter? come on sir. Exit Phi. King Evarchus saist? Mess. He has but a small traine my lord. Phi. Alas he comes to late to visit, but Most seasonable to be a judgein this Great cause, take gently up thatroyall body Whose soules a starre already, all that we Can pay is justice to his memorie. Exeunt
Actus Quintus. Enter Smipathus, Pamela, Philoclea. Pam. GOod Master jaylor you might be so curteous in your office to let vs see these Gentlemen, Sim. Madam I dare not, Pam. 'Tis well you dare obay King Philonax and be a rebell to me, the time may come you will repent. Sim. Confident that you will keepe your princely words not to interupt or change any discourse with 'em, I have brought you where you may tho at some distance heare 'em, they are pre∣paring for musique, 'tis all I dare consent to, neither durst I tell them you should be with in reach of their voyces Pam. Well sir we are content Song Phi. Weel speake with'em but in your hearing, Pam. Doe not intreate him sister, pray have a speciall remem∣brance to let'em want aire and necessaries, youl' forfeit your place if you make conscience to be over honest to'em. Sim. I am sorrie Madam you accuse my nature Which never yet was observ'd cruell, I Would be as just to your commands. Pam. So it seemes Sim. Were these misfortunes over Pam. Good sir no tedious excuses nor Apollogy but proceede you and your great Master Philonax, and he will make you his treasurer, or trust you with his great seale, you cannot choose but be an excellent keeper. Phi. What will become of us? Pam. Nay what will become at'h Princes, there's my feare, would they were free againe, and had but their good swords to second their innocence, I am mad to thinke what a condition we are falne to, prithee Philoclea shed some teares for me, if I weepe now it must be for anger that we cannot help 'em, but let the gray-beards looke too't, for if they suffer, unlesse they send me of an errand after them, not a head that nodded to their sentence, shall know where to finde Shoulders to support'em Phi. 'Las sister I want drops for my owne greefe My fathers death, Pum. My father, that that hath open'd The spring agen Ph. And although guilty of his bloud, for so
They say our mother hath confest her selfe I must in dutie weepe for her. Pam. My mother That word strikes double sorrow, and doth call A floud to drown my eyes, shall we not see her? Phi. She could not kill him sure, did ever greefe So soone make such a paire of Orphants, our Fortunes are so strange and thicke, posterity Will thinke our storie fiction, and yet It seemes th'are not so great to breake our hearts A'th suddaine, I would willingly dye too But I remember Pyrocles Pam. And I my deere lov'd Musidorus, at which name My teares dry up, and blacke revenge prepares Thy throne within my bloud, but Simpathus Sim. Madam Pam. Are not the Princes sent for yet? Sim. Not yet Pam. I prithee tell me how they looke; what say they to thee? Phi. Doe they name us? Sim. It hath been all their question, how both their Princely mistrisses doe fare, for so They call you Ladyes, when I answer well Their joy shootes up in prayers that you may still Continue safe. Phi. Doe they not raile sometimes and curse? Sim. I never heard'em Pam. Canst thou be such a foole then to beleeve They are murderers? Sim. I doe not beleeve they are Pam. Doe not if thou darst be a Knave, and try if the Divell will beare you out in't, we must not see'em Sin. Alas Madam Pam. Nor speake to our mother, Sim. I am commanded Pam. Thou shat not deny us a little discourse with Dametas my old governor since we have no other company. Sim. You shall Phi. His presence could be never more unwelcome Beside his follies will but ill agree With our affliction Pam. They cannot hurt Vs sister I have a brest as deepely charg'd As thine although I flatter it, 'tis no sinne To enable vs for bearing—how de'e Governor? Enter Dametas
Dam. How dee Madam, 'een as you see, as ill as this iron age can make a man Pam. What will they doe with thee? Dam. They cannot use me worse then they have; for I am hang'd in chaines already, I have had three whippings into the bargaine to, if they hold such a hand over me long, I shall never be able to sleepe in a whole skin. Pam. Had you any hand in my fathers death? Dam. Hand, I was so farre from having any hand, that I had not so much as a finger in't, no your mother poisond him with a base violl. Phi. Oh misery! Dam. But Madam, I did not thinke you had been so dishonest, and you had meant to runne away with any body I thought you would have told me so, but I see a woman and a wet eele have both slipperie tailes. Pam. You ran away from me. Dam. Who I runne? I was'never so good a foote man in my life, alas I was tould by that rascall Dorus where a great deale of gold was buried, and I went simply with a resolution after I came home to build halfe a dozen Churches, but now I heare say there is a Gallowes built to my hands, and I must hang ding dong like a bell in the wodden steeple. Pam. Speake well of Dorus sirra, you had more neede to pray for him. Dam. Heaven convert him then, and tho he live when I am dead he may be rotten as soone as I Phi. Who sent you sirra to my Chamber? Dam. Sent me, the Divell; and I ha thriv'd accordingly, would my wife had broke her necke when I tooke you together. Pam. Your wife. Dam. Or my daughter, or you or any body to save the loose of my owne sweete Madam speake a good word for me, and Ile— speake annother for you, my evidence will be heard, and I care Not what I sweare; 'tis not for the King hee's dead, I looke Every minute for a voyce to call me to the Sessions. Within. Dametas Dam. Hey there'tis already, as ever you hope to be married while your maiden heads are sweete; save me from the Gal∣lowes, for if I be once hang'd I shall never be my owne man agn. Exit. Phi. They are very hasty to arraigne em, Pyrocles
There's nothing left me now but prayers for thee With which Ile wearie heaven or tire my selfe For thy successe. Recorders, Pam. I wo ld doe so but I Flourish. Feare my revenge will kill my charity. Exeunt, Enter Evarchus, Philonax and Slmpathus, The Bere. Euax. My Lord your sorrow and not my ambition Hath made me Iudge to day, therefore attend The proofe of your election, I came With purpose of a visit to your Master But now salute his hearse, and weare a title Of your Protector, in whch name I gave command The prisoners should be sent for. Sim. 'Tis done, and they are readie; Philon. My Lord my part to day is to accuse And not side in compassion. Enter Gynecia, Mufidorus, Pyrocles and Damtas guarded: a Barre set out. Eu. That the Queene? Philon. Yes, My Lord Eu. She shewes a much deiected Lady. Philon. Has she not cause? Eu. Those the pretended Princes? Of comely presence both, what's he? Philon. Dametas to whose trust the King gave up Pamela his eldest daughter. Eu. Where is she? Philon. Accompanied with her sister in the Castle Their presence might occasion some tumult, Nor doe the Arcadian Lawes allow proceeding Against the next of bloud, as they permit not She should determine anything her selfe Till yeares or marriage enable her. Dam. I will forgive thee Philonax for more malice then thou hast brought against my life, for being so honest to Pamela, Philon. Sir I looke not for your thankes Pyr. As you are honorable, I beseech you I'th name of sacred Iustice, ere you further Proceed against our facts declare what you Determine of Philolea, who is all Innocence And most unjustly suffers, tho in thought
You doubt ther virgin honor Eu. She must become a recluse And all her life with strict profession Of Chastity repaire her blemish'd honor. Pyr. A Vestall? Not if I live, yet if I die it carries This comfort none hereafter shall enjoy The faire Philoclea. Eu. Now to the Queene Philon. Madam stand to the barre. Gy. My barr indeede which I have laide my selfe To bring my honor to a fall and ruine Oh my deere Lord my teares doe now enbalme thee, My blood shall quickly follow. Philon. As you are just Let not her sorrow tempt you to forget What sin she hath committed, I want words To expresse the horror of the deede which will Throw shame on all her sex. Gy. Stay Philonax sh'at have. What thou desirest, I have been a judge already Vpon my selfe and doe not desire life, That am condem'd by my owne killing sentence I doe againe confesse I was the murderer Of your and my Lord, robd Arcadia and My children of a father, I, none but I Poyson'd Basilius Pyr. Palladius dost heare? Mus. Vnfortunate Lady, Gy. And what could Philonax say more against me? There remaines onely to obay your Iudgement Which cannot come in any shape of death Too horrid for my sinne I'me very weary Of this bad world, be just and take a life From me that else will groane it selfe away And mocke your Iustice. Philon. You heare my Lord? Evar. And thus proceede to sentence Having confest, to spare your proofe how much She hath offended, an example to all times We censure thus, she shall presently Be carried to prison where she may Have foode but only to sustaine her life Vntill her husbands buriall, with whom
In the same vault she shall be clos'd alive To keepe his body company from which Her cruelty divorc'd his soule, Gy. Ya're Iust. Pyr. My heart weepes for her Mus, 'Tis a severe sentence. Gy. Who binds my hands? Basilius I come To de a living guest in thy sad tombe. Exit. Philon. The others to the barre Eva. What are their names? Pyr. Daiphantas of Licia mine Mus. Mine Palladius of Iberia. Ev. We do not dispute their titles heere, they are Privat persons, you may proceede. Phil. I shall, and with as much brevitie Ev. Choose whom you'l first accuse. Philon. Then first this Daiphantas, this Zelmane This what you will, for he hath yet no name Nor shape that we can trust to, having knowledge Of our late masters solitary life, Came not without a purpose of this treachery And by the cunning of Gynecia Ith habit of a woman was received As an unsuspected guest, enjoy'd the freedome, Of those whom the King plac'd neerest his bosome, His children not more deere, treason thus fortified They soone conspird the death of this good King, A cave this Gentlewomans, lodging was The fatall sceane where the unhappy Queene By his direction forc'd his deere life from him I omit what lustfull motive prompted her That with more licence she might twine with this Hermophrodite, and that they had appointed Where they might meete when this blacke deede was done, But heaven was mercifull and prevented her Flight by the happy comming in of Shepheards In the meane time transported with the confidence Of her performance, that he might not leave
Any revenger of this hatefull murder He hastily makes up to Philocleas Chamber, Whereby the mingling (what he could) her shame With his offence, he easily might enforce Her to be accessarie to her fathers death, And under her protection, and her sisters (Gainst whom they knew we were not to rebell) Soe with one gripe the state, but heaven preserv'd All by the unexpected comming up Of this Dametas. Dam. Yes heaven and I preserv'd all. Philon. Who sought then for Pamela Which the other Princely theefe had stolen away, And finding these, I meane Philoclea And this young man together, found occasion To inclose the ravisher till by command They were apprehended: thus you have in short His wicked storie, and what punishment Will not be thought a mercy to that monster That kills a King, dishonoreth a Queene, And violates the daughter? Pyr. In things promoted with such cunning mixture 'Tis hard to shape a square and direct answer. My accusers sordid and malicious railing More greevious to my tender sence of honor Then death can be, I forget him A thing beneath my anger and arm'd with My owne simplicity doubt not to assure How much my cause is iniur'd, know Grave Iudge This prince and I drawne hither by the fame Of the rare beauties in Basilius daughters Knowing that with their parents they liv'd heere Secluded from the world, where no accesse In our owne persons was to be expected, Put on these formes as soonest might conduce To make our loves knowne: this Palladius Became so fortunate that his Princely Mistris Consented to forsake, and trust his conduct
To a happier kingdome: my fortune Was not so happy, for I did not cherrish A greater flame, yet modest, of Philoclea Then her weake father in my sex deceiv'd Retain'd of me, that tyr'd with his solicites I had no time to perfect my desires With his faire daughter, Till under collour of some devotions I made a cave my lodging to invite Basilius thether, with full hope to enjoy me, But this revealing to the Queene, she tooke My place to make the old King see his follies. In the meane time I must confesse I went To bright Philocleas Chamber hoping to Win her by all the charmes of noble love To leave Arcadia; but she unhappily Obeying her owne Genius gave no Consent, when in the midst of my securitie I know not by what meanes I was made prisoner. And heere's the thred to guide through this laborinth, Me thinkes your man of mightie tongue should blush To have spent his rage so poorely. Ev. What ic all this to the death of the old King? Pyr. By all the gods I am innocent The Queene hath absolu'd me, as for Philoclea If you will call't a cryme in that I lov'd her I am and shall be guiltie, but had never A thought so rude to force her unstain'd chastity: Or if the honor of this excellent Lady Suffer it'h blind opinion of the world Our marriage not my death may cure all wounds Malice can fasten on her name. Philon. Oh impudence. Ev. If this be all you have to say proceede To his confederate. Philon. The imagination how miserable These juglers would have made us and our Country If their disguise had prosper'd, strikes a terror
Through all my faculties, my tongue's enfeebled. Therefore to omit his practice in the murder Which you may easily collect by circumstance This is enough to call him a foule traytor He did attempt to steale a way out princesse The hope and treasure of Arcadia And taken in the fact dares not deny it, Had he no other cry me to answer for This pulls severe death on him, and to insist Vpon offences of so foule a nature Were to distrust your wisdome or your Iustice. Thou to ther shame of mankinde speake to this. Mus. Not for thy sake who in this misery Hast only merrited to be my scorne But for the truth I answer, pardon sir If passion make me not remember language That should become this place, this ill tongu'd man That with such vehemence accuseth thus Is himselfe guilty. Philon. How? Mus. Of a more hatefull vice, ingratitude. Is this the paiment for our services Which once thy tongue acknowledged had desev'd Statues to the eternall memory Of the preservers of your King and Country? Is all the vallor of this young man cancell'd When Rebells had advanc'd their daring swords High as the throat of your old King, his wife And trembling daughters, is the time forgotten When wild beasts had prepared their riotous mawes To bury the deere pledges of your kingdome? Oh where had been my treason or his rape Had they been then devourd? the ground has not Drunke up the blood so perfectly, but there Remaines a coulour to teach impious men To blush for their ingratitude, have we Beene carelesse of our lives to preserve The King when danger threatend horror to him
And can a temperate man imagine we Should be his murderers, we had not sav'd To be our selves the hangmen? but I'me charg'd For stealing of your Princesse, can your breathes Acknowledge her your Soveraigne, and allow No faith to what she sayes, you have degraded My blood from honor, and vnlesse you make me Lesse then her subject I was bound to obay When she commanded I should waite upon her, But you'l object I counsell'd her, I did And justifie the act, she was confinde Too narrowly, and I durst leade her to A throane above the Majesty her birth Can challenge in Arcadia, love whose force The gods have not resisted may plead for me. Ev. Is this all? Mus. Tho it want method'tis enough to vindicate My honor from his base aspertion. Ev. To him you call Dametas Dam. Not guilty my Lord, as I hope to be sav'd not guilty. Philon. Neglect of the great charge with which the King Our Master trusted him summes up his fault. Dam. I was made a gould-finder, I desire Iustice for him and Mercy for my selfe. Philon. Silence. Eu. I have heard you with attention, and whereas To the Kings death (the unhappy cause of this Assembly) you have answer'd with deniall Which you thinke fortified by the Queenes Selfes only accusation, I must tell you It frees you not, for tho no manifest proofes Yet circumstances well examin'd make you The accidentall causes of his murder. For the other part of your offence I finde not You have deny'd your guilt, but onley use Quallification and excuse; your services In themselves high and honorable, allow you No priviledge to offend, but give your blacke, faults
A blacke die; then justly weighing your offence, you meete In equall guilt, for tho you first conveid Away Pamela, his intention was Earely as yours, and by the rules of justice The will stands for the act, both ravished Although not of the Ladies from themselves Yet from their parents and their countrie, which By all the Grecian Lawes is paid with death. Thus then I must pronounce Daiphantas shall Be throwne from some high tower to meere his death, Palladius loose his head before Sunne-set The executioner shall be Dametas Which office of the common hangman he Shall for his whole life execute, a punishment For his neglect of duty. Dam. must I be hangman? oh brave, heaven preserve your Lordship, I shall quickly learne the trade, and if ever any of your honors have occasion to use me, I will owe you a good turne, and in token I have beene bound to you the knot of my dutifull affection, shall tella tale in your eare you shall thanke me when you are hang'd, come your wayes, but I beseech your Lordship, I may be allow'd a man some times I would be loath to hange or to behead my selfe, my wife or my owne kindred, but if it happen there be more worke then he can turne his hands to, I will not sticke with him to hang my selfe, provide you malefactors and let me alone for halters. Enter Callander and Calodoulus Cala. Hold stay the prisoners my Lord Protector Calo. Oh my Lord Mus. My servant Calodoulus by thy duty Reveale us not. Calo. Let me rather be dumbe eternally Then two such princes be lost by my silence. Ev. My sonne and Nephew are they living? Calo. Your owne Pyrocles and his Princely Nephew, Cala. Aske your father blessing, unhand'em rascalls. Philon. The two most famous Princes in the world. Mus. 'Tis Evarchus thy father Pyrocles, my vncle king of Macedon, all yee gods, my heart is extaside with ioy.
Pyr. My father Ev. My blessing and my teares you both divide. Witnesse with me, yee immortall powers this day I have done nothing, but what justice and Your native lawes require, without the knowledge How neere they were to my owne blood, but since They are prou'd my Sonne and Nephew Endow'd by nature richly, and how merriting The fame and love of all the world before This accident, I leave to your owne thoughts, Besides these two I have no joyes of life. Cala. Excellent Evarchus; why did you change your names? Pyr. To prevent the dishonor of our blood If we had suffer'd Ev. But I have judg'd already and if right I have not wrong'd, vnlesse the name Of child have power to alter sacred Iustice You both must dye, though when I speake your death It creeps upon my heart. Mus. We dreame, is this thy father Pyrocles? Ev. Away with em. Mus. 'Tis most tyranicall he is thy sonne. Thou wot not be a murderer of thy owne? Make not thy name hated of all the world When it shall say hereafter Pyrocles Had no fault in him but he was thy sonne. Pyr. For me I am his owne and being so Dispos'd of by his Iustice; to whom rather I hop'd to have been a comfort then a shame I kisse my sentence; but you cannot place Your Kinsman in the sacrifice his mother And countrie pleade a title he is theirs Oh save my princely cosen Ev. Sure I shannot live Long after them, and Gentlemen if I dye Before I leave Arcadia let my ashes Mingle with theirs: Bas. oh oh oh Dam. My Lord, Gentlemen, there's something stirs and groan Come backe.
Ev. Basilius alive, assist him Philonax. He breathes, what  of joy runne through me? Send for Gynecia and his daughters. Bas Why am I supported thus like a dead man? What are you? Ev. Evarcus your old friend. Bas. I ha seene that face before,'tis like sweete Zelmane. Ev. My sonne Pyr. But was a conterfeit Zelmane. Bas. Wonders, and you? Ev. My Nephew, prince of Thessaly Enter Gynecia, Pamela and Philoclea, Mus. Tho  your servant Doru Bas. Very strange; Gynecia Gy. My deere Lord return'd A thousand kisses welcome him to life Which I was wearie of in thy losse. Bas. My daughters Pam. Oh my father Bas. Are you Philonax? Ev. Your trusty servant Philon. The oracle is accomplish'd. Bas. You amase me, let me collect Phi. Oh my sweet Pyrocles Pam. We shall not be divor'd I hope agen Pyr. I am your servant ever Mus. Devinest Mistris Ev. Your soules I see are married Let me present these princes to be your sonnes Bas. Is this reall? Gy. 'Tis dangerous to expect the storie. I fear'd the drinke, but it may be his vertue To encrease his love to me, Ile tell you more within sir. Philon. Let me obtaine your pardons Ev. To his Chamber  him gently Bas. All is strange. Mus. Never was day so full of happy change Florish: FINIS.
