24974 99837124 1434
A CATALOGVE OF THE NOBILITY of England, Scotland, and Ireland. VVith an addition of the Baronets of England, the dates of their Patents, the seuerall creations of the Knights of the Bath, from the Coronation of King Iames, to this present. Collected by T. W. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at the signe of the Eagle and Child at Brittaines Bursse. 1630.
A Catalogue of the Nobiliti of England. Duks. GEorge Villers Duke, Marquese, and Earle of Buc∣kingham, and Couentry, Viscount Villers, Baro of Whadden, Ifra atatem. Marquesses. Iohn Pawlet Marquesse of Winchester, Earle of Wilt∣shire, and Lord St. Iohn of Basing. Earles. Thomas Howard Earle of Arundell and Surrey, Earle Marshall of England, and Knight of the Garter. Robert Vere Earle of Oxford, Viscount Bulbec, Lord Samford, and Vadilsmere. Henry Percy Earle of Northumberland, Lord Poy∣ings, Fitz-payne, and Brian, Knight of the Garter. George Talbot Earle of Shrewesbury, Lord Talbot Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakemere. Henry Gray Earle of Kent, Lord Ruthin. William Stanley Earle of Derby, Lord Stanley, Strange of Knoking, and of the Ile of Man, Knight of the Garter. Henry Somerset Earle of Worcester, Lord Herbert of Chepstow, Ragland, and Gower. Francis Mannors Earle of Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir, and Trusbut, Knight of the Garter. Francis Clifford Earle of Cumberland, Lord Clifford Westmerland, and Vesey. Edward Radcliffe Earle of Sussex, Viscount Fitz-wal∣er, Lord Egremont, and Burnell.
Henry Hastings Earle of Huntington, Lord Hastings Hungerford, Botreaux, Moeles, and Molyns, Edward Bourchier Earle of Bath, and Lord Fitz-wa∣rin. Thomas Wriothesley, Earle of Southampton, and Ba∣ron Wriothsley of Titchfield. Francis Russell Earle of Bedford, and Lord Russell. Philip Herbert Earle of Pembroke and Montgomery Baron erbert of Cardiffe and Shirland, Lord Parre and Roos, of Kenda, Marmion, and St. Quintin, Lord Cham∣erlaine of his Maiesties Houshold, and Knight of the Garer. William Seymour Earle of Hartford, and Baron Beau∣champ. Robrt Deuereux Earle of Essex, Viscount Hereford, and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartly, Bourchier, and Louayne. Theophilus Fynes Earle of Lincolne, and Lord Clinton. Charles Howard Earle of Nottingham, and Lord Howard of Eingham. Earles made by King IAMES. Theophilus Howard Earle of Suffolke, Lord Howard of Walden, and Knight of the Garter. Edward Sackuile Earle of Dorset, and Baron Buck∣hurst, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Chamberlaine to the Queenes Maiestie. William Cecill Earle of Salisbury, Viscount Cram∣borne, and Baron Cecill of Essinden, Knight of the Gar∣ter. William Cecill Earle of Exceter, Baron Burghley, Knight of the Garter. Robert Carr Earle of Somerset, Viscount Rochester, and Baron of Branspath, Knight of the Garter. Iohn Egerton Earle Bridgewater, Viscount Brackley, and Baron Ellesmere.
Robert Sidney Earle of Leicester, Viscount Lifle, and Baron Sidney of Penshurst. Spencer Compton Earle of Northampton, Baron Compton of Compton. Robert Rich Earle of Warwicke, and Lord Rich of Leeze. William Cauendish Earle of Deuonshire, and Baron Cauendish of Hardwicke, Infra aetatem. Iames Hamilton Earle of Cambridge, Marquesse of Hamilton, Earle of Arran, Baron of Euen, and Aber∣broth, Master of the Horse to his Maiestie. Iames Stuart Earle of March, Duke of Lenox, Lord Aubigny, Baron of Leighton, Bromeswold, Lord Darn∣ley, Mertiuen, and St. Andrews. Iames Hay Earle of Carlile, Viscount Doncaster, Lord Hay of Sauley, and Knight of the Garter. William Fielding Earle of Denbigh, Viscount Field∣ing, and Baron of Newenham-padox. Iohn Digby Earle of Bristoll, and Baron Digby of Shirborne. Leonell Cranfield Earle of Middlesex, and Baron Cran∣field of Cranfield. Charles Villers Earle of Anglesey, Lord Dauentrey. Henry Rich Earle of Holland, Baron Kensington, of Kensington, Capt. of the Gard, and Knight of the Garter. Iohn Hollis Earle of Clare, Lord Houghton of Hough∣ton. Oliuer St. Iohn Earle of Bullingbroke, Lord St. Iohn of Bletso. Mildmay Fane Earle of Westmerland, Lord le De-Spencer, and Burghwash. Earles made by King CHARIES. William Knowles Earle of Banbery, Viscount Wal∣lingford, and Lord Knowles of Grayes, Knight of the Garter.
Henry Montague Earle of Manchester, Viscount Man∣deuile, and Lord Kymbolton, Lord Priuy Seale. Thomas Howard Earle of Barkeshire, Viscount Andoner, and Lord Charlton, Knight of the Garter. Thomas Wentworth Earle of Cleueland, Lord Went∣worth of Nettelsted. Edmond Sheield, Earle of Mulgraue, Lord Shefield of Butterwick, and Knight of the Garter. Henry Danuers Earle of Danby, Lord Danuers of Dantzy. Robert Cary Earle of Monmouth, Lord Cary of Le∣pington. Henry Ley Earle of Marleburgh, and Lord Ley of Ley. Edward Denny Earle of Norwich, and Lord Deny of Waltham. Thomas Darcie Earle Riuers, Viscount Colchester, and Lord Darcie of Chich. Robert Bartu Earle of Lindsey, and Lord Willough∣by of Eresby, Lord great Chamberlaine, Knight of the Garter. William Cauendish Earle of New-catell, Viscount Mansfield, Lord Boulfouer, and Ogle. Henry Cary Earle of Douer, Viscount Rochford, and Lord Hunsdon. Iohn Mordant Earle of Peterborough, Lord Mordant of Turuey. Henry Gray Earle of Standford, Lord Gray of Groby, Bonuille, and Harington. Elizabeth Finch Countesse of Winchelsey, and Vis∣countesse Maidstone. Robert Perpoint Earle of Kingston vpon Hull, Vis∣count Newarke vpon Trent, and Lord Perpoint of Hob∣nes Perpoint. Robert Dormere Earle of Carnauan, Viscount Asco, and Lord Dormere of Wing.
Mount-Ioy Blount Earle of Newport, Lord Mount-Ioy of Thurueston. Philip Stanhop Earle of Chesterfield, and Lord Stan∣hop of Shelford. Nicholas Tufton Earle of the Ile of Thanet, and Lord Tufton of Tufton. Richard de Burgh Earle of St. Albons and Clanric∣kard, Viscount Tunbridge, and Galloway, Baron of Somerhill, and Imanuey. Viscounts. Anthony Browne Viscount Montague of Cowdrey. Viscounts made by King IAMES. Iohn Villers Viscount Purbecke, Lord of Stoke. William ines Viscount Say and Seale, Lord Say, and Seale. Viscounts made by King CHARLES. Edward Cecill Viscount Wimbleton, and Baron Ce∣cill of Putney. Thomas Sauage Viscount Rock Sauage. Edward Conway Viscount Conway, and Killultagh, and Baron Conway of Ragley, Lord President of his Maiesties Priuie Councell. Paul Baynening Viscount Baynening of Sudbury, and Lord Baynening of Hookesley. Edward Noell Viscount Camden, Baron Noell of Ridlington. Dudley Carleton Viscount Dorchester, and Lord Carleton of Imbercourt, Principall Secretarie. Thomas Wentworth Viscount Wentworth, Baron Wentworth of Wentworth, Wood-house, New-march, and Ouerley. Bishops. George Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury. Samuel Harsnet, Archbishop of Yorke.
William Laude, Bishop of London. Iohn Howson Bishop of Durham. Richard Neile, Bishop of Winchester. Thomas Doue, Bishop of Peterborough. Francis Godwine, Bishop of Hereford. Iohn Thorneburgh, Bishop of Worcester. Iohn Buckridge, Bishop of Ely. Thomas Morton, Bishop of Couentry and Lichfild. Lewes Baily, Bishop of Bangor. Iohn Bridgeman, Bishop of Chester. Theophilus Field, Bishop of St. Dauids. Iohn Williams, Bishop of Lincolne. Iohn Dauenant, Bishop of Salisbury. Robert Wright, Bishop of Bristoll. Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester. Fancis White, Bishop of Norwich. Iouah Hall, Bishop of Exeter. William Murray, Bishop of Landaffe. Richard Mountagu, Bishop of Chichester. Walter Curle, Bishop of Bath and Wells. Richard Corbet, Bishop of Oxford. Barnabas Potter, Bishop of Carlile. Iohn Owen, Bishop of St. Ashaph. Iohn Bowle, Bishop of Rochester. Barons. Henry Clifford, Lord Clifford eldet sonne of Francis Earle of Cumberland. Henry Neuill Lord Abergauenny. Maruin Touchet Lord Awdeley of Highleigh. Algernon Percie, Lord Percie, eldest sonne of Henry Earle of Northumberland. Iames Stanley, Lord Strange, eldest sonne of Wil∣liam Earle of Derby. Charles West Lord Delaware, Infra aetatem. Gorge Barkeley, Lord Barkeley of Barkeley Castle.
Henry Parker, Lord Morley and Montegle. Richard Lennard, Lord Dacres of Hurst-monseux. Henry Stafford, Lord Stafford of Stafford, Infra tat. Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley of Dudley Castle. Edward Stourton, Lord Stourton of Stourton. Iohn Darcie, Lord Darcie, and Mennell. Edward Vaux, Lord Vaux of of Harrowden. Thomas Windsor, Lord Windsor of Bradenham. Thomas Cromwell, Lord Cromwell of Ockha. William Eure, Lord Eure of Whitton. Philip Wharton, Lord Wharton of Wharton. William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby of Parham William Paget, Lord Paget of Beaudesert. Dudley North, Lord North of Carthlage. George Bridges, Lord Shandos of Sudley, Infra ta. Barons made by King IAMS. William Peter, Lord Peter of Writtell. Dutton Gerard, Lord Gerard of Gerards Broley. William Spencer, Lord Spencer of Wormleighto. Charles Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of Harrington. Thomas Arundell, Lord Arundell of Wardour. Christopher Roper, Lord Tenham of Tenham, Infra aetatem. Edward Montagu, Lord Montagu of Kimbolton, eldest sonne of Henry Earle of Manchester. Basell Fielding, Lord Newnham Paddocks, eldest so of William Earle of Denbigh. Robert Greuill, Lord Brooke of Beachamp Court. Edward Montagu Lord Montagu of Boughto. William Gray, Lord Gray of Warke. Francis Leake, Lord Denicourt of Stton. Richard Roberts, Lord Roberts of Truro. Edward Conway, Lord Conway of Ragey, eldest sonne of Edward Viscont Conway. Barons made by King CHARLES. Horace Vre, Lord Vere of Tibury, Master of the Ord∣nance.
Oliuer St. Iohn, Lord Tregoze of Highworth. William Crauen, Lord Crauen of Hamsteed Marshll. Thomas Bellassise, Lord Falconbridge of Yarom. Richard Louelace, Lord Louelace of Hurley. Iohn Pawlet, Lord Pawlet of Hinton St. George. William Hrny, Lord Herny of Kidbrooke. Thomas Brudenell, Lord Brudenell of Stouton. William Maynard, Lord Maynard of Estaines. Thomas Couentry, Lord Couentry of Alesborough, Lord Keeper of the Great Seale of England. Edward Howard, Lord Howard of Estricke. Richard Weston, Lord Weston of eylad, Lord High Treasurr of England, Knight of the Garter. eorge Goring, Lord Goreing of Hurstperpoint. Iohn Mohun Lord Mohun of Ohampton. Iohn Saill Lord Sauill of Pomfret. Iohn Buler, Lord Butler of Bramield. Fancis Ligh, Lord Dunsemore. William Hrbert, Lord Powys of Powys. Edward Herbert, Lord Herbert of Chierbury. A Catalogue of the Dukes, Marquesses, Erles, Viscounts, and Barons of Scotland. Dukes. IAmes Stuart Duke of Lennox, Earle of March, Lord Daley Methuen, St. Andrews, and Aubigny, and Adirall and Chamberlane of Scotland by inheritance. Marqusses. Iames Hamiltone Marquesse Hamilton, Earle of Arran, and Cambridge, Lord Auen, Inordaill, and Aberbroth, Master of the Horse to his Maiestie.
George Gordoun Marquesse Huntley, Earle of Enzy, and Lord Strathbolgie. Earles. William Douglas Earle of Angus, Lord Douglas, and Tntallon. Archbald Campbell Earle of Argyle, Lord Lorne, and Kintine. George Lindesey Earle of Crauford, Lord Glenesh, and Fineuin. Francis Hay Earle of Erroll, Lord Hay of Slains, Con∣table of Scotland by Inheritance. William Keith Earle Marhall, Lord Dunoter, and Marshall of Scotland by Inhritance. Iohn Gordon Earle of Sutherland, Lord Strathnuer, and Dunrobin. Iohn Erskeine Earle of Mar, and Carioch, Lord Ers∣keine and Breichin, Treauer of Scotland. Iohn Grahame Earle of Menteeth, Lord, &c. Iohn Lesley Earle of Rothes, Lord Lesley, and Ba∣breigh. William Douglas Earle of Morton, Lord Dalkeith, and Aberdour. Iames Grahame Earle of Montros, Lord Kincairne, and Mugdock. Alexander Seton Earle of Eglenton, Lord Mountgo∣mery. Iohn Keneday Earle of Cassils, Lord Keneday. George St. Claire Earle Cateynes, Lord Brredaill. Alexander Cunnighame Earle of Glencarne, Lord Kilmauris. Iames Erskeine Earle of Buchan, Lord Aughterous. Iames Stuart Earle of Murray, Lord Donne, and St. Columbinch. Iohn Muray Earle of Athole, Lord, &c. Earles made by King IAMES. Robert Maxwell Earle of Nihisdale, Lord Maxwell, and Cartauerock.
George Setone Earle of Wintoun, and Lord Setone. Alexander Leuinstone Earle of Linlithgou, Lord Ka∣lendar. Iames Hume Earle of Hume, Lord Dungals. Iohn Drumond Earle of Perth, Lord Drumond, and Hobhall. Charles Setone Earle of Dunfermeline, Lord Fyuie, and Vrquarte. Fliming Earle of Vigtoune, Lord Cumber∣rd. Iohn Layon Earle of Kingorne. Iames Hamilton Earle of Abercorne, Lord Dasley, Iames Kere Earle of Louthian, Lord Heubotill. Patrick Murray Earle of Tullibardine, Lord Murray. Robert Kere Earle of Roxbrugh, Lord Cssfing. Thomas Erskeine Earle of Kelly, Viscount Fentone, Lord Diriltone. Walter Scot Earle of Buckcleuch, Lord, &c. Thomas Hamilton Earle of Hadingtoune, Lord By∣ning, and Byris, Lord Priuy Seale. Alexander Stuart Earle of Galloway, Lord Garleis. Collen Mac-Enzie Earle of Seafort, Lord Kintaill. Iohn Murray Earle of Anandill, Viscount Anan, Lord Lochmabine. Iohn Maitland Earle of Lauderdale, Viscount Mait∣land, and Lord Thirilstone, and Lethingtone. Iames Stuart Earle of Carrick, Lord Kincleuine. Viscounts. Henry Carey, Viscount Falkland. Henry Cunstable, Viscount Dunbar. Dauid Murray, Viscount Stormouth, Lord Scone. William Crightone, Viscount Aire, Lord Sanquhair. George Hay, Viscount Dupleine, Lord Hay of Kinfauns, Lord high Chamberlaine of Scotland. Iohn Gordon, Viscount Melgum, Lord Aboyne. William Douglas, Viscount Drumlanrick, &c. Barons. Lindesay, Lord Lindesay.
Iohn Forbes, Lord Forbes. Abrnete, Lord Saltoun. Andrew Gray, Lord Gray of Fouils. Iames Stuart, Lord Vchiltrie. Cahcarte, Lord Cathcrte. Lord Caruill Iohn Hay Lord Yester. Iames Semple, Lord Smple. Henry St. Clair, Lord St. Clair of Rauensheogh. Maxewell, Lord Heries. Alexander Elphingstone, Lord Elphingstone. Lawrence Oliphant, Lord Oliphant. Simon Foaser, Lord Loat. Iames Ogiluey, Lord Ogiluey. Borthwick, Lord Borthwick Robert Rosse, Lord Rosse. Thomas Boyde, Lord Boyde. Sandelius, Lord Torphichen. Alexander Lindesay, Lord Spynnie. Patrick Lesley, Lord Londoers. Cambell, Lord Loudon. Thomas Bruce, Baron Kinlosse. Iohn Elphingstone, Lord Balmerinoch. Iames Colueill, Lord Colueill. Iames Stuart, Lord Blantyre. Robert Balfour, Lord Burleigh. Adam Bothuell, Lord Holyrudehouse. Iohn Drumund, Lord Madertie. Iames Elphingstone, Lord Cooper. Iohn Cranstone, Lord Cranstone. Ogiluey, Lord Deskford. Robert Melueill, Lord Melueill. Dauid Carnagay, Lord Carnagay. Iohn Ramsay, Lord Ramsay. Carr, Lord Iedbrough. Campbell, Lord Kintyir. Naiper, Lord Naiper of Marcheston. Thomas Fairfax, Lord Cameron.
Edward Barret, Lord Newbrough. Walter Aston, Lord Forfare. Iohn Weymes, Lord Weymes. Elizabeth Richardson, Baronesse of Craumond, wife to Sir Thomas Richardson, Chiefe Iustice of his Maie∣sties Court of Common Pls. Iohn Stuart, Lord Traquair. Donald Macky, Lord Rae. Robert Dalzell, Lord Dalzell. A Catalogue of the Earles, Viscounts, & Barons of Ireland George Fitz-Gerald Earle of Kildare. Waltr Butler Earle of Ormond. Henry Obrin Earle of Thomond. Richard Burgh Earle of Clanricard. Mernen Tochet Earle of Castell-hauen. Richard Boyle Earle of Corke. Randall Mac-Donell Earle of Antrim. Richard Nugent Earle of Westmeath. Iames Dillon Earle of Roscomman. Thomas Ridgway Earle of London Derry. William Brabazen Earle of Eastmeath. Dauid Barry Earle of Barrymore, & Viscount oteuant. Gorge Fielding Earle of Desmond & Viscount Callon. Iohn Vaughan Earle of Carbury, and Lord Vaughan of Molingar. William Pope Earle of Downe, and Baron Bealterbert. Lucs Plunket Earle of ingale, & Lord of Killene. Viscounts. Iico Peston Viscount of Gormanston. Did che Viscount of Fermoy. Richard tler Viscount Montgarret. Richad Wingield Viscount Powerscourt. Oer St. Iohn Viscount Grandison. Charles Wilmot Viscount Wilmot of Athlone. Henry Poore Viscount of Valentia. Garret Moore Viscount of Droghda. Chrisopher Dillon Viscount Dillon of Costellagh-galni
Nicholas Netteruill Viscount Netteruill of Dowthe. Hugh Montgomery Viscount Montgomery of the Ardes. Iames Hamilton Viscount Clanhughboy. Adam Loftus Viscount Loftus of Ely. Thomas Beaumont Viscount Beaumont of Swords. Anth. Mac-Enos alias Magennis, Visc. Magennis of Euagh. Thomas Cromwell Viscount Lcale. Edward Chichester Viscount Chichester of Carigfergus. Dominick Sarsfield Viscount Sarsfield of Roscarbery. Robert Needeam Viscount Kilmurry. Thomas Somerset Viscount Somerset of Cassell. Edward Conway Viscount of Killultagh. Nicholas Sanderson Visount of Castltowne. Thomas Roper Viscount of Baltinglas. Theobald Burgh Viscoun of Maio. Lewes Boyle Viscount Boyle of Kynalmeaky. Roger Iones Viscount of Rannelagh. George Chaworth Viscount Chaworth of Ardmagh. Barnham Swift Viscot Carlingford. Thomas Sauile Viscount Sauile of Castle-Bar. Iohn Scudamore, Baron Scudamore of Dromore, and Viscount Scudamore of Sligo. Robert Cholmundeley Visco. Cholmundeley of Kellis. Thomas Smith Viscount Strangford. Richard Lumley Viscount Lumley of Waterford. Richard Wenman Viscount Wenman of Tuan, and Ba∣ron Wenman of Kilmanham. Iohn Taffe Viscount Corine, and Baron of Ballimote. William Mounson Viscount Mounson of Castle-mayne, and Baron Mounson of Bellinguard. Charles Mac-Carty Viscount of Muskry. Richard Mulenux Viscount Mulenux of Mariburgh. Thomas Fairfax Viscount Fairfax of Emmely. Thomas Fitz-William Viscount Fitz-William of Me∣ryung, and Baron Fitz-William of Thorne-Castle. Perce Butler Viscount Kerine. Barons. Richard Bermingham, Lord Bermingham of Athenry.
Iohn Courcy, Lord Courcy of Kinsale. Thomas Fitz-morrice, Lord of Kerry, and Lixnawr. Thomas Fleming, Lord of Slane. Nicholas St. Lawrence, Lord of Hothe. Patrick Plunket, Lord of Dunsany. Robert Barnwell, Lord of Trimleston. Edmund Butler, Lord of Dunboyne. Teige Mac-Gilpatrik, Lord of vpper Osery. Oliuer Plunket, Lord of Lough. Iohn Power, Lord Corraghmore. Morrogh Obrien, Lord of Inchequin. Edmund Burgh, Lord Burgh of Castle-connell. Thomas Butler, Lord of Cahir. Mont-Ioy Blunt, Lord Mont-Ioy of Mont-Ioy Fort. Oliuer Lambert, Lord Lambert of Cauan. Theobald Burgh, Lord Burgh of Britas. Andrew Steward, Lord of Castle-Steward. Iames Balfoure, Lord Balfoure of Clan-Awley. Henry Folliet, Lord Folliet of Ballishenam. William Maynard, Lord Maynard of Wicklogh. Edward Gorges, Lord Gorges of Dundalke. Robert Digby, Lord Digby of Geshell. William Heruy, Lord Heruy of Rosse. William Fitz-William, Lord Fitz-William of Liffer. William Caufield, Lord Caufield of Charlemont. Henry Docwray, Lord Docwray of Culmore. Edward Blany, Lord Blany of Monagham. Francis Aungier, Lord Aungier, of Long-ford. Lawrence Esmond, Lord Esmond of Lymerick. Dermond Omallum, Lord Omallum of Glan Omallum. William Brrton, Lord Brerton of Laghlin. Edward Herbert Lord Herbert of Castle-Iland. George Caluert, Lord Baltimore. Hugh Hare, Lord Colerane of Colerane. William Sherard, Lord Sherard of Letrim. Roger Boyle, Lord Boyle, Baron of Broghill. Brian Mac-Guier, Baron of Iniskillin. Francis Ansley, Lord Mount-Norris.
The names of Baronets made by King Iames and King Charles, at seuerall times; as followeth. Anno 9. & 44. Iacobi Regis, 1611. SIr Nicholas Bacon of Redgraue, in the County of folke Knight, created Baronet the 22. day of May, Anno praedicto. Sir Richard Molineux of Seton in the County of Lan∣caster Knight, created Baronet the 22. day of May, An∣no praedicto. Sir Thomas Maunsell of Morgan, in the County of Clamorgan Knight, created Baronet the 22. day of May Anno praedicto. George Shyrley of Staunton, in the County of Leice∣ster Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of May, vt su∣pra. Sir Iohn Stradling of St. Donates, in the County of Glamorgan Knight, teste vt supra. Thomas Peham of Lawghton, in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Francis Leake of Sutton, in the County of Derby Knight, teste vt supra. Sir Richard Houghton of Houghton-tower, in the Coun∣ty of Lancaster Knight, teste vt supra. Sir Henry Hobart of Intwood, in the County of Norfolke Knight, teste vt supra. Sir George Booth of Dunham Massie in the County of Chester Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Iohn Peyton of Hisman, in the County of Cam∣bridge Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Lionell Talmache of Hmingham, in the County of Suffolke Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Iruis Clifton of Clifon, in the County of Derby Knight, created Baronet, teste v supra.
Sir Thomas Gerrard of Brim in the County of Lanca∣ster Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Walter Aston of Titfall, in the County of Stafford Knght, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Philip Kneuet of Bucknam Esquire, in the County of Norfolke, teste vt supra. Sir Iohn S. Iohn of Lediard Tregos, in the Couty of Wilts Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Iohn Shelly of Michelgroue, in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Iohn Sauage of Rock-sauage, in the County of Chester Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, Anno 9. & 44. Iacobi Regis, anno praedicte. Sir Francis Barington of Barington-hall, in the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, v supra anno praedicto. Henry Berkley of Wymondham, in the County of Lice∣ster Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, anno praedicte. William Wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse, in the county of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, vt ante an. praed. Sir Richard Musgraue of Hartley-Castle, in the county of VVestmerland Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Edward Seimoure of Bury-Castle, in the county of De∣uon Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Miles Finch of Eastwell, in the county of Kent Knig. created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Anthony Cope of Harwell, in the county of Oxford Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Thomas Mounson of Carleton, in the county of Lin∣colne Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. George Griesley of Drakelow, in the county of Derby Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Paul Tracy of Stanway, in the county of Glocester Es∣quire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Iohn Wentworth of Gffield, in the county of Es∣sex Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra.
Sir Henry Bellassis of Newbrough, in the county of Yorke Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. William Constable of Flambrough, in the county of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Thomas Legh of Stoneley, in the county of VVarwicke Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Edward Noell of Brooke, in the county of Rutland Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Robert Cotton of Connington, in the county of Lin∣colne Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Robert Cholmondeleigh of Cholmondeleigh, in the county of Chester Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Iohn Molineux of Teuershalt, in the county of Notting∣am Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Francis Wortley of VVortley, in the county of Yorke Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir George Sauile the elder of Thornehill, in the coun∣ty of Yorke Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. William Kniueton of Mircaston, in the county of Der∣by Esquire, created Baronet, este vt supra. Sir Philip Woodhouse of imberley-hall, in the county of Norfolke Knight, created Baronet, teste vt su∣pra. Sir William Pope of VVilcot, in the county of of Ox∣ford Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Iames Harrington of Ridlington, in the county of Rutland Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, anno praed. Sir Henry Sauile of Metheley, in the county of Yorke Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Henry Willoughby of Risley, in the county of Derby Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Lewis Tresham of Rushton, in the county of North∣hampton Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Thomas Brudenell of Dene, in the county of Northamp∣ton Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir George St. Paul of Snarford, in the county of Lin∣colne Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra.
Sir Philip Tirwhit of Samefield, in the county of Lin∣colne Kight, created Baroet, tste vt supra. Sir Rogr Dalison o Laughton, in the county of Lin∣colne Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, anno pred. Sir Edward Carre of Sleford, in the county of Lincolne Knight, creatd Baroet, teste vt supra. Sir Edward Hssey of Henington, in the county of Lincolne Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Le Strange Mordnt of Massigham parua, in the coun∣ty of Norlke Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Iun. anno pred. Thomas Bendish of Steeple Bumsteed, in the county of Essex Esquire, creatd Baronet the 29. day of Iune, anno predicto vt supra. Sir Iohn Winne of Gwidder, in the county of Carnaruon Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir William Throckmorton of Trtworth, in the coun∣ty of Gloucester Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Richard Worsley of Appledorecombe, in the county of Southampton Knight created Baronet, teste vt supra. Richard Fleet-wood of Cakewish, in the County of Stafford Equire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Thomas Spencer of Yardington, in the County of Ox∣ford Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Iohn Tufton of Hothfield, in the County of Knt Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, Anno prae∣dictae. Sir Samuel Peyton of Knowlton, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Charles Morrison of Cashiobury, in the County of Hertford, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Henry Baker of Sissinghurst, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet, teste v supra Roger Appleton of Southbemsteet, in the County of Es∣sex Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt sup. Sir William Sedley of Ailesford, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra.
Sir William Twisden of East-peckham, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Edward Hales of Woodchurch, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, vt William Monyus of Walwasher, in the County of Kent Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Thomas Milemay of Mulsham, in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir William Maynard of Easton parua, in the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, anno praedicto. Henry Lee of Quarrendon, in the County of Bucking∣ham Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. These last Baronets which be in number 52. beare date all 29. day of Iune, Anno supradicto. And the other 18. which be first, doe all beare date 22. day of May, An. supradicto. Anno 10. & 45. Iacobi Regis, 1612. SIr Iohn Portman of Orchard, in the County of Somer∣set Knight, created Baronet the 25. day of Nouem∣ber, Anno pred. Sir Nicholas Saunderson of Saxby, in the County of Lincolne, created Baroned the 25. day of Nouember the An. praed. Sir Miles Sandes of Wilberton within the Ile of Ely Knight, created Baronet, teste vt surra. William Gostwicke of Willington, in the County of Bedford Esquire, created Baronet the 25. day of Nouem∣ber Anno praedicto. Thomas Puckering of Weston, in the County of Hert∣ford Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir William Wray of Glentworth, in the county of Lin∣colne Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir William Ailoffe of Braxted magna, in the county of Essex Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Marmaduke Wiuell of Custable-burton, in the coun∣ty of Yorke Knight, created Baronet, the 25. day of No∣uember, Anno pred.
Iohn Peshall of Horsley, in the county of Stafford Es∣quire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Francis Englefield of Wotton Basset, in the county of Wilts Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Thomas Ridgway of Torre, in the county of De∣uon Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra William Essex of Bewcot, in the County of Berkeshire Esquire, created Baronet the 25. day of Nouember, anno praed. Sir Edward Gorges of Langford, in the county of Wilts Knight, created Baronet the 25. day of Nouember, Anno praed. Edward Deuereux of Castle Bramwitch, in the county of Warwicke, Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Reginald Mohun of Buckonnock, in the county of Corn∣wall Esquire, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Harbottle Grimstone of Bradfield, in the county of Essex Knight, created Baronet, teste vt supra. Sir Thomas Holt of Aston iuxta Byrmingham, in the county of Warwicke Knight, created Baronet the 25. day of Nouember, Anno praed. Sir Robert Napar alias Sandy of Lewton-How, in the county of Bedford Knight, created Baronet, teste 24 day of September, Anno pred. Paul Bayning of in the county of Es∣sex Esquire, created Baronet the Sir Thomas Temple of in the county of Buckingham Knight, created Baronet the day of Thomas Peneystone of in the county of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the Anno 13. & 48. Iacobi Regis 1615. Thomas Blackston of Blackston, in the county and Bi∣shopiicke of Durham, created Baronet the 8. day of Iune, Anno praed. Sir Robert Dormer of Wing, in the county of Bucking∣ham
Knight, created Baronet the 10. day of Iune, Anno praed. and created Baron Dormer of Wing, the thirty of Iune, Anno praed. Anno 15. & 50. Iacobi Regis, 1616. Sir Rowland Egerton of Egerton, in the county of Che∣ster Knight, created Baronet the 5. day of Aprill An pred. Roger Towneshend of Rainham, in the County of Norffoke Esquire, created Baronet the 16. day of Aprill, Anno praed. Simon Clerke of Sulford, in the County of Warwicke Esquire, created Baronet the first day of May, anno pred. Anno 15. & 51. Iacobi Regis, 1617. Sir Richard Lucy of Broxborne, in the County of Hert∣ford Knight, created Baronet the 11. day of March, anno praed. Anno 16. & 51. Iacobi Regis, 1618. Sir Mathew Boynton Bramston in the County of Yorke Knight, created Baronet the 25. day of May. an. praed. Thomas Littleton of Frnkley, in the County of Worce∣ster Esquire, created Baronet the 25. day of Iuly, anno praed. Anno 16. & 52. Iacobi Regis, 1618. Sir Francis Leigh of Newneham, in the County of War∣wicke Knight, created Baronet, the 24. day of Decem∣ber, anno praed. George Morton of St. Andrewes Milborne, in the Coun∣ty of Dorset Esquire, created Baronet the first day of March, an. praed. Anno 17. & 52. Iacobi Regis, 1619. Sir William Heruy Knight, created Baronet the 31. day of May, an. praed. Thomas Mackworth of Normanton, in the County of Rutland Esquire, created Baronet the 4. day of Iune, an. prad. William Grey Esquire, sonne and heire of Sir Ralph Grey of Chillingham in the County of Northumberland Knight, created Baronet the 15. day of Iune, an. praed. William Villiers of Brookesby, in the County of Leice∣ster
Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of Iuly, an. praed. Sir Iames Ley of Westbury, in the County of VVilts Knight, created Baronet the 20. day of Iuly, an. pred. William Hicks of Beuerston, in the County of Leicester Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of Iuly, an. pred. Anno 17. & 53. Iacobi Regis. Sir Thomas Beamont of Coleauerton, in the County of Leicester Knight, created Baronet the 17. day of Septem∣ber, an. pred. Henry Salisbury of Leweny, in the County of Denbigh Esquire, created Baronet the 10. day of Nouember, an. pred. Erasmus Driden of Canons Ashby, in the County of Northampton Esquire, created Baronet the 16. day of No∣uember, an. pred. William Armine Esquire, sonne of Sir William Ar∣mine of Osgodby, in the County of Lincolne Knight, crea∣ted Baronet the 28. of Nouember, an. pred. Sir William Bamburgh of Howson, in the County of Yorke Knight, created Baronet the first day of December, an. pred. Edward Hartoppe of Freathby, in the County of Lei∣cester Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day of December, an. pred. Iohn Mill of Camons-Court, in the County of Sussex Es∣quire, created Baronet the 31. day of December, anno pred. Francis Radcliffe of Darentwater, in the County of Cumberland Esquire, created Baronet the 31. day of Ianuary, an. pred. Sir Dauid Foulis of Ingleby, in the County of of Yorke Knight, created Baronet the 6. day of February, an. pred. Thomas Philips of Barrington, in the County of So∣merset Esquire, created Baronet the 16. day of February, an. pred. Sir Claudius Forster of Bambrough-Castle, in the Coun∣ty
of Northumberland Knight, created Baronet the 7. day of March, an. praed. Anthony Chester of Chicheley, in the County of Buc∣kingham Esquire, created Baronet the 23. day of March, an. praed. Sir Samuel Tryon or Layre-Marney, in the County of Essex Knight, created Baronet the 28. day of Mach, an. praed. Anno 18. & 53. Iacobi Regis, 1620. Adam Newton of Charleton, in the County of Kent, Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day of Aprill, an. pr. Sir Iohn Boteler of Hatfield-woodhall, in the County of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the 12. day of Aprill, an. pred. Gilbert Gerrard of Harrow super montem, in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex Esquire, created Baronet the 13. day of Aprill, an. praed. Humfrey Lee of Langley, in the County of Salop Es∣quire, created Baronet the 3. day of May, an. praed. Richard Berney of Park-hall in Redham, in the County of Norffolke Esquire, created Baronet the 5. day of May, an. praed. Humfrey Forster of Aldermaston, in the County of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 20. day of May, anno praed. Thomas Biggs of Lenchwicke, in the County of VVor∣cester Esquire, created Baront the 29. day of May, anno praed. Henry Bellingham of Helsington, in the County of West∣merland Equire, created Baronet the 30. day of May, an. praed. William Yeluerton of Rougham, in the County of Nor∣folke Esquire, crated Baronet the 31. day of May, anno praed. Iohn Scudamore of Home Lacy in the County of Here∣ford Esquire, created Baronet the first day of Iune, anno praed. Sir Thomas Gore of Stitman, in the County of Yorke
Knight, created Baronet the 2. day of Iune, an. praed. Iohn Packington of Alesbury, in the County of Buc∣kingham Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of Iune, an. praed. Raphe Ashton of Leuer, in the County of Lancaster Esquire, created Baronet the 28. of Iune, an. praed. Sir Baptist Hicks of Campden, in the County of Glo∣cester Knight, created Baronet the first day of Iuly, anno praed. Sir Thomas Roberts of Glassenbury, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the 3. day of Iuly, anno praed. Iohn Hamner of Hamner, in the county of Flint Es∣quire, creatd Baronet the 8. day of Iuly, anno praedicto. Edward Osborne of Keeton, in the county of Yorke, Es∣quire, created Baronet the 13. day of Iuly, anno prae∣dicto. Henry Felton of Playford, in the county of Suffolke Es∣quire, created Baronet, the 20. day of Iuly, an. praed. William Chaloner of Ginsborough, in the county of York Esquire, created Baronet, the 21. day of Iuly, an. praedicto. Edward Fryer of Water-Eaton, in the county of Ox∣ford Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of Iuly an. praed. Sir Thomas Bishop of Parham, in the County of Sus∣sex Knight, created Baronet the 24. day of Iuly, an. praed. Sir Francis Vincent of Stockdawe-Barton, in the Coun∣ty of Surrey Knight, created Baronet the 26. day of Iuly, anno praed. Anno 18. & 54. Iacobi Regis, 1620. Henry Clere of Ormesby, in the county of Norfolke Es∣quire, created Baronet the 27. day of February, an. praed. Sir Baniamin Titchbourne of Titchbourne, in the Coun∣ty of Southampton Knight, created Baronet, the 8. day of March, an. praed. Anno 19. & 54. Iacobi Regis, 1621. Sir Richard Wilbraham of Woodhey, in the County of
Chester Knight, created Baronet the 5. day of May, anno praed. Sir Thomas Delues of Duddington in the County of Chester Knight, created Baronet, the 8. day of May, An. praed. Sir Lewis Watson of Rockingham Castle, in the County of Northampton Knight, created Baronet, the 23. day of Iune, An. praed. Sir Thomas Palmer of Wingham, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the 29. day of Iune, Anno praed. Sir Richard Roberts of Trewro, in the County of Cornwall Knight, created Baronet the 3. of Iuly, an. praed. Iohn Riuers of Chafford, in the county of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of Iuly, an. praed. Anno 19. & 55. Iacobi Regis, 1621. Henry Iernegan of Cossey, alias Cossese in the county of Norfolke Esquire, created Baronet the 16. day of August, anno praed. Thomas Darnell of Heyling, in the County of Lin∣colne Esquire, created Baronet the 6. day of September, an. praed. Sir Isaack Sidley of great Charte, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the 14. day of September, anno praed. Robert Browne of Walcot, in the County of Northamp∣ton Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of September, an. praed. Iohn Hewet of Headley-hall, in the County of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet, the 11. day of October, an. praed. Sir Nicholas Hide of Albury, in the County of Hert∣ford Knight, created Baronet the 8. day of Nouember, an. praed. Iohn Philips of Picton, in the County of Pembroke Esquire, created Baronet the 9. day of Nouember, an. praed.
Sir Iohn Stepney of Prndergast, in the county of Pem∣broke Knight, created Baronet the 24. day of Nouem∣ber, an. prad. Baldwin Wake of Cleuedon, in the county of Somerset Esquire, created Baronet the 5. day of December, anno praed. William Masham of High-lauer, in the County of Es∣sex, created Baronet the 19. day of December, Anno praed. Iohn Colbrond of Borham, in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of December, an. praed. Sir Iohn Hotham of Scorborough, in the County of Yorke Knight, created Baronet the 4. day of Ianuary, an. praed. Francis Mansell of Mudlescombe, in the County of Car∣marthen Esquire, created Baronet the 14. day of Ianua∣ry, anno pred. Edward Powell of Penkelley, in the County of Here∣ford Esquire, created Baronet the 18. day of Ianuary, an. praed. Sir Iohn Garrard of Lamer, in the County of Hert∣ford Knight, created Baronet the 16. day of February, an. praed. Sir Richard Groseuenor of Eaton, in the County of Chester Knight, created Baronet the 23. day of February, an. praed. Sir Henry Mody of Garesdon, in he County of Welts Knight, created Baronet the 11. day of March, anno praed. Iohn Barker of Grimston-hall in Trimley, in the County of Suffolke Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of March, an. praed. Sir William Button of Alton, in the county of Wilts Knight, created Baronet, the 18. day of of March, Anno praed. Anno 20. & 52. Iacobi Regis 1622. Iohn Gage of Ferle, in the county of Sussex Esquire,
reated Baronet the 26. day of March, Anno praedicto. William Goring Esquire, son and heire of Sir Henry Goring of Burton, in the county of Sussex Knight, created Baronet the 14. day of May, Anno pred. Peter Courten of Aldington alias Aunon, in the county of Worcester Esquire, created Baronet the 18. day of May, an. praed. Sir Richard Norton of Rotherfield, in the county of Southampton Knight, created Baronet the 23. day of May, anno praed. Sir Iohn Leuenthorpe of Shinglehall, in the county of Hertford Knight, created Baronet the 30. day of May, Anno praed. Capell Bedell of Hamerton, in the county of Huntington Esquire, created Baronet the 3. day of Iune, anno praed. Iohn Darell of Westwoodhey, in the county of Berke Es∣quire, created Baronet the 13. day of Iune, an. praed. William Williams of Veynoll, in the county of Carnar∣uon Esq. created Baronet, the 15. day of Iune, an. praed. Sir Francis Ashley of Hartfield, in the County of Mi∣dlesex, Knight created Baronet the 18. day of Iune, an. praed. Sir Anthony Ashley of St. Giles Wimborne, in the coun∣ty of Dorset Knight, created Baronet, the 3. day of Iuly, anno pred. Iohn Couper of Rocbourne, in the county of Southamp∣ton, created Baronet the 4. day of Iuly, an. praed. Edmund Prideaux of Netherton, in the County of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 17. of Iuly, an. praed. Sir Thomas Heselrigge of Noseley, in the county of Leicester Knight, created Baronet the 21. day of Iuly, an. praed. Sir Thomas Burton of Stockerston, in the county of Lei∣cester Kni. created Baronet the 22. day of Iuly, anno praed. Francis Foliambe of Walton, in the County of Derby Es∣quire, created Baronet the 24. day of Iuly, an. praed. Edward Yate of Buckland in the county of Berke Es∣quire, created Baronet the 30. day of Iuly, an. praed.
Anno vicesimo & 56. Iacob Regis. George Chudleigh of Ashton, in the county of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the first day of August, anno praed. Francis Drake of Buckland, in the county of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 20. day of August, anno praed. William Meredith of Stanstie, in the county of Denbigh Esquire, created Baronet the 13. day of August, anno praed. Hugh Middleton of Ruthyn, in the county of Denbigh Esquire, created Baronet the 22. day of October, anno praed. Gifford Thornehurst of Ague-Court, in the county of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of Nouember, anno praed. Percy Herbert sonne and heire of Sir William Herbert of Red-castle, in the county of Montgomery Knight, crea∣ted Baronet the 16. day Nouember, an. praed. Sir Robert Fisher of Packington, in the county of War∣wicke Knight, created Baronet the 7. day of December, anno praed. Hardolph Wastneys of Headon, in the county of Not∣tingham, created Baronet the 18. day of December. anno praed. Sir Henry Skippwith of Prestwould, in the county of Lei∣cester Knight, created Baronet the 20. day of December, anno praed. Thomas Harris of Boreatton, in the County of Salop Esquir, created Baronet the 22. day of December, anno pred. Nicholas Tempest of Stella, in the Bishopricke of Dur∣ham Esquire, created Baronet the 23. day of December, anno pred. Francis Cottington Esquire, Secretary to the Prince Charles, created Baronet, the 16. day of February, Anno praed.
Anno vicesimo primo & 56. Iacobi Regis. Thomas Harris of Tong castle, in the County of Sa∣lop, Serieant at Law, created Baronet the 12. day of Aprill, Anno praedicto. Edward Barkham of Southacre, in the County of Nor∣folke Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of Iune, Anno praedicto. Iohn Corbet of Sprowston, in the County of Norfolke Esquire, created Baronet the 4. day of Iuly, anno praed. Sir Thomas Playters of Sotterley, in the county of Suf∣folke Knight, created Baronet, the 13. day of August, Anno praedicto. Anno secundo Caroli Regis. Sir Iohn Ashfield of Nether-hall, in the county of Suffolke Knight, created Baronet the 27. day of Iuly, an. praed. Henry Harper of Calke, in the county of Derby Es∣quire, created Baronet the 8. day of September, anno praed. Edward Seabright of Besford, in the County of Wor∣cester Esquire, created Baronet the 20. day of Decem∣ber, an. praed. Iohn Beaumount of Gracedieu, in the County of Chester Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Ianuary, anno praed. Sir Edward Dering of Surrenden, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the first day of February, anno praed. George Kempe of Pentlone, in the County of Essex, Es∣quire, created Baronet the 5. day of February, an. praed. William Brereton of Hanford, in the county of Che∣ster Esquire, created Baronet the 10. day of March, anno praed. Patrick Curwen of Workington, in the county of Cum∣berland
Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of March, an. praed. William Russell of Witley, in the Country of Worcester Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of March, an. praed. Iohn Spencer of Offley, in the County of Hertford Es∣quire, created Baronet the 14. day of March, an. pred. Sir Giles Escourt of Newton, in the County of VVils Knight, created Baronet the 17. day of March, an. pred. Anno trtio Caroli Regis. Thomas Aylesbury Esquire, one of the Masters of the Court of Request, created Baroned the 19. day of Aprill, an. pred. Thomas Style Esquire, of Wateringbury, in the County of Kent, created Baronet the 21. day of Aprill, an. pred. Frederick Cornwallis in the County of Suffolke Es∣quire, created Baronet the day of an. pred. William Skeuington, in the County of Stafford crea∣ted Baronet the anno pred. Drue Drury, in the County of Norfolke Esquire, crea∣ted Baronet the an. praed. Sir Robert Crane of Chilton, in the County of Suffolke Knight, created Baronet the day of May, an. pred. Anthony Wingfield of Goodwins, in the County of Suffolke Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of May, an. praed. William Culpepper of Preston-hall, in the County of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of May, vt su∣pra. Iohn Kirle of Much Marcle, in the County of Here∣ford Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of May, vt su∣pra. Giles Bridges of Wilton, in the County of Hereford Es∣quire, created Baronet the 17. day of May, vt supra. Sir Humphrey Stiles of Becknam, in the County of Kent Knight, created Baronet the 20. day of May, an. pred.
Henry Moore of Falley, in the county of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 21. day of May, Anno praed. Thomas Heale of Fleet, in the county of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of May, Anno pred. Iohn Carleton of Holcum, in the county of Oxford Es∣quire, created Baronet the 28. day of May, Anno praed Thomas Maples of Stowe, in the County of Hunting∣don Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of May, anno praedicto. Sir Iohn Isham of Lamport, in the County of North∣hampton Knight, created Baronet the 30. day of May, an. praed. Hery Bagot of Blithfield, in the County of Stafford Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of May, Anno praed. Lewis Pellard of Kings Nimpton, in the County of De∣uon Esquire, created Baronet the 31. day of May, anno praed. Francis Mannock of Giffordes-hall, in Stoke neere Ney∣land in the County of Suffolke Esquire, created Baronet the first day of Iune, An. praed. Henry Griffith of Agnes Burton, in the County of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet the 7. day Iune, an. praed. Lodowick Deyer of Staughton, in the County of Hun∣tingdon Esquire, created Baronet the 8. day of Iune, anno praed. Sir Hugh Stewkley of Hinton, in the County of North∣hampton Knight, created Baronet the 9. day of Iune, an. praed. Edward Stanley of Biggarstaffe, in the County of Lan∣caster Esquire, created Baronet the 26. of Iune, an. praed. Edward Littleton of Pileton-hall, in the County of Stafford Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of Iune, an. praed. Ambrose Browne of Bestworth-castle, in the county of Surrey Esquire, created Baronet the 7. day of Iuly, an. praed. Sackuile Crowe of Lanherme, in the county of Car∣marthen Esquire, created Baronet the 8. day of Iuly, anno praed.
Michael Liuesey of Eastchurch, in the Ile of Sheppey, in the county of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the 11. day of Iuly, an. praed. Simon Bennet of Beuhampton, in the county of Bucking∣ham Esquire, created Baronet the 17. day of Iuly, anno praed. Sir Thomas Fisher of the parish of St. Giles, in the County of Middlesex Knight, created Baronet the 19. day of Iuly, an. praed. Thomas Bowyer of Leghtborne, in the County of Sus∣sex Esquire, created Baronet the 23. day of Iuly, anno praed. Buts Bacon of Milden-hall, in the County of Suffolke Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Iuly, an. praed. Iohn Corbet of Stoke, in the County of Salop Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of September, an. praed. Sir Edward Tirrell of Thorneton, in the County of Buckingham Knight, created Baronet the 31. day of October, an. praed. Basill Dixwell of Terlingham, alias Gerelingham, in the County of Kent Esquire, created Baronet the 28. day of February, anno praed. Sir Richard Young Knight, one of the Gentlemen of his Maiesties Priuy Chamber, created Baronet the 10. day of March, an. prae. Anno quarto Caroli Regis. William Pennyman the younger of Maske, alias Marske, in the County of Yorke Esquire, created Baro∣net the 6. day of May, an. praed. William Stonehouse of Radley, in the County of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 7. day of May, an. praed. Sir Thomas Fowler of Islington, in the County of Mid∣dlesex Knight, created Baronet the 21. day of May, anno praed. Sir Iohn Fenwick of Fenwick, in the County of Nor∣thumberland Knight, created Baronet the 9. day of Iune, an. praed.
Sir William Wray of Trebitch, in the County of Corn∣wall Knight, created Baronet the 30. day of Iune, an. pr. Iohn Trelawney of Trelawney, in the County of Corn∣wall Esquire, created Baronet the 1. day of Iuly, an. pr. Iohn Conyers of Norden, in the Bishopricke of Dur∣ham Gentleman, created Baronet the 14. day of Iuly, an. praed. Iohn Bolles of Scampton, in the County of Lincolne Esquire, created Baronet the 24. day of Iuly, an. pr. Thomas Aston of Aston, in the county of Chester Es∣quire, created Baronet the 25. day of Iuly, an. pr. Kenelme Ienoure of Much Dunmore, in the county of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 30. day of Iuly, anno praed. Iohn Price of Newtowne, in the county of Montgome∣ry Knight, created Baronet, the 15. day of August, an. praed. Sir Richard Beaumont of Whitley, in the County of Yorke Knight, created Baronet the 15. day of August, an. prd. William Wiseman of Canfield-hall, in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of August, an. praedicto. Thomas Nightingale of Newport Pond, in the county of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the first day of Septem∣ber, an. praed. Iohn Iaques of in the county of Mid∣dlesex, one of his Maiesties Gentlemen Pentioners Es∣quire, created Baronet the 2. day of September, an. praed. Anno quarto Caroli Regis. Robert Dillington of the Ile of Wight, in the county of Soutampton Esquire, created Baronet the 6. day of Sep∣tmber, anno praed. Francis Pile of Compton, in the County of Berk Es∣quire, created Baronet the 12. day of September, anno praed.
Iohn Pole of Shut, in the County of Deuon Esquire, created Baronet the 12. day of September, vt supra. William Lewis of Langrs, in the County of Breck∣nock Esquire, created Baronet the 14. day of Septem∣ber, anno praed. William Culpepper of Wakehurst, in the County of Sussex Esquire, created Baronet the 20. day of Septem∣ber, anno praed. Peter Van Loor of Tylehurst, in the county of Berke Esquire, created Baronet the 3. day of October, anno praedicto. Sir Iohn Lawrence of Iuer, in the county of Bucking∣ham Knight, created Baronet the 9. day of October, an. praed. Anthony Slinges by of Screuin, in the County of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet the 23. day of October, anno praed. Thomas Vauasor of Hesskewood, in the County of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet the 24. day of October, anno praed. Robert Wolseley of Morton, in the county of Staf∣ford Esquire, created Baronet the 24. day of Nouember, an. praed. Rice Rudd of Abersline, in the county of Carmarthen Esquire, created Baronet the 8. day of December, an. praed. Richard Wiseman of Thundersley, in the county of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 18. day of Decem∣ber, anno praed. Henry Ferrers of Skellingthorpe, in the county of Lin∣colne Esquire, created Baronet the 19. day of Decem∣ber, an. praed. Iohn Anderson of St. Iues, in the County of Hunting∣don Esquire, created Baronet the 3. day of Ianuary, anno praed. Sir William Russell of Chippenham, in the County of Cambridge Knight, created Baronet the 19. day of Ia∣nuary, Anno praedicto.
Richard Euerard of Much Waltham, in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of Ianuary, an. praed. Thomas Powell of Berkenhead, in the County of Che∣ster Esquire, created Baronet the day of Ianuary, an. praed. William Luckin of Waltham, in the County of Essex Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day of March, an. praed. Anno quinto Caroli Regis. Richard Graham of Eske, in the County of Cumber∣land Esquire, created Baronet the 29. day of March, an. praed. George Twisleton of Barlie, in the County of Yorke Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day of Aprill, an. praed. William Acton of the City of London Esquire, crea∣ted Baronet the 30. day of May, anno praed. Nicholas Le Strange of Hunstanton, in the County of Norfolke Esquire, created Baronet the 1. day of Iune, anno praed. Edward Aleyn of Hatfield, in the County of Essex Es∣quire, created Baronet the 28. day of Inne, An. praed. Richard Earle of Craglethorpe, in the county of Lin∣colne Esquire, created Baronet the 2. day of Iuly, Anno praed. Iohn Holland of Quidenham, in the County of Nor∣folke Esquire, created Baronet the 15. day of Iuly, An. praed. Robert Ducy Alderman of London, created Baronet the 28. day of Nouember, an. praed. Anno sexto Caroli Regis. Sir Richard Grenuile Knight and Colonell, created Ba∣ronet, Teste apud Westmonasterium, decimo nono die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri sexto.
Knights of the Bath, made at the Coronation of King IAMES. SIr Philip Herbert now Earle of Montgomery. Thomas Barkley, Lord Barkley. Sir William Euers, now Lord Euers. Sir George Wharton, after Lord Wharton. Sir Robert Rich, now Earle of Warwicke. Sir Robert Carre, of the Bed-chamber of his Maiesty. Sir Iohn Egerton, now Earle of Bridgewater. Sir Henry Compton, third brother to William Earle of Northampton. Sir Iames Erskine, sonne to the Earle of Marre. Sir William Austuddur. Sir Patricke Murray. Sir Iames Hay Lord Yster. Sir Iohn Lynsey. Sir Richard Preston, after Earle of Desmond. Sir Oliuer Cromwell of Huntingtonshire. Sir Edward Stanley of Lancashire. Sir William Herbert of Montgomery, now Lord Powys. Sir Foulke Griuell, after Lord Brooke. Sir Francis Fanne, after Earle of Westmerland. Sir Robert Chichester, of Deuonshire. Sir Robert Knowles of Bershire. Sir William Clifton of Nottinghamshire. Sir Francis Fortescue of Deuonshire. Sir Richard Corbet of Shropshire. Sir Edward Herbert, now Lord of Castle-Iland in Ire∣land, and Baron Chirbury. Sir Thomas Langton of Lancashire. Sir William Pope of Oxfordshire. Sir Arthur Hopton of Somersetshire. Sir Charles Morison Knight & Baronet of Hartfordshire. Sir Francis Leigh of Warwickeshire.
Sir Edward Mountagu, now Lord Mountagu of Boughton in Northamptonshire. Sir Edward Stanhop of Yorkeshire. Sir Peter Manwood of Kent. Sir Robert Harley of Herefordshire. Sir Thomas Strickland of Yorkeshire. Sir Christopher Hatton of Northamptonshire. Sir Edward Grifin of Northamptonshire. Sir Robert Beuill of Huntingtonshire. Sir Edward Harwell of Wostershire. Sir Iohn Mallet of Somersetshire. Sir Walter Aston of Staffordshire, Knight and Baronet. Sir Henry Gawdy of Essex. Sir Richard Musgraue of Westmerland, Kni. & Baronet. Sir Iohn Stowell of Somersetshire. Sir Richard Amcots of Lincolneshire. Sir Thomas Leedes of Suffolke. Sir Thomas Iermyn of Norfolke. Sir Ralph Harre of Hartford. Sir William Forster of Buckinghamshire. Sir George Speake of Somersetshire. Sir George Hide of Barkeshire. Sir Anthony Felton of Suffolke. Sir William Browne of Northamptonshire. Sir Thomas Wise of Essex. Sir Robert Chamberlaine of Oxfordshire. Sir Anthony Palmer of Suffolke. Sir Edward Heron of Lincolneshire. Sir Henry Burton of Leicestershire. Sir Robert Barker of Suffolke. Sir William Norris of Lancashire. Sir Roger Bodenham of Herefordshire. Knights of the Bath made at the Creation of Henry Prince of WALES. HEnry Vere Earle of Oxford. George Lord Gordon, son to Marquesse Huntley. Henry Lord Clifford, son to Francis Earle of Cumberland.
Henry Ratcliffe, Lord Fitz-water, sonne to the Earle of Sussex. Edward Bourcher, now Earle of Bath. Iames Lord Hay, now Earle of Carlile. Iames Lord Erskin, sonne to the Earle of Marre in Scot∣land. Thomas Windsor, now Lord Windsor. Thomas Lord Wentworth, now Earle of Cleueland. Sir Charles Somerset, son to Edward Earle of Worster. Sir Edward Somerset, son to the said Earle of Worster. Sir Francis Stuart, son to the Earle of Murray. Sir Ferdinando Sutton, eldest son to the Lord Dudley. Sir Henry Carey, now Earle of Douer. Sir Oliuer St. Iohn Lord St. Iohn, now Earle of Bulling∣brooke. Sir Gilbert Gerrard, after Lord Gerrard of Gerrard Bromley. Sir Charles Stanhop, Lord Stanhop of Harington. Sir William Steward. Sir Edward Bruce, after Lord Kinlosse. Sir Robert Sidney, Lord Sidney, now Earle of Leicester. Sir Ferdinando Touchet, eldest sonne to George Lord Audley, Earle of Castle-hauen in Ireland. Sir Peregrine Bartey, brother to the now Earle of Lind∣sey. Sir Henry Rich, second brother to the Earle of War∣wicke, and now Earle of Holland. Sir Edward Sheffeild, son to the Lord Sheffeild, now Earle of Mulgraue. Sir William Cauendish, after made Viscount Mansfield, and now Earle of Newcastle. Knights of the Bath made at the Creation of Charles Duke of YORKE. CHARLES Duke of Yorke. Sir Robert Barty Lord Willoughby of Eresby, now Earle of Lindesey.
Si William Compton, Lord Compton, after Earle of Northampton. Sir Grey Bridges, Lord Shandos. Sir Francis Norris, Lord Norris of Rycot, after Earle of Barkeshire. Sir William Cecill, now Earle of Salisbury. Sir Allan Percy, brother to Henry Earle of Northumber∣land. Sir Francis Mannors, now Earle of Rutand. Sir Francis Clifford, son to th Earle of Cumberland. Sir Thomas Somerset, now Viscount Somerset of Castile in Ireland. Sir Thomas Howard, second son to the Earle of Suffolke, now Earle of arkeshire. Sir Iohn Harrington, sonne to Iohn Lord Harrington of Exton. Knights of the Bath, made at the Creation of CHARLES Prince of Wales. IAmes Lord Matrauers, eldest son to Thomas Earle of Arundell. Algrnon Lord Prcy, eldest son to the Earle of Northum∣brland. Iames Lord Wiothesley, eldest son to Henry Earle of Southampton. Theophilus Lord Clinton, now Earle of Lincolne, eldest son of Thomas Earle of Lincolne. Edward Seimr, Lrd Bahamp, grand child to Ed∣ward Earle of Hrfod. George Lord Barkley, now Lord Barkeley. Hnry Lord Mordant, now Earle of Peterborough. The Master of Fnton, now Lord Fenton. Sir Henry Howard now Lord Matrauers. Sir Robert Howard, fift sonne to Thomas Earle of Suf∣folke. Sir Edward Sackuill, now Earle of Dorset. Sir William Howard, sixth son to Thomas Earle of Suf∣folke
Sir Edward Howard seuenth sonne to Thomas Ea f Suffolke, now Lord Howard of Estricke in Y of shire. Sir Montagu Bartu, sonne and heire to Robert Earle of Lindsey, now Lord Willoughby. Sir William Stourton sonne to the Lord Stourton. Sir William Parker, after Lord Morey and Monteale. Sir Dudley North, now Lord North. Sir Spencer Compton, now Earle of Northampton. Sir William Spencer, now Lord Spencer. Sir Rowland St. Iohn, brother to Oliuer Erle of Bulling∣brooke. Sir Iohn Cauendish, second sonne to William Earle of Deuonshire. Sir Thomas Neuill, son to Henry now Lord Abergaueney. Sir Iohn Roper, after Lord Tenham. Sir Iohn North, brother to Dudley, now Lor North. Sir Henry Cary now Viscount Faulkland. Knights of the Bath, made at the Cronation of King CHARLES. George Fielding, Viscount Callon second sonne to Wil∣liam Earle of Denbigh, now Earle of Desmond. Iames Stanley, Lord Strange, eldest son to William Earle of Derby. Charles Cecill, Lord Cranborne, eldest sonne to William Earle of Salisbury. Charles Herbert, Lord Herbert of Shurland, eldest sonne to Philip Earle of Montgomery. Robert Rich, Lord Rich, eldest sonne to Robert Earle of Warwicke. Iames Hay, Lord Hay, eldest sonne to Iames Earle of Carlile Bazell Fielding, Lord Fielding, eldest sonne to William Earle of Denbigh. Oiuer St. Iohn, Lord St. Iohn, eldest son to Oliuer Earle of Bullingbrooke.
Mildmay Fane, now Earle of Westmerland. Lord Henry Pawlet, younger son to William Marquesse of Winchester. Sir Edwad Montagu, eldest sonne to Henry Viscount Mndeuill, now Earle of Manchester. Sir Iohn Cary, eldest sonne to Henry Viscount Roch∣ford, now Earle of Douer. Sir Charles Howard, eldest son to Thomas Viscount An∣douer, now Earle of Barkshire. Sir William Howard, second sonne to Thomas Earle of Arundell. Sir Robert Stanley, second son to William Ea. of Derby. Sir Pawlt St. Iohn, second sonne to Oliuer Earle of Bul∣lingrooke. Sir Francis Fane, second son to Francis Earle of West∣mrland. Sir Iames Howard, eldest son to Theophilus Lord Wal∣den, now Earle of Suffolke. Sir William Cauendish, eldest sonne to William Lord Cauendish, Earle of Deuonshire. Sir Thomas Wentworth, eldest sonne to Thomas Lord Wentworth, now Earle of Cleueland. Sir William Paget, son to William Lord Paget of Bew∣desert, now Lord Paget. Sir William Russell, eldest son to Francis Lord Russell, now Earle of Bedford. Sir Henry Stanhope, eldest son to Philip Lord Stanhope of Shelford, now Earle of Chesterfield. Sir Richard Vaughan, eldest son to Iohn Lord Vaughan of Molengar in Ireland. Sir Christopher Neuill, second sonne to Edward Lord Abergaueney. Sir Roger Bartu, second son to Robert Lord Willough∣by, now Earle of Lindsey. Sir Thomas Wharton, second sonne to Thomas Lord Wharton. Sir Saint Iohn Blunt, brother to Mountioy Blunt, Lord Mountioy, now Earle of Newport.
Sir Ralphe Clare of Worcestershire. Sir Iohn Maynard of Essex, second brother to the Lord Maynard. Sir Francis Carew of Deuonshire. Sir Iohn Byron of Nottinghamshire. Sir Roger Palmer of Sussex, Master of the Kings House∣hold. Sir Henry Edmonds, sonne to sir Thomas Edmonds, Treasurer of the House-hold. Sir Ralph Hopton of Somersetshire. Sir William Brooke of Kent. Sir Alexander Ratcliffe of Lancashire. Sir Edward Scot of Kent. Sir Christopher Hatton of Northamptonshire. Sir Thomas Sackuill of Sussex. Sir Iohn Munson of Lincolneshire, sonne to sir Thomas Munson. Sir Peter Wentworth of Oxfordshire. Sir Iohn Butler of Hartfordshire. Sir Edward Hungrford, of Wiltshire. Sir Richard Lewson of Kent. Sir Nathaniel Bacon of Calford in Suffolke. Sir Robert Poyntz of Glocestershire. Sir Robert Beuill of Huntingtonshire. Sir George Sands of Kent. Sir Thomas Smith of Weston-Hanger in Kent. Sir Thomas Fanshaw of Warparke in Hartfordshire. Sir Miles Hobard of Plomsted in Norfolke. Sir Henry Hart of Kent, son to sir Perciuall Hart. Sir Francis Carew, alias Throgmorton, of Bedington in Surrey. Sir Iohn Backhouse of Berkshire. Sir Mathew Mynnes of Kent. Sir Iohn Stowell of Somersetshire, Sir Iohn Iennings of Hartfordshire. Sir Stephen Hauey of Northamptonshire, son to Iudge Haruey. FINIS.
