25178 99846829 11821
THE WHITE DIVEL, OR, The Tragedy of Paulo Giordano Ursini, Duke of Brachiano, With The Life and Death of Vittoria Corombona the famous Venetian Curtizan. Acted by the Queenes Maiesties Seruants. Written by IOHN WEBSTER. Non inferiora secutus. LONDON, Printed by N. O. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes head Pallace, neere the Royall Exchange. 1612.
To the Reader. IN publishing this Tragedy, I do but challenge to my selfe that liberty, which other men haue tane before mee; not that I affect praise by it, for, nos haec nouimus esse nihil, onely since it was acted, in so dull a time of Winter, pre∣sented in so open and blacke a Theater, that it wanted (that which is the onely grace and setting out of a Tragedy) a full and vnderstan∣ding Auditory: and that since that time I haue noted, most of the people that come to that Play-house, resemble those ig∣norant asses (who visiting Stationers shoppes their vse is not to inquire for good bookes, but new bookes) I present it to the generall view with this confidence. Nec Rhoncos metues, maligniorum, Nec Scombris tunicas, dabis molestas. If it be obiected this is no true Drammaticke Poem, I shall easily confesse it, non potes in nugas dicere plura meas: Ip∣se ego quam dixi, willingly, and not ignorantly, in this kind haue I faulted: for should a man present to such an Auditory, the most sententious Tragedy that euer was written, obser∣uing all the critticall lawes, as heighth of stile; and grauety of person; inrich it with the sententious Chorus, and as it
were life'n Death, in the passionate and waighty Nuntius: yet after all this diuine rapture, O dura messorum ilia, the breath that comes frō the vncapable multitude, is able to poi∣son it, and ere it be acted, let the Author resolue to fix to eue∣ry scoene, this of Horace, —Haec hodie Porcis comedenda relinques. To those who report I was a long time in finishing this Tragedy, I confesse I do not write with a goose-quill, winged with two feathers, and if they will needes make it my fault, I must answere them with that of Eurypides to Alcestides, a Tragicke Writer: Alcestides obiecting that Eurypides had onely in three daies composed three verses, whereas him∣selfe had written three hundreth: Thou telst truth, (quoth he) but heres the difference, thine shall onely bee read for three daies, whereas mine shall continue three ages. Detraction is the sworne friend to ignorance: For mine owne part I haue euer truly cherisht my good opinion of other mens worthy Labours, especially of that full and haightned stile of Maister Chapman. The labor'd and vnderstanding workes of Maister Iohnson: The no lesse worthy composures of the both worthily excellent Maister Beamont, & Maister Fletcher: And lastly (without wrong last to be named) the right happy and copious industry of M. Shake-speare, M. Decker, & M. Heywood, wishing what I write may be read by their light: Protesting, that, in the strength of mine owne iudge∣ment, I know them so worthy, that though I rest silent in my owne worke, yet to most of theirs I dare (without flattery) fix that of Martiall. —non norunt, Haec monumenta mori.
THE TRAGEDY OF PAVLO GIORDANO Vrsini Duke of Brachiano, and Vittoria Corombona. Enter Count Lodouico, Antonelli and Gasparo. LODOVICO. BAnisht? ANTO. It greeu'd me much to heare the sentence. LODO. Ha, Ha, ô Democritus thy Gods That gouerne the whole world! Courtly re∣ward, and punishment. Fortun's a right whore. If she giue ought, she deales it in smal percels, That she may take away all at one swope. This tis to haue great enemies, God quite them: Your woolfe no longer seemes to be a woolfe Then when shees hungry. GAS. You terme those enemies Are men of Princely ranke. LOD. Oh I pray for them. The violent thunder is adored by those Are pasht in peeces by it. ANTO. Come my Lord, You are iustly dom'd, looke but a little backe Into your former life: you haue in three yeares Ruin'd the noblest Earldome GAS. Your followers Haue swallowed you like Mummia, and being sicke With such vnnaturall and horrid Phisicke Vomit you vp ith kennell ANTO. All the damnable degrees
Of drinkings haue you, you staggerd through one Cittizen. Is Lord of two faire Manors, cald you master Only for Cauiare. GAS. Those noblemen Which were inuited to your prodigall feastes, Wherin the Phaenix scarce could scape your throtes, Laugh at your misery, as fore-deeminge you: An idle Meteor which drawne forth the earth Would bee soone lost ith aire. ANTO. Ieast vpon you, And say you were begotten in an Earthquake, You haue ruin'd such faire Lordships. LODO. Very good, This Well goes with two buckets, I must tend The powring out of eather. GAS. Worse then these, You haue acted, certaine Murders here in Rome, Bloody and full of horror. LOD. Las they were flea-bytinges? Why tooke they not my head then? GAS. O my Lord The law doth somtimes mediate, thinkes it good Not euer to steepe violent sinnes in blood, This gentle pennance may both end your crimes, And in the example better these bad times. LOD. So, but I wonder then some great men This banishment, ther's Paulo Giordano Or, The Duke of Brachiano, now liues in Rome, And by close pandarisme seekes to prostitute The honour of Uittoria Corombona, Vittoria, she that might haue got my pardon For one kisse to the Duke. ANTO. Haue a full man within you, Wee see that Trees beare no such pleasant fruite There where they grew first, as where the are new set. Perfumes the more they are chaf'd the more they render Their pleasing sents, and so affliction Expresseth vertue, fully, whether trew, Or ells adulterate. LOD. Leaue your painted comforts, Ile make Italian cut-works in their guts If euer I returne. GASP. O Sir. LODO. I am patient, I haue seene some ready to be executed Giue pleasant lookes, and money, and growne familiar With the knaue hangman, so do I, I thanke them,
And would account them nobly mercifull Would they dispatch me quicklie, ANTO. Fare you well, Wee shall find time I doubt not to repeale Your banishment. LOD. I am euer bound to you: Enter This is the worlds almes; pray make vse of it, Senate Great men sell sheep, thus to be cut in peeces, When first they haue shorne them bare and sold their sleeces. Exeunt. Enter Brachiano, Camillo, Flamineo, Uittoria Corombona. BRA. Your best of rest. VIT. Vnto my Lord the Duke, The best of well come, More lights, attend the Duke. BRA. Flamineo. FLA. My Lord. BRA. Quite lost Flamineo. FLA. Pursew your noble wishes, I am prompt As lightning to your seruice, ô my Lord! The faire Vittoria, my happy sister Shall giue you present audience, gentlemen (whisper Let the caroach go on, and tis his pleasure You put out all your torches and depart. BRA. Are wee so happy. FLA. Can't be otherwise? Obseru'd you not to night my honor'd Lord Which way so ere you went shee threw her eyes, I haue dealt already with her chamber-maid Zanche the More, and she is wondrous proud To be the agent for so high a spirit. BRA. Wee are happie aboue thought, because boue merrit. FLA. 'boue merrit! wee may now talke freely: 'boue merrit; what ist you doubt, her coynesse, thats but the superficies of lust most women haue; yet why should Ladyes blush to heare that nam'd, which they do not feare to handle? O they are polliticke, They know our desire is increas'd by the difficultie of inioy∣ing; where a satiety is a blunt, weary and drowsie passion, if the buttery hatch at Court stood continually open their would be nothing so passionat crouding, nor hot suit after the beuerage, BRA. O but her iealous husband. FLA. Hang him, a guilder that hath his braynes perisht with
quicke-siluer is not more could in the liuer. The great Barriers moulted not more feathers then he hath shed haires, by the con∣fession of his doctor. An Irish gamster that will play himselfe na∣ked, and then wage all downeward, at ard, is not more ven∣terous. So vn-able to please a woman that like a dutch doublet all his backe is shrunke into his breeches. Shrowd you within this closet, good my Lord, Some tricke now must be thought on to deuie My brother in law from his faire bed-fellow, BRA. O should she faile to come, FLA. I must not haue your Lordship thus vnwisely amorous, I my selfe haue loued a lady and peursued her with a great deale of vnder-age protestation, whom some 3. or 4. gallants that haue enioyed would with all their harts haue bin glad to haue bin rid of Tis iust like a summer bird-cage in a garden, the birds that are without, despaire to get in, and the birds that are within despaire and are in a consumption for feare they shall neuer get out: away away my Lord, Enter Camillo, See here he comes, this fellow by his apparell Some men would iudge a pollititian, But call his wit in question you shall find it Merely an Asse in's foot cloath, How now brother what trauailing to bed to your kind wise? CAM. I assure you brother no, My voyage lyes More northerlie, in a farre colder clime, I do not well remember I protest when I last lay with her. FLA. Strange you should loose your Count. CAM. Wee neuer lay together but eare morning Their grew a flaw betweene vs. FLA. T'had byn your part To haue made vp that flaw. CAM. Trew, but shee loathes I should be seene in't. FLA. Why Sir, what's the matter? CAM. The Duke your maister visits me I thanke him, And I perceaue how like an earnest bowler Hee very passionatelie leanes that way, He should haue his boule runne FLA. I hope you do not thinke
CAM. That noble men boule bootie, Faith his cheeke Hath a most excellent Bias, it would faine iumpe with my mistris. FLA. Will you be an asse. Despight you Aristotle or a Cocould Contrary to your Ephemerides Which shewes you vnder what a smiling planet You were first swadled, CAM: Pew wew, Sir tell not me Of planets nor of Ephemeridas A man may be made Cocould in the day time When the Stars eyes are out. FLA. Sir God boy you, I do commit you to your pittifull pillow Stuft with horne-shauings. CAM. Brother. FLA. God refuse me Might I aduise you now your onlie course Weare to locke vp your wife. CAM. T'weare very good. FLA. Bar her the sight of reuels. CAM. Excellent. FLA. Let her not go to Church, but like a hounde In Leon atyour heeles. CAM. Tweare for her honour FLA. And so you should be certayne in one fortnight, Despight her chastity or innocence To bee Cocoulded, which yet is in suspence: This is my counsell and I aske no see for't. CAM. Come you know not where my-night cap wringes mee. FLA. Weare it ath' old fashion, let your large eares come through, it will be more easy, nay I will be bitter, barre your wife of her entertaynment: women are more willinglie & more glo∣riouslie chast, when they are least restrayned of their libertie. It seemes you would be a fine Capricious Mathematically iealous Coxcombe, take the height of your owne hornes with a Iacobs staffe afore they are vp. These polliticke inclosures for paltry mutton, makes more rebellion in the flesh then all the pro∣uocatiue electuaries Doctors haue vttered sence last Iubilee. CAM. This doth not phisicke me, FLA: It seemes you are Iealous, ile shew you the error of it by a familiar example, I haue seene a paire of spectacles fashiond with such perspectiue art, that lay downe but one twelue pence ath'bord twill appeare as if there were twenty, now should you
weare a paire of these spectacles, and see your wife tying her shooe, you would Imagine twenty hands were taking vp of your wiues clothes, and this would put you into a horrible causlesse fury, CAM. The fault there Sir is not in the eye-sight FLA. True, but they that haue the yellow Iaundeise, thinke all obiects they looke on to bee yellow. Iealousy is worser, her fit's present to a man, like so many bubles in a Bason of water, twenty seuerall crabbed faces, many times makes his owne shadow his cocould-maker. * See she comes, what reason Enter Corom∣. haue you to be iealous of this creature? what an ignorant asse or flattering knaue might he be counted, that should write sonnets to her eyes, or call her brow the snow of Ida, or Iuorie of Co∣rinth, or compare her haire to the blacke birds bill, when 'tis liker the blacke birds feather. This is all: Be wise, I will make you freinds and you shall go to bed together, marry looke you, it shall not be your seeking, do you stand vpon that by any meanes, walk you a loofe, I would not haue you seene in't, sister my Lord attends you in the banquetting house, your husband is wondrous discontented. VIT. I did nothing to displease him, I carued to him at supper-time FLA. You need not haue carued him infaith, they say he is a capon already, I must now seemingly fall out with you. Shall a gentleman so well descended as Camillo.—a lousy slaue that within this twenty yeares rode with the blacke guard in the Dukes cariage mongst spits and dripping-pannes. CAM. Now he begins to tickle her. FLA. An excellent scholler, one that hath a head fild with calues braynes without any sage in them,—come crouching in the hams to you for a nights lodging—that hath an itch in's hams, which like the fier at the glasse house hath not gone out this seauen yeares—is hee not a courtly gentleman,—when he weares white sattin one would take him by his blacke mussel to be no other creature then a maggot, you are a goodly Foile, I confesse, well set out—but couerd with a false stone you con∣terfaite dyamond.
CAM. He will make her know what is in mee. FLA. Come, my Lord attends you, thou shalt go to bed to my Lord. CAM. Now he comes to't. FLA. With a relish as curious as a vintner going to taste new wine, I am opening your case hard. CAM. A vertuous brother a my credit. FLA. He will giue thee a ringe with a philosophers stonein it. CAM. Indeede I am studying Alcumye. FLA. Thou shalt lye in a bed stuft with turtles feathers, swoone in perfumed lynnen like the fellow was smothered in roses, so perfect shall be thy happinesse, that as men at Sea thinke land and trees and shippes go that way they go, so both heauen and earth shall seeme to go your voyage. Shal't meete him, tis fixt, with nayles of dyamonds to ineuitable necessitie. VITTO. How shals rid him hence? FLA. I will put brees in's tayle, set him gadding presentlie, I haue almost wrought her to it, I find her comming, but might I aduise you now for this night I would not lye with her, I would crosse her humor to make her more humble. CAMIL. Shall I, shall I? FLA: It will shew in you a supremacie of Iudgement. CAMIL. Trew, and a mind differing from the tumultuary opinion, for quae negata grat. FLA. Right you are the Adamant shall draw her to you, though you keepe distance of: CAMIL. A philosophicall reason. FLA. Walke by her a'the noble mans fashion, and tell her you will lye with her at the end of the Progresse CAMIL. Vittoria, I cannot be induc'd, or as a man would say incited. VITTO. To do what Sir? CAMIL. To lye with you to night; your silkeworme vseth to fast euery third day, and the next following spinnes the better. Tomorrow at night I am for you. VITTO. Youle spinne a faire thread, trust to't. FLA. But do you heare I shall haue you steale to her chamber about midnight. CAMIL. Do you thinke so, why looke you brother, because
you shall not thinke ile gull you, take the key, locke me into the chamber, and say you shall be sure of me. FLA. Introth I will, ile be your iaylor once, But haue you nere a false dore. CAM. A pox on't, as I am a Christian tell mee to morrow how scuruelie shee takes my vnkind parting FLA. I will. CAM. Didst thou not make the ieast of the silke-worme? good night in faith I will vse this tricke often, FLA. Do, do, do. Exit Camillo. So now you are safe. Ha ha ha, thou intanglest thy selfe in thine owne worke like a silke-worme Enter Brachiano. Come sister, darkenesse hides your blush, women are like curst dogges, ciuilitie keepes them tyed all day time, but they are let loose at midnight, then they do most good or most mischeefe, my Lord, my Lord BRA. Giue credit: I could wish time would stand still And neuer end this enteruew this hower, Zāche brings out a Carpet Spreads it and layes on it two faire Cushions Enter Cornelia But all delight doth it selfe soon'st dcuour. Let me into your bosome happy Ladie, Powre out in stead of eloquence my vowes, Loose me not Madam, for if you forcgo me I am lost eternallie. VIT. Sir in the way of pittie I wish you hart-hole. BRA. You are a sweet Phisition. VIT. Sure Sir a loathed crueltie in Ladyes Is as to Doctors many funeralls: It takes away their credit. BRA. Excellent Creature. Wee call the cruell fayre, what name for you That are so mercifull? ZAN. See now they close. FLA. Most happie vnion. COR. My feares are falne vpon me, oh my heart! My sonne the pandar: now I find our house Sinking to ruine. Earth-quakes leaue behind, Where they haue tyrannised, iron, or lead, or stone, But woe to ruine violent lust leaues none BRA. What valew is this Iewell VIT. Tis the ornament Of a weake fortune. BRA. In sooth ile haue it; nay I will but change
My Iewell for your Iewell. FLAM. Excellent, His Iewell for her Iewell, well put in Duke. BRAC. Nay let me see you weare it. VIT. Heare sir. BRAC. Nay lower, you shall weare my Iewell lower. FLAM. That's better she must weare his Iewell lower. VIT. To passe away the time I'le tell your grace, A dreame I had last night. BRAC. Most wishedly. VIT. A foolish idle dreame, Me thought I walkt about the mid of night, Into a Church-yard, where a goodly Eu Tree Spred her large roote in ground, vnder that Eu, As I sat sadly leaning on a graue, Checkered with crosse-sticks, their came stealing in Your Dutchesse and my husband, one of them A picax bore, th'other a Rusty spade, And in rough termes they gan to challenge me, About this Eu. BRAC. That Tree. VIT. This harmelesse Eu: They told me my entent was to root vp That well-growne Eu, and plant i'th steed of it A withered blacke-thorne, and for that they vow'd To bury me aliue: my husband straight With picax gan to dig, and your fell Dutchesse With shouell, like a fury, voyded out The earth & scattered bones, Lord how me thought I trembled, and yet for all this terror I could not pray. FLAM. No the diuell was in your dreame. VIT. When to my rescue there arose me thought A whirlewind, which let fall a massy arme From that strong plant, And both were strucke dead by that sacred Eu In that base shallow graue that was their due. FLAM. Excellent Diuell. Shee hath taught him in a dreame To make away his Dutchesse and her husband. BRAC. Sweetly shall I enterpret this your dreame, You are lodged within his armes who shall protect you,
From all the feauers of a iealous husband, From the poore enuy of our flegmaticke Dutchesse, I'le seate you aboue law and aboue scandall, Giue to your thoughts the inuention of delight And the fruition, nor shall gouernment Diuide me from you longer then a care To keepe you great: you shall to me at once, Be Dukedome, health, wife, children, friends and all. COR. Woe to light hearts they still forerun our fall. FLAM. What fury rais'd thee vp? away, away Exit Zanche. COR. What make you heare my Lord this dead of night? Neuer dropt meldew on a flower here, tell now. FLAM. I pray will you go to bed then, Least you be blasted. COR. O that this faire garden, Had all poysoned hearbes of Thessaly, At first bene planted, made a nursery For witch-craft; rather a buriall plot, For both your Honours. VIT. Dearest mother heare me. COR. O thou dost make my brow bend to the earth, Sooner then nature, see the curse of children In life they keepe vs freqeuently in teares, And in the cold graue leaues vs in pale feares. BRAC. Come, come, I will not heare you. VIT. Deere my Lord. COR. Where is thy Dutchesse now adulterous Duke? Thou little dreamd'st this night shee is come to Rome. FLAM. How? come to Rome, VIT. The Dutchesse, BRAC. She had bene better, COR. The liues of Princes should like dyals moue, Whose regular example is so strong, They make the times by them go right or wrong. FLAM. So, haue you done? COR. Vnfortunate Camillo. VIT. I do protest if any chast deniall, If any thing but bloud could haue alayed, His long suite to me. COR. I will ioyne with thee, To the most wofull end ere mother kneel'd,
If thou dishonour thus thy husbands bed, Bee thy life short as are the funerall teares In great mens. BRAC. Fye, fye, the womans mad. COR. Bee thy act Iudas-like betray in kissing, Maiest thou be enuied during his short breath, And pittied like a wretch after this death. VIT. O me accurst. Exit Uictoria FLAM. Are you out of your wits, my Lord Ile fetch her backe againe? BRAC. No I'le to bed. Send Doctor Iulio to me presently, Vncharitable woman thy rash tongue Hath rais'd a fearefull and prodigious storme, Bee thou the cause of all ensuing harme. Exit Brachiano. FLAM. Now, you that stand so much vpon your honour, Is this a fitting time a night thinke you, To send a Duke home without ere a man: I would faine know where lies the masse of wealth Which you haue whoorded for my maintenance, That I may beare my beard out of the leuell Of my Lords Stirop. COR. What? because we are poore, Shall we be vitious? FLAM. Pray what meanes haue you To keepe me from the gallies, or the gallowes? My father prou'd himselfe a Gentleman, Sold al's land, and like a fortunate fellow, Died ere the money was spent. You brought me vp, At Padua I confesse, where I protest For want of meanes, the Vniuersity iudge me, I haue bene faine to heele my Tutors stockings At least seuen yeares: Conspiring with a beard Made me a Graduate, then to this Dukes seruice, I visited the Court, whence I return'd: More courteous, more letcherous by farre, But not a suite the richer, and shall I, Hauing a path so open and so free To my preferment, still retaine your milke In my pale forehead, no this face of mine I'le arme and fortefie with lusty wine,
Gainst shame and blushing. COR. O that I ne're had borne thee, FLAM. So would I. I would the common'st Courtezan in Rome, Had bene my mother rather then thy selfe. Nature is very pittfull to whoores To giue them but few children, yet those children Plurality of fathers, they are sure They shall not want. Go, go, Complaine vnto my great Lord Cardinall, Yet may be he will iustifie the act. Lycurgus wondred much men would prouide Good stalions for their Mares, and yet would suffer Their faire wiues to be barren, COR. Misery of miseries. Exit Cornelia. FLAM. The Dutchesse come to Court, I like not that, Wee are ingag'd to mischiefe and must on. As Riuers to finde out the Ocean Flow with crooke bendings beneath forced bankes, Or as wee see to aspire some mountaines top, The way ascends not straight, but Imitates The suttle fouldings of a Winters snake, So who knowes policy and her true aspect, Shall finde her waies winding and indirect. Exit. Enter Francisco de Medicis, Cardinall Mountcelso, Marcello, Isabella, young Giouanni, with little Iaques the Moore. FRAN. Haue you not seene your husband since you ariued? ISAB. Not yet sir. FRAN. Surely he is wondrous kind, If I had a such Doue-house as Camillo's I would set fire on't, wer't but to destroy The Pole-cats that haunt to't,—my sweet cossin. GIO. Lord vnkle you did promise mee a horse And armour. FRAN. That I did my pretty cossin, Marcello see it fitted. MAR. My Lord the Duke is here. FRAN. Sister away you must not yet bee seene. ISAB. I do beseech you intreate him mildely, Let not your rough tongue
Set vs at louder variance, all my wrongs Are freely pardoned, and I do not doubt As men to try the precious Vnicornes horne Make of the powder a preseruatiue Circle And in it put a spider, so these armes Shall charme his poyson, force it to obeying And keepe him chast from an infected straying FRAN. I wish it may. Be gone. Exit. Enter Brachiano, and Flamineo. Void the chamber, You are welcome, will you sit, I pray my Lord Bee you my Orator, my hearts too full, I'le second you anon. MONT. E're I beginne Let me entreat your grace forgo all passion Which may be raised by my free discourse: BRAC. As silent as i'th Church you may proceed. MONT. It is a wonder to your noble friends, That you haue as 'twere entred the world, With a free Scepter in your able hand, And haue to th'use of nature well applyed High gifts of learning, should in your prime-age Neglect your awfull throne, for the soft downe Of an insatiate bed. oh my Lord, The Drunkard after all his lauish cuppes, Is dry, and then is sober, so at length, When you awake from this lasciuious dreame, Repentance then will follow; like the sting Plac't in the Adders tayle: wretched are Princes When fortune blasteth but a petty flower Of their vnweldy crownes; or rauesheth But one pearle from their Scepter: but alas! When they to wilfull shipwrake loose good Fame All Princely titles perish with their name. BRAC. You haue said my Lord, MON. Inough to giue you tast How farre I am from flattering your greatnesse? BRAC. Now you that are his second, what say you? Do not like yong hawkes fetch a course about
Your game flies faire and for you, FRAN. Do not feare it: I'le answere you in your owne hawking phrase, Some Eagles that should gaze vpon the Sunne Seldome soare high, but take their lustfull ease, Since they from dunghill birds their pery can ceaze, You know Uittoria, BRA. Yes. FRAN. You shift your shirt there When you retire from Tennis. BRAC. Happely. FRAN. Her husband is Lord of a poore fortune Yet she wears cloth of Tissue, BRAC. What of this? Will you vrge that my good Lord Cardinall As part of her confession at next Shrift, And know from whence it sailes. FRAN. She is your Strumpet, BRAC. Vnciuill sir ther's Hemlocke in thy breath And that blacke slander, were she a whore of mine All thy loud Cannons, and thy borrowed Switzers Thy Gallies, nor thy sworne confederates, Durst not supplant her. FRAN. Let's not talke on thunder, Thou hast a wife, our sister, would I had giuen Both her whitehands to death, bound and lockt fast In her last winding sheere, when I gaue thee But one. BRAC. Thou hadst giuen a soule to God then. FRAN. True, Thy ghostly father with al's absolution, Shall ne're do so by thee. BRAC. Spit thy poyson, FRAN. I shall not need, lust carries her sharpe whippe At her owne girdle, looke to't for our anger Is making thunder-bolts. BRAC. Thunder? in faith, They are but crackers. FRAN. Wee'le end this with the Cannon. BRAC. Thou'lt get nought by it but iron in thy wounds, And gunpowder in thy nostrels. FRAN. Better that Then change perfumes for plaisters, BRAC. Pitty on thee, 'Twere good you'ld shew your slaues or men condemn'd Your new plow'd fore-head defiance, and I'le meete thee, Even in a thicket of thy ablest men. MON. My Lords, you shall not word it any further Without a milder limit. FRAN. Willingly.
BRAC. Haue you proclaimed a Triumph that you baite a Lyon thus. MON. My Lord. BRAC. I am tame, I am tame sir. FLAN. We send, vnto the Duke for conference Bout leauyes' gainst the Pyrates, my Lord Duke Is not at home, we come our selfe in person, Still my Lord Duke is busied, but we feare When Tyber to each proling passenger Discouers flockes of wild-duckes, then my Lord 'Bout moulting time, I meane wee shall be certaine To finde you sure enough and speake with you. BRAC. Ha? FLAN. A meere tale of a tub, my wordes are idle, But to expresse the Sonnet by naturall reason, Enter Giouanni When Stagges grow melancholike you'le finde the season MON. No more my Lord, heare comes a Champion, Shall end the difference betweene you both, Your sonne the Prince Giouanni, see my Lords What hopes you store in him, this is a casket For both your Crowns, & should be held like deere: Now is he apt for knowledge, therefore know It is a more direct and euen way To traine to vertue those of Princely bloud, By examples then by precepts: if by examples Whom should he rather striue to imitate Then his owne father: be his patterne then, Leaue him a stocke of vertue that may last, Should fortune rend his sailes, and split his mast. BRA. Your hand boy growing to souldier. GIO. Giue me a pike. FRAN. What practising your pike so yong, faire cous. GIO. Suppose me one of Homers frogges, my Lord, Tossing my bul-rush thus, pray sir tell mee Might not a child of good descretion Be leader to an army: FRAN. Yes cousin a yong Prince Of good descretion might. GIO. Say you so, Indeed I haue heard 'tis fit a Generall Should not endanger his owne person oft, So that he make a noyse, when hee's a horsebacke Like a danske drummer, ô 'tis excellent.
Hee need not fight, me thinkes his horse as well Might lead an army for him; if I liue I'le charge the French foe, in the very front Of all my troupes, the formost man. FRA. What, what, GIO. And will not bid my Souldiers vp and follow But bid them follow me. BRAC. Forward Lap-wing. He flies with the shell on's head. FRAN. Pretty cousin, GIO. The first yeare vnkle that I go to warre, All prisoners that I take I will set free Without their ransome. FRAN. Ha, without thier ransome, How then will you reward your souldiers That tooke those prisoners for you. GIO. Thus my Lord, I'le marry them to all the wealthy widowes That fals that yeare. FRAN. Why then the next yeare following You'le haue no men to go with you to warre. GIO. Why then I'le presse the women to the war, And then the men will follow. MON. Witty Prince. FRAN. See a good habite makes a child a man, Whereas a bad one makes a man a beast: Come you and I are friends. BRAC. Most wishedly, Like bones which broke in sunder and well set Knit the more strongly. FRAN. Call Camillo hither You haue receiued the rumor, how Count Lodowicke Is turn'd a Pyrate. BRAC. Yes. FRA. We are now preparing, Some shippes to fetch him in: behold your Dutchesse, Exeunt Fr. Mon. Giou. Wee now will leaue you and expect from you Nothing but kind intreaty. BRAC. You haue charm'd mee. You are in health we see. ISA. And aboue health To see my Lord well, BRAC. So I wonder much, What amorous whirlewind hurryed you to Rome ISA. Deuotion my Lord. BRAC. Deuotion? Is your soule charg'd with any grieuous sinne ISA. 'Tis burdened with too many, and I thinke The oftner that we cast our reckonings vp, Our sleepes will be the sounder. BRAC. Take your chamber? ISA. Nay my deere Lord I will not haue you angry, Doth not my absence from you two moneths,
Merit one kisse? BRAC. I do not vse to kisse, If that will dispossesse your iealousy, I'le sweare it to you. ISA. O my loued Lord, I do not come to chide; my iealousy, I am to learne what that Italian meanes, You are as welcome to these longing armes, As I to you a Virgine. BRAC. O your breath, Out vpon sweete meates, and continued Physicke. The plague is in them. ISA. You haue oft for these two lippes Neglected Cassia or the naturall sweetes Of the Spring-violet, they are not yet much whithered, My Lord I should be merry, these your frownes Shew in a Helmet, louely but on me, In such a peacefull enterueiw me thinkes They are to too roughly knit. BRA. O dissemblance. Do you bandy factions gainst me? haue you learn't, The trick of impudent basenes to complaine Vnto your kindred? ISA. Neuer my deere Lord. BRAC. Must I be haunted out, or wast your trick To meete some amorous gallant heere in Rome That must supply our discontinuance? ISA. I pray sir burst my heart, and in my death Turne to your antient pitty, though not loue. BRA. Because your brother is the corpulent Duke, That is the great Duke, S'death I shall not shortly Rackit away fiue hundreth Crownes at Tenis, But it shall rest vpon record: I scorne him Like a shau'd Pollake, all his reuerent wit Lies in his wardrope, hee's a discret fellow When hee's made vp in his roabes of state, Your brother the great Duke, because h'as gallies, And now and then ransackes a Turkish flye-boate, (Now all the hellish furies take his soule,) First made this match, accursed be the Priest That sang the wedding Masse, and euen my Issue. ISA. O to too far you haue curst. BRA. Your hand I'le kisse, This is the latest ceremony of my loue,
Hence-forth I'le neuer lye with thee, by this, This wedding-ring: I'le ne'remore lye with thee. And this diuorce shall be as truely kept, As if the Iudge had doom'd it: fare you well, Our sleeps are seuer'd. ISA. Forbid it the sweet vnion Of all things blessed; why the Saints in heauen Will knit their browes at that. BRA. Let not thy loue, Make thee an vnbeleeuer, this my vow, Shall neuer on my soule bee satisfied With my repentance: let thy brother rage Beyond a horred tempest or sea-fight, My vow is fixed. ISA. O my winding sheet, Now shall I need thee shortly, deere my Lord, Let me heare once more, what I would not heare, Neuer. BRA. Neuer? ISA. O my vnkind Lord may your sins find mercy, As I vpon a woefull widowed bed, Shall pray for you, if not to turne your eyes, Vpon your wretched wife, and hopefull sonne, Yet that in time you'le fix them vpon heauen. BRAC. No more, go, go, complaine to the great Duke. ISA. No my deere Lord, you shall haue present witnesse, How I'le worke peace betweene you, I will make My selfe the author of your cursed vow I haue some cause to do it, you haue none, Conceale it I beseech you, for the weale Of both your Dukedomes, that you wrought the meanes Of such a separation, let the fault Remaine with my supposed iealousy, And thinke with what a pitteous and rent hear, I shall performe this sad insuing part. Enter Francisco, Flamineo, Montcello, Marcello, Camillo. BRAC. Well, take your course my honourable brother. FRAN. Sister, this is not well my Lord, why sister, She merits not this welcome. BRAC. Welcome say? Shee hath giuen a sharpe welcome. FRAN. Are you foolish? Come dry your teares, is this a modest course.
To better what is nought, to raile and weepe, Grow to a reconcilement, or by heauen, I'le nere more deale betweene you. ISA. Sir you shall not, No though Uittoria vpon that condition Would become honest. FRAN. Was your husband loud. Since we departed. ISA. By my life sir no, I sweare by that I do not care to loose. Are all these ruines of my former beauty, Laid out for a whores triumph? FRA. Do you heare Looke vpon other women, with what patience They suffer these slight wrongs, with what iustice They study to requite them, take that course. ISA. O that I were a man, or that I had power To execute my apprehended wishes, I would whip some with scorpions. FRAN. What? turn'd fury? ISA. To dig the strumpets eyes out, let her lye Some twenty monethes a dying, to cut off Her nose and lippes, pull out her rotten teeth, Preserue her flesh like Mummia, for trophies Of my iust anger: Hell to my affliction Is meere snow-water, by your fauour sir, Brother draw neere, and my Lord Cardinall, Sir let me borrow of you but one kisse, Hence-forth I'le neuer lye with you, by this, This wedding ring. FRA. How? nere more lie with him, ISA. And this diuorce shall be as truly kept, As if in thronged Court, a thousand eares Had heard it, and a thousand Lawyers hands, Seal'd to the separation. BRAC. Nere lie with me? ISA. Let not my former dotage, Make thee an vnbeleuer, this my vow Shall neuer on my soule be satisfied With my repentance, manet alta mente repositum. FRAN. Now by my birth you are a foolish, mad, And iealous woman. BRA. You see 'tis not my seeking. FRAN. Was this your circle of pure Vnicornes horne, You said should charme your Lord; now hornes vpon thee,
For iealousy deserues them, keepe your vow, And take your chamber. ISA. No sir I'le presently to Padua, I will not stay a minute. MONT. O good Madame. BRAC. 'Twere best to let her haue her humor. Some halfe daies iourney will bring downe her stomacke, And then she'le turne in post. FRAN. To see her come, To my Lord Cardinall for a dispensation Of her rash vow will beget excellent laughter. ISA. "Vnkindnesse do thy office, poore heart breake, "Those are the killing greifes which dare not speake. Exit. MAR. Camill's come my Lord. Enter Camillo. FRAN. Where's the commission? MAR. Tis here. FRAN. Giue me the Signet. FLAM. My Lord do you marke their whispering, I will com∣pound a medicine out of their two heads, stronger then garlick, deadlier then stibium, the Cantarides which are scarce seene to sticke vpon the flesh when they work to the heart, shall not do it with more silence or inuisible cunning. Enter Doctor. BRAC. About the murder. FLAM. They are sending him to Naples, but I'le send him to Candy, her's another property to. BRAC. O the Doctor, FLA. A poore quackesaluing knaue, my Lord, one that should haue bene lasht for's letchery, but that he confest a iudgement, had an execution laid vpon him, and so put the whip to a non-plus. DOCT. And was consin'd, my Lord, by an arranter knaue then my selfe, and made pay all the coulourable execution. FLAM. He will shoot pils into a mans guts, shall make them haue more ventages then a cornet or a lamprey, hee will poyson a kisse, and was once minded, for his Master-peece, because Ire∣land breeds no poyson, to haue prepared a deadly vapour in a Spaniards fart that should haue poison'd all Dublin. BRAC. O Saint Anthony fire: DOCT. Your Secretary is merry my Lord: FLAM. O thou cursed antipathy to nature, looke his eyes bloud-shed like a needle a Chirurgeon stitcheth a wound with, let me embrace thee toad, & loue thee ô thou abhominable loth∣some gargarisme, that will fetch vp lungs, lights, heart, and liuer
by scruples. BRAC. No more, I must employ thee honest Doctor, You must to Padua and by the way, vse some of your skil for vs. DOC. Sir I shall. BRAC. But for Camillo? FLAM. He dies this night by such a polliticke straine, Men shall suppose him by's owne engine slaine. But for your Dutchesse death. DOCT. I'le make her sure BRAC. Small mischiefes are by greater made secure. FLAM. Remember this you slaue, when knaues come to pre∣ferment they rise as gallouses are raised i'th low countries, one vpon another shoulders. Exeunt. MONT. Here is an Embleme nephew pray peruse it. 'Twas throwne in at your window, CAM. At my window, Here is a Stag my Lord hath shed his hornes, And for the losse of them the poore beast weepes The word Inopem me copia fecit. MON. That is. Plenty of hornes hath made him poore of hornes. CAM. What should this meane. MON. Ile tell you, 'tis giuen out You are a Cocould. CAM. Is it giuen out so. I had rather such report as that my Lord. Should keepe within dores. FRAN. Haue you any children. CAM. None my Lord. FRA. You are the happier Ile tell you a tale. CAM. Pray my Lord. FRAN. An old tale. Vppon a time Phoebus the God of light Or him wee call the Sunne would neede be married. The Gods gaue their consent, and Mercury Was sent to voice it to the generall world. But what a pitious cry their straight arose Amongst Smiths, & Felt-makers, Brewers & Cooks. Reapers and Butter-women, amongst Fishmongers And thousand other trades, which are annoyed By his excessiue heate; twas lamentable. They came to Iupiter all in a sweat And do forbid the banes; a great fat Cooke Was made their Speaker, who intreates of Ioue That Phoebus might bee guelded, for if now When there was but one, Sunne so many men,
Weare like to perish by his violent heate. What should they do if hee were married And should be get more, and those children Make fier-workes like their father, so say I, Only I will apply it to your wife, Her issue should not prouidence preuent it Would make both nature, time, and man repent it. MON. Looke you cossin. Go change the aire for shame see if your absence, Will blast your Cornucopia, Marcello Is chosen with you ioint commissioner For the relieuing our Italian coast From pirats. MAR. I am much honord int. CAM. But sir Ere I returne the Stagges hornes may be sprouted, Greater then these are shed. MONT. Do not feare it, I'le bee your ranger. CAM. You must watch i'ch nights, Then's the most danger. FRAN. Farewell good Marcello. All the best fortunes of a Souldiers wish, Bring you a ship-board. CAM. Were I not best now I am turn'd Souldier, E're that I leaue my wife, sell all shee hath, And then take leaue of her. MONT. I expect good from you, Your parting is so merry. CAM. Merry my Lord, a'th Captaines humor right I am resolued to be drunke this night. Exit. FRA. So, 'twas well fitted, now shall we descerne, How his wisht absence will giue violent way, To Duke Brachiano's lust, MONT. Why that was it; To what scorn'd purpose else should we make choice Of him for a sea Captaine, and besides, Count Lodowicke which was rumor'd for a pirate. Is now in Padua. FRAN. Is't true? MONT. Most certaine. I haue letters from him, which are suppliant To worke his quicke repeale from banishment, He meanes to adresse himselfe for pention, Vnto our sister Dutchesse. FRAN. O 'twas well. We shall not want his absence past sixe daies,
I faine would haue the Duke Brachiano run Into notorious scandale, for their's nought In such curst dotage, to repaire his name, Onely the deepe sence of some deathlesse shame: MON. It may be obiected I am dishonourable, To play thus with my kinsman, but I answere. For my reuenge I'de stake a brothers life, That being wrong'd durst not auenge himselfe. FRA. Come to obserue this Strūper. MON. Cursse of greatnes, Sure hee'le not leaue her. FRAN. There's small pitty in't Like mistle-tow on seare Elmes spent by weather, Let him cleaue to her and both rot together. Exeunt. Enter Brachiano with one in the habite of a Coniurer. BRAC. Now sir I claime your promise, 'tis dead midnight, The time prefixt to shew me by your Art, How the intended murder of Camillo, And our loathed Dutchesse grow to action. CON. You haue won me by your bounty to a deed, I do not often practise, some there are, Which by Sophisticke tricks, aspire that name Which I would gladly loose, of Nigromancer: As some that vse to iuggle vpon cardes, Seeming to coniure, when indeed they cheate. Others that raise vp their confederate spirits, 'Bout wind-mils, and indanger their owne neckes, For making of a squib, and some their are Will keepe a curtall to shew iuggling trickes And giue out 'tis a spirit: besides these Such a whole reame of Almanacke-makers, figure-flingers. Fellowes indeed that onely liue by stealth, Since they do meerely lie about stolne goods, Thei'd make men thinke the diuell were fast and loose, With speaking fustian Lattine: pray sit downe, Put on this night-cap sir, 'tis charm'd, and now I'le shew you by my strong-commanding Art The circumstance that breakes your Dutchsse heart.
A DVMBE SHEVV. Enter suspiciously, Iulio and Christophero, they draw a ourtains wher Brachian's picture is, they put on spectacles of glasse, which couer their eyes and noses, and then burne perfumnes afore the picture, and wash the lips of the picture, that done, quenching the fire, and putting off their pectacles they depart laughing. Enter Isabella in her night-gowne as to did-ward, with lights after her, Count Lodouico, Giouanni, Guid-antonio and others waighting on her, shee kneeles downe as to prayers, then drawes the curtaine of the picture, doe's three reuerences to it, and kisses it thrice, shee faints and will not suffer them to come nere it, dies, sorrow exprest in Gio∣uanni and in Count Lodouico, shees conueid out solemnly. BRAC. Excellent, then shee's dead, CON. She's poysoned, By the fum'd picture, 'twas her custome nightly, Before shee went to bed, to go and visite Your picture, and to feed her eyes and lippes On the dead shadow, Doctor Iulio Obseruing this, infects it with an oile And other poison'd stuffe, which presently Did suffocate her spirits. BRAC. Me thought I saw, Count Lodowicke there. CON. He was, and by my art I finde hee did most passionately doate Vpon your Dutchesse, now turne another way, And view Camillo's farre more polliticke face, Strike louder musicke from this charmed ground, To yeeld, as fits the act, a Tragicke sound. THE SECOND DVMBE SHEVV. Enter Flamineo, Marcello, Camillo, with foure more as Captaines, they drinke healths and dance, a vauting horse is brought into the roome, Marcello and two more whisper'd out of the roome, while Flamineo and Camillo strip themselues into their shirts, as to vault, complement who shall beginne, as Camillo it about to vault, Flami∣neo pitcheth him vpon his necke, and with the help of the rest, wriths his necke about, seeme's to see if it be broke, and layes him foulded double as 'twere vnder the herse, makes  to call for helpe.
Marcello comes in, laments, sends for the Cardinall and Duke, who comes forth with armed men, wonder at the act, commands the bodie to be carried home, apprehends Flamineo, Marcello, and the rest, and go as 'twere to apprehend Vittoria. BRAC. 'Twas quaintly done, but yet each circumstance, I tast not fully. CON. O 'twas most apparant, You saw them enter charged with their deepe helthes To their boone voyage, and to second that, Flamineo cals to haue a vaulting horse Maintaine their sport. The vertuous Marcello, Is innocently plotted forth the roome, Whilst your eye saw the rest, and can informe you The engine of all. MAR. It seemes Marcello, and Flamineo Are both committed. CON. Yes, you saw them guarded, And now they are come with purpose to apprehend Your Mistresse, faire Uittoria; wee are now Beneath her roofe: 'twere fit we instantly Make out by some backe posterne: BRAC. Noble friend, You bind me euer to you, this shall stand As the firme seale annexed to my hand. Exit Brac. It shall inforce a payment. CON. Sir I thanke you. Both flowers and weedes, spring when the Sunne is warme, And great men do great good, or else great harme. Exit Con. Enter Francisco, and Monticelso, their Chancellor and Register. FRAN. You haue dealt discreetly to obtaine the presence, Of all the graue Leiger Embassadours To heare Vittorias triall. MON. 'Twas not ill, For sir you know we haue nought but circumstances To charge her with, about her husbands death, Their approbation therefore to the proofes Of her blacke lust, shall make her infamous To all our neighbouring Kingdomes, I wonder (pable If Brachiano will be here. FRA. O fye 'twere impudence too pal- Enter Flamineo and Marcello guarded, and a Lawyer. LAVV. What are you in by the weeke, so I will try now
whether thy wit be close prisoner, mee thinke's none should sit vpon thy sister but old whoore-maisters, FLAM. Or cocoulds, for your cocould is your most terrible tickler of letchery: whoore-maisters would serue, for none are iudges at tilting, but those that haue bene old Tilters. LAVV. My Lord Duke and shee haue bene very priuate: FLAM. You are a dull asse, 'tis threatned they haue bene very publicke. LAVV. If it can be proued they haue but kist one another. FLAM. What then? LAVV. My Lord Cardinall will ferit them, FLAM. A Cardinall I hope will not catch conyes. LAVV. For to sowe kisses (marke what I say) to sowe kisses, is to reape letchery, and I am sure a woman that will endure kissing is halfe won. FLAM. True, her vpper part by that rule, if you will win her nether part to, you know what followes. LAVV. Harke the Embassadours are lighted, FLAM. I do put on this feigned Garbe of mirth, To gull suspition. MAR. O my vnfortunate sister! I would my daggers point had cleft her heart When she first saw Brachiano: You 'tis said, Were made his engine, and his stauking horse To vndo my sister. FLAM. I made a kind of path To her & mine owne preferment. MAR. Your ruine, FLAM. Hum! thou art a souldier, Followest the great Duke, feedest his victories, As witches do their seruiceable spirits, Euen with thy prodigall bloud, what hast got? But like the wealth of Captaines, a poore handfull, Which in thy palme thou bear'st, as men hold water Seeking to gripe it fast, the fraile reward Steales through thy fingers. MAR. Sir, FLAM. Thou hast scarce maintenance To keepe thee in fresh shamoyes. MAR. Brother. FLAM. Heare me, And thus when we haue euen powred ourselues,
Into great fights, for their ambition Or idle spleene, how shall we find reward, But as we seldome find the mistle-towe Sacred to physicke: Or the builder Oke, Without a Mandrake by it, so in our quest of gaine. Alas the poorest of their forc'd dislikes At a limbe proffers, but at heart it strikes: This is lamented doctrine. MAR. Come, come. FLAM. When age shall turne thee, White as a blooming hauthorne. MAR. I'le interrupt you. For loue of vertue beare an honest heart, And stride ouer euery polliticke respect, Which where they most aduance they most infect. VVere I your father, as I am your brother, I should not be ambitious to leaue you Enter Sauoy. A better patrimony. FLA. I'le think on't, The Lord Embassadors. Here there is a passage of the Lieger Embassadours ouer the Stage seuerally. Enter French Embassadours. LAVV. O my sprightly Frenchman, do you know him, he's an admirable Tilter. FLAM. I saw him at last Tilting, he shewed like a peuter can∣dlesticke fashioned like a man in armour, houlding a Tilting staffe in his hand, little bigger then a candle of twelue i'th pound. LAVV. O but he's an excellent horseman. FLAM. A lame one in his lofty trickes, hee sleepes a horse∣backe like a poulter, Enter English and Spanish LAVV. Lo you my Spaniard. FLAM. He carries his face in's ruffe, as I haue seene a seruing∣man carry glasses in a cipres hat-band, monstrous steddy for feare of breaking, He lookes like the claw of a blacke-bird, first salted and then broyled in a candle. Exeunt. THE ARAIGNEMENT OF VITTORIA. Enter Francisco, Montcelso, the sixe lieger Embassadours, Brachiano, Uittoria, Isabella, Lawyer, and a guard. MONT. Forbeare my Lord, here is no place assing'd you, This businesse by his holinesse is left To our examination.
BRA. May it thriue with you. Laies a rich gowne vnder him, FRAN. A Chaire there for his Lordship. BRA. Forbeare your kindnesse, an vnbidden guest Should trauaile as dutch-women go to Church: Beare their stooles with them. MON. At your pleasure Sir. Stand to the table gentlewomen: now Signior Fall to your plea. Domine Iudex conuerte oculos in hanc pstem mulierum corruptissimam. VIT. Whats he? FRAN. A Lawyer, that pleades against you. VIT. Pray my Lord, Let him speake his vsuall tongue Ile make no answere else. FRAN. Why you vnderstand lattin. VIT. I do Sir, but amongst this auditory Which come to heare my cause, the halfe or more May bee ignorant int'. MON. Go on Sir: VIT. By your fauour, I will not haue my accusation clouded, In a strange tongue: All this assembly Shall heare what you can charge mee with. FRAN. Signior. You need not stand on't much; pray change your language, MON. Oh for God sake: gentlewoman, your credit Shall bee more famous by it. LAVV. Well then haue at you. VIT. I am at the marke Sir, Ile giue aime to you, And tell you how neare you shoote. LAVV. Most literated Iudges, please your Lordships, So to conniue your Iudgements to the view Of this debausht and diuersiuolent woman Who such a blacke concatenation Of mischiefe hath effected, that to exterpe The memory of't, must be the consummation Ofher and her proiections VIT. What's all this LAVV. Hould your peace. Exorbitant sinnes must haue exulceration. VIT. Surely my Lords this lawier here hath swallowed Some Poticaryes bils, or proclamations. And now the hard and vndegestable wordes,
Come vp like stones wee vse giue Haukes for phisicke. Why this is welch to Lattin. LAVV. My Lords, the woman Know's not her tropes nor figures, nor is perfect In the accademick deriuation Of Grammaticall elocution. FRAN. Sir your paynes Shall bee well spared, and your deepe eloquence Bee worthely applauded amongst those Which vnderstand you. LAVV. My good Lord. FRAN. Sir, Put vp your papers in your fustian bag, Francisco speakes this as in scorne. Cry mercy Sir, tis buckeram, and accept My notion of your learn'd verbosity. LAVV. I most graduatically thanke your Lordship. I shall haue vse for them elswhere. MON. I shall bee playner with you, and paint out Your folies in more naturall red and white. Then that vpon your cheeke. VIT. O you mistake. You raise a blood as noble in this cheeke As euer was your mothers. MON. I must spare you till proofe cry whore to that, Obserue this creature here my honoured Lords, A woman of a most prodigious spirit In her effected. VIT. Honorable my Lord, It doth not sute a reuerend Cardinall To play the Lawier thus MON. Oh your trade instructs your language! You see my Lords what goodly fruict she seemes, Yet like those apples trauellers report To grow where Sodom and Gomora stood. I will but touch her and you straight shall see Sheele fall to soote and ashes. VIT. Your inuenom'd Poticary should doo't MON. I am resolued. Were there a second Paradice to loose This Deuell would betray it. VIT. O poore charity! Thou art seldome found in scarlet. MON. Who knowes not how, when seuerall night by night Her gates were choak'd with coaches, and her roomes.
Out-brau'd the stars with seuerall kind of lights, When shee did counterfet a Princes Court. In musicke banquets and most ryotous surfets This whore, forsooth, was holy. VIT. Ha? whore what's that? MON. Shall I expound whore to you? sure I shal; Ile giue their perfect character. They are first, Sweete meates which rot the eater: In mans nostrill Poison'd perfumes. They are coosning Alcumy, Shipwrackes in Calmest weather? What are whores? Cold Russian winters, that appeare so barren, As if that nature had forgot the spring. They are the trew matteriall fier of hell, Worse then those tributes ith low countries payed, Exactions vpon meat, drinke, garments sleepe. I euen on mans perdition, his sin. They are those brittle euidences of law Which forfait all a wretched mans estate For leauing out one sillable. What are whores? They are those flattering bels haue all one tune: At weddings, and at funerals, your ritch whores Are only treasuries by extortion fild, And empted by curs'd riot. They are worse, Worse then dead bodies, which are beg'd at gallowes And wrought vpon by surgeons, to teach man Wherin hee is imperfect. Whats a whore? Shees like the guilty conterfetted coine Which who so eare first stampes it bring in trouble All that receaue it VIT. This carracter scapes me. MON. You gentlewoman; Take from all beasts, and from all mineralls Their deadly poison. VIT. Well what then? MON. Ile tell thee Ile find in thee a Poticaries shop To sample them all. FR. EMB. Shee hath liued ill. ENG. and EMB. Trew, but the Cardinals too bitter. MON. You know what Whore is next the deuell; Adultry. Enters the deuell, murder. FRAN. Your vnhappy husband
Is dead. VIT. O hee's a happy husband Now hee owes Nature nothing. FRAN. And by a vaulting engine. MON. An actiue plot Hee iumpt into his graue. FRAN. what a prodigy wast, That from some two yardes height a slender man (more, Should breake his necke? MON. Ith' rushes. FRA. And what's. Vpon the instant loose all vse of speach, All vitall motion, like a man had laine Wound vp three dayes. Now marke each circumstance. MON. And looke vpon this creature was his wife. Shee comes not like a widow: shee comes arm'd With scorne and impudence: Is this a mourning habit. VIT. Had I forknowne his death as you suggest, I would haue bespoke my mourning. MON. O you are conning. VIT. You shame your wit and Iudgement To call it so; What is my iust defence By him that is my Iudge cal'd impudence? Let mee appeale then from this Christian Court To the vnciuill Tartar. MON. See my Lords. Shee scandals our proceedings. VIT. Humbly thus. Thus low, to the most worthy and respected Leigier Embassadors, my modesty And womanhood I tender; but withall So intangled in a cursed accusation That my defence of force like Perseus. Must personate masculine vertue to the point. Find mee but guilty, seuer head from body: Weele part good frindes: I scorne to hould my life. at yours or any mans intreaty, Sir, ENG. EMB. Shee hath a braue spirit MON. Well, well, such counterfet Iewels Make trew on's oft suspected. VIT. You are deceaued. For know that all your strickt combined heads, Which strike against this mine of diamondes, Shall proue but glassen hammers, they shall breake, These are but faigned shadowes of my euels.
Terrify babes, my Lord, with painted deuils, I am past such needlesse palsy, for your names, Of Whoore and Murdresse they proceed from you, As if a man should spit against the wind, The filth returne's in's face. MON. Pray you Mistresse satisfy me one question: Who lodg'd beneath your roofe that fatall night Your husband brake his necke? BRA. That question Inforceth me breake silence, I was there. MONT. Your businesse? BRAC. Why I came to comfort her, And take some course for setling her estate, Because I heard her husband was in debt To you my Lord. MONT. He was. BRAC. And 'twas strangely fear'd, That you would cosen her. MONT. Who made you ouer-seer? BRAC. Why my charity, my charity, which should flow From euery generous and noble spirit, To orphans and to widdows. MONT. Your lust. BRA. Cowardly dogs barke loudest. Sirrah Priest, Ile talke with you hereafter,—Do you heare? The sword you frame of such an excellent temper, I'le sheath in your owne bowels: There are a number of thy coate resemble Your common post-boyes. MONT. Ha? BRAC. Your mercinary post-boyes, Your letters carry truth, but 'tis your guise To fill your mouth's with grosse and impudent lies. SER. My Lord your gowne. BRAC. Thou liest 'twas my stoole. Bestow't vpon thy maister that will challenge The rest a'th houshold-stuffe for Brachiano Was nere so beggarly, to take a stoole Out of anothers lodging: let him make Valence for his bed on't, or a demy foote-cloth, For his most reuerent moile, Monticelso, Nemo me Impune lacescit. Exit Brachiano. MONT. Your Champions gon.
VIT. The wolfe may prey the better. FRA. My Lord there's great suspition of the murder, But no sound proofe who did it: for my part I do not thinke she hath a soule so blacke To act a deed so bloudy, if shee haue, As in cold countries husband-men plant Vines, And with warme bloud manure them, euen so One summer she will beare vnsauory fruite, And ere next spring wither both branch and roote. The act of bloud let passe, onely descend, To matter of incontinence. VIT. I decerne poison, Vnder your guilded pils. MON. Now the Duke's gone, I wil produce a letter, Wherein 'twas plotted, her and you should meete, At an Appoticaries summer-house. Downe by the riuer Tiber: veiw't my Lords: Where after wanton bathing and the heat Of a lasciuious banquet.—I pray read it, I shame to speak the rest. VIT. Grant I was tempted, Temptation to lust proues not the act, Cast a est quam nemo rogauit, You reade his hot loue to me, but you want My frosty answere. MON. Frost i'th dog-daies! strange! VIT. Condemne you me for that the Duke did loue mee, So may you blame so me faire and christall riuer For that some melancholike distracted man, Hath drown'd himselfe in't. MON. Truly drown'd indeed. VIT. Summe vp my faults I pray, and you shall finde, That beauty and gay clothes, a merry heart, And a good stomacke to feast, are all, All the poore crimes that you can charge me with: Infaith my Lord you might go pistoll flyes, The sport would be more noble. MON. Very good. VIT. But take you your course, it seemes you haue beggerd me And now would faine vndo me, I haue houses, (first Iewels, and a poore remnant of Crusado's, Would those would make you charitable. MON. If the deuill Did euer take good shape behold his picture.
VIT. You haue one vertue left, You will not flatter me. FRA. Who brought this letter? VIT. I am not compel'd to tell you. MON. My Lord Duke sent to you a thousand duckets, The twelfth of August. VIT. 'Twas to keepe your cosen From prison, I paid vse for't. MON. I rather thinke 'Twas Interest for his lust. VIT. Who saies so but your selfe? if you bee my accuser Pray cease to be my Iudge, come from the Bench, Giue in your euidence 'gainst me, and let these Be moderators: my Lord Cardinall, Were your intelligencing eares as louing As to my thoughts, had you an honest tongue I would not care though you proclaim'd them all. MONT. Go to, go to. After your goodly and vaine-glorious banquet, I'le giue you a choake peare. VIT. A'your owne grafting? MON. You were borne in Uenice, honourably descended, From the Vittelli, 'twas my cossins fate, Ill may I name the hower to marry you, Hee bought you of your father. VIT. Ha? MON. Hee spent there in sixe monthes Twelue thousand Dukets, and to my acquaintance Receiu'd in dowry with you not one Iulio: 'Twas a hard peny-worth, the ware being so light, I yet but draw the curtaine now to your picture, You came from thence a most notorious strumpet, And so you haue continued. VIT. My Lord. MON. Nay heare me, You shall haue time to prate my Lord Brachiano, Alas I make but repetition, Of what is ordinary and Ryalto talke, And ballated, and would bee plaid a'th stage, But that vice many times findes such loud freinds. That Preachers are charm'd filent. You Gentlemen Flamineo and Marcello, The Court hath nothing now to charge you with,
Onely you must remaine vpon your suerties, For your appearance. FRA. I stand for Marcello. FLA. And my Lord Duke for me. MON. For you Vittoria, your publicke fault, Ioyn'd to'th condition of the present time, Takes from you all the fruits of noble pitty. Such a corrupted triall haue you made Both of your life and beauty, and bene stil'd No lesse in ominous fate then blasing starres To Princes heares; your sentence, you are confin'd, VIT. Vnto a house of conuertites and your baud. FLA. Who I? MON. The Moore. FLA. O I am a sound man againe. VIT. A house of conuertites, what's that? MON. A house of penitent whoores. VIT. Do the Noblemen in Rome, Erect it for their wiues, that I am sent To lodge there? FRAN. You must haue patience. VIT. I must first haue vengeance. I faine would know if you haue your saluation By patent, that you proceed thus. MON. Away with her? Take her hence. VIT. A rape, a rape. MON. How? VIT. Yes you haue rauisht iustice, Forc't her to do your pleasure. MON. fy shee's mad VIT. Dye with these pils in your most cursed mawes, Should bring you: health, or while you sit a'th Bench, Let your owne spittle choake you. MON. She's turn'd fury. VIT. That the last day of iudgement may so find you, And leaue you the same deuill you were before, Instruct me some good horse-lech to speak Treason, For since you cannot take my life for deeds, Take it for wordes, ô womans poore reuenge Which dwels but in the tongue, I will not weepe, No I do scorne to call vp one poore teare To fawne one your iniustice, beare me hence, Vnto this house of what's your mittigating Title? MON. Of conuertites. VIT. It shal not be a house of conuertites
My minde shall make it honester to mee Then the Popes Pallace, and more peaceable Then thy soule, though thou art a Cardinall, Know this, and let it some what raise your spight, Through darkenesse Diamonds spred their ritchest light. Enter Brachiano. Exit Uittoria. BRA. Now you and I are friends sir, wee'le shake hands, In a friends graue, together, a fit place, Being the embleme of soft peace t'attone our hatred. FRA. Sir, what's the matter? BRA. I will not chase more bloud from that lou'd checke, You haue lost too much already, fare-you-well. FRA. How strange these words sound? what's the interpretatiō? FLA. Good, this is a preface to the discouery of the Dutches death: Hee carries it well: because now I cannot counterfeit a whining passion for the death of my Lady, I will faine a madde humor for the disgrace of my sister, and that will keepe off idle questions, Treasons tongue hath a villanous palsy in't, I will talk to any man, heare no man, and for a time appeare a polliticke mad-man. Enter Giouanni, Count Lodouico. FRA. How now my Noble cossin, what in blacke? GIO. Yes Vnckle, I was taught to imitate you In vertue, and you must imitate mee In couloures for your garments, my sweete mother Is, FRA. How? Where? GIO. Is there, no yonder, indeed sir I'le not tell you, For I shall make you weepe. FRA. Is dead. GIO. Do not blame me now, I did not tell you so. LOD. She's dead my Lord. FRA. Dead? MON. Blessed Lady; Thou art now aboue thy woes, Wilt please your Lordships to with-draw a little. GIO. What do the dead do, vncle? do they eate, Heare musicke, goe a hunting, and bee merrie, as wee that liue? FRAN. No cose; they sleepe. GIO. Lord, Lord, that I were dead, I haue not slept these sixe nights. When doe they wake?
FRAN. When God shall please. Good God let her sleepe euer. GIO. For I haue knowne her wake an hundreth nights, When all the pillow, where shee laid her head, Was brine-wet with her teares. I am to complaine to you Sir. Ile tell you how they haue vsed her now shees dead: They wrapt her in a cruell fould of lead, And would not let mee kisse her. FRAN. Thou didst loue her. GIO. I haue often heard her say shee gaue mee sucke, And it should seeme by that shee deerely lou'd mee, Since Princes seldome doe it. FRAN. O, all of my poore sister that remaines! Take him away for Gods sake. MON. How now my Lord? FRAN. Beleeue mee I am nothing but her graue, And I shall keepe her blessed memorie, Longer then thousand Epitaphs. Enter Flamineo as distracted. FLA. Wee indure the strokes like anuiles or hard steele, Till paine it selfe make vs no paine to feele. Who shall doe mee right now? Is this the end of seruice? Ide rather go weede garlicke; trauaile through France, and be mine owne ostler; weare sheepe-skin lininges; or shoos that stinke of blacking; bee entred into the list of the fourtie thousand pedlars in Poland. Enter Sauoy. Would I had rotted in some Surgeons house at Venice, built vpon the Pox as well as on piles, ere I had seru'd Brachiano. SAV. You must haue comfort. FLA. Your comfortable wordes are like honie. They rellish well in your mouth that's whole; but in mine that's wounded they go downe as if the sting of the Bee were in them. Oh they haue wrought their purpose cunningly, as if they would not seeme to doe it of malice. In this a Polititian imitates the deuill, as the deuill imitates a Canon. Wheresoeuer he comes to doe mischiefe, he comes with his backside towardes you. Enter the French. FRE. The proofes are euident. FLA. Proofe! t'was corruption. O Gold, what a God art thou! and ô man, what a deuill art thou to be tempted by that
cursed Minerall! You diuersiuolent Lawyer; marke him, knaues turne informers, as maggots turne to flies, you may catch gud∣gions with either. A Cardinall; I would hee would heare mee, theres nothing so holie but mony will corrupt and putrifie it, like vittell vnder the liue. You are happie in England, my Lord; here they sell iustice with those weights they presse men to death with. O horrible salarie! Enter English Embassador. ENG. Fie, fie, Flamineo. FLA. Bels nere ring well, till they are at their full pitch, And I hope yon Cardinall shall neuer haue the grace to pray well, till he come to the scaffold. If they were rackt now to know the confederacie! But your Noblemen are priuiledged from the racke; and well may. For a little thing would pull some of them a peeces afore they came to their arraignement. Religion; oh how it is commeddled with policie. The first bloudshed in the world happened about re∣ligion. Would I were a Iew. MAR. O, there are too many. FLA. You are deceiu'd. There are not Iewes enough; Priests enough, nor gentlemen enough. MAR. How? FLA. Ile proue it. For if there were Iewes enough, so many Christians would not turne vsurers; if Preists enough, one should not haue sixe Benefices; and if gentlemen enough, so many earlie mushromes, whose best growth sprang from a dunghill, should not aspire to gentilitie. Farewell. Let others liue by begging. Bee thou one of them; practize the art of Wol∣or in England to swallow all's giuen thee; and yet let one pur∣gation make thee as hungrie againe as fellowes that worke in saw-pit. Ile go heare the scritch-owle. Exit. LOD. This was Brachiano's Pandar, and 'tis strange That in such open and apparant guilt Of his adulterous sister, hee dare vtter So scandalous a passion. I must wind him. Enter Flamineo. FLA. How dares this banisht Count returne to Rome, His pardon not yet purchast? I haue heard The deceast Dutchesse gaue him pension, And that he came along from Padua I'th' traine of the yong Prince. There's somewhat in 't.
Phisitians, that cure poisons, still doe worke With counterpoisons. MAR. Marke this strange incounter. FLA. The God of Melancholie turne thy gall to poison, And let the stigmaticke wrincles in thy face, Like to the boisterous waues in a rough tide One still ouertake an other. LOD. I doe thanke thee And I doe wish ingeniously for thy sake The dog-daies all yeare long. FLA. How crokes the rauen? Is our good Dutchesse dead? LOD. Dead FLA. O fate! Misfortune comes like the Crowners businesse, Huddle vpon huddle. LOD. Shalt thou & I ioyne housekeeping? FLA. Yes, content. Let's bee vnsociably sociable. LOD. Sit some three daies together, and discourse. FLA. Onely with making faces; Lie in our clothes. LOD. With faggots for our pillowes. FLA. And bee lowsie. LOD. In taffeta lininges; that's gentile melancholie, Sleepe all day. FLA. Yes: and like your melancholike hare Feed after midnight. Wee are obserued: see how yon couple greue. LOD. What a strange creature is a laughing foole, As if man were created to no vse But onely to shew his teeth. FLA. Ile tell thee what, It would doe well in stead of looking glasses To set ones face each morning by a sawcer Of a witches congealed bloud. LOD. Pretious gue. Weel neuer part. FLA. Neuer: till the beggerie of Courtiers, The discontent of church-men, want of souldiers, And all the creatures that hang manacled, Worse then strappado'd, on the lowest fellie Of fortunes wheele be taught in our two liues. Enter Antonelli. To scorne that world which life of meanes depriues. AN. My Lord, I bring good newes. The Pope on's death-bed, At th' earnest suit of the great Duke of Florence,
Hath sign'd your pardon, and restor'd vnto you— LOD. I thanke you for your news. Look vp againe Flamineo, see my pardon. FLAM. Why do you laugh? There was no such condition in our couenant. LOD. Why? FLAM. You shall not seeme a happier man then I, You know our vow sir, if you will be merry, Do it i'th like posture, as if some great man Sate while his enemy were executed: Though it be very letchery vnto thee, Doo't with a crabbed Polititians face. LOD. Your sister is a damnable whore. FLAM. Ha? LOD. Looke you; I spake that laughing. FLAM. Dost euer thinke to speake againe? LOD: Do you heare? Wil't sel me fourty ounces of her bloud, To water a mandrake? FL. Poore Lord; you did vow To liue a lowzy creature. LOD. Yes; FLA. Like one That had for euer forfaited, the day-light, By being in debt, LOD. Ha, ha? FLAM. I do not greatly wonder you do breake: Your Lordship learn't long since. But Ile tell you, LOD. What? FLA. And't shall sticke by you. LOD. I long for it. FLAM. This laughter scuruily becomes your face, If you will not be melancholy, be angry. Strikes him. See now I laugh too. MAR. You are to blame, Ile force you hence. LOD. Vnhand me: Exit Mar. & Flam. That ere I should be forc't to right my selfe, Vpon a Pandar. ANT. My Lord. LOD. H'had bene as good met with his fist a thunderbolt. GAS. How this shewes! LOD. Vds' death, how did my sword misse him? These rogues that are most weary of their liues, Still scape the greatest dangers, A pox vpon him: all his reputation; Nay all the goodnesse of his family;
Is not worth halfe this earthquake. I learnt it of no fencer to shake thus; Come, I'le forget him, and go drinke some wine. Exeunt. Enter Franciso and Monticelso. MON. Come, come my Lord, vntie your foulded thoughts, And let them dangle loose as a brid's haire. Your sister's poisoned. FRA. Farre bee it from my thoughts To seeke reuenge. MON. What, are you turn'd all marble? FRA. Shall I defye him, and impose a warre Most burthensome on my poore subiects neckes, Which at my will I haue not power to end? You know; for all the murders, rapes, and thefts, Committed in the horred lust of warre, He that vniustly caus'd it first proceed, Shall finde it in his graue and in his seed. MON. That's not the course I'de wish you: pray, obserue me, We see that vndermining more preuailes Then doth the Canon, Beare your wrongs conceal'd, And, patient as the Tortoise, let this Cammell Stalke o're your back vnbruis'd: sleep with the Lyon, And let this brood of secure foolish mice Play with your nosthrils, till the time bee ripe For th'bloudy audit, and the fatall gripe: Aime like a cunning fowler, close one eie, That you the better may your game espy. FRA. Free me my innocence; frō treacherous actes: I know ther's thunder yonder: and I'le stand, Like a safe vallie, which low bends the knee To some aspiring mountaine: since I know Treason, like spiders weauing nets for flies, By her foule worke is found, and in it dies. To passe away these thoughts, my honour'd Lord, It is reported you possesse a booke Wherein you haue quoted, by intelligence, The names of all notorious offenders
Lurking about the Citty, MON. Sir I doe And some there are which call it my blacke booke: Well may the title hold: for though it teach not The Art of coniuring, yet in it lurke, The names of many deuils. FRAN. Pray let's see it. MON. I'le fetch it to your Lordship. FRA. Monticelso, Exit Monticelso. I will not trust thee, but in all my plots I'le rest as iealous as a Towne besieg'd. Thou canst not reach what I intend to act. Your flax soone kindles, soone is out againe, But gold slow heat's, and long will hot remaine. MON. 'Tis here my Lord. Enter Mont. FRA. First your Intelligencers pray let's see. Fran. with MON. Their number rises strangely, And some of them You'd Take for honest men. Next are Pandars. These are your Pirats: and these following leaues, For base rogues that vndo yong Gentlemen, By taking vp commodities: for pollitick bankroupts: For fellowes that are bawdes to their owne wiues, Onely to put off horses and slight iewels, Clockes, defac't plate, and such commodities, At birth of their first children. FRA. Are there such? MON. These are for Impudent baudes, That go in mens apparell: for vsurers That share with scriueners for their good reportage: For Lawyers that will antedate their writtes: And some Diuines you might find foulded there; But that I slip them o're for conscience sake. Here is a generall catalogue of knaues. A man might study all the prisons o're, Yet neuer attaine this knowledge. FRA. Murderers. Fould downe the leafe I pray, Good my Lord let me borrow this strange doctrine. MON. Pray vse't my Lord.
FRAN. I do assure your Lordship, You are a worthy member of the State, And haue done infinite good in your discouery Of these offendors. MON. Some-what Sir. FRA. O God! Better then tribute of wolues paid in England. 'Twill hang their skinnes o'th hedge. MON. I must make bold To leaue your Lord-ship. FRA. Deerely sir, I thanke you, If any aske for me at Court, report You haue left me in the company of knaues. Exit Mont. I gather now by this, some cunning fellow That's my Lords Officer, one that lately skipt From a Clerkes deske vp to a Iustice chaire, Hath made this knauish summons; and intendes, As th'Irish rebels wont were to sell heads, So to make prize of these. And thus it happens, Your poore rogues pay for't, which haue not the meanes To present bribe in fist: the rest o'th'band Are raz'd out of the knaues record; or else My Lord he winkes at them with easy will, His man growes rich, the knaues are the knaues still. But to the vse I'le make of it; it shall serue To point me out a list of murderers, Agents for any villany. Did I want Ten leash of Curtisans, it would furnish me; Nay lawndresse three Armies. That so in little paper Should lye th'vndoing of so many men! 'Tis not so big as twenty declarations. See the corrupted vse some make of bookes: Diuinity, wrested by some factious bloud, Draws swords, swelsbattels, & orethrowes all good. To fashion my reuenge more seriously, Let me remember my dead sisters face: Call for her picture: no; I'le close mine eyes, And in a melancholicke thought I'le frame Enter Isabola's Ghost. Her figure 'fore me. Now I—ha'te how strong
Imagination workes! how she can frame Things which are not! me thinks she stands afore me▪ And by the quicke Idea of my minde, Were my skill pregnant, I could draw her picture. Thought, as a subtile Iugler, makes vs deeme Things, supernaturall, which haue cause Common as sickenesse. 'Tis my melancholy, How cam'st thou by thy death?—how idle am I To question mine owne idlenesse?—did euer Man dreame awake till now?—remoue this obiect Out of my braine with't: what haue I to do With tombes, or death-beds, funerals, or teares, That haue to meditate vpon reuenge? So now 'tis ended, like an old wiues story. States-men thinke often they see stranger sights Then mad-men, Come, to this waighty businesse. My Tragedy must haue some idle mirth in't, Else it will neuer passe. I am in loue, In loue with Corombona; and my suite Thus haltes to her in verse.— I haue done it rarely: ô the fate of Princes! I am so vs'd to frequent flattery, he writes That being alone I now flatter my selfe; But it will serue, 'tis seal'd; beare this Enter seruant To th'house of Conuertites; and watch your leisure To giue it to the hands of Corombona, Or to the Matron, when some followers Of Brachiano may be by. Away Exit seruant. He that deales all by strength, his wit is shallow: When a mans head goes through each limbe will follow. The engine for my busines, bold Count Lodowicke: 'Tis gold must such an instrument procure, With empty fist no man doth falcons lure. Brachiano, I am now fit for thy encounter. Like the wild Irish I'le nere thinke thee dead, Till I can play at footeball with thy head. Flectere sinequeo Superes, Achernta mouebo. Exit Mon.
Enter the Matron, and Flamineo. MAT. Should it be knowne the Duke hath such recourse. To your imprison'd sister, I were like T'incur much damage by it. FLA. Not a scruple. The Pope lies on his death-bed, and their heads Are troubled now with other businesse Than guarding of a Ladie. Enter seruant. SER. Yonder's Flamineo in conference With the Matrona. Let mee speake with you. I would intreat you to deliuer for mee This letter to the faire Uittoria. MAT. I shall Sir. Enter Brachiano. SER. With all care and secrecie, Hereafter you shall know mee, and receiue Thankes for this curtesie. FLA. How now? what's that? MAT. A letter. FLA. To my sister: Ile see't deliuered. BRA. What's that you read Flamineo? FLA. Looke. BRA. Ha? To the most vnfortunate his best respected Uittoria. Who was the messenger? FLA. I know not. BRA. No! Who sent it? FLA. Vd's foot you speake, as if a man Should know what foule is coffind in a bak't meate Afore you cut it vp. BRA. Ile open't, were't her heart. What's heere subscribed This iugling is grosse and palpable. (Florence? I haue found out the conueyance; read it, read, it. FLA. Your teares Ile turne to triumphes, bee but mine. Reades the letter, Your propis fall'n; I pittie that a vine Which Princes heretofore haue long'd to gather, Wanting suppperters, now should fade and wither. Wine yfaith, my Lord, with lees would serue his turne. Your sadimprisonement lle soone vncharme, And with a princelie vncontrolled arme Lead you to Florence, where my loue and care Shall hang your wishes in my siluer haire. A halter on his strange aequiuocation. Nor for y yeares returne mee the sad willow,
Who prefer blossomes before fruit that's mellow. Rotten on my knowledge with lying too long i'th bed-straw. And all the lines of age this line conuinces: The Gods neuer wax old, no more doe Princes. Apox on't teare it, let's haue no more Atheists for Gods sake. BRA. Vdsdeath, Ile cut her into Atomies And let th'irregular North-winde sweepe her vp And blow her int' his nosthrils. Where's this whore? FLA. That? what doe you call her? BRA. Oh, I could bee mad, Preuent the curst disease shee'l bring mee to; And teare my haire off. Where's this changeable stuffe? FLA. Ore head and eares in water, I assure you, Shee is not for your wearing. BRA. In you Pandar? FLA. What mee, my Lord, am I your dog? BRA. A bloud-hound: doe you braue? doe you stand mee? FLA. Stand you? let those that haue diseases run; I need no plaisters. BRA. Would you bee kickt? FLA. Would you haue your necke broke? I tell you Duke, I am not in Russia; My shinnes must be kept whole. BRA. Do you know mee? FLA. O my Lord! methodically. As in this world there are degrees of euils: So in this world there are degrees of deuils. You'r a great Duke; I your poore secretarie. I doe looke now for a Spanish fig, or an Italian sallet daily. BRA. Pandar, plie your conuoy, and leaue your prating. FLA. All your kindnesse to mee is like that miserable cur∣tesie of Polyphemus to Ulisses, you reserue mee to be deuour'd last, you would dig turues out of my graue to feed your Larkes: that would bee musicke to you. Come, Ile lead you to her. BRA. Do you face mee? FLA. O Sir I would not go before a Pollitique enemie with my backe towards him, though there were behind mee a whirle∣poole. Enter Vittoria to Brachiano and Flamineo. BRA. Can you read Mistresse? looke vpon that letter; There are no characters nor Hieroglyphicks.
You need no comment, I am growne your receiuer, Gods pretious you shall bee a braue great Ladie, A statelie and aduanced whore. VIT. Say Sir. BRA. Come, come, let's see your Cabinet, discouer Your treasurie of loue-letters. Death and furies, Ile see them all. VIT. Sir, vpon my soule, I haue not any. Whence was this directed? BRA. Confusion on your politicke ignorance. You are reclaimed; are you? Ile giue you the bels And let you flie to the deuill. FLA. Ware hawke, my Lord. VIT. Florence! This is some treacherous plot, my Lord, To mee, he nere was louely I protest, So much as in my sleepe. BRA. Right: they are plots. Your beautie! ô, ten thousand curses on't. How long haue I beheld the deuill in christall? Thou hast lead mee, like an heathen sacrifice, With musicke, and with fatal! yokes of flowers To my eternall ruine. Woman to man Is either a God or a wolfe. VIT. My Lord. BRA. Away. Wee'l bee as differing as two Adamants; The one shall shunne the other. What? do'st weepe? Procure but ten of thy dissembling trade, Yee'ld furnish all the Irish funeralls With howling, past wild Irish. FLA. Fie, my Lord. BRA. That hand, that cursed hand, which I haue wearied With doting kisses! O my sweetest Dutchesse How louelie art thou now! Thy loose thoughtes Scatter like quicke-siluer, I was bewitch'd; For all the world speakes ill of thee. VIT. No matter. Ile liue so now Ile make that world recant And change her speeches. You did name your Dutchesse. BRA. Whose death God pardon. VIT. Whose death God reuenge On thee most godlesse Duke. FLA. Now for tow whirle windes. VIT. What haue I gain'd by thee but infamie? Thou hast stain'd the spotlesse honour of my house, And frighted thence noble societie:
Like those, which sicke' oth' Palsie, and retaine Ill-senting foxes 'bout them, are still shun'd By those of choicer nosthrills. What doe you call this house? Is this your palace? did not the Iudge stile it A house of penitent whores? who sent mee to it? Who hath the honour to aduance Uittoria To this incontinent colledge? is 't not you? Is 't not your high preferment? Go, go brag How many Ladies you haue vndone, like mee. Fare you well Sir; let me heare no more ofy ou. I had a limbe corrupted to an vlcer, But I haue cut it off: and now Ile go Weeping to heauen on crutches. For your giftes, I will returne them all; and I do wish That I could make you full Executor To all my sinnes, ò that I could tosse my selfe Into a graue as quickly: for all thou art worth Ile not shed one teare more;—Ile burst first. She throwes her selfe vpon a bed. BRA. I haue drunke Lethe. Uittoria? My dearest happinesse? Vittoria? What doe you aile my Loue? why doe you weepe? VIT. Yes, I now weepe poniardes, doe you see. BRA. Are not those matchlesse eies mine? VIT. I had rather. They were not matches. BRA. Is not this lip mine? VIT. Yes: thus to bite it off, rather than giu e it thee. FLA. Turne to my Lord, good sister. VIT. Hence you Pandar. FLA. Pandar! Am I the author of your sinne? VIT. Yes: Hee's a base theif that a theif lets in. FLA. Wee're blowne vp, my Lord, BRA. Wilt thou heare mee? Once to bee iealous of thee is t' expresse That I will loue thee euerlastingly, And neuer more bee iealous. VIT. O thou foole, Whose greatnesse hath by much oregrowne thy wit! What dar'st thou doe, that I not dare to suffer, Excepting to bee still thy whore? for that;
In the seas bottome sooner thou shalt make A bonefire. FLA. O, no othes for gods sake. BRA. Will you heare mee? VIT. Neuer. FLA. What a damn'd impostume is a womans will? Can nothing breake it? fie, fie, my Lord. Women are caught as you take Tortoises, Shee must bee turn'd on her backe. Sister, by this hand I am on your side. Come, come, you haue wrong'd her. What a strange credulous man were you, my Lord, To thinke the Duke of Florence could loue her? Will any Mercer take an others ware When once 't is tows'd and sullied? And, yet sister, How scuruily this frowardnesse becomes you? Yong Leuerets stand not long; and womens anger Should, like their flight, procure a little sport; A full crie for a quarter of an hower; And then bee put to th' dead quat. BRA. Shall these eies, VVhich haue so long time dwelt vpon your face, Be now put out? FLA. No cruell Land-ladie 'ith' world, VVhich lend's forth grotes to broome-men, & takes vse for thē, VVould doe't. Hand her, my Lord, and kisse her: be not like A ferret to let go your hold with blowing. BRA. Let vs renew right handes. VIT. Hence. BRA. Neuer shall rage, or the forgetfull wine, Make mee commit like fault. FLA. Now you are ith' way out, follow 'thard. BRA. Bee thou at peace with mee; let all the world Threaten the Cannon. FLA. Marke his penitence. Best natures doe commit the grossest faultes, When they're giu'n ore to iealosie; as best wine Dying makes strongest vinneger. Ile tell you; The Sea's more rough and raging than calme riuers, But nor so sweet nor wholesome. A quiet woman Is a still water vnder a great bridge. A man may shoot her safely. VIT. O yee dissembling men! FLA. Wee suckt that, sister, from womens brestes, in our
first infancie. VIT. To ad miserie to miserie. BRA. Sweetest. VIT. Am I not low enough? I, I, your good heart gathers like a snow-ball Now your affection's cold. FLA. Vd'foot, it shall melt, To a hart againe, or all the wine in Rome Shall run o'th lees for't. VIT. Your dog or hawke should be rewarded better Then I haue bin. Ile speake not one word more. FLA. Stop her mouth, With a sweet kisse, my Lord. So now the tide's turne'd the vessel's come about Hee's a sweet armefull. O wee curl'd-haird men Are still most kind to women. This is well. BRA. That you should chide thus! FLA. O, sir, your little chimnies Doe euer cast most smoke. I swet for you. Couple together with as deepe a silence, As did the Grecians in their wodden horse. My Lord supplie your promises with deedes. You know that painted meat no hunger feedes. BRA. Stay ingratefull Rome. (vsage. FLA. Rome! it deserues to be cal'd Barbarie, for our villainous BRA. Soft; the same proiect which the Duke of Florence, (Whether in loue or gullerie I know not) Laid downe for her escape, will I pursue. FLA. And no time fitter than this night, my Lord; The Pope being dead; and all the Cardinals entred The Conclaue for th' electing a new Pope; The Cittie in a great confusion; Wee may attire her in a Pages suit, Lay her post-horse, take shipping, and amaine For Padua. BRA. Ile instantly steale forth the Prince Giouanni, And make for Padua. You two with your old Mother And yong Marcello that attendes on Florence, If you can worke him to it, follow mee. I will aduance you all: for you Vittoria,
Thinke of a Dutchesse title. FLA. Lo you sister. Stay, my Lord; I'le tell you a tale. The crocodile, which liues in the riuer Nilus, hath a worme breds i'th teeth of't, which puts it to extreame anguish: a little bird, no bigger then a wren, is bar∣bor-surgeon to this crocodile; flies into the iawes of't; pickes out the worme; and brings present remedy. The fish, glad of ease but ingratefull to her that did it, that the bird may not talke largely of her abroad for non payment, closeth her chaps inten∣ding to swallow her, and so put her to perpetuall silence. But na∣ture loathing such in gratitude, hath arm'd this bird with a quill or pricke on the head, top o'th which wounds the crocodile i'th mouth; forceth her open her bloudy prison; and away flies the pretty tooth-picker from her cruell patient. BRAC. Your application is, I haue not rewarded The seruice you haue done me. FLAM. No, my Lord; You sister are the crocodile: you are blemisht in your fame, My Lord cures it. And though the comparison hold not in euery particle; yet obserue, remember, what good the bird with the pricke i'th head hath done you; and scorne ingratitude. It may appeare to some ridiculous Thus to talke knaue and madman; and sometimes Come in with a dried sentence, stuft with sage. But this allowes my varying of shapes, Knaues do grow great by being great mens apes. Exeunt. Enter Francisco, Lodouico, Gasper, and sixe Embassadours. At another dore the Duke of Florence. FRA. So, my Lord, I commend your diligence Guard well the conclaue, and, as the order is, Let none haue conference with the Cardinals. LOD. I shall, my Lord: roome for the Embassadors, GAS. They're wondrous braue to day: why do they weare These seuerall habits? LOD, O sir, they'r Knights Of seuerall Orders. That Lord i'th blacke cloak with the siluer crosse Is Knight of Rhodes; the next Knight of S. Michael▪ That of the golden fleece; the French-man there Knight of the Holy-Ghost; my Lord of Sauoy
Knight of th'Annuntiation; the Englishman Is Knight of th'honoured Garter, dedicated Vnto their Saint, S. George. I could describe to you Their seuerall institutions, with the lawes Annexed to their Orders, but that time Permits not such discouery. FRAN. Where's Count Lodowicke? LOD. Here my Lord. FRA. 'Tis o'th point of dinnertime, Marshall the Cardinals seruice, LOD. Sir I shall. Enter ser∣uants with se∣uerall dishes couered. Stand, let me search your dish, who's this for? SER. For my Lord Cardinall Monticelso, LOD. Whose this? SER. For my Lord Cardinall of Burbon. FRE. Why doth he search the dishes, to obserue What meate is drest? ENG. No Sir, but to preuent. Least any letters should be conuei'd in To bribe or to sollicite the aduancement Of any Cardinall, when first they enter 'Tis lawfull for the Embassadours of Princes To enter with them, and to make their suit For any man their Prince affecteth best; But after, till a generall election, No man may speake with them. LOD. You that attend on the Lord Cardinals Open the window, and receiue their viands. A CAR. You must returne the seruice; the L. Cardinals Are busied 'bout electing of the Pope, They haue giuen o're scrutinie, and are fallen To admiration. LOD. Away, away. FRAN. I'le lay a thousand Duckets you here news A Cardinal on the Tarras Of a Pope presently, Hearke; sure he's elected, Behold! my Lord of Arragon appeares, On the Church battlements. ARRAGON. Denuntio vobis gaudium magnum. Reuerendissi∣mus Cardinalis Lorenso de Monticelso electus est in sedem Apostoli∣am, & elegit sibinomen Paulum quartum.
OMNES. Uiuat sanctus Pater Paulus Quartus. SER. Vittoria my Lord. FRAN. Wel: what of her? SER. Is fled the Citty, FRA. Ha? SER. With Duke Brachiano. FRA. Fled? Where's the Prince SER. Gone with his father. (Giouanni FRAN. Let the Matrona of the Conuertites Be apprehended: fled ô damnable! How fortunate are my wishes. Why? 'twas this I onely laboured. I did send the letter T'instruct him what to doe. Thy fame, fond Duke, I first haue poison'd; directed thee the way To marrie a whore; what can be worse? This followes▪ The hand must act to drowne the passionate tongue, I scorne to weare a sword and prate of wrong. Enter Monticelso in state. MON. My Lord reportes Vittoria Corombona Is stol'ne from forth the house of Conuertites By Brachiano, and they're fled the Cittie. Now, though this bee the first daie of our state, Wee cannot better please the diuine power, Than to sequester from the holie Church These cursed persons. Make it therefore knowne, Wee doe denounce excommunication Against them both: all that are theirs in Rome Wee likewise banish. Set on. Exeunt. FRAN. Come deare Lodouico. You haue tane the sacrament to prosecute Th' intended murder. LOD. With all constancie. But, Sir, I wonder you'l ingage your selfe, In person, being a great Prince. FRAN. Diuert mee not. Most of his Court are of my faction, And some are of my councell. Noble freind, Our danger shall be 'like in this designe, Giue leaue, part of the glorie may bee mine. Why did the Duke of Florence with such care Labour your pardon? say. LOD. Italian beggars will resolue you that
Who, begging of an almes, bid those they beg of Enter Mon∣ticelso. Doe good for their owne sakes; or't may bee Hee spreades his bountie with a sowing hand, Like Kinges, who many times giue out of measure; Not for desert so much as for their pleasure. MON. I know you're cunning. Come, what deuill was that That you were raising? LOD. Deuill, my Lord? I aske you. MONT. How doth the Duke imploy you, that his bonnet Fell with such complement vnto his knee, When hee departed from you? LOD. Why, my Lord, Hee told mee of a restie Barbarie horse Which he would faine haue brought to the carreere, The 'sault, and the ring galliard. Now, my Lord, I haue a rare French Rider. MONT. Take you heede: Least the Iade breake your necke. Doe you put mee off With your wild horse-trickes? Sirra you doe lie. O, thou'rt a foule blacke cloud, and thou do'st threat A violent storme. LOD. Stormes are 'ith aire, my Lord; I am too low to storme. MONT. Wretched creature! I know that thou art fashion'd for all ill, Like dogges, that once get bloud, they'l euer kill. About some murder? wa'st not? LOD. Ile not tell you; And yet I care not greatly if I doe; Marry with this preparation. Holie father, I come not to you as an Intelligencer, But as a penitent sinner. What I vtter Is in confession meerely; which you know Must neuer bee reueal'd. MONT. You haue oretane mee. LOD. Sir I did loue Brachiano's Dutchesse deerely; Or rather I pursued her with hot lust, Though shee nere knew on't. Shee was poyson'd; Vpon my soule shee was: for which I haue sworne T'auenge her murder. MONT. To the Duke of Florence? LOD. To him I haue. MON. Miserable Creature! If thou persist in this, 'tis damnable. Do'st thou imagine thou canst slide on bloud
And not be tainted with a shamefull fall? Or like the blacke, and melancholicke Eugh-tree, Do'st thinke to roote thy selfe in dead mens graues, And yet to prosper? Instruction to thee Comes like sweet shewers to ouer-hardned ground: They wet, but peirce not deepe. And so I leaue thee Withall the Furies hanging bout thy necke, Till by thy penitence thou remoue this euill, In coniuring from thy breast that cruell Deuill. LOD. I'le giue it o're. He saies 'tis damable: Exit Mon. Besides I did expect his suffrage, By reason of Camillo's death. Enter seruant FRA. Do you know that Count? SER. Yes, my Lord, & Francisco, FRA. Beare him these thousand Duckes to his lodging; Tell him the Pope hath sent them. Happily That will confirme more then all the rest. SER. Sir. LOD. To me sir? SER. His holinesse hath sent you a thousand Crownes, And will you if you trauaile, to make him (commanded. Your Patron for intelligence. LOD. His creature euer to bee Why now 'tis come about. He rai'ld vpon me; And yet these Crownes were told out and laid ready, Before he knew my voiage. O the Art The modest forme of greatnesse! that do sit Like Brides at wedding dinners, with their look's turn'd From the least wanton iests, their puling stomacke Sicke of the modesty, when their thoughts are loose. Euen acting of those hot and lustfull sports Are to ensue about midnight: such his cunning! Hee soundes my depth thus with a golden plummet, I am doubly arm'd now. Now to th'act of bloud, There's but three furies found in spacious hell; But in a great mans breast three thousand dwell. A passage ouer the stage of Brachiano, Flamineo, Marcello, Hor∣tensio, Corombona, Cornelia, Zanche and others. FLA. In all the weary minutes of my life,
Day nere broke vp till now. This mariage. Confirmes me happy. HOR. 'Tis a good assurance. Saw you not yet the Moore that's come to Court? FLA. Yes, and confer'd with him i'th Dukes closet, I haue not seene a goodlier personage, Nor euer talkt with man better experienc't In State-affares or rudiments of warre. Hee hath by report, seru'd the Venetian In Candy these twice seuen yeares, and bene cheife In many a bold designe. HOR. What are those two, That beare him company? FLA. Two Noblemen of Hungary, that liuing in the Empe∣rours seruice as commanders, eight yeares since, contrary to the expectation of all the Court entred into religion, into the strickt order of Capuchins: but being not well setled in their vnderta∣king they left their Order and returned to Court: for which be∣ing after troubled in conscience, they vowed their seruice against the enemies of Christ; went to Malta; were there knighted; and in their returne backe, at this great solemnity, they are resolued for euer to forsake the world, and settle themselues here in a house of Capuchines in Padua. HOR. 'Tis strange. FLA. One thing makes it so. They haue vowed for euer to weare next their bare bodies those coates of maile they ser∣ued in. HOR. Hard penance. Is the Moore a Christian? FLA. Hee is. HOR. Why proffers hee his seruice to our Duke? FLV. Because he vnderstands ther's like to grow Some warres betweene vs and the Duke of Florence, In which hee hopes imployment. Enter Duke Brachiano. I neuer saw one in a sterne bold looke Weare more command, nor in a lofty phrase Expresse more knowing, or more deepe contempt Of our slight airy Courtiers. Hee talkes As if hee had trauail'd all the Princes Courts Of Christendome; in all things striues t'expresse, That all that should dispute with him may know, Glories, like glow-wormes, a farre off shine bright
But lookt to neare, haue neither heat norlight. The Duke. Enter Brachiano, Florence disguised like Mulinassar; Lodouico, An∣tonelli, Gaspar, Farese bearing their swordes and helmets. BRA. You'are nobly welcome. Wee haue heard at full Your honourable seruice'gainst the Turke. To you, braue Mulinassar, wee assigne A competent pension: and are inly sorrow, The vowes of those two worthie gentlemen, Make them incapable of our proffer'd bountie. Your wish is you may leaue your warlike swordes For Monuments i n our Chappell. I accept it As a great honour done mee, and must craue Your leaue to furnish out our Dutchesse reuells. Onely one thing, as the last vanitie You ere shall view, denie mee not to stay To see a Barriers prepar'd to night; You shall haue priuate standings: It hath pleas'd The great Ambassadours of seuerall Princes In their returne from Rome to their owne Countries To grace our marriage, and to honour mee With such a kind of sport. FRAN. I shall perswade them To stay, my Lord. Exeunt Brachiano, Flamineo? and Marcello. Set on there to the presence CAR. Noble my Lord, most fortunately wellcome, The Conspira∣tors here im∣brace. You haue our vowes seal'd with the sacrament To second your attempts. PED. And all thinges readie. Hee could not haue inuented his owne ruine, Had hee despair'd with more proprietie. LOD. You would not take my way. FRA. 'Tis better ordered. LOD. 'T'haue poison'd his praier booke, or a paire of beades, The pummell of his saddle, his looking-glasse, Or th'handle of his racket, ô that, that! That while he had bin bandying at Tennis, He might haue sworne himselfe to hell, and strooke His soule into the hazzard! O my Lord! I would haue our plot bee ingenious,
And haue it hereafter recorded for example Rather than borrow example. FRAN. There's no way More speeding than this thought on. LOD. On then. FRAN. And yet mee thinkes that this reuenge is poore, Because it steales vpon him like a theif, To haue tane him by the Caske in a pitcht feild, Led him to Florence! LOD. It had bin rare.—And there Haue crown'd him with a wreath of stinking garlicke. T'haue showne the sharpnesse of his gouernment; Exeunt Lodo∣uico Antonelli. And rancknesse of his lust. Flamineo comes. Enter Flamineo, Marcello, and Zanche. MAR. Why doth this deuill haunt you? say. FLA. I know not. For by this light I doe not coniure for her. Tis not so great a cunning as men thinke To raise the deuill: for heeres one vp allreadie, The greatest cunning were to lay him downe MAR. Shee is your shame. FLA. I prethee pardon her. In faith you see, women are like to burres; Where their affection throwes them, there they'l sticke. ZAN. That is my Country-man, a goodly person; When hee's at leisure Ile discourse with him Exit Zanche In our owne language. FLA. I beseech you doe, How is 't' braue souldier; ô that I had seene Some of your iron daies! I pray relate Some of your seruice to vs. FRAN. T'is a ridiculous thing for a man to bee his owne Chronicle, I did neuer wash my mouth with mine owne praise for feare of getting a stincking breath. MAR. You 're too Stoicall. The Duke will expect other discourse from you FRAN. I shall neuer flatter him, I haue studied man to much to do that: What difference is betweene the Duke and I? no more than betweene two brickes; all made of one clay. Onely't may bee one is plac't on the top of a turret; the other in the bottom of a well by meere chance; if I were plac't as high as the Duke, I should sticke as fast; make as faire a shew; and beare out
weather equally. FLA. If this souldier had a patent to beg in Churches, then hee would tell them stories, MAR. I haue bin a souldier too. FRAN. How haue you thriu'd? MAR. Faith poorely. FRAN. That's the miserie of peace. Onely outsides are then respected: As shippes seeme verie great vpon the riuer, which shew verie little vpon the Seas: So some men i'th Court seeme Colossusses in a chamber, who if they came into the feild would appeare pittifull. Pigmies. FLA. Giue mee a faire roome yet hung with Arras, and some great Cardinall to lug mee by th' eares as his endeared Minion. FRA. And thou maist doe, the deuill knowes what vilanie. FLA. And safely. FRA. Right; you shall see in the Countrie in haruest time, pigeons, though they destroy neuer so much corne, the farmer dare not present the fowling peece to them! why? because they belong to the Lord of the Mannor; whilest your poore sparro∣wes that belong to the Lord of heauen, they go to the pot for't. FLA. I will now giue you some polliticke instruction. The Duke saies hee will giue you pension; that's but bare promise: get it vnder his hand. For I haue knowne men that haue come from seruing against the Turke; for three or foure moneths they haue had pension to buy them new woodden legges and fresh plaisters; but after 'twas not to bee had. And this miserable cur∣tesie shewes, as if a Tormenter should giue hot cordiall drinkes to one three quarters dead o'th' racke, onely to fetch the misera∣ble soule againe to indure more dogdaies. Enter Hortensio, a yong Lord, Zanche, and two more. How now, Gallants; what are they readie for the Barriers? Y. LORD. Yes: the Lordes are putting on their armour. HOR. What's hee? FLA. A new vp-start: one that sweares like a Falckner, and will lye in the Dukes eare day by day like a maker of Almanacks; And yet I knew him since hee came to th' Court smell worse of sweat than an vnder-tennis-court keeper. HOR. Looke you, yonder's your sweet Mistresse.
FLA. Thou art my sworne brother, I'le tell thee, I doe loue that Moore, that Witch very constrainedly: shee knowes some of my villanny; I do loue her, iust as a man holds a wolfe by the eares. But for feare of turning vpon mee, and pulling out my throate, I would let her go to the Deuill. HOR. I heare she claimes marriage of thee. FLA. 'Faith, I made to her some such darke promise, and in seeking to flye from't I run on, like a frighted dog with a bottle at' staile, that faine would bite it off and yet dares not looke be∣hind him. Now my pretious Gipsie! ZAN. I your loue to me rather cooles then heates. FLA. Marry, I am the sounder, louer, we haue many wenches about the Towne heate too fast. HOR. What do you thinke of these perfum'd Gallants then? FLAM. Their sattin cannot saue them. I am confident They haue a certaine spice of the disease, For they that sleep with dogs; shall rise with fleas. ZAN. Beleeue it! A little painting and gay clothes, Make you loath me. FLA. How? loue a Lady for painting or gay apparell? I'le vn∣kennell one example more for thee. Esop had a foolish dog that let go the flesh to catch the shadow. I would haue Courtiers bee better Diuers. ZAN. You remember your oathes. FLA. Louers oathes are like Marriners prayers, vttered in ex∣tremity; but when the tempest is o're, and that the vessell leaues tumbling, they fall from protesting to drinking. And yet amongst Gentlemen protesting and drinking go together, and agree as well as Shooemakers and West-phalia bacon. They are both drawers on: for drinke drawes on protestation; and protestation drawes on more drinke. Is not this discourse better now then the mortality of your sun-burnt Gentleman. Enter Cornelia. COR. Is this your pearch, you haggard? flye to'th stewes. FLA. You should be clapt by th'heeles now: strike i'th Court. ZAN. She's good for nothing but to make her maids, Catch cold a nights; they dare not vse a bedstaffe, For feare of her light fingers. MAR. Your'e a strumpet. An impudent one. FLA. Why do you kicke her? say,
Do you thinke that she's like a walnut-tree? Must she be cudgel'd ere shee beare good fruite? Shee brags that you shall marry her. FLA. What then? MAR. I had rather she were pitcht vpon a stake In some new-seeded garden, to affright Her fellow crowes thence. FLA. Your a boy, a foole, Be guardian to your hound, I am of age. MAR. If I take her neere you I'le cut her throate. FLA. With a fan of feathers? MAR. And for you; I'le whip This folly from you. FLAM. Are you cholericke? I'le purg't with Rubarbe. HOR. O your brother. FLA. Hang him. Hee wrongs me most that ought t'offend mee least, I do suspect my mother plaid soule play, When she conceiu'd thee. MAR. Now by all my hopes. Like the two slaughtred sonnes of Oedipus, The very flames of our affection, Shall turne 10 waies. Those words I'le make thee answere With thy heart bloud. FLA. Doe like the geesse in the progresse, You know where you shall finde mee, MAR. Very good, And thou beest a noble, friend, beare him my sword, And bid him fit the length on't. Y. LORD. Sir I shall. ZAN. He comes. Hence petty thought of my disgrace, I neere lou'd my complexion till now, Enter Francisco the Duke of Florence. Cause I may boldly say without a blush, I loue you. FLA. Your loue is vntimely sowen, Ther's a Spring at Michaelmas, but 'tis but a faint one, I am sunck In yeares, and I haue vowed neuer to marry. ZAN. Alas! poore maides get more louers then husbands, Yet you may mistake my wealth. For, as when Embassadours are sent to congratulate Princes, there's commonly sent along with them a rich present; so that though the Prince like not the Embassadours person nor words, yet he likes well of the present∣ment. So I may come to you in the same maner, & be better loued for my dowry then my vertue. FLA. I'le thinke on the motion. ZAN. Do, Ile now detaine you no longer. At your better leasure I'le tell you things shall startle your bloud. Nor blame me that this passion I reueale;
Louers dye inward that their flames conceale. FLA. Of all intelligence this may proue the best, Sure I shall draw strange fowle, from this foule nest. Exeunt. Enter Marcello and Cornelia. COR. I heare a whispering all about the Court, Your are to fight, who is your opposite? What is the quarrell? MRA. 'Tis an idle umour. COR. Will you dissemble? sure you do not well To fright me thus, you neuer look thus pale, But when you are most angry. I do charge you Vpon my blessing; nay I'le call the Duke, And he shall schoole you. MAR. Publish not a feare Which would conuert to laughter; 'tis not so, Was not this Crucifix my fathers? COR. Yes. MAR. I haue heard you say, giuing my brother sucke, Hee tooke the Crucifix betweene his hands, Enter Flamineo, And broke a limbe off. COR. Yes: but 'tis mended. FLA. I haue brought your weapon backe. Flamineo runnes COR. Ha, O my horrour! Marcello through. MAR. You haue brought it home indeed. COR. Helpe, oh he's murdered. FLA. Do you turne your gaule vp? I'le to sanctuary, And send a surgeon to you. HOR. How? o'th ground? MAR. O mother now remember what I told, Of breaking off the Crucifix: farewell Enter Car. Hort. Pedro. There are some sinnes which heauen doth duly punish, In a whole family. This it is to rise By all dishonest meanes. Let all men know That tree shall long time keepe a steddy foote Whose branches spread no wilder then the roote. COR. O my perpetuall sorrow! HOR. Vertuous Marcello. Hee's dead: pray leaue him Lady; come, you shall. COR. Alas he is not dead: hee's in a trance. Why here's no body shall get any thing by his death. Let me call him againe for Gods sake. CAR. I would you were deceiu'd. COR. O you abuse mee, you abuse me, you abuse me. How many haue gone away thus for lacke of tendance; reare vp's head,
reare vp's head; His bleeding inward will kill him. HOR. You see hee is departed. COR. Let mee come to him; giue mee him as hee is, if hee bee turn'd to earth; let mee but giue him one heartie kisse, and you shall put vs both into one coffin: fetch a looking glasse, see if his breath will not staine it; or pull out some feathers from my pillow, and lay them to his lippes, will you loose him for a little paines taking? HOR. Your kindest office is to pray for him. COR. Alas! I would not pray for him yet. Hee may liue to lay mee ith' ground, and pray for mee, if you'l let mee come to him. Enter Brachiano all armed, saue the beauer, with Flamineo. BRA. Was this your handy-worke? FLA. It was my misfortune. COR. Hee lies, hee lies, hee did not kill him: these haue kill'd him, that would not let him bee better look't to. BRA. Haue comfort my greiu'd Mother. COR. O you scritch-owle. HOR. Forbeare, good Madam. COR. Let mee goe, let mee goe. Shee runes to Flamineo with her knif drawne and comming to him lets it fall. The God of heauen forgiue thee. Do'st not wonder I pray for thee? Ile tell thee what's the reason, I haue scarce breath to number twentie minutes; Ide not spend that in cursing. Fare thee well Halfe of thy selfe lies there: and maist thou liue To fill an howre-glasse with his mouldred ashes, To tell how thou shouldst spend the time to come In blest repentance. BRA. Mother, pray tell mee How came hee by his death? what was the quarrell? COR. Indeed my yonger boy presum'd too much Vpon his manhood; gaue him bitter wordes; Drew his sword first; and so I know not how, For I was out of my wits, hee fell with's head Iust in my bosome. PAGE. This is not trew Madam. COR. I pray thee peace. One arrow's graz'd allready; it were vaine T'lose this: for that will nere bee found againe. BRA. Go, beare the bodie to Corneliá; lodging: And wee commaund that none acquaint our Dutchesse:
With this sad accident: for you Flamineo, Hearke you, I will not graunt your pardon. FLA. No? BRA. Onely a lease of your life. And that shall last But for one day. Thou shalt be forc't each euening to renew it, or be hang'd. FLA. At your pleasure. Lodouico sprinckles Brachiano's beuer with a poison. Your will is law now, Ile not meddle with it. BRA. You once did braue mee in your sisters lodging; I'le now keepe you in awe for't. Where's our beauer? FRAN. Hee cals for his destruction. Noble youth, I pitty thy sad fate. Now to the barriers. This shall his passage to the blacke lake further, The last good deed hee did, he pardon'd murther. Exeunt. Charges and shoutes, They fight at Barriers; first single paires, then three to three. Enter Brachiano & Flamineo with others. BRA. An Armorer? vds death an Armorer? FLA. Armorer; where's the Armorer? BRA. Teare off my beauer. FLA. Are you hurt, my Lord? BRA. O my braine's on fire, Enter Armorer. The helmet is poison'd. ARM. My Lord vpon my soule. BRA. Away with him to torture. There are some great ones that haue hand in this, And neere about me. VIT. O my loued Lord, poisoned? FLA. Remoue the barre: heer's vnfortunate reuls, Call the Physitions; a plague vpon you; Ent. 2 Physitian: Wee haue to much of your cunning here already. I feare the Embassadours are likewise poyson'd. BRA. Oh I am gone already: the infection Flies to the braine and heart. O thou strong heart! There's such a couenant 'tweene the world and it, They're loath to breake. GIO. O my most loued father! BRA. Remoue the boy away, Where's this good woman? had I infinite worlds They were too little for thee. Must I leaue thee? What say you scritch-owles, is the venomne mortall? PHYS. Most deadly. BRA. Most corrupted pollitick hangmā!
You kill without booke; but your art to saue Failes you as oft, as great mens needy friends. I that haue giuen life to offending slaues And wretched murderers, haue I not power To lengthen mine owne a twelue-month? Do not kisse me, for I shall poyson thee. This vnction is sent from the great Duke of Florence. FRA. Sir bee of comforts BRA. O thou soft naturall death, that art ioint-twin, To sweetest slumber: no rough-bearded Comet, Stares on thy milde departure: the dull Owle Beates not against thy casement: the hoarse wolfe Sents not thy carion. Pitty windes thy coarse, Whilst horrour waights on Princes. VIT. I am lost for euer. BRAC. How miserable a thing it is to die, 'Mongst women howling! What are those. FLA. Franciscant. They haue brought the extreame vnction. BRA. On paine of death, let no man name death to me, It is a word infinitely terrible, Withdraw into our Cabinet Exeunt but Francisco and Flamineo. FLA. To see what solitarinesse is about dying Princes. As heretofore they haue vnpeopled Townes; diuorst friends, and made great houses vnhospitable: so now, ô iustice! where are their flatterers now? Flatterers are but the shadowes of Princes bodies the least thicke cloud makes them inuisible. FRA. There's great moane made for him. FLA. 'Faith, for some few howers salt water will runne most plentifully in euery Office o'th Court. But beleeue it; most of them do but weepe ouer their step-mothers graues. FRA. How meane you? FLA. Why? They dissemble, as some men doe that liue within compasse o'th verge. FRA. Come you haue thriu'd well vnder him. FLA. 'Faith, like a wolfe in a womans breast; I haue beene fed with poultry; but for money, vnderstand me, I had as good a will to cosen him, as e're an Officer of them all. But I had not cunning enough to doe it.
FRAN. What did'st thou thinke of him; 'faith speake freely. FLA. Hee was a kinde of States-man, that would sooner haue reckond how many Cannon bullets he had discharged against a Towne, to count his expence that way, than how many of his valiant and deseruing subiects hee lost before it. FRAN. O, speake well of the Duke. FLA. I haue done. Will't heare some of my Court wisedome? Enter Lodouico. To reprehend Princes is dangerous: and to ouer-commend some of them is palpable lying. FRAN. How is it with the Duke? LOD. Most deadly ill. Hee's fall'n into a strange distraction. Hee talkes of Battailes and Monopolies, Leuying of taxes, and from that descends To the most brain-sicke language. His minde fastens On twentie seuerall obiects, which confound Deepe Sence with follie. Such a fearefull end May teach some men that beare too loftie crest, Though they liue happiest, yet they dye not best. Hee hath conferr'd the whole State of the Dukedome Vpon your sister, till the Prince arriue At mature age. FLA. There's some good lucke in that yet. FRAN. See heere he comes. Enter Brachiano, presented in a bed Uittoria and others. There's death in's face allready. VIT. O my good Lord! BRA. Away, you haue abus'd mee. You haue conuayd coyne forth our territories; Bought and sold offices; oppres'd the poore, These speches are seuerall kinds of di∣stractions and in the action should ap∣peare so. And I nere dreampt on't. Make vp your accountes; Ile now bee mine owne Steward. FLA. Sir, haue patience. BRA. Indeed I am too blame. For did you euer heare the duskie rauen Chide blacknesse? or wast euer knowne, the diuell Raild against clouen Creatures. VIT. O my Lord! BRA. Let mee haue some quailes to supper. FLA. Sir, you shal. BRA. No: some fried dog-fish. Your Quailes feed on poison, That old dog-fox, that Polititian Florence, Ile forsweare hunting and turne dog-killer; Rare! Ile bee frindes with him. for marke you, sir, one dog
Still sets another a barking: peace, peace, Yonder's a fine slaue come in now. FLA. Where? BRA. Why there. In a blew bonnet, and a paire of breeches With a great codpeece. Ha, ha, ha, Looke you his codpeece is stucke full of pinnes With pearles o'th head of them. Doe not you know him? FLA. No, my Lord. BRA. Why 'tis the Deuill. I know him by a great rose he weares on's shooe To hide his clouen foot. Ile dispute with him. Hee's a rare linguist. VIT. My Lord heer's nothing. BRA. Nothing? rare! nothing! when I want monie, Our treasurie is emptie; there is nothing, Ile not bee vs'd thus. VIT. O! 'ly still, my Lord BRA. See, see, Flamineo that kill'd his brother Is dancing on the ropes there: and he carries A monie-bag in each hand, to keepe him euen, For feare of breaking's necke. And there's a Lawyer In a gowne whipt with veluet, stares and gapes When the mony will fall. How the rogue cuts capers! It should haue bin in a halter. 'Tis there; what's shee? FLA. Uittoria, my Lord. BRA. Ha, ha, ha. Her haire is sprinckled with Arras powder, that makes her looke as if she had sinn'd in the Pastrie. What's hee? FLA. A Diuine my Lord. BRA. Hee will bee drunke: Auoid him: th' argument is fearefull when Church-men stagger in't. Brachiano seemes heare neare his end. Lodouico & Gasparo in the habit of Capuchins present him in his bed with a Cru∣cifix and hal∣lowed candle. Looke you; six gray rats that haue lost their tailes, crall vp the pillow, send for a Rat-cather. Ile doe a miracle: Ile free the Court From all foule vermin. Where's Flamineo? FLA. I doe not like that hee names mee so often, Especially on's death-bed: 'tis a signe I shall not liue long: see hee's neere his end. LOD. Pray giue vs leaue; Attende Domine Brachiane, FLA. See, see, how firmely hee doth fixe his eye Vpon the Crucifix. VIT. O hold it constant.
It settles his wild spirits; and so his eies Melt into teares. LOD. Domine Brachiane, solebas in bello tutus esse tuo clypeo, nùnc hunc clypeum hostituo opponas infernali. the Cru∣ Ex. GAS. Olim hasta valuisti in bello; nùnc hanc sacram hastam vi∣brabis contra hostem animarum. y the Ho∣wed taper. LOD. Attende Domine Brachiane si nunc quòque probas ea quae acta sunt inter nos, flecte Caput in dexrum. GAS. Esto securus Domine Brachiane: cogita quantum habeas meritorum denique memineris meam animam pro tua oppignoratem si quid esset periculi. LOD. Si nùnc quoque probas ea quae acta sunt inter nos, flecte ca∣put in leuum. Hee is departing: pray stand all apart, And let vs onely whisper in his eares Some priuate meditations, which our order Heare therest being departed Lo∣douico and Gasparo discouer them∣selues. Permits you not to heare. GAS. Brachiano. LOD. Deuill Brachiano. Thou art damn'd. GAS. Perpetually. LOD. A slaue condemn'd, and giuen vp to the gallowes Is thy great Lord and Master. GAS. True: for thou Art giuen vp to the deuill. LOD. O you slaue! You that were held the famous Pollititian; Whose art was poison. GAS. And whose conscience murder. LOD. That would haue broke your wiues necke downe the staires ere she was poison'd. GAS. That had your villanous LOD. And fine imbrodered bottles, (sallets And perfumes Equally mortall with a winter plague GAS. Now there's Mercarie. LOD. And copperesse GAS. And quicke-siluer. LOD. With other deuelish potticarie stuffe A melting in your polliticke braines: do'st heare. GAS. This is Count Lodouico. LOD. This Gasparo. And thou shalt die like a poore rogue. GAS. And stinke Like a dead flie-blowne dog. LOD. And be forgotten before thy sunerall sermon.
BRA. Uittoria? Uittoria! LOD. O the cursed deuill, Come to himselfe a gaine. Wee are vndone. Enter Vittoria and the attend. (againe GAS. Strangle him in priuate. What? will you call him To liue in treble torments? for charitie, For Christian charitie, auoid the chamber. LOD. You would prate, Sir. This is a true-loue knot Sent from the Duke of Florence. Brachiano is strangled GAS. What is it done? LOD. The snuffe is out. No woman-keeper i'ch world, Though shee had practis'd seuen yere at the Pest-house, Could haue done't quaintlyer. My Lordes hee's dead. OMN. Rest to his soule. VIT. O mee! this place is hell. Exit Vittoria. FLO. How heauily shee takes it. FLA. O yes, yes; Had women nauigable riuers in their eies They would dispend them all; surely I wonder Why wee should wish more riuers to the Cittie, When they sell water so good cheape. Ile tell thee, These are but Moonish shades of greifes or feares, There's nothing sooner drie than womens-teares. Why heere's an end of all my haruest, hee has giuen mee nothing Court promises! Let wisemen count them curst For while you liue hee that scores best paies worst. FLO. Sure, this was Florence doing. FLA. Very likelie. Those are found waightie strokes which come from th'hand, But those are killing strokes which come from th'head. O the rare trickes of a Machiuillian! Hee doth not come like a grosse plodding slaue And buffet you to death: No, my quaint knaue, Hee tickles you to death; makes you die laughing; As if you had swallow'd downe a pound of saffron You see the seat, 'tis practis'd in a trice To teach Court-honestie, it iumpes on Ice. FLO. Now haue the people libertie to talke And descant on his vices. FLA. Miserie of Princes, That must of force bee censur'd by their slaues!
Not onely blam'd for doing things are ill, But for not doing all that all men will. One were better be a thresher. Vds'death, I would faine speake with this Duke yet. FLO. Now hee's dead? FLAM. I cannot coniure; but if praiers or oathes VVill get to th'speech of him: though forty deuils VVaight on him in his liuery of flames, I'le speake to him, and shake him by the hand, Though I bee blasted. FRA Excellent Lodouico! VVhat? did you terrifie him at the last gaspe? Exit Flamineo. LOD. Yes; and so idely, that the Duke had like T'haue terrified vs. FRA. How? Enter the Moore. LOD. You shall heare that heareafter, See! yon's the infernall, that would make vp sport. Now to the reuelation of that secret, Shee promi'st when she fell in loue with you. FLO. You're passionately met in this sad world. MOO. I would haue you look vp, Sir; these Court teares Claime not your tribute to them. Let those weepe That guiltily pertake in the sad cause. I knew last night by a sad dreame I had Some mischiefe would insue; yet to say truth My dreame most concern'd you. LOD. Shal's fall a dreaming? FRA. Yes, and for fashion sake Ile dreame with her. MOO. Mee thought sir, you came stealing to my bed. FRA. VVilt thou beleeue me sweeting; by this light I was a dreampt on thee too: for me thought I saw thee naked MOO. Fy sir! as I told you, Me thought you lay downe by me. FRA. So drempt I; And least thou should'st take cold, I couer'd thee VVith this Irish mantle. MOO. Verily I did dreame, You were some what bold with me; but to come to't. LOD. How? how? I hope you will not go to there. FRA. Nay: you must heare my dreame out.
MOORE. VVell, sir, forth. FRA. VVhen I threw the mantle ore thee, thou didst laugh Exceedingly me thought. MOORE. Laugh? FLA. And cridst out, The haire did tickle thee. MOO. There was a dreame indeed. LOD. Marke her I prethee, shee simpers like the suddes A Collier hath bene washt in. MOO. Come, sir; good fortune tends you; I did tell you I would reueale a secret, Isabella The Duke of Florence sister was impoison'd, By a 'fum'd picture: and Camillo's necke Was broke by damn'd Flamineo; the mischance Laid on a vaulting horse. FRA. Most strange! MOO. Most true. LOD. The bed of snakes is broke. MOO. I sadly do confesse I had a hand In the blacke deed. FRA. Thou kepts their counsell, MOO. Right, For which, vrg'd with contrition, I intend This night to rob Vittoria. LOD. Excellent penitence! Vsurers dreame on't while they sleepe out Sermons. MOO. To further our escape, I haue entreated Leaue to retire me, till the funerall, Vnto a friend i'th country. That excuse Will further our escape, In coine and iewels I shall, at least, make good vnto your vse An hundred thousand crowns. FRA. O noble wench! LOD. Those crownes we'le share. MOO. It is a dowry, Me thinkes, should make that sun-burnt prouerbe false, And wash the Ethiop white. FRA. It shall, away MOO. Be ready for our flight. FRA. An howre 'fore day. O strange discouery! why till now we knew not Exit the Moore. The circumstance of either of their deaths. Enter Moore. MOO. You'le waight about midnight In the Chappel. FRA. There. LOD. Why now our action's iustified, FRA. Tush for iustice. What harmes it Iustice? we now, like the partridge
Purge the disease with lawrell: for the fame Shall crowne the enterprise and quit the shame. Exeunt. Enter Flam. and Gasp. at one dore, another way Giouanni attended. GAS. The yong Duke: Did you e're see a sweeter Prince? FLA. I haue knowne a poore womans bastard better fauor'd, This is behind him: Now, to his face all cōparisons were hateful: Wise was the Courtly Peacocke, that being a great Minion, and being compar'd for beauty, by some dottrels that stood by, to the Kingly Eagle, said the Eagle was a farre fairer bird then herselfe, not in respect of her feathers, but in respect of her long Tallants. His will grow out in time, My gratious Lord. GIO. I pray leaue mee Sir. FLA. Your Grace must be merry: 'tis I haue cause to mourne, for wot you what said the little boy that rode behind his father on horsebacke? GIO. Why, what said hee? FLA. When you are dead father (said he) I hope then I shall ride in the saddle, O 'tis a braue thing for a man to sit by himselfe: he may stretch himselfe in the stirrops, looke about, and see the whole compasse of the Hemisphere, you're now, my Lord, ith saddle. GIO. Study your praiers, sir, and be penitent, 'Twere fit you'd thinke on what hath former bin, I haue heard griefe nam'd the eldest child of sinne. Exit Giou. FLA. Study my praiers? he threatens me diuinely, I am falling to peeces already, I care not, though, like Anacharsis I were pounded to death in a mortar. And yet that death were fitter for Vsurers gold and themselues to be beaten together, to make a most cordiall cullice for the deuill. He hath his vnckles villanous looke already, Enter Courtier. In dicimo sexto. Now sir, what are you? COVR It is the pleasure sir, of the yong Duke That you forbeare the Presence, and all roome, That owe him reuerence. FLAM. So, the wolfe and the rauen are very pretty fools when they are yong. Is it your office, sir, to keepe me out? COVR. So the Duke wils. FLA. Verely, Maister Courtier, extreamity is not to bee vsed
in all offices: Say that a gentlewoman were taken out of her bed about midnight, and committed to Castle Angelo, to the Tower yonder, with nothing about her, but her smocke: would it not shew a cruell part in the gentleman porter to lay clame to her vpper garment, pull it ore her head and eares; and put her in nak'd? COVR. Very good: you are merrie FLA. Doth hee make a Court eiectment of mee? A flaming firebrand casts more smoke without a chimney, then withint. Ile smoore some of them. Enter Florence. How now? Thou hart sad. FRAN. I met euen now with the most pitious sight. FLA. Thou metst another heare a pittifull Degraded Courtier. FRAN. Your reuerend mother Is growne a very old woman in two howers. I found them winding of Marcello's coarse; And there is such a solemne melodie 'Tweene dolefull songes, teares, and sad elegies: Such, as old grandames, watching by the dead, Were wont t'out-weare the nights with; that beleeue mee I had no eies to guide mee forth the roome, They were so ore-charg'd with water. FLA. I will see them. FRAN. 'Twere much vncharety in you: for your sight Will adde vnto their teares. FLA. I will see them. They are behind the trauers. Ile discouer Their superstitious howling. Cornelia, the Moore and 3. other Ladies discouered, winding Marcello's Coarse. A song. COR. This rosemarie is wither'd, pray get fresh; I would haue these herbes grow vp in his graue When I am dead and rotten. Reach the bayes, Ile tye a garland heere about his head: 'Twill keepe my boy from lightning. This sheet I haue kept this twentie yere, and euerie daie Hallow'd it with my praiers, I did not thinke Hee should haue wore it. MOO. Looke you; who are yonder. COR. O reach mee the flowers. MOO. Her Ladiships foolish. WOM. Alas! her grief
Hath turn'd her child againe. COR. You're very wellcome. There's Rosemarie for you, and Rue for you, to Flamineo. Hearts-ease for you. I pray make much of it. I haue left more for my selfe. FRAN. Ladie, who's this? COR. You are, I take it, the graue-maker. FLA. So. MOO. 'Tis Flamineo. COR. Will you make mee such a foole? heere's a white hand: Can bloud so soone bee washt out? Let mee see, When scritch-howles croke vpon the chimney tops, And the strange Cricketith ouen singes and hoppes, When yellow spots doe on your handes appeare, Bee certaine then you of a Course shall heare. Out vpon't, how 'tis speckled! h'as handled a toad sure. Couslep-water is good for the memorie: pray buy mee 3. oun∣ces of't. FLA. I would I were from hence. COR. Do you heere, Ile giue you a saying which my grandmother (sir? Was wont, when she heard the bell tolle, to sing ore vnto her lute FLA. Doe and you will, doe. COR. Call for the Robin-Red-brest and the wren, Since ore shadie groues they houer, Cornelia doth this in seuerall formes of distraction. And with leaues and flowres doe couer The friendlesse bodies of vnburied men. Call vnto his funerall Dole The Ante, the field-mouse, and the mole To reare him hillockes, that shall keepe him warme, And (when gay tombes are rob'd) sustaine no harme, But keepe the wolfe far thence: that's foe to men, For with his nailes hee'ldig them vp agen. They would not bury him' cause hee died in a quarrell But I haue an answere for them. Let holie Church receiue him duly Since hee payd the Church tithes truly. His wealth is sum'd, and this is all his store: This poore men get; and great men get no more. Now the wares are gone, wee may shut vp shop. Blesse you all good people, Exeunt Cornelia and Ladies. FLA. I haue a strange thing in mee, to th' which
I cannot giue a name, without it bee Compassion, I pray leaue mee. Exit Francisco. This night Ile know the vt most of my fate▪ Ile bee resolu'd what my rich sister meanes T'assigne mee for my seruice: I haue liu'd Riotously ill, like some that liue in Court. And sometimes, when my face was full of smiles▪ Haue felt the mase of conscience in my brest. Oft gay and honour'd robes those tortures trie, "Wee thinke cag'd birds sing, when indeed they crie. Ha! I can stand thee. Neerer, neerer yet. Enter Brachia. Ghost. In his lea∣ther Cassoc & breeches bootes, acoo a pot of lilly flowers wit a scullint. What a mockerie hath death made of thee? thou look'st sad. In what place art thou? in you starrie gallerie, Or in the cursed dungeon? No? not speake? Pray, Sir, resolue mee, what religions best For a man to die in? or is it in your knowledge To answere mee how long I haue to liue? That's the most necessarie question. Not answere? Are you still like some great men That onely walke like shadowes vp and downe, And to no purpose: say:— The Ghost throwes ear vpon him a shewes him the scull. What's that? O fatall! hee throwes earth vpon mee▪ A dead mans scull beneath the rootes of flowers. I pray speake Sir, our Italian Church-men Make vs beleue, dead men hold conference With their familiars, and many times Will come to bed to them, and eat with them. Exit Ghost. Hee's gone; and see, the scull and earth are vanisht. This is beyond melancholie. I doe dare my fate To doe its worst. Now to my sisters lodging, And summe vp all these horrours; the disgrace The Prince threw on mee; next the pitious sight Of my dead brother; and my Mothers dotage; And last this terrible vision. All these Shall with Vittoria's bountie turne to good, Or I will drowne this weapon in her blood. Exit. Enter Francisco, Lodouico, and Hortensio.
LOD. My Lord vpon my soule you shall no further: You haue most ridiculously ingag'd your selfe Too far allready. For my part, I haue payd All my debts, so if I should chance to fall My Creditours fall not with mee; and I vow To quite all in this bold assemblie To the meanest follower. My Lord leaue the Cittie, Or Ile forsweare the murder. FRAN. Farewell Lodouico. If thou do'st perish in this glorious act, Ile reare vnto thy memorie that fame Shall in the ashes keepe aliue thy name. HOR. There's some blacke deed on foot. Ile presently Downe to the Citadell, and raise some force. These strong Court factions that do brooke no checks, In the cariere of't breake the Riders neckes. FLA. What are you at your prayers? Giue e. Enter Vitto∣ria with a booke in her hand. Zanke, Flamineo, following them. VIT. How Ruffin? FLA. I come to you 'bout worldly businesse: Sit downe, sit downe: Nay stay blouze, you may heare it, The dores are fast inough. VIT. Ha, are you drunke? FLA. Yes, yes, with wormewood water, you shall tast Some of it presently. VIT. What intends the fury? FLA. You are my Lords Executrix, and I claime Reward, for my long seruice. VIT. For your seruice FLA. Come therfore heere is pen and Inke, set downe What you will giue me. VIT. There, FLA. Ha! haue you done already, Shee writes. 'Tis a most short conueyance. VIT. I will read it. I giue that portion to thee, and no other Which Caine gron'd vnder hauing slaine his brother. FLA. A most courtly Pattent to beg by. VIT. You are a villaine. FLA. Is't come to this? the say affrights cure agues: Thou hast a Deuill in thee; I will try If I can scarre him from thee: Nay sit still: My Lord hath left me yet two case of Iewels Shall make me scorne your bounty; you shall see thē.
VIT. Sure hee's distracted. ZAN. O he's desperate He enter with two of pistol For your owne safety giue him gentle language. FLA. Looke, these are better far at a dead list, Then all your iewell house. VIT. And yet mee thinkes, These stones haue no faire lustre, they are ill set. FLA. I'le turne the right side towards you: you shall see how the will sparkle. VIT. Turne this horror from mee: What do you want? what would you haue mee doe? Is not all mine, yours? haue I any children? FLA. Pray theee good woman doe not trouble mee With this vaine wordly businesse; say your prayers, I made a vow to my deceased Lord, Neither your selfe, nor I should out-liue him, The numbring of foure howers. VIT. Did he enioyne it. FLA. He did, and 'twas a deadly iealousy, Least any should enioy thee after him; That vrg'd him vow me to it: For my death I did propound it voluntarily, knowing If hee could not be safe in his owne Court Being a great Duke, what hope then for vs? VIT. This is your melancholy and dispaire. FLA. Away, Foole, thou art to thinke that Polititians Do vse to kill the effects of iniuries And let the cause liue: shall we groane in irons, Or be a shamefull and a waighty burthen To a publicke scaffold: This is my resolue I would not liue at any mans entreaty Nor dye at any's bidding. VIT. Will you heare me? FLA. My life hath done seruice to other men, My death shall serue mine owne turne; make you ready VIT. Do you meane to die indeed. FLA. With as much pleasure As e're my father gat me. VIT. Are the dores lockt? ZAN. Yes Madame. VIT. Are you growne an Atheist? will you turne your body, Which is the goodly pallace of the soule To the soules slaughter house? ô the cursed Deuill
Which doth present vs with all other sinnes Thrice candied ore; Despaire with gaule and stibium, Yet we carouse it off; Cry out for helpe, Makes vs forsake that which was made for Man, The world, to sinke to that was made for deuils, Eternall darkenesse. ZAN. Helpe, helpe. FLA. I'le stop your With Winter plums, VIT. I prethee yet remember, (throate Millions are now in graues, which at last day Like Mandrakes shall rise shreeking. FLA. Leaue your prating, For these are but grammaticall laments, Feminine arguments, and they moue me As some in Pulpits moue their Auditory More with their exclamation then sence Of reason, or sound Doctrine. ZAN. Gentle Madam Seeme to consent, onely perswade him teach The way to death; let him dye first. VIT. 'Tis good, I apprehend it, To kill one's selfe is meate that we must take Like pils, not chew't, but quickly swallow it, The smart a'th wound, or weakenesse of the hand May else bring trebble torments. FLA. I haue held it A wretched and most miserable life, Which is not able to dye. VIT. O but frailty! Yet I am now resolu'd, farewell affliction; Behold Brachiano, I that while you liu'd Did make a flaming Altar of my heart To sacrifice vnto you; Now am ready To sacrifice heart and all. Fare-well Zanche. ZAN. How Madam! Do you thinke that I'le out-liue you? Especially when my best selfe Flamineo Goes the same voiage. FLA. O most loued Moore! ZAN. Onely by all my loue let me entreat you; Since it is most necessary none of vs Do violence on our selues; let you or I Be her sad taster, teach her how to dye. FLA. Thou dost instruct me nobly, take these pistols, Because my hand is stain'd with bloud already:
Two of these you shall leuell at my brest, Th'other gainst your owne, and so we'le dye, Most equally contented: But first sweare Not to out-liue me. VIT. & MOO. Most religiously. FLA. Then here's an end of me: fare-well day-light And ô contemtible Physike! that dost take So long a study, onely to preserue So short a life, I take my leaue of thee. These are two cupping-glasses, that shall draw Shewing pistols. All my infected bloud out, Are you ready? BOTH. Ready. FLA. Whither shall I go now? O Lucian thy ridiculous Pur∣gatory to finde Alexander the great cobling shooes, Pompey tag∣ging points, and Iulius Caesar; making haire buttons, Haniball sel∣ling blacking, and Augustus crying garlike, Charlemaigne selling lists by the dozen, and King Pippin crying Apples in a cart drawn with one horse. Whether I resolue to Fire, Earth, water, Aire, Or all the Elements by scruples; I know not Nor greatly care,—Shoote, shoote, Of all deaths the violent death is best, For from our selues it steales our selues so fast They shoot and run to him & tr vpon him. The paine once apprehended is quite past. VIT. What are you drop't. FLA. I am mixt with Earth already: As you are Noble Performe your vowes, and brauely follow mee. VIT. Whither to hell, ZAN. To most assured damnation. VIT. O thou most cursed deuill. ZAN. Thou art caught VIT. In thine owne Engine, I tread the fire out That would haue bene my ruine. FLA. Will you be periur'd? what a religious oath was Stix that the Gods neuer durst sweare by and violate? ô that wee had such an oath to minister, and to be so well kept in our Courts of Iustice. VIT. Thinke whither thou art going. ZAN. And remēber What villanies thou hast acted. VIT. This thy death, Shall make me like a blazing ominous starre, Looke vp and tremble. FLA. O I am caught with a springe!
VIT. You see the Fox comes many times short ho me, 'Tis here prou'd true. FLA. Kild with a couple of braches. VIT. No fitter offring for the infernall furies Then one in whom they raign'd while hee was liuing. FLA. O the waies darke and horrid! I cannot see, Shall I haue no company? VIT. O yes thy sinnes, Do runne before thee to fetch fire from hell, To light thee thither. FLA. O I smell soote, most sinking soote, the chimneis a fire, My liuers purboil'd like scotch holly-bread; There's a plumber, laying pipes in my guts, it scalds; Wilt thou out-liue mee? ZAN. Yes, and driue a stake Through thy body; for we'le giue it out, Thou didst this violence vpon thy selfe. FLA. O cunning Deuils! now I haue tri'd your loue, And doubled all your reaches. I am not wounded: Flamineo riseth. The pistols held no bullets: 'twas a plot To proue your kindnesse to mee; and I liue To punish your ingratitude, I knew One time or other you would finde a way To giue me a strong potion, ò Men That lye vpon your death-beds, and are haunted With howling wiues, neere trust them, they'le re-marry Ere the worme peirce your winding sheete: ere the Spider Make a thinne curtaine for your Epitaphes. How cunning you were to discharge? Do you practise at the Artillery yard? Trust a woman; neuer, neuer; Brachiano bee my president: we lay our soules to pawne to the Deuill for a lit∣tle pleasure, and a woman makes the bill of sale. That euer man should marry! For one Hypermnestra that sau'd her Lord and husband, forty nine of her sisters cut their husbands throates all in one night. There was a shole of vertuous horse-leeches. Here are two other Instruments. Enter Lod. Gasp. Pedro, Carlo. VIT. Helpe, helpe. FLA. What noise is that? hah? falce keies i'th Court. LOD. We haue brought you a Maske. FLA. A matachine it By your drawne swords. (seemes,
Chuch-men turn'd reuellers. CON. Isabella, Isabella, LOD. Doe you know vs now? FLA. Lodouico and Gasparo. LOD. Yes and that Moore the Duke gaue pention to Was the great Duke of Florence. VIT. O wee are lost. FLA. You shall not take Iustice from forth my hands, O let me kill her.—Ile cut my safty Through your coates of steele: Fate's a Spaniell, Wee cannot beat it from vs: what remaines now? Let all that doe ill, take this president: Man may his Fate foresce, but not preuent. And of all Axiomes this shall winne the prise, 'Tis better to be fortunate then wise. GAS. Bind him to the pillar. VIT. O your gentle pitty: I haue seene a black-bird that would sooner fly To a mans bosome, then to stay the gripe Of the feirce Sparrow-hawke. GAS. Your hope deceiues you. VIT. If Florence be ith Court, would hee would kill mee. GAS. Foole! Princes giue rewards with their owne hands, But death or punishment by the handes of others. LOD. Sirha you once did strike mee, Ile strike you Into the Center. FLA. Thoul't doe it like a hangeman; a base hangman; Not like a noble fellow, for thou seest I cannot strike againe. LOD. Dost laugh? FLA. Wouldst haue me dye, as I was borne, in whining. GAS. Recommend your selfe to heauen. FLA. Noe I will carry mine owne commendations thither. LOD. Oh could I kill you forty times a day And vs't foure yeere together; 'tweare to little: Nought greeu's but that you are to few to feede The famine of our vengeance. What dost thinke on? FLA. Nothing; of nothing: leaue thy idle questions; I am ith way to study a long silence, To prate were idle, I remember nothing. Thers nothing of so infinit vexation As mans owne thoughts. LOD. O thou glorious strumpet, Could I deuide thy breath from this pure aire▪
When't leaues thy body, I would sucke it vp And breath't vpon some dunghill. VIT. You, my Deaths man; Me thinkes thou doest not looke horrid enough, Thou hast to good a face to be a hang-man,, If thou be doe thy office in right forme; Fall downe vpon thy knees and aske forgiuenesse. LOD. O thou hast bin a most prodigious comet, But Ile cut of your traine: kill the Moore first. VIT. You shall not kill her first. behould my breast, I will be waited on in death; my seruant Shall neuer go before mee. GAS. Are you so braue. VIT. Yes I shall wellcome death As Princes doe some great Embassadors; Ile meete thy weapon halfe way. LOD. Thou dost tremble, Mee thinkes feare should dissolue thee into ayre. VIT. O thou art deceiu'd, I am to true a woman: Conceit can neuer kill me: Ile tell thee what, I will not in my death shed one base teare, Or if looke pale, for want of blood, not feare. CAR. Thou art my taske, blacke fury. ZAN. I haue blood As red as either of theirs; wilt drinke some? 'Tis good for the falling sicknesse: I am proud Death cannot alter my complexion, For I shall neere looke pale. LOD. Strike, strike, With a Ioint motion. VIT. 'Twas a manly blow The next thou giu'st, murder some sucking Infant, And then thou wilt be famous. FLA. O what blade ist? A Toledo, or an English Fox. I euer thought a Cutler should distinguish The cause of my death, rather then a Doctor. Search my wound deeper: tent it with the steele that made it. VIT. O my greatest sinne lay in my blood. Now my blood paies for't. FLA. Th'art a noble sister I loue thee now; if woeman doe breed man Shee ought to teach him manhood: Fare thee well. Know many glorious woemen that are fam'd For masculine vertue, haue bin vitious
Onely a happier silence did betyde them Shee hath no faults, who hath the art to hide them. VIT. My soule, like to a ship in a blacke storme, Is driuen I know not whither. FLA. Then cast ancor. "Prosperity doth bewitch men seeming cleere, "But seas doe laugh, shew white, when Rocks are neere. "Wee cease to greiue, cease to be fortunes slaues, "Nay cease to dye by dying. Art thou gonne▪ And thou so neare the bottome: falce reporte Which saies that woemen vie with the nine Muses For nine tough durable liues: I doe not looke Who went before, nor who shall follow mee; Noe, at my selfe I will begin and end: "While we looke vp to heauen wee confound "Knowledge with knowledge. ô I am in a mist. VIT. O happy they that neuer saw the Court, "Nor euer knew great Man but by report. Vittoria dyes. FLA, I recouer like a spent taper, for a flash And instantly go out. Let all that belong to Great men remember th' ould wides tra∣dition, to be like the Lyons ith Tower on Candlemas day, to mourne if the Sunne shine, for feare of the pittifull remainder of winter to come. 'Tis well yet there's some goodnesse in my death, My life was a blacke charnell: I haue cought An euerlasting could. I haue lost my voice Most irrecouerably: Farewell glorious villaines, "This busie trade of life appeares most vaine, "Since rest breeds rest, where all seeke paine by paine. Let no harsh flattering Bels resound my knell, Strike thunder, and strike lowde to my farewell. Dyes. Enter Embassad: and Giouanni. ENG. and E. This way, this way, breake ope the doores, this way. LOD. Ha, are wee betraid; Why then lets constantly dye all together, And hauing finisht this most noble deede, Defy the worst of fate; not feare to bleed.
ENG. Keepe backe the Prince, shoot, shoot, LOD. O I am wounded. I feare I shall be tane. GIO. You bloudy villaines, By what authority haue you committed This Massakre. LOD. By thine. GIO. Mine? LOD. Yes, thy vnckle, which is a part of thee enioyn'd vs to't. Thou knowst me I am sure, I am Cout Lodowicke, And thy most noble vnckle in disguise Was last night in thy Court. GIO. Ha! CAR. Yes, that Moore thy father chose his pentioner. GIO. He turn'd murderer; Away with them to prison, and to torture; All that haue hands in this, shall tast our iustice, As I hope heauen. LOD. I do glory yet, That I can call this act mine owne: For my part, The racke, the gallowes, and the torturing wheele Shall bee but sound sleepes to me, here's my rest "I limb'd this night-peece and it was my best. GIO. Remoue the bodies, see my honoured Lord, what vse you ought make of their punishment. Let guilty men remember their blacke deedes, Do leane on cruthes, made of slender reedes. In stead of an Epilogue onely this of Martial sup∣plies me. Haec fuerint nobis praemia si placui. For the action of the play, twas generally well, and I dare affir∣me, with the Ioint testimony of some of their owne quality, (for the true imitation of life, without striuing to make nature a mon∣ster) the best that euer became them: whereof as I make a gene∣rall acknowledgement, so in particular I must remember the well approued industry of my freind Maister Perkins, and con∣fesse the worth of his action did Crowne both the beginning and end. FINIS.
