25624 S103076 99838834 3223
LARGE LETTERS. Three in number, contai∣ning much necessarie matter, for the instruction and comfort of such, as are distressed in conscience by feeling of sinne, and feare of Gods wrath. WRITTEN HEERETO∣fore by T. W. for some deare friends of his, and now published and printed for the raising vp of such as labor vnder the heauie burthen of an affli∣cted Spirite. PSAL. 42.11. y art thou cast downe my soule? and why art thou disquieted within me? wait on God: for I will yet giue him thanks, hee is my present hlpe and my God. AT LONDON Printed by Roger warde, for Thomas Man, 1589.
TO HIS FAITHFVLL friends, and verie deare brethren in Christ, Mast▪ Roger Ofield, Robert Washborne, George Smith, Thomas Shipton, Iohn Field, Robert Iones, Iohn Harper, Iohn Hounsell, and all the rest of his Christian ac∣quaintaunce in London, as well as though they were particularlie na∣med, together with all those that els where in the land, vnfaignedly feare the Lord, and looke for the glorious appearing, of his sonne and our saui∣our. T. W. wisheth all spirituall goodnes & heauenly comfort in this life, and in the end the eternall glori∣fication of their bodies and soules, in euerlasting blisse through Christ. MY loue in the Lorde, and the affectiōs of my hart in him, haue bin in some measure of soundnes, (I humbly thanke God for it in Christ)
strong∣ly carried generallie tovvardes all the Israell of GOD wheresoeuer, and more particularlye tovvardes you my good Breethren: vvhereof ouer and besides, the assured testi∣mony of mine owne soule, I haue for faithful witnesses, the Lord himselfe in heauen, and many of his saints vp∣pon earth, and amongst others you your selues. Causes leading me here∣to are manye: but as in respect of God, none more powerfull, than his grace and holy spirite, shed a∣broad into my heart: and as in re∣gard of you, none more effectuall than sundry sincere fruites of your faith, and the comfortable feeling of the communion of saints, in which holy fellowship standeth, not onely the spiritual felicity and good of the whole bodie, but the very ioy and contentment also, of euerie sounde member therein. For outward kind∣nesses that I haue receiued from you, I must & will euerie where, acknow∣ledge my selfe much beholding vn∣to
you. And yet this I may vvith all boldnes professe, that as that is not the only or principall cause, moue∣ing me to affect you: so though I haue beene beholding to you all, yet not to all alike, but to some more than to other some. Which also I re∣hearse not now, either to breed anie disdaine or emulation in you, one of you towards another, for that vvere to breake the bond of charity and v∣nitie of the spirit: or to lessn any fa∣uour though neuer so small, that I haue receiued from you, for that wer to depriue you of your praise, and to declare my selfe ingratfull: nor craf∣tilie clavving after the maner of the vvorld, to craue newe benefies, for that vvere nothing els but deceit and flatterie to procure mine own good, from all vvhich corruptions, I haue hitherto as in respect of my selfe and you, through Gods goodnesse beene graciouslie freed. But to let you vn∣derstand, that your benefits haue not bene bestowed vpon an vnskilfull or
an thankefull person, but vpon such a one, as by the light that he hath re∣ceiued from God, hath, vveighing them in an equal ballance, esteemed of them according to the goodnes of the gift, and the christian affection of the Partie giuing. The thinges in∣deede, which haue most speciallye lincked mee fast in the Lorde vnto you, are your precious faith towards God, vnfaigned loue to the saints, christian consciences amongest your selues, and holie praiers in presence and absence, one of you for an other and all of you I am assured, for the holy causes and faithfull members of the whole Church, and amongest the rest, euen for me pore and wret∣ched man that I am. In which duties of yours, as my heart hath greatly re∣ioiced in the lord, for the graces that in great mercy, he hath bin pleased to vouchsafe vnto you, & I my selfe haue as in some sort, though not to the ful, in regard of your spirituall fauours performed to me, by reson of weak∣nesse
and wants in my selfe, aunswe∣red them again with the like, (I write not as a vaine glorious boaster): so I doubt not, but that therby God him selfe hath receiued glorie at your hands, his childrē goten much good, and you your selues reaped a gracy∣ous measure and increase, of religy∣ous knowledge, and dutifull obedi∣ence. As for the worldly fauours that you haue shewed me, and bodily be∣nefites that vvay, I confesse my selfe to be far behind hand with you, and much indebted in deed, though not in affection surely, and readinesse of good vvill, for so my heart is verie large (in humilitie I speake it) ney∣ther will I wish better witnesses of it than your selues, yet in regard of ac∣tion, vvherein still my griefe grow∣eth great, and increaseth daily vpon me, as vvell by the feare that I haue of my future wants, as by the feeling of my former and present disabili∣ties. Hovvbeit, sith thys is the Lords doing, and that he is pleased thereby
to sift me, and to sound you (mee for my patience and comfortable indu∣ring of these necessities, and you for your faithfull obedience and vnfaig∣ned loue) I can not but vvith some measure of spirituall ioy, vndergoe mine owne lacks, and againe recom∣fort my spirites, because hauing to deale vvith God and his seruaunts, (vvho haue learned from his holie example greater than all exception, to accept of men according to that they haue, and not according to that they haue not) I rest resolued, my good vvill shall bee accounted as a deed, specially sith I am ready euery vvhere, vvithout flatterie in my self, or favvning vpon you, to acknovve∣ledge to the glorie of God, and the good of his people, the great good turnes that by you, I haue receiued euen from the Lords ovvne handes. And yet gladly vvould I, if I could tell hovve, some vvay recompence, though not all, yet som part & peece thereof. And in that respect indeede
haue I long looked & vvished for, as some good occasion from you, wher∣in it might haue pleased you all, or a∣ny of you, to haue imployed and vsed me to my pore vttermost: So, some sufficiencie in my selfe, at the least∣wise in some mean measure to haue requited that ouerflowing heape, of your kindnes and holy loue. But hi∣therto (I deliuer it with my griefe of heart, as a man sensiblie seeing and feeling gods hand vpon my selfe, both that and other waies also) my expe∣ctation and hope hath bene frustrat, and my power very short and skant. A small thing the Lorde vvas pleased some years ago, to inable me in two or three Letters, to performe for the comfort of some of my christian ac∣quaintance, (whose conflicts in con∣science vvere great and many) which lying by mee, vvith some other sim∣ple thinges that I haue done, and I beeing earnestly requested to make that cōmon to many, which was writ¦ten for some particulars, & lay at it
vvere buried in forgetfulnes, by me, the same also being at the last ouer∣viewed by some good breethren whome I much loue and reuerence in the lord, I was at the length ouer∣come & could not choose but yeild. Wherein though some perhaps may suppose that I labour, in publishing an vnnecessarie & impertinent mat∣ter, because these ignorant dayes re∣quire Doctrine for building of men vp in knovvledge and iudgement, and these carelesse and contemptu∣ous times, abounding vvith all man∣ner of loosnes and levvdnes, craue rebuke rather, and exhortation for care and conscience in the dueties vve knovve, as a more fit and meete argument for this dissolute age yet being assured of this, both by mine owne knovvledge, and other mens faithfull reportes, that sundrie there are abroad in this land, and amongst the rest, euen some of you and yours, that as in regarde of your spirituall combats and bickerings, and the bit∣ter
assaultes and temptations you haue found therein, had need of ho∣ly and heauenly comfort, I could not but as in a generall care, for all the af∣flicted ones, to vvhome I wishe all the comforts of God, as to my ovvn soule: so in particular good vvil to∣vvardes you your selues (vvhose in∣vvard comfort, and outvvard ioy, I vvould bee glad and ready to pro∣cure at all times, and by all meanes, if I could tel hovv, but acquaint you and them (specially sith it is one prin∣cipall portion of the svveet Manna, that the lord hath prouided for you) vvith such pleasaunt and delightfull consolations, & that out of the word as God by his spirit hath vvrought in mee, for the peace of mine ovvne heart, and by me, though vnvvorthie euery way, communicated vnto som others. What root they may take or effects they may bring forth I knovv not. Sure I am of this, my earnest praiers vnto God, as in regard of his religion and vvorship, and heartie
purpose in my selfe, as in respect of Christian good vvill, is, that all that mourne in our Sion, might reape some good by the same: vvhich if it cannot bee effected, either by meanes of my sinne that medle ther∣in, or by reason that the svveet things published, cannot so seasonablie or for lacke of oportunitie come to their knovvledge, or because that through diffidence they fore-close the vvaie and passage of consolati∣on vnto themselues, (in all and e∣uerye of vvhich desertes, I shall surelye mourne muche) yet my hope and heartes desire is, that all of you (my good friendes) might receiue some vvorthie fruite there∣by, as vvell those amongest you that haue not as yet tasted of thys bitter cuppe, (a matter that you must looke for, and make an account of, if euer you vvill feele hovve sweete the Lord is indeed) vvhile you per∣ceiue GOD sitting you, and fur∣nishing you vvith the best armour of
proofe that can bee, before the day of battaile dravve nigh: as those that haue beene or are tried (that beeing the verie state and conditi∣on of all Gods children) God ac∣cording to your present distresses, prouiding for you, and reuealing vnto you, the present comfortes of his most faithfull vvorde, and in∣fallible trueth, that so both the one sort and the other, hauing the povv∣er of your ovvne sinnes, in the suffe∣ringes of his sonne, if not vtterlie remooued and cleane taken avvay, yet verie much lessened, and as it vvere beaten dovvne, you might not onelye the more earnestlie, oppose your selues agaist satan in his sleights and haue an assured hope of a glori∣ous and ioyfull victorie, against him and his assaults, but also may be in∣abled to stand, yea to ouercome in the day of euill, and to be more than cōquerors thorow him, that hath lo∣ued you & washed you in his bloud, vvho I doubt not shall shortly and
mightilie also tread him and all his forces whatsoeuer, down vnder your feet. Now the very god of peace san¦ctify you and al yours thorowout: & I pray God, that your whole spirite and soule, and bodie, may bee kept blameles vntill the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ: vvhereof I doubt not, because he is faithful which hath called you, who also wil doe it. Good brethren pray for vs, that we may be readie in all things with vnfaigned∣nes to do the Lords vvill. At Lon∣don the tenth of of this December. 1589. Yours readie and assured euer in Iesus Christ. T. W. the Lord his vnworthy seruant.
GRACE AND PEACE from God, &c. BEcause I haue not nowe a long time, eyther by wryting or by worde of mouth heard from you, (good Sir) I grow into some vncertain imaginations concerning your estate, (and by meanes thereof I freely confesse it) not onely into neglect of some duety towardes your selfe, (I meane comming to visite you, and writing vnto you such simple comfortes, as God hath bin pleased to explicate vnto me, which I call simple, not as of thēselues, for so they are high and excellent, but as I haue them in my2. Cor. 4 7. earthen vessell) but also into cold per∣formance at the least, of som seruice vn∣to God, (I meane my supplications and
praiers vnto his maiestie,The duti of a Christian and faithfull friend, to∣wardes hys friend. as on your be∣halfe. To pray for you, when God hath bene pleased to giue you, and in you me (for I take the fauours bestowed vpon you, to be kindnesse heaped vp vpon my selfe) thorow his merciful de∣liuerance of you, a iust and holy occasion to prayse his name, should be the sinne of mine owne soule, because it were the offring vp of a wrong sacrifice, and pre∣senting vnto God aMalac. 1.8. blind beast (as it were) As on the other side, to striue to yeeld you comfort, when you haue re∣ceiued a riche aboundance of the same from God himselfe, thorowe his holie worde, and blessed spirite, were, as it might be thought to doe a needlesse and vnnecessarie worke, for where there is fulnesse and plentie, scarsitie and bar∣rennesse will little appeare, and doe small good. From the former, though I would gladly, as in regard of the lack of sound knowledge touching your present condition, and in respect of the dulnesse and heauinesse of my soule, as to other good workes, so to that parti∣cularlie,
cease till eyther from your selfe or others that are as your selfe, I should be faithfully certified of the state where∣in you are, that so I might, as a feeling member with you, eyther vnfeignedlyRom. 12.15. reioyce, in the asswaging of your tro∣bles and trials, or else heartily weepe, and pitie you, and pray with you, and for you, in the continuance and increase of these distresses: yet wil not the doubts that I haue in me touching the conti∣nuance of these calamities, and the dutie that I owe vnto you, as in that behalfe let me vtterly leaue off, but needes I must nowe and then, (according to my poore measure) present you before God, and that by name in my requestes and prayers (though poore and faynt) In the other surely, I cannot (God ayding me) but inlarge my selfe to my vtter∣most, yea beyond it (if I could tell how) because I know it to be the Lordes as∣sured trueth that I shall deliuer, and though not fit perhappes now for your selfe (by reason of your present comfort and ioy) yet heereafter i may bee, of
more then necessary vse for your selfe and others also, when these darke and glomie daies of assaultes shall againe take holde of you. In both which respectes, as I rest perswaded that my poore paynes shall not vtterly perish, so cannot I but tho∣rowly assure mine own heart, that both the one and the other, shall be well ac∣cepted of you, who are woont much to make of euerie thing that commeth from me. In consideration whereof, I will the more willingly assaie (God as∣sisting me) the performance of the mat∣ter I purpose, that is the yeelding of you some such comfortes, as2. Cor. 1.3.4. the God of all consolation hath giuen vnto me, not onely for the staie of mine owne conscience, but to the ende also that I might acquaint others that are in tribu∣lation with the same. The dealings of God with his dea∣rest saintes and seruantes (in this be∣halfe especially) are as we knowe, by the light of the world, and by experience in our selues, and examples of others,
that haue gone before vs, or liue with vs, diuers and sundry, he throwing vs downe, and lifting vs vp, andpsal. 90.3. turning vs to destruction, and yet saying, re∣turne you sonnes of Adam: whose wayes as euerie maner of way, so in this respect especiallie, are much more vnsearchable, and past finding out, thanpro. 30, 19 is the way of an Eagle in the ayre, the waie of a serpent vpō a stone, or the way of a ship, going with a right fore winde and full sayle, in the midst of the mayne sea, till God be pleased in the multitude of his mercies, in some measure to discouer the same vnto hys seruantes. What God will doe with you (good sir) after so manifold and long trials is vnknowne to me, because neither I, nor any other haueRom, 11, 34 bene of his councell, in such secret and particular purposes, speciallie concerning others, whatsoeuer we may feel touching our selues. How∣beit, I cannot otherwise thinke or be perswaded, but that you haue bene, are, and so shal be for euer,& 9.23. Tokens to as∣sure men to be the vessels of mercie. a vessell of his
mercy, wherein I am dayly more and more confirmed, not onely by the chri∣stian carrying of your selfe, in the dayes of your former and present troubles, you patiently bearing them, and ear∣nestly calling vppon God, for heauenly strength to vndergoe, and ouercome, but euen by the verie afflictions them∣selues, that you felt or feele, God by them setting (as it were) his own marke vpon you, the better to knowe you for one of his owne sheepe and sonnes, and so conforming youRom. & 8.29 vnto the image of his best beloued in his sufferinges, that in the same you might haue a cer∣taine pledge of glorification with him. Manifold and long afflicti∣ons a verie grieuous temptation.Wherein though I acknowledge that it cannot be but verie greeuous, to be long held and much exercised, and the rather because it is not one, but mani∣fold assaultes and temptations, with which you are troubled on euerie side, yet doubt I not, but that the issue and end that God shall worke of all these,An answere to it of the end. shalbe exceeding good, not onely in re∣gard of2. Cor. 4.17. a far most excellent weight
of eternal glory, yt I know they pledge vp in you & other of Gods children, but of the effects also that for the time pre∣sent, they bring forth in you,Of the effects. as adding an edge vnto your prayers, which for the time, seemed to be colde or dead ra∣ther: lessening, yea beating backe the force of many other temptations, which no doubt might strongly assault, and mightily encounter with you: confor∣ming you in vnfeigned affection, to the obedience of Gods good will (a worthy worke doubtlesse, and a matter of no small difficultie) filling you, and that for your selfe and others also, with the comfortes and consolations which are from aboue,Afflictions to the faithfull, not so much a cause of dis∣couragement, as to looke to themselues, and to cal vp∣on God for ayd and strength. whiche hardly but by such meanes wee taste of, or attayne vnto, with sundrie such like. In my poore iudgement therefore, you may, yea you ought to be so farre off from beeing discomfited and cast downe in this estate, wherein you are, that you haue rather iust occasion offe∣red you toHeb. 12.12. lift vp your handes which hang downe, and to strengthen your
weake knees, yea to raise vp your de∣caied spirites, assuring your selfe that howsoeuer the Lord lead you along, in manifolde and manifest afflictions, and carry you (as it were) from one sorrow to another, yea howsoeuer hee seeme to bring you to the pits bruicke, and make all the surges, andPsal. 42.7. waues of his dis∣pleasure, to rise vp against you and mount ouer your head, that yet I will not2. Cor. 4 8. destitute you, norHeb. 13.5. fayle you for euer, as well because hee trieth you no otherwise,Two reasons. nor exerciseth you no fur∣ther, than he hath done those that haue bene deare and precious in his owne eyes, as also because he is both faithfull and powerfull to perfourme, both in heauen and in earthe, whatsoeuer hee hath promised to the sonnes of men, much more to his owne seruauntes. Two apt simi∣litudes decla∣ring Gods loue towardes his children.Wherein also no doubt he dealeth no otherwise with you, than earthly pa∣rentes doe many times with their owne deare children, who to make them the more plainly see, and the more strongly to be perswaded of their fatherly loue
towardes them, and manlike strength for their deliuerance, bring their sayd children to the fire side, that so they may feele more than a woonted heate there∣of, and learne to feare it withall. The like they practise towards them also in another element, namely in wa∣ter, not onely carrying them all along the edge, brimme, or bancke, of some pond or riuer, but nowe and then ma∣king semblance, as if they would throw or thrust them into the same. And yet wee knowe they loue them no whit the lesse for all this: nay we are assured of this, the more nigh they are to daun∣ger, whether it arise from the negli∣gence and ignoraunce of the children themselues, or seeme to be layd vppon them from the very louing and natu∣rall parentes, the more sure and fast hold they take of them. And shal not we be much more perswaded, I wil not say of the like loue, but of farreEsay. 49.15. more exceeding loue in God, towards his sonnes and daughters? with whose fa∣uour towardes his people, and power
for his childrens good, no affections,  might (I dare auouch this) not of any, but of all, not men alone, but fathers and mothers in the worlde, (though lincked neuer so straitly vnto vs) is no maner of way matchable, nor so much as meete to be thought or spoken of with it, at the selfe same time. Obiection, answered by example.Your troubles in the soule, and you dangers that way, cannot seeme in any equall or vpright iudgment, to be more greeuous, or further past recouery, thanIonas. 2.2. &c. Ionas his were, when he was in the Whales belly: and yet the Lord com∣maunded that great fish, to deliuer him vp againe, whose absolute autho∣ritie he coulde not withstand, but as a man that hath his stomacke surchar∣ged, vomited him out. And is GodsEsay 59.1. hand streitened now, or his power shortned?Psal 77.8.9. or his mercy abated, that he can not or will not performe as much for you? Or rather doth not God worke then moste mightily and merci∣fully both when in mens eyes the way is stopped vp, not onely agaynst a deed,
but against hope or hart to conceiue it? To what ende tend these comfortable promises, both of the olde and the new testament:Isay 42.16. I will bring the blinde by a waie that they knowe not, and lead them by pathes that they haue not knowne: I will make darknesse light before them, and crooked thinges streight: these thinges will I doe vnto them, and not forsake thē: and againe:Math. 16.18. the gates of hell shall not preuaile against you: but to con∣firme vs more and more,A singular comfort farre beyond expe∣ctation. in the vn∣changeablenesse and certaintie of hys goodnesse towardes vs, and to let vs vnderstand, though there bee infinite barres and lets betweene him and vs, so that his mercy cannot seeme to haue anie passage vnto vs, that yet hee will breake them all to peeces, and ouer∣throwe2. Cor. 10.5. euerie high thing, that so we may plainly perceiue, and effectually & comfortablie feele, the incomprehensible treasure of his fauour towardes vs? If this be not comfortable, I know not what is: in which poynt of special
consolation,The cause mouing to write more largely of this poynt. I write nowe, both the more willingly and largely vnto you, because I perceiue by your last (though long since sent vnto me, vnto which al∣so I then shaped a short aunswere, sup∣posing because I heard not from you, yt that had satisfied you) and by some re∣port of sundrie, that loue vs both in the Lord (to which, for the further stirring of me vp thereto, I adde the dayly thoughts and feares of mine own hart concerning your case) that you haue not onely bene terrible shaken for the time, butand 12.7. sore buffeted, and that not with some one meane temptation, but with many great and grieuous assaultes: the consideration whereof raised vp such a thicke mist before your vnderstanding, whilest you dwelt too much, and ouer∣long in the minding thereof, and in the beholding of your owne, both vnwor∣thinesse and weakenesse, that as the comfortable sight of Gods grace and goodnes towards you in Iesus Christ, seemed for the time to be vanished from before you, yea altogether lost, (so you
thought) in your selfe, and would haue perswaded others, that you were vtter∣ly condemned and cast away. But be not anie whit at all dismaied,A reason or meane to re∣spect this temtation. with the violence and rage of this tem∣pest, but rather comfort your selfe, yea assure your selfe of this, that Sathan dealeth herein no otherwise with you,A similitude. than a cruel and bloud-thirstie captaine, besieging aninuincible and irrepugna∣ble hold, who at the first beginneth tem∣perately and coldly (as you would say) as well for the sparing of his owne for∣ces and charge, as to gaine some little credite with those that are beset: but when he seeth that preuayleth not, hee dooth by little and little increase the fiercenesse of his batterie, and the bit∣ternesse of his assault: but not gayning that way neyther, he putteth it al at once vpon the last pushe, wherein hauing ta∣ken the foyle, hee is glad also to betake himselfe to a shamefull flight. And what though the cannons roare, yea the dou∣ble cannons thunder in such sorte, that they make heauen and earth to shake
(as it were) and would seeme to ium∣ble them altogether, yet in trueth they are nothing els but sure pledges of the wasting and wearing of your aduer∣saries forces, and dishonourable run∣ning awaie on the one side, and moste comfortable messengers on the other side, of your happie and ioyfull deliue∣rance approching, and euen at the dores: which as it plainely appeareth by this,A similitude that euen as a little before day breake, the darkenesse is greatest, and then af∣terwardes commeth moste comfortable light, steppe by steppe, and degree by degree, the Sunne with his bright∣nesse and heate, chasing away all those thicke mistes and strong smelling fogs so may we be certainly assured of it, by the manifold examples of the word, and particularly of him that was possessed,Mar. 9.25.26. with a dumbe and deafe deuil, out of whome when our sauiour charged him to come, and to enter no more into him, he cried and rent him sore, and left him for dead, taking (as we say) his peworthes then vppon him
because he knewe, that as his time was but short, so hee should neuer after mo∣lest or vexe him. For your sinnes which you com∣plaine of,Accusation of conscience for the sight and giltinesse of sinne. I suppose verely that they are more in your owne iudgement, than in the sight of all the worlde beside, be∣fore whom notwithstanding your hard accusing of your self, you haue through Gods goodnesse liued an vpright and vnblamable life, and that not onely in the testimonie of them that feare God, but in the witnesse also of them that1. Tim 3.7. are without, which ought notwith∣standing the greatnesse of your assault in your selfe, to yeeld you no small com∣fort, that in the viewe not onely of those that can iudge rightly: (such as Gods children are, who haue their eyes in∣lightened by the knowledge of his trueth) you haue caried your selfe chri∣stianly, and yet if you had failed, would in theProu. 10.12. 1. Pet. 4.. multitude of loue (according to their duetie) haue couered a mul∣titude of transgressions, but in the iudgement of those, that are led with
prying and malicious eyes (who manie times obserue in Gods seruantes, more than they should,Of the accu∣sation of a tender con∣science. or iustly can, and the rather for their profession and troubles sake) haue lead a harmelesse and irre∣proueable conuersation. But let vs graunt that your owne heart accuseth you much. What then? Accusation implieth not conuictiō, much lesse condemnation, speciallie in such a height as we imagine. And yet withall giue me eaue to councell you, not to be∣leeue it further then it bringeth the eui∣dence of truth with it.The wicked haue no pro∣fitable feeling of their sins. This I am sure you cannot be ignorant of, that as the wicked want with profite & continuance that sting of hart (with profit I say, be∣cause though they haue it, it doth thē no good: and with continuance, because it is but as a flashe of lightning in them, raysed vp for their greater iudgement, as soone vanishing as it doth appeare) so the godly looking too much vppon themselues,The feeling of the godly. and their sinnes, and se∣cluding both from sight and sense, the viewe and memorie of Gods mercies,
lay to hard and heauie burthens vppon their owne soules. Me thinketh this rather woulde be stood vppon, that sith euen from that, that woundeth them most, I meane the continuall charging and accusing of themselues, men that haue their minds inlightned from God, may reape singu∣lar consolations, they should labour euen from thence to gather strong comfortes vnto themselues against their tempta∣tions, which they may doe by this holy consideration, that the heart wounded with the dailie sight and sense of sinne that is past, is pushed forward there∣by to speedy and vnfeigned repen∣tance (God to that end setting the same before them, that so in the lothsomnesse thereof they might make haste vnto him) which otherwise as in the want thereof, it could not so much as thinke vpon, much lesse performe: is strength∣ned also against sinne that is to come, because hardly haue anie bene found to fall into that which they haue with vp∣right and dayly iudgement misliked, in
themselues principally, and in others secondarily, the fear of the former, cau∣sing them to keepe a good watche ouer themselues in the latter: and is prouo∣ked in and by themselues, tenderly to pitie & earnestly to pray for such, whose state that waie foorth, they knowe and feel by experience in themselues, to be as lamentable and as much to be regarded as their owne. All which bringing with them the glory of God, their own bene∣fite and other mens good, that euen in the least thinges, cannot but yeeld them comfort, that seriously thinke thereupon, vnlesse they will deeme Gods honour light, or their owne comfort base, or the loue of the fathfull, and their welfare, a meane, yea a vilde thing. But we will put the case, that your sinnes were as huge and as high, as your selfe take them to be: yea let vs imagine that they had spread thēselues, throughout both heauen and earth, and did reach from the one end of the world to the other, yet who can, will, or dare denie, but that as God himselfe,
so his mercies towardes vs in Iesus Christ,Co. 3.20. The mercy of God in this life chiefly appeareth in the forgiue∣nesse of sinne. ouer reacheth them euery way, and the rather sith his meanes are no waie in this life more euidently ma∣nifested, than in the forgiuenesse of the sinnes of his seruantes? Concerning which trueth we may, and ought to be certainly perswaded, not onely by rea∣son,A reason ta∣ken of Gods nature, which is infinite. taken from the infinitnesse of Gods owne nature, who beeing infinite him∣selfe can haue nothing in him, but that which is infinite, and therefore his mer∣cie beeing in him, must also be infinite, with whom (howsoeuer) our sins be in numerable, as in respect of our selues:Psal. 19.12. for who vnderstandeth his iniqui∣tie, or is able to account his transgressi∣ons? yet they are finite and certaine as in regard of himselfe, that& 147.4. counteth the number of the stars, and calleth them all by their names: but also from the large and moste faithfull promises,Of Gods pro∣mises. that in euerie place almost of his word, for the vnderpropping of our weake fayth, hee hath plainly and plentifully propounded vnto vs: amongest which
euen these most sweete sayinges, seeme not of the least reckoning:& 103.12 As farre as the East is from the West, so farre hath hee remoued our sinnes from vs. Againe in another place:Isa. 1.18. Though our sinnes were as Crimsin, they shal be made white as Snow, though they were red as Skarlet, they shall be as wooll. And again:Rom. 5.20. Where sinne hath abounded, there grace hath more than abounded: with sundrie suche like, with which I knowe you are ac∣quainted, as hauing laid them vp in your heart, for the peace of the same, and ha∣uing expressed them with your mouth for the testification of your ioy. Hitherto I haue laboured, neither vnsoundly, as in regard of Gods trueth propounded, nor vnprofitably, as in re∣spect of you afflicted, nor vndutifully, as inconsideration of my selfe trauailing, generally to deliuer generall comfortes against generall transgressions. Now it remaineth that I come, to applie particular consolations, (as if it were) speciall medicines and plaisters,
to those peculiar offences & griefes, that you saie are in your selfe, and it hath pleased you to acquaint me withall, to this end (as I take it verily) that of my poore store, and penurie indeede, you might yet receiue some spirituall reliefe and comfort. What measure of mercie I haue receiued that way, hee that hath bene pleased freely to giue the same vn∣to me, best knoweth. Howbeit howe small or great soeuer it be, this doth not a little incourage me to a liberall vse of the same, that I knowe certainly I shall not decrease mine owne by that I bestow vpon others, but rather increase the same much, it seruing me, (as the widdowes2, King. 4, 2. &c. pitcher of oyle did in the dayes of Elisha, being miraculously in∣creased) not onely to inable me, in some sort to pay my debts, though it be but fiue shillinges in the pound (as we saie) but the rest being sufficient, for my selfe and my children to liue vpon. But to those thinges which you ob∣iect against your selfe, and to that first which you first put downe.Obiections answered.
You saie you are greatly troubled with manifold feares & much doubting. I beleeue it to be true. And who would not be of that minde, if they considered you, but as a man? howe much more then, if they behold you as a godly man, in whom such things are better seen, be∣cause naturall blindnesse is somewhat remoued, and more felt, because hard∣nesse of hart, and benummednesse is in some measure taken away? yea I am so farre of from thinking these thinges to be discomfortable to you (though as feare & doubting are in you, I cannot approoue them, because they are in vs tainted thorow the corruption of nature) that frō the same as I take it, you may reape and receiue singular consolation, not onely in this respect, that they bring forth in you good and gracious effects, of hartie praier to almightie God, care∣full watching ouer your selfe, tender pi∣tie and compassion towards others &c. and all these in a greater measure, than you feel & wil confesse: (& yet herein me thinketh you should do wel to giue glory
to God, and according to grace receiued yeeld his children a notable portion of comfort) but whilest you are herein be∣come like to ye saints & seruants of God who haue gone before you in the flesh, & in the faith, yea euen to Iesus christ him selfe, the eternal sonne of the eternall fa∣ther. Dauid was a2. Sam. 13.14. man according to Gods own hart, & vpon whō the Lord had set his eie & delight for much good: and yet who more afflicted this way thē he, he conceiuing of God, as of one that was in vtter displeasure with him, and that had cleane forgotten him, and quite takē his mercy from him? Of which if you doubt, may it please you to peruse, Psal.Psal. 6. & 38. & 42. & 77. & 88. & 102. 6.38.42.77.88.102. (whither also for shortnes sake I do referre you) & I doubt not but you shalbe thorowly per∣swaded therof.Act. 9.15. & 26.18. Paul was an elect & chosen vessel, and that not onely to car∣ry Christs name among the gentiles, but euen vnto eternal life▪ and yet2. Cor. 12.7 least he should be exalted out of measure thorow the abundāce of reuelations, there was giuen vnto him a prick in
the fleshe, and the Angell Satan to buffet him: which least we should ima∣gine to be peculiar vnto him, he doth in another place affirme of him selfe and the faythfull together:Heb. 2.17. & 4.15. Though wee doubt, yet we despaire not. But what stand we repeating these petie examples (which though they be pregnant for the purpose whereunto they are produced, are not yet matchable with that that followeth) sith we may most liuely see it in him, who (though hee was compassed about with our fleshe, was yet free from the taint or staine of anie corruption, and though he had na∣turall passions, was vtterly voyd of ex∣tremitie or sinne in them, or any thing els whatsoeuer) being the very true and naturall sonne of God, and equall with the father, was so farre humbled and brought lowe, that hee did yet notwith∣standing through fearefull feeling of Gods wrath, and extreme anguishe in himselfe, demand of his fatherMat. 27.46. whie hee had forsaken him? Of whome also the Apostle witnesseth by the spirit,
Heb. 3.7. that in the daies of his flesh, he did offer vp his prayers and supplicati∣ons, with strong crying, and teares vnto him, that was able to saue him from death, and was heard also in that which hee feared. Nowe if the strength of temptations coulde bring our sauiour to so lowe an estate, and hard condition, (as a man would saie) so that he seemed, not onely to be at the verie brinke, but to be plunged into the pit, not of feare alone, but of doubting and distrustfulnesse, (as it might seeme) who yet notwithstanding was the onely beloued of God, and had receiued all the graces of the Spirite generallie, and therefore no doubt the spirite of for∣titude and power particularlie, in moste absolute and full measure: shall wee thinke it strange that the sonnes and daughters of God, (who during the time of their mortalitie vpon earth, haue sinne dwelling in their brittle bodies: & who also, howsoeuer they be beloued of God, are not affected for their owne sakes, but for his sake alone: and who
notwithstanding many gifts they haue receiued, for the gathering together and building vp of thēselues and of the fel∣lowship of saintes, haue yet not so much as a sparke or crum of grace, compared with the infinite and incomprehensible treasures of Gods goodnesse in Christ) be greatly assaulted, and daily beaten on euerie side, yea as seemeth vnto them selues and others, sometimes ouer∣whelmed? Neyther herein alone stan∣deth your comfort (good sir) yea our comfort, that we areRom. 8.19. conformed and made like vnto the seruantes of God, yea, the only begotten sonne of God, in his and their sufferinges: but that as hee caused his almightie2. Cor. 12 9. strength to appeare in their poore weakenesse, making1. Cor. 10.13 an issue out of their temp∣tations for them, that they might e∣scape, that the lke mercie, fauour and strength hee will shew vnto vs, and in vs, notwithstanding our infirmities: because that as theEsay. 59.1. Arme of God, is not (thorowe length of time, or wor∣king of wonders anie maner of waie)
shortned, so is the fatherly affection, that hee setteth vppon his children vt∣terly vnchangeable. Whereof yet wee may be the better assured, because hee hath performed these great workes, not onely in some of his excellent ser∣uauntes, through his grace & strength alone, but in Iesus Christ our heade and Captaine, whose victorie as in other respectes, so in this particularlie is in such sorte become ours, that we cannot chuse, but in him become moreRom. 8, 37 than conquerours (as the Apostle sayth.) For if his absolute obedience, be suffi∣cient to take awaie our sinnes, and the imputation of his righteousnes, power∣full inough, to make vs stand as righ∣teous and innocent, in the presence of our heauenly father, why shoulde not his vanquishing both of death, andHeb, 2, 14 him that had the power of death, that is the deuill, be an assured pledge also of our ouercomming, sith we know and beleeue that hee conquered not for hymselfe but for vs, that wee in hym might bee, (as was euen nowe sayd
a little before) more than conque∣rours? Of great im∣patience or waywardnes.The second point that you complain of, as in regard of your selfe, is, the great impatience and waywardnesse, that you finde at home, in your owne soule, the same sometimes breaking out so farre, that it is not onely made ma∣nifest vnto God and men, thorow dis∣quiet behauiour, and vnsauorie words, but manie times also breaketh forth in∣to better cursinges. Answere.This I cannot chuse bu acknow∣ledge to be hard and heauie, as in re∣spect of your selfe, and the iniquitie high and great, as in respect of God. Howbeit euen against this also you shal well perceiue and finde,A Comfort. that the Lord hath prouided comfort for you, yea com∣fort in his hoy worde: which word of his, as it farre exceedeth all humaine speach and writing, that euer haue bin, are, or shalbe, and is indeede to speake propeperly, the onely trueth: so doubt∣lesse the comfortes therein conteined, in∣finitely surmount all worldly consolati∣ons
whatsoeuer, and are indeede onelie to be taken for the true ioyes. In which respect I wou d haue you not to be afraid, for the magnifying of Gods singular mercies, and for the ex∣tolling of the comfortes of the word, to your spirituall ioy, to vrge and pre a∣gainst your sele, as hard as you can, and as farre as anie maner of way you may with trueth, your owne sinne, and yet I am sure you shall neuer find it to reache further, than to blaspheme a∣gainst the father or the sonne, to which depth of iniquitie for anie thing I know it hath not atteined. But suppose it had ascended so high: doth not yet our sa∣uiour (being trueth it selfe) in the word of all trueth assure vs,2 Math. 12.32. that euerie sinne and blasphemy shalbe forgiuen vnto men, yea euē blasphemie against the sonne of God? which yet that wee might be the better assured of,Paule. we haue a comfortable example in Paule, who confesseth of himselfe against himselfe, for the plaine proofe of the trueth of this point, that ouer and besides that
he was1. Tim. 1 13. a persecutor, he was a blas∣phemer, and yet found fauour with the Lord to obteine forgiuenesse. To which particular example, tending doubtlesse to no small comfort of conscience, you may adde, for the further not onely in∣larging, but strengthning of your own ioy, that the sinnes that you haue com∣mitted, or the blasphemie that you haue spoken, haue not bene done or sayd with a high hand, or of prepensed malice, but rather of infirmitie (though happily a∣gaynst knowledge) and the same pro∣ceeding from a passionate and troubled spirite, rather than of any wilfulnesse, which weakenesse in you Satan by Gods appointment hauing you vppon the racke (not to fetche anie thing from you against your selfe, but to make your patience, constancie and faith, playnly known to others, effectually felt in your selfe, and graciously accepted in hys owne eyes) hath vsed as a meane, more and more to trouble your heart, but yet not to ouerthrowe your hope. And euen this consideration of the maner of of∣fending,
haue Gods saintes obserued in themselues, not so much to lessen their transgressions (for they knowe that eue∣rie sinne in it owne natureRom. 6.23. deserueth death) but to comfort their consciences in the dayes of their distresse, without which indeede, they can hardlie serue God religiouslie, or faythfullie dis∣charge anie duetie either publike or pri∣uate. And this to be true, we may a∣mongest others behold it in Paule, who sayth of hymselfe in the height and depth of his grieuous iniquities,1. Tim. 1.13. that hee was receiued to mercie: for that hee did it ignorantly thorow vnbe∣liefe. And if this aforded hym com∣fort, I see no reason why it shoulde not yeeld you consolation, speciallie sith your sinnes, (for anie thing wee knowe) are much lesse than his, and you haue to deale with the selfe same God, who is nowe, as then,Psal. 103 8. Exod 34.6 slowe to vvrath, and of great compassion, passing by sins, and forgiuing iniqui∣ties, and restoring mercie vnto thou∣sands of generations. Neyther is that
of lesse force in my minde,An other te∣stimonie to comfort. to lessen your sinne and to increase your comfort, that either before the offence committed, or in the deede doing, or after it was per∣formed, you had a spirite within you, that did not onely tell you it was euill, but checked you and controlled you, in & about the action it selfe: wherunto also though you were drawen, and did for the time sleepe, and delight therein, yet would it not gue you rest, till suche time as it had caused you, vnfeignedlie to hate it, humbly to confesse it, and in a notable measure of2. Cor. 7.10. godly sorrow, soundly to repent you of the same, which thing as the wicked doubtlesse,The wicked hate not their sinnes. seldome (or not at all) atteine vnto, for they notwihstanding the vglinesse of sinne loue it,A speciall grace to gods children to hate their sinnes. and hide their transgressi∣ons continuallie: so are they special gra∣ces, bestowed vpon such penitent sin∣ners, as God is pleased, thorowe hys mercy in Christ, to call vnto himselfe: whch as it may appeare by many par∣ticular examples of the holy scripture, so seemeth it to me to be iustificable, by
these words of the Apostle.Gal. 5. i7. The flesh lusteth against the spirite, and the spirite against the flesh, so that you cannot doe the same thinges you would. And in another place,Rom. 7.19. what I woulde that doe I not but what I hate, that doe I. Pull vp your heart therefore (I pray you) and be of good comfort,An exhorta∣tion. sh that from the sinnes that you haue cot∣ted, speciallie in the maner of the doing of them, and from your selfe speciallie in the wrestling affctions that you  in your selfe against sinne, God and his word would haue you to reape comfort and consolation. And as for your partlar case of a troublous heart, and disqt spirite, what is it els I pray you, but euen that that hath taken holde of Gods saintes, as well as of you? doth not Iereah himselfe curse (as it were) himselfe, and the mother that bare him, and brought him into the worlde, when hee saith:Iere. 1.0. Woe is me, my mother that thou hast born me a man of conten∣tion
to all this land: And doth not Ionah, when God debated with him about the withering of the gourd, that God prepared to be a shadowe ouer his head, and to shelter him from heate, and demaunded of him,Iona. 4.9. whether hee did well to be angrie for the gourd, did not hee (I saie) aunswere and say I doe well to be angrie vnto death? And yet these were excellent men and worthie prophetes, and such as had re∣ceiued rare grace from God: no mar∣ueile then though men of lesse sauour fall more? But moste plainelie shall you see this in Iob, of whome I pray you giue me leaue to write largely for your good. Hee opened his mouth so wide, that he bitterly cursed the night wherin he was conceiued,Iob. 3.1. &c. & the day wherin he was borne: yea, he thundred out execrations against many excellent creatures of God, which could not bee but blasphemie against the Creator himselfe, whose glorye is not onely much ioyned with, but greatlie ap∣peareth in the woorke of his owne
handes, as wee may perceiue by this that Salomon saieth:Pro. 17. & 14.31. hee that op∣presseth the poore (or as it is in an other place) mocketh him, reproo∣ueth or reprocheth him that made him. Yea if wee reade hys Booke with iudgement, wee shall see that hee doeth not onelie thus indirectlie (as a man woulde say) in his wordes, op∣pose himselfe against God, while he hudleth out heapes of curses against his workes, but proceedeth so farre, that hee seemed not eyther affrayde or ashamed, to take God (euen God himselfe) by the face, and to accuse him, (though most faslie) of iniustice, as maie euidentlie appeare, as well by Iobes owne woordes, and dis∣courses, in many places of his sayde booke, as by the Lordes owne voice and answeare, out of the whyrlewinde, ChapterIob. 38. & 39. 38.39. And yet notwithstan∣ding, this man found fauour with the Lord, not onely to bee restored to a farre better estate in worldly respectes than before hee hadde, but also to
haue the iniquitie of his hart and mouth freely pardoned, yea hee himselfe, and that by the holie Ghost himselfe, to be made a worthie paterne and example, to all ages to come, as of manie ver∣tues, so particularly of patience, which you say you lacke: for proofe whereof remember what Saint Iames saith of him:Iame. 5.11. yee haue heard of the pati∣ence of Iob, and haue knowne what ende the Lord made: for the Lord is verie pitifull and mercifull. Where marke I pray you, that hee notwithstanding all his frowardnesse against his friends, who came (no doubt with a minde) to visit and comfort him howsoeuer, either thorowe his own cor∣ruption, or their euill, he was prouoked to saie, b 16.2. miserable comforts are you, all the sorte of you: notwithstanding his horrible execration of the good crea∣tures of god, which neuer did him hurt, but manie wais tended to profite, and pleasure hm, for ease, comfort, health, and strength: notwithstanding all his inward impatience and fretting against
God, and outward furie, and open char∣ging of him, to doe him iniurie and wrong, is yet set before vs as a worthie paterne of patience, and a mirror of a milde and quiet spirite. These thinges perhaps maie seeme straunge to you, and you in your imagi∣nation may suppose, that they can hard∣ly agree well together.The worke of regenerati∣on o refor∣mation. But if you will labour wisely to di∣scerne the worke of reformation and re∣generation that God hath in his chil∣dren from the remaynders of their owne corruption, that beeing alwaies good and excellent in it selfe, and ths naught and abhominable, yea manie times also much darkenening the other: and consider that notwithstanding our sinnes, God is mercifully pleased in Iesus Christ, to cure and to couer them all, and to receiue vs vnto himselfe in him, not onely as though we had neuer sinned, but as if wee had actually and really fulfilled all righteousnesse: and haue receiued thorow the holie ministe∣rie of the worde, and the gracious wor∣king
of of the spirite, the eie of faith to see, and the hand of faith to lay holde of, and to apply this particularlie vn∣to your owne selfe, in the state and con∣dition wherein you are, you shall easilie knowe in your vnderstanding, faithful∣lie feele in your soule, stedfastlie be∣leeue in your heart, and francklie con∣fesse with your mouth this woorthie difference, and most comfortable point, wherein also for the better instruction, or perswasion of you, or both, I will (by your good patience) spend a line or two. Of ioy and feare in one person, and at one time.Ioy and feare doubtlesse, in humaine iudgement seeme one of them to be set against another: and yet in the holy gos∣pell, it is reported of the women, which went to see Christes sepulchre, that vp∣on the glorious apparition of Gods an∣gell at that place, and the declaration of Christes resurrection,Math. 28.8. they departed quickly from the sepulchre, with fear and great ioy: feare as I take it, at the strangenesse of the sight, and much ioy, for the comfortable and gladsome tidinges that they had heard. And what
I pray you is indeede more contrarie one vnto another, than beliefe and vn∣beliefe?The like of beliefe, and vnbeliefe. And yet the father of the sicke childe in the Gospell, hauing receiued this comfortable speache from our Sa∣uiour himselfe,Marke. 23.24. that all thinges are possible vnto him that beleeueth, cryed out with teares, and that when he prayed, Lorde I beleeue, helpe my vnbeliefe, calling and counting, that beginning of fayth, that God had wrought in him beliefe, and the doubt∣fulnesse and distrust of hys owne hart, vnbeliefe. And if it haue beene so in hym and others, and wee stedfasty beleeue the same, because wee see it is reuealed vnto vs in the written worde of God, why shoulde wee not perswade our selues, that the lyke is, and may bee in vs, because Gods workes are this waie, nowe as then, all alike. But wee are hyndered from the comfortable sight, and the ioyfull fee∣ling heereof, one while by suffering of oure myndes to bee whollie taken
vp, with the beholding of our owne sinnes onely, forgetting in the meane while the graces and fauours, that God hath bene pleased freely to bestow vpon vs, for his glorie and our good: and an other while by imagining, that whilest we haue not perfection of mercie and goodnesse, here we haue receiued no ac∣ceptable measure of grace and loue: the former of these being dangerous, vtterly to ouerwhelme vs with distrust, and the latter prest and readie to cause vs to deface Gods mercies in vs, but both of them powerfull, to deteyne and withhold vs, from yeelding due glorie to God, whilest which way soeuer wee looke, wee thinke we haue nothing (ha∣uing yet receiued something) & so yeeld him not holie praise and thankes,Psal 50.14.23. & 69.32. & 11.16.12.13. the best and onely sacrifice, that he requireth at our handes for all his fauours. As for that which seemeth heerein most to wound you, namely, your blas∣phemie against God (as you call it) or speaking euill of him, I woulde pray you, ouer and besides that that hath bin
said alreadie, to weigh this following, and see whether it may not satisfie you, concerning that great doubt, yea or no.A compari∣son or simi∣litude. Put the case that some one, that had borne you singular good will, not onely for worldly considerations, but in the trueth also: and as a sound testimonie thereof, had euerie where as occasion had bene offered, giuen you a due and iust commendation, for the good partes that be in you: and yet afterwardes puf∣fed vp in a haughtie imagination of hs owne heart, or forgetting your great fauours shewed him, or his own former friendship professed and practised, or mislead by some lewd and hypocriticall companie, (as al and euerie one of these thinges, are strong and mightie (no doubt) to carrie men awaie) should ey∣ther by himselfe, or together with them in companie, either thinke or speake euill of you: Tell me I pray you howe you would behaue your selfe towardes such a one, speciallie if hee should vnfei∣nedly confesse his offence, and protest sincere sorrowfulnesse of heart for his
sinne? surely I doubt not but theRom. 5.5. loue of God shedde abroad into your heart, would make you ready & willing, with a sound affectiō, to forget and to forgiue and to reciue him euen as though he had not fallen. And shal or can you, (which in respect of Gods infinite fauor towardes you, haue not so much as a crum of loue towardes men) shewe yet notwithstan∣ding, such a larges of the same? and god1. Ioh. 4.8. who is loue it selfe (as the Apostle saith) be skant and pinching, as in this respect? for mine own part, rather than I would thinke or say so, I would hold and affirme, that the bottomlesse depths of the huge and great Ocean, might be dried vp & want water, before the ponds and the cesternes, that in a parched land men haue digged vnto thēselues, or anie thing that is more absurd & vnreasona∣ble than this, if anie such can be found. Doubting of his election to eternal life.The last but yet that not of the least importance, wherewith your heart is troubled, is that you cannot feele your selfe to be one of those, whome God hath marked out to eternall life.
Wherein I would first haue you to know, and perswade your heart of this, that as the miseries of the reprobate,The repro∣bate cannot truely con∣ceiue, much lesse feele their con∣demnation. and their condemnation also, is more, I will not say than is well felt, for feeling they haue little or none, but well concei∣ued their harts not beeing fit to thinke either of their sinne, or iudgement due vnto them for the same: so many times the fauour of God is certaynly muche more, towardes and in his seruantes, than eyther they themselues, or others for them can well perceiue. For as it is most true, that naturall blindnesse, and benummednesse of heart, with a sensual delight the wicked take in sinne, pursu∣ing all maner of iniquitie with pleasure, wil not suffer thē to see their damnable estate, at the least wise to dwell vpon the contemplation of it with fruite, be∣cause thorowe impenitencie of heart, they bee2. Tim. 2.26. held captiues of Satan at his pleasure: so it is as certaine, that by reason of the remaynders of a darke minde, which resteth euen in the god∣ly (as yet) in parte, vnreformed, they
be sometimes as farre off from concei∣uing spirituall fauours from God. And no marueile, because beeing spirituall things, they must be1. Cor. 2.14 spiritually discer∣ued: and we knowe, that as other gra∣ces, so that of a discing spirite, is not onely in vs in part, but mae times see∣meth to be quenched in vs, and hidden from others thorowe the ashes of our corruption. And what reason can be shewed to the contrarie, but that if want of sight and feeling in the wicked can for the time (though not for euer) put out feare and pane, and all sense of the same: but also that the reliques of sinne in the righteous, and the sight they haue of it, and the eare and griefe of heart that they conceiue for it, should for the time, though not alwaies, bleare and de∣face, the hope and the ioy, that God would ha them to conceiue, Satan al∣so in his make working no doubt in all these tempations of the wicked, and the godly, that o he might (if he coulde tl how) preuaile vpon all, both good and bad.
By which you may well perceiue, that in this most high,What the godly in such a case, ought to doe. yet moste com∣fortable point, you are to goe beyond your owne reache and feeling yea to de∣part from your selfe: (who by reason, sometimes of blindnesse, and soetimes of partialitie, are vnfit to bee a iudge in ths cause) that so being spoiled o trust and donfidence in your sele, o in theIere. 17.5 arme of flesh and bloud ls where you may repaire vnto him, th alone is the God of all strength, both ouward and inward, and who will indeede for you and all his, effect that, which shalbe most meete for his glorie, and your eternall comforts. And this is the second thing that I would pray you well to weigh, namely, that as according to the trueth of the holie scriptures, God hath pleased, tho∣rowe the infinite multtude of his mer∣cies, in Iesus Christ, to elect you to lie euerlasting,Ephs. 1 4 before the foundaions of the world were laid: so hath he in time plainly manifested vnto you, and by you vnto others, that his great grace of your
eternall etettion, first in vouchsafing you, (though vnworthie of your selfe, yet for Christ Iesus his sake) thorowe the ministerie of his holy worde, and by the powerfull working of his blessed spirite, an effectual calling, so yt heAct. 13.48. & 16.14. no sooner spake vnto you, but withal pear∣sed your eares, and boared your heart to vnderstand and beleeue, he working in you also this readinesse, with vnfeig∣ned affection to saie,1. Sam 3.10. speake Lord for thy seruant heareth: God dealing with you heerein for your soule,The spirituall meanes of Gods mercie. as hee hath done alwaies with you for your body, that is bestowing vppon you, the spirituall meanes of his mercie, and making them mightie in you, to worke his will, not vnto iudgement, as in the wicked, but to eternall saluation, as in his saintes and seruantes. And this I take to be that, which the Apostle saith. Roman. 8.Rom. 8.30. Whom he predestinate, them also he called. Secondly by giuing you care and conscience, to a∣dorne these excellent graces, of his eter∣nall election from before all times, and
effectuall vocation in time, with the fruites of faith, and the deedes of bles∣sed obedience, and that both in the ser∣uices of pietie towards his maiestie,The duties of pietie. you hauing a minde to be often and earnest with him in prayer and thankesgiuing, adioyning thereto for your better direc∣tion therein, dayly reading of the word, deepe meditation, and christian confe∣ference therein: and also in the duties of charitie towardes men,Of charitie. you not onely not deteming from anie, that which be∣longeth vnto them, but rendring vnto euerie one that which is right & equall, and specially hauing care of the cōmu∣nion of saints,Rom. 12.15 vveeping there with them that weep, and reioycing with thē that teioyce. And this is that that the Apostle saith in another place, thatEphes. 1.4 God hath chosen vs in Christ, that we should be holy & without blame before him in loue. And againe:2. Tim 2.19. The strong foundatiō of God remaineth sure, & hath this seal, the lord know∣eth who are his: & let euery one that calleth on the name of Christ depart
from iniquitie. In which respect also it is, that Peter admonisheth vs,peter. 1.10. Why these duties are propounded to vs in the word. to giue diligence to make our calling and election sure, by good vvorkes. Not that eyther the one or the other, either as in respect of God, are vncer∣taine,Rom. 11.29. for his giftes and calling are such, as he repent him not thereof: are vnsure, as in regard of our selues, because we haue foūd thorow his good∣nesse in vs (though not that that wee should, yet) a minde bowable and ready to harken vnto, to loue and obey the fa∣therly voyce and calling of our gracious God. But therefore are these thinges propounded vnto vs in the word, on the one side to stop the mouthes of carelesse blasphemers, who in the vaine imagina∣tion of their owne heartes, feare not to affirme, that if they he elected, they may liue as they list: and on the other side to lift vp the weakned spirites of many of Gods deare seruantes, who finding ey∣ther the faith of their election, or the fruites following the same, fewe and skant in them, beginne to call their elec∣tion
into question: wherein ouer and besides the discomfortes and discou∣ragementes, that causelesly they cast vpon themselues, they doe great iniurie to God, whilest they make him that is certaine in his purposes and acts, to beNum. 23.29. Isa. 51.8. Ia. 1.17. as wauering as mutable man, and then to be subiect to alteration & change when they idessie fantasie or imagine the same. Yea they speake contrarie to common sense and reason: for if the sins that are from our selues, may (as they ought indeede) iustly cast vs down, shall not the graces that are in vs from god, be much more mightie to raise vs vp? What, is God become lesse than man? or are his mercies inferiour to mans transgressions? But we will put the case that we fai∣led in those good workes, that that hi∣therto hath bin put downe, & that out of the very word of trueth, concerning the fruites of our faith were false: yet see, what euen in such a case also, if it wer so, the holy Ghost saith, for our full per∣swasion and resolute comfort: e It is not
in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth,The whole worke of sl∣uation depen∣deth altoge∣ther on Gods mercie in Ie∣sus Christ. but in God, that sheweth mercy, that so the whole worke of our saluation, and euerie part and peece of it bee ascribed onely and wholie, to his free fauour towardes vs in Iesus Christ. For as this is sure, that God sa∣ueth not vs for our good workes, be they neuer so manie or excellent, because hee shall haue alwaies some thing for matter, or maner or ende and all, to saie against them, and vs for their sakes, and to holde that, were indeede to eua∣mate Gods free mercie, and to anni∣hilate Christes sufferings, and to puffe vp fleshe and bloud beyond all measure and trueth: so he will not condemne vs (vs I saie, and not men) because of our eull woorkes, though they be neuer so manie and grieuous (alwayes pro∣uided that no man abuse this doctrine of trueth and comforte, to licencious∣nesse and carnalitie, nor extend it be∣yond the persons of whome we meane it: namely the elect and faithfull, who as they haue receiued this sweete pro∣mise
from God,& 8.. that to them that are in Christ there is no condemna∣tion, so they haue this giuen vnto them that they walke not after the flshe, but after the spirite)Exod. 33.19. Rom 9.. For hee will haue mercie on him, to whome he will shewe mercie, and he wil haue compassion on him, on whome he will shewe compassion. And this is it that the Lorde hym selfe sayth in Esaiah:Isa. 43 25. I euen I am hee that putteth awaie thir iniquities for myne owne sake, and will not remember theyr sinnes. And in Ie∣remiah, establishig (as t were) a newe contract with hys Seruauntes, hee make Iesus a principall part of the couenaunt:Ire. 31.34. He. 8.12. That hee will for∣giue all theyr iniquities, and re∣member theyr sinnes no more: or as it is aleadged by the holie Ghost in the eight Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrues, I will be mercifull to theyr vnrighteousnesse, and I will remember their sinnes, and their iniquities no more, vsing all these
wordes, of vnrighteousnesse, sinnes, iniquities, &c. to assure vs, that neyther the heynousnesse, nor the multitude of our transgressions, shall for euer sepa∣rate betweene the Lord & vs, but that of his infinite mercie, he will receiue vs, & though we had not offended. A compari∣son or simili∣tude.Of which wee may be the better as∣sured by this, that if we would giue cre∣dit vnto the worde of an earthly man, speciallie if wee had some experience of his fidelitie, and that in matter of grea importance (and yet we know mē to be but men, that is fraile & inconstant) we should much more beleeue the trueth of the eternal our God (confirmed vnto vs by the deathe and bloudsheding of hys sonne, the best pledge of immutabil that can be, and that in causes of grea∣test weight concerning vs) who alwaisMala 3.6. remaineth like vnto himselfe, and who rather than he will fayle vs in hys pro∣mise, or falter with vs in the perfor∣mance of the same, giuing vs lesse th hee hath said, will inlarge himselfe, (I cannot saie, beyond his word and trueth,
for that remaineth alwaies as large as himselfe, and God the God of trueth shall neuer bee found a lier) but be∣yond our heart and hope I am sure. And surely for your selfe, in my mind this is one point that much perswadeth me, and may yeeld you comfort, that ne∣uer can be vtterly taken awaie (howso∣euer it may for the time be somewhat lessened, that you belong vnto the elec∣tion of God, & are (as it were)Isa 49.16. grauen vpon the palme of his right hand, that you haue not onely patiently sustei∣ned, (which is a rare vertue) but migh∣tely vanquished and subdued (which is a greater grace doubtlesse) in him that is the God of your strength, many and the same long and bitter temptations, which had you not belonged to God, and hee himselfe had not reserued you for daies and times not onely of comfort in this life: but of eternall ioy, you coulde not haue indured, much lesse ouercome: for as this is a certaine trueth, ytPsal 34.19 manie are the miseries of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth him out of all,
and that hs children are conquerours ouer many assaults, by the strength and power that they haue receiued fromIohn. 6 33. Rom 8.37. him: lo our onely temptation, and the same as short and small as may be, is able to quaile the strongest Giat, a∣mongst the reprobate and to throw him downe headlong, into the bottomlesse pit of hell, as experience of the wicked (who in this respect to withstand, at weaker then waer) and sundrie parti∣cular examples of former ages, and of our present time, doe playnely poue vn∣to vs, if I thought it conuenient to al∣leadge them. Thus you see my minde, and poore iudgement, concerning your scruples, in such measure and maner delired, as God hath inabled me. Where also I must confesse I woulde gladly end, as beeing almost wearie in my selfe, and tedious (I feare me) vnto you, sauing that the dutie of holie loue that I beare you, will not suffer mee to let slippe a necesarie admonition, that euen nowe commeth to minde, and sauing also,
that your present distressed estate (as I feare) calleth for the inlarging of my selfe, so farre as I may accom∣plishe some more particular course of comforte, than as yet I haue deli∣uered. Touching the former of these two,An admoni∣tion. let mee intreate you, (I beseeche you) as the trueth is, not to imagine as I knowe some doe, that there are al∣wayes like effectes and fruites of Gods grace in the heartes, and conuersati∣on of hys people, I meane eyther as in regard of feeling, or action, for wee knowe by that, that we haue no∣ted in others, and obserued in our selues (if euer God gaue vs grace to marke the one, or the other) that there is euerie day, yea almost euery houre in a daye, an entercourse of the same, God by hys spirite manie tymes mo∣uing vs to good thinges, and ouerru∣ling in the strength thereof, our cor∣ruption: and sometymes agayne the power of oure iniquitie, preuayling, and alwayes getting the vpper hand,
the Lord (no doubt) thereby prouiding, for hys glorye, whilest wee attribute all the praise of our well doing vnto him, (to whome indeede alone all praise and honour belongeth) and for our good and that in a double respect, not onely whilest by this meanes wee are made humble and lowly, before him and men, and in our owne eyes especiallie, hauing speciall recourse vnto him by praier, for heauenly strength, and comming to our brethren, for such spirituall ayd, as they haue receiued from him: but also whilest we learne, on the one side to loth that which is from our selues, as corrupt and defiled, and on the other side to che∣rish and foster that which is from him, as good and pure, according to that rule of the Apostle,1. Thes. 5.19 20. Quench not the spirits, despise not prophesie. A similitude.The Sunne it selfe a verie glorious creature, is not, no not in the summer time, alwaies alike hote and bright, but sometimes is couered with cloudes, that keepe backe the brightnesse, & hin∣der the heate of the same from vs. The
like may we saie of another celestial bo∣dy, the moone it self,An other. which ouer and be∣sides ye ordinarie eclipses that it doth in∣dure, somtimes ascendeth higher, some∣times commeth sower, & is many times in the winter season,Others. especially kept from vs, by thicke mists and darke fogs. Nei∣ther neede we for this to looke so high, for from terrestriall or earthly bodies may we perceiue the same. The trees in the fields, and the plants and hearbs in the gardens, all winter long not onely want any good fruite, but seeme not so muche as to haue a leafe on them, yea the verie truncke and stocke it selfe maketh shewe in mans eyes to be dead, and to lacke that life, that we call vege∣tatiue. And yet there is a sappe or natu∣rall moysture, that lyeth hid in the root, which when it is refreshed with the heate of the sinne, and comforted as it were, with the dewe that falleth from heauen, will yet notwithstanding in due time proue vnto vs, that the tree, plant, or herbe, was neuer dead whatsoeuer we supposed. But what neede we to go
out of our selues, and from our own bo∣dies, to viewe this matter? we haue as plaine a demonstration as may be. Our bodies to daie fresh and lustie, and to morrowe wythered and dried vp,Psal. 118.83. as a skinne bottle that hangeth in the smoke:Another. and yet in time raised vp a∣gaine to haue naturall moisture, and to performe with strength and agilitie, as woorthy deedes as before. And euen such doubtlesse for a while is the state of the children of God,The applicati∣on of these si∣militudes. who thorow the heynous offences that they haue committed, & the strength of temp∣tations, that they doe indure (speecially when they are pressed vpon them by the sting of their own heart, or Satans ma∣lice) and wherein oftentimes thorow the power of naturall corruption, they lie sleeping & snorting (as it were) a great while, appeare vnto men (yea very many thinke and saie so of themselues) as persons forsaken of God, and remedie lesse in this life, and past hope of recoue∣rie for that which is to come. It is true that such mens cases are (for the time)
specially before men & in thēselues, hard and heauie. And if wee shoulde say or thinke otherwise, wee shoulde contradict Gods truth, which telleth vs thatHeb. 12.1 no afflictions (much lesse this great one) is for the present ioious▪ but grieuous ra¦ther, and stand vp against common sense and reason, which plainly prooueth to our faces their condition to be pitifull. And yet for all this, it is not as they affirme, desperate and vnrecouerable, but rather thought not as in respect of it selfe yet as in regard of the consolations that God interminglth with it, and the good fruites that he bringeth foorth by it, very comfortable. And therefore how ought you,A consolation & such as you are to be raised vp (I come now to the second point, namely consolation) vpon whome the Lorde himselfe hath sette such infallible notes of your adop∣tion and election vnto eternall life in Iesus Christ? that no cloude that the enemie hath interposed betwixt you and God, or no myst that in imagina∣tion you haue raysed vp in your selfe,
to stoppe the comfortable Sunne-shine of Gods fauour vnto you, nor no ex∣treame frost or colde of winter, howsoe∣uer it bee harde or sharpe for the tyme, and sensibly felt of you, can kill the seed that is sowen in your heart, by Gods word and spirite, or disanull the1 Iohn. 2.27. an∣noynting,Ephes. 4.30 wherewith you are sealed a∣gainst the day of Christ: so louing, so faithfull and powerfull is God, in and for his Saintes, and that not onelie when they are assaulted with forraigne forces, but when they are assayed from within, and haue (as a man would say) the motions of their owne minde, and the imaginations of their owne hearts and heades, not only to conspire aganst them, but euen to betraie them into the handes of their most cruell and deadlie enemies.Obiections answered. Howbeit, it may bee that you will saie, your selfe thinketh otherwise of of your selfe. But be not your owne iudge I pray you, as wel because iudgement in ye espe∣cially, belōgeth not to you, but vnto god,t. Cor. 4 4 to whō only it appertaineth to pronoūce
a right sentence: as also because the way is slipperie here, and men (yea otherwise good men) may easilie be deceiued. For as in persons that are sicke in the bodie, it sundry times falleth out,A similitude. that of som melancholike conceit in them∣selues, or feare that they haue to die, they receiue the sentence of death in thē∣selues, yea and sometimes the Phisiti∣ons giue him ouer, and they are readye to take their leane of them, and yet God the Lord of life, saith they shal liue, and as a proofe of his power, restoreth them from deathes doore: so is it many times, with Gods children, in this spiri∣tuall disease and sicknesse of their soule, wherein as it is much more easie to bee mis-led, than in bodily sicknesse, so many times when al haue orsaken vs, and we haue destituted our selues, and failed in our own spirites, yet God the2. Cor. 1.3 God of all mercie, and father of all comfort, renueth his vnspekeable fauour vpon vs & calleth vs backe againe (as if it were) from death to life. Againe,Another. as men that in their owne iudgments seeme sick vn∣to
death, and are so farre from ho∣ping after health, that they can not so much as thinke of it, euen with ima∣gination, as many times wast and weare awaie, ad bee brought to deathes dore and yet for all that, the standers by, as learned phisitions, and faithull friendes for certaine and vndoubted tokens of happie health, and good recouerie, e∣uen such doubtles is the state and condi∣tion of many distressed in consciēce: and amongst the rest, your case particularlie, wherein whatsoeuer you say of your selfe, or vtter against your selfe, yet I t many other, (though not the best phisi∣tions, yet your vnfeigned familiars) that haue nowe a long time knowne you in God, and his trueth, haue seene in you, since the daie and hower of our firste acquaintaunce vntill this present time, and yet still doe beho de such eui∣dencie & clearnes of the graces of Gods spirite (notwithstanding your long and continuall complaintes) as all the smoke muther, mystes and fogges, and whatsoeuer els els that Sathan by him
selfe and his suppostes, hath or can cast out against you, shall neuer bee able to take away the cleare sight of them from vs, or mooue vs so much as once to doubt, of the comfortable reuiuing of them in you, euen vnto eternall lyfe. And I hope wee haue the spirit of God, and by the grace thereof, as also by the light of his Woorde, and experience that hee hath giuen vs, are able to deserue some thinge in this be∣halfe, though not so well in others, as in our selues (for that shall wee ne∣uer bee able to doo) yet in others al∣so. Wherefore to make an end where I began, Be of good comfort (good sir) I beseech you, and waite with pati∣ence the Lords ioyfull appearing, whose you are doubtles, and whereof you may be assured, because you haue himRom. 8.31. on your side, & therefore not feare, who shal or can be against you: & because also you haue his children standing with you and for you, not onely suffering the same af∣flictions in bodie and soule, that you do
and so learning by themselues to remē∣ber you in bonds, as those that are bound with you, but with all holie comfort, as in respect of your selfe, and with all ear∣nest praier, as in regard of the Lord, ay∣ding you to their vttermost: yea because he, thatIames. 1.17 Gracs from God bestow∣ed on his e∣lect. is free from shaddowe of tyranny, hath bestowed so many excel∣lent graces of his his vpō you, as sound knowledge, stedfast faith, vnfained loue, christian patience, and a notable measure of holie obedience to his blessed trueth, although that in some of these, many go before you yet, in al of them I hard∣ly know any of my godly acquaintance in Christ, that goeth beyond you. And yet farther you may the more certainely perswade your selfe of the trueth of this point, because you haue cast him so dear a peece, euen the hart blood of his best beloued sonne, whom he hath giuen, as for the testification of his singular loue towardes man, so to this end also,Iohn. 3.16 that euerie one that beleeth in him shall not perish but haue eternal life. And if that which men buy dear, they esteem,
precious, and cannot abide at any hand to haue it perish, surely God will not see that lost, that hee loueth so tender∣lie, and which he hath redeemed to him selfe with so great and high a ransome,1. Pet. 1.18 yea with such and excellent an most pre∣tious iewell. To all which if you wil ad the manifold victories that here to foe he hath giuen you, against sinne and sa∣than, and all their cruell and crafte as∣saultes, he euen then (as it wee) most miraculously deliuering you, wen nei∣ther you nor any for you, could so much as once dreame of a way (much lesse beholde it) how you mighte scape, cer∣tainlie you may take it, as the voice of God from heauen, that hee will not now (specially sith hee hath vouchsafed you so many mercifull meanes of a ioi∣full deliueraunce,) throwe you off or taste you awaye: but deale rather with you as hee dooth with other his ser∣uauntes,Phillip. 1.6 make perfct in you, the good thing that he hath begunne in you, euen vntill the day of Iesus Christ, and cause youAct. 24.22 thorow ma∣nifold
tribulations to enter into his owne kingdome,1. Cor. 9.25. 2. Tim 4.8 Imes. 1.12. 1. pet. 5.4 and crowne you there with eternall glorie. And what though you thinke it long, before the Lord come in comfort to you, yet knowe,2. pet 3. that the Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slacknes, but that hee that will come, wil come quicklie, and wil not tarie. His nature is notpsal 103.9 alwaies to bee chiding, neither vvill he keepe his anger for euer, (as the Prophete saith) Ioseph woulde not continuallie dissemble, his tender affection, towards his vnkinde brethren, but must of ne∣cessitieGen. 43 30. breake forth into teaes, and weepe vpon Beniamins necke. And shall wee thinke that the Lord is lesse compassionate? If wee doo so, we be∣lie God and dallie with, yea, deceiue our owne soules, I denie not, but he maie for a time in∣deede, hde his louing countenance from vs,Exd. 33 23. and shewe vs after a sorte (as it were) his darke partes, and that the bet∣ter eyther to prooue our patience, in
trying howe wee canne for a while forbeare that, which wee exceeding∣lie desire, and (as it were) hunger and thirst after, or else to cause vs the more highlie to esteeme of the same: For this is naturallie in vs, in the continuance of Gods fauours, to make little account thereof. Howbeit, this wee may assure our seues of that thoughpsal, 30, 5 vveeping may abide at euening, yet ioy shall come in the morning,psal, 89, 2 and that his louing kindnesse hee vvill not take from vs for euer, nor falsifie the vvoord, yea the oath that is gone out off hys mouth. And mee thinketh that heereof you, not onelye amongest, but aboue ma∣nye other, shoulde bee throughlie per∣swaded, as well by the viewe of your owne estate, as by the consideration of his most gracious nature: wee beleeue his mercies, yea, you beleeue them, to bee so greate, yea so infinite that they cannot bee (as a man would say) conteyned within himselfe, but must
of necessitie ere long, (euen as continuall springing fountaines, that will ouer∣flowe all, and make euerie thinge fruitful and pleasaunt where they come) breake foorth and shewe themselues not onely generallie to all, but in a speciall maner to some, chieflieEsay. 66.2 to those that are poor, & of contrite spirits trēble at his word,& 62.3 and mourn in Sion, for to such is it in verie deede that the Lorde vvill looke and haue a speciall re∣gard. Amongest the which, sith (if I knowe any) you your selfe may iustlie bee num∣bred: you can not but beleeue, that you shall haue a plentifull portion, of thys ouerflowing fauour, because you bee as certaynelye inrolled in that num∣ber, as if your name were particu∣lerlye put down. And as for your state, you and wee together knowe it to bee long, tedious, and hard, where in notwithstanding you ought to comfort your selfe, because you are assured of this, and that not on∣ly by diligent obseruation of naturall
courses, that there is no tempest or storme so greate, but there insueth e∣uen in the necke of it, (as a man would say) a verye quiet calme, nor any win∣ter so colde and deadlye, but there commeth both a springing time, and summer also after: neither yet by the ex∣amples of some worthie partitular per∣sons alone, as Abraham, Iob, Da∣uid, and such like, whose endes and is∣sues you haue heard off, to bee comfor∣table and (as it were) heauenlie, but by manifolde experiences in your selfe, the Lord making you in your owne hearte to finde that to bee true, which as hee had promised in hys woord, so hee faith∣fullye perfourmed to his seruauntes in all ages, and hath accomplished to and in you, that1. Cor. 10.13. he wil not suffer you to be tempted aboue that you be able, (to wit, to beare thorow him) but will euen giue the issue with the tempta∣tion, that ye may be able to beare it. Waite therefore with all christian patience, for the Lordes Spring-time and haruest, wherein hee will come
himselfe being reconciled vnto in Iesus Christ, and comfortablie call you foorth, yea take you (as it were) by the hand, & walke with you into the fieldes and say,Cant. 2.11 Arise my loue, my fire one, & come thy waie, for behold vvinter is past, the rain is chaunged and gone away: the flovvers appeare in the earth, the time of the singing of birdes is come, & the voice of the turtle is heard in our land: meaning vnder these earthlie similitudes and comparisons, all spiritu∣tuall and heauenlie graces, together with the excellent fruites and effectes that by the same he will worke in you. Concerning which, as you muste not bee discouraged, eyther with the length of time, in which they are withhelde from you, or the hardnesse and sharpnesse, of the instrumentes and meanes, whereby they are brought to passe in you: so must you assure your selfe, that at the length they will come, because hee is faithull, and willing and able to perfourme that hath promised, and their delaie doubtlesse wil be recom∣penced,
with all manner of spirituall a∣boundance. For euen as in husbandrie, the day∣lie moisture, harde frostes and thicke snowes that fall in the winter season, doo indeede nothing els, but season the ground, mellowing it and making it fitte for the better receiuing and bring∣ing foorth also of that, which is com∣mitted to it, and shall bee sowen in it, howesoeuer it seeme contrarie some∣times vnto mans iudgement: So no doubt, the raine, the frostes, the snow, and the ise of your afflictions, are (as it were) not onelie prepaparatiues, for the grounde of your heart and soule, fitting you for, yea filling you with the pleasaunt fruites of righteousnesse and religion, which are (as it were) Gods summer and haruestphil. 1.11 fruites and so in Christ, shallbe accounted and accompli∣shed in you. Till which time come, assure your self of this, that as heIoh. 14, 18. wil not leaue you (alwaies or vtterly, no not very long cō∣fortles, for so he hath faithfully promised
in his blessed woorde, but when you seeme most in danger and dystresse, will visite you, and replenish you with all heauenlye and holie comfort, that be∣ing a moste proper and fitte tyme for hym to woorke in, for the manifesta∣tion of his power in the eyes of the wic∣ked, and the declaration of his loue to∣wardes his owne people: so hee will not destitute you of all necessarye strength, both to vndergoe and to o∣uercome too, whatsoeuer it shal please him as your moste mercifull father, nowe or else at anye time hereafter, to laye vppon you, or to exercise you withall. As for mee, looe what dueye it shall please you to prescribe, and God shall vouchsafe in mercie to enable e to performe, I will not (God aiding me) faye therein: yea, I say vnto you, not onely vse me, but commaund me in the same, and if you finde mee not therein readie to my vttermost, I am content you shall write me vp with such dissembling and faithlesse friends,
as abound almost euerie where. This I promise, and by his strength, that must performe all in all, I hope I shall accomplish that I will not cease in my poore measure to pray for you, till such time, as I shall vnderstand, that as by manie other meanes, so particu∣larly by that, God himselfe shalbe plea∣sed, to bestowe vpon you your full deli∣uerance: and I haue occasion to yeeld him humble thankes, for graunting the graces that I & others, as on your be∣halfe, haue soundly (though in weake∣nesse and wantes) prayed vnto him for. And thus with hartie thanks for your manifold and continuall kindnesses to∣wardes me and mine, and humble salu∣tations in Christ, vnto you, and your good bedfellowe mistresse H. I doe vn∣feignedly commend you to the Lord Ie∣sus, whose sith you whollie are, and to whome sith your heauenly father, hath giuen you to be kept, I doubt not but you shal continue fast and remaine sure, en vnto the end, not onely because he o whom you are cōmitted for custodie,Math. 28.18,
Math, 28, 18 hath al povver giuen vnto him, both in heauen and earth, but also because we knowe, in the trueth of his worde that is the trueth it self,Iohn 10.12 that he looseth none of those, that are committed vnto him,& 6.37. nor casteth anie such away as come vnto him. At London the last of this May. 1589. Your worships, as bounden, so readie alwayes in all that he may. T.W. the Lords most vnworthy seruant.
GRACE AND PEACE from God, &c. WE haue (right hono∣rable) if my poore iudgement deceiue me not,The afflicti∣ons of the spirite most grieuous. manifolde proofs of this point that the afflictions f the spirite, are muche more great nd grieuous than the diseases or trou∣les of the outward man. For first the olie Ghost himselfe in plaine tearmes ffirmeth it, saying:Prou. 18.14. The spirite of  man will sustayne his infirmitie, mea∣ing thereby, his outward paines and griefes of what nature or kinde soeuer, ut a wounded spirite who can beare : vnderstanding thereby the troubles f the hart or soule, speaking as though ee shoulde saie it is not onely a very ard thing to performe, but that verie we also are found, that can indeede
indure it, yea none but suche, as are in∣dued with some special grace from God himselfe. Secondly, the verie lamen∣table complaintes and earnest prayers, that Gods Children (who indeede are moste, I had almost said onely exercised that way, this I am sure of, with fruite and profite) haue especiallie in that di∣stressed case, made and powred forth, doe plainlie proue it. Take Dauid & Paul, in stead of manie, or all if you will: the one auouching that therePsalm. 38.3. was nothing sound in his fleshe because of Gods an∣ger, neither rest in his bones by reason of his sinne: and the other crying out,Rom. 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me from the bodie of this death?By fearefull effectes. Thirdly the fearefull effectes, that the one bringeth foorth more than the other, it taking for the time, appe∣tite from the stomake, sleepe from the eye, hearing from the eare, and all ma∣ner of delight, lawfull and vnlawfull, outward and inward from the whole man, as particular examples of Gods saintes doe manifestly shewe (for which
see the places quoted in the margine,Psal. 77.2.3.4. &c. Psal. 102.3.4 5.6.7. &c. and some such like) and experience in our selues (if euer we haue bene in that estate) or the condition of other men (if wee haue heedily obserued it) will suffi∣ciently warrant the same vnto vs. Neither yet are these thinges pro∣pounded, to dismaie and discourage those that are after that sorte exercised, for surely their afflictions and troubles, be hard and heauie inough, and indeede doe rather craue all maner of comfort, than anie depressing at all their sinne, and the sight of the same, with the ap∣prehension of Gods iustice and iudge∣ment against them for it, beeing as the Prophet saith in another Psalme (vz. 38.4. gone ouer their head, and become as a weightie burthen, to heauie for thē to beare: or to throwe downe aboue mea∣sure when they come to it, such as haue not entred into that course or combate. For howsoeuer as yet, they haue not felt weakenesse or wantes in themselues, or Gods strength assisting them agaynst sinne, yet then shall they finde that true
that the Apostle sayth,1. Cor. 10.13 that God is faithull and will not suffer them to bee tempted aboue that they are able, but will euen giue the issue with the temp∣tation that they may be able to beare it: or to stop anie from striuing, to yeeld to particular persons in that distresse, anie reliefe or comfort that God hath giuen them themselues, for that were to cause them to neglect, the best duties of holie loue towardes men in their mise∣rie, we being enioyned by the Lord, toGalat. 6.2 beare one an others burthen,Rom. 12, 15 and to weepe with them that weepe, and to de∣priue themselues of comfort, in the daies of the like daunger, for howe can they looke to be pitied, that haue had no care to expresse the same to others. But rather to comfort them that are afflicted, and that euen in the greatnesse of their griefe whilest they see no. Cor, 10, 13 o∣ther temptation to haue taken holde of them, but such as appertaineth to man, yea to the best men that haue bene in this life, which also the greater they are, the more are they therein conformed
vnto theRom, 8.17 image of the sonne of God Iesus Christ in his sufferinges: who patiently vnderwent, and mightily o∣uercame (not onely for himselfe, but for vs) all that that we beare but in part, & yet shal at the last thorow him, be in and of the same29 more than conquerours: and to prepare others before they come into those conflicts, that so, neither an imagination of their own strēgth neuer as yet assaied, nor a conceit of the weake force of the foe, neuer well felt, nor the vnwontednesse of the troubles that they must indure, nor the greatnesse or length of the trials that they are to sustain,Ephes, 6.10 11. &c. nor any other thing whatsoeuer may cast thē downe, much lesse ouercome them, but prouoke thē rather to be prepared in the strēgth of God, the power of his word, and the might of his spirite, valiantly to encounter with ye sameLuke, 21, 2 lifting vp their heads & harts knowing that the time of their redemption draweth nigh: & to ex∣cite and stir vp the last sort, in al christian pitie & bowels of compassion, to inlarge thēselues to their vttermost, yea beyond,
it, if they coulde tell howe, towards such afflicted soules, that so according to the2. Cor. 1.4. consolations, which they themselues haue receiued from God, they may mi∣nister comfort vnto others distressed, perswading themselues further of this that the more hard the cure and worke is, (speciallie if they feele the same left them, as a spurre to pricke them for∣ward) the more glorie shall thereby re∣bound vnto God (thePhillip. 2.13. Iames. 1.17. onely worker and giuer of all good thinges) and the more comfort to themselues, whome God hath bin pleased to vse, as worthie instrumentes, & that not in some meane affaire or businesse, but in this great du∣tie of comforting the distressed,Iud. 23. and sa∣uing them with feare, pulling them out of the fire. Nowe as by that which hath bin al∣readie deliuered, wee may sensibly see a difference betweene bodily afflictions, and the inward sorrowes of a troubled spirite: so it is not to be doubted, but that euen amōgst those inward griefs, temptations and assaultes, that such
indure, some are more sharpe, and sore than other some, though indeede the least and shortest of them, be verie grie∣uous to flesh and bloud (or to speake as the Apostle dothHeb. 12, 11 no chastisement for the present seemeth to bee ioyous, but grieuous rather) I will not say to bear, for I suppose verily euerie man will confesse it, but euen to thinke of: which were the point doubtfull wee might la∣bour to proue but being a manifest and confessed trueth, it shall not be amisse to spare that pains, and to trauaile in that, which is somewhat more hard, and may be of much better vse. Amongest those troubles of the in∣ward man that are greatest indeede, none in my simple iudgement, fitteth more nigh to, or pincheth or presseth more hard the hearts of the deare saints and seruauntes of God, in the dayes of their fleshe and combating, than the sight or memorie of the fearefull sinnes that they haue committed against hys blessed maiestie: which also as they ag∣grauate vnto themselues, not onely in
their owne nature, that is to say, as they are sinnes, and violations or brea∣ches of the law of God, but in the cir∣cumstances of time, place, persons, and maner of doing, as that they were com∣mitted in the daies of knowledge, pub∣likely, and by men of great note & name &c. all which doth adde vnto iniquitie, & causeth the same to be more grieuous, so they increase it vnto thēselues, as in re∣gard of ye bitter effects they bring forth, as separation between God and man, a taint and curse vpō the creatures, horror of heart in our selues, infirmities vpon the flesh, temporall & eternall death both of bodie and soule, without great grace & singular fauor from almighty god, &c. in all which respects, the weake heart had neede to beCan. 2.5 1. Thess. 5.14 stayed, least it faint and fall downe without hope of rysing vp, and the wounded spirite calleth indeede, for some of the wine and oyle of God to be powred thereinto, least otherwise it fester and become irrecouerable. But against al and euery one of these (though sore, assaultes I confesse) we
shall see that we haue singular and spe∣ciall consolations, and that not fewe in number alone, and these weake and fee∣ble also, but manie and the same verie mightie, yea euerie one of them strong and sufficient it selfe, to beate backe this assault, though it were muche more powerfull and forcible, then it is, that so being compassed about, and as it were backed with such aHeb. 12.1 cloud of witnesses, our hartes might be the more stedfastly vp held not onely in present comfort, but in hope of all good thinges to come. I say therefore, that whether we re∣spect the father himselfe, who otherwise1, Tim. 6, 16 dwelling in light, that no man can come vnto, hath yet notwithstanding plentifullie and plainely reuealed him∣selfe vnto vs in his word: or by the eye of a stedfast faith looke vppon Iesus Christ his son and our sauior, who is also the brightnesse of the glory and theHebrew. i. 3. in∣grauen forme of his person: or regard the blessed word of almightie God, in all the parts and peeces of it, but speci∣ally in the promises thereof propounded
for our cōfort: or consider as we should and are bound,The Sacra∣mente. 1 Cor. 10.1.2.3. &c. Rom, 4.11. the holy sacraments that he hath giuen vs in this world, as pled∣ges of his goodnes toward vs, & seales of the faithe, that hee hath wrought in vs, or might well as wee ought, that right order of discipline & gouernment,Discipline of the Church. that he hath established in his Churche, for the repressing of euill, or mainte∣nance of all well dooing: or diligently marke the singular fauors that hee hath plentifullie shedde out vpon those, that haue gone before vs in the fleshe, and in the faith: or see and feele the great gra∣ces, that hee of his owne good will hath bestowed vppon vs our selues poore and miserable wretches that wee are: or be∣hold with a sound iudgement sin it selfe, specially, as in regard of the good, that God maketh to flowe from it (howso∣euer it be odious and vglie in it selfe) we shall certainely finde, that from all and euerie one of these, wee may without doubt gather strong argumentes and forcible reasons, assured and continuall comfort, for the forgiuenesse of all our
sins, & by consequent also for the sound and Christian peace of our own hearts. Nowe to the ende, that that which hath bene generallie spoken, and short∣ly deliuered may yet appeare to bee as true and certaine, so plentiful and large, let vs come more particularly, and at length (as it were) yet without tedi∣ousnesse, to deduct and laie out these poyntes. For the first we haue the verie mer∣cifull nature,Of the na∣ture of God himselfe. and readie inclination of almighty God in himselfe to shew pitie and compassion, to those that are hum∣bled, who howsoeuer he declare himslf in word and deede armed, and that with iustice against the proud Pharisee, or benummed and senselesse professor, as he hath good cause indeede, for their con∣tinuance in sinne, and want of a tremb∣ling spirite, standeth yet notwithstan∣ding, in his fatherly compassion and loue, moste graciously affected, to such as quake and sloupe before him. Which that we might be the better perswaded of, he hath bene pleased plainly to tel vs,
and that in his holie worde also that hee hath no desire thatEzech. 18, 23 the wicked shoulde die, but rather that hee should liue: and againe, that hee is theExod. 34, 6, 7 Lord, strong, mercifull and gracious, slowe to anger, and aboundant to goodnesse and trueth, reseruing mercie for thousandes, forgi∣uing iniquittes and transgressions, &c. and that he wil giue to such asIsaiah, 61.3 mourne in Sion, bewtie for ashes, and the oyle of ioy for mourning, and the garment of gladnesse, for the spirit of heauinesse, or as it is in the prophet EzechiellEzek. 9, 4, &c. a marke, by which they shalbe known and freed from the common calamitie and destruction of the wicked. Of the trueth of all which wee may bee the better assured, because it is the worde, not of a mortall man, who will in the hypocrisie and corruption of hys heart doubt and dissemble, but of the eternall God, (who as he is not decei∣ued so doth hee not deceiue, and who beeing of an vnchaungeable nature re∣mayneth fast and sure) and the same with a cleare voyce, and in wordes of
muche euidencie published and proclay∣med, not once and awaie (for then per∣haps in the distrustfulnesse of our owne heartes wee might quickly call it into question)Psal. 86, 5,  Psal. 103.8.9 The sonne of God and me∣diator. but sundrie times, and in ma∣nie places of his holy word. Secondly, who seeth not, that euen in Iesus Christ, wee haue a mercifull measure of spirituall comfort, pressed downe and running euer against this sharpe temptation and sore assault? and that not only, because as he is God, he isMath. 9.5 able to forgiue sinnes, and as man beingHeb. 2, 17 made like vnto his brethren, hee is pitifull and readie for that and all o∣ther good workes, but also because in him dwelleth,Colloss. 2, 9 al the fulnesse of ye god∣head bodily, we hauing in himColloss. 1, 14 redemp∣tion thorowe his bloud, that as the for∣giuenesse of sinnes, in whome likewise2, Cor, , 20 all the promises of God, are yea and amen, hee himselfe being made of God vnto vs1, Cor, 1, 30 wisdom, & righteousnesse, and sanctification & redemption: who alone wasIsaiah, 53, 5 woūded for our transgressions, & brokē for our iniquitie, bearing ye chastis∣ment
of our peace, & healing vs thorowe his stripes he himselfe and nowe other& 63.3 treading the wine presse of gods wrath agaynst vs for our sinnes: whome sith God hath bene pleased toRom. 8.32. giue vnto death for vs all: howe shall he not toge∣ther with him giue vs all thinges also? If all things, why not then the free par∣don, and ful forgiuenesse of all our sins? Shal you imagine that God wil say al, & giue vs but some? that were to make him a lier, who is notRom. 3.4 onely true, but truth it selfe. Or shall we deeme that for the testification of the largenesse of hys liberality, he wil vouchsafe vs some pety fauours, and withhold graces of muche greater excellencie? that were to make god deale worse with his dear children, then earthlie princes do, with their du∣tifull seruants. I say therfore againe if all things, why not remission of sinnes, speciallie sith in him are hidde (yet so as they daylie are plainelie, and in good time shall bee plentifullie displaied, and aboundantlie, yea perfectlie communi∣cated vnto his people)Colloss. 2, 3 all the trea∣sures
of wisedome, knowledge, mercy, and whatsoeuer els is excellent in God, as in respect of himselfe, or comforta∣ble and profitable, as in regard of vs. Thirdlie, the blessed booke of God it selfe, doeth in the holie commande∣mentes of it call vs, and in the comfor∣table promises thereunto adioyned, and conteyned therein allowe vs, that not∣withstanding the haynousnesse and hea∣uinesse of our sinnes, yea the rather for that (because without the sense of it, neither can we well perceiue our owne estate and miserie, nor effectually feele the excellencie and riches of Gods mer∣cie and fauour) toIames. 4. draw nigh vnto God that so he may draw nigh vnto vs, who neuer thrusteth them backe, much lesse driueth them awaie that come vnto him. In the olde testament none seemeth vnto me more plaine and pregnant, then these yt are in the book of ye prophet I say, ye holie ghost ther saying:Isay. i 18 Come now and let vs reason together saith the lord: though your sinnes were as crymosin,
they shal be made white as snow: though they were redde as Scarlet, they shall be as wooll. And in an other placeIsay. 55.1. bid∣deth euery one that is thirstie, come ye to the waters: and ye that haue no siluer, come buy & eat: Come I say, buy wine and milke without siluer, and without money. In the new Test.And in the new Testament, these of our sauiour Christ which is the eternall wisedome of the eternall father are most comfortable and sweet sayings,Math. 7.7 Aske, and it shall be geuen you, seeke, and ye shall find, knocke and it shall bee opened vnto you: and againeMath. 11.28.: Come vnto me all ye that are wearie and heauie laden, and I will ease you: Take my yoake on you, &c. and you shal find rest vnto your soules, for my yoke is easie, & my bur∣then light. What can be more lightfull or delightfull? By this commandement we knowe, that our comming to him, shall bee accepted of him, for hee com∣maundeth not the dooing of that which he abhorreth: And by the promises wee are incouraged, yea assured to receiue, be¦cause
Mat. 5.1 no one iot or tytle of his woord, much lesse his faithful promises shal fall to the ground, & it is yet more and more cōfirmed vnto vs, in the person of of him that speaketh it, I meane Iesus Christ, who beingIohn. 1.18 in the bosome of the father, hath fully reuealed him & al his wil vnto vs. As for the sacraments,The Sacra∣ments & the end why the they were or∣dayned. the very cause & end of their institution, doth propound comfort vnto vs in this point, they being ordained by God, & appointed to be ad∣ministred in his Church, not only to put vs in mind of him and his graces, but to be as helpes & aides to guide our weak faith to Christ himsele, yea to make vs partakers of him, & all his merites, speci∣ally the forgiuenes of our sins. In whō sith there is not onely of himselfe all ful∣nesse, but that that also is true,Iohn 1▪ 6 which is els where spoken in the Scripture of him, that of his fulnesse wee haue all receiued, and grace for grace, that is, grace vpon grace, or graces heaped one vppon another, or (as a man woulde saie) all aboundaunce of all manner
of grace, we may assure our selues, that with him and in him, we shall finde thys grace of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and eternall life also, because as there is no other sacrifice, for remission of sinnes, but he alone as the Apostle plainelie pro∣ueth in the epistle to the Hebrues, so ther is no otherAct 4. i2. name geuen vnder heauen wherein men must bee saued, but the name of Iesus. That which is spoken indefinitlie of both the sacraments together, shal better appeare in the particular consideraton of them by thēselues, and a part. Concerning baptisme, Gods spirit in many places affirmeth, that itBaptisme. saueth vs (which yet least any shold ty to the deed done,Mark. 16.16. it adioineth with it faith, theTitus 3.5 re∣nuing that is wrought in vs by the holy ghost, & termeth it,1. Peter 3.21 not a putting away of the filth of the flesh, but a confident de∣manding, yt a good cōscience maketh to god) which yet it could not do without for¦giuenes of sins before going,. Cor. 15.50 for flesh & blood cannot inherit eternal life: but to what end we vrge this sith Peter Acts 2
saith, be baptised euerie one of you in the name of Iesus Christ, for the remission of sinnes. And that which the seruant sayth (yet by the spirite of God) touching Baptis∣me, that the maister himselfe (Iohn. 4.34 The Supper. who hath not the spirite by measure) auoucheth in plaine tearmes touching the supper, sai∣ing:Math. 26.28 this is my bloud of the newe te∣stament, that is shed for many, for the remission of sinnes. And that the holie Discipline of the Church it selfe,Discipline of the Church. should affoord vs much comfort against this temptation, who is it that either can, will, or dare denie, that will either consider the author of it, euen God himselfe in Iesus Christ,Psal. 56.5.15 most in∣clinable to mercy and of great goodnes? or the endes whereunto it was orday∣ned, it being appointed not onely for the preuention of euill,2. Thes. 3.14 in the seuerall members and whole bodie, but for the1. Tim. 5.20 gaining of men vnto God, euen after sinne and transgression, hath enred or preuailed, they being1. Cor, 5.5 chastised a little in this life, that their soules might bee
saued in the daie of Christ: or the persons exercising or executing the same, that is the Church, and such woorthie men therein as the Church from among thē∣selues, for their rare excellent graces be¦stowed vpon them from God, haue cho∣out vnto themselues, who hauing not onelie the promise of the presence of god, that is, thatMark. 18.20 whersoeuer two or three are gathered together in his name, hee is in the middest of them, but also the as∣sistance and direction thereof, for where the spirite is, there is power also, rea∣dy to receiue & admit vpon repentance, euen as the Lord himselfe: whereof that we our selues might be the better assu∣red, the holy ghost hath bin pleased to cō∣mit into their handes, and to giue vnto them power alsoIohn. 20.23. to absolue, & to loose such as are bruised in spirite, and tou∣ched with a godlie sorrow for their sin: yea for the further strengthening of our weake faith therein, hee hath not onelie graunted them and vs together with them, his most certaine promise,Mat. 18.18 that whatsoeuer they loose on earth shall be
loosed in heauen, hee meaning thereby a most sufficient and full confirmation thereof, ratifieng it as verelie to our spirites, euen as though we had heard hys owne voyce speaking vnto vs out of the cloudes, but also hath left vs some example of it in the Woord, and that not of one man committing some smal transgression, or petie sinor offence (as wee say) but such1. Cor. 5.1 iniquitie as is not heard of, no not among the Gen∣tiles, that one shoulde haue his Fa∣thers wyfe: Concerning which facte, and reconciliation vppon repentaunce for the same, the Apostle saieth els where,2. Cor. 6.72 It is sufficient for the same man, that hee was rebuked of ma∣nie: so that nowe contrariwise you ought rather to forgiue him, and to comfort him, leaste the same shoulde be swallowed vppe with ouer much heauinesse, wherefore I praye you that you would confirme your loue to∣wardes hym. In the holie scriptures or woorde of God, we haue infinit store of examples,Examples of Gods mercie,
and bee compassed about on euerie side, (as it were)Heb. 12.1 with a thick cloude of wit∣nesses, which both for their multitude, and for their faithfulnesse, are greater then al expectation, and to whom for thē∣selues, and in whom for others, God hath bene pleased plentifullie to declare as the riches of his mercie generallie, so particularly, that heDeut. 7.9 2 Chron. 6.5 hath kept faith and trueth with them, and will doe so for euer with al those that succeed them in faith and aIame. 1.17 good conscience, that so our hope and harte might relie vppon him alone, with whom is no variable∣nesse, neither shall neuer turne. Let two verie woorthy and plaine (one wher∣of is in the olde, and the other in the newe Testament) serue for all?Psal. 32.5 Psal. 1 3.3 Da∣uid from an vnfeigned heart acknowled¦geth it, and that more then once, that the Lord in the multitude of his mercies, for∣gaue both the punishment of his sinne, and all his iniquitie whatsoeuer. And Paule with a franke and free mouth o∣penlie confesseth, and that others might heare it and beleeue it, saith.1. Timoh. 1.15 This is a
faithfull saying, and woorthy by all meanes to be receiued, that Ieus Chrst came into the world to saue ers, of whom I am chiefe. And if wee respect their persons ey were men notwithstanding their s, dearelie beloued of God: the one takenPsal. 8.7, by the Lord from the shpd, and fol∣lowing the ewes with yong, to eed his people in Iacob, & the other pulled from persecuting the church, to preach & to ca∣ry the Lords name among the gentils.Act. 9.15 If we consider the sins that they speak of, we shall find them no lesse2. Sam 1 than a∣dulterie, murther,2 Sam 24. pride,. T. 1.1. blasphe∣my, persecutiō, oppression, & sudry such like. If we regard the soudnes & sin∣ceritie of their hears, they speaking & deliuering that, as withou a mind doubt¦lesse to deceiue otes, so without parti∣alitie and respect as in regard of them∣selues, and euen as they fet Gos fa∣uour for themselues, & for others, we can¦not choose but beleeue it, & that we haue our part & portion in it, & the rathr be∣cause God hath geuen vs thse and
like holy examples to be (as it wer) seals set vnto the promises, for the more strong establishing of the same in our hearts, we perswading our selues, that as we may and ought to profit by the presidents of gods1. Cor. 10.11 iudgement, to work in vs vnfeig∣ned feare & reuerence of his maiesty, and care of a better course, thē euer we haue practised:Rom. 15.4 so we shal make vse of exāples of his mercy, to styr vs vp, & to make in vs a holy feeling of all spirituall cōfort & heauenly ioy. And that the graces of Gods holy spirite,Te ces of ods pirit. which hee himselfe in Christ hath bin pleased plentifully to be∣stow vpon vs, & moe particularly, that ourIude. 20. precious & holy fa th, together with the surall fruts & efcts that flow frō the sam, shold pledge vnto vs this great fauour of God in the forgiuenes of our sis, thorow the death & obedience of his sonne, it s as cleare as the sunne in his glorie and brightnesse: and that not on∣lie becase, if that which is from sinne, and from our selues, may iustlie dis∣courage vs and beat vs downe, then that which proceedeth from God who is
d greater than all, and e onely good, can not choose, but being liuely felt and sen∣siblie perceiued, but raise vs vp againe, also because the scripture it self, in terms that will admit no darke or doubtfull interpretation aduoucheth that God2, Cor, 8.12 accepteth vs according to that wee haue, and not according to that wee haue not. For fayth, wee haue amongst others that comfortabl promise of holie writte.O Fayth. Haba. 2.4 Rom 1.17 The iust shall liue by fath, which can¦not be vnderstood of life here, as well be∣cause it speaketh of ye tune to come as al¦so because as in respect of brea and be¦ing in this world, the wicked haue t as well as the godly, and we knowe that it was the Lords purpose by his spr, in that speach to discerne betweeneEzch. 22.26 the pretious and the vile. If we well consider,Vnfained lue either the loue that God hath wrought in our heartes towards his saintes, or the vygned mind, that thorow his great goodnes we find in our selues, to forget and forgeue other mens trespasses, wee shall finde
that to the one & the other may giue vs firme hope, & assured comfort of the for∣giuenes of our own sins: the holy ghost affirming of the former, that by this we1. Iohn. 3.14 know wee are translated from death vnto life, because we loue the brethren: & for the other, our sauiour himselfe, not only teaching vs to say,Math. 6.12 forgiue vs our trespasses as we forgiue them that tres∣pas against vs but also declaring in plain tearmes, that except wee forgiue from our heartes each one to his brother his trespasses,Math. 18 3i ther is no forgiuenes of ours before God, declaring withal, that wher that is, the other cannot bee wanting, because God is not onelye much more readye, but infinitely much more able, to shewe sinners that notable fauour then men are so manifest it one to ano∣ther. Wherein it shall not bee amisse for vs to marke this further,Of merits. that howsoe∣uer all the good things we are enabled to no, cannot as they come frō vs nor yet of thēselues in that respect merte Gods mercie becauseEsay 64.6 al our righteousnesses
are as filthie and stained cloutes before him, &Luke. 17.10 when we haue done al that we can, wee are yet vnprofitable seruants) much lesse any one of thē seperated from the rest, the weaknes whereof arising, not from the good things themselues in their owne nature, & as they come from God, (for so they are and must be verie strong, & exceeding good) but by reason of our corruption, & the imperfection ye thorow the same cleaueth therto, yet all of them together, and euery one of them selues may bee effectual pledges vnto vs, as of Gods great fauor shed abroad into our harts, so of ye crowning of those his graces in vs with wondeful honour, and glorious immortality at the last. Lastlie it seemeth vnto me,Of sin it self. that een from sinne it selfe, though not in it owne nature, for so it is abhominable in the Lords sight,Haa. 1.13 whose pure eies cannot se euill, neither yet in the, effects that com∣monly it bringeth foorth, for so is it al∣waies bytter, making a fearefullIsaiah. 59.2. se∣peration betweene the Lord and vs, & hauing for theRom. 6.2 wages of it, eternal death
and damnation, yet euen in the heynous∣nes and heyght thereof, being accompa∣nied with gods fauour in the forgiuenes of the same, we should & may reap an in∣uincible argument, of much consolation and singular comfort. For wherein shal or can the mercy of God in this life, so much appear towards his people, as in pardoning the sinnes of his seruants? To whom had they not offended neither could gods mercie that way foorth, haue bin declared, nor Christ for thē haue bin1. Tim. 3.16. God manifested in the flesh, who therefore came into the world, not to callMath. 9.13. the righteous, but sinners to repentaunce, and did therefore appeare amongest men, not onely that he might1, Ioh. 3.5.8. loose the works of the deuil, but also that he might take away our sins. Outward to∣kens of Gods fauour.All the outward fauours that wee haue in this life, if we should reckon thē vp, one by one, as for example creation, preseruation, health, wealth, &c. or binde them all in a bundle together, cannot so sensibly set before vs Gods loue, be∣cause some of them are in some sort com∣mō
to other creatures with men, & reach but to the bodie for the most part, & this time present onely, the wicked many times beeing before Gods saintes in some of the same, God alsoPs 17.14 filling their bellies with his hid treasure, their chil∣dren hauing inough, and leauing inough of their substance for their children.Spiritual gra∣ces. Nay, I will say more, many of those spirituall graces that God vouchsaseth vnto his Church, as h s worde, sacra∣ments & praier, of which the holy ghost saith, hePsal. 147.19 sheweth his word vnto Iacob, his statutes and his iudgments vnto Is∣raell, and he hath not dealt so with eue∣rie nation, doe not so plainiy exrsse the fauour and loue of the Lorde to∣wardes hys people, as the free par∣don and full forgiuenesse of their trans∣gressions: the reason is, becauseMath 22.14 manye are called, and fewe are cho∣sen, and diuers bee in the Churche, that bee not of the Church: This grace also extending it se, not one∣lye to bodye and soule in says lyfe, car∣rying with it comfort and the peace of a
good conscience here, but reaching euen vnto the life that is to come, eternal salua¦tion and life euerlasting, being an inse∣perable companion, to the forgiuenesse of our sinnes. And that we might the better be per∣swaded that this is a verie speciall fa∣uour, God himselfe taketh vpon himself as a principall point of his glory, this great worke of forgiuing, layingsaiah. 42.25 I, e∣uen I am he that putteth away thine ini∣quities for my owne sake, and will not remember thy sinnes. And in an other Prophet rehearsing the graces, that he will vouchsafe vnto his people in the newe Testament, he reckoneth vp this as the last and chiefest,Iere 31 34. I wil forgiue their iniquitieRom. 5.20, and remember their sinne no more, that beeing true here, that the Apostle saieth, that where sinne a∣bounded there grace abounded much more. To conclude then (good Madam) out of all that is gone before.The coclu∣sion. Sh in thys poynt of the forgiuenes of sins God who is greater than al isRom, 8, 3 on our side, &
therefore wee neede not care who be a∣gaynst vs: Iesus Christ standeth for vs, who isMath, 3, 17 his dearely beloued sonne, in whome onely hee is well pleased, and thorow whome he hath2, Cor, 3, 19 reconciled the world vnto himselfe. the word generally & partcularly the promises in the same, which are in Iesus Christ2, Cor, 1, 20 yea and a∣men speake comfotable things vnto vs: the holy sacramentes ordeined by God for the strengthning of our weake faith, seale vp that great and gracious fauor vnto vs: the displine and voyce of the Church, which is the1, Tim, 3, 16 piller & ground of trueth, and (as it were) Gods owne voyce from heauen, confirmeth it: the particular examples o his saintes, ha∣uing in former time found it and felt it true, doe ratifie and confirme the same: the peculiar fauos that God hath giuen vs our selues in this life, and namely faith2, Thess, 3, 2 (which all men haue not) with the sound trutes thereof, doe pledge it vp: and that god that maketh thePsal, 76, 10 rage of men to turne to his praise, and in the beginning commanded2, Cor. 4, 6, the light to
shine out of darkenesse, now maketh sin to serue, for the magnifying and mani∣festing of his mercie, and the comfort and good of his children who is it that can distrust? or rather who hath not iust cause, with the Apostles and saintes of God, to sing and say,1. Cor. 15.54.55.56.57 death is swal∣lowed vp into victorie, O deathe where is thy sting? O graue where is thy vic∣torie? The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the lawe. But thanks be to God, which hath giuen vs victorie, thorow our Lord Iesus Christ. And againe:Rom. 8, 38, 39. I am perswaded that ney∣ther death nor life, nor angels nor prin∣cipalities, nor powers nor thinges pre∣sent, nor thinges to come, nor height, nor deph, nor anie other creature, shalbe able to separate vs frō the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Thus (good Madame) I haue (as your honour seeth) plainely deliuered my poore iudgement, in this worthie point, touching the comfortable feeling of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and some such assured seales and pledges of the
same, as byDeut. 17, 18, 19, Ioshua. 1, 8 Psalm. 1.2. Iohn, 5, 39, dayly reading of the ho∣lie scriptures, and continuall meditation in the same, (holie duties that I and all other christians, of what qualitie or cal∣ling so euer, are bound vnto by Gods word to performe: and woulde to God all did it, as may knowe and confesse it) the Lorde in much fauor, I freely con∣fesse it, hath bene pleased in the dayes of my distresse, to manifest to me, mise∣rable man that I am, and that not onely for instruction and comfort vnto my self alone (for God neuer bestoweth anie grace vpon vs, much lesse such excellent fauors, to that ende onely) but for the good and consolation of others, who be∣ing,2, Cor. 1, 3 4, the father of mercies and God of all comfort, doth not onely comfort vs in all our tribulations, but also inableth vs to comfort them, which are in anie affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selues are comforted of him, what it is I will not affirme, because the holie Ghost hath taught mee saying:Prouer. 27.2 let an other man prayse thee, and not thyne owne mouthe, a straunger
and not thine owne lips, yet sure I am of this that Gods trueth it is, and vpon the certaine perswasion that I haue thereof, I shalbe readie (the Lord assi∣sting me) not onely to confesse it wholie and in all places, and before all persons, but Christ Iesus guiding me, and assi∣sting meIohn. 15.5 without whom I cannot do any thing to laie downe my selfe, and to seale (as if it were) with my bloud the certaintie of the same. What effect it may bring forth in your honor (at whose religious request I was vnfeignedly forward and wil∣ling to vndertake these trauailes, which also I haue accomplished in the simple measure and maner that you see, for the testification of my christian affection) or what it may worke in the afflicted party (for whose good I doubt not, it was, and is of vs both, in all sinceritie and soundnesse performed,2. Cor. 2.17. euen as in the sight of God) I knowe not. This I am sure of, wee be vsed as Gods instruments toPhilip. 2.12. plant and to wa∣ter, but it is he alone,1, Cor. 3.6 who working in
vs both the will and the deed according to his good pleasure, must also of his singular fauor graunt the increase,1, Cor, 10, 13 and with the temptation giue the issue also, that wee may be able to beare and ouer∣come, which I beseeche him heartily, euen for Iesus Christes sake, to vouch∣safe, as generallie to all his saintes, so particularlie to that his distressed ser∣uant, that as we haue learnedRom. 12.15 to weep with him in his affliction, so in the ef∣fectuall feeling of the communion of saints, we may learne to re∣ioyce with him in his spi∣rituall ioy. Your Hon. much bounden, and readie al∣waies in Iesus Christ. Tho. Wilcockes, the Lordes moste vnworthe seruant.
GRACE AND PEACE from God, &c. AS I cannot but reioyce (good sir) in your godly loue, and holie care, loue towardes me, that it will please you to vse me your poore friend, and one that is and will be readie according to my small abilitie, for anie dutie you shall enioyne me: and care towardes your selfe, in seeking for your seke in the middest of your troubles and tales, some Christian comforce and instruction, both which are plae manifested, in those two recrie questions that by you in your letter were prounded vnto me: so I  sowhat,Two qusti∣ons propoun∣ded to e an∣swered. I must confesse it, seized w sorowe, partly for that prouiding for my publike pace, lacke of leysure, wl  nowe let me, and partlie, for that want of abilitie, to wade into such
weightie causes sufficiently, will not suf∣fer me to deale therein, as gladly I would in respect of sincere affection to∣wards you, and as religiously I ought, both in regard of the worthinesse of the causes themselues and of the peace of mine owne heart. Howbeit this somewhat recomfor∣teth me that as I rest perswaded, yt you will accept whatsoeuer I shall deliuer, speciallie sith in the same I shoote at your sprituall consolation and good: so I hope that God whose cause it is that I deale in, and whose glorie I would gladly, principallie aime at in the same, will by his blessed spirite so guide me, that I shall propound no∣thing but the trueth, from imbracing whereof though you may be somewhat hindered, because it is deliuered in a simple and meane, both manner and meane, as I my selfe denie not, yet let the glory of the trueth it selfe (which needeth no mans colours to adorne and bewtifie the same) so farre preuayle with you, (I beseech you) that both for
iudgement and feeling, it may finde a blessed entertainement in you. The first of the difference of the feare of the wicked and the feare of the godly.Concerning your first question, about the difference that is betwixt the feare of the wicked, and the feare of the god∣ly, I suppose it shall not be much amisse to knowe this, that feare being a passi∣on of the heart, and arising not so much from touching,Natural feare what it is. (for that properly re∣specting the body and outward man, ra∣ther breedeth paine) as from cogitation and thought, which directly concerning the minde and inward man, doth more liuely strike the same according vnto which also, the bodie it selfe (by reason of the sympathie or fellow-feeling, that the one hath with the other) is for the most part affected, cannot of it selfe, and simply considered, be vicious and euill. The reason wherof is verie plaine and euident, because it being of nature sim∣ple: & the same infused, or put, or powed into vs, by ration from God, who can not be euill vnlesse we woud holde that God made some thing euill (which were horrible blaphemie, and quite & cleane
contrarie to the fulnesse of goodnesse, that is in himself, and cōmunicated vnto all his workes, but specially vnto man. I further taking it in it selfe, to be no more euill, to haue feare in the heart, than to haue paine in the flesh: nor that passion of feare to be no more sin in the soule, than appetite in the stomacke, to eate and drinke, or disposition in the bo∣die to sleepe &c. and such like naturall affections and passions. Besides if this and other naturall passions, were simply and of themselues faultie, then this would ensue thereupon, that the creatures, speciallie those that we call sensitiue (manie of them as ef∣fectuallie in their kinde feeling this and other passions also, as man himselfe) should of themselues carrie about in thē∣selues, a lump of iniquitie, which indeed cānot be true, both because as in regard of their creation they were good, theGen. 1.3. scripture affirming it after Gods own view of them (whose iudgement cannot be deceiued) that they were exceedingly good, and also because if they had sinne
in themselues and of themselues, eyther they must haue a reconciler, to passe be∣tweene God and them, who also par∣taking of their nature, must in the na∣ture that had sinned satisfie Gods wrath against sinne (but it is too too beastly to say, eyther that our Sauiour Christ had their nature, or that hee dyed for brute beastes) or els they must of necessitie, perishe vnder condemnation for sinne, because theRom, 6.23. hier of sinne in whomso∣euer, (without a price to satisfie it) is eternall death: and there is no meane we are sure betweene these two. But which is most notoriously euill, absurd, and erronious aboue all the rest: Our sauiour Iesus Christ himselfe, should by this meanes, be polluted with same, not onely because according to the scriptures, we generally know & beleue that he wasHeb. 2.17, & , 15. very man in euery respect like vnto vs, (sinne onely excepted) but also because the Apostle speaking, euen of this particular humaie affection in him plainly sayth, in the Epistle to the Hebrues, that hee was 5, 7. heard in the
thinges which he feared. Nowe to saie that he was touched or tainted any maner of way, with anie, though neuer so small spot of sin, what is it els but to gainesay the holy scrip∣tures, which inIsa. 53.9. Ioh. 8, 46. 1 Pet. 2, 22. manie places affirme him, and that most rightly, to be voyd of iniquitie? yea to make him no fit sauior for sinne, because he that must redeeme others from inquities and transgressi∣ons must be himselfe shamelesse, other∣wise he cannot be a price of reconcilia∣tion? and (which toucheth vs also to the quicke, and importeth vs as nigh as life and death) by consequent to depriue our selues of full pardon and forgiue∣nesse of all our sinnes, because if Christ died not the1. Pet. 3.18, iust for the vniust, wee re∣maine vnder transgression, and being a∣liueEphes, 2.5. are dead in trespasses and sinnes, and so vnder eternal death. Here then is required, a right deserning spirite, yea a hart indeede that is indued with a notable portion of heauenly wisedome & spiritual grace frō aboue that so yt which is not of it selfe euill (though I speake
particularly of the passion of feare, yet it shall not bee amisse to practise it in all of the like nature) may thorowe the great worke of the sanctfiication of the word and spirite of God, growe euerie daie better and better, with mightie in∣creases from an high. The sight and knowledge of al which as it cannot but strike muche terror, yea horror into the hearts of the wicked and vngodly, because thorowe the strength and power of their own sinne, they haue made the light that was in them (which in my minde may not vnfitly be resem∣bled to the dawning of the day, and was and is sufficient to make them without excuse or defence before God) to become darkenesse, and by that meanes are plunged into obscuritie as grosse (if not more grosse) as that of Egypt: so should it be very comfortable to those, in whom the Lord himselfe hath bene pleased by hys owne hand, and ordinaunce to ad∣uaunce that worthie worke of regene∣ration, and that not onely while they doe not as the wicked, sinne in all ma∣ner
of extremitie of naturall passions, adding drunkennesse vnto thirst) and thorow the corruptiō of nature and Sa∣tans deadly and insatiable malice, defa∣cing their own light, and so are become stocks and voyd of all sense of the same: but also while they haue nature it self so inlightned by the trueth of the word, and reformed by daily addition of grace frō aboue, that in continuall wrestling and striuing against it, speciallie the corrup∣tions of it, they gaine so much, that they cause euen that as other thinges also to tend to the aduauncement of his glorie that is Lord of nature, and hath it at cō∣maund, and to their owne comfort, and the good of others, wherat those sparks and remainders of nature, that are yet in vs vndefaced, doe in some sorte aime, how much more may they attaine vnto it, not onely when they are accompa∣nied, but when they are ayded thereto, with the graces of God in vs. But to come somewhat more nigh to the point we are to deale in, and yet it cannot be denied, but that that which
hath bene alreadie deliuered, doth pro∣perly concerne the same methinketh we may betwene the two fe res, which you desire to be satisfied in, obserue a double difference: the one as in respect of the causes, I say causes, neither let ye seeme straunge vnto you, that there are & may be many causes of one and the self same thing, from whence it commeth and pro∣ceedeth, though some in the same bee more principall working causes, than other, as euerie petie logician wil redily acknowledge) the other as in regard of the effectes and fruites that they bring forth in the seuerall parties and persons diuersly, (according to the diuersitie of the feares thēselues) affected therewith. Of the feare of the wic∣ked. Whence it riseth.That feare which is in the wicked ariseth, either from some conceite that they haue within them, of shame and disgrace before men, in whose sight, with them themselues, it is a great and grieuous iudgement, and goeth to their heart, as cold as the panges of death, to be clothed with confusion, for being men and no more but naturall men, as they
like well of themselues, so they woulde gladly be highly esteemed of their likes:Groweth. or els, (beeing bitten or stoong with the knowledge of some euill, eyther conceiued or performed) from some im∣pression, and sense that they haue, of pu∣nishment before god for the same, whose infinite iustice, as they haue moste hey∣nously offended, so they certainly know, that they cannot by anie meanes with∣stand and auoid,Continueth. this being ingrauen in their heartes by the light of nature that sinne and his punishment must alwaies goe, (as it were) arme in arme, or els from some other odde imagination, and carnall conceit of their own (asIere. 17.19, mans heart is deceitfull and wicked aboue all thinges, who can knowe it:) and that still in selfe loue towardes themselues onelie, for this neuer moueth them that by their iniquities, they haue pulled wrath and displeasure vpon other men, from almightie GOD: all and eue∣rie one whereof, (no doubt) are muche furthered in them, not onely through abuse of naturall feare, and also by
meanes of their melancholike constitu∣tion, or complexion, as we say (a meane that God himselfe hath bene pleased to appoint and vse, euen in his iustice a∣gainst the wicked, greatly to increase their terrors and feares) but also by the horrible distrustfulnesse of their owne heartes,Other causes thereof. they finding no matter of true and stedfast ioy in themselues (as who in the stinging testimonie of their owne soules, are conuicted of moste grieuous transgressions, and eternall iudgement for the same, and how is it then possible for them to haue sound peace?) nor see∣ing anie sure comforte from others, eyther in heauen aboue, or in earth be∣neath among men, who if they cannot when, and as they would affoord them∣selues consolation, much lesse may those other looke to receiue it at theyr hands because as in others, so in this respect charitable reliefe beginneth with a mans owne selfe: nor beholding any ioyfull fauour, to them selues from God, whose displeasure rather in hym selfe, and hys creatures, they haue
highlie prouoked against them, tho∣row infinite iniquities, and therefore must looke not onely to haue his backe partes geuen them, but all the vessels and vials of his wrath in time, and in a full measure to bee powred foorth vpon them. But the feare of the godlie, is in them not onely as a naturall passion (for so that condition they haue common wyth the wicked of the world,Of the feare of the Godly and some of the creatures of God,Where it ∣seth. as hath in part bene prooued alreadie,) but prooceedeth also from an vnfaigned loue, and a sincere reuerence of God, his maiestie, and whatsoeuer generallie is in him, & more particularlie his iudgementes,groweth. beeing shead abroade into their heartes, and ef∣fectually planted, continued and increa∣sed in them, thorow the holy exercises of his word, and powerfull working of hys blessed spirit accompanieng the same, they beeing also styrred vppe thereto, not for worldlye respectes or carnall considerations,Continueth as shame before men or outward punishment that they must
vndergoe for sinne committed, or transi∣tory glorie, which they must forgoe and loose, &c. as the wicked and vngodlie, but vpon holy regardes, euen as wel be seemeth Gods saintes and seruauntes, no onelie professing, but sincerelie im∣bracing godlinesse: namely, for that they haue set God against them selues, not as a iudge sharpe and seuere, but as a most louing & tender father, the remem∣braunce whereof, euen in that respect as vnto them, as if it wer the darts of death and the sensible feeling for the time, of the verie panges and paines of hell, and the state of the damned, there being litle or no difference betweene the one & the other, but as in regard of length of time, of this life present, and the causes moo∣uing such distresse: in also which they are lead not so much to respect themselues (for many of them in vnfeigned loue to o∣thers haue after a sort desired their own destruction) as the glorie of God their most gracious father, the honour of that blessed religion which they pro∣fesse, and loue of others, that not onely
in the flesh, but also in the faith, are deare and precious vnto them, fearing indeede, least all or any of these, should in them or by them, bee any manner of way, though neuer so smallie, wounded or hurte: hauing alwayes, and that in such a portion as God seeth fit for his glorie, and their good (notwithstanding their manifold wantes and vnwoorthy∣nesse) that pretious gifte of faih, which as it commeth from God alone, and is begun, continued, and encreased in his children, by the ministerie of prea∣ching, perticipation of the sacramentes, and powerfull working of his owne spirit, so is it peculiar to the elect onelie, to appropriate Gods mercies vnto them selues, for the cōfort of their own soules, and to sanctifie as other things o them, so this naturall feare within them, and to keepe it in so, that it beake not forth, either into sinne against God, or offence before men. And as concerning the effectes or fruites the which they yeeld and bring foorth (which is the seconde difference betweene them,) wee
shall find as great ods, and diuersitie as in the causes, whereof also there is good reason, because such as the cause is, such is the effecte (which who is it almost that knoweth not?) and then the causes being sundrie, the effectes likewise must be so too. Concerning the feare that is in the wicked, it either maketh them frefull in themselues, as we may see by that lit∣tle quietnesse they haue, whether they be at home or abroad, sleepng or waking in sicknesse or in health,The effects of fe  the wiked. their life being nothing els but a sea of continuall trou∣bles, which fire though they seeme for a time to rake vp vnder the ashes of coun∣terfeyt rest and dissembled ease,In themselues yet will it at the length breake foorth as a migh∣tie flame to consume them: or els cau∣seth them, to be much disquiet towardes others,owards o∣ers. they plainely bewraying the same either by some hard woordes, or sharpe deedes, or furious countenances, & that many times, not onely against them whom they cannot abide, but against them also that in manifolde respectes,
should be dear vnto them, as their wiues that lie in their bosomes, ther children that issue out of their loines, their friēds that be as themselues, their seruauntes that haue walked dutifullie towardes them. &c.Impacience or murmu∣ring against God. Or prouoketh them to bee im∣patient and murmuring euen against God himselfe, not only because his hand for sinne lieth hard & heauy vpon them, but also because they can see or finde no way, how eyther to soften, or to shift, or to auoid the same. For though they seek to run away, & would gladly flie if they could tell how, from the face & pre¦sence of his eternal maiesty, (as we may see in our firstGen. 3.8 parents Adam and He∣uah, and in the practise of all ages, and euen of this present time) who bit∣ten (as it wer) with the teeth, & wounded with the dart of this deadly feare, do not only faint in thēselues, andDan. 5.6. strike their knees together, but manifest to men by sorrowful sighes, lamentable cōplaints, yea and desperate dealings also, some∣times against their own soules & bodies & that without any remorse of heart, or
godlie griefe at all, whereof wee haue manyfold examples (both in the holye scrpitures & other writers also) knowne I am sure vnto you, so well exercised in the word (as I take and iudge you to be) yet they know there is no way to escape his reuenging hand against them for their sinnes, andRom. 2.5 hart that cannot repent, and that is it that increaseth their feare, and augmenteth their wo, and causeth them to enter into these fu∣rious both wordes and deeds. Th'effectes of feare in the godly.But the ee that is in the godly (be∣ing yet notwithstanding mingled, both with hope and ioy, as we may perceiue by the Apostles wordes, who speaking of the faithfull-saith,2. Cor. 4 8 We are afflicted on euerie side yet are we not in distresse, we are in doubt, but yet we despaire not: and by that which is reported in the go∣spell, of the women which came to Christes sepulhe, of whom the Euan∣ge st Matthew affirmeth, thatMath 28.8. they dparted with fear,In themselues & great ioy) maketh them in the daies of their prosperitie (considering in what a ticklysh estateIn the daies of prosperitie,
they are, and howe easily caried into pride, against men,I time of a∣uersitie, and forgetfulnesse of God) carefull and watchfull ouer themselues, ta walke in a good consci∣ence before God and men, according to the measure of mercies both past and present, that they haue receiued from God: and causeth them in the middst of their distresses (weighing how quick∣lie by the remainders of since, they may be thrust into impatience) to labour the attaining of a quiet spirite within themselues, beeng assured, thatRm .28 all things shall worke toge her to the best for them that loue and feare God: yea, it prouoketh them, to be humble & low¦ly, yea and that in all sound maner, to∣wards others, before whome,Towardes o∣thers. and to whō they practise that, and tht also for good example, incouragement and com∣fort (I meane humblenes of mind proce∣ding from a quet heart) that they haue had from others in such like times per∣fourmed vnto the themselues. Ne ther stai∣eth it here, but proceedeth further, ina∣bling them according to the grace that
they haue receiued from God,Luk. 21.19 What doubt∣fulnes is in the godly. in pati∣ence to possesse their owne soules before him, in what estate or condition soeuer it shall please him to place them, wherein howsoeuer they be sometimes seized with doubt, not of God verily (whose in∣finit power and good wil towards them, they knowe by the trueth of his woord, and particular experience that they them selues haue had, to be incomprehensible and vnchaungeable) but of themselues by reason of the weaknesse and want which they carrie about with thē, which also by manifold trials in themselues and others, they haue learned and not with∣out cause, iustlie to suspect) yet they haue at the length recourse vnto him, by ear∣nest praier made in faith, and so at the last are hearde in the thinges that they praied for, according to his will in christs obeience being of his singular mercie either vtterlie freed from the thinges that they feared, or els hauing strength, patience and comfort communicated vnto them from aboue, to vndergoe and to ouercome aso (but yet by such
holy meanes as God hath appointed, & at such times as he hath set with himself frō before all times) not only that which presentlie lieth vpon them, but whatso∣euer afterwardes may pynch, or presse downe. And this much for this present tou∣ching this question, wherein I coulde haue willinglie bene contented, further to haue inlarged my selfe, but that paper and time skanting me, I am constrained to finish, hoping that whatsoeuer is wan∣ting now, may be supplied some other time hereafter, either by word of mouth, or wryting, or both, as God shal be plea∣sed by you to giue occasion, and for you and some others (to whome I wish all good in Iesus Christ) to furnish mee with abilitie. In the meane while I hope this shal be wel accepted of you, which whether it be the summe of that, that I deliue∣red when wee were st together by word of mouth, and you desired mee to put downe in writing, I doo not certayneke know: howbeit, the trueth, I
rest perswaded, it is: and though it may differ something from it in form and manner, yet I am resolued that it is the same, in substaunce and mat∣ter: which if perhaps written it affect you not, as when it was spoken, lay not the blame thereof vpon your selfe (as you are woont to doo) charging yea surcharging your selfe with dul∣nesse of comprehension: for doubtles God hath giuen you a great grace, com∣pared with manye other of his ser∣uauntes to conceiue the trueth: neither accuse the point it selfe with darknesse and difficultie, for it is s the rest of gods trueth is, plaine and euident vnto them that are inlightned in Sion, but impute the fault of it vnto me, who either tho∣row the ignoraunce of the cause in my heart cannot, or by reason of negli∣gence, or thorow the want of a stayed minde perhaps haue not so plainely vn∣folded my selfe, nor waded into the cause according to the weight therof, as were to be wished. In the discourse whereof, I haue not
(as yu see) quoted many places of scrip∣ture, for neither indeede is that my man∣ner, howsoeuer some do too much affect it (vnlesse some vrgent c use, or the ear∣nest request of my good friendes drawe me thereto) neyther thinke I that the trueth standeth so much vpon the multi∣tude of allegations or wordes of text it selfe, as vpon sound reasons deduced from the same. But if happilie you are desirous to see sentences of scripturs for these pointes, you may looke vpon the Concordances and tables tht bee al∣ready published vpon the ode and new Testament, which in the tytle of Fere will affoord you store, whether also for breuities sake, I sende you to per∣use them, at your leysure, nd at your pleasure, s you shall thinke good. One or two pointes, and tht wth places out of the woord, s my memorie would helpe, I cou d not, or all tht is written before le psse, as this first, that feare is not contre to saith & hope, which is prooued Phil p. 2.11.
Hebrues 3.14. 1. Peter. 3.17. Second∣ly that God by his worde,Godly feare not contrary to faith. hath appoin∣ted men, sundrie good meanes to re∣moue it, and amongest the rest, these, as minding of Gods former fauours, for which see Deut. 7.18.19.20. earnest prayer and calling vppon his name, for which see,Meanes to remoue the griefe of feare. Genis. 32.7.9.13. Thirdly that the feare of the faithfull, is so farre from bringing miseries with it, that it hath attending vpon it, as an vnsepara∣ble companion, blessednesse from God, for which see, Prouerb. 28.14. The second question of the boldnesse of the wicked and the god∣ly.Touching your second question, con∣cerning the dference that is betwixt the boldnesse of the godly, & that which the wicked seeme to haue, I trust (the prses considered) I shall not neede to spend labour, or take anie pain there∣in, because these thinges beeing one of them contrarie to the other, and contra∣ry being opposed (as we saie) doe more plainly appeare, they may be an enter∣viewe (as it were) and by comparing them one with another, bee easily di∣scerned.
Notwithstanding, if you shall not thinke this sufficient, doe but signifie so much in a line or two, and you shal (God willing) with conuenient speede, heare from me. And so hoping that you wil assist me, with your heartie prayers vnto the al∣mightie, not onely for a sanctified vse of such fauours as I haue receiued, but for a blessed continuance and mightie increase of the same, for the glory of him that giueth them, for the peace of myne owne heart, for the profite of his peo∣ple, and amongest them for your good: I take my leaue hasti∣ly. At Broingdon, the 24. of this Decemb. 1588. Yours assured and readie alwaies in Ie∣sus Christ, Thomas VVilcocks, the Lordes vnworthie seruant.
To the Christian Reader. I beseech thee (good reader) pardō these scapes committed, & amend with thy pen, these faults following, or whatsoeuer thou, according to the iudgment and light that thou hast receiued, shalt find amisse herein. Pag. 1. line 17. for explicat, read commu∣nicate. pag. 4. line, 25. for world, read word. Pag. 8. line 10. l. read he. pag. 13, line, 10. for irrepugnable, read impregnable. pag. 19. lin. 3. meanes. read mercies. pag. 36. line 19. comforts, read comforters. pag. 48. line 8. repent, read repenteth. pag. 49 line 19. after works, adde, and. pag. 50. line 5. after it, add might, and line 14. for euamate, euacuat. Pag. 51. line 1. for make Iesus, read ma∣keth this. pag. 54. line 4. for our, read one. pag. 55. line 26. put out alwaies. pag 61. line 10. for him, read them. pag. 62 line 4. put out as, and line 8. for for, read see. pag. 63. line 22 after therefore, adde neede pag. 64. line 8. for tyrannie, read turning. 19. for cast, read cost. and line 20. for peece, read price. pa. 66. line 13. would, read could. pag. 67. line 6. naturally, read naturall. pag. 68. line 8 after spirite, adde, and. pag 70. line 1. af∣ter vnto, adde you. pag. 74. line 9. for 1589. read 1579. pg. 89. line 6. for might, read wegh. pag. 96, line . for expectation, read exception, line 15. for neither shall neuer turn, nor shaddowe by turning. pag 98, line 10, o me, ead work, pa. 100. lin, 1. for to, read both. pag 108. line 9, for selfe, read lie.
