25783 99847082 12092
The pleasant and Stately Morall, of the three Lordes and three Ladies of London. With the great Ioy and Pompe, Solempnized at their Mari∣ages: Commically interlaced with much honest Mirth, for pleasure and recreation, among many Morall obser∣uations and other important matters of due Regard. by R. W. LONDON. Printed by R. Ihones, at the Rose and Crowne neere Holburne Bridge. 1590.
The Actors names. Pollicie, the thrée Lords of London. Wit. their pages. Pompe, the thrée Lords of London. Wealth. their pages. Pleasure, the thrée Lords of London. Wil. their pages. Nemo, a graue old man. Loue, three Ladies of London. Lucre, three Ladies of London. Conscience, three Ladies of London. Honest Industrie, thrée Sages. Pure zeale, thrée Sages. Sinceritie, thrée Sages. Pride, three Lordes of Spaine, Shame, their pages, Ambition, three Lordes of Spaine, Treachery, their pages, Tiranny, three Lordes of Spaine, Terror, their pages, Desire, thrée Lordes of Lincolne. Delight, thrée Lordes of Lincolne. Deuotion, thrée Lordes of Lincolne. Sorrowe, a Iayler. Simplicity, a poore Frée man of London. Painefull Penurie, his wife. Dilligence, a Poste, or an Officer. Fealtie, two Heraldes at Armes. Shealtie, two Heraldes at Armes. Fraud, Foure Gallantes. Vsurie, Foure Gallantes. Dissimulation, Foure Gallantes. Simony, Foure Gallantes. Falshood. two that belong to Fraud and Dissimulation. Double dealing. two that belong to Fraud and Dissimulation.
Enter for the Preface, a Lady very richly attyred, representing Lon∣don, hauing two Angels before her, and two after her with bright Rapiers in their handes. London speaketh. LO, Gentles, thus the Lord dooth London guard, Not for my sake, but for his owne delight: For all in vaine the Centonels watch and ward, Except he keepe the Citie day and night. Now may my foes in vaine both spurn and spight, My foes I meane, that London represent, Guarded from heauen by Angels excellent. This blessing is not my sole benefit, All England is, and so preseru'd hath bene, Not by mans strength, his pollicie and wit, But by a power and prouidence vnseene. Euen for the loue wherwith God loues our Queen: In whom, for whom, by whom we do possesse More grace, more good, than London can expresse. And that hath bred our plenty and our peace, And they doo breed the sportes you come to see, And ioy it is, that I enioy increase, My former fruites were louely Ladies three, Now of three Lords to talke is Londons glee. Whose deeds I wish may to your liking frame, For London bids you welcome to the same. Finis.
The pleasant and statelie Morall of the three Lords of London. Enter the three Lordes and their pages: First, Pollicie with his page Wit before him, bearing a shield: the ympreze, a Tortoys, the word, Prouidens securus. Next Pompe, with his page Wealth bearing his shield, the word, Glorie sauns peere: the ympreze a Lil∣lie. Last, Pleasure, his page Wil, his ympreze, a Faulcon, the woord, Pour temps: Pol. attired in blacke, Pompe in rich roabes, and Pleasure in collours. Pollicie. HEre I aduance my shield and hang it vp, To challenge him who euer dare denie, That one of those thrée London Ladies rare Ought not of right be matcht with Pollicie: A London Lord, the which I represent. Pom. And pomp prouides his challenge in his word, (Glorie sauns peere) claiming the one of them, Not by compulsion, but by common right, Yet maugre men my shield is here aduaunc'd For one matchlesse, a London Lady best Beséemeth Pompe (a London Lord) to haue. Plea. Pleasure hath soar'd as dooth his ympreze show, To loke alooffe on earthly Ladies all, Yet neuer could my curious eie discerne A Dame of woorth, for Londons Pleasures loue, But one, and she dooth shine as siluer Dooue. Of selfe bred soile, of London is her race, For whom in challenge I my shield aduaunce. Pol. Thus each in honor of his Mistresse And in regard of his wel daring mind, Hath here ymprizde the challenge of his right: But Lordings both, and brethren bred and sworne,
A caution must be had in this conceit, That all our thoughtes aspire not to one heauen, Nor all our ships do saile for one selfe hauen, I meane that all our suites and seruices We tend and tender to one onely Dame, All choosing one, refusing th'other two. Pom. A great mislike amongst vs that might breede. Plea. I seeke but one and her vnto my selfe. Pom. And one with I sauns partner of my loues. Pol. It stands with honour to be sole or none. Pom. Whom louest thou pleasure? Plea. Hearke ye. Whisper in his eare. Pom. Lush, ye lie. Wil. If my maister were a souldier, that word wold haue the stab. Wit. VVel Wil, stil you'll be a saucie Scab. pom. VVhy Pleasure? Pompe hath chosen Lucres loue. plea. VVhy pompe? But pleasure honors Lucre most. pol. And pollicie may Lady Lucre gaine Before you both: but let vs not contend, For Nemo dooth the Ladies prisoners keepe, Though they were slaundered late with Liberti And mariage to three farre borne Forriners. Then first it fits we practise their release, And sée them, and by sight our liking place, For yet we loue as Gossips tell their tales, By hearsay: Fame, not Fauour hath vs yet enflam'd. pom. Lord pollicie with reason hath discuss pleasure consent, and so our loue shall hold. ple. Ye neuer found that Londons Pleasure err'd From reason, or from pompe and pollicy. pol. Come on sir boy, attend you wel your charge, To his page Wit. VVait in this place to watch and ward this shield, If any man in honor of his loue, So hardy be with stroke of sword to attaint This shield, and challenge him that hereby challengeth, Say for thy Lord as should a trusty Page, That pollicie doth dare him to perfourme A hardier taske than common challengers. If he demaund what pollicy may be,
A Lord of London say, one of the three. pom. And you (sir boy) for pompe perform the like, To Weath. Bid him that dare this Ympreze batter once, Be well aduisde he be no beggers brat, Nor base of courage, nor of bad conceit: To match himselfe with such magnificence, As fits Lord pompe of London for his loue: Call if he come that can encounter me, Or mooue me not for ech enuious swad. plea. Will, be not wanton nor of waiward mood, To Will. Waite as doo these, vse faith and diligence, And marke him well that dare disdaine this shield, Which Londons Lord that pleasure hath to name, Hath here aduaunc'd in honor of his Dame. I bid thée marke him well, what e'er he be, That Londons pleasure dooth in malice scorne, For he's a Rascal, or a straunger borne. Good boy marke well his iesture and his looke, His eie, his gate, his weapon and attire, And dog him to his lodging, or his denne, For I will make him scomme and scorne of men, No better boy than Wil, when Wil is pleasde, Be pleasd my boy, and so be my good Wil. pol. And so good boyes farewel, look to your charge, Watch well good Wit, who scorneth Londons pollicy, Be warie Wit, for thou canst well discerne. pom. Wealth watch for pomp for thou canst wel defend plea. Wil can do something too when pleaseth him. Wit. Wil is a good boy where better is none. Exeunt he . Lordes. Wil. Nay Wit were the best boy if wil were gone. Wea. Nay wealth is the best boy, sirs let that alone. VVit. I wisse he saith true wil, this wealth's a gay lad, Wil. I care not for him, curmudgenly Swad. Wea. Wel, misse me a while & you'll go neer to be sad. VVit. Wil, ye are wil foole, if of him ye be not glad. VVil. Nay wit if thou want him, thou'ilt go neer to be mad. VVea. To keepe vs still quiet, I would other talke we had, VVit. I hope we'l not fall out being none but we three.
Wea. If Wealth were away, Wit and Wil would agree. Wil. Nay, Wit and wil are at strife, when ther's no body but we. VVit. Let passe, and of our shields (sirs) let's make a litle glee, Wil, what giues thy maister here? a Buzzard or a Ryte. wil. Wit, you showe your selfe a Gentleman by gssing so right, A Buzzard? thou Buzyard, Wit, hast no more skil Then take a Faulcon for a Buzzard. Wit. O be quiet good Wil: It was but for sport, for I know the bird els, Wea. Thou mightest see it was no Buzzard man by the bels: wit. What's the reason of this Faulcon, I pray thee Will show. Wil. Thou knowst that a Faulcon wares hie, and stoupes low, So doeth pleasure. Wit. And what's the word? Wil. Pour temps, for time. Wit. A verie pretie one, I would it were in rime. Wea. In rime VVit, why so? Wit. Because it wantes reason. Wil. Looke for my fist VVit, if ye rap out such treason. VVit. Treason, to what, boy? Wil. To my maisters bird. Wit. Now Wil my thombe wags, it was but to his word. Wil. Tis a pleasant Gentleman, this yoong mast. Wit, Your maister hath samething too, I pray ye what's it. VVit. Looke wil, and gesse. Wil. Tis a Load in a shell. Wea. I had as léeue ye had said, a Frog in a well. VVit. Is't not a great Butterfly, Wil, canst thou tll? Wil. What is it in sadnesse? VVit. A Tortoys my boy, whose shell is so hard, that a loaden art may goe ouer and not breake it, and so she is safe within, and where∣soeuer shee goes, she beares it on her backe, needing neither other succour or shilter but her shell: the woord vnderneath her is Proui∣dens securus, the prouident is safe, like to the Tortoys, armed with his owne defence, and defended with his owne armour: in shape somewhat rounde, signifying compasse, wherein alwaies the prouident forsee to keepe themselues within their owne compasse, my boy.
wil. wittily spoken, now wealths maist. hath got a Daffadowndilly. VVea. If VVill had not bene wilfull, now he might haue saide a Lilly, whose glorie is without comparison, and beautie matchlesse. for Salomon the most sumptuos King that euer was, was neuer comparable in glorie with the Lilly, neither is ther any citties match∣able with the pomp of London, mistake me not good boies, that this pompe tendes to pride, yet London hath ynough, but my Lord pomp doeth rightly represent the statelie magnificence and sumptuous e∣state without pride or vaine glorie to London accomodate, and there∣fore the woord is well applied to the ympreze (Glorie sauns peere) for that the Lillie is neither proud of the beautie, nor vainglorious of th pompe: No more is London, but if it be ioyful of any thing, it is of the peace and plentie, both flowing from two such fountaines as becomes not vs to name. Now therefore, my god boies, know that my Mai∣ster is rather Magnificence than pompe in bad sense, and rather pomp than Pride in the best sense. wil. And my Lord is not pleasure sprong of Voluptuousnes, but of such honorable and honest kind conceit, as heauen & humanitie wel brookes and allowes pleasure pleasing not pernitius. wit. Who would haue thought that wil had bene philosophous, But what means the word pour temps in the shield, for time? wil. Wit, shal I cal thee foole? the best pleasure of al lasts but a time, For of all pleasures most pleasing to sight, Mee thinks there is none to the Faulcons hie slight, Yet diseases end it, the breach of a wing, Nay, the breach of a fether spoiles that sweet thing: wit And so my maister hath the vantage wil ye or no, pomp and pleasure may be il. Wil. May not pollicy be bad? weal. Wit, wel ouertaken by VVil that craftie Lad. wit. A craftie Goose, the Gander giues him health, Bad pollici's seldome found in so Christian a common wealth, As London is I trust, where my maister is a Lord. wil. And ours so too. wea. Wel, let vs accod, for wit's a good thing, yet may be il appli'd wit. nd so may wealth, be it imploied in pride, And wil worst of all, when it disdaines a guide. wil. A Jack an Apes hath wit.
Wit. And so he hath Wil. Wea. But he neuer hath wealth: now ye are both still. Wit. Yes, he weares a chaine. Wil. Well spoke, and like a bearward. Wea. If ye be Non plus let the matter fall. Wil. Wit, dost thou see? thus goes wealth away with al. Wit. Let's reason no further for we shal haue glee, Here is a challenger to our shields, step we aside. Enter Simplicitie in bare blacke, like a poore Citizen. Wil. He will eate them I thinke, for he gapes verie wide. Wea. Say nothing to him, and ye shal see the foole goe by. Wil. Sirra, gape not so wide for feare of a flie. Simp. Fly, flam flurt: why? Can a flie doo hurt? Wit. Yea, haue ye not heard that the fly hath her spleene And the Ant her gall? Sim. My Vncle hath so I weene, for its an angrie old fellow When his gall runs ouer: children good day, Whose pretie lads are you three? Wit. Three, are ye sure? Sim. Ile not sweare till I haue told you: one, two, three. Wil. I beshrew thee. Sim. Mee boy, why? I am beshrewed already, for I am maried. Wea. Then thou hast a wife? Sim. Yea, I would thou hadst her, if thou couldst stay her tongue, Wea. I thy wise man? Why, I am too yoong. Sim. And I am too old, but in good ernest good boies, be not angry, that I cal you boies, for ye are no men yet, ye haue no beardes And yet I haue séene boies angrie for being called boies: Forsooth they would be called youths: wel, yet a boy is a boy And a youth is a yout: wel, if ye be not ashamed of the boy, Good boyes, whose yes are ye? VVit. No whit ashamed sir of that that we are, nor ashamed at all of those whom we serue, for boyes we be, and as we be, we serue the three Lordes of London, to weet, pollicie, pompe, and pleasure. Sim. A pretie spoken Child and of a prety wit. VVil VVit's his name indeed, are ye one of his Godfathers, yee hit it so right?
Sim. It is more then I know, then is thy name wit boy? Now of mine honestie welcome, for I haue wanted thee a great while. VVit. Welcome sir, how so? why do ye entertaine me so kindly? I cannot dwell with you for I haue a maister already. Sim. So haue I too, but she learnes me litle wit: my wife I mean VVel, al this while I stand heere my wares are not abroad, and so I may loose both my customers and market. VVea. VVares sir, haue ye wares? what wares do ye sell? Sim. Truely Child, I sel Ballades: soft, whose wares are these that are vp already? I paid rent for my standing, and other folkes wares shall be placed afore mine, this is wise indeed. VVit. O, the finenes of the wares (man) deserue to haue good place. Sim. They are fine indéed, who sels them, can ye tell? Is he frée? VVit. Our maisters be, we wait on this ware, and yet we are no chapmen. Sim. Chapmen, no that's true, for you are no men, neither Chapmen nor chopmen, nor chipmen nor shipmen, but if ye be chappers, chop∣pers or chippers, ye are but chapboyes, and chapboyes ye are double. VVil. Double, how is it? Teach me that and you wil make me laugh a litle. VVea. And me a litle: VVit. And me a litle. Sim. Then your three litle laughes will make one great laugh: VVit. True, for if three fooles were one foole, that were a great foole. But how are we double chapboies?Point to Simplicity. Sim. Because ye haue two chaps, an vpper chap and a nether chap. wil. Ha, ha, ha. wit. Ha, ha, ha. wea. Ha, ha, ha. simp. You said you would laugh but a litle, but you laugh a great deale, why doo ye laugh so much? wil. Because your wit was so great in expounding your meaning sim. Yee, you may see it is a good thing to haue wit. wit. I thanke you sir. wea. And what say you to wealth? sim. wealth? Marie wealth is better. wea. I thanke you sir. wil. And how say ye to wil?
Sim. Indéed, good will is a great matter, wil. Yea betwéene a maid and a bacheler. Sim. Why? you are not in loue boy? Wil. yes but I am, and in charity too. Sim. Charitie? alas poore child, thou in chariti, ha, ha, now must I laugh. wit. But you laugh a great while, and you laugh verie loud, Sim. Then I ow you nothing for laughing, & you hear me the Wea. But now laugh not we. Sim. No, you may be maddle, coddle: wel heres thrée passing fine lads, if a man were able to keep them all: let me see wealth, oh that's a swéet lad: then wit, oh that's a sine lad: Wil, oh that's a pretie lad. Wil, wit, and wealth, God lend yee health. I would I could guile heir maisters of two of them. If I had Fraud here that serued Lady Lu∣cre, he would teach me: he would teach me to tice one of them from his maister: which of them now, if a man should steale one? wil? Nay, I care not for wil outsep he be good wil: VVit, a pretie child, but a man can not liue by wit: wealth, yea marie sir, I would I could win that wealth, for then I néed neither wil, nor wit, nor I need sell no Ballad but liue like a mouse in a mill and haue another to grinde my meal for me, Ile haue a fling at one of them anone. Wea. Do you not forget your selfe gaffar. wit. Haue you not wares to sell gaffar? wil. When doo you show gaffar? Sim. VVel remembred pretie lads, ye may sée, children can teach old folks, I am an vnthrift indeed: wel, my wares shall out now. But sir, how sell ye your wares, how many of these for a groat? wea. Our wares are not to be sold. sim. Not for siluer nor gold? why hang they then in the open market? wil. To be seene, not bought. Sim. Then they are like ripe plummes vpon a rich mans trée that set mens téeth a watering when they be not to bee bought: but what call ye these things? wit. Scutchions. Sim. Cushens, alas it were pittie to sit on such fine cuhens: but come my boies if you'il buy any of my wares, her's my stall, and Il open and show strait. VVea. What daintie fine Ballad haue you now to be sold?
sim. Marie child, I haue chipping Norton a mile from Chappell othe heath, A lamentable ballad of burning the Popes dog: The swéet Ballade of the Lincoln shire bagpipes, And Peggy and Willy, But now he is dead and gone: Mine own sweet Willy is laid in his graue la, la, la, lan ti dan derry, dan da dan, lan ti dan, dan tan derry, dan do. Wit· It is a dolefull discourse, and sung as dolefully. Sim. Why, you can not mend it, can ye? Wit What wil you lay on that? For I my selfe dare lay six groats to six of your balde Ballades, that you your selfe shall say I sing bet∣ter than you. Sim. What a brag boy is this to comparison with a man, but boy boy, I will not lay six Ballades to six groates, but I will lay six Bal∣lades to six ierkes at your buttockes, that you shall not sing so well as I. Wit. That I shall not? No, possible you wil not let me sing. Sim. I not let you? Is that spoken like wit? It is spoken like a Woodcocke, how can I stay thee if thou wilt sing out thy throat? Wit. Well then, to our bargaine, six Ballades to six stripes, and who shall keepe stakes? Sim. Neither of your companions, for that's aske my fellow if I be a theefe. Wil. Will you keepe the stakes your selfe? Sim. Best of all, for I meane plainely and will pay if I loose, her's my six Ballades, they bee ready: now how shall I come by your sixe stripes boy? Wit. Downe with your bréeches, Ile fetch a rod and deliuer them straight. sim. Nay then I care not if thou keepe stakes. Wit. You speak too late gaffar, hauing challenged preheminence. sim. Then let's lay no wager but sing for good fellowship. Wit. Agreed, who shall begin? sim. O boy, who is the elder? Hast thou not heard giue Flounders to thy elder? Wit. You mistake the fish, trust me I am sure tis giue place, but begin with good grace. Here simp. sings first, and Wit after, dialoguewise, both to musicke if ye will. Wit. Now sirs, which singes best?
Sim. Tush, your copesmetés shal not iudge: friend, what say you, which of vs sings best?to one of the auditory. wil. To sy trueth ther's but had choice, How wil you sel the ballad you sang, for Ile not buy the voice. Sim. Why wilt thou not buy my voice? wil. Because it wil cost me more money to buy sallet oile to kéep it frō rusting, than it is woorth: but I pray ye honest man, what' this? Sim. Read and then shalt see. wil. I cannot read. Sim. Not read & brought vp in London, wrust thou neuer to schols wil. Yes, but I would not learn. Sim. Thou wast the more foole: if thou cannot read Ile tel thi, this is Tarltons picture: didst thou neuer know Tarlton▪ Wil. No: what was that Tarlton? I neuer knew him. Sim. What was be: a prentice in his youth of this honorable ci∣ty, God be with him: when he was yoong he was leaning to the trade that my wife vseth nowe, and I haue vsed, vide lice shirt, water-bearing: I wis he hath tost a Tankard in Cornehil er nowe, if thou knewest him not I wil not cal thée ingram, but if thou knewest not him, thou knewest no body: I warrant her's two crackropes knew him. Wit. I dwelt with him. Sim. Didst thou? now giue me thy hand, I loue thée the better. Wil. And I too sometime. Sim. you child, did you dwel with him sometime? wit dwelt with him indeed, as appeared by his rime, And serued him well, and wil was with him now & than, but soft, thy name is wealth, I think in earnest he was litle acquainted with the O it was a fine fellow as ere was borne, there will neuer come his like while the earth can corne. O passing fine Tarlton I would thou hadst lined yet. Wea. He might haue some, but thou showest smal wit, there is no such finenes in the picture that I see. sim. And thou art no Cinque Port man, thou art not wit free, the finenes was within, for without he was plaine, But it was the merriest fellow and had such iestes in store, that if thou hadst seene him, thou wouldst haue laughed thy hart sore. weal, Because of thy praise, what's the price of the picture.
sim. Ile tell thee my lad, come hether, if thou wilt be ruled by me thou shalt pay nothing, Ile giue it thée, if thou wilt dwell with mee, and I promise thee this counsell is for thy prefarming, hadst not thou better serue a free man of the Citie, and learne a trade to liue ano∣ther day, than to be a seruing boy in thy youth and to haue no oc∣cupation in thine age, I can make thee free if thou wilt be my pron∣tice. wea. Why, wealth is free euery where, what néed I serue you. My Lord is a freeman if that may doo me good. sim. I cry ye mercy M. boy, then your maister is frée of the lords company and you serue him that ye may be a Lord when ye come out of your yeares. wit. Wealth is a proud boy, gaffar what say you to mée? sim. Thy name is wit, wilt thou dwell with me? wit. If I like your name and science, perchance wee'il agree simp. Nay, my name & mine honestie is al one, it is wel knowen He's a very foole that cannot beguile me, for my name is simplicity. Wil. Coads gaffar wer not you a meal-man once and dwelt with Lady Conscience? sim. Yes, for want of a better. wil. What, a better man? sim. No, for want of a better mistresse, she was as very a foole as I We dwelt so long together that we went both on begging. Wit. Indeed they that vse a good conscience cannot sodainly be rich, But Ile not dwel with ye, you are too simple a maister for me. Wil. Nor Ile not dwell with you for all this worlds treasure. sim. No, why whom serue you Wil? Wl. I serue my Lord pleasure. sim. And whom serue you wit? Wit. I serue my Lord pollicie· simp. And whom serue you wealth? wea. I serue my Lord pompe. sim. You should be serued al with my Lord Birchley if you wer wel serued, these lads are so lordly that louts care not for them: for wealth serues Pomp, Wit serues pollicy, and wil serues pleasure. welth, wil you buy this picture for your Lord?Shew Tarltons picture, wea. No, it's too hase a Present for pomp. Wit. And pollicy seldom regardes such a trisle. Wil. Come on gaffar, come on, I must be your best chapman,
Ile buy it for pleasure, hold, there is a great: sim. Gramercie good wil, my wife shal loue thee still, And since I can neither get Wit nor wealth, Let my wife haue her wil, and let me haue my health. God forgiue me, I thinke I neuer name her, but it coniures her, look where she comes, be mannerly boies that she knocke ye not with her staffe: kéepe your owne counsell, and Ile make ye laugh. What doo yee lacke, what lacke ye. Stand away these boies from my wares, Get ye from my stall, or Ile wring you by the eares. Let my customers sée the wares: what lack ye what would ye hau bought. Enter painfull Penurie, attired like a waterbea∣ring woman with her Tankard. Pen. You haue customers inow and if they were ought, What do ye with these boies here to filtch away your ware? You show all your wit, you'il ne'er haue more care. Wil. Content ye good wife, we doo not fltch, but buy. Pen. I meant not you, yoong maister, Gods blessing on your heart You haue bought indeed sir I see, for your part. Be these two yoong Gentlemen of your companie, Buy Gentlemen, buy ballads to make your friends merrie. wit. To stand long with your burden, me thinks you shuld be weary Pen. True Gentlemen, but you may sée poore painful penury Is faine to carry thrée Tankerds for a penie. But husband I say, come not home to dinner, its Ember day, You must eate nothing till night, but fast and pray. I shall loose my draught at Conduit, and therefore Ile away. Yoong Gentlemen God be with ye. sim. Wife, must I not dine to day? Pen. No sir by my say. Exit Penurie. sim. If I must not eat, I meane to drinke the more. What I spare in bread, in ale Ile set on the skore. How say ye my lade? And doo I not speake wisely? Wit. Me thinks ye doo, and it's prety, that simplicity Hath gotten to his wife plaine painfull Penury. sim. Yea, I thanke God though she be poore and scarse cleanly, yet she is homely, careful and comely.
One cal within. Wit, wealth and wil, come to your Lords quickly. wil. Must the Scutchions hang still? One within. yea, let them alone. wit. Farewel Maister simplicity.Exeunt. sim. Farewel good M. boies ene hartily, ene hartily, hartily. And heare ye wil, I thanke you for your hansel truly. Prety lads, heark ye sirs how? wil, wit, wealth. Enter VVit. wit. What's the matter you call vs backe so sodainly. sim. I forgot to aske you whither your thrée Lords of London be courtiers or Cittiners? wit. Citizens borne and courtiers brought vp: Is this all? Fare∣well. Exit. sim. Citizens borne and Courtiers brought vp, I thinke so, for they that be borne in London are halfe Courtiers before they see the Court, for finesse and manerlinesse oh passing, my maners and misbe∣hauiour is mended halfe in halfe since I gaue ouer being a meal-man and came to dwll in London: ye may see Time dooth much, Time weares out yron horshooes: Time teares out milstones: Time sea∣sons a pudding well, and Time hath made mee a frée man, as free to beare water and sell Ballades, as the best of our copulation: I would haue thought once my horse should haue bene frée as soon as my selfe, and sooner too, for he would haue stombled with a sacke of meale and lien along in the channell with it when hee had done, and that some cals fréedome, but it's but a durtie fréedome, but ye may sée, bad hor∣ses were but ades in those daies: But soft, here comes customers: What lacke ye, what is't ye lack, what lacke ye? Come along and buy nothing: fine Ballades, new Ballades, what lack ye? Enter Nemo and the three Lordes. Ne. My Lordes come on, what suits haue you to me? Pol. Renowmed Nemo, the most onelie one That drawes no breath but of th'eternal aire, That knowest our suit before we bound to speak For thou art the very Oacle of thoughts: Whose vertues doo encompasse thee about, As th'aire surroundes this mssie globe of earth.
Who hast in power what euer pleaseth thee, And canst bestow much more than we may craue, To thee we seeke, to thée on knées we sue, That thou wilt deigne from thraldom to release, Those louely Dames, that London Ladies are. Ne. What, those thrée caitiefs long agoe condemn'd? Loue, Lucre, Conscience, wel deseruing death, Being corrupt with all contagion: The spotted Ladies of that stately towne. pom. Loue, Lucre, Conscience we of thée desire, Which in thy self hast all perfection, Accomplished with all integritie: And needest no helpe so doe what pleaseth thee, Who holdest Fame and Fortune both thy slaues, And doest compell the Destinies draw the coatch: To thée we sue, sith power thou hast thereto, To set those Ladies at their libertie. plea. At libertie, thou spotlesse Magistrat, That of the cause doost carie all regard, Carelesse of bribes, of birth and parentage, Because thy selfe art onely borne to blisse, Blesse vs so much that Lordes of London are, That those thrée Ladies borne and bred with vs May by our suites, release of thraldome nd. Ne. Release my Lords? why seeke ye their relase? That haue perpetuall prison for their doome. pol. But Nemo can from thence redéeme them all. Ne. Their deeds were cause, not Nemo of their thral. Pom. Yet Nemo was the Iudge that sentence gaue. Ne. But Nemo neuer spill'd, whom he could saue: plea. Thou from perpetuall prison maist reuoke. Pol. Death hath no power gainst him to strike a strok Pom. Thou onlie milde and curteous sir, vouchsafe To graunt our suit, and set those Ladies free. Ne. What's your purpose in this earnest suit? Plea. To marie them, and make them honest wiues. Ne. But may it be that men of your regard, Lords of such fortune, and so famous place,
Wil linke your selues with Ladies so forlorne, And so disteined with more then common crimes? Pol. Mariage doth make amends for many amisse. Pom. And loue doth couer hears of combrous euils. plea. And doth forget the faults that were before. Ne. Meane as you say, ye neede to say no more. pol. In token that we meane what we haue said, Lo here our shieldes the prizes of our loue: To challenge all except thy selfe that dare Denie those Ladies to be ours by right. Ne. Woo them & win them, win them & wear thē too, I shal both comfort and discourage you my Lords, The comfort's this, of all those former crimes· Wherwith the world was wont those dames to charge I haue them cléer'd and made them all as free As they were borne: no blemish left to sée. But the discourage (gentle Lords) is this, The time of their indurance hath bene long, Whereby their cloathes of cost and curious stuffe Are worne to rags, and giue them much disgrace. Pom. Alas good Ladies, was there none that sued For their release, before we took't in hand? Ne. Yes, diuers for fair Lcre sought release, And some for Loue would faine haue paid the sées, But sillie Conscience sat without regard, In Sorrowes dungeon, sighing by her selfe: Wich when I saw that some did sue for Loue, And most for Lucre, none for Conscience: A vow I made, which now I shall perfourme, Til some should sue to haue release for all, Iudg'd as they were, they should remaine in thrail: But you that craue their fréedomes all at once Shal haue your suit, and see them here ere long, A litle while you must haue ptience, And leaue this place: go in my Lordes before. Pom. Becommeth vs to waite on Nemo still, Ne. Not so: but Lordings, he condition more You promise me, sith they are in my power,
I shall dispose them when they are releas'd Vpon you three, as I shall thinke it best. Pom. Doe but commaund and we shall all subscribe. Ne. Then goe your ways, for I haue here to do. Exeunt 3. Lord Enter Sorrow. Sorrow draw neere, to morrow bring thou foorth Loue, Lucre, Conscience, whom thou hast in thrall, Vpon these stones to sit, and take the aire, But set no watch or spyall what they doo. Exeunt ambo. Enter Fraud, Vsurie, Dissimulation, Simony and Simplicity. Frau. How happie may we call this merie day my mates, Wherein we meet, that once were desperate, I thinke, euer to haue seene one another, when Nemo that vpright Iudge had by impriso∣ning our Mistresses, banished vs (by setting such diligēt watch for vs) out of London, and almost out of the world. But liue we yet? And are we met? and neere our old seat? Vsury is it thou? Let me see, or hath some other stolne thy face? Speakest thou man? Vsu. No Fraud, though many haue counterfeited both thee & me, We are our selues yet, and no changlings I see: And why shouldst thou aske me man if I liue: The silly Asse can not feed on harder forrage than vsurie, She vpon thistles, and I vpon a browne crust of a moneth old. simp. So that Vsury and an asse are two of the profitablest beasts that a man can kéepe, yet th'one hath sharper teeth than th'other. Frau. But what meanes Dissimulation? He droopes me thinks, What cheere man? Why cousen, frolick a fit, art thou not glad of this meeting? What's the cause of thy melancholy? Dis. Not melancholike, but musing how it comes to passe that we are thus fortunate to méet as we doo. simo. Ile tell thee why we met, because we are no mountaines. simp. But ye are as ill, for ye are monsters. simo. And men may meete though mountaines cannot. Frau, In token that this meeting is ioyfull to vs all, Let vs embrace altogether with harts ioy and affection. simp. I see many of these old prouerbes prooue true, tis merrie when knaues meet:
Frau. How sir, whats that? Sim. If a man had a casting net, he might catch all you. Frau. Art not thou Simplicity? Simp. Goodman Simp. for I am maried, & it like your maistership, And you are mast. Fraud too, a pox on your worship. I sée, a fox and a false knaue haue all one luck, the better for banning, And many of you crafty knaues liue merilyer than we honest men. Frau. Sirra, bridle your tongue if you'il be welcom to our cmpany No girdes nor old grudges, but congratulate this méeting, And sirs, if you say it, let's tel how we haue liued since our parting. simp. O it is great pity. Vsu. What? to tell how we haue liued: simp. No, that ye doo liue. Frau. Yet againe sirra. Vsury, as for thée it were folly to aske, for thou liuest but too wel, but Dissimulation and simony, how haue you two liued? discourse I pray you hartily. simp. Faith euen like two mice in an amberie that eat vp all the meat, and when they haue done, gnaw holes in the cupbord. Dis. Fraud, after my scaping away at the Sessions where I shifted as thou knowest in thrée sundry shapes, one of a Frier, and they can dissemble: another like a woman, and they doo litle else: the third as a Saint and a Deuill, and so is a woman. I was banished out of Lon∣don by Nemo, to the countrie went I, amongst my olde friendes and neuer better loued than among the russet coates: once in a moneth I stole in othe market day to Leaden-hall and about, and sometime to VVestminster hall. Now hearing some speach, that the Ladies should be sued for, for I ame come in hope of my old intertaiment, supposing my selfe not knowen of many, and hoping the three Lords wil pre∣uaile in their suit, and I to serue one of them. simp. He shall doo well that giues thee a coat, but he should do bet∣ter, that could take of thy skinne. simo. And I haue bene a traueiler abroad in other realms, for here I am so cried out against by preachers (and yet some ministers that be none, could be content to vse me) that I was glad to be gone nowe in some other landes, and not verie far of, I am secretly fostered, sa∣uing in Scotland, and the low Countries, they are refourmed, they can not abide me. Wel now and then hither I came stealing ouer sea, and hearing as you here intend as you doo.
Frau. And for mine owne part, amongst artificers and among a few bad consienced Lawyers, I haue found such entetainment, as dooth passe, yet would I with Lucre faine be s I was. simp. Fraud is as ill as a cut-purse, by the masse. Vsu. And for Vsury, the longer I liue, the greater loue I find Yet would I be with Lucre, again to please my mind. Frau. Heer's a good fellow too, one of our acquaintance, how hast thou liued Simplicity? simp. More honestly then all the rest of thy company: for when I might beg no longer, as begging was but bad, for you cson'd me once of an alms, I fel to tankard bearing▪ & so os a wife of the same science. painful penury, then got I my fréedom, and feeling my shoulder grow wearie of the tankard, set vp an easier trade to sel ballas. Frau. Hadst thou a stock to set vp withal? Simp Wise inough to tell you, I, & yonder's my stal, but bewar I loose nothing, for if I do, Ile lay it straight to some of you, for I saw none so like theues I promise you, since I set vp. Frau. Ye are a wiseman when your nose is in the cup, but soft who comes here? step wee close aside, for these be the three Ladies for my life brought out of prison by their keper, let vs be whist and we shall heare and se all, Sirra you must say nothing. Enter Sorrow and the three Ladies, he sets them on three stones on the stage. simp. not til ye speak for I am affraid of him that's with ye womn▪ Con. O Sorrow when? when sorrow wilt thou cease To blow the sparke that burnes my troubled soule? To féede the worme that stings my fainting breast, And sharp the stéele that goares my dieng heart? My thoughtes are thornes, my teares hot drops of lead, I plaine, I pine, I die, yet neuer dead. If world would end, my woe should but begin, Loe, this the case of Conscience for her sin: And sin the food wherewith my worme was fed, That sting me now to death, yet neuer dead. Loue. Yet neuer dead, and yet Loue doeth not th, Loue that to losse in life her follie lent, Folly the food whereon her frailtie fed, Frailtie the milke that Natures breast did gie,
Life, losse and follie, frailtie, foode and kinde, Worme, sting, thornes, fire and torment to the mind, Life but a breath, and follie but a flower, Frailtie claie, dust the foode, that fancie scornes, Loue a sweet bait to couer losses sower. Flesh breedes the fire that kindles lustfull thornes, Lust, fire, bait, scorne, dust, flower, and feeble breath Die, quench, deceiue, flie, fade, and yeeld to death, To death? O good, if death might finish all, We die each day, and yet for death we cal. Lucre. For death we call, yet death is stil in sight, Lucre doth seald in drops of melting gold, Accusing Rust, cals on eternal might, Where flames consume, and yet we fréeze with cold: Sorrow addes Sulphur vnto Furies heat, And chops them yee, whose chattering teeth do beat, But sulphur, snow, flame, frost nor hideous crieng Can cause them die, that euer are in dying. Nor make the paine diminish or increase, sorrow is slacke, and yet wil neuer cease. Sor. When Sorrow ceaseth, Shame shal then begin, With those that wallow sencelesse in their sin: But Ladies I haue drawen you from my Den, To open aire to mittigate some mone. Conscience, sit downe vpon that sweating stone, And let that Flint (loue) serue thee for a seate, And Ladie Lucre, on that stone rest you. And Ladies thus I leaue you here alone, Mourne ye, but moane not, I shal absent be, Yet good it were sometime to thinke on me. Exit Con. Comfort it is to thinke on Sorrow past. Loue. Sorrow remaines when ioy is but a blast. Luc. A blast of wind is worldes felicitie, Con. A blasting wind and full of miserie. Loue. O Conscience, thou hast most tormented me. Luc. Me hath thy worm O Conscience, stong too déep. Con. But more my selfe my thoughtes tormented haue Than both of you in sorrowes sullen caue.
From whence drawen foorth I find but litle rest, A seat vneasie, wet, and scalding hot, On this hard stone hath sorrow me assignde, Loue. and on my seat my selfe I frozen fin. No flint more harde, no ye more cold then this. Lucre. I think my seat some mineral stone to be. I cold from it, it drawes heat from me. Ladies consent, and we our seates will view. Con. Dare we for shame our stained faces shew. Loue. My double face is single growen againe. Lucre. My spots are gone, my skin is smooth and plain. Con, Doffe we our veiles and greet this gladsom light. The haser of glome sorrowes heauie might. Loue. Haile cheerful aire and clearest christal skie. Lucre. Haile shining sunne and fairest firmament, Comfort to those that time in woe haue spent. Con. Vpon my weeping stone is set remorse in brazen letters. Loue. And on this Flint in lead is Charity. Lucre. In golden letters on my stone is Care. Con. Then Lucre fits vpon the stone of care. Lucre, And Conscience on the Marble of remorse, Loue. Loue on the flint of frozen Charitie, Ladies alas, what tattered soules are we? Con. Sorrow our hearts, & time our cloaths hath torn Lucre, Then sit we down like silly soules forlorn, And hide our faces that we be not knowen, For Sorrowes plagues tormented me no more, Than wil their fight that knew me heretofore. Loue. then wil their sight that knew vs heretofore Draw ruth and help from them for our reliefe: Con. For our reliefe? for Conscience and for Loue, No help, smal ruth that our distresse may mooue: Loue, O Conscience thou wouldst lead me to dispaire, But that I see the way to hope is faire, And Hope to heauen directs a readie way, And heauen to help is prest, to them that pray. Lucre, That pray with faith, and with vnsain'd remors For true beleefe and teares make praier of force:
Con. Then eile our selues, and silent let vs stay, till heauens shall please to send some friends this way:Sit all dow Frau. Ladies vnmask'd, blush not for base attire, Here are none but friends and seruants all, deer Lady Lucre, Deerer vnto vs than daily breath we draw from sweetest aire; Dearer then life, dearer then heauen it selfe, Deigne to discouer those alluring lampes, Those louely eies more cleare than Venus Star, Whose bright aspectes worlds woonder do produce, Vnueile I say that, beauty more diuine, than Nature (saue in thée) did euer paint: that we sworne slaues vnto our mistrsse, may Once more behold those stately louely lookes, And doo those duties which vs wel beseemes, Such duties as we all desire to doe. Con. I know that tongue Lucre, beware of Fraud. Luc. Of Fraud? Indéed by spéech it should be he. Fra. what séekest tho Frau. Lucre, to honor thée with wit, with worth, with life, with al I haue, to be thy seruant as I was before, to get thée cloathes, and what thou wantest els. Lucre. No Fraud, farewell, I must be wonne no more, to keepe such seruants as I kept before. Simo. Swéet Lady Lucre, me thou maiest accept. Lucre. How art thou called? Simo. Simon. Lucre. I? No, sir, Conscience saith. Con: No Lucre, now beware, false not thy faith, For Simoni's subiect to perpetuall curse. Dis. As you two haue sped, I would desire to spéed no wors, Frau. Make you a suit, you may chance to spéed better: Dis. Not I, for of al, my tongue is best knowen, But if I speak, it shal be to her that was once mine own: Good Ladie Loue, thou litle knowest the grief that I thy friend sustaine for thy distresse, And lesse beleeuest what care I haue of thée: Looke vp good Loue, and to supply thy wants, Aske what thou wilt, and thou shalt haue of me, Of me that ioy more in thy libertie,
Than in this life our light that comforts me. Loue. O gall in hunnie, serpent in the grasse, O bifold fountaine of two bitter streames, Dissimulation fed with Vipers flesh, Whose wordes are oylt, whose déedes the dartes of death: Thy tongue I know, that tongue that me be guil'd, Thy selfe a Deuil, madest me a Monster vild. From thee well knowne, well may I blesse my selfe, Deere bought repentance bids me shun thy snare. Con. O happie Loue, if now thou can beware. simp. Marie, but heare ye motley-beard, I think this blindfold buz∣zardly hedge-wench spoke to ye, she knowes ye though she see ye not, harke ye, you women, if you'il go to the alehouse, Ile bestow two pts on ye, and we'il get a paire of Carde and some company, and winn twenty pots more, for you play the best at a game call'd smelling of the foure knaues that euer I saw. Vsu. Foure? soft, yet they haue not smelt thée. Simp. No, I am one more than is in the deck, but you'il bee smeld as soone as ye begin to speake, Ile see what they'il say to me: hear ye you women, wiues, widdowes, maides, mens daughters, What shall I cal ye? these four fellowes (hark ye, shal I cal ye afty knaues) make me beléeue that you are the three that were the three faire La∣dies of London. Con. Gentle Simplicity we are vnhappy they. Sim. Now ye bad fellowes, which of ye had such a word as gentle fir▪ Vsu. Bad fellowes yee Rascall? If ere you bring me pawne Ile pinch yee for that word. sim. I cry you mercie M. Iniurie, M. vsurie I meant not you, Frau. If you meane vs, we may be euen with yee too. Simp. Tut, I knew you an Ostler, and a theefe beside, you haue rub'd my horse heels er now for al your prie: but Ladies, if ye be the thrée ladies, which of ye dwelt in Kent street? one of ye did, but I know not which is she, ye looke all so like broom-wenches, I was once her seruāt, Ile nere be ashamed of her though I be rich, & I she be poore, yet if she that hath bene my dame, or he that hath bin my mister come in place, Ile speak to thē sure, Ile do my duty, which is Lady Consc? Con. Euen I am she Simplicity. Sim. I am glad ye are out of prison, I thought ye had forgot me,
I went a begging from you til he bedles snapt me vp, now I am free and keepe a stall of Balades, I may buy and sell, I would you had as good a gown now as I caried once of yours to pawn to Vsury here. Con. Gramercy good imp wilt thou be with me now? simp. No I thank you hartily, Ile beg no more, I can not be with ye though I would for I am maried to painful penury: Looke now my proud stately maisters, I may if I wil, & you would if ye might. Frau. No, not dwel with such a beggar as Conscience. simp. No, Fraud nere loued Conscience since he was an Ostler. Vsu. Who cares for Conscience but dies a begger? sim. That wil not Vsury do, he wil first take 3. score pound in the hundred. Dis. loue, looke on me and I will giue thee cloathes. loue. I will no more by thee be so disguised. simp. Ye doe the wiser, for his face looks like a cloakbacke: Dis. In thy affctions I had once a place: loue. Those fond affections wrought me soule disgrace, Dis. Ile make amends, if ought amisse were done: loue. Who once are burn'd, the fire will euer shun. Dis. And yet once burn'd to warme againe may prooue: loue. Not at thy fire, I will be perfect loue? simp. I promise you the wenches haue learn'd to answer wittily, Her's many faire proffers to Lucre, and loue, But who cloaths poore Conscience, she may sit long inough. Vsu. I wil cloath her straight:Vsurie takes Frauds cloak, & casts it on Cons simp Wil you maister Vsurie, that's honestly spoke. Ha, that's no gramercie to cloath her with another mans cloake, But I see you haue a craft in the dooing M. Vsury, Vsury cours Conscience with Frauds cloake verie cunningly. Con. Alas who loades m shoulders with this heauie weed, Fy, how it stinks, this is perfum'd indeed, Fra. Marie geppe goody Conscience, indeed I doo you wrong, But Ile quickly right it, my cloake shal not comber you long. Vsu. All this while Lucre knowes not I am here, But now wil I to her, marke how I sped. Lady the fairest that Nature euer fourmed, Lodestone of Loue, that drawes ffctions darte. The only obiect to all humaine eies,
And sole destred Daintie of the world, thy Vassall here, a vertue in thy néede Whom thou by license of the law maist vse, tenders himselfe, and all his seruices to doe thy will in duetie as to fore, Glad of thy freedome as his proper life. Simp. Lady Lucre, you loue an apple, take heede the Caterpill consume not your fruit. Lucre. Why who is it that maketh this latest suit? Simp. Tis vsurie.aloud in her ear. Lucre. Great is the seruice he hath done for me, But Vsury now I may not deale with thee. Vsu. the Law allowes me Madam, in some sort. Con. But God and I would haue thy boundes cut short. Vsu. For you I recke not, but if God me hate, Why dooth the Law allow me in some rate? Con, Vsury slanders both Law and state, the Law allowes not though it tollerate, And thou art sure be shut out at heauen gate. Vsu, You were euer nice, no matter what you prae: Simp, Then it will be with him as it is at a great man house in dinner time: he that knockes when the doore is shut comes too late, Lucre. Well Vsurie, Fraud, and Simony Dissimulation hearken vnto me, My tongue (although in memorie it be greene) Cannot declare what horrors I haue seene, He can it enter into mortall eares Vnmortified: the furies, fres and feares. the shrikes, the grones, the tortures and the paines, that any soule for each of you sustaines. No pen can write, how Conscience hath me scourg'd. When with your faults my soule she euer vrg'd: Arithmeticke dooth faile to number all, the plagues of sorrow in the Den of thrall: then tempt me not, nor trouble me no more, I must not vse you as I did before, If you be found within faire Londons gate. You must to prison, whence we came of late.
Conscience will accuse ye if ye be in sight. Frau. That scuruie Conscience works vs all the spight: Enter Nemo, Vsu. Wel Lucre, yet in thée we haue delight. Dis. Yonder come some, we must take our flight. Exeunt omnes Simp. Birdes of a fether wil flie together, but when they be taken then are they baken, yonder comes a customer, Ile to my stall: Loue, Lucre, and Conscience, blindman buffe to you all. Ne. Conscience, Loue, Lucre, Ladies al what chéere? How doo ye like the seates you sit vpon. Con. O pure vnspotted Nemo sole paragon, Of Loue, of Conscience and perfection, The Marble of Remorse I sit vpon Sweats scalding drops, like bitter brinish teares. Ne. So should remorse when Conscience feels her gilt But gentle Loue how féelest thou thy flint? Loue. O sharp and cold, I fréeze vnto my seat, The Flint holds fire, and yet I feele no heat, But am benumb'd and frozen euerie ioint. Ne. O Loue, so cold is charitie in these times: Lucre, how sit you? Lu. Vpon a heauy stone, not halfe so cold, not halfe so hot as theirs, But of some secrete power, for I do find and sensibly I féele, That I from it exhale an earthly cold, And it from me dooth draw a kindly heat. Ne. Such force hath Care of Lucre in it self, To coole the heart and draw the vital spirits, And such the true condition of you thrée: Remorse of Conscience, Charitie of Loue, And Care of Lucre, such your vses be: But Ladies now your sorrow lay aside, Frolick faire Dames, an vnexpected good Is imminent through me vnto you all: Thrée Lords there be your natiue countrimen, In London bred, as you your selues haue bene. Which couet you for honorable wiues, And presently wil come to visite you,
Be not abashed at your base attire, I shall prouide you friends to decke you all. If I commaund, stand vp, els sit you stil. Enter the 3. Lord. Lo, where they come: my Lordes the Dames be here. pol, Why are they wympled? shal they not vnmaske theme Ne. It is for your sake, for Pollicie they doo it: Pom. Much may their fortune and their feature be. But what it is we cannot thus discerne. Ne. You shall in time Lord Pomp, be yet consent. plea. Their same is more then cause or reason would, May one of these be pleasures paragon? Ne. Pleasure, be pleas'd and vse no preiudice. Madames stand vp, mislike not their attire, That shal be mended as your selued desire. Pol. Their port, and their proportion wel contente. Pom. Right stately dames, if they were wel attir': Plea. May we not sée their beautie what it is? Ne. Yes Lordings yes, Lucre, lift vp thy veile. Pol. Of beautie excellent. Pom. Of rare perfection. Plea. A daintie face. Ne. Vnmaske Loue. Pol. Swéete loue indéed. pom. A louely face. Plea. A gallant grace. Ne. Conscience, vncouer. pol. Beautie diuine. Pom A face angelicall. Plea. Swéet creature of the world. Ne. Enough for once, Ladies sit downe againe: As cunning chapmen do by curious wares, to the audie Which seldome showen do most inflame the mind, So must I deale, being daintie of these Dames, Who seldome séen shal best allure these Lords: A while my Lords, I leaue you with these thrée, Conuerse, confer on good conditions, I will right soone returne with such good friends As it concernes to cloath these daintie one
If any in my absence visit them, Know their intent, and vse your skill therein. Exi pol Ladies, to call to mind your former liues Were to recount your sorrowes on a row, Omitting then what you haue bene or bee, What you may be Ile speak, so it please you, Wiues to vs thrée, Ladies to London Lords, pompe, Pleasure pollicie, men of such regard, As shall you guard from euil, once matched with vs, And Pollicie presents this good to you. pom. With Londons Pomp may one of you be ioin'd, Possessing more than Fortune can affoord, Fortune's a foole, but heauenly prouidence Guards Londons pompe, and her that shal be his: plea. And Londons pleasure, peerles in delightes, Wil deigne to make one of these Dames his owne, Who may with him in more contentment liue, Than euer did the Quéene of Ethiope. Con. Though silence Lordes, our modestie inforce, Nemo can tel the secretes of our thoughtes, Nemo that womens minds can constant kéepe, He shal for vs you answere good my Lordes, I speak for al, though il beseeming me. Enter Falshod & doub. dealing pol. You speak but wel: My Lordes step we aside To note these fellowes, what they do intend. Pom. Nemo can tel, for he doth follow them. Enter Nemo. Falsh. Ladies to you, to some of you, we come, Sent from such friendes as much affect your good, With garmentes, and with complements of cost Accordant well to dames of such degree: I come to Lucre. D. Dea. I to loue am sent with no lesse cost then could be got for coin Which with my message I deliuer would, Could I discerne which of these Dames were shee, Loue. Friend, I am Loue, what bringest thou there to me? Con. Beware good Loue, from whom and what thou takest. Ne. No whispering friend, but shew it openly, The matter good, you need not be ashamed:
From whom commest thou? D.Dea. That I conceile from any but from loue, Ne. From whom come you sir? Falsh. That shal lucre know, and none but she. Ne. Then speak aloud, for whispering here is barr'd. Falsh. Then neither wil I do nor speak at al. Ne. Then I wil speake and tel what you are both, Thy selfe art Falshood, and art sent from Fraud, To compasse Lucre with a cloake of craft, With lawne of lies, and calle of golden guile. Pol. Packe you my friend, for if you stay a while You shal returne no more to him that sent you. Ne. Thou from Dissimulation art sent, And bring'st a gown of glosing, liu'd wish lust, A Vardingale of haine boast, and fan of flatterie, A Ruffe of riot, and a cap of pride, And double dealing is thy name and office both. D. Dea. Falshood, let's go, we are disciphered. Falsh. Lucre, thou loosest here a priucely gift. Exeunt Ne. lucre censumes being won by Fraud or shift, Thus Lords you sée how these are qualified, And how these Ladies shun that sharp rebuke, Which some deserue by taking of such toies, As women weake are tempted soone with giftes, But here they come that must these Ladies deck. lucre, arise, come from the stone of Care: Enter honest Industrie, pure Zeale, & Sincerity. ho. Indust. Fair lucre, lo what honest Industry To thée hath brought, to decke thy daintie self, Lucre by honest Industrie atchieu'd Shall prosper, flourish, and continue long, Exit Lucre with ho. In∣dustrie. Come to thy chamber to attire thée there. Ne. Thou maiest depart with honest Industrie. P.Zeal. And Loue arise from Charities cold Flint, Pure Zeale hath purchas'd roabes to couer Loue, Whiles loue is single, Zeale shal her attire With kind affection, mortifying lust,
Come loue with me these garments to put on: Ne. loue, follow zeal and take his ornaments. Exit Loue with p. zeale Sincer. Rise Conscience from that Marble of Remorse, That wéeping stone that scaldes thy partched skinne, sincerity such roabes for thée hath brought, As best beséemes good Conscience to adorne: Come follow, that thou maist goe put them on, For Conscience cloathed by sinceritie, Is armed wel against the enemie. Ne. Follow him Consc. feare not, thou art right. Exit Con. with Si pol. Most reuerend Nemo thanks for this good sight, lucre is cloathed by honest Industrie. Pom. loue by pure zeale. plea. And Conscience by sincerity. Ne. Lordings, thus haue you séene them at the first, And thus you sée them, trust me, at the worst, Depart we now, come hence a day or two, And sée them deckt as daintie Ladies should, And make such choice as may content you al. pol. Thanks righteous Nemo we the London Lordes Only to thée our selues acknowledge bound. Exeunt omnes Enter painful Penury and Simplicity. pen. Come on gentle husband, let vs lay our heades together, our purses together, and our reckonings together, to sée whether wee win or loose, thriue or not, goe forward or backward, doo you keepe a booke or a skore? Sim. A skore wife? you meane for the Alehouse, doo you not? I would haue her examine me thereof no further, for I am in too farre there, more then I would she should know. Pen. I meane no alehouse skore, but a note of your wares, let me sée, First you began to set vp with a Roiall, how much money haue ye? what ware, and what gaine? Sim. I haue fiue shillings in money, two shillinges in wares, or thereabout, and I owe two shillings and eight pence vppon the skore, how much is that? fiue shillings, two shillings, and two shillings and eight pence. pen. That is nine shillings and eight pence, so we are worse by a
a groat then when we began, wel once again Ile set ye vp, here is four groates I haue got by bearing water this weeke, make vp your stock, and run no more behind▪ Who comes here? Enter Fraud like an Artificer. Simp. What lacke ye? What d ye lack? Frau. Me lack da moones pour de frene verie seene Franche knack da feene gold buttoone, de braue bugla lace, a da feene gold ring, you be free man, mee vn' Fortiner, you buy a me ware, you gaine teene pownd by lay out téene shelleng. Sim. Wife, what hard luck haue we that cannot make x. shillings now to gain x. pound: why, x. pound would set vs vp for euer. pen. Husband sée the ware, & if ten shilling wil buy it, it shal go hard but we wil make that money: Friend, show my husband your wares Frau. Looke you dere mastra de seene buttoone de la gold, de ring de gold, de bugla sheane, two shelleng vne doozen de buttoone, vne shel∣linga vne Ring, tis worth x, shelleng, but mastra & matressa mee mus∣sa make money to go ouer in my owne countrey, but mee loose teen pownd pour hast to goe next tyde or to morrow. pen. Here is fiue shillings buy them of this straunger. simp. Friend you haue not stolne them, but you make them, well, Ile buy them ithe open market, and then I care not, here is ten shil∣lings, deliuer me the wares. Frau. Déer mastra, oh pouer necessitee maka mee selpour graund, graund losse, you shal gein x. pound at least, gor boye. simp. What's your name? Frau. Mechant, I think I am euen with ye now for calling me O∣stler, you'il thriue wel with such bargaines, if ye buy, yee knowe not what, Fraud hath fitted ye with worse than your ballades. pen. You'il warrant them gold sirra, Frau. Wee, so good goll as you pay for: Adieu Mounster. Exit. simp. Adieu Mounster: Adieu foole, sel such gold buttons & ringes for so litle money, good Lord what peniworths these strangers can af∣ford: now wife let me see, x. pound, when we haue ten pound, we'il haue a large shop, and sell all maner of wares, and buy more of these, and get ten pound more, and then ten pound, and ten pound, and twenty pound, then thou shalt haue a taffata hat and a garded gown, and I a gown and a new cap, and a stik doublet, and a faire house.
Pen. I thanke ye husband, wel, till then looke wel to your wares, and Ile ply my waterbearing and saue and get, and get and saue till we be rich, but bring these wares home euery night with ye: simp. Tush, I shall sel them afore night for ten pound, gow wife, gow, I may tel you I am glad this French fellowe came with these wares, we had falne to eramining the Ale-skore els, and then wee had falne cut, and the ale wife and my wife had scolded: Wel, a man may see, he that's ordained to be rich, shal be rich: gow woman. Exeunt Enter Nemo and the three Lordes, as though they had bene chyding. Ne. From whence good Lordes grew this hot argument? pol. Thou knowest alreadie, yet if thou wilt heare, For this we striue: fond pleasure makes account Somming his bils without an auditorie, That Ladie Lucre ought of right be his. plea. So I affirme, and so I wil maintaine That Ladie Lucre ought of right be his. plea. So I affirme, and so I wil maintaine That pleasure ought by right Dame Lucre haue, To beare the charge of sportes and of delightes. pom. Nay to support the haughty magnificence And lordly Pompe of Londons excellence, Befits it rather Lucre ioine with me, By whom her honor shal be most aduanced. pol. More fit for pomp than pleasure, but most fit That Pollicie with Lucre should be matched, As guerdon of my studies and my cares And high employments in the common wealth: plea. What pleasure can be fostered without cost: pom, What Pompe or port without respect of gaine pol, What pollicie without preferment liues? ple. Pleasure must haue Lucre: pom. pomp hath need of Lucre: pol, pollicy merits lucre: ple, Pleasure dies without Lucre, pom, Pomp decaies without Lucre, pol, pollicy droopes without lucre: Ne, Thus Lordes you showe your imperfections:
Subiect to passions, straining honours boundes, Be wel aduisde, you promised to be rulde, And haue those Dames, by me disposed to you, But since I see that humaine humors oft Makes men forgetfull of their greater good. Be here a while, Dame lucre shal be brought By me, to choose which Lord she liketh best, So you allow her choice with patience. Exit. Plea. Go, we abide thy doome til thy returne, Pom. If lucre be not mad she wil be mine, Pol. If she regard her good she wil be mine. Plea. If she loue happie life, she wil be mine, Women loue Pleasure. pom. Women loue Pompe. pol. Women vse Pollicie: and here she comes that must decide the doubt. Enter Nemo with Conscience al in white. Ne. Conscience content thee with a queint conceit, Conceile thy name to work a speciall good, Thou art not knowne to any of these Lordes, By face or feature, til they heare thy name, Which must be lucre for a fine deuice, And Conscience cleare indeed's the greatest gaine, Lo, Lordings here faire lucre whom ye loue: lucre, the choice is left vnto thy selfe, Which of these three thou wilt for husband choose. Con. The modestie that dooth our sex beseeme Forbids my tongue therin to tell my thought, But may it please my Lordes to pardon me, Which of you three shall deigne to make such choice, Him shall I answere to his owne content, pol, If lucre please to match with Pollicie, She shall be mistresse ouer many men. Pom. If lucre like to match with Londons Pomp, In stately port all others she shall passe. plea. If pleasure may for wife faire lucre gaine, Her life shall be an earthly Paradice.
Ne. Lo, Lucre, men, and port, and plesant life Are here propounded, Which wilt thou accept? Con. Lord pollicie, Loue were the only choice Me thinks for you, that all your cares imploy And studies for the loue of common wealth, For you Lord pleasure, Conscience were a wife, To measure your delightes by reasons rule, In recreation Conscience helpe to vse. plea, Were Conscience halfe so sweete as is thy selfe, Her would I seek with suites and seruices. Ne, No lesse accomplisht in perfction Is Conscience, then this Ladie I protest, plea, But on this Dame hath pleasure fixt his hart, And this or death the period of his loue. Con. Lucre with pompe most aptly might combine ple. Lucre, or Loue if case thou wilt be mine, Let passe thy name, thy selfe doe I desire, Thee will I haue except thy selfe denie, With thee to liue▪ or els for thee to die. Ne. What if I denie? ple. Then wil I haue her. pol If we denie? ple. So much the rather. pom. The rather in dspight of vs? Not so. Ne. My Lords, no quarrell, let tis Lady goe, And if ye trust me. Ile content ye both, pleasure, this is not lucre: ple She's Luce vnto me: but be she Loue or Consciēce, this is she. pol. Whom you wil, haue? ple. Spight of the Deuil, I wil. Con, Must it not be my Lord if I agrée? ple. Agree. Con. Some further prooe it fits of you to sée: ple, Receiue a pawn, my hart, my hand, and oth, To be thy owne in loue, in faith, and troth. Con. Thus you are fast, and yet my selfe am frée: ple. I know in ruth thou wilt me not refuse: Con. I know not that, but other Ile not choose.
Ne. It is inough, Lord pleasure, do not feare, Conscience will vse you as becomes her best. plea. And art thou Conscience? welcommer to me than either loue or Lucre, Con. God send grace I be, Ne. My Lords be pleasde, ere long shal you be sped, As much to your contents as pleasure is, Say but the word▪ my selfe shall soone present Lucre and loue, wel worthy such as you. pol, Right thankfully those fauors we'il receiue, Enter Diligence, in hast Dil. My Lords, if your affaires in present be not great Greater than any, saue regard of life, Yea euen the greatest of the common wealth, Prepare ye to withstand a stratagem, Such as this Land nor London euer knew. The Spanish forces Lordings are prepar'd, In brauerie and boast, beyond all boundes T'inuade, to win, to conquer all this land. They chieflie aime at Londons stately pompe, At Londons pleasure, wealth and pollicy. Intending to dispoile her of them all, And ouer all those louelie Ladies three. Loue, lucre, Conscience, peerlesse of the rarest price. to tyrannize and carie hardest hand. From Spain they come with Engine and intent to slay, subdue, to triumph and torment: My selfe (so heauen would) spiall of them had, And Diligence, deere Lords, they call my name. If you vouchsafe to credit my report, You do me right, and to your selues no wrong, Prouided, that you arme you, being warn'd. pol. Diligence, thy seruice shall be knowen, and well rewarded: Nemo, for a time Conceale this Dame, and liue secure vnséene, Let vs alone whom most it dooth concerne, to meete and match our euer wéening foes. Pom. Nemo keepe cloase, and Conscience pray for vs.
Bée gone and recommend vs to our God. Con. My Lordes, if euer, show your honors now, Those proud vsurping Spanish tyrants come, To reaue from you what you doo most regard, to take away your credit and your fame. to race and spoile our right renowmed towne: And if you loue or lucre doo regard, Or haue of Conscience any kind of care, The world shall witnesse by this action, And of the loue that you to vs pretend, In this, your valour shall assurance giue: More would I speake, but daunger's in delay, You know my mind, and heauens record my thoughtes, When I with praiers for you will penitrate, And will in heart be present in your fight: Now pleasure, show what you wil doo for me. ple. I wil be turn'd to paine for thy sweet sake. pol. Faire Conscience feare not, but assure thy selfe What kind affection we so euer beare to Loue and Lucre, in this action Chiefly for thée our seruice shall be done. pom. For Conscience sake more than for Lucre now, pol, For Loue and Consciēce, not dispising Lucre. ple. Onely for Conscience will I hazard all. Ne. And I from hence will her conuey a space, Till you return with happy victory. Exeunt Ne. & Con. Con. Farewel my Lords, for me my Lords, for me. pol. Diligence, what number may there be? Dil. A mighty hoste, and chieflie led by three, Who braue it out in show, as men assured Of victorie, sauns venture, or repulse. pol. How néere be they? Dil. So néere my Lords, that ech delay is death, Stand on your guard, they come as challengers, to bruise your shieldes, and beare away your prize, Mounting the seas, and measuring the land With strong imaginations of successe, pol. Wel, Diligence go get in readines
Men and munition, bid our pages plie To see that all our furniture be wel, Wt, Wealth and Wil to further wars be fit, Exit Dil. My Lords, I would I might aduise ye now, To carrie as it were a carelesse regard, Of these Castilians, and their accustomed brauado: Lord Pomp, let nothing that's magnificall, Or that may tend to Londons graceful state Be vnperfourm'd. As showes and solemne feaste, Watches in armour, triumphes, Cresset-lightes, Bonefiers, belles, and peales of ordinance. And pleasure, see that plaies be published, Mai-games and maskes, with mirth and minstrelsse, Pageants and school-feastes▪ beares, and puppit plaies, My selfe wil muster vpon Mile-end gréene, As though we saw, and fear'd not to be séene: Which wil their spies in such a woonder set, To see vs recke so litle such a foe, Whom all the world admires, saue onely we: And we respect our sport more than his spite, That Iohn the Spaniard wil in rage run mad, To see vs bend like Oakes with his vain breath. pom. In this deuice such liking I conceiue, As London shall not lack what pomp can doe, And well I know that worthy Citizens Doe carie mindes so franke and bountiful, As for their honor they will spare no cost: Especially, to let their enemie know. Honor in England, not in Spaine doth grow. ple. And for the time that they in pleasure spend, Tis limmitted to such an honest end, Namely, for recreatien of the mind, With no great cost, yet liberall in that kind, That pleasure vowes with all delightes he can To doe them good, till death to be their man. pol. Of pollicy they triall haue at large: pom. Then let vs go and each man to his charge▪ Exeunt the three Lords.
Enter Simplicity led in by Vsurie. simp. I sir? Why alas I bought them of a stranger, an old French man for good gold, and to be worth ten pound, for so be told me, I haue good witnesse, for my owne wife was by, and lent mee part of the money. Vsu. And what did they cost you? Simp. Ten shillings euery penny. Vsu. That argues you are guilty: Why? could ye buy so many rings and buttons of gold thinke ye for ten shillings? Of whome did ye buy them? simp. Of an olde French man, the olde French disease take him. Vsu. And where dwels that old French man? simp. In Fraunce I thinke, for he told me he was to goe ouer the next tide, or the next day, my wife can tell as wel as I, if ye thinke I lie, for she was by. Vsu. A good answere, he dwels in Fraunce and you dwel here, and for utering copper for gold you are like to loose both your eares vpon the pillorie, and bsides loose your freedome. simp. Nay, if I loose my eares, I care not for my fréedome, kéepe you my freedome, so I may kéepe my eares, is there no remedy for this M. Vsury? vsurie. None, except you can find out that old French man. simp. Peraduenture I can, if you'il let mee go into Fraunce to seeke him: Vsu, So we may loos you, and neuer see him, nay that may not be. simp, You haue a good pawne there, good maister Vsury be good vnto me. Vsu Ny, now Ile pinch ye, you villaine, ye know how ye haue euer vsed me, but now off goes your eares at least, Sim. Nay▪ good maister Vsurie take all my goodes and lt me go, Enter raud, Dissimulation, Simonie in canuas coates like Sailers. Frau. What's the matter Vsurie, that this poore knaue cries so: Simp. O Maister Fraud, speake to him to let me goe: Frau. Fraud? Ye villaine, cal me not by my name, and ye shall sée I wil speak to him to lt ye goe free: Vsury, of al old fellowship let this
poore knaue packe, if the matter be not too hainous. Vsu. No sir, his fault is odious, look here what stuffe hee would vt∣ter for gold, flat copper, & he saith, he bought them of an old frenchman Frau. But thou didst not sel them, didst thou? Sim. No sir, I would haue but laid them to pawne for fiue pounds to him. Frau. That was more than they be woorth, I promise thée a foule matter, wel, thou must loose thy ware and be glad to escape, so Vsurie, at my request ye shal let the poore man goe. Vsu. Wel, for this once I will, sirra, get ye packing, and take héede of such a peece of worke againe while ye liue. simp. There is diuers péeces of work in that box, pray ye giue me some of my goods againe, a ring or something. Vsu. Not an inch, and be glad ye scape as ye doe, Simp. Alas, I am vndone, ther's al the wealth & stock I haue. Fra. Do ye long to loose your eares, be gone ye foolish knaue. Sim. I thanke ye Maister Fraud: Ile not goe so far, but Ile be néere to heare and see what the meaning of these fellowes in this canuas should be, for I know Fraud, Dissimulation, and simony to be those thrée: here I think I am vnséene. Simplicity hides him neer them. Frau. Vsury, thanke me for this god bootie, for it is I that holy ye to it, for I sould them to him for gold indéed in the shape of an old French artificer, come giue me halfe for I deserue it, for my part was the first beginning of this Comedie, I was euer affraid, least the foole should haue knowne me, for ye see now though disguisde, hee cal∣me by my name. simp. Did a so? I am glad I haue found the french man, now Ile raise the street, but Ile haue my wares again, & prooue ye as ye were, euer both false knaues I beleeue. Exit sim. Frau. Kil him, stab him, out villaine, he wil betray vs all. Vsu. What a foole were you to speake before e was gone, now you haue lost your part of this too, for he will goe complaine, you will bee sought for, and I made to restore these things againe. Fra. Not if thou be wise, thou wilt not tarie the reckoning, for seest thou not vs three? Dissimulation simony and my selfe? Vsu. Yes: What meanes these canuas suites? Will yee be Sailers? Fra. Vsury make one, this is our intent: let's sée that none heare
vs now: the Spaniards are comming thou hearest with great power, here is no liuing for vs in London, men are growen so full of consci∣ence and religion, that Fraud, Dissimulation and Simony are disci∣phered, and being disciphered are also dispised: and therefore wee will slip to the sea, and meet and ioine with the enemie, and if they con∣quere as they may, for they are a great armie by report, our credite may rise againe with them, if they faile and retire, we may either goe with them and liue in Spaine, where we and such good fellowes are tollerated and vsed, or come sitly again hether, so long as none knows but friends. Vsu. But wil you do thus you two? Dis. And thou too I hope, why, what should we do? Vsu. Whatsoeuer ye doe, be not traitors to your natiue countrie. Simo. Tis not our natiue countrie, thou knowest, I Simony am a Roman, Dissimulation a Mongrel, half an Italian, halfe a Dutchman Fraud so too, halfe French, and halfe Scottish: and thy parentes were both Iewes, though thou wert borne in London, and here Vsu∣ry thou art cried out against by the preachers: ioine with vs man to better thy state, for in Spain preaching toucheth vs not. Vsu. o better my state, nay, to alter my state, for here where I am, I know the gouernment, here can I liue for all their threatning, if strangers peuaile, I know not their lawes nor their vsage, they may bée oppressore, & take al I haue, and it is like they are so, for they sk that's not their owne. Therfore here will I stay sure, to keepe what I haue, rather than be a traitor vpon hap and had I wist: and stay you if ye be wise, and pray as I pray, that the preachers and all other good men may die, and then we shall flourish, but neuer trust to strangers curtesie. Fra. We shal trust but to our friends & kin, yo'il not go with vs, yet for old acquaintance kep counsel, betray vs not, for we'il be gone to sea, I am affraid yen foolish knaue haue belaied the stréets for vs. Vsu. Let me go afore ye, if any such thing be, Ile giue ye inkling. Exit Fra. Do, farewel Vsury: and as he goes one way, we'il go another, follow sirs, nuer trust a shrinker, if he be your owne brother. Exeunt omnes. Enter the three Lordes with their Pages and Fealtie a Heral before them, his coat hauing the armes of London before. and an Oliue tree behind.
pol: Fealty, thou faithfull Herald of our towne, Thou true truce-kéeper, and sure friend in peace, Take downe our shields, and giue them to our boies: Now Fealty, prepare thy wits for war, he deliuers the To parlie with the proud Castillians Approching fast the frontiers of our coast: Wit, here, my Page in euerie message shall Attend on thee, to note them and their déedes: I néed not tel thée, they are poore and proud, Vaunters, vaineglorious, tyrants, truce-breakers, Enuious, irefull, and ambitious, For thou hast found their facing and their brags, Their backes, their coffers, and their wealth, their rag, But let me tell thee what we craue of thée, To scanne with iudgment what their leaders be, To note their presence and obserue their grace, And truly to aduertise what they seeme, Whether to be experienced in armes, Or men of name those three that lead the rest, the rest referre we to thy owne conceit, Feal, I hope in this my dutie to discharge, as heretofore Simplicity, make a great noise within, and en∣ter with three or four weaponed. Simp. Clubs, clubs, nay come neighbours come, for here they bee, here I left them, arrant theeues, rogues, cosoners, I charge ye as you wil answere, prebend them, for they haue vndone me, and robb'd me, and made me the poorest free man that euer kept a ballad stall: A Constable, I charge ye keepe the peace and lay downe your wea∣pons:To the three Lords. pomp, Who rais'd this tumult? Speake, what meanes this stir? simp. O I am vndone, robb'd, spoil'd of all my stocke, let me see, where be they? Keepe euerie street and doore, samine all that comes for Fraud that cosoner. pol, Maisters, what meane you in these troublous times to keepe this coile? Const, Alas my Lord, her's a poore man rob'd, or cosoned.
simp. I am rob'd O my boies, my pretie boies, I am vndone, saw ye no theeues, nor no craftie knaues, what be all these? Wit. Simplicity, away, these be our Lordes, offend them not for feare. Simp. I séeke not them, I séeke for Fraud that rob'd me. plea. Go seeke els where, for here's no place for such. Pol. My friends depart, and qualifie this stir, And see peace kept within the walles I charge ye. Const. I wil my Lord, come Simp. we came too late to find your losses. Exeunt. simp. Pray for me my boies, I thin  shal hang my selfe I come euer too late to speed. pol. Now Lordes, let Honors fire enflame on? thoughtes, And let vs arme our courage with our cause, And so dispose our selues to welcome them, Doe me the fauour (if I may intreat) To be the first to front the foe in face, The Vauntgard let be Pollicies this once, Pompes the maine baittaile pleasures the Rereward: And so bestow vs if you thinke it good. Pom. I think it good, and time that it were done. Plea. I think it good, and wish the enemie come. Enter Diligence. Dil. And here they come, as braue as Philips sonne, And his Ephestion, woont to be arraied In glittering gold, and party coloured plumes, With curious pendents on their Lances Ext, Their shieldes Ymprez'd with gilt copertiments, Their Pages carelesse, plaieng at their backes, As if with conquest they triumphing came. Pol. If they be conquer'd greater is their shame, But Diligence go post alongst the coast, To tell the newes, and looke to welcome them, Let vs alone: My Lords you heare the newes, More words were vaine, I know ye wel resolu'd. Exit Dil. Pom. And here they come, Oh proud Castillians.
Enter first Shealty the Herald: then Pride, bearing his shield him∣self, his ympreze, a Peacocke: the worde, Non par illi His Page Shame after him with a Launce, hauing appendent gilt, with this word in it, Sur lé Ciel, Ambition, his ympreze, a blacke Horse sal∣liant, with one hinder foote vpon the Globe of the earth, one for foote stretching towards the cloudes, his woorde, Non sufficit obis: His page Treacherie after him, his pendent Argent and Azure, an armed Ame catching at the Sun beames, the woorde in it, Et gloriam Phoebi. Last, Tyrannie, His ympreze, a naked Childe on a speares point bleeding, his woord, Pour sangue, His page, Terrour, his pendent ules, in it, a Tygers head out of a cloud, licking a bloody heart: The woord in it, Cura Cruor. March once about the stage, then stand and viewe the Lords of London, who shall martch towardes them, and they giue backe, then the Lords of London wheele about to their standing, and th'other come a∣gaine into their places, then Pollicie sendes Fealtie: their Her∣raldes coate must haue the armes of Spaine before, and a burning ship behind. pol. My Lordes, what meane these gallants to perfourme, Come these Castilian Cowardes but to braue? Doo all these mountaines moue to breede a mouse? Fealty, goe fetch their answer resolute How they dare be so bold, and what they dare doo here. Shea. What wouldst thou Herald?As Feal is going towards thē, they send foorth Sheal. Fea. Parlle with those thrée, Herald. Shea. They scorne to grace so meane a man as thou with parlie or with presence. Fea: Do they scorne? what, are thy masters, Monarchs euerie one? Or be they Gods? or rather be they Deuils? Scorne they a Heraldes presence and his speech? Name them, that I may knowe their mightines, And so auoid of duties some neglect. shea. Monarches in minds, and Gods in high conceites, That scorne you English, as the scomme of men, Whom I ne dare without their license name, Fore whom thy duties all are few and base, Fea. Imperious Spaniard, doo a Herald right.
Thy selfe art one, their Trowch man if thou be, Be thou my Trunke, that I my message may through thee conueigh to them from London Lords. shea. Base English groome, from beggars sent belike, Who for their mate thée malapert account, Dare I (thinkst thou) these Lords magnificent, Without their speciall pleasure vnderstood, Once mooue with message, or with show of speach? Fea. More seruile thou to loose a Heraldes due, That is in field a kinges companion, But if thou dare not my Ambassage doo, Stand by and stop not my accesse to them. Shea. Rather wil I returne and know their mindes. Pol. Now boy, what newes. When Sheal goes to thē, Wit goes to the 3. Lords of Lond. Wit, The fearful Herald of yen famous crue Durst not your message to his maisters tell, Til Fealtie with contumelions wordes, (Yet was the Spaniard braue and hot in tearmes) Enforced him for their answere resolute. The Span. whisper with their Her. Pom. Which now belike our Herald shall receiue, For theirs comes to him. sheal. It pleaseth them to be magnifical, And of their speciall graces to vouchsafe And counteruiew of Pages, and of shields. A countermessage by vs Heraldes done: A fauour which they seldome graunt to foes, Go thou for those, I meete thee will with these. Fea. My Lords yen brauing Spaniards wish A counteruiew of Pages and of shieldes, But what they meane or be I know not yet: Haply you may by their ymprezes view, Or I by parlle some coniecture giue, So please it you your pages and your shieldes With me to send, their Herald comes with theirs. pol. Our shields I reck not, but to send our Wealth Feal. Accompanied with Wit and Will, no peril. Pom. It is my wealth, but kéep him if they dare, Ile fetch him double if they doo my Lordes,
Plea. Boies, take our sheildes and speares, for they come on. Wit. Vaile Spaniard, couch thy Launce and pendent both, knowest where thou art? Here wil we beare no braues When the English boies meet the other, cause them to put downe the tops of their Lances, but they beare vp theirs. Wea. Downe with your point, no loft borne Lances here By any stranger be he foe or friend. Wil. Wel doest thou note the couching of thy Lance, Mine had ere this els goar'd your Spanish skin. Feal. Wel done my boies, but now all reuerence. Shea. Aduaunce againe your Launces now my boies hold vp again S. Pride. Dicito nobis ideo qui ades, quid sibi velint isthaec Emble∣mata? Dicito (inquam) lingua materna: nos enim omnes belle intelli∣gimus, quamuis Anglicè loqui dedignamur. Fea. Then know Castillian Caualieros this, The owners of these Emblemes are three Lordes Those three that now are viewing of your shieldes, Of London, our chiefe citie are they Lordes, Pollicie, pompe, and pleasure be their names: And they in honour of their mistresses, Loue, Lucre, Conscience, London Ladies thrée, Emblazoned these Scutchens, challenging Whom durst compare, or challenge one of them, And Pollicie a Tortoys hath Emprez'd, Encompast with her shel, her natiue walles, And prouidens securus is his word: His page is Wit, his Maistresse Lady Loue. pomp in his shield a Lilly hath pourtrai'd, As paragon of beautie, and boone grace: Glorie sauns peere his word, and true it is, With Londons Pompe Castile cannot compare, His Page is wealth, his maistresse Lucre hight. Pleasure, the daintie of that famous towne, A Faulcon hath emblazon'd, soaring hie, To showe the pitch that Londons Pleasure flies: His word Pour temps, yet neuer stoupes to traine, But vnto Conscience, chosen for his deere.
His Page is Will, and thus th'effect you heare. S. Pride. Buena buena per los Lutheranos Angleses. Fea. Mala, mala per Catholicos Castillianos. Pol. Loqueris Anglicè? Shea. Maximè Domine. Pol. Agedum, Go too then and declare thy Lords, their shields, their pages, and their purpose. Speak man, feare not, though Spain vse messengers il, Tis Englands guise to entreat them curteously. Shea. Three Caualieros Castillianos here, Without Compeeres in compasse of this world: Are come to conquer, as ful wel they shal this mool-hill Isle, that litle England hight, With London that proud paltrie market towne, And take those Dames Loue, Lucre, Conscience Prisoners, to vse or force as pleaseth them. The first (now quake) is Spanish Maiesty, That for his ympreze giues Queene Iunoes Bird, Whose traine is spangd with Argus hundred eies, the Quéene of Gods scornes not to grace him so. His woord is Non par illi, none his like: Yet is his page or hench-man Modesty, Lucre the Lady that shal be his prize: And in his pendent on his Lances point, Sur le Ciel his word, aboue the heauens. pol. Whileme indeed aboue the heauens he was, Could be haue kept him in that blessed state, From thence for pride he fell to pit of paine, And is he now become the pride of Spaine? And so his page not Modesty but Shame. Wel, on the rest. sheal. Don Honor is the next grand peere of spain, Whose ympreze is a Courser saliant. Of colour Sables, darkening aire and earth, Pressing the Globe with his disdainfull foot. And sallieng to aspire to rowling skies, Non sufficit orbis is his haughtie woord, The world sufficeth not high Hono thoughtes,
And on the pendent fixed en his Lance, A hand is catching at the sunnie beames: & gloriam Phoebi, and the Suns bright coatch. Honor would guide, if he might haue his wil. His Page is Action tempering stil with state. pol. Himselfe Ambition, whom the heauens do hate, shea. and Loue the Lady that he hopes to gaine, pol. His thoughts distract from foule distempered brain Prooues him the verie firebrand of Spain: And in his shield his blacke disordered beast, Scaling the skies, scornfull to tread the ground, And both his words, proud words prooue perfectly Action his page to be but Treachery, Euer attendant on Ambition: but to the third. Sheal. The third ground Caualiero is Gouernment, Seuere in Iustice, and in iudgment déepe: His ympreze is a naked Infant goar'd Vpon a Lance, signifing, seueritie. His word, pour sangue, for blood of enemies He bendes his sorces: on his pendent is A Lyger licking of a bleeding heart: And Cura Cruor is the word thereon, His care's for blood of those that dare resist: Yet hight his Page that followes him, Regard, and he for Conscience to this conquest comes. pol. The Gouernment of spaine is Tyrannie, as doo his ympreze and his words declare, His Page is Terror: for a Tyrant feares His death, in diet, in his bed, in sleepe, In conscience: Spight the Spanish tyrannie Hath shed a sea of most vnguilty blood: Wel, what's the end? Shea. The end is best you yeeld, submitting you to mercy of these Lords. Pom. Before we fight? soft sic, ye braue too fast. Castilians, know that Englishmen wil knock, but say. Dooth Spanish Pride for Londons Lucre gape, ple. And would their Tyranny Conscience captiue haue? pol: Doth their Ambition Londons loue affect? sheal. All this they will, and pray vpon your towne,
And giue your landes away before your face: alas, what's England to the power of spaine? a Molehil, to be placed where it pleaseth them. pom. But in this Molehil many Plsmyres be, All which will sting before they be remoou'd, What is thy name? sheal. Shealty, pol. An Irish word, signifieng liberty, rather remisnes, loosnes if ye wil, why hath thy coat a burning ship behind? shea. to signify ye burning of your fléet by vs Castilliās. pol: It rather means your common wealth's on fire, about your eares, and you were best looke home, a common wealth's compared to a ship, If yours do flame, your countrey is hot, beware. Feal. I see Castilians, that you maruel much at this same Embleme of the Oliue tree Vpon my backe: Lo this it signifies. Spaine is in warres, but London liues in peace, Your natiue fruit dooth wither on your soile, and prospers where it neuer planted was. This Londons Fealty dooth auouch for trueth, Herald of war, and Porter of their peace, Commaund ye me no seruice to my Lords. S. Pride. Quid tibi cum domini mox seruient miseri nobis: diseede. Feal. Quid mihi cum dominis seruietis miseri meis▪ pom. shealty, say vnto yen Thrasos thrée. The Lordes of London dare them to the field, Wittieng their pride and their Ambition, Scerning their Tiranny, and yet fearing this, That they are come from home and dare not fight, But if they dare in ioint or seueral armes, Battaile or combat, him that Lucre seekes, Your Spanish pride, him dare I from the rest. ple. That bloodie curre, your Spanish Tyranny, That Londons Conscience would force with crueltie, I challenge him for Conscience sake to fight, a Lord of London, and I pleasure hight. And shealty, when Citizens dare them thus,
Iudge what our Nobles and our courtiers dar▪ Pol. Say if thou wilt that Londons pollicy Discernes that proud Ambition of spe, And for he comes enflamde with Lons loue, In combat let him conquere me and haue her, this is Loues fauour, I her seruant am. pom. This Lucres fauour, Pomp for her will fight. Plea. this Conscience fauour, she my mistresse is. shea. You crauen English n your donghils crowe. Pom. You Spanish Fesants crow vpon your pearch, But when we fire your coates about your eares, And take your shippes before your walled townes, We make a donghill of your rotten boanes, And cram our chickens with your graines of gold. shea. You will not yéeld? ple, Yes, the last moneth. shea. Farewel. Retire Heraldes with the pages to their places. S. Pride. Vade. pol. Herald, how now? Fea. Yen proud Castillians looke for your seruice. Pom. So do we for theirs: but Fealtie, canst thou declare to me the cause why all their pages follow them, when ours in showes do euer goe before. Fea. In war they followe, and the Spaniard is warring in mind pol. But that's not now the cause, yen three are Pride, Ambition Tyranny. shame followes pride, as we a prouerbe haue, pride goes before, and shame comes after, Treachery euer attendes vpon Ambiton. And Terrour alwaies with a fearfull watc, Doth wait vpon il conscienced Tyranny: But why stay we to giue them space to breath: Come, Courage, let vs charge them all at once. Let the three Lordes passe towards the Spaniards, and the Spaniardes make show of comming forward and sodainly depart. Pom. What brauing cowards these Castillians be, My Lordes let's hang our Scutchens vp againe,
And shroud our selues but not farre off vnséene, To prooue if that may draw them to some deed, Be it but to batter our ymprezed shieldes. plea. Agréed, here Fealty, hang them vp a space. They hang vp their shieldes, and step out of sight. The Spaniardes come and flourish their rapiers neer them, but touch them not, & thē hang vp theirs, which the Lords of London perceiuing, take their owne and batter theirs: The Spaniards making a litle showe to rescue, do sodenly slippe away an come no more. pol. Facing, faint-hearted, proud and insolent, That beare no edge within their painted sheaths, That durst not strike our sillie patient shieldes. Pom. Vp haue they set their owne, sée if we dare Batter on them, and beat their brauing Lordes. ple. Let them not yonder hang vnbackt, my Lords. Pol. With good aduise, that we be not surprised, and good enough. pom. My selfe wil onset giue on Prides, at your Peacocke sir. plea. At Tyrannies wil I bestow my blow, wishing the maister. Pol. I at Ambitions strike, haue at his pampered Iade. Enter S. Pride. S. Pride. Fuoro Viliagos, fuoro Lutheranos Angleses, fuoro sa, sa, sa. Pom. Their shieldes are ours, they fled away with shame, But Lordings, whiles the stratageum is fresh, And memorie of thir misfortune greene, Their hartes yet fainting with the nouell griefe, Let vs pursue them flieng, if you say it, Haply, we may preuent their passage yet. pol. With spéed and héede the matter must be done, ple. Therefore you Pollicie shall our leader be. Exeunt omne. Enter three Ladies and Nemo. Ne. The day is ours, faire Ladies let vs ioy, The ioyfull day that all men may reioice, Yet onely I am thankfull for this good. And your good day at hand approcheth fast. Wherein you shall be ioinde to thrée such Lordes,
As all the cities vnder heauens bright cope, Cannot with all their glorie match in worth, Lucre, Lord Pomp a victor comes to thee: Loue, looke thou for Lord pollicy aswell: And Conscience for her well reformed Fere, pleasure, that onely made his choice of her. Vpon that day triumphant shall we feast, Wherein (Madames) your honors nil be least. Lucre. Against their comming might my read be hard, Prepare would we garlands of Laurell greene, To welcome them, more for the common good, Than for affection priuate that we beare. Loue. To meet them comming wil not be amisse, But what know we how they will take such work, Con. Report may be much more than there is cause, We may them méete and gréet with ioyfull heartes, And make them garlands when we know their mindes. Enter the three Lords with the Spanish Shieldes and Diligence Ne. And here they come with new ymprezed shields, My Lords wel met, and welcome from your foes. Lucre. Lord pomp, wel met, and welcome home againe. Loue. Lord pollicy, wel met, and welcome home againe. Con. Lord pleasure, welcome with vnfained heart. ple. Faire ioy and Lady xx. thousand thankes. pol. Faire Loue, and Lady, twise as many thankes· Pom. Faire and beloued Lucre, though I speake last, As kindly I thy welcome do accept, As heart can thinke, pen write, or tongue can tell. Ne. Now speak my Lords, how haue ye sped? pol. Right wel: thanks vnto him yt gaue the day to vs, The pride of Spaine was cloak'd with Maiestie, And Shame his page, (nicknamed) Modestie, Spanish Ambition, Honor would be cal'd, And Treacherie his page, term'd Action. Their Tyranny was cleped Gouernment, Terror his page, was (falsly) nam'd Regard, But God aboue hath giuen them their reward.
They with dishonor left their shields behind, The onely prises purchast by vs now, And those (faire Ladies) we present to you, Loue, this is thine, and he that giues it thee. Ne. In lieu whereof your gift and her I giue Againe to you, that merite more than both. pol. The greatest gift and good could me befall. pom. Fair lucre, loe, my present and my self. Lucre. Which I with Nemos license gladly take. Ne. Take her Lord pomp, I giue her vnto thee, Wishing your good may ten times doubled be. pom. the wished good this world could giue to me. ple. Of dutie I (my deere) must giue thee this, that art my comfort and my earthly blisse. Ne. Now Lords, I hpe you are contented all, pomp with his Lucre, pollicie with Loue: pleasure with Conscience, ioy fall you from aboue: And thus to you my promise is perfourm'd, And I expect that yours aswell be kept, That present preparation may be made to honour those with holy mariage rites, that I in presence of the world may giue these as my daughters vnto you my sonnes. Pol. By my consent one day shal serue vs all, Which shall be kept for euer festiuall. pom. And on that day in honor of these Dames, these shields in triumph shall be borne about. Plea. with pageants, plates, and what delights may be to entertaine the time and companie. Ne. So it please you Lordings, me thinks it were méet, that the Ladies tooke care to prouide their owne toies. My selfe néede to helpe them, who know their mindes well, For I can kéepe women both quiet and constant. pol. It pleaseth vs well that you wil take the paines. Faire ones, for a while we betake you to your busines. Pom. Ladies, adue. the Lords bring thē to the doore, & they go out & Ne. ple. Beloued, farewel. Fra. giues Pol. a paper, which he reads & then saie pol. It seemes by this writing sir, you would serue me, Is your name Skil? whom did you serue last?
Frau. An ill maister, my Lord, I serued none but my selfe. pol. Haue ye neuer serued any heretofore? Fra. Yes, diuers my Lord, both beyond sea and here with your pa∣tience, my good Lord, not offending the same, I thinke I am your poore kinsman, your Lordship, pollicy, and I Skil, if it like ye. pol. You say verie well, and it is verie like, I will answere yee a∣non. Diss. giues Plea. a paper which he reades, and saies. ple. Is your name faire semblance that wish to serue me. Dis. Please it your Lordship, fair semblance, I am wel séen, though I say it, in sundry languages, méet for your Lordship, or any noble ser∣uice, to teach diuers tongues, and other rare things. Plea. I like ye verie well, stay a while for your answere, Enter Vsurie and giues a paper to Pompe which he reades, and saith, pom. Maister Vsury, I thanke ye that ye offer me your seruice, it séemes to be for your old maistresse sake, Lady lucre, stay but a while, I will answere you with reason. The three Lords go together, and whisper, and call Diligence, Diligence goes out for a marking yron, and returnes. Frau. How now my hearts, think ye we shal spéed. pol. Diligence, Come hether. Vsu. I cannot tell what you shal, but I am sure I shal. Dis. I am as like as anie of ye both. Vsu. Fraud. Dis. Whist man, he's Skil. Vsu. Skil, Why doest thou séeke to serue Lady Loue? What profite wil that he? Fra. Cut hold thée content, Ile serue but a while, and serue mine owne turne and away. pom. Maister Vsury come hether, you desire to serue me, you haue done Lady Lucre good seruice you say, but it was against God and Conscience you did it, neither euer in your life did ye anie thing for Loue: Well to be short, serue me you shall not, and I would I could banish you from London for euer, or keepe you cloase prisoner, but that is not in me, but what is or may be, that strait you shall see: By pollicies counsell this shall be done, Diligence bring that yron, helpe me my Lords.
Enter Diligence. pol. Giue me the yron Pomp, Cosen Skil help to hold him, Fraud laies hold on him but Diss. slip away. Sirra, pollicy giues you this marke, doo you sée, A litle x. standing in the midd'st of a great. C, Meaning thereby to let all men vnderstand, that you must not take aboue bare x. pound in the hūdred at any hand, And that too much too, and so be packing quietly: And know that Londons Pomp is not sustained by vsury, But by well ventured marchandize and honest industrie. Vsu. I would I had neuer seene ye, if this be your curtesie. Exit Vsurie. pol, Now Cosen Skil, alias, filthy Fraud, No kinsman to Pollicie, nor friend to the state. In steed of seruing me, Diligence take him to Newgate, Aske not whie, sir, but Diligence if he doe striue, Raise the street he's vnweaponed, and thou hast a weapon on: And now Lordes when ye wil, about our affaires, let's be gone, ple. Agréed, but what's become of faire semblance my man. pom. A crafie villaine, perceiuing how we meant to Vsurie, slipt away. Enter Simplicitie in hast, and giue the Lords a paper to read. Simp. All hail, all raine, all frost, & all snow, be to you thrée Lords of London on a row: Read my supplantation and my suit yee shall know, Euen for Gods sake aboue, and three Ladies sakes below. Frau. M. Diligence, Do me fauour, you know I am a gentleman. Dil. Step aside til my Lordes be gone, Ile doo for you what I can. slip aside. pom. What's here my boy, what's here? pleasure, this suit is sure to you, for it's mad stuffe, and I know not what it meanes. ple Neither doe I: sirra, your writing is so intricate, that you must speake your mind, otherwise, we shall not know your meaning. pol. You sue for three things here, and what be they tell them: simp. Cannot you thrée tell, and the suit to you thrée? I am glad a simple fellow yet, can go beyond you three greate Lordes of London.
Why my suite, looke yee, is such a suite, as you are bound in honor to heare, for it is for the puppet like wealth, I would haue no new or∣ders, nor new sciences set vp in the citie, whereof I am a poore frée∣man, and please ye, as ye may read in my bil ther, simplicity fréeman. But my Lords, I would haue three old trades, which are not for the common wealth, put downe. Ple. And after all this circumstance, sir what be they? simp. they be not thrée what lacke yees, as what do yee lacke, fine Lockerome, fine Canuas, or fine Holland cloath: or what lacke ye, fine Ballades, fine Sonets: or what lacke ye, a purse or a glasse, or a paire of fine kniues: but they be three, haue ye anies, which mee thinks are neither sciences nor occupations, and if they be trades, they are ve∣ry malapert trades, and more than reason. pol. As how sir? Name them. sim. Wil you banish them as readily as I can name them? the first is, hue ye any old yron, old male, or old harnis? pom. And what fault find ye with this? simp. What fault? I promise ye a great fault, what haue you or any man els to doo to aske me if I haue any old yron? What if I haue, or what if I haue not? Why should you be so saucie to aske? plea. Why foole, tis for thy good to giue thée money for that, that might lie and rust by thée. simp. No my Lord, no. I may not call you foole: it is to marke the houses where such stuffe is, that against rebels rise, there is harneis and weapon ready for them in such and such houses, and what then? the rustie weapon doth wound past surgerie, and kils the Quéens good subiects: & the rest of the old trash wil make them guns too, so it is good luck to find old yron, but tis naught to keep it, and the trade is crafty, and now my L. pollicy, I speak to you, t'were wel to put it downe. pol. Wisely said, which is your second? Is that as perillous? simp. Yea, and worse: It is, haue ye any ends of gold and silue? this is a perilous trade, couetous, and a ticement to murther, for, marke ye, If they that aske this should be euill giuen, as Gods forbod▪ they sée who hath this gold and siluer, may not they come in the night breake in at their houses, and cut their throates for it? I tell ye, gold and sil∣uer hath caused as much mischiefe to be done as that, down with it. pom. they that haue it need not shew it. Sim, tush, they need ask no such question, many a man hath delight
to shew what he hath, the trad's a ticing trade, downe with it: pol, Now your third sir: sim, that is the craftiest of all, wherein I am disbus's, for that goes vnder the colour of simplicity, haue ye any wood to cleane? ple. A perillous thing, what hurt is there in this sir? Sim. O do you not perceiue the subtiltie? why sir, the Woodmongers hires these poore men to goe vp and downe with their betles & wed∣ges on their backs, crieng, haue ye any wood to cleaue, and laugh to see them trauell so loden with wood and yron: now sir, if the poore men go two or thrée daies and be not set a worke (as sometimes they doo) the Woodmongers pay them and gaine by it, for then know they there's no wood in the citie, then raise they the price of billets so bie, that the poore can buy none. Now sir, if these fellowes were barr'd from as∣king, whether there were wood to cleaue or not, the woodmongers néed not know but that there were wood, and so billets and fagots woulde be sold al at one rate, downe with this trade, we shall sit a cold els my Lords. Ple. I promise you a wise suit, and done with great discretion. sim. Yea, is it not? might ye not do wel to make me of your counsel I beléeue I could spie moe faults in a weeke, than you could mend in a moneth: pol. Wel, for these three faults the time serues not now to redresse: sim. No marie, for you three must be maried sodainly, and your feast must be dres: pom, Against which feast, repaire you to Diligence, and hee shal appoint you furniture and money, and a place in the show, till when farewell. Exeunt sim. Farewell my Lords, farewel my three Lords, and remember that I haue set ech of yee a fault to mend: wel, Ile go seek M. Diligēce that he may giue me forty pence against the feast sir reuerence:Exit Dil. what is it M. Fraud, ye would demaund of me?Dil & Frau. step out Frau. Sir this you know, though your selfe be a man of good recko∣ning, yet are yee knowen an offier vnto these thre Lords, and what discredit it were to me, being a noted mn to passe through the streets with you being officer, or if any of my friends should suspect me with you, and dog vs, and see me committed to Newgate, I were vtterly discredited, here is a purse sir, and in it two hundred Angels, looke sir, you shall tell them.
Dil. Here are so indeed, what meane yee by this, I will not take these to let ye escape. deliuer Fraud the purse againe. Fra. I meane not so sir, nor I wil not giue halfe of them to be suf∣fered to escape, for I haue done no offence, though it please them to im∣prision me, and it is but on commandement, I shal not stay long, but I will geue you this purse and gold in pawne to be true prisoner, onely giue me leaue to goe some other way, and home to my lodging, for my bootes and other necessaries, for there Ile leaue word I am ridden out of towne, and with al the hast that possibly I may, I wil meet you at Newgate, and giue you an Angell for your curtesie: there is the purse. Fraud giues him a purse like the other. Dil. I hazard (as you know) my Lords displeasure herein, and yet to pleasure you I will venture this once, but I pray ye make hast that I be not shent, I would not for ten Angels it were knowen. Fra. If I tarie aboue an hower, take that gold for your tarieng. Exit. Dil. I do not feare that you'l forfeit so much for so litle cause. Exit. Enter Nemo with Desire, Delight, and Deuotion, the three Lordes of Lincolne. Ne. My Lords of Lincolne, haue you such tytle and such interest To Loue, Lucre, and Conscience, as ye say? Who gaue you leaue to haue accesse to them? I am their father by adoption, I neuer knew of Loue twixt them and you: And to perpetuall prison they were doom'd, From whence I onelie might deliuer them. Which at the suit of three most matchlesse Lordes, Their countrimen, in London bred as they, I haue perfourm'd and freed them from their bonds, And yet haue bound them in their freedome too To Pollicie, to pleasure, and to pomp, Three Lords of London, whose they are in right, Contracted wiues, and done by my consent, And euen to morrow is the mariage day, Except your comming stay or break it off, I wil go call their Lords to answere you, The (pvnder couert Baron) medle not. Exit.
Desire. Fetch them Lord Nemo, we will here attend. Delight. Attend we may, but vnto litle end, The Ladies are in hucksters handling now, Deuo. I would I had my time in praieng spent, That I in woing Conscience did consume. Enter the three Lordes of London and Nemo. Desire. Here come the Lords, let's show good counte∣nance man. Pom. Yet more adoe before we can inioy The ioies of mariage with our mistresses? Be these the Lords that tytle doo pretend? My Lords of Lincolne, so we heare you be. What are your names? Del. Deuotion, Desire, and Delight. pom. Which comes for Lucre? Desire. I Desire. ple. Which for Conscience? Deuo. I Deuotion. pol. Which for Loue? Del. I Delight. pol. You shall be answered straight. ple. I can answere them quickly: ye cannot haue them, nor ye shall not haue them. pol. Stay pleasure, soft: My Lord Desire, you Lucre séeke, Desire of lucre (be it without reproch to you my Lord) is couetousnes which cannot be seperated long from that: read my Lord. Point to the stone of Care. Desire. In golden letters on this stone is written Care. pol. Care with desire of lucre well agrees, the rather for that Londons Lucre may not be seperated from Londons Pompe, so you may take that stone if ye will, but the Lady you cannot haue. Desire. And a stone is a cold comfor in steed of Lucre. pol. Deuotion to Conscience (I speake now to you my Lord that are learned) is sorrow for sinne, or in one word read. point to the stone of Remorse. Deuot. On this sweating stone in brasse is set Remorse. pol. And that is your portion, for Conscience is bestowed on Lon∣dons
Pleasure, because London maks a conscience what pleasure they vse and admit, and what time they bestowe therein, and to what end: s my Lord Deuotion, either that or nothing. Deuo. A stone is a hard lot in stod of a Ladie. pol. My Lord Delight, that to delight in Loue, you must I loue, for making choice of mine. Loue is my portion, and that Flint is yours. Del. Here in lead is written, Charitie: and what of this? pol. If you be (as I doubt not) honest delight in loue, then in the best sene, you can haue but Charitie, if you be (which I suspect not) o∣ther Delight in Loue, you must be noted for Concupiscence, and that you will blush to be: wel Charitie is your best, then that is your porti∣on: For, marke ye, Londons pollicy ioines with Londons Loue: to shew, that all our policie is for loue of Londons common wealth: and so our loue cannot be seperte from our pollicy, you beare this. Delight. A Flint's a hard change for so faire a wife. pol. And thus Lords, Desire of Lucre may take Care, Deuotion of Conscience may haue Remorse, and Delight of Loue may haue Charitie, other recompence none. ple. And so we thrée leaue you three with Care, Remorse, & charity. Exeunt. Desire. With Care and Remorse I sweare, ye doo leaue vs, but what charitie I cannot tell. Deuot. Wel. yet must we vse Charity though we faile of our desire, and we are answered with such reason as is not to be gainsaid. Del. Indeed my Lord your calling is to perswade to Charity, but if I vse patience, it shall be perforce. Deuo. Yet being so wisely warn'd, me thinks wée should be arm'd And take this in worth, that the world wonder no further, I wil take vp my hard burden of Remorse and be gone. Exit. Desire. It is good to follow examples of good, Ile take this heauy burden of Care, and follow as I may. Exit Del. Because Ile not be slagular, Ile frame my selfe to follow, ta∣king this cold portion of Charitie as my share. exit Enter Simplicity with Diligence. Simp. Come on M. Didligence, I haue bene seeking ye, as a man should seek a load of hay in a néedles eie. Dil. And why hast thou sought me (I pray thee) so earnestly?
simp. Why? For this ointment, these shels, these plesure, do ye not know this Countu mountus cum this d mihi? Dil. What money, why? Do I owe thee any money? Simp. Owe me? Tush, no man, what do ye talke of owing? Come, and yet I must haue some certaine sigillatum & deliberatum in prae∣sentia. Doo you not vnderstand sir? Fourty pence and furniture by my Lord pompes pointment, against the wedding day: to bee one of the show-makers, I doe not say shoo-makers, and yet they be honest men. Dil. I vnderstand thée now, and thou shalt want neither mony nor furniture for that: sawest thou not Fraud lately? Sim. No, a For ferit him, for if I could find him, I would make him fast ynough for cosoning me of ten shillings for certain copper buttons and rings, I thought to haue bene a haberdasher, and he hath made me worse than a hay-maker. Dil. I may say to thee in counsell, but Ile haue no words of it, hee hath ouerreacht me too: but if thou spie him first, let me vnderstand, and if I see him first thou shalt haue knowledge, for Ile tell thee, but laugh not, he shewed me a purse with a hūdred pound in Angels, which he would deliuer me in pawne to be my true prisoner, because for his credite, e was loth to goe with me through the stréetes to Newgate: I refused it at first, but at last by his intreatie I was content to take his pawne, and thinking he had giuen me the right purse of golde, he had another like it, which he gaue me with counters, and so went a∣way, I neuer did see him since, but mum, no words of it. simp. No words quoth a, that's a state test, would you be coson'd so? Dil. Wel, so it is now, come follow me for thy furniture and mo∣ney. exeunt Enter Dissimulation and Fraud in caps, and as the rest must be for the showe. Dis. The coast is cleare, come follow Fraud and feare not, for who can discipher vs in this disguise, thus may we shufl into the showe with the rest, and see and not be seene, doing as they doo, that are at∣tired like our selues. Fra. That is, to stand amongst them, and take as they take, torches or any thing to furnish the showe, now if we we can passe but this day vnseene, let to morrow shift for it slfe as it may, I promise thee Dis∣simulation thou art verie formall.
Dis. Not more than thy self Fraud, I would thou sawest thy picture Frau. Picture here, picture there, let's follow our busines. Exeunt. Enter a Mench singing. Strowe the faire flowers and herbes that be greene, To grace the gaiest wedding that euer was seene. If London list to looke, the streetes were nere so cleene, Except it was when best it might, in welcome of our Queene: Three louely Lords of London shall thre London Ladies wed, Strowe sweetest flowers vpon the stones, perfume the bridall bed. Strowe the faire flowers. &c. Enter first Diligence with a Truncheon, then a boy with Pollicies Launce and shield, then Pollicie and Loue hand in hand: then Fraud in a blew gowne, red cap and red sleeues, with Ambitions Lance and shield, then a boy with Pomps Launce and shield, then Pompe and Lucre hand in hand: then Dissimulation with Prides Launce and shield, then a boy with Pleasures Lance and shield: then Pleasure and Conscience hand in hand: then Simplicitie with Tirannies Lance and shield: they al going out, Nemo staies and speakes. Ne. These Lordes and Ladies thus to church are gone, An honoured action to solemnize there, With greater ioy wil they return anone, Than Caesar did in Rome his Laurell weare. Lord pollicy hath Loue vnto his Fere. Lord pompe hath Lucre to maintaine his port, Lord pleasure Conscience to direct his sport. Vsury is marked to be knowen, Dissimulation like a shadow fléetes, And Simony is out of knowledge growen, And Fraud vnfound in London but by fits. Simplicity with painefull penurie sits. For Hospitality that was woont to feed him,
Was slaine long since and now the poore doo néed him. That Hospitality was an honest man, But had few friendes (alas) if he had any, But Vsury which cut his throat as than Was succoured, and sued for by many. Would Liberality had bene by thy side, Then Hospitality, thou hadst neuer died. But what meane I, one of the mariage traine, To mourne for him wil nere be had againe. His Ghost may walke to mocke the people rude: Ghostes are but shadowes, and doe sense delude: I talke too long, for soe this louelie crue Are comming backe, and haue perfourm'd their due. Returne as they went, sauing that the blew gownes that bare shields, must now beare torches: Simplicity going about, spies Fraud, and falleth on his knees before Pleasure and Conscience, saieng. Simp▪ O Lady Conscience that art maried to Lord pleasure, Help thy seruant simplicity to recouer his lost treasure: A boone my Lords, all for Loue and Lucre sake, Euen as you are true Lordes, help a false lout to take, plea. Thou shalt haue helpe, speake, what is the matter? simp. Sée you yen fellow with the torch in his hand? One the falsest villaine that is in this land, Let him be laid hold on that he run not away, And then yee shall heare what I haue to say. ple. Diligence bring him bether, good Lordes and Ladies stay, simp. O Maister Fraud, welcome to the buts, Now Ile haue my ten shillings in spite of your guts, The French Tanker consume ye, you were an old Frenchman, Da goll buttoone, goll renga, bugla lase, you coson'd me than, My Lords I beseech ye that at tyborne he may otter, For in steed of gold, the villaine sold me copper. plea. Is this true M. Skil? Fra. It is true in a sort my Lord, I thought to bee pleasant with him being my old acquaince, and disguis'd my selfe like an old French
Artificer and hauing a few copper knacks, I sold them to him to make sport for ten shillings, which money I am content to pay him againe so shall he haue no losse though he haue made a litle sport. ple. First giue him an Angell before my face. Simplicity, art thou pleased? Sim. Truly I am pleas'd to take a good Angell for ten shillinges, speciouslie of such a debter as M. Fraud: but now I am to bee pleas'd otherwise, that is, to see him punished, I promise yee the people loue him wel, for they would leaue work and make halfe oliay to see him hanged. ple. That his punishment may please thee the better, thou shalt pu∣nish him thy selfe: he shall be bound fast to yen post, and thou shalt bee blindfold, and with thy torch shalt run as it were at tilt, charging thy light against his lips, and so (if thou canst) burne out his tongue, that it neuer speake more guile. Sim. O Singulariter Nominatiuo, wise Lord pleasure: Genetiuo bind him to that poste, Datiuo, giue me my torch, Accusat. For I say he's a cosoner. Vocat. O giue me roome to run at him. Ablat. take and blind me. Pluraliter, per omnes casus. Laugh all you to see mee in my choller adust to burne and to broile that false Fraud to dust. Bind Fraud, blind Simplicity, turne him thrife about, set his face to∣wards the contrarie post, at which he runnes, and all to burnes it, Dis. standing behind Fraud, vnbindes him, and whiles all the rest behold Simp. they two slip away: Pleasure missing Fraud saith. plea. Wisely perfourm'd, but soft sirs, where is Fraud? O noble vil∣laine, gone whiles we beheld the other: Who loosed him? Who let him slip? wel, one day he wil pay for all: vnblind Simplicity. Simp. How now, Haue I beated his lips? haue I warm'd his nose? and scortched his face? Let me see, how lookes the villaine? Haue I burned him? Dil. Thou hast done more, for thou hast quite consumed him into nothing, looke, here is no signe of him, no not so much as his ashes. Simp. Verie few ashes if there be any, ye may see what a hot thing anger is, I thinke that the Torch did not waste him so much as my wrath: wel, al London, nay, all England is beholding to me, for putting Fraud out of this world, I haue consum'd him & brought him to nothing
& Ile tread his ashes vnder my feet, yt no more Frauds shal euer spring of them: But let me sée, I shal haue much anger, for the Tanners wil misse him in their lether, the Tailors in cutting out of garments, the Shoo-maker in closing, the Tapsters in filling pots, and the verie oi∣stermen to mingle their oisters at Billinsgate, yet it is no matter the world is well rid of such a craftie knaue. plea. Well now thou art satisfied, I wish all here as wel contented, And we my Lords that praise this happie day, Fall wee on knees and humbly let vs pray. pom. First that from heauen vpon our gratious Queene, All maner blessings may be multiplied, That as her raigne most prosperous hath bene, During worlds length so may it stil abide, And after that with saintes be glorified· Lord graunt her here health, hearts-ease, ioy and mirth. And heauen at last, after long life on earth. pol, Her counsel wise, and Nobles of this land Blesse, and preserue O Lord with thy right hand. plea. On all the rest that in this Land doo dwell, Chiefly in London, Lord poure downe thy grace, Who liuing in thy feare and dying well, In heauen with Angels they may haue a place. FINIS.
