4990 99840671 5198
. THE SHADOVV OF NIGHT: CONTAINING TWO POETICALL HYMNES, Deuised by G. C. Gent. Versus mei habebunt aliquantum Noctis. Antilo. AT LONDON, Printed by R. F. for William Ponsonby. 1594.
TO MY DEARE AND MOST VVORTHY FRIEND MASTER MATHEW ROYDON. IT is an exceeding rapture of delight in the deepe search of knowledge, (none knoweth better then thy selfe sweet Mathew) that maketh men manfully indure th'extremes incident to that Herculean labour: frō flints must the Gorgonean fount be smitten. Men must be shod by Mercurie, girt with Saturnes Adamante sword, take the shield from Pallas, the helme from Pluto, and haue the eyes of Gra (as Hesiodus armes Perseus a∣gainst Medusa) before they can cut of the viperous head of benumming ignorance, or subdue their monstrous affe∣ctions to most beautifull iudgement. How then may a man stay his maruailing to see passion-driuen mē, reading but to curtoll a tedious houre, and alto∣gether hidebownd with affection to great mēs fancies, take vpon them as killing censures as if they were iudgements Butchers, or as if the life of truth lay tottering in their ver∣dits. Now what a supererogation in wit this is, to thinke skil so mightilie pierst with their loues, that she should prosti∣utely shew thē her secrets, when she will scarcely be lookt vpō by others but with inuocatiō, fasting, watching; yea not without hauing drops of their soules like an heauenly fami∣liar. Why then should our Intonsi Catones with their pro∣fit-rauisht grauitie esteeme her true fauours such question∣lesse vanities, as with what part soeuer thereof they seeme to be something delighted, they queimishlie commende it for
a pretie toy. Good Lord how serious and eternall are their Idolatrous platts for riches! no maruaile sure they here do so much good with them. And heauen no doubt will gro∣uill on the earth (as they do) to imbrace them. But I sty this spleene when I remember my good Aa. how ioyfully of∣tētimes you reported vnto me, that most ingenious Darbie, deepe searching Northumberland, and skill imbracing heire of Hunsdon had most profitably entertained learning in thē∣selues, to the vitall warmth of freezing science, & to the ad∣mirable luster of their true Nobilitie, whose high deser∣uing vertues may cause me hereafter strike that fire out of darknesse, which the brightest Day shall enuie for beautie. I should write more, but my hasting out of towne taketh me from the paper, so preferring thy allowance in this poore and strange trifle, to the pasport of a whole Cittie of others. I rest as resolute as Seneca, satisfying my selfe if but a few, if one, or if none like it. By the true admirour of thy vertues and perfectly vowed friend. G. CHAPMAN.
Hymnus in Noctem. GReat Goddesse to wose throne inHE cals these Cynthi fiers of Cynthius or the Sunne. In whose beames the fumes and vapors of the earth ar exhald. The earth being as an alter, and those fumes as scrificing smokes, becaue they seeme pleasing to her in resembling her. That the earth is cald an aulter, Aratus in Astronimicis testifies in these verses: &c. Nox antiqua suo curru conuoluitur Ar Hanc circum, qua signa dedit certissima atis Commiserata virm metuedos vndi{que} cass. In which verses the substance of the first foure verses is ex∣prest. Cyn∣thian fires, This earthlie Alter endlesse fumes ex∣spires, Therefore, in fumes of sighes and fires of griefe, To fearefull chances thou sendst bold reliefe, Happie, thrise happie Type, andNight is cald the nurse or mother of death by Hesiodus in Theogonia, in these verses repeating her other issue: Nox peperit fatum{que} malum, Parcam{que} nigrantem Et mortem & somnum, diuersa{que} sonia: natos Hos peperit, nulli dea nox coniuncta marito. nurse of death, VVho breathlesse, seedes on nothing but our breath, In whom must vertue and her issue liue, Or dye for euer, now let humor giue Seas to mine eyes, that I may quicklie weepe The shipwracke of the world: or let soft sleepe (Binding my sences) lose my working soule, That in her highest pitch, she may controule The court of skill, compact of misterie, VVanting but franchisementPlat saith dicere is nothing else but reminisci. and memorie To reach all secrets: then in blisfull trance, Raise her (deare Night to that perseuerance, That in my torture, she all earths may sing, And force to tremble in her trumpeting Heauens christallThe heauenly abodes are often called, celestiall tem∣ples by Homer & alijs. temples: in her powrs implant Skill of my griefs, and she can nothing want. Then like fierce bolts, well rammd with heate & cold In Ioues Artillerie, my words vnfold,
To breake the labyrinth of euerie eare, And make ech frighted soule come forth and heare, Let them breake harts, as well as yeelding ayre, That all mens bosoms (pierst with no affaires, But gaine of riches) may be lanced wide, And with the thrates of vertue terrified. Sorrowes deare soueraigne, and the queene of rest, That when vnlight some, vast, and indigest The formelesse matter of this world did lye, Fildst euery place with thy Diuinitie, VVhy did thy absolute and endlesse sway, Licence heauens torch, the scepter of the Day, Distinguisht intercession to thy throne, That long before, all matchlesse rusde alone? VVhy letst thou order, orderlesse disperse, The fighting parents of this vniuerse? VVhen earth, the ayre, and sea, in fire remaind, VVhen fire, the sea, and earth, the ayre containd, VVhen ayre, the earth, and fire, the sea enclosde, VVhen sea, fire, ayre, in earth were indisposde, Nothing, as now, remainde so out of kinde, All things in grosse, were finer then refinde, Substance was sound within, and had no being, Now forme giues being; all our essence seeming, Chaos had soue without a bodie then, Now bodies liue without the soules of men, Lumps being digested; monsters, in our pride. And as a wealthie fount, that hils did hide, Let forth by labor of industrious hands, Powres out her treasure through the fruitefll strands, Seemely diuided to a hunderd streames, VVhose bewties shed such profitable beames,
And make such Orphean Musicke in their courses, That Citties follow their enchanting forces, VVho running farre, at length ech powres her hart Into the bosome of the gulfie desart, As much confounded there, and indigest, As in the chaos of the hills comprest: So all things now (extract out of the prime) Are turnd to chaos, and confound the time. A stepdame Night of minde about vs cligs, VVho broodes beneath her hell obscuring wings, VVorlds of confusion, where the soule defamde, The bodie had bene better neuer framde, Beneath thy soft, and peace-full couert then, (Most sacred mother both of Gods and men) Treasures vnknowne, and more vnprisde did dwell; But in the blind borne shadow of this hell, This horrid stepdame, blindnesse of the minde, Nought worth the sight, no sight, but worse then blind, A Gorgon that with brasse, and snakie brows, (Most harlot-like) her naked secrets shows: For in th'expansure, and distinct attire, Of light, and darcknesse, of the sea, and fire, Of ayre, and earth, and all, all these create, First set and rulde, in most harmonious state, Disiunction showes, in all things now amisse, By that first order, what confsion is: Religious curb, that manadgd men in bounds, Of publique wellfare; lothing priute grounds, (Now cast away, by selfe lou's paraores) All are transformd to Calydonian bores, That kill our bleeding vines, displow our fields, Rend groues in peeces▪ all things nature yeelds
Supplaning: tumbling vp in hills of dearth, The fruitefull disposition of the earth, Ruine creates men: all to slaughter bent, Like enuie, fed with others famishment. And what makes men without the parts of men, Or in their manhoods, lesse then childeren, But manlesse natures? all this world was namde A world of him, for whom it first was framde, (VVho (like  tender Cheurill,) shruncke with fire) Of base ambition, and of selfe-desire, His armes into his sholders crept for feare Bountie should vse them; and fierce rape forbeare, His legges into his greedie belly runne, The charge of hospitalitie to shunne) In him the world is to a lump reuerst, That shruncke from forme, that was by forme disperst, And in nought more then thanklesse auarice, Not rendring vertue her deserued price: Kinde Amaltha was transferd by Ioue, Into his sparckling pauement, for her loue, Though but a Goate, and giuing him her milke, Basenesse is flintie; gentrie soft as silke, In heauens she liues, and rules a liuing signe In humane bodies: yet not so diuine, That she can worke her kindnesse in our harts. The sencelesse Argiue ship, for her deserts, Bearing to Colchos, and for bringing backe, The hardie Argonauts, secure of wracke, The fautor and the God of gratitude, VVould not from number of the starres exclude. A thousand such examples could I cite, To damne stone-pesants, that like Typhons fight
Against their Maker, and contend to be Of kings, the abiect slaues of ddgerie. Proud of that thraldome: loue the kindest lest, And hate, not to be hated of the best. If then we frame mans figure by his mind, And that at first, his fashion was assignd, rection in suc God-like excellence Fr his soules sake, and her intelligence: She so degenerate, and growne deprest, Content to share affections with a beast, The shape wherewith he should be now ndde, Must beare no signe of mans similitude, Thereforee cals them Promethen Poets in this high conceipt, by a figuratue comparion be∣twixt thē, that as . with fire etcht frō hea∣uen, made men: so Poets with the fire of their soules are sayd to create those Harpes, and Cenaures, and thereof he calls their soules Geniale. Promethean Poets with the coles Of their most geniale, more-then-humane soules In liuing verse, created men like these, VVith shapes of Centaurs, Harpie, Lapithes, That they in prime of erudition, VVhen almost sauage vulgar men were growne, Seeing them selues in those Pierean founts, Might mend their mindes, asham'd of such accounts. So when ye heare, theCallope is cald the swee∣test Muses, her name being by signification, Cautus suaui∣tas, vel mod∣lio. sweetest Muses sonne, VVith heauenly rapture of his Musicke, wonne Rockes, orrests, floods, and winds to leaue their cou In his attendance: it bewrayes the force His wisedome had, to draw men growne so rude To ciuill loue of Art, and Fortitude, And not for teaching othersInsolence is here taken for rarenesse or vnwontednesse. insolence, Had he his date-exceeding excellence VVith soueraigne Poets, but for vse applyed, And in his proper actes exemplified. And that in calming the infernall kinde, To wit, the perturbations of his minde,
And bringing his Eurydice from hell, (VVhich Iustice signifies) is proued well. But if in rights obseruance any man Looke backe, with boldnesse lesse then Orphean, Soone falls he to the hell from whence he rose: The fiction then would temprature dispose, In all the tender motiues of the minde, To make man worthie his hel-danting kinde. The golden chaine of Homers high deuice Ambition is, or cursed aarice, VVhich all Gods haling being tyed to Ioue, Him from his setled height could neuer moue: Intending this, that though that powrefull chaine Of most Herculean vigor to constraine Men from true vertue, or their pristine states Attempt a man that manlesse changes hates, And is enobled with a deathlesse loue Of things eternall, dignified aboue: Nothing shall stirre him from adorning still This shape with vertue, and his powre with will. But as rude painters that contend to show Bests, foules or fish, all artlesse to bestow O ery side his natiue counterfet, Aboue his head, his name had neede to set: So men that will be men, in more then face, (As in their foreheads) should in actions place More perfect characters, to proue they be No mockers of their first nobilitie: Else may they easly passe for beasts or foules: Soules praise our shapes, and not our shapes our soules. And as when Chloris paints th'ennamild meads, A flocke of shepherds to the bagpipe treads
Rude rurall dances with their countrey loues: Some a farre off obseruing their remoues, Turnes, and returnes, quicke footing, sodaine stands, Reelings aside, od actions with their hands; Now backe, now forwards, now lockt arme in arme, Not hearing musicke, thinke it is a charme, That like loose froes at Bacchanalean feasts, Makes them seeme franticke in their barraine iestes. And being clusterd in a shapelesse croude, VVith much lesse admiration are allowd. So our first excellence, so much abusd, And we (without the harmonie was vsd, VVhen Saturnes golden scepter stroke the strings Of Ciuill gouernement) make all our doings Sauour of rudenesse, and obscuritie, And in our formes shew more deformitie, Then if we still were wrapt, and smoothered In that confusion, out of which we fled. And as when hosts of starres attend thy flight, (Day of deepe students, most cotentfull night) The morning (mounted on the MusesLycophron in Alexandra, affirmes the morning vseth to ride vpon Pegasus in his verses: Aurora montem Phagium aduoluerat Vlocis altum nuper alis Pegasi. stead) Vshers the sonne fromVulcan is said by Natalis Comes in his Mythologie, to haue made a golden bed for the Sunne, wherein he swum sleeping till the morning. Vulcans golden bed, And then from forth their sundrie roofes of rest, All sorts of men, to sorted taskes addrest, Spreade this inferiour element: and yeeld Labour his due: the souldier to the field, States-men to counsell, Iudges to their pleas, Merchants to commerce, mariners to seas: All beasts, and birds, the groues and forrests range, To fill all corners of this round Exchange, Till thou (deare Night, ô goddesse of most worth) Letst thy sweet seas of golden humor forth
And Eagle like dost with thy starrie wings, Quae lucem pellis sub terras: Orpheus. Beate in the foules, and beasts to Somnus lodgings, And haughtie Day to the infernall deepe, Proclaiming scilence studie, ease, and sleepe. All things befor thy frces put in rout, Retiring where the morning fir'd them out. So to the chaos of our first descent, (All dayes of honor, and of vertue spet) VVe basely make retrait, and are no lesse Then huge impolisht heapes of filthinesse. Mens faces glitter, and their hearts are blacke, But thou (great Mistresse of heauens gloomie racke) Art blacke in face, and glitterst in thy heart. There is thy glorie, riches, force, and Art; Opposed earth, beates blacke and blewe thy face, And often doth thy heart it selfe deface, For spite that to thy vertue-famed traine, All the choise worthies that did euer raigne In eldest age, were still preferd by Ioue, Esteeming that due honor to his loue. There shine they: not to sea-men guides alone, But sacred presidents to euerie one. There fixt for euer, where the Day is driuen, Almost foure hundred times a yeare from heauen. In hell then let her sit, and neuer rise, Till Morns leaue blushing at her cruelties. Meane while, accept, as followers of thy traine, (Our better parts aspiring to thy raigne) Vertues obscur'd, and banished the day, VVith all the glories of this spongie sway, risond in flesh, and that poore flesh in bands Of stone, and steele, chiefe flowrs of vertues Garlands.
O then most tender fortresse of our woes, That bleeding lye in vertues ouerthroes, Hating the whoredome of this painted light: Raise thy chast daughters, ministers of right, The dreadfull and the iust Eumenides, And let them wreake the wrongs of our disease, Drowning the world in bloud, and staine the skies VVith their spilt soules, made drunke with tyrannies. Fall Hercules from heauen in tempestes hurld, And cleanse this beastly stable of the world: Here he alludes to the fiction of Hercules, that in his la∣bor at Tartessus fetching away the oxen, being (more thē he liked) heat with the beames of the Sunne, he bent his bow against him, &c. Vt ait Pherecides in 3. lib. Historiarum. Or bend thy brasen bow against the Sunne, As in Tartessus, when thou hadst begunne Thy taske of oxen: heat in more extreames Then thou wouldst suffer, with his enuious beames. Now make him leaue the world to Night and dreames. Neuer were vertues labours so enuy'd As in this light: shoote, shoote, and stoope his pride: Suffer no more his lustfull rayes to get The Earth with issue: let him still be set In Somnus thickets: bound about the browes, VVith pitchie vapours, and with Ebone bowes. This Priphrasis of the Night he vseth, because in her the blest, (by whom he intēds the vertuous) liuing obscure∣lie are relieued and quieted, according to those verses before of Aratus, Commiserata virum metuendos vndi{que} casus. Rich-tapird sanctuarie of the blest, Pallace of Ruth, made all of teares, and rest, To thy blacke shades and desolation, I consecrate my life; and liuing mone, VVhere furies shall for euer fighting be, And adders hisse the world for hating me, Foxes shall barke, and Night-rauens belch in grones, And owles shall hollow my confusions: There will I furnish vp my funerall bed, Strewd with the bones and relickes of the dead. Atlas shall let th'Olimpick burthen fall,
To couer my vntombed face withall. And when as well, the matter of our kind, As the materiall sul stance of the mind, Shall cease their reuolutions, in abode Of such impure and vgly period, As the old essence, and insensiue prime: Then shall the ruines of the fourefold time, Turnd to that lumpe (as rapting Torrents rie) For euer murmure forth my miseries. Ye liuing spirits then, if any lie, VVhom like extreames, do like affections giue, Shun, shun this cruell light, and end your thrall, In these soft shades of sable funerall: From whence with ghosts, whō vengeance holds frō rest, Dog-fiends and monsters hanting the distrest, As men whose parents tyrannie hath slaine, VVhose sisters rape, and bondage do sustaine. Bu you that nere had birth, nor euer prou'd, How deare a blessing tis to be belou'd, VVhose friends idolatrous desire of gold, To scorne, and ruine haue your freedome sold: VVhose vertues feele all this, and shew your eyes, Men made of Tartar, and of villanies. Aspire th'extraction, and the quintessence Of all the ioyes in earths circumference: VVith ghosts, fiends, monsters: as men robd and rackt, Murtherd in life: from shades with shadowes blackt: Thunder your wrongs, your miseries and hells, And with the dismall accents of your knells, Reuiue the dead, and make the liuing dye In ruth, and terror of your torturie: Still all the powre of Art into your grones,
Scorning your triuiall and remissiue mones, Compact of fiction, and hyperboles, (Like wanton mourners, clyd with too much ease) Should leaue the glasses of the hearers eyes Vnbroken, couting all but vanities. But paint, or else create in serious trth, A bodie figur'd to your vertues ruth, That to the sence may shew what damned sinne, For your extreames this Chaos tumbles in. But wo is wretched me, without a name: Vertue feeds score, and noblest honor, shame: Pride bathes in teares of poore submission, And makes his soule, the purple he puts on. Kneele then with me, fall worme-like on the ground, And from th'infectious dnghill of this Round, From mens brasse wits, and golden foolerie, VVeepe, weepe your soules, into felicitie: Come to this house of mourning, serue the night, To whom pale day (with whoredome soked quite) Is but a drudge, selling her beauties vse To rapes, adultries, and to all abuse. Her labors feast imperiall Night with sports, VVhere Loues are Christmast, with all pleasures sorts: And whom her fugitiue, and far-shot rayes Disiyne, and driue into ten thousand wayes, Nights glorious mantle wraps in safe abodes, And frees their neckes from seruile labors lodes: Her trustie shadowes, succour men dismayd, VVhom Dayes deceiptfull malice hath betrayd: From the silke vapors of her Iueryport, Sweet Protean dreames she sends of euery sort: Some taking formes of Princes, to perswade
Of men deiect, we are their equals made, Som clad in habit o deceased frinds, For whom we mournd, and now haue wisht ands, And some (deare fauour) Lady-like attyrd, VVith pride of Beaties full Meridian fird: VVho pitie our contempts, reuiue our harts: For wisest Ladies loue the inward parts. If these be dreames, euen so are all things else, That walke this round by heauenly sentinels: But from Nights port of horne she greets our eyes VVith grauer dreames inspir'd with prophesies, VVhich ot presage to vs succeeding chances, VVe proouing that awake, they shew in trances. If these seeme likewise vaine, or nothing are Vine things, or nothing come to vertues share: For nothing more then dreames, with vs she findes: Then since all pleasures vanish like the windes, And that most serious actions not respcting The second night, are worth but the neglecting, Since day, or light, in anie qualitie, For earthly vses do but serue the eye. And since the eyes most quicke and dangerous vse, Enflames the heart, and learnes the soule abuse, Since mournings are preferd to banquettings, And they reach heauen, bred vnder sorrowes wings. Since Night brings terror to our frailties still, And shamelesse Day, doth marble vs in ill. All you possest with indepressed spirits, Indu'd with nimble, and aspiring wits, Come consecrate with me, to sacred Night Your whole endeuours, and detest the light. Sweete Peaces richest crowne is made of starres,
Most certaine gides of hord Mariars, No pen can any thing eternall wright, That is not eept i hmr of the Night. Hence beasts, and birds o caues and bshes then, And welcome Night, ye noblest heires of men, Hence Phebus to thy glassie strpets bed, And neuer more let The dghters spred,Themis daughters are the three houres, viz. Dice, Iree, and Eomia, begottē by Iupiter. They are said to make rea∣dy the horse & chariot of the Sun euery morning. vt Orph. Et louis & Themidis Horae de seine , &c. Thy golden harnesse  thy rosie horse, But in close thickets  thy oblique crse. See now asceds, the glorio ride of Brides, Nptials, and triumphs, glittring by her sides, Iuno and Hymen do her traine adorne, Ten thousand torches rod about them bore: Dumbe Silece  on the Cyprian starre, VVith becks, rebkes the winds before his carre, VVhere she ; beates downe with clodie ace, The feeble light to blacke Saturnius pallace: Behind her, with a braseCynthia or the Moone, is said to be drawne by two white hindes, vt ait Caliach: Area nam dmitrix Tityi sunt arma Diana Cuncta tibi & zona, & fuga qua cericibus area Cerarum imponis currum c dcis ad are. of siluer Hynds, In Iuorie chariot, swifter then the winds, In greatHesiodus in Theogonia cals her the daughter of Hype∣rion, and Thya, in his versibus. Thia parit Sole Auroram quaefert luce mortalibus Celicolis{que} Deis cunctis, Hyperionis al Semine concepit, nam{que} illos Thia dcora So is she said to weare partie-coloured garments: the rest intimates her Magick authoritie. Hyperions horned daughter drawne Enchantresse-like, deckt in disparent lawne, Circkled with charmes, and incantations, That ride hge spirits, and outragious passions: Musicke, and moode, she loes, but loe she hates, (As curious Ladies do, their publique cates) This traine, with eteors, comets, lightenings, The dreadfull presence of our Empresse sings: VVhich grant for euer ( eternall Night) Till vertue flourish in the light of light. Explicit Hymnus.
Gloss 1 HE cals these Cynthi fiers of Cynthius or the Sunne. In whose beames the fumes and vapors of the earth ar exhald. The earth being as an alter, and those fumes as scrificing smokes, becaue they seeme pleasing to her in resembling her. That the earth is cald an aulter, Aratus in Astronimicis testifies in these verses: &c. Nox antiqua suo curru conuoluitur Ar Hanc circum, qua signa dedit certissima atis Commiserata virm metuedos vndi{que} cass. In which verses the substance of the first foure verses is ex∣prest. 2 Night is cald the nurse or mother of death by Hesiodus in Theogonia, in these verses repeating her other issue: Nox peperit fatum{que} malum, Parcam{que} nigrantem Et mortem & somnum, diuersa{que} sonia: natos Hos peperit, nulli dea nox coniuncta marito. 3 Plat saith dicere is nothing else but reminisci. 4 The heauenly abodes are often called, celestiall tem∣ples by Homer & alijs. 5 Insolence is here taken for rarenesse or vnwontednesse. 6 Lycophron in Alexandra, affirmes the morning vseth to ride vpon Pegasus in his verses: Aurora montem Phagium aduoluerat Vlocis altum nuper alis Pegasi. 7 Vulcan is said by Natalis Comes in his Mythologie, to haue made a golden bed for the Sunne, wherein he swum sleeping till the morning. 8 Quae lucem pellis sub terras: Orpheus. 9 Here he alludes to the fiction of Hercules, that in his la∣bor at Tartessus fetching away the oxen, being (more thē he liked) heat with the beames of the Sunne, he bent his bow against him, &c. Vt ait Pherecides in 3. lib. Historiarum.
10 This Priphrasis of the Night he vseth, because in her the blest, (by whom he intēds the vertuous) liuing obscure∣lie are relieued and quieted, according to those verses before of Aratus, Commiserata virum metuendos vndi{que} casus. 11 Themis daughters are the three houres, viz. Dice, Iree, and Eomia, begottē by Iupiter. They are said to make rea∣dy the horse & chariot of the Sun euery morning. vt Orph. Et louis & Themidis Horae de seine , &c. 12 Cynthia or the Moone, is said to be drawne by two white hindes, vt ait Caliach: Area nam dmitrix Tityi sunt arma Diana Cuncta tibi & zona, & fuga qua cericibus area Cerarum imponis currum c dcis ad are. 13 Hesiodus in Theogonia cals her the daughter of Hype∣rion, and Thya, in his versibus. Thia parit Sole Auroram quaefert luce mortalibus Celicolis{que} Deis cunctis, Hyperionis al Semine concepit, nam{que} illos Thia dcora So is she said to weare partie-coloured garments: the rest intimates her Magick authoritie. FINIS. For the rest of his owne inuention, figures and iles, touching their aptnesse and noueltie he hath not laboured to iustifie them, because he hopes they will be proud enough to iustifie themselues, and proue sufficiently authenticall to such as vnderstand them; for the rest, God helpe them, I can not (do as others), make day seeme a lighter woman thē she is, by painting her.
Hymnus in Cynthiam. HE giues her that Periphrasis, viz. Natures bright eye sight, because that by her store of humors, issue is gi∣uen to all birth: and thereof is she called Lucina, and Ilythyia, quia praeest parturientibus cum inuocaretur, and giues them helpe: which Orpheus in a Hymne of her prayse expresseth, and cals her besides Prothyrea, vt sequitur. &c. Audi m veneranda Dea, cui nomina multa: Pragantum adirix, patientum dulce Sola puellarum sernatrix▪ sola{que} prudens: Auxilium velox teris Prothyrea puelli. And a little after, he shewes her plainlie to be Diana, Ily∣thyia, and Prothyrea, in these verses: Solam anim requiem te clamant par rutes. Sola potes dir partus placare labores Diana, Ilythyia grauis, sumus & Prothyrea. NAtures bright eye-sight, and the Nights faire soule,He cals her the soule of the Night, since she is the purest part of her according to common conceipt. Orpheus in these verses, in Argonauticis saith she is three headed, as she is Heccate, Luna, and Diana, vt sequitur. Cum{que} illis Hecate, properans horreda cucurrit, Cui trinum caput est, geis quam Tartarus olim. The rest aboue will not be denied. That with thy triple forehead dost con∣troule Earth, seas, and hell: and art in dignitie The greatest, and swiftest Planet in the skie: Peacefull, and warlike, and theThat she is cald the powre of fate, read Hesiodus in Theo∣gonia when he giues her more then this commendation▪ in these verses: Iupiter ingentes illi largitur honores, Munera{que} imperium terr{que} maris{que} profundi: Cunctoru{que} simul, quae coelum amplectitur altum, Admittit{que} preces facilis Dea, propta, benigna: Diuitias prbet, quid ei concessa potest, Imperat haec cunctis, qui sunt è emie nati: Et terrae & Coeli, cunctorum fata gubet. powre of fate, In perfect circle of whose sacred state, The circles of our hopes are compassed: All wisedome, beautie, maiestie and dread, VVrought in the speaking pourtrait of thy face. Great Cynthia, rise out of thyIn Latmos she is supposed to sleepe with Endymion, vt Catullus. Vt triam furtim sub Lmia saxa elegans, Dulcis amor Gyro deoce Ari. Latmian pallace, Homer with a maruailous Poeticall sweetnesse, saith she washes her before she apparells her selfe in th'Atlantick sea. And then shewes her apparell, as in thse verses. In Ocean Lauacri. Rursus Atlantis, in lymphis membra lauata, Vestibus indut, & idis Dea Luna micantes: Curru iunxit equos celeres, quibus ardua colla. VVash thy bright bodie, in th'Atlanticke streames, Put on those robes that are most rich in beames: And in thy All-ill-purging puritie, (As if the shadieCytheron, as Menander saith was a most faire boy, and beloued of Tisiphone, who since she could not obtaine his loue, she teares from her head a Serpent, & threw it at him, which stinging him to death, the Gods in pittie turned him to a hill of that name, first cald Atrius, full of woods wherein all Poets haue affirmed wild beasts liue, and vse it often to expresse their haunts, or store of woods, whereupō he inuokes Cynthia, to rise in such brightnesse, as if it were all on fire. Cytheron did frie In sightfull furie of a solemne fire) Ascend thy chariot, and make earth admire Thy old swist changes, made a yong fixt prime, O let thy beautie scorch the wings of time, That fluttering he may fall before thine eyes, And beate him selfe to death before he rise: And as heauensThis is expounded as followeth by Gyraldus Lils. The application most  made by this author. Geniall parts were cut away By Saturnes hands, with adamantineHarpe should be written thus, not with a y, yet here he vseth it, lest some, not knowing what it meanes, read it for a Harp, hauing foūd this grossenesse in some schollers. It was the sword Perseus vsed to cut of Medusas head. Harpey, Onely to shew, that since it was composd Of vniuersall matter: it enclosd No powre to procreate another heauen.
So since that adamatine powre is gien To thy chast hands, to cut of all desire Of fleshly sports, and quench to upids fire: Let it approue: no change shall take thee hence, Nor thy throne beare another inference: For if the euious forehead of the earth Lowre on thy age, and claime thee as her birth. Tapers, nor torches, nor the forrests brning, Soule-winging musicke, nor teare-stilling mourning, (Vsd of old Romanes and rude Macedns In thy most sad, and blacke discessions) VVe know can nothing further thy recall, VVhen Nights darke rbes (whose obiects blind vs all) Shall celebrate thy changes fnerall. But as in that thrise dreadfull foghten field Of ruthless Cannas, whe sweet Rule did yeeld, Her beauties strongest proofs, and hgest loue: VVhen men as many as the lamps aboue, Armd Earth in steele, and made her like the skies, That two Auroraes did in one day rise. Then with the terror of the trpets call, The battels ioynd as if the world did fall: Continewd long in life-disdaining fight, Ioues thundring Eagles featherd like the night, Ho'ring aboue them with idifferent wings, Till Bloods sterne daughter, cruellFortune is cald Tyc,  witnesseth Pausanias in Messe∣niacis, who affirmes her to b one of the daughters likewise of Ocea, which was playing with Prserpine, when Dis rauisht her. Vna omnes vario per prata contia ore, Candida Lucipp, Ph{que}, Elctra{que} ant e. Melobosis{que} Tych, Ocyrhe prgnis ocllis. And Orpheus in a Hymne to Fortuna, saith she is the daughter of bloud, vt in his, sanguine prognat, Vi & inexpugnabile numen. Tyce ings The chiefe of one side, to the blushing grod, And then his men (whom griefs, and feares cnfond) Turnd all their cheerfull hopes to grimme despaire, Some casting of their soules into the aire, Some taken prisners, some extreamely maid, And all (as men accurst) on fate exclaimd.
So (gracious Cythia) in that sable day, VVhen interposed earth takes thee away, (Our sacred chiefe and soueraigne generall, As chrimsine a retrait, and sleepe a fall VVe feare to suffer from this peace, and height, VVhose thancklesse sweet now cloies vs with receipt. Plutarch writes thus of the Romanes, and Macedons, in Paulus Aeilius. The Romanes set sweet Msicke to her charmes, To raise thy stoopings, with her yrie armes: Vsde loud resoundings with spicious brasse: Held torches vp to heauen, and flaming glasse, Made a whole forrest but a burning eye, T admire thy mournefull partings with the skye. The Macedonians were so stricken dead, VVith skillesse horrour of thy changes dread: They wanted harts, to lift vp sounds, or fires, Or eyes to heauen; but vsd their funerall tyres, Trembld, and wept; assur'd some mischiefs furie VVould follow that afflicting Augurie. Nor shall our wisedomes be more arrogant (O sacred Cynthia) but beleeue thy want Hath cause to make vs now as much affraid: Nor shall Democrates who first is said, To reade in natures browes, thy changes cause, Perswade our sorrowes to a vaine applause. Times motion, being like the reeling sunes, Or as the sea reciprocallie runes, Hath brought vs now to their opinions; As in our garments, ancient fashions Are newlie worne; and as sweet poesie VVill not be clad in her supremacie VVith those straunge garments (Romes Hexaters) As she is English: but in right prefers
Our natie robes, (put on with skilfull hands English heroicks) to those antick garlands, Accounting it no meede but mockerie, VVhen her steepe browes alreadie prop the skie, To put on startups, and yet let it fall. No otherwise (O Queene celestiall) Can we beleeue Ephesias state wilbe But spoile with forreine grace, and change with thee These ar commonly knowne to be the properties of Cynthia. The purenesse of thy neuer-tainted life, Scorning the sbiect title of a ife, Thy bodie not composed in thy birth, Of such condensed matter as the earth, Thy shnning faithlesse mens societie, Betaking thee to hounds, and Archerie To deserts, and inaccessible hills, Abhorring pleasure in earths common ills, Commit most willing rapes on all or harts: And make vs tremble, lest thy soeraigne parts (The whole preseruers of our happinesse) Should yeeld to change, Eclips, or heainesse. And as thy changes happen by the site, Neare, or farre distance, of thy Phe∣isses, cals her the daughter not sister of the Sunne, O  &c. fathers light, VVho (set in absolute remotion) reues Thy face of light, and thee all darkned leaues: So for thy absence, to the shade of death Our soules fly mourning, winged with our breath. Then set thy Christall, and Imperiall throne, (Girt in thy chast, and neuer-loosingThis Zone is said to be the girdle of Cynthia. And thereof whē maids lost their maidenheads, amongst the A∣theniās, they vsed to pt of their girdles. And ter, custom made it a phrase , to lose their maidenheades, vt Apol. lib. 1. zone) Gainst Europs Sunne directly opposit, And giue him darknesse, that doth threat thy light. O how accurst are they thy fauour scorne?These are the verses of  translated to effect. O miseri, quib ipsa  &c. Diseases pine their flockes, tares spoile their corn:
Old men are blind of isse, and young wies Bring forth abortiue frute, that neer thriues. Bt then how blest are they thy faor grace, Peace in their hearts, and youth raignes in their faces: Health strengths their bodies, to subdue the seas, And dare the Sunne, like Thebane Hercules To calme the furies, and to qench the fire: As at thy altars, in thy Persicke Empire, This Strabo testifieth  Thy holy women walkt with naked soles Harmelesse, and confiden, on burning coles: The vertue-temperd mind, euer preserues, Oyles, and explsatorie Balme that serues To quench lusts fire, in all things it annoints, And steeles our feet to march on needles points: And mongst her armes, hath armour to repell The canon, and the firie darts of hell: She is the great enchantresse that commands Spirits of euery region, seas, and lands, Round heauen it selfe, and all his seuen-fold heights, Are bound to serue the strength of her conceipts: A perfect type of thy Almightie state, That holdst the thread, and rul'st the sword of fate. Then you that exercise the virgine Court Of peacefull Thespya, my muse consort, Making her drunkes withPegasus is cald  since Pots fayne, that when Pers smote of Medusas head,  ew frō the woūd: & therefore the Muses  whh he made with his hoofe, is cald Grg. Gorgonean Dews, And therewith, all your Extasies infuse, That she may reach the top-lesse starrie brows Of steepe Olympus, crownd with freshest bows Of Daphnean Laurell, and the praises sing Of mightie Cynthia: truely figuring, (As she is Heccate) her soueraigne kinde, And in her force, the forces of the mind:
An argument to rauish and refine An earthly soule, and make it eere diuine. Sing then withall, her Pallace brightnesse bright, The dasle-sunne perfections of her light, Circkling her face with glories, sing the walkes, VVhere in her heauely Magicke mood she stalkes. Her arbours, thickets, and her wondrous game, (A huntesse, being neuer matcht in fame) Presume not then ye flesh confounded soules, That cannot beare the full Castalian bowles, VVhich seuer mounting spirits from the sences, To looke in this deepe fount for thy pretenses: The iuice more cleare then day, yet shadows night, VVhere humor challengeth no drop of right: But iudgement shall displaie, to purest eyes VVith ease, the bowells of these misteries. Se then this Planet of our lines discended To richOrtigia is the countrie where she was brought vp. Ortigia, gloriouslie attended, Not with hir fiftie Ocean Nimphs: nor yet Hir twentie forresters: but doth beget By powrefull charmes, delight some seruitors Of flowrs, and shadows, mists, and meteors: Her rare Elisian Pallace she did build VVith studied wishes, which sweet hope did guild VVith sunnie foyle, that lasted but a day: For night must needs, importune her away. The shapes of euerie wholesome flowre and tree She gaue those types of hir felicitie. And Forme her selfe, she mightelie coniurd Their priselesse values, might not be obscurd, VVith disposition baser then diuine, But make that blissull court of hers to shine
VVith all accomplishment of Architect, That not the eye of Phebus ld detect. Forme then, twixt two superior pillers framd This tender building, Pax Imperij nam'd, VVhich cast a shadow, like a Pyramis VVhose basis, in the plaine or back part is Of that queint worke: the top so high extended, That it the region of the Moone transcended: VVithout, within it, euerie corner fild By bewtious forme, as her great mistresse wild. These are the verses of  before. Here as she sits, the thunder-louing Ioue In honors past all others showes his loue, Proclaiming her in compleat Emperie, Of what soeuer the Olympick skie VVith tender circumuecture doth embrace The chiefest Planet, that doth heauen enchace: Deare Goddesse, prompt, benigne, and bounteous, That heares all prayers, from the least of vs Large riches giues, since she is largely giuen, And all that spring from seede of earth and heauen She doth commaund: and rules the fates of all, Old Hesiod sings her thus celestiall: And now to take the pleasures of the day, Because her night starre soone will call away, She frames of matter intimate before, (o wit, a bright, and daseling meteor) A goodlie Nimph, whose bewtie, bewtie staines Heau'ns with her iewells; giues all the raines Of wished pleasance; frames her golden wings, But them she bindes vp close with purple strings, Because she now will haue her run alone, And bid the base, to all affection.
And Euthimya is her sacred name, Since she the cares and toyles of earth must tame: Then straight the flowrs, the shadowes ad the mists, (Fit matter for most pliant humorists) She hunters makes: and of that substance hounds VVhose mouths deafe heauē, & furrow earth with woūds, And maruaile not a Nimphe so rich in grace To hounds rude pursutes should be giuen in chase: For she could turne her selfe to euerie shape Of swiftest beasts, and at her pleasure scape, VVealth faunes on fooles; vertues are meate for vices, VVisedome conformes her selfe to all earths guises, Good gifts are often giuen to men past good, And Noblesse stoops sometimes beneath his blood. The hounds that she created, vast, and fleete VVere grimme Melampus, with th'Ethiops feete, VVhite Leucon, all eating Pamphagus, Sharp-sighted Dorceus, wild Oribasus Storme-breathing Lelaps, and the sauage Theron, VVingd-footed Pterelas, and Hinde-like Ladon, Greedie Harpyia, and the painted Styct, Fierce Trigis, and the thicket-searcher Agre, The blacke Melaneus, and the bristled Lachne, Leane lustfull Cyprius and big chested Aloe. These and such other now the forrest rang'd, And Euthimya to a Panther changd, Holds them sweet chase; their mouths they freely spead, As if the earth in sunder they would rend. VVhich change of Musick likt the Goddesse so, That she before her formost Nimphe would go, And not a huntsman there was eagrer seene In that sports loue, (yet all were wondrous keene)
Then was their swift, and windie-footed queene. But now this spotted game did thicke take, VVhere not a hound could hungred passage make: Such proofe the couret was, all armd in thorne, VVith which in their attempts, the doggs were torne, And fell to howling in their happinesse: As when a flocke of schoole boys, whom their mistresse (Held closelie to their bookes) gets leaue to sport, And then like toyle-freed deare, in headlong sort VVith shoutes, and shrieks, they hurrey from the schoole. Some strow the woods, some swimme the siluer poole: All as they list to seuerall pastimes fall, To feede their famisht wantonnesse with all. VVhen strait, within the woods some wolfe or beare, The heedlesse lyms of one doth peecemeale teare, Affrighteth other, sends some bleeding backe, And some in greedie whirle pitts suffer wracke. So did the bristled couert check with wounds The licorous hast of these game greedie hounds. In this vast thicket, (whose descriptions task The penns of furies, and of feends would aske: So more then humane thoughted horrible) The soules of such as liu'd implausible, In happie Empire of this Goddesse glories, And scornd to crowne hir Phanes with sacrifice Did ceaselesse walke; exspiring fearefull grones, Curses, and threats for their confusions. Her darts, and arrowes, some of them had slaine, Others hir doggs eate, painting hir disdaine, After she had transformd them into beasts: Others her monsters carried to their nests, Rent them in peeces, and their spirits sent
To this blind shade, to waile their banishment. The huntsmen hearing (since they could not heare) Their hounds at fault; in eager chase drew neare, Mounted on Lyons, Vnicorns, and Bores, And saw their hounds lye licking of their sores, Some yerning at the shroud, as if they chid Her stinging toungs, that did their chase forbid: By which they knew the game was that way gone. Then ech man forst the beast he rode vpon, T'assault the thicket; whose repulsiue thorns So gald the Lyons, Bores and Vnicorns, Dragons, and wolues; that halfe their courages VVere spent in rores, and sounds of heauines: Yet being the Princeliest, and hardiest beasts, That gaue chiefe fame to those Ortygian forests, And all their riders furious of their sport, A fresh assault they gaue, in desperate sort: And with their falchions made their wayes in wounds: The thicket opend, and let in the hounds. But from her bosome cast prodigious cries, VVrapt in her Stigian fumes of miseries: VVhich yet the breaths of those couragious steads Did still drinke up, and cleerd their ventrous heads: As when the fierie coursers of the sunne, Vp to the pallace of the morning runne, And from their nosthrills blow the spitefull day: So yet those foggie vapors, made them way. But preasing further, saw such cursed sights, Such Aetnas filld with strange tormented sprites, That now the vaprous obiect of the eye Out-pierst the intellect in facultie. Basenesse vas Nobler then Nobilitie:
For ruth (first shaken from the braine of Loe, Aud loue the soule of vertue) now did moue, Not in their soules (spheres meane enough for such) But in their eyes: and thence did conscience touch Their harts with pitie: where her proper throne, Is in the minde, and there should first haue shone: Eyes should guide bodies and our soules our eyes, But now the world consistes on contraries: So sence brought terror, where the mindes presight Had sat that feare, and done but pittie right, But seruile feare, now forgd a wood of darts VVithin their eyes, and cast them through their harts: Then turnd they bridle, then halfe slaine with feare, Ech did the other backwardes ouerbeare, As when th'Italian Duke, a troupe of horse Sent out in hast against some English force, From statelie sited sconce-torne Nimigan, Vnder whose walles theThe Wall is  most excellent riuer, in the Low coun∣tries parting with another riuer, cald the Mae, neare a towne in Holland, cald Gurckham, and runnes vp to Guel∣derland vnder the walls of Nimigen. And these like Siles, in my opinion drawne frō the honorable deeds of our noble countrimen, clad in comely habit of Poesie, would become a Poeme as well as further-fetcht grounds, if such as be Poets now a dayes would vse them. wall most Cynthian, Stretcheth her siluer limms loded with wealth, Hearing our horse were marching downe by stealth. (VVho looking for them) warres quicke Artizan Fame-thriuing Vere, that in those Countries wan More fame then guerdon; ambusados laide Of certaine foote, and made full well appaide The hopefull enemie, in sending those The log-expected subiects of their blowes To moue their charge; which strait they giue amaine, VVhen we retiring to our strength againe, The foe pursewes assured of our liues, And vs within our ambuscado driues, VVho straight with thunder of the drums and shot, Tempest their wraths on them that wist it not.
Then (turning headlong) some escapt vs so, Some left to ransome, some to ouerthrow, In such confusion did this troupe retire, And thought them cursed in that games desire: Out flew the houndes, that there could nothing finde, Of the slye Panther, that did beard the winde, Running into it full, to clog the chase, And tire her followers with too much solace. And but the superficies of the shade, Did onely sprinckle with the sent she made, As when the sunne beames on high billowes fall, And make their shadowes dance vpon a wall, That is the subiect of his faire reflectings:Simle ad an∣dem explicat. Or else; as when a man in summer euenings, Something before sunneset, when shadows bee Rackt with his stooping, to the highest degree, His shadow lymes the trees, and skales a hill, VVhile he goes on the beaten passage still, So sleightlie toucht the Panther with her sent, This irksome couert, and away she went, Downe to a fruitfull Iland sited by, Full of all wealth, delight, and Emperie, Euer with child of curious Architect, Yet still deliuerd: pa'd with Dames select, On whom rich feete, in fowlest bootes might treade, And neuer fowle them: for kinde Cupid spread, Such perfect colours, on their pleasing faces, That their reflects clad fowlest weeds with graces, Bewtie strikes fancie blind; pyed show deceau's vs, Sweet banquets tempt our healths, whē temper leaues vs Inchastitie, is euer prostitute, VVhose trees we loth, when we haue pluckt their fruite.
Hithr this Panther fled, now turnd a Bore More huge then that th' Aetolians plagud so sore, And led the chase through noblest mansions, Gardens and groues, exempt from Parragons, In all things ruinous, and slaughter some, As was that scourge to the Aetolian kingdome: After as if a whirlewind draue them one, Full crie, and close, as if they all were one The hounds pursew, and fright the earth with sound, Making her tremble▪, as when windes are bound In her cold bosome, fighting for euent: VVith whose fierce Ague all the world is rent. But dayes arme (tir'd to hold her torch to them) Now let it fall within the Ocean streame, The Goddesse blew retrait, and with her blast, Her morns creation did like vapours wast: The windes made wing, into the vpper light, And blew abroad the sparckles of the night. Then swift as thought) the bright Titanides Guide and great soueraigne of the marble seas, VVith milkwhite Herffers, mounts into her Sphere, And leaues vs miserable creatures here, Thus nights, faire dayes: thus griefs do ioyes supplant: Thus glories grauen in steele and Adamant Neuer supposd to wast, but grow by wasting, (Like snow in riuers falne) consume by lasting. O then thou greatThe Philosophers stone, or Philosophica Medicina is cald the great Elixer to which he here alludes. Elixer of all treasures, From whom we multiplie our world of pleasures, Disend againe, ah neuer leaue the earth, ButThis of our birth, is explaned before. as thy plenteous humors gaue vs birth, So let them drowne the world in night, and death Before this ayre, leaue breaking with thy breath.
Come Goddesse come,The double-fathered sonne is Orion, so cald since he was the sunne of Ioue and Appollo, borne of their eede en∣closed in a Bulls hide, which abhorreth not from Philoso∣phie (according to Poets intentions) that one sonne should haue two fathers▪ for in the generation of elements it is true, since omnia sint in omnibus. He offering violence, was stong of a Scorpion to death, for which: the Scorpions figure was made a signe in heauen, as Nicander in Theriacis affirmes. Grandine signatum Titanis at inde pella, Scorpion immisit qui cuspide surgat acuta: Boto vt meditata ncem fuit Orioni, Impuris ausus manibus qia prendere peplum: Ille D est▪  percussit Scorpis illi, Sub paruo lape occul vestigia propter. the double fatherd sonne, Shall dare no more amongst thy traine to runne, Nor with poluted handes to touch thy vaile: His death was darted from the Scorpions taile, For which her forme to endlesse memorie, VVith other lamps, doth lend the heauens an eye, And he that shewd such great presumption, Is hidden now, beneath a little stoe. If proudeAlpheus taken with the loue of Cynthia▪ not answered with many repuls pursued her to her companie of virgins, who mocking him, cast mire in his face, and draue him a∣way. Some affirme him to be a flood, some the sonne of Par∣thenia, some the waggoe of Pelops, &c. Alpheus offer force againe, Because he could not once thy loue obtaine, Thou and thy Nimphs shall stop his mouth with mire, And mocke the fondling, for his mad aspire. Thy glorious templeLucifera is her titl▪ and Ignifra: giuen by Euripides, in Iphiged in Taris. (great Lucifera) That was the studie of all Asia, Two hunderd twentie sommers to erect, Built by Chersiphrone thy Architect, In which two hundred, twentie columns stood, Built by two hunderd twentie kings of blood, Of curious bewtie, and admired height, Pictures and statues, of as praysefull sleight, Conuenient for so chast a Goddesse phane, (Burnt by Herostratus) shall now againe, Be reexstruct, and this Ephesia be Thy countries happie name, come here with thee, As it was there so shall it now be framde, And thy faire virgine-chamber euer namde: And as in reconstruction of it there, There Ladies did no more their iewells weare, But franckly contribute them all to raise, A worke of such a chast Religious prayse: So will our Ladies; for in them it lyes, To spare so much as would that worke suffice:
Our Dames well set their iewels in their myndes, In-sight illustrates; outward brauerie blindes, The minde hath in her selfe a Deitie, And in the stretching circle of her eye All things are compast, all things present still, VVill framd to powre, doth make vs what we will, But keepe your iewels, make ye brauer yet, Elisian Ladies; and (in riches set, Vpon your foreheads), let vs see your harts: Build Cynthiaes Temple in your vertuous parts, Let euerie iewell be a vertues glasse: And no Herostratus shall euer race, Those holy monuments: but pillers stand, VVhere euery Grace, and Muse shall hang her garland. The minde in that we like, rules euery lime, Giues hands to bodies, makes them make them trimme: VVhy then in that the body doth dislike, Should notTe bewtie of the  being sigfied in Ganemede, h here by Prosppia, gis a mans shape vnto it. his sword as great a vennie strike? The bit, and spurre that Monarcke ruleth still, To further good things, and to curb the ill, He is the Ganemede, the birde of Ioue, Rapt to her soueraignes bosome for his loue, His bewtie was it, not the bodies pride, That made him great Aquarius stellified: And that minde most is bewtifull and hye, And nearest comes to a Diuinitie, That furthest is from spot of earths delight, Pleasures that lose their substance with their sight, Such one, Saturnius rauisheth to loue, And fills the cup of all content to Ioue. If wisedome be the mindes true bewtie then, And that such bewtie shines in vertuous men,
If those sweet Ganemedes shall onely finde, Loue of Olimpius, are those wizerds wise, That nought but gold, and his dyiections prise This bewtie hath a fire vp her brow, That dimmes the Sunne of base desires in y, And as the cloudie bosome of the tree, VVhose branches will not let the smer see, His solemne shadows; but do entertaine, Eternall winter: so thy sacred traine, Thrise mightie Cythia shold be frozen dead, To all the lawlesse flames of Cupids Godhead, To this end let thy beames diinities, For euer shine vpon their sparckling eyes, And be as quench to those pestiferent fires, That through their eyes, impoison their desires, Thou neuer yet wouldst stoope to base assalt, Therefore those Poetes did most highly fault, That fainde theePausamas in Eliacis, affirmes it: others that she had but three, viz. Pn, which Homer cals the Gods Phisitiō, Epeus, and Aetolus, &c. Cicero saith she had none, but onely for his loue to the studie of Astrologie, gaue him chast kisses. fiftie children by And they that write thou hadst but three alone, Thou neuer any hadst, but didst affect, Endimion for his studio intellect. Thy soule-chast kisses were for vertes sake, And since his eyes were euermre awake, To search for knowledge of thy excellence, And all Astrologie: no negligence, Or female softnesse fede his learned trance, Nor was thy vaile once toucht with dalliance, VVise Poetes faine thy Godhead properlie, The thresholds of mens doores did fortifie, And therefore built they thankefull alters there, Seruing thy powre, in most religious feare. Deare precident for vs to imitate,
VVhose dores thou guardst against Imperious fate, Keeping our peacefull households safe from sack, And free'st our ships, when others suffer wracke. Her temple in Ephesus was cald her virgin chamber. Thy virgin chamber then that sacred is, No more let hold, an idle Salmacis, Nor let more sleights, Cydippe iniurie: Nor let blacke Ioue possest in Scicilie, Rauish more maids, but maids subdue his might, VVith well-steeld lances of thy watchfull sight. All these are proper to her as she is Heccate. Then in thy cleare, and Isie Pentacle, Now execute a Magicke miracle: Slip euerie sort of poisoned herbes, and plants, And bring thy rabid mastifs to these hants. Looke with thy fierce aspect, be terror-strong; Assume thy wondrous shape of halfe a furlong: Put on thy feete of Serpents, viperous hayres, And act the fearefulst part of thy affaires: Conuert the violent courses of thy floods, Remoue whole fields of corne, and hugest woods, Cast hills into the sea, and make the starrs, Drop out of heauen, and lose thy Mariners. So shall the wonders of thy power be seene, And thou for euer liue the Planets Queene. Explicit Hymnus. Omnis vt vmbra.
Gloss. 1 HE giues her that Periphrasis, viz. Natures bright eye sight, because that by her store of humors, issue is gi∣uen to all birth: and thereof is she called Lucina, and Ilythyia, quia praeest parturientibus cum inuocaretur, and giues them helpe: which Orpheus in a Hymne of her prayse expresseth, and cals her besides Prothyrea, vt sequitur. &c. Audi m veneranda Dea, cui nomina multa: Pragantum adirix, patientum dulce Sola puellarum sernatrix▪ sola{que} prudens: Auxilium velox teris Prothyrea puelli. And a little after, he shewes her plainlie to be Diana, Ily∣thyia, and Prothyrea, in these verses: Solam anim requiem te clamant par rutes. Sola potes dir partus placare labores Diana, Ilythyia grauis, sumus & Prothyrea. 2 He cals her the soule of the Night, since she is the purest part of her according to common conceipt. 3 Orpheus in these verses, in Argonauticis saith she is three headed, as she is Heccate, Luna, and Diana, vt sequitur. Cum{que} illis Hecate, properans horreda cucurrit, Cui trinum caput est, geis quam Tartarus olim. The rest aboue will not be denied. 4 That she is cald the powre of fate, read Hesiodus in Theo∣gonia when he giues her more then this commendation▪ in these verses: Iupiter ingentes illi largitur honores, Munera{que} imperium terr{que} maris{que} profundi: Cunctoru{que} simul, quae coelum amplectitur altum, Admittit{que} preces facilis Dea, propta, benigna: Diuitias prbet, quid ei concessa potest, Imperat haec cunctis, qui sunt è emie nati: Et terrae & Coeli, cunctorum fata gubet. 5 In Latmos she is supposed to sleepe with Endymion, vt Catullus. Vt triam furtim sub Lmia saxa elegans, Dulcis amor Gyro deoce Ari.
6 Homer with a maruailous Poeticall sweetnesse, saith she washes her before she apparells her selfe in th'Atlantick sea. And then shewes her apparell, as in thse verses. In Ocean Lauacri. Rursus Atlantis, in lymphis membra lauata, Vestibus indut, & idis Dea Luna micantes: Curru iunxit equos celeres, quibus ardua colla. 7 Cytheron, as Menander saith was a most faire boy, and beloued of Tisiphone, who since she could not obtaine his loue, she teares from her head a Serpent, & threw it at him, which stinging him to death, the Gods in pittie turned him to a hill of that name, first cald Atrius, full of woods wherein all Poets haue affirmed wild beasts liue, and vse it often to expresse their haunts, or store of woods, whereupō he inuokes Cynthia, to rise in such brightnesse, as if it were all on fire. 8 This is expounded as followeth by Gyraldus Lils. The application most  made by this author. 9 Harpe should be written thus, not with a y, yet here he vseth it, lest some, not knowing what it meanes, read it for a Harp, hauing foūd this grossenesse in some schollers. It was the sword Perseus vsed to cut of Medusas head. 10 Fortune is cald Tyc,  witnesseth Pausanias in Messe∣niacis, who affirmes her to b one of the daughters likewise of Ocea, which was playing with Prserpine, when Dis rauisht her. Vna omnes vario per prata contia ore, Candida Lucipp, Ph{que}, Elctra{que} ant e. Melobosis{que} Tych, Ocyrhe prgnis ocllis. And Orpheus in a Hymne to Fortuna, saith she is the daughter of bloud, vt in his, sanguine prognat, Vi & inexpugnabile numen. 11 Plutarch writes thus of the Romanes, and Macedons, in Paulus Aeilius. 12 These ar commonly knowne to be the properties of Cynthia.
13 This Zone is said to be the girdle of Cynthia. And thereof whē maids lost their maidenheads, amongst the A∣theniās, they vsed to pt of their girdles. And ter, custom made it a phrase , to lose their maidenheades, vt Apol. lib. 1. 14 These are the verses of  translated to effect. O miseri, quib ipsa  &c. 15 This Strabo testifieth 16 Pegasus is cald  since Pots fayne, that when Pers smote of Medusas head,  ew frō the woūd: & therefore the Muses  whh he made with his hoofe, is cald Grg. 17 Ortigia is the countrie where she was brought vp. 18 These are the verses of  before. 19 The Wall is  most excellent riuer, in the Low coun∣tries parting with another riuer, cald the Mae, neare a towne in Holland, cald Gurckham, and runnes vp to Guel∣derland vnder the walls of Nimigen. And these like Siles, in my opinion drawne frō the honorable deeds of our noble countrimen, clad in comely habit of Poesie, would become a Poeme as well as further-fetcht grounds, if such as be Poets now a dayes would vse them. 20 The Philosophers stone, or Philosophica Medicina is cald the great Elixer to which he here alludes. 21 This of our birth, is explaned before. 22 The double-fathered sonne is Orion, so cald since he was the sunne of Ioue and Appollo, borne of their eede en∣closed in a Bulls hide, which abhorreth not from Philoso∣phie (according to Poets intentions) that one sonne should haue two fathers▪ for in the generation of elements it is true, since omnia sint in omnibus. He offering violence, was stong of a Scorpion to death, for which: the Scorpions figure was made a signe in heauen, as Nicander in Theriacis affirmes. Grandine signatum Titanis at inde pella, Scorpion immisit qui cuspide surgat acuta: Boto vt meditata ncem fuit Orioni,
Impuris ausus manibus qia prendere peplum: Ille D est▪  percussit Scorpis illi, Sub paruo lape occul vestigia propter. 23 Alpheus taken with the loue of Cynthia▪ not answered with many repuls pursued her to her companie of virgins, who mocking him, cast mire in his face, and draue him a∣way. Some affirme him to be a flood, some the sonne of Par∣thenia, some the waggoe of Pelops, &c. 24 Lucifera is her titl▪ and Ignifra: giuen by Euripides, in Iphiged in Taris. 25 Te bewtie of the  being sigfied in Ganemede, h here by Prosppia, gis a mans shape vnto it. 26 Pausamas in Eliacis, affirmes it: others that she had but three, viz. Pn, which Homer cals the Gods Phisitiō, Epeus, and Aetolus, &c. Cicero saith she had none, but onely for his loue to the studie of Astrologie, gaue him chast kisses. 27 Her temple in Ephesus was cald her virgin chamber. 28 All these are proper to her as she is Heccate. Explicit Coment. FINIS.
