5339 99850307 15498
AN EPISTLE DISCOVRSING vpon the present Pestilence. Teaching what it is, and how the people of God should carrie themselues towards God and their Neighbour therein. Reprinted with some Additions. By Henoch Clapham. LONDON Printed by T. C. for the Widow Newbery, and are to be sold at her shop in Pauls Church∣yard, at the signe of the Ball. 1603.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipfull Sir Baptist Hickes, Knight: all necessarie sauing gifts from aboue. GOod Sir, before I returned last into England, I did publish a certaine E∣pistle, wherein I noted how certaine a∣mongst vs had laide the groundes of Brownisme, while theyr zeale (beyond knowledge) had laboured our Churches reformation. That comming into the hands of some of them here in and about the Citie, they welcomed me home, with an ad∣uisement giuen to some theyr disciples, that I should neither be heard Preach, nor priuatly conferred with, nor haue any of my bookes read of them. Theyr reason was, that Cl. would bring people to all the corruptions of the English Church, and finally to Romes church. But when there was some extraordinary cause of oppo∣sing to Romish platformes, let the Traytor W. Wat. speake of his conscience, if the Accused did not rather oppose to such wickednes then his Accusers? As they bgun to malice without grounde (for now they shame to meddle with theyr dombe Presbyterie, and halfe faced Deaconry, with some other things not to be main∣tained) so, they haue not therewith stinted the bitternesse of their spirits, but now must please them (whom otherwise
But some will say, that meate and drinke, Chirurgene and Phisicke, helpeth and doth good to many, who neuer call vpon the name of the Lord, specially in the name of Christ Iesus, I answere:1. Tim. 4. 4. 10. The liuing God is a Sauiour of all men, specially of them that beleeue. His mercie is vpon all the creatures. Not the vilest Barbarian, but he suffreth his com∣fortable Sunne and Ayre to shine and breath vpon. When the mercies of God are called into question, euery mouth shall be stopped. But howsoeuer he is a Sauiour of all men, yet he hath a speciall saluation for the faithfull, as S. Paul teacheth Timothie. Howsoeuer he affordeth blessings to all, yet in a speciall forme he blesseth the Beleeuer. For as they call for his sauing fauour in the vse of all his creatures, so they haue it in their much and little, in their health and sick∣nesse, in their life and death. These vse the Creature, with assurance of a peculiar blessing, when the other eate, drinke, and apply it with a peculiar curse; Now, we are not to la∣bour for the temporary blessing sauced onely with a com∣mon mercie, (for then we goe no further then the dogge in his eating of grasse, for easing his stomacke) but to labour with the Lord by prayer for his speciall blessing our con∣scence in the vse of these creatures: leauing the issue tem∣potarie to his will, which is holy in all things. A true Christian walketh thus in common diet, and vsuall infirmities, how much more doth it stand him in hand, to looke to his carriage towards God, in respect of this Pest or Pestilence? A theists, meere Naturians and o∣ther ignorant persons, do hold it to be a natural disease, pro∣ceeding from naturall causes onely: as from corruption of ayre, caused by vnseasonable Planets aboue, or else from carrionly stinking smelles here belowe. Who while they looke not higher then the earth, or not higher then the Planets, do sticke in the Creature, forgetting the Creator (called thePsal. 84 1. Lord of hostes) who commaunds or forbids, sends out, or stayes the course and operation of creatures and corruptions. As God is the Lord of Hostes, soPsal. 101. Hee
maketh a flaming fire his ministers, sometimes for consuming, sometimes for preseruing. For by it, Nebuchadnezzers exe∣cutioners were destroyed, when the three young Nobles of Iudah were in midst thereof preserued. Addition expository and Apologeticall to the first Section. GAlenistes] So called of Galen a Gréek Heathen Physiti∣an. This kind of Plague or Pestilence is of him tearmed Loimos, respecting onely Bodies bursting out in corrupti∣on, which may be cause sometimes of corrupting other bodies: specially such as are inclinable to and capable of such corrupti∣on. And this is it, that some Christians vnderstand, when they say, that the Pestilence is as a Candle, and bodies as strawe, some wet, some dry, more or lesse capable of taking fire. And this is true, but not all the truth, nor yet in the first sence which is Diuine, whereof I shall speake somewhat after. To stick therfore in this consideration, is to speake rather after the man∣ner of Naturalls then of Diuines. And who dare speake rather after the maner of man, then after the vncontrowlable forme of the Holy Ghost? The dead creature can giue to him no life:] Because the dead creature cannot of it selfe vinifie the bodie, therefore the Christian is taught to looke vp to God the Author of life: who, as he hath promised to euerie Belieuer the thing that is good calling for it by prayer; so, such a praying belieuer ought to ex∣pect the veritie of his promise, séeing he is faithfull that hath pro∣mised: for, Godlines is profitable to all things, which hath promise of the life present and of that is to come, 1 Tim. 4, 8. without Godlines, many are partakers of some Spiritual and all sorts of Corporall giuings, without diuine direct promise, and therefore such giuings do finally turne into bitter∣nes, vexation of spirit, and the iust heaping vp of iudgement.
SECTION. II. THe word Plague, is originally a Greeke word: for Plege it is termed in Reuelation. 16. 9. and of the Latines Plaga, in English valuing a blowe or stripe. Which, as it may haue a more generall vse, so, it is not applyed to this particu∣lar disease of the Pest, otherwise, then because it is a blowe or stripe inflicted on mankind. By whom? By God, al∣though mediately by spirit, or corruption, or both. The lan∣guage of God & Adam in the old Testament, doth terme it Deber (as in Exod. 3. 3. Deu. 28 21. Psal 91. 36 2. Sam 24. 13.) of Dabar to speake, whether it be a speech of life or death. And so it is termed I doubt not because it is an effect of the Lords Word for sinne, according to his threatning in Deut. 28. 21. Let the word be so considered in the two sacred lan∣guages of the old and new Testament, and the Plague is no other maladie, then a speciall blowe inflicted on man∣kinde for sinne. I speake not of it, as it seizeth on beasts, see∣ing it commeth to them by Mankindes sinne. Sinne is the cause why the Lord (according to his word) smiteth Man∣kind, whether corruption be in the way or not. Doth God send out a Spirit to smite (as Dauids people in 2. Sam. 24. were smit by a good Angell, but Iob before with a bad) the Spirit smiteth not but vpon the Lords word, smite or touch: in which respect it is called Negagn in Psal 91. 10. of Nagagn to touch: Although the terme Negagn may well imply a plague or stripe lesse piercing and killing. The stroke of God, it is for sinne. And smiteth he with his owne finger immediately, or mediately as by the hand of an other?Deut. 29. 29. The secret things belong vnto the Lord, nor will I meddle with what hee doth beyond the words reue∣lation. In Leuiticus 26. and Deut. 28. hee threatneth varie∣tie of plagues for sin; but concealeth the particular meanes which hee will vse for accomplishing that word. In other places we read of his Angell smiting people til the Lord did
stay, but that euer he made Corruption his messenger I read not: and yet I doubt not but God may haue vsed cor∣ruption in the ministry of his Angell, for correcting or con∣founding the corrupt creature. But why in such discourse, hath the spirit of God still mentioned only God for Agent, and the Angell for Instrument? Because we should in such cases, looke first to God, as he that is all in all: secondly, to the ministrie of his Angels, who are appointed to preserue such from the plague as commit themseluesPsal. 91. 1. 11. in their wayes to the protection of God all sufficient. A doctrine full opposite to our practise, who cast our eye more to acryall corruption, then vnto God and his Angell smiting. Addition Expos. & Apologet. to the second Sestion. THe word plague] Séeing there can be no true dispute where the thing to be disputed vpon is vncertainlie or doubtfully vnderstoode, I therefore in the second Section, haue laboured to cleare what the Plague may be. Plague (and so Pestilence) is a word of large vse, but in this dispute applied to a certaine disease extraordinarily mortall and deadly: yea, a disease now amongst vs, confessed by our Physitians, to excéed the compasse and reache of all their naturall reason and rea∣ding. No maruell, séeing that which is primordiall and princi∣pall in it, is spirituall and inuisible. What that is, the Diuine Scriptures do teach, when not only they shewe that Sinne is the prouoking cause (and specially, sinne vniversall) but also do shewe that it is a stroke inflicted from without, and that by the ministrie of an Angell, appointed so by Iehouahs expresse word: for which the Hebrewes do vse the very same letters (Deber) for word and Pestilence. And herevpon it is, that the Hebrues turne the word Deber by Logos, in Psal. 91. so well as in other places, which in English is word or speech: for as Gentils without God could not reach hier thē nature herein▪ so the Hebrues (to whom the liuely Oracles were commited) did
passe by that, as being but the effect; and looked (as we ought) to God be his Angell smiting. Nor is it for other cause, that the Holy Ghost tells vs of Aaron & Dauids intercéeding by praier, in Nom. 16. and 2. Sam. 24. and not of any corporall flight or naturall courses. The Gréeke translation, in Psal. 91. 3 doth read for these our words; From the noysome Pestilence, these words Apo¦logóu tarachodous, which valueth this, From the word that be-muddeth: from whence I gather, first the Angell smiting according to the Lords word gone out: secondly, an effect in the bodie so smitten, and that is, the blood and powres commoued and bemudded: like as a poole smitten with some instrument of waight, shoulde haue the myre and mudde therevpon rai∣sed, to the troubling of all. Originall sinne hath conuey∣ed into our humane nature corruption as mudde: this is in vs as setled, vntill the Angell smite, and loe therevpon all the bodie is out of order. Because we should not créepe on the earth herein with Galen, Hippocrates and such, we haue not onely the scriptures to teach vs the former Super-naturall stroke, but also diuerse so smitten, haue felt and heard the noyse of a blow; and some of them haue vpon such a blow found the plain print of a blew hand left behind vpon the flesh. At the funerals of sundrie such, I my selfe this sicknes time haue preached. Such a stroke, was to put vs in mind of Iehouahs Angell smi∣ting; and such a blewnes, may put vs in minde of the muddie corruption in our humane nature. The Angels stroke so is the Cause, the plague-sores and marks arising and appearing are the effect. The first not infec∣tious; and therefore the Angell in Egipt went from house to house in Egipt, and from Dan to Bersheba, and Ierusalem in Iudea, with his sword drawne. The second is infectious some∣times more or lesse. The first absolutely mortall and deadly, as Hezekiah was told: and therefore such regaining health and life, haue new daies added, as Hezekiah had yeares. The se∣cond is not absolutely deadly, because but naturall in the forme of deriuall, as it befalleth in other corrupt cases.
SECTION. III. SInne being the cause for which he smiteth a people with Pestilence (sinne poisoning earth, ayre and all) some will demaund, if so it cannot be preuented or cured with change of place and vse of Physicke? By changing place they thinke they may,Pron. 22. 3. & 27. 12. because it is written, A prudent man se∣eth the plague and hideth himselfe. And by physicke they sup∣pose they may, because that sundry (of their knowledge) haue so escaped. For the diuine prouerbe, they abuse it two waies. Once in vnderstading the word Plague for Pestilence. Though e∣uery pestilence be a plague, yet euery plague is not a pesti∣lence. Nor doth the originall word properly signifie the one or the other. It is Ragnah, valuing the Latine Malum, in English Euill, as in an other forme it is aptly turned into: Prou. 14. 16. For the Translator, howsoeuer hee leaue the proper signification of the word, hee yet speaketh to good purpose, seeing the holy Ghost there speaketh of such an Amos 3. 6. euill in the citie as the Lord doth: that is, of such a punish∣ment as the Lord inflicteth; called an euill of mankinde, though properly a correction or punishment of euill And secondly, such Excepters abuse the Prouerbe, in saying, they may flye from the place with the prudent man. Salomon saith not that such a one flyeth, but that he hideth himselfe. A man may couer or hyde himselfe without flying. If thou say that a man cannot hide himselfe from the plague, I say likewise that thou cannot any more flye from the plague: Goe where thou wilt and his right hand shal finde thee out: If thou wert with Ionas first vnder the hatches, and after with the Whale in the bottome of the Sea, he will finde thee out. The wings of the morning cannot carrie thee beyond his reach. What is this hiding or couering thy selfe then? It is no couer corporeall, but spirituall: euen the same that is spoken of in Psal. 61. 4. where safetie is assured to him that
coucheth vnder the Lords winges. The prudent hearted seeth a plague or iudgement com∣ming towards a people for sinne; what doth he then? Hee commits himselfe in his Christian way, to the protection of the Almightie, who hath promised to be a shield to such as put their trust in him:Psal. 91. 6. that such a one shall not need to feare that pestilence that walketh in darknesse, nor the plague that destroyeth at noone-day. For walking in his way, that is, in the way God hath called him vnto, and leaning vpon the Lords promise, what neede is there of locall flight or co∣uer? Secondly, for their phisicall experience, I thereto make this answere: Sinne being the cause of the maladie, (as also of euery maladie) it is for none to make physick their staffe, nor yet their first meane, lest they sinne the sinne of2. Chro. 16 12. Asa: much lesse seeke to Idol-wizards, which was the sinne of2. King. 1. Achaziah. Besides, they see many preserued in the midst of the plague, who haue vsed no phisicall meanes: what will they make the cause of their deliuerance? No other thing, but the diuine pleasure of God, who hath forbid his Angell to smite them. Is Phisicke then in this and all other plagues to be auoyded? No: asIsai. 38. Hezekiah (howsoeuer ha∣uing promise of recouerie) did meane time suffer a lumpe of drie figs to be applied to his boyle (hauing in nature to heat, mature, and digest) so we are not to neglect such naturall means as reason and experience haue found out to auaile a∣gainst naturall infirmitie [Deo non obstante] the Lord not crossing nature. Otherwise, we shalbe found tēpters of God, leauing our way: rather then faithfull keepers of our way. Reason of vsing naturall meanes (where God barres them not vp) is this: Whether the ayre be infected without vs, there neuer wanteth infection within vs, which is readie to take an head against our heart, if the Lord do not bridle it. As God smiting vs with other maladies (threatned in the lawe so wel as Pestilence) doth not only say, Let it be, where∣vpon the maladie growes, but also hath that his word wor∣king
vpon preiacent corruption effected by our sinne: so, hee looketh that his word be satisfied by humbling our selues in prayer and fasting, and that naturall corruption haue the power preuented or destroyed by naturall means, he ffording them. To say, I shall liue so long as God hath appointed, though I neuer vse phisicke, it is as good as this, I shall liue so long as God hath appointed, though I neuer eate nor drinke. As meate and drinke is for the hungry, so is phisicke for the diseased: for to the necessitie of naturall phi∣sicke, our Sauiour alludeth, when as for establishing his spi∣rituall phisicke, he saith:Luk. 5. 31. They that are sicke need the Phisiti∣on. God hath created the Word, Prayer and Fasting for re∣pelling and killing sinne, the Materiall cause of Gods anger: and he hath created phisicall creatures for preuenting and curing naturall corruption, the materiall cause of our mala∣die and naturall sicknesse. So both be the good creatures of God, and both to be vsed to his glory. The first for helping and healing our soule: the second, for helping and healing the body. God sometimes blesseth the first without the se∣cond, to shewe that he is not tyed to meanes. And he some∣times blesseth the second without the first, to shew that we ought not neglect the meanes. But as we haue both sinfull soules and corrupt bodies, so we should vse both, for bene∣fiting both. Addition to the third Section. IN the Pestilence there falling out a two-fold consideration as afore, the first Supernaturall, the second Naturall, it so followeth, that the supernaturall cause be salued by that which is spirituall; the other by that which is naturall, Heze∣kiah did both in Isa. 38. First, he in all truth of spirit did humble himselfe in prayer, and secondly, did applie a lump of igges, the second becomming effectuall, when God in the first place had accepted of teares and mournings. Our Naturians should neuer therefore promise or insinuate health and life by
the second, but by putting people in the minde, that they must labour with God for satisfaction for the first. That this is our Churches iudgement also, let it be considered, first, in that the Magistrates and Ministers haue appointed publike and vni∣uersall fasting and prayer, by way of humiliation before God for sinne: secondly, in that also they haue published naturall meanes in respect of naturall corruption. How vntollerable wicked then haue they béene, who priuatlie and in Gods most holy place, haue giuen out that Clapham hath béene herein singular and odde by himselfe. They be rather odde that vn∣derstand not themselues. SECTION. IIII. BVt seeing the LordIn Psal. 91. promiseth deliuerance from the plague, to all such as rest vnder his wings and walke in his way, it may be asked, how comes it to passe that some Beleeuers die of the pestilence, and some vnbeleeuers scape it? I answere, the Lords promise being euer fast to the Be∣leeuer (for he is faithfull that hath promised) there is in Be∣leeuers so dying, a want of faith for apprehending this par∣ticular deliuerance, this temporary mercy. Though they haue not lacked faith for their eternall iustification & finall saluation, by vertue whereof their flesh resteth in hope of an happie resurrection, and their spirit is gone in comfort to God that gaue it: yet hath euerie one perishing on the pestilence bene found, not to apprehend this particular promise. To say that the psalme speaketh only of a spirituall plague and a spirituall promise, is to conclude the same of Leuit. 26. & Deut. 28. and of all the like places. Then the which, what can be more absurd? vnder literall promises and mercies, menacies and curses, spirituall things are also entended, but not onely. The first shadoweth out and leadeth to the second. And because still there is the same vse, the outward euils so well as the second are still abiding. When we haue receiued Christ by faith, we haue promise ofRom. 8. 32. all
things also: (promises of this world & of the world to come.) But when by faith we haue apprehended the greater, loe we are often found to doubt of the lesser. In not doubting of the eternall, we should not doubt of the temporarie. But doubting of the lesser and loosing it by doubting: we see what we should do in the greater, if God should leaue vs to our owne standing. That manie wicked escape in midst of strongest pesti∣lence, first, it is not because they haue any promise, but be∣cause it pleaseth God both to them and vs to be in manie things, manie times, better then his promise: teaching them and vs therein, how good he would be to vs in all things walking in his way, and vndoubting the promise. Secondly, the wicked so escaping, are ordinarily such as haue walked boldly through the sicknes, bragging of their faith in God, touching deliuerance from pestilence: shew∣ing plainly that they had a faith in God for apprehending promise of deliuerance. Though they haue not had faith for apprehending things spirituall and eternall, yet for lay∣ing hold on this particular temporarie. And such a faith, is ordinarily countenanced with such a mercie, as that tempo∣rary repentance of Ahab, Manasses, and Niniuets, was graced with particular flitting mercies. God teaching such therein, how much more he would draw neare vnto them in all goodnes, if so they had in them a right continuing faith, and continuing repentance. And therewithall checking his chil∣dren for doubting the lesser, hauing faith in him for the greater. Addition to the fourth Section. THere is in belieuers so dying, a want of faith.] That is, some want in faith. S. Iames willing vs in she want of knowledge to haue our recourse vnto God in prayer,Iam. 1. 6. &c. he telleth vs that we must not waner; for if we do, he concludeth, that we are not to thinke that we shall receiue any thing of the
Lord. From whence I gather, that lack of faith is cause we are denied any thing necessarie our life here. Some will obiect, There is some want of faith, some doubting, some wa∣uering in the best child of God, therefore none can assure him∣selfe of receiuing any good of God, whether corporall, or spiri∣tuall. I answere, it is one thing what we ought to do, another thing what we do. Secondly, it is enioyned vs in Leuit. 26. and in Deut. 28. that as we would haue blessings temporary, and auoid cursings temporarie, we should obey the commaun∣dements; and the best are found daily to breake the commaun∣dements, haue they therefore no assurance of blessing? If they looke into the measure of obedience (literall or spirituall) as it is in themselues only, they haue cause to looke for no good thing. This want then in all things, is to driue them vnto the Lord by Christ Iesus in all things. Obiection. God will not exact such obedience, such faith, except we could so obey, so belieue. Answere. The Romanists indéede say so, but they and others must remember, that it is equall for him so to exact, séeing (as we were set out of his hands in Adam) we were enabled so to belieue and obey. Thirdly, as there is no promise of God but it is deliuered vnder condition, and there is no condition kept fullie of our part, and therefore no flesh that may be able to re∣ioyce in Gods sight: so, it pleaseth him sometimes not to im∣pute the want in faith and obedience to his children (for if he should, we could not breath one day) but to accept them as Perfect and iust, Iob. 1. 1. 8. Ezek. 14. 20. Luke. 1. 6. Other∣wise, S. Iames should leaue vs litle or no hope of receiuing any thing of God by prayer. Fourthly, in case of temporary bles∣sings, it pleaseth God to giue an extraordinarie strength of faith, by the which deuils and mountaines of difficulties are often remoued: so well as vnto his children he besides giueth an extraordinarie strength of faith for Eternalls, called of the Apostle to the ColossiansColoss. 2. 2. full assurāce. Plerophoria, with allusion to a Ship carried with a full sayle. To say that the 91. Psalme speaketh only of a spirituall plague.] To say that the legall promises and menaces are
only spirituall, is to teach a doctrine that the Auncient church was neuer acquainted with, nor yet any moderne writer that I know of. Let such a, b, c, diuines go reade Tremellius, and Fr. Iunius their notes on Psal. 91. and of the rest, that on the fift verse: A pauore nocturno] id est, ab vllis apertis, occullis, in∣ternis, externis, corporeis aut spiritualibus malis, vllo vnquam tempore; wherein they teach that the promise is of deliuerance from any euils, open, hid, internall, externall, corporall or spirituall. It is not because they haue any promise.] Here I speake of the wicked in generall: Shewing plainely that they had a faith in God.] Héere I speake of some certaine wicked. Héere some say I speake contraries: first, because I teach that the wicked haue no such promise: secondly, that some such haue a faith or beliefe in God touching such deliuerance. I see a diuerse thing in these wicked-ones, but no contrary thing deliuered. That they haue no promise of hauing good by so much as a bit of bread, my ma∣leuolent brethren graunt, that some of them haue beliefe in God for temporary blessings, yea, and sometimes of eternall happines, who can doubt, except all wicked should alwayes dispaire of all things? If I had said, they haue iustifying or sauing faith, I had spoken contraries, séeing promises of this life, and that to come is made directlie and properlie vnto them. What kind of faith I spoke of, it may appeare when I terme it a bragging faith, that is, a presumptuous beliefe with∣out any ground of promise. These that come to our Sauiour in the last day, saying, Haue we not prophecied in thy name, cast out Deuils, &c. had they no faith touching temporaries? Tis very sillie. They had (as Schollers vsually speake) a tem∣porarie faith, and perswasion: and my writing can no way entend any other. And thus men crow before the victorie. That temporary repentance of Ahab, Manasses, &c. A great quarell ariseth from the poore word Manasses, that I should number him with the temporarie repentant. If they had not liked the word, they might easily haue wiped it out,
and so haue kept peace with the booke. That I vnderstand so of his repentance, obserue what I haue to say. In the 2. King. 21. the historie of his life and death is set downe, and no speech of any repentance. And thereto is annexed, that Amon his sonne did euill in the sight of the Lord, as did his father Manasses. And Amon is neither there nor elsewhere noted repentant, but caried out of the world in iudgement. This connexure of Father and Sonne, causeth me to thinke that the repentance spoken of in 2. Chron. 33. (in which respect he is preferred to his sonne) to haue bene of the Prophets then held but as temporarie, and fitted to time. If it be a good argument of Salomons true repentance, that Reho∣boam and his people are said to haue walked three yeares in the way of Dauid and Salomon, 2. Chron. 11. 17. (for that Salomon should not so haue bene matched with Dauid, if he had not died well to the Church-ward, as did Dauid) if I say, that be good for prouing his true repentance; then I sée not why Manasses his repentance may not be held as no true repen∣tance, when he comes to be so conioyned with Amon, that ne∣uer truly repented to the Church-ward. I say to the Church-ward, because it is possible for a man to vnsatisfie the Church, & yet of God be saued: as also to dye innocent to the Church-ward, & yet of God condemned for some secret abhomination vnrepented of. But if any hereafter will logomachein, contend and wage warre about a word, it is not my purpose easily to follow them. SECTION. V. FAmine, sword and pestilence, are a Trinitie of punish∣ments prepared of the Lord, for consuming a people that haue sinned against him. 2. Sam. 24. 12, 13. S. Iohn in the opening of the fourth Seale, doth number them thus; Reuel. 6. 8. Sword, Hunger and Death: the Sword leying, Famine staruing, the Pestilence effecting death, but death with a witnes, as the most readie destroyer. Dauid being put to his choise, doth distinguish them into two sorts; the first being
a Fall into the Enemies hands, and that he refuseth, because the Churches aduersarie would insult without all mercy. The other two should be a Fall into God his hands, and that he chooseth, because his mercies were great. And of these two (Famine and Pestilentiall death) he chooseth the latter; why? Some thinke, because himselfe might be relieued of Famine, and so not die: and he coueting to die with the people, would therefore choose the pestilence which would as well seize vpon him. This is somewhat, but I see it not in this scripture. After he had seene a fearfull fall of the peo∣ple, he coueted Gods hand to be turned against him: but that he was of such mind before that Fall, it should not seeme; first, because his heart (before Gad the prophet came to him) was smitten with the sight of his sinne, whereupon he repented: secondly, because in his option of the pesti∣lence, he expreslie expected some great mercie in the midst of iudgement. But the direct cause of electing this Plague, was (I doubt not) diuided (at least) into these two respects: the first, ayming at the easinesse of death: for to die of fa∣mine is a more lingring torturing death. And herein ap∣peared Dauids Charitie. The second ayming at the Chur∣ches enriching with necessaries alreadie possessed: for fa∣mine would haue deuoured vp all her maintenance. And herein was both loue and policie. Dauid being a Prophet, he could not haue fewer godlie respects in his option. Of all these three plagues, Sword, Famine, and Pesti∣lence, I conclude the last to bring with it the most mercie. If the Aduersaries sword destroy, ô the mockings, proud insultings, filthie prostitutions, cruell oppressions, accom∣panying that sword? The sword of Romish Babilonians was prest to haue beene drawen within and without vs. How great was the Lords mercie to shut that vp in the scaberd? Famine was threatned vpon the death of our late soueraigne Elizabeth; for the Rascalitie of our land hoped, as Drone-bees, to haue spoiled our Hyues, as an vnsatiable Hell or graue to swallow vp all. How mercifull was God
vnto vs, that with a crosse-wynd did rather take them vnto Tyburne, or consume them in warres without vs? Yea, how was his mercie great vnto vs, in putting farre from vs both the former plagues, and in smiting, to smite vs with this pestilence: that so falling, we fall before his hand that is a mercifull Father, in the midst of iudgement remembring mercie; leauing vs not to lingring deaths, whereby we might be more pained; and giuing that we haue possessed to his Church, whereof we haue bene members. Yea, where in three dayes the Lords Angell did smite to death 70. thou∣sands of Dauids people: loe his great mercie to vs ward, he hath not so smitten yet one thousand in full three dayes. O that the liuing would lay it to heart, and praise God for his mercies. SECTION. VI. GOd of necessitie being to punish vs; and then in stead of sharp rods, to smite vs with the pestilence; and in the pestilence to destroie so leisurely, it should teach vs (King,These that stumble at the word Priest, do it without ground: seeing Priest is deri∣ued of Presby∣ter, as Bishop of Episcopus, and Deacon of Diaconus. Nor maketh this any thing for the Roma∣nist that will be a Iewish carnall Sacer∣dos, or Sacri∣ficer. Priest and People) to be humbled vnder his hand in the free confession of our sinnes, admiring his leni∣tie and fatherlie kindnes. God giue vs grace speedily to be humbled. And the Lords mercies to vs, should force vs to be more mercifull one to another. It should teach Magistrate and Minister (with Dauid) to bide by their charge, and to intreat mercie for the sheepe of his pasture, till the Angell put vp his viall of pestilence. To augment our spirituall deuotions in the openest places, as did Dauid, who built an alter in2. Sam. 24. 48. &c. 2. Chro. 3. 1. A∣raunahs threshing floore on mount Moriah, the place chosen of God for putting his name there, whereon after the Temple was builded. Yea, to put our sacrifices betweene the plague and the Church, as Dauid did betweene the falne of Israel and Ierusalem, that so the plague may not creepe any further. Yea, the mercie of God to vs, should teach vs all
to be helping one to an other, not to please our selues in all things, to lay downe our liues for the brethren, liuing and dying in good workes, to the sicke and needie. The ninetie∣nine are to be left that stand not in such need, and the sheepe that is readie to perish, we ought to seeke vp. Happie is the soule, who (when his maister commeth) is found so wor∣king: and thrise happie is the soule, that hath the body cut downe in such a worke of mercie. True it is, that for certaineLeuit. 11. & 12. & 13. & 14. & 15. Chapters. bodily vncleannesses and maladies, people vnder the lawe of Moses were to be seue∣red from the Church, more or lesse: and yet now no com∣maundement vnto vs; why? For that they were a part of the Ceremonial law. This may appeare, first from the rites, secondly, from their significations. In certaine vncleannes∣ses, they were to wash themselues with water, and then (not before) to be held cleane for company. For the Leprosie, it was censured onely by the Ecclesiasticall Minister; and this hee did not till hee sawe it, and sometimes not till he had made some fourteene dayes triall; and speciall rules he had for the triall. Who will say that these rites were not ceremoniall and abolished, besides that the Priest had no feare of the leprous-plague during all the time of his pro∣bation? For their signification, it respected the degrees of excōmunication for Soules vncleanenesse. Which not only appeareth by many2. Cor. 6. 17. Coloss. 2. 21. Tit. 1. 15. Iude 23. Reuel. 3. 4. speeches in the new Testamēt, alluding to such vncleannesses, but also, for that the new Testaments church hath power only to excōmunicate for defects in the soule; as the auntient Synagogue did for wants in the body. These then that will maintaine their flight from the Leui∣tical lawe, do in their fact pronounce all they flie from to be Excommunicate; yea, with the black Kerem or Maranatha to be excommunicate to the death, for not louing the Lord Iesus; for to them such a censure only belongeth, 1. Cor. 16. 22. Thus such Fleers are left of God to belie scripture, and to abuse their brethren; which is a worse plague then that they flie from If they meet now with the Pest in the coun∣try,
let them tel me, if so they can die with such peace of con∣science as if they died in the city, performing workes of mer∣cie to the sick and needie. But if they feast and reioyce in the country while the yron enters Iosephs soule in the Citie, let them know that God may serue in the last dish sauced with his vengeance. We haue sinned together, and the hand of God hath come vpon vs togither: let vs therefore humble our selues togither before the Lord in fasting and prayer. LetNehe. 1. 4. 5. 6. &c. Ne∣hemiah andDad. 9. 3. 4. 5. &c. Daniel, Magistrate and Minister, confesse their sinnes & the sinnes of their people, and let all the peo∣ple subscribe, saying, Amen. It is not change of place, but change of life that must healp vs. Lord, for thy son sake, re∣mit all our offences; giue vs grace to turne vnto thee with all truth of repentance; and for thy holy names sake remoue this same deserued Pestilence from vs. Amen. Addition to the 6. Section. FOr the Leprosie, it was censured only by the Ecclesiasti∣call Minister. The Minister was to finde out the trueth of leprosie, for giuing true information to Magistrate and people, and vpon the experience of a fretting leprosie to put the Person out of cōmunion, to burne the garment, to pull downe the house, Leui. 14. and 15. First, it may be a question whether in the new testaments Church there be a Leprosie of such form that can be so tried: secondly, whither by fretting was ment in∣fectious. And if: yet whether the Pestilence ought so to be pro∣céeded withall, séeing the Minister now neither is so cōmanded to try it: nor in garments nor in houses it can so be found. For if; then all our garments must be burned, the houses pulled downe, and the Persons excōmunicate, which vnto me (and I thinke to euery one) would séeme absurd, and be the ruine of Citie and common wealth.
Epilogus. THe Pestilence being in scripture phrase, an extraordi∣narie stroke of God by the ministrie of his Angell, whereupon often-times visible corruption ariseth, and all for sinne: it leadeth you (Beloued) First, to cast your eye vp vnto God the first Mouer whe∣ther corruptiō visible be in the way, yea or no. Secondly, to behold the Angel of God appointed to keep vs in our way; and that specially in respect of our bodies good: seeing since the consummation of the Testament in Christs blood, our soules are specially to be tended of true Pastors, called of S. Iohn, the Angels of the Churches. For now, no lesse then be∣fore they be ministring Spirits sent forth to Minister for their sakes, which shall be Heires of Saluation, Heb. 1. 14. And yet (as before) they are appointed of God sometimes to punish man for going out of his way. Thirdly, we are called to repent sinne, which did moue God so to send out his Angell to smite vs, euen to the raising vp of the mudde in our nature. The truth of which repen∣tance will appeare in our better care of setting right steps to to our feet, and in being more carefull of performing holy duties of Charitie one to another. Fourthly, seeing it seizeth vpon old and yong, rich and poore, of all complexions whatsoeuer, so well as some of all sorts are spared, we are lead to acknowledge that all sorts haue sinned (though not after the same manner of trans∣gression, Rom. 5. 14.) and therefore the dutie of all to be humbled, least the Niuinites condemne vs. Fiftly, the Angels of the Church (from the like in the Angels of heauen) are to comfort and cheare vp such as be in their Christian way, as also to reproue and sharply cor∣rect such as be out of that way. The first they are to do with the voyce of the glorious Gospell or glad tidings of Christ Iesus who hath taken away the sting of death to them. The
second they are to doe, by the terror of Moses lawe, which bringeth with it to the infidelious & vnrepentant, curse and condemnation. Andin so doing, they may with good con∣sicnece make that prayer, Thy will be don in the earth (that is, of people in the earth) as it is done in heauen, that is of the bles∣sed Angels that attend the word of the father in heauen. And thus with my heartie prayer vnto God, first, for the remission of all our sinnes: and secondly, for his grace to stablish vs in euery good worke for the glory of his name, I commend you vnto him that is able to present our bodies and soules faultles before the throne of iudgment, who spread his wyngs of sauing pro∣tection ouer vs and his whole Church for euer, Amen. FINIS.
