5807 99844371 9178
CORYATS CRAMBE, OR HIS COLWORT TVVISE SODDEN, AND Now serued in with other Macaronicke dishes, as the second course to his Crudities. LONDON Printed by William Stansby 1611.
CERTAINE VERSES WRITTEN VPON CORYATS CRVDITIES, WHICH SHOVLD Haue beene Printed with the other Panegyricke lines, but then were vpon some occasions omitted, and now communicated to the WORLD. Incipit Ben. Ionson. To the London Reader, on the Odcombian writer, Po∣lytopian Thomas the Traueller. WHO euer he be, would write a Story at The height, let him learne of Mr. Tom Coryate; VVho, because his matter in all should be meete, To his strēgth, hath measur'd it out with his feet. And that, say Philosophers, is the best modell. Yet who could haue hit on't but the wise noddell Of our Odcombian, that literate Elfe? To line out no stride, but pas'd by himselfe? And allow you for each particular mile, By the cale of his booke, a yard of his stile? VVhich, vnto all Ages, for his will be knowne, Since he treads in no other Mans steps but his owne, And that you may see he most luckily ment To write it with the selfe same spirit he went,
He sayes to the world, let any man mend it, In fiue monthes he went it, in fiue monthes he pend it. But who will beleeue this, that chanceth to looke The Mappe of his iourney, and sees in his booke, France, Sauoy, Italy, and Heluetia, The Low-countries, Germany, and Rhetia There nam'd to be trauell'd? For this our Tom saith: Pies on't, you haue his historicall faith. Each leafe of his iournall, and line doth vnlocke, The truth of his heart there, and tell's what a clocke He went out at each place, and at what he came in, How long he did stay, at what signe he did nne. Besides he tried Ship, Cart, Waggon, and Chayre Horse, oote, and all but flying in the ayre: And therefore how euer the trauelling nation, Or builders of Story haue oft imputation Of lying, he feares so much the reproofe Of his foote, or his penne, his braine or his hoofe, That he dares to informe you, but somewhat meticulous How scabbed, how ragged, and how pediculous He was in his trauaile, how like to be beaten, For grapes he had gather'd, before they were eaten. How faine for his venery he was to crie (Tergum ò) And lay in straw with the horses at Bergamo, How well, and how often his shoes too were mended, That sacred to Odcombe are now there suspended, I meane that one paire, where with he so hobled From Venice to Flushing, were not they well cobled? Yes. And thanks God in his Pistle or his Booke How many learned men he haue drawne with his booke Of Latine and Greeke, to his friendship. And seuen He there doth protest he saw of the eleuen. Nay more in his wardrobe, if you will laugh at a Iest, he saies, Item one sute of blacke taffata Except a dublet, and bought of the Iewes: So that not them, his scabbes, lice, or the stewes,
Or any thing else that another should hide, Doth he once dissemble, but tels he did ride In a Cart twixt Montrell and Abbeuile. And being at Flushing enforced to feele Some want, they say in a sort he did craue: I writ he onely his taile there did waue; VVhich he not denies. Now being so free, Poore Tom haue we cause to suspect iust thee? No: as I first said, who would write a story at The height, let him learne of Mr. Tom Coryate. Explicit Ben. Ionson. Incipit Iohannes à Grandi-Bosco. THE Orbs Almutez of this age haue bene (Beam'd with the gracefull light of heauens Queene) Ascending Stilbon in his doubled house, Sweete Aphrodite, and he that slew theNempe A∣pollo Smintheus. Mouse. Yee Germane wits, Hence, Smith, and Noortwicks Lord, Lipsy, and Hortisbon, you can affoord (Of Rome and Athens you two paragers) Mee testimony, and the Scaligers. VVith, what all you through negligence omitted: This English Ilerma hath vs now befitted; VVho Vnto whose praise no Muse that euer said no! No more shall mine. A happyAlluding to that of Pindar. Olymp.  neuer fitting so lite∣rally as the au∣thers shoe (perserued like Epinsnideum. Corium,) fits it. foote had hee In shoe, thatLunata planta in Martial, and that of Iuuenal Sat.7.Appositam more lunans subtexit alute: Witnesse that the Romane nobility, and of the best sort had their Crescents on their shoes expressing a C. the single for our Authors name. Lunatique most sure had bee In Antique Rome, when iudgement both and guerdon Concurr'd: his like, fore Ioue, was neuer heard on.
And Somerset, hereafter Odcombe steeple Shall be Tom's Pyram: nay all Odcombe people No more in him that from theBaron of Odcombe,. Heath was nam'd, But him, that all his country-men hath sham'd In's worth and wit, shall now for euer vaunt them: Eternally thy Manes too shall haunt them, Till with lustration they haue explane, The non-supply of thy wants Coryate. Compar'd by many th'are to Odysscus, Were not comparisons too odious: I could compare Thssalian Apulee, Thou Anacreon. Ros loode deseru'st as well as hee. I could compare? alas I find no such In him, in the Ithaqu, Cesar, nor so much Of others praise as thou hast tane; both Muse Do sing thy name, and merry Cornamuse. That smothred name these Calends new broke out, With trumpet summons vs from all about, As 'twere to do were  Mart. wherein such as had bene faulty in Fornacalia, did their deuoires (as the multi∣tude of braue spirits do now at this feast, to preuent weake stomacks from reiection of Crudities e∣slus. Quirinus sacrifice, Too long omitted; now thy Frontispice Pictures that feast; the Muses it deferr'd For thy desert. Well ere thou be enterr'd, The Beames in Court reflecting from thy plaine (There as a mirrour shalt thou be bsern'd) Shall make Castilio's trauelling abstaine, Hopelesse to haue the palme thou hast deseru'd, Or hopelesse haue it. Thy example Tom, VVill cause our sharpest Han despe∣rate of equal∣ling him. heads to stay at home. Explicit Ioannes à Grandi-Bosco.
Incipit N. T. Certaine Anacreonticke verses praeam∣bulatory to the most ambulatorie Od∣combian Traueller. COryate, Coryate, Though it was my hard fate, Not to know thy decre pate, Before it was too late To sing thy praises: Yet now I'le call a Muse, (Which of them thou shalt chuse) To sing thee and thy shoes, VVhich Fame vp-raises. No Muse of the Horse hoof'd-spring, Because thou had'st no such thing As a Horse, but on foot did'st bring Thy selfe and thy wit too. Whēce thou sawest notThe statue of Iupiter being found in Rome was set vp for the image of S. Peter, the keyes beeing put into his hand in steede of the thun∣der-bolt: as it is there now to be seene. Ioue like a Pope, Nor Dian's vaile made a Cope, Nor to Loretto crope. Nor the goddesse Cotytto (Yet madest gobled Crudities, Or cobled rudities: O how well brued it is For the trauelling members! VVith wise Obseruations Of seuerall nations, And rare indagations Rak'd out of th'embers. But thou wilt see e're long
Whether Romes walles be strong, Or may be sack'd by a throng Of warlike Brittons. Yet sure thou need'st not goe To coasts or countries moe, New fashions for to know, Vnfit or fit ones. For thy Businesse-face who lookes o're, VVill say, thou now trauel'st more VVith thy wit then thy feete before, Floreat, Floreat. In nobile mobile Par Calceorum Th. Coryati T'Is you alone O cobled shoes, That caused haue these much a-does. You haue bin sung by many a Poet, And your good Master would haue moe yet. T'is not his sayling to strange lands, From Douer cliffes to Cahee sands, That makes his iourney so admired: By you alone all braines are fired. Most trauellers those countries see, And haddocks feede as well as hee. Many thousands ride in wagons, VVhose foremen make them goe like dragons. Most of your trauelling members know VVhat doth belong to a Gondalo. And some I thinke all ages knew, That scaped fairly from the Iew. And some for stealing grapes of yore Haue bene like threatned by a Bore. To Beggars t'is no new deuice To hang vp ragges from whence drop lice. And many ostlers doe (I tro N) With horses lie at Bergamo.
If this be so, what's then the newes? Onely the story of his shoes. O shoes, no shoes, but monstrous leather, Inchanted aganst winde and weather! Not made of any common hide, But of one necromantifide Of some Oxe-hide in Styx long drenched, Or that had someA warlike engine other∣wise called a Mortar, vsually quenched with wet Hides. Granada quenched. At least (of lice he was so full) Of some rebellious Irish Bull. Or if that their Antiquitie Require a further pedegree; Perchance (they were so louing fellowes) That they were made of Vulcan's bellowes. Or of that leather bag I find in Homer, Vlysses kept the wind in. Sure I am they were so patch'd With Theseus ship they may be match'd, Of whch a doubt at length did grow Whether it were the same or no. Had they endured more thinke you, Had they bin worne by a Perdu? Or if they heretofore had bin Made for some wandring Capuchin? So might they haue prou'd sandale shoone, And lasted more by many a Moone. Yet was it well I needs must say, They lasted fiue moneths on the way. Though they can now no more be mended, Yet may their praise; else God defend it. Great pitie 'twas they brake in sunder Before they had made a nine monthes wonder. Quòd se necauit Seneca si nomen tulit: Coryate tutè nomen à coriotenes.
De futuris eiusdem T. C. Peregrina∣tionibus infinitis. NOui qui peregrè totum propè circuit orbem, Stultifer âque domum naue reucctus erat. Non Thomas sic noster: is omne quod hactenùs egit, Nimirùm pedibus penè peregit iter. At nunc longinquas solers scrutabitur oras, Et quae diuer so, littora, sole calent. Romanam nihil est vrbem, Papam{que} videre, Anglos saepè videt Roma, videre cupit. Pendens arte tuum viset (Mahomete) sepulchrum, Vel Monacho instructus fraude dolo{que} magis. Incensus Zelo Solymas rimabitur ipsas, Ex tot reliquijs si quid adbûc veliqui est. Et Christum quoniam agnoscit Prestera Iohannem Inuiset Thomas, & (si opus) erudict. Lunae cultores, Persas, & Solis adibit, Et Sophi ipsorum, sed magìs ipse Sophos. Laetemur tantis eius conatibus omnes, Ille typis rediens omnia, nempe, dabit. Mactc esto Coryate: peregrinantior (opto) Sit fortunatus Spiritus iste tibi. Non solùm Antipodes: ipsas, audentior, vmbras Si potes infernas vise: reuise tuos. Si chartis demùm mandes quid agatur in Orco, Tu peregrinator solus in orbe clues. Explicit N. T.
Incipit Laurentius Whitaker. (The ensuing verses of these three Authors were made since my booke of Crudities came forth.) Course Musicke plaid vpon the Odcombian Ho∣boy, to attend the second course of Coryats Coleworts, and dittied to the most melodious Comicall ayre, borne and brought vp in the Septentrionall suburbs, which the vulgar call, The Punks delight. VAile bonnet ijgging Festiuals, of Brittish land and others, you proudest Tuscan Carniuals, and yee French Bals their brother: DutchA most in∣genious sport vsed in the low Countries by Citizēs, where in they vse shooting with Crosbowes at a thing made like a Geay. Pappigcay, andA kind of drunkē Dutch aire held on Sundaies and holidaies in afternoones in Sommer time, both note vnhap∣pily omitted in the Authors text, which is their proper place. Car∣mas gay, in season after Easter, with Frow and Punke, All reeling drunke, both Boore and Burgomaster. YEe Churchales, and ye Morresses, VVith Hobby-horse aduancing, Ye Round-games with fine Sim and Sis, About the Maypole dancing;
Ye nimble ioynts, That with red points, And ribands tricke the Bridall, Looke vp your pumpes, And rest your stumpes, For you are now downe cri'd all. Your Coryphee, great Coryate, TheThe Cory∣bants were certaine mad Priests, and had their names of  of going vpon their heads (which some∣times they v∣sed: a terme not vnproper to our Author, because he in going vpon his feete, went truly vpon his head also, for he went vpon that which contained his wit, and con∣ueyed to him the matter of his obseruations. Corybant of Odcombe, Now crested hath his witty pate With no mad but a sad combe Of Doctorship,Viz at the Vniuersitie of Royston, wher he proceeded a Caelarean Doctor. And will not trippe To Market Crosse, or Alehouse, But hath bene made More sage and stayd, By th'Oracles of aOur Author being a Graecian, would needs vary from the Troians, therefore whereas they in their trauails receiued an Oracle from the knawing of Mice (as the knowing Author well knowes the story,  he would needs haue an Oracle also but from the biting of smaller. louse: A learned louse at Heidelberg That bad him fall to writing, Which came to him fromViz. in an old paire of shockings which a Prussian of Koningsberg gaue him, wherein inhabited some or aculous vrmine. Koningsberg, To warne him of the biting. Of his vile crew. Which to eschew, And put him into clothes, He must to Court, Write and make sport, So now he hath done both these. Then waile not Odcombe for thy losse, Though Coryate be remoued,
His triumphs acted on thy Crosse, Are in Pauls-yard approued. Nay all pastimes Nam'd in my rimes, Shall stoope to Odcombes standish, Which makes more glee Then any three Of English or outlandish. An Encomiasticke scrap or fragment throwen by a charitable hand into this new Bing or Almes∣basket made by the Author to receiue the Relicks of the Crudities; which fragment is quicke, for though it creepes not, yet it thus speakes to the Author. AS at graue Senate-feasts begun with beefe & mustard, Ended with Pippin-pies, with Florentine and Custard, The courser off all is i'th' hole of the Almes basket By officers laid close, till suters come and aske it; So in thy Pilgrime feast of lushious Crudities Dishes of biting beasts, and shirtlesse Nudities, Some Panegyricke scraps of Court and countrey speeches, (Which whilom thou wert wont to shew out of thy breches And with tough Crudities could hardly be digested) Be in th' Almes-basket now of new Calues-skin inuested: Which dry meat none cācal; for ther's one scrap a moist one The shel fill'd with May dew, thou didst present at Royston. Yet not thy feasts nor scraps are made much to be tasted, Nor shall their Title leaues on doores or posts be pasted, But as brown pasts hard bak't fil roome, & few do tast them, So hauing ta'ne thy books, & in some odroome plac't thē, Let gentle gallants work their wils: ne're aske thou whether They haue ta'ne paines to reade or tast of both or either. Explicit Laurentius Whitakerus.
Incipit Richer for bookes. Obserue Reader that the worthy Gentleman which is the Author of these verses, and who graced me with singular lines vpon my Crudities, euen as good as any vpon my booke, doth for certaine considerations conceale his name and his time, and in steede thereof expresseth onely an Anagramme of it, euen that be∣fore named. To the most notable Tom Coryate, the very Prim∣rose of the Authors of this present yeare 1611. (the sawcy Almanacke-maker onely excepted.) IF, who flie praise, praise onely follow those, How got you so much Tom? that write in prose, To be set out in verse, and made so deere As Cookes with dainty sawce make homely cheere? But well, since your great worke set forth of late, Hath made you famous vnto euery state: Of these small gleanings let no more be said, But if the like of them were neuer made, Nor neuer shall by any mortall braine, That is not weight with yours iust to a graine. Againe to the most royall Phoenix Doctor, and fluent Orator. M.T.C. YOu haue Harangued in English, Tom, so fully, That men doe parallele you now with Tully. And M.T.C. which his name signifie, As aptly to your name they now apply.
See see, in placing letters you do sweat, And letters doe conspire to make you great. As silliest Troian fighting with Achilles, To your braue answer, so your foe-mans bill is; For there was neuer found in paper scrolles, Nor yet in close or patent Parchment Rolles Any like yours, it may be a precedent To all your Clarkes of Christendome and Kent. O happiest child of Winchester aliue, Thence leapt out Doctor by Prerogatiue. Explicit in Anagram Richer for Bookes. Incipit Antonius Washborne. SInce Doctor Coryates Crudities came forth Parboyled in his Oratory broth, Since these Orations in Tom Odcombes braine pan Decocted were, what lyricke tongue refraine can To taste his pickeld wit, and pandred art, Seene and allow'd in Citie, Court, andI meane in the country. Cart? Till now no Orator arose like Best That ere declaimde at Coach-booh, boate, or feast, Till now no traueller allowd to lie and cogge Did euer write a booke worth casting at a dogge. Explicit Antonius Washborne.
Incipit William Rich. William Rich of the middle Temple, in the com∣mendation of (his learned country-man) Mr. Thomas Coryate of Odcombe, both Traueller and Orator. WOnderfull Coryate, that bring'st two impressions Sooner to vs, then Time two quarter-Sessions, That writ'st as thou hast trauell'd, with such speed As hackney horses, hounds, or hunters feed: That writ'st and trauell'st, as there were a strife Betweene thy hands and feete for death or life. VVell did high Odcombe boast her pride of thee VVhen thou to Euill went'st in iollity, And led'st an army forth with bowes and gunnes To swill their VVhitson-Ale, and cracke their Bunnes, VVhere thou, on Crosse aduanc'd, didst spend more wit, Then man would thinke thou couldst recouer yet. But thou hast more, though much of the same mint Men here may reade, and wonder at, in print. VVhat will they say, when with thy Crudities Thy twise boild Colewort here shall simpathize, And the great vnbegotten (God knowes what) VVhich thou wilt bring vs next, that, yet, is at The farre Ierusalem, all in one volume? They cannot chuse but then erect a columne, trauels Trophaees shall be hung thy workes in Ballades sung. Explicit Guiliclmus Rich.
A PETITION MADE TO THE PRINCE SHORTLY AFTER THE DEATH OF THE Last Archbishop of Canterburie, concerning the Printing of the Booke of my TRAVELS. To the High and mighty Prince, HENRY Prince of Wals, Duke of Cornewall and Rothsay, Earle of Chester, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, &c. The humble Petition of Thomas Coryate. FOr as much as that greatThe Archbi∣shop of Canter∣burie. Oecolampadi∣us of England, euen that refulgent Lamp of Gods house, hath lately lost his light, the snuffe therof be∣ing fallen downe into the Socket, and so consequently is extinct for a time; that Lampe which should haue giuen lustre,
and lent her light vnto my poore Hodae∣poricall lucubrations as the Sunne doth to the Moone, by the Eclipse whereof they are now dimmed, and lurke in a kind of darknes more thē Cimmerian; My thrise-humble and thrise-suppliant suite vnto your Highnesse is this, that you would graciously vouchsase to cherish and maintaine the scintillant embers of my diminutiue Lampe by infusing into them the quickning Oyle of your Gra∣cious indulgence; by vertue of which, my Candle which is now hid vnder a Bushell, may gather strength, and bee eleuated euen to the conspicuous and eminent places of this Kingdome, and disperse abroad her coruscant light to the illuminating of the caliginous vnder∣standings of my trauelling Countrimen. Your Highnesse suppliant and humble Petitioner, Thomas Coryate the Od. combian Traueller.
CERTAINE ORATIONS PRONOVNCED BY THE AV∣THOR OF THE CRVDITIES, TO THE KING QVEENE, PRINCE, LADY ELIZABETH, AND THE DVKE OF Yorke, at the deliuerie of his Booke to each of them. This Oration following was pronounced to the Prince in the Priuie Chamber at S. Iames vpon Easter Munday last, betweene sixe and seuen of the Clocke in the after∣noone. MOst scintillant Phos∣phorus of our Brit∣tishThis was the ancient name of Sicily, so cal∣led, Quasi  that is, hauing three promon∣tories, namely Pelorus, Pachy∣nus, and Lily∣baeum. As for our Brittish I∣land, I there∣fore call it Tri∣cria, because it hath three Promontories also s  had, viz. That of  in  ll. Kan∣tum in the East, euen in that part which we com∣monly call Kent, and  or Oss in the  part of Sal∣land. Conen in . Trinacria, Euen as the Christalline deaw, that is exhaled vp into the ayre out of the cauernes & spun∣gie pores of the succulent Earth, doeth by his
distillation descend, and disperse it selfe a∣gaine vpon the spacious superficies of his mo∣ther Earth, and so consequently fecundate the same with his bountifull irrigation: So I a poore vapour composed of drops, partly na∣turall, partly literall, partly experimentall, hauing had my generation within the liquid Wals of this farre-decantated Iland, being drawen vp by the strength of my hungrie and high reaching desire of Trauell, and as it were craned vp with the whirling wheele of my longing appetite to suruey exoticke Regi∣ons, haue beene hoysed to the altitude of the remote climats of France, Sauoy, Italy, Rhe∣tia, Heluetia, Alemannie, and the Nether∣lands; and being there in a maner inuolued for a time in the sweatie and humid clouds of industrie capitall, digitall, and pedestriall, did distend the bottle of my braine with the most delectable liquor of Obseruation, which I now vent and showre downe vpon the yong and tender Plants sprouting out of the same earth from the which like a poore Mush∣rome,
I first ascended. With this May dew of my Crude collections (May I may well call it, because in May I first vndertooke my Iourney) I haue now filled this new-laide Egge-shell, not doubting of the like effect in your Highnesse the radiant Sunne of our English Hemispheare, that the great Phae∣bean. Lampe hath ouer a naturall Egge-shel produced by a checkling Henne, and filled with the Pearly iuyce of the watry cloudes, which is to eleuate it to a farre more eminent height then its owne desert can mount it vn∣to, and so by your Gracious irradiation to make it conspicuous and illustrious. Yes, (which is more) I wish that by the auspicious obumbration of your Princely wings, this sencelesse Shell may prooue a liuely Birde, whose bill with length & strength may reach and peake the very Mountaines of Arabia, and there nestle, increase and ingender, and so breede more Birds of the same feather that may in future time bee presented as no∣uelties vnto your heroycall protection. In
the meane time receiue into your indulgent hand (I most humbly beseech your High∣nesse) this tender featheredBecause the Booke was bound in Crimson Vel∣uet. Red-breast. Let his Cage be your Highnesse studie, his pearch your Princely hand, by the support whereof, hee may learne to chirp and sing so lowde, that the sweetnesse of his notes may yeeld a delectable resonancie Vltra Gara∣mantas & Indos. DIXI.
TO THE KING IN THE CHAMBER OF PRESENCE AT ROYSTON THE SECOND Day of Aprill being Tuesday, about eleuen of the Clocke in the Mor∣ning. IT were no maruaile if the like should happen vnto me (most inuin∣cible Monarch of this thrise renownedNot Quasi  but Quasi Al be one in regard of the happie V∣nion of Eng∣land & Scotland Al∣bion, and the reful∣gent Carbuncle of Christendome) speaking vnto your most Ex∣cellent Maiestie that did once to Demo∣sthenes that thunder-bolt of Athens, when he spake to Philip King of Macedone, euen to bee as mute as a Seriphian Frogge, or an Acanthian Grashopper; since the very Cha∣racters
imprinted in the forehead of a King are able to appall the most confident Orator that euer spake, much more my selfe the meanest Orator in your Maiesties King∣dome, whom if I should compare to a Frogge as hauing crawlen many leagues by water, or to a Grashopper as hauing hopped many miles by land, why should I wonder if by the gracious aspect of your resplendent Excellen∣cie, words, speeches, and Orations should be drawen from me, since by the very inarticu∣late sound of Amphions Harpe, stockes and stones, mountaines and valleyes were said to daunce Lauoltoes and Roundelayes? But what talke I of ayrie speeches? Why doe I mention expatiating Orations? The Persi∣ans (as the auncient Historians doe make vs beleeue) were wont to present their Kings with reall gifts and anniuersarie oblations. I being no Persian borne, but intending er long by the propicious indulgence of the ce∣lestiall powers to bee borne vpon Persian ground, do offer vnto your Maiestie a farre∣growne
bnt a home spunne present, made in∣deede of course Wooll, but plucked from the backes of the glorious Palaces, the lostie cloud-threatning towers and decrepit moun∣taines of France, Sauoy, Italy, Rhetia, Heluetia, Alemannie, and the Nether∣lands; spunne into a threed by the wheele of my braine, the spindle of my Penne, and the Oyle of my industrie in my natiue Cell of Od∣combe in the County of Somerset, and now wo∣uen into a piece of Rawe cloth in the Prin∣ters Presse of the most famigerated Citie of London. The lists of this Cloth are the Ver∣ses at both the ends of my Booke. In the be∣ginning whereof some of the most singular and selected wits of your Maiesties triangu∣lar Monarchie doe combate in the listes of Helicon and Parnassus; and in the end my Fathers Ghost alone doeth diuerberate the enthusiasticke ayre of Pierian poesie. But I glory not so much in imitating the Persian vassals, as in following the trace of our Eng∣lish Marchants, who returning from for∣raine
and remote Nauigations, doe bring home in their Vessels many vncouth and transmarine commodities; but herein I differ from them. For they bring home their ra∣rities in their Ships. But I haue brought home my Ship and her farre-fetched lading in My-selfe. My Ship (My dread Soue∣raigne) is my Booke, which I brought home swimming in the liquid Ocean of my braine. Shee is now rigged, and trimmed, and ready to hoyse Sayle; your Maiesties fauour will be vnto it both like a pleasant gale of wind in the Poupe to make it beare Sayle, and like a wel-fenced docke and secure hauen of tran∣quillitie, where shee may ride at Anchour in a Halcedonian calme, and shoote off her Or∣dinance against the Criticall Pirates and malignant Zoiles that scowre the surging Seas of this vaste Vniuerse. DIXI.
TO THE QVEENE IN THE PRIVIE GARDEN AT GREENEWICH, THE FIFTH Day of Aprill being Fryday, about fiue of the Clocke in the afternoone. MOst resplendent Gem and radiant Aurora of Great Brittaines spacious Hemisphere, thinke not this appa∣rance of mine to bee other then naturall, though contrarie to the course and order of nature, my selfe who am nothing but a foggie vapour and an obscure relique of darkenesse; doe presume to approach so neare vnto your Maiesticall Presence, when as all cloudie fogges and obtenebrating Mistes are by the
glorious appearance of Rose-fingerd Auro∣ra abandoned and put to flight. Now as a∣mongst darke clouds and mistie conglomera∣tions diuers strange shapes are represented, sometimes of Mountaines, sometimes of men fighting in the ayre, sometimes of Ships, sometimes of great beasts, as Mules, Ca∣mels, and such like: So in my selfe and this which I now offer vnto your most Excellent Maiestie most of these shapes, nay euen all of them and many more are most liuely and perspicuously presented vnto your Gracious eyes. If your Royall fingers will but deigne to vnclose this poore Itinerarie, there shall they discouer the Snowie tops of the Alpine mountaines, the eminent skie-menacing Turrets of many renowned Cities and mag∣nificent Monasteries, my selfe combating with the Venetin Iewes with my tongue, the Wormacian Boore with mee with his Halbert, yea (which is more) the shape of a Camell your Maiesie may perceiue in my poore selfe, who (as Camels vse in the Coun∣tryes
that breede them) am come home out of forraine Regions, laden with outlandish nouelties and farre-fetched commodities; which not packed vp in Cordes and Canuas, but bound vp in Paper and Veluet, I most humbly present vnto your Maiesties Royall hands; the glittering resplendencie of whose fauour will adde such grace and lustre vnto my silly Merchandise bought with the nim∣ble industrie of my legges, braine, and fin∣gers, that as my legges were indefatigably current through those Kingdomes where∣hence my Ware is fetched; so my Ware it selfe being the lawfull begotten issue of my legges, may bee irrefragably current through those Kingdomes whereof your Maiestie is iustly stiled Queene; through that also where your Maiestie first drew your vitall breath, and all others where the name of Coryate the Traueller and Odcombe his natalitiall Pa∣rish shall be knowne to posteritie. DIXI.
TO THE LADY ELIZA∣BETH HER GRACE IN THE HOVSE OF THE LORD HARRING∣TON at Kew, the seuenth day of Aprill being Sunday, about Noone. MOST Peerelesse and Gracious Princesse, the true attractiue Adamant of this famous Iland, in who sename, sexe, and heroicall dis∣position me thinkes I see our great Queene ELIZABETH reuiued and resuscitated vnto life from the very bowels of her graue: Giue me leaue I most humbly beseech your
Grace as a poore Traueller out of the round∣nesse of my hart as the circumference, and the soundnesse of the same as the center and meditullium thereof, to present to your Gra∣ces lily-white hands the Raw Trauels of my Head and Toes, faithfully written by my industrious Fingers as they were truely tro∣den by these laborious Feete of mine which with all nimblenesse yeeld true obedience to their commaunding head. Let not my Ti∣tle of Crudities (most Princely Lady) a∣ny thing dismay your Grace, as if it were like pot like potled, like lippes like lettice. For the inuentorie of my Bookes freight being a miscellanie of things of diuers kinds both in prose and verse, will (I hope) giue your Grace a full contentment, though the Title thereof doth not seeme to promise so much. Vouchsafe then I beseech your Grace to re∣ceiue this leuidense, rough, scabrous, and vn∣planed work into your Graces smooth hands, where I hope it will receiue a secure protecti∣on against all the malignant bitings of vi∣rulent
tongues. And so with all lowlinesse and submission of duetie, I most humbly kisse your Graces FOOTE. DIXI.
TO THE DVKE OF YORKE HIS GRACE AT SAINT IAMES THE DAY BEFORESAID about fiue of the Clocke in the afternoone. MOst glittering Chry∣solite of our English Diademe, in whose little yet most louely, Gracious, and ele∣gant body doe budde most pregnant hopes like faire blossomes of great fortunes and greater vertues: Within whose velume great Liuies prayses of Romes ancient Worthies are inuolued and infolded. Loe, I here present vnto your Grace the fruites of my furious Trauels; which I therefore inti∣tle
with such an epithete, because I perfor∣med my iourney with great celeritie, compas∣sed & atchieued my dessignes with a kind of fortune not much vnlike that of Caesar, Ve∣ni, Vidi, Vici. I came to Venice, and quickly tooke a suruey of the whole modell of the Citie together with the most remark∣able matters thereof; and shortly after my arriuall in ENGLAND I ouercame my aduersaries of the Towne of Euill in my natiue Countrey of Somerset, who thought to haue suncke mee in a bargaine of Pil∣chards as the wise men of Gotham once went about to drowne an Eele. Vouchsafe with grace and fauourable aspect, and with the blandishments of your benigne nature to ripen these my CRVDITIES, that bee∣ing distilled through the Limbecke of your debonaire Grace, they may prooue com∣fortable, medicinable, or any other good thing else that tendeth to enable all those generose Spirits that attend vpon your Gra∣cious person; my selfe in one onely straine of
ambition, and no more, differing from them all, euen in this present suite that I make vnto your Grace, namely that you would bee pleased to dignifie and stile mee with the Title of your Graces Traueller in Ordi∣narie. DIXI.
AN OTHER ORATION MADE TO THE SAME THE TWENTIETH OF MAY LAST Past at Saint Iames, concerning the Election and Installment of him into the thrise∣Noble and illustrious order of the Knights of the Garter. AS those repre∣sentatiue beastes of Woode and Stone carued by the curious hand of Daedalo{us} sta∣tuaries, and layd vnder the mag∣nificent concamerations of Churches and Palaces, doe seeme grieuously pressed and crushed vnder that massie fabricke which is imposed vpon them; or as that laborious
Porter, whose brawnie shoulders like a hard paued Cawsie giue gentle passage to all pon∣derous Trunkes and Cloke-bagges, doeth groane vnder the presse of his cumbersome carriage, and is forced to send foorth in sweat the liquid superfluities of his porous carkasse. So the poore carkasse of my crased braine hauing lately disburdened it selfe of the plumbeous weight of my elaborate Cru∣dities, doth now as it were groane vnder this heauie and close-bound loade laide vpon it by your Grace; bound not with Cordes or Ropes, but with a Garter, that Royall Garter which so decently and gracefully en∣uironeth the Left Legge of your Right Gracious Person. This Garter hauing held the sinewes of my braines fast tyed, your Graces commaund hath beene the launcing instrument to make the bloud thereof, which is my inuention, to spirt and spinne out in these muddie streames; and this prepondera∣ting burden hath squeezed out of mee poore Coryate, as out of the Porters Corium,
these sweatie distillations of my fatigated braines; which distillations I haue measu∣red out into three Bottles or Gallipots, and for orders sake (because I am to speake of an Order) haue thus ranked and collocated. In the first shall bee put the Etymologie of the most famigerated and farre decantated word of Garter; In the second, the memorable foundation of this magnificent Order; In the third, the resplendent dignitie of the illustri∣ous Knights and companions of it. For the Etymologie, I may fetch it out of the French or out of the Greeke. In the French (as those that are intelligent in the language haue informed me) it may seeme to bee fet∣ched from the word Garroter, which is, to fetter or manacle, emblematically implying that it fettereth, chaineth, and linketh toge∣ther all the associates of it in loue amongst themselues, and in loyaltie to their Prince. In my second Etymologie borrowed from the Greeke idiome, I may call it Garter, quasi Carter, of  signifying the head, and
to preserue; because that as an ordinarie garter bound about the head of any plebeian when he would giue his members repose, mi∣tigateth the ach of the head, and maketh him sleepe in case and quiet; So this Regall Garter making as it were a circle in the per∣sons of the circumstant noble Subiects that be of this sublimious societie, doth euen inring, colligate, and bind close the head of his most Excellent Maiestie, and the temples of his head, which are the Splendidious Prince his Highnesse and your Gracious selfe, to giue you all —Tranquillam & placidam per membra quietem. And thus haue I euacuated the first Bottle of my distillation. In my second infusion I promised the first institution and primarie foundation of this nobilitated Societie, and that was at the famous Citie of Burdeaux in France by that most renowned King ED∣VVARD the third, who hauing first tramp∣led vpon the French Floure de Luces with the English Lyons, hath made euer since
the one to rampe and stampe, the other to bee nourished and flourished in the same field or Cote of Armes. The yeere was 1348. So that it may for venerable antiquitie hold his ranke aboue all the Orders of Christendome, aboue that of the Annunciada of Sauoy, of the Golden Fleece of Burgundie, of the Al∣cantares or Calatrauaes of Spaine, or of that of Saint Michael, or of the Holy Ghost in France: And for that of Saint Michael the reason is most euident and eminent, be∣cause French Saint Michael doeth but on foote like a Pedant trample vpon his Dra∣gon. But English Saint George doeth on Horse-backe like a Caualier pessundate a Dragon no lesse direfull then the other. And this is the liquor of my second Bottle. For my last infusion, it shall not neede any curi∣ous sublimation or extraction, to make the persume odoriferous. The whole Europaean Territorie is abundantly possessed with the renowne and Splendor of this Princely Or∣der. What Prince is so illustrious, what
Potentate so potent, what Monarch so high∣crested, that doeth not esteeme his Celsitude conspicuously signified, his Maiestie Royally dignified, and his Sublimitie gloriously mag∣nified by being condignely qualified with the resplendent honour of the English Garter? To be silent of the rest of the Heroical No∣bilitie of this our Iland that either haue bene aunciently possessed, or bee now recently in∣uested into it (betwixt whose persons and their Order there is a reciprocall contribu∣tion of honour and dignitie, they nobilitating their Order, and their Order them) if no∣thing else were added to make it transcen∣dently Noble, it had enough of this that your Graces Princely Legge is inringed in the Garter, your Honoured shoulders inui∣roned with the Collar, and your Noble breast condecorated with the rich Image of worthy Saint George on Horsebacke. Vn∣to which most magnificent societie though my poore selfe can not giue a nights lodging to a thought so ambitious as to aspire to; my tra∣uelling
Legges being kept to their vocation with Garters of an other kind, and my bit∣ten and beaten shoulders being destinated to Collars of a different matter; yet haue I this day shewed my dewe affection to doe seruice to that Noble societie, and principally to your thrise-noble Grace, as a beggarly Al∣chymist, a fragrant Apothecarie, or an honest Yeoman of the Bottles; all which Bottles hauing now emptied, I will here stoppe both them and mine owne speech, and conclude with that Loyall, ancient, elegant, and to this purpose pertinent apprecation, Saint George for England, Saint Denis for France, Sing Hony soit qui mal y pense. DIXI.
AN ANSWERE TO THE MOST SCANDALOVS, CONTV∣MELIOVS AND HYBRISTICALL Bill of IOSEPH STARRE of Euill in the Countie of Somerset Linnen Draper, wholly conflated and com∣pacted of palpable Lies, deceitfull prestigiations, iniurious calumniations, cluding cuasi∣ons, and most fraudulent tergiuersations. THE CONTENTS. My Answere of a certaine Bill exhibi∣ted into the Chancerie against mee shortly after my arriuall in England from beyond the Seas, by Ioseph Starre of the Towne of EVILL in the Countie of Somer∣set Linnen Draper, whereby hee hoped ei∣ther to haue nullified or qualified the Debt of a hundred markes due vnto mee from him
according to his Band vppon my returne from Venice. This Answere being com∣maunded by Authoritie to Print, I haue thought good to insert it in this place, though my Plaintife hath not as yet giuen me his consent to publish the same, which Answere followeth. MAy it Please your Lordship to be ad∣uertised that my an∣tagonist, my crastie and versute aduer∣sarie Ioseph Starre hath composed such a Bill as no Christian whatsoeuer (ex∣cept hee hath a very cauteriate consci∣ence, or hath beene brought vp amongst the inhumane Garamants, the barbar∣ous Getes, the inciuill Gothes or Tar∣tars) would doe the like. For it is no∣thing else but a cinnus, a rabble, a rhap∣sodie,
a miscellanie of diabolicall false∣hoods. Diabolicall I may well cal them, because they proceede from the sugge∣sting instigations of that  that arch lyar the diuell. Therefore to the ende I may with the more perspicuitie & plain∣nesse ouerthrow, pessundate, and anni∣hilate all these fained obiections, I hold it expedient to answere each particular Si∣gillatim, as they follow in order, and that with as much Laconical breuitie as may be, auoiding that Battalogia that he hath vsed in his tedious Bill. Obserue Reader that because I could not take occasion to bee so conceited in answering the first part of his Bill, the matter contai∣ning only a relation of the first originall bar∣gaine betwixt my aduersarie and my selfe; I haue therefore excluded the former parts of my Answere, and doe here expresse onely the later part therof, as being a litle better hand∣led (according to the opinion of some critick) then any part of the rest was, euen this.
Well may I apply to STARRE Cice∣roes speech against Marcus Antonius, Mi∣ror eum quorum facta imitetur, illorum exi∣tus non perhorrescere. I maruaile that Starre is not afraid lest hee should make such an end, that is, die such a death as they do whose example in lying he imi∣tateth. He coaceruateth and conglome∣rateth a meere farrago of lyes. Also hee traduceth me about the smalnesse and commonnesse of my Voyage, as hauing beene out of England but fiue moneths. Can he iustly call this a smaland cōmon Voyage to passe almost two thousand miles by land? to expose ones body to such a world of iminent dangers both by Sea and Land as I did? to passe those stupendious mountaines of the snowie Alpes? to dispatch my iourney with such a compendious celeritie? to performe it with such a dispendious disaduantage to my estate? & after the consūmation of my trauels to be thus opposed by a Vilipen∣dious
Linnen Draper? to walke aboue the clouds ouer hils that are at least seuen miles high? For indeede so high is the mountaine Senys I passed ouer, which disterminateth Sauoy and Piemont: the danger whereof is such, that if in some places the traueller should but trip aside in certaine narrow wayes that are scarce a yard broad, he is precipitated into a ve∣ry Stygian Barathrum or Tartarean lake sixe times deeper then Pauls tower is high. Continually to stand in feare of the Alpine cutthroates called the Ban∣dits? Being entred into Italy, to passe throgh that carnificina, that excruciating and excarnificating torture of the Spa∣nish Inquisition, which is more cruel then Phalaris his brasen Bull, or the exquisi∣test torturs that the Sicilian tyrants were wont to inflict vpon offendors? These dangers and many more I was exposed vnto, and like to bee circumcised in Ve∣nice amongst the Iewes for maintaining
the cause of my Sauiour and Redeemer against their refractarie obstinacie, as that Honourable and completly accom∣plished Knight Sir Henry Wotton our Kings Leager Ambassadour in Venice, that was an eye witnes of the conflict be∣twixt them and me, can testifie. At last being as desirous to see my natiue coun∣trey as Vlysses after his ten yeares trauels was to see his Ithaca, which is so deare vn∣to me that I preferre the very smoake of England before the fire of Italy, I walked alone asoote with one onely paire of shooes through many fierce and warlike nations betwixt Venice & Flushing in Zealand, hauing my throate like to bee cutneere the Citie of Worms in Ger∣manie, and my body to bee turned into wormes meate onely for pulling a poore cluster of Grapes in a Vineyard. These perils beeing considered I hope your Lordship wil say I haue as hardly gotten my money as poore laborious Brickma∣kers
eight pence a day for making Brick. Wherefore most humbly beseeching your good Lordship vpon the prostrate knees of my heart to haue a Christian commiseration of my estate that haue vndergone such a multitude of difficul∣ties and calamities for the getting of this little wages (little I may well call it in re∣spect of my great trauell) and to exclude mine aduersarie out fo your Court of Chancerie, that by the ordinarie course of the Common-law I may recouer my money, which I hope no man in the Christian world (except he be partiall) but will say I haue well deserued. Dominationis tue humillimus supplicissimus{que} Orator Thomas Coryatus Peregrinans. Your Lordships most humble Orator Thomas Coryate the Traueller.
AN INTRODVCTION TO THE ORATIONS ENSV∣ING, VVHEREIN IS DECLA∣red the occasion of the first making of the said Orations. IT hapned in the yeare 1606. that the Church stocke of my natalitiall Parish of Odcombe being exhausted & spent sauing sixteene shillings, some of my friends of the Parish, amongst the rest the Church wardens sollicited me to set abroach my wits, and inuent some conceited and plausible matter, to the end to draw some great company of good fellowes toge∣ther for the benefit of our Church of Odcombe, seeing they knew that I was well acquainted in the countrye. Hereupon I resolued to muster vp out of the Parish one hundred choise and ablemen, as were fit to beare armes in the field, and by a time limited, euen the VVhitson∣day following about sixe of the clocke in the morning ap∣pointed them to meete me at Odcombe Crosse. VVhich
they did according to my appointment, being furnished with conuenient munition for a kinde of warfare. For some of them had muskets, others Caliuers, some Parti∣zans, some Halberts, with diuersity of other weapons. Likewise we had good Martiall Musicke and military officers. I my selfe being their Captaine, was mounted vpon a goodly milk-white steed, vnto whom that verse of Virgil which he made vpon Queene Didoes horse, might be well applied. Stat Sonipes, ac frae na ferox Spumantia mandit. And hauing put my whole centurie into a conuenient or∣der, marched forward with them towards the towne of Euill three miles distant from Odcombe, being met by the way by the Oppidanes of Euill, that consisted of two cohorts, one Masculine & another Faeminine, which in∣countred vs like a company of Amazones, & aftert here had bene some two or three volleyes of shot discharged on both sides with a prettie kinde of velitation or light skirmish, we descended a hill called Henford, and entred the towne. In the market place whereof nere to the Crosse, wee had one skirmish more, but vm∣braticall and imaginarie. Then I ascended an emi∣nent and conspicious place about the Crosse, where was erected a kind of Canopy, vnder the which I aduan∣ded my selfe alone, and after the warlike Musicke was ended, hauing two or three times brandished my naked∣sword, I spake this Oration following to the Euillians,
and at the least two thousand people more, that then flocked together to the towne of Euill from many pa∣rishes of the countrie round about. FRiends and Confoede∣rates, if ye maruaile for what cause we Odcom∣bians onely of all your other neighbours what∣soeuer ye haue borde∣ring about your towne, doe no lesse valiantly then voluntaly present our selues in this mili∣tary manner, according to the forme of martiall discipline before the face of your whole towne, and your fraternities: I will alledge two causes why ye ought to pardon our boldnesse in this behalfe. First, because I that am chosen to be their Generall Captaine, haue euer from mine infancy borne that loue to your towne, that I thought good at this present to make an apparant demon∣stration thereof by some extraordinary action; being also the principall animator of my whole band of soldiers to ioyne their hands, their hearts and their purses with me for the accomplish∣ment of this my resolued proiect. Secondly, be∣cause although we are come vnto you with mar∣tiall
instruments, yet not with a martiall resolu∣tion to inuade the precincts of your incorpora∣tion by force of armes, to brandish our glittering and refulgent swords after a terrible and warlike sort against you, to bereaue you of your ancient priuiledges and immunities, to ransacke your houses and your goods, to subuert your whole estates, to lade our selues with the rich spoyles of conquered enemies, to put some as obstinate and stiffe-necked rebels to the furious and irrelenting dit of our swords, to embrace others with the ar...es of mercy that shall humbly submit them∣selues into our hands, and after to carry them a∣way into most lamentable captiuity. These mat∣ters (deare Consederates) we neuer as much as harboured in our thoughts; much lesse intended to put any such hostility in execution. But veri∣ly we are come vnto you for a contrary purpose, namely, to offer our selues euen of our owne ac∣cords vnto you in a league of friendship, yea such a league, the like whereof made betwixt vs Od∣combians and you Euillians, neither antiquity hath recorded, nor the time wherein wee liue hath seene, nor succeeding ages could haue hoped for, had not we Odcombians at this present out of the sincere affection we beare you, sued vnto you for this confederacy. Moreouer we are come vnto you for another cause, which is very honest and
religious: for we determine to spend our money with you for the benefit of your Church, hoping yea most earnestly crauing to receiue the like cur∣tesie againe at your hands for our Church of Od∣combe. But before I vse any further speeches vnto you concerning the confirming of this foresaid league of friendship, I resolue, by way of preuen∣tion, or preoccupation, to communicate my slen∣der opinion into you concerning the lawfull vse of that, for the which we are now assembled, I meane Church ales; least any captious and car∣ping wits should deem that we haue intruded our selues into your liberties, as a very disorderly and confused crew, rather to giue some cause of of∣fence, then to benefit your Church. Therefore to the end I may illustrate this present matter by relating examples of solemnities vsed in ancient ages, vnto some whereof our Church-ales may (in my opinion) be very fitly compared, I will exemplyfie some few. The ancients celebrated so∣lemne meetings at certaine times of the yeare for their pastimes and recreations, as the Romanes had their seueralThese feasts are treated of at large by su∣drie ancient Romane wri∣ters as Liuie, Varro, Macre∣bius, Gellius, &c. feasts, whereof some were called Bacchanalia or Dionysia, some Saturnalia, some Ago∣nalia, some Lupercalia, & some others Amberualia, with innumerable more that were ordained for sūdrie purposes. Likewise the Atheniās had their ocrales thereof wrote an Oration. Panathenea, & their Thesmophoria. The Thebans
theirXenop.histo.Graca.i.b.5. Aphrodisia, and their Trietericall Orgia cele∣brated euery third yeare vpon Cithaeron a moun∣taine of Boeotia. The Corinthians theirXmop.in orat.de Aesilao.Hya∣cinthia. The Lacedemonians theirXenop histo G act. lib.5.Plut.in Lyeur. Phiditia, in∣uented by their famous lawgiuer Lycurgus, and so called from the Greeke word  which signifi∣eth parsimonie, because those feastes exhibited a very true spectacle of sobriety, and frugality. Fi∣nally the ancient Christians which liued about the beginning of the Primitiue Church had their feasts of charity, which they called in GreekEpist.tude. A∣pustult.Tertull.in Apologtico. because they were the verie meanes to confirme mutuall amitie, and Christian charity betwixt friends and friends. I humbly craue pardon for mine errour (if at the least l erre) in saying that these Church ales which we vse now in England are very like to those  of the ancient Christi∣ans, if they are rightly and religiously vsed, as they ought to be without any outragious enoimities. Truly I thinke they are: my reason is, because these are feasts of charity, as those were, and they were instituted by our anciēt progenitors for ma∣ny hundred years ago for these two causes of especi∣ally First for the breeding of loue betwixt neigh∣bors, & secondly for the raising of a stocke for the supporting and maintenance of our Church, & the Church affairs: so that I do most confidently beleeue that the good & religious vse of Church∣ales
may be well retained, if the abuses thereof be vtterly banished, and exterminated out of a Chri∣stian Commonwealth, as drunkennesse, glutto∣nie, swearing, lasciuiousnesse, with many more, which indeed I must needs confesse seeme to be the inseparable accidents, and indiuiduall ad∣iuncts of Church-ales. But ought the vse of Church-ales, which were first destinated for a re∣ligious intent, to be absolutely extipated, because now and then some few abuses creepe into ciuill and sober societies, by the meanes of some disso∣lute, rusticall, and ill-nurtured pessants? Surely no. Neither ought they which doe so greatly dis∣like the lawfull vse of Church-ales soberly ma∣naged for the benefit of a stocke-spent Church, incurre lesse reprehension, then that furious king of ThraceHom.Ilia.6.Lycurgus, who because many of his subiects were often times drunke with the wine that came from plentifull vineyards of his king∣dome, in his angrie passion, caused all the vines of Thrace to be rooted vp an action verily most in∣discreet and inconsiderate. For it behooued him rather to haue rooted away the abuse, I meane the drunkennesse of his subiects, then to abolish both the vse and the abuse cleane together. Ther∣fore let vs, at this our present meeting, (fellow souldiers) imitate the feasts of those ancient and religious Christians, not those of the prophane
and irreligious Gentiles, wherein were exhibi∣ted many lasciuious spectacles, that as certain an∣gling hookes yeelded alluring baites to draw the spectators to diuers vanities, and most inciuill outrage: but we Christians ought at our solem∣nities to expresse a very patterne of modesty, and temperance, yet so intermingled and seasoned At∣ticis leporibus, that is, with the sauory salt of plea∣sant conceits, well beseeming both the time, the place, and the persons, that they may neither sa∣uour of a rude scurrility on the one side, nor of a too Cynicall austeritie on the other side, but keepe the golden meane, which vertue betwixt both ex∣tremes we call in Greeke  in Latine vrbani∣tas, and in our mother English tongue, ciuility. Now for as much as this sociable & neighborly meeting, which doth tend to the aduancement of our Churches wealth, cannot be performed without some expences of mony, giue me leaue I pray you to make some short digression from my maine matter, to the end to animate you to spend your money for so laudable a purpose. Be not I beseech you slaues to your money, which is but a base excrement digged out of the very bowels of the earth. Worship not so dumbe an image, as a litle peece of stamped gold, or siluer. For truly I may very fitly terme those euen worshippers of their money, out of whose purses a man shall
with greater difficulty draw a litle peece of coine, althogh it be for the benefit of their country, the credi of themselues, the good of their soules, and the wealth of their Church, then Hercules club out of his hands. Therefore set a broach your pelse at so opportune a time as this is; howbeit I exhort you not to prodigality, which is an extreme vice, but to frugall and moderate expences for the aduantage of your Church. Remember that gol∣den sentence of the sweetest Philosopher that euer drew vitall breath,the place of a Captaine: to that I deriue the word Ducall not from Dux, which signifi∣eth a Duke, that is, a su∣preme or so∣ueraigne Lord of a Signiorie or free State, as the Duke of Florence, the Duke of Saxo∣ny &c.f For the name of Duke I did not chal∣lenge it my selfe, in my so∣uiall merri∣ments, al∣though a worshipfull friend of mine graced me with the re∣ligious title of the great Duke of Charity but more properly frō Dux which signifieth a Captaine in warre which word. com∣meth from Duke, that signifieth to lead an armie or a band of soulcicis. Plato, that We are not borne for our selues onely, but that our countrie doth challenge one part of our birth, our parents another, and our friends the third. Taxe mee not, Confederates, of arrogancy, though I doe according as the nature of my place and office doth require. For euen as it behoueth e∣uery prouident and prudent Captaine to direct & instruct his souldiers in those things that are to be done, and to forbid them those things that are not to be done: so I by vertue of my * Ducal au∣thority, which is a dignitie that I haue receiued at this time, not by way of vsurpation, but by imposition, (for by the generall consent and suf∣frages of you all it was imposed vpon me) by ver∣tuel say of my Ducall authority I command you some things, and prohibit you some other things. The things that I command you are these. First a
mutuall obliuion of all iniuries whatsoeuer, euen from the beginning of the world till this present day, (if at the least any haue bene offered betwixt vs Odcombians and you Euillians) according to the imitation of that memorableValer. Max.li. 4. verum memorabilium Tul. in I. Philippica. Xenop. histor. Graca. 3. lib.7. lust.lib.5. Diodorus Siculus lib.14. historica Bibliotheca.  of the A∣thenians, that is, an obliuion of wrongs, which was established by their valiant Captaine Thra∣sibulus, after the bloodie gouernment of the thir∣tie tyrants (who had most grieuously dilaniated the whole State with very horrible massacres) was abrogated and defaced out of the Common∣wealth of Athens. Secondly, friendly, louing, and harmelesse societie, ioyned with ciuill and discreet merriments fit for this flourishing time of the yeare. Thirdly, a cheerfull spending of your mony without any base whinching or mur∣muring, for the emolument of your Church. The things that I prohibite you are these. Drunken∣nesse, swearing, brawling, picking of quarrels, lasciuious & obscoene communicatiō. For (accor∣ding to Menanders speech)  , that is, euill words corrupt manners. Finally, I forbid you to commit any enormous outrage, whereby we should scandalize our credit, and make our selues infamous in our country. For these foresaid matters beseeme rather the wanton feasts of the goddesseAug.de Ciuit.Dei. Flora, or god Bacchus the patron of drunkards, which were celebrated a∣mongst
the barbarous Paynims, then the sober solemnities of godly and religious Christians. But whereas at the beginning of my Oration I called you Confederates, (which word signify∣eth those that are vnited and combined together in a league of friendship) not because ye are so al∣ready, but for that I hope yee will be so: I hold it expedient to vnfolde vnto you the ceremonies which were heretofore obserued in ancient at the making of leagues, and to declare the cu∣stome which I would haue you now vse tou∣ching this present league betweene vs. It was the custome of the ancient Romanes (asDeca Liuie their most peerelesse and incomparable Historiogra∣pher doth' record) that a certaine Herauld of armes should at the Kings commandement take an hearbe in his hand, and strike an Hog with a flint stone, pronouncing these words. Sic â loue feriatur is, qui sanctum hoc fregerit foedus, vt ego hunc porcum ferio: that is, I pray that lupiter may so strike him that shall violate this holy league, as I now strike this present Hogge. But Polybius the Arcadian hi∣storian affirmeth in his third booke of Histories, where he treateth of a league that was conclu∣ded betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, that there was another rite. For he saith thus. As soone as the conditions of the league were agreed on betwixt the parties, a certaine herauld of arms
took a stone in his hand, and vttered these words: If I make this league without any guile or de∣ceit, I pray the goddes to giue mee most happie successe in my affaires. But if I doe, or as much as thinke otherwise then according to the couenants of the league, I wish that all the rest being saued, I onely may perish, euen as this stone shall by and by fall out of my handes: and there withall hee presently flung away the stone. As for thePolydorios Virgilius lib.3. ca.15.de rerum inuentoribus. Arabians, whensoeuer they contracted confederacy with any forraine na∣tion, one standing in the middest betwixt both the Ambassadors, strooke with a certaine sharpe stone the palmes of the handes of them that were to make the league, euen about their greater fingers, & incontinently taking a peece of flocks out of the garments of both the Ambassadors, annoynted seuen stones that were put in the middest of them, with the bloud that issued out of their hands; and all the while they were occu∣pied about this ceremonie, they inuocated Dio∣nysius and Vrania. This being done, hee that was the mediator of making the league betwixt the friends, ingaged his credit, as suertie for the stran∣ger: which league they also thought good to ob∣serue that contracted friendship and familiaritie together. These and such like sundrie formes of making leagues there were heretofore amongest
the ancient Pagans, according to their seueral and distinct nations. But we setting aside these super∣stitious rites, as being for many ages past growen stale and out of date, will vnite our selues in the league of loue, especially for this time, onely by the ioyning of our bands together, a token very sufficient to ratifie an euerlasting and inuiolable vnion betwixt vs.Erosmu in A∣dagio Chad. I. Let vs not imitate the Foedi∣frage (that is the league-breaking) Carthaginians, who for their most execrable infidelity haue bene branded by many classicall historiographers with the infamous marke of eternall dishonour, and infamie; Insomuch that Punica fides, that is, the faith of the Carthaginians, is prouerbially vsed for all imaginable treachery, and disloyalty. But ra∣ther le vs in our thoughts, in our words, and in our deeds, firmly and sincerely establish this pre∣sent league not onely we that are here present du∣ring our liues, but also posterity for many succee∣ding genera ions after vs, to whom let vs now cōlecrate the memory hereof. But what mean I to expatiate so far beyond the bounds of the time I limited myself? wel then I wil recall my selfe, and now at length draw togither the sailes of this my rude & inelegant Oration. For I perceiue that I do euen cloy your eares with such an heap of cōfused words. Wherfore sūmarily to shut vp al in a word, I most heartily desire you all to take in good part
this my naked and slender Oration, considering that I am no professed Orator, nor an affected Rhetorician, to whom it belonges to paint out his speeches with filed phrases, curious circum∣quaques, and rhetoricall insinuations; but I am rather a man of armes, and a souldier. There∣fore ye ought to expect the lesse at my hands. Ne∣uerthelesse if in this my speech I haue de∣liuered any documents that are wor∣thy the obseruation, put them I pray you in execution with all alacritie. DIXI.
THIS ORATION FOL∣lowing I pronounced at Odcombe to the Euillians when they came home to vs. DEere Associates, we en∣tertaine you with a whole volley of most heartie thankes, partly for the bountifull and magnifi∣cent entertainment yee lately affoorded vs at your towne, and partly for that yee haue satisfied our expectation by reuifiting vs according to your faithfull promise, for the reliefe of our Church. Truly we ingenuously confesse that yee Euillians haue iustly merited our euerlasting loue, in that ye being oppidanes (that is, townes∣men)At the pro∣nouncing of this word, a volley of shot was discharged by twenty Mus eters. borne, brought vp, and dwelling in a rich, populous, and fertile towne, dotated with anci∣ent charters and priuiledges, yea liuing in so fat a
soyle, that it doth euen flow with milke and ho∣ney, doe vouchsafe vs your poore confederates the Odcombians of this fauour, as to visite vs with such a troope of the most selected persons of your towne; vs I say the Odcombians, being a rurall and mountanous people, dwelling vpon a billy and sterill countrie, and wanting many comfortable helpes of life, which both Nature and Art haue most abundantly powred out vpon you. Neuer∣thelesse because it shall not be thought that I de rogte too much from our selues by attributing so much vnto you, pardon me I pray you though I speake somewhat in commēdations of this lit∣tle parish Odcombe being my natiue soyle, the smoake whereof (according as another Au bor saith of a mans natiue countrey) is more deere vnto me, then the fire of a forraine place: and the rather I am induced to digresse somchin; into the praise hereof, because yee shall haue the lesse occa∣sion to repent for the league yee haue contracted with vs, as being no perfidious and disloyall slaues, but such as will, while our breath doth last, shew our selues most faithfull and sincere friends to those whom wee haue once entertai∣ned in our friendship.Lucian in his Treatise inti∣tuled Encomi patriae, whose words are these  that is, that smoake of a mans owne countrie it brightet then the fire of an other country. Therefore to deriue my beginning euen from that which is the necessari∣est thing that man hath in this life, without the which it is impossible for him to breath as much as
one minute of an hower, I meane the ayre, na∣ture the best perfectresse of things hath priuiled∣ged this rien soyle of Odcombe with so great a pre∣rogatiue of a most wholsome and pleasant ayre, that in that part of happinesse we hold our selues nothing inferior to any towne or parish whatsoe∣uer in the whole Shirewe dwel in, nay we attri∣bute so much to the excellēt subtiltie of our pier∣cing Odcombian ayre, as the PoetIn Epistola ad Mec Horace did to the aire of Baiae a famous maritime town of Cam¦paniain in Italy, whereof he saith thus, Nullus in orbe locus Baiis praelucet amoenis. That is, no place whatsoeuer within the whole circumference of the earth doth surpasse pleasant Baiae for the incomparable temperature of the ayre. Neither doe we Odcombians sticke to affirme that our ayre is as sweete as that of the royall Ci∣tie Madril in Spayne, Brixinia in the Earldome of Tyrol, Serauallum in Italy, Ormus in Persia, Alexandria in Egypt, and finally Croton in Magna Grecia: all which Cities are most highly extolled both by the ancient and moderne Geo∣graphers for the passing amoenitie of their ayre. The second thing which doth euen nobilitate our little parish (being also such a speciall acci∣dent for the sustentation of mans life, that it is impossible for man, especially in this part of Europe, to liue well without it) is our wooll,
which is so famous for the singular finenesse thereof, that wedare boldly auouch, that no place whatsoeuer in England yeeldeth better sauing onelyCambden in Herefordthite Lemster in Hereford-shire. Neither sure∣ly is this a thing of the least importāce to ennoble our Parish. For euen asStephanus de vrbibus. Pompo. Mela.lib.. Strabo vulgo Melazo. Miletus which was in times past the verie Queene of the Cities of Ionia in Greece, and the mother of almost ouescore Colonies, grew no lesse famous for the singularity of her wooll, which was distracted into diuers re∣gions & quarters of the world, then for her plea∣sant situation, and the statelinesse of her sump∣tuous buildings: So Odcombe (not that I make any iust comparison betwixt the glorious ci∣tie of Miletus and our little parish, being but as it were an handfull in respect thereof) ought to be much the better regarded, by reason of so worthy an helpe that it ministreth to couer mans nakednesse. The third is the conspicuous eminencie of our Church, being erected vpon so loftie a place, that it ouerprieth and ouertop∣peth the whole countrie round about it; euen as that notable AEgyptian watch tower calledPlinius lib.2.cap.85. Pharos neere to Alexandria, which was built by Ptolo∣maeus Philadelphus vpon so eminent an hill, that it ouerlooked the whole circumacent countrey. And truly this our Church deserueth commen∣dation in consideration both of the nobility of
the founder, being one Moritonius an Earle of Normandie, that came into this land (as I haue heard) with William the Conqueror; and also of the antiquitie. For it is at the least fiue hundred yeares agoe since the first foundation thereof was laid. The fourth is the varietie of our sweet and wholsome springs, distributed by the prouident artifice of nature into sundrie conuenient places of our parish, as well for the delight as the vtility of our inhabitants, and endued with that ori∣ent and Cristalline cleerenesse, together with the singular effects most inseparably therunto adioy∣ned, that we may presume to compare them with whatsoeuer fountains are reputed the excellentest in our whole countrey. The fift and last is that which shall (I hope) encourage you to per∣seuere most constantly in your league, namely, our vnity & perfect loue amongst our selues; for we all from the verie highest to the lowest are most firmly knit togither in an indissoluble knot of friendship. It fareth not with vs as it dothof∣tentimes with citizens and townsmen. For they are eftsoones so inraged and inflamed with the burning 7 eale of ambition, that they foster many turbulent factions, and oppose themselues in such virulent and hostile manner against each o∣ther, that now and then there fall out most grie∣uous broyles and mutinies betwixt them, where∣by
the strength of their societies is the sooner weakened and dissolued: but wee Odcombians conioyne our selues together in one, euen as the members in mans bodie without any emula∣tion, or repining at each others prosperous e∣state, and dispose our affections as a well-tu∣ned harmonie, that they neuer suffer any iat∣ring discord. So that by this sympathie of our neighbourly loue wee waxe the stronger, and become euen inexpugnable to our enemies, if at the least wee haue any. Heerein wee follow the wise counsaile of that sage ScythianPlutarbus: Scy∣lurus, who being on his death bed called to him all his sonnes, which were in number foure∣score, to all whom seuerally one after another bee deliuered a sheafe of arrowes bound vp to∣gether, commaunding them to breake those arrowes as they were so bound; they tried, but were not able to doe it. Whereupon hee tooke the sheafe againe into his owne handes, and hauing loosed the bond, hee easily brake all those shaftes being sundred one from another, which hee could not doe, when they were bound together. By which token hee intima∣ted to them that they should bee strong and in∣uincible, as long as they perseuered in the bond of vnitie, but should quickly come to vtter ruine and destruction, if by their priuate
dissentions they were diuided asunder. There∣fore, louing Confederates, imitate vs Odcombi∣ans in this our vnitie, so that not onely yee your selues may cherish and embrace mutuall loue amongest your selues, but also that yee and wee ioyntly together may expresse such sinceritie of friendshippe, by reason of this late league confirmed betwixt vs, that wee may bee as it were one fraternitie, one neighbour∣hoode. Now if any shall reprehend mee of par∣tialitie, for attributing so much to my natiue countrey, which seemeth indeede in outward shewe but a verie obscure and ignoble place: I heartily craue pardon for my presumption in this behalfe, being by so much the more pardonable, by how much the lesse I did euer il∣lustrate my countrey with any condigne pray∣ses heretofore in all my life till this present time. Desiring my countrey-men also the Odcombi∣ans to take this my present speech as a suffici∣ent satisfaction and recompence in liew of my long silence of Odcombe, for whose good and saferie, I hope I shall bee as readie to expose my bodie to any perils, (if opportunitie shall so require) yea, (which is more) to powre out my deerest vitall bloud, as euer was nobleulirus lib.2.sectio.5. Codrus for his Countrey of Athens,
Liuius Deca.Marcus Curtius for Rome, or the famous Ladie Androclea for Thebes..Pausanias lib. 9. Boeticorum. As concerning the entertainment which ye ex∣pect at our hands, pardon vs we pray you, though we requite you not with a correspondent propor∣tion both in manner and matter like vnto yours. For we want those meanes to expresse our boun∣tie towards you, as yee oppidanes are plentifully furnished with all. But this wee will assure you, that the defect of your entertainment shall bee most abundantly supplied with the integrity of our heartie loue and affection. Truly wee haue neither Bulles, nor Beares, nor Apes that are wont sometimes to be beaten vpon skittish iades, nor any such things to shew you, for the sight wher¦of together with the most peeuish pastimes that they yeeld to their spectators, many men are oftē times drawen to vndertake long and chargeable iournies: but in steed thereof we shew you our men, that like valiant Martialists present them; selues vnto you with their warlike munition, some with partizans, some with those remorse∣lesse and mercilesse instruments which were for almost seuen score yeares agoe inuented by a cer∣tainePolydor. Vir∣gil.&c. Germane as a pernicious bane of many millions of worthy men, I meane Muskets and Caliuers; and some other with swords, with all which weapons we Odcombians can (if neede re∣quireth)
maintaine right, and repulse wrong: but these instruments which were made for the effu∣sion of bloud, we like peaceable men lay aside at the entertaining of you, and with our Laurell branches in our hands, which are the true en∣signes of peace, most effectionately ambrace you as our deere friends. But seeing I perceiue that the time doth impose silence vpon me, I will breake off further circum∣stances, which doe breed a tedious wearisome∣nesse to the eares of the hearers: and finally con∣clude my speech with this request, namely to in∣treate you all, and that most instantly, that yee would as louingly accept of this rurall entertain∣ment, which our parish shal now yeeld you, as of luxurious and Epicurious delicacy, which Cities and townes doe oftentimes affoord their guestes; seeing kinde entertainment ought not so much to be measured by the curiositie of delicious cates, as by the vnfained welcome and entire beneuolence of the in∣uiting friends. DIXI. FINIS.
To the Reader. AT the conclusion and vpshot of this Booke, let mee a little aduertise thee (gentle Reader) of a Booke lately Printed in huggermugger, intituled The Odcombian banquet. And I am the rather induced to make mention of it, because it doth not a litle concerne my credit to cleere my selfe of two very scandalous imputation laide vpon me by that virulent and ranco∣rous pessant, some base lurking pedanticall te∣nebricous Lucifuga that set forth the booke. Wherof the first is the Motto in the first leafe of the booke. A sinus portans mysteria. The other in the end of the booke, euen in his No∣uerint vniuersi, viz. That one that inten∣ded to epitomize it, affirmed hee could not
melt out of the whole lumpe of my Volume so much matter worthy the reading as would fil foure pages. For the first I will tell thee the originall wherehence it sprang. It hapned that after I had presented my Booke at Roy∣ston to the King, and returned backe to Lon∣don for Bookes to present to Noblemen of the Court, I did determine for conceite sake, and to minister occasion of merriment to the King, to get me an Asse to carie my Bookes, with this Latine inscription in faire Capitall Romane Letters vpon that which should haue contained them, Asinus portans my∣steria; being indeede taken out of Alciats Emblemes, and spoken of an Asse that cari∣ed the Image of the goddesse Isis. But heere the diuulger of the foresaid Odcombian Banquet most sinisterly and malignantly applied it (as all the Readers doe interprete it) to my selfe, and thereby very peruersly wrested it from that allusion which I inten∣ded. As for the second imputation contained in his Nouerint vniuersi, it farre exceeded
the first in spite full bitternesse. For whereas he writeth that hee could not melt out of the whole lumpe of my Booke so much matter worthy the reading as would fill foure pages, I will boldly affirme for the better iustificati∣on of my Obseruations, and by way of opposi∣tion against the malicious censure of that hy∣percriticall Momus, that of the sixe hundred fiftie and foure pages (for indeede so many are in the booke) he shall find at the least fiue hundred worthy the reading, especially in my descriptions of these Cities, Paris, Lyons, Milan, Padua, Venice, Verona, Brixia, Bergomo, Zurich, both the `Badens, Basil, Strasbourg, Heidelberg, Spira, Wormes, Mentz, Franckeford, Colen, &c. This al∣so I will further say for the confirmation of the sufficiencie of my historicall notes, (see∣ing they are so seuerely chastised by the cen∣sorious rod of this maleuolent traducer, that biteth my worke with his Theonine teeth) and yet without any vaine glorious ostentati∣on: that let him or any other whatsoeuer in
our whole Kingdome of Great Brittaine, shew both larger Annotations for quantitie, and better for qualitie (absic dicto inuidia) gathered in fiue moneths Trauels by any English man since the incarnation of Christ, I will be rather contented to consecrate all the Bookes that remaine now in my hands ei∣ther to god Vulcan or goddesse Thetis, then to present one more to any Gentleman that fauours wit and learning. Therefore let this Coryatomastix Zoilus barke at mee as long as he list, swell with enuie as bigge as the AEsopical Toade, and shoote all his darts of malignitie against me; I oppose this double thield stronger then the seuen fold Target of Aiax in Ouid, for my securitie and defence against him, first that it hath pleased the best of the Kingdome euen from the Kings owne person with all those sacred members of the Royall family, and many Noble persona∣ges of the best note of our land, as well as the Lords of the Priuie Counsell, as other gene∣rous spirits of great eminencie, not onely to
affoord gracious entertainment to my booke, but also with their courteous approbation and candid censure to thinke well of my labours. Secondly, that my vnparalled friend, that voluble linguist & sound Scholler M. Lau∣rence Whitaker, who (I thinke) doth as farre excell in learning my antagonist the Author of the Nouerinti vniuersi, as a rose doth a nettle in sweetnesse, or a Pearle a Pebble-stone in price, hath vouchsafed to confirme the authoritie of my booke (hauing yeelded me that fauourable and patient at∣tention to heare me reade ouer the whole be∣fore it came to the Presse) with his no lesse learning then elegant Elogie that preceedeth my owne Obseruations. But to conclude this matter of my malicious enemie, against the violent stroake of whose base wrongs my in∣nocencie and integritie will like a brasen wal defend me, I wish the same of them that an ancient Poet did of the bitter Poet Archi lochus; Vtque repertori nocuit pugnacis Iambi, Sic sit in exitium lingua proterua tuum. FINIS.
