6807 99847863 12926
¶Here begynneth a dialogue betwene the comen Secretary and Ielowsy tou¦chynge the vnstablenes of harlottes. Secretary. Ielowsy.
¶Ielowsy. WHat a world is this / I trow it be a curst Fayne wold I marye / yf yt I durst But I trow syth ye time yt god was born So many honest mē neuer held of ye horn ¶Secretary. ¶What is the mater / be ye in ony doubte Pacyfye your mode / let it come oute Dyscharge your stomake / avoyde it forth Sorowes in store be nothynge worth ¶Ielowsy. ¶Trouth it is / I trust ye wyll not be greued To a small questyon be to you moued In a mater / to me doubtfull and defuse Whiche I suppose ye haue had in experyence & vse ¶Secretary. That {per}auenture / but I wyll not {pro}myse you p̄sysely To assoyle your questyon very wysely Howe be it that ye say / I am of experyence So ye wyll be close / ye shall here my sentence
¶ Ielowsy. ¶Then thus / she that hath a rollynge ey And doth conuey it / well and wysely And therto hath a waueryng thought Trowe ye this trull wyll not be bought. ¶Secretary. ¶Yes / but take hede by the pryce ye haue noo losse A made marchaunt yt wyll gyue .v. m̄ke for a goose Beware a rollyng ey wt wauerynge thought m̄ke yt And for suche stuffe passe not / a dandy pratt ¶Ielowsy. ¶She that is very wanton and nyse Thynkyng her self maruaylous wyse And wyll come to hym that doth her call Wyll she not wrastell for a fall ¶Secretary. ¶Yes suerly / for a fall flat as a cake And cares not howe many falles she doth take There is noo fall can make her lame For she wyll be sure of the best game.
¶Ielowsy. ¶She that doth make it all straunge and quaynt And lokyth as she were a very saynte If a man in the darke doo hyr assay Hath she any power to holde owte nay / nay ¶Secretary. ¶Holde oute / yes / or it is pyttye she was borne A horse a whele barowe and a Rammys horne It the other thynge come ye Wott what I mene For all her holly lookes she wyll conuey it clene ¶Ielowsy. ¶She that doth loue moche dallyng With dyuerse men for fayre spekynge And thynkys not on her owne shame Wyll not this wylde foule be made tame ¶Secretary. ¶Yes with good handlynge as Iayme Euen by and by ye shall her reclayme And make her tame as euer was Turtyll To suffre kyssyng and tyklyng vnder the kyrtell
¶Ielowsy. ¶She that is sum what lyght of credence And to make her freshe / large of expence Howe say you and her mony doo fayle Wyll she not lay too pledge her tayle ¶Secretary. ¶Yes and yf she be of that appetyte She wyll pledge and sell oute ryght Hede pece / tayle pece / and all .iiii. quarters To one or other / rather then fayle to carters ¶Ielowsy. ¶She that louys to sytte and muse And craftly can her selfe excuse When she is taken with a faulte Wyll she not be wonne with a small saulte ¶Secretary. ¶What nedys a saulte / I dare say she wyll consent That ye shall enter by a reasonable poyntment And thē take hede for ī kepynge of this warde & hold Is more daunger thē in gettynge a thousande folde
¶Ielowsy▪ ¶ She that is of mynde sum what rechelles Gyuynge her selfe all to ydelnes And louys to lye longe in her bed Who wayteth his tyme shall he not be sped ¶Secretary. ¶Tyme nay nay wayte / yf she be in good mode For out of chyrche all tymes be goode But passe not theron / though she say nay For so she wyll whan she hath best lust to play ¶Ielowsy. ¶She that can no counsayll kepe And lyghtly wyll sobbe and wepe Laughe agayne and wote not why Wyll she not be sone tysed to foly ¶Secretary The teares be token a gracyous corage And laughnge doth all malyce aswage Whan she is in that takynge marke well marke Let slyp / spare not for one course in her parke
¶Ielowsy. ¶She that is fayre and lusty yonge And can comyn in termes with fyled tonge And wyll byde whysperynge in the eare Thynke ye her tayle is not yght of the seare ¶Secretary· ¶By all these symblytudes me thynkes suerly Her owne tayle she shulde occupy Somtyme for nede her honeste saued She wyll wasshe often or she be ones shaued ¶Ielowsy. ¶She yt paynteth her in starynge apparell Use hote wynes and dayly to farewell And loues to slepe at after none tyde Who lyst stryke trowe ye she wyll not stryde ¶Secretary. ¶I can not say yf she wyll stryke But yf reason be offered nothynge shall fall besyde For of a trouth as frost engendereth hayle Ease and ranke fedynge doth cause a lycorous tayle. ¶Finis
