7357 99846507 11480
A TRVE IOVRNAL OF THE SALLY FLE VVITH THE PROCEEDIN OF THE VOYAGE. Published by IOHN DVNT London Mariner, Master of the Admir call'd the LEOPARD. Whereunto is annexed a List o Captives names and the places where dwell, and a Description of the three Townes in a CARD. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Dawson for Thomas Nicholes, a be sold at the signe of the Bible in Popes-head al 1637.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE LORD VAINE, One of his MAIESTIES priv Councell of his High Court of Admiraltie. RIght Honourable, in S∣tember last was twel month, I redeemed m selfe prisoner from Sal being sent out Mast and Pilote in a Sally ma of warre, with twenty one Moores and five Flemish rennagadoes, un the coast of England to take Christians, brough them into the Isle of Wight under the co∣mand of Husk Castle, where I was detained a Pirate, and sent to Winchester with the re
till wee were tryed by the Law, then com∣ming to London very bare, I found much fa∣vour at your Honours hands; For which I must ever rest ingaged, and have no way to testifie my thankfulnesse more, than by pre∣senting this my poore indevour to your Ho∣nour: which if you please to accept and con∣sider of, may be a meanes to relieve more as you have done mee; for my onely sonne is now slave in Areire, and but ten yeares of age, and like to be lost for ever, without Gods great mercy and the Kings clemencie, which I hope may be in some measure ob∣tained by your Honours meanes, and then your poore suppliant shall be ever bound to pray for you and yours all his dayes, and ever rest at your command, IOHN DVNTON, Mariner.
A FLEET OF SHIPPES Set out by his MAIESTIE against the Turkish Pirats and Pirats of Sally in Ianuary 1636. IOHN DVNTON went aboor his Majesties Ship the Leopard at Cha∣tham the 26 of Ianuary, to see her v∣ctualls and provision taken in for th Voyage; and the tenth day of Fe∣bruary following, his Majesties Shippes had all the victuals and provision shipped aboord, and were rea∣dy to set sayle, but the wind was not good, for it wa against us, and at North-east, and at East North-eas untill the 13th day of the said February in the mor∣ning at 8 of the Clocke we broke ground to set sayl with the said Ship the Leopard. And wee did warp the same Ship to his Majesties Dock at Chatham, an there did ride till the 14th day of the said February i the morning, and then at day-light we did make wa to warpe the said Ship downe over the Chayne, th weather then being calme, and no winde stirring And as soone as wee were downe over the Chayn with the Ship, wee had a little winde Northerly, s wee sayled downe to Gillingham, and there came t
an Anchor in six fathome water, for the winde was against us at Nore and Nore North-east, and we did ride all night untill the 16th day of the same February in the morning at ten of the Clock, at which time we set sayle with the wind at South Sea-west, and did get up as far as the west end of the Nore, and there came to an Anchor and rode all night till the 17th day in the morning at day-light, and then wee set sayle and at noone wee came to an Anchor in Tilbery hope, and there did ride to get Sea-men to man our Shippes, and gather our Fleete together, and stayed for no∣thing but a wind. And the 24th day in the morning, we set sayle from Tilbery hope with the wind at West and little wind; and the 26th day of February at two of the Clock in the afternoone wee came to an An∣chor in the Downes, in eight fathom water, with the wind at West Nore West,March 4th and there wee did ride un∣till the 4th day of March in the morning at six of the Clock we set sayle out of the Downes with the wind at South-east,6th a fine gale of wind: and sayling along the Coast of England untill the sixt day of March at noone wee departed from the Southermost land of England called the Lizard in Cornwall, and set our course for the Coast of Spaine with the wind at East North-east. And I will not be too tedious to set downe every point what course we did steere, and e∣very day how the wind was, because I will make it as short as I can, and sayling alongst the Coast of Spaine with a faire wind, and sometimes a contrary wind, wee did not see a sayle nor a ship all the way, but one small Carvill, and short of the Northern Cape, wee had much wind at South-west, and West north-west,
and the 12th of March in the night betwixt twelve an one of the Clock our Reere Admirall the Hercule bore her Mayne Mast by the board; and wee were faine to leave her, and we staying by her all night un till the next day, our Generall asked the Captain what he would doe, and he told him that he would goe for Lisborne to set a new Mast, so wee tooke ou leave of him, and steered away our course; and tha Carvill we saw we could not speake with her, for sh was too Windward of us. It was the 19th day of March that wee did see tha Carvill, and so sayling alongst the Coasts untill the 21 of March in the morning at day-light wee did se the South Cape of Spaine, and were fayre by the land by six a clock in the morning; and so steering away our course South-east for Sally in Barbary, and the 2 of March in the morning, we saw the land at noone we made the Towne of Momora; and at night wee came to an Anchor in 27 fathom water, two leagues off the shore before Momora, and there did ride al night untill the 24th day of March in the morning we set sayle at ten of the clock with little wind at Nor North-west, and at 4 of the clock in the afternoone▪ we did come to an anchor in Sally Rode in 33 fathom water, right before the new towne of Sally. And our Captaine and Generall having the command of all the Shippes, sent some unto the Southward, and some unto the Noreward; and wee riding in the middle right against the Castle, and before the Harbours mouth, that Ships should neither goe in nor out, so we dispersed all our Shippes over all the Rode of Sally, that neither shippe nor boat could passe in nor our,
for our shippes and boats did lie under the Castle e∣very night close under the Harbors mouth the watch. The 26th of March our Generall sent his Letter a∣shore to the Governour of New Sally to demand our Kings Majesties subjects,26th. and Christians, and satis∣faction for shippes and goods, and for all those Chri∣stians that they sold away both to Argier and other Countryes before we came there; which did trouble them very much, and move their patience. And in a bravado they refused to send our Generall an answer; whereupon we perceived, and looking well about us, wee went roundly to worke with them another way which they expected not, as you shall know hereafter. It was Gods great mercy that wee did come into the Rode so soone as we did, for they had made ready all their ships to goe for the Coast of England, as it was credibly reported of some Christians that were slaves ashore that did steale away out of the Towne, and came swimming aboord the Leopard, they were most Frenchmen, and some Spaniards, and they told our Generall, that the Governour of New Sally sent for all the Captaine Runnagadoes, and commanded all the Captaines in New Sally that they should goe for the Coast of England, so neere the shore with their shippes, and hoyst out all their boats, and goe ashore and fetch the men women and children out of their beds, had not GOD of his great mercy prevented them, but wee comming so suddenly into the Rode upon them before they knew of any shippes that our gracious King had at Sea, or any such intent to send a Fleete of Shippes upon the Coast of Barbary, and they were growne to such a height of pride, that
some English Merchants and men ashore told the G vernor of new Sally, that they were the King of En∣lands Ships, he said, what care I for the K. of Englan Shippes, or all the Christian Kings in the world, a not I King of Sally: but wee made him sing anoth song in a short time after, for we went to workewi him another way that he dreamed not of. The 2 of March at three of the clock in the afternoone the did come in a Sally man of warre from Argier wi passengers, and going close aboord the North sho as neere as shee could steere for running ashore, w and the Antilop did shoot above 100 peeces of On nance at that ship, wee shot through and through h and over her, and into the towne. It was such a gr Sea that wee could not sinke her, but wee met w her in the Harbour, and sunke her within amongst rest, as will appeare in a short time afterwards, a wee did come to an anchor hard by the Castle, the Castle did shoot at us, and wee did shoot at Castle, into the Castle, and over it, and thro it, and into the towne, and through the towne, over it, and amongst the Moores, and did kill a g many of them. The 29th of March, the Governour of the towne did send our Kings Letters of peace aboor our Generall, and did desire a peace with our K for they are out with the new towne, and many ters passed betwixt the Saint and our Generall, an in a short time after our Generall did make a pe with the Saint, for the old towne was so terrified the rogues in the new towne, for we saw them in fi all day ashore one with the other, and a great
men and horses were killed and hurt on both sides, the old towne set up a white Flagge of truce upon their walles for our boats to come ashore to see what they would have, so our Generall caused five or six of our boats and shallops to be manned with good small shott, and our boat with our Kings Colours therein went a shore, and they told our men they lac∣ked a Surgeon. Our Cockson having order from his Generall to take in two of the best of them and bring them aboord the Leopard for pledges, and sent our Surgions-Mate ashore, and in a short time, he cured all their hurt men, that were curable, at which the Governour and all the Moores in the old towne did much rejoyce, and were very diligent unto us; and all those rogues in New Sally were very cropicke, and much discontented at our being ashore, and so conversant with them, and called them and us Eng∣lish-dogges, and did say amongst themselves that they were all turned Christians, and rayled upon them and us, shooting with their great gunnes at them and us continually; and they of the new towne had built a bridge over the River upon boats with Deale boords to march over to the old towne with horse and man with many thousands, and were fully resolved to take the old towne into their owne possession, had not wee prevented them, but in a short time after, wee made them pull up their bridge, breake their Campe, and goe their wayes home and fortifie their owne walles and Castles, for they found their hands full of us. Aprill the 5th our peace was concluded with the Saint our friend,Aprill 5. this Saints name was Siddy Hamet
Allilash, he is a pettie King of the old towne, an some other townes in Barbarie, as Barbary is in muc trouble and much warres one with another, but will be now better: For the King of Morocus dot now goe abroad to warres himselfe, he was abroa this Summer with 40000 men horse and foote, an was comming to Sally, but the Saint our friend pre∣vented him, for he did burne up all the Corne up∣on the ground round about the Countrey, that the King could have no provision for his men and ho∣ses, and by that meanes he could come no neer Sally, than within thirtie leagues, and so he was fai to retire home againe with fire and sword grammi all the Country wheresoever he went, and put the all to death. The 9th of Aprill we did see a sayle off at Sea, w did give her Chace untill night, and lost her, w did goe into the Rode againe, for shee was so wind-ward of us, that we could not fetch her. The 11th day in the morning wee saw two shipp wee did give them Chace all day, they were so fa off at Sea, and night was comming on, and then w lost them. The 18th day of Aprill, the Hercules our Reere A∣mirall did come into Sally Rode from Lisbone, a had set her Mast againe. The 20th day of Aprill, the two townes of S were in fight very hard one against another, and kill a great many men on both sides, wee did sta and looke upon them in our shippes as they wer fight, wee riding at an Anchor, and could not re them with our Ordnance, they were ashore.
The next day being the twenty-one of Aprill the Moores in the old towne did hang out a white Flagge for our boats to come ashore,21th. and our Generall did send two of our boats ashore to the old towne with the Kings Colours in our boats, and as soone as our boates did come to the shore side, there were many Moores would have come aboord: Our men did take in three of the best of them, and they told our Generall that he should have all the old owne at his command, as Castles, Forts, and Gunnes, and men, and all to lay siege and battery against the new towne at his service, or any thing else in the towne, for the King of Englands sake, so in a short time af∣ter, our Generall did send our Master-Gunner and one of my chiefe Mates ashore, to see how the towne was fortified, and how many Gunnes they had mounted, and how many great Gunnes they can bring to beate upon the new towne, for to lay bat∣tery, and likewise how many great Gunnes they can bring to beate upon their Shippes to inke them, or how they may come to burne them, and also to goe round about the towne, and take very good no∣tice of all things therein, and likewise of all their Shippes, and for a place to make a trench for great Gunnes, and they being many times ashore did find out a place for a trench, and so in a few dayes after our Generall had well understood himslefe, what a good worke it would be to sinke and burne their Shippes, did give order unto our Master-Gunner, and my chiefe Mate Simpson, with some other good Sea-men out of every shippe, to take some barrels of power & shot ashore into the old towne, and to shoot
at their Shippes, and to sinke as many of them as the can; and they did sinke three of their best shippesth first day, and the next day they did come aboord f powder and shot, and they told our Generall th they had found out a place to make a Trench, th will sinke all their shippes in the Harbour, and o Generall did sent to every shippe for every Gunn and men to take their urnes ashore to manage th Ordnance and baery, all day lon, and while t Trench was making our men did sinke many of the Shippes, and shot through many of their house and killed a  many men in their towne and Cstle; and continued killing of them everyday, a when the Trench was made and their Gunnes hal downe into the Trench, our Generall sent for all t best Gunnes of every Shippe, and appointed eve Gunner and his Company his day, and to take poder and shot with them, and so to goe to worke w their Ships to sinke and burne them all, and as the were shooting at their shippes and barkes, the Moo in the new towne did shoot at our men in the Tren and did shoot off one of our mens legs, but he is w againe God be praysed for it, for we did so torm them in sinking and burning of their shippes that th were starke madde, and at their wits ends, for we every day  some of their shippes, and kill some them in the new towne with the great Gunnes, w shooting out of the Trench at them, and shoot through their houses and from the walls and forts the old towne, & in every place where our men cor could bring great Gunnes for to beate upon the or their ships, boats, or houses, or Churches, or
or anything of theirs, and at last we did sink & spoile and burne all their shippes but three that did lie up in the Harbour behinde a point of rocks, that our men could not bring any Gunnes to beate upon them, and what with the Saint besieging them by land, and wee by Sea, they were in a mutinie in all the towne, and together by the eares amongst themselves, and being so, and victualls began to be short with them, they were so tormented, that that side which was strongest, in the night did set upon their Governour, and tooke him prisoner, and put him in chaines, and sent him prisoner to the King of Morocus, that is fifty leagues from Sally to the Southward; and when that Governour to that great King of theirs was gone, they made one Governour one day, & another ano∣ther day, from the time we did come into the Rode, to the time the old Governour came to the Towne againe. The 27th day at one of the clock in the morning,27th. seven of our boats were in close aboord the shore at watch, and did see two great Carvells comming out of the Harbour; and our boats did set upon them, and did wedge one of their Rudders fast, and did lay her by the Lee and were board and board, and did heave in fire pots unto her, and did burnethree men of them to death, and did kill fifteene men of them out-right, and did hurt eighteene more of them with our small shot, and they did kill us one man in the head with their small shot and hurt us eight more in our boats with small shot, and all our boats had men hurt in all that fight thirtie Sea-men, some i the legges, and some in the armes with small shot: and
two of the Hercules men were shot with arrowes in the backe, and are dead, and all our men be all well againe God be thanked, had they not beene so neere the shore, and a gale of winde off the land, that wee could not helpe them, nor rescue them with ou Gunnes, and the rogues from the shore did beat of our boats with their small shot; and so our boate were forced to leave them, and go aboord their ship againe. The 28. of April wee saw two ships off at sea the Mary and the Hercules did goe off to them, an fetch them up, and spake with them. They were tw Spaniards bringing Soldiers from Momora. The 29 of April the Saint our friend beieged th new Towne of Sally, and set all their corne on fire o the ground without the towne, and did keep them in that they cannot not stirre. The first day of May in the morning, we did see sayle goe into the harbour from all our shippes: she did goe so neare the shore that wee durst not'follow her. The Antilop followed her to the harbour mouth, and made many a shot at her, and did kil them a great many men, as the Moores in the ol towne told our men. The 5. of May the Mary and the Hercules did com into the Roade from Fedally, and told our General that they did put a Sally man of Warre ashore at Fdally, and set her on fire; and the Saint had taken al her men: she was one of the best ships that they had she had in her 23. or 24. great Gunnes, and comming from Argiere with a great many men in her would have gone a roguing, had not wee destroye them.
The 11. day in the morning wee saw a ship off at Sea,11th. and wee gave her chase all the day, and in the eight we lost ght of her: for it was so darke, and no winde. The 12. day in the morning, we did see two ships,12th. and wee did give them chase all day untill night, and then lost them, it was so darke, and little winde. The 15.15th. day, in the morning wee saw two shippes to the norward of us, as farre as we could see them, wee did give them chase all day, and at night wee lost them. The 18.18th day at two a clock in the morning, eight of our boats were in fight with foure of their great boats untill day light: wee did kill them a great many men in their boats, as they were comming from Fedally: and had it not beene a gale of winde, our boats had taken them all before they had got∣ten into the harbour. Wee had but two men hurt in all our boats. The 24.24th. day, our boats did take a great boat of theirs. The 25.25th. day we did give a man of warre chase to the Southward of Sally all day: in the night we lost her, for it was darke, and little winde. The last of May in the morning, wee did see a shippe off at sea:Last. wee gave her chase all day till night. She sayled too fast for us. All those shippes that wee have chased, were men of Warre, Rogues and Pirates of Sally. Some of them did come out of the Straights, & some small men of warre of them out of Sally.
Iune. 1. The first day of Iune, in the morning we did see two shippes off at Sea,Iune 1. we did give them chase all day, till at night, little winde and darke, and then we lost them. 5. The fifth day at ten a clocke at night,5. the Governor was sent away prisoner in a boat to the King of Morcous, thinking that the King would have cut off his head, and wee having notice of his going, did watch nar∣rowly for him with all our boats: it was such a night, and so darke, and such a Fogg, that our boats could, not meete with him, for we would have taken him prisoner. 7 The seventh day in the night,7. a small man of Warre did come out of the Harbour, our boats being at watch did meete with her, and did put her ashoare, and shee was spilt all too peeces, and all her men drowned and taken by the Saint our friend.
The tenth day of Iune the Expedition did come into Sally Roade.10. The eleventh 'day Providence came into the Roade;11. and one of their men of warre came creeping alongst the North shoare, a mile from the Norward of the Old Towne; our boates and one of the Pinnaces did set upon her, and put her a shoare, and she was split all too peeces, and most of her men kil'd and taken by the Saint our friend. The twenty third of Iune,23. our Generall did goe aboard of the Expedition in the morning, to see how they would row, and they did row after three leag s a watch, and did row under the Castle and the Ca∣stle did shoote at her, and thee did shoote at the Castle, and into the Castle, and over the Castle, and into the towne, and over the towne; and the Castle at her, and she at them, and so they did lye shooting one at another, untill foure a clocke in the afternoone; and then she did come off into the Roade againe, and did come unto an Anchor hard by the Leopard, and came off very well, and had never a man hurt we give God thankes: they broake one of their best Gunnes of brasse in the Castle, with shooting at her. The twenty seaventh day of Iune in the morning we saw two shippes at an Anchor under the Castle;27. Our Generall sent for all
the shippes boates to towe in the Providence, for it was clame, she did row and eight boates did towe, and they towed her within Musket shot of the shoare, and the Providence did shoote at those two shippes, 100 peeces of Ordnance through & through, and the great shot did kill them, some men right out, and went a shore amongst a thou∣sand Moores, and the Castle did shoote a∣bove eighty peeces of Ordnance at her. And the men in the towne came downe to the water side with 1000 small shot at her; And at noone they left off, and she came off very well, and had never a man hurt; but her ropes, and her sayles, and her side; were payd with small shot; wee could not know how many Moores she did kill them. The thirteenth day in the morning we saw a shippe,13. Captaine White chased her a shore to the Northward. The same day at noone, the new town sent a boate aboard with let∣ters to our Generall, about the Christians, & would saine have made a peace with our Ge∣nerall, but he would not make a peace with thē, except they would give us al our Chri∣stians, and satisfaction for all that ever had beene taken by them, those words made them in a dumpe, and when they did see our two Pinnaces come into the Roade out of England, and did see them row with Oares after one of their shippes
they were starke mad, and sought all the wayes they could for a peace with us, or with the Saint, and there did runne away one hundred men in a day out of the new towne to the old towne, to the Saint: and most of the best men in the towne for want of victuals, which were very short with them, who durst not goe out for feare of our men, they were almost all sterved for want. 30. Iune the thirtieth we saw a shippe at Sea,Iune 30. and gave her chase all day, and at night wee lost her, it was darke and little wind, that we could not fetch her. Iuly 3. Iuly the third,Iuly 3. we did put a Sally man of warre a shore, with fifty five Mores and Turkes in her, all killed and drowned, and taken with the Saint our friend, and their shippe split all too peeces. 11. The eleventh day in the morning,11. wee
saw three shippes at Sea, we gave them chase all day, and at night we lost them. 12. The twelsth day the Providence chased a Sally man of warre ashore,12. with eighty five Mores and Turkes in her, to the South∣wards, all taken and kil'd by the Saint our friend, and their shippe split all too peeces, to the Southward of Sally, Shippes and Car∣vels sixe, and boates two put ashoare with∣out the Harbour of Sally barre, unto the Southward two shippes and one boate, un∣to the Northwards foure shippes and one boate, they were all men of warre, and Pi∣rats of Sally, and all the shippes that wee gave chase too, were all Turkes men of war and Pirats of Sally, but foure that came to trade with the town. But our Generall would not suffer them to trade. 26. Iuly 26.26. our Master Gunner, and my mate Simpson, and a grear may men more, had made ready some great Gunnes to go up to the Saint, by the Generals appointment a∣bout the head of the river, for they in the new
town had taken away their bridge, that they had made upon boates and deale boards, to goe over the river into the old towne, to fight with them, and did fight with them many times; and had taken the old towne, if we had stayed away but tenne dayes lon∣ger, but when they saw our shippes, and knew wherefore we came, we made them soone take a way their bridge againe, for feare we should take their bridge away from them, and carry our great Gunnes over, and beate downe the towne about their eares, and made them in a wofull case, that they were sometimes in the minde to give up the towne to the Saint, & sometimes in minde to give it to the Spaniards, and t last they were in the minde to runne away, and did runne away a great many out of the towne dayly, if they could have told how to have got out of the Harbour, for they could not hold the towne above sixe or tenne dayes longer, the Christians did all scape so to our Gene∣rall, but we did looke out with our boates close in the shoare, and before the Harbours mouth, that they could not stirre; and if chance they had got out of the Harbour from our boates, our shippes in the Roade; were all ready to set sayle, and to cut our Cables in the Harse, and all our sayles in
smiting being ready to set sayle after them, at an instant. The 27.27. day of Iuly there came letters to our Generall from the King of Morocus, and Master Robert Blacke a Merchant and Interpreter for the Kings Ambassador to our Generall; and in that shippe was the old Governour, that was sent away in chaines unto the King of Morocus, and had made his peace with the King, so the King sent him to bee Governour in Sally againe, with a Proviso that he could make his peace with our Generall about our Christians, for the towne of new Sally was very neere the matter to be none of the King of Morocu's, nor hee to be entertained for Governour againe, had not our gracious King with his shippes given him possession of it, he had ne∣ver beene King of Sally in this world, for we had notice of their comming a week be∣fore they came, and our Generall sent his warrant and the Providence, and one shippe more, and a small Friget out at Sea, to looke for their comming. The same day our Pinnace the Provi∣dence met with him, and commanded him a board our ship the Leopard, and he was kept prisoner till the next day, and our Generall threatned to hang him, at which he trembled
very much, and was sore afrai of it, and our Generall sent for all the Captaines aboard, and Called a Councell of Warre, and it was agreed upon, thr the Kings, Alcade, and Master Robert Blake should goe ashore first into the new towne, and see how they would intertaine the Kings Alcade, and how they would intertaine the old Governor againe. And the 28. day, they sent a boate aboard unto our Generall with eleven Christians that were the Governors slaves or most of them, and Merchants some of them to my knowledge, and told him if bee would send the Governour ashore, he should have all the Christians aboard; and it was agreed upon that they should bring all our Christi∣ans aboard in their boats, and the old Go∣vernour was sent a shore, and they did re∣ceive him very thankfully againe, for had not hee and the Kings Alcade come as they did, the towne had been the Saints and ours, but God would not have it so, and they did make as much haste to bring our Christians aboard as they could, because they would have us gone out of the Roade. August. 8. The eight day of August,August. 8. wee had all our
Christans aboard our shippes, and all their names, and in what townes they formerly dwelt, as you shall see in a List following God willing. The same day towards night our Generall sent foure of our shippes away to rove and to range the Coast of Spaine, and to looke for Turkes men of warre, Py∣rates or others, the Antilop, the Hercules, the Providence, the Expedition, two shippes, two Pinnaes. 12. And the twelfth day the Mary Rose,12. and the Roe Bucke, did come into Sally Roade out of England, with a new supply, not knowing what we had done; but the Moores of new Sally, seeing two shippes with the Kings Colours, they were madde to see more shippes come into the Roade of Sally, and we must stay still to take in the Kings Alcade, and Master Robert Blacke, and foure of the best men in Sally, to goe to the King of Morocus for pledges, and to see the peace confirmed betweene the King of England, and the King of Morocus.
August. 21. August the 21.Aug. 21. we set sayle out of Sally Roade. 23. And the twenty third day we came to an Anchor in Saffee Roade,23. twenty fathome water. September. 19. And the nineteenth of September,Sept. 19 at sixe aclocke at night, the Embassador came a∣board with all his men to go for England in the Leopard. 21. The twenty one day of September,21. at 4. a∣clocke in the afternoone, we set sayle out of Saffee Road, with the wind at South South∣west, little winde and calme all night. 23. The twenty third day at eight of the clocke in the morning,23. Cape canteene did beare East South-east, 7 leagues from us.
October. 4. The fourth of October,Octob. in the morning at eight of the clocke, we sounded and had 110. fathome of water, the ground was great red sand, with some small blacke sand, and some white shels, and other small white peeces, and some round stones. 5. The fifth day at noone,5. a North-east and by North way, 31. leagues in degrees, 49, and 41 minuts, the winde at South, and South-west. The same day at 2. of the clocke in the afternoone, which did beare from us at noone North, eight leagues off, and the Lizard North-East and by Nore Northerly, 20 leagues at noone, wee sounded 55. fathome water off Scylla, and did see land upon the decke at two of the clocke, the winde at South South-west. 6. The sixth day in the morning at nine of the clocke,6 we did lye by the Lee of the Bery, a mile off the shore to land all our Christians, that day at night they were all landed at Tar∣bay,
that wee brought from Sally which were Capives. 7. The seventh day at seven of the clocke at night,7. we came to an Anchor in the Downes, nine fathome water. 8. The eighth day being Sunday,8. in the fore∣noone, wee did set the King of Morocus Em∣bassador ashore in the Downes, and at two of the clocke in the afternoone, we set sayle, the winde at South South-east, and at five a∣clocke in the afternoone we came to Anchor in eight fathome water in Marget Road, with very much winde, at South South-east we did ride all night. 9. The ninth day,9. at eight in the morning, we set sayle out of Marget Road, the winde at South South-west, and at one of the clocke in the afternoone, wee came to an Auchor at Quinborow in nine fathome water, and there stayed for a faire winde to go up to Chatham, and there to deliver his Majesties Shippe over the Chayne in safety.
Captaine William Rainsbrough, Captaine of the Leopard, and Generall of the South Squadron of the Sally Fleete. Captaine George Carteret Captaine of the Antilop, and Vice-Admirall. Captaine Brian Harrison, Captaine of the Hercules, Rere-Admirall. Captaine George Hatch, Captaine of the Mary. Captaine Edward Symons, Captaine of the Providence. Captaine Thomas White, Captaine of the Expedition. Captaine Trunchfield, Captaine of the Mary Rose: And Master Broad of Rederiffe, Master and Commander of the Row-bucke.
The Leopard in burthen 600. tunnes 36. great gunnes, 180. Sea-men. The Antilope in burthen 600 tunnes, 36. great gunnes, 180 Sea-men. The Hercules in burthen 400. tunnes, 28. great gunnes, 140. Sea-men. The Mary in burthen 400 tunnes, 28. great gunnes 140. Sea-men. The Providence Pinnace, in burthen neere upon 300. tunnes, with 14 great gunnes, 100. Sea-men. The Expedition, in burthen neere upon 300 tunnes, with 14. great gunnes, 100. Sea-men. The Mary Rose in burthen neere upon 400. tunnes, with 28 great gunnes, 100 Sea-men. The Row Bucke in burthen 80 tunnes, 10. great gunnes 50 Sea-men. All these good Shippes with the Captives are in safety arrived in England, we give God thankes. And God blesse King Charles, and all those that love him.
Hampton Court, the 20. of October. 1637. This Iournall and Mappe may be Printed. Ex mandato Sae. Rae. Matis. R. Weekherlin.
