A4138 12572276 63512
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Power of Dispensing WITH PENAL STATUTES. Together with Some Animadversions UPON A Book writ by Sir EDW. HERBERT, Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, ENTITULED, A short Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which JUDGMENT was given in Sir Edward Hales's Case. By Sir ROBERT ATKYNS, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Bath, and late one of the Judges of the Common Pleas. Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis, Legibus Alli∣gatum se esse Principem profiteri. LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maiden-head against St. Dunstan's-Church in Fleet-street. 1689.
ADVERTISEMENT. January the 21st, 1689. TO Morrow will be Published by Tim. Good∣win, at the Maiden-head against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street, The Pow∣er, Jurisdiction, and Priviledge of PAR∣LIAMENT: And the Antiquity of the House of Commons asserted: Occasioned by an Information in the King's-Bench, by the Attorney General, against the Speaker of the House of Commons. As also a Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Ju∣risdiction in the Realm of England; occasioned by the late Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes. By Sir Robert Atkyns, Knight of the Honourable Order of the Bath, and late one of the Judges of the Court of Common-Pleas.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Power of Dispensing WITH Penal Statutes. 25 CAR. II. Cap. 2. An Act for preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants. FOR preventing Dangers which may happen from Po∣pish Recusants, and quieting the Minds of his Majesties good Subjects, Be it enacted, &c. That every person that shall bear any Office, Civil or Military, &c. or shall have Com∣mand or Place of Trust from or under his Majesty, &c. within the Realm of England, &c. shall personally appear in the Court of Chancery, or of the Kings-Bench, or at the Court of Quarter-Sessions in that County where he shall reside within three Months next after his Admittance into any of the said Offices, and there in open Court, take the several Oaths of Supremacy and Allegi∣ance, and shall also receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, according to the Usage of the Church of England, in some Parish-Church, upon some Lord's-day, immediately after Divine Service. And every the person aforesaid, that doth or shall neglect or refuse to take the said Oaths and the Sacrament in the said Courts, and at the respective times aforesaid, shall be ipso facto adjudged un∣capable, and disabled in Law to all intents and purposes whatso∣ever, to have, occupy, or enjoy, the said Office or Employment, and every such Office and Place shall be void, and is hereby adjudged void. And every person that shall neglect or refuse to take the said Oaths or the Sacrament as aforesaid, and yet after such neglect or refusal, shall execute any of the said Offices, after the said times expired, wherein he ought to have taken the same, and being there∣upon lawfully convicted upon any Information, &c. in any of the King's Courts at Westminster, or at the Assizes, every such person shall forfeit 500 l. to be recovered by him that shall sue for the same. And at the same time when the persons concerned in this Act shall take the said Oaths, they shall likewise subscribe the Declara∣tion against the Belief of Transubstantiation under the same Pe∣nalties as by this Act is appointed.
Paschae 2 JAC. II. In the King's-Bench. Arthur Godden Plaintiff, in an Action of Debt of 500 l. grounded upon the Act of 25 Car. 2. for preventing Dan∣gers from Popish Recusants. Sir Edward Hales, Bart, Defendant. THE Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant after the First day of Easter-Term, 1673. sc. 28 Nov. 1 Jac. 2. at Hackington in Declaration. Kent, was admitted to the Office of a Colonel of a Foot-Regiment. That being a Military Office, and a Place of Trust under the King, and by Authority from the King. And the Defendant held that Office by the space of three Months next after the 28 Nov. 1 Jac. 2. And from thence, till the time of this Action begun, he was and still is an Inhabitant and Resident of the Parish of Hackington. And the Plaintiff taking it by Protestation, that the Defendant within three Months next after his Admission into the said Office of Colonel, did not receive the Sacrament in Manner as the Act directs, but neglected to receive it. Avers, that the Defendant did neglect to take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, either in the Chancery, or in the Kings Bench, or at any Quarter-Sessions in Kent, or in the Place where he was resident, either the next Term after his admission to his said Office, or within three Months after. And that the Defendant after such neglect, sc. 10 Mar. 2 Jac. 2. at Hackington in Kent, did exercise the said Office, and still doth, contrary to the Statute of 25 Car. 2. for preventing Dangers from Popish Recu∣sants. Whereupon the Defendant at Rochester, at the Assizes held 29 Mar. 2 Jac. 2. was duly Indicted for such his neglect, and for executing the said Office contrary to the said Statute. And thereupon duly Convict, as by the Record thereof appears, where∣upon the Plaintiff became entituled to this 500 l. as forfeited by the De∣fendant. The Defendant pleads, that the King within the three Months, in the De∣claration mentioned, and before the next Term or Quarter-Sessions, after Plea. his admittance to the said Office, and before his Suit began, sc. 9 Jan. 1 Jac. 2. by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal, and here produced in Court, did dispence with, pardon, remit, and discharge (among others) the Defendant from taking the said Oaths, and from receiving the Sacra∣ment, and from subscribing the Declaration against Transubstantiation or Tests in the Act of 25 Car. 2. for preventing Dangers from Popish Recufants, or in any other Act, and from all Crimes, Convictions, Penal∣ties, Forfeitures, Damages, Disabilities, by him incurred by his exerci∣sing the Office of Colonel. Or by the Act intituled, An Act for the Preserving of the King's Per∣son
and Government, by disabling Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament. Or by the Acts made in the first or third Years of King James the First, or the Acts made 5 Eliz. or 23, or 29, or 35 Eliz. And the King, by his Letters Patents, granted, that the Defendant should be enabled to hold that Office in any Place in England, or Wales, or Berwick, or in the Fleet, or in Jersey, or Guernsey, and to receive his Pay or Wages. Any Clause in the said Acts, or in any other Act notwithstanding & non obstante, that the Defendant was or should be a Recusant convict. As by the said Letters Patents doth appear. Whereupon the Defendant prays the Judgment of the Court, whether the Plaintiff ought to maintain this Action. The Plaintiff demurr'd generally to this Plea. The Defendant joyned in Demurrer. Judgment is given for the Defendant. THE Order I shall observe in speaking to this Case, as to the (Order.) Point upon the Dispensation, shall be this: First, I shall open this Act of 25 Car. 2. and shew the great Occa∣sion The Act of 25 Car. 2. and Necessity for the Making of it; the Scope and Design of it; the excellent Remedy it does prescribe; and the great Benefit and Se∣curity that might arise to the Nation from it, were it duly observ'd. Secondly, I shall then discourse briefly of the Nature of Law in gene∣ral, Of the Law in general. as far only as may be useful and pertinent to our present Case, and of the great Force and Authority that a Law ought to have, and of the great Veneration that should be paid to it, especially if the True Reli∣gion, and the Honour of Almighty God, the Safety of the Government, and the Publick Good and Peace of the Nation depend upon it, as they all do upon this Act of 25 Car. 2. Thirdly, In the next place, I shall give an Account of the True Na∣ture Of a Dispen∣sation. (as near as I can) and of the Original and Growth of the Notion or Invention call'd a Dispensation, and who were the first Authors of it, and about what time it began, I shall endeavour to shew the right use of it, (if there be any) and where the just Power of granting Dispensa∣tions does reside, as also the abuse of it, and how that according to the late Practice, these Dispensations are contrary and repugnant to the Nature and Properties of Law, tho' they pretend themselves to be Law, they have a different Original and Foundation, and do indeed subvert Law. First, For the Occasion and Necessity for Making of this Act of Par∣liament, Of this parti∣cular Act of 25 Car. 2. and the Scope and Design of it, and the Ends aimed at, they all appear in the Preamble. The Preamble distinguishes the King's Subjects into two sorts: 1. Some from whom there are great Dangers. 2. Those who are the Persons subject to those Dangers. The Dangers are from Popish Recusants; those who are threatned by those Dangers, the Act terms them his Majesty's good Subjects. It would be needless to tell what those Dangers are, and whence they arise.
All the times since the Reformation, have abundantly discover'd Dangers from Papists what the Dangers are. There have been a multitude of Acts of Par∣liament made that have still been fencing against those Dangers, which do sufficiently point them out: so do the frequent and incessant Ad∣dresses to the Prote∣stants. from every Parliament for many Years, setting forth the Dan∣gers; and all our Histories and Publick Writings, and especially those written and published by his now Majesty's Royal Grandfather, King James the First, and a multitude more, but above all, the sad event of things, and what we all see is come to pass; these disclose to all the World, what the Dangers were, and the great need of a further Re∣medy. Their destructive Principles, and their desperate Designs and Practi∣ces, do abundantly testifie the Danger from the one sort, and the just fears of the other sort of Subjects. The Scope therefore, and the great End that our Act of Parliament had, is to prevent the Dangers from the one, and to quiet the Minds of the other; many former Acts of Parliament which had the same end and purpose proving ineffectual. The Remedy provided is very suitable, and the likeliest and most effectual that either the Wisdom or Supreme Authority of the King and Parliament could devise, and the very Remedy points out the danger. The Danger would be at the heighth of it, if the dangerous Prin∣ciples and Practices should but arrive at the Power and Authority, and gain that into their hands, (and it was growing apace towards it). The wise and proper Remedy therefore provided by the King and Parliament, is first to discover who are Popish Recusants; to offer a Trial and Test to all that should be in any publick Trust and Authority, for it was suspected that there were many Papists under the disguise of Protestants. And in the next place, so to Fence and Guard the Power and Autho∣rity and all Publick Trusts in the Nation, that they might by no means come into the hands of the Papists. Persons entrusted with the Power and Authority over the Nation, had need give a signal Testimony of their Loyalty and Fidelity to the King and Government, and of their true Zeal for the Religion establish'd by Law. The Test, as to their Loyalty, are the two Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, (and neither of these are new Tests). The Test. The Test, as to Religion, and the true Worship of God, are likewise two, the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, and the Subscribing a De∣claration against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. The Temper and Moderation shewn by his late Majesty and both Houses, in this Act of Parliament, deserves to be observ'd: It is not like the Leges Draconis, written in Blood; this is no Sanguinary Law. It does not proceed against them with Fire and Faggot. It does not disturb them in their Estates and Possessions; it does not deprive them of the Liberty of their Persons. Nay, it does not hinder them from the Exercise of their own Religion (if it may be so called) (I speak as to our present Act of 25 Car. 2. only). It lets them live quietly in their Habitations, without so much as put∣ting any Oath or Test upon them, so long as they live private men. It only requires, that if they will be entrusted with Power and Autho∣rity they should give some just and reasonable Security and Assu∣rance,
that they will be true to the Religion and the Government esta∣blish'd. If they will be medling with the Power, without giving such secu∣rity, then at their Peril be it: The Law pronounces them uncapable, and disabled, and inflicts Penalties upon such as shall presume to violate this Law. And it is worth the noting, how sollicitous and intent the Makers of this Law were, that this Test and Tryal might be taken and perform∣ed with great solemnity, and that the Law might not be eluded with any Arts and Tricks, that no Cheat might be put upon it. All this shews, that the Law-makers had great expectation from this Law. The Oaths are to be taken in one of the two highest Courts of West∣minster-Hall; the very Hours of the Day are limited when they must be taken, that is when the Courts are usually fullest; during the taking of them, all Pleas and Proceedings are to cease. There is the like care taken concerning the receiving of the Sacra∣ment, and of the certifying of it, and plentiful proof to be made of it, and then the recording of it. And the like for subscribing the Decla∣ration against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. It were great pity, that after all these pains, they should signifie just nothing, and that so high an Authority should be made ridiculous. But after all this securing against the Danger from Popish Recu∣sants, how shall we do to secure against the Danger of Dispensations? Suppose this Act had contain'd a Clause in it, declaring, that all Dispen∣sations and Grants, with Non obstante's to the contrary of this Law, should have been ipso facto void, and had inflicted Penalties upon such persons as should have procur'd them, would this have made it stron∣ger? No: several Acts of Parliament have been made in divers Cases, with express Clauses incerted in those Acts, to make void all Non ob∣stante's to the contrary of those Laws, (which one would have thought would have been strong enough) and yet they all came to nothing: for the Judges heretofore have resolv'd, that if the King grant a Dispen∣sation from such Laws, with a Special Non obstante to any such Special Law, mentioning the very Law, that presently the force of that Law vanishes. Therefore, beside the Disabilities and Incapacities put upon them, further to obviate this Mischief also, and to frustrate all contrary Judg∣ments, and to prevent the Allowance of any such Grants and Dispensa∣tions with this Act, by the Opinion of the Judges, or future Resolution of any Court in Westminster-Hall to the contrary, (as if the Law-ma∣kers had foreseen this Danger too) and to give a Rule to Judges in such Cases, when any should happen to come before them, There is this further Provision made by this Law, that the granting Judgment gi∣ven by Par∣liament. or conferring of any such Office and Place is by express words adjudged void. The words are, And is hereby adjudged void. It does not leave the Courts below to Judge it, but this Law before∣hand gives the very Judgment. It directs the way of trying the Matter of Fact by Indictment, &c. and then declares the Judgment upon it, and leaves it only to the Judges to apply that Judgment to the parti∣cular Case. May the Judgment of any Inferiour Court controul the Judgment of the Supreme Courts.
Here is more then a threefold Cord to tie it. An Oath, a Sacra∣ment, a Declaration subscrib'd. I look upon the two Oaths as one Cord. And these two Oaths are so much alike, and to the same effect, that Cardinal Bellarmine, purposing to refute the Oath of Allegiance, by a gross mistake, bent all his forces against the Oath of Supremacy, not minding the difference. As King James the First, in his Answer to The Pishop of Winche∣ster's Colle∣ctions. the Cardinal, hath observ'd in the Collection of his Majesty's Works, fol. 263. The next Cord is the Sacrament. The third subscribing a Declara∣tion, to remain on Record to all posterity. And at last, a Judgment in the very point by the King and Parlia∣ment, (the supremest Court of the Nation) which must not be con∣tradicted by any other Court, nor by all the Courts of the Nation put together; this Supreme Court exercises its Legislative and Judicial Power both at once, and shall it all at last be lost labour? Secondly, Having given an Account of this particular Law, upon Of Law in general. which the present Case does arise, I shall in the next place briefly speak concerning Law in general, of what Force and Authority it ought to be, which will make way for those Arguments that I shall raise from it. For when we know the true Nature of a Law, the Nature and Use of a Dispensation will be better understood. The Name does oftentimes denote the Nature of a thing. The truest derivation is that of Lex à Ligando, from its binding quality and the obligation it puts upon us; and this is most pertinent to the Matter in hand. The Laws of England (as all just and righteous Laws) are grounded Laws made by consent of the People. originally upon the Divine Law, as their Foundation or Fountain. The Supreme and Soveraign God among the Heathen is suppos'd to have the Name of Jupiter quasi Juris pater: But more immediately Humane Laws have their Force and Authority from the Consent and Agreement of Men. All Publick Regimen, (says learned Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Po∣lity) of what kind soever, seemeth evidently to have arisen from deli∣berate Advice, Consultation and Composition between Men. To live, says he, by one Man's Will becomes the Cause of all Mens Misery; this constrained Men to come to Laws. A People whom Providence hath cast together into one Island or Country, are in effect one great Body Politick, consisting of Head and Members, in imitation of the Body Natural, as is excellently set forth in the Statute of Appeals, made 24 H. 8. c. 12. which stiles the King the Supreme Head, and the People a Body Politick, (these are the very words) compact of all sorts and degrees of Men, divided into Spiritualty and Temporalty. And this Body never dies. We our selves of the present Age, chose our Common Law, and con∣sented to the most ancient Acts of Parliament, for we lived in our An∣cestors a 1000 Years ago, and those Ancestors are still living in us. The Law is the very Soul that animates this Body Politick, as learned Hooker describes it, the Parts of which Body are set to work in such Actions as Common Good requires. The Laws are the very Ligaments and Sinews, that bind together the Head and Members, without which this Body is but a Rope of Sand, or like the Feet of
Nebuchadnezzar's Image, Iron mixed with Clay, that can never cleave one to another, nor cement. And so properly Laws have their name, à Ligando, in this respect too, viz. from knitting together, for as they bind by their Authority, so they unite in Affection and strengthen. And these Laws are made by Publick Agreement, not impos'd upon Men against their Wills, but chosen by the Prince and People: They are (that I may express it in our familiar and ordinary Terms) the Articles of Agreement, chosen and consented to by Prince and People, to be the Rule by which all are to square their Actions. Hence the Law is term'd, The Act and Deed of the whole Body Politick. The Rule by which the Prince Governs and the Subject Obeys. From whomsoever the Designation of the Royal Person is that go∣verns, whether from Heaven or of Men, be it the one or the other, Grotius de Jure Bell. & pacis, f. 151. The Consent and Agreement of the whole Body Politick, both Head and Members, is the Rule of the Government. David was made King by God's immediate appointment, yet he himself call'd all Israel together to Hebron, and there they made a Co∣venant with him: King James the Firstin his Speech to the Lords and Commons at White-hall, 1609. f. 531. This is that I am now speaking of, (the Law of the Nation) made by general consent; or a Scheme for the Government, as a late Lord Chancelor terms it in his Survey of the Leviathan. Eve∣ry Just King in a setled Kingdom is bound to observe the Paction made to his People by his Laws. But nothing can more lively describe it then the Preamble of the Sta∣tute of 25 Hen. 8. c. 21. where the Lords and Commons addressing themselves in their Speech to the King, thus deliver themselves: Namely, WHere this your Grace's Realm recognising no Superior under God, 25 H. 8. c. 21. but only your Grace, hath been and is free from subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as have been devised, made and obtained within this Realm, for the Wealth of the same, or to such other, as by sufferance of your Grace, and your Progenitors, the People of this your Realm, have taken at their free liberty, by their own consent, to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long use and custom to the observance of the same, not as to the observance of the Laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate: but as to the customed and ancient Laws of this Realm originally establish'd, as Laws of the same, by the said suf∣ferance, consents and Customs, and none otherwise. Upon the same ground it is that learned Hooker says, that the law∣ful Power of making Laws to command whole Politick Societies of Men, belongs so properly unto the same entire Leges nulla alia causa nos tenent quam quod judicio po∣puli receptae sunt. Ulpian de Lege, 32. Tum Demum Leges huma∣nae habent vim suam cum fue∣rint non modo institutae sed etiam firmatae approbatione Communitatis. Sir Wal. Ral. in his Hist. of the World, 245. Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate of what kind soever upon Earth (I use his very words too) to exercise the same of himself, and not either by express Commission imme∣diately and personally receiv'd from God, or else by Authority derived at first from their consent, upon whose persons they impose Laws, it is no better than meer (Tyranny Fol. 531.). King James the First, in his before∣mentioned Speech, speaks much the same words. Laws therefore (says Hooker) they are not, which Publick Appro∣bation hath not made so. Approbation may be declar'd (says he) ei∣ther
by a personal Assent, or by others, by a Right deriv'd from them, as in Parliaments. This hath the more Authority, being the Judg∣ment in a Point of Religion, not of an Historian or Lawyer, but of a Reverend Divine, and such an one as hath been so great a Champion for Authority and Government, and for exact Conformity to Eccle∣siastical Laws. Some of our late Writers and Preachers have discours'd quite in ano∣ther strain. The Noble Author I just now cited, calls the Laws, Con∣descentions and Voluntary Abatements of the King's Original Power, (supposing his Power at first was absolute). Now that Preamble of that Statute which I just now read, is directly contrary in the very word (Original.) Another, (a certain Lawyer, a Knight) in a small, but bold, Trea∣tise of his, will by no means allow of any limitation of Power, and holds it absurd, to say a Government can be mixed or limited. A certain Divine and Geographer, in his History of the Life of a late Archbishop, declares himself much of the same mind with both these, and many others have trod since in their steps. I therefore thought it very proper and seasonable, to shew the Judg∣ment in these Matters of an eminent Divine too, a Person in all re∣spects Mr. Hooker. without exception, and his Judgment is concurring with all the ancient Authors in our profession of the Common Law, who being so learned and so ancient, are therefore the most Competent Witnesses of our English Constitution. That ancient Author of ours, whose Book is stiled Fleta quia in Car∣tere Fletae de jure Anglicano conscripsit, in the time of King Edward the First, (as learned Mr. Selden has noted in his Dissertatio ad Fle∣tam, c. 10. sect. 2, 3. This Author, L. 1. c. 5. tells us, Superiorem non habet Rex in Reg∣no nisi Deum & Legem. Per Legem factus est Rex temperent Reges po∣tentiam suam per Legem. Non quod principi placet Legis habet potesta∣tem. Non quicquid de voluntate Regis sed quod magnatum suorum Consi∣lio Regia authoritate prestante & habita super hoc deliberatione & tra∣ctatu Fol. 17. recte fuerit diffinitum. Bracton, who was a Judge in the time of King Henry the Third, but wrote his Book in the time of King Henry the Second, stiles the Laws of England, the ancient Judgments of the Just. And Briton, Bi∣shop of Hereford, who publish'd his Book 5 Edw. 1. by the Command of that King, and as written in the King's Name. And Sir Gilbert de Thornton, who was a Chief Justice in Edward the First's time, and re∣duced the Book of Bracton into a Compendium. And Sir John Fortescu, another Chief Justice, and afterwards Chancelor in the time of Henry the Sixth, writ all to the same effect, and almost totidem verbis. These Authors discourse altogether of the Imperia Legum, as Livy calls it. And Laws thus made by an universal consent, must needs be most equal, and have a far greater veneration paid them by all sorts of men. The best men are but men, and are sometimes transported with pas∣sion. The Laws alone are they that always speak with all persons, high or low, in one and the same impartial voice. The Law knows no fa∣vourites. Hence it is, that Aristotle most significantly and elegantly says,
That the Law is a Mind without Affection; that is, it binds all alike, and dispences with none, the greatest Flies are no more able to break through these Cobwebs than the smaller. Imperatoria Majestas Legibus armata est, says the Introduction to Non eget Mauri jaculis nec Arcu. the Imperial Law, These are the surest Arms and Guard about a Prince. Baldus, the great Lawyer, says, Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis Legibus alligatum principem se profiteri. Sir Edward Cook, in his 2 Inst. fol. 27. observes, that the Nobility of England have ever had the Laws of England in great reverence, as their best Birth-right, and so (says he) have the Kings of England, as their principal Royalty belonging to their Crown. He there mentions our King Henry the First, (the Son of him that is stiled Conqueror.) He wrote to Pope Paschal in this manner: Notum habeat sanctitas vestra quod me vivente (auxiliante Deo) dig∣nitates & usus Regni nostri Angliae non imminuentur. Et si ego (quod ab∣sit) in tanta me dejectione ponerem, Optimates mei & totus Angliae po∣pulus id nullo modo pateretur. And fol. 98. there is mention of the Letters which all the Nobility of England, by assent of the Commonalty, in the time of Edward the First, wrote to Pope Boniface, viz. Ad Observationem & Defensionem consuetudinum & Legum Paternarum ex Debito prestiti Sacramenti a∣stringimur quae manutenebimus toto posse totisque viribus (cum Dei auxi∣lio) defendemus. Nec etiam permittimus aut aliquatenus permittemus tam insolita in∣debita prejudicialia & alias in audita Dominum nostrum Regem (etiam si vellet) facere seu quomodo libet attemptare: Sealed with the several Seals of Arms of 104 Earls and Barons. And the Noble King Edward the First took no offence at the stout and resolute penning of this Letter: but wrote himself to the Pope to the same effect. And yet it contains in it a kind of a Non obstante to what the King should do by way of submission and compliance with the Pope. Nor is a Just Law any restraint to a Just Liberty, it rather frees us from a Captivity and Servitude, viz. to that of our Wills and Passions. It is true, this obligation and binding of the Law is very uneasie to such Men as will be slaves to their Lusts and Appetites. They cry out, let us break these Bonds asunder, and cast away these Cords from us; but to such as are virtuous and just and pious, the Laws are a Direction and Protection. The Orator truly says, Legum id circo omnes servi sumus ut liberi esse possimus. The true English of which is, that such service is perfect freedom. Hence our English Laws in Magna Charta are called Liber∣ties. Concessimus omnibus hominibus regni nostri has libertates subscrip∣tas, (says King Henry the Third, in the first Chapter of Magna Char∣ta) which Sir Edward Cook expounds to be meant of the Laws of Eng∣land; quia liberos faciunt, (says he). And tho' this Statute of Magna Charta run in the stile of a Grant from the King, in the word concessimus, for the honour of the King; yet as he says, they were the Common Laws and Rights of the People be∣fore, and it was made by the King, Lords and Commons, as is recited by the Statute of 15 Ed. 3. c. 1.
Thus it appears what the true Nature and Properties of a Just Law are; of how great Force and Authority a Law ought to be; how dear and precious Laws have been heretofore to Prince and People, and whence they have their Birth and Original. Thirdly, I come now to that Notion or Invention of a Dispensation, The original of Dispensa∣tion. the Power of relaxing or dispensing with a Law, and enquire into the Original and Nature of it, and the great Mischief that hath arisen from it. The Pretence for the Use or Need of a Power of Dispensing is this, viz. There is no Providence or Wisdom of Man, nor of any Council of Men, that can foresee and provide for all Events and variety of Cases, that will or may arise upon the making of a new Law. But a new Law may sit heavy upon some particular persons, or in some extraordinary Case that may happen, let what care can be taken in the penning of it. It is enough to commend a Law, if it be beneficial to the greater number, and be for the publick good; Laws are fitted Ad ea quae fre∣quentius Accidunt, and not for rare and extraordinary Events and Ac∣cidents, as the Romans had no Law against Parricide. And the Law says, better is a Mischief than an Inconvenience. By a Mischief is meant, when one Man or some few Men suffer by the hardship of a Law, which Law is yet useful for the Publick. But an Inconvenience is to have a Publick Law disobey'd or broken, or an Offence to go unpunished. Now from this suppos'd and imaginary defect of Law, or some par∣ticular mischief or hardship sometimes (tho' very rarely) happening to some Men, which hardship was not foreseen by the Makers of the Law, (altho' this is oftner pretended and feigned then hapning in truth) oc∣casion hath been taken to assert a Power in the Prince or chief Ruler, to dispence with the Law in extraordinary Cases, and to give ease or relaxation to the person that was too hard bound or tied to a Law; for, as I observ'd before, the Law is of a binding and restraining nature and quality, It hath the same specious pretence as a Law made 31 H. 8. c. 8. had, which was of most desperate and dangerous consequence, had it not speedily been repealed by the Statute of 1 E. 6. c. 12. The Title of that mischievous Act of 31 H. 8. is this: An Act that Proclamations made by the King's Highness, with the Advice of the Ho∣nourable Council, (meant of the Privy Council) shall be obey'd and kept as tho' they were made by Act of Parliament. The Preamble recites the King, by Advice of his Council, had then∣tofore set forth sundry Proclamations concerning Articles of Religion, and for an Unity and Concord to be had among his Subjects, which nevertheless many froward, wilful and obstinate persons, have wilfully contemned and broken, not considering what a King by his Royal Power may do: and for lack of a direct Statute and Law to coherce Offenders to obey those Proclamations, which being still suffered, should encourage Offenders to the disobedience of the Laws of God, and sound too much to the great dishonour of the King's most Royal Majesty, (who may full ill bear it.) Considering also, that sudden Occasions fortune many times which do require speedy Remedies, and that by abiding for a Parliament, in the mean time might happen great prejudice to ensue to the Realm:
and weighing that his Majesty (which by the Regal Power given him by God, may do many things in such Cases) should not be driven to extend the Supremacy of his Regal Power, by wilfulness of froward Subjects: It is therefore thought necessary, that the King's Highness of this Realm for the time being, with the Advice of his Council, should make Proclamations for the good Order and Governance of this Realm of England, Wales, and other his Dominions, from time to time, for the Defence of his Regal Dignity, as the Cases of Necessity shall re∣quire. Therefore it is enacted, that always the King, for the time being, with the Advice of his Council, whose Names thereafter follow, (and all the great Officers of State are mentioned by the Titles of their Offi∣ces only) for the time being, or the greater number of them, may set forth at all times, by Authority of this Act, his Proclamations, under such Pe∣nalties, and of such sort as to his Highness and his Council, or the more part of them shall seem requisite. And that the same shall be obey'd, as tho' they were made by Act of Parliament, unless the King's Highness dispence with them under his Great Seal. Here, at one blow, is the whole Legislative Power put into the King's hands, and there was like to be no further use of Parliaments had this continued. Then there follows a Clause, that would seem to qualifie and mode∣rate this excess of Power, but it is altogether repugnant and contra∣dictory in it self. And the Conviction for any Offence against any such Proclamation, is directed not to be by a Jury, but by Confession or lawful Witness and Proofs. And if any Offender against any such Proclamation, after the Of∣fence committed, to avoid the Penalty, wilfully depart the Realm, he is adjudged a Traytor. And the Justices of Peace are to put these Proclamations into execu∣tion in every County. And by another Act of 34, and 35 H. 8. c. 23. Nine of the Great Offices are made a Quorum, &c. for they could not get half the number to act under it. The Act of 1 E. 6. c. 12. (which repeals the terrible Law) begins with a mild and merciful Preamble, and mentions that Act of King H. 8. which as this Act of E. 6. does prudently observe, might seem to Men of Foreign Realms, and to many of the King's Subjects, very strict, sore, extream and terrible; this Act of King E. 6. does therefore, by express mention of that Terrible Act, wholly repeal it. And so that Law (to use the Lord Bacon's phrase) was honourably laid in its Grave. And God grant it may never rise again. It is very probable, that this Terrible Law was drawn by King Hen∣ry the Eighth's own hand, by that expression in it, that the King may full ill bear the Disobeying of his Proclamations, and the dishonour done to him by it; and by several other Clauses. The History of the Reformation, fol. 262. mentions the Draught of a Bill intended for an Act of Parliament, concerning giving the King Power of Erecting ma∣ny new Bishopricks, by his Letters Patents; upon which the Author of that History says, that the Preamble, and material parts of it, were drawn by King H. 8. himself, and the first Draught of it, under his hand, is still extant; and this passed the Lords, and was sent down to
the Commons: and this is the very same Parliament of 31 H. 8. when this terrible Law passed. Sir Edw. Cook, in his first Inst. fol. 99. defines a Dispensation thus: Dispensatio est mali prohibiti provida relaxatio utilitate seu necessitate pensata. So that great utility, or necessity, are at least pretended for the granting of them; now publick utility and necessity are the true grounds and foundation of all Laws, (which I have already shewn, bind all Men alike, without respect of person) But a Dispensation does untie that Knot, or slackens and lets loose that Obligation, as to some particular persons, and in some cases, and for some limited time, at the will and pleasure of the Prince that exercises that Power. It looks like a Dispensation which Naaman the Syrian obtained from the Prophet Elisha. In this thing (that is in one particular) the Lord pardon thy servant to bow down himself in the house of Rimmon, when his Master the King did so. He calls it a Pardon, but it rather was an Indulgence or Dispensation that he crav'd. A Pardon is properly of an Offence already committed. See Dr. Field, Dean of Gloucester, in his Treatise of the Church, printed at Oxford, 1628. fol. 475. what a Dispensation is, viz. It is in respect of certain persons, times, places, and conditions of men and things. So that a Dispensation, permitting the Law to retain her wonted Authority, only freeth some particular person or persons, at some times in some places, and in some condition of things from the necessity of doing or leaving undone that which (unless it be in consideration of such particular circumstances) ought to be done. A Dispensation is of a thing future, to allow of a thing to be done, that it may not be accompted for a Crime, and makes the thing pro∣hibited lawful to be done. And thereupon the Chief Justice Vaughan, in his Argument of the Case of Thomas and Sorrel, seems to take it in its right Notion, when he says a Dispensation obtain'd, does Jus dare Tho' he quarrels with Sir Edward Cook's Definition of it, and says, it is Ignotum per Ignotius. But, under his favour, if he dislik'd that, he should have given us a better. Carpere vel noli nostra, &c. 1. I know very well, that there are some of late, that do ground this Power upon the Soveraignty of the Prince, as if to be Soveraign, and to be Absolute, and Solutus à Legibus, were one and the same thing. As if it were inconsistent for a Soveraign Prince to be bound to Law. A Prince may be a Soveraign, i. e. no subordinate or subject Prince. Rex est qui Regem Maxime not habeat, and yet not absolute and unli∣mitted in Power. It is a frequent Argument, and often disputed in our Books, what Law the King is bound to, and where he is not inclu∣ded in the Law. 2. It hath been argued, that because the Laws are the King's Laws, that therefore the King may dispence with the Laws: this Argument is of a vast extent in the consequence, as that of the Soveraignty is. But it is not the King alone that makes the Laws, and tho' they are indeed his Laws per Eminentiam, and Denominatio sumitur à majore, yet others have an hand in the making our Laws, and a Propriety and Interest in them when once they are made. We shall be best instructed in the Use and Nature of a Dispensation, if we give some Instances of particular Cases, wherein Dispensations have
been allowed good by our Judges, against the Penalties of some particu∣lar Acts of Parliament. For example, By a certain Statute, Gascoign Wines and other Foreign Goods were Instances of Dispensation. prohibited to be imported into this Kingdom, but in English Ships, un∣der the penalty of forfeiting the Goods, and it was a profitable Law for the encrease of our Navy and employment of our own Mariners, where∣in the strength and safety of the Kingdom is concerned. This import∣ing of Foreign Goods in Foreign Ships was the Malum, but it was only Malum prohibitum; that is, it was no offence till the Law made it so. It was not Malum in se. It was therefore resolv'd by all the Judges, 2 R. 3. fol. 12. that the King might dispence with this Law, Cum Clausu∣la non obstante, and might give License to some particular persons to im∣port such Foreign Goods in Foreign Ships. That which before this Act of Parliament was a common Liberty and Trade, by occasion of this Law, applying the Prerogative of dispen∣sing to it, was now engross'd into some few hands, from whence a Reve∣nue it's likely was rais'd; so that it might be said, Sin took occasion by the Law. By the Statute of 17 R. 2. c. 5. no Aulnager or Weigher of Wool shall have any Lease for Life or Years of his Office, and if any Charter or Letters Patents be made to the contrary, (the Statute says) they shall be null and void: so that the Makers of this Law did not allow of any Dispensing Power, but provided against it, which shews what Opinion a Parliament hath of Dispensations. Yet it was resolv'd, Dyer 303. that the King, by a Non obstante, might dispence with this Law. The Judges indeed were of that Judgment, but the Parliament, who are the supreamest Judges, plainly appear to be of a contrary judg∣ment. By a Statute made 1 H. 4. he that petitions to the King for Lands, &c. in his Petition is to mention the Value of the thing, &c. or else the King's Letters Patents, &c. shall be of no effect: and yet Let∣ters Patents to the contrary, are good with a Non obstante. By the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 24. for avoiding Partiality and Favour in administring Justice, no man is to exercise the Office of a Judge of Assize in the County where he was born or dwells, under 100 l. penal∣ty; and divers former Acts had been made to the same purpose, as 8 R. 2. c. 2, &c. yet this we know is frequently dispenc'd with by a special Non obstante; so that these Statutes are seldom or never ob∣serv'd, and are of little use. So likewise is the Statute of 7 Ed. 6. c. 5. for Retailing of Wine, according to the Resolution in the Case of Thomas and Sorrel. These may suffice to shew what is meant by the Term Dispensation, and what the Nature of a Non obstante is. It is an Indulging of a Priviledge to some particular Person, or to a The Defini∣tion of a Di∣spensation. Corporation, allowing him or them to do a thing that is prohibited by some Act of Parliament, (under a Penalty) without incurring the Penal∣ty. The doing whereof was lawful to all, till that particular Law did make it an Offence to do it. The Chief Justice Vaughan, who argued in his turn the last but one of all the twelve Judges, in the late great Case of Thomas and Sorrel, (and there was hardly a Case in all the Books under that Title, but what had been cited by one or other, and all the Rules and Distinctions were there remembred) yet that Chief Justice, after all, says, that not
one steady Rule had been given either by the Books, or any of the Judges, (that argued before him.) And for that trite Distinction, so generally used of Malum in se & malum prohibitum, the Chief Justice Vaughan professes, that Rule hath more confounded mens judgments than rectified them: yet he himself gives us no other. Which shews, that the Notion of Dispensation is not very ancient with us in our Law, and is but rare, and as yet unform'd, not licked into a perfect shape, (I mean still Dispensations with some Acts of Par∣liament, such as this of 25 Car. 2. not the granting Non obstante's as to mis-recitals or non-recitals in Grants of Lands, &c.) It having yet no steady Rule, and yet being frequently used, it is the more fit for the Supreme Court to give some certain Rule in it, that may regulate and guide the Judgment of Inferiour Courts: and this is the proper work of the King and Parliament. And because we find it a growing Mischief, and getting ground upon the Law, and every day brings forth new Precedents, it is high time that a stop were put to it. So much for the Nature of a Dispensation. I shall in the next place endeavour to trace out the Original of this Invention of a Dispensation, when it first began, and who was the Au∣thor The Origi∣nal of Dis∣pensation. of it, and shew, that it was look'd upon as a Monster, and ex∣claim'd against by Kings and States and all Good Men, and yet the Pre∣cedent was followed, and the Abuse of it spread and increas'd, and hath been ever since growing. I am not the first that have undertaken to make this discovery: In the Argument of the Case of Comendam, in Sir John Davy's Reports, fol. 69. b. It is said, that the Non obstante was invented and first used in the Court of Rome, and they bring an Marsilius Patavinus, in the 14 Cent. (of Padua) in his Defensor. pacis. Author that denounc'd a Woe against that Court, for introducing so ill a Precedent, mis∣chievous to all Common-wealths in Christendom; for the Temporal Princes perceiving the Pope to dispence with his Canons, in imitation of him, have used it as a Prerogative to dispence with their Penal Laws and Statutes, where before they caused their Laws to be religiously observ'd, as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which might not be changed. Thus says that Report: Here we see from whence 'twas borrow'd. The late Chief Justice Vaughan, in his Report of the Case of Thomas and Sorrel, fol. 348. does acknowledge, that the use of Dispensations was principally derived to us from the Pope. Now, to make some conjecture about what time it began, that we may discover how old it is, and which of the Popes was the Author Its Antiquity. of it. The History of the Reformation, fol. 101. says, this Power of Di∣spensing with the Laws of the Church by the Popes, was brought in, in the latter Ages. Popes Zozimus; Damasus, Leo, Dr. Barrow of the Pope's Supremacy, 316. See there the unreason∣ableness of Dispensa∣tions. and Hilarius, do freely acknowledge they could not change the Decrees of the Church. It is suppos'd, it was first invented by Pope Innocent the Third, about the beginning of the thirteenth Century, and about the times of our King John, and his Son King Henry the Third; and it is observable, that in this Pope's time the Doctrine of Transubstantiation was first de∣creed to be an Article of the Faith, and this at the Council of Anno 1215. Lateran: that Doctrine, which by this very Act of ours, is to be declar'd against,
and is now dispens'd with. This is that Pope that excommunicated Otho the Emperour, and our King John, and forced him at last to re∣sign his Crown, and to take it back from him again to hold it of him at the Rent of 1000 Marks: What good issue can we expect from such a Father? After the time of this Pope, Dispensations began more frequently to be practised by the Successors of Innocent the Third, by Honorius, and by Pope Gregory the Ninth, and Innocent the Fourth, but they were exclaimed against by all Kings and Princes, and by all the good and learned Writers of that Age, which shews, that they had not been ancient, and that the Kings and Princes themselves had not then fol∣lowed the ill example in Dispensing with their Laws; for had they done so, they could not with any confidence have condemn'd the Pope for using them. And we may see how odious these Dispensations were, by the vile Epithites the Learned and Good Men of that Age gave them. We have a full Relation of it from one of their own Order, a Monk, but an Historian of very good esteem, that is, Matth. Paris; he tells Pag. 646, 647. us, that our King Henry the Third sent Earl Bigod and other Nobles to the Council at Lyons, and amongst others, one William de Powic, one of his Procurators and a Clergy-man, who made an Elegant Oration, rip∣ping up the horrible Oppressions used by the Pope upon England, and then deliver'd in an Epistle, directed to Pope Innocent the Fourth, by the Magnates & Universitas Regni Angliae, to the same effect. After this had been openly read in the Council, and a mighty silence followed, and the Pope gave no answer to it. The King's Proctors, Prioribus ad∣debant querimoniam gravem & seriam videlicet de violenta Oppressione, intolerabili gravamine, & impudenti Exactione, & injuria, quae per hanc Invisam Adjectionem papalibus Literis frequenter insertam (Non ob∣stante) &c. exercetur per quam Jus pro nihilo habetur & Authentica scri∣pta Enervantur, says that Historian. The same Author says, that the Reformation of many things was obtained from Pope Innocent: Sed omnia haec & alia, per hoc Repagulum (Non obstante) infirmantur ubi vero fides! ubi jura, quae scriptis solebant solidari? Our King Henry the Third conven'd his Parliament, and spread be∣fore them the Articles of the Grievances which he had so sent to Rome, and amongst others one in these words: (viz.) Gravatur Regnum Angliae Mat. Paris, p. 677. ex multiplici adventu illius infamis nuncii (Non obstante) per quem Ju∣ramenti religio, consuetudines Antiquae, scripturarum vigor, concessionum autoritas, Jura & privilegia debilitantur & evanescunt. We find it frequently termed (Detestabilis Adieclio Non obstante) and we find the form of his Dispensation running in these words: viz. Indulgentia quâcunque vel privilegio quolibet, aut Constitutione in Generali Concilio edita, Non obstante. The Pope afterwards required a third part of the Goods of all benefi∣ced Clerks, and (says that Historian) Multis adjectis durissimus Conditio∣nibus; and (amongst other) per illud verbum & adjectionem detestabilem (Non obstante) quae Omnem Extinguit Justiciam. Sir Robert Cotton's A∣bridgment of the Records of the Tower, amongst the Petitions of the Commons, 51 E. 3. Numb. 62. Dispensations from Rome, are said to be the chief Grief.
In another Bull he requires the payment of a Sum of Mony from the English Clergy, Quocun{que} Privilegio seu Indulgentia Non obstante, Licet presentes expressam de ipsis non faciant Menconem. This very Phrase is grown most familiar in Letters-Patents with us, and we see from whence it hath been borrowed. That Temporal Princes at that time did not practise the like, does evi∣dently appear, not only by their frequent Complaint of them; but the Historian tells us, It was then grievously feared, that the Kings and Great Men would in time be infected with the ill Example of the Pope: his words are, Quod multi formidabant vehementer. Ne Principes Laici & Seculares exemplo Papae Edocti Non obstante talis, vel talis Chartae te∣nore: would revoke their Concessions too. Therefore as yet it was not in practice by Temporal Princes, no not in Letters-Patents, much less in Laws. I shall give one instance, wherein we shall find the Pope teaching this very Lesson to the King of England, (K. H. the 3d) and instructing him as his Schollar, to write after his Copy. King H. the Third had made several Grants to his Subjects (Bishops, Noblemen, and others) and had oblig'd himself by Oath never to revoke them. Pope Gregory the Ninth, by his Bull, (which Mr. Prin (who had the keeping of the Records in the Tower) says he found in the White Tow∣er, Prinn's Se∣cond Tome. Fol. 504. under Seal) the Pope commands the King to revoke these Grants, Juramento & Instrument is predictis nequaquam obstantibus. King Henry the Third was easily taught this Lesson, and did soon put it in practice; and being reprov'd by some about him, for using of Non Obstante's, the King justified himself by the Example the Pope had given him: Nonne Papa (says he) facit similiter, subjungens in Literis Ibidem, 760. suis manifeste Non Obstante aliquo Privilegio vel indulgentia. But as yet it was not exercised as to Acts of Parliament, till a long time after. What sad Apprehensions it rais'd in good Men, may appear by an Ex∣ample or two: When one of these Patents with a Non Obstante in it, was produc'd in the Courts of Westminster, one Roger de Thurkeby, (who was a Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, in the time of King Henry the Third) upon the hearing of it (says the Historian) Ab alto ducens su∣spiria (he fetcht a deep sigh) and, De predictae adjectionis appositione: That is concerning this Clause or Addition of Non Obstante. Dixit heu! heu! hos ut quid dies expectavimus ecce jam Civilis Curia exemplo Eccle∣siasticae Coinquinatur & a Sulphureo fonte Rivulus intoxicatur. This plainly shews the time when the use of them was first introduced into England in Civil and Temporal Cases, they were not used before the time of King Henry the Third, which is not ancient enough to make a Prescription by the Rules of our Law, and we see from whence they learnt it. I shall now cite the Judgment of a Famous and Learned Bishop of those times, concerning these Non Obstante's: that of Robert Grostest, or Great∣head, who per excellentiam, was generally stil'd no more, but (Lincol∣niensis) in the Book of his that is Entituled, De Cessatione Legalium, Publish'd by the late Dean of Windsor (Dr. Reeves): There are some Te∣stimonies given of the Bishop, out of Authors in the beginning of that Book: Among others, it is remembred of him that he sent a smart Epistle to the then Pope, wherein he does cry out upon the Pope, for that the Pope's Bulls did superaccumulate (as he terms it) the words (Non Ob∣stante) Innocent 4th.
which words, says that good Bishop of Lincoln, did, Christianae Religionis puritatem & hominum tranquillitatem perturbare: And he does thereupon affirm the Pope to be Antichrist: Nonne (says he) Antichri∣stus merito dicendus est? And to prove him to be Antichrist, he further charges him: Privilegia Sanctorum Pontificum Romanorum praedecessorum suorum Papa impudentur annullare, per hoc Repagulum (Non Obstante) non erubescit, sic diruit, & Reprobat, quod tanti & tot Sancti aedificarunt. When Innocent the Fourth read this Bishop's Letter, he fell a swearing by Peter and Paul, that he would Confound him: In tantam confusio∣nem praecipitaret ut totius mundi fabula foret, stupor & prodigium: And that he would command the King of England, (whom he there insolent∣ly term'd, Noster Vasallus, (a Tenant, or Vavasor): Et ut plus dicam Mancipium (his Property) illum nutu nostro in carcerare. But the Cardinals then about the Pope, advised him to consider bet∣ter of it; for (said they) Ut vera fateamur vera sunt quae dicit, Catho∣licus est, imo & Sanctissimus. Of this Bishop (says Mr. Camden in his Britannia) he was, Terrifi∣cus Papae & Regis Redargutor manifestissimus, & veritatis amator. Hen∣ry de Knighton adds this of him: Ad Innocentium Papam misit Epistolam satis tonantem, (a thundring Epistle) qua de re ad curiam vocatus & Ex∣communicatus appellavit a Curia Innocentii ad Tribunal Christi. And this Usurped Power, tho' used with more modesty at first, yet in a short time it grew to that heighth, that it prov'd intolerable and in∣solent. The Bull of Pope Pius the Fourth, publishes Decrees, Non obstantibus Constitutionibus & Ordinationibus Apostolicis. Another Dispensation of the same Pope's runs in these words, viz. Licet Christus post coenam instituerit sub utra{que} Specie Panis & Vini Ve∣nerabile Sacramentum; tamen hoc Non Obstante, &c. The Pope takes upon him to Dispense with that Sacred Institution: A conficientibus (for so he prophanely expresses it) sub utra{que} & a Laicis tantum modo sub Spe∣cie Panis suscipiatur. In the Dr. Barrotti in the Pope's Supremacy. 31. Oath of a Bishop to the Pope (extant in the Roman Pontifical, set out by Pope Clement the Eighth) the Bishop upon his Oath doth ac∣knowledge amongst other Regalia Petri, That the Pope can make void Promises, Vows, Oaths, and Obligations to Laws, by his Dispensations. Dr. Marta de Jurisdictione affirms, That Papa de Plenitudine potesta∣tis potest Dispensare contra jus Divinum, & contra Apostolum, est super omnia Concilia, quae interpretatur, tollit & Corrigit. The Glossator upon the Canon Law (avowed by the Rota of Rome (as the History of the Council of Trent does quote him) holds the Pope can Dispense against the Old Testament, and the Four Evangelists, and against the Law of God. Bishop Jewel, in his Defence of The Apology of the Church of England, against Harding, brings in one of their Canonists that holds, That the Pope, Privilegium dare potest contra jus Divinum, Papa Dispensare po∣test de Omnibus preceptis veteris & Novi Testamenti. It is part of the Description given of Antichrist, by the Prophet Daniel, chap. 7. He shall think that he may change Times, and Laws, and they shall be given in∣to his hands. Bishop Jewel's Exposition upon the Epistle to the Thessalonians, fol. 131. Antichrist (says the Bishop) is there called O. Anomos, a Man without Order or Law, that Man of Sin; which is one of the peculiar Notes of
Antichrist. He shall seek to be free and go at liberty, he shall be tied to no Law neither of God nor Man. Hence it is said of the Pope, that he is solutus omni Lege humana. In iis que vult, est ei pro ra∣tione voluntas nec est qui dicat illi, Domine cur ita facis? Ille potest supra jus, dispensare & de Injustitia facere justiciam Corrigendo jura & mutando. Pope Martin the Fifth dispens'd with a Man that married his own Sister. In this last Instance the Pope did directly write after the Copy of an Heathen King. The story of Cambyses is the same Case in the very point with this last of Pope Martin. Sir Walter Raleigh mentions L. 3. c. 3. sect. 10. it in his History of the World. Cambyses inquir'd of his Judges whether there were any Law among the Persians, that did permit the Brother to marry his own Sister. It was the intent of Cambyses to marry his own Sister too. The Judges (who as Sir Walter Raleigh observes) had ei∣ther Laws or Distinctions in store to satisfie Kings and Times, they make a subtil answer, that there was not any thing written allowing any such marriage: But they notwithstanding found it in their Cu∣stoms, that it was always left to the Will of the Persian Kings to do what best pleas'd themselves. This was a Non obstante with a wit∣ness. This surely, and the Popes practice together, gave the occasion to Mr. Chillingworth's observation. He that would usurp (says he) an ab∣solute Fol. 39. Lordship over any People, need not put himself to the trouble of abrogating or disannulling the Laws made to maintain the Common Li∣berty, for he may frustrate their intent, and compass his design as well if he can get the power and authority to interpret them as he pleases, and to have his Interpretations stand for Laws. If he can Rule his People by his Laws, and his Laws by his Lawyers; therefore (says he) there is a necessity of a frequent resort to be had to the Law-makers, not only to resolve Difficulties of Judgments, but to keep the Power of Interpretation within its due bounds; which is excellent ad∣vice. I shall give but one Instance more, and that is of the most impious sort of Dispensations that could possibly be devised; I find it in the Hi∣story of the Church of Scotland, written by Archbishop Spotswood. He tells us, that in Anno 1580. Dispensations were sent from Rome into Scotland, whereby the Catholicks were permitted to promise, swear, subscribe and do what else should be requir'd of them, so as in mind they continued firm, and did use their diligence in secret to advance the Ro∣man Faith. Thus we see the monstrous Abuses brought in by Dispensations: I have been something long upon this Subject, but it was necessary to shew how that it is in the very nature of it, to be stretching and grow∣ing, and at last to be altogether unlimitted, and will totally subvert the Law. Having thus laid my Foundation, I shall now proceed from thence to raise my Arguments against Dispensations in general, to prove, that they are not Law, but indeed contrary to Law and destructive of it. I hold there is no just nor lawful Power of Dispensing with any Act of Parliament, in any other hands than in those that are the Law-makers, that is, in the King and Parliament in conjunction: (I confine my self to Dispensations with Acts of Parliament.)
1. My first Argument shall be from the Nature of a Law, (whereof an Act of Parliament is the highest and of greatest Authority.) A Law hath its Name (as I said before) from its Nature, Lex à Ligando, it binds and compels to Obedience, and it binds together and cements, it knits and unites a multitude of People, and makes them all as it were but one body. Now a Dispensation is of a quite contrary nature, and is destructive of Law: As the Law does Ligare, a Dispensation does Relaxare. It is defin'd to be, Relaxacio Juris: it does unbind and set loose the Obliga∣tion of the Law, and by consequence tends to the dissolving of the Body Politick. Whatsoever is destructive of the Law cannot it self be Law; for then the Law would be felo de se, Lex quae Leges evertit ipsa Lex esse non potest, a thing divided against it self, and therefore will not stand. Ubi non est pudor, nec cura juris, instabile Regnum est, (says Se∣neca.) Law is made by an universal consent and agreement of Prince and People. I have already shewn, how that the Common Law (which is as an∣cient as the Nation it self) is that Covenant which was agreed upon by Prince and People at the first framing and institution of the Govern∣ment. The Statute-Law hath its Force and Authority from the like consent, and nothing is Law without that consent, as appears by the Preamble of 25 H. 8. c. 21. concerning the very Point of Dispensations; Sir John Fortescue says, Rex leges sine subditorum assensu mutare non potest; pote∣stas regia lege cohibetur, in his Book de Laudibus legum, &c. Now for the Prince alone, without the like consent, to depart from that Agreement, and at his will and pleasure to break any Article of it, is in effect to put the sole Power of the Law into the hands of one per∣son, which receiv'd its force and vigour from the consent of all, which is irrational. Sir Ed. Coke 2 Inst. 27. No Law or Cu∣stom of Eng∣land can be annul'd but by Act of Parliament. Bracton, who, as Sir Edward Coke says, in his Preface to the Ninth Report, was a famous Judge of the Common Pleas, in the time of King Henry the Third, is of this Judgment, Leges (says he) cum fuerint ap∣probatae consensu utentium & Sacramento Regum confirmatae, mutari non possunt nec destrui sine Communi consensu & Concilio eor' quor' concilio, & consensu fuerint promulgatae. 2. The Laws of England (both Common and Statute Law) have (as I have already shewn) a different Original from that of the Power of Selden's Dis∣sertatio ad Fletam, 539. Dispensation (as it is exercis'd now among us) they have not the same Father. The King, (who is Pater Patriae) with the consent of the People, is the Father of our Laws, he is Juris Pater: but he that is called the holy Father, and from thence hath his name of Pope, is the Father and first Inventer of Dispensations: so that there is no kindred nor affi∣nity between the Law and Dispensation. 3. The Laws amongst us and this faculty of Dispensations, as they have a different Original, so they have no resemblance one of another: facies non omnibus una est, they have contrary qualities and dispositions. The Law is equal and impartial, and hath no respect of persons, and (as before I observ'd from Aristotle) is a Mind without Affection. Now the nature of a Dispensation is to favour some, to set some at liberty from the obligation of the Law, and is a kind of praeterition of others, leaving them still under the tye and obligation, and obnoxious to the
Penalty if they transgress. Whereas, in a well govern'd Kingdom there ought to be Unum pondus, and Una Mensura in distributive, as well as commutative Justice. It was part of the Oath that was taken by King William the First, (who is commonly stiled the Conquerour) that he would, Aequo jure Anglos & Francos tractare: Which Oath favours nothing of a Con∣quest, nor does it run in the stile of a Conquerour. And it is the Oath of a Judge at this day, That he shall truly serve the King and his People, &c. That he shall do Right to every Person, notwithstanding the King's Letters, that is, notwithstanding any (Non Obstante). It is a Maxim in Law, Quo modo aliquid Ligatur, eo modo dissolvitur. Now a Law being made by Consent of all, should not be Dissolv'd again, but by the like Consent; that is, by Authority of the King and Parliament, who have the Legislature. Dr. Willet in his Synopsis Pa∣pismi, Fol. 775. makes a Difference between a Toleration, and a Dispensation: That of Moses, in case of Divorces was a Tolleration. A Dispensation (says he) must be of as high a Nature as the Institution: None but the Law-Maker, can Dispence with the Law, not he that hath but a share in the Legislature. And from hence I shall take occasion to assert, and shall endeavour to make good my Assertion by Law, that the Lawful Power of Dispen∣sing The King and Parlia∣liament have the Power of Dispensing. with an Act of Parliament, that concerns the Publick, is only in the hands of those that have the Legislative Power. I confine my self to such Acts only as concern the Publick (as the present Act we have now to do with, does in a very high degree). And therefore I hold that none can Dispence with such a Law, but the King and Parliament, and such as they entrust with it. I shall begin to prove this by an Act of Parliament, which is the The Statute of Dispensa∣tion. highest Resolve and Authority in our Law: It is in the Preamble of the Act of 25 Hen. 8. c. 21. (the Statute of Dispensations) and the Pream∣ble of a Statute is Law, as well as the enacting part, or body of the Law. It is in effect a Declaration of what was Law before, at least it shews the Opinion and Judgment of the Law-Makers; which is of high Authority. It first utterly disowns and renounces the Pope's long usurped Claim and Pretence of Dispensing with any Person within this Realm, even in The Pream∣ble. Matters Spiritual, tho' by him practis'd for many Years. I desire to observe upon this, that long usage by an Usurpation, gives no lawful Right: But I would further observe too, that where it hath been long admitted and used, it is in such Case reasonable for none but the Supream Court to undertake it, and declare against it. In the next place, this Act of Parliament does affirm, That this Realm of England is subject to no Laws, but such as have been made and taken by sufferance of the King and his Progenitors, and the People of this Realm, at their free Liberty, by their own Consent to be used a∣mongst them, and have bound themselves by long Use and Custom, to the observance of them, as to the customed and ancient Laws of this Realm Originally establish'd, as Laws of the same, by the said Sufferance, Consents, and Customs, And none otherwise. This shews the Origi∣nal of our Common Law. This likewise clearly proves, that whate∣ver is imposed upon the People without their Consent, hath not the Authority of a Law: And it cannot be shewn that ever the People did
consent to this Power or Practice of Granting Dispensations. But it plainly appears that our Acts of Parliament are so far from approving or countenancing of it, that they have often fenced against it, altho' in vain hitherto. And tho' the Usage have been very Ancient (as I have shewn) yet that gives it no lawful Authority; for this Preamble de∣clares, those only are Laws binding to the People, that have been Ori∣ginally establish'd as Laws. The Word (Originally) refers no doubt to our very Primitive Institution, which is Common Law, or at least to a time so ancient, as that the Original cannot be traced out, nor shewn, and then it shall be presum'd to be the Common Law. Now I have (I hope) clearly evinced that the very first invention and pra∣ctice of Dispensations by the Bishop of Rome, is not time out of mind, No Prescri∣ption. nor can the Usage of it here by imitation of the Pope, reach up to a Prescription, in the judgment of our Law, nor by the Rules of it: For Sir Edward Cook in his first Instit. Fol. 115. treating of a Prescription, and the nature of it, says, That if there be any sufficient proof of Re∣cord or Writing to the contrary, albeit it exceed the Memory of any Man living, yet it is within the Memory of Man, in a legal sence, it had its Original since the beginning of the Reign of our King Richard the First, (that is in the time of King John, and King Henry the Third). The time of Limitation in a Writ of Right, is li∣mited to the time of R. I. But that which makes it much the stronger is, that this Declaration of the King and Parliament against such Dispensations and Laws intro∣duc'd without the King and Peoples Consent, does conclude with Nega∣tive Words, viz. (and not otherwise) and is exclusive of all other, that is, that nothing is Law without their Consent. And this Statute of Dispensations proceeds further to shew, where the true and lawful Power of Granting Dispensations is vested, in these words, viz. It stands with natural Equity, and good Reason, that in all Laws humane within this Realm, the King and both Houses representing the Where the true Power of Dispensing resides. whole State of the Realm, have full Power to Dispense, and to Autho∣rize some Person to Dispense with those, and all other humane Laws of this Realm, and the same Laws to abrogate, annull, amplifie, and diminish as it shall be seen unto the King, the Nobles, and the Com∣mons of the Realm present in Parliament, meet and convenient for the Wealth of the Realm, and then it does dispose of the Power of Dispen∣sation in Matters Ecclesiastical to the Archbishop of Canterbury; some whereof are to be confirm'd by the King, and others that may be good without the King's confirming. And altho' the body or enacting part of this Statute, extend only to Causes Ecclesiastical, yet the Preamble does reach expresly to all hu∣mane Laws. This Statute of 25th of Henry the Eighth, was made in the time of such a King, as we all know, by reading our Histories, stood highly upon his Prerogative, and would never have consented to such a Decla∣ration, concerning the Power of Dispensing, if it had been a special Prerogative in the Crown; and had there been such a Power in the Crown, the King would never have suffered himself to have been de∣priv'd of it, and to have it dispos'd of into other hands, by the Parlia∣ment, and there would have been no need of passing such a Law, the King himself alone could easily have transacted all this Matter provided for by this Act of Parliament, had he had the sole Power. It is true that the Lord Hobart, in his Reports, Fol. 146. mentio∣ning this Act of Dispensations, and taking Notice that by the express
words of the Act, all Dispensations, &c. shall be granted in Manner and Form as is prescribed by that Act, and not otherwise; yet he holds that the King is not thereby restrained, but that his Power remains full and perfect as before, and that he may still grant Dispensations as King: for (says he) all Acts of Justice and Grace flow from him. This and such like Statutes (says the Lord Hobart) were made to put things into ordinary form, and to ease the King of Labour, not to deprive him of Power. This Opinion of his is grounded upon a presumption, that the Pow∣er of Dispensing with Laws, was always from the beginning a Prero∣gative inherent in the Crown, not examining who was the first Au∣thor, and the time when it first began, and whence we borrowed the use, and how there was a time within evident proof of credible and authentick Writers, when Dispensations were not in use, and so they are within the time of Memory in a Legal Construction, and cannot be by Prescription. And it is plain every Legal Prerogative must be so by Prescription, that is, used time out of Memory of Man, and whereof there is no suf∣ficient Writing to the contrary. But I may appeal to any unbiass'd and equal Judgment, upon the reading of this Act (especially the Preamble of it) whether this Act meerly intended to put things into an ordinary Form, and to case the King of Labour, or whether it was not to put an absolute stop to the former Practice, and does not directly declare and determine where the true Power of Dispensing ever was, and therein uses those exclusive words (and not otherwise) for those words are in the Preamble, as well as in the Body of the Act. So that this Construction of the Lord Hobart's, That still the King may Dispense alone by himself, and that he might have done so by his Prerogative, before the making of this Statute, and may do so still, not∣withstanding this  is directly against the very words of the Sta∣tute, that says it shall not be otherwise then as the Statute directs, and being in the Negative are the stronger. And the three Instances, or Cases cited by the Lord Hobart all out of Dyer, do not come home to the Case of the King's Granting Dispen∣sations in other manner than the Statute of 25 H. 8. c. 21. hath di∣rected, which expresly enacts that they shall not be granted otherwise. 1. His first Instance is out of Dyer, 211, the Statute of 28 H. 8. c. 15. Appoints, that the Commissioners for Tryal of Piracy, shall be named by the Lord Chancellor; now it happened there was no Lord Chancel∣lor, but a Lord Keeper, and it was held that he might name the Com∣missioners, by the meaning of this Statute, as well as the Lord Chan∣cellor. This is, under favour, but a weak proof of the King's Power or Prerogative, of varying from the Directions of an Act of Parliament, or dispensing with the Rules prescrib'd by it; for it is a meer imagina∣ry variation, the Lord Keeper ever having the same Power as the Lord Chancellor; and it is not meerly so enacted, but declar'd by the Act of 5 Eliz. c. 18. which proves it was Law before. And yet some Judges held the Commissioners were not well named, but that the Com∣mission was void. 2. The second Instance or Authority that the Lord Hobart uses to prove his Assertion, that the words (and not otherwise) in the Statute of Dispensations, doe not restrain the King's Power, but that he may
do otherwise, is out of Dyer, 225. That Queen Elizabeth might make Sheriffs without the Judges, notwithstanding the Stat. of 9 E. 2. this I shall have occasion to examine and speak to more fully hereafter, and therefore shall reserve it till then, and doubt not to shew, it is a mistake: and it was done by the Queen in a case of necessity, it being in the time of the Plague, when the great Officers could not safely meet in the Exche∣quer, (as the Statutes require for the chusing of Sheriffs) and the Term was held at Hertford; and the Report says, no Sheriff was named by the Queen, for the most part, but out of those Names that remained in the Bill for the former Year. And the Book only says, it was held, the Queen might do it by her Prerogative. 3. The last Instance that the Lord Hobart gives is out of Dyer, 303. b. that the King may grant the Aulnagers Office without a Bill sealed by the Treasurer, tho' the Statute of 31 H. 6. c. 5. says the Grant of that Office shall be void, without a Bill seal'd by the Trea∣surer. The Resolution of that Point is very obscurely reported, but how∣ever take it at the strongest, this is in a matter that concern'd the King's Revenue, and where it may more reasonably be said by the King. May I not do what I will with my own? And this Statute may easily be understood to be to put the granting of this Office into an ordinary form, and to ease the King of Labour, and not to restrain his Power. If that may be said in any Case against the express words of a Statute, it may be in a Case that concerns meerly his Revenue, as this of the Aulneage was. In the next place I shall shew, that the stream of Dispensations did anciently run in this channel, till afterwards it found out another course, and that Dispensations with Laws, were only in the same hands as had the Legislature, that is, in the King and Parliament, in former times, and this answers that Example that hath been used, that Almigh∣ty God dispens'd with his own Law of the sixth Commandment, when he commanded Abraham to sacrifice Isaac: God was the great and only Legislator. Now the King is not the sole Legislator. I shall present you with a very full Precedent and Proof of the Power of Dispensing with Acts of Parliament to be no where else but where the very Legislative Power is. And that the Kings have some∣times accepted it from them in some particular cases, and for some limitted time, and with divers restrictions, which is a full acknow∣ment that it belongs only to the Legislative Power to dispence with Laws. The Commons, for the great Affiance which they repose in the King, 15 R. 2. nu. 8. granted, that he, by advice of his Lords, might make such Toleration touching the Statute of Provisions, as to him shall seem good, until the next Parliament, so as the Statute be repealed in no part thereof. So also as the Commons may disagree thereunto at the next Parliament, with this Protestation too, that this their Assent being indeed a No∣velty, (these are the very words) be taken for no example. This is granted with abundance of caution and jealousie, and proves it is not ancient. The Commons do agree to the Power granted to the King, for the 2 H. 4. nu. 26. Moderation of the Statutes touching Provisors in the last Parliament, beseeching the King, that the same may not license any Cardinal or Stranger to enjoy any Benefice within the Realm.
It was enacted by the Lords and Commons, that Tydeman, late Abbot R. 2. nu. 22 of Beaulew, and Elect of Landaf, by the Pope's provision, should enjoy the same Bishoprick, notwithstanding any Act, so always as this be ta∣ken for no example. That the sale of Tin may be at Lostwithiel in Cornwal, and shall 17 R. 2. 34. not continue at Calais. Notwithstanding the Council may grant Li∣cense to Merchants, to carry the same Tin to what parts they will, as to them shall seem good. Here the Power of Dispensing is delegated to the Council. Upon the request of the Commons, the King promiseth, that he will not from thenceforth dispence with the Statute of Provisions to Bene∣fices. 2 H. 4. nu. 63. This implies, that the King had practis'd it, and we know who began the practice, and who taught it to others, and this Record shews it was without consent, and was a cause of complaint, and the King promises to reform it for the future. But what signifies a Promise, where a Law and an Oath is too weak to secure it? this Promise doth not confer a new Right, but is to reform an unjust Practice. I shall use one Argument more against this exercise of the Power of Dispensing with Acts of Parliament, as it hath of late been practis'd, and that Argument shall be rais'd from the great Inconvenience and Mischief that will ensue upon it to the Kingdom; it may occasion the infrequency of Parliaments, by taking much of their power out of their hands. Laws are many times made but probationers and temporary, to the end, that if upon experience of them they be found to be too severe or strict and to sit hard upon any persons, that the Parliament at their next meeting may moderate or relax the severity or inconvenience that may arise by them. But if there be another way allowed for the do∣ing of this Work, there will be the less need of a Parliament, and so other Work, that requires also their meeting, may remain unreme∣died. If we consider how frequently the Parliament ought to meet, and and how often they did anciently meet, we shall easily be convinc'd, that the relaxing of a Law, or giving remedy, (where the Law was upon experience found inconvenient) was a work properly belonging unto them, and there was no need of resorting to any other help: for who should cure or reform a Law, if any thing were amiss in it, but the Law-makers? See the Statute of 6 H. 8. c. 18. the Book of Statutes at large concerning Bristol. Our Saxon King Alfred and his Wise Men (that is, the great Coun∣cil of the Kingdom) ordained, that a Parliament twice a Year, and oftner in time of Peace, should meet in London. Thus says that an∣cient Book, stiled, The Mirrour of Justices, c. 1. sect. 3. pag. 10. by 4 E. 3. c. 14. It is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every Year once or more often if need be; this does not abrogate not alter King Alfred's Law. By 36 E. 3. c. 10. many Laws had passed in that Parliament of 36 E. 3. which are there called Articles, (as anciently our Statutes were drawn into certain Articles, and so passed, as being Articles of Agree∣ment betwixt the King and his Subjects (as I had occasion to observe in the beginning of my Discourse) and this Statute of 36 E. 3. pro∣vides, that for maintenance of the said Articles and Statutes and redress
of divers Mischiefs and Grievances, which daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every Year, as another time was ordained by a Statute) referring to the Statute of the Fourth of this King. The Act of 16 Car. 2. c. 1. for repeal of the Triennial Act made 16 Car. 1. in the last Paragraph recites, that by the ancient Laws and Statutes of this Realm, made in the Reign of King Edward the Third, Parliaments are to be held very often; and this Act of 16 Car. 2. makes a new provision, to the end (as the words are) there may be a frequent calling, assembling and holding of Parliaments once in three Years at the least. Now let us enquire what the proper Work of a Parliament is, which the said Statute of 36 E. 3. mentions in part, viz. for maintenance of the Articles and Statutes and redress of Mischiefs and Grievances that daily happen (as that Statute recites). Sir Tho. Smith, (who was principal Secretary of State) in his Trea∣tise de Republica & Administratione Anglorum, L. 2. c. 2. fol. 50, 51. says this of the Parliament. In Comitiis Parliamentariis posita est omnis augustae Absolutae{que} pote∣stat is vis veteres leges jubent esse irritas, novas inducunt, praesentibus mo∣dum constituunt. (There is the true dispensing power) Incerti juris controversias Dirimunt. Bracton writes of this High Court, Habet Rex Curiam suam in concilio suo in Parliamentis suis ubi terminatoe sunt dubitationes Judiciorum & no∣vis injuriis emersis, nova constituuntur remedia. The Mirrour of Justices, c. 1. pag. 9. says, that Parliaments were in∣stituted to hear and determine the Complaints of the wrongful Acts of those against whom the Subject otherwise could not have common Ju∣stice, that is, against great and powerful Delinquents. Nihil prodest (says Bracton) Jura concedere nisi sit qui Jura tuea∣tur. So that there is need of a frequent resort to be had to the Law-ma∣makers, not only to resolve difficulties of Judgments, but to keep the power of Interpretation within its due bounds, and the Law hath taken care for frequency of Parliaments. Sir Francis Bacon, in his Advancement of Learning, gives this ex∣cellent Advice to Law-makers, and to those to whom it belongs to de∣fend the Laws. Let not (says he) Praetorian Courts (speaking of Courts of Equity) have power to decree against express Statutes, under pretence of Equi∣ty; for (says he) if this should be permitted, a Law interpreter (that is a Judge) would become a Law-maker, and all Matters should de∣pend upon Arbitrament, (that is) upon an Arbitrary Power. And Ar∣bitrament would encroach upon, and at last swallow up Law. The power of extending or supplying or moderating Laws, little differs (says he) from the power of making them. Courts of Equity sometimes, under the pretence of mitigating the Rigor of the Laws, (and such is the Power of Dispensing) relax the Strength and Sinews of Laws, by drawing all to Arbitraments: he was well able to judge of this, having been Lord Chancelor. And it is his 46th Aphorism. That is the best Law which gives the least li∣berty to the Judge; he is the best Judge, that takes least liberty to himself.
Therefore where any new Law sits uneasie and too hard and heavy in some particular cases, it were much safer to suffer the mischief for a time, (if any such happen) and let it wait till those that gave the wound come to cure it. Una eadem{que} manus vulnus opem{que} feret. The overhasty cure, arising from the impatience of enduring pain, makes the case the worse: frequency of Parliaments is a proper cure. Other ways of cure are apt to cause infrequency of Parliaments. And in Matters of great difficulty which come before the Jud∣ges in the Courts of Westminster, or if there be no great difficul∣ty, yet if it be of mighty concernment and not clearly concurring with the Hob. 157. at the lower end. It is the Office of Jud∣ges to advance Laws made for Religion, according to their end, tho' the words be short and im∣perfect. intent and words of Law-makers, but the Law in the scope of it, is like to be frustrated by an hasty determination, it is, under favour, the Duty of the Judges in such Cases of Sir Ro. Cott. Abridg. 1 R. 2. nu. 95. 2. Inst. 408. Dubitaciones Judicior' to rest till the Parliament meet, and then to propose it to the Parliament for their resolution. Thus it is expresly provi∣ded in the Statute of Treasons, 25 E. 3. to defer doubtful Cases till the Parliament resolve them, being in a matter of so high concernment as that of Treason. And in Cases of much lesser consequences, especially upon a new Law, (as that is that we have before us) in several Cases cited in Blackamore's Case, the Judges have sought to the Parliament for a Re∣solution in smaller matters. 8 Rep. 158. In doubts arising before the Judges in their Courts, upon the Construction of Acts of Parliament, the Judges resorted to the Council, (which is there said to be meant of the great Council, (the Parliament) that made the Act in the Case there cited. The Question 39 E. 3. 21. 40 E. 3. 34. did arise upon the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 6. which gives power to Courts to amend Misprisions of Clerks in Process, in writing a Letter or Syllable too much or too little: But whether these words in the Act, gave power to amend where there was a whole Word too much or too little, was the Question, and the Lords declared, 39 E. 3. 21. that their meaning was, that in such Cases the Process should be amend∣ed: this shews the tenderness of the Judges in those times, in constru∣ction of new Acts of Parliament, and the frequency of Parliaments and the resort still had to them in case of Doubts. And this was in the time of E. 3. the most flourishing time of the Law; and a Case that the then Archbishop said had no great difficulty in it. But I presume it will be said against me, that this is a clear Case Objection. in Law which is now before us, and that there was no doubt nor diffi∣culty in it, but that the King by his Prerogative could dispence with this Act of 25 Car. 2. and that all the twelve Judges (but one or two) was of that opinion, and that the Point hath formerly been resolv'd in the Case of Continuing a Sheriff in his Office longer than one Year, not∣withstanding the several Acts of Parliament to the contrary, and that was so resolv'd by all the Justices in the Exchequer Chamber, 2 H. 7. and by the opinion of Sir Edward Coke, 12 Rep. 18. and repeated in Cal∣vin's Case, 7 Rep. 14. which are the only Authorities that come home to the Case, and none of them ancient. Before I speak to these Authorities in the Case of Dispensing with a Sheriff to continue longer than a Year, I shall make it appear, that the Case now in question, or the Point in Law of this Case, was very much doubted, if not clearly held on the contrary, that the King could not di∣spence with this Act of 25 Car. 2. and that by no mean Judgments.
If the King could have dispens'd with it by his Prerogative, and it had been so clear, what need was there of his Majesty's proposing it to the two Houses, at the opening of a Session, to allow him a Power of Dispensing with this Law? or that they themselves would dispence with it? why would the two Houses, after long debate about it, excuse themselves from consenting to that which the King could do without them? were there no Judges that did scruple the doing of it? If it were a Prerogative in the King, how came it to be so long be∣fore the King's learned Council could start it? we heard nothing of this till all other ways were tryed. Let me add to this what was spoken by the late King's own com∣mand and direction in the House of Lords, before the King and both Houses, and all the Judges present, by a late Lord Chancelor, who as he was an excellent Orator, so he was a very learned Lawyer, and my honourable Friend. It was in his Speech made to both Houses the Twenty third of May, 1678. (about five Years after the making of this Act of 25 Car. 2.) and it was spoken in reference to this very Act of Par∣liament. Hath not the late Act (says he) made it impossible, absolutely impos∣sible for the most concealed Papist that is, to get into any kind of Employ∣ment? And did ever any Law since the Reformation give us so great a security as this? Hereupon, in the same Speech, that noble Lord does declare it now a stale Project to undermine the Government, by accusing it of endea∣vouring to introduce Popery, that a man would wonder to see it taken up again. This Law had so abundantly secured us against the Danger of it. And yet, after all this, do we hear the Judges openly and judicially declaring, that it appear'd to them to be a very plain case, that the King alone could dispence with this Act of Parliament by his Prero∣gative: and tho' it was acknowledged to be a Case of great con∣sequence, (as the truth is) yet it was pronounc'd withal to be of as little difficulty as ever any Case was, that raised so great an expecta∣tion. These are strong Arguments to prove the Doubtfulness of it: after all these Refusals or Hesitations, it might very well be accounted a Doubt or Difficulty, worthy to be referr'd to the judgment of the Par∣liament, if the Parliament had not already in effect given their judg∣ment to the contrary. As I remember, it was in February 1663. that the two Houses made an Address to the last King, for revoking a Declaration, whereby his late Majesty had granted a Toleration and Indulgence to some Pro∣testant Dissenters, as being against Law, and such a Toleration was de∣clared illegal by the Parliament in 1672. These are two Resolutions in the point by the Supream Judicature. If this Prerogative of Dispensing with Acts of Parliament were in the Crown by Prescription, (as it ought to be if it were a legal 12 H. 7. 19. Plowden 319, & 322. Preroga∣tive) it ought then to be confin'd and limitted to such cases only where∣in it had been anciently and frequently excercised: and there ought to be no extension of Cases where they are depending upon a Prescription, nor is there any arguing a Paritate rationis in such Cases and which have their force meerly from ancient and constant Usage.
It is a Rule at Common Law, Ubi eadem est ratio ibi idem Jus: But this Rule doth not hold in Customs and Prescriptions. In the Case of Bayly and Stevens in Croke, Jac. 1. fol. 198, it was held per Curiam, that where Lands in Borough English descend to the youngest Son, and he dies without Issue, that the Land in such Case shall not go to the younger Brother without a particular Custom; but the elder Brother shall have it, for the usage had been in the one, but not in the other Case; yet these two Cases are very near of kin. Now this Prerogative of dispensing with Acts of Parliament, in the original use and exercise of it, was but in very few Cases, and those which more directly concern'd the King himself immediately, in his Revenue, or the like, which were Cases of no great Consequence, and such wherein the Law-Makers, in making their Laws, might be easily understood not to intend to abridge the King of his Power, but to ease him rather of Labour, and to put things into an ordinary course, which yet the King might depart from, if he were so minded, and if he did accordingly signifie his Pleasure, by granting an express (Non Obstan∣te) the Act of Parliament to the contrary) and making particular men∣tion of the Act: Unusquisque renunciare potest Juri pro se intro∣ducto. Or in Cases where there is no disability impos'd upon a Person by the Act, but only a pecuniary Penalty given to the King, and forfeited by the Subject, transgressing the Act, where the King is Creditor poe∣noe; it seems more reasonable that the King may dispense with the Pe∣nalty that will be due to himself. And these, and such like, are the on∣ly Instances given in that great Case of 2 H. 7. But to dispense with an Act of Parliament, made in a Case of the highest Sir Francis Moor's Re∣ports, 239. Warram's Case: A Pre∣rogative that tends to the great preju∣dice of the Subject, is not allowa∣ble. concernment to the Publick that can be, wherein Religion, and the Government are so deeply concern'd, and where the King him∣self, and the Parliament, have thought fit to disable any Person to do to the contrary, and so pronounc'd it, and have put an incapacity upon Persons, and adjudged the thing done to the contrary void; this hath been of latter times, and but of late found out and practis'd, and is not warranted by any Prescription. I shall cite some Resolutions to this purpose, that the King cannot di∣spense with Disabilities and Incapacities imposed upon any Person by Act of Parliament. The Lord Hobart's Reports, fol. 75. in the Case of the King against the Bishop of Norwich, Res. That if an Incumbent were guilty of Symo∣ny Croke, Jac. 385. The same Case. in obtaining a Benefice, he was made incapable of that Benefice for ever, by the words of the Statute of 31 Eliz. c. 6. Paragr. 5. And the Case of Sir Arthur Ingram was cited, who bought the Office of Coffe∣rer; he was holden by Egerton Lord Chancellor, and Coke Chief Ju∣stice, uncapable of that Office, by force of the Statute of 5 E. 6. c. 16. tho' he had a Non Obstante; and the reason there given is in these words: For the Person being disabled by the Statute, could not be enabled by the King: And yet the Office of Cofferer is a special Service about the King's Person, and his Treasure. The Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, in his Reports of the Case of Tho∣mas and Sorrel, fol. 354, 355. gives this for the reason why the King cannot dispense with a Man to buy an Office contrary to the Statute of E. 6. nor with one Simoniacally presented, to hold that Living, or to
be at any time after presented to it; nor with any of the House of Com∣mons not to take the Oath of Allegiance, according to the Statute of 7 Jac. 1. c. 6. Because (says he) the Persons were made incapable to hold such Office or Living, and a Person incapable is a dead Person, and no Person at all, to that wherein he is incapable. And a Member of the House of Commons is by 7 Jac. Persona in∣habilis. 1. Inst. fol. 120. In the Case of the Simonist, Sir E. C. says, The Act so binds the King, as that he cannot present him that the Law hath disabled, for ever after, to be presented to that Church. The words of the Act be: He shall be from thenceforth adjudged a disabled Person in Law, to have or enjoy the same Benefice. And the Party being disa∣bled by the Act (says Sir E. C.) cannot be dispens'd withal by any Grant by a Non Obstante, as it may be where any thing is prohibited sub modo, as upon a Penalty given to the King. The Case of Sir John Bennet does not at all contradict these Authori∣ties. It is Croke, Car. 55. Sir John Bennet by Sentence in the Star-Chamber, was made incapable of any Office of Judicature for Bribery, Res. by all the Judges, and Barons, that by the King's Pardon, all Inabi∣lities are discharg'd, because the Sentence could not take the Office from him being Freehold, over which the Court had no Power. So that after so often declaring by several Acts of Parliament, Grants, and Patents made contrary to their Acts to be void, and all Dispensa∣tions, and Non Obstante's, to the contrary of the Laws made by them, to be void, and inflicting Penalties upon such as should obtain those Grants, and Non Obstante's, or make use of them as appears by a mul∣titude of Acts; and all these too weak, and all in vain by the Judges allowance of these Non Obstante's, the Parliament had no other sence a∣gainst these Non Obstante's, but to fix a disability in the Persons, and to make them uncapable of taking the benefit of such Grants; and this hath held good till now, but now they break through this too. And as I observ'd in the Pope's Exercise of his Power of Dispensing, that it was used with some moderation at first, in Cases that seem'd to be of great necessity only, but at last, by degrees, it grew to be intole∣rable and unlimited: So the like may be observ'd in the use of this Pre∣rogative. 3. Instit. fol. 236, in the Chapter of Pardons, by divers Acts of Par∣liament, the King's Power of Granting Charters of Pardon hath been re∣strained, as by 2 E. 3. c. 2. 10 E. 3. c. 2. 14 E. 3. c. 14. 13 R. 2 Stat. 2. c. 1. these are ancient Statutes. It hath been conceiv'd (says Sir E. C.) which we will not question (says he) that the King may dispense with these Laws by a Non Obstante. Yet Sir E. C. there declares, That he found not any such Clauses of Non Ostante, to dispense with any of these Statutes, but of late times. This shews that it is a growing mis∣chief and had not been anciently used, as it ought to have been to make it a good Prescription and Prerogative. I shall now examine the Authorities and Cases that are cited in de∣fence of this Prerogative and Power of dispensing with a disability im∣pos'd by Act of Parliament; for I do not purposely dispute it in any o∣ther Case, but as they are coincident with this. The first that we meet with, is that of 2 H. 7. fol. 6. and it was by all the Justices in the Exchequer-Chamber. The Case thus:
King Edward the Fourth granted the Office of Sheriff of a County to the Earl of Northumberland, for the Life of the Earl, and the Ju∣stices held the Patent good, there being a Non Obstante in it to the Statutes. Let us look into 14 E. 3. c. 7. That by their trusting to tarry in their Office by procurement they are en∣couraged to do many Op∣pressions to the People. 28 E. 3. c. 7. 42 E. 3. c. 9. 1 R. 2. c. 11 the Statutes that forbid a Sheriff to continue in his Office longer then one Year: There had been several Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. 18 E. 3. nu. 54. ancient Sta∣tutes made to that purpose, but they all prov'd to be of little effect, for Patents were still granted to hold the Office of a Sheriff, for a lon∣ger time than one Year. At length came the Stat. 23. H. 6. c. 8. which recites the former Statutes forbidding any Persons continuance in the Office of Sheriff, above one Year; and observing the great Oppressions and Abuses to the People, that did arise from it, and how that yet they were gran∣ted contrary to those Statutes. This Statute therefore of 23 Hen. 6. ordains that those Statutes shall be duly observ'd. And further ordains, That if any occupy that Office contrary to those Statutes, or to the effect or intent of any of them, he shall forfeit two hundred Pound yearly, as long as he occupieth contrary to any of those Statutes, and that every Pardon granted of that Forfeiture shall be void, and that all Patents made of the Office of Sheriff, for Years, or any longer time, shall be void, any Clause, or word of Non Obstante in any wise put, or to be put in such Patents notwithstanding; and every such Person is thereby disabled to bear that Office. Nothing could be penn'd stronger than this Statute, and it is a Law made by the Supream Legislative Power of the Nation, and it expresses the former granting of Non Obstante's to be a great abuse, and to be contrary to Law. Yet contrary to the express words, and clear intent and meaning of this Statute, did all the Judges resolve in 2 H. 7. That by a Non Obstante, a Patent for a longer time than a Year should be good, of the Sheriffs Office. The King, and both Houses were of Opinion, that they could make a Non Obstante in such Case void. The Judges are of a contrary Opi∣nion, that a Non Obstante shall make void the Statute. Here is an In∣feriour Court over-ruling and controuling the Judgment of a Superiour Court. The Judges who are but Jura dicere, contradict those who have the Power Jura dare, as well as Jura dicere, and of Correcting the Errors of the highest Court in Westminster, and controuling their Judgments. The Statute was a meer idle nugatory thing, if it were not to re∣strain the granting of a Non Obstante: if it did not that, it did no∣thing. The King himself alone, (if he had pleas'd) could without any Act of Parliament, have reform'd the Abuse, by refusing to pass any such Patents for a Sheriffs continuing in his Office longer than a Year. But the King was sensible of the Abuses, and therefore wil∣ling to be restrained from passing any more such Patents, and to avoid any importunity that might be used for the obtaining any such Pa∣tents, and therefore consented that a Law should pass to make such Patents void. And after all, shall the King (if he pleases) still make the like Grants? Why then the Act was of no manner of use, and o∣perates nothing; and the Resolve of the Judges has made the Act a meer idle vain thing.
But the twelve Judges in 2 H. 7. have so resolv'd, and the only use Objection. they would allow to all these Acts of Parliament is no more than this, that if the King grant a Patent to one of the Sheriffs Office for more than one Year, and there be no Non obstante in the Patent, that then, for want of a Non obstante, the Patent should be void by those Acts of Par∣liament which otherwise would have been good, had not those Acts made them void. But how easie would it be for one that obtains such a Patent, to get Answer. the Non obstante to be inserted? and who would accept such a Patent without a Non obstante? and to whom would the Non obstante be deni∣ed to whom such a Patent is granted? the Lord Hobart, in the Case of Needler against the Bishop of Winchester, fol. 230. says it is denied to none, and that it is in the power of the Attorney-General. The Reasons given by the Judges in 2 H. 7. for that resolution, are, because the King had always used such a Prerogative of dispensing with the Acts of Parliament that required the 1 H. 4. c. 6. true value of the Lands, and the certainty of the Lands to be mentioned in his Grants of Lands, and with the Acts concerning the 11 E. 3. c. 1. 13 H. 7. 8. by Daver's Let∣ter B. shipping of Wool, and pardoning of Murder (without express mentioning of the Mur∣der.) These Cases are nothing alike, but of a trifling consideration in re∣spect Answer. of the Act we have in hand of 25 Car. 2. And in these Cases the Penalty and See 13 H. 7. 8. by Daver's Letter B. Forfeitures are given to the King, and they concern the King's profit only to dispence with them: but in our Case the Safety of the Government, & salus populi, and the maintaining of the true Religion establish'd by Law, are all concern'd, and so the Case is not alike. And to compare this with those Cases, is parvis componere magna. This Opinion and Resolution of the Judges in 2 H. 7. has been the Foundation of all the like Opinions that have since that time been given of the King's Power of Dispensing with Disabilities and Incapacities im∣pos'd by Acts of Parliament. Upon what ground the Justices held the Patent of the Sheriff's Office, good to the Earl of Northumberland for Life, does not appear, whether because it had formerly been an Office of Inheritance, and so within the Exception in the Statute of 23 H. 6. or whether by virtue of a Non obstante to the Statutes, as Ratclif only ar∣gues, for the rest say nothing of the Non obstante. Some Resolutions have been to the contrary of that of 2 H. 7. as in the Case that I cited of the King against the Bishop of Norwich, in the Lord Hobart's Reports, and the Case of Sir Arthur Ingram, where it was adjudged, that the King could not dispence with a Disability. And the Book of 2 R. 3. fol. 11 & 12. concerning Waterford in Ireland, is of the King's Power to dispence with an Act of Parlia∣ment where the Forfeiture is given only to the King: so it comes not home to our Case. This Resolution of the Judges in 2 H. 7. was the Precedent and leading Case to all the subsequent Opinions, and was the Foundation of them, and they all must stand and fall by it. Now it will be very evident, that the King had no such Power or Prerogative of continuing Sheriffs in their Offices longer than a Year. For, under favour, the Making of Sheriffs, doth not, nor never did, be∣long to the King, neither at the Common Law, nor by any Act of Par∣liament;
so that all these Opinions and Resolutions are built upon a sandy Foundation, and have but debile fundamentum, and they take that for granted, which is not a truth. The Election of Sheriffs, at the Common Law, even from the very first Constitution of the Kingdom, and by the Original Insti∣tution Election of Sheriffs by the County. of the Government, was in the Freeholders in the several Coun∣ties, ever since there was any such Office as a Sheriff, and ever since the Kingdom hath been divided into Shires, that is, in the time of the Saxons, (from whom we derive most of our Common Law) and long after their time, in the time of the Normans, till being neg∣lected by the Freeholders, it came at length, by an Act of Parlia∣ment, made within the legal time of Memory, to be taken from the Freeholders, and the Power of Naming and Chusing Sheriffs every Year lodged in the hands of certain great Officers of State, and so it continues to this day; but neither is, nor never was in the King. Mr. Lambard, in his Book de Priscis Anglorum Legibus in his Lemma de Heretochiis, fol. 147. says, that those Heretochii were Ductores exercitus. (Here, signifying an Army in the Saxon Tongue. The same as in the Dialect of this present Age may be called Lord-Lieutenants or Deputy-Lieutenants. The Law of King Edward (which I take to be the Confessor) speaks of these Heretochii, in these words: Isti vero viri Eligebantur per Commune Concilium pro Communi utilitate regni per provincias & Patrias Universas & per singulos Comitatus in pleno Folkmote sicut & Vice-Comites Provin∣ciarum & Comitatuum Eligi debent. This Law mentions this Election, as an Use and Custom. If the King did not make the Sheriff, he could not continue him Sheriff; if he could not make him for a Year, he could not grant him the Office for longer than a Year: the Sheriff had his Authority and Office from the Election, not by Commission or Patent, and that but for a Year. Sir Edward Coke, in his Second Institutes, in his Exposition of the Statute of Westminster 1. Cap. 10. concerning the Election of the Co∣roners Fol. 174, 175. by the Freeholders, (which ever was so, and so still con∣tinues) says, there is the same reason for Election of Sheriffs, and so (says he) it anciently was by Writ directed to the Coro∣ners. In like manner were the Conservators of the Peace chosen, in whose place the Justices of the Peace now succeed, and so the Verderors of the Forrest are to this day. These were great and high Liberties, and did belong to the Free∣holders from all antiquity, and are strong Arguments to confute those late Authors, that will by no means allow of a limitted Government, but leave us under an Absolute and Arbitrary Power, and who call our Laws and Liberties, but the Concessions and Condescensions from the Regal and Absolute Power. Sir Edward Coke discourses largely of these Elections, in his Expo∣sition of the Statute of Articuli super Chartas, in his Second Institutes, 28 E. 1. c. 8. & chap. 13. See the Re∣ports of E. 2. int' Memo∣randa Scac' fo. 28. or Magna Charta, fol. 558. By this Statute (it is said) the King hath granted to his People, that they have the Election of their She∣riff in every County where the Sheriff is not of Fee, if they will.
Sir Edward Coke says, by this Act, that ancient Right the People (that is, the Freeholders) had, was restor'd to them; and the words (if they will) import, that they formerly had it, but neg∣lected it. By a Statute made in the next King's Reign, viz. 9 E. 2. styled, The Statute of Sheriffs, upon pretence, that insufficient persons were com∣monly chosen for Sheriffs: by that Act it is ordained, that from thence∣forth the Sheriffs shall be assigned by the Sir Rob. Cot. Abr. 18 E. 3. nu. 54. Chancellor, Treasurer, Ba∣rons of the Exchequar, and by the Justices. And by the Statute of 14 E. 3. c. 7. some change is made of the persons that are to have the Election, and the Day and Place of such Assigning of Sheriffs is prefix'd, viz. yearly in the morrow of All-Souls, and in the Exchequer. By the Statute of 12 R. 2. c. 2. the Assigning of the Sheriff is put into the hands of more great Officers, who are to be sworn to execute this Trust faithfully, but it is not vested in the King all this while, nor ne∣ver was. It is true, that out of Reverence to the King, these great Officers, who had the Assigning of Sheriffs, did afterwards use to name three persons, out of which number they left it to the King to chuse one for every Shire. But this was more out of deference to the King, than out of any strict Obligation so to do, and the Election made by the King, was in Law to be accounted an Assignment by these great Officers. Nor could the King chuse any other for Sheriff than one of those three so Assigned by those great Officers, tho' it is sometimes other∣wise practis'd. And this hath been a Resolution of all the Judges of England, and is mentioned in Sir Edward Coke's Second Insti∣tutes, fol. 559. it was in the 34th Year of Henry the Sixth, and it is in these words. viz. That the King did an Error, when he made another person Sheriff of Lincolnshire then was chosen and presented to him by those great Officers, after the effect of the Statute. So that the right of Electing She∣riffs by those great Officers, we see, continued so lately as the lat∣ter end of King Henry the Sixth, and I know of no Law since, that hath alter'd it: therefore we may conclude, it is no Prerogative in the King. And we may further observe, what plain Language all the Judges used in those days, as to tell the King and the Lords of the Council, that the King had erred in what he had done. I observe this the ra∣ther, that it may be some excuse to me for the plain Language I am forced to use in the Arguing upon this Subject. The Lawyers are not always Courtiers, nor will the Subject-matter bear Complements and Courtship. Ornari res ipsa negat, contenta doceri. I cannot reconcile this Resolution of the twelve Judges, given in the time of King Henry ths Sixth, with that Opinion that is deliver'd in the Lord Dyer's Reports, fol. 225. b. and it is but an Opinion. 5 & 6 of Queen Elizabeth. In the time of the Plague, the Sheriffs were na∣med and made without assembling the Judges ad Crastinum Animarum at the Exchequer, according to the common usage, but for the most part none was made but one of the two that remain'd in the Bill the
last Year. Tho' it was held, (says the Report) that the Queen, by her Prerogative, might make a Sheriff, without such Election, by a Non Obstante aliquo Statuto in contrarium, which crosses the Resolution I now mentioned. It is but an Opinion against a Solemn Resolution of all the twelve Judges. I find, that some who had transgress'd that Act of 23 H. 6. and had continued above one Year in that Office of Sheriff, soon after the making of that Act, did not think themselves secure against the Penal∣ty of that Act by any Non obstante from the King, but procur'd an Act of Parliament to indempnifie them for what they had done; for, See the Stat. of 6 H. 8. c. 18. in the Sta∣tutes at large, concerning the Under-Sheriff of Bristol. by another Act made the 28th of the same King Henry the Sixth, it is ordain'd, that the Sheriffs for the Year then last past, should be quit and discharged against the King and his People, of the Penal∣ties of the 200 l. which they incurr'd by the Statute of 23 H. 6. by Exercising the Office of Sheriff longer than a Year, from the day next after the day of all All-Souls, on which day, by the Statute, a new Ele∣ction was to have been made. I have one great Authority more, and that is of an Act of Parlia∣ment too, which, in my judgment, clearly proves, (against this Reso∣lution of the twelve Judges in the time of 2 H. 7.) that the King had no such Prerogative to dispence with the Sheriff's continuing in his Office longer then a Year. But that the only dispensing Power was in the King and Parliament, as I have affirm'd, and in the King, when any Special Act of Parliament shall for a time limit∣ted enable him so to dispence. And it is an Act in the time of a wise and powerful King, who would not lose his Prerogative, where he had right to it. It is the Statute of 9 H. 5. c. 5. in the Statutes at large, this Statute recites the Statute of 14 E. 3. whereby it was ordain'd, that no She∣riff 9 H. 5, c. 5. should continue in his Office above a Year. And it recites fur∣ther, that whereas at the making of that Statute, there were divers valiant and sufficient persons, (I suppose it is ill translated (valiant) and it should have been (men of value) in every County of Eng∣land, to exercise the said Office well, towards the King and his Peo∣ple: But by reason of divers Pestilences within the Realm, and Wars without the Realm, there was not now such sufficiency of such per∣sons. It is therefore ordained, that the King, by Authority of this Parliament of 9 H. 5. may make the Sheriffs through the Realm, at his will, until the end of four Years, notwithstanding the said Statute made 14 E. 3. or any other Statute or Ordinance made to the contrary. Here the King is entrusted with the Power, and that but for a short time in the very Case of continuing Sheriffs in their Offices longer than a Year, and that in a case of great and absolute necessity, and this by a Special Act of Parliament, which plainly shews, he could not do it by any Prerogative he had of dispensing, for then he would never have taken it under an Act of Parliament. What ground therefore the Judges had in the second Year of Henry the Seventh, to adjudge it to be a Prerogative in that King, I cannot see: and that Resolution is the leading Case to all the Opinions that have been delivered in the Point, since that time, and the Opinions
still justifie themselves by that one first Resolve, and cite that for their great Authority: That Opinion seems to be delivered upon a sudden Question, put to the Judges by the King's Council, not argued nor de∣liberated on, nor upon any Case that came Judicially before them, and the Judges there take notice only of two ancient Statutes, viz. 28 E. 3. c. 7. 42 E. 3. c. 9. both which barely forbid the Sheriffs to continue longer than a Year in their Office, but no Penalty is imposed; and the Earl of Northumberland's Case had a Non Obstante in it only to these two Statutes, as appears by the Abridgement of that Case by Brook, Tit. Patent's Case, 109. So that they did but, ad pauca respicere & de fa∣cili pronunciare. But they do not take the least notice of the Statute of 23 H. 6. c. 8. which makes the disability, nor do the Judges in that Case, give that reason for their Judgment, as Sir E. C. hath since found out to justifie it, viz. His Prerogative inseparable, &c. Something may be observed from the time when that strange Reso∣lution pass'd: Judicis Officium est ut res ita tempora rerum querere. It was in 2 Henry the Seventh, in the beginning of the Reign of that King, who stood high upon his Title and Power (if we may believe a late Historian.) (Mr. Buck.) in his History of the Life and Reign of Richard the Third, who in his Second Book, fol. 54. discourses likewise of King Henry the Seventh, and his Title to the Crown, says of him, That he seemed to wave all other Titles, and stuck to that of his Sword and Conquest, and at his Coronation he caused Proclamation to be made with these Titles, Henricus Rex Anglioe Jure divino, Jure humano, & June belli, &c. Which yet the Barons could not agree to, tho' the King peremptorily avowed he might justly assume it, having as a Con∣querour, entred the Land, fought for the Crown, and won it. The Barons answered (says the Historian) as peremptorily, That he was beholding to them both for his Landing and Victory. But the more they opposed it, the more he insisted upon it. Now that King that made his Title by Conquest, might carve out to himself what Prerogatives he pleased; And who durst dispute it with him? And this probably might have some influence upon that Resolu∣tion of the Judges, being so early after his Claim, viz. 2 H. 7. But I find Sir E Coke, a Chief Justice of great Learning, and of as great Integrity, taking up the same Opinion: It is in the Reports that go by the Name of Sir Edward Coke's, 12 Rep. fol. 18. No Act, says he, can bind the King from any Prerogative which is sole and insepa∣rable to his Person, but that he may dispense with it by a Non Obstante, as a Soveraign Power to Command any of his Subjects to serve him for the Publick-weal; and he instances in that of a Sheriff, and quotes the Resolution of the Judges of 2 H. 7. and urges that of Judges of Assize, that they may go Judges of Assize in the Counties where they were born, or did inhabit, if the King dispense with it by a special Non Ob∣stante. But he gives another instance, which I presume none in these days will subscribe to; and if he mistook himself in this instance, he may be supposed to mistake and err in all the rest: Purveyance (says he) for the King and his Houshold is incident solely, and inseparably to the Per∣son of the King: And for this Cause the Act of Parliament of Henry the Third, de tallagio non concedendo, which barrs the King wholly of Pur∣veyance,
is (says he) void. If this be Law, what a Case are the Sub∣jects in, that have given a Recompence by a Revenue of Inheritance (in part of the Excise) to the King, in lieu of Purveyances. It is sober Advice given by Learned Grotius, in his Book De Jure Belli & pacis, 82. Let us not (says he) approve of all things, tho' delivered by Authors of greatest Name, for they often serve the Times, or their Affections, and bend the Rules as occasion requires. This Resolution of all the Judges, in the Second of Henry the Se∣venth, is again cited in Calvin's Case, in Sir Edward Coke's Seventh Report, and there a Reason is given to justifie that Resolution, which is not so much as touch'd upon in the Report itself, of 2 H. 7. but it has been studied and found out since that Resolution, viz. That an Act can∣not barr the King of such Service of his Subject, which the Law of Na∣ture did give him. And this is the main Reason insisted on in the late Judgment given in Sir Edward Hales's Case (as I am informed); which is the only Case, that I find, which came to be argued upon the very point, yet it was but lightly spoken to, for that of 2 H. 7. which is the first of the kind, was not upon a Case that came Judicially before the Judges, but was upon a Consultation only with the Judges, and without Argu∣ment. Nor in any other Authorities that I have cited, grounded upon that Resolution of 2 H. 7. did the Point directly come in question Ju∣dicially. And Calvin's Case is the first that I find, which offers this special Reason, viz. That no Act of Parliament can restrain the King from commanding the Service of his Subject, but it is an inseparable Prero∣gative in the King; and as Sir E. C. speaks in his 12 Rep. Tho' an Act makes the King's Patent void, and tho' the King be restrained to grant a Non Ob∣stante, by the express words of the Act, and tho' the Grantee is disa∣bled by the Act to take the Office, yet the King (says Sir Edward Coke) may by his Royal Soveraign Power of Commanding, command a man by his Patent, to serve him and the Weal-Publick, in the Office of Sheriff for Years, or for Life: And this the King may do for such Causes as he in his Wisdom shall think meet and profitable for himself, and the Common-weal, of which he himself is solely Judge, says Sir E. C. So tho' the King and Parliament have adjudged and declared by a Law, such a person, or such a sort of persons to be altogether unfit for such a Service or Office. As for Example: They have adjudged Pa∣pists (who own a Forreign Authority and Jurisdiction, and who hold Doctrines destructive and contrary to the Religion Established in this Kingdom) to be very unfit and uncapable of being entrusted with the maintaining of the Government, and the Religion Established by Law, in this Kingdom. Yet according to late Opinions and Resolutions, tho' the King himself, by the Advice of his Great Council, have so adjudged and declared, yet he may do otherwise, and he may employ a Papist to de∣fend the Protestant Religion; and he is the sole Judge of the fitness of Persons for his Service. This is the Discourse, this is the Argument and Reason used. Will this Reason be allowed of, shall the King be the sole Judge of the Persons fit to serve him in all Cases, and is it an inseparable Pow∣er and Prerogative in the Person of the King?
I shall put a Case wherein the Judges depart from this Opinion, and appear to be of another mind. In the Lord Anderson's Reports, the 2d Part, 118. It is there said, If an Office in the King's-Bench or Common-Pleas be void, and the pla∣cing of the Officer belongs to the King, if the King grant it to a per∣son not able to execute it, the Palmer's Rep. 451. Grant is void; as 'tis there held by many of the Justices. And there a Case is cited out of 5 E. 4. rot. 66. where one Tho. Wynter was placed by the King in the Office of Clerk of the Crown in the King's-Bench. The Judges, before the King himself, did declare him to be Inhabilem ad Officium illud pro commodo Regis & populi sui Exercendum, and he was laid by, and one Roger West (at the commendation of the Judges) was put in. Will any man presume to say the person is unfit, when the King, who is the sole Judge of the fitness of persons to serve him, hath ad∣judg'd him fit? yes, the Judges, in a Case that concerns the Courts where they sit, (it seems) will controul the King's own judgment, and judge the person inhabilis, and hold the Grant void in such case. To compare our present Case with this: The King and Parliament by a Law have adjudged the Papists unfit to be entrusted with the Go∣vernment, and with the preserving of the Reform'd Religion: but (says the Judges) if the King, without the Parliament, judge otherwise, his judg∣ment shall prevail: why not as well in the case of an Office in the Courts at Westminster, which does belong to the King to dispose of, as in an Office that immediately concerns the Safety of the King and King∣dom and the great concernment of Religion? So here is one Command of the Kings set up in opposition to another Command of the King. A Command of the King upon private advice, or (it may be possible) gained from him by surprize, by an impor∣tunity or an undue solicitation, against a serious solemn deliberate Com∣mand of the King, upon advice with his great Council, and with the Consent of the whole Kingdom: this is the very Case before us. This is against all reason, and against the Examples of the greatest, wisest and most absolute of Kings and Princes, who commanded their Judges to have no regard to any Commands of theirs, that were contra∣ry to Law. Vinius the Civilian, in his Commentary on the Imperial Institutes, fol. 16. gives this Rule, Rescripta Principum contra Jus vel utilitatem publicam, Elicita à Judicibus improbari etiam ipsorum Imperatorum con∣stitutionibus jubentur. Princeps non creditur (says he) aliquid velle contra utilitatem publi∣cam concedere, 21 H. 8. c. 13. sect. 10, 11, 27. Dispensations for Plura∣lities, contrary to Act, are declared to be void, Hob. 82, 149, 146, 155. The King is never by Law supposed ill affected, but abused and deceived, for Eadem praesumitur mens Regis quae est Juris. Grotius de Jure belli & pacis, 112, 113. Amongst the Persians, the King was Supreme, yet he took an Oath at his entrance, and it was not lawful for him to change certain Laws made after a particular form. If the King Establish the Decree, and Sign the Writing, it may not be changed, according to the Law of the Medes and Persians, which alte∣reth not, as we read in the Book of Daniel, 6 Dan. 8. 12, 15.
By the Act of 2 E. 3. c. 8. it is accorded and established, that it shall not be commanded by the Great Seal, nor the little Seal, to disturb or delay Common Right, and tho' such Commandments do come, the Ju∣stices shall not therefore leave to do right in any point. Grotius ubi supra, 117. Antiochus the third, sent a Rescript to the Magistrates, that they should not Obey him, in case he should command any thing against Law. And Constantine published the like, That Orphans and Widows be not constrained to come to Court for Justice, no, not if the Emperor's Rescript be shewed. In the story of Daniel, we read, that King Darius signed the Writing, and the Decree, which indeed was but a snare laid for Daniel, and Da∣niel had fallen into the snare: The King was his friend, but could neither dispence with him, nor pardon him, tho' he were sore displeased with himself for signing the Decree, And the King set his heart on Daniel to deliver him, and he laboured (says the History) an whole day, till the going down of the Sun to deliver him: he wanted such Judges as Cam∣byses had, to find out an Evasion; But the King himself sealed the stone that was laid upon the mouth of the Den with his own Signet, and with the Signet of the Lords, that the purpose might not be changed concern∣ing Daniel. Nihil opus est (says a learned Author, writing of the Government of England) Licentiam dominandi in Rege Coerceri, quoniam quicquid in administranda rerum summa vel contra Patriae leges vel minus ex populi commodo gestum fuerit Id omne Ministris Luendum rejicitur Adeo ut non ab adulatione sed ab aequitate summa fluxerit Notum Axioma apud No∣strates Rex Nunquam potest Errare aut cuiquam injuriam facere Quippe in Administros & Conciliarios quorum est Admonere Principem iniqua volenti, denegare operam, aut officio renunciare, potiusquam contra Leges quicquam jubenti parere tam culpa omnis quam paena derivari solet & debet. And we have seen Examples of such in our times, many that have left good Places, rather than act against their Judgments. There is a rare Example of this in the French History. Lewis the Eleventh, King of France, at the Pope's importunity, had signed a Concordate for setting aside the Pragmatical Sanction which was made in defence of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the King had undertaken to the Pope, that his Parliaments should approve of what he had done, and the King sent a Command to the Parliaments accordingly, and required them to give a punctual obedience to his Or∣der. The King's Advocate, Johannes Romanus, argued stoutly against it, Dr. Burnet's Hist. of the Rights of Princes, 239. K. James in his Promoni∣tion to all Christian Monarchs, 298. and being threatned to be turned out of his Place for his pains, he said, The King had freely bestowed that Office on him, and he would discharge it faithfully, as long as the King thought fit to continue him in it, and should be ready to lay it down, whenever it pleased the King: But he would suffer all things, rather then do any thing against his Conscience or the King's Honour and the good of the Kingdom: and out he went. It will be admitted by those that argue for the Prerogative of Di∣spensing, that tho' the King, without the Parliament, cannot dissolve nor Objection. repeal, no nor so much as suspend the Law totally, tho' but for a time,
but he may dispence with it, as to some particular persons, and for some limited time, and so the Law will still remain in force against all o∣thers. Those that will argue thus, do yet hold, that the King is the sole Answer. Judge who are to be dispensed with, so that he is not limited to any number, nor to any time, so that tho' he may not in the gross dispence with the Law, yet he does the same thing by retail, which comes all to one, or it is in his Royal Will and Pleasure to do so: We are nothing beholding to the Judges if the King uses his Prerogative with modera∣tion. According to that sort of Argument that is called Inductio: which is a particularibus ad Universalia progressus. He that can dispence with A, B, C, and so with the 24 Letters, one by one, does in truth dispence with the whole Alphabet; but he must not do it Uno Ictu. And we find it by Experience. What signifie those several Acts of Parliament that forbid a Judge of Assize to Execute that Office in the County where he was born or dwells, they are easily and daily dispens'd with? How many Acts have been made against pardoning of Murder, and to make void such Pardons, and what fruit have they had? Let us hear a learned Judge plainly speaking his experience and his mind in it: Stamford, in his Pleas of the Crown, fol. 101. says, that tho' there are words to null and make void these Charters of Pardon, yet by put∣ting into the Charters of Pardon these words, viz. Non Obstante ali∣quo Statuto in contrarium Edito, the force of these Statutes is taken away, and not only of these, (says he) but also of all others, in which this Clause of Non obstante is put, and it is put (says he) in every Let∣ters Patents. And fol. 102. (he says) that the Statute of 13 R. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1. and the rest of the Statutes to the same effect, have always been destroy'd by that Clause of Non obstante; and so false Suggestions have continued (says he) to this day without redress, and abound from one day to another, to the great detriment of the Publick Weal, and do not cease till Princes have more regard what Charters they pass; and he might have added, till the King's Attorney and Council at Law shall have more Fidelity and Courage. I hear, that in justification of such a Dispensation as this, it was said Objection. in the Argument of the Case of Sir Edward Hales, in the Court of King's-Bench, That there is no Law whatever, but may be dispensed with by the Supreme Law-giver, as the Laws of God may be dispen∣sed with by God himself, as appears by God's command to Abraham, to sacrifice his Son Isaac. So likewise may the Laws of Man be dispens'd with by the Supreme Legislator. I fully agree to this, and have already argued upon this ground, That Answer. the Legislators (and no other) can dispence with their own Laws, and I have given several Instances and Examples wherein it was so practised; that is, by King and Parliament. But does this justifie the present Dispensation now in dispute? I agree the King hath a great and most eminent part in the Legislature, and in the passing of Laws, it is he that quickens the Embrio, and first
gives it Life, but under favour, and with all due Reverence to the King, I may affirm it, That the King hath not the sole Legislature, such as Almighty God hath over his Creatures, but the whole Kingdom hath a share in that Power, as I have fully proved, as well as the King. I would cite one Case, not so much to prove what I have said here∣in, but rather to illustrate it: It was a Case in Hill. 11 Jac. B. R. Do∣minus Rex, and Allen against Tooly, in the Second Part of Bulstrode's Reports, 186, to 191. in an Information brought upon the Statute of 5 Eliz. for using the Trade of an Upholsterer, in which he had not ser∣ved as an Apprentice Seven Years. The Defendant pleaded, That he was a Freeman of London, and that by the Custom of London, a Free∣man might use any Trade; and he alledged that the Custom was con∣firmed per Regem in Parliamento. It was holden first, that there can be no good Act of Parliament, without the three Consents, viz. Of the King, Lords, and Commons. 2. That tho' divers Acts of Parliament do not specifie these Three Assents, but only mention the King as Dominus 8 R. 20. Rex Statuit; and as it is in the Prince's Case, Dominus Rex de Communi Concilio Statuit (and the like): Yet when the Party will Plead, he ought to Plead it according to Law, and to set forth all the Assents, that is, of the King, Lords, and Commons: and this was the Opinion of the whole Court. Now Pleading is an exact setting forth of the Truth. We are not to raise Arguments from Forms of Speaking, but rather from exact Pleading, and the Resolutions of Judges: And tho' Magna Charta in the stile, seems to be spoken by K. H. 3. as by the word (concessimus); yet the Act of 15 E. 3. c. 1. recites that it was made a Law by the King, Lords, and Commons, and that what is said to be granted, was but their former Right. Lambert's Archion, 267, &c. I hear, that in speaking to the Case of Sir Edward Hales, it was ob∣served that by this Act of 25 Car. 2. there is no incapacity, or disability at the first, and upon the admission to the Office put upon any Person from taking of an Office, but that he is well admitted to it, and the Grant is good, and that time is given to take the Tests, and if by the times given he fail to take them, then he is to be disabled, and the Grants are to become void, but not before: Like a Condition subsequent that de∣feats the Estate, which yet was well vested; and then before the Grant is defeated, and the Party become disabled, the King's Dispensation steps in and prevents the Penalty and Disability: And herein (it was said) it differs from the Case of Symony, and buying of Offices, where the Interest never vested, but the Person was first disabled. There is indeed a difference, but none that is material, for it is all one whether the Party be disabled to take, or whether having well Answer. taken, and been well admitted, he is afterward disabled to hold, and retain, by not performing the Condition: For when he is first admit∣ted, it is sub modo, and under a Condition, that if he fail to perform what the Law requires, his Office shall be void. Another Argument (as I hear it reported) was rais'd from the King's being a Soveraign Prince, and from thence it was inferred, that he Argument. might dispense with Laws that are Poenal upon necessity, whereof he is the sole Judge.
The ground of this Argument, namely, That the King is a Soveraign Answer. Prince; if it serve for the Point in question, it may also extend a great way further then to this question we have before us, it is hard to li∣mit the extent of it, it seems to speak that we must obey without Re∣serve. The word (Soveraign) is French, and in Latin is Supremus, id est qui in alios potestatem habet: The Correlate whereof is, Subditus, or a Subject, and is attributed frequently to some sorts of Subjects, especial∣ly to the Heads or Superiours of Religious Orders. But among us, tho' now frequently used in our humble Addresses to the King, or in our reverend mention of him, yet we find it very rarely, if ever, used in our ancient Acts of Parliament, or in our Law Books. I find no mention of the very word among the many Attributes and Titles ascribed to Kings and Princes, in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honour: He hath that which is Synonimous, as Supream Monarch, as it signi∣fies in opposition, or in distinction to Princes that are subordinate and feudatory, such as Tacitus speaks of, that the Romans (when their Go∣vernment Or Tributa∣ry. was Popular) had instrumenta servitutis, Reges. But properly, he is a King that is a Soveraign, and hath no Supe∣riour upon Earth: According to Martial, Rex est qui Regem (Maxime) non habeat. And such we freely and cheerfully acknowledge the King to be, and the best and most of his Subjects do swear that he is the only Supream Governour of this Realm, and of all other his Dominions, as well in all Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical, as Temporal Causes, and that no Foreign Prince hath any Power within this Realm. And I wish that all the rest of his Subjects would heartily take this Oath: but this among others, is that which Sir Edward Hales's Dispensation extends to. Yet how from hence it can be argued that the King can dispense with his Laws, I do not see. I mean Laws of the same nature as that we have now before us. Therefore those that used this Argument surely meant the word of (Soveraign) in another sence. viz. Absolute & Solutus a legibus. It they mean by (Soveraign) a Prince that is absolute, and solutus a legibus (and they must understand it so, or else I do not see how it is pertinent to the present Argument) this is of a mighty Consequence, and ought to have been well considered before it had been used. I find the word in this sence (as I take it) propounded in an additi∣on or saving to the Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1. viz. Not to infringe Soveraign Power: But it was not liked, and upon Reasons given at a Conserence, those that did propound it, were satisfied to lay it aside. It may be read in the Memorials of the English Affairs, fol. 10. If the word (Soveraign) be meant in this sence, it is oppos'd by all our ancient Authors, Judges, and others, by plain and express Lan∣guage, whose very Writings I have before cited, and I will but only touch upon them again. Fleta says, Superiorem non habet Rex in Regno nisi Deum & Legem per L. 1. C. 5. Legem factus est Rex: This fully expounds the word Sovereign. Both Fleta and Bract. and Sir Gilbert Thornton (who was Chief Ju∣stice in Edw. the First's time) take notice of that: Jus Caesareum, or Lex Regia, as it is called by the Civilians, Nec obstat quod dicitur quod
Principi placet Legis habet vigorem: For it never was received in Eng∣land, but in a restrained sence. And with this agrees the ancient Coronation Oath, That the King shall hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, which the People have chosen. But King H. 8. with his own hand, corrected the old Oath, to the effect following, viz. That he shall hold the Laws and Customs of the Realm, not prejudicial to his Crown or Imperial Jurisdiction: The Original of this Correction is in Sir Robert Cotton's Library K. James 1. in his Speech to both Hou∣ses, 1609, in his Works, fol. 533, says the King with his Parlia∣ment, are ab∣solute in ma∣king or form∣ing of any sort of Laws. Sir Walter Rawleigh's Hist. of the World, fol. 245. See the History of the Reformation: Sir John Fortescu, sometime Chief Justice, and afterwards Lord Chancellor, in his Book De Laudi∣bus Legum Angliae: The Civil Law (says he) runs thus, Quod Prin∣cipi placuit legis vigorem habet, sed longe aliter potest, Rex politice impe∣rans quia nec Leges sine subditorum assensu mutari poterit: Potestas regia Lege Politica cohibetur. Sir Edward Coke, in his 12 Rep. fol. 63, 64, and 65. (says) It was greatly marvell'd that the Archbishop Bancroft durst inform K. James Archbishop Laud too did the like. that such absolute Power and Authority (as is there mentioned) belong'd to the King, by the Word of God, and there Sir E. C. cites the Say∣ings of these ancient Authors in our Law: But he says that the King was greatly offended with him. A Learned Civilian gives some restraint even to the Lex Regia in this point: Vinius in his Comment upon the Instit. fol. 381, Populus Romanus jura Majestatis omnia abdicative in principem transtulit, hinc Principes Romani Legibus soluti fuerant. But he utterly opposes that Opinion of the School-men: Principem Legibus solutum esse quoad vim coactivam sed etiam quoad vim directivam. Rot. Parl. 11. R. 2. The King and Parliament declare, That the Realm of England never was, nor was it intended by the King and Lords, that ever it should be go∣verned by the Civil Law. In the deciding of the Great and Royal Controversie, in the time of K. E. 1. concerning Right of Succession in the Crown of Scotland; it was debated by the Commissioners, according to what Law that Case should be determined; whether by the Law of England, or of Scotland, by the Civil Law, as being the Jus gentium, before the King of England, as being the Superior Lord: they all at last concluded, That the Civil Law by no means should be admitted: Ne inde Majestatis Anglicanae Juri fieret detrimentum. Seld. dissertatio ad Fletam, 539. Mr. Selden, mentioning John of Salisbury, who said, that in his time there were those that did prefer the Civil Law before all other Laws, especially, that de absoluta principis potestate quae in lege habetur Regia; he says, it was meant of none but de assentatoribus illius saeculi exgenere Hieratico, non de gente Anglicana aut de aliis qui Judiciis tunc praefuere, It would have been far from any of the English Nation, especially from any of the Judges, to have maintained any such Opinion. But let it be understood (sano sensu) and in a proper and literal sence Seld. Dissert. 539. too, and it is very true and agreeable to our Law, quod Regi placuit le∣gis vigorem habet; without the King's Placet, and his Royal Consent, nothing is Law amongst us. The Laws already in force, have had the Consent of his Predecessors, and no new Law can pass without the Roy∣al Assent; nay, they are his Royal Words, Le Roy le veut, that first gives life to any new Law. And the Judges Oath in the time of H. 3. was, that they should
judge Secundum Legem & consuetudinem regni; which words (as Mr. Sel∣den there says) seem designedly to Exclude the Jus Caesareum then lately brought in: whereof, as he says, some were fond in those times; and he tells us of what Order they were, but they were not Common Law∣yers nor Judges, but the Hierarchy. But should Judges give countenance to any such Law in the Latitude of it, they should be put in mind of what was done by King Edward the Confessor, which we are taught by Sir Roger Twisden, in his Preface to the Laws of William the First, annexed to Mr. Lambert's Treatise, De priscis Anglor' Legibus, fol. 155. Omnes (says he) qui Leges iniquas adinvenerant & injusta Judicia judicaverant multa{que} concilia contra An∣glos dederant, exlegavit: such Enemies to the Laws of England should be put out of the Protection of the Laws of England. Rode caper Vi∣tem, &c. It is said amongst the Laws of King Henry the First, c. 28. (and it is in the very Body of that Law) Lambert, ibid. 186. Gravius Laceran∣tur pauperes, à pravis Judicibus, quam à cruentis hostibus. The Lords of Parliament, when any attempt is made to introduce the Caesarean Law, (as once in the time of our K. H. 3. there was an endea∣vour to bring in part of the Pontifician Law) and it was by the Bishops, I make no doubt but they will answer Una voce, as their Ancestors then Seld. Disser∣tat. ad fletam. fol. 537. did Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare quae hucus{que} usitatae sunt & approbatae. The Statute of Merton, c. 9. 2 Instit. fol. 96. The Act of 25 Car. 2. one of the principal Ends and Aims of it is, to keep out that Foreign Power, that would pretend to a Soveraignty or Supremacy over our Soveraign, but the Dispensing with this Law (which is maintained to be a Right incident to the Soveraign Prince) seems to be the likeliest way of setting up again that Pretence and Claim of a Foreign Bishop, which was so long usurp'd, and against which Pre∣tence so many Acts of Parliament have been made, and which our ancient Kings did of old utterly renounce and disclaim, and we know the same Foreign Bishop hath made another Pretence to England, besides, that Ecclesiastical Power, by colour of a Resignation, made by King John. But King Hen. 3. Son and next Successor to King John, in the General Coun∣cil at Lyons, Anno 1245. by his Embassador and Advocate, made a Spe∣cial Protestation against that pretended Resignation made to Pandolphus, the Pope's Legate, (Innocent the Third) as a meer Nullity, In quod nun∣quam Pryn's Se∣cond Tome, fol. 290, 292, 299. & 301, 302. consensit Regni Universitas, and afterwards upon the Pope's issuing out of Process against K. E. 3. and the whole Kingdom, for the Homage and the Arrears of the 1000 Marks Rent due to him. The Parliament declared, That King John, nor no other, could put himself or his Realm into such a subjection, without their consent. 46 E. 3. Rot. Parl. nu. 7. 8. And that it was against the Oath King John had taken at his Coro∣nation. This Record expounds the word (Sovereignty) in the true sence of it, namely, that our Sovereign is no way subject to the Bishop of Rome, or to any Foreign Power. But it doth no way import, that the King can dispose of his People ut placuit Regi, or alter the Government, without the Peoples consent, nor dispence with his Coronation-Oath, but proves the quite contrary.
A Short Argument UPON THE PLEADINGS Of the aforementioned CASE of Sir EDW. HALES. THE first Point argued by the Plaintiff's Councel was, That it appears by the Declaration, and it is now con∣fess'd by the Defendant's joyning Demurrer, that the De∣fendant hath been Indicted for this Offence, in exercising the Office of a Colonel, without having taken the Tests. And upon the Indictment he either did plead this Dispensation, or might have pleaded it. And he is now Convict, according to the di∣rection of the Act of 25 Car. 2. so that he now comes too late to plead it to this Action: for he cannot falsifie the Conviction, nor averr any thing against the Record of it, and bring the Fact to be tryed over again in this Action; but is concluded and estopp'd in Law to say any thing to the contrary of that Record, by which he is found guilty of the Of∣fence against this Act of Parliament. The Defendant either did plead this Dispensation or Pardon to the In∣dictment, in discharge of the Indictment, and it hath been over-ruled by the Judges at the Assizes, (as by Law it ought to be, being no good Plea:) Or he might have pleaded it, if he had been advis'd it had been a good Plea. And not having done it, he hath elaps'd his time, and now comes too late to plead it, being Convict of the Crime. To this it was objected, (as I hear) That the Plaintiff, if he will take the advantage of an Estoppel, ought to have set it forth by way Object. of Replication to the Defendants Plea, and to have relied upon Estoppel. it. For the Rule is, That he that pleads an Estoppel, must rely upon it as an Estoppel. It is true, if a man will plead an Estoppel, he must rely upon it. Answ. But in this Case the Plaintiff does not plead the Estoppel, but the Estoppel appears by the Declaration, and the Defendant's own Plea to∣gether: so that there was no need for the Plaintiff to set that forth by way of Replication; which doth sufficiently appear by the Defendant's
own Plea, viz. That he did not take the Tests within the time limitted by the Act, and the Conviction is confess'd by his Plea, and joyning in Demurrer. If a man recover a Debt upon a Bond, and before Execution dies, if his Executor sue a Scire Facias upon that Judgment, the Defendant can∣not plead any Plea that he might have pleaded before, as Non est factum, or by Dures, or the like: for he is concluded by the Judgment. In Jason and Ketes Case, in Siderfen's Reports, fol. 43. by Bridgman, Chief Justice, a man shall never help himself by Audita querela, (tho' that is an equitable Suit at Law) for any matter that he might have pleaded before. There is no Estoppel in this Case: for the Conviction is upon an In∣dictment, which is the King's Suit; and this is the Suit of another, viz. the Object. 2. Here is no Estoppel. Answ. now Plaintiffs, and so they are two distinct Suits. The Conviction upon the Indictment, is an Estoppel against the Defendant himself; of which any man may take the advantage, and he himself shall never be admitted to averr against it. As in Maynyes Case, in Leonard's first part, fol. 3. An Attainder for Treason is an Universal Estoppel, of which any Stranger may take the advantage, not only against the Party attainted, A Stranger may take the advantage of this Estopp. but against his Wife too, if she sue for Dower. And it does not run in Privity. By Manw. Ch. Bar. Where a man is attainted by his own Confession of a Felony, a Stranger is not Estopp'd, to say he was not guilty. But if A. commit Felony, and after enfeoff 7 E. 4. 1. Br. Estoppel 163. I. S. of his Land, and after A. is attaint of this Felony by Verdict, there I. S. is Estopp'd, and may not averr Knoil & Heymor's third Kebk. 528. by Chief Justice Hale. that A. was not guilty, because he claims under him; much less shall A. himself averr against the Verdict, that he is not guilty. That a Stranger cannot falsifie a Verdict. If a man be acquitted of Felony, all the World, says Grevil in Kellow. Rep. 81. b. is Estoop'd to say the con∣trary. Rol. Abr. first part, 362. So vice versâ, if he be convict, by the same reason. Dr. and Stud. 68. à ad fin. & b. As to that which is objected, that the Conviction is upon an Indict∣ment Object. 2. (which is the King's Suit) but this is another Suit; and therefore the Verdict shall not conclude the Defendant in this Suit. This is not another Suit, but in effect an Execution upon the Convi∣ction, and grounded upon that Record; and therefore not meerly a Answ. new Suit, but a dependant Action; as a Writ of Error, or an Audita quae∣rela, A dependant Action. or a Scire Facias upon a Record, are dependant Suits, or an Action of Debt upon a Judgment. The Act of 25 Car. 2. c. 2. hath made it Criminal in any person, af∣ter his neglect of taking the two Oaths, or of the Sacrament, by the times limited, to execute any such Office or Place of Trust: and for such Offence hath made him indictable at the Assizes; and upon a Con∣viction the Offender incurs (among other Penalties) the forfeiture of 500 l. and gives it to any one that will sue for it in an Action of Debt. So the Statute hath directed the method of trying the Offence, and of convicting the Offender, by Indictment at the Assizes. And if he that sues for the Forfeiture shall be driven to prove the Of∣fence over again, then the Conviction at the Assizes serves for nothing, but
was all in vain. And such Construction defeats the intention of the Law∣makers, for they intended this for the only Tryal, and not to have se∣veral Tryals; for suppose it should be tryed again in this Action, and a Verdict pass for the Defendant, here shall be Tryal against Tryal, and Verdict against Verdict. And such Construction ought to be made of Acts of Parliament, as may not elude, but agree with the intent of the Law∣makers; and so, as that no Words, Clause, or Sentence, shall be altoge∣ther idle and insignificant. And this Conviction upon the Indictment, is the very ground of the A∣ction of Debt brought by the now Plaintiff: for the words of the Act are, And being thereupon lawfully Convicted upon any Indictment, e∣very such person shall from thence-forth forfeit 500 l. So that till there be such a Conviction, there is no Forfeiture incurr'd of 500 l. nor no Action can be brought for the 500 l. The Offence must be prov'd and determin'd, before any Action can be brought; and therefore the proof of the Offence whereof the Defendant is convict, must not be made in this Action over again: if it must, what serves the Conviction for? Suppose the Plaintiff here had brought his Action, after the neglect of the Defendant of taking the Oaths, and of receiving the Sacrament, and his acting in his Office after such neglects, and before any Conviction up∣on Indictment, and had only averr'd, that the Defendant had so neglect∣ed, and yet acted; would this Action have been well brought? Or, sup∣pose there had been a Conviction, but the Plaintiff had not set it forth in his Declaration, but had only averr'd the Offence committed; would this have been a good Declaration? Surely it would not. This proves, that the Record of the Conviction is the very ground and foundation of this Action, and the Action would not lie without such Conviction: so that it is not a meer new Action, but a dependant Action. And the usual difference is where the Action is a dependant Action, de∣pending An Action dependant or collateral. upon a Record, and grounded upon it; and where it is a col∣lateral Suit, not depending upon that Record. An Action against the Sheriff for an Escape of one taken in Execu∣tion, this is a dependant Action, and is grounded upon the Record of the Judgment given against the Party that escap'd. The Sheriff cannot aver any thing against that Record, and examine it over again; nor can he take any advantage of Error or erroneous proceeding, in obtain∣ing that Judgment. Jaques ver∣sus Caesar. And Dr. Dru∣ry's Ca. 8 R. 142. And Mac∣kaelly's Ca. 9 R. 68. Saunders Rep. 2 part. 101. So in an Action of Debt, grounded upon a Judgment, or in an Audita quaerela to be reliev'd upon a Judgment. And so in our Case, this Action of Debt for the 500 l. is grounded upon the Conviction, which must stand for truth, as long as it remains in force not avoided by Error or Attaint. A Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment, is a dependant Action: In error, the Plaintiff may not averr any thing against the Record. Mul∣lens versus Weldy. Siderfin's 1st part 94. Error was sued in the Kings-Bench to reverse a Judgment given in the Palace-Court. And the Plaintiff in Error assign'd for Error, that the Duke of Ormond (who is principal Judge of that Court by Patent) was not there. It was agreed by the Court, that it might not be assign'd for Error, for it was contrary to the Record.
But per Cur. in an Action of Trespass, or false Imprisonment, which (says that Report) are collateral Actions, he may falsifie and assign that, if he be taken upon such Judgment. So if a man be indicted and convict of an Assault and Battery, and af∣terwards the person so assaulted brings his Action for the Battery, this hath no dependance upon the Indictment or Conviction, for it may be sued, though there were no Indictment, but is a distinct and collateral Suit. The Indictment and Verdict is no Estoppel, nor can so much as be given in Evidence, as is held by the whole Court in the Case of Samp∣son versus Yardley, and Tothill, 19 Car. 2. B. R. Kebles's 2 part, 384. The like in an Appeal of Murder. Kebele's 2 part, 223. Another Penalty upon the Offender against this Statute of 25 Car. 2. is, That he shall be disabled to sue in any Action. Now suppose a per∣son convict at the Assizes sues an Action, may not the Defendant in that Action take the advantage of that Disability. and plead the Conviction? As in Case of an Outlawry pleaded in Disability, there need not be set forth all the proceedings in that Suit wherein the Plaintiff was outlawed, but he may plead the Record of the Outlawry, and rely upon it, and it shall not be examin'd whether there was any just cause to sue him to the Out∣lawry, or not. The Indictment, the Defendant's Plea to it, and the Verdict upon it, have determin'd the matter of Fact, that the Defendant is guilty of the Offence against this Act of Parliament. The Act it self hath pronounc'd the Judgment, which consists of many particulars; one whereof is, That the Defendant shall forfest 500 l. to him that will sue for it. And the Action of Debt for the 500 l. brought by the Plaintiff, grounded upon all these, is in the nature of an Execution. And all these put together, are not several and distinct Suits, but in effect all but one Suit, and Process, one depending upon the other. The second Point is, Whether the Dispensation pleaded by the Defen∣dant, be a good Bar to the Action of Debt? And this is properly called, The Matter in Law, and the great Point of the Case? for which I refer the Reader to my Argument at large.
POSTSCRIPT: BEING SOME Animadversions UPON A Book writ by Sir EDW. HERBERT, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, ENTITULED, A short Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales's Case. SINCE the finishing of my Argument about the Power of Dis∣pensing with Paenal Statutes, a Book came to my hands touching the same subject, entituled, A short Account of the Authorities in Law, upon which Judgment was given in Sir Edward Hales his Case; writ∣ten by Sir Edward Herbert, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in vindication of himself. And although I am of opinion, that the substance of all the Ar∣guments contained in the said Book, are fully answered in my aforesaid Dis∣course, yet I hold it necessary to make some Animadversions upon the said Book, and to point out readily to the Reader the several Pages of my Dis∣course, wherein the Arguments of the Chief Justice are more directly and particularly treated of, and answered. And there being great Reverence justly due to a Person that bears so high a Character, as also to a Judgment given in that Superiour Court of the King's Bench, and by advice of all but two of the rest of the Judges, as I now hear, some short Apology had need be used for that freedom I have taken to animadvert upon it, being (as I am) but in a private station. In short therefore, I have not undertaken it out of any vain conceit of my own Abilities, but out of a sincere desire to inform such as in the approaching Parliament are like to have this great Case in Judgment before them; and some may possibly not be at leisure (as I have been) to study the Case, the matter being of a mighty importance. Nor have I entred the Lists upon any contentious humour, or taking any ad∣vantage of the late Happy Change of publick Affairs. I am (I thank God) more inclin'd to commiserate the Distress that may befal any persons by the change of the times (it having been my own case so lately) although they dif∣fer from me in Judgment or Interest. I am very far from insulting over any, whatever hard usage I my self have met with. Nemo confidat nimiûm secundis, Nemo desperet meliora, lapsus.
My Apology is this: 1. I was engaged in the Argument before the coming forth of this Book, and it happening into my hands before my publishing of my Discourse, I could not decline the observing something upon it, without being suspected to have given up the Cause. 2. The Lord Chief Justice himself hath by his Book given fresh occasion fair∣ly to discuss the point again, by declaring that he expects (as we all do) that it will receive a disquisition in Parliament. 3. And as the Chief Justice hath endeavour'd (with as much as can be said) to give the World satisfaction in the justice and right of the Case to main∣tain the Judgment given; so he is well known to be of that ingenuity and good temper and candour, as willing to receive a satisfaction, if any further Argument to the contrary may be so happy as to convince him. The Chief Justice Herbert, pag. 6. gives us the Definition of a Dispensation out of Sir Edward Coke's 11th Report, fol. 88. viz. Dispensatio mali prohibiti est de jure Domino Regi concessa, propter impossibilitatem praevidendi de omnibus particula∣ribus. And again, Dispensatio est mali prohibiti provida relaxacio utilitate ceu necessitate pensata. Upon the word (Concessa) I would gladly be satisfy'd when or by whom that Power was ever granted to the King; where shall we find that Grant? It is clear, that whoever hath the entire Power of making a Law, may just∣ly dispense with that Law. And therefore Almighty God being the sole and supream Law-giver, might dispense even with the Moral Law; as he did with the sixth Commandment, when he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac; and with the eighth Commandment, when he commanded the Israelites to borrow the Jewels of the Aegyptians, and to go away without restoring of them. But it stands not with reason, that he who hath but a share with others in the making of a Law, (as the King hath no more) should have the power by himself alone to dispense with the Law, unless that power were expresly in∣trusted with him by the rest of the Law-makers (as sometimes hath been done.) Sir Edward Coke in his seventh Report, in the Case of Paenal Statates, fol. 36. towards the lower end, does affirm, that this Dispensing Power is committed to the King By All his Subiects: So that it is not claimed Jure Divino, but by Grant from the People. But where to find any such Grant, we know not. I have (as I conceive) made it appear in my larger Argument, p. 14. that the first Invention of Dispensations with Laws, began by the Pope, about the time of Innocent the Third, and by our King Henry the Third, in imitation and by encouragement from the Pope; so that it was not by the Grant of the People, but ever exclaimed against by all good men, and generally by all the people, and ever fenced against by a multitude of Acts of Parliament. It is true, the Dispensing with Laws hath ever since been practised; and they began at first here in England to be used only in Cases where the King alone was concern'd, in Statutes made for his own profit, wherein he might have done what he pleas'd. But it is but of latter times that they have been stretched to Cases that concern the whole Realm. See my Argument, fol. 13. Hence it evidently appears, it cannot be a legal Prerogative in the King; for that must ever be by Prescription, and restrain'd to those Cases that have been used time immemorial, and must not be extended to new Cases. Now there hath been no such usage as will warrant the Dispensing with such an Act of Parliament as is now before us: that of 25 Car. 2. c. 2. The Chief Justice Herbert, from the Definition before recited, and those two Authorities of Sir Edward Coke in his Case of Monopolies, and that
other of Penal Statutes, frames an Argument to prove, that the Dispensation granted to Sir Edward Hales, was good in Law. Because a Dispensation is properly and only in case of a Malum Prohi∣bitum, he thence insers, that the King can dispense in all Cases of Mala Pro∣hibita. Which is a wrong Inference, and that which Logicians call, Fallacia à dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. Because he can dispense with some, that therefore he can dispense with all, is no good Consequence. It appears by the late Chief Justice Vaughan's Reports, in the Case of Tho∣mas and Sorrel, (so often cited by the Chief Justice Herbert) Vaughan's Rep. fol. 333. the fourth Paragraph, that his Opinion is, That the King cannot dispense with every Malum Prohibitum; and he gives many Instances of such Mala Prohibita that are not dispensable, fol. 342, and 334. parag. 4. Therefore the Lord Chief Justice Herbert should (as I conceive) regu∣larly first have given us the distinction of Mala Prohibita, into such as are dispensable, and such as are not dispensable; and then have shewn, that the Dispensation granted to Sir Edward Hales, fell under the first part: but that learned Reporter, (the chief Justice Vaughan) (so often cited by our now Lord Chief Justice) in the aforesaid Case of Thomas and Sorrell, fol. 332. the last Paragraph save one, quarrels with the very distinction of Malum Pro∣hibitum, and Malum in se, and says it is confounding. From whence I would observe, and from the whole Report in Thomas and and Sorrell's Case, that the Notion of Dispensation is as yet but crude and un∣digested, and not fully shaped and formed by the Judges. The Pope was the Inventer of it. Our Kings have borrowed it from them. And the Judges, from time to time, have nursed and dressed it up, and given it countenance. And it is still upon the growth and encroach∣ing, till it hath almost subverted all Law, and made the Regal Power Abso∣lute, if not Dissolute. I must agree, that our Books of late have run much upon a Distinction, viz. Where the breach of a Penal Statute is to the particular damage of any person, for which such person may have his Action against the Breaker of that Law, there tho' it be but Malum Prohibitum, yet the King cannot dispense with that Penal Law; according to the Rule in Bracton: Rex non potest gratiam facere cum injuriâ & damno alterius. As for instance: There are several Statutes that prohibit. one man from maintaining another's Suit, though in a just Cause. See Poulton de pace Regis & Regni, in his Chapt. of Maintenance, fol. 55. Now it is held, that the King cannot dispense with those Laws, because it would be to the prejudice and damage of that particular person, against whom the Suit is so maintain'd by another: for there can be no maintenance, but it is to the wrong of a particular person. So of carrying a Distress out of the Hundred. But there are many other Penal Laws, where by the transgressing of them, no Subject can have any particular damage, and therefore no particular Action for the breach of them. As upon the Statute that prohibits the Transportation of Wool, under a Penalty. By the breach of this Law, that is, by the Exportation of Wool, no one particular man hath any damage, more than every other man hath; but it is only against the Publick Good. And the breach of such a Penal Law is punishable only at the King's Suit, by Indictment or Presentment. And the like, where such a Penal Statute gives an Action Popular, to him that will sue for the Penalty, who hath no right to it, more than any other, till his Suit be commenced. In these Cases (it is commonly held) that the King may dispense with such Penal Statutes, as to some particular persons, and for some limitted time, (whereof they make the King the sole Judge) because, as the reason is
given in the Chief Justice Vaughan's Reports, fol. 344. parag. 2. Such offence wrongs none but the King. This is now the common receiv'd Opinion and Distinction. And the breach of such kind of Penal Statutes, are said to be only the King's damage in his publick capacity, as Supream Governour, and wronging none but himself. Lord Vaugh. Rep. 342. parag. 3. But if we will narrowly search into this Distinction, and weigh the Reasons so given, we shall find it is without any just ground. The damage done to the particular person in the Cases past, in the first part of this distinction, are meerly his own proper and peculiar damage; and he is intituled to his particular Action for it, in his own proper personal Right: and therefore, if he discharge and dispense with them, it is no wrong to any other man. He may do what he will with his own. But the Cases in the second part of this Distinction, are where the King hath a right to the Suit, and the offence and damage are said to be to him only. But are they so (as the former) in his own personal right, as his Lands and other Revenues are? or are they to him but as a Trustee for the Publick, for which reason he is called Creditor Poenae? and may he therefore upon the like reason, dispense with them, or dispose of them, as a Subject may do with his own particular Interests? Again, Shall a publick Damage and Injury to the whole Nation, be more dispensable by the King, than the loss of one private man? —fuit haec sapientia quondam Publica privatis secernere— And therefore in my apprehension the King cannot in such Cases of Dis∣pensations, be truly said to wrong none but himself; and it is not agreeable to the Definition before given, Utilitate Compensata, for the King wrongs the whole Realm by it. Where if he grants a Dispensation with a Penal Law of the first sort of this distinction, he only wrongs some particular per∣sons. The Cases and Authorities for Dispensations in our Books that were gran∣ted in ancient times, will generally be found to be only where the Penal Statutes were made for the King's own proper interest and benefit: As his dispensing with the Statute of Mortmain. For in such Cases it was to the King's own loss only, in Cases where the King might by Law have given away his Lands or Services. So the King may in his Patent of Grant of Lands, dispense with the Statutes that require there shall be mention of the true Va∣lues of them. And by a Non-obstante to those Statutes (which is now ge∣nerally 1 H. 4. c. 6. used) the King does in effect declare, that it is his pleasure to grant those Lands, whatever the Value of them be more or less: and the Statute does by express words save a liberty to the King in that Case. The King is not a Trustee for others in such Cases, nor can these Dis∣pensations be said to be directly to the damage of the Publick. And such Penal Laws as meerly concern the King's own Revenue or Profit, may justly be thought to be intended to be made only to put the King's matters into an ordinary method and course, and so save the King a labour, as the Lord Hobart says; and so prevent the King's being surpriz'd or mis-inform'd, when Patents are gained from him, and not design'd to tye the King's hands, or to restrain his power: as out of all doubt was done and intended by the Law-ma∣kers in our Act of 25 Car. 2. But in all the late Cases and Authorities which we meet with in our Books concerning Non-obstante's, and Dispensations, as in the time of King Henry the Seventh, and so downward to this day, we shall find them practising up∣on such Penal Statutes as meerly concern the Publick Good and Benefit, and the Laws of such a nature, by the breach of which the whole Nation suffers: While some particular persons, it may be, by giving a large Fine, or a yearly Sum, obtain the favour to be dispens'd with and exempt from a Penal Law, while all others continue to be bound by it.
As for Example: Where a Statute forbids the Exportation of Wool, or of Cloth undyed or undress'd, under a Penalty; such a Law is greatly for the Publick Good, and it takes care that our own People shall have Em∣ployment and Maintenance. Yet this is such a Law, as according to the receiv'd Distinction, the King may dispense with, there being no particular damage to one man more than to another, by breach of such a Law, al∣though it be a mighty damage to the whole Nation: For by such a Dispen∣sation, the person so dispens'd with to Export such White Cloth undyed, will have the sole Trade, which before the making of that Penal Statute, was equal and common to all. I wish the House of Commons would en∣quire what vast Riches have been heretofore gotten by such as have obtain'd the Dispensations with this Penal Statute, besides the Sums they paid to the Crown for them. These are meer Monopolies. In such a Case it may rightly be applied, That Sin taketh occasion by the Law. It had been better for the Nation, that such Laws were never made, being no better observ'd: for here again the Dispensation is neither Utilitate, nor Necessitate pensata. Look into the Case of Thomas and Sorrell, and you will find few or no Cases of Dispensations cited out of our Books, but of the time of King Henry the Seventh, and much more of very late times: so that the ill practice is still improving and stretching. The Lord Chief Justice Herbert, in the next place, pag. 9. proceeds to mention the great Case of 2 Hen. 7. a Resolution of all the Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber, upon the King's dispensing with the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 8. That no man should be a Sheriff above one year. This is the great Leading Case and Authority, upon which the main stress is laid to justifie the Judgment given in Sir Edward Hales his Case. I would avoid repeating what I have already so largely said to this Autho∣rity, to which I must refer my Reader, by which I hope it is most evident∣ly made out, that the King neither hath, nor never had any just Right or Power to elect Sheriffs: But the right of Electing was anciently and origi∣nally belonging to the Freeholders of the several Counties; and since it was unjustly taken from them (as they have ever been on the losing hand) it hath been lodged in the great Officers of the Realm, as the Lord Chancel∣lor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy-Seal, and the Judges, &c. as appears by the several Statutes. And they are to make such Choice every year in the Exchequer, on a day appointed by the Statute for that purpose. So that the Sheriffs are by those Statutes to continue in their Offices for one year only. And the King cannot hinder such Election. Only by his Patent or Commission to the Sheriff, hath he used to signifie to the Sheriff himself that is so chosen, and to publish to all others, who the person is that is so chosen. This is all the use of the Patent; but it is the proper Election of those great Officers that truly vests them in their Of∣fice. And it does as clearly appear, that when former Kings have dispens'd with a Sheriffs continuing in his Office for longer than one year, contrary to the several Statutes so forbidding it, the King hath so done it by virtue (not of his Prerogative) but by a special Act of Parliament enabling him to do it, for some extraordinary occasions, and for some limitted time only. See for this the Statute of 9 Hen. 5. cap. 5. in the Statutes at large, and my larger Argument, fol. 34. The truth is, the Power of Dispensing is originally in the Legislators. He only can dispense with a Law, that can make a Law. The Power is equal; and the Legislators can confer the same Power upon the King or any others, for some convenient time, &c. as appears by the last Instance of the Sheriff, and divers other like Cases, mentioned in my foregoing Argument, where I have also observ'd many other things upon that Resolution of 2 H. 7. concerning Sheriffs.
The Chief Justice Herbert supposes the Mischiefs recited in the Preamble of that Statute of 23 Hen. 6. cap. 8. concerning Sheriffs continuing in their Offices longer than one year, to be equal, if not greater (as he judges) than the Mischiefs recited in the Statute of 25 Car. 2. by Papists being in Offices. And from thence, I presume, would infer, that the Case of Sir Ed∣ward Hales is not so fatal in the consequence, as the Case of a Sheriff. I may appeal to any ordinary Judgment, and to the sad Experience and Tryal we have so lately had, and to the desperate Danger we were so lately in (from which Almighty God, by no less than a Miracle hath in great mercy deliver'd the Nation) whether the Mischiefs that could any way pos∣sibly arise from the dispensing with the former, (I mean, th Statute con∣cerning Sheriffs) be comparable to the infinite Mischiefs arising from putting Papists into Office, and intrusting them with our Religion, and all our Civil Rights. The Chief Justice, upon those words of the Statute concerning Sheriffs, viz. That no Non-obstante shall make them good, infers, that those words do shew, that the Parliament which made that Act concerning Sheriffs, was of opinion, Pag. 10. that had it not been for that Clause, the King could otherwise have dispens'd with that Act by a Non-obstante. Answ. This to me seems a strained Inference, and that it is very far from shewing any such Opinion in that Parliament. It rather signifies, that had not the Parliament inserted that Clause into the Act, the King might have done again as he had frequently practis'd before, viz. granted Dispensations upon that Statute: which ill practice they endeavour'd to prevent for the fu∣ture, not approving the practice, nor owning the power of doing it. Ex ma∣lis moribus bonae oriuntur Leges. A good Law rather condemns a contrary pra∣ctice before used. I heartily desire my Reader (as I have done in my foregoing larger Argu∣ment) carefully to observe and examine of what sort and nature those several Cases are, which the Resolution of the Case of 2 Hen. 7. urges to warrant that Resolution. As those Cases concerning the true Value of Lands, which the King grants; and that concerning the shipping of Wool to a certain Staple, &c. and let the Reader judge how vast a difference there is between those Statutes in the nature, and import, and reason of them, and this weigh∣ty important Statute now before us; and how little that Resolution of 2 H. 7. can be warranted by the Cases there cited, being of so inferiour and minute a Consideration, in comparison of the principal Case. It is true, Sir Edward Coke (if the twelfth Report, which goes by his name, be truly his) hath since that Resolution given in 2 Hen. 7. found out new and different Reasons and Arguments, which are not urged, and there∣fore I presume never so much as thought on, at that time, by the twelve Judges who gave the Resolution in that Case of 2 Hen. 7. Thus says Sir E. Saundys, in his Relation of the Religion used in the West parts of the World: Those of the Roman Religion made their Great∣ness, Wealth, and Honour, to be the very Rule by which to square out the Canons of their Faith; and then did set Clerks on work to devise Arguments to maintain them. Sir Edward Coke seems to justifie that Resolution concerning Sheriffs, from this ground, viz. That the King hath a Soveraign Power to command any of his Subjects to serve him for the Publick Weal. And this is (says he) solely and in∣separably annexed to his Person, and that this Royal Power cannot be restrain'd by any Act of Parliament. 12 Rep. fol. 18. That it is not solely annex'd to the King's person, appears by the several Acts of Parliament which I have cited to this purpose in my larger Argument, fol. 34. where the Power of Dispensing with some particular Acts, was gi∣ven to the King by the Parliament, and by him accepted for some short time. And the whole Parliament have in divers Cases themselves exercis'd this very Power. Judge of the weight of the Reasons said to be given there by Sir Edward Coke, by that one Instance of his in the Case he puts of Purveyance, 12 Rep.
fol. 19. which (he says) cannot be taken from the King, no not by Act of Parliament. Yet we have lived to see it lately taken away by Act of Parliament; which in the Judgment of a Parliament (which is of the highest Authority in Law) may therefore be taken from the King. And is the King in truth restrain'd from commanding his Subjects to serve him for the Publick Weal, either by those Statutes that disable Sheriffs to con∣tinue in their Offices longer than one year, or by our Statute of 25 Car. 2. that disables Popish Recusants to bear publick Offices: Because some very unfit, un∣capable, and dangerous persons are disabled to bear Offices of Trust and Power, (and this by the King's own consent to the Act, and by the advice of the great Council the Parliament) and indeed of the whole Realm? Does the King by this (which the Judges mis-call a Restraint) want for choice of fit persons to serve in Offices? Doth the Publick Weal suffer by this Restraint? is it not rather preserv'd by it? Hath not the King Protestant Subjects enow to bear Offices? And are Popish Recusants (who account Protestants Hereticks, and to be rooted out and destroy'd, and with whom they hold no Faith is to be kept, and against whom they have been continually plotting Mischief) are these the fittest to be intrusted with the Defence of the Protestant Religion, and with our Lives and Estates, which are all con∣cern'd, more or less, in every Publick Office and Trust? And are those persons (the Papists) that have a dependance upon the See of Rome, and a Forreign Power, fit to be intrusted with the power of the Nation, with the Militia, and the Sea-Ports? Is not this to commit the Lamb to the custody of the Wolf? This Act that disables Papists to bear Offices, cannot be justly said to be a Restraint upon the King; that expression sounds ill, and takes the matter by the wrong handle. It rather imports the King's Declaration and Resolution, by advice of his great Council, to employ none in Offices and Places of Trust, but such as are most capable and fit, and will most faithfully answer the great Ends for which they are so intrusted, that is, the preservation of the Prote∣stant Religion, which is the true English Interest. And this agrees with the Rules of the Common Law, That if an Office be granted to one that is Inidoneus, the Grant is void, though granted by the King himself. Of this I have treated more largely, in my Argument, fol. 37. The Lord Chief Justice Herbert, pag. 16. asks the Question, Whether so many solemn Resolutions of all the Judges of England in the Exchequer-Chamber, are not to be rely'd upon for Law? And I answer, That if they were ten times as many more, yet they are not to be rely'd on against many express positive Acts of Parliament directly to the contrary. For what words could the Parliament use more emphatical and express, and more to the pur∣pose, than by saying, That a Non-obstante, or a Dispensation, or a Grant of such a thing, (prohibited by that Law) shall be absolutely void, and ipso facto adjudged void, and the person made uncapable to take? And is not a Judgment in Parliament, and by Act of Parliament, of the highest Autho∣rity? But (says the Chief Justice, fol. 16.) the constant practice hath been to dispense with the Statute of Sheriffs. I answer, It hath also been a very fre∣quent practice too for the King, to make such persons Sheriffs, as were none of the number nominated or chosen, as aforesaid, by the Chancellor, Trea∣surer, Judges, and other great Officers; and it passes for currant that he may so do, though it be a vulgar Errour: For it hath been resolv'd by all the twelve Judges, to be an Errour in the King. See Sir Edward Coke's 2 Instit. or Magna Charta, fol. 559. and yet it is practis'd to this very day. The Chief Justice, pag. 18. seems to excuse Popish Recusants, for not qua∣lifying themselves for Offices, by taking the Oaths and the Test, &c. for that no man (says he) hath it in his power to change his opinion in Religion as he pleaseth, and therefore it is not their fault. It is an Errour of the mind, &c.
Answ. Here is no occasion taken to find fault with them for their Opini∣on; let them keep their Religion still, if they like it so well, who hinders them? This Act of 25 Car. 2. imposes no Penalty upon them for their O∣pinion. But is there any necessity of their being in Offices? Must they needs be Guardians of the Protestant Religion? The Penalty upon them by this Act, is not for their Opinion, but for their presuming to undertake Offi∣ces and Trusts, for which they are by King and Parliament adjudg'd and de∣clar'd unfit. Page 20, & 21. The Chief Justice Vaughan is brought in, arguing for the Kings Power of Dispensing with (Nominal) Nusances, (as he is pleas'd to call and distinguish Nusances). The word (Nominal) (as there under∣stood) imports, that though a Parliament declares any thing to be a Nusance, (as sometimes they do in Acts of Parliament, to render them indispensable) which yet in its proper nature would not otherwise be so conceiv'd to be; that such a Nominal Nusance (as he holds) may however be dispens'd with by the King, though regularly by Law the King may not dispense with any Nusance. Answ. Shall any single or particular person, though a Chief Justice, pre∣sume to call that a meer Nominal Nusance, which a Parliament by a solemn Act and Law have adjudg'd and declar'd to be a real Nusance? Are we not all concluded by what a Law says? This Arrogance is the Mischief now com∣plain'd of. The Chief Justice Herbert, pag. 22. at the lower end, says, That from the abuse of a thing, an Argument cannot be drawn against the thing it self. I agree this is regularly true; yet we have an Instance to the contrary in the Scripture, in that point of the Brazen Serpent. But in our Case the abuse doth arise from the very nature of the thing it self, from the constitution of it. For the King practises no more in dispensing, than what these Resolutions of the Judges allow him to do by this pretended Prerogative. The Errour is in the Foundation. They have made his Power to be unlimitted, either as to number of per∣sons, or as to the time how long the Dispensation shall continue. Sir Ed∣ward Coke says, and so the other Books, That the King is the sole Judge of these. Nec Metas Rerum, nec Tempora Ponunt. The Chief Justice Herbert, fol. 24. cites two clear Concessions (as he is pleas'd to call them) of all the Commons of England in Parliament, which he esteems much greater Authorities than the several Resolutions of all the twelve Judges. But how far these are from Concessions, will easily appear to an indifferent Reader. They are no more than prudent and patient avoiding of Disputes with the several Kings. And there are multitudes of the like in the old Par∣liament-Rolls. It is but an humble clearing of themselves from any purpose in general, to abridge the King of any of his Prerogatives, (which have always been tou∣chy and tender things;) but it is no clear nor direct allowance of that dis∣pensing there mention'd, to be any such Prerogative in him. However, I am glad to see an House of Commons to be in so great request with the Judges. It will be so at some times, more than at others. Yet I do not remember, that in any Argument I have hitherto met with a Vote or Order, or Opinion of the House of Commons, hath been cited for an Authority in Law, before now. Will the House of Peers allow of this Au∣thority for Law? It will be said, That this is but the acknowledgment of Parties concern'd in Interest; which is allowed for a good Testimony and strongest against themselves.
Answ. I do not like to have the King and his People to have divided In∣terests. Prerogative and the Peoples Liberties, should not be look'd upon as Opposites. The Prerogative is given by Law to the King, the better to enable him to protect and preserve the Subjects Rights. Therefore it truly con∣cerns the People to maintain Prerogative. I could cite several Parliament-Records wherein the poor House of Com∣mons have been forced to submit themselves, and humbly beg pardon of the King, for doing no more than their Duty, meerly to avert his displeasure. See the Case of Sir Thomas Haxey, whom the King adjudg'd a Traytor, for exhibiting a Bill to the Commons for the avoiding of the outrageous Expen∣ces of the King's House 20 R. 2. num. 14, 15, 16, 17, and 23. and the Commons were driven to discover his Name to the King, and the whole House in a mournful manner craving pardon for their entertaining of that Bill. No doubt, as good an Authority against the Commons for so sawcily med∣ling in a matter so sacred, and so far above them. Yet afterwards, 1 Hen. 4. num. 91. that Judgment against Sir Thomas Haxey was revers'd. As for the distinction, pag. 30. of a Disability actually incuri'd before the medling in an Office, and where the Disability is prevented by the coming of a Dispensation; I answer, That its being so prevented, is but Peticio Principii, and a begging of the Question. And to this Distinction I have (I think) ful∣ly spoken in the foregoing Argument, fol. 40. The late Parliament, in making this Act of 25 Car. 2. had, no doubt, a prospect that probably the Crown would discend upon a Popish Successor; and they levelled this Act against the Dangers that might then befal our Re∣ligion and Liberties, and they thought it a good Security: But it is all va∣nished and come to nothing, by occasion of this Judgment in the Case of Sir Edward Hales. And that must be justified by a (Fiat Justitia.) As to the Objection that the Chief Justice fancies might have been made against him, or advice given him that he should rather have parted with his place, than to have given a Judgment so prejudicial to the Religion he pro∣fesses, pag. 33. This, I say, that for my part I should never have advis'd him to have parted with his Place, much less to have given a Judgment against his own Opinion. But let his Opinion be what it was, yet seeing the clear intention of the Makers of the Law, contrary to that his Opinion, and knowing the desperate effects and consequences that would follow upon dispensing with that Act, (for we were upon the brink of destruction by it) and taking notice (as this Chief Justice and the rest of the Judges needs must) that the King had first endeavour'd to have gain'd a Dispensing Power in thismatter from both Houses (which was the fair and legal course) and that yet that very Parliament which out of too great a compliance with those times, had over-look'd so many Grievances, and conniv'd at the King's taking and collecting of the Customs, (though in truth the Collectors, and all that had any hand in the receiving of them, incurr'd a Praemunire by it) not to mention the ill Artifice used in gaining the Excise, yet that Parliament of the King's, boggled at the Dispensing with the Act of 25 Car 2. knowing the mighty Importance of it. And though they could not but take notice that so many Judges at once had been remov'd, because they could not swallow this Bitter Pill, and others brought into their places, as might be justly suspected to serve a Turn, and the King's Learned Councel could not at first find out this Prerogative to do his work with, till so many ways had been attempted, and all proved ineffectu∣al; sure in such circumstances it had been Prudence, nay the Duty of the Judges, to have referr'd the determination of it to a Parliament; and the ra∣ther, because it was to expound a Law newly made, and the consequences so dreadful, and the intent of the Law-makers so evident. And this hath been frequently practis'd by Judges, in Cases of far less diffi∣culty and concernment. This I have also enlarged upon in my Argument, page 26.
Object. But it might have been a long time before any Parliament had been called. Answ. We ought to have Parliaments once a year, and oftner if need be; and eadem praesumitur esse mens Regis, quae Legis; and we then stood in great need of a Parliament even for the sake of this very Case. And these hasty Judgments are one ill Cause why Parliaments meet no oftner; the Work of Parliaments is taking out of their hands, by the Judges. And it is the Interest of some great Officers, that Parliaments should not be called, or else be hastily prorogu'd or adjourn'd. As to the point of the feigned Action, which the Lord Chief Justice seems to justifie, I conceive he mistakes the force of the Objection. Feigned Acti∣ons may be useful; but this Action against Sir Edward Hales, is suspected not only to have been feigned and brought by Covin between him and his Ser∣vant and Friend, but it was feignedly and faintly prosecuted, and not heartily and stoutly defended. Like the practice of common Fencers, who play for a Prize, they seem to be in good earnest, and look very fierce, but agree before-hand not to hurt one another. Qui cum ita pugnabat tanquam se vincere Nollet Aegre, est devictus, proditione suâ. This solemn Resolution was given upon a few short Arguments at the Bar, and without any at the Bench, and upon other Reasons (as I have heard) which were then made use of, are now given by the Chief Justice; but the Times will not now bear them. After all, I intend not by this to do the Office of an Accuser, nor to charge it as a Crime. But as I think my self bound in Duty, on the behalf of the whole Nation, of my self, (though a small part and member of it) and of my Friends, I humbly propose, That the Judgment given in Sir Edward Hales his Case may, after a due Examination, (if there be found cause) be legally Revers'd by the House of Lords, and that Reversal approv'd of and confirm'd by a special Act of Parliament. FINIS.
