B1145 R20079 12732670 66511
IMPRIMATUR. Jo. Battely RRmo Patri ac Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris Domesticis. Ex Aedibus Lamb. Junii 2. 1686.
A SERMON Preached at Bury St. Edmonds Before the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM Lord Bishop of NORWICH At the Third Session of His LORDSHIP's Primary Visitation Holden there on Wednesday May 5th. 1668. By MICHAEL BATT M.A. Preacher at St. James's in St. Edmond's Bury. . . . S. Ignat. ad Polycarpum. LONDON, Printed for William Oliver, Bookseller in Norwich: and to be sold by B. Aylmer in London. 1686.
TO The Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM Lord Bishop of NORWICH. My LORD, IN Obedience to your Lordship I have here taken the Confidence to present a very mean, and imperfect Discourse to the View of a most Critical, and Discerning Age. And yet might I be allow'd to plead the Hastiness of its Com∣posure, without being thought to urge a Crime in excuse of a Crime, and to defend One fault by Another; possibly it would need no other Apo∣logy. But if that may not be insisted on, I have only this Favour to request of the World, that they would believe the Author to have as mean an Opinion of these Sudden Thoughts, as They can have, and that They would look upon them only as an instance of the incomparable Candor of Your Lordship; In pure compliance with whose Pleasure it is, that they are thus made
publick. And since they are so, may it please that God, who can work His ends by very small, and contemptible (for He has oft times done it without any) Means, to bless them for some Good to those who have not yet learn'd duly to revere their Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Supe∣riors. And may the same God long continue your Lordship A Blessing to his Church, An Ornament to this See, and an Eminent Example of Virtue to All that know You. In which Prayer, I am perswaded, there is not a Person in Your whole Diocese, that Fears God, Honors the King, or Bears any Affection to the Establish'd Religion, but will heartily concur with, My Lord, Your Lordship's most Dutifull Son, and most humbly devoted Servant, MICHAEL BATT.
A SERMON Preached at Bury St. Edmond's Before the Right Reverend Father in God WILLIAM Lord Bishop of NORWICH AT The Third Session of His Lordship's Primary Visitation holden there on Wednesday May 5th. 1686. 1 CORINTH. 4.21. What will ye? shall I come unto you with a Rod, or in Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness? NO sooner had St. Paul planted a Church at Corinth, (and that with a great deal of care and pains, con∣tinuing there a year and six months teaching the Word of God among them, as St. Luke gives
us the Relation of it, Acts. 18.) but by the Craft and Envy, the Cunning and Malice of the Devil, there were the most notorious Disorders crept in, and the most scandalous Abuses and Corruptions introduc't into it. In particular, there were a sort of false and Hae∣retical Teachers started up among Them, who by the Charms of Popular Eloquence, and the little Arts of Rhetorick, (for They had nothing else to trust to) making advantage of their Weakness, had so insinuated them∣selves into their Affections, that there was no longer place for the Apostle there; these New Instructors had got their Hearts, even to the Exclusion of their Father himself, who in Christ Jesus had begotten them through the Gos∣pel. An early Stratagem of the grand Enemy of Mankind was this, and so succesfull He found it for the creating Variances, and Di∣visions among the Professors of Christianity, that He has been encourag'd to make use of the same, for the infesting, and disturbing these latter Ages of the Church too. And we for our parts have had, I'm sure, the wofull Experience of it, that whilst some
have cried up this Holy Man, others mag∣nified that Godly Teacher, in opposition to the Orthodox establish'd Ministry; whilst People have forsaken, and exchang'd the publickly allowed form of sound and wholesome words for the Religious Cant of Private Corners, the Devil's ends have been most effectually serv'd among us; Piety has decay'd and iniquity abounded, Charity has waxen cold, and strifes and emulations grown fierce and hot, to the infinite detriment, and damage of Religion, and of the best constituted Church in the Christian World. But I forbear inlarging here, and return to the Corinthians, among whom (besides di∣vers other gross miscarriages) this that hath been mention'd having, in the Apostles ab∣sence, got in, viz. (their siding, and dividing into Parties about their Teachers, some having this Man's person in admiration, others that) St. Paul that he might obviate the further mischief, that might otherwise from hence a∣rise, though he was detain'd at that time by some other necessary Service of the Church from a Personal Visitation, writes them his mind in this Epistle. In which, after having
premis'd his Salutations of them, and Thanks∣givings to God for them, the first thing he falls upon is the regulating that disorder. And to that end, he decries, and exposes that Carnal Wisedom they were so mightily in love with, gives the reasons of his own not affecting those lofty strains, for which others were had in such esteem by them, and vindicates his plain, and familiar manner of Preaching whilst among them; which indeed is the main drift of the four first Chapters of the Epistle. But lest this method should prove ineffec∣tual, (as writing at a distance is not, for the most part, so moving as conferring and dis∣coursing Face to Face) he sends Timotheus unto them, his beloved Son, and faithfull in the Lord, as it is v. 17. of this Chapter, to excite and perswade them to their duty, by bringing them into remembrance of his ways which were in Christ, both what he had for∣merly taught whilst among them, and what he did yet continue to teach in every Church. And this indeed lookt like a very hopefull ex∣pedient, and was such a course, as the Apo∣stle might reasonably promise himself success from.
Not but that He had still One Reserve more in case of a failure here too, and that was The coming among them once again in His own person, which was a Certain way if not by fair means by foul, I mean, if not by love and gentleness, by fear and severity to reform, and rectify all Abuses, not only that hitherto complain'd of, but likewise their toleration of Incest, their litigious Law-Suits (and that) before Infidel-Judges, their Propha∣nation of the Sacred elements in the Lord's Sup∣per, and the other disorders and Misdemea∣nors reckon'd up in the Sequel of this Epistle. He resolves, I say, in case all other Expe∣dients fail, once again to come among them in person, (declaring v. 19. that nothing but God Almighty should hinder Him) and then take a sure, and effectual Course of re∣dressing All that was amiss. And, to speak the Truth, He had great reason to suspect before-hand that the fore∣mentioned Means would prove insufficient, that let Him write, or send what, or whom soever He pleas'd, the Height and Haughti∣ness of some was such, as would not be curb'd, nor taken down thereby.
Nay and which was more, (and which call'd upon Him to make the more hast to them) it should seem that His Absence had already caus'd them to entertain low, and contemptuous thoughts of Him too; For so does the Learned Hammond paraphrase the 18th. ver. Now some are puff'd up as though I would not come to you, , Be∣cause I come not to you my self personal∣ly, some among you have taken occasion to despise me that am absent. And hence it is that He resolves ver. 19. I will come to you shortly if the Lord will, and will know not the speech of them that are puffed up but the Power. That is, I'le make trial of those confident boasters, not of their plau∣sible words, and fine talk, (at which, I know, they are excellent;) but of their solid worth, and the real good they do with all their os∣tentatious braggings. For the Kingdom of God is not in word but in power, ver. 20. Christia∣nity does not consist in speaking, but doing, not in vaunting, but performing great Things. And hereupon follow the words of the Text.
What will ye? shall I come unto you with a Rod, or in Love, and in the Spirit of Meek∣ness? Which the now-mentioned Hammond thus introduces, and explains. And now I talk of coming to you, I pray consider, which will you chuse? As you behave your selves, so at my coming will I exercise either my Power of inflic∣ting punishments, or the milder way of kindness toward you; and therefore ac∣cording as ye like best, so prepare your selves for my coming. In the words of another Paraphrast,Bish. Hall. a Re∣verend Prelate of our Church, and sometime of this Diocese. Let it be your own choice, after what manner I shall come unto You; My car∣riage must be directed by your deserts and dispositions; Will you that I shall come to You with a Rod of Censure to correct your Exorbitances? or in Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness, to com∣mend and cherish your Holy Proceedings, and Christian Carriage? I shall do either of them, as I shall receive occasion from You.
Thus you see the Occasion, and Connexion of the Words, in discoursing on which, I shall endeavour to do these four Things. 1. To explain the Power the Apostle inti∣mates Himself to have in the Church, in these words, shall I come unto you with a Rod? 2. To shew how far, or in what measures and degrees that Power is continued to the Bishops, and Governors of the Church now. 3. To take notice how loth and unwilling the Apostle was to exercise this Power of His but in case of absolute Necessity; And how de∣sirous He was, (as appears from the manner of His expressions) that He might have occasion to use only the fair, and gentle Methods. 4. To exhort Christians to be more obedient to their Spiritual Pastors and Fathers, by an orderly and regular Conversation, than to force Them to the Ʋse of that Severity, which They are otherwise averse from. In speaking to which Particulars, I hope, I shall do (in some measure) Right to the Text, and no improper or unsuitable Service to this So∣lemnity. 1. First, for the Power the Apostle intimates Himself to have in the Church, in these words, shall I come unto you with a Rod?
Our Blessed Saviour after he had publish'd His most excellent, and Heavenly Doctrine to the World, and lived here a considerable time an Example of the Practicableness of it, and had by divers unquestionable mira∣cles, and at last by His Death, and Resurrec∣tion abundantly confirm'd the Truth of it; in sine, after having finish'd the Work that was here given Him to do, being to return again to the Bosom of His Father, He could not any longer manage in His own Person the Interests and Concerns of His Church. But still being touch'd with an infinite Pity, and Compassion for it, and well knowing to what hazards its infancy, and tenderness would expose it, left it not, till He had con∣stituted, and appointed divers Orders and Officers in it, to whom He committed the Care, and whom He invested with Power suf∣ficient to administer, from time to time, to all the Exigencies, and Necessities of it. The precepts of His Religion were not like the later Impostures of Mahomet calcu∣lated on purpose for the gratification of Mens lusts, and for humoring the looseness and wantonness of the World.
No, they were quite of another nature, and as opposite to those, as Light to Darkness; requiring mortification, and self-denyal, and enjoyning Men to Crucify their carnal Appe∣tites, and Affections. And was it likely that such an Institution as this should readily gain footing and Countenance in the World? or rather, was it not sure to meet with the ut∣most hatred, and opposition imaginable? Most certainly our Saviour plainly foresaw it was, and therefore took Care before His departure to settle certain Persons, viz. His eleven Apostles, (whom He had before selec∣ted for that Purpose) as His immediate De∣puties, and Vicegerents, giving them in charge to feed His flock, to watch over, and provide for His Church at present them∣selves; and empowering them, as Occasion should require, to depute, and Ordain others for the same service afterwards; giving them, in short, the same commission to execute that He received of His Father, at His coming into the World, according as we read, Joh. 20.21. As my Father sent me, even so send I you.
Now as for our Saviour's Mission; it will be sufficient for my present purpose, if I give you only St. Peter's account of it, Acts. 10.38. where in His Sermon to Cornelius, and his Company, He tells them, That God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power. And accordingly were His Apostles breath'd on by Him, in or∣der to their installment to a Succession in His Office, and had the same Spirit, and Power assured to Them; Which, not many days after His Ascent, they likewise receiv'd, and were thereby enabled both to gather, and govern the Church; effectually to establish Christianity; and to propagate the Doctrine of the Gospel both in Jerusalem, and in all Ju∣daea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth, as it is, Acts. 1.8. Though they were destitute of all Secular Helps, and had no worldly Advantages to assist or further them, and yet were to en∣counter with Mens riveted opinions, ancient customs, and inveterate habits; to beat them off from those Practices, and Courses they had been used to ever since they were born; and to impose upon them a new, and quite
contrary way of life; reducing them from the smooth, and delightfull paths of Sin in∣to the more rugged, and tiresom tracks of Virtue, yet, so effectually were they endued with power from on high, as St. Luke expresses it,Ch. 24.49. that by their means, the Christian Faith was in a short time wonderfully disseminated, and diffus'd. Like lightning, to borrow our Saviour's allusion in another case, it came from the East,Matt. 24.27. Acts. 19.20. and shone even to the West, and the word of God grew mightily, and prevail'd, the Lord working with them that publish'd it, and confirming it with signs following;Mar. 16.20. Heb. 2.4. God also bearing them witness, as it is in another place, both with signs, and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost. And by this means it was that though They had no silver and gold,Acts. 3.6. they became ca∣pable of exercising the most usefull, and bene∣ficial Charity; though they were not in a condition to relieve the poor Cripple with the small Alms he beg'd, yet They help'd him to what was much better, the use of his limbs, which till that time he had never en∣joy'd, having been lame from his Mother's Womb.v. 2. By which single Good Act, and no∣table
Miracle alone, as it is styled, Acts. 4.16. They greatly ingratiated both themselves and their Doctrine too, thereby proselyting a vast multitude of their Auditors to the Christian Religion, even to the number of five thousand Men, v. 4. Again, though They could not pleasure  with money wherewith to repair to a Pician; yet, which was much more ac∣ceptable, as well as surprizing, at a word of their mouth, or a touch of their hand, was Health many times restor'd. Nay at their ve∣ry Shadow were Distempers, and unclean Spi∣rits scar'd, and put to flight, and the poor Patients were no longer vext, and tormented with them. Even the most obstinate diseases, and stub∣born maladies that had long time been Me∣dicorum ludibrium, the Scorn and Reproach of the Men of Skill, and had baffled all the Rules of their Art, immediately gave place, and vanish'd at their command; So large was their Commission, and in such general terms did it run, as to empower them to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease.Matt. 10.1. I shall not instance to you, as I might ea∣sily do, in any of the other unwonted gifts,
and extraordinary abilities, which the Apo∣stles were vested with, (as Prophesying, Spea∣king with tongues, Discerning of Spirits, and Interpretation of Tongues) for the better fitting, and qualifying them for that eminent work, and employ to which they were delegated; and which render'd them so wonderfully helpfull, and beneficial to the world. But, in reference to what I have already said, t'was impossible but their doing so much good, in that particular respect now-mention∣ed, should create in the minds of Men a very high veneration both for themselves, and the doctrine which they taught. Whereas otherwise, we may conclude, there would have been but little regard paid either to the One, or the Other; but their Persons would have been scorn'd and contemn'd, as be∣ing so very mean, and despicable; and the Gospel they preach'd been disown'd, and rejected, as being so opposite to the loose and irreligious tempers of their Hearers. How infinitely wise therefore, as well as kind and carefull did it speak the Author of our Religion, to send forth the first Planters, and Spreaders of it, so throughly, and com∣pleatly furnished for their Work?
Though they wanted the benefit of let∣ters, Inspiration enabled them to put to si∣lence their most learned Gainsayers; Though their speech (if we take the measures of it from Man's Wisedom) was but rude and un∣polish't,1 Cor. 2 4 yet was it in Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power; though they were poor,2 Cor. 6 10. as the Apostle speaks, yet were they in con∣dition of making many rich, and that with the most true and valuable riches; Lastly, Though in appearance they had nothing, yet really they possessed All Things; All that I have hitherto mention'd being but Part of that Power, that was given them of God, for the greater Benefit, and Edification of His Church. In particular, and to come home to the Text; for the enabling them the better to discharge the Office that was laid upon them, there was committed to them the Power of the Rod, or of inflicting the severest of cor∣poral punishments on gross, and notorious Offenders; of their doing which we want not instances in that account St. Luke gives us of the Acts of the Apostles,Acts 13.11. ch. 5.5.10. where we read of Elymas the Sorcerer smitten with Blindness
by St. Paul; and of Ananias and Sapphira struck with Death it self by St. Peter; Ei∣ther of them an Instance terrible enough of that Power and Authority which Christ, the Head of His Church, had given to the (then) Rulers and Governors of it, of punishing and chastising Her undutifull and incorrigible Children, and of revenging upon them all their disobedience, as the Apostle speaks to these his Corinthians, 2. Cor. 10.6. Besides both which we have an Example of the Use of the Virga Apostolica in another no less dreadfull manner, 1 Tim. 1.20. where Hymenaeus and Alexander having first put away a good Conscience, and at last made Ship∣wrack of their Faith too, (as nothing is more ordinary or natural than for such as are loose and careless in their Practice to fall in∣to Errors in Judgment, and to be given up to believe lies) are by the Apostle deliver'd unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. And this, I say, is another most terrible manner, wherein the Apostles might, and upon occasion did punish Stubborn and re∣fractory Sinners; to see whether the Devil could not torment them into better Manners;
and to force them, if possible, to Repentance and Reformation of life. For that That was the End of delivering over Persons to Satan, viz. the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, we read ch. 5. of this Epistle v. 5. And it being usual with God Al∣mighty, in the earlier days of the Gospel, to give Satan leave to seize the bodies of such as were for their obstinate perseverance in Sin cut off from the Communion of the Church, (Who, (glad of the opportunity) was wont to plague them with diseases, and to bring divers maladies upon them) Excom∣munication is therefore called a delivering un∣to Satan, the power of doing which you have heard, the Apostles had, yea and did not spare, when Occasion so requir'd, to exercise and make Ʋse of the same. And this is That which, I presume, the Apostle intends in this His threatning of these delinquent Corinthians in my Text; where∣in He gives them to understand that in case He heard not of a speedy amendment, they must not expect to be dallied with, or to escape with a slight and easie Penance, but
that He would soon come in Person among them, and proceed, according to the Power the Lord had given Him, to this most severe Ecclesiastical Censure upon them. And indeed had the Apostle been destitute of this Power, and could not have animad∣verted in this manner as has been said on the more bold and hardned transgressors, there being at that time no Christian Magistrates, and consequently the Civil Power not of His Side; so little would He have been able to have gone through the Work He had un∣dertaken, the propagating the Religion of His Lord, that He could never have vindicated it from Contempt, much less have conciliated any tolerable respect either to Himself or It, but People would have contumaciously des∣pis'd His Sentences and Determinations, and have made a mock of violating, and tramp∣ling upon the Laws of His New Religion. Whereas, when They perceiv'd Him arm'd with a Power of exercising such a Discipline upon them, as was follow'd with such strange and frightfull effects, great fear fell upon all the Church,Acts 5.. as 'tis said in reference to that dreadfull Case of Ananias and Sapphira, nay.
as many as but heard of those things were mightily influenced thereby, they were aw∣ed into Compliance, and Obedience to Him, and durst not any longer oppose or withstand Him. And this shall suffice to have been spoken as to the Power of the Apostle, which He here terms His Rod, and to the Nature, Ne∣cessity, and Efficacy, thereof in the Infancy, and Nonage of the Church. 2. My next Enquiry must be in what Measures, and Degrees this Apostolical Power is continued to the Bishops, and Governors of the Church now. The true Oecumenical Bishop, and good Shepherd of Souls, though at first He sent forth His Apostles like Sheep among Wolves,Matt. 1.16. as Himself Speaks, yet he engaged they should never be utterly worried, and destroy'd by them; But admit, when they had served Him in their generations, they might, (as most of them afterwards did) Suffer violent deaths in their own persons; they should still survive in theirQuia A∣postoli à mundo re∣cesseunt, hbes pro illis Epis∣copos filios. S. Hiero∣nymus in Ps 45. ver. 16. Successors, and their Order should be perpetuated from age to age, according to the import of the promise of His being
with them alway  Matt. 28. ult. (which is rightly translated even un∣to the End of the World, as the same phrase does likewise signify, chap. 13.39. Where our Saviour explaining to His Disciples the parable of the Sower, tells them by Harvest is to be understood  The end of the World.) But still that the Successors of the Apostles now-adays have, in all respects, that Pleni∣tude of Power continued to them, which the Apostles themselves at first enjoy'd, or that it is at all necessary they should have, I by no means affirm. For such was the State of the Church in the Apostles time, as required an extraordina∣ry effusion of the gifts of the Spirit, and could not be manag'd without such a Divine, and Supernatural Assistance as, God be thank'd, there is in our time no necessity of; The righ∣teous and mercifull Lord having long since made good His gracious promises to it, that Kings should become the Nursing Fathers,Isa. 49.23. and Queens the Nursing Mothers of it. Whereas 'twas ordinary with the Apostles, where ever they came to publish the tidings
of the Gospel, to meet with discouragements, and oppositions, and to be brought before Rulers for speaking in the name of Jesus; Whole Na∣tions, and Countries have now espous'd His Religion, and the Profession of it is not on∣ly tolerated and allow'd, but strictly com∣manded, and enjoyn'd even by the laws, and constitutions of Kingdoms. What need therefore is there now of those Supernatural and miraculous Gifts, and Pow∣ers that were confer'd upon the Apostles? The difficult task of gaining admittance of Christianity into the World is long since o∣ver; The Miracles that were formerly wrought are sufficient Credentials for the Truth of that Message the present Ministers of the Gospel deliver, and the Laws of their Countrey protect them in the due and regu∣lar discharge of their Office; The Kings of the Earth having not only embrac'd, and sub∣mitted themselves to the Faith of Christ, but glorying in the Style, and Character of being the Defenders of it. As therefore de facto there is not; so nei∣ther is it needfull there should be a Continuati∣on of those antient branches of the Apostles
Power, whereby they were enabled to work Miracles, some of Kindness, and some of Se∣verity, and by Both to confirm and establish the Favourers, and to silence, and confound the Opposers of, (their till then unheard of) Doctrine. 'Tis sufficient that there is such a standing and perpetual Part of that Power transmitted, and to be transmitted to their latest Succes∣sors, as qualifies them for the exercising such a Discipline, and Government in the Church, as Her present adult and grown Estate can ordinarily require. And such we are assur'd, and thankfull too that there is. And not only Hereticks, and Schismaticks, but all such Persons as are im∣pudently dissolute, and immoral in their lives, may know, that though miraculous inflicti∣ons are ceas'd, there are still Penances, and Ex∣communications to be made use of against them. And These! how mightily were they re∣ver'd, and how awfully regarded by the Pri∣mitive, and Purer Ages of Christianity? 'Twas then reputed a Sentence terrible e∣nough to be excluded from the Publick Ordi∣nances; To be debar'd the Church-Prayers,
and Sacraments, and banished from the Com∣munion of their Brethren impressd upon the minds of Men the most sad, and dismal Re∣flections, and even swallow'd them up with Horror, and Astonishment. Such was the Anguish of Soul that seiz'd those Criminals that lay under the Sentence and Censure of the Church, that the methods of Prayers, Sighs, and Tears were willingly undertaken by them in order to the recovery of Her Favour. And Ecclesiastical History informs us that even Theodosius the Emperor being excom∣municated by St. Ambrose, testified the in∣ward trouble and concern of His Mind, by all the outward expressions of Grief, and Sor∣row; He disrob'd Himself of His Imperial Purple, and put on the Garments of Mourning; yea for the Space of Eight Months together He humbled Himself in His penitential Weeds, and took shame to Himself for the foulness of His Crime, The giving way to the Shedding of a great deal of innocent Blood, and at last esteemed it an inestimable Privilege to be again admitted into the Church of Milan. Thus sacred, and that long after the Apo∣stles
time, (this passage happening towards the latter End of the fourth Century) was the Churche's Authority; and so greatly reve∣renced was Her Discipline, by all Orders, and Degrees of Men. Nor is That which She now brandishes a Brutum Fulmen, Her hand is not now so short∣ned, but that She can upon just Provocation Stretch it forth still, to Strike as hard, and correct as sharply as then. When Her Head and Founder first incor∣porated Her into a Community, He vested Her with Power, (as all other Communities are, and must be that are design'd long to sub∣sist) and promis'd She should for ever retain a share of it, sufficient for the punishing such Members of Her Society, as should, at any time, presumptuously violate the Laws, and Consti∣tutions of it. And to this Power have the Ecclesiastical Superintendents, and Governors, all along, (when need has so requir'd) not Stuck to have recourse; Rather than not maintain the Churche's Purity, and Peace, They have ever smartly chastis'd that Vice, and Wickedness that has eclips'd, and defac'd the One, and
those Divisions, and Disorders that have dis∣turb'd, and endanger'd the Other. And if (as it may possibly be urg'd that) Persons now-adays despise these Chastisements, regard not Church-Censures, and are not so a∣fraid of them, nor awed by them as formerly; It shall suffice me to reply, That a Man's stupid insensibility (in many cases) argues his condition not to be the better, but the worse; They are but so much the more worthy of Blame, I will add, and Pity too; In a word, I look upon this Practice of theirs; as one In∣stance of that wofull Degeneracy of the last days, wherein the Apostle long since foretold us, that Men should not only be disobedient,2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. unthankfull, and unholy; But proud, fierce, and heady. And thus I dismiss the second Thing, viz. That the Bishops, and Governors of the Church now have the Power of the Rod con∣tinued to them in a measure sufficient, pro hoc statu; though not so large and full as their first Predecessors had. And yet, of the two, no doubt, They had rather, after St. Paul's example (which is my third Particular,) 3. Have occasion to use only the fair, and
gentle Methods; This the Apostle's manner of Expression in my Text, What will ye? Shall I come? &c. intimates Him to have been most desirous of; The putting the question to the Corinthians, as He does, being in effect a telling them, it should be purely their own fault, if He came unto them with a Rod, and not in Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness. He well remember'd, t'was the Service of the Prince of Peace that he was engag'd in, viz. The divulging the Gospel of Peace, (Bring∣ing Men over, at first, to the Profession, and then preserving them in the Practice of it,) and he accordingly attempted to do it in the most meek, and peaceable manner. Had He delighted in Severity, or been fond of making Use of His Power, He would never have troubled Himself to have given the Offenders such fair warning to prevent, and escape it, by a timely Amendment, and Reformation of life. His thus premonishing them of the Tendency of their present doings, whilst 'twas yet in their power to evade it, argued great tenderness, and indulgence, yea a truly Paternal kindness towards them. The affection of a Father prompting Him to me∣nace,
and threaten Punishment, to the very End, that He might not execute, and inflict it. Suitable to what He has, 2 Cor. 13.10. Therefore, I write these things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpness; For this reason I give you these wholesome war∣nings before I come, that when I come, I may not have occasion to proceed to ex∣cision and excommunication, as against con∣tumacious Offenders I must of necessity do. Thus truly Christian, and exactly resem∣bling that of the meek, and lowly Jesus, was the Temper of our Apostle; He was very loth to be harsh and rigorous, if His Business might be effected without it;Ille dolet. quoties co∣gitur esse ferox. and will∣ing not only to respite, and suspend, but wholly to withhold the Punishments due to Evil-doers, in case He could by any milder way attain His Ends on them; Provided they would but be reclaim'd by kindness, and won upon by candid Ʋsage. 'Twas in his opinion a more noble and manly way of victory to conquer Mens wills, and captivate their understandings, than to use force and violence upon their Persons. But still He was not so cruelly complaisant neither,
as not to put a Rub in the way of Him that He saw posting to his ruine; or to suffer impenitent Sinners to damn themselves with∣out Check. No, in that case He took His Rod in hand out of meer Pity; chastening them therewith as an Argument of His Love, & scourging them to shew His Compassion. Scriptor Responsionun ad Orthodoxos.. The Church is in Scripture not unfitly re∣sembled to a Vineyard, (as Isa. 5. and else∣where) and that upon several accounts, but none more aptly than this; That even the noble Vine (as the Prophet Jeremy's Epithet is) is wont to have its luxuriances,Jer. 2.21. and excrescen∣cies, which till they be prun'd away, and lop'd off, it either produces no fruit, or else such as never comes to Maturity, and Per∣fection. And accordingly in the Church, there are those that have embraced, at least that make daily profession of the Faith of Christ; those that have been baptized into the best Religion in the World, and are yet guilty of such notorious exorbitances, and irregula∣rities in their lives, as the Masters in God's Spiritual Husbandry, the Bishops and Pastors
of His Church must be forced to reclaim and rectifie by the Discipline of their Censures, or there will never be any Good to be expected from them. Rather, they will turn at last, (to keep to the Prophet's Allegory) to degene∣rate plants of a strange Vine, and become ut∣terly unprofitable branches, fit only to be cast forth till they wither, and then to be gathered, and cast into the fire, and burned.Joh 15.6. Thus you see the Pastors and Governors of the Church are of necessity compell'd sometimes to use sharpness; And unless They could be (as their near Relation will not suffer them) wholly indifferent to the Welfare of those un∣der their Care, They must, in some cases, do it, though with never so much reluctance. Nay, the welfare of those who are actu∣ally delinquent is not concern'd alone neither, but there is infinite danger lest their Counte∣nance and Example should inveigle others, and draw them at last into the same Misery and Perdition with themselves. And these are Consequences so sad, and mischievous, as that they must be prevented by any lawfull means, though haply such as may Prove harsh and cutting; And yet Cuncta priùs ten∣tanda
be still the Churche's Motto in the case; For this hinders not, but rather proves and confirms (according to what I am now asserting) the Apostolick temper naturally to incline to Christian tenderness, and pity. And so much for the third Thing, That albeit the Apostle was furnish'd with Power sufficient to punish all Stubborn Offenders in the Church, yet He was very loth, and unwil∣ling to exercise and make use of it, but in case of pure necessity, being much rather de∣sirous He might have occasion to use only the fair, and gentle means. 4. And so I proceed to the fourth and last Thing propounded, namely, To exhort Chris∣tians to be more obedient to their Spiritual Pas∣tors, and Fathers, by an orderly and regular conversation, than to force them to the use of that Severity, which They are of themselves averse from. And here methinks there should nothing More be needfull to prevail with Men to yield a hearty, and willing Obedience to those that are over them in the Lord, than a Con∣sideration, what Their Office and Employ is, which is in Scripture term'd, a Watching for Mens Souls.
An Office above all others so vastly benefi∣cial to the World, that 'twere to be expec∣ted, Meer Gratitude should put Men upon endeavouring to render it as sweet, and easie as possible to Them that Sustain it; And Kind∣ness to themselves oblige them to be submissive and obedient to it. This the Apostle thought a good Argument for Christians to obey them that have the rule over them, even their watching for their Souls;Heb. 13.17. And such most certainly would it appear, were it but consider'd aright. For can Men reasonably suspect that They whose aims and designs are so infinitely kind, and charitable towards them, should require any thing of them that is really hurtfull and prejudicial to them? Can they be jealous of enmity from Them, whose constant endea∣vour it is to befriend them, and that in the most important instance of Friendship? Lastly, Can they justly fear any Harm from Those, whose daily task, and business it is to doe all the Good they can to as many as are commit∣ted to their Charge, Yea, I may add, who dare not but do it, being, as the Apostle speaks, to give account?
And yet 'twould be a matter of great won∣der, did not the commonness abate it, that the wholesome and profitable, the grave and wise, the kind and friendly Advices of their Eccle∣siastical Superiors should be so slightly regar∣ded, and not more readily complied with by them than they are; That there should be those among us who being told by Them of their Duty never so plainly, continue to neg∣lect it; that being premonish'd never so fair∣ly refuse to take warning, till like Children, I mean not in meekness, innocence, and simpli∣city, (they are far enough from that) but in crossness, and stubbornness, they are whip'd into Obedience. Though their Spiritual Guides, as they are the Ambassadors of Christ, would rather beseech, intreat,2 Cor. 5.20. and pray them, as St. Paul speaks, in Christ's stead, that they would be reconcil'd to God, than come as His Heralds to proclaim War, and denounce Vengeance against them; Though as Paranymphs of the Heavenly Bride∣groom, they had rather court and perswade His wandring and inconstant Spouse to return to His Love, and re-admit His dear Embraces, (if by that means they might prevail with Her)
than threaten Her with an Eternal Divorce; Yet, howsoever it comes to pass, the latter me∣thods are they fain, for the most part, to have recourse to. So madly do Men flee their Hap∣piness, and forsake their own Mercies.Jonah 2.8. Nay with some, Experience abundantly teaches that even These, (I mean the sharpest courses) lose their Effect; They being so far from trembling at (as was usual heretofore) that they slight, and contemn the severest Sentences, and Denunciations of the Church. But all I have, at present, to say to such, is to desire them to recollect the Proverb, and to consider well the Meaning of it, That what they spit against Heaven will fall in their face; That the time will come, when the great Bishop of Souls will interpret Mens des∣pising of those that were commissionated un∣der Him, as a despising of Himself;Luk. 10.16. And sure∣ly they will not be so fool-hardy as to dis∣regard, and pish at the dismal consequences of that too. Surely, they will for the future, quietly, and dutifully submit themselves to their Spiritual Governors; and if not be drawn by the Cords of love alone to obey their orders, and reverence their injunctions; at least
not contumaciously oppose themselves, and stand out against their Authority, lest haply, as was said in another case,Acts 5 39. they be hereafter found to have fought against God. I shall conclude all with one word to You, my Brethren in the Sacred Function, and it shall be by way of entreaty, That forasmuch as we are commanded in all things to shew our selves Patterns of good works; and Ensamples to our Flocks, We may be carefull (as certainly we have as much reason (to say no more) as any Clergy in the Kingdom) to approve our selves such in this particular respect, I mean, In hum∣bly and chearfully complying with, and submit∣ting our selves to all the Injunctions of our Re∣verend Diocesan. And let us earnestly implore the God of peace,Heb. 13.20, 21. that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, to make both us, and all that we have the inspec∣tion over, perfect in every good work, to do His Will, and to work in us all whatsoever is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever, and ever. Amen. FINIS.
