B2940 R6101 12320534 59467
THE NON-PAREIL, OR, THE VERTVOVS DAVGHTER SVRMOVNTING ALL HER SISTERS: Described, In a Funerall Sermon upon tbe Death of that vertuous Lady, ELIZABETH HOYLE, late wife of the Worshipfull Thomas Hoyle, Alderman of the City of Yorke. By that godly and Reverend Divine Mr Iohn Birchall, late Pastor of the Church of St. Martins in Micklegate. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remem∣brance, but the memoriall of the wicked shall rot. YORK: Printed by Tho: Bro, welling in Stone-gate over against the Stare. 64.
To the Honourable Thomas Hoyle, Lord Majo of the City of Yorke, and one of the Burgesses of the High Court of Parliament for that City, increase of Honour and Vertue. HONOVRABLE, I Hope whiles I revive your vertuous Ladies memory, I need not fear to renew your so∣row, which is not so much worn away with Time, as born with Christian Fortitude, and allayed with discretion. Againe, you have happily repaired your losses, (and in the same kind) by a second Rebecca; so you are comforted after her death, who (living) was Mother in Israel, as Israels Father was after the death of his Mo∣ther. Adde to this, that all private Crosses are to be forgotten, yea and present Blessings scarce to be injoyed, when wee remember our publique calamities. So Pbineas his wife was more affected wiih the taking of the Ark, then with the death of either Husband or Fa∣ther; nether would she forget her sorrow, though a Man-child was born into the world. Such was (not the wilful humour, but) the gracious temper of that good Hittite, who would neither eate nor drink, nor go down to his house or wife, whiles the Ark and Judah abode in the Tents, and his Lord Joab and his servants lay in the open fields, counting that unlawfull, which was onely unseasona∣ble. Pardon I pray you, this digression, which yet is not altogether impertinent to this ensuing Funerall Subject, seeing the whole Kingdome is almost turned into one Funerall. The righteous pe∣rish, and none layeth it to heart; where, though the departure of the Righteous is much to be lamented, yet much more the apathy and seslesnesse of the miserable Surviver. But to return and resume our former Subject. As she wa a ecel∣lent Pattern of many divine graces, so especially she exceld in this tenderness & compassion, which, with the rest of her holy vertues, I need not pourtray and represent unto your view, seeing you fully know them by a long and sweet experience▪ & have their Idea still before your eyes: & this also is done to my hand in this just Panegy∣rick by a better Orator, who was your vigilant Pastor, & my reverend acquaintance, in whom those rich endowments, which he describes in your worthy Consort, did also shine in an eminent manner, so that changing onely the Psrson, it may serve for his own Funerall Sermon; for as in water face answereth to face, so their hear is both washed with water and the same holy Spirit, were alike spirituall
and holy. He being dead, yet speaketh in his Sermon, and she being dead, yet liveth in our affections and memory. & remaines a lively pattern of heavenly conversation. Her excelling vertues he sets forth, not in excellency of words, but with the Apostle in the de∣monstration of the Spirit and of Power. Neither could his medita∣tions & composure be very exact and perfect, seeing this his pre∣gnant issue was to be delivered the day after the conception: and though he had more time for preparation, yet he was not like those who prick their words, (as birds set their feathers, or nice women their curles,) in a quaint & curious order; for this savours more of affectation then of affection, & of ostentation, then truth & sinceri∣ty. There are many whos& Sermons are halfe a yeer in contriving, then vented in one hour, & forgotten in another; (like painted Pa∣geants erected against the Kings Coronation, which after much pains & time spent in decoring, are taken down when the day of Solemnity is over,) and these are they who like those Jews, John. 5. 44. seek honor one of anther, & seek not the honour which cometh from God only, especially the chief Rulers among them did love the praise of men more then the praise of God, Joh. 12. 43. whereas not he that commendeth himself (as such plaunble, but unprofita∣ble men would do) is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth, 2 Cr. 10. ult. But the sole aime of our Orator is, to glorifie God, to do your Consort right and us all good, by setting forth in plain, yet patheticall language, her holy life, for our happy imitation: and though his time of preparation was very short, yet his Semons very full; for he being a present man alwayes furnished, had his quiver full of divine meditationss which he culd readily open upon every opportunity, and it becomes every one of us to expose the tender parts of our hearts to such wounding, yet healing arrows, which receive this soveraign quality from the Sun of righteousness which hath healing in his wings. Now for this particular Sermon, certain∣ly it is much eclipsed, from that primitive lustre which it had when it was presented viva voce before you: for his tongue was he pen of a ready writer, but not the pen of any writer could match his ready tongue; for he was very quick boh in his tongue and in his mind, full of holy affections to sanctifie his learning, and full of choice leaning to beautifie his holinesse. Thus much I thought good o write in his honour, who so much honoured you & yours. But I feae me I have weaied you, so now remit yu to the refre∣freshm of his comfortable Sermon, which I make bold to commend to your Patrnage, you and yours to the Almighties protection, and ny poor endeavrs to your Lordships acceptation. So rest, Your Lordships true Honourer, J. F.
The Commendation. PROV. 31. 29. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all. WHen I looked first into this Text, thin∣king to consult (as I did) with some, yea, divers Commentators, then I did begin to thinke of saving that labour; for truly this blessed Saint of God was the best Commentary of this my Text in her life: What an happy thing was it that she should heare her Funerall Sermon (as it were) before her death; the last Ser∣mon that ever she heard was on that ubject, and it was observed concerning her, that she came from the place of Gods Worship with such joy, as though she had come from Heaven. The text was that which we spake of last Munday
on the 116. Psalme 13. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. She both in her life and at her death did expresse the truth of that last text which shee heard discourse of on a Funerall occasi∣on, and she also in her life and conversation is an exact Commen∣tary on this my text. That which I purpose to speak of concerning her, shall be nothing but what I conceive in Gods sight to be truth: and what shall be now said in her commendation, (for seeing shee honoured the Lord in her life, it is my poor desire, and it shall be my best indeavour to honour her at her death,) what (I say) now first shall be said in her commendation, shall at last be repeated againe with application unto you all, for your imitation. Truly this in generall, first I may say, that when I look into those examples in the Scripture of rare persons, even of godly women, as Sarah and Deborah a Mother in Israel, and the like, may not we say, that the name indeed differs, but the practise doth not; a Sarah is dead, a Deborah a Mother in Israel is gone: Nay, beside these exam∣ples, when I read those expressions and discriptions of godly we∣men, in the 1 Tim. 2. in the 2 Titus, as also in the 1 Peter 3. me thinks, there is a lively discription of this godly Saint. But leaving generals, we will come to speak of some particulars, and we will reduce them briefly into these two heads. First, to her conversation before God, as in the sight of God, as also amongstHer con∣versation towards God. and before men here on earth. Secondly, to her affection and Hea∣venly mindednesse towards that glorious place, and the enjoying of that blessed person there, even the Lord Jesus. or the first of these, (and by the way, that you may not conceive, that what shee did even in regard of Morall things, was nothing but what a Civil and Morall man might have done) this Man-ward, the will of God was her rule, the Spirit of God was her guide, and the glory of God was her end. Three such qualifications of an action, as never yet were found in the best action of the highest Formalist. But now particularly concerning that first work of God upon her, even her conversation unto God (as I am given to understand.) It is since the Lord begun to set her face towards Heaven some thirty yeares, or thereabouts, all which time untill now, she kept her face and her heart towards that blessed place. Look a little into the Gospell (for there are the best and the surest
evidences of a blessed estate) concerning the great work of Faith inH Faith the blood of the Lord Jesus: oh, how precious was the Lord Christ unto her soule, as her discourses many a time did manifest, and as the text speaks, 1 Pet 2. It is a cleer evidence that she beleeved on the Lord Jesus, because (as the Apostle there speakes) to such as doe be∣lieve he is precious, and so he was unto her; and you may conceive from that, which some persons doe think, is not such an evidence, she her self would often confesse, that she found shaking sometimes concerning her Faith: for I do assent unto his judgment that affirm it, That he that alwayes believes alike, and he that alwayes prayes alike, hee never believed, nor prayed truly. But all her shaking were for her further setling and rooting in the Faith; as ye take a tender Plant & shake it that so the roote of it may bee more setled in the ground, and spread abroad further in the earth. And for her repentance in respect of sinne, oh her sorrowfull andHer repen∣tance. penitent soul for that! after her dayes of humiliation in secret, she comming out into the family severall times these years have heard her speaking of her sins, with eyes as full of tears as may be; and when she came unto the Lords table, she came with such broken∣nesse and with such tendernesse of spirit, as it was a cleere evidence unto me, that as with joy she looked on Christ the Maker and Mat∣ter of that blessed Feast, so with sorrow she looked on her sinne by which she had pierced so sweet a Saviour. What shall I say further, I might goe through all those markes and evidences of life and of salvation revealed in the Gospell, ex∣pressed by our Saviour, in 5. Mat. O I might tell you that she was poor in spirit, and she was pure in heart, and shee was a mourning soule, and she was an hungry soul, she was a meek soule, and she was a mercifull soule, of all which our blessed Saviour pronounces this in that place, that they are certain and infallible markes of a bles∣sed estate. Looke into those evidences that are expressed in the rules and commands of the Gospell, as concerning the mortifying of sinne, so as not suffering it to raign, growing in grace, walking, not after the flesh, but after the spirit, self-deniall and humility of spi∣rit,Her selfe-deniall & umilitie. especially that in the will, not only that reverentiall humility whereby she had high thoughts of her God, and low and meane thoughts of her selfe, but also that obedientiall humility in sto∣ping,
and subjecting her will unto the will of her God; this was e∣nough for her that God had said it, and therefore shee for ber par would indeavour to do it; these are such evidences as are Evange∣licall. Look now a little into the Law as modifyed by the Gospell; in all the commands of the first Table. For the first command I haveHer obe∣dience to the first Command often thought of her speech; oh! saith she, I am greatly in love with the first command, and truly it was a sound evidence of life in her, for this is the summe of the first Table, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c. nay, she was heartily glad that the Lord had bin pleased to expresse himself in that manner. Oh beloved, could any man hear her speake this, how she loved the first Command, which indeed is the root and substance of all the rest, and how glad shee was, that God had given out such a Command; could any man (I say) heare this, and not thus conclude from it, and say, Oh, the strength of grace in the heart of this Saint!T the 2. Cmmand Her rdi∣nary du∣ties. In heing the Word. In recei∣ving the Sacra∣mente. And for the second Command, that is, of Gods worship, whether ordinary or extraordinary. For the ordinary, whether publique, private, or secret; For those in publique, as the hearing of Gods Word and joyning in Prayer, oh what meltings, and oh what breakings have these eyes seen, in that seat, she used to heare, and made use of what she heard! Many of us doe use to heare Ser∣mons, but there is an end, we make but little good use of the Ser∣mons that we heare. And for her receiving of the Sacrament, oh what care did she take in a speciall manner by her selfe, by hum∣bling of her soule to prepare her selfe for the participation of that ordinance! and oh what melting affection in a sweet mixture of joy and sorrow (for at that time there is both) have these eyes seene in her, when as these hands have given her the outward elements? and oh the joy and gladnesse of her soule after shee returned home, having been feasted with the Lord Jesus at his own Table? And asIn ding of  Sri∣tues.  me∣ition. for private performances what shall I say for reading the Scriptures from the first, unto the last, she was a constant dayly reader of Gods Word; And for that same duty of Meditation, (oh, that too much neglected duty) it was her constant course one or twice a day to run over what she had heard on the Lords-Day, even on the weeke day, and I my self have seen her many a time retire her self to walk
in a place commonly called the Garth, or in some other place in a speciall manner (I am perswaded) for this very end, to presse upon her soule in secret, what she had heard in publique. And for that of prayer, her constant course was to pray by her self three or foureI prayer. times constantly every day, beside her constant joyning in the fa∣mily duties. And here now (if you please) let me bring in her death because when she was closing with God in that duty, then the Lordconcerning her present Death. was pleased in a speciall manner to draw neer unto her, & this you must know that it is one thing to die suddently, another thing to die presently or quickly. Suddennesse is this, when a man never thought on the matter before, nor prepared for the matter before; but presentnesse or spee∣dinesse may come on a person that is fitted and prepared; therefore let me say two things concerning this. First, for her preparation forHer prepa∣ration for Death. death, and her thoughts and speeches of death, it was very much, and they were very many and frequent; nay, the very last day that ever shee lived here on earth, even at Noone in discoursing with o∣thers, to this purpose she said unto her husband; Husband you are not like to enjoy me long; some replyes being made unto her, shee returned this answer, But no man knows so much by me, as I do by my selfe; and this was about eight hous before her death; thus her thoughts were running upon it, and no doubt still she was pre∣paring for it; and she hath said unto me and others, that shee was verily perswaded she should die this kind of death, because it seems both her Father and her sister before her dyed so. Yet you must re∣member the distinction that even now we gave you. There is a two∣foldA twofold suddennes in dying. suddennesse; one in respect of preparation, and another in re∣gard of time: the former was not to her, the latter was: to make this distinction plain to you: It may be you are indebted to a man an 100. pounds, and there is no day set for the payment of it; hee may come when he pleaseth; well (say you) Sir come when you will, your money shall be ready for you; you lay the 100. pounds by you in a readinesse, because you do not know certainly when he will come; it may be such a day he comes, and hee knocks at your doores, and calls for the hundred pounds: you may say now, his comming is sudden, and not suddain, in respect of preparation it is not suddain, for you have the money by you; but in respect of time
it is suddain, for hee came in a time you looked not for; oh, how many thousand, thousand, have warning enough for Time, but as for Preparing for Death, alas what preparation is made! oh, let me labour for the former that Death may never finde mee unprepared, and for the latter the will of the Lord be done. Shall I tell you, one of the rarest Saints that ever breathed here on earth, dyed quickly, Moses by name; why, saith God to Moses, Moses go up into the Mount and dye; nothing but this, Go up, depart and dye: thus Moses dyed. So Aaron (as a man may say) he is onely strip't of his cloaths, and so he dyes; this is the first thing that I would have you consider, con∣cerning her death. And secondly, this I adde, (seeing that the Lord was pleased that this death should be) how seasonable was it that at this timeHer death was seaso∣nable. she should be taken out of this world unto God? how it is with o∣ther men I know not, this I am sure of, that a child of God, as gene∣rally at all times, so especially towards the evening will goe unto God, and make even his reckonings with him, that so if death should come to him in the night, and his Bed should be his Grave, yet then his soule might go to Heaven; Now though she had been againe and againe with her God that day, both in private and in publique, yet she is not weary, but as Moses goes up into the Mount, so she still goes into her Parlour unto her God in Prayer, and at that time she closes with her God so, that Hee was pleased to seize upon her body, and so presently after, her soule departs unto the Lord Jesus. Here I bring in her death in her Prayer, to wit, as when the River is going towards the Sea, the Sea at the Tyde comes out, as it were to salute it, and to bring it in; so this blessed Saint, oh! she was running fast towards heaven, and she was almost in heaven all that day after the Sermon; well now, the Lord seeing her make such speed towards him he comes down to meet her, and now hee hath taken her unto himself, this for ordinary duties both in pub∣lique, private, and secret, respecting the second Commandement. Now for extraordinary duties, this on my owne knowledge alsoHer du∣ties extra∣dinary. I speak, that she constantly every weeke did keepe a private Day of Humiliation, retiring her self alone, and spending some part of the day with her husband, and that in examining of her heart, & hum∣bling of her soule, in reading and in meditating, and yet such was
her wisdome, that she cast things so, as she might not be interrupted by those occasions which she might meet withall, either in the world, or in the family. This for the second Commandement. For the third, for her reverencing of Gods Name, it is no greatTo the 3. Comman∣dement. matter for me to say, I never heard her swear (as I never did) du∣ring all that seven yeers that I lived with her, and I am perswaded had I lived 70. yea 100. yeares with her, I should never have heard her swear; no, no, more then that, she feared an oath; and this evi∣denceth that she had respect unto the thitd Commandement. And for the fourth, what shall I say for that, a whole day mightTo the 4. Comman∣dement. I spend concerning that day: she spent it wholly for God: I will tell you nothing but the truth: shee did rise constantly at 6. of the clock in the morning, and being up, she first went apart secretly and commended her own case unto God in Prayer, and she did reade Gods Word; then she came forth, and she (to prepare her selfe fur∣ther for the publique duties) went to pray with her husband in pri∣vate, or with the Minister that was there present in the family; af∣ter this she went about seven or eight of the clock unto the publique place of Gods Worship, where shee spent all the forenoone, untill dinner: presently after dinner, so soone as the servants had dined, she occasioned their calling in; then was an account given by them of what they had heard that forenoon, and usually this continued untill the time that the Bell ceased ringing, then she went to the House of God again, and there she spent all that time which was alotted for the publique Worship: then she returned backe again, and presently after, before supper, the servants were called in again an account was given concerning the Word that they had heard, and oftentimes, oh! with affection would she speake unto her ser∣vants, (especially now of late) Oh! remember this; when a seaso∣nable Truth was delivered. What did she yet before supper? why, she retires her selfe in secret, shee goes to God in prayer, and what then? why, presently after supper, the servants were a third time called in, an account was still given of the Word that they had heard, what this or that servant could say, so as they were able to answer in some method, for method helpes both judgment and me∣mory: then the whole Family, the Church, the Word of God, and all was commended unto the Lords blessing, and we were fitted and
prepared for to take our rest; Loe here a Saint of God spending the Lords day graciously. And this was her constant course: had shee done it once or twice onely, it had bin lesse, but it was her constant course; thus I have led you along in speaking something of her concerning her carriage towards God both in the Gospell, and in the Law, these are main things, beleeve it, these are speciall things, and in all these the authority of God overawed her, and the love of God constrained her to do what she did. Now we come to speak something of her in relation unto man,Her con∣verstion towards man. and there you may see, that though she hath gained, yet wee have lost; I have heard it reported of her by a man that was not apt to flatter, he said plainly, That of all the persons in the world, with whom he did converse, he never knew her equall in all things, and I confesse ingeniously and sincerely, that I have beene acquainted with divers in the Southern, in the Western, and in the Northerne parts, but for all things both towards God and man, I never knew her equall. But more particularly in respect of the Church, and People ofTowards th Church and people of God. God, (to begin with the best first) oh the Church of God hath a great losse: She was but a woman, but she was a most valianr Soul∣dier, one that could fight with the enemies of the Church of God, yea wrastle with God himself by her prayes, and tears, these are the weapons of the Church, without which let a mans spirit be never so couragious, yet if he go not out with God, all his courage and strength will but little availe: thus the Church of God for a friend, hath lost one. Look now unto the Ministers of the Church of God, and to the members of the Church of God, this is the truth; For the MinistersTowards Ministers of Gods Word. of Christ, I have wondred at her carriage towards them, and what if I should say also of her bounty towards them; Concerning the members of Christ,Twards the Mem∣bers of Chist. the Saints of God, yea all the Saints of God, yea the poorest Saint of God, with whom she was acquainted, every one of them was her dearly beloved. I do not know a Child of God that was acquainted with her, but he will seal unto this truth, that she loved the Saints, all the Saints, and that therfore, even because they were Saints. This I know, that in her eyes a vile person was contemned, but (as the Psalmist speakes) shee made much of them
that feared the Lord. Well then, Church of God thou hast a losse; Ministers and Members of the Lord Jesus ye also have a lose. In relation now unto the family, to the City, to friends, to foes, to Parish, to Poor, to all. In relation to the family, to the head of the family, oh, she was a dear, obedient, and faithfull wife: oh, aTwrds her family losse unto him: what! for the outward man? yes, a losse that way: but especially for the inward man; oh, her presence, her counsell, her company, her prayers for the soule of her husband above thou∣sand thousands yearly. A losse thus unto the inward man of her husband, she was every way unto him a meet help indeed, and this now in the want of her is both known and felt; and for her Chil∣dren, she had many taken away from her by death, very young and tender, but for that which remains, oh her care over her! oh her prayers for her and with her! she it seemes for other times (this ex∣cepred) used to take her daughters along with her, to pray with her: Oh a losse thus in respect of her husband! oh a losse thus in re∣spect of her daughter! this is known and felt. For her servants in the Family, before I knew her 20. yeares, it was her constant course to Catechize her servants, and now lately more especially, she was put∣ting on to that duty: oh her love ut the soules of her servants! Concerning her kinded on his side, on her side, they may come in and say, Not only husband and daughter, and servants, but we also have lost a great losse Concerning the City now, and those that shee conversed withall in it, truly, when I remembred what was once said concerning Ahnsius, in his paise and commendation, I could not keep my thoughts from running upon her, she was (as it is said of him) both Magnes & Admas, both  Load-stone and an Adamant; as a Load-stone she did draw others sweetly by her carriage; and a woman so grave, and yet a woman so cheerfull seldome have I seen; yet she was as firme for God as an Adamant, not yeelding unto any thing, whereby Gods glory might be any way impeched, or his wil might be disobeyed. For those morall vertues, which wee toucht up∣on before, as her Justie, her Tempere, her Cure, yea and that rai∣sed higher, her courae fr Gd, her pan  in her calling, her meeense, her mdst,  in ll  she was admirable: Thus bth Family and City, the persons therein with whom she conversed, in respect f both there is a losse Looke to friends now, and to foes also▪ to have a friend that is a
Saint, and to love an enemy; both these are marks of grace. For the former, I have already told you of it; and for the latter, this I have been told, that I having had some occasion to speake something of that subject, she could freely speak, what a large heart the Lord had given her for her enemies, to pray for them, and to do them good both in word and deed, and this but about some 8. houres before he death. And for the Parish, they themselves well know that they have lost a Matron, and lost a Motber indeed. And for the poore, this was her constant course every week, to lay up something for them, to see how the Lord would have it. In the morning of that day on which she dyed, about the poore neighbour for whom we prayed, she was imploy'd in making something ready for him, yea sending mo∣ney to him, yea a third time sending; and that it might not be done for ostentation, shee would sometimes charge the servant that car∣ryed the almes, to give the almes so as to conceal the name; thus both Parish, and Poor, all have a losse. Now for her two-fold outward state, as thus she carried towards all persons, so thus also she carried in all estates; still she was con∣stant with her God, in the time of prosperity, so humble, so thankful, so bountifull, and liberall she was: In the times of any crosse, or losse, or adversity, oh, then the strength of the patience, and long-suf∣fering of this godly soule! oh, what wisdome did she shew! what subjection unto Gods will, nay, what fruitfulnesse also after the af∣fliction was past; thus did she go through sufferings. She told me not long since, that the Lord had answered every prayer that shee had put up, as if he should have said to her, why, child, I will both direct thee what to ask, and I will also answer thee in what thou askest; as the Lord said to Moses concerning the people of Israel, Let mee a∣lone: so concerning her last deare child, I shall never forget her words, Ah (saith she) I could never yet get my heart inlarged in praying for his life, because (to wit) the Lord had a purpose to take him unto himselfe; therfore he restrained the spirit of his servant, from being so instant with him in praying for his life. Thus you have seen some things in relation to God, to man, to persons, to things, to states. Now for the second thing that we propounded, that is, concerning her heavenly mindednesse; eertainly her conversation was in heaven, for all her endeavors did tend thitherwards; nay, she
had a heart set for heaven, and she had set her affections on things above long before. And for the world, oh how often would she speak of that, as having her heart taken off from the world; and finding that the things of the world did steal away her hear, she cuts of the affection by taking away the occasion; What saith she, you things of this life do you begin to steal away my heart from heaven and hea∣venly things? away with you, let not me be troubled with you; that therefore which the men of the world do look after so carefully, as loving it dearly, even their gold and silver, shee finding it somewhat to incroach upon her affections, her husband must have it, shee will not keepe it; and in respect of her expressions many and many a time concerning her desires to be absent from the body, that she might be present with the Lord, oh, how Saint-like did she expresse her selfe? Now seeing in this manner (as you have heard) towards God, and towards Man, in the use of all good means shee was walking & step∣ping on still towards heaven; and seeing that she, (setting heaven and the Lord Jesus before her) thus pressed hard forward toward the Mark for the price of her high calling, wee may say two things for conclusion: First, we may say this, That though we have lost, yet she hath gained to eternity: And secondly, this also wee may say (and so I come unto my Text) that though many have done vertuously, yet may I not speak of he as Salomon doth ther hast not thou excelled them all? And so from her unto our text wee passe with what brevity may be. THE SERMON. PROV: 31. 29. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all. IN the latter end of this last Chapter there is a commenda∣tion of a vertuous and godly woman, positively from the tenth verse unto my text, and here in my text compara∣tively. The words divide themselves into two parts: the
former part is this, Many Daughters have done vertuously: the latter part this, But thou excellest them al. Seeing then what is said here, is for the Praise, Commendation, and Honor of a vertuous and godly woman, we will therefore from the words at this time handle this one truth. Doct. That though mny do eruousl, yet sone of Gods people do excell in grae, and this is their praise and glory. We say sometimes of the lives of women, as Origen once spake con∣cerning them, that if they be good they are very good; though ther∣fore wee might bring to the exaples of men in the Scripture that did excell in grace, yet notwithstanding for the confirmation of this truh, we will only inance in those of the same Sexe with this god∣ly soul now departed: And the fir shll be in ne of her own name, lzaet, Lue 1 6. there you sall find ha Zchry and Elizabeh were two rare and excellent persons in grace, for there it is said con∣cerning them both, that they were rihteous befoe God, & blame∣lesse among men▪ there is one excellent woman. The second that we shall name is Tbih, shee is decribed in Act. 9. 36, 37. shee was a Disciple, a Professor of the Gospell, and a woman full of good works, thee is a second excelen woman▪ The third that wee shall name, for a woman that was excellent in gra, is Mary, John 1. 11, 20. shee was first at the grave, and she was last at the grave; shee stayes at the grave, weeping, and mourning, and crying, when Peter, that rare Apo∣stle, was gone; here was a woman rare for her affection unto Christ, her heart did appeare to bee more tende being a woman, then the heart of Peter, a person of another Sexe: To name yet another, Rom. 16. 12. there Paul salues two godly Matrons, that laboured in the Lord; but saith he salute our beloved Psi, that laboured much in the Lord; that is more; Others they laboured in the Lord, and his was their commendation, but this beloved Pesi shee laboured and laboured much in the Lord, theefore she is especially commended for it. Reas. The reasons of this truth are thee; The first is taken from the inward working causes, and they ae these two, Christ his spiri∣tuall providence, and his peoples speciall diligence. First, Christs spiritual providence in dispensing the gift, for according to his gift so is not the truth of grace only, but the measue of grace also, Eph. 4 every one hath grace given him according to the measure of the gift of Christ; and (as the Apostle speakes unto the Corinthians,) The spirit
of Christ distribute unto every one even as he will: This blessed Head, though he gives unto all, yet notwithstanding he gives unto all dif∣ferently, to some more, and to some lesse, even as he pleaseth; this for the inward meanes. So for the outward means, by his spirituall pro∣vidence he affords unto some, more and greater meanes, and a longer time, to others lesse: He also doth blesse the means more unto some then unto others. Againe, another inward working cause is the speciall diligence of Gods people themselves, exciting and stirring up, and also execising that grace which is given them, applying the meanes unto their hearts, and bringing all home in private, that was done in publique, this is the reason why, though some do vertuously, yet others do ex∣cell in grace, even their practise of Piety, and their Christian dili∣gence. And as thus ye have heard the working causes per se, by them∣selves, so also per accidens, by accident, the Lord sometimes makes the sence of sinne a means to break the heart, and that sinner that hath bin exceeding nful, that sinner afterwards somtimes becomes a no∣table Saint; this is the first generall ground from the inward wor∣king causes. The second generall ground is from the finall cause, and that is double, for his owre gory, and his peoples good; for this double reason, though others do vertuously, yet the Lord will have some to excell in grace: First, for his own gloy; thus in dangerous times, Elijah he must stop up, the three children they must be willing to step into the Furnance, and Dnie into the Denne, rather then the Religion and Woship of God shall e demolished and beaten down: though ther∣fore he have many Worthies, yet the Lord will have some speciall Worthies, that not onely shall have grace, but also much grace, for his honou. Thus fo his own glory thugh others do vertuusly, yet the Lord will have some to excell in grace. So also for the good of his people, to draw them on when they are backward, to strengthen them when they are weake, and to incourage them when they ae faint-hearted. Why had Caleb and Joshu an excellent spirit given them? why? to strengthen and incouage others that were weake and fint-hearted: therefore when the people were discouaged Ʋp (say they) fr not the people of the Land, r thir strength is dearted fo them, ud thy shall be but as bread or us. This from the working ,
and also from the finall cause, you see reasons why though others do vertuously, yet the Lord will have some to excell in grace. But why is this their praise and glory? why, the reason of that is taken from the definition of true honour; that is truly honoura∣ble, which the wisest and the best do speak in the praise of; That is not honourable which every man speaks well of, (though I am perswaded in respect of this Saint of God, who ever he or she was that did speak against her, while the tongue was against her, the conscience was for her,) but that is truly honourable which is commended by the wisest, and by the best, by the wisest Prophets, and the wise Apostles; For the wise Prophets when they come to commend persons, whom do they speak well of? why, holy per∣sons, holy soules, the Saints that do expresse the power of grace in their lives: And for a wise Apostle, tell me, where Paul is commen∣ding any but a Saint especially: nay, if an Angell must come from heaven to speak in the praise and commendation of any man here on earth, it shall be onely in praise and commendation of a Saint; this is plain in the 9. of Daniel, there Daniel is humbling of his soule, and breaking of his spirit for his own sinnes, and the sinnes of the people; well, now an Angell is dispatced from Heaven with a message to him, and he brings him this newes, Oh Daniel thou art a man greatly beloved; thus an Angell will rejoyce to bring good ty∣dings from Heaven, for the praise and commendation of a Saint upon Earth. But what do I speak either of Saints or Angels, even God himselfe doth account their death to be precious, hee hath a high opinion of them, he hath high prizing thoughts of them, as you have heard Here you see the reasons of this truth, why though many doe vertuously, yet some of Gods people do excell in grace, and this is their glory and honour. We have a question before we cme to Application, it is this; Wherein appeares this excellency in grace? I answer in short, It appeares in the matter that is done or suffered, and in the manner of doing it: First, in the matter that is to be done, both in avoiding evill, and in doing good; For the avoiding of evill (and all this you shall see in this godly soul that we have discoursed of) She is a woman of an excellent spirit, that indeavours so to avoid all sinne, her speciall sinne (which David cals his owne iniquity, and the speciall sinnes of the time; here is an ad∣mirable
spirit indeed; and certainly herein did this blessed child of God shine out most chearly, in that she laboured to avoid all finne, and her own sinne, and the sinnes of these dayes and times. Again, for the doing of good, she that indeavours to perform all duties, and especially her duties, and those duties that the world hates, and scornes, and speakes ill off, certainly such a woman as this, is of an admirable spirit; yet this also was the spirit of this Saint of God, in that she indeavoured to do all duties injoyned: and for those that concerned her in her place, she shined out admi∣rably in them; yea, she was constant and diligent in performing those duties, which a wicked heart most hates, as redeeming of the time, walking precisely, growing in grace, standing for God with zeale of heart, and the like; this argues an excellencie: And as thus in doing the will of God in his command, so also for a patient subjecting unto the will of God in his providence. Though the Saint of God had much experience in matter of prosperity, yet she had had also great experience in matter of adversity, yet notwithstan∣ding was not that an admirable speech of her: I is the Lord, let doe what seemes him good? had any dne this but the Lord, I should never have borne it, but seeing the Lord hath done it, why should I be impatient under it. Nay, when her Child, her dear and onely Sonne was dead, this was that which stayed her spirit, that the Lord had done it. And as thus for the matter, so also for the manner too, when this is done sincerely, with constancie and continuance, truly that was a pretty time of tryal which she had for 30. years together, and for the measure thus, with zeal, when this manner and measure is added to that matter, there must needs be an excellencie; together with this effect growth in grace, and this end, the glory of God, when for for the matter it is thus universally, against all sinne, our sinne, and the sinnes of the Time; unto all duties, our duties, and the contem∣ned duties of the Time. And thus in respect of suffering, patiently submitting unto the will of God, and when for the manner, it is thus, sincerely for truth, constantly for continuance, zealously for measure, having this effect, growth in grace, and this end, the glory of God, this must needs be excellent indeed. Thus you see wherein this excelleney appears.
Now the application will be threefold, unto the wicked, unto the godly, and unto all. Is this a truth then first for wicked men, concer∣ning themselves, and concerning others? See sometimes this way, First, concerning themselves, what doe they think to be the glory and excellency of a man or woman? truly to have those titles, pla∣ces, riches, and means in the world, to have that esteeme and repute in the world, oh this is a rare thing indeed; this is the judgment of a man of the world. But now concerning grace, and goodnesse, aske them whether that be an excellent thing, yea or no, and they must must needs tell you (if they will but confesse the truth) that they think not so; if they should say so, they must needs lye, because their whole practice is against it: certainy, if this be a truth which wee have confirmed, these persons do erre in their judgments, in judging thus of the honour and glory of any person; nay, another errour is this, that although in their life time they shew very little, nay, indeed nothing at all in a godly way for which they should be commen∣ded, yet notwithstanding when they come to dye, if a Minister be to preach for them, and in preaching will not speak in their praise and commendation, they think him a strange Preacher: why, you heare that we must onely speak in the praise of such as do excell in grace, these onely we must commend; would'st thou be commended when thou dyest? oh man live godly while thou livest. Art thou a Drun∣kard? art thou a Swearer? art thou a Sabbath-breaker? art thou an oppose of goodnesse whilest thou livest? and yet notwithstanding when thou commest to dye, a Minister of Christ must stand up in the place of God to praise and to commend thee? And as thus for an error in judgment, so also for an evill in heart, What is that which wicked men do love? What is that which they affect? is it grace? is it an excellency in graces though certainely a righteous man (as the text hath it) is more excellent then his neighbour, yet notwithstanding a wicked wretch that is neighbour to a godly man, he thinkes not so of him, nor answerably is he affe∣cted towards him. What? dost thou not think a godly man better then thy selfe, (I speak to a wicked Wretch) nor art thou answera∣bly affected towards him? and the Lord saith so directly, Ther righte∣ou  is more excellent then his neighbour. What? are persons more willing to be bad and vile, then to be so accounted, and so called?
yet how many are there that cannot indure to be evill spoken of, who yet will do most vildly, most unworthily. And concerning an excellencie in grace, many a one is afraid to be too hot and zealous for God, least that he shoul'd be scorned and derided by the wicked of the world. I wish it might not be found true of many a one, that the praise, account, and opinion of men hath not too much byaced the matter, so that they dare not strictly conforme in all things to the will of God in their lives, least they should hear ill of those of whom they would be commended. Thus men do erre in their judgments; they should preferre the testimony of their consciences in pleasing the God of Heaven, before the praise and commendation of all the men and women in the world. Where find we amongst these men that I am speaking of, such a man as that Heathen was, of whom it was said, That soner a man might plucke the Sune ou of his Shear, then draw him asid out of the course of Justice; Oh this great Idoll in the world! this esteeme and re∣pute! it draws persons aside wonderfully, an they think it  dis∣gracefull thing ometimes to do that which God commands: yea, adde one thing more, when men are ashamed and afraid to be too good, and yet they are neither ashamed nor afraid to be too bad, It is an old saying, and it is a true one, Qui timet sse bonus, non timet esse maus. If you see a man afraid to be good, that man surely is not afraid to be evil. And as for that singularity in goodnesse (which indeed is the excellencie that I am speaking of) how is that evill spoken of? many a man is afraid to be thought such a one. It is the Observa∣tion of a learned godly Divine, Persons, saith he, would bee singular in every thing, but in one thing, that is, in gre, in goodnesse, and in godi∣ness, for wealth a man would be the richest man in the Parish, nay for Pride, persons would be above any in the City; what? do men affect ungularity this way in riches, and in pride, and yet when they should come to be singular for goodnesse, they will be as their neighbours then, they are afraid to be too good, yet they are no afaid to be too proud; this for the first use. Use 2. This lookes dectly on Gods people, is this a truth, that though many doe vertuously, yet some do excell in grace? then
for the people of God thus: Are they stronger, or be they weaker, in respect of themselves, or in regard of others, they may learn some∣thing from hence; for those that are stronger in the highest forme, let them first walke humbly: amongst the graces that make persons to shine and to be rare; Humility is one: You know what the Apostle speakes, Who made thee to differ? and the same Apostle writes a whole Chapter, & all for this end, to take off those in the higher form from Pride, and those in the lower forme from Envie, in respect of those gifts of edification, especially in 1 Cor. 12. And Paul himselfe a man excellent in grace, and full of it, yet saith he, in 1 Cor. 16. 10. By the grace of God I am that I am, for my spirituall being I give it onely un∣to Gods grace; and, I laboured, saith he more abundantly then they all; How novv Paul? dost thou take any thing to thy selfe? mark how he corrects himself immediatly, Yet not I, but the grae o God in me, saith he; thus still he gives all to God, this is the first thing, That they who are in the higher forme should doe, they should walke humbly. Secondly, And as thus walk humbly, so also let them walk thank∣fully, oh give thankes unto that God who hath called you out of the world, and made you rare and excellent in grace & goodnesse, had the Lord made another vvorld, and given you it all, it had bin nothing to this to give you grace, and that grace wherein you doe excell: be thankfull therefore according to the sight and sence of grace. Let them walk also with comfort and cheerfulnesse; what is that that makes a child of God go sadly and heavily? why this, as he is afraid that all is not well at home, but if the Lord come in, and shew himself powerfully and sweetly unto his soule, then as he should give the glory of it unto God, so he should take the comfort of it unto himself. Thirdly, let them walk wisely, yet let them also walk resolutely; I have wondred at the wisdome and resolution of Daniel, he was a man so resolute for God, that though he was a man of great im∣ployments, being et over 120. Princes, who had rule over 127. Pro∣vinces, and though it is likely that his enemies did vvatch him, to see it in any sort he had neglected the Kings bunesse, yet notwith∣standing they could find no fault a all in him that way, such was
his vvisdome. And for his resolution, nay, saith he, rather then I will not pray to the God of Heaven, the Lyons shall devour me; and before I vvill defile my self with that meat, I will venture life & all. But may some say, was not this resolution of Daniel an impeach∣ment of his vvisdome? no, I vvill shevv you three rare men, vvho though they vvere resolute for God, yet you shall see also that they were very wise; 1. The first was this of Daniel, so wise a man vvas he, that the Proverb runs of him, What? as vvise as Daniel? He had the matter revealed unto him, vvhich vvas not revealed unto any other man in the World, yet notwithstanding, his discretion and wisdome will not keep him in a moderate frame, but he is resolute for his God. The second example is that of David, of whom the 200. men spake, that he was as wise as an Angell of God; yet notvvithstanding, his vvisdome did not hinder his resolution for God; therefore when she had that laid in his bosome, even Michol his vvife check't him for his zeal, What, saith he to her, is this to be vile? I will be more vile yet. The third is Moses, he must be as God to Aaron, there is his vvisdome, yet notvvithstanding make this resolution, Heb. 11. 24. great things are offered unto him, great honors in Egypt, great trea∣sures in Egypt, and great pleasures in Egypt, threescore temptations, and it is likely that they might cry secretly unto Moses, and say, Stay Moses, stay a vvhile Moses, be not such a foole Moses: vvhat? vvilt thou joyn vvith the people of God, and so lose all thy honour, all thy vvealth, and all thy pleasures? What novv doth this vvise man Moses? farevvell all, saith Moset, farevvell all, I will rather suffr afflcti∣on with the people of God, then I will enjoy the pleasures of sinne for a season. Oh then what a discretion is that which keepes men in such a mo∣derate and luke-vvarm temper, that it vvill not suffer them to bee so resolute for God, as for his sake to be vvilling to part even with all the things in the World, whereas you see here the persons so re∣solute for God that they vvill venture life and all for him, and yet they vvere very vvise. And thus also be resolute, so as neither being allured by the dea∣rest friend, nor affrighted by the bitterest foe: not being allured by the dearest friend thus in the Acts of the Apstles you shall find, that vvhen they had there vvhat Agaus had prophesied, namely hovv Paul should be bound at Jerusalem, the friends of Pau (and it is likely
they were godly friends) they come unto him weeping and crying, Oh Paul, go not unto Jeruslem, what, wilt thou be bound Paul? mark novv hovv Paul answers them, Why stand ye weeping thus, and breaking my heart? bound? saith he, I am willing not onely to be bound, bu to dye als at Jerusem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. A courteous word from a dear friend draws much, yet notwithstanding, Paul there, when his friends sought by weeping to draw him off from being so resolute for Christ, Oh saith he, in so doing you break my heart; yea, marke also the speech of that rare Marquesse Galeaceus by name, when great proffers ere made unto him, if he would do so and so, Let him be acursed, saith he, that thinks all the wealth in the world worthy in any sort to be compared with one dayes fellowship with Jesus Christ. Thus though we be allured by the dearest friends, yet vve must be resolute for God: nay, though also we be affrighted and scorned by the bitterest foe as David, you heard, when his vvife scoffed him for dancing before the Ark (where she played the part of a bitter foe) What? aith he, am I vile for this, and I will e more vile yt. So Luhe, great offers were made unto him, and great thunderings were sent against hi, yet he was esolute for God still. And saith Nehemih that great Re∣former, Shall suh a man as I fle? he would resolutely stand for God. Thus you see what advice may be given unto those that doe excell in grace, they should vvalk humbly, walk thankfully, & cheerfully, vvalk vvisely, yet also resolutely for God. The second branch of the Use concerns those that are in the lower form, and they are either such as have bin stronger, & now are wea∣ke, having weakned themselves; or els they are such as are weak. For the former; Let such be deeply humbled, & that speedily, in calling to mind the mercies, the merits, the time, and the corrections vvhich have bin afforded unto them, & which they have bin tried withall; let them look on all these things to humble their souls before God. And 2. let such also double their diligence novv. And for those that are vveak, let them pray that what is promised by the Lord, Isaiah 40. two last verses, it may be accomplished in them; there the Lord speaking of his people, saith thus, They shall mount up with wings as Ea∣ges, they shall walk and not faint, yea runne and not be weary; thus then do thou, run to the Lord and say, Ah Lord, I am cat behind in thy way, others do outstrip me, others get before me, and thou hast said Lord, that I shall vvalk, yea run, yea fly, in running the vvays of thy
Commandements, make good thy word unto thy poor servant Lord; Thus flye to the throne of grace when thou art hindred and cast behind in travelling to∣wards heaven. Thus for those that have bin strong, & have weakned themselvs, & are vveak still. And as thus concerning themselves, so also concerning others their fellow Saints and brethren, let them thus do, comfot the sorrowfull, sup∣port the feeble, and if any man be disjoynted, joynt him again, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. If any man be overtaken in an infirmitie, ye that are spirituall restore suh a one in the spirit of meeknesse. And as thus for their indeavour, so also for their affe∣ction, let it be with them as it was with David, Psal. 16. All my deights, saith he, are in the Saints upon earth, and such as do excell in vertue. So let your speciall love and delight be to the excellent ones upon earth, even unto those that do excell in vertue, and excell in grace. Should a man come unto every man and unto every woman in this place, and ask them this question, vvhat kind of persons have the highest roome in your soules? whom de you most highly prize and most dearly love; this is a most sensible thing, and bing applyed, will come close unto the quick; is it a gracious man yea or no? is it an excellent man in praise? yea or no? if it be not from God, I tell thee this day that the Lord marks thee out this day for a bad man; what can be more plain then that in 1 Jh. 3. 10. by this is manifested a chi of God, and a child of the Divell: a child of God is one that loves God, an rks righteousnesse, and he loves his brother, especially his brother in race, above hi bther in ntue why ye must live with those whom ye love. Oh▪ this child of God that is now dea, she loved the Saints of God while she lived, and theeore now she lives with the Saints of God being dead; This loving of the brthe is not as the cause why we are in a blessed state, for so Christ is; but as an evidence; so indeed it is. This for the second Use. Use 3. The third Use is to perswade good men, bad men, all men to come un∣to God, and to get much from God, even to excell in grace, that so at deth they may be able to say in truth what our Saviour said for pefection, Oh saith he in John 17. 1. Faher I have finisht the work which thou gavst me to d, now therefore Fther glrifie me; There was a work given him to doe, and a work given him by God, this work must be done, it was so; then he prayes, Now therfore Father glorifie me. So the Lord hath given thee and given me a work to do, a work in generall, a work in speciall, a work to do, a work to finish, and it is the work which the Lord hath given us; now then let it be thy indeavour to finish it, and then when death comes thou maist pray in truth, as thy Saviour did for perfection, Father, the worke which thou gavest me to doe I have done it, yea Fa∣ther I have finished the work that thou gavest me to do, now therefore Fathe glorifie me. And here now take both the means for this, and also the Argument▪ to it. 1. For the means whereby we may come excell in gace (for this is thy glory and this is thy commendation) they are these three; 1. The Lord Christ the Fountain of grace. 2. The spirit of Christ, the Author and Work of grace, some speciall and particular graces of Gods spirit. And 3. the right
making use of the meanes of grace. For the first of these, to wit, Christ the foun∣tain of grace. Would a man have grace? yea would a man be full of grace? why, the Text tells us, that there is a fulnesse of grace in Christ, and of his fulnesse we must all receive grace, for grace: And would a man indeed be excellent? let him labour in a speciall manner to be filled with Gods Spirit; oh that evill jea∣ring spirit that is in persons against Gods Spirit! at any time at their best lei∣sure, let them read what I would commend unto them, and they shall finde in the book of God, that when it is said, that such a man did something that was excellent, then the text tells us, that the Spirit of God was upon him, and the Spirit of God filled him. Sampson was a strong man, yet when he did any admirable act of strength, you shall find that the Spirit of God stirred him up. Elijah did great great things, but then the Spirit of God came upon him; Elisha also did great things, but then the Spirit of God came upon him. So in Luke 1. there it is said, that the Mother of John was filled with rhe Holy Ghost, and the Father there was filled with the Holy Ghost, and then he spake unto admiration, ver. 37. and 34. So in the Acts of the Apostles. in the 1. of the Acts, there the promise is made, that the Apostles shall be filled with the Hol Ghost; and in Acts 2. what won∣ders do they? but first they are filled with the Holy Ghost. So you shall find in Acts 3, 4, 5. Then the Apostles filled with the Holy Ghost, and, Then the Apostles filled with the Holy Ghst, did so and so. So in Acts 6. and in Acts 7 there is Stephen full of the Holy Ghost, an admirable man, and Paul in Acts 11. being full of the Holy Ghost set his eyes there on a wicked Wretch; who is that? why a man that hin∣dred the passage of the Gospell, that Bariesus that sought to turn the Deputy from the Faith▪ Pau looking on him, he said, Oh full of all subtilty and malice, thou child of the Divell, and enemy of all righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to pervert the straight wayes of the Lord? Thus you see that when any, either admirable speech hath bin spoken, or any admirable thing hath bin done, still persons have bin filled with the Holy Ghost. Thus labour to partake of the fulnesse of Christ, and labour to be filled with the Holy Ghost. And for the speciall grace of Gods Spi∣rit as in the body of a man that is strong & lusty, active, and able, some parts are to supply with spirits for nourishments, and for growth, as the stomack, liver, and heart; so in the soul of a child of God, there are certain graces, that are usefull, for all practises, such as are these  Faith, Hope, Love, and Fear, these are all Mother graces h but above all, the fist, o, the grace of Faith! this will direct a man what he should d, this will perswade a man why he should do, and this will inable a man hw he should d, yea to work wonders: all the wonders that have bin in the world, have bin wnderfull by their Faith. And for Hope, that is an admirable grace to make a man rare in gace, de not you remember what is said in Jh. 1. 3. he that hath this hope, what hpe is that? why this hope to see Christ, and t be like him; he that hath this hope, what doth he? why he doth purifie himself even as Chist is pure, and that other Text also in 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12. Seeing these things mst be dissolved, h what mnner of persons ought wee to be in all holy
conversation, and godlinesse: why what is the matter? why, because the time shall come when the Heaven shall passe away with a noise, the Element shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth with the things that are therein shall be burnt up, and then we looke for ew Heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousnesse; we look for a new Heaven▪ & a new earth, that is, we look for another place of habitation, even in heaven; for properly there is no earth in heaven, but as these heavens, and this earth is now the place of our habitation, so after death we looke for another place of habita∣tion then this, even in heaven. Seeing then our hope is in heaven to have ano∣ther and a better, a more happy and blessed place of habitation, then wee have here below, now therefore what manner of persons ought we to be. For Love, now Faith is an intaking grace, but when it would put it selfe out, for the doing of any good, then it takes hold on Love Faith works by love, saith the Apostle, it works love, and it works by love, and this love of God (as the Apostle speaks) will constrain a man to live unto God, yea to the utmost of his desires and inda∣vours; the love of grace will not make a man stint himself in his deres after grace; no, as those persons that do love money would not only have this hun∣dred or that 1000. but many hundreds and many thousands, especially, if they love it, for it selfe, then there is no end of their desires after money: So let a man turn the steam of his desires, towards grace, and then he will long after it un∣measurably, he will never stint his desires after it, and say, Thus much grace will serve me, and so much grace will content me. And as love thus will put a man on unto that is good, so lastly, for Feare, it will pluck a man back from the doing of what is evill; therefore that man there in the book of Nehemah was faithfull above many, because he feared God above many Lastly, the meanes of grace in the use and the right use of them, when men hea Sermons, and then afterwards preach them over and over again to themselves, that they may have grace in their hearts, and expresse grace in their lives. Oh this duty of medita∣tion in bringig things home unto the heart, is one of the peciall means to make the soule rich, in expressing the power of godlinesse in life and conversa∣tion: this for the means of it. Now for the Arguments to it, and they are four, From God, the thing, our selves, and others▪ Why shoud thou and I labour thus to be rare and excellent in grace? why first because God bids us; if there were no more but this, it is enough for thee and me that God bids us labour to be so: thus in 1 Pe. 5 the Lord is cal∣ling upon us to grow in grace, and in Mat. 5. last verse, Be ye pefct as yur  Fther is perfect: what, can we be as perfect as God is? fa be we from that con∣ceit, but we should labour to be like unto God, for there he is speaking, how God doth good to the bad: nay God doth good to his enemies now let us bing our selves unto this rule of perfectin: Certainly if a man doth excell in vertue, and be rare in grace, in the world he shall have enemies ost thou love them? canst thou pray heartily for them? this is now to be perfect, as thy heavenly ∣ther is perfect. Secondly, look on the thing it selfe, it is in it self a most cm∣mendable
thing: you shall find that the Lord doth study to find out tearmes to to put upon his people that are rare in grace, for their praise and commndati∣on, as Abraham, Moses, David, and Daniel; oh for Daniel the Lord comes again & again to him to tell him, Oh Daniel a man of desires, a man greatly beloved? the heart of God is so taken with him, that herepeats it again. O Daniel, a man greatly beloved; that is a rare expression of the Holy Ghost, for the praise and com∣mendation of such a man as doth excell in grace. Thirdly, look on ou selvs, in regard of our own persons in heart, and in regard of life. 1. For our hearts, to have the love of God towards a man, and the blessing of God in a speciall man∣ner upon the spirit of a man, oh this is an admirable thing indeed; to bee inri∣ched in the world, oh we say, this is an excellent thing, and how will men ie early, and go to bed late, and all for what? why for this, that the Lord may bese them with a rich state in the world. But, oh the blessing of God on the sule of a man, in making a man ich in grace, this is an excellent thing indeed, one dam of grace is worth all the world; now the Lord will inrich thoe in grace that do use well the means of grace. Take heed how you he, saith Christ, for loo in what manner of hering you hear, nd with what mesure of diligene afer hea∣ring you use, s God will measure out again to you. Thus in regard of a mans heart with∣in 2. In regard of a mans life without, truly our life is but shot, we have a great del of work to do, and but little time, therfore saith the wisemn, Eccles. 9. What soever thou findest to do, do it with all thy might, saith he; why so? why, for as the time is short, so after death there is no working then; the time of this life is a working time, after death is the receiving of wages, though a wicked man shold do never so much in hell, yet that coud not any way comfort him▪ but what he hath done in the body, look to that mainly. And as thus for ou selvs, so lastly for others, and that both for them, & also from them; For them, dot hou wish well to thy Countrey? dost thou wish well to Engand? dost thou wish well to this City of Yore, to the Parish & the Family where thou livet? oh then labour for this excelent state, if thou de excell in grace, thou art the person that must prevail with God, for wife, for child, for Church, for state, for County, for ing∣dom, & all, if there be any hope to prevail with God in mercy, his excellent ones must do it▪ but when there is no hope, then saith the Lord, Though Noah, Daniel & Jo, should all joyn together in prayer, I would not hear them implying thus much, That then the case is desperate, when such excellent ones cannot prevail. And as thus for others, so also from others; Would'st thou receive strength and incouragement from persons in the worst times? why then it must be from the Saints that d excell in grace In evill and dangerous times, Cle & Jshuh who were rare Saints, Elyah a rare Saint, & Dniel a rare Saint, they must step up, that so from them, Gods people being discouraged, & distressed, might receive com∣fort & incouragement. And here now, Her whom in the beginning I set out un∣to you by way of Commendation, I now again set before you as a pattern for the imitatin. FINIS.
AN ELEGIE UPON The much lamented Death, of that vertuous Lady, and unparallel'd Matron, ELIZABETH HOYLE, LATE Wife to the Worshipfull Thomas Hoyle Alderman of the City of Yorke, who (surprized with an Applexie at her private Devotion) depar∣ted this lif, Decemb. 9. 1639. Come my people enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy Doores about thee, hide thy self for a moment, untill the indignation be overpast. For behold the Lord commeth out of his place to punish the Inha∣bitants of the Earth for their iniquity. Esay 26. 20, 21. woodcut of two pots of flowers YORK: Prrinted by Tho: Broad, dwelling in Stone-gate over against the Stare.
To the Worshipfull his honoured Friend, M. Tho: Dikinson, Alderman of the City of Yorke, & one of the Standing-Committee there, and Treasuret-Generall of the Army for the City and County, Health and Happinesse. SIR, IN regard of your near alliance to the Subject, and dear ac∣quaintance with the Author of this Sermon, you may challenge of right the Dedication of these Lines: And indeed they were long since yours, being immediately upon her death presented to your selfe, and your vertuous Consort her Daughter; so you are in every respect worthy of them, only my fear is they are unworthy of you. Yet let them not now in your as∣censions be unwelcome to you, seeing when the distance was not so great I thought you right welcome to them. Now both that Elogie in the fore-going Funerall Sermon, and those due expressions in this insuing Funerall Elegie, want not the best example for their warrant. The Royall Prophet David wept and mourned over Amer, and by his pathetike Oration melted all the people into tears; nay they wept a second time; as how could they contain, when they heard the moving words of a lamenting Prophet, and saw the swollen eyes of a tender-hearted King? Part of his Oration was, Know you not that there is a Prince and a great man this day fallen in Israe? so the day of this Ladies Fuerall there fell a Matron, and though not so great, yet (which is much better) a good woman and Mother in Israel. So fo my Elegi, that sweet singer of Israel is also my Pattern, for he lamented with the like, yet far surpassing Lamentation over Saul and Jonathan, part whereof I ere insert, as I long agoe translated it, VVeepe, ye Isacian Daughters, weepe O're Saul, who did so bravely eepe, And cloath you all in Skarlet trimme, And in all pleasures made you swimme. 'Twas he about your Robes did fuld Those msse Cbains of beaten Gold,
Yet all these were but glistring trifles, or if treasures, yet onely Treasure on earth, subject to Moaths, Rust, and Theeve▪s, but the adorning of this Matron was not in the plaiting of the haire, or of wearing of gold, or putting on of Apparell, but in the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of1 Pet. 4. 5. a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price: and in this she surmounted all the Daughters of your City, as also in many golden rules, and in a shining example. Nor was she onely the wife of tht Merchant, who is known in the Gates when he sit∣teth among the Eldes of the People, Prov. ult. 23. but she her self also was that Merchant who considered a field and bought it, even that field with hidden Treasure, Mt. 13. 44. for which (as the Merchant man for the Pearl, ver. 36) she sold al that she had to purchase. In∣deed, the Kingdome of Heaven was her Treasure and her Pearl, which he body hath ill in hope, her soule in possession, and both shortly shall enjoy in perfect fruiion. If we love her, and would bee with her, let our care be to go to her, seeing she shall not return to us. In the mean time our tears for her may be wip'd from our eys, since all tears are wiped from hers: that which is required of us, is, our repenting for sinne, not lamenting for her, not our mounfull ex∣gressions, but our chearfull imitaion. The Epigrammatist did thus revive his old friend Prisus, upon the death of Saloninus; Sed defire, nefs: num qui te Prise, reliquit, Vivit, qua veluit vivere prte mis. 'Twere sinne to weepe: since he for whom you grieve,Mart. Epig. Lives in that part wherein he wish't to ive. She is now where she long long'd to be; her desire was to be dis∣solved, and to be with Christ; with whom we leave her. Thus it becomes us to set forth the vertue and praises of her, who set forth the praises and vertues of him, who hath called us out of darknesse into his marvellous light. I is observeable in that Text, that the word tanslated Praises, sgnifieth also Vertues (as in the margin) whch sewes, that only Vertue is Prise-wothy; so the royall Preacher, The woman that feareth the Lord she shall bee praysed, not her favor for that is deceitfull, not her beauty, for that is vanity, but her fear is commended, and her vetue highly prized, ver. 10. Especially, if she excell in vertue, Psal. 16. 3. as the righteous do, The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Prov. 12. 36.
and a man of understanding is of an excellent Spirit, 17. 27. by which we understand, the Fear of God, for this is called that good Understanding, Psal. 3. ult. the praise wherof endures for ever. And this grave and understanding Matron is that Righteous one, that Mulier strennua, that wise and vertuous woman, which the wise man so much enquireth after, and having found advanceth her above all her fellows. Many Daughters have done ve tuously but thou surmountest them all: thus it pleaseth him who hath called the Poor of this world to be rich in Faith, to make the weaker vessels strong in Faith; and Daughters of Abrahm, whose Daughters they are as long as they do well, do vertuously, especially, if they excell in thus doing: and indeed this doing vertuously is that Practicall, not Speculative beauty on which we should bestow all our amorous and imbellishing phrases, in the highest strains and expressions of commendation and glory. Excelling vertues shall have extolling praise. Now for her, such were her perfections that I know not whe∣ther she more illuster her Sex, by communicating her immanent gra∣ces unto others, or obscure it, (as the greater light the lesse) by her eminent brightnesse out-shining others; so that I hope it were no disparagement to Greatnesse though I should apply that vers. which was sung of the Lady Elctesse, to this Elect Lady of the same name, Tell me if she was not dsign'd, The Eclipse and Glory of Her Kinde. Thus we ought, in the best manner we an, to honour them that fear the Lord, but above all to honour him who hath put this feare into our hearts, that we may not depart from him: so ceasing fur∣ther to praise her, let us never cease to praise God for her, and pray unto him for our selves, that we may be follwers of her, even as shee was of Christ. Now if there be any of her sisters that do vertuously, yet not so vertuously, think much that we have bin so liberal in her commendations, let them know, that first we only do her right; and secondly, that we have done them no wrong; for the commendati∣ons of one is not the disparagement, but rather should be the inou∣ragement of another; and to them we only say, Go and doe like∣wie. Thus having commended her, I now commend you and yours to the protection of the Almighty, desiing you to patronize, and kindly to accept of the weak indeavours of Jan. 20: 1644 Your truly affectionate Friend to serve yo in Christ. J. F.
A Prosopopeia to Her. MAdam, you strangely left your widowed Friends; Fr so te ignorant stranger apprehends, Who knew you not: else 'twere no wonder, why She should dye once, that did so dayly dye, You daily mortified your very breth, Whih Dying-life, prevents that iving Death. When to your wonted roome you did repair You truly powred out your Sule in prayer. 'Tis strange that in your passing was no noise When the remotest Heavens did her your voice. I seems that winged prayer your spirit did heare Amongst the Cherubins, and they staid it there, Lft us your ashes. Blest that servant, whom Te Lord so doing findes when he shl come. How sweetly did she steal eternitie! 'Tis credible, you thus desired to dye. Blest soule! what haste th' impatient Angels made To fetch thee hence away! they seem'd t'invade Thy crazy Tent, thee to immortalize Envying Mortality so rich a prize. The prize was great; nor the surprizall strange, For still you long▪d after this happy chnge, Were sicke of love, and Swan-like did divine Your death; and fainting sung, Stay me with Wine And comfort me with Apples: fare above The love of Wine, or Jonathan, was thy Love. Or your expiring Cnticle might be this, My Welbeloved's Mine, as I am His. Or this, Thou chears me with thy staffe and rod. Or this, Make no long tarrying O my God.
Or with the Heavenly Bride migh dying pray, So come Lord Jesu, quickly come away. Madame, wt which of these did you expire When you went up in Chariots of fie, And flaming Raptures, whih Psyram▪d-wise Sil tower and wind hemelve within the sies. Thus having prai▪d, straightway about you sprung A flight of Cherub, in whose armes you sung A tryumph Psalm, went up, and now are set With your sweet Saviour in Mount Olivet. If from that Christ all Mount you can behold This darkesome Vale of tears, and duskie mould, And see from thence your mourners swolle eyes, Wringing of hands, d her their bitter cryes, Pity and wonder too, Pity our fears; Wnder to see your Cffi float in tears. But greater wonder twere to imitate Your gracious ife: And our own piteous state Calls for a streming and un essnt teare Tom the our bed to swimme, and not your Bere. Your Sviour bids, nd you, Weepe not for me, Weep for your selves, and your own misery. Sure yu fresw some dismall gloomy day Hstning, which made you make suh hast away. I deed; and did you see the Flying Roule Sent with black execrations, 'gainst that soule That enters league with death, applaudeth Hell, And sets Heaven at dstnce, nd ds swll With word▪ against th' Amhy: (fr there ae Suh Gian-Atheists who th Sune outstre) Did these ffrigh you hence? make you retire, Astrea-lie, from us, and so desire Wh eed to be dsslv'd? so sone be gone, And hide your self in Heav'ns Paviion? It seemes that wgd Bo was large, and spread S far, that it wud hve ie ped In one just dm, nd commn judgment bth Clean ad uncean, that swears, or fears an oath.
Sure you perceiv'd by some thick pitchy cloud A storm a comming, so your self did shroud Vnder the wings of prayer; yet none can say You (coward-like) affrighted run away. But staid and waited in your private roome Till you were taken from the ill to come, And snatch▪d with lingring Lot. When suh  name Is 'ent away, fear in appochin fle. How many anxious mind, which now survive Your chste unspotted soul, are scorcht alive With fiery Serpents, Worms that never dye, Which knawing in their oscious bosoms, lye! Whse akng hearts are pin'd with discontent, Fearng death, Doom-day, or Priamet. Whil you wth th'Heveny Courtiers Feast, and passe Yur time in aneternall Chstenmsse. Ld we your Hoy Life, that so we may With you, keepe evrsting Holy-Day. Mirrour of Vertue! still my thinks you live; Your hnd I see it open still to give: Your lips I see them with an orient smile Enchear the good, your tongue rebuke the vile: I see you frowning brow, untaught to sooh The obstinate, t his relenting smooth. Your awfull midnesse boh yur friends did move, And enemies, with reverence and with love. At pride how like an Empresse would you storme! But th'humble found you humbler then a Worm. Your feet have made two path-wayes from your dore, Th'one to the Temple, th'other to th Poor. But now both wayes, nd Poor, nd Temple mourn, Th'hurch wants Her frequen Guest, thought has your urn. The rich mss their der friends, friends bid adieu To riches and such comforts missing you. The painfull Prophets want their Patronesse Whom your abounding table oft did blesse, And they your table; scarce could I dine Wheher your gusts or you were more ivine. Hw puous was your board! yet how discreet! Te reet misses a fmily, York a street:
Old Age wants his companion; younger yeers Their Counsellor, and Infants drink their tears For lacke of your refreshings. Every one Old, Young, Poor, ƲƲalthy, all their losse bemoan. Th'hungry want their Purveyor, and the Feast, Missing its moderator, seems unblest. And's even at Christmas like a Funerall; Whiles you (Angel-like) in the Starry Hall Keep a perpetuall Banket in those roomes Of Cristall, where no tear or sorrow comes. We feed on both, unpleasing to the sence, O! had we your victorious patience, Stay'd Wisdom, Faith, and Hope, then we might be▪ Mountains of trouble with undanted chear. You bore twelve children (if I do not erre) And soon eleven of them you did interre. Nay when your Isaac (struck with that disease Which plowes up flesh and blood, and there sowes Pease) And your sweet Granchild by your onely Daughter ƲƲere rent from you, this multiplyed slaughter You bore with constancy unmoveable, Not the least murmurcheard, but all ws well, God's only wise, and his correction milde, My Fathers Will is dearer than my Childe, And w not all your patience well bestowed?2 Cor. 4. When for your short afflictions esie load, You challenge now a weight of glorious Joyes Great as Eternity, and yet ne're cloyes. Happy exchange! to compasse Heaven for earth, Solid and lasting jyes, for fainting mirth; Kingdoms for Cities, Ever for a Breath. And th'great Jerusalem for Nzreth. Onely your widowed Husband's left bebind, Thinkes on your absene with a bleeding mind; May your unwearied spirit of patienee b Doubled on him, to bear his misery; For duble cause of griefe doth him pursue, He missetb both bis children de, and you▪
More then ten children to him. Heavie crosse! No Merchant ere sustain'd so great a losse. Next your sweet Daughter, and her Husband deare, True mourners, wait upon your Sable Biere, ƲƲith thousands more. How soon did you bereave Our Joyes! you left your friends, yet took no leave. So th'Holy Child of Nazareth slunck away.Luke 2. From his perplexed Parents: every day They seek and sigh, and wonder where hee's gone, The third day (like his Resurrection) Restores him found. But they amaz'd begin To check his absence: Son, where have you bin? Our heart akes for you. Sharply then their Son, ƲƲhat? must my Fathers businesse be undone? That Fathers children nothtng mis-befalls, He still hath businesse for them when he calls. And for what businesse were you summon'd hence? T'adore the Throne with prostrte Reverence:Rev. 5. To hear the Lamb wth his own mouth reveale The mystick Oracles of the eaven-fold Seale. To larn at once and in perfction know,1 Cor. 13. The truth of All men argue of below. To read your name writ in the White-stone gemme,Re. 2. 17. Psa. 8. 5. Rev. 8. 3. And to receive the Royall Diadem. To pray at th▪golden Altar, and to sing New songs of tryumph to th'immortall King. The hidden Manna▪ and the Fruit to eatRev. 2. 7. Of life, i'th midst of Gods own Eden set. Embroidered stoles of Ophir-gold to weare,Psa. 45. Rev. 7. 9. And in your hands victorious Palms to bear: To parlie, and to be familiar With Saints and Seraphins, and the morning star.Re. 2. 28. Here you did bear and sing, discourse and pray, (Much more' not done above,) and in this way You walk' to Heaven; where glorious now you see Fulnesse of jy in Christs sweet Majesty. Many there be, who carelesse live, and spend. Their dayes in ignorance, and still depend
On longer time for mercy, then decay, And in some lingring sicknesse melt away. Like the foul candle in the socket spent, Damping the roome with an unwholesome sent. After some blazes doth at last consume, And dye, and vanish in a noysome fume. So these vain Flashes do: still judging wrong, Themselves dye suddenly though they languish long To dye well, yet live ill, is a vain strife: Sweet Death ere followed an unsavoury Life. But you, after your conversation bright Had shin'd long time amongst us, had your light At once put out with an Extinguisher, The blasting Apoplxie did interre Your brain in earthen mists, which over-cast, And through obstructions, bind the sences fast. Here Art is sencelesse too: yet are we sure The resurrection this Disease can cure. This you foresaw in your last morning fligh Before the evening of your fatall Night, For rising from your Bed, these words you gave, How sweet vvill be our rising from the grave. Then from your closet to the Church you hyed Where your own happinesse you heard prophesied, The Funerall text was this, When a Saint dyes. How precious is his death in the Lords eyes.Psa. 116. Whence you, as Christ from Jordan, straight returne, Or like that mournfull Paire, whose heart did burn In Emaus way: thus fir'd wih Heavnly flame You fully were possest with your ownElizabeth, i. e fulnesse of God. Name, And (thus inlivened) with your friends at table Your heart so cheerfull was, so comfortable, So pleasant was your veine, that you correct Your self, and smiling, sid to this effect. Well, Husband, here I have not long to bide Why Love? saith he, I hope a longer Tide We may. Nay, you reply, that may not be Tis little known to you, whas know to me.
Then straight the sacred Temple did you call, Invited to a second Funerall: Where (present) I observ'd your sparkling eye Through th'incense of your evening Sacrifice; That done, to your last Supper you retire, Thence to your Agony. This was the gire And circuit of your last and well spent day, The Modell of your life and Heav'nly Way. Then Israel-like, you strive to your last breath: He tooke his Maime in Prayer, and you that death By which you live. Such blessed victories Are soonest got by wreasting on our knees. You conquered death, and your sweet end begins More happy years, then all the world hath snns. Religious Soul, could you devise a way, Your last sweet Raptures hither to convey, The Pattern of your dying Prayer would be Thrice recompence for my course Elegie. Yet my blest memory shall your Acts enshrine, And Vertues, and to vertue me incline. Let them whom fears of sudden Death beset, Still wear about them this tryed Amulet. Agracious heart, and life's the surest guard, He ne're dyed suddenly that dyed prepar'd. Cll't not a sudden or untimely Doome, VVhich did boh welcome and expected come. Happy, thrice happy, who departeth hence, With your sweet Name, and spotlesse Conscience. Cum mihi supremos Lachesis perneverit annos, Non aliter cineres mando jacere meos. FINIS.
