B3553 R17339 11931388 51153
Christ carrying cross to Golgotha Principia et documenta Vitae Christianae Golgotha Matthew 16: Ver: 24 If any man will com after me let him deny him self and take up his Cross and follow me F. H. Van. Houe▪ feci
PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life. BEING A Summary of Excellent Di∣rections to follow the narrow way to BLISS. In two PARTS. Written Originally in Latin By JOHN BONA. Englished by L. B. LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for H. Brome, at the Gun in S. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXVIII.
TO The Reverend Mr. Thomas Ken, PREBENDARY OF THE Church of Winton, &c. SIR, YOU are known to be a Person of a very Charitable and Generous Spirit, ready and desirous to oblige the publick: yet had you been aware your commendati∣on of this Book, would
have drawn upon you the trouble of this address, it may well be doubted whe∣ther you would not have kept it secret to your self, without promoting its be∣ing divulg'd in our vulgar tongue, for the benefit of others. But Sir, that you may not repent this good deed, I will spare you as much as is possible, and leave it still to publick fame to proclaim your great worth: only pray give me leave to offer that to you, to which you had
most right. It will not only be an Act of justice, but a kindness also to them that love good Books: For they will be sure this is one, when they shall know, so Pious and so Learned a man, hath recommended it for such. And I may well expect, this will pre∣vail with others to read it gladly, when it was that made me undertake the greater trouble of Transla∣ting of it. I know not whether I should deprecate for the
more than usual liberty I have in some places taken: but Sir, either I could not follow my Reader in his too lofty flight: or else I thought plainness might be of a more general useful∣ness: or it may be I judg'd it convenient that speaking another language, he should somewhat alter his senti∣ments. It may be no diffi∣cult matter to win a Janse∣nist not now biast by worldly Considerations: and however 'tis a good work to draw a good man
from a bad party. So that I am almost confident that what I have done in this, will not only have your pardon, but your approba∣tion also: and then I shall not need fear the censure of any judicious Reader. Sir, I am well assur'd, your name will more than answer all the objections that might be raised against this Book on the account of its Author; as for the mat∣ter of it, 'tis most excellent; and if my Translation be but tolerable, it cannot
but do good, and be accep∣table to all good Christians. I know 'twas your design it should, and I wish it may: and that this Dedication may be looked upon as a Testimony of my great respects for you, worthy Sir, whom unknown I ho∣nour, as a Person well known to deserve it, re∣maining SIR, Your humble Servant L. B.
THE Translators Preface TO THE READER. I Know we have great plenty of good Books already, but the number of the bad ones in∣creaseth daily, and we must not suf∣fer the tares to choak the good seed: for the new ones are read and enquired after, though for nothing but meerly Novelty. I know likewise that for the best of modern Authors, we need not be beholden to strangers, we have many of our own, more excellent
than any can come from abroad: But why should we be greedy of such forein things as minister to vanity, and neglect such as advance true goodness? Why should we teach Poets and Romancers to speak the English Tongue, and not acquaint Christian Philosophers with the graces of it: If I wanted Apologies for this Translation, such as these would sufficiently plead for it: but indeed I rather want words to set forth its due praise, for 'tis very good in it self, and designed to a good end; I mean the instructions of it, which if attended to, cannot but be very serviceable, in promoting Holiness and true Religion. I know some will be ready to ask with Nathaniel, John 1.46. Can there any good thing come
out of Nazareth? But I Answer with St. Philip, Come and see. Believe not my report, but come and satisfie thy self, and judge as thou shalt find cause. 'Tis true we may not go to school to the Devil: but we may receive truth from whencesoever it comes. I mean only that we should not seek to dissenters, to learn from them those things wherein we disagree: but in those things which we know to be true, we may use their coun∣sel and their assistance: and we are all agreed that unfeigned ho∣liness and Christian vertues are absolutely requisite to make us true Christians, and to make us happy. We may therefore use all such means as tend to this end, without inquiring whence they come; Israelites may go down to the Phi∣listines,
to sharpen their mattocks, their shares and their axes: and where we know the right way, there is no danger in being forwarded therein, by any strangers help. 'Tis not to be denied but that the Church of Rome maintains many Doctrines very injurious to God, and destructive of Holiness and true Piety: but withal, it must be granted that many of her mem∣bers admit not of the direful con∣sequents, but still believe and press the necessity of a good life, and obedience to the Gospel-precepts: and were it not for this 'twould be impossible for any good man to live in so erroneous and so corrupt a society. But however, fear not to read and to follow the Christian Directions contained in this Book: for it hath past
through such hands, as would not have made it publick, but for a publick advantage: and withal, it is not so much the Authors composure, as his Collection from Ancienter and more Orthodox Writers. But Blessed God! how differ∣ent are the tempers and proce∣dures of men? Not a few in the Roman Church, are grieved for, and very sensible of the corrupti∣ons crept in, and establisht a∣mongst them; and yet they are meek and peaceable, silent and sub∣ject under their worst Constituti∣ons: and this purest of Churches, the Church of England, against which nothing reasonable can be objected, is clamour'd against, torn and distracted, even by some that would be thought the best of
Protestants. There they impose a heavy yoke, and teach things apparently design'd to gratifie their Pride and their Ambition; and yet they are obey'd: here the Church is indulgent, and plainly aims at nothing, but the Salvation of Souls and the Glory of God; and yet it is rebel'd against and persecuted. And I profess, but that the Gospel it self is slighted, and Heaven not cared for, I must eternally wonder, that the Church of England is not lov'd and re∣verenc'd, and most gladly follow'd, by all that have the happiness to live within the limits of her in∣closure. But I say, this wonder must cease, when we consider that men can stand out against the mercies of their Redemption, the infinite
Love and Charity of the Blessed Jesus, and the glorious rewards and promises offered to all that will be true Christians. While men shall be so stupid as to neglect these, 'twill be no hard matter to impose upon them: and it must not seem strange that the means are despised, where the end it self is disregarded. Ʋntil Christians make it their first and chiefest business, to secure a blessed Eter∣nity, by living holy lives, it cannot be expected they should make wise and serious enquiries into those truths which are more disputable and less necessary. For the mixing secular interests with things of Religion, first made, and still maintains the errors and breaches of the Christian world: and the way to bring to an end many con∣troversies,
is not so much to decide as to bury them; at least to make them give place to those things, which are much more plain, and much more requisite and bene∣ficial. And here again, I might have a just occasion to commend this Church we live in, for the best guide of Souls: for either she meddles not with many disputes; or else she always stands on the much surer side of the question: holding that which even her Ad∣versaries cannot but acknowledge for truth: and never amusing her Children with unnecessary specula∣tions, or unprofitable contests. But as it is her great design to make us obedient to the Gospel of Christ, and bring us to a sincere practice of all holy vertues: so I
shall conclude this Preface, with an Exhortation to the same pur∣pose. That thou wouldest seriously and often consider, that thy life is short and uncertain, and that the world passeth away, and all things here below: and that thou resolve thereupon, not to lose, not to ven∣ture thy portion of good things a∣bove, for any earthly enjoyment. That thou wouldest bear Eternity in mind, and weigh the impor∣tance of these two words, which conclude our Creed, Life Ever∣lasting: and that afterwards thou resolve carefully to follow the way that leads to it; the Doctrine and Example of our Blessed Saviour, who hath purchast and promist it, to all that love and follow him. Live therefore as one that follows
the King of Eternity, to a blessed Eternity: and despise the world. Ʋse diligently such means as will make thee know thy duty, and in∣courage and assist thee in the dis∣charge of it: and amongst them good Books, which read with at∣tention, and a design to make their goodness our own, are very useful instruments of Vertue and Religi∣on. This I hope will somewhat conduce to their advancement; Nay, I am sure thou shalt be much better'd by it, if thou wilt tran∣scribe it with thy Life, as I have with my Pen: and make it thy hearty Endeavour, as I do my Prayer. L. B.
THE Authors Dedication TO ALL TRUE CHRISTIANS. WIth due Reverence, I offer this small volume to you blessed Souls, vessels of honour and mercy, elect and holy, Children of God predestinated to glory before the foundation of the World: who being redeemed from death by the bloud of Christ, and from sin, by the gift of grace, are not asham'd to own the despised Cross of your Redeemer. For to you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; to you that are not born of bloud, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. You are call'd by the Father
to a portion of the inheritance of the Saints in light, that ye might be holy and unreprovable in his sight in love: and in Christ you are chosen, according to the purpose and good pleasure of God, not for your own works and merits. For you the Bles∣sed Jesus prayed, when being ready to leave the world and go to the Fa∣ther, he said, I have manifested thy name unto the men whom thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were and thou gavest them me. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me, for they are thine. He prayed not for the world, be∣cause all that is in it, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, are not of the Father. And therefore they that are of the world hear not, or at least will not regard and understand the words of eternal life, for the natural man re∣ceiveth not the things of the Spirit of God. And though Christ be the true light which lightens every man
that comes into the world, yet the world sees him not, nor knows him, neither can it receive the spirit of truth. On this will be grounded the iust judgment of the wicked, This will be their condemnation, that light came into the world and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil, and every one that doth evil hateth the light. Now if Christ was a light in his life and doctrine, he was so much more in his sufferings; he did shine on the Cross most gloriously to all the world. The tree of death to which he was tyed, became his pulpit whence he preached his divinest Sermons, teaching us that great lesson dying, which he set while he was alive: He that doth not take up my Cross and follow me, cannot be my disciple. Therefore to take up our Cross and follow Jesus, is our greatest safety as well as duty, our surest title to glory; the Cross is the highest pitch of Christian learning, to know Jesus Christ and him Crucified.
I heartily wish that they that shall read the ensuing Precepts and Practi∣cal Rules may have sanctified affecti∣ons and a clear understanding, that by the divine grace they may be brought to know and to follow the truth. And my prayer for them is, that God would strengthen them by his good Spirit in the inner man, that love may abound in them more and more, and that they may be sincere and unblameable, replenisht with the fruits of righteousness, pleasing to God in all things, without contenti∣on and without offence. I also beg for my self of the divine goodness, that the glorious light of Christ may en∣lighten and guide my mind, and that his strength may be perfected in my weakness, lest after having preached to others, I my self should become a cast-away, by acting contrary to my own instructions. And therefore I also beseech you, good friends of God, Blessed Christians, who are the sheep of his Pasture, remember me in
your Prayers, that what I teach I may fulfil; that the precepts contained in this Book may be my practice, by his divine grace and assistance, without whom we can do nothing, who with the Father and the Holy-Ghost, liveth and reigneth one ever glorious and adored God. Amen.
Imprimatur. Geo. Hooper. R. P. D. GIL. Ep. Cant. à Sacris Dom. May 29. 1677.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART. PART I. Of the Christian Life, and of its end and offices. Pag. 1 CHAP. I. OF the distribution of all Christians into three ranks; good, middle∣sort, and bad. ibid. CHAP. II. A further Description of the Wicked and their Wickedness. 4
CHAP. III. That Original Sin is the spring whence all Evil proceeds. 8 CHAP. IV. Of the Occasion and Drift of this Book. 10 CHAP. V. The Cause why so many learn the Rules of Christianity and follow them not. 12 CHAP. VI. That the Rules of Evangelical Per∣fection are intended for all Christians. 14 CHAP. VII. Of the Ʋsefulness of this Book, with an Exhortation to follow after Perfection. 17
CHAP. VIII. Of the Folly of them that neglect their last End, and how necessary it is to consider it seriously. 19 CHAP. IX. The Reasons why all men are not happy, being they all desire it. 22 CHAP. X. That with an upright intention we must use all things, and refer all our Acti∣ons to God. 24 CHAP. XI. That men trifling about things Eternal, and being so earnest about the World, is the cause why so many attain not their main end. 26
CHAP. XII. How men suffer themselves to be deceiv'd by a fair out-side, and false appearance of good. 29 CHAP. XIII. How men spend themselves and their time, and abuse all things to their own Ruin. 31 CHAP. XIV. That the right way to Heaven is, every one to remain in the station Providence hath appointed him, and therein bear the Crosses which he meets withal. 33 CHAP. XV. How man's last end or supreme happiness is qualified, and how so many mistake and miss it. 35
CHAP. XVI. Another Reason why so many miss of their End; their living too much by Sense. 38 CHAP. XVII. That we being the Children of God, ought to be guided by his Spirit and by the example of Christ. 41 CHAP. XVIII. The Just liveth by faith, not by the laws of flesh and bloud. 43 CHAP. XIX. That Faith works in a Christian self-denyal and contempt of the World. 46
CHAP. XX. Of the desperate folly of men, who willingly run to ruin, by their inconsideration. 48 CHAP. XXI. The Character of a true Christian. 50 CHAP. XXII. Several useful cautions how a Christian should undertake and perfect his works. 53 CHAP. XXIII. That to discharge the Duties of our station is the best thing we can do. 56
CHAP. XXIV. How Christians are to live and to be sincere. 57 CHAP. XXV. That a hearty affection is the life of good actions. 60 CHAP. XXVI. Whence the goodness of our works pro∣ceeds. 62 CHAP. XXVII. How useful and comfortable is the con∣sideration of God being always pre∣sent. 63
CHAP. XXVIII. Why the Imitation of Gods Saints ap∣pears difficult. 66 CHAP. XXIX. How we should in all things aim at Gods Glory. 68 CHAP. XXX. Self-Love is the Root of all Evil. 70 CHAP. XXXI. That Self-Love is that Babylon out of which God hath called us. 72 CHAP. XXXII. How men naturally seek themselves even in their best works. 74
CHAP. XXXIII. Things which every Christian is bound to know in order to Obedience 77 CHAP. XXXIV. The difference betwixt the outward and the inward man. 79 CHAP. XXXV. How dangerous it is to be governed by Opinion and false apprehension of things. 81 CHAP. XXXVI. Three things very profitable and necessary to every Christian. 84
CHAP. XXXVII. That Repentance is necessary to all Chri∣stians. 86 CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the signs and effects of true Repen∣tance. 88 CHAP. XXXIX. Remedies against ordinary failings, and greater sins. 90 CHAP. XL. Clergy-men have some special obligati∣ons, though all are bound to endeavour after perfection. 93 CHAP. XLI. That Prayer is necessary to all, and what dispositions are requisite to make it acceptable. 96
CHAP. XLII. Why many are not profited by Prayer, and that we should study to Pray well and frequently. 100 CHAP. XLIII. How to Pray, and avoid distractions, and fix the intention. 103 CHAP. XLIV. The great advantages of Prayer. 106
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART. PART II. Of the moderation of our affecti∣ons, and the study and endea∣vour after true Virtue. CHAP. I. That Voluptiousness and Vanity are to be avoided, and Truth sought for in things Eternal, after Christ's Ex∣ample. Pag. 1
CHAP. II. That to attain Perfection nothing must be neglected. 4 CHAP. III. That Self-denyal and the Cross is abso∣lutely necessary to all Christians. 7 CHAP. IV. That Self-denyal is the Character, and the principal duty of a Christian. 10 CHAP. V. How we must fight our corrupt nature and depraved affections. 13 CHAP. VI. Of the right use and moderation of our outward senses. 16
CHAP. VII. Of denying our Sensual appetites especi∣ally Intemperance. 19 CHAP. VIII. Of Talkativeness and Silence. 22 CHAP. IX. Of true and false delights, and of self-complacency in virtue. 25 CHAP. X. That we are led too much by Opinion. 27 CHAP. XI. That the Doctrine of Salvation is much slighted, even by some who pretend to it. 30
CHAP. XII. That Self-will is a great Evil and must be renounc'd. 32 CHAP. XIII. Of the advantages of Solitariness and Retirement. 34 CHAP. XIV. Of the Danger of Riches, and that the desire of them is to be mortified. 36 CHAP. XV. Of the use of Riches, and how to know we love them not. 39 CHAP. XVI. Of Poverty in Spirit, and the contempt of the World. 41
CHAP. XVII. Of the Necessity and the Measures of Alms-giving. 44 CHAP XVIII. Of Patience in Bearing and Forbearing. 48 CHAP. XIX. Adversities are occasions of Virtue, and must be Patiently indur'd. 51 CHAP. XX. That we must bear patiently the little Vexations that happen daily. 53 CHAP. XXI. That we should Rejoyce in Triublations. 56
CHAP. XXII. That Detractions and Derisions must be indur'd and derided. 59 CHAP. XXIII. Remedies against Discontent and Anger for what abuses we receive. 61 CHAP. XXIV. Remedies against Impatience. 64 CHAP. XXV. Of Humility the proper Vertue of Chri∣stians. 66 CHAP. XXVI. From God we turn'd away by Pride, to him we must return by humility. 69
CHAP. XXVII. The Character of a proud man. 72 CHAP. XXVIII. Motives and Reasons for Humility. 75 CHAP. XXIX. That the Humble man judgeth himself and not others; with a Character of him. 79 CHAP. XXX. Of the Conformity of our Will to Gods. 83 CHAP. XXXI. Of the Resignation of our selves to God in all things. 87
CHAP. XXXII. That the Hope of our Salvation must rest upon God. 91 CHAP. XXXIII. That Love is the Spirit of Christian Re∣ligion. 93 CHAP. XXXIV. Of the right Placing and Ordering of Love. 96 CHAP. XXXV. Of the Necessity and Measures of Loving our Neighbour. 98 CHAP. XXXVI. True Friendship and the true Offices of it. 101
CHAP. XXXVII. Of the several Acts of Charity to our Neighbours. 105 CHAP. XXXVIII. Charity is also due to our Enemies. 107 CHAP. XXXIX. That the love of the Supreme Good, com∣prehends all goodness. 109 CHAP. XL. Wherein consists the Love of God. 112 CHAP. XLI. That there is more of Love in Practi∣cal Knowledge than in Speculation. 115
CHAP. XLII. That by Love Holiness is to be per∣fected. 117 CHAP. XLIII. That the Consideration of the fewness of the Chosen, ought to make us very wary and diligent. 120
PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life. PART I. Of the Christian Life, and of its end and offices. CHAP. I. Of the distribution of all Christians into three ranks; good, middle-sort, and bad. 1. WHen in my meditation as from a watch-tower, I consider the whole multitude of Chri∣stians in the universal Church, with their manners and principles, they appear to
me as divided into three distinct bands or orders. The first contains them who fol∣lowing the doctrin of Christ and his bles∣sed example with a sincere and hearty affection, and daily reaching forward to∣wards the highest pitch of Evangelical perfection, thereby approve themselves to be Christians indeed; constantly serving God, and meditating in his Law, they crucifie the flesh with the affections and lusts, and are not cast down by adversity, nor puft up by a prosperous fortune. Now among these, some are more eminent in virtue than the rest, and seem to be even more than men; abstaining from all de∣licious fare, and being temperate even to a perpetual fast; keeping themselves pure and unspotted even to the refusing of law∣ful pleasures; exercising themselves in pa∣tience, so as to go manfully through fire and the worst of pains; mortifying and denying themselves, as being their own enemies; de∣spising wealth and riches, so as freely to bestow in charity all that they possess; being filled with the love of God, as much as is possible in this life; and possessing all virtues in the highest degree, so as to be the admiration rather than the ex∣ample of others, who with shame acknow∣ledge their own weakness, when they con∣sider how far short they fall of these He∣roick Christians. But the number of these
is not great, and they are commonly un∣known, being dead and crucified to themselves and the world, their conversation being in Heaven, and their life hid with Christ in God. 2. In the next rank are they who rest in the profession of the true faith, and think that all Christian duties consist in outward acts; they fear God, and yet retain and worship their secret Idols; they often come to the Sacrament, but with so much unpre∣paredness and indevotion, that their fre∣quent receiving profits them not; they ab∣stain from great and crying sins, and ne∣glect lesser; outward Acts of Religion they omit not, but their affections are immerst in the World, they are acted by Self-love and Self-interest, and they are unacquaint∣ed with the inward peace and beauty of a Spiritual life; they know not what it is to indeavour after Christian perfection; they are, and will be strangers to that Heaven∣ly mindedness and renouncing of all things, without which Christ declares none can be his Disciple; and so sadly deluded they are, so unhappily besotted with inconsideration, that if you exhort them to a stricter and more holy life, they will bid you go and preach to Monks and Hermits, and remain unconcern'd and the same as before. 3. In the last order come all such as are called Christians, onely because born of
Christian Parents and Baptized; their Lives and Actions being scandalous, and they themselves wicked and abominable, worse than infidels; of these, the number is great and innumerable. CHAP. II. A further Description of the Wicked and their Wickedness. 1. THese are they that confess God with their mouth and constantly deny him with their deeds, who so study to gra∣tifie their appetites, and so resolvedly live after the flesh and the sinful customs of the World, that the revelations and laws of the Gospel can make no impression on them, they being rather asham'd and almost sorry that they are Christians. They daily in∣dulge to their Lusts, and their vilanies growing customary deprive them of all sense of human modesty. They relish no∣thing but the Earth; they take their ac∣count of good and evil by carnal pleasures, and they so order the course of their lives that like brutes they follow nothing but their bodily senses. Riches they value at a mighty rate, and right or wrong seek to obtain them; they esteem nothing base and
unworthy that advanceth their profit or their preferment; and as one said of some Greeks, they build as though they were never to die, and live as if they were weary of their life. 2. This they do, because they believe not what our blessed Lord hath reveal'd, and because being unmindful of the uncertainty of our condition, they promise themselves many years to live. They rest satisfied with the injoyment of transitory things, which soon shall be possest by others: and things that abide for ever they slight and neglect, because they think not of Eterni∣ty. They are tormented by ambition, and weakned by lust, swel'd with pride and rack'd by Envy; Passions and unsatiable desires toss them to and fro, and they are so averse to all righteousness, that they not only neglect, but even hate the just laws of God. Christ pronounceth them Blessed that are poor, and mourn, and suffer persecu∣tion: they contrarywise esteem them bles∣sed that are rich, great and prosperous, and generally honoured by men. Christ declares that none can be his Disciple, who is not ready chearfully to forsake all that he hath for him: but these men place their affections on their wealth; keep it nigard∣ly, part with it sorrowfully, and are ever greedy of more, ever ready to invade others right, and to get what they can from them.
3. Even some Professors, that have cho∣sen Christ for their portion, and pretend to be devoted to him, even some of these there be, who, unmindful of their Sacred Promises, indeavour nothing more than to increase their wealth, and oftentimes en∣joy greater riches under Christ the great Exemplar of Poverty, than they could have done in a civil Calling under the greatest Monarch of this World. Neither are some of these more careful to obey than to imi∣tate, for instead of loving their Enemies, and rendring good for evil to them that hate them, as our Blessed Lord hath com∣manded us, they return hatred for ill will, and are ever ready and desire to revenge the least injuries. Who is there that obeys Christ's counsel or injunction of turning the cheek to him that smites us, and suffering him that strives for our Coat to take our Cloak also? or rather who is there that doth not slight and deride it? Let who will take an exact account of the Evangelical precepts, and of the observers of them, he shall find that they are very few that live by the Rules of the Gospel, few that regard and esteem it as they should. Nay few there be that care to read or hear it; Fables Romances, and Idle Discourses are generally prefer'd to the Word of God; whereby the vain World make it appear, that they belong not to him whose voice they care not
to hear, that they hear not God's Words, be∣cause they are not of God. 4. 'Tis the Duty of every Christian faith∣fully to believe what God hath revealed, to follow his Counsels, and sincerely obey his Commands, whence it clearly follows, that he is no Christian who neglects or scorns this Duty, for Faith without Works is dead, and except our conversation be suitable to our Profession, the most glo∣rious Names and Titles shall avail nothing. Life and manners, as well as Faith, make a difference betwixt a Heathen and a Be∣liever; by Works the distinction is made betwixt the true Religion and the false. For what manner of Faith is theirs, who so believe in God that they despise and re∣ject his Commands? are they not like the Devil who believes and trembles? or ra∣ther it were to be wisht that they were no worse; for his Faith begets an awe and terror, but these boast of Faith, and yet do not so much as fear God.
CHAP. III. That original sin is the spring whence all evil proceeds. 1. NOW of the cause of all this wick∣edness none can be ignorant, that hath but heard of the transgression of our first Parents. For by their fall original Righteousness being lost, human nature utterly depraved and shut up under con∣demnation, their off-spring fell into evils of all sorts so great and so many, that they can be neither exprest nor numbred. Hence that deep and dreadful ignorance which like a black cloud darkens the mind and lies upon it; hence that brutish and untam∣able Lust which like a heavy weight sinks the soul to the ground and there keeps it fast; hence that aversion from God, and conversion to things perishing; hence those anxious cares and foolish joys, those dissensions, quarrels and enmities, those perverse Heresies, greedy Sacrileges, and unsatiable Lusts; and hence the Eternal ruin and damnation of all Mankind. For this was the just vengeance of Man's impious Disobedience and Rebellion, that God should forsake him, who by Pride lift up
himself against God; that he that would not when he could, make a good use of his free will, should be depriv'd of it, and be∣come uncapable of doing what was infi∣nitely his duty and his interest to per∣form, except he be prevented and assisted by the divine grace and mercy. 2. Thus Man left to himself in the state of Nature, is by self-love drawn to himself, seeks himself onely, and in his wretched self alone sets his rest and his satisfaction. This is a sad truth, and 'tis much to be wisht all Christians did well consider and understand it, for if they were sensible of their weakness and impotency, how un∣capable they are of themselves to do any good, then 'tis like they would daily by fer∣vent prayer beg his gracious help, that works in us to will and to do; from whom comes all our light, our strength, and our sufficiency. But alas too many in a deep death-like sleep, rest in carnal security, and unhappily abused by vain delusions, love their blindness and their disease too, dreaming that they are safe and sound, be∣cause they have no sense of their di∣stemper.
CHAP. IV. Of the occasion and drift of this Book. 1. WHilest I often thought of these things, and in the bitterness of my Soul call'd to mind the lost years of my life, I was griev'd and perplext both upon the account of the time which is past, and of that which shall follow hereafter. Look∣ing backward on those days which are gone, and examining seriously how I have spent them, I was seiz'd upon with horror at the sight of my many soul prevaricati∣ons against the laws of my gracious God, and my great unfaithulness to Christ my Sa∣viour, in the breach of those sacred vows I made when I gave up my name to him, in holy Baptism: I was asham'd and con∣founded to have thus requited my God, and abused his Grace. And when I turn'd my self to the future, to those things that are coming upon me, I could not but dread the dreadful judgments of my offended God, and tremble exceedingly at the greatness of my danger, and the uncertainty of that pardon I want, and am so much unworthy of. In these straights I resolved by God's help, first to help my self, and then others that are in the same case; to prescribe what
might easily be had, and yet be effectual; things ready at hand, which being often read and considered, might be remembred and follow'd: that they that seriously de∣sign to be happy and to take the safest way that leads to Heaven, might find it here, without the trouble of a long and laborious search. 2. Now because Physicians have their Aphorisms, and Philosophers their Axioms or sentences: and in all inquiries after truth, we must begin at certain principles, which are short and comprehensive, and as it were, the seed and marrow of the whole discipline; therefore I purpose in this little book, to lay down briefly and clearly those chiefest Rules and instructi∣ons for to lead a holy and a religious life, which more at large are scattered in the sacred books of Divine Scripture, and in the works of the Holy Fathers and other good Authors. For when all is done, this is our first and our greatest concern, that one necessary thing on which all depends, to know how to live well, to live like Christians. For what shall a man be profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? and what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.26. Nothing more perverse and unreasonable can be imagined, than to own our selves Christ's disciples, and live quite contrary to the
example and the precepts of Christ. The name of a Christian will avail nothing, where the life is Antichristian. CHAP. V. The Cause why so many learn the Rules of Christianity and follow them not. 1. MAny without difficulty can read and learn the Gospel-precepts, and even often think of them: but 'tis much to be lamented that few understand well their force and their full importance. We easily grant that the only way to hea∣ven lies through self-denyal, fasting, watch∣ing and praying, keeping under the body, and going patiently through many tribula∣tions: but when it comes to the proof of action, we seem to be of another mind. We can readily say and affirm that it is a Christian's duty chearfully to endure re∣proaches and persecutions, torments, and even death it self: but when these evils are at hand, and our life comes to be in danger, then things appear not as they did before, we cannot see that we are oblig'd to resignation and sufferance; what before was a very clear case, is now at the best but very doubtful. We can be humble when
no body reviles us: and when wee meet with no vexation then we are patient. We assent to the doctrine of Christ, and his se∣verest injunctions, when we are not con∣cern'd: but when they come to regard us, and press upon us a present duty, then the inticements of lust, and worldly vanities alter our resolutions and disturb our minds; and by a corrupt gloss or lazy interpreta∣tion we elude the unpleasing precept. 2. Truth is as it were, wrapt up in a cloud, and men hate it, because it re∣proves them, their sinful depraved nature cannot abide its rigour and austerity. They find in virtue something rough and bitter, and in sin a mixture of sweetness; that offends, and this gratifies their distempe∣red palat, and they brutishly follow the bait, run into all dissolution, and so reject truth to imbrace a lie. If at any time they give ear to an honest and plain monitor who lays the truth open before them, and be so far work'd upon, as to be sensible that they are in darkness, and to have some de∣sire after light: yet like men that would fain awake, but are opprest by a heavy slumber, and so presently fall to sleep a∣gain; they soon after close their eyes, and exclude the light, to return to their beloved darkness. 3. No wonder therefore, if we pro∣pound to do many things, and effect no∣thing.
For we not foreseeing the diffi∣culties which commonly occur in well-doing, when we come to meet with them, we presently draw back, and our courage fails; again, we trust in our own strength more than in the divine help and assistance: and when temptations grow strong we lose heart and are soon worsted, and learn by a sad experience, that when we overcome, it is not by our own virtue, but by the power of God's grace. Lastly, we give much to notion and speculations, and take little care to affect our will and affections; the Christian laws of well-living we learn as a science, rather than as a matter of conscience; we study Divinity, not to o∣bedience and conformity to God's will, but to vain glory and ostentation. Now 'tis alto∣gether in vain to learn wisdom and yet live foolishly. CHAP. VI. That the rules of Evangelical Perfection are intended for all Christians. 1. MAny that have no mind to perfect holiness in the fear of God, by living according to the strict precepts of our Sa∣viour Christ, pretend that they belong not
to them, but only to Clergy-men or such as are shut up and recluse from the World; this is their excuse and their plea, but as I shall soon make it appear, it is alto∣gether void of truth and vain. For though it is to be acknowledg'd, that some by new vows and ingagements are more particu∣larly devoted to God, and under greater obligations to live Religiously and tend to perfection; yet certain it is that all Chri∣stians tend to the same end, though their way may differ in some circumstances: and as to what regards the practice of Christian virtues, contempt of the World, poverty in Spirit, and the loving and bearing of the Cross, they are all equally concern'd; they have the same Gospel, and are equally oblig'd to obey its dictates. Charity which is the band of perfection, comprehensive of all other duties, God requires of all Christians alike: and lust or self-love which is the root of all evil, is likewise generally forbidden; no exception of persons; no difference is made betwixt any. Our Blessed Saviour hath injon'd we should ab∣stain from idle words, of which an account shall be rendred in the great day, that we should not be angry with our Brother, nor covet what belongs to him; he makes no distinction betwixt Clergy-men or Lay-men, or persons of any rank or calling; nor yet when he says, Woe unto you that laugh
and blessed are ye that mourn: nor when he teaches that we must always pray, that we must forsake all and follow him, that we must hate our own life, deny our selves, suffer injuries patiently, and enter in at the straight gate; in these consists Christian perfection, and yet from these he excludes no man. 2. Saint Paul likewise writing to all Chri∣stians, such as were cumbered with worldly affairs, and had the care of large families, gives them this strict Ascetick Rule, to be content with food and raiment. 1 Tim. 6.8. Than which nothing more was ever re∣quired of any Hermits. Saint Peter also exhorts all believers, to be holy in all manner of conversation, as he that hath called them is holy. 1 Ep. 1.15. So doth Saint James 1.4. to be perfect and intire, wanting nothing. And our Blessed Saviour before them all, preach∣ing to the multitude that followed him, Be ye perfect, saith he, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5.48. Thereby re∣commending the highest degree of holi∣ness, to all that would be his Disciples; that as many as are reputed children of God, by grace and adoption, might live accord∣ingly indeavouring after the example and perfection of their Heavenly Father. And so hath our Blessed Lord laid upon all Chri∣stians infinite obligations to live holy lives, to be strict and virtuous to the highest mea∣sure
and possibility, which they may not neglect without forfeiting his favour, and excluding themselves from his Heavenly Kingdom. CHAP. VII. Of the usefulness of this Book, with an exhortation to follow after perfection. 1. NOW then let us despise and for∣sake all those things, wherein worldings place their felicity, and make it our onely study to pursue after the prize of our high calling, the height of Christian perfection, in following the blessed steps of our Blessed Redeemer. This is the aim of this little volume; to this purpose are de∣sign'd all the instructions here laid down, that we may overcome the temptations and allurements of sense, attain to the knowledge of the truth, and so return in some manner to our primitive station, that Paradise wherein we were created, to tri∣umph over sin, and at last reign to Eter∣nity. The children of this World would fain have it believ'd, that that perfection or sincerity which the Gospel requires, is very hard to come by, and hardly to be found in any man living, thereby endea∣vouring
to make Christians faint and remiss, loth to venture upon an attempt, which they would have them think is wholly im∣possible: whereas nothing is difficult to him that is truly resolv'd and willing, and what∣ever is hard in it self, is made easie by that grace of God, which is always ready to assist us. 2. The truth is, there is so much of de∣licious beauty in virtue and righteousness, so ravishing a joy in a glimpse of heavenly light, so glorious a brightness in the sight of God's eternal truth, that the enjoyment of these for one day, may justly be prefer'd to many ages of the greatest pleasures this world can afford, for one day in thy Courts is better than a thousand, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 84.10. 3. Now here would I caution my Rea∣der, not to wonder, if perchance he finds the same thing repeated more than once in this little book, for that cannot be avoided, there being so close a connexion and affinity betwixt the precepts of several virtues: and withal it may be an effect of the great power of truth, that the nearer we view it, the oftner we are drawn to review it. Likewise if something herein seems too Angelical and high, or more harsh and difficult than the frail nature of man can well bear, let him remember that the Kingdom of Hea∣ven suffers violence, and that the sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be re∣vealed in us. Our labour is but short, but our promised reward is infinite and eternal. CHAP. VIII. Of the folly of them that neglect their last end, and how necessary it is to consider it seriously. 1. IT is not to be thought nor exprest how ignorant and careless many Christians remain about their great and last end; if there were no Eternity, and if nothing after this life were to be fear'd or hoped for, they could not live more loosely than they do. Few they are that seriously con∣sider that their great interest and their chiefest business which should take place of all other, is to attain their proper end; that end which is desired for it self, and beyond which we shall wish for nothing, of which S. Philip saith, Joh. 14.8. Lord shew us the Father and it sufficeth us: For this end, which is God, the beatifical vi∣sion of him, will be al-sufficient, because that it will have no end; all other things
are meer trifles, vanities and vexation of spirit. 2. The very shape of our bodies doth admonish us of the end for which we were born; for God made us with our face up∣wards, that looking up to heaven, we might know that thence is our origine, and that there is our rest and countrey. And yet for all this, many like brutes look down and grovel upon the ground, and can relish nothing, nor desire nothing, but what is earthly; nay more, like men in a deep lethargy, they can hardly be waked by the loudest clamours and the fear of a rage∣ing approaching fire; and what is worst of all, if they somewhat lift up their head, and speak imperfectly two or three words of sense, they soon fall again into their slumber, and no longer will hear, or mind what concerns their life and safety. 3. It is the counsel of our Blessed Savi∣our, Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you: but we slighting and neglecting that blessed Kingdom, seek for mony, pleasures, and preferments, and mind nothing else. Christ tells us, that one thing is necessary, Luke 10.42. but we cum∣ber our selves about many things, which for the most part are only hindrances to our salvation. He commands us, Mat. 7.12. To do that to others, which we would they
should do unto us: But we generally do those things to them, which we would think most grievous to suffer our selves. He forbids us to judge, Mat. 7.1. But we love to censure others, and to condemn them very severe∣ly; we take notice of motes in their eyes, and perceive not beams in our own: and to sum up all in this, he requires we would love him above all things, with all our heart and soul, Mat. 22.37. But we dote on pelf and riches; we are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; to him we prefer any thing that gratifies our lusts and our sinful affections. Thus, in as much as in us lies, we make the preaching of the Cross to be of none effect, the Incarnation of the Son of God to be to no purpose, and sacraments to be vain and insignificant: because we will live as if we had no knowledge of God, no thoughts of heaven nor hell, no remem∣brance of our latter end. The life of every creature consisteth in acting sutable to its own nature; now that which we are to do, as men, wherein properly consists our duty and our dignity, is to know God, and to love him: therefore to be imployed in this, is our proper work, our life and hap∣piness; to do any thing else, is vain and useless; and to do any thing contrary, is infinitely pernicious.
CHAP. IX. The reasons why all men are not happy, being they all desire it. 1. IT is the constant sense and design of all men that can use their reason, to aspire after happiness; but what that is, there are and have been many opinions and disputes; and Philosophers have spent much time and industry to find out the way to Blessedness, the desire whereof is natural, and common to all, of what parts or per∣suasions soever. Yet Christians alone know it, they being taught by the doctrine of Faith, that God is the fountain of all feli∣city, the fulfilling of all rational desires, that Summum Bonum or last end, which is to be prefer'd and lov'd, and sought before all other things, as that wherein alone we can find perfect rest and satisfaction. Not∣withstanding 'tis to be confest and sadly be∣wailed that multitudes of Christians are so wilfully blind and perverse, that though they passionately wish for happiness, yet they do nothing whereby to obtain it. They are so grosly cheated by a false appearance of Bliss, the deceit and illusions of things pre∣sent, that they aspire to nothing above sense, and therefore they would, and yet cannot
be happy, because they aim not at the right end; their actions and pursuits have a ten∣dency to misery, and thither necessarily lead them, though it be much against their will. 2. As in a circle, though never so ample, there is but one center, which being alone in the middle, seems to have dominion over all the lines that can be drawn from the circumference, and to be their proper place of rest: thus is God the one onely center and rest of our souls, and if they turn from him, they may wander eternally, other objects being finite and altogether unsatisfying. Therefore God requires only that we should seek after him, because that alone is absolutely required to our well-being. Whatever else is wanting, we may be well without it; life it self is not neces∣sary: and if not life, much less lesser en∣joyments. And so he that lives as he should, aiming at his right end, must live to God alone, to serve and to glorifie him. For this is the nature of man, and a law ap∣pointed to him which cannot be changed, that he that desires and pursues after that su∣preme, eternal, uncreated good, thereby be∣comes happy: whereas he that any ways turns from it, becomes necessarily mi∣serable.
CHAP. X. That with an upright intention we must use all things, and refer all our actions to God. 1. IN that we are pilgrims and travellers going to our countrey, it is altogether necessary we should always advance thither∣ward, and seriously inquire whether we follow the right way, whither we are going, what end we propound to our selves in all our labours, and what it is we now aim at by our present studies and endea∣vours: for man undertakes nothing, but to a certain end and purpose, which the better it is, the better also is the undertaking; it is a good intention that makes a good work, and that good intention is that, which is directed by the rule of faith. It is the voice of the wicked, Wisd. 2.6. Come on therefore, let us enjoy the good things that are present. Whereas the best of creatures are only for use; and God alone for enjoyment. The Creatures are as so many steps, or rounds of a ladder whereby we might ascend up to God; thus at least he intended it: but by our depravation and folly, they
became obstacles in our way to him, they turn us from the path to life and happiness, and as the Wiseman saith, Wisd. 14.11. The creatures of God become stumbling blocks to the souls of men, and a snare to the feet of the unwise. Of the unwise, he saith, such as will not take God for their guide, such as turn their eyes from his glorious light, to enjoy the shade and obscurity of creatures: thereby falling in love with darkness, and so becoming un∣capable of ever abiding the divine saving light. 2. Now if all creatures are created for this, to be as helps and means whereby we may obtain our end, then are we to take off our affections from them, to place them upon the Creator, who is the end we should aim at. For the end should be lov'd and desir'd without end, and without compe∣titor, in goodness being independent, su∣preme, and alone satisfactory: whereas means have no farther goodness, than as they help to obtain the end. A Christian should therefore refer to God all his thoughts, and words, and actions, and that, not lazily or verbally only: but with a strong affection, and with a pure heart: avoiding thereby the cheat men often put upon themselves, in being deceiv'd with their own formalities and specious pre∣tences, when even in Religion and spiritual exercises, they often seek and please them∣selves,
rather than God. Upon this account the Scripture calls the way to life, straight and narrow, because depraved man re∣fers all to himself, and can hardly follow the pure and direct ways which God pre∣scribes, being naturally averse to an up∣right intention. But when this aversion is once overcome, by an assiduous diligence and delight in the law of God, then divine commandments are not grievous, the way to life is wide, and the yoke of Christ is light and pleasant. CHAP. XI. That men trifling about things Eternal and being earnest about the World, is the cause why so many attain not their main end. 1. THat the number of fools is past number, was rightly affirmed by the Wise man: For indeed infinite multi∣tudes of men trifle away their days so simp∣ly, act so childishly, or rather so much like mad men, that their intolerable follies cannot be sufficiently deplor'd. They set the flesh above the spirit; they prefer time to Eternity, and Earth to Heaven, till
the unhappy Comedy of their sinful lif ends in a sadder Tragedy of death, and they go down to Hell in a moment. If a suit at law is to be determin'd, or an estate gain'd, or a place of honour obtain'd, then they spare no cost nor labour, no search, no dili∣gence, no study: but if Heaven is to be purchast, and eternal life and glory made sure, then no man stirs; they are all asleep and unactive; no regard, no care is had of it. 2. In things that touch and afflict the body, as hunger and thirst, heat and cold, pains and infirmities, our senses are quick, and can never be deceiv'd: and therefore with all our might and industry, we pre∣sently occur to those evils, and endeavour to remove them. But if our soul suffers un∣der the same or the like spiritual evils, we are not sensible, and we care no more, than if that nobler part of us whereby we live, and are rational and like to Angels, had no being at all. And this, because the flesh hath got the upper hand: and we value this sport, uncertain life, more than life eternal: and we make it our first and sole employment to rescue that carcass from death, for a few moments, which certainly must soon become its prey. 3. One cause of these preposterous do∣ings, is the gross and brutish ignorance, or rather inconsideration of too too many,
who will neither know nor consider, to what end man was created, what it is he should seek and design in the whole course of his life, and what way he should take that he may not miss of his great aim, Jer. 12.11. The whole land is made desolate because no man lays it to heart, i. e. because no man considers wisely. Another cause of this mischief, is the great number and power of those Ene∣mies that perpetually assault us, whose snares no man can possibly avoid, without God breaks them, and delivers him: for we are continually besieg'd by a frail flesh, a flattering world, and legions of devils, who seek to devour us. 4. Lastly, our folly and misery proceeds partly from our blindness; the whole World being in darkness, we want light to guide us, and yet will not beg it of God, and pray him devoutly, he would lead us a∣right, who alone is able and willing to do it: and partly from our sloth and inconstancy; for we are vertuous in wish and not in effect, because we are lazy to work, and when it comes to the practice, we find difficulties, and being soon tir'd and dis∣heartned, hastily give over, before we have effected any thing. All Christians no doubt would be glad to come at last to Christ, but they have no heart to come after him: they would be glad to enjoy him, but care not to imitate him: fain would they come to him,
but not follow him. Men would obtain riches without labour, and Crowns without fighting; they like well of rewards, but they would take no pains. GHAP. XII. How men suffer themselves to be deceiv'd by a fair out-side, and false appearance of good. 1. THis World's felicity put all toge∣ther, with all those things that are most esteem'd by the generality of man∣kind, the whole is but like a coarse picture which seems to have something pleasing and inviting, when you look upon't with a false light, or in a place somewhat obscure, or with a small blind candle, such as is the dim and deceitful light of present time: but if you bring forth the picture, and view it before that glorious sun that shines for ever, the radiant brightness of Eternity, there it will appear deform and unfinish'd, a dark and imperfect shadow which represents nothing, a confused heap of strokes and lines drawn without order or design. For though the light of the Gospel enlightens the World, yet it remains in darkness;
men will not see the glorious discoveries which the Gospel makes; The light shined in the darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not. 3. Yet that light it is, and none else, that clearly shews the great difference betwixt good and evil, btwixt vile and precious, be∣twixt truth and appearances; how we may know and chuse the one from the other. By this blessed light of Christianity which dwells in the heart and instructs it, and abides for ever, by it we are taught not to cleave to the creatures because of their attractive beauty: but so to consider their perfections, as to be by them led to the fountain whence they proceed, to the love and admiration of the glorious maker of all things. And the same divine light it is, makes me see that it is good for me to hold me fast by my God, and to put in him alone my whole confidence, and not in Princes or Friends, or even Brothers: who as they have all a distinct being, have also different ends, and seek from us every one his own advantage, being ever ready to forsake us, as soon as they shall think we are become useless to them. This light therefore we ought gladly to receive and follow, that appearances and pleasing illusions put not a cheat upon us, and make us seek for happiness in the creatures which are as if they were not, and have no value, but what the ignorant vulgar attri∣butes
to them: and make us forsake God, who remains for ever, who is the fountain of all being, and the author of all good things, out of whom there is no rest, no peace, no felicity to be had. He that de∣parts from the supreme happiness, thereby becomes miserable in the highest degree. CHAP. XIII. How men spend themselves and their time, and abuse all things to their own ruine. 1. THE Life of man runs round and spends it self within this circle, they eat and drink, they sleep and wake, that they may return to the same again; they scrape together as much as they are able, and there is no end of their acquists; they will live as merrily as they can, and die as late as possible may be; betwixt their baptism and the hour of death there lies a confused heap of acts of sin and acts of Religion, of penitent confessions and wilful relapses, of Sacramental vows and breaches of them. No day passeth over without they add to the number of their transgressions; and they all go on heedlesly
without considering what will be the end of their course of life; and they all run, when but a few care, how they come to the end of their race: because they consider not what reward and glory is prepared in Heaven, to them that remain faithful to their Christian engagements, overcoming the world and the flesh, for to follow Christ. 2. God created the whole universe, and in it man to his image, giving him an under∣standing to know his maker, a will to love and obey him, a memory to think of his laws, faculties to serve him, and a tongue to praise him: but then as he made man for him∣self, so he created the whole world for man, that he might use all things for his own hap∣piness, and for the glory of God, the giver of all. But ungrateful man, un∣mindful of his duty, drawn by the deceit of voluptuousness, minds only his sensual plea∣sure, useth or rather abuseth his know∣ledge and reason, his riches and honours, his health and life and all other enjoyments, to the displeasure and dishonour of God his gracious benefactor, who freely granted him all those things, that if he would make a good use of them, they might be instru∣ments of his present ease and well being, and of his future eternal happiness. So great is the folly and perversness of man, that he abuseth that to his own ruine, which God in∣tended, and gave him for his greater good.
CHAP. XIV. That the right way to Heaven is, every one to remain in the station Providence hath appointed him, and therein bear the crosses which he meets withal. 1. EVery man that aims at the right end, must guide his course thither by the measures of Eternity, and that in a way sutable to the circumstances of his con∣dition. This necessary Rule is not ob∣serv'd by all, for many following their own fancies, unadvisedly forsake that way where∣in Divine providence had brought them, and take some other of their own chusing. Like Naaman the Syrian who, though he much longed to be cur'd of his leprosie, yet refused to use the easie remedy pre∣scrib'd by the Prophet, and preferring what he himself had fancied, had gone away in anger diseased as he came, had not his wiser servant hindred it. After this manner, many following their own heads, undertake many things which they cannot perform, but which only vex and distract them: being above their abilities, or inconsistent with the ne∣cessary occupations which they lie under;
so that they can neither act, nor advance towards the desired end, but spend them∣selves in unprofitably wishing that things were otherwise than they are. 2. But the short and ready way to Bliss, is that which our Blessed Saviour hath shew'd us, saying, Let him that will come after me, take up his Cross and follow me. His Cross, he saith, not that which was to be another man's burthen; the Cross which God lays upon him, and hath fitted for him, and given him strength to bear: not that which he foolishly shall take up, and soon after poorly sink under. These two things must therefore carefully be heeded, first that a man understand perfectly what is the right end at which he should aim; without this, all deliberations concerning the means, are to no purpose: and secondly that knowing that good end, he keeps his mind intent upon't, and take that plain path towards it, which lies before him, and agrees with his state and condition, therein bearing his Cross chearfully, as the Lord hath commanded. Now this is every man's Cross, to discharge well the duties of his place and of his several relations, to bear patiently those afflictions which he daily meets in his way, and constantly, by doing better and better that which belongs to his province, to endeavour after the highest perfection attainable therein. Every man
in his proper station, in that calling where∣in he is called, may best become a good Chri∣stian, perfect holiness in the fear of God, and at last obtain happiness. CHAP. XV. How man's last end or supreme happiness is qualified, and how so many mistake and miss it. 1. THese be the inseparable properties of the last and highest end at which man should aim, that it be perfectly good, and perfectly satisfactory, so that being once obtain'd, nothing else is wanted, and no∣thing else desir'd; for whoever wants any thing, desires it also, and he that desires is not satisfied, is not yet come to that last end beyond which his wishes can go no further; that is, is not possest of God, who alone is infinitely good, and can alone replenish all our desires and capacities. I shall be satisfied when thy glory appears, saith the Psalmist, or I shall be satisfied with thy like∣ness. Psal. 17.15. that and nothing else can perfectly do it. 2. Yet such is the perverse and incurable folly of man, that he will have that to be
best which he loves best; though by the testimony of others, and the conviction of his own conscience he knows it to be evil. And therefore many, either ignorantly or perversly pursue after that which is good only in appearance, and forsake that which is good indeed. And they thereby become disorderly, wretched and criminal; ene∣mies to God, lovers of the thorny pleasures of sin; and lovers of that fatal darkness which hides their sorrows, the snares among which they walk, and covers their misery and danger, so that they neither see nor fear the dreadful tribunal of that just Judge, who will condemn all Apostates, that turn from the right way. They walk, saith the Apostle, in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkned, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: being past feeling, they have given them∣selves over to lasciviousness, to work all un∣cleanness with greediness, Ephes. 4.17. They count their life a market for gain, and say, we must be getting every way, though it be by evil means, Wisd: 15.12. And then it often happens by a just judgment, that their faith comes to be as debaucht as their life; that having long said it by their wicked deeds, they at last say it in their heart, that there is no God.
3. I have already, and cannot too often note the cause of this evil; that is Adam, who by his sin, not only lost the uprightness of his will, but also the true light of his un∣derstanding: so that in him, who was the stock and root whence all men grow, we were depriv'd of both. And now this cor∣ruption of the will, inclines man to self-love, vain glory, and an imperious pride; to covetousness, sloth, sensuality and loose∣ness: And in the darkness of the under∣standing exposeth him to ignorance, and false apprehension of things, to doubts, errors and lies, and makes him have an aversion to good and serious thoughts. Thus man is become earthly, weak, and distem∣perd, unable to resist the sinful motions of his own heart, and unable to know or to attain true felicity: but rather, as it is written, His ways are always grievous, and God's judgments are far above out of his sight, Psal. 10.5. And he now being alienated from God, to whom all things should be refer'd, is also a stranger to virtue, which consists in the intention, in being design'd to please God, rather than in the act. But that Soul which by the Grace of our Blessed Jesus, is redeem'd from this power of Sa∣tan and slavery to sin, is also enabled to cleave stedfastly to God, in whom it enjoys Peace and joy, and full satisfaction, all that can make him intirely happy; for he is un∣reasonable
and too unsatiable, to whom God is not sufficient. CHAP. XVI. Another reason why so many miss of their end; their living too much by sense. 1. WHereas reason it self teaches, and all men freely confess that things to come should be prefer'd to things present, heavenly things to things earthly, and things eternal to things that last but for a short time: 'tis hard to conceive why so many who be∣lieve and acknowledge this, yet by their acti∣ons strongly deny it. In worldly matters, and such as concern this present life, they are very active, very wise and very laborious; in others they seem to have neither sense nor reason. If you speak to them of God, of Holy-Living and Life Eternal, they un∣derstand you not, or they presently forget what you said. Things material and perish∣ing are sensible, and therefore more regard∣ed and set by; though oftentimes ex∣perience will force them to know that all human concerns are flitting, uncertain, and very deceitful, yet men follow sense, and they soon return to embrace those things which custom and a familiar converse hath made dear to them.
2. The fall (as I said) of our first Pa∣rents, is the head-spring whence all this mischief flows; from it proceed all tempta∣tions, as also the darkness and inconstancy of our minds: but the more immediate cause of it, which I now consider is the im∣becillity, depravation and weakness of the faculties of our souls, which have no right apprehension of the things of God, and but an imperfect confused notion of the amazing concerns of Eternity. The loveliness of virtue and the great deformity of sin, the terrors of death and the dread of God's righteous judgments, the joys of Saints above, and the grievous torments of the wicked in hell: these are but words which we hear, we have dark and narrow conceptions of them, we understand not of how great an importance they are, and therefore we are not so affected with them, as to be made wise unto salvation. Of things offer'd to our consideration, we only mind that least outward part which falls under the reach of sense: but we attend not to that which is less sensible, though more con∣siderable and apt effectually to work upon the mind. Thus in sin, we look most of all to what's temporal; we are more con∣cern'd for the impairing of our same and the diminution of our worth or self-complacency, than for having offended God, and made our selves obnoxious to an
infinite pain. Likewise in a dying man we most observe what is in view, outward symptomes and accidents, little regarding the more essential adjuncts which concern the soul, and are of far greater moment. And we conceive of the last judgment and the unquenchable flames of Hell, which are imperceptible to sense, as of things which are nothing to us, and which we have no interest to mind. 3. The same deception also extends it self to things present which gratifie our ap∣petite; we take notice only of that outside which pleaseth us, and so deplorable is our sottish mistake, that we count our selves very happy to enjoy that for a moment, which must make us eternally miserable. Every man knows his Soul is immortal, and many Philosophers have writ great things upon that subject: but where are they that are solicitous for its well-being after death? Do not most men neglect their soul, and live as if it were to die with the body? The mischief is, that generally men live neither by faith nor by reason, they follow blindfold and brutishly just as sense leads them: avoiding carefully what is now troublesom to the flesh, as if nothing else were to be done here, and nothing else fear'd hereafter,
CHAP. XVII. That we being the Children of God, ought to be guided by his Spirit and by the example of Christ. 1. IF a man should rightly understand and seriously consider, that God by a gracious adoption owns him for his son, that he is redeem'd by the Bloud of Christ, and born again by Holy Baptism into the hope of Eternal Life, he would doubtless esteem it his noblest title and his greatest honour, he would despise all earthly advantages, and mind and value nothing but what is Divine and Eternal, and passionately desiring to come to his Father, he would do nothing unworthy of him. As he that acts the King on the stage, though it be but a vain shew to delight vainer people, yet is careful to do and to speak nothing but what befits a King: so, and much more careful should a Christian be to do nothing unworthy of that honourable name, which makes him a bro∣ther and disciple of Jesus, and an heir of his Heavenly Kingdom. And as a picture-drawer when he is upon a great design, fixes his eyes and mind on that Original
which he means to copy: So should a fol∣lower of Christ in all his words and actions set before himself his Master's Life, as the most perfect exemplar he is resolv'd to imitate, and never to swerve from. 2. Now he that professeth Christ and re∣mains in him, should walk as he walked, carefully observe and follow the steps of his new and better Lord. For as whilest we remain in the state of Nature and follow its instinct, we are Children of wrath, and are slaves to Satan and to our own lusts: so now we are redeem'd from that unhappy slavery by the bloud of Christ, his Grace must be the principle of all our actions, we must carefully follow him whose members we are. 1 Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the Earth, earthly; the second man is the Lord from Heaven: therefore as we have born the Image of the Earthy, we should also bear the Image of the Heavenly; making that our first and chiefest care, that we walk worthy of our high calling, as being led by his Spi∣rit from whom we have our highest title, for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8.9. 3. Now he alone hath the Spirit of Christ whose outward and inward life; that is, whose actons and affections are according to the Pattern of Christ's blessed example, who endeavours always to speak and act, as Christ his Master did. According as we are
exhorted not to walk after the flesh, but after the Spirit, being created anew in Jesus Christ unto good works. We should look unto the Rock whence we are hewn, not living after the methods of depraved man, but walking in the ways of that righteous God, from whom we have our being: that we being holy in all manner of conversation, may be own'd to be the children of our Father which is in Heaven. For he certainly is no child of God, who is not led and sancti∣fied by the Spirit of Christ. CHAP. XVIII. The Just liveth by faith, not by the laws of flesh and bloud. 1. FAith is to all virtues and to a Chri∣stian life, the same thing as the root is to the tree, the foundation to the build∣ing, and the Spring to the fountain: for it is the first lesson of Christianity from whence we learn all the rest, there we must first begin, and without it it is impossible to please God, for the just lives by faith. The Com∣mendation Job gives to wisdom, Chap. 28. is justly due to Faith, Faith being the prin∣ciple of it: and likewise it is evident and
granted by all wise men, that Solomon's high Encomium of Wisdom doth but set forth the Divine excellencies of Faith; Wisd. 7. Gold in respect of her is as little sand, and silver shall be counted as clay before her, she is a treasure unto men, that never faileth, which they that use, become the friends of God. She is the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted mirrour of the power of God, and the Image of his goodness. The doctrine of Faith apprehended by Faith teacheth us all Truth, informs our Souls what we ought to love, what to shun and what to pursue. It teacheth us that what the world counts good, is evil: And that worldly calamities are good, if indur'd patiently. It teacheth us to despise things visible and temporal, and all that which is for no use but to the material part of us. It teacheth us to know God and to know our selves, which is the true saving knowledge, and the highest of our wisdome. And it frees us from the pernicious errors of this foolish world, and from its wretched slavery, to make us wise unto salvation, and set us at perfect liberty. 2. There is a vast distance and great con∣trariety betwixt the instructions of faith and the customs of this present world; but then, Christ who delivers the first, being ever true and infallible, it is clearly our duty and interest to live by faith and not by
sense, to follow the holy light of our holy faith, not the wicked example of this wicked world. And withal 'tis much to be observ'd, that depraved as we now are, there is nothing in us, nothing in our na∣ture but what is contrary to the prin∣ciples of the Christian Faith, and alto∣gether destructive of them. For 'tis the constant dictate and endeavour of flesh and bloud and natural reason, to pro∣cure by all means possible, a well-being to our selves in this present world, without taking any further care of a better life, and a blessed Eternity. This evil men have from Adam, and from those lusts which reign in their mortal bodies, and the best of men have still some cause to groan under the sense of it. Rom. 7. The good that I would, I do not, and the evil which I hate that I do; O wretched man that I am, who shall de∣liver me from the body of this death? St. Paul answers, the Grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ will deliver us: For by Grace we are sav'd from our blindness and impotency, and enabled to see and chuse that which is good, and to perform the same: and the first and chiefest work of that grace is faith, whereby we are united to Christ, and receive a new life from him.
CHAP. XIX. That Faith works in a Christian self-denyal and contempt of the World. 1. GReat is the power and strength of Faith, for it makes the faithful Christian to be as it self is, unshaken and unmovable. The true believer whose faith is lively and active, regards and seeks no∣thing but God, and in him alone finds light and peace, delight and full satisfacti∣on: but in the world and in the sons of men, he finds neither rest nor pleasure; for in time of need there is no help in them. They are like all other things under the Sun perishing and unstable, so that he that relies on them must expect the same destiny: whereas he that trusts on God who is un∣moveable, is established for ever. As the Saints that see God as he is, become like unto him: so should our life express the holiness of our belief, our actions should be a lively representation of what we see by faith: and we should glory in nothing but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, which to the lovers of this present world, is a re∣proach and an offence.
2. The first man indeed in the state of his innocence might have come to Bliss by a free and lawful use of those good creatures which God had prepar'd for him, in the delights of Paradise: but after he had re∣bel'd against God and infected his unborn posterity with sin, the Divine Wisdom ap∣pointed another way to Bliss; that is, the way of the Cross and Self-denyal, through which Christ himself past, and appointed the same to all his followers, saying, Luke 9.23. If any man will come after me, let him deny him∣self, and take up his Cross daily and follow me. And again, Luke 14.26, 33. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disci∣ple. And whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, he cannot be my disciple. 3. This is the ground-work and the true institution of a Christian life, and this is that excellent knowledge of Christ, which is difficult and unpleasant to natural men, and contrary to the Spirit of the World. This is the highest Philosophy, which exceeds the capacity and knowledge of the wise men of this world; and this is the highest per∣fection, and the certain way to Bliss, to know and to follow Jesus Christ and him crucified; to hate ones self and the world, with all its pleasures and vanities, and to love poverty, contempt, sorrows and tribulations. But
to understand well this plain lesson, or first principle, requires a great measure of Grace; and more yet to relish it with pleasure; most of all, to practise it, to live accordingly in the whole course of our conversation. CHAP. XX. Of the desperate folly of men, who willingly run to ruin, by their inconsideration. 1. ETernal torments being prepar'd for none but such as will be miserable, and by their free and wilful wickedness, chuse Hell for their portion; on the other side, Eternal joys above being offer'd to all that will partake of them: who would not think the Prisons of darkness and sorrow should be wholly empty, and Heaven in∣finitely full and throng'd? Who could imagine any man should be so desperately mad, as to chuse eternal misery, when he could easily be happy for ever? Yet so it is, few there are that enter the Kingdom of Heaven, and many there are that go down to Hell; insomuch that the first, compared to these, are but a small number, whom our Blessed Saviour calls the little flock. The folly of men is so strange and amazing, that
the greater part of them prefer Eternal woe to Bliss Eternal, though you shall not find one how thirsty soever, that would sip of that cup, he should suspect to be poison'd, yet many every where may be found, who greedily commit those sins, which, not doubts or opinions, but a certain faith as∣sures them, must be punisht with ever-burning flames. 2. This unheard of madness, many attri∣bute to want of Faith, which though it may be true of some amongst us, yet daily ex∣perience and observation puts it beyond all doubt, that the greater part of them that perish, perish for want of consideration. For though they believe that there is a Hell, and that therein none shall suffer but such as will enjoy the pleasures of sin while they live, yet they soon forget this impor∣tant truth; their fancy and their affections are fixt to this earth, they only please their appetites, and live so sensually, that their reason can hardly look beyond the present; the notions of Eternity are kept out, and their understanding made uncapable and unwilling to consider wisely, that their short joys and delights will soon end into bitterness and endless sorrows, and that it is very easie for us whilest we live, to avoid that dreadful misery, and obtain Eter∣nal happiness. And would to God, men would seriously mind and observe this; O
that they were wise, that they would un∣derstand and consider their latter end, and live accordingly. It is man's property and his privilege, to think and meditate, and sure his thoughts and meditations should of themselves run, first of all, to his chief end, to that which is his own greatest in∣terest. No error or ignorance is so per∣nicious, as to neglect ones own Salva∣tion. CHAP. XXI. The Character of a true Christian. 1. HE is a Christian indeed that owns the Faith of Christ, and obeys his precepts, and follows his Blessed Exam∣ple; for to this we are oblig'd by our Chri∣stian Profession, to raise our selves above these earthly things, to live a Divine and Heavenly Life. Because that the Grace of God which bringeth Salvation hath appeared unto all men (saith the Apostle, 1 Tit. 2.11.) teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live in this present World Soberly, Righteously, and Godly: looking for that Blessed Hope and the glorious appearing
of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works. There∣fore, as he cannot justly be called Doctor, who is not so much as a Scholar; as he deserves not the name of Captain, who un∣derstands not Souldiery; and as he is not an Artist, that hath not the skill of it: No more can he with truth be called a Christian, who is not a true follower of Christ. 2. They therefore only are truly Chri∣stians, who having renounc'd the vanities and sinful desires of this World, love God with all their heart, and with all their strength, and their neighbour altogether in God and for God, preferring not them∣selves to any others, because that in our second and better birth we are all made equal: They that strictly observe the rules of justice and sobriety; in all things be∣having themselves so innocently as not to give a just cause of offence to any Person: they that use the creatures for necessity, as sick men do Physick, coveting nothing but that only which cannot be taken away from them: they that seek not to please, and fear not to displease any, but God alone: they that hate their own flesh, in that it is the body of sin, and therefore daily chastize and keep it under, lest it grow petulant and masterless: they that are ever con∣stant
to their resolutions, and being above the World cannot be terrified by any threats or persecutions: they that in pros∣perity and adversity are always the same, peaceable and even, able clearly to see and to follow truth: they that longing after things Eternal, despise things present, and living upon Faith, Hope and Charity, be∣lieve therefore what they see not, hope what they have not, and love that which as yet they do not possess: they that so love God, that for his sake they refuse no labour, and are always ready to expose themselves to any dangers, without any other design but only to advance his glory: they that from the testimony of a good conscience, and their confidence in Gods mercy, chearfully expect Christ's coming in his Heavenly Kingdom, and can joyfully say with the Apostle, 2 Tim. 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day: They alone have a right to the Title and the Blessedness of Christians, that do all these with since∣rity. 3. Such men as these rejoyce when they are counted worthy to suffer for the name of Jesus, and they count that day lost, in which they have not done and endured something upon his account. They make
their Glory, their Felicity, their Wisdom, to consist in such things as the World ac∣counts Shame, Misery and Folly. They detest the false Principles on which pro∣ceeds carnal prudence, as that we must be Rich and Great, honour'd by the World, and above others: and they love and hear∣tily imbrace the Christian verity which teacheth us to despise riches, to deny our selves, and to glory in nothing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. In a word, their conversation is in Heaven, and they so live that all their actions seem to speak aloud, That their Kingdom is not of this World. These things indeed are high and difficult, but the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and is only to be taken by force: and withall it well deserves all our labours, and noblest conten∣tions. CHAP. XXII. Several useful cautions how a Christian should undertake and perfect his works. 1. ALL the actions of a Christian should be done in peace and meek∣ness, and he ought to consider the circum∣stances of time and place and persons, and
especially of the end of that he is about: but withall let him take care of being rash and hasty, of following sudden motions of na∣ture rather than reason, Grace and Religion. Let not his mind be light and inconstant, easily wandring after vain projects: but let him attend and be ready to entertain and to obey the illuminations and mo∣tions of the good Spirit: When he is about to begin any work, let not his mind be too busie and distracted with other thoughts, for then he must ex∣pect to want his wits and fail in many things, which afterwards will grieve him, when it will be too late. When he first enters upon any design, let him humbly beg that God would guide and assist him, and let him seriously consider what share God hath in the business, and how much of it is on his own account. In the carry∣ing on of his work let not self-complacency turn him from the good end he proposed: and in the finishing thereof let him be cau∣tious that all he hath done be not marr'd and spoil'd by self-applause and vain-glory: above all, let him be seriously intent upon this, that he seeks not the praise of men, but the glory of God, keeping down proud thoughts, in the consideration of his being nothing. 2. He should not meddle with any busi∣ness, except God by his Providence calls
him to it; and then he ought to go through with it chearfully and diligently; and with noble designs of charity to men, specially to their souls: considering that the bliss or per∣fection of this present life, consisteth not in the full enjoyment of God, but in the con∣formity of our will to his, in the doing and suffering his pleasure. Except necessity compell him, let him not undertake any thing that's above his strength, that if it be possible he may lose nothing of his peace nor of the freedom of his mind: for to be too intent, and too much taken up with things without us, commonly quencheth the Spirit of God, and deprives our Souls of tranquillity. Rather as the Angel which is said to have accompanied Tobit, though it was always ready to serve him, yet never∣theless attended to the will of God, and was always present to him: so should a good Christian mind the necessary concerns of this life, and be outwardly troubled and imployed about them; when yet his heart should be with God, and his soul in Heaven, there to be free from the distractions and all the affections of the World.
CHAP. XXIII. That to discharge the duties of our stati∣on is the best thing we can do. 1. TO do that which our place and calling requires of us here, and that which will make us happy hereafter, may be said to be one and the same thing; for no man more certainly works out his Salva∣tion, than he that honestly, and diligently works in his proper sphere. Therefore the Devil commonly lays this snare in our way to Christian perfection, to make us aspire after the doing of great matters which are no parts of our office, thereby to busie and distract our mind, that we may not attend to our proper duty, which lies before us, and the doing whereof is our greatest vir∣tue. 2. He therefore greatly deceives him∣self, that would fain change his condition, imagining he could better serve God if he were here or there, or so or so, after Provi∣dence or a prudent choise have otherwise determin'd it. It doth but make him lazy and negligent in doing what he should,
whilest he thinks of what belongs not to him; it makes him to sit idle, and do no∣thing in the place where he is, whilest he projects to do great feats where he is not. Whereas the unblameable integrity or per∣fection at which a Christian should aim, depends upon particular actions, they that are negligent and incurious to do them well, set themselves backward and make no progress; for their heart being absent, and their thoughts employ'd somewhere else, they do but little where they are, and yet that little is done after a dreaming careless way. Such men are always beginning, or about to begin to live well; they contrive many things, but bring nothing to perfecti∣on; they are all leaves and no fruit. Like Trees that are often remov'd, they no where take firm root, and so remain every where useless. CHAP. XXIV. How Christians are to live and to be sincere. 1. CHristians should not indulge to the Lusts of the lower belly or to the pleasures of a nice or gluttonous palat; they should abstain from all vanity and unde∣cency
in their Apparel, and from all idle sports that are too expensive of time; and their life should be free from sloth and negligence, from ambition and pride, and from covetousness and desire of riches. Anger ought not to lodge in their breast, and they should never do that to others which they would not have done to them∣selves. They should do nothing carelesly, nor yet rashly, least of all deceitfully and hypocritically. Christian duties and acts of virtue that are not done in Spirit and Truth, with attention and a good intenti∣on, are meer dissembling and pageantry. In some places where Religion is made a Theatrical representation, you shall often find men of wicked lives act the highest virtues of the greatest Saints; one the con∣stancy of Martyrs, another the modesty of the Blessed Virgin, or perhaps the heroick actions of Christ and his Apostles: but the end of the play puts an end to their fine dissembling; they no longer appear those holy men they were, but presently return to their nature, to their prophaneness and impurity. Just so are they that have a fair specious out-side, appearing precise and godly, to be seen and praised, or drive an interest; they are meer jugglers and stage-players, they put a fair vizard over an ugly face, holiness outwardly, inwardly unmorti∣fied lusts and perverse passions; Their lives
are nothing but a Comedy, that will have a Tra∣gical end. 2. For indeed, this is the cause why so many are not so perfect and holy, as their Christian faith requires and would enable them to be, that they are not sincere, but want truth in the inward parts. The false opinions of the World, are of greater power with them, than the precepts and the examples of Christ: and those moral virtues which nature it self recommends, are commonly made sin, or subservient to it, by the depraved judgments and customs of men. We therefore that live in a crooked and perverse generation, among corrupt and deceived persons, ought seriously and often to make this inquiry; whether we our selves do know the right way, and whe∣ther we truly follow it? Now that way, which is the way of truth, is one and alto∣gether unchangeable, and they that will keep it without change; must not look to the World, but up to Heaven; must not follow the example of men, but must di∣rectly follow God, who alone is the way, the truth, and the life.
CHAP. XXV. That a hearty affection is the life of good actions. 1. WE must have a special care that the sensitive part of us have not the principal concern in our good works, and that we be not led by sense in our actions: for sense is the great deceiver, the fountain of error; therefore 'tis said, that the mor∣tification of sense, is the life of truth. And hence it is that we cannot be confident, ever to have done any thing perfectly good and without defect, because that we bear a part in our best works, and as far as they proceed from us, they are stain'd with im∣perfection, although they be done upon Gods account, and by the impulse and as∣sistance of divine Grace. Thus it was said to the Angel or Bishop of Sardis, Rev. 3.2. I have not found thy works perfect before God: and thus it might be said to any other. For our Prayers, Fastings, and Alms, and such like good works, though they may ap∣pear complete before men, who see no∣thing but the outside, yet before God who searcheth the heart, they are defective;
and cannot be acceptable in the least, ex∣cept they be done with a pure and sincere intention to please him. 2. Of ten Virgins mentioned in the Gos∣pel, five foolish were excluded from the wedding; not but that they were Virgins and had lamps, that is, works: but be∣cause they wanted the oil of good in∣tentions and holy affections. This may well be the case of every one of us; our works will be dead before God, and un∣pleasing to him, except we breath life into them, by our inward sanctified spirit, and fervent love to God. In outward acts and appearance, all Christians are almost alike: but as the hand of a watch is mov'd by the hidden springs, and as the colour of the face depends on the secret constitu∣tion of the body: so the good are distin∣guisht from the bad by their inward spirit, or the hidden man of the heart; for the King∣dom of God is within us.
CHAP. XXVI. Whence the goodness of our works pro∣ceeds. 1. AS many that eat much, yet are feeble and infirm and lean, be∣cause they overcharge their stomach, so that their nourishment is not well con∣cocted: and as many that eat very mo∣derately, yet because they digest well, are strong and healthy and long-liv'd: So like∣wise some Christians there are that do ma∣ny good things, and yet themselves become little better, because they go not the right way to work. They think that by doing much, they must become great proficients, though they do it remisly and incuriously: whereas to do our duty every day with grea∣ter fervency and exactness, is the right way to perfection; a few things well done profit more, than heaps of works done negligently. 2. For so, there are others that com∣pared to these first do but little, and yet increase much in the love of God, because they endeavour always to work with greater affection, and a more upright intention: so that at the end of every good action, they
may in some manner, use that expression of Christ on the Cross, Joh. 19.30. It is finished; I have in this, as far as was possible, done what God required of me, as perfectly as my infirmity would allow, and his free grace enabled me, who gives us to will and to do, and without whom we can do no∣thing. They so spend each day, that at night, they can say, It is finished: and they so spend their whole life that when 'tis ended, they can say with an holy and humble confidence, I have now perfected that work which God had appointed me to do. He that lives so, lives like a Christian, and he shall not fear in the evil day. CHAP. XXVII. How useful and comfortable is the con∣sideration of God being always pre∣sent. 1. NOthing will more prevail to make perfect our works as much as is possible, than to consider that God is pre∣sent every where, and that from him and in him, all things have their being, power and motion. This is the most pressing Ar∣gument why we should always act with the
greatest circumspection, that God sees the things, that are in secret and we can never be hid from his eyes; that in him we live and move and have our being, and that he never forsakes us, till we forsake him to turn our affections upon the creatures. For this is the unhappy effect of our original corruption, that our senses are so affected and pleased with material things present, that our mind is drawn from the contem∣plation of Gods presence and things as yet invisible: whereas, if the love of this world did not bear too great a sway in our heart, we could see God in every place; holy affections would always see him who is the Author of all holiness; according to the saying of our Blessed Saviour, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. 2. For indeed 'tis not to be exprest, how sweet and comfortable is the goodness of God which he hath laid up for them that fear him: but laid up it is; none have a sense of it but they that love God; they alone taste and see how gracious the Lord is. For 'tis not enough to have a treasure, we must know we have it, before we can be rich, and we must know the use and the worth of it: Now such a treasure we have within us, as is of an inestimable infinite value, and yet we seem not to know it, for we run after motes and shadows, and
catch at painted drops that cannot quench our thirst, as the Psalmist saith, O ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanities and seek after lies? Thus we are cheated and under∣stand not our own happiness, for God is pre∣sent to us every moment and we could always enjoy him; we are rich and we know it not. 3. We could if we would anticipate the joys of Heaven; we could now have a taste of the felicity of beatified Saints, but that we indulge Sense to the prejudice of the Soul; we shake off the thoughts and the comforts of Gods presence, because it puts a restraint upon our appetites: And when at any time Spiritual joys are denyed us, we presently seek for Earthly pleasures; because we open not the eyes of our Faith to see God present, and we embrace him not with devout affection, and we care not to converse with him. This is the way to Perfection which God himself shewed to Abraham, to have always a sense of the Di∣vine presence; Gen. 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect: Holy David likewise made a great use of this, to be always mindful that God is with us, Psal. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. He can never but be happy, that dwells with the Author of all happiness.
CHAP. XXVIII. Why the imitation of Gods Saints ap∣pears difficult. 1. WE think it a matter of great diffi∣culty to follow the example of those Christian Worthies that have gone be∣fore us, because we represent them to our selves, as being now of another nature, freed from the body, inhabitants of the mansions of bliss, whence anger, lust, and all tempta∣tions are for ever banish'd, and where they enjoy peace and joy and eternal felicities. But if we really desire to follow their steps, and to conform our lives to theirs, then are we to consider, that as we are so were they, mortal men, cumbred with the uneasie bur∣then of the flesh, infected with sin, tempted by sinful affections, and exposed to miseries and dangers: but that by Faith they over∣came all these, subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, and by fighting obtain'd the Crown. 2. Elias (saith St. James 5.17.) was a man subject to the like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and
it rained not on the Earth by the space of three years and six months: and again he prayed, and the Heaven gave rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit. The same may be said of any other Saints, that have done the greatest wonders; they were like us, made of the same clay, and subject to the same passions and temptations, while they were on Earth. They were only above us in this, that with great and assiduous pains, they conquered pride and lust, and escaped the snares of the Devil, by diligent care and in∣vincible resolution. Why then do we draw back and make delays? to them that are truly resolved and willing, 'tis not difficult to become Saints, by the imitation of those that have gone before us; if shaking off our sloth and laziness we would seriously en∣deavour, we might by the help of Divine Grace arrive to the same height of Sanctifi∣cation and bliss, as they have. For he hath proceeded far towards holiness, that sincerely desires to be holy.
CHAP. XXIX. How we should in all things aim at Gods Glory. 1. IT is the precept of St. Paul, that God should be the end of all our works, that they may be good and acceptable. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God: and again, Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. For a good work which is not done upon Gods account, doth become evil, it being the nature of virtue to receive its form from the end, rather than from the act. And if we cleave to the creatures and love them for their own sake without re∣ference to God, this is that lust or sinful love which Saint John condemns, 1 Ep. 2.15. Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World; love them not so as to rest in them. For here we are Pilgrims, Travel∣lers going home, to our Fathers house, to our God: and so what creatures we meet in our way, we may use them as conveniences to carry us forward, towards him: but we
may not dwell with them, as if we were at our journeys end. God alone is to be lov'd for himself, he alone being infinitely good, and the last and best end we can propound to our selves; in him alone our appetites shall rest satisfied, our enjoyment shall be secure, and our joys undisturb'd for ever. Whosoever knows not and pursues not this end, knows not why he lives, nor how to live well: but he that knows it, knows whi∣ther to direct his intentions, and whither to tend in all his actions. 2. It is granted that some natural acti∣ons, as to walk, to eat, to sleep, and such like, are of themselves neither good nor evil: yet all Divines teach that they become sin, if we do them not to some further and bet∣ter end, that is, to live to serve God; whose glory should be the ultimate design of all mens actions, because as he is the beginning, so should he be the end of all things. The light of the Body is the Eye (saith our Blessed Saviour, Mat. 6.22.) if therefore thine Eye be single, thine whole Body shall be full of light: but if thine Eye be evil, thine whole Body shall be full of darkness. This Eye is the intention of every man in his actions; if it be not good, they become works of darkness: and good it cannot be, except it be refer'd to God, the supreme goodness. Every good thing comes from God, and whatever returns not to him is evil.
CHAP. XXX. Self-love is the root of all evil. 1. AFter our first Parent, by preferring himself to God, committed that grievous transgression, whereby all man∣kind became obnoxious to death; lust and ignorance: darkness and evil propensities seiz'd upon our nature, man forsook God, and turn'd to seek himself, and having lost all sense of spiritual comfort, ran dissolute∣ly after carnal pleasures. Hence Self-love the greatest Enemy to virtue, came to tyrannize over men, who to comply with it, seek nothing now but wealth, honours, and sensual delights. And now, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8.7. The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; for all its instincts and impulses have a tendency to sin, and to sin only. 2. And yet self-love which seeks so much our own ease and satisfaction, is indeed its chiefest hinderance; for God having crea∣ted us for his glory, and enjoyn'd us to de∣sign it always; when by self-love we seek only our selves and our own advantage, we do nothing whereby to obtain Gods favour
and eternal life, but rather fall into a wretched state of damnation; We are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh (saith Saint Paul, Rom. 8.13.) For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Now to this mortification, we are strongly oblig'd by Christian Religion; its great design is to bring us out of our selves to God, that as we yielded our members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, even so now we should yield them servants to righteousness unto holiness; as it is writ∣ten, Be ye holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord. Lev. 11.45. 3. Now as Christianity checks and re∣strains self-love, so doth self-love keep men from understanding and approving the Christian doctrines; for how can he that seeks and loves himself, rightly apprehend that whatever the world dotes upon, is meer vanity: that Estates and Honours bring great vexations and great slavery: that to forgive Enemies and do good to them that hate us, is the part of a noble and generous mind: that 'tis better to despise than to possess riches: that 'tis more honourable to be subject where God commands, than to bear rule and to domineer: that for a man to restrain his appetite and conquer him∣self, is more glorious than to win battels and take fenced Cities? These are Para∣doxes,
hard and incredible sayings to the self-lover, whose fondness of himself ties him fast to this earth, to whatever can be useful and any ways pleasant to the flesh: whereas the Children of God live to God, being not led and govern'd by the flesh, but by the spirit: they live in the flesh, but not after the flesh; some of their actions are natural, whilest they are in the body, yet they proceed from a supernatural principle, and are designed to a nobler end; for they continually deny themselves and mortifie all sensual unruly desires. Self-lovers hold, a great regard should be had to the flesh; 'tis true, but it must be such as Christ hath taught us; to keep it under: otherwise Saint Paul hath declar'd, that to be carnally minded is death. CHAP. XXXI. That Self-love is that Babylon out of which God hath called us. 1. GOD at first placed man in Para∣dise, but Adam, in whom we all sinned, transported us into this world out of Paradise, out of Jerusalem into Babylon, out of our freedom into slavery, out of integrity into corruption, out of our countrey into ba∣nishment,
and out of life into death. Thus from truth and perfection we fell into va∣nity, we are now like unto vanity, nay, every man is but vanity, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 39.6. Man is vain in his body, which ends in death and corruption; vain in his soul, which being inslav'd to sin, is ob∣noxious to death eternal, and vain in all his outward enjoyments, which all perish, or must be forsaken when he dies. Yet man strangely dotes on this vanity; he passio∣nately runs after these transitory things which are all cheats and lies, whereby he is drawn into thousands of pernicious errors, and out of the Heavenly Jerusalem, into a Hellish Babylon. 2. Now these two Cities are built by two sorts of love; to love God, so as to despise our selves, makes the City of God: and to love our selves so as to despise God, makes the Devils Babylon, the City of this World. The way to this, is broad and short; to that, is streight, difficult and long: because dull and earthly as now we are, we more easily fall on the earth and descend down to Hell, than we can raise up our selves and ascend to Heaven. Let every man therefore examine himself and find out what he chiefly loves; for if he loves God, so as to deny himself, he is doubtless a Citizen of the Jerusalem which is from a∣bove; but if he loves himself, so as to pre∣fer
his own desires to God, 'tis plain he belongs to that Babylon out of which God hath called his Children. For thus the Scripture cries aloud, Go ye forth of Babylon, and remove out of the midst of her: (Isa. 48.20. Jer. 50.8.) and again the Psalmist, Psal. 137.8. O Daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. We come out of Babylon when we leave the con∣fusion of sin, forsaking our disorderly course of life: and we dash the children of Babylon against the stone, when our love to Christ overcomes our ill desires and ill inclinati∣ons. Self-love is the death of the Soul, and the love of God is its life: therefore he doth not truly love himself, who by self-love destroys himself. CHAP. XXXII. How men naturally seek themselves even in their best works. 1. IT may seem strange to observe, that whereas mens opinions and inclinati∣ons are so various and different, yet all men are agreed in this, that none appears vile to himself, none is willing to yield and sub∣mit
to others, none though never so mean but thinks himself somebody, and is de∣sirous to be taken notice of; every one seeks to be higher than others; every one is in∣dulgent to himself, and severe to others: all men will have their will and their say∣ing; all applaud to their own inventions and conceits, and censure others; they count their own follies, wisdome; and not∣withstanding their great ignorance, there is nothing but what they think to know. They carefully hide their own faults, and pretend to those virtues, they know they have not. And what is most of all to be wonder'd at, even good men who endea∣vour to please God, and seem to aim at no∣thing but his honour and glory: Even they, sometimes in their best actions, by a se∣cret and natural instinct, almost unknown to themselves, seek their own comfort and complacency, most of all; and the more excellent are their works, the more sub∣til and undiscernable is this snare, which self-love sets to the most spiritual. 2. What better than to obey God, to read his Sacred Word and preach it, to re∣ceive and administer his Holy Sacraments? Yet these duties are commonly stain'd with some secret desire of praise: and except the Christian be very watchful over his own heart, he may easily lose his better reward. Though I speak with the tongues of men and
Angels (saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.1.) and have not Charity, I am become like sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal. And though a man should give all his goods to the Poor, and even his Body to be burnt, yet without Cha∣rity, without the love of God hath purified his heart, it will profit him nothing. Ac∣cording to the saying of the Prophet Hag∣gai, 1.6. Ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink: and he that earns wages, earneth wages to put into a bag with holes: for thus good works avail nothing, if done out of respect to our selves, and not to please God. This being there∣fore the bent of our corrupt nature, to draw us to our selves, we ought carefully to ex∣amine our selves, and search the hidden corners of our hearts, that there lurk not in them some ill purpose of vain-glory or self-interest, to mix with our best actions, either first or last. This is the Rule of a true Christian Life, always to seek and love the things of God, and never his own.
CHAP. XXXIII. Things which every Christian is bound to know in order to obedience. 1. EVery Disciple of Christ ought to know those Divine and Human Laws un∣der which he lives, and the which he is oblig'd to observe. The Divine are con∣tain'd in the Ten Commandments, and in the New Testament, which contains the precepts of Faith, Hope, and Charity. Faith obligeth all the Faithful to believe the doctrines of Christianity, as they are sum'd up in our Creed. By Hope we trust, by the grace of God, and our own sincere endea∣vour, to obtain and use all necessary means of Grace, and Eternal Life at last; all which, in this assurance, we heartily beg in the Lord's Prayer. And Charity requires of us to love God above all things, and our Neighbour as our selves. A Christian by these three virtues is made a new and holy creature; Faith inlightens and directs his understanding: Hope raiseth him up, and sets his will at work for God: and to God Charity unites him wholly. It is also ne∣cessary to understand the necessity of Bap∣tism
and the Lord's Supper, and true Re∣pentance, which are all Divine Institutions, indispensably necessary to all that will be saved. For except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Joh. 3.5. And Except we eat the flesh and drink the bloud of Christ, we have no life in us. Joh. 6.53. And as for Repentance, it is the only remedy we have for the sins committed after Baptism, that by it we may be made clean again. 2. Lastly, there are also Human Laws, Enacted by the Church or the State we live in, and them we are also to know and to observe with meekness and humility, and for Conscience sake. But no man of him∣self is able to keep all these Laws which God hath bound upon us; none can obey them without the true light from above en∣lighten and guide him, as it is written, Psal. 94.12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teachest him in thy Law. For ever since sin came into the World, men without the light of Faith, sit in dark∣ness and the shadow of death, and take an account of good and evil, not by the mea∣sures of truth, but by their lusts and de∣praved passions. We must therefore ear∣nestly beg the divine assistance, that he that commands what he wills, would enable us to do what he hath commanded: heal∣ing our blindness and impotency; destroy∣ing
self-love and filling our hearts with de∣vout love to him: for the end of the Com∣mandment is Charity: and he that truly loves God keepe his Commandments without hypocrisie or reservation. CHAP. XXXIV. The difference betwixt the outward and the inward man. 1. OUR Christian hope is not for this World, nor for this present time, and we were not created to enjoy that Earthly happiness which the World only seeks: but God made us for that Eternal Bliss which he hath promised, and whose excellency we cannot as yet understand; For eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither is it entred into the heart of man, what things God hath prepared for them that love him. We therefore that are called to the possession of that Kingdom, which was prepared for us, from the beginning of the World, ought not to govern our selves only by human reasons, and live by natural instincts, after the common manner of men, who are un∣acquainted with the ways of Eternity, and the motions of Divine Grace. But happy
are they that wisely dive into the depth of things, who live to God and commune with him in their hearts, and suffer not their thoughts and affections to range and dwell abroad. 2. These men live an inward life, they are recollected and dwell at home; always disposed to hear Gods voice within them, and to understand his secrets. Whereas they live an outward life that are most af∣fected with outward things: having fair pretences for their worldly-mindedness, being greedy of news, and curious sights, and sensual pleasures, walking (saith the Apostle Eph. 4.17.) in the vanity of their minds, alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them. For the more a man profits in carnal wisdom, the more ignorant he becomes in the things of God. As much as we love the creatures, as much we lessen our love to the Creator.
CHAP. XXXV. How dangerous it is to be governed by opi∣nion and false apprehension of things. 1. HE is a wise man that weighs things justly, and then esteems them ac∣cording to their intrinsick value: for every thing in the world hath a twofold aspect or a double face, the one natural and real, and the other disguised and fallacious. The first is what God judgeth and hath revealed it to be: and the second depends on mens passions and false opinions. Thus for Ex∣ample; the Dignity of a Bishop is in effect and according to Gods appointment, a high and Angelic office, of such a weight as should make human strength tremble and shrink under it; it is a place of great ho∣nour, but also it requires the greatest labour and diligence, to watch for the Souls in∣trusted with the dignified Prelat, who shall give a strict account for them in the day of judgment. But in the Worlds account, a Bishoprick is only a degree of honour in the Church, which promotes the owner of it to riches and greatness and temporal advan∣tages. Hence it is that they that rightly
apprehend what the office is, fear and avoid it, and are so far from seeking, that they refuse it when offer'd: and it is much to be feared that they follow the worlds judge∣ments, and seek themselves, that seek it, and make it their aim, and the object of their passionate desires. The same may be said of all other dignities and places of trust, in Church and State; Generally men have a wrong notion of them, and understand not their definition: and hence the confusions and malvorsations that are in the world, that men mistake things, and hate truth, and will not see nor follow divine light, but the darkness of their own perverse hearts. 2. Such names are commonly used a∣mongst men as are consecrated by the Bloud of Christ, and the highest virtues of his grea∣test Saints; as that some be called Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Monks or Hermits; Some Kings, Princes, and Magistrates; and all together, Christians: but who is there that duly considers the great worth, the strength, and true significations of those names? what virtues, what perpetual care, what duties, they require from such as bear them; the bare Titles, with a vain shadow of the things remain, but the reality and significancy of them is vanish'd: few men are in truth what they call themselves, few live accord∣ing to the name of Christian, because few make it their first care to follow the ex∣ample
of Christ. This unhappy deceit is also an effect of the first and worst of evils, Self-love, the most crafty deceiver: hardly found out by the wisest, and seldome quite conquer'd by the best of men. 3. The truth is, that the good and evil things of this present life, are so mixt and confused, that if we take an exact view of the nature of them, we shall hardly discern the one from the other: for they are all vain and uncertain, and in a moment they come to nothing. Wherefore David the man after Gods own heart, passing by all temporal things, entertain'd his meditation with things Eternal, I have considered the days of old, and the years of Eternity, Psal. 77.5. And Solomon his Son, the wisest of men, after a long and comprehensive enumera∣tion of all things good and bad, under the Sun, concludes that all is vanity, vanity of vanities. Eccles. 1.2.
CHAP. XXXVI. Three things very profitable and necessary to every Christian. 1. THat we may be faithful to God as we are oblig'd, we must of necessity attend to these three things. First, to watch and observe our selves and our actions, at all times, that we turn not aside out of the right path, into by-ways, difficult and un∣passable, seeking for happiness where it is not, in spight of all admonitions. By rea∣son, a Christian differs from the brutes, and by Faith from unbelievers; so that when he doth any thing rashly and basely meerly to satisfie his unruly passion and his appetite, so far he becomes a beast and ceaseth to act as man: and likewise, when for vain-glory or self-interest he is drawn to action, in this he acts like a Heathen, Faith hath no hand in it. As Arts are attained and perfected by working according to the rules of them: so a man becomes Wise, Just, Sober and Patient, by living according to the prescript of those Virtues. 2. The second thing recommended is a good and careful use of our time, on which
depends Eternity. Philosophers would have us not only know things useful, but also be studious and watchful to take hold of all opportunities of virtue: because time passeth away and comes not again, and once lost is lost for ever. Time flies away, and the unwise man considers not, that 'tis never to be recall'd, and that with time he loseth more than he can think or ever re∣cover. It may be pleasant indeed to pass away the time in sports and merry compa∣ny: but so doth our day go away, and the night comes when no man can work, and we lose the acceptable time, that time that was given us to obtain our Pardon and work out our Salvation in. We must give an account for every idle word, much more for that time which is spent idly, 3. The third thing we are carefully to mind, is to make a right use of the Sacra∣ments, especially that of the Lord's Supper, which if frequently and devoutly received, would be to us a fountain of grace, profi∣table beyond expression: and the more, in that penitence as a Sacramental is joyn'd to it, whereby we are humbled and clean∣sed, and our hearts prepar'd to entertain Christ, whom we receive in the Holy Com∣munion, and from whom we receive in∣crease of love to God, and of meekness and charity to men. As a covetous man minds nothing but gain and money, and is always
gasping after it: so the devout Christian duly and often receives the Blessed Eucha∣rist, always pants and longs after God, and cannot without trouble mind any thing but him. And it is the principle of a heavenly life, to despise and forsake all things that have not a relation to God. CHAP. XXXVII. That Repentance is necessary to all Chri∣stians. 1. EVery Christian ought so to live and die, in such continual regret and mortification, as to make it appear he is a true Penitent, who endeavours to make what satisfaction he can for his sins, and entirely to be cleansed from the guilt of them. This was the beginning and is the sum of the Gospel, Mark 1.4. John did bap∣tize in the Wilderness and Preach the Baptism of Repentance, for the Remission of sins. And the Blessed Jesus himself, the Author and finisher of our Faith, made it the first sub∣ject of his preaching; Verse 14. Jesus came into Galilee Preaching the Gospel of the King∣dom of God and saying, the time is fulfilled and the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, repent ye and
believe the Gospel: Or as Saint Matthew re∣lates it, 4.17. Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Repentance was first sent to prepare men duly to entertain the Gospel, that their Souls might be purified and fitted to re∣ceive Divine Grace, which never enters wicked hearts, nor abides with them that yield their bodies to be instruments of un∣righteousness. 2. But Penitence is a Sacrifice well plea∣sing to God, when a man is sensible of his sin, and confesseth it with shame and sor∣row, and with a broken contrite heart begs Pardon of his offended God. For the greatest evil in sin, is a contempt of the Divine Majesty; to live in sin, is to live in enmity and defiance against the Great and Holy God: and to this desperate impiety men are betrayed by infidelity, and by in∣consideration. For who is there so mad and presumptuous that would dare transgress the Divine Laws, if he believed and under∣stood that God is Almighty and infinitely Good and Glorious, and that an offence against so high a Majesty is heinous beyond expression? But to this height of wretched folly, men are carried by original depra∣vation, that as being seiz'd on by an un∣happy frenzy, they have a secret aversion to God the chiefest good, and delight them∣selves in impure shadows, in base and false
enjoyments; and this because they see not the truth, or they have not power to follow it. 3. How great and deplorable is this blind∣ness and impotency, we cannot well under∣stand, except we seriously consider, that the guilt and malignancy of sin was so ex∣treme, that nothing could make expiation for it, but the bitter death and passion of the Blessed and only Son of God. This if we believe, and if we are sensible of the intolerable burthen of our sins, we are to pass our days in sorrow, and to spend our years in mourning, thereby to own our selves guilty, and that we have deserv'd the worst, the greatest of evils. For God readily forgives those sins which penitence and amend∣ment indeavour to undo. CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the signs and effects of true Repen∣tance. 1. WE shall never be in a capacity to avoid sin when the temptation comes, except the soul hath conceiv'd a great horror and detestation of it: and our penitential exercises will soon be at an
end, except we hunger and thirst after Righteousness, so as never to be satiated without it. Therefore when we humble and punish our selves, and when we make our confession to God or his ministers, we should, besides contrition and a resolution in general to sin no more, design the ex∣tirpation of some one particular sin, to a∣void and prevent the occasions of that one sin which is most dangerous and importu∣nate. Hence will accrue to us a great ad∣vantage of our penitence, and we shall the better bring forth fruits worthy of Repen∣tance, such as these; fear to offend and displease God any ways, a great dread of his just judgment, to check and reprove our selves with shame and confusion of face, to be ready to make all satisfaction and amends possible for past offences, to re∣strain and mortify all sinful appetites, care∣fully to avoid all the ways and allurements to sin, to humble our selves and willingly to bear contempt, frequently to examine our conscience and search the secrets of our hearts; to root out, as much as is possible, all vicious desires and inclinations, and to set in their stead all virtuous and holy affections. 2. They that make this their serious and constant employment have their own sins before their eyes, but have no eyes for the sins of others; they grieve for their own
offences, and punish their own follies, but they pass by or excuse the faults of others; they see their own danger, and are always afraid of falling, and always watchful not to fall. For our necessary converse with the World, our ill customs, and our dwelling with baits and temptations, exposeth us to sin, and yet takes the sense of it from us: especially our evil inclinations, which being born with us, have a strong party in our hearts, and begin by times to deprave or harden Conscience, that it shall hardly have any feeling of sins daily committed. And then this is the unhappiness of contracting ill habits, that the oftner we act by them, the more we confirm them, and the less we observe our faults and errors. CHAP. XXXIX. Remedies against ordinary failings, and greater sins. 1. TO fall into those sins which some call Venial, or sins of daily incur∣sion, is hardly to be avoided; and yet even those sins cannot be said to be little that are committed against a great God, and for which we must suffer Eternal Tor∣ments,
if we our selves were to make ex∣piation for them. But though there is pardon for those unavoidable errors which without a special grace, we cannot but commit at some time: yet ought we to en∣deavour with all our power daily to lessen the number of them, and to prevent them by acts of contrary virtues, one by one. To that end, we should be as careful as men are in contagious times, who not only avoid infected persons, but also all that hath toucht and been about them: so should we in the case of those sins that are counted light, avoid and stop all the ways and avenues that lead to them, Lest we falling frequently, at last fall into the pit of death. 2. Every moment almost we have some temptation to vain talk or vain inquisitive∣ness, to anger or unseemly jesting, to con∣tention or impatience, to idle thoughts and distraction, or to such like sins, which are the more difficult to be avoided, that being mixt with all our worldly affairs, they are hardly to be discern'd. Therefore we must at least secure this, that however our na∣ture stands affected to any of those lesser sins, yet our hearts may not entertain any love for them, lest our own affections hin∣der us, carefully to watch and strive against them. Without this, our after-Repentance and our Sacramental vow will signifie little
to obtain remission of them, or victory against them. I know that 'tis said of these failings, that the just man falls seven times a day: but yet certain it is, that the just man endeavours against it, and that he never falls, but by frailty or by sudden surprise. 3. Likewise for vices or greater sins, to conquer them you must stifle them in the birth, suppress the first motion to them, and meet the temptation with an act of vir∣tue contrary to it. As for example, if you be abused and provok'd, refrain the first stirring of Anger, and then busie your mind with some act of Patience and Humility, considering that you suffer that, and less than that you deserve, praying for him that doth you wrong, and resolving to do him any kindness you can. For thus we best avoid evil by studying to do that which is good, and the last is as much our duty as the first: and that servant deserves no great reward who doth not strike and re∣vile his master, if he doth not withal, faith∣fully serve and obey him. In this many deceive themselves, who think to have made sure work of their Salvation, because they have not been wicked, when yet they have neglected positive duties, and have not done those good works which God re∣quir'd from them. Cease to do evil, learn to do good, both are equally commanded, not to transgress by omission no more than commission.
CHAP. XL. Clergy-men have some especial obligati∣ons, though all are bound to endeavour after perfection. 1. THough the same institutes of Chri∣stian perfection be delivered to all, and all are to walk by the same rule, as has been shew'd before, Chap. 7. Yet it cannot be denyed, but that Clergy-mens obligati∣ons to a strict devout life, are much inforced upon them, by their particular calling: For they are not only oblig'd to be holy them∣selves, but also by their life and doctrine to set forth the glory of God, and set forward the Sal∣vation of all men. In order to which, they must be very careful so to follow after vir∣tue, and all things that are honest and of good report, so to live, and so to converse with men, that their words and actions may speak them, and others may acknowledge them, to be indeed the sons of God, and ministers of Christ: and to this the least neglect and remissness will be very preju∣dicial, because they are observ'd by all,
and men generally are apt to judge and to follow the worst. 2. They must remember that as all Chri∣stians are but Stewards and have nothing of their own, and must use the World as not possessing it, and as being ready to part with it: so they more especially are to count nothing their own, and that little they have as well as themselves, must be subservient to the design of their function. They must remember that they are not only as others oblig'd to live by the Gospel-Rules, but that besides, they have devo∣ted themselves to the service of the Church, and have vow'd obedience to its constituti∣ons, and so far are barr'd from their own will, which must comply with that order and commission they have taken. And most of all let them remember that Christ himself, whose servant they are, humbled himself, came in the form of a servant, be∣came of no reputation, became poor for us, though he were Lord of all, and became obedient to the death, Professing he was not come do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. 3. What will it avail to read the instructi∣ons and examples of Christ and his Saints, if we follow them not? those things were written for our learning and are set before us for our imitation. It hath been said by some, that no Christian comes to Heaven,
that is not a Martyr; we must all be pre∣par'd for it, and indeed that mortification and self-denyal, which all Christians, espe∣cially spiritual guides are oblig'd to use, is a kind of Martyrdom without bloud; is the Crucifixion of our desires and appetites. Too many, 'tis to be confest, live irregularly in their calling, Christian and Ecclesiasti∣cal, unmindful of the obligations of that blessed order they are entred in; their in∣devotion deprives them of the sense and the comforts of Piety, so that they are fain to seek for pleasure abroad, in the enjoy∣ment of the world, because they find it not in their own heart, and the doing of their duty. Many they are that go a stray, and judge that to be best which is done by the most, and follow the broad way in a crowd: but few they are that with sincerity follow Christ in the narrow way of the Cross. It is a great folly to be careless and se∣cure in that way, wherein the best and wisest men have trembled, and walking with the greatest wariness, have found it very hard to go right.
CHAP. XLI. That Prayer is necessary to all, and what dispositions are requisite to make it acceptable. 1. SUch is the necessity of Prayer that 'tis become an approved saying, that without it none can be saved. For who can obey the divine call, leave all and follow me, without the assistance of grace? and who can obtain it without begging for it? therefore we are taught by Holy Scripture, Luke 18.1. 1 Thes. 5.17. That we should always pray and not faint, because that al∣ways and in all things we want the help and assistance of God. Now he may be said to pray always, who every day hath his set hours of Prayer, which as they return, are observ'd duly. He Prays always, who in all things walks uprightly, and with an holy intention designs Gods glory; for Prayer is the elevation of the Soul to God. He Prays always, who in his heart preserves an ha∣bitual devotion, and always desires to Pray; that very desire is a good Prayer. Lastly,
he prays always who always lives well; a good life is a continual Prayer. 2. No man ever became wicked, pro∣phane or heretick, who did not first ne∣glect and cast off this Holy Duty. Prayer is the pipe or conduit which brings Divine Grace into our Souls; take it away, and Grace hath no passage, and the Soul is parch'd and wither'd, and at last by degrees must die. Neither is it enough to mumble over a few orisons, and recite them only with the voice, as too many do, without attention, without reverence, and without devout affections. Of them God complains by his Prophet and his Son. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8. This people honour me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. On them shall come the imprecation of the Psalmist, 109.6. Let his Prayer be turned into sin. Their words are lies that work wickedness, and yet sing with Holy David, That they hate sin and love the Law of God: and they whose God is their belly, and yet profess with him, Psal. 102.4. My heart is smitten and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread: And they that spend their time in mirth and laughter, and yet say with that penitent Prophet, Psal. 42.3. My tears have been my meat day and night: And they that neither regard nor obey divine precepts, and yet pronounce with David, Cursed are they that depart from thy Commandments and are far
from thy Law. Such Prayers are meer mockeries, they are an abomination to God, and they provoke his wrath, rather than appease him. 3. No man deserves the name of a Chri∣stian, except at least twice a day, morning and evening, he lift up his Soul to God in devout and fervent Prayer: spending as much time therein for the comfort and be∣nefit of his immortal soul, as he commonly doth for the feeding of his mortal body. And let none intermit or lessen the duty, because he finds himself dry and dull, and wants that holy relish and liveliness of holy affection, which sometimes he hath felt; for true devotion doth not consist in tears and tender passions, and overflowings of sensible joys, which may be felt by such as pray to images and false deities: but true devotion consists in a ready and well dispo∣sed will to serve and obey God, and abstain from all sin. God is known and worshipt by Faith and not by Sense. 4. I do not find fault with those rules and directions how to Pray, which are given by pious men; they may be useful, but alone they are not sufficient: For Prayer is not to be learn'd as a Trade, by imitation of the work that lies before us. No, the Art of it is in the Heart, in a careful watch over it, and over our senses. For how can he have the Spirit of Prayer, whose Spirit
is let loose to vanity? How can he approach God, duly to deal with him concerning the Salvation of his Soul, whose Soul is all day taken up with the World, with idle talk and idle business? It is a great error to think that of a sudden a man of clay can raise himself up to Heaven, can do that work which is most Spiritual and most dif∣ficult, without serious attention and prepa∣ration, nay with the obstacles and distracti∣ons of a whole days employment about earthly things. No, Prayer doth require a pure and well composed heart, free from the Images of Worldly concerns, fitted and desirous to entertain it self with God: and the best preparation to this Blessed Duty, is a good and upright life, with a meek and peaceable conversation. He that would daily pray better, should so value Heaven and Heavenly things, that therein may be his comfort, and he may be dead to the World. That Prayer which is accompanied with true Faith and humility is ever accepted.
CHAP. XLII. Why many are not profited by Prayer, and that we should study to Pray well and frequently. 1. MAny receive little or no advantage from their Prayers and Meditati∣ons, because they entertain and cherish af∣fections contrary to what they Pray and Meditate; and they make reservations, and do not wholly devote and offer them∣selves to God, to comply in all things with his good pleasure. They desire that God would teach them to know and to fulfil his will, and yet they cease not in many things to neglect and to oppose it: having as it were, a double heart, one they offer to God when they Pray, the other they reserve to them∣selves, and cannot say with the Psalmist, With my whole heart I have sought thee. Others acted by curiosity and the spirit of Pride, seek after high Speculations and abstruse learning, which signifies little or nothing to the knowing themselves, and the master∣ing of their sinful passions: and if at any time their Spirit be softned and they find
some delight in sighs and tears; yet soon after that delight is gone, they remain im∣patient of their Humiliation, they return to their former ways, and still remain tangled in their follies and their vicious habits. 2. Hence it is that those sudden changes or conversions are not durable, which pro∣ceed from sudden and strong commotions; for the violence of that passion, which carryed away the Heart, coming to abate, it returns to its former and more pleasing affections, and soon repents of its Re∣pentance. Some seek themselves more than God, in their Prayers, because therein they find some refreshments and Spiritual delights: and some seek after abstractions and extatick raptures, to be therein raised up to Heaven and know great mysteries: but all these will signifie nothing without Contrition and Humility. The great bene∣fit of Prayer is to find the World lose its power and its repute in our Hearts, and to find our wills more resign'd to God, to pa∣tience and to obedience. He Prays best that desires to know nothing and to obtain nothing, but Jesus Christ and him crucified. 3. It is a common error to think that meditation is a thing exceeding difficult, when indeed every man is daily occupied about it, for to meditate is to revolve and view things in our minds; and that we al∣ways
do, vain and worldly, and often sin∣ful things. Why cannot we then as well consider the mysteries of Faith and the con∣cerns of our Salvation? Sure we could ea∣sily, if we would seriously endeavour to expel the world out of our hearts, then there would be room for the things of God, and we could fix our thoughts upon them. Want of this makes us unfit for Prayer, and unwilling to be crucified to the World, and to bear the Cross and Reproach of Christ. We pretend indeed that our occupations are necessary, and perhaps good and pro∣fitable, so that we have a good warrant to dispense with prayer and meditation: but there is a time for all things, and however the business of the Soul is our chiefest con∣cern, and 'tis a great folly to neglect it upon any account. 4. The body without nourishment soon decays into weakness and death, so doth the Soul without its proper food, which is prayer: and it wants it the more frequently, in that it hath many more and greater ne∣cessities than the body hath. For heat and cold, hunger, thirst and sickness, and what∣ever afflicts the body, doth also vex and prey upon the Soul which is compatible with it: and besides that, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh it self, are all Ene∣mies to the Soul, and daily conspire its ruin, and it hath no strength nor defence,
nor comfort, but from prayer only. We ought therefore always to pray, and de∣voutly to call upon God, in the inner-man, in the inward recesses of our Souls, which are the Temple of God, wherein he is pleased to dwell. We need not always words in our private Closets, God sees our thoughts, and hears our secret desires. Yet they may use books to good purpose, that are not used to mental prayer. And how∣ever the publick Devotions of the Church ought to be said and sung aloud, and to be constant and unalterable. That all the Faithful may agree in them, and edifie one another, by joyning their voices as well as minds, to send up their praises and petitions to God: Yet still the heart is the house of prayer, and the Kingdom of God is within us. CHAP. XLIII. How to Pray, and avoid distractions, and fix the intention. 1. THat our Prayer may be truly good and acceptable, we must endea∣vour to ask all things out of love to God. For though a thing be good in it self, yet
the surest and better way it is to desire and demand it upon Gods account, because it will please him, that Self-love may not be the principle and purpose of our petitions. The ground on which our prayer must rest, is a lively Faith, and a sense of the pre∣sence of God, whom we must approach with an humble simplicity; as much as may be like an Infant brought to his Mothers breast. He is not altogether intent to his devotion, that considers himself praying; for whilest he reflects on his prayer, his mind is diverted from God to whom he prays, and sometimes he is distracted, in∣deavouring to avoid distraction. There∣fore I say, simplicity is best in prayer; to think of nothing but God, to look to none but him whom we worship. 2. For his mind shall hardly be drawn to other objects that shall consider God as pre∣sent; the immensity of divine perfections will absorb his thoughts; they shall sail in that boundless Ocean, and find no limits, and all other things but God will be out of sight. But the perfection of this, is reserv'd for a better State; here we must expect distractions, and if we duly strive against them, they shall not make our prayers to be unprofitable: For God will hear them and assist us, whilest we contend with our in∣firmities. Yet we shall sooner be freed from ill and idle thoughts, by slighting
them, and taking off our minds from at∣tending to them, than by fencing and fighting against them: for sometimes whilest we stand to confute them, they make the deeper impressions on perplext and timo∣rous hearts. A Prayer dry, without relish and comfort, is the more acceptable to God, in that it is unpleasing to Nature. 3. As Travellers always bear in mind the place whither they would go, so they that pray should always be mindful of the de∣sign of Prayer, which is to be united to God, as much as is possible in this life; to have our will made conform unto his, in all things; to aim at any thing but this, is to lose our labour. Now prayer may be said to be of two sorts, the one common and ordinary, perform'd by our endea∣vour and diligent application, together with the assistance of Grace; For no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit: the other extraordinary and infused, more secret and mysterious, with sighs unutterable. We may beg the gift of both, for God is free and very gracious: yet we must apply our selves to that which is more common, and wherein we have a part to act; which consisteth in a blessed disposition to lift up our Soul to God, and entertain holy affecti∣ons, and pour out our hearts before him. This God is ready to grant to such as trust in him, and are of a meek and humble
Spirit; for every good and perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights. Therefore ought we to begin our prayers with an humble acknowledgement of our being nothing but misery and impo∣tency, and wretched sinfulness: and with∣all, we should take care to fix our inten∣tion aright, that God may be glorified, and his will may be done, and we may cheer∣fully fulfill it. Now this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification. CHAP. XLIV. The great advantages of Prayer. 1. WHat is written concerning Wis∣dome, may very well be said of Prayer. Wisd. 7. I prefer'd her before Scep∣ters and Thrones, and esteemed Riches nothing in comparison of her; I loved her above health and beauty, and chose to have her instead of light, for the light that cometh from her never goeth out: All good things together came to me with her, and innumerable riches in her hand: and I rejoyced in them all, because she goeth be∣fore them, and I knew not that she was the mother of them; she is a Treasure unto men, that
never faileth, which they that use become the friends of God. For indeed, Prayer is a fountain of grace, a parent and nurse to all virtues; it increaseth the joy of them that rejoyce, and giveth comfort to sad hearts; it is the light of the understanding, and the food of the Soul, and the procurer of all happiness. Prayer appeaseth Gods Wrath, obtains pardon for our faults, overcomes our sins, delivers us from dangers, inkindles the holy fire of divine love in our hearts, and is an act of all virtues together. It is an Act of Faith, for thereby we declare our belief of God's being present, ready to hear our prayers, able and willing to grant our devout petitions. Hope also is quickned and confirm'd, for by Prayer we relie upon God, and profess our trust in his infinite mercy. And Charity likewise is increast; whilest we consider and call upon the divine incomprehensible goodness, we are inflam'd with the love of it, and other things lose their esteem with us. 2. Devotion teacheth us to fulfil all Righteousness, and to weigh things wisely in the balance of the Sanctuary. Prayer is an Act of Courage and Christian Fortitude; whilest we resolve to serve God, and be faithful to him, whatever we suffer for it. It is also an Act of Temperance; for the devout heart having a foretast of Heavenly joys, despiseth the World, and all its plea∣sures.
Prayer gives a clearer sight of things Eternal, and manifests the secrets of Divine Wisdom. By it the Soul approaching God, is penetrated by his light, and so learns the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. By it we exercise our Charity whilest we pray for others, our fear of God, whilest we humble our selves at his feet, and our love and constancy to our Dear Redeemer, whilest we profess we would die, rather than displease or deny him. And so Prayer is an abstract of many Virtues, and he that Prays much, is much a Christian. The End of the First Part.
PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life. BEING A Summary of Excellent Di∣rections to follow the narrow way to BLISS. PART II. Written Originally in Latin By JOHN BONA. Englished by L. B. LONDON: Printed by A. C. for H. Brome, at the Gun in S. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXVIII.
PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life. PART II. Of the moderation of our affections, and the study and indeavour after true Virtue. CHAP. I. That Voluptuousness and Vanity are to be avoided, and Truth sought for in things Eternal, after Christ's Example. 1. ALL men generally commend and desire truth, but few know where it dwells: and should they know it, they would love and pursue nothing else. But certain it is that truth is not in
things Earthly and perishing, because they soon decay into nothing, whereas truth alters not, but abides for ever. We must seek it therefore in things immortal, which have a constant being and remain to Eter∣nity. Truth is to be found in Virtue, which is the Image or Transcript of it, and va∣ries not according to the circumstances of Human Life; but continues the same in all conditions, always above vanity, always absolute Regent over all Passions and sen∣sual desires. 2. That man is acquainted with truth, whose mind and affections are guided by reason, and his reason by revelation, by Faith, by the Spirit of God: Whereas he that is a Caitif to his Lusts, and a Slave to his Passions, is altogether vain, being tossed by continual troubles and contrary pertur∣bations: sometimes fears and sometimes desires, sometimes anxious thoughts or per∣haps vain joys; now grief for losses, by and by greedy pursuits after new acquists; grievous vexation now for being injur'd, worse soon after in seeking for revenge. These unruly passions are the springs of all our miseries, and the off-spring of vanity and voluptuousness, the great disturbers of our Peace and tormentors of our unhappy Souls. Vanity begets impatient desires of being honour'd and esteem'd, high con∣ceits of our selves, contempt of others, and a
secret aversion to Truth. Voluptuousness inclines men to ease and sports, to the Lusts of the Palat and the lower belly, to all things that can please the body and gratifie a sen∣sual mind. Hence looseness and dissolution, and worldly mindedness; whilest the Soul estranged from God pursues after outward comforts, seeks after Vain-glory, idle talk and idle pastimes, and is altogether taken up with toys and vanities. 3. These are the things that make the Christian Laws, the Gospel-Rules unaccep∣table to the World, to all carnal men; that the Gospel injoyns nothing more than Hu∣mility, and corrupt nature inclines them to Pride; the Gospel requires broken peni∣tent hearts and reformation, and men ab∣hor nothing more. So that without Faith 'tis impossible to find out and imbrace those great and saving truths; Faith is our victory over the World. The Blessed Son of God to attest the truth of this his Heavenly Doctrine, that we must take off our affections from the World, confirm'd it by his Life and Example as well as by Miracles. For whereas men labour to be rich, he chose to be poor; whereas they aspire after domi∣nion and high dignities, he fled and hid himself when the Jews would have made him King; men think it most grievous to bear injuries, and he patiently suffered the greatest; they will not abide to be ill spo∣ken
of, and he was most falsely and un∣justly condemn'd. His sufferings and his conversation, were our lesson and instructi∣on: and we never sin but when we seek those things he despised, and flee from that which he willingly indur'd. He doubtless is much abused and deceiv'd that thinks felicity consists in what Christ taught us to despise. CHAP. II. That to attain Perfection nothing must be neglected. 1. YOU shall hardly find a perfect Chri∣stian, because they commonly that have overcome the greater sins, neglect the lesser; they will not watch and offer violence to themselves for small matters (as they count it) and by degrees they ap∣proach the brink of the Precipice, and per∣chance afterwards get a grievous fall. Heinous and crying sins affect us with hor∣ror at first sight: but we easily admit of ordinary failings. None will be so desperate as to cast away all his hopes and spend his whole stock of Grace at a time: as none would be so mad as to send his whole Estate
going in one day. No, men use to say, this is no great cost, this will hardly at all sink the bag: or in another case, 'tis but one glass, one bit more, that can do me no hurt: but by little and little they at last spend all, and come to poverty, or else they surfeit and are drunk: and likewise the same fate in Spiritual things attends the same neglect and unwariness. Occasions of heroick virtue and doing God extraordinary service, do seldome occur: but almost every moment we have an opportunity of doing some good; therefore we should despise nothing, because almost every thing puts it in our power to exercise some virtue and do something to please God. We should ra∣ther observe every motion of our heart, and mind to rectifie the least irregularity of our affections, and take all occasions to mortifie pernicious self-will and self-love. No man of a sudden grows wicked, but he that despiseth small things, shall fall by little and little. Eccl. 19.1. 2. Every human comfort, though never so innocent, yet in some manner excludes the divine: but he that can pass by all outward things, and entertain himself with Christ, chuse him for his onely portion, who alone is all-sufficient, his joys shall be solid and lasting. As Philosophers say that when∣soever you take one body, another succeeds in its place, lest there should be a vacuum
in nature: So, and much more certain it is, that when the soul empties it self of all affection to creatures, it is soon replenish'd with God, and all divine consolations. But alass, 'tis to be confest that we having used our selves from our infancy to delight in ma∣terial things, which are present and per∣ceived by sense: we afterwards grow very unapt to entertain and please our selves with objects Spiritual and Supernatural, which are far out of sight and can be appre∣hended but by Faith only. Hence it is that we lie groveling on the ground, and attend to nothing but the dictates of flesh and bloud, and remain inconstant and unable to raise up our selves above our depressed nature: until having shook off the vain com∣forts of transitory things, We turn our selves to God and settle our rest in him, who is our peace and our joy, and the end and center of all things.
CHAP. III. That Self-denyal and the Cross is abso∣lutely necessary to all Christians. 1. THE Life of every Christian should be a perpetual Self-crucifixion, yet the deliciousness of the Cross is understood but of very few, such as have been intimate∣ly acquainted with it. They only know that have tryed, how much pleasure follows contrition and self-abnegation, insomuch that they find it most bitter when they any ways depart from their humble penitent temper, to return to the life of sense. The World indeed counts them unhappy, be∣cause commonly they are poor, afflicted and despised: but they rejoyce in their tribulations, and find themselves happy, being well pleased with what happens to them, because they desire most of all, that God's will may be done in all things. Is it his pleasure to make Poverty their lot? they freely accept of it. Will he have them afflict∣ed? they submit. Are they to be scorn'd and disgrac'd? they are not unwillign; come what will they like it; therefore they are most happy that have all things at will. As for
the wicked that seek after the pleasures of sin, though they have what they wish, and appear prosperous to envy and admirati∣on: yet they really are unhappy, because they wish what they should not, what is un∣just and dishonest, and will bring sorrow at last. 2. The Cross is the Center of our holy Religion, the most mysterious and profi∣table doctrine of it, both for belief and practice; he that seeks not for the Cross when he becomes a Christian, understands not as yet what the Gospel designs. Christ at first conceal'd many things from his Disciples, because they could not hear them: yet weak and ignorant as they were, he acquainted them with the scandal of his Cross and ignominious passion. St. Paul likewise to the new Converts would give milk and not meat, yet notwithstanding would preach to them Jesus Christ Crucified, to the Jews an offence, and to the Gentiles foolishness; nay, he himself with all his learning, profest that he did not care to know any thing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. And the Primitive Church, for some time conceal'd many things from the Catechumens, and yet never the Cross of Christ. Nay every Christian is, and was of old signed in his forehead with the sign of the Cross, in token he should not be ashamed of Christ crucified: And God forbid we should
glory in any thing save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is made unto us, wisdome, righteousness, sanctification and redemption. 3. As he hath redeemed us by the Cross, so none can receive the benefit of his Re∣demption, but by bearing the Cross. Hence the absolute necessity of patience and self-denyal, so that whoever doth not renounce himself cannot be Christ's Disciple. If any one (saith he) will come after me, let him take up his Cross and follow me: and if he doth not hate (that is, be ready to forsake) father and mother, wife and children, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple: for whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it. Mat. 16.25. He doth not only say that a Christian must deny pride, intemperance, luxury, in∣justice, pomps and riches, and such things that are without us, but himself; he must deny himself, that is, his natural desires and affections, his own will, the suggestions of his own carnal mind. These he must op∣pose and mortifie, and overcome; Crucifie the flesh with the affections and lusts; and make his life an image and representation of the Crucifixion of Christ. These things are hard to flesh and bloud, but in them consists our Faith and our Salvation.
CHAP. IV. That Self-denyal is the Character, and the principal duty of a Christian. 1. IN the Spiritual building Self-denyal is the first Stone; for what will raptures and high-flown thoughts signifie, what will avail communions and familiar acquain∣tances with God, and what the precisest vir∣tue, if in all these we seek our selves, aim at our own glory, and puft up with Pharisai∣cal pride do despise others? He is wiser than all the Philosophers, who in his heart owns himself simple and ignorant; he is higher than the greatest Monarchs, who re∣putes himself the meanest of men. Our virtue, perfection and safety consist not in lofty expressions, nor yet in things won∣derful and extraordinary; but in the Cross, in bearing reproaches, in self-abjection: and no man can obtain here true vertue and sanctification, and hereafter glory, ex∣cept, renouncing his own desires, he pre∣pare himself to suffer, and be made con∣formable to Christ Crucified. Yet we must observe that as Simon the Cyrenian did bear the Cross of Christ and yet not die with him:
so many bear a heavy Cross without true mortification; in what they suffer they have some other design, than to glorifie God and to submit to his blessed will. 2. Who would think that self-love should be found in the Cross, which it abhors so much? Yet so it is; not a few there are, who willingly or otherways, can indure much, that they may boast of it, that they may be seen and praised by men. Such men indeed do bear the Cross, but they will not be crucified with Christ; they deny and afflict themselves, but because they will not trust God for their reward, they have none at all, they lose their labour and them∣selves. Many others there be that com∣plain, that their affairs and necessary em∣ployments abroad, keep them from mind∣ing what is good, by depriving them of their inward peace: but the things that disturb the tranquillity of the Soul, are from within, because we will not break with our selves, because we are too sensual and too much seek our ease and advantage. From hence proceeds that inward and vexatious war betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh, which can never cease till Reason and Religion reign in us, and the inferior appetites be brought to obedience and perfect subjection, to the higher rational faculties. 3. If a man had a friend so dear and in∣timate, that he could not eat, nor rest, nor
live one day without him, and a faithful and creditable Monitor should tell him that his pretended friend is false and trea∣cherous, and designs to ruin and to mur∣ther him; would not his love presently cease, and be turned to hatred and thoughts of revenge? Christian Reader, such a friend is our flesh; we gratifie and indulge it, and use it with the greatest kindness: and at the same time, under pretence of friendship it deceives us, and designs to de∣prive us of immortal life, and to bring to Eternal death. Yet this false friend sleeps in our bosome; we are not to war with strangers and with far distant Enemies: but with one that dwells with us at home, and accompanies us wherever we go, and always lies in wait to take advantage of us, and do us mischief. Let a man forsake him∣self and come out of himself, and then he will find no obstacles in his way to Heaven.
CHAP. V. How we must fight our corrupt nature and depraved affections. 1. WE must be very careful to observe what is the object of our love or fear, and what of our joy or sorrow; for these four affections have the absolute power of our heart: and God by them is the master of it, when we love and fear nothing but him and for him, and when he is the cause and the measure of our joy or sorrow. When these motions of our mind are dis∣orderly and tend where they should not, we become unruly like beasts: but when they are ordered and directed right, then they are highly serviceable and they make us holy and happy like Angels. For in this consisteth the perfection and happiness of man, to have his affections and desires guided by truth and reason; for then his love and his joys become instruments of bliss and virtue: whereas the same affecti∣ons, when guided by corrupt nature alone, become pernicious and vexatious, degene∣rate into wild lusts, monsters which we must always fight, and with our utmost strength indeavor to conquer.
2. But to this purpose, it will not suffice that we in general indeavour to reform and keep under our appetites and unruly passi∣ons; for corrupt nature is well enough pleased with all the apparel and formali∣ties of mortification, self-denyal, and victo∣ry over sinful passions; and Philosophers grow in love with the fair Ideas of virtue, in this pompous attire: and many in this have deceiv'd themselves, and boasted of con∣quest over their evil inclinations, because they find not in themselves an aversion to vertue and good desires. But when it comes to tryal indeed, and they are no longer to fight with the notion of sin in general, but with a present urging lust, with a pressing uneasiness and necessity, with some pro∣vocations to anger or to impatience: then it appears how vain, how weak and insigni∣ficant, were their great thoughts and fine resolutions. Better it is therefore carefully attend to every particular occasion of van∣quishing our selves and restraining our de∣praved appetites, and to do it seriously and to purpose; for so by degrees we shall rectifie and amend every defect, and bring all our passions and desires under the power of right reason, or Christian Religion. 3. But this is not to be done without an ever-watching diligence, an unwearied pa∣tience, a great application, and a perse∣vering courage and labour: that by offer∣ing
a perpetual violence to our evil pro∣pensities, as they shew themselves, we may go to the root of them; and quite pull them up. For now in our state of depravation, every holy affection and the lifting up of our Soul to God, is violent, being against nature, against the bent of our sensual ap∣petites: so that we must renew our indea∣vours and add new vigor to them every moment, else we fall down, and nature easily prevails, and we soon return to our selves. 4. As weeds in gardens may be pull'd up, and yet not hindred from growing again of themselves: so by care and by keeping a strict hand over our vicious affections, we may so keep them under, that we shall think they are quite destroy'd: but do what we can, the ground of our corrupt nature, will always be apt to produce ill weeds, and sin of it self will be growing again; so that we must never give over fighting, never cease to mortifie and puri∣fie our selves whilst we live. And yet, if by God's assistance we can once do some one noble act of Christian vertue, report one noted victory over our selves: that alone may be sufficient to assert and enlarge our liberty, and obtain us grace, whereby we shall afterwards easily overcome all our aversions to vertue. Some holy men have been so encouraged and strengthned by one
great and difficult triumph, that afterwards without fear and with little trouble or danger, they have overcome all enemies and oppositions. So great a thing it is to fight with fortitude, and maintain once a noble contention, till we have conquer'd. CHAP. VI. Of the right use and moderation of our outward Senses. 1. BEcause the eyes commonly are an inlet to sin, we ought to turn them from tempting objects with the same care and quickness as a man would remove out of a house infected with the Plague. Now human eyes wherewith created things are beheld, may be said to be of three sorts. The first altogether Sensual or natural, when viewing the outward beauty of an object, we are pleased with it, and consider no farther. The second may be call'd Rational or Philosophical, when we making reflecti∣ons upon the symmetry and other proper∣ties of things visible, are moved thereby to search and to know the nature of them. And the third we may say, are Christian or Religious, when by the beholding of
creatures, we raise up our Souls to the love and contemplation of the Creator. With these eyes pious Souls viewing the beauties of the universe are led to the consi∣deration of its glorious maker, who is the fountain of all beauty and perfection, as the author of all subsistence and being. 2. Now as the life of the body depends upon its union with the Soul, so doth in some manner the life of our senses depend on the presence of their proper objects; as things visible to the eyes, audible voices to the ears. The pleasure which those senses receive from a beautiful sight, or a sweet harmony, may be called their life: and their death or mortification, in proporti∣on to this, is their being deprived of those objects, whereon they act with delight; which deprivation is very useful, if not altogether requisite, to arrive to a state of vertue and sanctification. For nothing is more destructive of a Christian Life, than a life of sense: the imagination being as it were in the middle betwixt the soul and the senses, when these work upon her, as they are moved by outward objects, she likewise works upon the soul, and draws it to assent to the voluptuousness of lower fa∣culties: and this is not to be avoided with∣out we bar our senses, by a strict restraint, from those things which affect them with sinful delights.
3. In this consists the death of sense, which is to be considered as twofold; the first Natural, when there is such a real sepa∣ration betwixt sense and its object, that they cannot possibly meet: The second Mo∣ral, when sense perceives but enjoys not its object, being restrain'd from the pleasure of it. The first, some judge to be less difficult and more safe: it being easier to avoid all occasions of sinful pleasure, than to keep a due moderation when we ingage in them: but in this discretion and due measures are to be observ'd. The second is accordingly thought to be more dangerous, because sensual pleasures are very inticing and in∣sinuating, and are known by sad experi∣ence to have a great prevalency over the Soul and nobler affections. 4. And then farther, it is to be con∣sider'd, that we suckt the poyson of volup∣tuousness together with our milk; from our very infancy we learn'd to indulge sense: and though we have often experimented that its delights and satisfactions are short, and vain, and unsatisfying, and withal per∣nicious and highly afflictive to the Soul: yet still we have the same notions of them, they stick close to our mind: and those pleasing though false apprehensions which first entred our hearts, will not be rectified, nor be gone, till we have a long time, used serious reflections and considerations, till
by many acts of self-denyal and contrary virtue we have imprinted in our minds the true principles of Christianity. God is a Spirit, and a spiritual life is the way to him; to chastize and restrain the fancy, to keep under the body, and be guided by divine precepts, is the way to spiritualize our selves and to come to God. CHAP. VII. Of denying our Sensual appetites, especi∣ally Intemperance. 1. IT is no difficult matter for a man who truly loves and fears God, and studies to please him, to despise and forsake all worldly pleasures, pomps and vanities: but to abstain from all food is not to be done, for by it our bodies are rescued from death, and the necessity of it returns upon us dai∣ly. But because there is something of de∣light in the satisfying of this need, there is danger also lest luxury mingle with it, and pleasure which may follow after, be the leading cause to our refection: therefore though we cannot wholly forbear eating and drinking, yet we must take great heed of the voluptuousness of it, that necessity be
not the pretence, and pleasure the design of eating. Nature is satisfied with a little, but greediness or daintiness are always craving: and sometimes we know not whether want or wantonness call for food, and we are glad and willing to mistake, that we may have an occasion to gratifie the unruly appetite. In these we must daily watch our selves, because these temptations do daily return: and we must diet our selves with such moderation, that we may nourish our bodies, and not feed our lusts. Plain, abstemious and frugal food is the health of Soul and Body: and he that pampers not his flesh, by the quality or quantity of his meat and drink, may easily master all carnal desires. 2. To seek after feasts and dainties, and to make them the matter of our discourse and our meditation, is the part of an Epi∣cure, of one whose God is his belly, and who minds earthly things: but a Christian should be indeed, and also live as a peni∣tent; pressing necessity should bring him to his table, and thither he should come as if bread and water were his onely allow∣ance; that whatever is superadded may relish better, and he may be more content and thankful, and also moderate. This we might easily do, if we would duly consider how abstemious primitive Christians were, how much our blessed Lord fasted, and how for us he tasted vinegar and gall. This if
we would often call to mind, and seriously set our selves to the imitation of their Bles∣sed examples, our conversation would be in Heaven, and our thoughts would be far enough from dwelling in caves and kit∣chins. As for the other fleshly lusts which also war against the Soul; all occasions to them are to be avoided, and idleness also; a strict watch over our senses must be kept; the rules of a severe modesty must be ob∣served; and especially we must shun all frequent and familiar converse with the other Sex: for this without our knowledge and against our will, kindles a dangerous and secret fire. And lastly we must take great heed that we be not confident of our selves: for in such a slippery way, he is in some manner already fallen, that fears not to fall.
CHAP. VIII. Of Talkativeness and Silence. 1. THE Evils of the tongue are past number, therefore saith the wise man, Prov. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin, but he that restraineth his lips is wise. Indeed talkativeness is a fountain and a torrent of iniquity. It is a mark of ignorance, it betrays much folly, and is a great enemy to serious thoughts and recol∣lection. Mens words for the most part proceed from something of Pride, for they commonly speak to teach others and to shew their own wisdom and great parts. Every one thinks he knows much, and to make it appear and be thought some∣body he commonly outs with more than he knows. As bad air drawn in, doth in time affect, infect the body: so doth the breath of many words much prejudice the Soul. It dissolves the spirit, and breeds quarrels and contentions, and utters lies and detractions, and brings forth loose un∣seemly jesting and jeering, and evils of all sorts. In vain doth he indeavour to be devout and to have peace within, who doth
not refrain his tongue and set a watch be∣fore his lips. In vain doth he endeavour to amend himself, that censures and speaks ill of others. This is a snare wherein many are caught, to be indulgent to themselves and severe to others, to boast and magnifie what is theirs, and slight as much what re∣lates to others. Few there are that wholly renounce to this vice; few that lead so un∣corrupt a life, as not willingly to tax others corruptions. The propensity to this sin is so great, that many counted good Christi∣ans, who have overcome divers temptati∣ons, and mortified their other lusts: yet fall here, and cannot bridle their unruly tongue, the last gin the Devil sets to catch Souls: and it hath been observ'd by men of great piety and great experience, that a great talker was never very good, or never persever'd to be so. 2. Silence therefore which sequesters us from mens vain converse, that we may en∣tertain our selves with God; silence which sanctifies all our persecutions, sorrows and infirmities, must needs be highly advan∣tageous to every one that makes a right use of it. For when in any case we suffer wrong∣fully, and yet hold our tongues, we then offer to God our Souls and Bodies, goods and good names, as a sacrifice: we follow the example of Christ, who opened not his mouth, but was led as a lamb to the slaugh∣ter:
and we possess our Souls with pati∣ence, and free our selves from clamours and perturbations. Sometimes indeed a just defence of our selves may be requi∣site: but we must be very cautious that we exceed not the due bounds of Christian meekness and humility. And yet this can happen but seldome; as when we are called to answer, by the Magistrate; when the slander would make us uncapable of exercising, or useless in the exercise of a publick office; or when it would be others detriment; in these cases we may speak with truth and meekness: in others we had best hold our tongue. And that it may be to purpose, we must also refrain and quell our inward passions: that the tumult within make not the outward peace insignificant. I kept silence even from good words, saith the Psalmist: if from good words sometimes we must refrain, much more always from vain and ill language. He is a wise man that can hold his tongue, for 'tis less difficult to kn how to speak well, than how to be silent.
CHAP. IX. Of true and false delights, and of self-complacency in virtue. 1. VIrtue alone is the true and lasting pleasure of rational creatures; other things are pleasant but in appearance, and for a short uncertain time, and ac∣cording to mens various opinions: for worldly pleasures proceed not from rea∣son, which is constant and common to all, but from corrupt appetites which always do change and differ. As a sick Palat cannot rightly discern of the relish of meats, no more can a vicious man feel and understand what is true pleasure, which proceeds only from virtue, to which he is too much a stranger. Sensible delights indeed by natures instinct, are pleasing to all, and few justly know how to use, and when to refuse them. But man was created to a nobler end, than only to gratifie sense: he was made for the sight and the fruition of God, the last and sovereign good. 'Tis true in∣deed we cannot contemplate truth and spi∣ritual things, but by the help of those Ideas and representations which we have from
sense, and our rational faculties cannot well discharge their function, when the organs of the body are discomposed: and there∣fore we must have such care of our bodies, as may render them fit instruments for our souls, and preserve them so. 2. But we sin grievously and pervert the order which God and nature have ap∣pointed, if we make bodily pleasure the end of our natural actions: whereas we should design them, and make them sub∣servient to those nobler offices for which we were created after God's Image. I confess we cannot long subsist without some plea∣sure, corporal or spiritual: and we cannot divide our Souls equally betwixt both: but then this obligeth us to aspire the more after heavenly joys, and to delight our selves so much the more in God, in the sense of his favour and the hope of his glory, that we may despise and disrelish the pleasures of sense and vanity. 3. But let it be observ'd also, that some love vertue more for its glory, than its goodness sake; they aspire after God, be∣cause it is a thing high and transcendent; they live a strict and severe life, because it denotes a brave and generous spirit; they preserve inward peace, because it is pleasant; they inquire after the way to Heaven, and to that purpose consult many Books, that they may enlarge their know∣ledge
and satisfie their curiosity; and they walk in the narrow way to perfection, that they may delight in themselves, and admire their own excellencies. All this these men do for to please and magnifie themselves; when they think most of all to serve God, they only serve to their own pride; and when at last they shall expect great re∣wards, they shall find their hands empty of good works; and their hearts full of no∣thing but Self-love. God is therefore to be sought with humility, with singleness of heart and a sincere Spirit; he is to be lov'd above all things, and for his own sake. This life is the valley of the shadow of death, a state of warfare, a place of perpetual labour: rest and peace, and joys eternal are reserv'd for a better life. CHAP. X. That we are led too much by Opinion. 1. THat we generally live by opinion, is known and acknowledg'd, but how great is the force and the prevalency of it, is not perhaps so well understood. Opinion in many cases and after a strange way, doth exercise a great power, or rather tyranny
over men. It makes them as it pleaseth healthy or sickly, poor or rich, miserable or happy: for no man is either of these but as he thinks himself. Opinion brings joy or sorrow, not so much according to the reality of good and evil, as according to the fancy: for experience tells us that what we wish'd or fear'd was nothing so pleasant or grievous as we imagined. More than that, Opinion not only gives a kind of pre∣sent being to things that are future: but also unites together things that are far distant, and makes us feel in one moment the goods or evils of many years to come, and which perhaps shall never be. Opinion alone for the most part, brings credit and praise to men and their actions: and if all the digni∣ties and the riches of the world were united together, they could not content one single man, except his opinion were also satis∣fied. Hamans wealth was exceeding great, and he was first in the Court of King Ahasuerus, and yet he thought himself the unhappiest of men, because Mordecai a poor Captive, would not stand up and honour him, when he came into the Palace. 2. Another great mischief of opinion is this, that it lengthens the present time, and makes its duration in some manner inter∣minable; as if our life and worldly enjoy∣ments were to have no end: and that con∣trariwise it contracts Eternity, and lessens to
almost nothing those incomprehensible, amazing, everlasting ages that follow this uncertain life. Men also commonly take an account of moral good and evil by the measures of opinion: and whilst they seek to avoid one extreme, they too often fall into another. As some from a dull lazy life, become too restless and busie; from pro∣digality many fall to covetousness; and from superstition to profaneness and irre∣verence. The last cheat of Opinion I shall now reckon, is that it generally makes us judge and esteem our selves, not accord∣ing to our own sense and consciousness, but according to the vain thoughts and talk of other men. We defer so much, not only to our own, but also to others opinions, that except they will count us happy, we cannot be so. We are not contented to live to our selves, but we must also entertain a trouble∣some imaginary life to please we know not whom; people that perhaps know us not, and to be sure, care not for us; whose judgment we our selves slight in other things. Thus neglecting that true and real life which we our selves enjoy, we make it our care and indeavour to preserve and adorn that life which depends on others, and hath no subsistence but in ours, and other mens fancy: and so far doth this delusion prevail that what we our selves feel and know, is nothing to us, except others be
acquainted with it. From all these mis∣chievous errors and deceptions of opinion, we cannot be freed by the power of natu∣ral reason, without the supernatural light of the Divine Grace enlighten our minds: For our opinions become true or false according as is the light that guides us. CHAP. XI. That the Doctrine of Salvation is much slighted, even by some that pretend to it. 1. ALL knowledge is good that agrees with truth, but he that would work out his salvation with fear and trem∣bling, had need learn first what concerns it, because our time is short, and great learning in other things is great trouble and great vanity. It is the saying of S. James, that to him that knows to do good and doth it not, to him it is sin: 4.17. As if he should say that it is ill to eat and not digest. For as indigested meat nourisheth not, but ra∣ther hurts: so much knowledge not con∣cocted and converted to use by the fire of holy charity, fills men with pride and such
peccant humors, and at last ends in death. These two things men are to care for whilst they are in this World, first to keep the life of the Soul, which consists in the grace and the favour of God: and secondly to preserve their temporal life: but for the first, many are unconcern'd; let what will become of the Soul, their study and all their labour is that it may be well with the body. And so they run blindfold after their lusts and sensual enjoyments: being wise indeed, as children of this world, but having none of that wisdom which makes men wise unto Salvation. 2. They that speak doubtfully and de∣ceitfully are odious to men (saith the Son of Sirach,) much more are they odious to God, that live so; whose very life is a lie, as well as their words. They pretend to know God and his holy ways, and vainly boast to follow them, when yet they go quite contrary; they reprove and tutor others, not themselves; they cunningly dissemble their vices, and make a shew of those virtues they are strangers to. But they cannot deceive God who searcheth the heart, and their hypocrisie cannot be hid from him, who seeth the things that are in secret, and at the last day will bring all to light. And O that men would view their stains and imperfections, in the great and eternal light of that terrible day, for
then they could easily discern, and as easily cleanse and amend them. We have but these two ways to take notice of our defects and deformities, either in the light of our own reason, comparing them to our selves: or in the light of Divine Revelation, bring∣ing them forth before the bright and glo∣rious presence of the most holy God. The first is like a winter days light, dim and cold: but the second is the sun-shine of a summer-day, so clear as to make the least mote visible, and hot enough to burn and consume all our dross. But to see this saving divine light, a man must come out of himself and go to God, in whom alone is truth and wis∣dome, and out of whom all things are meer impostures and follies. CHAP. XII. That Self-will is a great Evil and must be renounc'd. 1. ALL our actions contrary to God's will, and in compliance to our own, are the fewel for that fire which is un∣quenchable. For self-will may be said to be the maker of Hell and the leader to it, the Author of all the evils which eternally
afflict all the wicked that rebell'd against God. As likewise even in time, the less a man follows his own will, the farther he is from being miserable, the nearer he comes to true happiness. And he that hath wholly renounc'd to his own desires and inclina∣tions, hath the greatest assurance that can be had here, of being eternally happy here∣after. How this is to be done, our Blessed Saviour taught us when he said follow me: for he himself, as he testified came not into the world to do his own will, but the will of the Father that sent him: so that to follow him, we must follow his obedience, forsake our own will to comply with his; to follow him we must take up and bear his yoke and his Cross, which to the flesh is indeed hard and afflictive, but to the Spirit is comfortable and delicious. 2. This our Christian profession doth re∣quire from us, that in all our works and un∣dertakings, we may heartily say, Not my will, but Gods will be done: This also is the design of the supreme eternal will of God, in creating and preserving mens wills, that they may freely serve him, and in all things fulfil his good pleasure. And truly it is the greatest and most blessed freedom, to be in subjection to God, to be able from our hearts to say in all events, Even so Father, for so it hath seemed good before thee. My only will is, Gods will may be done. He is in∣finitely
good and wise, I freely resign my self to him, and desire evermore to have an entire dependence on him, and to be contented with all the disposals of his Pro∣vidence, and that in all things his blessed name may be glorified. All mens troubles and vexations proceed from their unwillingness to submit to God, for there is not a greater pain or grief than to be what we would not be. CHAP. XIII. Of the advantages of Solitariness and Retirement. 1. TO be much alone in quiet silence, and there to examine and instruct ones self, is the way to have our senses and our thoughts well compos'd. Therefore a wise man hates much talk and much com∣pany, keeps his eyes close to curiosities, and his ears to flying reports, and cum∣bers not himself with too much of the world: remembring the saying of wise Ben-Sirach, that he shall become wise that hath little business, (Ecclus. 38.24.) God is but one, and he can best commune with God that dwells by himself. And if a wise man be called forth to some outward
imployment, by necessity or by Gods glo∣ry: yet his thoughts will always tend homeward, to dwell in peace with the inner man, in an humble and quiet heart, wherein there is always a sense of Gods gra∣cious presence. Whereas he that is too intent and busie about the circumference of unsettled creatures, shall not be able to come to his proper rest and center, which is God. 2. To the ignorant foolish World it is very grievous to be alone and converse with themselves but for a few hours: they are afraid of themselves, and they make it their chiefest care to be ingag'd abroad, and to avoid their own company. They spend much of their time upon the necessities of this present life, and yet what remains of it, lies upon them like a heavy burthen, and they are glad to find out occasions to throw it away. They dread to look within, and to hear the voice of their own consci∣ence: and finding nothing in themselves but fearful apprehensions, vexation and tediousness of spirit, they range abroad, and go for comfort to other creatures. Serious thoughts are a terror to them, and consideration is as bad as death: because their Soul lies naked and deformed, loaded with sins and miseries, and they have just cause to avoid the sight of such a Spectacle. No wonder therefore, if but a
few men love to be private and to be se∣questred from the World, when so many desire to be in a croud and a perpetual hurry, and esteem themselves unhappy when they must be alone: as indeed un∣happy they are and must be, until they rectifie many things, and learn to confer and live with themselves, and by inward purity invite God to dwell in their hearts, that there they may rest in him. We are told that many are called and but a few chosen, that we might learn to forsake the many and live with the few, and with fear and dili∣gent care, make our Calling and Election sure. CHAP. XIV. Of the Danger of Riches, and that the desire of them is to be mortified. 1. HOW apt Riches are to corrupt a good Life, how pernicious is the love of them, our Blessed Saviour taught his Disciples, when he affirm'd with an asseveration, as being a thing of great moment, and much to be noted, Verily I say unto you, that a Rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.23.
And that this terrible sentence might make the deeper impression upon their hearts, he exemplifies Rich mens danger by this Parable; It is easier for a Camet to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God. The Door of the Heavenly Kingdom is narrow and can give no entrance to such as are loaded and cumbred with fardels of Wealth. We should therefore love and desire Riches, as a sick man doth a bitter Potion; it is ne∣cessary to recover health but it is unplea∣sant, and if he could be well without it, he would let it alone, and however he takes no more than needs must: so should every Christian be affected to the things of the World; they are the staff of our Pilgrimage, and our necessities require the use of them: but yet they are vexatious and dangerous too, and therefore we may wish we could live without them, and we must take no more of them than is requi∣site to supply our wants; for as the Apostle saith, 1 Tim. 6.6. Godliness with Content∣ment is great gain. And 'twas the Counsel of a good man, Fear not my Son, though we are made Poor, for thou hast much wealth if thou fear God, and depart from all Sin. Tob. 4.21. 2. He is truly Rich, that is Rich to Eter∣nity, and hath a Treasure of Good Works in store. But they can hardly be Innocent,
that will be Rich in the World; for the love of Riches is the Root of all Evil. Men care not what sins they commit so they may get Wealth, and when they have it, its great use is to purchase therewith the satisfaction of their Lusts; the Lust of the Eyes, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which are the Idols of the World. But as some that play with pibbles and pins, are very intent to their game, when yet they value not the instruments of it: so should we care for our necessities, and yet not set our hearts upon those things that supply them; we may use money to that end, but we may not inslave our affections to it, except we will become most base and miserable. We see when Nuts are thrown among Children, they will greedily scrape and fight for them, and Men will stand unconcern'd and despise such trash: so should we, as many as fear God and are true Christians; when Riches and Honours are to be got, and men that know and ex∣pect no better, will croud and strive and sweat for them, let us laugh and pitty their folly, those things are but Nuts, not worth our stooping; if any fall into our bosome, we may break it and eat it, but 'tis below us to scramble for them; all Worldly things are meer deceit and vanity. When the Son of God became Man, he would have no Riches, to teach us how much we
should despise them. The Children of this World like not of this, they rather despise Christ and his Divine Doctrine, be∣cause they love and esteem Mammon: but the Children of light gather their Treasure in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust corrupteth, and where thieves cannot break through nor steal. He is Rich enough in this World, that wants not Daily Bread. CHAP. XV. Of the Ʋse of Riches, and how to know we Love them not. 1. FEW understand or consider how to use their Estates aright; that they are the provision for this present short Life which a good man obtains with∣out any wrong to others; and own with∣out Pride or Covetousness, and preserves without anxious fears, and distributes with∣out regret or nigardliness, where Charity and Necessity call. Now the measures of Necessity are to be taken from the Man's state and condition. For some by birth or by place, are Noble and dignified Persons, who in respect of their ranks, which should
be Honourably maintain'd, have greater wants than their inferiors, who may have sufficient with a lesser Portion. Yet how∣ever, we are all but Stewards of what we possess, and we should all study Alms and Moderation, that God our great Land-lord may find us faithful. For he is the true owner of all that we have, we are but Ser∣vants under him, who should use all for his glory, and in the midst of our plenty be voluntarily Poor as to our selves: And when Riches increase should not be proud nor set our heart upon them. 2. Nature hath hid Gold and Silver in the bowels of the Earth, and the Covetous that seeks for those beloved mettals, is bowed down and stoops to the ground, and can hardly raise up himself to look to Hea∣ven: but the wiser Christian looks upon all inferior things as perishing and soon ended, and therefore sets his affections on the Riches above, which are true and ever∣lasting. There he seeks for Honour, where 'tis given to none that are unworthy of it; he expects that Kingdom which being ob∣tain'd, expells all fears and all dangers; all his possessions here, he offers to God with himself: being ready freely to be in want, if Providence shall please. 3. Now by these tokens it will appear that our hearts are free from Covetousness and the love of Mammon: If we are per∣swaded
that they are a cumbrance and a heavy burthen; if we slight them, and are very well pleased to be without them; if when we have them we are not pust up with Pride and Vain-Glory; and if we look upon fine Houses, and rich Furnitures and such things, as the vain Monuments of Mens Vanities, and the great obstacles to their Salvation. Happy are they that are free from the love and desire of those things, they shall live in peace and safety, and trouble and fear shall not be able to take hold of them. As 'tis better to sleep well in a mean narrow Couch, than to be sick and restless in a stately Bed: so is it much better to be content and quiet with a little, than to have much, and there∣with much of vexation. He that is content, is Rich and Happy. CHAP. XVI. Of Poverty in Spirit, and the contempt of the World. 1. OUR Blessed Saviour hath assign'd the Kingdom of Heaven to them that are Poor in Spirit, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the King∣dom
of Heaven. Such are they that neither desire to be Rich, nor place their Peace and Contentment in Riches; whose wishes and possessions can never fail nor be taken from them; who are more afraid of having their good things in this Life, than others are of being Poor; and whose Heart raised above all created things can truly speak in this manner. I am Rich, praised be God, and have more than sufficient for my needs, and more than I desire: and my affections cleave not to what I have; I have the use but not the trouble of it, for I can freely part with it, without pain or regret. I am truly inricht with the possession of that Di∣vine Truth which is from above, in it all things are contain'd, and it is all-sufficient of it self; for in it I perceive that I have right to nothing, that I am nothing, and that I can do nothing of my self. That Blessed Truth tells me that I must not place my Contentment in Earthly Transitory things, which like shadows will soon pass away and would deceive me: and that no∣thing can happen to me, but by that Gra∣cious Providence of my Heavenly Father, which brought me naked from my Mothers Womb, and naked will bring me to the Dust again. This is the Wisdom of the Just, infused from above: theirs only is the Kingdom of Heaven, for they only despise this Earth. 2. Would to God Christians were thus
wise and did well understand this Truth; for then none of them would seek after the perishing Riches of this World, and none would love them: but as few are chosen, few are Wise, and but few Poor in Spirit. Blessed is the Rich that is found without Ble∣mish, and that is not gone after Gold; (saith the Son of Sirach) Who is he? and we will call him Blessed, for wonderful things hath he done among his People. Ecclus. 31.8. For indeed you shall hardly find one man that can possess the things of this World, as not being his own, and that can be Rich and Content under Poverty. Few they are that come to this Perfection, because men love the Vanities and Conveniencies of this Life, which are purchast with Riches: and few they are that regard the Precepts of Christ, Mat. 6. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and its Righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you. And, Be Content with your Food and Raiment and be not solicitous for it, for your Heavenly Father knows that you want those things. Why then don't we believe our loving Saviour, and trust the Provi∣dence of our Heavenly Father? because we suffer our desires to run over the World, and we consider not that the way to Heaven is streight and narrow: and because we give ear to our Lusts, and will not hearken to the Truth, nor be guided by it. The broad way is for them, that carry the
World before them, or at least carry it in their hearts: but the narrow way is for the naked, such whose Spirit is free from the cumbersome Riches of the World. What will the false Mammon avail, if we are desti∣tute of the true Riches? We are Strangers and Pilgrims travelling homeward through a streight and difficult way, and great loads can be but great hindrances. CHAP. XVII. Of the Necessity and the Measures of Alms-giving. 1. SUch Riches as are not imploy'd in a moderate supply of our necessities, according to our quality, may not be kept nigardly, nor spent profusely upon Pride or Luxury: but they belong to the Poor, they must be spent in Good Works and Pious uses, for the advancement of God's Glory, and the benefit of mens Souls and Bodies; and he much indangers his Salva∣tion that doth not dispose of them on this wise. Mony kept in bags is but dress, its worth consists in the use of it: and if it serves not for the relief of the necessitous,
and the gathering Treasures in Heaven, then it becomes mischievous, and the guilt of it doth exceed its weight. Lands, Mo∣neys, and other moveables are generally called Goods, not that they make a man good of themselves, but because the owner may do good with them, and thereby make himself better and happier: as it is written, Psal. 112.9. He hath dispersed, he hath given to the Poor, his Righteousness endureth for ever. For, The ransom of a Man's Life are his Riches, (saith Solomon) Prov. 13.8. And as water will quench a flaming fire, so Alms make an attonement for Sin (saith the wise Ben-Sirach) Ecclus. 3.30. Nothing suits better with our Christian Profession than to pitty and help the afflicted, remembring and re∣lieving the infirmities of our common Na∣ture in the afflictions of others: and no∣thing is more unnatural and Anti-Christian, than to refuse comfort and assistance to others, or even to our selves in our wants, that we may increase our Wealth and in∣rich our heirs: but the worst of all is, to lose our share of the joys of Heaven, and damn our Immortal Souls, that they that shall seize upon our Riches, may have wherewith to be Prodigal and Vicious. 2. I shall not undertake to determine, when and how far every one that can, should deprive himself, that he may spare for Charity, this can have no other measures,
than such as Piety and Christian Prudence shall assign. Only I say that God knows our hearts and abilities, and we must ap∣prove our selves to him. And I hear our Blessed Saviour commanding to all without distinction, Luke 11.41. Give Alms of such things as you have. And the great Preacher of Repentance injoyn'd the multitudes that asked him what they should do, Luke 3.11. He that hath two Coats let him impart to him that hath none: and he that hath meat let him do likewise. I hear the Psalmist declaring that Blessed is he that considereth the Poor, for the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. Psal. 41.1. And the Prophet instructing all Penitents on this wise, Deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and bring the Poor that are cast out, to thy House; when thou seest the naked cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh. Isa. 58.7. I hear Religious Tobit giving this Lesson to his Son, Give Alms of thy sub∣stance, and when thou givest Alms, let not thy hand be Envious, neither turn thy face from any Poor, and the Face of God shall not be turned away from thee. If thou hast abundance give Alms accordingly: If thou have but little, be not afraid to give according to that little; for thou layest up a good Treasure for thy self against the day of Necessity; because that Alms do de∣liver from Death, and suffer not to come into darkness. Tob. 4.7. &c. 3. What can be said more than all this
to prove Alms-giving to be much a Duty, and most advantagious? But yet let us hear also what the Beloved Apostle saith in this matter, 1 John 3.17. Whoso hath this Worlds good, and seeth his Brother hath need, and shutteth up his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwelleth the Love of God in Him? If not the love of God, then self-love, that is, lust and sin, dwell and reign in him: and his Portion in the next world shall be with the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 16. who was cloathed in purple and fine linnen, and fared sumptuously every day, and yet would not give Lazarus so much as the crums that fell from his Table. The Con∣science of the Covetous cryeth, or ere long will cry against him, why dost thou put by that poor hungry man? thou art his mur∣therer, in that thou art able and dost not feed him; that Bread which thou canst spare is his: those garments which fill up thy Trunks, belong to the Naked: and the money hoarded in thy Coffers, is the just right of the Necessitous. Christ in the great Judgment, will condemn to Hell such merciless wretches as thou art: Go ye (saith he) into Everlasting Fire, for I was hungry, and you fed me not: I was thirsty and you gave me no drink: naked and ye clothed me not. Mat. 25.42. He doth not mention such pressing extream necessities, as must be now supplied, and could be relieved by
none else; such occur but seldome, not once perhaps in a mans life. Therefore we must not stay for such Extremities to be Charitable: but we must spare as much as we can, and what we can, we must give in Good Works, for Charity is the band of perfectness, and shall cover a multitude of sins. Neither yet must we as some do, de∣lay our Charity till we can keep no longer what we have. That which Death makes us give, if we could have given it before, will be nothing so acceptable, as what we our selves freely distribute, when we have power to keep it. CHAP. XVIII. Of Patience in Bearing and Forbearing. 1. OF all the Virtues wherein Christians must exercise themselves, that they may come to Life Eternal, none is more excellent and none more useful than Patience. By it we imitate the forbearance and long-suffering of God, who provoked by so much wickedness and disobedience, yet doth good to all men, and makes his Sun to rise upon the Just and the Unjust. Patience governs the mind and preserves it in Peace and an even Temper; it breaks
Anger, and bridles the Tongue, and mor∣tifies Pride and a high Spirit; it ends Quarrels, and entertains Friendship, and it conquers the World; it tames the Flesh, overcomes Temptations, bears nobly and meekly reproaches and persecutions, and it perfects and crowns the life of a Chri∣stian. If all men were Patient, the evils of mankind would be nothing so great nor so numerous as they are: and we should be happy with abundance of love and quietness. By Patience a wise and good man may be distinguish'd from a vicious fool. It is so diffusive a vertue, that it is necessary to all other vertues, and contra∣ry to all vices: and God instructs and proves the best of his Children by exer∣cising their Patience. Nothing can hinder but that injurious Words and Actions shall affect and stir up our minds: and nothing but Patience can make us masters of our selves, can pacifie our tumultuous Spirits, and restrain us from mischief and revenge. 2. Philosophers themselves have extold very high the Praises of this excellent vertue: and they made it the chiefest mark and ostentation of their own wisdome. But as they know not the true God, from whom proceeds, and to whom tends all true vertue: so their Patience was false as well as their wisdom. But we that live in the School of Christ, are taught by him, that
through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God: and this is the only true wisdom, to know Jesus Christ and him crucified, and to love, and chear∣fully bear his Cross. For a Christian must be made conformable to his Crucified Sa∣viour, our life must be the Image of his Death: So that he is no Christian that hates and refuseth the Cross, and will not suffer. Let none of us sinful men that own God for Father expect to be without Cha∣stisement in this World, for his own natu∣ral Beloved Son was not, though he was without sin: even the Christ was to suffer that he might enter into his Glory. Every one in this life is visited with pains and sor∣rows, either for his conversion or for his grea∣ter perfection: but the most afflicted endures nothing that can be compar'd to the shame and the Cross of Christ.
CHAP. XIX. Adversities are occasions of Vertue and must be Patiently indur'd, 1. THis our present Life is the way through which we must go to Hea∣ven: and in it we find all the properties that belong to a way: sometimes it is even, sometimes rough; sometimes it is pleasant, sometimes full of briers, rocks and precipices; in some places it is crowded with company, in some it is desart and so∣litary: and here and there you meet with wild beasts and robbers; rain and fair weather daily succeed each to other, ob∣stacles and difficulties frequently occur, and even in Grace and Religion the Philoso∣phers saying doth take place, Omnia fieri secundum litem, that there is contention and opposition in all things. We see it in Vertue which is acquired by fighting, by resisting Temptations: and mans strength and fortitude would be unknown and of no use, should he not meet with afflictions, and uneasie tryals. I know this is not the sense of the world, the fools party is very
numerous, and they are all for ease and for pleasure. If you take a prosperous one out of the herd, one that is every where flatter'd and loudly applauded, one whose Table abounds with costly dainties, whose Estate is great and daily increasing, whose Houses are stately and richly furnish'd, whose worldly prosperity is complete, and is equally admired and envied: If you come to such a one, and indeavour to per∣suade him with the strongest reasons and sweetest eloquence, that his is but a painted happiness, a more empty vanity, grounded upon vulgar opinions and errors, and that crosses and afflictions are much more eligible and beneficial, and lead to Bliss and Eternal Glory: you shall certainly speak that which is truth, but as certainly spend your breath in vain. 2. But so it is; God visits his Children with sorrows and calamities that by experi∣ence they may learn, how inconsiderable, how weak and perishing and how false are all those Enjoyments wherein the World place their felicity: and contrariwise, how advantageous are those afflictive dispensa∣tions which men count the worst of evils, and how sweet and lasting those comforts they despise. It is therefore the part of a wise man, in all events, in all crosses, meek∣ly and cheerfully to comply with Divine Providence: and to look beyond the
cloud and there fix his heart, where true joys are to be found. Let the wicked rage and persecute the righteous as far as they can, let what calamities will happen: yet still it will remain true what Solomon saith, that No Evil shall happen to the Just. Prov. 12.21. Prosperity shall not de∣prave, and Adversity shall not cast him down: but he will say with the Prophet, Jerem. 10.19. Truly this is my grief and I must bear it; 'Tis best it should be as it is, and I would have it so, for it is God's will. All Creatures whether they will or no, must be sub∣ject to God: but some like children chearfully obey and do what is just, and some like slaves bear punishment and suffer what is just, but all men are bound by the Divine Laws, either to pair or obedience. CHAP. XX. That we must bear patiently the little Vexations that happen daily. 1. MAny bear patiently imaginary crosses which never happen, they fancy to themselves great evils to come, and they go through them with great cou∣rage, and upon this account reckon them∣selves
patient, and mean while the little vexations that occur daily dissolve them into peevishness and fretful anger, and they cannot bear the least cross or contradicti∣on when it is present. But we must beware of this illusion, and consider that great occasions of patience happen but seldome, whereas the lesser are very frequent; almost every hour we may have opportunities of exercising this vertue, either by bearing with others, or by checking and correcting our selves. And we should always bear more chearfully that cross which is of God's sending, than that which is our own choise: for that which God appoints is always best, whereas we are ignorant and often de∣ceived. As a sick man therefore would rejoyce to have met with a skilful Physician, able and willing to cure his otherwise mor∣tal distemper, and would drink and suffer any thing from him: So should we gladly and thankfully take the bitter Cup from Gods hand, whatever it be filled withal, and though malice and envy reach it out to us; for thereby God restores our dying Souls to health, and fits us for an endless life. 2. This holy confidence and resigna∣tion will take the sting out of all afflictions; when we are thus disposed and thus willing to receive them, they shall not be half so grievous, and they shall be much more ad∣vantageous. Neither shall the oppositions
of the flesh, nor the reluctancies of nature be an hindrance to this, as long as we pray and fight against them, and those acts of our minds, which being free are capable of rewards or punishments, side with God against sensual affections. But indeed if the man murmurs, and transported with passion, bites the Rod he should kiss, and goes on in disobedience, then his will is rebellious against God, and his sufferance shall find no acceptance and shall have no remuneration. Those vertues are much easier which consist in action, than such as are passive and bind us to suffer; for the scene of the first is without us, and the ex∣ercise of the second within, upon the ten∣derest part of us, our natural desires and affections. But can we want courage to bear patiently, for Gods sake, those petty evils and afflicting occurrencies we daily meet withal: when Soldiers bear much more, upon a poor and uncertain account? they expect rest when they are old, or a fading laurel, and upon the groundless hope of this, how much of cold and heat, hunger and weariness, pains and dangers, necessi∣ties and inconveniencies of all sorts do they not indure? And we that expect and are sure of Eternal Rest within a short time, shall we shrink for a short labour or a short affliction? shall we complain and be de∣jected, when they chearfully go through a
much greater misery? What ever we suffer in this world would be light and easie, if we consider'd what reward God hath assigned to our patience. CHAP. XXI. That we should Rejoyce in Tribulations. 1. AS in building, one stone requires more cutting and carving than another, according to the nobler place the Master-builder hath assigned to it: so must we go to the divine pleasure for to know the reason why one man suffers more than another; for God hath appointed to every man his Cross, answerable to his strength, and to that Crown which is laid up for him. Therefore as the marble design'd for Orna∣ment would patiently suffer the Carvers strokes, and even be thankful, had it the use of sense and reason: so should we joy∣fully and thankfully receive the various afflictions wherewith God, as with a cut∣ting instrument doth polish and beautifie us, to exalt us to a higher place of Glory in his Heavenly Palace. He prevents the deviation and ruine of his beloved, by cha∣stizing them: and for this the wicked are
instrumental, by their malice and perse∣cutions, they forward the vertue and the happiness of the just. Therefore should we be meek and loving to our enemies, who certainly procure us great advantages: or at least we should look upon them as being commission'd by God, as David did upon Shimei, 2 Sam. 16.10. The Lord (saith he) hath said unto him, go and curse David, and who shall say, wherefore hast thou done so? For were it not Gods permission, they could do us no injury: and God would never permit them, but in order to his Glory and our own Salvation. So that in all the wrongs and vexations which we suffer, we must not seek for comfort from created things, for they are vain and vexatious themselves: but we must go directly to God, who hath appointed us all our pains and sufferings, and will make them beneficial to us, and at last will turn them into joy. 2. Let us therefore look upon afflictions as very necessary and useful to us: and let us receive them as pledges of Gods love, and assurances of his care for us: according as St. James exhorts, Jam. 1.2. My Brethren count it all joy when you fall into divers Tempta∣tions; knowing this, that the tryal of your Faith worketh Patience: but let Patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and intire wanting nothing. Reproaches, slanders, persecutions, and all other evils
we suffer in this world, are to be lov'd by pious men and to be counted good: for though they be afflictive to flesh and bloud, yet they proceed from the divine pleasure, they come to us from God: and as our Blessed Saviour told his unjust Judge, John 19.11. They could have no power at all against us, if it were not given them from above: So that in all events we may meekly submit and rest satisfied, considering this power from above. And if we do not thus con∣sider and receive our sorrows; if we view them by themselves, and not in their first cause, that wise God who is the contriver of them, and the fountain of all goodness: then our minds will be afflicted with a thousand grievous fancies of things past, present, or to come, which yet never were or shall be: and we shall be sleepless and restless, full of anguish and fears and di∣stractions. Whereas if we used our selves to refer all things to God, and did look up to him in our Tribulations, we should find rest and tranquillity, his gracious will and appointment would answer and silence all our objections: and whatever hapned we could quietly say with patient Job, Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. That God who will have me to be afflicted is gracious and compassionate,
and hath a tender care of me: He hath laid this cross upon me, which I resolve to bear, till he himself is pleased to take it off. CHAP. XXII. That Detractions and Derisions must be indur'd and derided. 1. IF we grieve more for the Evil men speak against us, than for the Evil we our selves commit against God: then 'tis a plain demonstration, self-love prevails in us above the love of God. He, infinitely perfect and holy, bears patiently with innumerable blasphemies and provocati∣ons, and all the while bestows many bles∣sings upon the offenders: And we wretch∣ed sinful creatures, who can hardly hear worse than we deserve; a disobliging word, or the least mention of our faults puts us into a fit of anger and fury; though we infinitely deserve it, we will not bear with reproof or contempt. Whereas in∣deed we should rather fear the undeserved praise of men, lest the prosperity and honour of the world cut off our com∣munion and fellowship with the Cross of Christ. Should the pains which our sins
deserve, and the Torments Christ suffered for them, be laid in one scale, and in the other, the evils and injuries we suffer: these would have no weight, and be nothing com∣par'd to the other. And farther, if it be consider'd that the injuries we receive, are made grievous according to our own ap∣prehensions, and not according to the in∣tention of our enemies: the disproportion betwixt our sufferings and deserts will appear yet greater. For he cannot be injur'd that slights injuries: and he is not wounded that will not by his impatience tear open his wounds. The soft flesh, not the angry hand that flings the dart, is the cause of the hurt. Should a mans body be hard as a rock, arrows thrown against it could never enter: and 'tis from the softness and frailty of our minds, that reviling words and affronts have power to make impression. 2. Blessed is he that so orders his life, that malice it self cannot fasten a calumni∣ation upon him: and next to him, blessed is he that indeavours to be innocent, and to have a good conscience in all things: otherwise he is a peevish fool that will not hear what he delights to do. But if it so happen that notwithstanding our Christian prudence and our perseverance in well doing, men will speak ill of us: then this is our comfort, that we suffer with Christ undeservedly, and we must remember his
saying, Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly. Let men think and say what they will, we are happy if our conscience doth not accuse us before God. Mens opinions and their judgments are false and inconstant, and vain, and can make us neither better nor worse; and therefore St. Paul saith that if we seek to please men we cannot be the servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10. For it is impossible for one to please all; mens thoughts differ as their inclinations: and what some admire, others will censure. When a Philosopher was told that others laugh'd at him, he answer'd, At ego non derideor, that others might laugh, but he was not laugh'd at, for it neither did hurt nor afflict him. Meaning, that those injuries are nothing, for which we our selves will not be concern'd. CHAP. XXIII. Remedies against Discontent and Anger for what abuses we receive. 1. IT would be much to the purpose of comfort and patience in all our ad∣versities, to fix our minds stedfastly upon
God, and take it off of our trouble, which we increase by reflecting on it: for whilst we affect our selves with pitty, at the con∣sideration of what we suffer, we soften our spirits, and the sense of our misery makes the deeper impression upon them. Now all our afflictions proceeding from a present or a feared loss, the best and most univer∣sal remedy against them, would be to set our affections upon that supreme increated Good, which is subject to no change and can never be taken away from them that love it. And that we may also observe an outward Decorum, and not disgrace our selves by giving way to impotent passions, we must refrain and quite hold in our tongue, as soon as we find our selves pro∣voked by any word or deed: for as it is a symptom of a weak stomach, not to be able to digest harder meat, so 'tis a certain sign of a poor and weakly spirit, not to have strength enough to bear with a cross word or a cross accident: and it was the saying of a Wise and Religious man, that he never found any thing so grievous, but by silence he did overcome it. For whatever others do to vex us, comes to nothing if we slight it: and if we shew our selves much concern'd, we betray our weakness or our guilt, and we make it ap∣pear that we well deserve the abuse. 2. But 'twill not be enough thus to re∣press our grief and our talkativeness: we
must farther reprove and humble our selves with the consideration of our sinful∣ness and unworthiness, acknowledging we deserve more contempt than can be here pour'd upon us; for a wise and good man, will not only regard what he suffers, but what he deserves to suffer for his offences against God. Also let no man judge and condemn another, remembring the saying of St. Paul, Ro. 2.1. Thou art inexcusable, O man, for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judgest, dost the same things. For 'tis very unfitting, he that owes ten thousand talents, should be a severe exacter of his Brother's mite: and he is a fool that thinks to cure others by his di∣stemper, that is, by his pride and his im∣patience. Who art thou (saith the Apostle, Rom. 14.4.) that judgest another mans ser∣vant. To his own master, he standeth or falleth: And how canst thou say to thy Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thy self beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye, Luke 6.42. God alone that can amend and forgive, or else punish the sins of men, hath right to judge of them: our part is to prevent them if we can, or else bring men to repentance: however to hide and bear with them: indeavouring first to amend our own faults, before we take upon us to cor∣rect others. As God is merciful and patient to us all, so must we be to our Brothers.
CHAP. XXIV. Remedies against Impatience. 1. MAny and various are the affairs a man must go through in his life, and very different are the humors and companies he must converse withal: so that it is next to impossible all men should be of his opinion, and all things should fall out according to his mind: therefore he must resolve before hand and be very careful that he lose not his Peace and his Patience, whatever happen. To that end let him consider in all his concerns and under∣takings, what things may come cross to his desires and above his power to help: and having took a view of them, let him pre∣pare himself to bear them if they come. For this will avoid the surprize, and lessen the grief, and compose the mind. This must be therefore our first and chiefest task, to understand the nature of things, and to use them accordingly: as that they may be taken from us; and they are and must be subject to thousands of changes and chances, which we cannot hinder; and they are to serve, not to command us;
and withal they are out of our power; so that we must not be troubled if we cannot dispose of them, as we would. 2. These considerations well weighed will make a wise mans mind stedfast and even; able to entertain all events with a generous indifferency. Is he depriv'd of his good name, of his estate or liberty? is he threatned with persecutions, or with death itself? he is not mov'd nor dejected; he had consider'd long before, that such things might happen whether he would or no, and now he can bear and overcome them. 'Tis not outward things that wound us, but the wrong notion that we have of them; our own mistaken conceits do us the most hurt. No man grows pale with fear or perplext with anguish, but he that passionately would avoid or obtain that which is not in his power; mind your duty, and let not your passions go out of your own sphere, and you shall avoid all those troubles which come from abroad, where mans Jurisdiction cannot reach. The Chri∣stian Martyrs were constant in the midst of their wearied tormentors, their patience could not be conquer'd: even women and children were undaunted in the midst of the flames, they could not be overcome though they might be kill'd: because they valued not those things which Tyrants might give or else take away. Things
without were nothing to them: but things within, things that were their own, as their vertue, their divine faith and love: these they kept and preserv'd and in so doing were happy. For these are the true goods which depend only from our selves: and which the world can neither give nor take away from us. CHAP. XXV. Of Humility the proper Vertue of Chri∣stians. 1. LEarn of me, saith our Divine master, the eternal wisdom, the inex∣haustible fountain of Grace and Vertue. Learn of me; what? sure some great mat∣ter; for he that bids us learn, hath him∣self created Heaven and Earth, and com∣manded the light to shine out of darkness. Will he therefore teach us to make a new world, and so bring things out of nothing also? No, that belongs only to God. He bids us learn, not what he made, but what he, himself was made for us, Who being in the form of God, yet made himself of no reputa∣tion, taking on him the form of a Servant, and being made in the likeness of men, Phil. 2.
Learn of me therefore, saith he, not to raise the dead or cast out Devils; not to cleanse lepers or give light to the blind; not to walk on the Sea, or to work such wonders as he enabled some to do: but Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11.29. He would not teach what himself would not do, but he himself becomes our lesson, and this he makes the sum of his wisdome and his saving doctrine, that we learn to be meek and humble after his example. So great, so difficult a thing was lowliness, that we could not learn it, but from the humi∣liation of the most highest. 2. Indeed human pride can be cur'd by none, but him who being God, yet humbled himself and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. And humility is the chiefest vertue of Christians; proper to them alone; unknown to the Philosophers and wise men of the world; recommended by Christ, by his Example and by his Pre∣cepts, above all other duties: That we following him in his abasement, might at last come to his glory. Now that we may think meanly of our selves, we must se∣riously consider who it is that calls us; the wretched State whence he calls us; the Bliss he calls us to; our perverse dulness to follow, and the assistances he gives to forward us. For we shall never come to the prize of our high calling, except hu∣mility
goes along, and follows our best works, which are the steps we make to∣wards it: Because our vertues shall avail no∣thing if we be proud of them, and if we seek for praise and glory here, we shall not have any hereafter. 3. If at any time our thoughts be lift up, and we fancy our selves to be something, the Earth which is always present will tell us whereof we are made and whence we had our origin. For dust we are, and to dust we must needs return; and upon this humble and low foundation we must build the highest vertues. For if a man had the gift of miracles and could remove moun∣tains; if he could speak all languages and foretel things to come; if he had converted all the infidels, and given all his substance to the Poor: yet he would be in great and perpetual danger of falling, and losing his reward by pride; except he were always mindful of his peril and his infirmity: and except diffident of himself, he still made it his business, to work out his Salvation with fear and trembling. The true wisdome and safety of Christians, is to learn to be humble.
CHAP. XXVI. From God, we turn'd away by Pride, to him we must return by humility. 1. PRide the first and the worst of sins took beginning when the Rebellious Angels, proud of their excellency, list up themselves against God; saying in their cursed ambitious thoughts (as the Prophet Isaiah is thought to mean, Isa. 14.13.) I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most High. With the same wickedness mankind came to be infected, when by the Serpents fraud, Adam was perswaded to aspire to the being like his Maker, happy in himself, without dependance: for, The beginning of Pride is, when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his maker, Ecclus. 10.12. And so Pride is the beginning of Sin; and that with its appendant miseries, is the inheritance we all derive from our first Parents; to seek and regard our selves in every thing; to forsake God and aim at our own glory and excellency.
2. That we may therefore return to God, from whom we are fallen by Pride, we must go back in the way of humility; the basis or foundation whereof, is the sense of our frailty and misery; the sincere acknowledgment that we owe nothing to our selves, and that we are nothing and can do nothing. For God created mans body out of the Earth, and breathed into him a Soul made out of nothing, and man was adorned with many graces, and was holy and happy: but by sin he defaced Gods workmanship, forfeited all his gifts, and so foully defiled himself, that nothing in nature can make him clean again. Nay, though by the mercies of our Redemption man hath been restored to the possibility of bliss and holiness, yet by his choise and his free-will, he would remain in his for∣mer state of sinfulness and misery, should not the Divine Grace actually bring him out of that unhappy condition: sanctifying his heart, and bringing him into the liberty of the Sons of God. 3. For who but Christ by his Free-Grace, can chuse and bring a man out of that mass or heap of perdition, wherein we are all involv'd by nature? If any one puffed up with Pride, answer that his Faith, his Prayers is Righteousness, have made the difference betwixt him and them that re∣main in their corruption, the Apostle
replies upon him, but What hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not receiv'd it? 1 Cor. 4.7. Again saith he in another place, 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not suffi∣cient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. And, Without me ye can do nothing, saith our Blessed Saviour: that no flesh should glory before him, but as it written, He that glories should glory in the Lord. Sinners can have no just cause to glory in themselves: neither can the Just glory but in him, to whom they sing with the Psalmist, Thou O Lord art my glory, and the lifter up of my head, Psal. 3.3. 4. But may not a man glory that he hath not rejected Gods gracious offers? This if he did, would be the same folly as if a man should boast, that whereas he could have made himself miserable, and drown'd himself if he would, yet he had not done it. But yet even our receiving Gods free benefits, proceeds from a new mercy: which were it denyed us, and should Grace withdraw from us her light and assistance, we should neither value the gifts of God, nor know how to use them aright. We must therefore mortifie the desire of our own glory, as we desire God would make and account us righteous; let the sincere love of God make us despise the praise of
men; let truth take place, we have no cause to glory in any thing, for nothing good is our own. This is the ground and the perfection of all true vertue, to know and be truly perswaded that we are, and have, and can do nothing of our selves: for it is God that works in us to will and to do. Therefore let us fear and beware, for God who gives grace to the humble, doth take it away from the Proud. CHAP. XXVII. The Character of a proud man. 1. PRide is a swelling or lifting up of the mind, whereby the man would reach and stretch himself beyond his narrow bounds, and attribute that to himself which is not his own. This is joyn'd with an high conceit of himself and of his great worth, which he indeavours to propagate to others, boasting upon all occasions his birth, dignities and riches, and those ac∣complishments of body and mind, which he thinks make him great and mighty, and much superior to others. This opinion gets strength, and the mans Spirit grows more high and arrogant, if he hath withal
great Riches and a great Retinue, stately Houses and Garments, Gold, Jewels, and all such Ornaments, as are the effects and the signs of mens vanities. Then he must have great Titlet, loud Applauses, and much Reverence from others, to testifie that they acknowledge him for their Supe∣rior. And these he counts the sovereign happiness of this life: and as for life Eter∣nal, he minds it not, and he cares not for it. 2. Hence proceeds a great aversion and hatred against all things that betray his weakness and defects, and this being in any thing inferior to others. Hence Anger and sullen discontent, when any thing hap∣pens or is discover'd, which reflects some disgrace and lessens his excellency. Hence a perpetual fear, lest what he undertakes should not succeed to his credit. For in∣deed all men generally seek to be seen and to be commended: even ordinary people in the meanest imployments seek to excell others of the same calling, and to make an ostentation of their skill. Nay the Philo∣sophers themselves affected praise, whilst they spake against it: and they aim'd at glory, writing brave things for the con∣tempt of it. The infection of Pride runs secretly, and is hardly to be discern'd: and when the best of men think to have plucked up by the root that cursed plant
out of their hearts: yet there remain small slips and strings, which will bud forth, though they cannot be found out. We must therefore love and follow the truth, and utterly despise vain shews and false praises: and with a strict observation, and the fear of the just and all-seeing God, we must kill and stifle all proud and vain-glorious thoughts. As smoke rising out of a fur∣nace, becomes a great cloud and darkens the Sun, but being but smoke is soon blown away: so he mounts up aloft, that is high-minded and proud, and diffuseth himself to obscure others, and thereby grows thin and puffed up with wind, and wanting the solidness of vertue, he soon passeth away and comes to nothing. I have seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself like a green bay-tree: yet he passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. Psal. 37.35.
CHAP. XXVIII. Motives and Reasons for Humility. 1. OUR station is very slippery, and the heavy burthen of our corrupt nature doth perpetually weigh us down: so that, without Gods right hand uphold us, we can neither stand, nor yet walk firmly, we are always in danger of falling. If we have not fallen into grievous crimes, 'tis Gods gracious providence hath remov'd the occasions from us: else we too well know by experience, how weak we are in the neighbourhood or under the assaults of a temptation. If any good thing be in us, it is very small and imperfect: and if the least detect can marr the best work, who who then can say he hath ever done any thing altogether good and without any mixture of evil? Who is there indeavours after perfection and is as careful of his Salvation, as are the children of this world for pleasure and riches? And are we not all conscious of many great sins, of the pardon whereof we can hardly be certain, because that depends upon our Repen∣tance,
which still remains many ways im∣perfect? Nay, if we were sure of the par∣don of what is past, yet have we not rea∣son to fear for the future, lest we fall and perish. 2. Whoever shall duly consider all this, how little is our vertue and our assurance, how great our danger and frailty, will hardly pride or trust himself in any thing: but will find much cause to tremble, and trembling to acknowledge that he is no∣thing, and of himself can do nothing. As when the Sun goes away, the Air imme∣diately becomes dark: so doth the Soul grow blind and impotent, as soon as God withdraws his light and gracious assistance. He that rightly understands this truth, can∣not but desire, it may be known to others also: and he that acknowledgeth from his heart, that he deserves nothing but shame and confusion, cannot refuse to bear con∣tempt, without opposing the known truth. Truth and humility are inseparable: and he therefore is always most humble, that is best acquainted with the truth. 3. It were an easie thing for a man to rise again after he is fallen, if he would soon repair to the spiritual Physician, and from him receive help and directions: but whilst men are possest with a spirit of pride, that they will not see their distem∣per, or they fancy they can cure it them∣selves,
they remain for the most part where they fall, and wallow in the mire till they die: and that because they would not flee to God for succor, and use those means which he hath appointed; but they count the prescriptions of the Physician worse than the disease, flattering themselves they should do well enough, and by their own applications making the evil despe∣rate. For no man is more unhappy and sure to perish than he who being blind yet fancies he can clearly see: because the con∣ceiting he wants no mans assistance to guide him, is like to fall into every ditch, and into the great Precipice it self. But let a man learn to know himself, according to the old saying, which was said to have come from Heaven, Nosce teipsum, know thy self: for then he shall know that of him∣self he can do nothing but fall and perish; but that in God is his strength and suffici∣ency. Many lie down in their bondage, and faint under the burthen of their sins; because they will not be helpt, and they will not by humble prayer, seek to God for help; and in him trust, of whom the Apo∣stle says, I can do all things through Christ which strengthneth me. Phil. 4.13. 4. To yield and lose heart is despon∣dency: but true humility will raise us up, and make us chearfully undertake and per∣form the most difficult duties: confiding
in his gracious help, who for us became man that he might make us partakers of the Divine Nature. As an Iron red hot, burns by the fire that penetrates its sub∣stance, and not of it self: so a man becomes fervent and inflam'd, not of his dull na∣ture, but by the fire of Divine Charity which God kindles in him: as also when he is said to shine before men, it is by vertue of that divine light of Truth and Wisdome, which God sends in his heart. Man of himself can do nothing; he is but an instrument in Gods hand, from whom he receives power to will and to do; it is God that works all our works in us, as the Scripture saith. For if the Divine Love, and Light, and Wisdom, depart from a man: he presently becomes Dark, Cold, and Unactive, useless as an Instrument without an Artist. Man of himself being nothing, and fit for nothing, must dwell in the sense of his nothingness, as in his Center: for then he is most strong in God, when he is most sensible of his own weakness.
CHAP. XXIX. That the Humble man judgeth himself and not others, with a Character of him. 1. HUmility is a vertue which makes man vile his own eyes, by the knowledge of himself, attain'd by self-examination: for when the book of Con∣science is opened, and our past sinful life search'd into, the Soul must stand as crimi∣nal before her own Tribunal, and there be by her self accused and condemn'd: and happy they that thus judge themselves, for they shall not be judg'd of the Lord. But woe to that Soul which soars high in lofty conceits, and dwells much abroad in vain inquiries: for then she remains unknown to her self, unacquainted with her own misery, and those her errors and failings, she should watch over and amend. Yet this is the case of many, and a sad case it is, to see wretched, ignorant and vicious per∣sons, take no notice of their own follies: but prie into others infirmities, and ob∣serve their least miscarriages: and this
commonly is the imployment of the most loose and negligent; they are the more busie to censure others, that they do not reprove nor correct themselves. But 'tis not so with upright men that indeavour to know themselves, for the greater profici∣ents they are in that knowledge, the more humble they are and concern'd for them∣selves, perceiving their great distance from perfection and true holiness: and finding so much work at home, the less they mind others, except where it is their duty. 2. This is the true discipline of the Saints, to exercise ther zeal against them∣selves, and to bear patiently with the faults of others: for he that cannot bear with the imperfections of others, is himself the most imperfect. As God in Nature produc'd all things out of nothing: so in Grace he produceth all vertues out of a mans hearty perswasion of being nothing, out of the sense of his own sinfulness. That is true vertue that will bear with scorns, contempt, and injuries: being grounded upon humi∣lity: but if this fails, vertue is but Hypo∣crisie, a vain oftentation, and an empty name. He gathers dust before the wind, that is not humble, and yet would be vertuous. 3. But he is to be counted truly humble, who is more lowly than the lowest condi∣tion, and higher than the highest: who is
not lift up with honours, nor swelled with the wind of mens applauses: and who is never so much afflicted and disgrac'd, but he is perswaded he deserves much worse. He is truly humble who is willing to be vile in the eyes of others, as he ever is in his own: who if he hath advanc'd an untruth is not asham'd to retract it: and to ask par∣don of others, if by surprize or any other way, he hath offended them in word or deed; this is known to good men to be a great self-denyal. He is truly humble that is careful to do nothing for which he may justly be despised, and yet he is content to be so: and meekly bears with reproches, grieving for the offence to God, but re∣joycing in his own abasement. He whose most innocent actions are misunderstood and misreported, who is disappointed of his due reward, and requited evil for good, and yet is patient and contented, makes it appear that he neither values himself nor his best actions. The humble man is silent of himself and dead to the world: and when he is forsaken and per∣secuted, yet in God he finds refuge and comfort. He is decently courteous and obliging to all persons, even to them that are his inferiors. He compares what is na∣tural to him, to the gifts of God in others, his imperfections to their vertues: and so entertains always mean thoughts
of himself, and is content to have others prefer'd before him, and to sit low and be conceal'd in his humility. I might add that humility will make a man obedient to his superiors, meek and peaceable under Government, and always ready to believe better of the goodness and wisdome of his Rulers than of his own: but these must suffice. 4. This is a rude draught and but an imperfect Image of that lovely creature called an Humble Christian: whereby yet a man may discern how unlike he must be to the original, that comes not near to the copy. That is, how far he is from being master of that blessed vertue, which Christ our Blessed Lord, did so much recommend to his followers, by his lowest and wonder∣ful humiliation. In the exercise of humi∣lity there is no danger of excess; we can never be too humble: but we may easily not be humble enough, here the danger is great, as the crime also. As he that would come in at a door which is low of entrance, if he bows himself more than needs, there is no harm done; but if he comes too up∣right and never so little too high, he must bruise his head, if not break his skull: so the lowest humility will never hurt the Soul, but the least Pride may destroy it. Let a Christian therefore to avoid this danger, not onely not exalt himself, but
even not equal himself to others. For in so doing he shall best imitate the Blessed Jesus, who being Son of God, yet took on him the form of a servant, that be might shew to us the true form of humility. CHAP. XXX. Of the Conformity of our Will to Gods. 1. WE can offer to God nothing more pleasing, no victim better and more acceptable, than our own will; in∣tirely to resign that to God, and desire that in all things it may be subject and con∣formable to his blessed will, is that living and holy sacrifice wherein God delights, which none but a Pious man can offer, and which is the highest act of Religion we can perform on Earth. For in this submit∣ting and conforming our will to the Divine pleasure, we offer not to God any one par∣ticular thing alone: but our whole selves, Body and Soul, and all that we have without any reservation. Therefore we should make that our daily study; thus to deny and forsake our selves, to empty our hearts of all self-desires and self-affections, that even here, God may be all in all in us, and we may be wholly
devoted to him; prepared and willing to be in all things disposed of by him, ac∣cording as he shall think good. For God will not work in us his good and acceptable will, if we have a will of our own, distinct from, and contrary to his; he requires the whole heart, and he that gives less, gives nothing. It may be allowed indeed to human frailty, that we should wish and will after the manner of men: but then we must soon recollect our selves, and lifting up our heart to God, lay our will in the dust, that we may acquiesce in him, and cleave to him, who being the Sovereign hath absolute dominion over all. He is the Creator, we are his Creatures; he is the Lord, we are all his Servants; he is Om∣nipotent, we are weak and infirm: we must therefore restrain our own, and give up our selves wholly to his Blessed will, saying in all contingencies, Not as I will, O Lord, but as thou wilt. 2. Thus Prayed our Blessed Redeemer, when he acted for us, and suffered in our stead: not that he whose Godhead is one with the Father, could will any thing con∣trary to him: but to teach us how to be∣have our selves, in resigning all our desires to God. Therefore he also taught us to make it our daily Prayer, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; that as the Angels are always ready to fulfil God's will,
we may be so likewise; in all things de∣sirous to be obedient to his laws and dis∣pensations; That that unhappy fight and contention may be taken away, of which the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. That so God's will may be obeyed by the whole Man, Body, Soul, and Spirit, without any opposition or reluctancy: and Nature may be governed by Grace, and Human affections be changed into Holy Charity: for this is the will of God, even our Sanctification. There is one onely God, and he that cleaves to him, is one with him in Spirit and in Will, and cannot but be Holy and Happy. 3. There is not a more excellent duty than to receive whatever happens as coming from Gods hand, with a quiet and a contented mind: casting all our care upon him, for he careth for us, 1 Pet. 5.6. There is no true evil, but the evil of sin; all other things so counted, do proceed from God; Prosperity and Adversity, Life and Death, Po∣verty and Riches come of the Lord, saith the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 11.14. Therefore God saith by his Prophet, Isa. 45.7. I form the Light and create Darkness; I make Peace and create Evil; I the Lord do all these things. Whereas therefore all things, even those that seem to be most accidental, depend upon Gods most wise determinations and
secret counsels, we must submit our selves to his most gracious Providence, and in∣terpret the most afflictive events as signs of his care and good will for us: casting our selves into the arms of his infinite mercies, and suffering him to fit us for him∣self, by what means he pleaseth. 4. Slanders, Treacheries, Oppressions, Losses, Rapes, Thefts, Sicknesses, Plagues, Famines, and all other calamities publick or private, they are all sent and appointed by God, for to punish or reclaim wicked men, or else to exercise and perfect the Righteous: therefore under the sense or apprehension of any of these, let a Chri∣stian humble himself and worship, and say with patient Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord. Masters commit their work and their affairs to trusty servants, and yet acquaint them not with their secret in∣tents and all the train of their designs: so should we like faithful and humble servants, yield to God chearfully an active or pas∣sive obedience, in all things: unconcern'd for the final event, how in any particulars God will dispose of us or of others; taking that to our selves which our Blessed Lord told St. Peter once, What is that to thee? follow thou me; follow me, whatever hap∣pens, and mind nothing else. If thou art entred upon a good design, some profi∣table undertaking, and canst not go on
with it by reason of sickness or some other hindrance which thou canst not help, grieve not and be not dejected, for God knows what is best for thee; follow him wheresoever he calls. Thus if we would meekly entertain Gods will and be guided by it, Peace and Tranquillity would dwell in our hearts, and perturbations could have no access to the place wherein God dwells and reigns. CHAP. XXXI. Of the Resignation of our selves to God in all things. 1. 'TIS good to wish that God would afflict us, and that we may suffer for him and from him: but 'tis yet better to be wholly devoted to him, so as to follow without anxiousness or reluctancy, whither∣soever he is pleased to lead. Natural life shews it self by the acts of sense and mo∣tion; Spiritual life, by the cessation of those acts: when we no longer live our selves, but Christ lives in us. For he that truly forsakes himself, and transfers the motions of his mind, and the liberty of his will to God, lives here as a new born In∣fant, without choise or desires of his own;
having wholly permitted himself to the Di∣vine guidance, he is free from himself, and lives the life of Grace. In all cross acci∣dents, he looks and rests upon Providence, and of all the World calls nothing his own: because he himself is not his own, but Gods, in whose hand he is as an instrument, to be done with and put to such use as the Master shall please. He is not curious and inquistive after Divine secret Counsels, but he adores them, and believes them to be always just and equitable: and therefore in what matter, and for what cause soever God is pleased to determine any thing, he assents, and yields, and thinks it best. 2. He depends upon God for all the concerns of Nature, of Grace and Glory: and divesting himself of his own liberty, he chuseth Gods will and makes it his own. And whereas by natural corruption man hath too much complacency in himself, and delights in the best acts of his will, rather as his own, than as good, whence pro∣ceed many troubles: he that hath parted with his own will, to make it one with Gods, suffers no grief in himself nor any creature, but always rejoyceth in his acquiescence to the Divine pleasure. At best, if natural affections cannot be quite subdued, yet this prevails; and the man easily overcomes his sorrows, and finds in God peace and satisfaction. None can resist
the Almighty, he doth whatsoever pleaseth him, and his will must absolutely take place in all things: therefore better it is willingly to follow than be drag'd: better it is to comply with, than to be forc'd by it. 3. Our content and tranquillity consists in our meek subjection to the will of God. And even if we have fallen into great and mischievous sins, though we are seriously to repent, to chastise and afflict our selves: yet we must not give way to di∣stracting perturbations, and a tedious and confused spirit: but rather we must humbly implore the Divine mercy which permit∣ted us to fall, that we might not be high-minded but fear, and be sensible of our own frailty in our fall, and of the Divine Grace, when we rise up again and stand: we must patiently wait upon God, and beg for Pardon and the return of his fa∣vour, with a contrite heart: and without impatience or amazement, make it our diligent study and indeavour to mortifie our sins and amend our lives. A faithful and wise servant under God, seeks and desires no∣thing but that his Lords commands may be fulfilled: he will always be disposed to say from his heart, Thy will be done, I am ready to do and suffer thy pleasure: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Mat. 11.26. Wilt thou grant me health and plenty, and inward peace and joy:
or wilt thou have me be poor and sickly, and to live in mournful sadness and spiri∣tual driness: thy will be done, do with me what thou pleasest, for I am wholly thine. 4. This preparedness of mind and in∣differency to all things that God shall please to send, will free a man from all anxious troubles and fears, and from being cast down; nay, will make him undaunted, always peaceable or always victorious in all adversities. We are forbidden by our Saviour Christ to be solicitous about food and raiment, how much more about super∣fluous things, which minister only to vani∣ty. We must do our duty and leave all to God, and rest our selves upon his gracious and Almighty will: for even the peace of the Soul is lost if it be sought too anxiously. Too much care and inquisitiveness after things to come, betray a timerous and unsettled mind, not yet resign'd to God, and are the effects of self-love afraid to suffer any thing. God who sees all things from above, knows what is best for every man; and he sweetly and powerfully disposing all things, takes a special care of that man, that depends and relies upon him.
CHAP. XXXII. That the Hope of our Salvation must rest upon God. 1. A Man guided by the Christian wis∣dom, will not only, as the Gospel commands, leave all temporal things to Gods disposal, taking no thought for the morrow: but also commit his Soul and Salvation to him, who never faileth them that trust in him. In this hope, and in conforming his will to Gods will, he will work out his Salvation; admiring and re∣conciling together the Divine Justice and Mercy: and yet not seeking to enter into the deep abyss of Gods secret judgments and decrees; a bold presumption which belongs to none but to wicked impenitents, whose desperate Lives make their Souls desperate, because they will not leave their sins and return to God. 'Tis true indeed that no man without a special Revelation, can have a special assurance of his Salva∣tion: but we have that which is as good to secure us against despair, and to ground an holy and comfortable hope upon. That
we are redeemed by the Bloud of Christ, and devoted to him in Holy Baptism, and that God is our confidence and refuge: always ready to help them that call upon him, and to forgive them that beg for pardon, with tears and contrition, and a serious purpose of amendment. And many more great and precious assurances we have that God hath given us eternal life, and that this life is in his Son; so that all his Provi∣dences are to fit us for it, if we do not wilfully frustrate all his saving methods and purposes: Only he would have our Electi∣on to be hid and secret, that security may not breed in us pride and negligence, and that he that thinketh he standeth should take heed lest he fall. 2. Now therefore, because the chosen are few, let every true Christian live a Holy Life with the few, that he may make his Calling and Election sure, and be counted worthy at last to receive the Crown of Life with the few. Streight is the way and narrow is the gate that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it, saith our Blessed Sa∣viour, Mat. 7.13. Therefore we must walk in that narrow way, and that always with care and fear, even when we seem to run with most speed, because no man in respect of himself is absolutely sure of per∣severance. Yet our fear must not proceed so far as to make us faint, but only to
make us wary, and make us put our trust and confidence in God, and with a chear∣ful submission cast our selves upon him, both for time and eternity. If any one objects that he knows not how Gods will is affected towards him; I answer that Gods promises are sincere, and must be received as they are generally set forth in Holy Scripture, to all that will obey Gods revealed will: and moreover that his own will is much more uncertain, so that it is much more safe to trust Gods, for God we are certain is infinitely good. He is extreme∣ly proud and unhappy withal that relies on him∣self more than upon God: but happy is he that confides in that gracious Lord whose mercies and promises are sure for ever, and in whom whosoever trusted was never confounded. CHAP. XXXIII. That Love is the Spirit of Christian Re∣ligion. 1. THough it be by vertue of our Bap∣tism and profession of the Christian Faith, that we are, and are called Christi∣ans, yet the Life or Soul of our Religion is Charity or the Love of God, whereby we
are enabled to live godly, as becomes Christians. For as God, by his great love wherewith he loved us, sent his dear Son into the world, to die for us, that we might live through him: so are we to love God most affectionately, with all our heart and strength, and our Neighbour as our selves, for his sake. In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Love therefore is the first and great Com∣mandment on which depends the Law and the Prophets. Love is the foundation and excellency of our Faith, to know the love of God which passeth knowledge, that when we were enemies we were recon∣ciled to him by the death of his Son. Love is that fire which our Blessed Redeemer came to send in the Earth, Luke 12.49. which cost him much to kindle, and which burns up mens dross and impurities, and cannot be put out but where iniquity doth abound. And Love is the spirit of Primi∣tive Christians, who had one heart and one mind: and is even the Soul of the whole Church, whereby it is united and lives. 2. Christ left and appointed Love as the mark whereby his followers should be known, Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another. And so in the love of God consists our union with him, and it is the highest perfection
of the Christian life. Now perfection is the work of Grace; therefore we must not relie upon our own strength, but we must beg of God daily and devoutly that by his good Spirit, he would kindle in our hearts the fire of an holy Charity, that by it we may be guided, quickned, and at last per∣fected. Neither yet must we lose heart, if we sometimes fall, as if all our hope were in our own strength: but we must acknow∣ledge our own infirmity, and rise quickly, and pray more fervently, and afterwards fight more couragiously. Still pursuing after perfection, not only in words or ineffective wishes, but in hearty desires and serious indeavours: manifesting our love by daily mortifying our sins, and at∣taining to new and higher degrees of vertue. And then shall a Christian be most, perfect and happy, when his heart shall be empty of himself, and free from the love of the world, but purified and burning with the love of God.
CHAP. XXXIV. Of the right Placing and Ordering of Love. 1. HE is a just and holy man who rightly values things according to their worth, and also loves them propor∣tionably; for sin is duly by wise men de∣fin'd to be a disorderly Love, and vertue to be a regular and well placed Love. And though there be other natural affections, yet they all proceed from and depend upon love, and if this be well placed and governed as it should, the rest cannot be unruly. It is vertue to love what deserves to be lov'd: and wisdome to make choise of it, and constancy to pursue it through all dangers and sufferings: and to be drawn from it by no inticements, is temperance: and to prefer nothing to it is justice: and the order of Love must follow the order of things: and so God is to be lov'd infi∣nitely more than any creature, because he is infinitely better, more perfect and lovely. We become good and pure, by loving him who is the fountain of all goodness
and purity: for our manners follow our affections; we become either vertuous or vicious according to the nature of what we most love. 2. The true object of Love is God, our Neighbour and our selves. God in the first place to whom all love is due, and from whom it must pass to other creatures, ac∣cording as they are more or less like him. By this, we must love our Neighbour be∣cause he is, or that he may be just: and we must love our selves, in that we are, or else that we may be holy: taking from God the measure of our Love to all other things, that our Love may be regular and we may be happy. Let no man therefore love sin, for thereby he hates and destroys his Soul: and let no man love himself for his own sake, but upon Gods account, who is the chiefest Good, in whom alone we can be intirely happy. For God who alone is the Author of our being and well-being, hath set these bounds to our affections, that we should love him with all our heart and with all our Soul; that we should conse∣crate to the service of that Love, our under∣standing, our life, and all our powers; and that if we love any thing else, it be in refe∣rence and in subordination to him that deserves all our Love, and should be the master and disposer of it. The love of God must therefore lead the way to what else we
should love; it must always prevail and be the rule of all our affections, and then we cannot love nor do amiss. CHAP. XXXV. Of the Necessity and Measures of Loving our Neighbour. 1. WE cannot love God as we should, without we love our Neighbour, neither can we love our Neighbour except we love God. If any man saith, I love God and hateth his Brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his Brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? and this commandment have we from him, that he who loveth God, loveth his Brother also, 1 Joh. 4.20. The Commandment makes no exception; though the man be poor, though he be a stranger, nay, though he be vicious and thine enemy, yet he is thy Neighbour and thy Brother, and he must be lov'd. The expressions of thy love may vary according to his needs and thine op∣portunities. Yet they must be hearty, real, and effective: for, The End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good Conscience and of Faith un∣fained,
1 Tim. 1.5. And we must not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth, 1 Joh. 3.18. 2. As Christ loved us and gave himself for us, not that we deserv'd any love, but because he lov'd God, and us in God, to whom he purchast us; so must we love all men, not for ours or their sakes, but for God's sake, having no further regard to what is good in them, than only as it re∣lates to God. True Christians are so strictly united together by love, that what one hath not in himself, he with joy finds it in others, and what one hath more than the rest, he willingly imparts it to all. As by our love to God, we are united and in some manner become one spirit with him: so by the mutual love of men, of Christi∣ans especially, they become one among themselves, so that what one hath to him∣self, is for the good of all, and what one hath not in himself, he hath and enjoys in others. Thus love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the fulfilling of all Righteousness. According as is the mans Charity, in the be∣ginning, progress, or perfection, so is his good∣ness and his righteousness: and then most perfect in this life, when even life it self is parted with for love. 3. The modus or measure of love to our Neighbour is twofold, positive and nega∣tive. First, To do to him as we would he
should do to us. Secondly, And not to deal with him any otherwise, than as we would he should deal with us. Every one therefore, in the sight of God to whom all things are known, must consider seriously what he would others should do, or not do to him: and if he desires others should he patient towards him, and bear with his faults and infirmities, and speak well of him, &c. Then let him be careful to do so to others. 'Tis a sure indication of a perverse heart for a man in a private capacity, to do that to another, which he should be sorry to suffer himself. A good Christian doth not inquire into the manners and faults of others, but leaves them to his view and cor∣rection to whom all judgment is given. He examines, judgeth, and punisheth him∣self, and makes self-reformation his serious and constant business. Whatever he sees or hears his mind is undisturb'd and abides in peace: for if it be good, he praiseth God, if evil, he turns it to good, by turning his mind from it towards God in Prayers and Resignation. 4. If his Office and Charity obligeth him to reprove and to correct others, he doth it with a zeal sweet and benign, and compassionate to his Brothers infirmity: for roughness and ungovern'd passion can∣not consist with Charity. If the ill actions of others are capable of an excuse, he ex∣cuseth
them; however he censures not: knowing that nothing human is so perfect and holy, but may be ill interpreted, and at the best may be some way defectuous enough, to be liable to reprehension, if car∣ping men let loose their censorious humors. Whilst men are men, they will have some imperfections, and to be zealous against them, is under pretence of preciseness, to give way to peevish impatience or proud censoriousness. He that is too busie to tax and judge others, will never grow better him∣self. CHAP. XXXVI. True Friendship and the true Offices of it. 1. FRiendship is the communion of good things, and therefore it follows the nature of those things which friends have common. Now there being nothing truly good, but things supernatural and eternal, true friendship must consist in the commu∣nication of these mutually. Hence it is that carnal friendship is soon dissolved, because things of sense cannot last, nor always con∣fine the spirit: whereas spiritual friend∣ship
is never broken; for though it may seem to be interrupted by little angers and contentions, yet true piety and the love of God sweetens the harshness of them, and keeps the knot indissoluble. As for that friendship which too much sets our hearts upon any person, and may be called Doting, it should be stifled and avoided, as being mischievous, and it is to be known by these tokens; when the party belov'd is always in our thoughts and we can never be well without him; when we fear his displeasure above all things, when in him we rest as in our center, and we sacrifice to him all our actions and most important concerns. And let none flatter themselves that this is pure innocent friendship, with∣out any self-interest: for it is altogether sensual, it depraves the heart and affecti∣ons, it is an enemy to all wisdom and true Religion, and it begins and ends in the flesh; and 'tis to be observ'd, that this kind of friendship is never betwixt persons truly good and vertuous. 2. Men of real worth are always well composed, grave, and of a sweet deport∣ment; they are courteous to all, but they are familiar to few, and they flatter none: in their conversation, modesty, discretion, an exact justice, and an unaffected severi∣ty is to be observed. They seek not to make a shew outwardly, their life is inward and
secret, they live to God and to their own conscience. They fairly converse with men outwardly, when it is fitting: but their heart cleaves to God, and they will not disturb themselves with the silly im∣pertinencies or petty concerns of the world: Their designs and affections differ much from the vulgar multitude, and there∣fore their words and actions are guided with greater and more divine wisdome, they proceed from a higher principle, and they tend to an end much more excellent. Their soul and conversation, their treasure and joys are all in Heaven, and if thither they draw not others after them, 'tis be∣cause health propagates not it self as di∣stempers do. Mans nature is corrupt, and now infections are catching, but cures are difficult. 3. Men are sociable by nature, and by a certain instinct they generally seek to please others, and to be loved by them: but that friendship which they so much in∣deavour after, will never be sincere nor lasting, except their souls meet and are joyn'd in the love of God. That friendship which consists only in the reciprocation of civil offices, is but a kind of a traffick, and it abides no longer than whilst men can be useful one to another. That courteousness and obligingness which friends so strictly exact one of another, is but a vain deceit
or pastime, or at the best a game at words: and many that play best at it and with most readiness, are they that cheat you most; they talk and promise gracefully and at a high rate, but these are but wind and come to nothing, when realities are wanting, and effects be required. Whereas if God were possest of mens hearts by Holy Charity, he would make their love to their Neighbours hearty and sincere; there would be no contentions, no envies, no discords be∣twixt them; they would dwell in peace and a happy union together, every one not following his own will and desires: but all conspiring together in the will of God and his good pleasure. 4. Self-love and self-interest are the spring of all divisions, for men therefore esteem not their Neighbours nor seek their advantage, except it be for some ends of their own. Let a man be a great Philoso∣pher or a great Mathematician, very Learned or very Religious, few care for that, and few love him therefore: but if he be Rich and Prodigal withal, multitudes worship him and run after him. Vertue and Learning are valued by few, but many love and admire the money, and thence many wars and enmities, and many Law-suits do proceed. Man commonly loves not himself, because he is partaker with others of humanity, but for some things
which he fancies peculiar to himself: there∣fore he lives not as he should to the com∣munity, loving others, especially Christi∣ans, for what they have common with him: but by his imaginary particular ex∣cellencies he separates himself from the rest of mankind, and upon that account cherisheth himself, and cares for none else but for his own sake, This well con∣sidered will make a wise man despise much the friendship of the men of this world. He will not purposely do any thing to get their hatred, but yet he will not much value their good words, and their fine pre∣tences. Privacy and silence will be pleasant to him, and his delight will be in conversing with God, in whom alone all joys and all com∣forts are to be found. CHAP. XXXVII. Of the several Acts of Charity to our Neighbours. 1. WE are never without an occasion to shew our love to our Brothers: for so great and various are the miseries of human nature, either corporal or spiritual, that we can hardly look or step, without
finding objects of Charity. Even the best of men want our hearty Prayers that they may persevere: for such is our weakness, and such the strength of our enemies, that no man can be secure in this world: and many strong ones have been known fall suddenly and irrecoverably at the assault of an ordinary and often baffled temptation. And how much want they our assistance and our prayers, that are fast tyed with the bonds of their sins, that they may not perish in their dungeon and unhappy slavery. This is the case of all Infidels and Hereticks, besides many vicious Christians, who all together croud in the broad way to destruction, and heedlesly go down to Hell. 2. Bodily miseries also are frequently to be met with, and are altogether past num∣ber. Many are afflicted with hunger, thirst and nakedness, with debts and law∣suits, and natural infirmities: Many are persecuted and opprest, reviled and slan∣dered, imprison'd and begger'd, and per∣petually vext and distracted. And many struggle with the terrors of a guilty con∣science, and the fear and approaches of death, and the amazements of that last moment, on which depends Eternity. To all these our pitty and charity is to be extended, as God shall enable us; by alms, by counsel or comfort, by prayers,
and by any means that are in our power. Christ accepts as done to himself, what good we do for his sake to the afflicted: and in the great day of recompences, he will bountifully reward Charity. CHAP. XXXVIII. Charity is also due to our Enemies. 1. TO love our Enemies is the highest and most divine vertue, and the sum of Christian perfection, which our Bles∣sed Saviour most earnestly recommends, and absolutely enjoyns to all his Disciples, saying, Mat. 6.44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you: that you may be the children of your Father which is in Heaven, for he maketh his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. This Law is hard to flesh and bloud, therefore the Law-giver raiseth his subjects minds above all things earthly and natural, even to the highest glory and priviledges of Heaven. That ye may be (saith he) the children of your Father which is in Heaven: that despising our first
carnal birth, we may live according to this second, whereof the honours and advan∣tages in Christ, are so much above all we could hope from Adam. Enough certainly to make us chearfully comply with our duty, in this particular; not only to love but also to do good to our enemies, to speak well of them, and to pray for them. And yet we are bound to this also by our greatest interest, for except we thus forgive, and requite good for evil, our heavenly father will not forgive us our sins, nor receive us into favour again, as our Blessed Saviour plainly asserts, Mat. 6.15. and 18.35. 2. Saint Paul likewise exhorts us, Rom. 12.20. If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink. And, Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Men may be too strong for us, that we cannot help: but we cannot be overcome of evil, except we please our selves. For to be overcome, is to hate them that do evil to us, and to seek to revenge it upon them, and 'tis in our power to do otherwise if we will; we may overcome evil with good, in pitying and forgiving those that hate and injure us, and doing good to them, when we have occasion. But this is better understood and perswaded by Holy Charity, than by all argumentations and learned discourses: Wee need not fear therefore the evils men can do to us, but those we do against
our selves by an angry, impatient, and re∣vengeful Spirit. Let us but pray and labour for Christian Charity, and it will make us invincible, it will make us conquer and overcome all wrongs and afflictions. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the flouds drown it. Cant. 8.7. The waters of Calamities and Persecutions, cannot put out that bright and ever-burning flame, kindled by God in pious hearts. CHAP. XXXIX. That the love of the Supreme Good, com∣prehends all goodness. 1. GOD is our true and sovereign good, him we must love with all our soul and strength, and to him we must di∣rect all our ways. For the love of God comprehends all vertue and godliness; it is temperance, whereby we despise the pride and delights of the World, that God may have our whole hearts to himself; it is constancy, whereby we patiently bear any cross for and from God; It is justice, whereby we serve and obey God alone, and with due moderation command his creatures; it is prudence and the highest
wisdom, whereby we diligently avoid the obstacles, and use the means to come to God; it is all that can make us good, and make us happy. Now God must be lov'd for himself, for nothing can be better than God; he is infinitely good, and the be∣ginning and end of all goodness. There∣fore other things must be lov'd only for his sake, and in such proportion as they are more or less related to him: but he must be lov'd on his own account, as much as is possible, without bounds or measures, for his perfections are vast enough to swallow up all our affections, nay, they infinitely exceed them: so that nothing must share our love with him, it is all infinitely more than due to him. 2. It much concerns us therefore to be very careful, that those lower sensible goods wherewith we converse in this Earth, do not steal our hearts from God the giver of them. For though we set the greater value upon things Spiritual and Eternal, yet because now they are out of our sight and we cannot reach them, our affections to them are dull and heavy, and must be forc'd and listed up: whereas they are brisk and swift to such things as are the object of sense, and we naturally fall down to our sensual nature, and without great care we cannot avoid to be by it cheated into self-love. If we would therefore be
replenish'd with the Holy and Beatifying Love of God, we must first cast the World out of our hearts: for as a full vessel cannot receive better liquor, except it be emptied, no more can our hearts love the Creator, if they are possest by creatures. Therefore saith Saint John, the beloved Apostle of Jesus, Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world, for if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 Joh. 2.15. Worldly things are made for our use, and there is in them some beauty: but how much more beautiful is he that made them, and made us for the enjoy∣ment of himself. He that seeks for happiness out of God, shall never find it: but if we love him above all things, then we are cer∣tainly happy, for he also loves us, and his favour is all.
CHAP. XL. Wherein consists the Love of God. 1. IT consists chiefly in joyfully suffering for God: for Love is a passion, and he therefore loves most that is most pati∣ent: as the Blessed Apostles returned from the Council rejoycing that they had been worthy to suffer shame and stripes for the name of Jesus. There may be much of nature in that tenderness of devout affection, and those tears that proceed from it, which are observ'd in some: but true vertues and solid joys do proceed from a Love practical and obediential. For he that truly loves, obeys in all things cheer∣fully, for savour not for fear: and if any burthen unpleasant to the flesh be laid upon him, Love makes it light and acceptable too: Therefore the Scripture saith that Gods Commandments are not grievous, to let us know we are not yet perfect in Love, when we find them grievous and difficult, and that we should pray and la∣bour for an increase of Charity. The keep∣ing of Gods Commandments is doubtless very hard to them that are acted by fear,
but Perfect Love casteth out Fear: and as it fulfills the Law, so it makes it easie and delightful to us. For there is no trouble nor difficulty, in that service which Love obligeth to, what duties it binds on a good servant, are ever thought pleasant, and readily discharg'd: whereas the same im∣posed by fear, will make subjection grie∣vous, and obedience to be cavill'd at, and by some means eluded. 2. By this they are convinc'd to want the Love of God, who complain of the strictness of Gospel-precept, and count morality a needless burthen, and by pre∣tences and objections, seek to loosen the yoke, that they may shake it off. Such are they that have itching ears, and heap to themselves teachers after their own heart, such as may more comply with their humor, and inlarge their wanton liberty, by restraining Gods Laws and the injuncti∣ons of his Church. For men now adays will not be held in by duty, but will range according to their will; they have dispu∣ted themselves out of meekness and Cha∣rity: and now that their actions are not govern'd by plain precepts, but by opini∣ons and parties, they may be warranted to do, in a manner whatever they lust. But alass, before Christs dreadful Tribunal, we shall not he judged by vulgar opinions, nor by the exceptions of contentious men, but
by truth and by divine Laws. There mens fancies and relaxations, and the doctrine of probability, as some do teach it, will be found to hare been only pernicious cheats, whereby men sought to warrant their loose∣ness and disobedience. 3. But these things are not weighed nor understood, but by them that sincerely love God, and are therefore ready always to obey him, in all things he requires. For 'tis by Love that the Soul gives up her self to God, and by cleaving to him, be∣comes one will and one spirit with him: for God is Love, saith the Scripture, and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him, 1 Joh. 4.16. And from this union flows an holy peace, and a delicious joy: when by love we are subject to our Beloved, and are possest of him, in whom and by whom are all things, and who is the foun∣tain of all happiness, and the satisfaction of all our desires. Now by this shall a man know whether he truly loves God, and adheres to him, if God be the last end of all his purposes and actions, if his thoughts and desires always run after him, and if above all things he seeks to please and to obtain him.
CHAP. XLI. That there is more of Love in Practical Knowledge than in Speculation. 1. TO desire knowledge is natural to man, and still the more he knows, the more that desire increaseth, and then he rejoyceth in himself, and is much de∣lighted with his great learning, when he thinks he knows much, and hath a great insight into the profoundest of divine mysteries, and so he comes to love his knowledge more than God the object of it. Thus the Philosophers, as St. Paul reproves them, when they knew God, yet they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations: much admi∣ring themselves and their discoveries. And thus also many Christians value more what they know, and what they can discourse of God and Religion, that they value both him and it. They speak great things of the love of Christ, and they love themselves for so speaking. In that knowledge they have of God, as in a mirror, they view themselves especially, and take little notice of the glass; they admire the vision, their
own act, more than the object which is seen. But God must be lov'd and worshipt in spirit and in truth, in singleness and simplicity, without any respect to our selves. 2. As a Country-man plain and un∣learned, who daily sees the Sun, is more in love with the light of it, than a blind Philo∣sopher who can talk many things con∣cerning the nature, and the causes and effects of light: so an honest pious man without Scholarship, by an active practical Faith, shews more love to God, than the profound Divine, by his subtleties and high speculations. And as a learned man in Northern Countries, where no Vines can grow, may learnedly discourse of their fruit and the properties of it, and yet not have such an intimate acquaintance with the nature and strength of the wine, as the plain vine-dresser that drinks it daily: so may a Religious illiterate man have a greater insight into divine mysteries, and a more relishing apprehension of them, than many a man of great fame and learning. For experience goes beyond all theory, and love passeth knowledge, and we much sooner come to God by affection, than by studious inquiries. 3. We must not only therefore inform our understanding: but if we desire to love God fervently, we must ingage our
affections and give our selves to Prayer. Proficiency in goodness will make us know more of God, and to better purpose, than proficiency in knowledge. Goodness will make us love, and love will bring us into Gods secret place, where we shall see more, and with more delight, than all notional learning can shew us. What we can know of God in this our exile, is but little: but we may love him as much as we will, he grants us that power; and as our love in∣creaseth, our labour will grow less, and our obedience more perfect. But many had rather seek God, whom they never find: than love, and thereby enjoy him. CHAP. XLII. That by Love Holiness is to be per∣fected. 1. IT is a commandment of God, both in the Law and the Gospel, be ye Holy, for I am Holy. That is, that we should be pure, and without the unclean mixture of the creatures. For as Lead in Silver, and dirt upon white robes, will debase and stain: so if we ingage our Souls to the
world, to things beneath them, we make them vile and unclean, whereas if we list them up to God by a hearty love, we make them pure and beautiful. A heart whence all sensual and earthly things are excluded, and whose affections cleave to God, by the unions of love, may with joy and confi∣dence say with the Apostle: Who shall se∣parate us from the love of Christ? shall tribu∣lation, or distress, or persecution, or famin, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors, through him that loved us. For I am perswaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Prin∣cipalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God; which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Rom. 8.35. 2. Fasting and Alms, and Corporal Au∣sterities, the use of Sacraments, and all such means, are great helps towards Sanctity; but they all profit nothing without Charity; No, not Martyrdom it self, saith St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.3. The exercise of some other vertues may be sometimes dispenc'd with∣all: as the poor from Alms-giving, and weak and sickly people from fasting, and rigorous discipline: but to love God and our neighbour, which is the end of all other precepts and the fulfilling of the Law, every one is always oblig'd; no man
at no time, can be any ways hindred or excused; obstacles and difficulties may stop the progress of other vertues, but they in∣crease Love. Love is within, in the heart and will, there God hath placed it, there God looks for it, and there nothing can obstruct or stifle it, except we will our selves. Love alone is necessary, and alone sufficient to make us holy. It is the first and great Commandment, pleasant and easie beyond all others: for what more pleasant than to love? and who dares say, I cannot love? 3. He that heartily loves God who is one, loves all things in one, and one in all things: for he loves not God truly, that loves any thing, which he loves not in God and for God. There is nothing above, there is nothing equal to God: and if at any time we turn our affections from him, they fall upon inferior objects, upon earth∣ly things, whose weight doth sink and press them down: and our hearts are never at rest and liberty, till they return to God, from whom they ungratefully departed. That we may therefore be truly sanctified, we must forsake our selves and all created things, and return as high as to that first principle of sanctity, that God from whom we had our origin: and then cleaving stedfastly to him by a devout love, we shall become one with him, in life and holiness, and felicity.
CHAP. XLIII. That the Consideration of the fewness of the Chosen, ought to make us very wary and diligent. 1. NOthing can sooner startle a man out of his slumber and security, and edge him on to amend and order his life by the Gospel Rules, than the due ponder∣ing of the dreadful saying of Christ, Mat. 20.16. That many are called but few are chosen. For no man knows whether he be called by that secret election, which in∣titles him to glory and justification; No man knows either love or hatred, by all that is be∣fore him; all promises for the life to come are conditional, nothing but our sincerity in fulfilling the conditions, can give us any ground of assurance. And yet how de∣fective are we in this? how uncertain is it that we shall persevere? and who can search and see into the deep secret of his Electi∣on? here the Apostle who had been once in Paradise, cryes out and wonders, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and know∣ledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!
Rom. 11.33. In this great danger and uncer∣tainty every Christian ought exceedingly to fear: and with trembling and an assiduous care, indeavour to make his election sure: living in that Faith which worketh by Love, and declaring by his good works, that he is one of that little but blessed number, to whom God will give his Kingdom. 2. Now that that number is but little, compared with the greater multitude of the wicked unhappy world; nay, that the num∣ber of the chosen is but small, even of them that profess the Gospel, and are capable of chusing life or death, we have too many reasons to believe. And our Blessed Sa∣viour intimates so much, when he warns his disciples of the difficulties of coming into that blessed Kingdom of which the entrance is narrow. Mat. 7.13. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. Then he adds, as wondring at this narrowness; be∣cause strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. Being also asked another time, Lord, are there but few that shall be saved? he gives no other answer but this, Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you, will seek to enter in and shall not be able. Luke 13.23. King David also inquiring, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy
holy hill? the holy Spirit suggests this answer, he that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, Psal. 15. And in the twenty fourth Psalm, he questioning again, Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? he is like∣wise answered, He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart, and hath not lift up his Soul unto vanity. Now, who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prov. 20.9. Who can say to David, I shall, for I work righteousness, and I am innocent? 3. Our Blessed Saviour saith, Mat. 10.38. He that taketh not his Cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me. Now where are they that thus willingly take their Cross and suffer with Christ? or rather how sadly doth St. Paul's saying fit our Age: All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christs? Phil. 2.21. Our Blessed Redeemer, who alone hath the keys of Heaven, and knows how we must be qualified, before we come thither, affirms, Mat. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and be∣come as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Which saying if compared with the pride of men, it will be found that but a few by meekness and humility, seek to become children, to be heirs of the Heavenly Kingdome. It is declar'd by St. Paul, Rom. 8.29. That those whom God foreknew, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son. But who
is the man can boast that his life is conform to the Life of Christ? and who is he that suffers with Christ, that he may be with him glorified? It is a saying that belongs to all, If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Command∣ments, Mat. 19.17. But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abomi∣nable, there is none that doth good, no, not one, Psal. 14.3. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence (saith the King of Heaven, Mat. 11.12.) and the violent take it by force: Now this violence being against Na∣ture, there are but few that will offer it to themselves, by forgoing any present sen∣sual satisfaction, on the account of that Kingdom which is out of the reach of sense, not now to be enjoyed, but expected only by Faith. If all our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, as the Prophet saith, Isa. 64.6. What are then our sins and iniquities? If the Righteous scarcely shall be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.18. 4. None but eight persons of the old world, were saved with Noah in the Ark; all the rest of mankind perisht in the floud. Lot alone with his wife and two daughters escaped the conflagration of the infamous Cities, all the other Inhabitants were con∣sumed by the revenging flames. And of six hundred thousand Jews that came out of Egypt, two only, Caleb and Joshua, came into the Land of Promise. Now those
things were examples, representations of things to come: denoring that the number of those that come to life, is but small, in respect of the greater number of such as go to perdition. Which is yet further but too evident, by confidering how most men live and die; how few give any certain marks of true contrition. Fear and sorrow extort groans and good words, and death forceth men to recant, and 'tis much to be feared there is seldome any sincerity in a late death-bed repentance. For how can he begin to live well, that is now dying? how can he heartily detest those pleasures of sin, which he loved and enjoyed, as long as he liv'd? how hardly will he now he a true penitent, who before abhorred all the mortifications of true penitence? how will his resolutions be prov'd effectual, if he should esape, for the forsaking those sins, which custom hath made ha∣bitual, and almost a second nature? how shall now his sensual mind lift up it self to those spiritual heavenly things, which he before seldom or never regarded? and how shall he straitned by time and sad circumstances, exercise those vertues con∣trary to the sins he repents of, to make it appear by his life that there is a change in his heart? 5. 'Tis known by experience that very few, when the pains and the danger is over,
stand to those resolves and promises which they made in the day of sorrow. Generally men forget and are asham'd afterwards of what they promised and resolv'd: and they soon return to their customary vices and beloved vanities: Especially because there is still a secret reserve in those resolutions of amendment made in their distress, there being still some hope of an escape, till they are at the worst, and then they are alto∣gether passive, and can act no longer; or at the best their strength and rational fa∣culties are so weakned, there are such anxi∣ous fears and trepidations when the Soul is nigh to depart, that men are almost di∣stracted, and know not what they do. We may hope well of them, who though they liv'd ill, yet gave signs of repentance when they were dying: But this is a desperate venture, there is much of uncertainty, and nothing of safety in their condition. We have a sad example of this in King Antiochus; read Maccab. 9. what vows he made, while he was under his grievous sickness. He thought himself in earnest, no doubt, but God knew the unsincerity of his heart, that his repentance proceeded from the fear of death, and would therefore no more have mercy upon him, as the text affirms. And who can consider all this, and not tremble? who will dare to presume he hath nothing to do, and that his Salvation is
sure? who in the midst of so many and so great dangers, will dwell as in safety, and not watch, and call upon God? therefore because the chosen are few, fewer perhaps than we think, let us not go with the many, nor follow the croud: but let us live with the small select number of truly good and religious Christians, that we may have com∣fort and confidence, when our life is ended; that we may with an humble and well-grounded hope, look up to God, and expect that gracious reward he hath pro∣mised to his faithful servants, to all that sincerely love and obey him. THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Brome. MR. Comber on the Com∣mon-Prayer, in Three Volumes. Dr. Spark's Primitive Devo∣tions on the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England. Bishop Wilkins Natural Reli∣gion. The Fathers Legacy, or Counsels to his Children, being the whole Duty of Man, in three parts, very useful for Families. Christian Education of Chil∣dren.
Cardinal Bona's Guide to Eter∣nity, Extracted out of the Writings of the Holy Fathers and Ancient Philosophers. The Reformed Monastery; or the Love of Jesus. A sure and short but a pleasant and easie way to Heaven. In two Parts. Written Originally in Latin by the same Author. A Guide to Heaven from the World, or good Counsel how to close savingly with Christ. Holy Anthems of the Church. The Brief Rule of Life. The Crums of Comfort. Mr. Farindon-'s Sermons. Several Sermons at Court and at other Places.
A Discourse concerning the Opera∣tions of the Holy Spirit. Toge∣ther with a Confutation of some part of Dr. Owen's Book upon that Subject. A Discourse concerning God's Judgments, Resolving many weighty Questions and Cases relating to them. Preached (for the substance of it) at Old Swinford in Worcester-Shire: And now published to accompany the annexed Nar∣rative concerning the Man whose Hands and Legs lately rotted off: in the neighbouring Parish of Kings-Swinford, in Stafford-Shire; Penned by another Author. By Simon Ford, D. D. and Rector of the said Parish.
Christianity no Enthusiasm: or the Several Kinds of Inspirations and Revelations pretended to by the Quakers, Tried, and found Destructive to Holy Scripture and True Religion: In Answer to Thomas Ellwood's Defence thereof; in his Tract, Miscalled Truth Prevailing, &c. A Narrative of the Principal Actions occurring in the Wars betwixt Sueden and Den∣mark, before and after the Roschild Treaty.
