c2182 12123952 54494
His Majesties DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS Propounded to his Excellence the the Earle of ESSEX; Concerning a Treaty of Peace▪ and a Cessation of Ames, by both Armies. Given at Our Court at Oxford, Decemb. 19. 1642. Also The Earles Answer to the said Propositions. Likewise a True Discovery of the prac∣tizes of the Lord Shandoice, to betray the City of Gloucester, to the Cavaliers. Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that these Particulars be forthwith Printed and publi∣shed. Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parliamentorum. Decemb. 22. Printed for I. H. and William Anderton, 1642.
His Maiesties Declaration and Pro∣positions, to his Excellency the Earle OF ESSEX. CHARLES REX TRusty and well-belo∣ved Councellor WEE greet you well, Where as of late dayes WEE have considered of the present distracti∣ons of this Land, and out of our second and mature thoughts arising out of Our Royall Breast, Wee thought meet to declare Our will and pleasure unto you, that you would forbeare to proceed any further in this de∣structive
VVarre, and, VVe promise on the word of a King, to give you a free pardon for all former Acts, and will no more re∣member any former passages, even from the first begining of this disscention be∣twixt Us and Our Parliament, to the end that a further effusion of blood may be pre∣vented and matters settled, whereby the Kingdome may flourish as it formerly hath done; We likewise desire that certaine grave substantiall persons, may be chosen to reconcile those differences betweene Us, and Our two houses of Parliament; VVE are likewise resolved to appoint some of e∣quall fidellity and understanding to con∣sult with them about the great affaires, and insupportable pressures and grievances of this Kingdome, and what they shall agree upon VVEE are willing to ratifie, and make good, by consenting to all their Acts, con∣sultatons, and determinations, that so this civill Warre which hath bred so great a disturbance in this Our Kingdome, may proceed no further, a pacification being
made on both sides, to the generall con∣tent of Our Person and Posteritie, and all Our loving Subjects. And Wee doe declare this to be Our earnest desire, it being the most ready way to procure the Peace and hapinesse of this Our Kingdome, desiring that all grudges may be removed, and all matters well or∣dered for the good of the Common-wealth, whereupon will follow a cleere understan∣ding between Us and Our People, being combined together in a mutuall League of dearest affection. Given at Our Court at OXFORD, the nineteenth of December, 1642. The Earles answer to the said propositions. MOst grattious Soveveraigne, J humbly tender my service at your Royall feet, being willing to hazard my Life and for∣tunes in the defence of your Majesty, where as you have beene pleased to declare your resolution concerning a Treaty of Peace, so hath it beene my desire ever since the be∣gining of these differences to imbrace the same.
But having such a great trust reposed in me & committed to my charge by both Houses of Parliament, and I cannot con∣ceive but that I am bound in conscience according to the Law of God, to discharge that trust which is reposed in me, by your great and Honourable Councell, being for the defence of your Majesties Person, Gods true Religion, the Priviledges of Parliament, the liberty of the Subject, and the good of the Common-wealth, and if it be the plea∣sure of that great Councell that hath repo∣sed in me, to take the same charge from me againe, and to conferre it upon some other honourable Person, J shall willingly sur∣render up my Commission, and be ready to hazard my life and fortunes in your Maje∣sties Service against any forraigne Enemy. Your Majesties most loy∣all Subject, ESSSEX. Happy Newes from the City of Gloucester WOrthy Sir, J am bold to present you with some remarkeable pas∣sages, being very ob∣servable, which hap∣ened neere Gloucester, on the eighteenth and nineteenth of this instant moneth, the Lord Shandoice, and divers other Cavaliers, having received information of the proceedings of this our County, and that they had di∣vers friends therein, which would be ready to assist them, if they made their approach thereunto, whereupon the aforementioned persons having gathered together a great and mighty strength in other Counties, they ad∣vanced neere to the said City, where they laboured with all the force and strength they could, to possesse themselves of the said County, but he was valliantly opposed, by the Jnhabitants of the said County, who
having notice of his comming, set th men in a faire Battalia, and at his first ap∣proach they gave them such a desperate charge, that the Cavaliers soone retreate but they pursued him very close. by which meanes they tooke him, and caused him to deliver up his Commission, and to subscribe under his hand, that he would never by his owne power or procurement of others, disturbe the Peace of that County, but that he would oppose and hinder it to his power, and that he would maintaine the Priviledges of Parliament, the Law and Li∣berty of the Subject, with his life and for∣tune, all which the said Lord promised to performe. Ordered by the Commons House of Parlia∣ment, that these Particulars be printed and pub∣lished. Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. FINIS.
