C2900 15578673 103868
ARTICLES OF PEACE and COMMERCE, Between The most Serene and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES II. By the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, &c. And the Most Illustrious LORDS THE BASHAW, DAI, AGA And Governours of the Famous City and Kingdom OF Algiers. Concluded by Sir Edw. Spragge Knight, Ad∣miral of His Majesties Fleet in the Medi∣terranean, Novemb. 29. Old Stile, 1671. Published by His Majesties Command. In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill, & Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1671/2.
ARTICLES of PEACE and COMMERCE between the most Serene and Mighty Prince CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of Great Bri∣tain, France, and Ireland, Defen∣der of the Christian Faith, &c. and the most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dai, Aga, and Gover∣nours of the famous City and King∣dom of Algiers. I.IN the first place it is Agreed and Con∣cluded, That from this day and for e∣ver forward, there be a true, firm, and inviolable Peace between the most Serene King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Christian Faith, &c. and the
most Illustrious Lords, the Bashaw, Dai, Aga and Governours of the City and Kingdom of Algiers, and between all the Dominions and Subjects of either Side; and that the Ships, or other Vessels, and the Subjects and People of both Sides shall not henceforth do to each other any harm, offence, or injury, either in word or deed; but shall treat one another with all possible Respect and Friendship. II. That any of the Ships or other Vessels be∣longing to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of His Majesties Subjects, may safely come to the Port of Algiers, or to any other Port, or Place of that Kingdom, there freely to Buy and Sell, paying the usual Customs of Ten per Cent. as in former times for such Goods as they sell; and the Goods they sell not, they shall freely carry on Board, without paying any Duties for the same; and that they shall free∣ly depart from thence whensoever they please, without any stop or hinderance whatsoever. III. That all Ships and other Vessels, as well those belonging to the said King of Great Bri∣tain, or to any of His Majesties Subjects, as
those belonging to the Kingdom or People of Algiers, shall freely pass the Seas, and Traf∣fick without any search, hinderance, or mole∣station from each other; and that all Persons or Passengers of what Countrey soever, and all Moneys, Goods, Merchandises, and Move∣ables to whatsoever People or Nation belong∣ing, being on Board of any of the said Ships or Vessels, shall be wholly free, and shall not be stopped, taken, nor plundered, nor receive any harm or damage whatsoever from either party. IV. That the Algiers Ships of War, or other Vessels meeting with any Merchant-ships or o∣ther vessels of His said Majesties Subjects, not being in any of the Seas appertaining to His Majesties Dominions, may send on Board one single Boat with two Sitters onely, besides the ordinary Crew of Rowers; and that no more shall enter any such Merchant-ship or Vessel without express leave from the Commander thereof, but the two Sitters alone; and that upon producing to them a Pass under the Hand and Seal of the Lord High-admiral of England, the said Boat shall presently depart, & the Mer∣chant-ship or Vessel shall proceed freely on her voyage.
And although the said Commander of the Merchant-ship or Vessel, produce no Pass from the Lord High-admiral of England; yet if the major part of the Seamen of the said Ship or Vessel, be Subjects to the said King of Great Britain, the said Boat shall presently depart; and the said Merchant-ship or Vessel shall pro∣ceed freely on her voyage: And any of the Ships of War, or other Vessels of His said Majesty meeting with any Ships, or other Vessels of Algiers, if the Commander of any such Algier Ship or Vessel shall produce a Pass firmed by the chief Governours of Algiers, and a Certificate from the English Consul li∣ving there; or if they have no such Pass or Certificate, yet if the major part of their Ships Company be Turks, Moors, or Slaves belonging to Algiers, then the said Algier Ship or Vessel shall proceed freely. V. That no Commander or other person of any Ship or Vessel of Algiers, shall take out of any Ship or Vessel of His said Majesties Sub∣jects, any person or persons whatsoever, to carry them any where to be examined, or up∣on any other pretence; nor shall they use any torture or violence to any person, of what
Nation or Quality soever, being on Board any Ship or Vessel of His Majesties Subjects, upon any pretence whatsoever. VI. That no Shipwrack belonging to the said King of Great Britain, or to any of His Maje∣sties Subjects, upon any part of the Coast be∣longing to Algiers, shall be made or become Prize; and that neither the Goods thereof shall be seised, nor the Men made Slaves; but that all the Subjects of Algiers shall do their best endeavours to save the said Men and their Goods. VII. That no Ship, nor any other Vessel of Algi∣ers shall have permission to be delivered up, or to go to Sally or any other place in Enmity with the said King of Great Britain, to be made use of, as Corsairs or Sea-rovers against His said Majesties Subjects. VIII. That none of the Ships, or other smaller Vessels of Algiers, shall remain cruising near His said Majesties City and Garrison of T∣gi, or in sight of it▪ nor any other way di∣sturb the Peace and Commerce of that place.
IX. That if any Ship or Vessel of Tunis, Tripoli, or Sally, or of any other place, bring any Ships, Vessels, Men or Goods belonging to any of His said Majesties Subjects to Algiers, or to any Port or Place in that Kingdom, the Go∣vernours there shall not permit them to be sold within the Territories of Algiers. X. That if any of the Ships of War of the said King of Great Britain, do come to Algi∣ers, or to any other Port or Place of that King∣dom with any Prize, they may freely sell it, or otherwise dispose of it at their own pleasure, without being molested by any; And that His Majesties said Ships of War, shall not be obli∣ged to pay Customs in any sort; and that if they shall want Provisions, Victuals, or any other things, they may freely buy them at the Rates in the Market. XI. That when any of His said Majesties Ships of War shall appear before Algiers, upon no∣tice thereof given by the English Consul, or by the Commander of the said Ships to the chief Governours of Algiers, publick Proclamation shall be immediately made to secure the Chri∣stian Captives; and if after that any Christi∣ans
whatever make their escape on Board any of the said Ships of War, they shall not be re∣quired back again; nor shall the said Consul or Commander, or any other His Majesties Sub∣jects be obliged to pay any thing for the said Christians. XII. That all the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, now Captives in Algiers, or in any of the Territories thereof, shall be set at Liberty, and delivered upon paying the Price they were first sold for in the market; And that for the time to come no Subjects of His said Majesty shall be bought or sold, or made Slaves in any part of the Kingdom of Algiers. XIII. That if any Subject of the said King of Great Britain happen to dye in Algiers, or its Terri∣tories, his Goods or Moneys shall not be seized by the Governours, or any Minister of Algiers, but shall all remain with the English Consul. XIV. That neither the English Consul, nor any o∣ther Subject of the said King of Great Britain, shall be bound to pay the Debts of any other of His Majesties Subjects, except that they be∣come Sureties for the same by a publick Act. XV. That the Subjects of His said Majesty in
Algiers, or its Territories, in matter of Contro∣versie, shall be liable to no other Jurisdiction, but that of the Dai or Duan, except they hap∣pen to be at difference between themselves, in which case they shall be liable to no other De∣termination, but that of the Consul onely. XVI. That in case any Subject of His said Majesty being in any part of the Kingdom of Algiers hap∣pen to strike, wound, or kill a Turk or a Moor, if he be taken, he is to be punished in the same manner, and with no greater severity then a Turk ought to be, being guilty of the same of∣fence; but if he escape, neither the said English Consul, nor any other of His said Majesties Subjects, shall be in any sort questioned and troubled therefore. XVII. That the English Consul, now or at any time hereafter living in Algiers, shall be there at all times with entire freedom and safety of his Per∣son and Estate; and shall be permitted to chose his own Druggerman and Broker, and freely to go on Board any Ships in the Road as often and when he pleases, and to have the Liberty of the the Countrey, and that he shall be allowed a place to pray in, and that no man shall do him any injury in word or deed.
XVIII That not onely during the continuance of this Peace and Friendship, but likewise if any Breach or War happen to be hereafter between the said King of Great Britain, and the Kingdom of Algiers, the said English Consul, and all others His said Majesties Subjects inhabiting in the Kingdom of Algiers, shall always, and at all times both of Peace and War, have full and ab∣solute liberty to depart, and go to their own or any other Countrey, upon any Ship or Vessel of what Nation soever they shall think fit; and to carry with them all their Estates, Goods, Fa∣milies, and Servants without any interruption or hinderance. XIX. That no Subject of His said Majesty being a Passenger from or unto any Port, shall be any way molested or meddled with, although he be on board any ship or vessel in enmity with Algiers XX. That presently after the Signing and Sealing of these Articles by the Bashaw, Dai, and Go∣vernours of the Kingdom of Algiers, all injuries and damages sustained on either part, shall be quite taken away and forgotten: And this Peace shall be in full force and vertue, and con∣tinue for ever: And for all depredations and damages that shall be afterwards committed or
done by either side before notice can be given of this Peace, full satisfaction shall be immedi∣ately made, and whatsoever remains in kind, shall be instantly restored. XXI. That whensoever it shall happen hereafter, that any thing is done or committed by the Ships or Subjects of either side contrary to any of these Articles, satisfaction being demanded therefore, shall be made to the full, and without any manner of delay; and that it shall not be lawful to break this Peace, until such satisfacti∣on be denied. And Our Faith shall be Our Faith, and Our Word Our Word; and who∣soever shall be the cause of the breaking of this Peace, shall assuredly be punished with present death. Confirmed and Sealed in the presence of Almighty God the 29th. of November Old Style, and the Year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1671. being the 7th. day of the Moon of Shaban, and the Year of the Hegira, 1082. L. S. L. S. L. S. It is further agreed, That when the Subjects of the said King of Great Britain, Captives in the Kingdom of Algiers shall be redeemed, the Sum of Twelve pieces of Eight and a half for each of them, shall be abated and cut off from the Port Charges, usually paid in freeing of Slaves. FINIS.
