C2777 18240519 107221
His Maties Speech, & The Queenes Speech, Concerning the Reasons of the House of Commons, to stay the Queenes going into Holland. ❧ The Kings Speech. MY Lords, and Gentlemen; nothing but extreame necessity shall make me willing at this time for to give consent unto the Queenes going out of the Land; and I shall be very sorry if the case stand so, that she should be forc't to goe to preserve her health, and I give unto both Houses many thanks, for the care they have of my Wives health and contentment: therefore I desire there may be a Committee of both Houses here to morrow, at three a clock, to attend my Wife, with these Reasons which have now been read to me. The Reasons of the House of Commons, to stay the Queenes going into Holland: Delivered to the Lords, at a Conference the 14. of July, By John Pym Esquire; And Delivered the 15. to his Majestie, in presence of both Houses by my Lord BANKES. THere is great cause to doubt, lest the Papists have some designe upon her Majesties Journey, because the House hath beene informed, that divers of them have sold off their Lands to a good value, and used other meanes to get ready money. 2. It is observed some of them have beene very diligent, gathering great quantities of Gold. 3. It is informed, that more than an ordinary number of Papists are gone beyond Sea already, and those of the better sort. II. The great number of English fugitives now beyond the Seas, who by their late designes and practises, are knowne to be full of malice to the State, and will no doubt, seeke all opportunities of accesse to, her Majesty; and as much as they can labour to infuse into her such evill Counsels, as may trouble the peace of the Kingdome, whereof at this time there is more danger, because the affaires of the Kingdome are not yet fully settled, and up∣on disbanding of the Army, all parts are like to abound with Souldiers, and such others as will be apt to be pro∣voked to tumults and seditions; especially in the time of the Kings absence in Scotland. III. That the House of Commons have received information of great quantity of Treasure in Jewells, Plate, and ready Money, packt up to be conveyed away with the Queene, not onely in such a proportion, as the present occasions with due respect to her Majesties Honour, may seeme to require, but a farre greater quantity, and that divers Papists and others, under pretence of her Majesties goods, are like to convey great summes of money, and other Treasures beyond the Seas, which will not onely impoverish the State, but may be imployed to the fomenting some mischievous attempts, to the trouble, of the publique peace. IV. That as it will be a great dishonour to the State, if her Majesty should not be attended and furnished sutably to her quality, so it will be a very heavie burthen in this time of great necessity and occasions of other pub∣lique charges, if shee shall be provided in so Royall a manner, as shall be fit for her Majesty, and the honour of the King and Kingdome. V. That because we understand by Sir Theodore Mayerne, that the chiefe cause of her Majesties-sicknesse, and distem∣pers, proceed from some discontent of her minde; the House of Commons have thought good to declare, that if any thing within the power of Parliament may give her Majesty contentment, they are so tender of her health, both in due respect to his most Excellent Majesty, and her selfe, that they will be ready to further her satisfaction in all things, so farre as may stand with that publike, to which they are obliged. VI. That the Commons conceive it will be some dishonour to this Nation if her Mtie. should at this unseasonable time go out of the Kingdome, upon any griefe or discontent received here, and therefore we shall labour by all good meanes to take away, and prevent all just occasions of her Majesties trouble, in such manner, as may further her content, and there∣in her health, which will be a very great comfort, and joy to our selves, and the rest of his Majesties loving Subjects. The Queenes Speech, July 21. 1641. VVHen the Parliament did th' other day expresse their Affections to me, in taking into consideration the journey which I had resolved on for the recovery of my health, and represented a desire of my stay, with a tender care of removing all occasions of my indisposition, I could not then give a positive answer, such as I desired for their satisfaction, because I knew not that my health would give way unto it; but since that time I have resolved to venture my health, and (for complying with their desires) not to goe, since my presence here, will be acceptable unto them; and that they conceive it will be for the good of the Kingdome: For I desire nothing more, than to let you see, that I shall in all things be ready to gratifie them, and to serve the State, though (as I then said) with the hazard of my life. Printed in the yeere 1641.
