C3993 11725152 48375
THE Church & Crown's Felicity CONSUMATED: OR, Englands Happiness Compleat, IN THE JOYFUL RECEPTION OF THE Princess of Orange. THe wondrous Happiness, that England once reap'd, from the Uniting of the Red and White Rose, in the Marriage of Henry the 7th, to the establishing the Peace of the Kingdom, by Reconciling the Bloody Wars between the House of York and Lancaster, are Blessings infinitely inferiour to the larger Portion of National Happiness we are destind to enjoy, in the Illustrious Prince and Princess of Orange's Accession to the the Imperial Crown of England. For in the Former Union, the Fewds of two Corrival Families were only appeased; but in the Present more Glorious Union, we have that Great work, which Ages have been labouring for, Compleatly finisht and perfected. viz. In that unshaken and lasting Foundation of our Religion and Liberty (the nearest and dearest concern of mankind,) so firm∣ly laid, that the power of Rome, and Gates of Hell it self, shall never prevaile against them. And more and above the security, Peace, and Happiness of the People so in∣tirely consumated, we have likewise the Glory of the Nation exalted above all the for∣mer Grandure of preceding Ages; that is in the unity of all Hearts, to strengthen the Royal Arm; and 2dly, by Rivetting the English and Dutch Interest, Our Naval walls, and Maritime Strength, will soon render Us the Terrour of the World, and make Us once more the Arbiters of Europe, A Title which our long frenchify'd Interest, and Alliance before, had so meanly and ignobly lost Us, by giving up the Reins to the in∣satiate Ambition of that wild Ravager of the Christian World, and plague of all Eu∣rope, the French Tyrant. There onely wanted this Blessed Day to perpetuate the Security of the Prote∣stant Religion and the Liberties of England. And to our no little Satisfaction, and Delight the welcome Tidings of her Arrival is our only remaining Felicity. Accordingly the Guns of the Towre, and the General Ringing of Bells, have al∣ready proclaimed Our Universal Joys: and the whole Court, the more immediate sharer of so Divine a Blessing, is fill'd with the Highest Transports suitable to Her Royal Re∣ception. London Printed for T. Tillier. 1689.
