C5945 19720043 109335
The Constant Maidens Resolution: Or Silver and Gold cant buy true Love. Wherein is show'd an old mans fondness the maidens constancy unto her dearest Friend, being a rare pattern for all maids to take example by the same. To the Tune of, laugh and lye down. I Am a young Damsel that's plunged in Woe. And how to remove it I do not well know: My friends they wou'd tye me unto an Old Man, That has store of Riches but ove him who can. Tis not Father nor Mother my mind shall remove. For I am resolved to have him that I love. Ther lived a spruce Old Man near unto this Girl, Who wooed her and sued her like Lord or yet Earl, Of wealth he had plenty in Riches did swim, But r all he'd such dainty shed not fancy him. But still she reply'd my mind shan't remove, For, &c. The Old man. My joy and my Honey these words then spake he, If thou wilt but set thy affecion on me, In Laid I will seat thée worth thirty a year, And a house that's worth twenty i'le me it appear. Then be ot so coy Love althouh I am old, For my e is fervent and so  all hold, The maid. HAd you ne're so much Riches or ne're so much Gold You never shall get my heart in your hold, For I am resolved sink or yet svim, To have the Man I can love though I do eg with him. For what joy or what comfort has any young bride, To have an old sapling to lye by her side. Where their's auking and spitting and coughing all night, Grunting and Groaning instead of delight: Scratching and Scrubbing their Wrinkled Skin, When Rest should be had then they'r making a din. And I wonder such old men as you cannot see, But will marry young wenches a Cuckold to be. The Old Man. My Dearest wy dost thou despise an Old Man, That will bravely maintain thée with Wood and Fan: Gloves, Ribbous and Scarves thou daily shall Wear, Larks, Chickens and Capons it shall be thy fare, Thou hadst bette an Old Mans darling to be, Then to marry with one that will never ove thee. The Maid. Tis not your Ric dainties nor your brave ttire, Shall make me codescend unto your desire VVhere my mind cannot fancy I'le never be tide, Although every day in my Coah I might Ride. No Gold nor yet, Silver, my mind, &c. The Maid. Therefore take your answer and from me depart. For I cannot love you with a serious heart: No Old Mans Darling I mean for to be, Cause Old flesh with young flesh will never agrée. Come wealth or come woe my mind, &c. The Old Man. I Wonder swéet Lady you should be so strange, That us Love nor perswasions your mind it can change: If you felt but the Torments the which I abide, You soon wou'd yeild to me whatever betide. My hearts so perplexed all joys from me flye, To think of thy beauty I surely shall dye. The Maid. Fye leave off your doting you silly Old Sot, My beauty's like others therefore praise it not: I do not regard you nor pitty your moan, Because that I have a true love of my own. And no man on Earth my mind, &c,
