d1844 12331520 59690
LICENSED, Octob. 12. 1685. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.
DON HENRIQUEZ DE CASTRO. OR, THE CONQUEST OF THE INDIES. A Spanish Novel. Translated out of Spanish, by a Person of Honour. LONDON, Printed by R. E. for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel-Street in Covent-Garden.
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER. THose who have seen the Life of Don Henriquez de Castro, in Spanish, will accuse me, it may be, of not being a faith∣ful
Translator. But I hope, I have made the Work Perfecter in the Translation, than it was in the Original: The Ori∣ginal, ends with the Sacrifice of the In∣dians, and does not tell us what became of the Hero of the Novel. To end this Adventure agreeab∣ly, I make but one Person of Leonora, and Julia; of which the
Spanish Author makes two; and I make Leo∣nora come into the Kingdom of Chili, which is, in my O∣pinion, more accor∣ding to the Rules; than to break off, as he does, with the Adventure which hapned to her, when she endeavoured to go out of her Guar∣dian's House, to fol∣low Don Henriquez. I have also Retren∣ched
all the Wars of Italy, which length∣ned extreamly the History of Don Este∣van, and had no Re∣lation to the Sub∣ject. The Adven∣tures of John Becaio, which I took out of another Spanish Book, altho' of a low Stile, may di∣vert the Reader by their Variety; and I am of Opinion, that the Accident
of the Monkey which serves to make the Sex of Princess Con∣stantia known, will not be Condemned by him. In short, I have forgotten nothing which might render this Novel di∣verting; if the Chan∣ges which I have made in it are not agreeable to some, there are others who will have more in∣dulgence, and will
own their Obliga∣tion to me, for the Design I had to di∣vert them.
Some Books printed, and sold by R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel-Street in Covent-Garden. BEaumont and Fletchers Plays: in all 51. in large Fol. Mr. Shakespear's Plays: in one large Fol. Volume. Containing 43 Plays. Bishop Brownrig's Sermons, in Fol. Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple and Altar: In Fol. Dr. Alistry's 40 Sermons: In Fol. Towerson on the Creed: In Fol. Hudebras Compleat: In 8 vo. Present State of England: In 2 Vol. in Twelves. Enter into the Closet: in 12. Mr. Evelin's Calendarium Hortens. in 8 vo. Rules of Civility: in 12. Mauger's French Grammar: the
Twelfth Edition: in Octavo. French Common Prayer: In 12 French Psalms: in 12. French Testament and Psal. in 12. Moral Essays, in 4 Vol. in 12. Plato's Apologie of Socrates in 8 vo. Natural Hist. of the Passions in 8 vo. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry: In 8 vo. Dr. Whitby of Host-worship: In 8 vo. Dr. Whitby's Answer to D. Cressey In 8 vo. Prospect of Humane Misery: in 12. Cornelius Agrippa's Vanity of Arts and Sciences: 8 vo. Bp. Andrew's Devotions: In 12. —His Manual for the sick: in 12 Perswasives to the Commun. By the Author of Enter into thy Closet. in 12.
DON HENRIQUES DE CASTRO, OR THE Conquest of the Indies. THE Atlantick Island had remained undiscovered to all the Nations of Eu∣rope, for many Ages; for Vesputius Americus, who disco∣vered it, and gave it his Name, did not settle there any Collony. Ma∣gellanus made a Voyage thither, and soon came to the knowledge of the great Riches which might
be had from thence; but he could not persuade any of the Princes, that reigned in his time, to under∣take the Conquest of it. The Em∣perour, Charles the Fifth, being ei∣ther more Penetrating, or more Ambitious than his Predecessors, hearkened to the Propositions that were made to him by Ferdinando Cortes, and Pizarro, of sending thither and Army. He furnished them with Ships, Forces, and Mo∣ney, and allowed them to carry the War against Montezuma into Mexico, and against Atabalipa into Peru. They neither of them found much difficulty in subjugating those Nations, which had always lived in Softness and Voluptuous∣ness, and which had no knowledge of the Revolutions and Disturbances practised in Europe. The surpri∣sing effects of the Artillery and Fire-Arms, terrified them in such a man∣ner, that they thought it would be to oppose the will of Heaven, to
fight with Men, who had the command of its Thunder-bolts (for so they called those terrible En∣gines which carried Death to them from so great a distance). The good Fortune of Pizarro was, not∣withstanding, not so constant as that of Ferdinando Cortes. Don Diego de Almagro, who had shared with him in the Glory of the dis∣covery of this happy Climate, could not bring himself to submit the Command of the Army to him. They had often small Quarrels, which at last broke out into an o∣pen War. Each had his Follow∣ers, and there were several Fights between these two Chiefs, where∣in each, in his turn, was Conquerour and Conquered. This Division was equally fatal to both, and the ill blood which was bred between the two Parties, lasted even after the death of their Generals. Val∣divia, whom the Emperour, Charles the Fifth, had sent to supply the
place of Pizarro, and to punish the Authors of the Revolt, executed the Orders of his Master with great severity, so that those who had had any hand in the Conspiracy, hoping for no more favour than those they had already seen die by the Hands of the Executioners, went into the Province of Chilli for Sanctuary, where Ruminagui, Son in-Law to Atabalipa, Governed This Prince received the Malecon∣tents with joy, and having had time to examine, near to him, the Arms which the Spaniards had made use of to overcome the King of Peru, he found there was no∣thing of Supernatural in them; af∣ter which he endeavoured to unde∣ceive the Indians, who were of his Party, and to rescue them from that Fear, which made them take the Spaniards for Demi-Gods; he made them understand, that since all the advantages they had over them, proceeded only from those
Arms, the use whereof they knew not till then, it would not now be difficult for them to drive out these Usurpers, by the means of the Succours which were come to them. Don Alonso de Co∣varuvias, who had put himself at the Head of the Rebels, thought it best to begin the War with an ea∣sie enterprise, thereby to raise the Courage of the Indians, and to con∣vince them of what Ruminagui had endeavoured to insinuate into them. Pizarro had built a Fort in the plain of Tucapel, which com∣manded all the plain, where he had but a hundred Men in Garri∣son, thinking that number suffici∣ent, in the Submission and Terror wherein all those of the Country were; and as those which he had put in this Post, had no opportuni∣ty of exercising their Valour, they thought of nothing but of diverting themselves, and lived in as great a quiet, as if they had been at Sevill,
or at Saragose. Don Alonso surpri∣sed them in this negligence, and having Marched all Night, came by Day-break before the place; he immediately Stormed it, and having scaled it, made himself Ma∣ster of it before Night. The Indi∣ans, who had the Cruelty, (which the Spaniards had used towards all of their Nation) fresh in their me∣mory, would give quarter to none of those they found in the Fort, nor would they pardon the things that were inanimate; for they immedi∣ately entirely razed the place, that there might remain no monument to Posterity, of their having groa∣ned under the yoak of those Cruel Tyrants. They, after this advan∣tage, marched fiercely against Val∣divia, who was the fortifying Penco, one of the most famous Ports of the Province of Chilli. This General, who had notice of their march, might have waited for them in the Town, which was in good
Condition enough, to have made a long resistance; or he might have defended the entries of the Lanes, through which they must have ne∣cessarily past, to come to him; but despising Enemies, which he had always beaten, he went out to meet them in the plain, thinking astonish them with his undaunted∣ness; but the Indians, incouraged by the Remonstrances of Rumina∣gui, and by the taking the Fort of Tucapel, far from taking fright, as they had been accustomed to do, whensoever they saw the Spaniards appear, put themselves in Battel, under the Command of Covaruvi∣as, with as great Discipline, as if they had been experienced Forces. Don Alonso took the command of the right Wing, leaving that of the left to Ruminagui. Valdivia, gover∣ning himself by the Disposition of the Army of the Enemies, put himself at the Head of the Forces, which were to engage the Male∣contents,
leaving to Don Henriques de Castro, the Care of attacking the Indians. This young Spaniard had given so many Proofs of his Cou∣rage, that Valdivia, made no difficul∣ty of intrusting him with so impor∣tant a Command, and to prefer him before many old Officers, who bandy'd for it. Don Henriques did not belye the good Opinion which his General had conceived of his Valour; he, at the first on∣set, broke through the best Bata∣lians of the Indians, till he came to that which Ruminagui Commanded in person; and although this Prince did all that could be expected from a great General, yet he could not hinder his Forces from giving way, and taking flight at the sight of a Man, who carry'd Death wherever he directed his Steps: Don Hen∣riques pursued the Run-aways with so much heat, that he came with them to the same place, where the Fort of Tucapel had been, which
the Indians had razed the Day be∣fore. He there made a hault, and drew up his Men again in Battel, for fear lest the Indians should ral∣ly, and, surprising him, might take from him a Victory, which he look∣ed upon himself as secure of: He left therefore the pursuit of the Run-aways, and returned to the Field of Battel, where he found Don A∣lonso Conqueror of the left Wing of the Spanish Army, which he had entirely defeated. The two Ge∣nerals were, notwithstanding, still engaged in a private Combat, with a Party of Chosen Men, disputing weakly the Victory with the Re∣bels. Valdivia could not take any advantage of the Succors that Hen∣riques so opportunely brought him, for Don Alonso doubling his Cou∣rage, at the sight of the new Ene∣my, which came to attack him, made, by the Death of the unfor∣tunate Valdivia, Victory declare it self on his side; those who fought
in his Defence, lost Courage, see∣ing him fall, and breaking in up∣on on those which Don Henriques led up again to the Fight, drew them along with them, notwithstanding the Generous endeavour of their Chief, who was at last himself for∣ced to follow the Multitude. This cruel turn of Fortune, put him into so great a Consternation, that he marched the rest of the Day, without knowing whither he went; in this Profound Melancholy, he went so far from the Field of Battel, that he found himself, at the beginning of the Night, at the foot of a high Mountain, cove∣red with Mirtles and Palm-Trees; this Hill, which seemed to bound his Course, stopped him, and made him, for some time, suspend that Grief which possest all his thoughts; and feeling his Horse, which had re∣ceived many Wounds in the fight, fail under him, he lighted, that he might not fall under him. The
Night was so dark, that Don Hen∣riques would easily have resolv'd to spend all the Night in this place, lest he should lose himself, by venturing to climb up the Moun∣tain, if the Moon, which rose al∣most at the same time, had not by its Light, shewn him a Cross which was set up upon the side of it; he thought, by this Mark, that it had been inhabited by Christians; so he endeavoured to get up, not∣withstanding his weariness; when he was come thither, he found no Habitation, but only the entry of a dark Cave, before which this Cross was erected, he perceived at the end of this Cave a Light, and therefore thought he might there take the rest which he had need of; he had not advanced six steps before he discovered a terrible Li∣on, which seemed to guard this dark Habitation; this furious Beast, which was lain down, rose as soon as he saw Don Henriques appear,
beating his sides with his Tail, and beginning to Roar in a most hidi∣ous manner: The Spaniard, as brave, as he was, was surprised at so un∣looked for an Accident, and did not know whether he had best leave this furious Beast in his retreat, or secure to himself, by his Death, this Grotto, which seem'd to him, in the deplorable Condition to which he was reduc'd, absolutely necessary for him. But a new Ob∣ject soon made this Dispute with himself cease, for he saw come from the end of the Grotto a young Man, who having made the Ly∣on retire, demanded of him, what he lookt for in this solitary Place. Don Henriques told him, that he had lost himself in the Path of the Mountain, and desir'd him to give him a retreat for that Night only; he made no difficulty of re∣ceiving this new Guest into his Subteranean Habitation, and ha∣ving-brought him to the further
end of the Grotto, did not Charm him less by his good Meen, than by the obliging Air with which he receiv'd him. Don Henriques al∣so admir'd the docile Temper of the Lyon, which obeyed all his or∣ders, as if it had been a little Dog. Don Henriques had the leasure to consider the Charms of his Land-Lord, by the light of a Stick, of that Aromatick Wood which the Indians make use of in the dark, instead of Candles, and seeing him have a delicate Complection, which did not agree with the plainness of his House-hold-stuff and lodg∣ing, he took him for an Appariti∣on, and all the Objects, which ap∣peared to his Eyes, for delusions, which would vanish at the return of the Light. Don Garcia, for so was this solitary Person called, ha∣ving observed the astonishment of his Guest, endeavoured to make it cease with these words. I find said he, that you are surprized to
see this Cave inhabited by a man of my Age; you can hardly be∣lieve, in so great a Youth, I can abandon all those Pleasures which others seek after with so much earnestness. I know very well al∣so, that you can hardly imagine, that a Man, who has not yet had the time to study. Nature, should find out the way to tame the fiercest of all Beasts: if I were of the humour to gain praises by a Lye, I might tell you, that ha∣ving a Father a Philosopher, who had taken care to cultivate my mind early, and that he having imparted to me much of the lear∣ning he had acquired, I have chosen this solitude to be at more leisure, for the study of the most refined Sciences; but I am sincere, and I will not surprize your E∣steem, by a disguise, so unworthy of a Man of Honour. I will confess to you, that this Cave is in∣habited by a reverend old Man, who has entrusted me, during the
Journey which he is now gone towards the Sea-side, with this House-hold-stuff which he uses, and the Lyon, which feeds him with the Prey he catches for him. Was it he, interrupted Don Hen∣riques, who tamed this terrible Beast? No, replied Garcia, it was the work of a Man, who retir'd into this Grotto, and who at his death, left it to the Person who has allowed me a share in these Lodgings, and gave him all his goods, which consisted of some Di∣shes, made of the Bark of Trees, five or six Cups of Coco, a Covering which he had made of Palm-Tree-leaves, and a Pillow of Bearskin, stuft with dried Leaves; he had bred this Lyon from its Youth, and having taught him to bring his Prey to him, he gave him at his death to his successour, who has always made use of him with the same success. If you will go to the bottom of this Grotto with
me, you may there Sup upon a remainder of Venison which the Lyon has brought, and some Dates which I gathered this Morning up∣on this Mountain; there is a Fountain, which comes out of this Rock, which will furnish you with very fresh water to drink, and you may afterwards repose your self upon the Bed of Moss, where I was first lain, when you first came into the Grotto. Don Henriques very chearfully accep∣ted of these offers which were made him, and went with him to the bottom of the Grotto, and there made with him a rustical Meal of the Provisions which they there found. It being already late, Don Henriques had no sooner Sup∣ped, but he endeavoured to take that rest, which he had so much need of, upon the Bed of Moss, which was so kindly offered to him. In lying down, he let fall a Picture-Box, set with Diamonds, which
Don Garcia took up, and as he was going to restore it to Don Henri∣ques, it opened, and discovered to him a Picture, the Features of which were not unknown to him; after having looked upon it some time, he presented it to him to whom it belonged, saying to him, Pray, Sir, do me the favour, to let me know how this Picture of Julia fell into your hands? The Lady, which it represents, answered he, was never called by the Name of Julia; she was a Spanish Lady, and her Name was Leonora; I loved her to her Grave, the memory of her being still so dear to me, that I cannot think of her without shedding of Tears. I have seen, replied Don Garcia, a Picture, very like this, in the hands of the old Man, who has here chosen the place of his retirement; he keeps it with a great deal of care; it is of a young Woman, of whom he had all the ten∣derness of a Father; and although he lost her in Constantinople, when
he was there a Slave, he is not yet a∣ble to forget her. This being the same Julia, which I just now spoke of I have a great Curiosity to hear th Adventures of Leonora, who resem∣bles her so perfectly; and I shall b infinitely obliged to you, if after yo have taken some repose, you will b pleased to make me some relation  it. My mind, replied Don Henri∣ques, is disturbed with so many dif∣ferent thoughts, that I cannot hope sleep will have the power, for a great while, to shut my Eye-lids; and therefore am very willing, whilst we are alone, to satisfie your Curiosity▪ and not keep you any longer in ex∣pectation. Don Henriques seeing Don Garcia shew, by his silence▪ he was disposed to hear him, began his History in these terms.
History of Don Henri∣ques, and Leonora. MY Name is Don Henriques de Castro, and I am Son to Don Lorenzo. By this account, in∣terrupted Don Garcia, embracing him, I have the Honour to be your Brother, since I owe my Birth to this same Don Lorenzo, who distinguisht himself so glori∣ously in the Conquest of Mexico and Peru; I am the only Issue of his Marriage with Hismelia, Daugh∣ter to King Montezuma. I never heard, replied Henriques very coldly, of this second Marriage. It would have been hard, replied Garcia, for you to have heard of this Marriage, since it was made in the Indies, whilst you were in Spain. I will, if you desire it, relate to you the Circumstances of it, when you
have made an end of your Relati∣on. Don Garcia said no more, that he might give his Brother time to pursue his Discourse, which he did after this manner. Since you are Son to Don Lo∣renzo, you are not ignorant that he Married, in the Moluccas, Tere∣sa Mendez, a Kinswoman of the Vice-Roys; and that having a de∣sign to return into Spain, when Ferdinando Cortes had made an end of the Conquest of Mexico, he sent her before him to Sevill, where she was brought to Bed of me. You know, without doubt also, that be∣ing ingaged, with Pizarro, in the Wars of Peru, it was impossible for him ever to see his own Coun∣try again, and so I shall only en∣tertain you with what relates to my self. When I was of an Age fit to bear Arms, I resolved to go to the In∣dies to my Father, but Love stayed me for a while in Spain. A Kinsman
of my Mother, who had long served the Venetians, and made several Voyages to Constantinople, for the Service of that Repub∣lick, had a Daughter, who was about sixteen years old, of an accomplished Beauty, as you may guess by her Picture. Don Antonio de Sylva, for that was the Name of the Father of Leonora, who having been a Widdower for a long time, thought it not fit to keep her with him any longer, sent her to my Mother, whose Virtue he was fully satisfied of; he writing to her a Letter, wherein he desired her to take care of the Education of his Daughter, until he returned to Se∣vill. The Charms of Leonora, made me now forget the design I had taken to go to the Indies, to learn there the Art of War. I was always with her, and I took such pleasure in her Conversation, that I could not take up a resolu∣tion to be from her, although I
had a violent desire to gain a Re∣putation in the World. Leonora had seen several Courts, and her Mind was far more cultivated, than could have been expected of a per∣son of her Age; her Coversation served to form mine, and I made use of that pretence, to excuse the stay I made at Sevill, at a time, when I ought to have been signa∣lising my Courage, to support the Reputation which my Ancestors had acquired. Leonora was pleased to impart to me so much of her knowledge, that somtimes I was confounded at it; and not having deserved her Favours, I perswa∣ded my self, for some time, that she did thus only to shew her gra∣titude for the care my Mother took of her. But Love being of a piercing sight, I soon perceiv'd that it was an Impulse of a more pressing concern, and that she had not less tenderness for me, than I had for her. I had a mind to have
the pleasure to make her explain t her self; so, one day, finding my elf alone with her, I spoke to her n these Terms: Dearest Sister, (for so used I to call her,) will not you find your self too much disturbed, with the Trouble I give you every day? Will not my Ignorance cre∣ate in you a scorn of me? And if you continue to instruct me with the same Goodness you have done, how shall I ever be able to be grateful enough, for so obliging a Care? By making me Reign (Re∣plied Leonora) Soveraign in your Heart, it seem'd to me, when I first saw you, that we were born for each other; and I think I reap an advantage for my self, when I inform your Mind of any thing. It has all the Dispositions Nature could give it, of learning every thing necessary with ease; and it wants only a little Experience, which time will afford. I applaud my self, for your being so apt to
learn by my Instructions, and I shall be very glad to see you one of the best bred Men in Spain, if you have no design to please any body but my self. You may assure your self of that, I reply'd, taking one of her fair Hands, which I ten∣derly kissed. You alone shall make all my happiness, and I will po∣lish my mind, only to make my self worthy of you. We had ma∣ny Conversations much like to this, and I thought my self the happiest of all men. But Fortune was wearied with favouring me. Leonora lost her Father, and altho' she became, by his Death, one of the richest Heiresses in Spain, she was extreamly grieved at it. I scarce had time to wipe away her Tears, before she was forced to ren∣der me the same Office; for my Mother soon after fell sick and di∣ed. Leonora, who could not decent∣ly live alone with me in the same House, went to lodge at the House
of Don Thomas de Camboya, who was made her Guardian by her Relations. His Wife was one of those false reserved Women, who being out of a Condition of plea∣sing her self, would have the young Persons, who are under Go∣vernment, renounce all the Diver∣sions proper for their Age; and fly the Company of them, as if they were Monsters. Altho' Leonora con∣demned this great severity, yet she would not see me against her Will, lest she might give her an occasion of suspecting her behaviour. She felt very sensibly the trouble which this separation caused in me. But since we could not continue our Commerce, unless we had a Confident, who might facilitate our Interviews, she endeavoured to know the Character of all those who had access to the House where she was, before she discoverd to any one the secret of her Heart. She heard that Don Pedro de Gu∣diel
made his addresses to Elvia, Daughter to her Guardian, she en∣tred into the Secret of their A∣mours, and after having done a great many good Offices to the Gentle∣man, she confessed to him the Passi∣on she had for me. He offered very civilly to help us to meetings, and he seemed so zealous for her Interests, that she applauded her self with having chosen so generous a Confident. But Don Pedro was not so sincere as he affected to ap∣pear, he appli'd himself to Elvia only out of Policy, he felt no∣thing of Love for her, and he having only pretended it, to get access to the House of Don Thomas, it was to Leonora, that his Vows were di∣rected, but whether for the Love he had for her, or because she was a very great Fortune, I do not know; he had not Estate enough to pretend to her openly, where∣fore he design'd to make himself be beloved by her, before he dis∣covered
his intention. The Court which he made to Elvira, fa∣cilitated to him the means of see∣ing Leonora at all Hours, and he was overjoyed at being able to dis∣cover her secrets, that he might in time break the Correspondence which she had with me. He brought me a Note from Leonora, and see∣med to take our interest so much to heart, that I made no difficulty of discovering to him my most se∣cret thoughts, he came to give me notice when every Body was re∣tired in the House, and we went together into a By-street, where Leonora spoke to me through a lower Window, whilst Don Pe∣dro discoursed with Elvira. No bo∣dy knew of our Engagements, and Don Thomas, who thought of pro∣viding for Leonora according to her Estate and Birth, cast his eyes upon Don Diego de Avalos, who made a considerable Figure in Se∣vill, and who had not less Wit
than Courage; he was inform'd of the Love which this Gentleman had for Leonora, and there having been some proposition made to him, from him, but before he would give him a positive Answer, he desired to know first the thoughts of the young Lady, he went therefore to her one morning into her Chamber, and having ex∣tolled to her the merit of Don Diego, he told her of the design he had to marry her to him; she would not absolutely reject the Proposition, lest Don Thomas should suspect her Heart was ingaged in favour of some other, and that causing her to be watched, he might discover the Commerce that was between us; she only answer'd her Guardian, that she was yet too young, to think of engaging her Liberty, and desired him not to press her to resolve upon any settlement. Don Thomas who had a great deal of kindness
for Leonora, would not impose a∣ny thing upon her which might trouble her, and leaving her at liberty, he let Don Diego know he should render himself agree∣able to Leonora, and that when he he had obtained her Love, he should always be very ready to approve of the match. Leonora charged Don Pedro to give me notice that I had a Rival; and as he had a mind to make use of this Conjuncture, to take her out of the Hands of Don Thomas, he re∣presented to me with so much Art, what I had to fear from the weakness of Leonora, and the au∣thority of her Guardian, that he made me in a short time the Jea∣lousest man in the World. Don Pe∣dro the same night contrived a meeting for me with Leonora, to whom I express'd all my Fears; she did what she could to settle my mind, but it was impossible; when she indeavoured to assure me, that
Don Thomas could not force her inclinations, and that though he should have a design to do it, she had courage enough to oppose his injustice, I thought she spoke to me, only to deceive me with more ease; in short, she could not still my disquiets, but by promising me she would allow me to carry her away from her Guardian's House. I told Don Pedro what we resol∣ved, and he gave me to under∣stand, it was not best for me to appear my self upon this oc∣casion, and that it would be much easier for him than me, to take Leonora out of the House of her Guardian, without being mistrusted, and to conduct her to the place where I should stay for her. How could I mistrust a Man, who had till then appeard fo faithful and generous? I approved his thoughts, and gave him a Note to Leonora, in which I desired her not to sail, within two days, to be in the Bal∣cony
which was towards the little Street, where I us'd to discourse with her, that Don Pedro would take care to carry thither to her a Ladder of Silk, which she might make use of to come down when she saw him appear, and that he would conduct her to the place where I was. She sent me her An∣swer by Don Pedro, that she would not fail to do every thing punctu∣ally, as I desired of her in the Note. I agreed with Don Pedro, that I would expect her in an open place which vvas neer to the House, and after having considered, some time, vvhat vve had to do, vve parted to give order, each on his own part, for the Execution of his Design. I did not fail coming to the Rendezvous, so soon as the Clock had stricken Tvvelve, I vvaited there for Don Pedro, vvith an ex∣tream impatience, and hearing no news of this Traytor, I vvas just going to seek after him, vvhen
I savv by the light of the Moon come tovvards me a Man, vvith his Svvoord dravvn, vvho vvas fight∣ing in retreat against six others, he defended himself vvith great Courage, but they prest him so hard, that he vvould have been forced to yield, had I not taken his part. I could not suffer so un∣equal a Combat, and having put my self on his side vvith tvvo Servants that follovved me, I quickly sound the Heat of my Enemies cool. One amongst them, vvho did not care to fight vvith∣out advantage, told me, that I should make my self guilty, by hindring the execution of justice, and that he vvhom I had defended, had just then assassinated one of the most considerable Men in the vvhole Tovvn, and kill'd one of the finest Ladies in all Spain. But as I knovv People of that sort never fail to pretend, those vvhich they carry to Prison are gulity
of great Crimes, thereby to ren∣der them odious, I gave no credit to what this Man told me, nor would not quit the unknown Gentleman's side. Those who would have arrested him, endured no long fight, and having turned their backs, they left him at liberty to shew his thankfulness to me. I in∣terrupted him at the first word, and desired him to leave me alone, for a reward of all the service I had done him; but yet I could not be rid of him, till I had accepted of a Diamond Ring which he gave me, that he might, as he said, ano∣ther time know his deliverer. After he had left me, I did not stay long in the place where the fray was, the Impatience which I had, to hear some news of Don Pedro, forced me to seek him out, in the little Street where I was used to discourse with Leonora; but I left, however, one of my Servants there, that he might ingage Don Pedro to stay for me,
in case he came to look after me; scarce had I set my foot in this Street, before I heard a confused noise of people speaking, and saw coming towards me a great many Armed Men, who carried Lanthorns with them; I was advanced too far, to retreat without being seen, and those Men could take no other way than that by which I came; all that I could do to escape from, them, was to go with my Servant who had followed me, into a house which was building, and which I was then very near. We had but just hidden our selves, when I saw come by the same place, which I just then left, a second Company, which joyned with the first; I easily perceived that it was the Watch, and that the last Comers were those who endeavoured to arrest my un∣known Friend; they spoke of this Action to their Companions, so soon as they were come to them,
but it was so softly, and I was so far from them, that I could not hear them very distinctly; having a great desire to know the Names of those which had been kill'd, be∣cause the murther had been com∣mitted very near the House of Don Thomas, I order'd my Servant to go near to them, and to bring me an account of what he hear'd. The House which we were in, was raised but to the ground Floor, and the Youth, to go to them, was to go over a very narrow board, the Night being very dark, and the Lanthorns dazling him, he missed his footing, and fell into the Foundations; he had in his Pocket a Pistol ready cockt, which, unfortunately for him, at the same time went off, and shot him through the Body. I hastned to his assistance, but the Watch-men, being drawn thither by the noise, were before me, and taking me for the Author of this Murther,
seiz'd me; they would not give me time to defend my self, but hur∣ried me away to Prison, notwith∣standing whatsoever I could say in my justification. You may easily imagin, Brother, what a despair I was in when I was arrested; I saw by this mis∣fortune, all the hopes which I had conceived of possessing a Person, who could alone make all the happiness of my Life, frustrated; that which I had heard, made me fear, with a great deal of reason, that the Lady whom the unknown Person had killed, was my dear Leonora, and I had not any long time the Comfort of being able to doubt of it, for the Guards who had taken me Prisoner, told the Gao∣ler that I had killed with a Pistol∣shot, which I had aimed at Don Pedro, a Woman who was coming down by a Silk Ladder out of a Balcony into the Street, and that Don Pedro, indeavouring to revenge
her Death, had had the same Fate. Although I perceived they took me for the Stranger, whom I had re∣scued from their hands; yet I could not therein find any thing to make me doubt of my unhappiness; and I had the more reason to be afflicted, because I my self had taken up the Defence of him who had assassina∣ted my Friend and my Mistress. I passed the Night in so great an Af∣fliction, that I felt no more my Grief, by feeling it too much. The next morning, when I was drest, I went down to the Court; I found my self immediately incompassed by a great number of Prisoners, who told me, I must pay them my welcome; as if it was a great ad∣vantage to me, to become a Com∣panion with them in their Misfor∣tunes; I was forced to give them the little Mony I had about me, to deliver my self from their Impor∣tunity; they sent immediate∣ly for Wine, with which they
made themselves so Drunk, that six of them, who lay in a Garret, let fall their Candle in a Bed, which immediately set Fire to the Bed-Mat, and the Rafters of the Gar∣ret being very dry, they flamed out immediately: The Turn-keys, go∣ing the Round, perceiving the Fire, ran all affrighted, to endeavour to quench it. In this Fright they left open a great Dungeon, where there lay above fifty Prisoners, who having seized the Keys, went and opened the Doors of all their Fel∣low Prisoners, making the word Liberty sound throughout the whole Prison; they then broke open the Prison Gates with some great Blocks they found in the Kitchin. I suffered my self to be carried a∣way with the Throng, and I found my self in the Convent of the Cor∣deliers, without knowing how I was carried thither; and I being one of the most considerable of those who had taken Sanctuary
there, these good Fathers came to Compliment me, and promised to let me out, the beginning of the next Night, by a back Door of their Garden, in the Habit of a Monk. I answered their Civility as well as the disturbance my mind was in would allow me; and was Conducted into a Cell, until they brought me what was necessary for my Disguise. After I was thus disguised, they led me out of the Convent, with another Prisoner drest in the same manner, who was to be my Companion; we walked through the Town in this Equipage, without being taken notice of by any Body; and having passed the Gate of Xerez, we entred the High way which leads to Cadez, having followed it some time, we left it to get into a Wood, which is about three Leagues from the Town, where we staid in the day time, not daring to Travel but by Night. We sent, in the mean
while, a little Boy, which the Cordeliers had given us, to get us something to eat; and we sate our selves down upon the Grass, in a place where the Trees were thick∣est, that we might have the bene∣fit of their shade. I began to be in so deep a study, that I did not think of him who was by me; his Mind was more at liberty; and having by chance cast his Eyes upon the Dia∣mond Ring which I had upon my Finger, knew it to be that which he had given me; and embracing me with a great deal of Affection, Suffer me (said he to me) to shew my Gratitude to my Deliverer. I found by his Discourse and his A∣ctions, that it was the same un∣known Person, whose Defence I had ingaged my self in, and that I supposed to be the Author of the Death of Don Pedro and Leonora; but the more to clear my Doubt, I desired him to tell me why the Bayliffs would have arrested him,
and he satisfied my Curiosity in this manner. I loved, said he, one of the finest young Ladies in the Town, her name was Leonora. At this Name I sent out a great sigh, but he took no notice of it, but thus pursued his Discourse, Her Relati∣ons approved of my Suit, but her Inclinations were not favourable to me: I had notice given me of the Commerce which she had with a more happy Rival, by a Maid which I had gained, and desiring to be assu∣red of it my self, I passed several Nights under her Window, without discovering any thing which could sa∣tisfie my Curiosity: But, one Night, sitting upon a Stone, which lies over against the House of Don Thomas, I saw two Men come near the Balco∣ny, which is next to the Chamber of that Fair ungrateful Lady; one of them stepping forwards, made a sign by throwing two little Stones against the Window; she immediately ap∣peared, and came down out of the
Balcony by a Silk Ladder to this Man, who had fixt it at bottom with a Stone, that it might be the firmer. I could not any more doubt but that it was to follow the Rival, which was preferred, by her, before me; and being no more Master of the tran∣sports of my Jealousie, I thought  nothing but Revenge. I cocked  Pistol which I had at my Girdle, and fired it upon him, just at his Breast but he, with his hand, making my Pi∣stol mount, it shot Leonora, who was upon the Ladder; she fell down dead immediately, and her Lover▪ who was witness of his Misfortune, came upon me like a mad man; he attacked me with so little Caution, that he ran himself through with my Sword, which I had drawn as soon as I saw him come towards me. When I was rid of my Enemy, I ran to Leonora to give her some assistance, thinking she was only in a Swoon, but I soon was convinced, to my ex∣tream grief, that her Wound was mor∣tal.
I was not yet come to my self, from the surprize which this Mis∣fortune had caused in me, when I found my self attacked by several Men at the same time. What rea∣son soever I had to hate Life, I thought I was bound then to preserve, to make a voluntary Sacrifice of it to her, of whose Death I was the cause. In the apprehension which I had of be∣ing inclosed by my Enemies, I gain∣ed a narrow Lane, where I could not be attacked but before; but whatsoe∣ver advantage this Post might give me, I should never have been able to resist long mine Enemies, without the assistance which you so opportunely afforded me; and since I have been so happy, as to find out my Benefa∣ctor by the Ring, which he was pleased to accept as a small token of my ac∣knowledgment, he may assure himself, that I will expose for his sake, upon all occasions, the life which he has pre∣served to me. I did not enjoy long the happiness which you procured for
me, for being wounded in many places, I could walk but very slowly; and the Watch had time to return a∣gain upon me in greater number: I seeing that my resistance would be to no purpose, therefore suffered my self to be carried to Prison, without drawing my Sword; you know the rest, since we recovered our Liberty by the same way; and I have nothing more to tell you, but that I am call'd Don Diego d'Avalos, and that Don Thomas had promised me to marry this Leonora to me, whose Life I so unfortunately took away. When I was assured that Leonora was dead, I was pierced with so kil∣ling a Grief, that I could give no more attention to the Relation, with which Don Diego went on. I was yet buried in a deep Study, when he left off speaking, and he was forced to pull me by the Arm to bring me out of it; but having my mind filled with Despair, in∣stead of answering his Civility, I
broke out into these Reproaches a∣gainst him. Finish, cruel Don Die∣go, what you have begun, and take from me a Life, which can now be of no other use to me, than to make me the longer endure the Evils which you have caused me; you have assassinated a Mistress which could alone make me happy, when I was just going to pos∣sess her, and yet far from punishing thee, I took thy Defence against those who endeavoured to revenge it; nay, I have done more, coming out of the Prison, where we were shut up, I have made thee the Companion of my Fortune, what can you do to acknow∣ledge so many Favours? but what would your Gratitude signifie to me, since you cannot restore to me that Treasure, which your Inhumanity robbed me of? Don Diego was so surprised, with a Discourse which he so little ex∣pected, that he was a long time without being able to say any thing to me in his justification;
when he was recovered of the a∣stonishment, which my Complaints had cast him into, he threw him∣self at my feet, he embraced my knees, which he bedewed with his tears, and said so many moving things to me, that what Love soever I had for Leonora, I could not have had the hard-heartedness to have refused her to him, if I could have brought her to life again; but that being impossible, I contented my self, with swearing to him invio∣lable Friendship, which neither ab∣sence nor time have been ever able to weaken. When the Boy, which was sent to Town, was returned; we eat the meat which he had brought us, and after having retaken our ordinary Habit, and put our swords by our sides which he had brought us out of the Town, we continued our journey. When we were arri∣ved at Cadiz, we went to a House of a Friend of my Fathers, where
we remained conceal'd, till we had heard the success of our Affair. We sent a skilful Man to Sevil, who at his return told us, that they had sent to Prison all those who came out of the Sanctuary, and that the Officers of Justice endea∣vouring to take out by force those that remained there, the People rose up in Arms, and that I was prosecuted upon Contumacy; he ad∣ded also, that many Witnesses had sworn, that I had killed Don Pedro, because he had made use of my Name to steal Leonora, and that I could not escape being condem∣ned to death. I saw there was no more safety to be expected for me in Spain, and therefore took up a resolution of going up to my Father into Peru, where I knew he was returned, since Valdivia had taken upon him the Command of the Forces there. Don Diego know∣ing my design, desired me to allow him to accompany me in this Voy∣age,
that he might have an oppor∣tunity of shewing his acknowledge∣ments for the service I had done him; we heard that Valdivia had demanded succours from the Em∣peror, and that there were in the Port five or six great Men of War, waiting for a Wind to fail for Pe∣ru; we were not willing to let so fair an opportunity slip, and ha∣ving desired Don Antonio, (in whose House we were lodged) to assist us in our passage, he related our adventure to a Captain, who was his intimate Friend, and desired him to receive us on board. It was not hard to perswade him to it; this Officer, knowing the great Consi∣deration they all had for my Fa∣ther in the Indies, thought him∣self much honoured with our have∣ing chosen his Ship sooner than a∣nothers. We set fail from Cadiz, fifteen days after our arrival; the beginning of our Voyage was pret∣ty prosperous, but in the Latitude
of the Island of St. Domingo, we met with a furious Tempest, which lasted for two Days, and two Nights. When the storm was cea∣sed, we continued our Voyage to Penco without any other ill accident happening to us. Valdivia came thither some days before us, with a design to fortifie it; we did not find there my Father, who remai∣ned in the Province of Quito with one half of the Army, but were notwithstanding very well recei∣ved by the Vice-Roy for his sake, he treated me with so much respect, when he knew of what I was capable, that he gave me the Command of the left Wing of his Army in the last Battel where he lost his life, and to Don Diego that of all the Horse, for my sake, al∣though he knew neither of us had served in any Army before. I know not what is become of this generous Friend, but if he be dead, as there s great Probability he is, I ought
very much to regret his Life, since he twice saved mine in this Battel; he there gave so many Proofs of his Conduct and Valour, that he was to be found every where, where there was need of him to defend a weak Post. Don Henriques related after∣wards to his Brother the success of this Battel, and how following some Runaways, he came to the foot of the Mountain on which they were, and that having lost his Horse, he sought for a Sanctu∣ary in this Grotto, which the Cross erected before it, made him find. When he had done speaking, being late, he bad Don Garcia good Night, and lying down upon the Bed of Moss where he sate, fell a∣sleep; the toyl of the Night before had so tired him, that neither the break of day, nor the singing of Birds interrupted his sleep; he had in all likelyhood awaked very late,
had he not heard some great cries, which seemed to come from a place not far distant from the entry of the Grotto; when he had wholly di∣spersed the Vapours of Sleep, he hearkned with more attention, and thought he heard the Voice of Don Garcia; he looked about him, and not finding him there, he doub∣ted not but that his dear Brother had need of his help. He was stirred up to do him Service by a secret impulse, the cause of which he was ignorant of, and which act∣ed more strongly in him than Na∣tural Relation, he took his Sword and went out of the Grotto, he had not gone twenty paces, before he found Don Garcia wrestling weakly with an Ape of a prodige∣ous bigness; this Beast had alrea∣dy thrown him down, and altho' he held him very straitly imbraced, he did him no other hurt, but im∣portuning him with his Caresses. Don Henriques was amazed to see
that the Ape had more discern∣ment, and knew better the Sex of Don Garcia, than he; and if he had not apprehended that this Co∣mical adventure might have fatal Consequences for the supposed Gentleman, he would have taken pleasure in diverting himself with it, and in making Reflexions upon the advantage which Beasts have over Men, in the knowledge of things which are proper for them; but the violent Condition, in which he saw the feigned Don Garcia, would not allow him to go on with those thoughts. He had al∣ready his Sword drawn in his Hand, and ran to the assistance of this fair disguised Person, with all the eagerness of a Lover possest by a strong Passion; but the Lion did not give him leisure to execute his Design; he was coming back from his Chace, and having seen the vio∣lence that the Ape used to∣wards Don Garcia, whom he look∣ed
upon as his Master, he ran to his assistance; his Enemy, vvho look∣ed upon him as the King of Beasts, and who found himself too weak to dispute the Victory with him, endeavoured, but in vain, to save his Life by flight; the Lyon had soon catched the poor Ape, and torn him in pieces, in sight of the Person whom he had affronted. This odd accident suspended, for some few moments, the Grief, with which these two Persons were affected, and furnished Don Hen∣riques subject enough to be plea∣sant upon, concerning the perplexi∣ty he had found Don Garcia in, he had a mind to persecute him, con∣cerning what he knew of his Sex; but Don Garcia took upon him his serious Air, and upheld, with a great deal of boldness, what he had first pretended; so that Don Henri∣ques did not know what to believe. This fair Counterfeit was greatly concerned to confirm Don Henri∣ques
in his Error; for she thought she could not, with Decency, live alone with a Man of the Age of Don Henriques, if he were truly informed of her Sex, and she could not go from the place where she was, without suffering many incon∣veniencies. For this reason she af∣fected great sincerity, the better to deceive Don Henriques, and told him, that she could not make a bet∣ter return to the Confidence he had reposed in her, than by relating to him, in her turn, the Adventures which had brought her to this a∣greeable solitary place. Don Henriques, who hoped by the means of the Relation she was go∣ing to make, to clear his Doubts, prest her to afford him this satisfa∣ction; they sate down under some Palm-Trees which were near the Mouth of the Grotto, and Don Garcia, after having studied some short time, began his Discourse in this manner.
The History of Don Garcia. SInce you never heard, dear Bro∣ther, of the Marriage of Don Lorenzo, with the Daughter of Montezuma, I ought, before I give you an account of what relates to my self, to inform you what has hapned to him since his coming in∣to the Indies. You know that he having set Sail, with Ferdinando Cortez, for Mexico, a storm separated the Ship, aboard of which he was, from the rest of the Fleet, and that he was forced to put in at the Molucca's to refit; it was whilst he remained in these Islands, that he fell in love with your Mother, whom he Mar∣ried, to have the Protection of the Vice-Roy, whose Kinswoman she was: she was with Child soon after
her Marriage, and Don Lorenzo sent her into Spain, whither he hoped, in a short time to come to her, but his unhappy Fate stayed him in the Indies, where he gloriously lost his Life, as you told me last night. Ferdinando Cortez, with whom he wentto joyn, so soon as he was fit to set Sail again, having observed in ma∣ny occasions, that he was undaun∣ted amongst the greatest dangers, and that he always acted with a∣great deal of Conduct and Pru∣dence, made him General of his Army: He found no reason to re∣pent his having givenhim this em∣ployment; and he owed the Con∣quest of Mexico to his manage∣ment. Cortez, who had not Forces enough, to undertake the Siege of the Capital of that Kingdom, made use of Don Lorenzo to treat with Montezuma, and with his Cassicoes, who are the great Men of the Coun∣try, indeavouring to persuade them what a great advantage they
would have from an Alliance be∣tween the two Nations, by the ex∣change of Merchandises brought from Europe, with theirs; and the knowledge of the Arts and Trades which are used in Europe. This Prince had heard so much of my Fathers Vertue, and sincerity, and he speaking to him with so much eloquence; my Father obtai∣ned of him what he desired, not∣withstanding the endeavours that had been used to terrifie Montezuma by Prophesies, by which it was foretold, that the Monarchy of Mexico was to be destroyed by a People who were to come from the other end of the World; the King went out to meet Cortez, and made him to be carried in a Golden Chair, followed by all his Cassicks, with a most magnificent Equipage. He conducted this Illustrious Ge∣neral into his Palace, with the sound of many Instruments of mu∣sick, after the manner of the Coun∣trey,
and lodged him there, in a most sumptuous Appartment. But Montezuma was ill rewarded for the kind reception he gave to Cor∣tez; for whil'st he was a-sleep in his Chamber, the Spanish General came into it, under pretence of discoursing with him, concern∣ing some important business, and being followed by some Officers, who were entrusted with his de∣sign, seized not only upon his Per∣son, but upon all the Royal Fami∣ly. The People provoked by so black a treachery, took Arms, and besieged Cortez in the Royal Pa∣lace, and they had certainly put all the Spaniards to the Sword, who were not in a condition to resist so great a Multitude, if my Father had not appeased the Kings just resentment, and prevailed with him to appear in the Balcony, and command the Mutineers to lay down their Arms. Don Lorenzo did yet more, he treated with Cortez
for Montezuma's ransom, who promi∣sed to give him a Pike of Gold in square. This Prince performed on his part, all that he was enga∣ged to. But Cortez, far from setting him at Liberty, as he had promised, caused him to be strangled with a cruelty beyond example, using all his Children with the same inhu∣manity, excepting Ismelia whose beauty had charmed this barba∣rous Tyrant. This Treason would have been the destruction of all the Spaniards, if my Father had not endeavoured to excuse it to the Princess, and perswaded her that the refusal which Montezuma had made to his General, of accepting of him for his Son in-Law, had forced him to this Violence; he represented to Ismelia, that Cortez would have been more moderate, if he had been less in Love, and that it would be more advantage∣ous for her to sit with him upon the Throne of her Fathers, than
to undertake to revenge the death of Montezuma upon a man that would be supported by the grea∣test Monarch in the World. Isme∣lia, yielding to his reasons, appea∣sed the People, and turned Chri∣stian; but Cortez, who was more Politique than Amorous, would not have his safety depend meerly upon the humour of a Woman, fortifyed himself in the Palace, and sent for Ships and Artillery, to keep the Mexicans in awe; when he saw his Power setled, he used Ismelia without any respect, and looked upon her then but as his Slave. Don Lorenzo, who thought his Honour engaged to support the interest of a Princess, who had suf∣fered her self to be guided by his Counsels, spoke of it with so much heat, to his General, that he there∣by discovered himself her Lover; Jealousie joined it self to the usual severity of Cortez, who thought himself obliged at the same time,
to punish Don Lorenzo for the bold∣ness which he had spoken, and the Charms of the Princess, which had been able for some time to slacken his Courage; but he would not put them to death, he contented himself with exposing them upon the Sea in a Canoo, without Oars or Sails, and Provision which could last them but a few days; these two unfortunate Persons, after ha∣ving been fifteen days a Play-game to the Wind and the Waves, ex∣pecting nothing but Death, either by a wrack or hunger, when they perceived a far off some Ships, they made a sign to them, with a piece of white Linnen. Pizarro, who commanded this Fleet, sent out his long Boat to take them in; after he came to know the name of my Father, and that of the Princess, and the adventure which had reduced them to so sad a Con∣dition, he condemned the cruelty of Cortez, and offered them his
Protection; he assured Don Lorenzo that it should not be his fault, if his courage was not rewarded; and to give him some proofs of this, he desired him to accept of the Em∣ployment of Vice-Admiral of his Fleet, which was then newly Va∣cant; he afterwards addressed him∣self to the Princess, to whom he said he took great part in her mis∣fortunes, and protested to her, that he should always preserve that re∣spect for her, which was due to her Merit and Birth; after Don Lorenzo had been received into this new Employment with a discharge of all the Cannon, and with the general applause of the Fleet, they steer'd their Course for Panama, where Pizarro found Don Diego d'Al∣magro, who had been his Compa∣nion. The discovery which he had made of Peru, this ambitious man, who was in hopes to have an e∣qual power with Pizarro, as a re∣ward due to his services, could
not endure to see himself fallen from this hope, without shewing some concern at it, and reproach∣ing him, that he had considered only his own interest. Don Loren∣zo indeavoured to reconcile them, and by his skill effected it, he pre∣vailed with Pizarro to give Alma∣gro the command of a Squadron, and was willing himself to serve under him, the two Generals lived in very good correspondence during the rest of the Voyage. And after the Army landed, Don Diego re∣mained to guard the Ships, whilst Pizarro marched forward into the Countrey; all the Towns which were in his passage opened their Gates to him, and he marched directly to Cusco the Capital City of the Kingdom. Attabalippa, ha∣ving had notice of his success, came against him with a great Army, but it was to his shame, for he was beaten and taken Prisoner, this Prince promised Pizarro 200 thou∣sand
Marks of Gold for his Ran∣som; but whilst he sought after pretensions, to defer the Execution of this Treaty, he hired men to assassinate Pizarro: The General would not be his own avenger for this attempt, but left the judg∣ment of it to the Council of War, who having heard those that At∣tabalippa would have employed in this Action, and finding the Plot sufficiently proved, condem∣ned this unhappy Prince to have his Head cut off; which Sentence was executed upon him, at the Head of the Army, which was drawn up in battel to be present at it. The news of the death of Attabalippa being carried to Cusco, its Inhabitants sent Deputies to Pi∣zarro, to offer him the Keys of their City, and he some few days after∣wards made his entry into it with great Magnificence. Ismelia fol∣lowed the Army, being resolved not to leave Don Lorenzo; who be∣ing
come to Cusco, received there the News of the death of Teresamendez your Mother; after time had quali∣fied the grief, which the loss of so dear a Person had caused in him, he thought he could not repair it better than by marrying Ismelia, vvith vvhose vertue he had been charmed. This Princess lookt upon this marri∣age as a considerable advantage in the change of her Fortune; and grati∣tude, vvhich had prepossessed her Heart in favour of Don Lorenzo, made her find some satisfaction in being able to make a firm con∣junction betvveen their Fates; their Wedding vvas celebrated vvith all the Pomp vvhich the disorders of War would allovv. A few days after, my Father was forced to leave his new Wife, to go to fight against Rominagui, Son-in-Law to the deceased King, who had gathered together an Army in the Province of Quitto, whilst Pi∣zarro was making an end of re∣ducing
that of Cusco. Fortune was favourable to both; for Rominagui, who was overcome in two Battels, was forced to abandon the Province of Quitto, and to retire into that of Chilli: My Father would not pur∣sue him thither, but returned to Pizarro, who had ordered him to join with him: This General having had notice, that Almagro, being Jea∣lous of the Reputation he had gain∣ed, had Landed the Forces which remained in the Ships, and having seized upon the Maritime Towns, he endeavoured to make himself Soveraign of all the Country on the Sea side. Pizarro marched a∣gainst him with his Army, and so intimidated the Mutineers by his diligence, that they seised upon the Person of Almagro, and delivered him into his hands, who prosecu∣ted him at a Council of War, which having Condemn'd him, Sentence was executed upon this great Cap∣tain, who would have gained a
great deal of Honour, if he had had less Ambition. After his Death every thing remained quiet, and Pizarro, who was now joyn∣ed by my Father's Forces, went to attack Rominagui in the Province of Chilli, where, in his march, he took in the Town of Los Royes. Almagro left a Natural Son, who had served in the Army in considerable Employments; this Man, who was bold and underta∣king, resolving to revenge the Death of his Father, entered, one morning, the Castle of the Town of Los Royes, where the General was Lodged, and being followed by a company of resolute Men, who were engaged in the Conspi∣racy, by the hopes of a great re∣ward, he stabb'd the General in his Bed, and cut to pieces all those who indeavoured to oppose his passage. The success of this Enter∣prise having raised the Courage of the Friends of Almagro, they took
up Arms, and being drawn toge∣ther in an open place, which is in the middle of the City, they made choice of his Son for General of the Army. Don Lorenzo, who thought he had great reason to fear the Fury of the Mutineers, by reason of the Friendship which Pizarro had had for him, went secretly to Cusco, to take my Mother, whom he found delivered of me, and he carried her with great diligence to the Sea side, where he went on board his Ship, before the news of the Death of Pizarro had been published in the Fleet, and retired with her to the Molucca Islands, where he hoped to be in safety, by the Interest he had with the Relations of your Mother. He resolved to stay there until he knew the Emperours thoughts, concerning this action of young Almagro, and he lived there ten years in great Tranquility. I was about fourteen years old, when Charles V. sent Valdivia to suc∣ceed
Pizarro, who sent Orders to my Father, to take upon him again his former Command, which he might exercise without any fear of the Mutineers, he having made an Example of their Chief. Don Lo∣renzo, having received this advice, departed, in order to his return in∣to the Province of Chilli, where this new General then was, and I stayed with my Mother, who died four years after the departure of Don Lorenzo. When I found my self strong enough to bear Arms, I went on Shipboard to find my Father at Penco, of which Valdivia had given the Government to him. I had a Sister younger than my self by some years, who was so like me, that we were often taken the one for the other, if we were not di∣stinguished by our Habits; and she chose rather to follow me, than to remain in a strange Countrey alone.
Our Voyage was happy but the first day, for the next day the Wind changed, and there arose so violent a storm, that we thought every moment we should perish. My Sister, who had never before seen the inconstancy of this Ele∣ment, repented more than once of her having undertaken this Voy∣age; but I did what I could to comfort her, tho' I my self was not wholly void of Fear. Fortune vvhich had a mind to give us some respite, to make us aftervvards more sensibly feel her blows, appea∣sed the Winds, and made the Sea as Calm, as vvhen vve came on board. Scarce had vve escaped this danger, before vve found our selves expo∣sed to another, vvhich vvas much greater; vve discovered vvithin Cannon shot six great English Men of War, vvhich vve could not see before, by reason of the agitation of the Waves; we were too near to avoid fighting, and too weak to resist them.
We having then Peace with Eng∣land, we thought they would suf∣fer us to follow our Course, but they coming on board our Ship, under pretence of searching for Counterband Goods, made them∣selves Masters of it, and made all in the Ship go down into the Hold, but my Sister and my self, who were carried on board the Admiral; we were presented to Winch, who Commanded this Fleet, and we were received by him, with greater Civility, than we could expect from a Man, who passed for the most terrible Privateer that sailed upon the Seas. He made excuses for the severity which was used to∣wards those of our Ship, which he pretended were taken in a Fault; altho' I easily perceived that this was but a Pretence, to Confiscate the Merchandise we had on board; yet I durst not but agree with him, in what he said, lest he should use us with more severity. He order'd
two Spanish Captains, which served in his Fleet, to take care of us; and I should have wonder'd what made him treat us with so much difference from the rest, had I not observed that he looked upon my Sister with very passionate Eyes. When we were retired into the Cabbin which was allotted for us, a Servant, which was appointed to attend us, came to us, and told us in Spanish, (thinking he was not understood by the two Offi∣cers who followed us) that he had been some time in England, and that understanding that Language, he stayed with Winch, after we left him, to learn his thoughts; he added also, that he had heard him say, That he valued more the Prize he had now taken, than all that he had got since he had passed the Line, because of a young Lady he had sent for on board, and which he intended to make his Mistress.
After this Youth had ended his Discourse, Alvarez and Velasquez, (for so the two Spanish Officers were called,) assured us, that we needed not be in fear for the Honour of my Sister, and that they would both dye, together with all their Friends, rather than suffer any Vi∣olence to be used towards us. Al∣varez, to disperse our fears with the more ease, spoke to us thus, We were, my Brother and I, both born in Cordua; we had an Estate near to the Town, where one of our Neighbours had a mind to Hunt, and we endeavour'd to hinder him from it, upon which, coming to blows, he was killed in the Fray: We remained some time concealed in Cordua, in the House of a Friend; but having heard we were Condemned to Death for Contumacy, and our Estate Con∣fiscated, we fled into England, where we came to be acquainted with Winch. It was at the time when he set out on his Voyage; and he offering
to each of us the Command of a Ship, we were very glad to embrace this offer, when we durst not return into our own Country; and we ought to think our selves extreamly happy, that it gives us an opportunity of doing Ser∣vice to Persons, who are able easily to obtain our Pardons from the Em∣perour. After we had returned their Civility, and that we had as∣sured them, that we would use all the Interest of Don Lorenzo, to set∣tle them again in their Estates. We asked their advice, how we should behave our selves. After having argued a long time, we concluded that I should change Cloaths with my Sister, that she might not be exposed to the violences of the Privateer, and it was not hard to deceive him by our resemblance. This Caution was not without need, for Winch, who was not a Man that used to make Love in form, endeavoured to take a freedom with me, which a Person of my
Birth could not look upon, but as a sensible Affront. I upheld the rights of the Sex, of which I had taken the habit, with as much firmness as was necessary to repress his Insolence. I spoke to him thus, with a great deal of resolution. Sir, your present extravagant acti∣ons answer ill the promises you made to us, the first time we had the honour to see you; you may remem∣ber we were taken Prisoners against the Law of Arms; and you are not ignorant that Don Lorenzo, my Fa∣ther, has interest enough with the Emperour, to obtain, by his Autho∣rity, from the King of England, re∣paration for any Affront which I may receive on board of you. If these considerations will not make you be∣have your self otherwise towards me, you may be satisfied, I despise Life so much, that I will at any time sacrifice it for the preservation of my Honour. These words, spoken with an Air, which made him be∣lieve
the effects would soon follow the threats, allay'd the transports of his Passion; he made the vio∣lence of his Passion his excuse, and told me, gentile enough for a Pi∣rate, that such an extraordinary Beauty as mine, did not leave Reason free long, and that I ought to accuse nothing but the force of my Charms, for the Crime which he had now committed. Winch would not continue his Discourse any longer the first time, for fear of importuning me; he only charged Velasquez to talk to me of his Passion, to inform me of his Riches, and to speak to me of Mar∣riage, if an Amorous Concern should alarm my Virtue. Velasquez gave me a faithful ac∣count of their Conversation; and we agreed that it was necessary to gain time, since my Sister could not do any thing for Winch. For Henry the 8th having changed the Religion in England, and my Fa∣ther being very zealous in his,
we thought he would never con∣sent to have my Sister married to a Man, who would ingage her in a contrary Opinion. This was the reason why we thought there was no other course to be taken, than to amuse Winch, until we had Lan∣ded in some place or other, lest he should have used force. But it was impossible for me to effect my De∣sign; for the tender things which I said to him, did not content him, his Passion required other Favours, which the Body was to have a greater share in than the Mind; and he at last was so forward, that one day, being provoked by my resistance, he spoke to me in these terms. I have hitherto been wil∣ling not to make use of the Right, which War has given me, over your Person. I have given you time to dispose your self, to allow me out of Gratitude, what my Love deserves; and I thought to have silenced your Vertue, by offering you to possess you in
a lawful way, but since you oppose my desires, by an unjust resistance, I shall be obliged to force from you a Treasure, which you would not afford me with your consent. I endeavou∣red to find out terms which might allay his transports, that I might have time to consult with my two Protectors what course to take. Sir, replyed I, I have used all my endea∣vours to make my Heart sensible of your Passion, but you know that Spanish Ladies live in so great a retirement, that the name of Love alone, is capable of affrighting them; you have nothing to combate, but a remainder of a dying Virtue, and I will let you know by Velasquez the measures which are to be taken to sa∣tisfie you. So soon as Winch was gone out of my Chamber, I sent for the two Spaniards, to whom I related our Conversation. We were all of Opinion that it was absolutely ne∣cessary to destroy Winch, if I had
a mind to preserve the Honour of my Sister; and after having consider'd of the means to do it, we resolved that Velasquez should tell him, my Sister was incli∣ned to make him happy, but that she could not effect it in the Ship, without exposing her self to the scorn of the whole Fleet; and that pretending she was willing to sa∣tisfie his desires, he should persuade him to come near to the Coast, which was the same where we now are, and to go into his Long-Boat with such Persons as he could in∣trust with this secret, and walk under the Trees, which are at the foot of this Rock, where she might have no Witness of her frailty. There being a great likeli∣hood that Winch would suffer him∣self to be taken in this Trap, we thought it fit to have the Supper carried on shore, with the best Wine which was in the Fleet, and to mix some Drugs, which might
doze him, in the Wine which Ve∣lasquez should fill for him, that be∣ing asleep he might be the more expos'd to our Revenge: We thought that after that we might be strong enough to rid our selves of the Servants he should bring with him, if they should venture to obstruct our Design. Alvarez, on his part, promised to engage in our Quarrel, the Lieutenant of the Ship which Velasquez Comman∣ded, and Ablington, Lieutenant to the Admiral, who had a pri∣vate pique to Winch, and to make them attack the other three Ships, so soon as we should give them a signal that our undertaking had succeeded. After having thus ta∣ken our measures in what we were to do, as well at Land as at Sea, we parted, each to use his endea∣vours, for the promoting of the ge∣neral Design. Velasquez was able so fully to persuade Winch of the change of my Sister, that this Ge∣neral
expected night with impati∣ence, which he hoped would make him happy. So soon as the Sun was set, he made me pass in his Long-Boat, into which he suffered none to come, but Velasquez with two of his Servants, and a like number he took of his own, which he chose for their Fidelity. He commanded the Rowers to make to shore with all the diligence possi∣ble, and so soon as we were Landed he gave me his hand, and led me under the Banian Trees, which gave a very agreeable shade; there we sate down, and after having spread a Napkin upon the Grass, they brought us the Provisions which were for our Supper. Velas∣quez took charge of the Bottles, that he might prepare the Wine whereof he intended to make Winch drink, but having in vain looked for the Drug which he had a mind to mix with it, he found he had forgotten it in his Ship: But however being
in a Condition to do that by Force which he had design'd to do by Cunning, he arose from his seat, and pretending to go to reach a Cup, he drew out his Hanger, and struck VVinch so great a Blow, that he severed his Head from his Bo∣dy; he went afterwards and run one of the Privateers Servants through, who was bringing some Sweet-meats, which were forgot∣ten in the Ship, before he knew of his Masters Death; he that re∣mained fell upon his Knees to beg his Life of us, but we were forced to sacrifice it to our own safety. After we were rid of all our Enemies we returned to the Sea side, and gave Alvarez the Signal which we had agreed upon, being a Handkerchief held up upon the end of a Stick; he answered it by a Broad-side upon a Ship of the contrary Party, which was next to him, and his example was followed by Ablington, and by Velasquez his Lieutenant. The
Night was so dark, and the smoak of the Cannon so thick, that we could not see any thing more. A little while after the Clouds, with which the Heavens were covered, broke with so terrible a Noise, and the Rain fell in so great abundance, that we were forced to seek for shelter in this Rock, although the Thunder and the Lightning, which frightned us, had nothing in them but what was Natural, we thought that the Heavens, displeased with our having so lately spilt so much Blood, had sent this Tempest, as a mark of its Anger. When the Thun∣der had ceased chiding for a while, the Waves beat against each other with so much violence, and were rai∣sed to such a height, that we thought they were just going to overwhelm us; the Winds which were shut up in this Rock, made such terrible Ecchoes, that we feared, every minute, we should be buried under its Ruines. I had not Courage enough to resist
so many Alarms, and I sell into a Swoon, out of which I was re∣covered by the Lamentations of Velasquez. He had been out, a∣bout day-break, towards the Sea-side, where he saw the Wracks of three of the Ships of Winch his Fleet, which had suffered Ship∣wrack against this Rock. The vio∣lence of the Tempest had carried from the Shore the Bodies that were drowned, and there appearing on∣ly pieces of Masts, Boards, and o∣ther heavy things, which were more capable of resisting the Waves, Velasquez could not judge of which side those were that had suffered Shipwrack; however, in this doubt, he could not avoid shew∣ing his surprize vvith continual La∣mentations, which vvere so loud, that they came to my Ears. I arose immediately, and ran tovvards the place vvhere I heard his voice, to knovv vvhat nevv Misfortunes vve vvere exposed to; he shevved
me the subject of his Complaints; and the Sea being calm, I looked out on all sides, to see if I could discover any of the Vessels of our Friends, but I saw nothing but the sad Wracks which Velasquez had shewed me at first; I thought that I had no more reason to doubt but that the Fleet was lost, and that the Anger of Heaven had punished the Innocent with the Guilty. The fear with which I was seized, at this cruel reflection, made me fall again into my first sort of Indispo∣sition. Velasquez, who saw me stagger, came forwards to support me, and having made his Servants bring some water, he threw it in my Face, to make me come to my self; he made me sit down upon a bundle of Sea-weeds, and per∣ceiving me to open my Eyes, he endeavour'd to persuade me (to dis∣sipate my Fears,) that Heaven was too just, to have preserved an In∣famous Pyrate, rather than those
who had taken upon them the pro∣tection of opprest Virtue; he assu∣red me, that, before Night, we should see the three Vessels, which caused our Fears, come back again to take us up, that we might continue our Voyage. He told me, that if we stayed any longer without having any news of them, we ought to be∣lieve they were forced into some Neighbouring Port, to repair the dammages they sustained by this last storm. As we are apt to believe what we desire, the reasons which Velas∣quez urged quieted a little my mind; but when we had stayed three days, and I found that our Victuals be∣gan to grow short, and that we had no news, either of Alvarez or Ablington, I relapsed into my for∣mer melancholy. We resolved to get up to the top of the Mountain, to seek after some inhabited place; and we left one of our Servants at the Sea-side, to desire our Friends to stay for us there, if they should
come to Land in that place. We went about the Rock, but we found it so steep, that it was impossible for us to get up to the top; and after having wearied our selves, without success, for several hours, we were forced to return back to the place from whence we came. We stayed there two days, with∣out having any hopes of an end of our Afflictions; we began to pre∣pare our selves for Death, as a thing we were certain of. We were so wearied with discovering the Country, that notwithstanding our desperate Condition, we slept as soundly, as if we had had in a∣bundance all things necessary for Life. I was the first up in the morning, rising at break of day, and using my usual Exercise, I went to the Sea-side. After having walk∣ed on all sides, and looked about, to find with my doubting Eyes suc∣cour, which did not come, I would have returned back the same way I
came, but I was seized with fear, at the sight of a terrible Lyon, which came towards me. I cryed out aloud, which brought Velasquez to my help. One would have thought this Beast had been sensi∣ble of my Fear; he appeared to me so gentle and loving. He let fall at my Feet a wild Kid, which he brought in his Mouth, and rolling himself upon the Sand, in∣vited me, by this action, to come to stroak him: I was so afrighted, that, far from going to him, I could not stand upon my Legs. My Com∣panion, who was bolder than I, and as he was as willing to be de∣voured by the Lyon, as to dye with Hunger, he made a sign to one of his Servants, to carry a∣way his Prey, whilst he should play with the Lyon. He went to∣wards this furious Animal, and ha∣ving ventured several times to stroak his sides with his hands, he found him so tame, that he became
bolder, and put his Hand in his Mouth, and plaid with him, as if he had been a little Lap Dog. But when he saw his Servant had hid∣den his theft, he made an end of his dangerous Play, and went a∣way from the Lyon, which re∣turned softly back the same way by which he came. When we had lost sight of the Lyon, we cut down some Boughs from the Trees, the dryest we could find, and having lighted a Fire with two Flints, upon a heap of dryed Leaves, we drest, after the fashion of the Country, the Venison, which the Noble Beast had hunted, and had been cut up by our Servants. Hunger made us relish this Meat more deliciously than any we had ever been at, and we only wished that the Lyon would continue to be our Purvey∣or. Our Hopes were not deceived, this tractable Beast, which saw himself Caressed, used himself to
visit us often, and took care to feed us with what his Chace pro∣duced. When we found, by these means, our subsistence was so cer∣tain, we thought of nothing, but finding a way to get out of the place where we were, by follow∣ing the Lyon, which we looked upon as sent by Heaven for our support. We supposed there was some Habitation upon the Hill, where the Man lived who had ta∣med this Lyon, and that he would have been more wild, had he been bred up in the Woods. Upon this assurance we resolved to make him our Guide. Velasquez, who had more Strength and Activity than I had, undertook the Enterprise. The next day the Lyon being re∣turned from hunting, Velasquez took his Sword and a Gun, which he had brought out of the Ship, and followed him afar off. The Lyon climbed up the Rock, and going through so many difficult
ways, that Velasquez was forced to make use of his hands, to keep himself from falling. And after having often gone up and come down the Rock, he at length discover'd the highest point of it. He had not far to go to the top of the Rock, when the Lyon having rouzed a Deer of that Country, somewhat different from those of Europe, began to run after him with so great a swiftness, that Velasquez could not follow him. The trouble which this was to him, did not last long, for his guide having caught his Prey, walked gently before him with it, and gave him time to follow him to the top of the Hill. Velasquez, who found himself weary, had a mind to take Breath a little, and turning himself towards the Sea, he disco∣vered so great a Tract of Land, that he could not forbear fixing his Eyes, and considering it exactly. In the mean vvhile the Lyon continued on his vvay; and vvhen Velasquez
vvould have follovved him, he no more knevv vvhat vvas become of him. He ran to overtake him, but stumbling fell dovvn. His Gun, which he held cockt in his Hand, that it might be the readier for use, if there vvere occasion, vvent off at the same time. The Old Man, vvho inhabits the Grotto vvhere you found me, surprized vvith hearing the noise of a Gun in that solitary place, came out, follovved by the Lyon. So soon as he savv Velasquez, he came tovvards him, and offered him his assistance in Spanish. My Companion extreamly re∣joyced to find, in such a Desart, a Man vvho understood his Lan∣guage, related to him in a fevv vvords the adventure vvhich had brought him into this place, and told him he had left me with two Ser∣vants on the Sea side. They came to∣gether to take us vvith them, by a much easier vvay, on the o∣ther
side of the Mountain: but it ending a great vvay from the place vvhere vve vvere, vve vvere forced to turn about the Cape in a Boat, vvhich the Old Man used for Fishing. Ve∣lasquez asked, in his vvalk vvith the Old Man, vvhy the Lyon took another Path, than that vvhich vve follovved to go to the Sea? To vvhich he ansvvered, That the Lyon, in hunting, sought after places vvhich vvere least frequented. I began to fear some accident had happened to Velasquez, vvhen I savv the Boat come to the place vvhere vve vvere. I went on Board vvith an unconceivable Joy, but it vvas much greater, vvhen the Old Man told me vve vvere in the Kingdom of Chilli, and not far from the Tovvn of Penco. Being extreamly tired, and in a very bad Equipage, I desired Velasquez to seek my Father,
taking his tvvo Servants vvith him, and come to me again vvhere I vvas, vvith Cloaths, Horses, and Arms; but the nevvs vvhich you have brought me of the loss of the Battel, makes me fear he is fallen in∣to the hands of the Enemy. Don Garcia thus finished his Relation; and although Don Henriquez had hearkened to it, as a pleasant Fable, the Com∣plaisance he had for the fair dis∣guised Person, prevailed vvith him not to discover his thoughts. And he also found some advan∣tage for him in doubting of his Sex, since under the notion of a Brother he might take Li∣berties vvhich vvere not allovv∣able, vvere the Sex of Don Garcia knovvn. He expressed by the most tender transports, the Joy vvhich he had for so happy a meeting; but it be∣ing late he vvas forced to go
into the Cave vvith him, to ake that nourishment vvhich must not be refused to Na∣ture.
DON HENRIQUES DE CASTRO. Book II. AFter the two Brothers had dined, they thought they could not spend the day better, than in seeing the Lyon Hunt. Don Henriquez, who loved this exercise very well, fol∣lowed him, as well as his strength would give him leave. But Don Garcia, or rather, Princess Constan∣tia, for so it was in reality, being more tender, stayed in the Wood,
which was upon the side of the Hill. A Fountain which precipita∣ted it felf from the top of the Rock, formed many Cascades, and made that place very fit to muse in; she promised her Com∣panion to wait for him there, but when he was gone out of sight, she took the way towards Penco, thinking she could not with De∣cency stay with a Man who had given so many instances to her of a violent Passion. Altho' he be∣gan not to be indifferent to her, yet her Vertue made her renounce the Pleasure, which she might re∣ceive from his Conversation. She took the way towards the Sea, that she might put her self in the Old Man's Boat, and follow the Shore. She thought that thereby she would be least exposed to the meeting either of Indians or the wild Beasts, and she made so much haste, that she was very soon at the bottom of the Rock.
Don Henriquez, who had not had any suspicion of her design, re∣turn'd to the Wood, where he had left her, so soon as he had ended his Chase; his mind full of the tender thoughts, with which his Passion inspir'd him. When he missed her, he accused himself of neglect, for having abandoned her in so wild a place, where she was exposed to a thousand Dangers. A moment afterwards, he reproched himself for having discovered to her his Passion, before he had sought for the ways of pleasing her; and he feared he had con∣strained her to go from him, by reason of his too precipi∣tated Declarations. But upon the whole matter, he did not know what to think of it, sometimes he thought she was become a Prey to the wild Beasts, wherewith hese Mountains were filled; and nother time he fancied she had ooked for another retreat, to keep
a decency, and not to expose her Honour. Sometimes he blamed his own levity, and the easiness with which he had forgotten Leonora, to love the next Object, which presented it self to his Eyes. From this thought, he ran to another, and took the meeting of the tame Lyon, and of the young Beauty which had charm'd him, all for a Delusion. It may be, said he to himself, it is the Spirit of Leonora, who had a mind to put thy Constan∣cy to this Tryal, and her sudden retreat is a convincing proof of it. Thou didst not say any thing to this Fair Stranger, which could affright her, and what could make her ap∣prehend, thou should'st ever sail in thy respect to her? And since she had no reason to leave thee, it is to be presumed, it could be nothing but an Apparition; so fearful as she see∣med to be, certainly she would ne∣ver have undertaken a Journey thus alone, in an unknown Countrey. She
would rather have stayed with me, than expose her self to unavoidable dangers, by flying from me. There∣fore thou canst not but think that it is the Ghost of a dead Leonora, and dead, because she would have given her self to thee, and which will eternally haunt thy steps, to pu∣nish thy unfaithfulness. Don Henriques was not so possest with this thought, but he had a remainder of hope, which made him search for her in all the places where he thought he might find her. He spent so much time in this, that it was far in the Night before he came into the Grotto. He was amazed to meet there the old Man, who had dwelt there with a Lady of a great Beau∣ty, although she was not very young. She was drest after the Spanish fashion, as also a Gentle∣man who accompanied her, and she had almost all the Features of the Counterfeit Don Garcia,
which increased the surprize of Don Henriquez. However he ac∣costed the Company, with a free∣dom of mind, which shewed the greatness of his Birth. He Com∣plemented the Master of this Habi∣tation, with an excuse for having, in his absence, taken up his lodg∣ing; he told him that he had done it by the encouragement of Don Garcia, who had assured him, that he would not take it ill, that he had used this liberty, but that he was very much ashamed to come back without that dear Friend, who had promised to make his ex∣cuses for him. At the naming of Don Garcia, the Lady, in a passion, could not forbear interrupting Don Henriquez, to ask him what was become of that Traytor, and what he had done with her Daugh∣ter. Madam, replied this Gentle∣man, if she be in the power of Don Garcia, you need not fear any thing for her Honour. I know very well
that there is no body, who may not be deceived by him, and who would not trust his discretion. It is not that which I mean, replied Don Henriquez, but that she is a Lady, disguised in the habit of a Man, and that therefore your Daughter is in great security with her. This dis∣course increasing the wonder of the Lady, the Company desired Don Henriquez to relate what had passed between Don Garcia and him, and what he had learnt of the History of his Life; he gave imme∣diately this satisfaction to the strange Lady, but she could find no ease by it. Don Henriquez, for his part, had not less impatience, to discourse in private with the old Man, and to know from him who that Julia was who so perfectly resembled Leonora. So soon as it was day, he engaged him to walk with him, and having shewed him her Picture, he asked him if he there discovered the Features of
Julia; after the old Man had assu∣red him that it was the true Picture, he asked him by what accident he had lost her. I cannot, replied the Stranger, satisfie your curiosity with∣out opening again a wound which has bled for a long time, but which now begins to close; but if it be any service to you, I will endeavour to overcome my grief, to relate to you the accidents with which my life has been crost. Don Henriquez told him it was very important for his qui∣et, to hear this relation, and having conducted him into a private place, that they might not be inter∣rupted, he made him sit down in the shade, and desired him to satisfie his Curiosity, which he did in this manner.
The History of Don Estevan. I am called Don Estevan de Ca∣stro. What, interruped Don Hen∣riquez, are you the Father of Don Lorenzo, who was thought to have died in Prison at Tunis? I am he, replied Don Estevan, Fortune which reserved me for other Crosses, rescued me from Slavery, to make my sufferings the more lasting. And I, replied Don Henriquez, am the Son of the same Don Lorenzo, and of Teresamendez. I had, repli∣ed Don Estevan, some suspition of it before, for I observed his very Features in you; and Mendez, Bro∣ther to your Mother, who was in my Grotto when you came thither, had the same thought; for this reason, I was not willing to refuse you a confidence, which may
give you some satisfaction; and I will continue my relation, if you are disposed to hear me; and, see∣ing that Don Heriquez kept si∣lence, he thus pursued his dis∣course. I believe, Son, you are not ignorant of the reasons which for∣ced me to leave my Countrey and have made me, for fifteen years last past, wander from King∣dom to Kingdom? Yes, my Lord, re∣plied Don Henriquez, I know that Don John de Fonseca was in love with your first Wife, and that, not being able to obtain his desires, he was resolved to be revenged of her, and of Don Lopes de la Que∣vae, who had had better success with his own Wife, that to bring about this design, he had made you be in∣formed by a Maid, who was gained by him, that Lopes kept with your Wife a Correspondence which was prejudicial to your Honour; that you having in Friendship told him of it,
he confirmed you himself in these su∣spicions, and promised you he would so order it, that you should find them together at their first meeting: That to effect this treachery, he told his Wife, that yours had talked every where in publick, that Don Lopes bragged of the favours he had re∣ceived from her, and that she was desirous to Justifie her self in his pre∣sence, in the House of a Sempstress, who was one of their Confidents; that Don John, who knew the Hour they pitcht upon, went with you thi∣ther, and made you come in at one door, whilst his Wife went out at the other; that your Wife being come thither to clear her self, was, by these means, left alone with Don Lopes; and that finding them together with∣out any body with them, you were fully perswaded she had betrayed you: and being transported at it, with jea∣lousie you killed them both, him with your Pistol, and her with your Sword; and that thinking, after having com∣mitted
these murthers, you could not expect any safety in Sevil, you de∣parted from thence immediately. I know but confusedly, all that happen∣ned to you afterwards, because you changed your Name, that you might not be known. You have done me a great pleasure, replied Don Este∣van, to spare me the confusion I should have been in; if I had been forced to relate to you my self, the Crime which my Credulity made me commit, with too much precipitancy; but since you are so well informed of these Circumstan∣ces, I have nothing more to tell you, but what happened to me af∣ter I left Sevil. I went from Sevil to Seragossa, where Ferdinand and Isabella then kept their Court. It was easie for me to hide my self in the throng of Strangers, who came thither from all parts, but fearing I might at lest be disco∣vered, I resolved to go into some other Countrey, to serve in the
Army. I heard Charles the VIII of France, was then design∣ing for Italy with a strong Army, to recover the Kingdom of Naples, which he pretended belonged to him, as descended from the House of Anjou, from which it had been unjustly taken away by Usurpa∣tion. They told me also that the King of Spain took no part in this War, which made me resolve to serve in the French Army, rather than in that of Alphonso, who was not now in a condition to resist so great a Monarch. I took Post immediately, and having crossed the Pyrenian Hills, I came to Ly∣ons, where was appointed the gene∣ral Rendezvous of the Army; I found the King ready to pass the Alpes; and having no Acquaintance in France, I followed the Army in the quality of a Volunteer. I had a pretty handsome Equipage, and spending liberally, I soon got Friends in the Army. We passed
through Italy, as if the King had only travelled through his own Do∣minions; so great a Veneration had all the little Soveraigns of the Countreys, where we passed, for this Prince. When we were come to the frontiers of the King∣dom of Naples, we heard that Al∣phonso, frightned by the approach of our Army, was retired to Ma∣zara in Scicily, where he made him∣self a Monk; his Son Ferdinand indeavoured to make some resi∣stance, but seeing all places open their Gates to the French, without staying for their Cannon, he feared lest his own Subjects should de∣liver him up to King Charles, and therefore retired into the Island of Chio, leaving us, by his retreat, masters of his Kingdom. Charles made himself be Crowned King of this new Conquest, and after ha∣ving left there a Vice-Roy, de∣parted in order to his return for France; and it was, to speak pro∣perly,
in this Voyage that we began to make War. These great successes of Charles had allarmed all the Princes of Italy, who being leagued together, raised a great Army under the Conduct of Francis de Gonzaga. This great General disputed with us the passage of the Texin, and we were forced to come to blows. I was so happy in this fight, as to save the life of the Marshal de Gie, who commanded our Van-Guard; his Horse having been killed under him, I gave him mine, and after having dismounted with a blow of my Sword, a Horseman, who had his Sword at the Marshals back, mounted upon his Horse; the Marshal was so thankful to me for this Service, that he would not suffer me to make use of any other Table but his, and lodged me in his House, when I came to Paris. He had a Nephew in his House, called Keroline, with whom
I contracted a strict Friendship; and the chief employment of the French, being to visit the Ladies in time of peace, I accompanied him in a visit he made to a Kins∣woman of the Dutchess of Candale, for whom the Duke of Orleance had a great passion; this Lady, whom I had the honour to please, introduced me into that Princes service, whose Favourite I became soon after; few days after this, the Dutchess of Beaujeu, whom the Duke courted to marry, having dis∣covered this Intreague, became jea∣lous of it, and complained to the King, who sent my Master Priso∣ner to the Tower of Bourges. I remained some time at Paris, for my Master's service, but having heard that Keroline reported every where, that my indiscretion had been the cause of the Duke's dis∣grace; I could not avoid challeng∣ing him, and fighting him; we fought with Sword and Daggar
upon the Road to the Bois de Vin∣cent; many of our Friends ran after us to part us, but they came too late, for our Combat was en∣ded by the death of Keroline. And Duels being forbidden then in France, the fear I had of being ta∣ken Prisoner, made me, without delay, take Post for Lyons, and then repassed the Alpes. I heard, at Turin, that Ferdinand was come back into his Dominions, that King Charles was dead, that my Master had succeeded him, by the name of Lewis the twelfth, and that he had entered into a League with Spain for the Con∣quest of the Dutchy of Milan, and the Kingdom of Naples. Although I had a great deal to hope for in France, from the goodness of the new King, who had been so kind to me when I served hm, yet the love of my Countrey made me resolve to take a Command in the Spanish Army, so soon as it was
raised. I came thither in all dili∣gence, and I waited upon Ferdi∣nand Gonzalez de Cordoua Marquess de Leve, who commanded it, he had heard of me to my advantage, when I went by the name of Demiguel Cardegnas, which I had taken in France; this induced him to make me Lieutenant of his own Lances. Ferdinand having been a second time Stript of his Countrey, the two Kings quarrelled about the di∣viding of their Conquest, and I was forced to bear Arms against the French, at the Battel which the Mar∣quess de Leve fought aginst the Duke of Nemours. I took several Prisoners in this fight, and amongst others Blessac, who was a near Kinsman to the Lady that had given me to the Duke of Orle∣ance; he made himself known to me, and being very glad to have this opportunity, to acknowledge the favours I had received from
his Kinswoman, I sent him back without ransom, which afterwards saved my life, as I shall tell you. I was taken at the Battel which the French won neer Ravenna, un∣der the Command of Gaston de Foix, and being so unhappy as to render my self to Keroline's Bro∣ther, he would have killed me, to revenge the death of a Man I had killed without treachery; but Blessac, who was present, could not suffer so great a baseness, he took my part with so much warmth that it came to blows, and they fought at the head of the Camp; this quarrel happenning in the presence of so many, they were soon parted; but however in this disturbance, I found an opportu∣nity to escape; I got back to Ra∣venna, whither the remaining part of our Army had retreated, where I remained sick for many Months; for the wounds which I had re∣ceived in the last fight, having
been long without dressing, in∣flamed and put me into a Feaver, and out of which, I recovered with great difficulty. a Spaniard na∣med Don Alvarez, who had been my dearest Neighbour when I lived at Sevil, lodged in the same House where I lay sick. he came by chance into my Chamber, and knew me, although I was ve∣ry much altered; he offered me his service with so good a Grace, that I spoke to him without dis∣guise, I enquired of him, what had passed since my departure; and he informed me, that my Son, who was but four years of age, when I was forced to leave my Countrey; and who is the same Don Lorenzo, whose Son you are, was gone into the Indies with Fer∣dinando Cortez, he told me also, that although he was very young, yet he had gained a great Reputa∣tion, which was a great comfort to me.
The Wars of Italy being ended by the loss of the Battel of Pavie, and by the Imprisonment of Fran∣cis the First, King of France, who had succeeded Lewis the twelfth, I found my self without employ∣ment, and not daring to return into Spain, I resolved to go to Naples, to pass my time there, till a new War should find me an employment. I had done great servi∣ces, the last time this Town was taken, to Alexander Cappaccio, who made there a considerable Fi∣gure, and although he was since dead, his Wife did not forget it. I went to give her a visit, and she would not suffer me to lodge in any other House but hers; she had with her a Daughter, who was the only fruit of her mar∣riage. Flavia, for so she was called, was grown as much in Beauty, as in Age, since I saw her, and her Charms raised jealousie in the greatest Beauties of Naples; her
Lovers were in great number; but in that Crowd, she had cast her Eye more especially upon two Brothers, who were no less considerable for their Merit, than their Birth; the name of the Eldest was Scipio, and the Youngest Octavius; there was so great an equality between them, that Flavia durst not chuse the one, for fear of displeasing the o∣ther. I having the opportunity to see her at all hours, she told me her thoughts with great freedom. One day, after having related to me, what these two Brothers had done to deserve her kindness, and having described to me the Cha∣racter of each, she asked my ad∣vice, concerning the choice she was to make. I answered her plea∣santly, to make them agree, her best way was to give me a Heart, for which these two Rivals dispu∣ted with so much heat, to hinder Love from distinguishing in them the Sentiments of Nature. She look∣ed
upon me smilingly, and seeing in my eyes an amorous languishing, which she had never before obser∣ved, she began to think I spoke this only to discover her thoughts. My humour was not unpleasing to her, and she found in the advice, which I gave her, something which flattered her Inclination, but she would not let me know what passed in her Heart, until she had satisfied her self better, what I self for her: she observed my be∣haviour with great exactness, and so soon as she was fully perswaded of the truth of my Passion, she began to love the two Brothers less; they soon were sensible of her coldness towards them, and seeing she favoured none of their Rivals, they guessed I was the cause of this change in her. You know, that in Italy, the Women have not any more liberty than in Spain, and that the greatest favour they can afford to their Lovers,
is to appear at a Window, or in a Balcony, when they give them a Serenade, and make Love to them. Flavia shewed this Complaisance to none but the two Brothers; and therefore it was easie for them to guess, that if she had any other Amour, it must be with me, whom she might see at all times, since I lodged in the House. They did not dare to make their jealousie known to me, for fear of displeasing their Mistress, or her Mother. But Scipio, who was the violentest of the two, ingaged me to play with him, and having picked a quarrel with me, he provoked me to such a Degree, that I was forced to draw my Sword upon him, we went to fight out of the Town, and he attacqued me with so much violence, that he run himself through with my Sword, and fell down dead at my feet. The Officer who was guar∣ding some Prisoners to Naples, being followed by about twenty Guards,
passed by the place where we had fought, and having seized me, car∣ried me away to Prison. Flavia heard with great trouble, the mis∣fortune which had befallen me, and she having been the innocent oc∣casion of it, she sent for Don Alva∣rez, to find out with him some way to save me. He advised her, to make use of the Power she had o∣ver Octavius, and to ingage him to let fall his prosecution. She imme∣diately took a Pen in her hand, and writ to him in these words. YOƲ are not ignorant of the Interest I ought to take in whatsoever concerns Don Miguel de Cardegnas, I cannot abandon him without Ingratitude, after the Ser∣vices he has done for our Family. You have taken the Tokens of my acknow∣ledgement, for the effects of a more tender Passion; and your Brother lost himself, by not having known my thoughts well. I am willing to help
you out of an Error, by ingageing to you my Faith, and and I shall do it without repugnancy; since your Bro∣ther is dead, nothing hinders me from yielding up my self wholy to you. But to obtain this Happiness, you must sacrifice all your resentments, and re∣store Don Miguel his Liberty. And you have no reason to hate a Man, who by taking from you a Brother, at the same time freed you of a Ri∣val. Therefore never see me again, un∣less you bring him back with you, and satisfie your self; my Heart and my Hand are only to be had at this Price. She immediately sent this Let∣ter to Octavius, who, to shew the strength of his Love, by the quick∣ness of his obedience, went imme∣diately to the Judges, who had condemned him. He told them he knew my Innocency, and desired them to let me be freed out of Prison. They answered him, that
the time was now past, and that the Sentence having been once gi∣ven, there was no way to revoke it. Octavius, who feared Flavia would accuse him of negligence, resolved to rescue me, when they carried me to Execution. He got his Friends together, and having posted them in the Avenues, where I was to pass, so soon as he saw me appear, he fell upon the Offi∣cers who guarded me, with so much violence, that they were forced to quit me. And he came immediately and unbound me. But as I was giving him my thanks for so generous an Action, the Guards, who were already gone a consiberable di∣stance from us, fired in their flight upon us, to hide their Cowardise. And Octavius was so unfortunate, that a Bullet, which was shot at random, hit him in the Head, and mortally wounded him; when I saw my help was of no use to my Benefactor, I thought of nothing
but making my escape in this disturbance, and being passed the Gates of the City, I retired to Ca∣pua. Don Alvarez took care to let me hear from Flavia every day. He sent me word, that the Mother of Flavia, taking me for a Souldi∣er of Fortune, had condemned the Inclination that fair Person had for me, and had forbidden her to con∣tinue a Commerce, whereof she disapproved so much. I desired Don Alvarez to tell her my true Name, without telling her the reasons which had made me change it, and to dispose her to give me her Daughter, shewing her that my Birth was not inferior to hers. My Friend acquitted himself of this Commission, with a great deal of Wit. But this Lady intending to write into Spain, to be assured that what he had told her was true; he feared the cruel Adventures which happened to me at Sevil, would be known to her. Flavia, who
was afraid her Mother should en∣gage her to any body else, and marry her against her Inclination, resolved to come to me to Capua, and be married to me there pri∣vately, she discovered her Intenti∣ons to Don Alvarez, who sent to me to come incognito to Naples. So soon as I was arrived there, he gave notice of it to Flavia, who came out of her Lodgings in the dusk of the Evening, at the Gar∣den Door, where I waited for her, with my Friend. We led her into a House which was not far from thence, where vve remained con∣cealed for five or six days. When vve found that the noise of the stea∣ling avvay of Flavia vvhich vvas spread about the Tovvn, vvas some∣vvhat abated, vve returned to Ca∣pua, vvhere I married Flavia pri∣vately. I then made my Friends use their Endeavours with her Mo∣ther, and they convinced her so fully, that I vvas not a Match un∣vvorthy
of her, that at length she approved of our Marriage, and came to take us up at Capua, to bring us to a fine House vvhich she had in Calabria on the Sea side. Don Estevan was continuing his Relation, when he was interrupted by the Arrival of Mendez and the unknown Lady, who not having found them in the Cave, came thi∣ther to seek them. The old Man told them he had discovered that Don Henriquez vvas his Grandson, and Son to Don Lorenzo, of vvhom he had so often spoken to him. Af∣ter the tvvo nevv Comers vvere seated near Don Henriquez and the Old Man, the strange Lady perse∣cuted Mendez, for his being alvvays in so deep a study. Well Sir, said she, does the remembrance of the Princess Zulemaide possess always your mind, and are you resolved to leave us, to seek her, without knowing in what part of the World you can find
her? I confess Madam, replied Mendez, that since I lost her, I have never had a moment of quiet, and that I have wandered from one Pole to the other, for some years past, without discovering what might give me any hopes of seeing any period put to my misfortunes; but only that which the Man of the House, where we lodged at Penco, told me; who gave me some Idea of the Course I ought to take, to succeed in an undertaking, which has hitherto been without suc∣cess. Don Henriquez, having heard nothing of the Adventures vvhich had happened to Mendez, and that all that vvas now spoken concerning Princess Zulemaide vvas a Riddle to him▪ he desired his Unkle to ex∣plain it to him. Don Estevan and the strange Lady, joined in the re∣quests of Don Henriques, all three pressing him so hard to afford them this satisfaction, that he could not refuse it; and, having studied a little while, he began his Relation in these words.
The History of Mendez and the Princess Zu∣lemaide. YOU have been informed of my Birth, and knowing as you do, that War has been for a long time my employment; I have nothing to relate to you, of the first Accidents of my Youth. I was at Diu, when Rustan-Basha came to besiege it by order from Soliman the Emperor of the Turks. Don Pe∣dro de Sylvera, who was Governour of it, sent me into Peru, to demand Succours from Pizarro. A storm drives me upon a Desart Island, which is not far distant from the Province of Cusco, and the sweet∣ness and mildness of the Climate, invited me to Land there. I for some time admired the Beauty of
the Countrey, but after having walked in it a quarter of an Hour, I met with what struck me with admiration, I saw between the Trees a young Woman, naked, a∣bout sixteen years old, and won∣derfully beautiful. Altho' she was very much amazed to see me, yet she did not run away, but gave me leave to come nearer to her. I ask∣ed her in Portuguese, if she would come into my Ship, but she answe∣red me with an inarticulated Voice, which resembled more the how∣ling of Beasts, than a human voice. I made her observe the Ship which I came in, and made her under∣stand by signs, the Proposition I had made to her. She reached out her hand to me, and suffered me without difficulty, to lead her in∣to my Ship. The Storm being cea∣sed, I continued my Course, and arrived in a short time in Peru. I went to Pizarro, and carried with me this young Woman, to whom
I had given one of my Suits of Cloaths to cover her nakedness, until I had time to have some made, conformable to her Sex. She had a very lively wit, and altho' our voyage was very short, yet I taught her Portuguese enough in that time, to make her self understood. When I had brought her up to be fit to converse with, I asked her how she came to be left in this uninhabited Island, and naked. Seigneur, said she, I had always been shut up in a Cave, out of which I could not stir, the entry being closed by great Thorns, some great Beasts, which I think they call Lyons, brought me what was ne∣cessary for my nourishment, till about three Months ago, a Thunderclap broke the top of the Cavern where∣in I was shut; and I was surprized to see the light. I observed very nar∣rowly the circuit of this Cave, and finding Stones which came forwarder some than others, and which I might make use of for steps, to get to the
top of the Vault, and to get out of my Prison. I put my self in a posture of executing this thought, I found the execution of it so easie, that in a little time, I set my self at full liberty. I went round the Island several times, to find out, if I could, any Creature which resembled me, that I might converse with him, but having found there no habita∣tion, nor a possibility to look for any further, I contented my self, with en∣joying the fruits which the Island af∣forded me, without extending my curiosity further. When I saw you ap∣pear upon the top of the Hill, I ex∣amined you narrowly, and seeing you were made very like me, excepting your being clothed, and I being na∣ked, I stayed till you came up, with∣out being frightned, to learn what it was you came to seek in this Island. When she had done speaking, I asked her many questions, that I might know by what accident she came to be shut up in this Cave,
but I could learn nothing more of it from her. When I was arrived at the Camp of Pizarro, they would have imprisoned me as a Spye, because they said I had with me in mans Cloaths, Rominagui's Wife, who was Daughter to the late King A∣tabalipa; but after they had look∣ed upon her more attentively, (the Person they took for this Princess,) they found she was much younger, and much more beauti∣ful, which made them cease to hin∣der me from delivering to Pizar∣ro, the Pacquet wherewith Don Pedro de Silvera had intrusted me for him. I had a very obliging re∣ception from him, but he gave me to understand, that he had need himself of his Forces, that he could not send any of them to the re∣lief of Diu. During the stay which I made in the Army, I learnt the Queen of Peru was ready to be brought to Bed, when Pizarro took
Atabalipa Prisoner, and that being frightned with the King her Hus∣band's being condemned to death, she had put her self into a Canoo, with two Women to wait upon her, and that she had landed upon the same Island, where I found this young Woman; that she was de∣livered in this Cave, and was de∣voured by a Lyon which had there his Den; and that the two Women which had followed her, returned back in their Boat, without daring to take the Child whereof she was delivered, and came back into the Province of Cusco, where they related to Pizarro, the unfortu∣nate end of this Princess; at which he seemed to be sensibly afflicted. These Circumstances, and the re∣semblance that was between this Girl, and the Wife of Rominagui, made me easily comprehend, that this was the Child whereof the Queen of Peru was delivered and that she might have a Name suitable to
her Birth, I called her Zulemaide, which signifies, in the Language of the Countrey, full of Majesty. I would not take her with me to Diu, nor leave her in the Mo∣lucca Islands, for fear some acci∣dents should happen to her in my absence, or that she might suffer some inconveniency, by being in a besieged Town. I therefore chose rather to send her to Lisbon, where I hoped to be my self, in a short time; I found near an Island where I touched for water, six English Vessels, who were there for the same purpose; they were comman∣ded by an English Captain called Winchester; and were returning for Europe. I would not slip so fair an opportunity, to send Zulemaide thither, it being the more conve∣nient, because two Vessels of this Fleet were commanded by Portu∣gal Captains, the Name of the one was Velaquez, and the other Alva∣rez. I put her into the hands of a
Souldier who served long under me, and whose fidelity was well known to me, his name was John Becaio; our parting was very passionate, altho' I did not think I should have lost her, as I have done, without ever having been able to learn any news of her. After the Siege of Diu was rai∣sed, I went to the Molucca's, where I made some stay, and from thence took passage to Portugal, where I could not hear any news, ei∣ther of Zulemaide, or of John Be∣caio. I searched for her in all the Courts of Europe, and not having been able to discover any thing, which could quiet my mind; I re∣turned to Lisbon, where I heard the King of Portugal was sending a Fleet to the Molucca's, and I obtai∣ned a Ship. I had, during this Voy∣age, a quarrel with the Admiral of this Fleet, and separated my self from him in the Night, with a design to return for Lisbon. My
Lieutenant, to whom I had not com∣municated my design, opposed me, when he saw me change my Course. Upon this Contest we fell to words, and drew our Swords upon the Deck, our Souldiers took parties, each following his own inclination, and the fight was so bloody, that of above 500 which we were at first, there remained alive but 50, and those almost all wounded; and for a full Complement of our mis∣fortunes, we were driven by so cruel a storm, that we thought e∣very moment our Ship was going to sink, we were driven near an Island, and altho' we knew it was not inhabited, yet we put out our Long-Boat to land there, fearing our Vessel should run a ground, coming too near the Land. It was almost night when we landed, and we passed the Night in great dis∣quiet, under some Banian Trees, the great Leaves of which defen∣ded us from the injuries of the wea∣ther;
when it was day, we travel∣led further into the Island to get some fresh water, but we were ve∣ry much amazed, to meet there that Lady, said Mendez, (shewing the unknown Lady) vvith a Man in a Spanish habit, vvhich we afterwards found to be Don John de Serano, vvho vvent out vvith Magellan, to discover the Straights, to vvhich he gave his Name, they told us by vvhat accident they came into this Island, vve offered them to car∣ry them vvhither they pleased, and the Lady, in return offered us, to procure an employment for us, of the King of Borneo, her Father, if vve vvould conduct her into that Island. We used so much diligence in repairing the dammages vvhich the Tempest had done to our Ship, that in a fevv days, vve vvere in a condition to set sail again. We vvent on Board with this Lady, and Don John de Serano, and, the Wind being favourable, vve arri∣ved
in a short time at one of the Ports of this Island. When we had landed, we mounted upon Beasts little differing from our European Stags, of which the great ones are made use of here, instead of Horses, and they being very nimble, we came in a short time to the King of Borneo's Court, who gave us a favourable reception, up∣on the account, and for the sake of his Daughter. This Prince having sent an Army under the Conduct of Don John de Serano against Mucitapan, King of the Island of Cuba. I had the Ho∣nour to serve him in this War with my Ship, we overcome Mu∣citapan, and after his death, this Lady was married to Don John, who was crowned King of Cuba. My Lady was baptized by one of the Priests, aboard my Vessel, and was named Isabella, all the La∣dies of our Court followed our ex∣ample, and in a short time, the Exer∣cise
of the Christian Religion, was etled in this Island, with as much freedom as in Spain. I remained still at the Court of the new King, who had always a great value for me, looking upon me as a Man to whom he owed his life. Sometime afterwards the Emperor Charles the fifth, sent Don Garcia to Tim∣ala, where Don John kept his Cours; but this Embassadour in∣stead of acquitting himself of the Commission the Emperor had given him, minded nothing but his pri∣vate interest; and stole away the Princess Constantia. Daughter to King John. This Prince went after him with the lightest of his Ships, and I remained with the Queen, to take care of the Government of the Island in his absence. Some days after the Kings departure, the Queen had notice that Constantia was carried away with the con∣sent of Don John; that he had pre∣tended to pursue Don Garcia, only
to take that opportunity, to go to Charles the fifth's Court, who promised to marry one of his na∣tural Daughters to him, provided he would quit to him the Sove∣raignty of the Island of Cuba. The Queen desired me to conduct her to the Imperial Court, to demand justice of the Emperor, against Don John for his Treachery. I would not undertake this Voyage, until I had consulted, how I was to be∣have my self, with Don Lorenzo, who knew better than I, the humour of the Ministers whereof the Empe∣ror made use. We went to Pen∣co to seek for him, but we heard at our arrival, that he was gone from thence some days before, to find out Rominagui; and they tel∣ling us at the same time, that Don Estevan was his Father, and that he had retired himself into this Grotto, we sent to desire him to come to the Queen to Penco; in the mean while, I was very
much amazed, that the Land-Lord of the House where we lodged, was the same John Becaio, whom I had intrusted with the Princess Zulemaide. I asked him what he knew concerning her, one day when I was alone in my Chamber, and he thus related to me, what had hapned to him since our separa∣tion.
The History of John Be∣caio. YOU know, Seigneur, that I went on board Winchester's Ship, with the Princess Zulemaide, of whom you gave me charge. I observed that this Privateer lookt upon her, with great earnestness; but I never stirred far from her, and he durst scarce speak to her. This constraint being uneasie to him, he endeavoured to find out some way to be rid of me, without using any violence; he stayed till we were in the narrow Seas, and putting upon the Coast of Brit∣tain in France, he sent me on Shore in the Long-Boat, under pretence to buy him some Provisions, which we wanted; it was above half a
League from the place where I went on shore to St. Maloes, and it was already almost Night. I made all the haste I could, that I might come to the Town before the Gates were shut. But I found in my way some Recruits, which were new∣ly raised, who stripped me, with∣out leaving me so much as my Shirt. I continued my Journey to St. Maloes, and thought my sell very happy, that I got into the Town; I came under a Shop, where I would have sheltered my self, and have slept all Night. But I had not been there above half an hour, before I had been sprinkled with some water, which was not very clean, this made me cry out aloud, which made the Mistress of the House put her head out at the Window, she asked me what had befallen me; and after I had related to her my misfortunes, she gave or∣der I should come up; passing by the Kitchin door, I saw prepa∣tation
making for a great Supper, which gave me great Comfort; hoping I should have my share. However I seemed not to take any notice of it, but followed my Conductor to the first appartment, where I found a Woman which was pretty handsome, and about thirty years of age; she made signs to me to come nearer to her, and having asked me, how I came to be reduced to so sad a Condi∣tion, I related to her in a few words, the adventures of my Voy∣age She seemed to be much con∣cerned at my misfortunes, and af∣ter having given me a Cloak to cover me, she told me, she expect∣ed to supper one of her Friends, and that as soon as he was come, the meat should be set upon the Table, and I should eat with her. Whilst we were thus in conversa∣tion, there came a young Man of a pretty good Meen, I know not whether it was her Husband, or
her Gallant, but he looked upon me with a bended Brow; and after having asked this Woman who I was, and what I did there; he bid me get out of the House, if I had not a mind to be soundly beaten, he took from me at the same time, the Cloak which had been given me, and having conducted me to the door of the Street, he shut it upon me. I walked some time a∣bout the Town, not knowing whi∣ther I went; and passing through a Church-Yard, I sate down, think∣ing to stay there the rest of the Night. I had but just sate down when I perceived a Lanthorn come∣ing towards me, if this sight fright∣ned me, he who carried the Lan∣thorn, and his Companions, were not less afraid, for they took me for Spirit, and were just going to turn back, but they being six, came-to me with their Pistols cock't, ask∣ing me, who was there? When they had heard my misfortune related,
they thought I was proper to serve them in a design which they had, they made me go with them into the Church by a little door, of which they had the Key, they then took up a great stone, which cove∣red the mouth of a Vault, and ha∣ving let me down into it, they stuck the Candle which was in the Lanthorn against the Wall, and shewed me a Knight, which was in a Coffin of Lead, with all his Ha∣bits and a great many Jewels, which they ordered me to take from him. I first took a Knights Cross, set with Diamonds which I gave them, but having taken from him seve∣ral Rings of value, which were up∣on his fingers, I kept one for my self, to make use of in case of necessi∣ty. At the same time the Candle fell down, and went out, and the six Robbers went up immediately into the Church, and shut the Vault with the stone they had first raised. When I found my self alone in a
place so full of horror, I took such a fright, that I thought I should have died upon the place, but ha∣ving in a short time after, heard singing in the Church, I came to my self again, and groped up the Stairs, when I was at the top, I cried out so loud, that the Canons, who were come to say Matins, took up the Stone to see what it was. So soon as I had a free passage, I ran away so swiftly, that they knew not what became of me. I went out by the little Door, which the Thieves had left open, but did not care to stay any longer in a Town, where I had been so ill u∣sed; so I went round the Walls, and having found a breach, I went down through it into a Ditch, and from thence into the Fields. I per∣ceived a far off a Dung-Hill, which I went towards, and endeavou∣red by its heat, to recover my self from the cold which I had endured. So soon as it was day. I went to∣wards
the Sea, and meeting a Coach with six Horses, attended by ma∣ny Horsemen, he, who was in it, seeing me in so bad an Equipage, commanded me to come to the Coach side. It was a reverend Bi∣shop, who enquired of me all the particulars of my misfortune, with a great deal of Compassion. After I had told him all, he ordered one of his Servants to give me a Cloak, and ordered his Coachman, that I should ride behind him, I accom∣panied him as far as Vannes, where I desired he would be pleased to buy my Ring, which was the only thing I had left; after having shewed it to a Jeweller, he kept it, and orde∣red me a hundred Crowns, where∣of half went to cloath me, and the other half I subsisted upon, till I went in to my own Country. I endeavoured to find out a con∣venience to go thither, and went to Dover, where I asked for Win∣chester, I heard there, that he had
passed the Straights, and that he was gone into the Mediterranean to cruise there; that which made me go into Portugal, was, to endeavour to get some money, before I went after the Privateer, I came to Lisbon, where I drained the purses of all my Friends, to put me into a Con∣dition to go the Voyage of Italy. I had the opportunity of a Ship, in which I went to Naples, and from thence by Land to Rome, but the Stock which I had carried, not being very great, it was soon spent, and I was forced to beg. My good For∣tune brought me acquainted with another Begger, whose name was Bernardin, who conducted me to the Hospital to lodge, where I be∣came known to the Directors of it. I behaved my self with so much cunning, that I was employed to beg for all the Hospital, in which employment, I found my account many ways, I made an acquain∣tance with some of the Conside∣rablest
Women in the whole Town, who made me from time to time small presents; of the mony which was given me, I carried but two thirds to the Hospital, and I divi∣ded that which I kept for my self, into three parts, one part was al∣lotted for play, and my other di∣versions, the second to buy me Cloaths and Linnen, and the third I kept in bank, to make use of when I wanted an employment. I had been but too happy, if this life had lasted always, but by mis∣fortune, Velasquez found me one day in a Church, and having gi∣ven me his Alms, without know∣ing me, he went from me two or three steps, but came back again to me, and asked me how much he had given me? Sir, said I, it is two pence I have from your Liberali∣ty. Give it me back again, replied Velasquez, and I will give thee a Pistole. I thought he had known me, since he gave me such great Alms.
But however, I thought it best to let him explain himself before I did, I only gave him the two pence, and took the Pistole he gave me, and seeing he went away with∣out saying any thing more, I kept the same silence. Four days after this, meeting him in the street, he accosted me, and desired me to de∣liver from him a Note to a young strange Lady, which was lately arrived in Rome, and who lived in great retirement. I represented to him what a hazard I should run, in venturing to do such a thing to a Woman of so great Vertue as she was, and that I could not un∣dertake a charge so opposite to the profession I followed. But he made me so many promises, and spake so many civil words to me, swearing so often he would ne∣ver forsake me; that I could not refuse doing him this Service. The next day I found the Lady at Mass, and being accustomed to
give her often little Images or Prayers to invite her to liberality. She took the Note without open∣ing it, thinking it was something of the same nature, with what I used to present every day. The next day I came to her, to see how she had taken the thing, and asked her Charity as I used to do, but she called me by several op∣probrious Names, and protested she would have me punished, if I ever appeared again in her sight. And I assure you that altho' I have without fear gone through the greatest Dangers, yet this young Beauty made me tremble, and took from me the Confidence to give her any answer. This story came to the Ears of the Director of the Hospital, who after having rebu∣ked me severely for it, would have had me whipped, and sent to Prison, but I chose rathcr to re∣tire and quit the profits which I made of the employment he had
given me. I went to give a visit to Velasquez, and after having made my self known to him, I asked him for news of Zulemaid. He told me Winchester was fallen in love with her, that he had sent me to buy Victuals only to rid himself of me, and that he had passed into the Mediterranean, to avoid meeting with you, and not to be forced to restore her. I desired him to tell me if she were yet in the hands of Winchester. And he told me, that he having been forced to land on the Coast of Africa, his Ship had been attacqued by four Gallies, which came from Algiers, and that they had made the Princess a slave. I resolved to live with Valasquez, that I might the easier find a way to hear of Zulemaide, and he, know∣ing I vvas resolute, vvas glad to make use of me. I accompanied him alvvays by night, vvhen he vvent upon any night Intreague; and to bring my self into grea∣ter
Reputation vvith him, I made use of this pleasant Artifice, I post∣ed four Bravos of my acquaintance, who came to assault us; I imme∣diately drew my Sword, and vvent tovvards them vvith great resolu∣tion. After having fenced vvith them some time, they turned their backs, and fled, as vve had agreed they should; this made Velasquez have a great opinion of my cou∣rage, and made me pass vvith him for an undaunted Souldier. The next morning being at his rising, he gave me one of his suits of Cloaths, vvhich vvas vvorth above an hundred Ducates, to shevv me his gratefulness, and I vvent imme∣diately to the Tavern vvith my four Friends, and treated them ve∣ry highly. Velasquez blazed abroad this Action every vvhere, and spoke of me vvith such great Commen∣dations, that the greatest Men of the City vvere glad to have my Friendship. I vvent every morning
to the Tennis Court, vvhere I judg∣ed and every one acquiesced in my judgment, for fear of displeasing me. I vvas put upon all dangerous adventures, and I vvas often forced to venture my Life, to keep up the reputation vvhich I had acqui∣red. But going often to dine at the Tables of the great Lords, I met at the Table vvith a Buffoon, who had been vvell received every vvhere, he sometimes speaking things vvhich vvere diverting. I never loved that sort of People, and having one day met him abroad, I laughed at him, and called him fool. He ansvvered me insolently, and I gave him a box on the Ear, vvhich I thought vvould have throvvn him upon the ground. A Bravo vvho vvas there, took his part vvith so much Warmth, that I vvas forced to come to blovvs vvith him; vve vvent to fight in the great Place before St. Peters Church, and vve were both vvoun∣ded
in the first attack, but vvith great difference, for he geve me only a Cut upon my Head vvhich stunned me, and at the same in∣stant, I ran him thorovv the Bo∣dy vvith my Svvord, and made him fall at my feet wallowing in his own blood. There came by at the same time, a Company of Catch-poles, vvho came upon me, and forced me avvay to Prison. All the other Adventures vvhich had happened to me at Rome, vvere added to this, to blacken me; and I vvas accused for corrupting the Youth of Rome. But my Enemy recovering of his Wound, they vvere contented vvith only banish∣ing me from the City for some years When I vvas come out of Prison, I vvent to Velasquez, vvho vvas just upon his departure from Rome; I took this opportunity, and vvent vvith him to Venice. I could not hear there any nevvs of Zulemaid, vvhich made me re∣solve
to return to the Indies, that I might relate to you vvhat had been the Destiny of that Princess. I vvent to Naples, vvhere I found a passage for Sevil. I vvaited there, for the going off of the Gallions, upon which I embarqued. They came to an Anchor before Penco, where Valdivia then was, I could not hear of you there, which made me resolve to stay there until I could. I have married there a Wife, whose first Husband kept an Inn, which made me have a mind to take up the same trade. I find ve∣ry vvell my account by it, by the tricks my Wife has taught me to use in it. When there comes any Passengers, so soon as their Horses have any Oats given to them, I send my Hens to the Stable, who eat with them without being invited. I kill every year five or six Hogs, where∣of I make a spiced sort of Pudding, which lasts all the Winter: The Shepherds round about us furnish
me with meat, at a very easie rate; for when they have any Sheep or Goats sick, or ready to die with Age, they immediately bring them to me. Those who eat of this meat, find it often hard and tough, but when a Man is hungry, he eats any thing We have an hundred Hens, whose stale Eggs we sell dea∣rer than they do fresh Eggs at Lis∣bon. We keep Pigeons, Capons, and Pheasants, but these are only for the Vice-Roy, or for the Principal Officers of his Army. This is the life I lead. I wish I could tell you better news of the Princess where∣with you intrusted me, but you can∣not but be very well satis∣fied, that it was not in my power to hinder her from falling into the misfortune she has done. Thus John Becaio finished his Hi∣story, added Mendez, and I am re∣solved to go to Constantinople. For altho' it looks as if it were impossible to get her out of the Seraglio, I will
do it, or I will perish in the attempt. When Mendez had made an end of speaking, those who had been listning to him, would have retur∣ned into the Grotto, but a great noise which they heard towards the Sea, made them search into the Cause. They went to the bottom of the Hill, and when they were upon the shore, they saw nothing which gave them any Light. After having listned some time, they observed this noise came from some place under ground, and was formed of confused Voices, but they searched no further into it, they knowing the entry of that Cave was on the other side of the Rock, and it was impossible for them to go thither, the feigned Don Garcia having taken away Don Este∣vans Boat, so they were forced to go back to their Grotto, to take a slender Meal which was provided for them. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Novels and Plays Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes. NOVELS. 1 ZElinda a fam'd Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count Brion. 4 Count Gabales. 5 Hatige, or, the Amours of the King of Tamaran 6 Madam Lavalier and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Mad. Colonna's Memoirs. 9 Queen of Majorca, in two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian King of Portugal. 11 Heroine Musquitier. 12 Princess of Cleves.
13 Obliging Mistress. 14 Fatal Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16. Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of Love. 18 Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Earl of Essex and Qu. Elizabeth. 21 Neopolitan, or, the Defender of his Mistress. 22 Nicostratis. 23 Amorous Abbess. 24 Homais Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim, in two Parts. 26 Meroveus, Prince of the Blood-Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28 Extravagant Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instruction for a young Noble∣man. 31 Love Letters from the Cavalier to the Nun. 32 Gallant Ladies; or, the Mutual Conference: In two Parts. 33 St. Lewis; or, the Politick
Conduct of Queen Blanch. PLAYS. 1 Tartuff, or the French Puritan. 2 Forc'd Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom. 3 English Monsieur. 4 All mistaken or the Mad Couple. 5 Generous Enemies, or the Ridi∣culous Lovers. 6 The Plain-Dealer. 7 Sertorius, a Tragedy. 8 Nero, a Tragedy. 9 Sophonisba, or Hanibal's Over∣throw. 10 Gloriana or the Court of Au∣gustus Caesar. 11 Alexander the Great. 12 Mythridates King of Pontus. 13 Oedipus King of Thebes. 14 Caesar Borgia. 15 Theodosius, or the Force of Love. 16 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 17. The Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters. 18 Esquire Old-Sap, or, the Night-Adventures.
19 Fool turn'd Critick. 20 Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at Last. 21 The Fatal Wager. 22 Andromache. 23 Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or, the Chaste Nymph. 25 Destruction of Jerusalem, in two Parts. 26 Ambitious Statesman; or, the Loyal Favourite. 27 Misery of Civil War. 28 The Murder of the Duke of Glocester. 29 Thyestes, a Tragedy. 30 Hamlet Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy. 31 The Orphan, or the Unhappy Marriage. 32 The Soldiers Fortune. 33 Tamerlain the Great. 34 Mr. Limberham, or, the Kind Keeper. 35 Mistaken Husband. 36 Notes of Morocco, by the Wits. 37 Essex and Elizabeth, or the Un∣happy Favourite.
38 Virtue Betray'd, or, Anna Bul∣len. 39 King Leare. 40 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Re∣venge. 41 Town Fop, or Sir Tim. Tawdery. 42 Rare en tout, a French Comedy. 43 Moor of Venice. 44 Countrey Wife. 45 City Politicks. 46 Duke of Guise. 47 Rehearsal. 48 King, and no King. 49 Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 50 Maids Tragedy, 51 Grateful Servant. 52 Strange Discovery. 53 Atheist, or, the second Part of the Soldiers Fortune. 54 Wit without Money. 55 Little Thief. 56 Valliant Scot, 57 Constantine. 58 Valentinian. 59 Amorous Prince. 60 Dutch Lovers.
61 Woman Bully. 62 Reformation. 63 Hero and Leander. 64 Love Tricks. 65 Julius Caesar. 66 Fatal Jealousie. 67 Monsieur Ragou. 68 Island Queen, or, Mary Queen of Scotland. 69 Empress of Morocco. 70 Common-Wealth of Women. 71 The Noble Stranger. 72 Duke of Millan. 73 The Knave in Grain. 74 Amends for Ladies. 75 Manamochy. 76 The Emperor of the East. 77 The Wedding. 78 St. Patrick for Ireland. 79 Albumazor. 80 The Tragedy of Albertus.
