D2016 11081082 46301
THE VVrit of Restitution: By the Lady ELEANOR. PSAL. &c. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; Be learned ye that are Iudges of the earth. ACTS 3. 21. Whom the Heaven must receive, till the times of Restitution of all things which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world began. Printed in the Year 1648.
THE VVrit of Restitution: BY The Lady ELEANOR. ANd now in this his cause, the Iudge of all the earth, Prince of the Kings of the earth, a case wherein all con∣cerned; these are to pray three, who here sit in his place Iudges: Give me leave to speak, and shew you a my∣stery, from this writ Amoveas ma∣nus, defended by the happy Mr. May∣nard, notwithstanding opposed by Mr. Solicitor, with S. John, not know∣ing what Spirit he's of.
Before whow this day, the day of Iudgements figure, shewing by rea∣son of a writ of Error, not executable, three stand charged with contempt of the Court, pleading Ignorance, notwithstanding the aforesaid Amove∣as manus writ being executed (as it were) the forbidden fruit tasted un∣timely; these men yet each dis∣charged and acquitted: as let it nei∣ther be reputed impossible, how much opposed soever by others, for All to be saved at last, when the utmost mite or mi∣nute satisfied or expired, the worst of reprobates not excepted, in his time whose immense mercy inscrutable: this is the argument, Against whom no writ of Error feisible either or pos∣sible. Who saw every thing very good at first
made by him, reduced to be no doubt to the same estate, as holds good from that of dust return to dust, every thing to the place from whence it came; faln An∣gels and men restored every one, not left a hoof, &c. or lost of that kinde bearing his Image. Of which general deliverance well understood to be an Article of the Christian Faith, famous Origen, from whose judgment other fathers erring, forced were to erect a Purgatory for Saints, that Babel edifice of theirs; of whom the aforesaid ancient father, the worst they could say of him was, As he did worst of any when he wrote ill, so exceeded all men when he did well. And so proceeding with this re∣ported Case of this days Hearing, where the fiery adversary upon their
surmisings, pressing for a present sen∣tence, before the accused heard or ans∣wering, charg'd, that although moved in open Court such a writ, the Amoveas manus to be respited: and according∣ly a Supersedis issued out, delivered to the Sheriff then in being; the Tenants nevertheless outed of possession by the now under-Sheriff of that county about three moneths ago: whereup∣on he cald and appearing, demanded of whom, how those doors came to be opened, denied not what he had done by vertue of such a sealed writ, by such a Solicitor brought to him; as for other writs concerning them, pleads Ignorance: One Pomfred by name, (alias Pomum) surprized in state of inocency, like her first in the transgres∣sion; (for pursuing which Allegory
thus) shewing one Massingal cald, pleading ignorāce too as the man lay∣ing the fault on Eve; he (some three years since in that Office) onely had a Supersedis, of what validity now he knows not; for other writ, none came to his hand. Also Jo: Rand Solicitor cald, he ap∣pears, no yong Fox, not to be foold with pocket Errors, refers to the Iud∣ges, whether year after year that writ like to be of much force, brought be∣force such and such Officers; namely the Treasurer, &c. when as in being none such, or like to be: And so this the Epilogue or end of it, their stale Errors being quasht; the writ stands good for taking off or removing his Majesties unhealing hands, his Te∣nants cashier'd; moreover for stren∣gthning
which, another writ, a Writ of Restitution produced, brought in COURT, stops the Lyons mouthes, forced to put up their pipes, as let it happen to the enemie of Ge∣neral Restitution, sent to that parable of the unnatural elder Brother towards his own flesh and blood, Luke; and murmu∣ring laborers, because their fellows mads partakers with them; endless unmer∣cifulnes thereof to bid others beware. And here to make an end with what penance imposed on those three for a presumption of that nature; these a touch of it: The under She∣riff Pomfred, somewhat of a low pitch, he never to aspire or take upon him the state or stile of a high Sheriff; the other sometime in the same im∣ployment or Office, Massingal to re∣turn
to his domestick function or cal∣ling deserting former dainties. The honest poor Solicit' J: Rand as for him unto other Solicitors an example his lot, besides to pinch himself with hard and thin fare, never to attempt the Kings Solicitors place, or St. John to be cald like the wandring Iew. And so farther, no jesting matter neither of mean consequence, where like Twins, this finished tedious Law Suit in Trinity term; and Gods word both sympathizing or joyned in wed∣lock, like the blessed Virgin and just Joseph Cousins, though abruptly in brevities behalf handled or penn'd, presaging without doubt, maugre the old Serpents plotting with his smooth outside, through the holy Ghosts po∣wer, the third person in Trinity, long silent
for unexpected Ghests such. His Fa∣ther meeting him, by whom healed forthwith: forerunner of the stum∣bling Age significant dicttates; on the future of a supernatural blessing: when swallowed up in dispare, at their wits end. According to whose express charge observed, not to take a strange wo∣man to wife. But of his people one of a holy descent: withal above o∣thers, namely of PRIDE to be∣ware: his seed that they might inhe∣rit the Land. Arrogancy (not un∣known) the Mother of want, insepa∣rably joyned with a servile condition. Concluding with the beatifical Vision the true healing Angel, discovering himself unto them: one of the seven Angels or Spirits in presence of the
Throne: presents the Prayers of the Saints (to wit) in reference to the Sabbath, alludes to the Sabbatical Century. Raphael signifying The Medicine of God. As his vigilent parents for his re∣turn, also to watch all: So from whose stumbling mentioned in what obscurity the last days. Dreaming of such anointings as much or superna∣tural participations. His Grave when as prepared abroad and at home both: their son by whom she conceived (as it were) re∣turned into a New World: such a change closed with Father Tobias Trumpets Alarm or Prayer: by the Angel preferred, withal pointing to his close Imprisonment in the Whales womb, three days in Travel of him:
heard whose cry out of the Deep, who acknowledges brings up from Hell, &c. And Hell and the Grave, one and the same word Gehenna expressing both as in that similitude from un∣likeness. And in Adam as all died, so in Christ all made alive, Cor. 15. O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God. By the Ancients Origin, Ter∣tullian and others: no question made thereof with whom all things possible, but to be implacable absolutely. And so much for these, the chil∣drens teeth not set an edge for the Fa∣thers default. Captive Angels put in∣to the List. The word Everlasting, That cansell'd also being determin∣able signifying Ages: and farther,
passing for ad infinitum. VVhen as spared in tender consideration of one Heathen City, wherein so many thou∣sands discerning not the right Hand from the left. And Eve hers as a thou∣sand for one how much more spot∣less in that nature. Then why thus incensed our JONASES against them Abraham stiles Sons worse then annihilated a million of times, whose love a thousand times surmounts his hate: By that Jewish envious elder Brother as figured, expostulating with his Father, &c. where in truth a prefixt space of time signified, more proper then of place fixt, &c. Prayed O ye sinners, therefore re∣pent, turn and do Justice, shew mercy, who knows whether he may extend com∣miseration to this sinful City: as in be∣half
of those Innocents, whose sit∣tuation not far from Paradice. As by the Fish taken in Tygris Ri∣ver of such vertue, &c. O make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon, That they may receive you into everlast∣ing Habitations: pointing to the transitory whereon set up their rest, all dote. So finished his magnificat Tobias, that Brides incomparable Lustre or preparation: New Jerusa∣lems precious Edifice so ravished with it. From the Lady Eleanor. Tobias signifying good, for Good-Friday. FINIS.
