D245 14871735 102772
DESCRIPTION OF A Drunken Club. A POEM. Silenum pueri somno videre jacentem. Virgil. LONDON: Printed and Sold by E. Whitlock, near Statio∣ners-Hall. 1698.
THE DESCRIPTION OF A Drunken Club. I. IT was my hap, Spectator, once to be, As I, unseen, in secret Angle, sate, Of that unmanly Crowd, Who, with Wits low, and Voices loud, Were met to Celebrate, In Evening late, The Bacchanalian Solemnity. If what I then Or heard, or saw, I here relate agen, Accuse me not of Incivility, In blabbing privacy; Since all Men know, that in those Mysteries, (Quite different from other Deities) No man obliged is to secresie. Yea, if I should Conceal, 'Twould be in vain: That pervious Tribe would their own Acts reveal, Since Wine (transparent thing!) no secret can retain. II. The Actors of this Scene were not of one Age, Humour, Figure, or Condition. See one with hollow Cheeks, meagre and lean, By Sipping-Hectick, e'ne consumed quite, As he a Skeleton had been, Enough to put Deaths self into a fright:
It gave no vantage unto either Side. Signal once giv'n, the Bullets fly From side to side, so furiously, That, in short time, none scap'd without a Wound, Yea bloody Wound: only, 'twixt this, And common Wounds, some difference is, That those do let blood but, but these infund. One thing indeed I mus'd to see, Each Souldier, to his own mouth, lift his paw, Before he aim'd at face of Enemy. What? sure, quoth I, these do their Bullets chaw, Before they Fight. Or, is it Dutch-mans Law, Who, e're his Valour in Sea-Fight appear, First takes a Dose of his own Gunpowder? And now the Battel's hot. Each Champion grows (Like chased Lion) more enrag'd by blows. For Wounds do Valour but augment. Wounds broach their Fury, and give Rage a Vent, Nothing will now their keen Revenge content, Until they see their Foes Lie prostrate at their Feet, senseless, and dead: And hence their blows Are level'd all against the Soul's chief Seat, the Head. V. And, by this time, me-thought, I saw Dame Reason trembling stand upon The top of her Conarion, Dreading a Deluge from the Floods below. As Mortals in Deucalion's Flood, on cliff Of Caucasus, or Tenariff, On Aiery Alps, or Apennine, Prolong'd that Fate, which they could not decline. But what she fear'd is come. See! the Waves rise, and Billows foam; And washing first her Foot, and Shin, Then Wast, and Shoulders, Neck, and Chin, At last quite stop her mouth, surround her piercing Eye, Yea swallow Head and Brain, Till nought of her doth visible remain, No not the very Hair, Which stands upright, Through dismal fright, But all, by swelling Surge, surmounted are.
VI. And now a new Scene comes. The Censor's gone, All things in medley, and confusion, run. Words now, like Thieves in Interregnums, break Their Prisons. All men hear, and all men speak: Yet none another understands, nor yet Himself a whit. And, could some nimble-handed Scribe have writ All that was said; Babel had been retriev'd, And all her Tongues Reviv'd. Yea more confus'd these Tongues, than Babel's, were: They talkt of Towers on Earth, but these in Air. VII. One is All Manhood; talks of nothing else, But Swords, and Guns, and Forts, and Cittadels; Sieges, and Fights by Sea and Land, And with a Gravity Censorian, 'Tixt generous scorn, and pity; doth condemn What the World calls Exploit, or Stratagem. Alas! your Dutch Fights, or Blakes Tunis Knacks, What were they all, but Squibs and Cracks? Throw Eighty Eight in, 'Twas but a meer Bear-baiting. Cales Fight was but a Flutter, And Great Lepanto, fam'd of yore, To a true Sea-Fight, was no more, (Although Historique Coxcombs make a Splutter) Than shooting Ducks in Pond, or stabbing of an Otter. VIII. Some talk of Bejazet's great Battel; 'Twas more a Tumult, than a Fight. I would more Execution with one Well-Marshal'd, resolute Troop, have done, Than Tamerlain's long drove of Motley Cattel. And Cannae Field (to speak the right) Was meerly lost for want Of Courage both, and Management.
O, how I would have knockt, had I been there, And kickt, and cuff'd, that Punick Cur, As long as He could stir! I would have giv'n him Beef to's Vineger. The Stripling Macedonian, What was he to a Man, Although his Legends make a mighty pother? And those two Roman Boys, Who in Pharsalian Fray did make such noise (As Lucan prates) they did but spit at one another. IX. The World did ne're yet know What Resolution, join'd with Art, could do. Could I but find A pack of Heroes to my mind, And of as clear A Valour, as my self; I'd not despair To rid poor Christendom of all its fear. I'd seize the Turk in his own Dardanells, That all the Spells Of Magick Art, should never set him free, Then wafting o're the Euxine Sea, To Cham of Tartary, I'd make his Cham-ship, and his flat-fac'd men For eating raw Horse-legs agen. The Persian King I'd take, and in his Carpets roll Him up, like his own Silk-Worms; and so bring Him quite away under my Arm. Mogoll I'd make to stoop. Or, if he durst advance His sturdy Lance, I'd hamstring him, and all his Elephants. So passing on To China, and Japan, To Africk shore, and to American, I'd Conquer th' Universe, in far less bound Of time, than lazy Drake, or Magellan, could sail it round.
X. Another, he is all State-Bolicy; Esteeming then Himself most wife In Mysteries Of Government, when he Has lost the Hegemonique Faculty. As if his Wine-soakt Brains Like Rivers were, Which ever deepest are, In times of greatest Floods, and Rains. Or, as on watry Brook, In Moon-shine Night, we look, And see the Stars, how in their Orbs they move: So, while with Wine His liquid Brains do shine, He sees the motions of the Powers above. Europe, quoth he, Is meerly lost, I see, For lack of good Intelligence, And understanding of Intrigues, The Crafts of Treaties, and of Leagues, This Spoils all States, and ruins Governments. But, were I once in Secretaries Place, I'd quickly bring things to a better pass. Alas! Colbert's an Ass, I'd Fox him with his own French Wine; Then gage his Brains, and so the bottom find, Extent, and Compass of the French Design. The Jesuits themselves I'd undermine; Out-do th' Ignatian Criples in their Play, I'd halt e're I was Lame, as well, and better far, than they. XI. Are these the Popes Grand Tools? Worshipful Noddies who, but blundiing Fools, Would ever have forgot, To burn those Letters, that Reveal'd their Plot? Or, in an Ale-house, told, that Godfrey's dead, Three days before he was discovered; Leaving the Silly World, to call to mind That Common Logick, They, that hide, can find?
But see their Master-policy On Primrose-Hill! Where their Grand Enemy, Like Saul upon Mount-Gilboa, doth lie, Faln on his Sword, as he himself did kill. But O the Infelicity! That blood was fresh, and gusht out of the Wound, This so congeal'd that not one spot was found, No, not upon his Sword; as if it wou'd Tell us, 'twas guiltless of its Master's blood. Some Carkasses, by bleeding, do declare; This by not bleeding, shew'd the Murderer. But, to his broken-Neck, I pray, What can our Politicians say? He hang'd, then stab'd Himself, for a sure way? Or, first he stab'd himself, then wrung about His Head, for madness, that advis'd him to't? Well Primrose, may our Godfrey's Name, on thee (Like Hyacinth) inscribed be. On thee his Memory flourish still, (Sweet, as thy Flower, and lasting as thy Hill) Whilst blushing Somerset, to her Eternal shame, shall this Inscription wear, The Devil's an Ass: for Jesuits, on this Spot, Broke both the Neck of Godfrey, and their Plot. Thus spake this Sage: whilst I, from thence, Infer'd, amidst heaps of Impertinence, (upon sense, Fools sometimes chop on Truth, and Drunkards stumble XII. Another's all Art, and Philosophy. Encyclopaedia, with it's mighty sound, What is't, quoth he, but when the brain turns round? Of which versatile Ingeny No man, I'm sure, is Master more than I. Tongues are my Element. I declare, I'll talk with any man on Earth, And yet a dearth Of words will never fear. The fertile Cups best Dictionaries are. And as for Rherotick, that two-handed Art, VVhich play's both Plaintiff's, and Defendants part; To me 'tis Natural: for, ev'n now, what e're, Me-thinks, I look on, double doth appear. Logick's a Toy. Alas! I'll prove by Syllogisms, a Man's an Ass,
Yet never stir out of this Room, (Most Reverend Friends) to find a Medium. Arithmetick, and Algebraick Arts, What are they to a man of parts? A member, he Unworthy sure must be, Of such a Learned Club as this, Who understands not, what a Reckoning is. Actronomy's a Science which I know So throughly, that my Head ev'n now, I feel, is in the Clouds; and with each Star I'm so familiar Without a Jacobs-Staff, I know not how to go. XIII. Philosophy both new, and old, I know. The seven wife Men, of whom the Grecians tell us, Were but a Club of honest Fellows, That sate, and drank, and talkt, as we do now; Until the Reckoning was come, Then every man threw in his Symbolum. Yea Sects of old had their Origination But from the Liquor's various Operation. Some, when inspired by the Barrel, Grew Sceptical, or apt to quarrel: Others, enclin'd to the Dogmatique way, Are wondrous Positive in all they say. 'Twas the same Sherry, That made Democritus so merry, And weeping Heraclite so sorry: For he (as most suppose) Was Maudlin, when he snivel'd so at Nose. Some would be so dead drunk, that, pinch them n'ere So hard, they never felt: these Stoicks were. Others were sensible a little, And this was call'd the Peripatetique Whittle, Others, of Epicurus mad-cap strain, No pleasure knew like drunk, and drunk again: Yea ev'n grave Plato's Academick Tribe No scruple made to bibb, Until Idea's crawled in their Brain. As for Mechanick Virtuoso's Skill, That founds all knowledge in Experiments, (Although indeed I know what 'tis, full well, To make Mans' Reason truckle to his Sense)
Yet I have found a more Compendious way, For whilst, in quest of Nature, they By tedious searches clear the Object; I Do all, by strengthening the Faculty. With brisk Falernum, clear the dim-ey'd Soul; This was, I'm sure, the old Philosophy, They ever sough t, for Truth, i'tha bottom of the Bowl. XIV. But the most frequent Humor's still behind, Which is, to talk of Grave Divinity. Of which the proper Reason to assign, I find it not an easy task to be Whether from that near Consanguinity, And natural Love 'Twixt Bacobus and great Jove; VVhose Son he was, and hatch'd up, in his Thigh, In place we commonly do call Popes-Eye; An Omen that, in time, he'd prove A great Dictator in Theology? Or, that the Grape so sweet, That Nectar of the Gods, do's men inspire VVith sacred Fire, And raise their thoughts to more than Humane height? Or that the Intellect doth gasping he, And thence, to utter doth desire, Some few grave Sentences, before she die. XV. To give you an Account of my Belief, Quoth one deep Sage, who thought himself a Chief, I'm no Mahometan: But utterly defie the Alcoran; VVhose Cursed Laws forbid the use of wine. Nor shall the Jews Religion be mine, VVhich so abhors that harmless Beast, the Swine. The Pope I do Pronounce to be Stark Antichristian VVhich prove by forty Arguments I can. But only, name this One, I shall, So strong, it well may serve for all, He takes the Cup from th' honest Layity. Base dirty Clown! I wonder in what Town, Unless it were Hogs-Norton, he was bred.
To drink to men, And presently forbid, On pain of Death, they must not pledge agen. Were he un-erring; as he do's pretend. His Wit would Him have better Manners taught: But Wit, and Manners both I see, are naught. And shall I then believe What such a Slovenly Religion faith, And pin my Faith Upon a Snotty Sleeve? No, no; if e're my Reason I resign, It shall be only to a Glass of Wine. Thus did the Heroe vent, 'Gainst Triple-Crown, his discontent; Throughout which whole Discourse, thought I An Argument close coucht doth lie, 'Gainst Rome's Infallibility, Stronger than what have yet expressed been: For Standers by are apt to think, That Popes sometimes, may be in Drink, And then, as rambling talk, as other men. XVI. But he proceeds. I could reherse ye The State, quoth he, of Modern Controversie. What Weapons keen are us'd in that sharp Sport, Betwixt Arminius, and Dort. How those twit These, with turning men To Stocks, and how agen The Absolute Divine Whips Cinq with thirty Nine; Not much unlike the Jewish scourging Discipline. I could the Gordian knot unty Of Ecclesiastick Polity; And tell the Street, and Sign, Where that Great Lady dwells call'd Jus Divine, Who courted long by all has been, But still so Coy, Shee's scarcely to be seen. I could Discourse of Ceremonial Jarr. (That least yet greatest War) Whose Hot Spurs, on each side, engage so far. Beyond their slow pac'd Squadrons, that oft they, By meer pursuing lose the Day. Some would confine Religion's Dress To the Course Freeze of meer Necessity: Others attire Her all in Lace, Preferring still the greatest Bravery.
Some make Her all Embroidery, and Seaming; Some let Her ravel out, for lack of Hemming Some are resolv'd to scruple whatsoe're Is by Authority enjoyn'd: Whilst some again, to cross the others mind, Wish all things were Enjoyn'd, that scrupled are. But how much better would it be, Would but you Bigots of each side, quoth he, Come hither, to observe Our prudent Fashion, And imitate Our signal Moderation! For We, in these Solemnities, Do neither scruple, nor press Modes upon ye; Drink either with, or without Ceremonie. Each Man enjoy's his Liberty, provided He takes his Cup, And drinks all up, All other Doubts and Circumstances are decided. XVII. But by this time Tongues 'gan to rest; The Talking game was at the best. A sleepy Scene beginneth to appear. Bright Reason's ray, By damp of Wine, within his Hermisphere, Was quench'd before: and now dim sense, to stay, Must not expect, long after Her, So when, Nights fairest Lanthorn, Cynthia bright Is set; each little mist, or thin-spread Cloud Sufficient is to shroud The pink-ey'd Stars, and make a pitchy Night. Old Morpheus comes, with Leaden Key, His drowsie Office to perform: Though some there are, that do affirm, 'Twas Bacchus did it; and that He Had Legal Right, to lock up each mans Brain: Since every Room His own Goods did contain, And was his proper Wine-Cellar become. XVIII. Some down into their Seats do shrink, As snuffs in Sockets sink; Some throw themselves upon the Bed, Some at Feet, and some at Head,
Some Cross, some Slope-wise, as they can; Like Hogs in straw, or Herrings in a pan. Some on the Floor do make their humble Bed, (Proper effect of Wine!) So over-laden Vine, Prop failing, bowes its bunchy Head, To kiss the Ground, from whence 'twas nourished. One, stouter than the rest, maintain'd the Field, And scorn'd to yield. A Roman Emperour, standing, vow'd to die, And so, quoth he, will I; Till nodding, as he stood, the Churlish Wall Repuls'd his Head, and made him, reeling fall; So with a jot, Embrac'd the common lot, The last, but yet the greatest, Trophy, of them all. XIX. So slept they sound; but whilst they slept, Nature, which all this while, had kept Her last reserve of strength, In Stomachs mouth, where, Helmont saith, The Soul its chiefest Mansion hath, Began at length To kick, and frisk, and stoutly strove To through the Liquid Rider off. For now Her Case, like Marriners, was grown, In leaky Ship, She must or pump, or drown. Or whether that the Wine, which, till this time, Was wont to dwell in Cellar's cooler Clime, Now put in Stomachs boiling pot, Found its new Habitation too hot? What e're it was, the Floods gusht out From ev'ry spout, With such a force; they made a fulsome fray. One who athwart his Neighbour lay, Did right into his Pocket disembogue; For which the other would have call'd him Rogue, But that his forestall'd mouth (brawls to prevent) Replenisht was with the same Element. I'th' next Mans face Another spues, VVho doth, with nimble Repartee, retort His own, and His Assailants juice, And so returns him double for't. One with a Horizontal mouth, Discharges up into the Air,
Which falls again in Perpendicular: Much like those Clouds, in Sea, that's South, Which in a Lump, descend, and quite O're-whelm the Ship, on which they chance to light. The Floor with such a Deluge was o'reflown, As would infallibly have ran Quite through, and to it's native Cellar gone, As Rivers Circulate to th' Occan: Had it not been incrassate with a scum, Which did, for company, from Stomach come. Nor was this all: The surly Element, With Orall Channels not content, Reverberates; and downward finds a Vent. Which my Nice Muse to tell forbears, And begs, for what is past, the pardon of your Ears. XX. At length the Storm blows o're; the Sky grows clear, Clouds are dispel'd, and foggs, and fumes, And Madam Dianoia now resumes Her Throne; when nimble Drawer mounts the stair, And guessing, by this time, these Heroes were In Reckoning-case; produceth, sans delay, A Bill more swel'd, and more inflam'd, than they. Gigantick Items! yet evicted Nothing could be, nor contradicted, By any of the Company: Because 'twas all beyond Mans Memory. Since then Objection was fruitless, Solution must be the business. All pockets (but ev'n now well lin'd) were swept, Not one Cross, for a Neast egg, kept. Tokens, and single pence, must go, Jacobusses, and Meddals too; And all too little to discharge the score, But forc'd to Sign a Bill for as much more. And thus the Poets Fiction came to pass, That Bacchus Conquered the golden India's. XXI. All done, and now just ready to depart, I, from my close recess, out start. And cry'd, Hold Gallants! I perceive, The Play is done; yet give a Stranger leave, Before the Company up break, In a few words, the Epilogue to speak.
Epilogue. Now these mad Hurricanes are over-blown, In cooler thoughts, Consider what y' h' done. Think, each of you this day has kil'd a Man, Stabbing with Murd'rous Hand, That noble Reason, by which Mortals are Most like their Maker, and do bear Their Great Creator's Superscription. Think of your ruin'd Health. See! your own Blood Flies in your guilty Face: as if she wou'd Now tell you, to your Head, 'Tis you alone, By whom she's scorch't, disordred, and undone. Think of those Hours consum'd in sordid Vice, Those Golden Sands, that run in vain, (Lusts Measure made and Sacrifice) Those winged Hours, that n'ere return'd again. Think of that abused Wealth, Due to your Families, or the Poor; Think how you swallow, in each Drunken Health, The Widdows Tears, and starved Orphans Goar, Think of your Bankrupt Reputation; Each Ear abhors your more than brutish Name; More dirty than the dirt you tread upon. Your very Vomit stinks not, like your Fame. Think, lastly, on the Worlds great Doom, When guilty Souls must to an Audit come. A far more heavy Reckoning, then e're You met with here. More true by far, and yet far more severe. Think on all this: and think on't soberly, And then, perhaps you'l say, as well as I, Your Mirth is Madness: Wine is Poison fell: Your Paradise is Bedlam, if not Hell. FINIS.
