D252 13222181 98543
The K: of Englands Subjects in India Massacred & Tortured by the Hollander
A True and Compendious NARRATION; OR (Second Part of AMBOYNEY) OF Sundry Notorious or Remarkable Injuries, Insolencies, and Acts of Hostility which the HOLLANDERS Have Exercised from time to time against THE ENGLISH NATION in the East-Indies, &c. And Particularly, Of the totall Plundering and Sinking of the Dragon & Katherine Both Ships and Men. With Undeniable and Convincing Proofs for Evidencing the Truth thereof, and Satisfaction of the Reader. By a Person of long Observation and Experience; Employed First and Last in the Affairs of the Indies, Fifty Years, (to wit) from Sr. Walter Rawleigh, his last Voyage, 1615. To this Present Year, 1665. By I. D. LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for Nathaniel Brooke, at the Angel in Corn-hill neer the Royal Exchange, 1665.
TO ALL Loyal and True-Hearted Subjects TO THEIR KING and COUNTRY. Much Honoured Readers, HERE I Present to your View and Se∣rious Consideration, a strange and Unpollished (but True) Discourse, consisting of several Particulars of great Consequence and Concernment; And although strange and somwhat Obstruce, yet very necessary (as I humbly conceive) at this present time tru∣ly and undoubtedly to be rightly understood, in regard the Subjects of this, and questionless of all other Nations in Europe and else where, that hears so many false and frivilous Reports of the Dutch; Accompanied with such Insolent, Ridiculous, and Uncivil Expressions and Interludes; Boastings. Threatnings and Aspersions of the Hollanders, con∣cerning this their (long-practized and intended) Cruel, Inhumane and Ingrateful War with Eng∣land; and little Knowing or Imagining the first Rise and Foundation thereof; which now accor∣ding to my Weak Judgment (but long Observati∣on and Experience) I intend (God willing) really and briefly to declare, and discover, sufficiently
to satisfie any Reasonable or upright Reader, as by this following Tract from time to time, may Gradually be observed. And I humbly conceive that (without pre∣sumption) I may confidently affirm, that whatso∣ever Prince or Potentate, in or out of Europe, that shall Hear and Rightly understand the real Truth and Ground of this Holland VVar, herein so plainly and punctually Expressed and Remonstrated, and yet will give any countenance thereto, or compli∣ance therewith; will in conclusion see his own Error, when he finds and apprehends himself an E∣nemy to his own Honour and Grandeur, as well as to his Subjects Just Freedom and Liberty, in point of Trade and Traffique. And so most earnestly and heartily desiring and imploring all happiness and good successe to the Land of my Nativity, and to every Individual person therein that loves the Truth in Sincerity: I do most willingly and freely refer the Contents hereof to the Grave and Judicious Consideration of the more wise and discreet Reader; to whose better Judgment, I do most willingly and readily submit and subscribe, Iohn Darell. Post-Script. The Adventurers Names, Ann. 1635. Sir William Courteen, Knight, and William Courteen his onely son; Endimion Porter, Cap John Weddall, Thomas Kynastone, Na∣thaniel Mountney, and Samuel Bonnell, all Adventurers in the Dra∣gon and Katherine, &c.
THE PREFACE, OR INTRODUCTION. In the prosecution of this uneouth and obstruse dis∣course, and scrutinous discovery, I must of necessi∣ty plain the way before me by a long and tedious perambulation of forreign and domestick passa∣ges, that by the tract thereof, the discreet Reader may more easily apprehend how to discern and di∣stinguish by demonstrative and plain reasons, the hidden truth acted in the East-Indies, from all those surmised and pretended mists of error and ignorance, wherein it is clouded and Inveloped briefly thus; viz. The Tract, or Explanation. WHen famous Sir Francis Drake, Anno 180.Sir Francis Drakes disco∣very, 1580. had passed the Straits of Màgelline, and ari∣ved at Ternatto (one of the Molluccas or Ben∣da, or rather Amboyna Islands, because by that dieful name they are best known to the English) and
intending to return thither again three years after, but other occasions prevented him. The Dutch 1595 the Eng∣lish about the same time.Then the Dutch, Anno 1595. prosecuting the said discovery set forth Fleet after Fleet, and the English shortly after them and both of them discovering and arriving at the aforesaid Islands, and other places in the South Seas, as China, Iapan, &c. but made their Rendevouz upon Iava major, the English at antum (a place formerly possest and walled about with bricks by the Portuguez, but the Natives had expelled them:) the Dutch at Iaccatra,The English rendevouz at Bantum, the Dutch at Iac∣catra. a small Village of Fishermen with a little Fort taken by the Dutch from the Natives and afterwards taken by Sir Thomas Dale from the Dutch,Sir Thomas Dales civility to the Dutch. whom the Natives demanded to be their priso∣ners, but Sir Thomas aforesaid would not deliver a Christian into a Heathens hand, and thereupon gave the Dutch again possession of the Fort, and bid them fight for their lives, and left them; which now is be∣come a Famous and Metropolitan City called attavia, or new Holland; But the two Nations English and Dutch did Diametrically differ in their constitutions and forms of Government,Their constitu∣tion in Go∣vernment quite different. and of management, the one here, the other there, from whence proceeded diffe∣rent successes even to admiration, as at this day ap∣pears. Not long after this there grew quarrels and con∣tentions between them concerning some of the said Islands of Amboyna,War and con∣tention began, aforesaid, which by the af∣fections of the Natives, and Proprietors thereof to the English, were legally surrendred to the said English for the King and Crown of England,A real resigna∣nation to the Kings Majesty and Crown of England of 4. or 5. of those Islands and In∣habitants. and confirmed by way of livery, and seizin the said Natives, delivering to the said English a Turf or Clod of their said Earth, and some of their Fruits thereupon growing, in testi∣mony of their solemn, and serious, voluntary, and free resignation of the said Natives themselves, and all their
said Lawful and Hereditary Islands and possessions therein into the protection and subjection of the King and Crown of England aforesaid. And as I was infor∣med from some English, to whom they were so surren∣dred and delivered, the said Islands were these, viz Pol∣loroon, Lantore, Seran, Nero, Cobo or Cambello;English Amboy∣na Islands, Pol∣laroon, Lantore, Seran, Nero, Cobo, or Cam∣bello. but the Dutch having Fortified themselves at Amboyna aforesaid and elsewhere, would not endure it, but warred, de¦stroyed, and massacred both English and Natives, as well as Spaniards and Portugals,Dutch war be∣gun. which continued there and at Bantum many years together, notwithstanding sundry overtures of Treaties and Debates here and in Holland,All Treaties nulled. Anno. 1613. and 1615. but all to no purpose because the Dutch prevailed still in India more and more untill they had taken there most of the said I∣slands, and twelve Ships, with about eight hundred men, and disposed of them as they pleased; the Fort or Castle of Seran aforesaid being the last which was held and defended by the English and Natives one and twen∣ty days, but the Dutch came with great force and beat away the Natives from assisting the English, and then they were constrained to abandon it and aboord in May 1615. which gave the Dutch great incouragement,Bartholomew Churchman, and the English beaten out by the Dutch. and fair hopes of attaining their proposed end, to gain the riches, honour, and dominion of the whole vast trade of India to themselves, still observing the same rule, knowing thereby how to expel the English from all places in India of profit by degrees at their pleasure;The Dutch de∣sign and end. And so in the Prince of Auraunge his name, going on then conquering, and to conquer in the South-seas, as now they do in the North-seas, as Mallabar, Cothen, Goa, India, Persia, Arabia, Red-sea, &c. But the aforesaid sad news coming into England cau∣sed a treaty here with the States of Holland, Anno, 1619.Another treaty 1619. no bet∣ter then Trea∣son. and there upon an agreement made for some small sum of 80. or 100000 l. ready mony to lose 2 or
300000 l. per annum,For 80. or 100000 l. the English lost 300000 l. per annum. dreyned ever since out of his Ma∣jesties Dominions, for Nutmegs, Cloves and Mace, and now for Cinamon also, wherein the English East-India company did contract as I was informed (without consent of King or Parliament) as well for the foresaid Amboyna Islands, surrendred and appropriated as afore∣said; as for the Fruits thereof, Nuts, Cloves, and Mace, &c. Engl. stock of 1600000 l. circumvented and destroyed by the Dutch masacres and injuries.And thereupon a mighty joynt stock of 15 or 1600000 l. was here speedily procured, wherewith the English at home (especially Grocers) hoped for won∣ders in concluding 2/3 parts thereof to th Dutch and / part thereof to the English, and to pay there further in ready mony 1/3 part of their charges of fortifying; which the Dutch thereupon having power in their own hands, knew very well how to make use of such a blind bargain (as it proved afterwards;) for thereupon the Dutch went on vigorously with their Fortifications for themselves,The Dutch in∣solent and pe∣remptory ac∣compts, and present pay. The English submits, being conquered, so now either sub∣due or submit, which God for∣bid. making them both many and strong, and raised their accompts to such an unreasonable height (as they did afterward to the King of Zeloan in ano∣ther case) and to be paid forthwith without examina∣tion, delay, or abatement (as the said company can best declare;) insomuch as is conceived by some, that the said 1/3 part in ready mony, did bear the whole charge, both of Fortifying and Shipping to fetch rack rice, and course clouts from Mesulapatam, Siam, &c. making five or six for one, at least in the profits thereof to pay the workmen, so that in few years thereby, and maintaining a Fleet of defence, and the like; the afore∣said great stock was much shattered and consumed, and (as some do verily believe) 800000 l. of the 1600000 l. never returned into England upon a profitable account, which exceedingly advanced the Dutch de∣signs. And during all the aforesaid Treaties they ceased
not by hostile actions to subjugate the English more and more: for Anno 1620.Nothwithstan∣ding the trea∣ties 1619. in 1620. the Dutch seized two Eng∣lish Ships. (upon some pretence) they made prize of two English ships, the Bear and Star (car∣rying tidings of peace, having freed a Dutch ship in their way to India upon that account) and used much severity to the said English, and confiscated ships and goods. General Iohn Coon of Battavia;General Iohn Cooe said then he would clear India of all English men. In order there∣to he dbarred them from China; observe that well. saying that he would not leave an English man in India before he had done as Vantrump of late (though contrary to his own judgement) would sweep the narrow seas. This done, then they forced the English Factors from Iapan, and so cleared and debarred the English for ever after for having any Trade or Commerce either with China, (observe that well) abounding with Gold, Musk, Civet, and Pearl (as some report) silk of all sorts wrought and raw, Cloth of gold and silver, Purselane or China dishes, Lignum Alloes, China roots, and many other rich commodities. Also from Iapan abounding with silver and Bulloine more then sufficient to furnish both Dutch and English in their East-India Trade and Traffique,Then drove them from Ia∣pan. though the Dutch (I suppose) amount to 3000000 l. and the Eng∣lish to 150000 l. per annum, returning for Holland, com∣munibus aliis 14 or 1600000 l. but this year 1664.The Dutch re∣turn 1664. re∣ported 4000000 l. or more. (as a Dutchman reported to me) in their eleven Ships were valued at 4000000 l. or more. But the Dutch in India not yet contented with this limitation of the English, viz not to look into the South-seas beyond Amboyna,The Dutch suf∣fer no Ship to sail beyond Amboyna. upon pain of confiscation of Ship and Goods, or utter destruction: the foresaid Gene∣ral Coon (as conceived) having contrived the Amboyna Massacre Anno 1621. came for Holland to palliate the same by friends and bribes,Gen. Iohn Coone for Holland, and then the A∣boyna Massacre put in executi∣on. or frivolous, or false pre∣tences, and left Senior Carpenter General at Battavia and General Spealte at Amboyna, to see it put in execu∣tion, Anno 1622. which was done very exquisitely and
fully, and so abandoned the English thence to Macassr a Celebe Island where they could have but what small quantity of Cloves and Mace, the Molajans or Celebeans could procure by stealth from the said Islands of Am∣boyna. Iohn the Italian his imploy∣ment.But that continued not many years neither, but the Dutch by degrees did intercept and prevent the same; and to that purpose was imployed one Iohn an Italian, and others by the General of Battavia with commissi∣ons for that design; and the said Italian being become a Burgher at Battavia aforesaid, who upon some occa∣sion (to me unknown) commenced a sute against Presi∣dent, Hawley and his Council,English Presi∣dent, and coun∣cil demurres. which they conceived by the aforesaid Treaty, Anno 1619. they were not bound to answer; yet notwithstanding the Dutch there proceeded to judgment, and gave the said Italians 6000 Rials of Eight Spanish, for damage, and the a∣foresaid General Carpenter sent the Captain of the Ca∣stle one Adrian,The Captain of the Castle with Musque∣teers, Halberts, & Blacksmiths, &c. who came with a File of Musqueeers, Halberts, and two Blacksmiths with Instruments, and caused the English ware-house to be forced open, and so much mony in chets to be carried away from thence as satisfied the foresaid Judgement, whereupon Presi∣dent Hawley and Council aforesaid, sent a protest to the Dutch General and Council aforesaid against their pro∣ceedings by Mr. Io Cartwright an English Factor there;Mr. Iohn Cart∣wright threat∣ned with ano∣ther Massacre. but the Dutch General aforesaid, would not receive it, but commanded him to carry it back again quietly, lest they should serve them as they did the English at Amboyna; and it had certainly been done if the Dutch had known then what came to pass shortly after; for General Coon not long after his arrival at Battavia from Holland,Gen. Coones ar∣rival, 1628. The raising of customs caused a war. raised the Iavaes customs from 10 to 20. per cent. whereupon the Iavaes made war upon the Dutch which they undoubtedly would have charged upon the Eng∣lish,The English gone in time, 162. as Combinators, and Instigators thereof. But
their removing to Pantum, Anno 1627. prevented it, for the Iavaes came by land with 20000 men, and by sea with 60 or 70. Prows, Anno 1628 with about 60 or 70. men a piece; and next year with about 40 or 50000. men by land, and all to little purpose;Gene. Coone sent to the Eng∣lish to abandon their houses. although at first they assaulted the Castle, and killed six or seven Dutch men therein, and knockt at the Generals cham∣ber door, (as reported) but were presently orced to fly into the woods, and thereupon the General sent to us English (being but two) to lodge on the other side of the River, lest in the night the watch taking us or Iavaes should shoot us, which we did. But I having no mind to sleep, and walking in my chamber in view of the said English houses,The English Houses fird 1628. Aug. 26. about ten a clock that night I saw two men, the one seeming to me a Dutch Skipper, the other a Moor or Lasar with long poles and reeds, or Cajans fastened thereon go from house to house set∣ting them a fire, which were quickly consumed to ashe, being built and covered with combustible stuff, and the day following, the Dutch searched and carried away what remained unburnt, as Sword blades, &c. and all the Brick wall compassing the said houses were forthwith pulled down and laid flat with the ground; And thereupon the English President and Council at Bantum,Another protest for 200000. Rials of eight Spanish. made another protest of damages for 200000 l. Rials of Eight Spanish (as true related) but what the issue thereof was, is suely best known to the English East-India company, and the two foresaid English go∣ing afterwards to the Dutch General to crave passage for Bantum in their ships (amongst other discourse he took occasion to sy that the English knew of the Iavaes coming,Gen. Iohn Coones hopes. but they did well to be gone; he said more∣over, that the English would not suffer them to go through the narrow seas, but about Scotland, but he hoped ere long they would go thorow whither the English would or no:ronice quo ad Engl. Realiter quo ad Dutch. And said moreover that our
Masters were like their Masters, they would have all the world, but will not afford the meanes to get it. Gen Coone sti∣led Captain of 12. Castles, & Commander of all the Seas in the world, 1628.And the King of Ternatte aforesaid, (one of the Am∣boyna Islands) sending some of his Orankaies, or No∣blemen Anno 1627. upon some message to the Dutch general aforesaid, gave him the title of captain of twelve Castles, and Commander of all the seas in the world. 17 Eminent Ia∣vaes massacred, imprisoned, and pillaged.But the said General (like enough) ruminating how to revenge himself both of the English and Iavaes, Anno 1632. (the ship Dolphin) one of the English companies ships, Mr. Thomas Proad commander, having taken ino his ship at Iapara seventeen eminent Iavaes to trans∣port them to the red sea and setting sail from thence towards Bantum, when he came thwart Battavia rode a Dutch ship, boarded him, and entered, killd and took prisoners, the said Iavaes, and took all their Jewels, Gold, and Treasure they could find, supposing thereby, so to incense and exasperate the Iavaes against the English either to fall upon them violently,The Dutch pro∣ject against the English. or expel them from their Factories of Bantam, and Iapara, and Iambe that the Dutch might shut them out of the streights of Sundie as well as Molacca, and that is it they long for, &c. Observat. I.Observation I. To ponder and consider the Dutch TyrannyBy pondering and well considering the premisses, the discreet. Reader may truly perceive and under∣stand to what a transcendent height of soveraignty, power and opulency the said Dutch East-India com∣mon-wealth had attained 36 years ago,The Dutch East-India com∣mon-wealth. where neither English nor French, Dane, Swead nor Iannesses, as well as Portugals and Spaniards (but English and Portugals espe∣cially have suffered by them exceedingly and cruelly:) I say not any of the foresaid Nations, nor any others
under Heaven (not there inhabiting) durst then look or sail into their foresaid south seas (as they term and challenge them) but all Nations must be subject to seizure, and confiscation of men, ships, and Goods, to that insolent and abitrary Government, notwithstan∣ding any Treaty or Contact made here with the States of Holland to the contrary,All Treates contemned, and used as nets and snares. which are but nets and snaes to delude the English; for in India they neither are nor have been regarded; thereby the Dutch as former and later experience doth suffiiently evince, having always their Ships ready to seize and command, for there hath been seen and told in Battavia rode at one time together, riding at Anchor 130 fall great and small, from 3 or 400 Tun burthen,130 ships in Battavia Rode, by Captain William Swan∣ley. to 13 or 1400 Tun burthen; and as they have done in the south sea, now they proceed in like sort in the North seas, having lately taken Cocheen Town and Castle from the Portugals upon the coast of Mallabar and Con∣nanoze,Cocheen Town and Castle ta∣ken by the Dutch from the Portugals, 1662. and other Ports and places where Esq Courteen had most of his Factories,Esq Courteens factories. and so commanding from Mallabar to Detanne, India, Persia, Arabia, Red sea, Sof∣fala, Mosambique, Mombassa, all along to Cabo de bona Es∣peranza, ten thousand leagues coasting,Cape bon Es∣per. K. Iames proclaimed 1620. now un∣der the Dutch command of ten thousand Leagues coa∣sting. where they have now a brave plantation; notwithstanding Anno 1620. Captain Andrew Shilling, Captain Richard Blithe, Captain Iohn Swan, and Captain Christopher Brown, commanders of Ships, London, Hart Ro-buck and Eagle, with Trumpets, Drums, and English colours; then proclaimed King Iames (of blessed memory) King thereof, gathering a great heap of stone, and left there for a Monument of remembrance. But now the two aforesaid Dutch companies of East and West-Indies, are met together,How the two Dutch Compa∣nies meet. in hopes also to command from North to South, and so to cross all the subjects of Emperours, Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the whole Universe (save only the Narrow Seas of Eng∣land,
which is their chief stumbling block. Observ. 2.Observation II. The Readers observations of Treaties and Treasons.From whence the discreet Reader may further ga∣ther this truth from the Premisses; That all or most of the Dutch Treaties (especially those relating the East-Indies their Darling Diana) are either Clandestine Treasons or prepensed prejudicial Pollicies, to abuse and circumvent Kingdoms and Nations to reduce them to reason (as they term it) which reason of theirs will never be satisfied untill they have subjected the trade and treasure of all Countrys and Nations upon earth, to their unlimited East-India arbitrary Go∣vernment,The Dutch Ar∣bitrary Go∣vernment. to bring and fetch, rule and rate, all com∣modities bought or sold, at their pleasure and price; and then to put in practice that design and project which they were hammering at their Town of Polli∣catte,A Dutch Project. upon the coast of Mesulapatum, Anno 1628. hark∣ning but to hear the word from Battavia (as there they reported) which was, viz. First, to sack and plunder the rich Town of Mesulapatam,The Dutch Pro∣ject in 1628. and then to destroy all their Vessels and Boats upon that coast: And it should have been done had not a brabling pedling Na∣tion (meaning the English) stood in their way to re∣ceive some profit thereby, as well as themselves; and peradventure they have used this pollicy already in their south-seas of Amboyna, China, Iapan, &c. from whence they might send for Holland such a large return this year 1664, of 4000000 l. (as some report) much more hath and might have been said concerning this Subject: But I must remember my promise and follow the question propounded more closely, and suc∣cinctly. The English Companies supine Error and IgnoranceNow the English East-India company (as I conceive, but themselves can best discover) having advan∣ced
5000000 l. or more in several joynt-stocks, and purchased no place to secure men, ships, or goods; and the Dutch but one sacred stock (as they term it) of 600000 l Anno 1602.The Dutch cruel diligence. And the English Factors and Ser∣vants in India as aforesaid being so tossed, tortured, and ejected out of their best Factories and Foundations of trade; And his Majesty highly abused and deluded in his just right and title to 4 or 5. of the said Islands of Amboyna as formerly exprest;His Maje∣sties Right to Castles and Customs. Also to half of the cu∣stoms of Persia, as well as to the Towns and Castles of Ormus and Cashme,Ormus and Persian Castles and Customs. which the Dutch hitherto by their power refuseth to pay, though justly due, as by agree∣ment with the Persian may appear, which is of very great consequence: And by these great abuses afore∣said and otherways much of the said 1600000 l. nati∣onal stock was spent and consumed in and about the Fortifications there, which in reason ought to add much to the Interest of the English there, and to be expected from the benefit of the Fruits thereof, for the time elapsed,To require an Account of damages su∣stained during the time elap∣sed. which would amount to an exceed∣ing great sum: And in Justice and Equity ought to be required and satisfied by the usurpers, and wrongful possessors thereof. Thus the said company being reduced to such a sad condition of Commerce losing in their principal ad∣venturers some 30. some 40 per cent some more.The English East-India Companies sad condition. His late Ma∣jesties excel∣lent wisdom and redress. His late Ma∣jesties Honour and respect. Sir William Curteen's ad∣venture in par∣ticular 80000 l. But upon their addresses to his late Majesty (of ever bles∣sed memory) a remedy was speedily provided, And a new company of adventurers instituted and ordained wherein his said late Majesty was pleased so far to ex∣press his interest therein, and affection thereto, as ap∣pears by admitting them to wear his own collours constantly, and honouring the said company with a royal Signet engraven with three Crowns and a Lyon Passant, whereof Sir William Courteen (that famous Merchant) was appointed Governor and Director by
his Majesty and Council, adventuring therein for his own particular (inter alium) 80000l. and the said com∣pany was constituted and ordained by his said Majesty and Council in the best and most legal way and form that ever yet in England was invented (which the Dutch quickly apprehended) and with so much wisdom,The Dutch fore∣sight in the loss and danger of their Trade. dis∣cretion, reason, moderation, and modification, in the limitation and prescription of all parties and inte∣rests without injuring or encroaching one on the other being in strange and remote Countries and places where the English had no Factories or Correspondence of Commerce, and with as much prudence and respect as any reasonable man could expect, desire, or require. And the said Sir William and adventurers, Anno 1635. speedily equipped and set forth to sea 6. ships viz the Dragon,6 Ships set forth 1635. Captain Iohn Weddal Commander and Admi∣ral, the Sun, Captain Richard Swanley Commander and Viceadmiral; the Katharine, Captain Iohn Carter Com∣mander and Rear-admiral; the Planter, Captain Ed∣ward Hall Commander; the Anne and Discovery: But shortly after their departure from the Downs, the said Sir William fell ick and died; and the said ships pro∣ceeded and arrived in India purchasing Ports and pla∣ces for Commerce, and Customs, and for Fortificati∣ons, and rendevouze to secure the same;Arriving in India, purcha∣sed and settled Factories and Fortifications. which the old Company heretofore never did. And by this expedition, in the very first and second year, the said old Companies losses in their adventures aforesaid, returned with so much profit increasing also their ships from 1, or 2 per An. to 3,4, or 5 per Ann. and also affording the said Company many several courte∣sies, relieving their ships with necessaries,Great advan∣tage thereby to the English-East-India Company. and their men from the miserable Mallabar Captivity that ever yet was known (save the matchless Massacre at Amboyna;) and yet this Company (as Coun∣sellor Chute pleaded for Esquire Courteen, at the Bar
of the Lords house, Anno 1647. (did very modestly term them) proved afterwards in many respects ex∣ceedingly ingrateful and injurious,Councelor Chues lead∣ing gain the Company for 50000l. dammags, now much more. where I must leave them and hasten my search, after the Dragon, Sun, and Katherine aforesaid. The Subject, Matter, or Conclusion. ANd finding them pursuing their honest and lawful Imployments, but passing through the Straights of Mallacca for China (a Town and Castle taken by the Dutch from the Portugals,Mallacca ever fce, till thē Dutch tok it fom the Por∣ugals but never ater. and ever till then free for the English to pass) the said ships were there presently encountred and commanded by four or five Dutch ships to go into Mallacca aforesaid;Sr. William Courten ships the e encoun∣tered, and threatned. but having no business there they refused, the said Dutch then threatned to ink or burn by their sides, but they would force them in; yet the said Dutch doubting their own Strength suffered them to pass but with terrible Me∣naces and Threats, that they would have a better ac∣count at their Return: And when the said English with much perplexity and trouble from sundry Na∣tions as well as the Dutch, had finished their Affairs in China aforesaid, they returned back again through the aforesaid Straights of Malacca, and then they were en∣countred again with a greater power of Dutch ships double manned, and by them sternly commanded to go into Mallacca and speak with their Governour:Sr. VVilliam Courn ships again there encountered, & sre threat∣ned to sink or burn them, so commanded by Commission. Cap¦tain Weddal and the rest English, still denying to obey their command, then the said Dutch shewed their Com∣mission, which was either to bring them in by force, or to deliver them, the Portugals and their goods who were many and of great value, by estimation worth 200000l. or to sink or burn by their sides, and there∣upon their time being limited, & a glass turned for the
English to give their answer:The glass tur∣ned to give their answer. Then Captain Weddal cal∣led a Consultation, and debated with his Captains and chief Officers what they should do, wherein were dif∣ferent Opinions; for some were for Fighting the Dutch forthwith, as Captain Weddal and his men;Difference in opinions, a∣mogst the English Com∣manders, at last agreed. Others for delivering up the Portugals and their Goods, holding it neither Valour nor Wisdom to venture their Lives for them, from whom they had received many Injuries and Abuses, as Captain Richard Swanley aforesaid Vice-Admiral and his men, whereat Captain Weddal afore∣said was exceedingly moved, and thereupon gave Cap∣tain Swanley some reproachful and uncivil language, as Coward, and the like: But Captain Weddal falling in∣to a calmer temper, Captain Swanley moved him to call for the Black box, November 8. wherein were in∣structions from the Kings Majesty concerning the Por∣tugals,Black box, No. 8th. His late Majesties Or∣der concerning the Portugals. and there they found to this, or the like effect, viz: That if they hapened to receive any prejudice, or damage from the Portugals, to take their remedy by what means they could get it. Then Captain Swanley aforesaid, moved Captain Weddal aforesaid further, and said; that if he Captain Weddal would really seize the Portugals as prisoners, and their goods confiscated to the King of England for the injuries and abuses they had received from the said Portugals; Captain Weddal should then see and finde,Captain Wed∣dal's seizure of the Portugals and Goods. that neither himself nor his men would prove Cowards, but would freely and wil∣lingly spend their dearest blood in that Quarrel, and fight it out to death to the last man. To which mo∣tion, Captain Weddal readily and speedily condiscen∣ded and made seizure accordingly. Then Captain Swanley in the ship Sun (being of greatest force) weigh∣ed Anchor,Captain Rich∣ard Swanleys Declaration and Message to the Dutch Commander of their Reso∣lution. and went and rid a head the Admiral, pur∣posely to receive the first Assault of the Dutch; and be∣fore the glass was out, Captain Swanley carried this their Resolution and Ground of the Quarrel, and De∣clared
the same to the Dutch Commander (being one of his old acquaintance at Amboyna) at the hearing of which Message and Resolution, the said Dutch Com∣mander was much troubled, fretting and fuming, and tearing his hair; saying, he had no instructions in that case, but must go in again for new, and that he was sure to lose his head when he came to Battavia,The Dutch Commander much discon∣tented, feaing his head. because he did neither burn, nor sink, nor bring them into Mallacca, and so going in for new and further Instructi∣ons, came out no more: And the Dragon, Sun, and Ka∣therine, proceeded and came to Goa, and there landed all the said Portugals and their Goods,Captain Wed∣dal at Goa, landed the Por∣tugals and Goods. according to agreement made with them at Maccao in China (but contrary to that pretended seizure, and Captain Swan∣leys expectation) and the said Captain Swanley in the said Ship Sun, came that year home and arrived safe in England, but the Dragon and Katherine staid in India until the next year to compleat their lading. But when the Dutch (observing the Motion of the Dragon and Katherine) understood plainly,The Dutch thereby so in∣raged and ex∣asperated, sought how to be revenged. that by the foresaid pretended seizure, they were meerly deluded and disappointed, both of their prey and purpose, doubtless they were exceedingly exasperated and in∣raged; And it was not their Commanders head that would asswage or satisfie their Constant and Frequent Bloody and Cruel Malice and Revenge (as former and latter experience plainly remonstrates) but when the aforesaid Dutch Commander came to Battavia,The Sceane altered, and the Comman∣ders head off no pice to ap∣pease their Mallice. the Sceane was altered, and a new device framed to destroy them altogether, and not suffer any to live to bring back the said tidings of their Destruction. FOr, in, or about the Year, 1637. upon a War or Diffe∣rence between the King of Coelon & the Portugals there Inhabiting; The Hollanders Vpperland States of their V∣nited Provinces of Battavia, Amboynia, Tewan, &c. neg∣lecting
no opportunity to advance their foresaid designs of Con¦quest and Trade Complied with, and assited the forsaid King against the said Porugals (being very antient inabitants there) and undoubtedly it was that very same Fleet going upon tht occasion to Coelon (before the Dragon and Catherine set saile for England) that extinguished, and most barbarous∣ly destroyed both those two hips and Men, according to the se∣veral Relations of English, Portugals, and Dutch, &c. And that done; Then the said Fleet proceeded upon their de∣sign at Coelon aforesaid, where in few years after, they con∣quered and vanquished the foresaid Portugals both by Sea and Land, and took and surpriz'd all thrir ships and goods (with their chief Town or City of Collombo and the rest) with all their Castles, Fortifications and Houses or Towns, with all the Good and Treasure; Ordinance, Amunition and Appurtinan∣ces, therein and thereto belonging, and so quickly possest and dispatcht the Riches and Subjects of two Eminent Kings in Eu∣rope out of their way; and the third, the King of the said Island and his Subjects escaped not altogether free; For (by good report) when the said King desired to know their de∣mands for their assitance, and the same being produced, the said King was thereat much amazed and said, that he and all his Subjects were not worth the one half or quarter of what the said Hollanders demanded, (notwithstanding the exceeding great plunder and booty taken from the English and Portu∣gals aforesaid? And so the said King being altogether unable to satifie their said demands in any reasonable measure (and to be rid of them, as he once well hoped, but they never inten∣ded) Therefore the said King was constrained and necessita∣ted to Submit, and to suffer the said Hollanders to enjoy all the Portugals Towns and Castles aforesaid with, &c. ut supra; and what other Ports or places upon his said Islands they desired: And further to permitt and suffer the foresaid Hollanders States, to conferr a Kings Ship upon the said John Tyson, as an extraordinary Reward and Recompence for all his good services, according to the usual construction of
Holland and Dutch Reason? Supposing thereby, to Declare and Proclaim to all Kings, Emperours, and Princes, beyond Cape bona Esperanza and to their Subjects; That as they the Holland Upperlander States aforesaid, had power there to destroy and set up Kings at their pleasure; so had their Masters in their Neatherlands the like power; or more over all Kings and Emperours in Europe, and o threby thinking to free themselves from that aspersion, which many Heathens seemed long since justly to lay upon them, (to wit,) That they were some Rude, Bruitish, Boarosh, Vncivil, and Barbarous people, and of low esteem in Europe? Because they had no King. And thus, Per fas aut nefas they intend  if possible) to build their Babel as high as Heaven. But I must here, Ponere Obicem, and give you a True and Perfect Copy of Quondam Skipper Now Dutch President, and Hollands King John Tyson, one of his Warrants to his Subjects, with∣in the Verge of his Command and Iurisdiction. A true translation of one of his Warrants by Geo. Gawton Marchant, which came to my hands at Goa in India, 7. Nov. Stilo Veter, 1664. Iohn Tyson President for the Dutch at Gallee in Coelon. THe Chief of the people of Gampa, with the rest dwellers; Let them come and obey the Hollands King, and bring the other Duragos or Dwellers of the Neighbouring Aldees or Towns; and the Challes or Inhabitants of Urngampala, and of Galleluja and Hivitiania, and all other Challees or Inha∣bitants, Subjects to the Corlo or Governour of Allicuer, and
the Captain of Gampan withall; And in case all these people eannot come, Let him appear before the King; For so is the Kings command. The seaven Corlos or Commanders are already at Ningumbo. Concerning the loss of the Dragon and Katherine. Out of the Book of Resolutions at Goa, in the In∣struction given to Io. Dursenon his Persia Voyage written by Iohn Darett. ALso if you happen to meet with the ship Hopewell (Mr. Edward Lock or whosoever Commander) enquire di∣ligently of six Dutchmen taken Aboard the said ship, at her last being at Cocheen; who can make certain relation con∣cerning the Dragon and Katherine, their sinking between the Islands of Coylon and Mauritius by seven Dutch Vessels or Ships, (as we are informed) whereof the Ship called Am∣sterdam was Admiral; 21. November 1644. in Goa. London, 9th. of June, 1641. FRancis Day saith, That from Mesulapatam, he came to Surratt; and coming before Goa, was forced to strike by the Hollanders; and a Boat from the Ship Amboyna, came aboard to have a discharge, how that they received no in∣jury from the Hollanders; which discharge, was written twice before it could be to their likeing. And amongst the Boats Crew, there was an English man who told to the Pur∣ser of the Expedition (as three or four men come home by the Crispine can witness) It is well you struck, for all the guns aboard were primed, and the Lynstocks ready, waiting for the word to give fire and would have sunk you, and God knows
what is become of Captain Weddal, which words being spoken he was called away by the Commander into the boat. These persons present: William Courteen, Fr. Day, Isaac Saxby, and D. G. (i. e.) David Goubard. Iohn Carter came home in the Crispine, and after∣wards in the Bon Esperanza tells the same words as Francis Day abovesaid. London 25th January, 1641. A Board the Hester at Blackwal, present. William Courteen, John Rushout, Captain Robert Moul∣ton, Anthony Robert, one of the Queens Musitions, Ed∣ward Kinpe, John Bening, Thomas Gent. and D. G. (i. e.) David Goubard. Was told by William Taylor Masters Mate, and confirm∣ed by Robert Hogg Master of the Hester. THat William Taylor aforesaid, going a shoare at Co∣cheen with William Gorley, the Governour of the Town and Castle, demanded, or asked him (among other things) whether the General (meaning Captain Weddal was arrived in England with his two Ships, to which they answered, he was not; And do you know (said the Governour) what is become of those two Ships? They said they knew not; then said he, you must know that they were sunk by the Hollan∣ders about Ceylon; They asked how he knew this; To which he answered, here are passed through this Town two slaves which were taken by the Hollanders, and made an escape from them at Ceylon, which two slaves have reported the same for a certain truth to all the Inhabitants of Cocheen; The said two slaves were then gone for Goa or India, &c. More particulars they neglected to enquire after, because that Mr. Gurley nor none of our people would believe it to be pro∣bable.
They also asked what Hollanders should have sunk or ta∣ken them. Answer was made, The Fleet which lay before Goa of twelve saile in their way home to Jaccatra, whereof was General one of the Holland Ships lying before Goa was the ship Trevere. Sir John Hubbard writes to his Friends in London, that he hath advice out of Holland, that Captain Weddall was sunk in the East-Indies by the Hollanders. John Bening Mr. of the Planter, heard Mr. Mountney say, Captain Weddalls two ships were worth, 150000l. in England besides his own goods, 20000l. very neer. One Lawrence a Dane who came home from the Streights with Mr. Lucas, told to the Wife of James Clarke, taylor in the Dragon; That he was at the sinking or Taking of the Dra∣gon and Katherine, by seven Holland Ships. Robert Hogg tells of one which was at Plynmouth a Hol∣lander, and was before at the sinking of Captain Weddall, he was with Mr. Tuchburn. Captain Swanley tells of one James Burdett which had a Letter from India which makes mention of the very same re∣port by a slave, which made escape from the Hollanders. Anno 1644. AT the return of Thomas Lamberton, William Page, Thomas Newman and others taken in the Bon-Esper∣anza going to China, and brought prisoners into Mallacca with ten wounded men which lay there in the Hospital, where they found a Scotch-man lying sick, who upon his dying told the aforesaid men of the Bon-Esperanze, that he could not dye before he had declared that he was at the taking of the Dragon and Katherine, which were going from India unto the Cape Bon-Esperanza by seven Holland Ships which coming in fare by Captain Weddall they pretended to be bound home, and invited him with Captain Carter and both the Mountneys aboard; where having feasted together, so was
Captain Weddall and his Friends brought upon the Deck, and told they must into the Sea, whereupon more words past; and they were bound back to back and thrown into the sea, those of the Dragon and Katherine seeing the same fited themselves to fight, but were taken, and their Ships Robbed, and then with (all the men remaining alive) bored and let sink in the Sea; he told that the same Fleet came to Mallacca, afterwards where much was hid; the rest of the common men was sent for the Moluccoes, and that well known by many in Mallacca, but durst not speak of it, The said Lamberton and others asked the Lievtenant of the Town about the same; but he an∣swered, that upon their liues they should not speak of such things. A Declaration of some News seeming probable, of the Dragon and Katherine of Esquire Courteens; Captain Iohn Weddall, and Captain Iohn Carter Commanders. From the Mouth of Boat-swain Wente; John Thomas, Hinton Quondam, Chy∣rurgion of the Ship Bon-Esperanza em∣ployed in the service of the Worshipfull Esquire Courteen, Anno 1644. in the Moneth of August, being by sinister occasion at Johanna, in the Ship Hopewell of the old Companies, at which time also was the Crispine and Dol∣phin of the old Companies there, as also the Loyalty Mr. John Durson Commander, be∣longing to the Esquire Courteen, had this following Relation of the Destruction of the
Dragon and Katherine, by the Dutch as follows. THe said Boat-swain Wente, Boat-swain of the good ship Dolphin, Mr. Thomas Proude Master in the said Ship, 1643. upon some employment went from Surratte to the Southward, viz. To Cocheen a Portugal Town, where (upon what occasion I know not) having some conference with a servant of the Governours of Cocheen concerning the Dutch. The man told him of a fight made off of Ceylon between the Dutch and English, viz. Two English Ships and seven Dutch Ships, the English Ships named the Dragon and Katherine, both which the Dutch overcame, sinking the one and forcing the other a shore, so eagerly prosecuting them, that some of the English having escaped drowning and got a shore, the Dutch in their Boats hasted a shore likewise and cut them all off. Now no doubt but the Dutch have projects enough to conceal this Villanie; but if this Relation be true, Gods wonderful power is evident in the Discovery, for this ser∣vant to the Governour was in the Dutch Ships at that time in their service, when they fought and following the English a shore (he being one among the Dutch) made escape to the Portugals and in time came to serve the Governour of Co∣cheen. This is the Relation that I heard Boat-swain Wente Relate, and indeed I went aboard purposely to inquire of him about that business: I desired to have the Relation under the Boat-swains hand, but I could not obtain it, by reason partly of is unwillingness, and partly the shortnesse of our time, for they suddenly set saile from Joanna, Also the Boat-swain said the Governour of Cocheen nows of the matter, and up∣on inquiry (if he pleaseth can produce you his Servant if li∣ving; if not, he himself is able to give satisfaction. Was under written, Thomas Hinton. DUarte, de figueiredo de Mello Secretario de sua Majestrade do estado da India, Certifico
que assistindo na Ilha de Ceylon soube por algus Prisoneires Olandeses, que se tomarao coms as duas naes do Capt. Guadel que hia da China Pa∣ra Inglaterra, as tomarao o Olandeses no Cabo da Boa-Esperança & as meterao ambas apique; Iso he ó que me constor de ditos dos dites Prisoneires, Secutarto. Goa a 22 de April de 1647. Duarte defigueiredo de Mello. I Edward De Figueirdo de Mello Secretario to his Ma∣jesty of the State of India, do Certifie, that being in Com∣mission in the Island of Ceylon; I came to know by some Pri∣soners of the Hollanders, that they met with two Ships of Captain Weddals, which were going from China for England, and that the Hollanders took them towards the Cape of Bon-Esperanza and sunk them both. This is what appears unto me by the Relations of the said Prisoners. Goa 22. April. Anno 1647. Was under-written, Duarte defigueiredo de Mello. FOr when the said Dutch Commander doubted the cutting off his Head; in stead thereof they furnish him (as credibly reported) with seven Sail of proper Ships,Seven Sail set out to look af∣ter the Dragon and Katherine. four greater, three lesser; the Ship Amsterdam about 1400. Tun burthen being Admiral: No doubt but with strict Injunctions utterly to destroy the said two Ships, Dragon and Katherine and so preserve his Head on his Shoulders, which it seems by manifold re∣ports and Instances he performed very Fully and Ef∣fectually lying in wait or them with his said Fleet, hovering too and again about Caeloan the onely Cinamon
Island in the world, taken by the Dutch from the Por∣tugals and Natives, whereof Iohn Tyson a Dutch man,Iohn Tyson the Holland King at Caeloan. (first a Scullion, (or some such thing) then a Skipper, and at best a Commander) was made King as by his Warrants appeared, Anno. 1644. Eter. forab, 26. or 28. years, &c. and knowing well what course the said two Ships Dragon and Katherine would steer for England, hav∣ing sufficient Intelligence and Spies abroad to observe their motion, and to bring them word when and at what time they set saile from Goa and the Coast of Mal∣labar, whom the said Dutch Fleet unhapily discovered,The Dutch Fleet with the Dragon and Katherine. and hailing one to the other, who and whether bound according to the manner of the Sea; Captain Weddall answered of White-hall for England, as by his Colours appeared? The Dutch answered of Battavia, homward bound for Holland, and so seemed glad of one anothers company, and as commonly reported in India, they kept company some reasonable time until they had them at sea farr enough from any Land. And when the Dutch saw their opportunity, they invited Captain Weddall and Captain Carter with their chief Officers, in friendly manner aboard their Admiral,The Dutch their friendly invitation of Captain Wed∣dal &c. aboard the Ship Am∣sterdam aforesaid. And when they had eaten and drank sufficiently, the Dutch suddenly clapt a guard upon them, and Seized, Pillaged and sunk the said two Ships Dragon and Katherine,The Dutch seizing, Pil∣lgng and Sinking the two Ships, binding all the men back to back, throwing them over∣board; and this was the certain end of the Dragon & Katherine. wearing the King of Englands Colours, and bound the English back to back and threw them all over board (as in India and else where frequently reported) and this was the final and dis∣mal conclusion and confusion of the aforesaid two Ships, Dragon and Katherine, valued at 180000l. besides their Commanders, Marchants and others, men of great Quality and Reputation, who doubtlesse had ve∣ry great estates therein. Ship Bon. Es¦peranza after∣wards taken.Afterwards the Ship Bona-Esperanza in the same Im∣ployment, and in the said Straights of Mallacca, was
there violently assaulted by the said Dutch, killing and wounding the Master and many others, but the Portu∣gal Passengers calling for Quarter, the ship was enterd and seized on by the Dutch,Some of the Dutch enter∣ing, said they did well to yield when they did, else they had gone after the Dra∣gon and Kathe∣rine aforesaid. some of them saying to the Chyrurgion and other English in the said ship, viz. They did well to yield when they did, else they had gone after the Dragon and Katherine, and Carrying the English Prisoners a shore, towing his Majesties Colours at their Boat stern (as reported.) A Scotch man a shore lying very sick, very earnestly, desired to speak with some of the English;A sick Scotch man did de∣clare the Fact to several Eng∣lish men. And it was to inform them, that he was in that sad action of the Dragon and Katherine, and his conscience therefore was exceedingly troubled and afterwards died. Then the Great William, Captain Ieremiah Blackman Commander upon the same Imployment,Captain Iere∣miah Black∣man very nar∣rowly escaped the like by an unexpected course. and in the said Streights of Mallacca was likewise assaulted and sore threatned by the said Dutch, but doubting their own strength, he passed them going to China, but they way∣laid his return with seven Ships, they supposing and expecting that for fear he would have gon through the Streights of Sundie at the Souther most end of Sumatra & so to catch or tole him to sea without ken of land as they did the Drgon & Katherine, & pretend themselves a homeward-bound Fleet; and when they had seen their opportunity if not to carry him to Battavia, confiscate Ship and goods which had been as great courtesie as he could expect from them, or else to have sent him and his Company to seek the Dragon and Katherine in the bottom of the sea,And this was the end of the Dragon and Katherine, ithout any other cause, then pre∣suming to sail in their South Se, for presuming to sail in their South-seas without their leave; but he steering an un∣expected courfe, by, or near the Shore in sight of Mal∣lacca happily escaped them. Now to conclude and finish this Disquisition concern∣ing the Dragon and Katherine, and to discover the plac into which they are sent, and the parties who sent
them; our next and lst work is to produe our Indi∣ and proofs that it is so really and indeed,Now they are discovered, nxt to or proofs, &c. which are farr more and bet∣ter then in such a case would be expected or Imagned. wherein it is well hoped that better evidence will be asseted and produced, thn in suh a case could well be expected or required. Some plain and pertinem Indiies and Proofs, concerning the destruction of the Dragon and Katherine. I. THe diligent observation of the constant Series of the Dutch in the Insolent actions, and cruel pro∣ceedings of their States General in their East India Vp∣perlands and United Provinces of Amboy and Butta∣via (Alias, New Holland) and in their continued Pro∣secution of English and Portugals;Portugals and English con∣paed to sheep or Ja-cauls, driven to and fro by the Dutch Lyons and Tigers. Abinitio, driving them (like Sheep or Jac-cauls by their high & mighty pow∣er) out of all profitable places of Trade as aforesaid, in order by degrees to expell them out of India, not daring to look beyond Cape Bon-Esperanza.The constant and insolent actions of their Vpperlands States of Am∣oyna & Bat∣tavia: And by Affi¦avit thereof made before Iohn Pae a Master n Chancery 23. of Fb. 1646. Bartholmew Church man, &. As also their contempt and deision of all Treaties and Agree∣ments made with their States of the Netherlands con∣cerning any matter or thing beyond the aid ape, as may appear not onely by their neglect of all former Treaties, and Waring and Wronging there, while treating here (as I conceive) at this instant with the King of Bantum, meerly to drive the English out of their Pepper Trade at Iambee; but also it appears by their General I. Coones expression, Anno. 120. to the Com∣manders and Company of the English Companies; two Ships, Bear and Sar, saying, that they would not leave an English man in India before they had done; And An∣no, 1628. When the said Coon was stled by the King of
Ternatte Captain of Twelve Castles, and Commander of all the Sea in the World. And afterwards two Eng∣lish men craving passage for atum? He the said Gene∣ral oon replyed, aud said, the English would not suffer them to go thorow the Nrrow Ses, &c. But he hoped ere long to go thorow whether the English would or no, &c. as by Remonstrance appears and said more∣over, that the English East-India Company like theirs, would have all the World, but not afford them the means to get it, &c. II. That long before the Amboya Massacre, they had debarred the English from having any Commerce with China, Iapan, or Phillipeen Islands the Spaniards.Their de∣baring and ob∣structing all Nations, for trading into those seas upon Confiscation. And ever after that Massacre, not to sail byond the Celeeb Islands, or Macasser upon confiscation of ships and goods, and incurring their further displeasure; where∣fore some English knowing this, and that the Dutch were in good earnest for their own advantage, for it was 4. or 500000l per an. profit to them, and 2. or 300000l, per annum loss to the English ever since, by loosing his Majesties Right (and Merchant Trade) herefore re¦fused to go that Voyage with Capt. Iohn Carter Com∣mander of the Katherine, for this very Cause and Dan∣ger, els very willingly would have accepted of the Motion. III. That Rebellious and wicked agreement made in In∣dia,Their a∣greement, and resolve in In∣dia to destroy, as by Affidavit &c. ut supra. (and afterwards Printed by Authority in England, and Affidavit upon Oth likewise made before a Ma∣ster in Chancery) between the Dutch and English, ut∣terly to destroy that exceeding hopefull Imployment of Sr. William Courte Kt. William Courteen Esquire his Son and the rest Adventurers into East India, by Seizing,
Sinking, Burning, or otherwise; wherein the Dutch diligence was very remarkable in all the said Esquires Ships that went for China,All ships go∣ing that way questioned, sunk, or taken. for certainly the Dragon and Katherine suffered as aforesaid, and the Ship Bon-Esper∣anza also, and the Sun and Great William very nar∣rowly escaped; neither was the said English at home or abroad, altogether idle as in time convenient may fur∣ther be declared. IV. Capt. Richard Swanley to Io. Darell, August 1647. upon Exchange Lon∣don.The Relation of Captain Richard Swanley concern∣ing that last passage of Seizure of Portugals and their Goods in the Streights of Mallacca, whereby the said Dutch were so enraged and exasperated, that they hun∣ted violently to destroy the said Dragon and Katherine as the said Captain feared, as by the aforesaid Rela∣tion more largely appeareth. V. Capt. William Swanley's Re∣lation to the said Iohn Dar∣rll upon Ex∣change Lon∣don.The Relation of Captain William Swanley, who be∣ing in Holland, Anno 1638. when the Dutch East India Fleet arrived; and the said Dragon and Katherine was then expected: As the said Captain was drinking with a Friend, there several Dutch men doing the like, and onely a slight thin Deal board between them, some o∣ther Dutch men enquired; What news of Captain Wed∣dall? They answered that he was sunk and Drowned. The said Captain hearing this, presently desired to be satisfied more fully; therefore he went to those Dutch men newly come from India and enquired of them, but they were very shie and would not discover it any fur∣ther; onely they told him they heard it was so, and that it is all one, for none but their own Countrey men could tell them so, and it will admitt of no other con∣struction, but that it was so indeed; which amounts to a plain discovery by their own open and free Confes∣sion
for the one or the other, must actually be present actors in the said Destruction. VI. The Relation of Iohn Stratford a Cord-wainer in Southwark (and Kinsman to Mr. Daubeey Chyrurgeon of the aforesaid Ship Katherine) and for whom the said Stratford had caused to be made,The Rela∣tion of Iohn Stratford, to the said Iohn Darell and o∣thers. an Imbroidred Gir∣dle with Silver Buckles; which Girdle the said Chy∣rurgion, promised never to part with for love or mo∣ney. And this said Chyrurgeon was well and in good health, when the Dragon and Katherine aforesaid set sail for England (as the men in the Ship Mary coming then from India aforesaid report.) But afterwards the said Iohn Stratford saw two Dutch men in Southwark, going from one Gold-smiths shop to another upon their oc∣casions, and espied one of the said Dutch men to have or wear the very same Girdle, and enquired of the said Dutch man, how he came by the said Girdle, and where he had it? for said Stratford, I know it very well; The said Dutch man somewhat abashed at the question, at last told him he had it in India; I thought so replied the said Stratford, you are one of the Rogues that sunk the Dragon and Katherine. And the said Stratford inten∣ded to have had him before a Justice, but his VVife and other Friends diswaded him; then came he to the Secretary of the East India Company Richard Swingle∣hurst (not knowing Esquire Courteen) who laughed at the news (as the said Stratford related;) and so that discovery rested for further prosecution. VII. The Relation of Senior Lues Ribro,Senior Lues Ribero at Goa in India, to Iohn Farren, Iohn Darell and others. an Eminent Por∣tugal Merchant at Goa, who said that a Gentleman and friend of his (which lay then ick in one of their Ca∣stles) who told Agen Farren, if he would send to him,
he could make a perfect discovery of the said Ships: and likewise one Thomas a Mustzoe who srved the Por∣tugal Governour of Coucheen, who was also in that action; besides the common relations of Moores, Gen∣tues and Mallabars; but what the said Agent rrn did therein is to be unknown, for I was then upon occasion sent to Rabagge, and afterwards for England. VIII. Tho. Hiton's Relation at Island Ioanna and Goa to Io. Darell, 1644.The Relation of Thom Hton Chyrurgion of the ship Bona-Esparanza and others therein, who said that when the Dutch entered and had possssion of their said ship; some of the Dutch sailors said to the said Hiton and others; They did well to yield as they did, else they had gone after the Dragon and Katherine; and moreover a Bootch man when they were in Malacca be∣ing there very sick, and was in that action desired ear∣nestly to speak with some English man, who told them (as they said) that his Conscience was much troubled, because he was in that sad action and destruction of the said Dragon and Katherine. IX. Mr. Newman's Relation to Iohn Darell.Memerandum, 12. December, 1664. Master Newman said in the Custome-house London, that one came to Mr. Gurley and himself (being Dutch Prisoners at Malacca) and desired that some English men ould go to speak with a sick man there; for the said sick, earnestly de∣sired it: so Mr. Gurley and Mr. Newman sent Thomas Lamberton and some others, who returned this Message from the said sick man, that his Conscience troubling him, and that he sent for them to tell them that he was at the sinking of the Dragon and Katherine by the Dutch, and that the said Dutch bound all the English back to back and threw them over-board, according to the Relation of Mr. Hinton Chyrurgion, Richard White and others, &c.
X. The Relation of Richard White an English man at Goa sving the Portugals;Richard Whi's Relation at Goa 21. Iune 1644. to Iohn Farrn, John Darell, &c. Factors. who said, that  me wih ight Dutch men upon the Coast of India, and seven of them conssed to him they were in the Dutch Fleet that destroyed the Dragon and Katharine, and that there were Nine Ships in Number, Six Greater, Three lesser, whereof the Ship Amsterdm about 1400. Ts Burthen w Admiral, and pretended them selves a homwrd bound Flet for Holland. And Captain  and Captain Carter with some of their , being invied bord the said Admiral after a pretnded friendly Entertainment; the said Dutch, Sid illa∣ged, and Sunk the said ships Dragon and , and bound the men back to back, and  the men all o∣ver-board, and this was  bout Forty Leagues from the Island Zeloan as the said Dutch men related. XI. It is the opinion of some,Some are very confident thereof upon good reason. that the English Presidents of Suratt, Mr. Methwould, Mr. Fremblin, and Mr. Brittain, and other their Factors there could all, or most of them have made a clear discovery thereof (as well as one of them, Mr. Iohn ) but being coceived to☜ e combi  with the said Dutch in th general de∣struction, and seeming well pleased herewith therefore an uncharitable silence did possess them, whose case even now might be th own (if God and the Kings Majesty prevent it not) but the  adventurers are sure to suffer mo; and ing that formerly through their great ignorance and upie, and incon∣siderate Government, and Management of that weigh∣ty Affair of such High Concernment and Consequence; so it is, that they (of Merchants) have been doubtless
the greatest Friends and Promoters of the said Dutch designs,English ast India Compa∣ny, the great∣est friends and enemies. and consequently the greatest enemies to the Land of their Nativity, as his late Majesty of ever Bles∣sed Memory, seemed excellently to apprehend in the Preface of his Majesties Pattent under the Great Seal of England, made to Sr. William Courteen and the rest ad∣venturers therein. But I presume that the least of these Indicia's and Proof, (being all of them Voluntary and Free) are of greater Force and Efficacie, in the Judgment of any understanding and upright Reader. The least In∣dicia or Proof, greater then all at Amboy∣na.Then the greatest or all those empty and pretended cruel, and extorted Indiciaes, and proofs produced and alledged by the Dutch in their proceedings against His Majesties Subjects, whether the innocent English or Natives at Amboyna or elswhere. Further Reasons to satisfie the Rea∣der, and refell Objections. Reason, I. ☞THat it was never known before this (that ever I heard of) that ever two ships together English or Dutch, going or coming to or from India, perished by stress of Winds or Weather. Reason, II. Further Rea∣sons.That there was eight Ships or Pinnaces more lost at Sea belonging to that Expedition, yet not a word or relation of any one of them to sail by such Destructi∣on.
Reason, III. That it was more Impossible or Improbable by Land, to conceal the burning of the English Houses and Stores at Battavia in sight of Ten Thousand people, and not one of them since discovering the same (that ever I heard of,) then to conceal the sinking of the Dragon and Katarine. Rex & Regina Beati. ALL these Indiciaes and Proofs seems Superfluous and needless; seeing the Dutch Combinations,Dutch constant practises, con∣sidered all these proofs and rea∣son seems su∣perfluous. Actions, and constant Obstructions, their Combinati∣ons, Hostile Seizures, and Bloody Depredations are fully evident, and good and sufficient proofs of the Premises. The Lading of the Dragon and Katherine, for the Adventurers onely estimated, 180000l. The loss of Trade, Factories, Plantations, for the Adventurers onely estimated at, 120000l. The loss of particular Persons in two Ships, being men of quality and good Estates, — For Murthers, Massacrees and Loss and Destruction of Trade to Posterity, being onely matters of State, are most humbly left to His Majesty and others under Him, in Highest Power and Authority.
Some special Annotations further to explain the Premises, (viz.) THat this East India War and Dutch Design, began a∣bout  sixty years ago, and continues to and at this very day; witness the Town and Castle of Cocheen in India, lately taken by the Dutch from the Portugals: Also the Dutch new Waring against Bantum, to drive the English from thence and from their chief Pepper trade at Iambe, and so shut them clear out both of the Streights of Sundye and Mallacca. That this Dutch War now ageth not so much as for∣merly for want of prey to feed upon; having long since destroyed both the power and profit of English and Por∣tugal, to the exceeding enriching of their Netherlands or old Holland by the one, and of their Vpperlands or new Holland by the other, to such a high and transcendent degree of Pride, Riches, and Power, insomuch that the lading of their Eleven Ships this year, 1664. from their foresaid new Holland, home to old Holland; some of their own Nation reported to be worth 4000000l. or more 15. or 1600000. being formerly their usual annual return. That the Dutch now having made an absolute Con∣quest of all the South-East Seas of Asia and Affrica (half of the whole Universe from Iapan and China, to Cape Bon-Esperanza Thirty Thousand miles Coasting, and reduced the Subjects of at least Thirty Emperours, Kings, Princes, and Governours, to the Dictates and Rules of their own Arbitrary Power and Protection, without any Dispute or Contradiction; And all this in the Prince of Aurange his Name.Prince of Au∣range.
Now they treen about the foresaid Cape and meeting  there with their Neatherlands, West India Company☜ (with whom uniting and combining together) endea∣vour to carry on and propogate the said old War and design into Europe and America (the other half of the whole Universe) with Confidence and Assurance of like success. And Subtilly and Slily striking at the root and main obstacle, viz. The Command of the English Narrow Seas; having already (as themselves and o∣thers conceive) the Command of all the Seas in the World besides: And thereupon they frame a caus∣less Contest and Demand concerning some injuries and damages (as they pretend) lately done upon the Coast of Guinnie and Cabo Verde; wherein they are proved to be the first and onely trespasses: But by the blessing of the Almighty upon the Vigilence, Care, and Prudence of His now Majesty, their secret design is at present put to a stand, they being peradventure in further Expe∣ctation of a large supply from their Vpperlands of For∣ty or Fifty Tall Ships of inestimable value by April or May next; and in the mean time use some Delatory, Pretences, or Treaties. But seeing His Majesty, with the happy concurrence  of his Royal and most Valiant and Magnanimous Bro∣ther His Highness the Duke of York, and Lord High Ad∣miral of all His Majesties Forces by Sea) with the Un∣animous Assistance of a Wonderful, Discreet, and Loyal High Court of Parliament Representing the whole Na∣tion; May apprehend great Hopes and Incouragement in this so Transcendent and Mighty Undertaking, a∣gainst such Powerful and Politique Universal Enemies (especially of England;) and who may compare their Conquests by Sea, with the Great Turk by Land, and allow him Ten foot for One. I say to reduce this Peo∣ple☜
to Right Reason, is onely the work of the Almigh∣ty, and of the King of Great Brittain, his Instrumental and most Valiant Vicegerent; no other King or Prince under Heaven, being sufficient in apprehension to Weild their Weapons, and to dispute this most Noble and Just Cause with them at Sea; and to this end, A Voice seems to be heard from Heaven, in His Majesties most Glorious and Triumphant Restauration, with∣out one drop of Blood-shed: To Question and Chastize these Rebellious, Ingrateful, and Cruel People for all their Actions and Misdemenours in India, where blood hath touched blood continually. And further Paulus Grobnerus ex Misnia, in his Sericum Mundi Filium, sent to His Majesties most Famous Pre∣decessor and Nursing Mother, to these forgetful and ungrateful people, (Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed Me∣mory) 1574. seems as it were to point with his Fin∣ger at these very time, and His Majesties Person; say∣ing as I take it, Page 273. Et sic a Carolo Carolus Mag∣nus, sit Regnans qui Magno Successum, & fortund Septentri∣onalibus populis suis dominabitur & faeliciter Classe sua, &c. And lastly, Considering that by the continual con∣tempts of the said Dutch-Vplands, of all former De∣bates and Treatie, yea, and of Kings to, (as appears by Skipper Tyson their Hollands King of Celoan) I con∣ceive are Nul and Vold; and by the Dutch Netherlands onely used, as Nets and Snares hitherto to gain Ad∣vantage of all Kings and Nations, to acccomplish their afoesaid Design. Therefore when Time seems convenient, Reason and Justice may require Reparation, and Satisfaction for all their former old Injuries and Damages, before new Debates or Treaties, can in equity well be admit∣ted, viz.
First Restitution and Reposition of His Majesties and Subjects Right to those four or five Amboyna Islands, In☜ Statu Quo, and the Damages thereof for forty two years by past; And his Majesties Interest in the Forti∣fications of their other Ambyna slands, built with a good part of the English National great Joynt stock of 1600000l. with free trade to Iapan, China, illipeenes, and elswhere in the South Seas; for otherwise the Dutch will eat out all Nations in India with those Commodi∣ties; which said Damage and Loss (besides blood) can∣not be estimated less Viis & modis, then 300000l. per annum, dreyned out of His Majesties Kingdoms yearly for those Commodities; as Mercers, Grocers, Drug∣sters, Potters, and other Trades-men, can best disco∣ver with Battavia interest at 5. per Cent, per moneth, &c. Also the Dutch haf Customes of their vast trade into Persia for 40 years by past, they being strangers and never in the Gulf, before that Agreement made be∣tween the Persian and the English, which may be rea∣sonably estimated at 30. or 40000l. per annum, or more. Then the old East India Company and other, for Damages done since &c. Likewise, Sr. William Courteen and Adventurers with him for their four ships, viz. ship Bon Esperanza, Hen-Bonadventure, Dragon and Katherine, and utter loss and destruction of all their Trade, Factories, Plantations, and Fortifications in India; the Damages and Losses, whereof in knowing Judgments, cannot be estimated in all so little as 300000l. And whosoever makes any doubt or dispute con∣cerning the Dutch, their certain destruction of the Dragon and Katherine aforesaid; me thinks the conside∣ration☜ of their own designs, constant and bloody acti∣ons and practises, frequent threatnings, combinations,
and commissions, to sink or burn; to any rational man, may seem evidence sufficient to prove the fact, especi∣ally appearing so plainly to proceed from prepensed malice, and revenge. But being seconded by a multitude of voluntary and free Indiciaes, Relations, Predictions to prove, and combinations to destroy, from very sufficient witnesses of English, Portugals, and Dutch themselves; besides Mores, Gentues, and Mallabarrs, all which may seem superfluous, &c. Therefore, whosoever will not believe these truths, neither would they (without doubt) believe if one should rise from the dead and depth of the sea, to de∣clare and justifie the same unto them. All which, in every particular matter and thing therein, are most humbly referred to the farr more Wise, and Judicious, to do, and to determine, as in their more Excellent Wisdoms and Judgments, seems most meet and convenient. Vivat Rex, Carolus Magnus. The Authors Attestation. THus having Freed and Discharged my Con∣science and Duty towards God and Man, without Favour or Affection, in this Plain and Impartial Declaration of my long and serious ob∣servation and experience, of the various passages therein expressed; being altogether for Sum and Substance, what I have both heard and seen, and
do verily believe the same to be really the truth, and nothing but the truth, faithfully collected and asserted, and will make good the same upon Oath, when thereunto lawfully called. And so I do most humbly committ the Care and Considera∣tion thereof, to those whom it more Neerly or Publickly Concernes, to move and to do therein for Relief and Redress as Occasion and Opportu∣nity shall Present; and procure a Remedy and Reparation from the Transgressors, according to the Righteous Rules of Justice and Equity. FINIS.
