F1158 12033942 52858
Divine Conduct: OR, THE MYSTERIE OF Providence. WHEREIN The Being and Efficacy of Pro∣vidence is Asserted, and Vindicated: The Methods of Providence as it passes through the several Stages of our Lives opened; and the proper course of improving all Provi∣dences directed, in a TREATISE upon Psalm 57. Ver. 2. By John Flavell, Preacher of the Gospel. Totam Dei Providentiam omnia tandem dirigere ad glo∣riam suam, & ad Electorum salutem; ac tum quiescere Spiritum Dei, cùm videt Impios damnari, ac Electos ser∣vari; ex qua utraque re Deus glorificetur.Hieron-Zan∣chii Miscell. Tom. 2. pag. 199. Psal. 111. 4  memoriam fecit mi∣rabilium suorum. LONDON: Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton at the Three Dag∣gers in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXVIII.
TO THE Right Honourable WILLIAM EARL of BEDFORD, Lord RUSSELL of Thorneugh, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER. My LORD, IT was a weighy, and sa∣voury Speech,Mr. Isaa Ambrose Epist. to his Vl∣tima. which a Pious Pen once saved from your Lordship's lips, viz. that You account∣ed the Prayers of Gods Ministers and People, the best Walls about your House. He that so accounts, doubtless understands,
that Prayer engageth Providence, Isa. 45. 11. and Providence so engaged, is the surest Munition, Job 1. 10. Many great men enclose their dwellings with an high Wall, but the foundation (as the Wisest of men ob∣serves) is laid in their own conceits, Prov. 18. 11. Yea, in sin, and crying sin too, Hab. 2. 12. Of such Walls we may say, as the Oracle to Phocas, . If the Building emulate the Skies, yet sin being in the bottom, all will totter. 'Tis a fond vanity, to think of en∣suring a destiny that can controll the Stars, and endure the assaults of For∣tune, (as they love to speak) whilst Providence is not engaged for them, no not so much as by a bare acknow∣ledgement. My Lord, It is not the vast bulk of an Estate, nor the best humane securi∣ty in the World, but the vigilant care
of Divine Providence, that guards both It, and its Owners from the stroke of ruine. 'Tis the fear of God within us, and the Providence of God round about us, which make the firm and solid basis of all sanctified and durable prosperity. It is beyond all debate, that there is a Providence of God alwayes enfolding those in ever∣lasting arms, that bear his Image. The Impress of that Image upon you, and the Embraces of those Arms about you, will advance you higher, and secure you better, than your Noble Birth or Estate could ever do. My Lord, Providence hath molded you, è melJori luto, made you both the Offspring and Head of an Illustrious Family, planted you in a rich and pleasant Soyl, caused many Noble Branches to spring from you, drawn your life even unto old age, through the delights and honours of this world. And now that you have tried
all those things that make the fairest pretensions to happiness; what have you found in all these painted beau∣ties, and false glozing excellencies which have successively courted you? Which of them all can you pro∣nounce self-desirable? Which can you call objectum par amori? What is it to have the flesh indulged, sense grati∣fied, fancy tickled? What have you found in meats and drinks, in stately Houses and pleasant Gardens; in Gold and Silver, in Honour and Applause to match the Appetite of your No∣bler Soul? Surely (My Lord) to turn from them all with a generous dis∣dain, as one that knows where to find better entertainment; is much more Noble, than wholly to immerse, and lose our Spirits in those sensual fuiti∣ons, as many do, alas, too many in our dayes! We are fallen into the dregs of time, Sensuality runs every where
into Atheism. ProvidentJa peperit livJas, sed filJa devoravit matrem. The largesses of Providence have so blinded, and perfectly stupified the minds of some, that they neither own a Providence, nor a God, who do , as Plutarch both wittily and judiciously reply'd upon Colotes the Epicurean. But blessed be God, there is a sin∣cere part, both of the Nobles and Com∣mons of England, which this Gangrene hath not yet touched, and Ihope, ne∣ver shall. My Lord, It is both your Honour and Interest, to be , the entire and devoted servant of Provi∣dence. It was once the wish of a good man, optarem id me esse Deo, quod est mihimanus mea. This is the most Noble and Divine life that can be, to live and act in this world upon Eternal de∣signs. To look upon our selves and
what we have, as things devoted to God; not to be content that Provi∣dence should serve it self of us, (for so it doth even of those things which understand nothing of it) but to stu∣dy wherein we may serve Providence, and be instrumental in its hand for the good of many; this is to be tru∣ly Honourable; quo magis quis Deo vi∣vit, eo evadit nobilJor, clarJor, divinJor. How much God hath honoured you in this respect, the World will understand better, when your Lord∣ship shall be gathered to your Fa∣thers, and sleep in the dust, then he that praiseth, cannot be suspected of flattery; nor he that is praised, be moved with vain glory: But the ap∣probation of God, is infinitely better than the most glorious Name among men, before, or after death. And as it is most honourable to serve, so you will find it most comfortable to observe the wayes of God in his
Providence. To compose our selves to think of the Conduct of Providence through all the Stages of life we have hitherto passed. To note the results of its profound Wisdom, the Effects of its tender Care, the distinguishing fruits of its special Bounty: To mark how Providences have gone along step by step with the Promises, and both with us, till they have now brought us near to our Everlasting Rest, Oh how delectable! how trans∣porting are such Meditations as these! My Lord, It is the design of this Ma∣nual, to assert the Being and Efficacy of Providence against the Atheism of the times; and to display the Wisdom and care of the Providence of God in all the Concerns of that people who are really his. 'Tis probable, if your Lordship will stoop to such a vulgar composure, somewhat may occurr of a grateful relish to your pious
mind. I confess, It is not accommo∣dated, either in exactness of method, or elegancy of style, to gratifie the curious; nor yet is it destitute of what may please and profit the truly gra∣cious. Should I here recite the pleasures and advantages resulting from an humble and heedful eying of the me∣thods of Providence, it would look more like a Book in an Epistle, than an Epistle in a Book. One taste of spiri∣tual sense will satisfie you better, than all the accurate descriptions and high EncomJums that the most elegant Pen can bestow upon it. My Lord, It is not that eminent sta∣tion that some persons retain (in civil respects) above the vulgar, that will enable them to penetrate the Myste∣ries, and relish the sweetness of Pro∣vidence better than others; (for doubtless many that live immediate∣ly upon Providence for daily bread,
do thereby gain a nearer acquaintance with it, than those, whose outward enjoyments flow to them in a more plentiful and stated course) but those that excel in grace and experience, those that walk and converse with God in all his dispensations towards them; these are the persons who are most fully and immediately capable of these high pleasures of the Christi∣an life. The daily flow and increase whereof in your Lordships Noble Person and Family, is the hearty de∣sire of From my Study at Dartmouth, Aug. 10. 1677. Your Lordships most humble servant, JOHN FLAVELL.
To the ingenuous Readers, those espe∣cially that are the heedful Observers of the wayes of PROVIDENCE. Reader, THERE are two wayes whereby the blessed God condescends to ma∣nifest himself to men, His Word, and his Works. Of the written Word we must say, No words like these were ever written since the beginning of Time, which can (as one speaks) take life and root in the Soul, yea, doth it as really as the seed doth in the ground: and are fitted to be engraf∣fed and naturalized there, so as no coalition in nature can be more real than this, James 1. 21. This is the most transcendent and glorious me∣dJum of manifestation; God hath magnifJed his word above all his name, Psal. 138. 2. However, the manifestations of God by his Works, whether of CreatJon or Providence have their value, and glory: but the prime glory
and excellency of his ProvidentJal works consists in this, that they are the very fulfillings and real accomplishments of his written word. By a wise and heedful attendance hereunto, we might learn that excellent Art, which is (not unfitly) called by some ScJentJa architectonica, an Art to clear the Mysterious occurrences of Providence, by reducing them to the written word, and there lodge them as Effects in their proper Causes. And doubtless, this is one of the rarest essayes men could pursue against Atheism, to shew, not only how Providences concurr in a most obvious tendency to confirm this great Conclusion, Thy word is Truth; but how it sometimes extorts also the confession of a God, and the truth of his Word, from those very tongues which have boldly denyed it. Aeschyles the PersJan relating their discomf∣ture by the GrecJan Army,schiles ragoed. makes this not able observation, When the GrecJan Forces hotly pursued us, (saith he) and we must needs venture over the great water Strymon, then frozen; but beginning to thaw; when a hun∣dred to one we had all dyed for it, with mine eyes I then saw many of those Gallants whom I had heard before so boldly maintain, there was no God, every one upon their knees, with eyes and hands lifted up, begging hard for help and mercy, and entreating that the Ice might hold till they got over. Many thou∣sand seals hath Providence forced the very
Enemies of God to set to his Truths, which greatly tends to our confirmation therein; but especially, to see how the Word and Provi∣dences of God do enlighten each other; and how the Scriptures contain all those Events, both great and small, which are disposed by Provi∣dence in their seasons: And how not only the Promises of the Word, are in the general faith∣fully fulfilled to the Church in all her Exigen∣ces and Distresses; but in particular to every member of it; they being all furnished by Pro∣vidence with multitudes of Experiences to this use and end. O how useful are such observa∣tions! And as the profit and use, so the delight and pleasure resulting from the observations of Providence, is exceeding great. It will doubt∣less be a part of our entertainment in Heaven, to view with transporting delight, how the de∣signs and methods were laid to bring us thi∣ther: and what will be a part of our blessedness in Heaven, may well be allowed to have a prime ingrediency into our Heaven upon Earth▪ To search for pleasure among the due Observati∣ons of Providence, is to search for water in the Ocean: for Providence doth not only, ultimately design to bring you to Heaven, but (as inter∣mediate thereunto) to bring (by this means) much of Heaven into your souls in the way thither. How great a pleasure is it to discern how the
most wise God is providentially steering all to the Port of his own Praise, and his peoples Happi∣ness, whilst the whole world is busily employed in managing the Sails, and tugging at the Oars, with a quite opposite design and purpose? To see how they promote his design by opposing it, and fulfil his will by resisting it, enlarge his Church by scattering it, and make their rest to come the more sweet to their souls, by make∣ing their condition so restless in the world. This is pleasant to observe in general: But to record and note its particular designs upon our selves; with what profound wisdom, infinite tender∣ness, and incessant vigilancy it hath managed all that concerns us from first to last, is ravish∣ing and transporting. O what an History might we compile of our own Experiences, whilst with a melting heart me trace the footsteps of Providence all along the way it hath led us to this day; and set our Remarques upon its more eminent performances for us, in the several Stages of our Life! Here it prevented, and there it delivered: Here it directed, and there it corrected. In this it grJeved, and in that it relJeved. Here was the Poison, and there the Antidote. This Providence raised a dismal Cloud, and that dispelled it again. This straitned, and that enlarged. Here a want, and there a supply. This Relation withered, and that springing up in its room. Words cannot express the high de∣lights
and gratifications, a gracious heart may ind in such employment as this. O what a world of rarities are to be found in Providence! The blind heedless world makes nothing of them: they cannot find one sweet bit, where a gracious soul would make a rich feast. Plutarch relates very exactly, how Timoleon was miraculously delivered from the conspiracy of two Murderers, by their meeting in the very nick of time a certain person, who to revenge the death of his Father, killed one of them, just as they were ready to give Timoleon the fatal blow, though he knew nothing of the business, and so Timoleon escaped the danger. And what did this wonderful work of Provi∣dence think you, yield the Relator? Why, though he were one of the most learned and ingenious among the Heathen Sages; yet all he made of it, was only this, The Spectators (saith he) wondered greatly at the Artifice and contri∣vance which Fortune uses. This is all he could see in it. Had a spiritual and wise Chri∣stian had the dissecting and Anatomizing of such a work of Providence, what glory would it have yielded to God! What comfort and encou∣ragement to the Soul! The Bee makes a sweeter meal upon one single flower, than the Ox doth upon the whole Meadow, where thousands of them grow. O Reader, if thy heart be spiritual and well stockt with experience, if thou hast recorded the
wayes of Providence towards thee, and wilt but allow thy self time to reflect upon them; what a life of pleasure maist thou live! What an Heaven upon Earth doth this way lead thee in∣to! I will not here tell thee, what I have met in this path, lest it should seem to savour of too much Vanity; non est religJo ubi omnJa patent. There are some delights and enjoyments in the Christian life, which are and must be enclosed. But Try it thy self, Taste and See, and thou wilt need no other inducement; thine own Experince will be the most powerful Oratory to perswade thee to the study and search of Providence. Histories are usually read with delight: when once the fancy is catcht, a man knows not how to disengage himself from it. I am greatly mistaken, if the History of our own lives, if it were well drawn up, and distinctly perused, would not be the pleasantest History that ever we read in our lives. The ensuing Treatise is an Essay to that pur∣pose, in which thou wilt find some remarques set upon Providence, in its passage through the se∣veral Stages of our life. But Reader, thou only art able to compile the History of Providence for thy self, because the memorJals that furnish it, are only in thine own hands. However, here thou maist find a pattern, and general Rules to direct thee in that great and difficult work, which is the very end, and design of this Manual.
I have not had much regard to the dress, and ornament in which this Discourse is to go abroad, for I am debtor both to the strong and weak, the wise and foolish: and in all my ob∣servation I have not found, that ever God hath made much use of laboured periods, Rhetorical flowers, and Elegancies to improve the power of Religion in the world: Yea, I have observed, how Providence hath sometimes rebuked good men, when upon other Subjects they have too much affected those pedantick fooleries in with∣drawing from them its usual aids, and exposing them to shame; and much more may it do so, when it self is the Subject. Reader, if thy stomach be nice and squeasie, and nothing will relish with thee, but what is spruce and elegant, there are store of such com∣posures in the world, upon which thou maist even surfeit thy curious fancy: mean time there will be found some that will bless God for what thou despisest, and make many a sweet meal upon what thou loathest. I will add no more, but my hearty prayers that Providence will direct this Treatise to such hands, in such seasons, and so bless and prosper its design, that God may have glory, thou maist have benefit, and my self comfort in the success thereof, who am Thine and the Churches servant in the hand of Providence, Iohn Flavell.
Divine Conduct, OR THE MYSTERIE OF Providence: Opened in a TREATISE Upon PSAL. 57. 2. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performeth all things for me. THE greatness of God is a glori∣ous, and unsarchable Mysterie. The Lord most high is terrible; he is a great King over all the Earth, Psal. 47. 2. The condescesinon of the most high God to men is also a profound Mysterie. Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly, Psal. 13 8. 6. But when both these meet to∣gether (as they do in this Scripture) they make
up a matchless Mysterie. Here we find the most High God performing all things for a poor di∣stressed creature. It is the great support and solace of the Saints in all the distresses that befall them here, that there is a Wise Spirit sitting in all the wheels of motion, and governing the most excentrical Creatures and their most pernicious designs to blessed and happy issues. And indeed it were not worth while to live in a world  de∣void of God and Providence. How deeply we are concerned in this matter, will appear by that great Instance, which this Psalm presents us with. It was composed (as the Title notes) by David prayer-wise, when he hid himself from Saul in the Cave: And is inscribed with a double Title, Al∣taschith Michtam of David. Altaschith refers to the scope, and Michtam to the dignity of the subject matter. The former signifies destroy not,Itaschith  perdas, . vel  Saulem; ressit im suos vid qui citabant sum ut ulem rderet▪ vel me  eus. Gei∣ in loc. ichtam   aureum vel aureolum earmen   (i. e.) aurum optimum;  psalmus hic precJosus est instar auri. Bu. gensis. or let there be no slaughter, and may either refer to Saul, con∣cerning whom he gave charge to his servants not to destroy him; or rather, it hath reference to God, to whom in this great exigence he poured out his soul in this pathetical ejaculation, Al∣taschith destroy not. The later Title Michtam signiies a golden or∣nament, and so is suited to the choice and excel∣lent matter of the Psalm, which much more de∣serves such a Title, than Pythagoras his golden Verses did.
Three things are remarkable in the former part of the Psalm. Viz. (1) His extream danger. (2) His earnest address to God in that extremity. (3) The Arguments he pleads with God in that address. His extream danger, expressed both in the Title, and body of the Psalm. The Title tells us, this Psalm was composed by him when he hid himself from Saul in the Cave. This Cave was in the Wil∣derness of Engedi among the broken Rocks where the wild Goats inhabited,Cm aut locum in quo lateb  esse ab  ercitu S lis vide nec jam ullum , quo antease∣per in si∣libus perculis fe∣rat: n qoque a dum co∣git. Mrus in an obscure and desolate hole; yet even thither the Envy of Saul pursued him, I Sam. 24. 1, 2. And now he that had been so long hunted as a Partridge upon the Mountains, seems to be enclosed in the net; for the place was begirt with his Enemies, and having in this place no out-let another way, and Saul himself entring into the mouth of this Cave, in the sides and creeks whereof he and his men lay hid, and saw him; judge to how great an extremity, and to what a desperate state things were now brought: Well might he say, as it is ver. 4. My soul is among Lyons, and I lye even among them that are set on fire. What hope now remained? What but immediate de∣struction could be expected? Yet this frights him not out of his aith and du∣ty, but betwixt the Jaws of death he prays, and earnestly addresses himself to God for mercy, v. 1. Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful unto me. This excellent Psalm was composed by him, when there was enough to discompose the best man in the world. The repetition notes both the extremity of the danger, and the ardency of the Supplicant. Mer∣cy, Mercy! nothing but Mercy, and that exerting it self in an extraordinay way, can now save him from ine▪
The Arguments he pleads for obtaining mercy in this distress, are very considerable. (1.) He pleads his reliance upon God, as an Argument to move mercy. Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusteth in thee; yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamitJes be overpast, v. 1. This his trust and dependance on God, though it be not Argumentative in respect of the dignity of the Act; yet it is so in respect, both of the nature of the Object, a compassionate God, who will not ex∣pose any that take shelter under his wings; and in respect of the Promise, whereby protection is assured to them that fly to him for sanctuary, Isa. 26. 3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Thus he encourages himself from the consideration of that God, to whom he betakes himself. (2.) He pleads former experiences of his help in past distresses, as an Argument encouraging hope under the present strait, ver. 2. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performeth all things for me. In which words I shall consider two things, 1. The Duty resolved upon, 2. The Encouragement to that resolution. The duty resolved upon; I will cry unto God. Crying unto God, is an expression that doth not only denote Prayer, but intense and fervent prayer. To cry, is to pray in an holy passion; and such are usually speeding prayers, Psalm 18. 6. and Heb. 5. 7.
The Encouragements to this Resolution, and these are twofold. 1. Objective, taken from The Soveraignty of God. and 2. Subjective, taken from The Experience he had of his Provi∣dence. The Soveraignty of God, I will cry unto God most High. Upon this he acts his faith in Extremity of danger. Saul is high, but God the most high; and without his permission, he is assured Saul can∣not touch him. He had no to help; and if he had, he knew God must first help the helpers, or they cannot help him. He had no means of de∣fence or escape before him, but the Most High is not limited by means. This is a singular prop to faith, Psal. 59. 9. The Experience of his Providence hitherto: unto God that performeth all things for me. The word which we tradate [performeth] comes from a root, perfecit, desecit, destit, Pagnin. Buxtor that signifies both to perfect, and to desis or cease. For when a business is performed and perfected, the Agent then ceases and sists from working: he puts to the last hand, when he finishe the work. To such an happy issue the Lord hath brought all his doubtful and difficult matters before; and this gives him encouragement, that he will still  gracious, and perfect that which con∣cerneth him now, as he speaks, Psal. 138. 8. The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me. The Sepuagint renders it by who profiteth, or benefiteth me. And it is a certain Truth, that all the results and issues of Providence
are profitable and beneficial to the Saints. But the Supplement in our Translation well receives the importance of the place, Who performeth all things. And it involves the most strict and proper notion of Providence, which is nothing else but the perfor∣mance of God's gracious purposes, and promises to his people. And therefore Vatablus and Muis supply and fill up the room which the conciseness of the Original leaves, with quae promisit, I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performeth the things which he hath promised. Payment is the performance of promises. Grace makes the pro∣mise, and Providence the payment. Piscator fills it with benignitatem & misericordJam suam, unto God that performeth his kindness and mercy. But still it supposes the mercy performed, to be contained in the promise. Mercy is sweet in the promise, and much more so in the providen∣tJal performance of it to us. CastalJo's Supplement comes nearer to ours, re∣rum mearum Transactorem, I will cry unto God most high, unto God the Transactor of my affairs. But our English, making out the sense by an uni∣versal particle, is most fully agreeable to the scope of the Text. For it cannot but be a great encou∣ragement to his faith, that God had transacted all things, or performed all things for him; this Pro∣vidence that never failed him in any of the straits that ever he met with (and his life was a life of many straits) he might well hope it would not now fail him, though this were an extraordinary and matchless one. Bring we then our thoughts a little closer to this Scripture, and it will give us a fair and lovely pro∣spect of Providence
in its 1. Universal 2. Effectual 3. Beneficial 4. Encouraging Influence upon the Af∣fairs and Concerns of the Saints. The expression imports the Vniversal Interest and Influence of Providence in and upon all the Concerns and Interests of the Saints. It hath not only its hand in this or that, but in all that con∣cerns them. It hath its eye upon every thing that relates to them throughout their lives, from first to last. Not only great, and more important, but the most minute and ordinary affairs of our lives are transacted and managed by it. It touches all things that touch us, whether more nearly or remotely. It displaies the Efficacy of ProvidentJal Influences. Providence doth not only undertake, but [perfor∣meth] and perfects what concerns us. It goes through with its designs, and accomplisheth what it begins. No difficulty so clogs it, no cross acci∣dent falls in its way, but it carries its design through it. Its motions are irresistible and uncontrollable, he performs it for us. And (which is sweet to consider) all its pro∣ducts and issues are exceeding beneficJal to the Saints. It performs all things [for them]. 'Tis true, we often prejudge its works, and unjustly censure its designs, and under many of our straits and troubles we say, all these things are against us: but indeed Providence neither doth, nor can do any hing that is really against the true Interest and god of the Saints. For what are the works of Providence, but the execution of God's Decree,
and the fulfilling of his Word? and there can be no more in Providence, than is in them. Now there is nothing but good to the Saints in God's purposes and promises; and therefore, whatever Providence doth in their Concernments, it must be (as the Text speaks) the performance of all things for them. And if so, how chearing, supporting, and encou∣raging must the consideration of these things be in a day of distress and trouble? What life and hope will it inspire our Hearts and Prayers withal, when great pressures lie upon us? It had such a chearing influence upon the Psalmist at this time, when the state of his affairs was to the eye of sense and rea∣son forlorn, and desperate: there was now but an hairs breadth (as we say) betwixt him and ruine. A potent, eaged, and implacable Enemy had driven him into the hole of a rock, and was come after him into that hole, yet now whilst his soul is among Lyons, whilest he lies in a cranny of the Rock, expecting every moment to be drawn out to death, the reflections he had upon the gracious perfor∣mances of the Most High for him, from the begin∣ning to that moment, support his soul, and inspire hope and life into his prayers, I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performeth all things for me. The amount of all you have in this Doctrinal Conclusion. DOCT. That it is the duty of the Saints, especJally in times of straits, to reflect upon the performances of Provi∣dence for them in all the states, and through all the stages of their lives. The Church in all the works of mercy, owns he
and of God, Isa. 26. 12. Lord, thou hast wrought all our works in (or for) us. And still it hath been the pious, and constant practice of the Saints in all generations, to preserve the memory of the more famous, and remarkable providences that have be∣fallen them in their times, as a precious treasure. If thou be a ChristJan indeed, I know thou hast, if not in thy book, yet certainly in thy heart a great many precJous favours upon record; the very remembrance and rehearsal of them is sweet: how much more sweet was the actual enjoyment? Baxter's Saints Rest, p. 768. Thus Moses by divine direction wrote a memorial of that victory obtained over Amalek as the fruit and return of prayer, and built there an Altar with this Inscription Jehovah Nissi, The Lord my Banner, Exod. 17. 14, 15. Thus Mordecai and Hester took all care to perpetuate the memory of that signal de∣liverance from the plot of Haman, by ordaining the feast of Purim, as an Anniversary throughout every generatJon, every family, every Province, and every Ci∣y, that those days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorJal of them perish from their seed, Esth. 9. 28. For this end you find Psalms in∣dited, to bring to remembrance, Psal. 70. the Title. Parents giving suitable names to their Children, that every time they looked upon them, they might refresh the memory of Gods mercies, 1 Sam. 1. 20. The very places where eminent Providences have appeared, new named, upon no other design, but to perpetate the memorial of those sweet Pro∣vidences which so refreshed them there: Thence Bethel took its name, Gen. 28. 19. And that well of water where Hagar was seasonably refreshed by the Angel in her distress, Beer-la-hai-roi, the well of him that liveth and looketh on me, Gen. 16. 14.
Yea, the Saints have given, and God hath assumed to himself new Titles upon this very score and ac∣count; Abraham's Jehovah jirch, and Gideon's Je∣hovah shallum were ascribed to him upon this rea∣son. And sometimes you find the Lord stiles him∣self, The God that brought Abraham from Vr of the Chaldes: then the Lord Lord that brought them out of Egypt: then the Lord that gathered them out of the North Countrey: still minding them of the gracious providences which in all those places he had wrought for them. Now there is a twofold reflection upon the pro∣videntJal works of God. One entire and full, in the whole Complex and perfect frame thereof.When the ecords of Eternity shall be exposed to view, all the coun∣sels and results of that pro∣found wis∣dom look∣ed into; how will it transport? when it shall be discerned, Loe, thus were the designs aid: here were the apt junctures and admirable dependencies of things, which when acted upon the stage of time, seem'd so perplex and intricae, owes Blessedness, p. 76. This blessed sight is re∣served for the perfect state. It is in that Mount of God, where we shall see both the Wilderness and Canaan: the glorious Kingdom into which we are come, and the way through which we were led into it. There the Saints shall have a ravishing view of that beautiful frame, and every part shall be distinctly discerned, as it had its particular use, and as it was connected with the other parts, and how effectually and orderly they all wrought to bring about that blessed design of their salvation, according to the promise, Rom. 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, &c. For it is certain, no Ship at Sea keeps more exactly by the Compass which di∣rects its course, than Providence doth by that Pro∣mise, which is its Cynosura and Pole-star.
The other partial and imperfect in the way to glory, where we only view it in its single acts, or at most, in some branches and more observable course of actions. Betwixt these two is the same difference, as be∣twixt the sight of the dis-jointed wheels and scat∣tered pins of a Watch, and the sight of the whole united in one frame, and working in one or∣derly motion: or, betwixt an ignorant Spectators viewing some more observable vessel or joint of a dissected body; and the accurate Anatomist's dis∣cerning the course of all the veins and arteries of the body, as he follows the several branches of them through the whole, and plainly sees the pro∣per places, figure, and use of each, with their mu∣tual respect to one another. O how ravishing and delectable a sight is that! to behold at one view the whole design of Provi∣dence, and the proper place, and use of every single act, which we could not understand in this world: for what Christ said to Peter, John 13. 7. is as applicable to some providences in which we are now concerned, as it was to that particular action; What I do thou knowest not now, but hereaf∣ter thou shalt know it. All the dark intricate puz∣ling Providences at which we were sometimes so stumbled, and sometimes amazed, which we could neither reconcile with the promise, nor with each other; nay, which we so unjustly censured and bitterly bewailed, as if they had fallen out quite cross to our happiness: we shall than see to be un∣to us, as the difficult passage through the Wil∣derness was unto Israel, the right way to a City of ha∣bitatJon, Psalm 107. 7. And yet though our present views and reflections
upon Providence be so short and imperfect in com∣parison of that in Heaven, yet such as it is under all its present disadvantages, it hath so much ex∣cellency and sweetness in it, that I may call it a little Heaven, or as Jacob called his Bethel, the Gate of Heaven. 'Tis certainly an high-way of walk∣king with God in this world, and as sweet commu∣nion may a soul enjoy with him in his Providences, as in any of his Ordinances. How often have the hearts of its observers been melted into tears of joy,ther was  to escribe God,  at last , risit  dubiè  sapi∣iam Do∣us, & , Deus , non uax. at the beholding of its wise and unexpected productions! How often hath it convinced them, upon a sober recollection of the events of their lives, that if the Lord had left them to their own counsels, they had as often been their own tor∣menters, if not executioners? Into what, and how many fatal mischiefs had they precipitated them∣selves, if Providence had been as short sighted as they? They have given it their hearty thanks, for considering their Interest more than their Importu∣nity, and not suffering them to perish by their own desires. The benefits of adverting the works of Provi∣dence, are manifold and unspeakable; as in its place we shall shew you. But not to entangle the thread of the discourse, I shall cast it into this method. First, I shall prove, that the Concernments of the Saints in this world, are certainly conducted by the Wisdom and care of special Providence. Secondly, I will shew you, in what particular concernments of theirs this providential care is evidently discovered. Thirdly, That it is the duty of Saints to ad∣vert, and heedfully observe these performances
of Providence for them in all their Concern∣ments. Fourthly, In what manner this duty is to be per∣formed by them. Fifthly, What singular benefits result to them from such observations. And then apply the whole in such Uses, as offer themselves from the Point. The first General Head. First, I shall undertake the proof and defence of this great truth, That the affairs of the Saints in this world are certainly conducted by the Wisdom and care of specJal Providence. And herein I address my self with cheerfulness, to perform (as I am able) a service for that Pro∣vidence, which hath throughout my life perform∣ed all things for me, as the Text speaks. There is a twofold consideration of Providence according to its twofold Object, and manner of dispensation; the one is general, exercised about all creatures, rational and irrational, animate and inanimate; the other specJal and peculiar. Christ hath an universal Empire over all things, Ephes. 1. 22. the head of the whole World, by way of dominJon; but an head to the Church, by way of unJon and specJal influence, John 17. 2. the SavJour of all men, but especJally of them that belJeve, 1 Tim. 4. 10. The Church is his specJal care and charge; he rules the world for its good, as an head con∣sulting the welfare of the body. Heathens generally denied Providence, and no wonder, since they denied a God: for the same Arguments that prove one, will prove the other.
Aristotle the Prince of Heathen Philosophers, could not by the utmost search of reason, find out the Worlds original, and therefore concludes, it was from Eternity. The Epicureans did in a sort ac∣knowledge a God, but yet denied a Providence, and wholly excluded him from any interest or concern in the affairs of the world, as being inconsistent with the felicity and tranquillity of the Divine Be∣ing to be diverted and cumbered with the care and labour of government. This assertion is so re∣pugnant to reason, that it is a wonder themselves blush not at its absurdity; but I guess at the design, and one of them speaks it out in broad language. Itaque imposuistis cervicibus nostris sempiternum domi∣num, quem dJes & noctes timeremus. Quis enim non timeat omnJa providentem, & cogitantem, & ani∣madvertentem, & omnJa ad se pertinere putantem, curJosum & plenum negotii Deum? Vell. apud Cicer. de Natura Deorum. They foresaw, that the conces∣sion of a Providence, would impose an eternal yoak upon their necks, by making them accounta∣ble for all they did to an higher Tribunal: and that they must necessarily pass the time of their so∣journing here in fear, whilst all their thoughts, words and wayes were strictly noted and recorded, in order to an account by an All-seeing and righteous God: and therefore laboured to perswade them∣selves that was not, which they had no mind should be. But these Atheistical and foolish con∣ceits fall flat before the undeniable evidence of this so great and clear a truth. Now, My business here, is not so much to deal with professed Atheists, who deny the existence of God; and consequently deride all evidences brought from Scripture, of the extraordinary
events, that fall out in favour of that people that are called His: but rather to convince those, that professedly own all this; yet never having tasted Religion by experience, suspect at least, that all these things which we call specJal providences to the Saints, are but natural events, or meer contingencJes: and thus whilst they profess to own a God, and a Providence, (which profession is but the effect of their education) they do in the mean time live like Atheists; and both think and act, as if there were no such things: and really I doubt, this is the case of the far greatest part of the men of this ge∣neration. But if it were indeed so, that the affairs of the World in general, and more especially those of the Saints, were not conducted by divine Provi∣dence, but (as they would perswade us) by the steady course of natural causes: beside which, if at any time we observe any event to fall out, it's meerly casual and contingent, or that which pro∣ceeds from some hidden and secret cause in na∣ture: If this indeed were so, let them that are tempted to believe it, rationally satisfie the fol∣lowing demands. First Demand. How comes it to pass, that so many signal mer∣cies and deliverances have befallen the people of God, above the power, and against the course of natural causes: to make way for which, there hath been a sensible suspension and stop put to the course of nature? It is most evident, that no na∣tural effect can exceed the power of its natural cause. Nothing can give to another, more than it
hath in it self. And it is as clear, that whatsoever acts naturally, acts necessarily: Fire burns adultimum sui posse to the uttermost of its power: Waters over∣flow, and drown all that they can. Lions and other rapacious and cruel easts, especially when hungry, tear and devour their prey: And for Arbitrary and rational Agents, they also act according to the principles and Laws of their natures. A wicked man when his heart is fully set in him, and his will stands in a full bent of resolution, will certainly (if he have power in his hand, and opportunity to execute his conceived mischief) give it vent, and perpetrate the wicked devices of his heart: for having once conceived mischief, and travailing in pain with it (according to the course of na∣ture) he must bring it forth, as it is Psal. 7. 14. But if any of these inanimate, brutal, or rational agents, when there is no natural obstacle or remora, have their power suspended, and that when the effect is near the birth, and the design at the very article of execution, so that though they would, yet cannot hurt; to what think you is this to be assigned and referred? Yet so it hath often been seen, where Gods interest hath been immediately concerned in the danger and evil of the event. The Sea divided it self in its own Channel, and made a wall of water,ow d was phyry  to it,en in∣ of etter,  pretence must serve the turn, That Moses taking the advantage of a  water unknown to the EgyptJans, passed over the people thereat: as Moses a stranger, were better acquainted there, than the EgyptJan . on each side, to give Gods distressed Israel a safe passage, and that not in a calm, but when the Waves thereof roared; *as it is Isa. 51. 15. The fire when blown up to the most intense and vehement flame, had no power to
singe one hair of Gods faithful Witnesses, when at the same instant it had power to destroy their in∣tended ExecutJoners at a greater distance, Dan. 3. 22. Yea, we find it hath some time been suffici∣ent to consume, but not to torment the body; as in that known instance of blessed Bayncha, who told his Enemies, The flames were to him as a bed of Roses. The hungry Lions put off their na∣tural fierceness, and became gentle and harmless, when DanJel was cast among them for a prey. The like account the Church Sory gives us of Polycarpe, and DJonysJus Areopagia,Acts an Mn. Vo p. 55. whom the fire would not touch, but stood ater the manner of a Ship-man's fail filled with the wind about them. Are these things according to the course and Law of Nature? To what secret natural cause, can they be ascribed? In like manner, we find the vilest, and iercest of wicked men, have been with∣held by an invisible hand of restraint from injuring the Lords people. By what secret cause in nature, was Jeroboam's hand dried up, and made inflexible at the same instant it was stretched out against the Man of God? 1. King. 13. 4. No wild Beasts rend and devour their prey more greedily, than wicked men would destroy the people of God that dwell among them, were it not for this providential re∣straint upon them. So the Psalmist expresses his case in the words following my Text, My soul is among Lyons, and I lye among them that are set on fire. The Disciples were sent forth as Sheep into the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10. 16. It will not avail in this case to object, Those miraculous events depend only upon Scripture testimony, which the Atheist is not concluded by: for beside all that may be alledged for the Authority of that testi∣mony
(which is needless to produce to men that own it) what is it less that every eye sees, or may see at this day? Do we not behold a weak de∣fenceless handful of men, wonderfully, and (ex∣cept this way) unaccountably preserved from ruine in the midst of potent, enraged and trucu∣lent enemies, that fain would, but cannot destroy them; when as yet, no natural impediment can be assigned why they cannot? And if this pose us, what shall we say, when we see events produced in the world for the good of Gods chosen, by those very hands and means, which were intentionally imployed for their ru∣ine? These things are as much beside the intenti∣ons of their enemies, as they are above their own expectations; yet such things are no rarities in the world. Was not the Envy of Joseph's bre∣thren, the cursed Plot of Haman, the Decree pro∣cured by the nvy of the Princes against DanJel, with many more of the like nature, all turned by a secret and strange hand of providence, to their greater advancement and benefit: their Enemies lifted them up to all that honour and preferment they had. Second Demand. How is it (if the Saints Concerns are not ordered by a special divine Providence) that natural causes unite and assocJate themselves for their relJef and be∣nefit in so strange a manner as they are found to do? It is undeniably evident, that there are marvellous coincidencies of Providence, confederating and agreeing as it were, to meet and unite themselves to bring about the good of Gods Chosen. There is
a like face of things shewing it self in divers places at that time, when any work for the good of the Church is come upon the stage of the world. As when the MessJah the capital mercy came to the Temple, then Simeo and Anna were brought thither by Providence, as witnesses to it. So in Reformation work, when the Images were pulled down in Holland, one and the same spirit of zeal possessed them in every City and Town, that the work was done in a night. He that heedfully reads the History of Joseph's advancement to be the Lord of Egypt, may number in that story twelve remarkable acts or steps of Providence, by which he ascended to that honour and autho∣rity: if but one of them had failed, in all likelihood the Event had done so too: but every one sell in its order, exactly keeping its own time and place. So in the Churches deliverance rom the plot of Haman, we find no less than seven acts of Providence concurring strangely to produce it, as if they had all met by appointment and consent, to break that snare for them: one thing so aptly suiting with, and making way for ano∣ther, that every heedful observer must needs con∣clude, this cannot be the effect of casualty, but wise counsel. Even as in viewing the accurate structure of the body of a man, the igure, posi∣tion, and mutual respects of the several members and vessels hath convinced some, (and is suffici∣ent to convince all) that it was the effect of di∣vine Wisdom and power: in like manner, if the admirable adaptation of the means and in∣struments employed for mercy to the people of God be heedfully considered,Act. & Mon. Vol. p. 974. who can but con∣fss, that as there are tools of all sorts and
sizes in the shop of Providence; so there is a most skilful hand that uses them, and that they could no more produce such effects of themselves, than the Ax, Saw, or Chisell can cut or carve a rude logg into a beautiful figure, without the hand of a silful Artificer? We find by manifold instances, that there certainly are strong combinations, and predis∣positions of persons and things, to bring about some issue and design for the benefit of the Church, which themselves never thought of: they hold no intelligence, communicate not their counsels to each other, yet meet together, and work together as if they did: which is, as if ten men should all meet together at one place, and in one hour, about one and the same busi∣ness, and that without any fore-appointment be∣twixt themselves; can any question, but such a meeting of means and instruments is certainly, though secretly over-ruled by some Wise invisi∣ble Agent? Third Demand. If the Concerns of Gods people be not go∣verned by special Providence, Whence is it, that the most apt and powerful means imployed to destroy them are rendered ineffectual, and weak contemptible means imployed for their defence and comfort, crowned with success? This could never be, if things were wholly swayed by the course of na∣ture. If we judge by that rule, we must con∣clude, the more apt and powerful the means are, the more successful and prosperous they must needs be; and where they are inept, weak,
and contemptible, nothing can be expected from them: thus reason layes it according to the rules of nature; but Providence crosses its hands, as Jacob did in blessing the Sons of Joseph, and or∣ders quite contrary issues and events. Such was the mighty power and deep policy used by Pha∣raoh to destroy Gods Israel, that to the eye of reason, it was as impossible to survive it, as for crackling thorns to abide unconsumed amidst de∣vouring flames; by which Emblem, their mira∣culous preservation is expressed, Exod. 3. 2. the bush was all in a flame, but no consumption of it. The Heathen Roman Emperours, who made th World tremble, and subdued the Nations under them, have employed all their power and policy against the poor, naked, defenceless Church, to ruine it; yet could not accomplish it, Rev. 12. 3, 4. O the Seas of blood that Heathen Rome shed in the ten persecutions! yet the Church lives, and when the Dragon gave his power to th Beast, Rev. 13. 2. (i. e.) the State of Rome became Anti∣christian, O what slaughters have been made by the Beast in all his dominions; so that the Holy Ghost represents him, as drunken with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17. 6. And yet all will not do: the gates (i. e.) the powers and policies of Hell cannot prevail against it. How manifest is the care and power of Providence herein? Had half that power been imployed against any other people, it had certainly swallowed them up immediately, or in the hundredth part of the time wo them out. How soon was the PersJan Monarchy swal∣lowed up by the GrecJan, and that again by the Roman?Act. & Mon. Vol. p. 974. DJoclesJan and Maximin in the height of their persecution ound themselves so baffled
by Providence, that they both resigned the go∣vernment, and lived as private men. But in this wonderful preservation God makes good that promise, Jer. 30. 11. though I make a full end of all NatJons, yet will I not make a full end of Thee: and that in Isa. 54. 17. no weapon formed against thee shall prosper. On the contrary, how successful have weak and contemptible means been made for the good of the Church? Thus in the first planting of Chri∣stianity in the world, by what weak and impro∣bable instruments was it done? Christ did not chuse the eloquent Orators, or men of Authority in the Courts of Kings and Emperours, but twelve poor Mechanicks, and Fisher-men; and these not sent together in a troop, but some to take one Countrey to conquer it, and some another: the most ridiculous course (in appearance) for such a design as could be imagined; and yet in how short a time was the Gospel spread, and the Churches planted by them in the several King∣doms of the world? This the Psalmist oresaw by the Spirit of Prophecy, when he said, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings hast thou ordained strength, to still the Enemy, and the Avenger, Psal. 8. 2. At the sound of Rams horns Jericho is delivered into the hands of Israel: see Josh. 6. 20. By three hundred men with their Pitchers and Lamps, the huge host of MidJan is discomsited, Judges 6. 19. The Protestants besieged in BezJers in France are delivered by a drunken Drummer, who going to his Quarters at midnight, rang the Alarm-Bell of the Town, not knowing what he did; and just then were their enemies making their assault. And as weak and improbable means
have been blessed with success to the Church in general, so to the preservation of its particular members also. A Spider by weaving her web over the mouth of an Oven, shall hide a servant of Christ, Du Moulin from his Enemies, who took refuge there in that Bloody ParisJan Massacre. A Hen shall sustain another many dayes at the same time, by lodging her egg every day, in the place where he had hid himself from the Cut∣throats. Examples might be easily multiplied in the case; but the truth is too plain and obvi∣ous to the observation of all ages to need them. And can we but acknowledge a divine and special Providence over-ruling these matters, when we see the most apt and potent means for the Chur∣ches ruine frustrated, and the most silly and contemptible means succeeded and prospered for its good? Fourth Demand. If all things be governed by the course of na∣ture, and force of natural causes, How then comes it to pass, that men are turned (like a bowle by a rub) out of the way of evil, unto which they were driving on with full speed? Good men have been engaged in the way to their own ruine, and knew it not; but Providence hath met them in the way and preserved them by strange diversions, the meaning of which they understood not, till the Event discovered it. Paul lay bound at Caesarca, the High PrJest and chief of the Jews request Fe∣stu, that he might be brought bound to Jerusa∣lem, having laid wait in the way to kill him; but Festus (though ignorant of the plot) utterly
refuses it, but chues rather to go with them to Caesarea, and judge him there: by this rub, their bloody design is frustrated, Acts 25. 3, 4. Possido in the lie of Augustine,Possid. in vit. Aug. cap. 15. tells us, that the good Father going to teach the people of a certain Town, took a Guid with him, to shew him th way; the guide mistook the usual road, and ignoratly foll into a by-path, by which means he escaped  by the hands of the bloody Do∣natists, who knowing his intention way-laid him to kill him in the road. And as memorable and wonderul are those rubs and diversions wicked men have met with in the way of perpetrating the evils conceived and intended in their own hearts.Gen. 31. 24. Laban and Esa came against Jacob with mischievous purposes; but no sooner are they come nigh him, but the shackles of restraint are immediately clapt upon them both, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprizes. Balaam runs greedily for re∣ward to curse Isral; but meets with an unexpe∣cted check at his very out-set, and though that stopt him not, but he essay'd every way to do them mischief, yet he still finds himself etter'd by an effectual bond of restraint, that he can no way shake off, Numb. 22. 25, 38. Saul the High-Priest's Blood-hound, breaths out threatnings against the Church, and goes with a bloody com∣mission towards Damasus, to hale the poor lock of Christ to the slaughter; but when he comes nigh the place, he meets an unexpected stop in the way, by which the mischief is not only di∣verted, but himself converted to Christ, Acts 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. Who can but see the singer of God in these things?
Fifth Demand. If there be not an over-ruling Providence or∣dering all things for the good of Gods people, How comes it to pass, that the good and evil which is done to them in this world, is accordingly repaid into the bosoms of them that are instrumental therein? 1. How clear is it to every mans observation, that the kindnesses and benefits any have done to the Lords people, have been rewarded with full measure into their bosoms? The EgyptJan Mid∣wives ressed to obey Pharaoh's inhumane com∣mand, and saved the Male Children of Israel: for this the Lord dealt well with them, and built them houses, Exod. 1. 21. The Shunamite was hospitable, and careful for Elisha, and God recompenced it with the desirable enjoyment of a Son, 2 Kings 4. 9. 17. Rahab hid the Spies, and was exempted from the common destruction, for it Heb. 11. 31. PublJus the chief man of the Island Melita, courteously received and lodged Paul after his shipwrack: the Lord speedily re∣paid him for that kindness, and healed his Fa∣ther, who lay sick at that time of a Bloody Flux and Fever, Acts 28. 7, 8.— In like manner,Si ab exor dio mundi ad nostra usqe me∣moriam percurramus historias, insignia divine ultionis in peccatores occurrent indicia. Alstedii Nat. Theol. p. 196. we find the evils done to Gods people have been repaid, by a just retribution to their enemies. Pharaoh and the EgyptJans were cruel enemies to Gods Israel, and designed the ruine of their
poor innocent babes; and God repaid it, in smiting all the first-born of Egypt in one night, Exod. 12. 29. Haman erected a Gallows fifty Cubits high for good Mordecai, and God so ordered it, that him∣self and his ten Sons were hanged on it. And indeed it was but meet, that he should eat the fruit of that tree which himself had planted, Esther 7. 10. Ahitophel plots against David, and gives coun∣sel like an Oracle, how to procure his fall; and that very counsel, like a surcharged Gun, recoils upon himself, and procures his ruine: for seeing his good counsel rejected, (good politically, not morally,) it was now easie for him to guess at the issue, and so at his own fate, 2 Sam. 17. 23. Charles the Ninth most inhumanely made the very Canals of Paris to stream with Protestant blood, and soon after he died miserably, his blood streaming from all parts of his body. Stephen Gardiner, that burnt so many of Gods dear servants to ashes, was himself so scorched up by a terrible inflammation, that his very tongue was black and hung out of his mouth, and in dreadful torments ended his wretched dayes. Maximinus that cruel Emperour, who set forth his ProclamatJon engraven in Brass, for the utter abolishing of the Christian Religion, was speedi∣ly smitten like Herod, with a dreadful judgement, swarms of Lice preying upon his Entrails, and causing such a stench, that his PhysicJans could not endure to come nigh him, and for refusing it were slain. Hundreds of like Instances might easily be produced, to confirm this Observation. And
who can but see by these things, that verily there is a God that judgeth in the Earth? Yea, so exact have been the retributJons of Pro∣vidence to the Enemies of the Church, that not only the same persons, but the same members that have been the instruments of mischJef, have been made the subjects of wrath. The same Arm which Jeroboam stretched out to smite the Prophet, God smites. The Empe∣rour AurelJan when he was ready to subscribe the Edict for the persecution of the ChristJans,Euseb. l. 7 cap. 29. was suddenly crampt in his Knuckles, that he could not write. Mr. Greenhill in his Exposition upon Ezek. 11. 13. tells his Auditory, that there was one then present in the Congregation, who was an eye∣witness of a Woman scossing at another for pu∣rity and holy walking, who had her tongue stricken immediately wth the Palsie, and died thereof within two dayes. Henry the Second of France in a great rage against a Protestant Counsellor, committed him to the hands of one of his Nobles to be imprisoned, and that with these words, that he would see him burned with his own eyes: but mark the righteous providence of God, within a ew dayes after, the same Noble man, with a Lance put into his hands by the King, did at a Tilting match run the said King into one of his eyes, whereof he dyed. Yea, Providence hath made the very place of sinning, the place of punishment, 1 King. 21. 19. In the place where Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall Dogs lick, thy blood: and it was exactly ful∣filled, 2 Kings 9. 26. Thus Tophet is made a bu∣rying place for the Jews, till there was no room
to bury; and that was the place where they had offered up their Sons to Molech, Jer. 7. 31, 32. The Story of Nightingale is generally known which Mr. Fox relates, how he fll out of the Pulpit and brake his neck, whilst he was abusing that Scripture, 1 John 1. 10. And thus the Scriptures are made good by Pro∣vidence, whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him, Prov. 26. 27. and Matth. 7. 2. with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. If any shall yet say,bject. These things may fall out casually: That many thousands of the Churches E∣nemies have dyed in peace, and their end been like other men. We answer with Augustine, If no sin were pu∣nished here, no Providence would be believed; and if every sin should be punished here, no Judge∣ment would be expected. But, that none may think these Events to be meerly casual and acci∣dental, we yet further demand. Sixth Demand. If these things be meerly casual, How is it that they square and agree so exactly with the Scriptures in all particulars? We read, Amos 3. 3: Can two walk together ex∣cept they be agreed? If two men travel in one road, it's like they are agreed to go to the same place. Providences and Scriptures go all one way: and if they seem at any time to go diverse or contrary waies; be sure, they will meet at the journeys nd. There is an agreement betwixt them so to do.
Doth God miraculously suspend the power of natural Causes, as in the first Demand was ope∣ned? Why, this is no accidental thing, but what harmonizeth with the word, Isa. 4. 3. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the shame kindle upon thee. Do natural Causes unite and associate them∣selves for the good of Gods people? Why, this is no more than what is contained in the Pro∣mises, and is but the ulilling of that Scripture, 1 Cor. 3. 22. All is yours, for ye are Christs; (i. e.) the use, benefit and service of all the Creatures is for you, as your need shall require. Are the most apt and powerful means em∣ployed for their ruine frustrated? Who can but see the Scriptures fulfilled in, and expounded by such Providences? See Isa. 54. 15, 16, 17. and 8. 8, 9, 10. expounded by 2 Kings 18. 17. & seq. See you at any time a rub of Providence di∣verting the course of good men from falling into evil, or wicked men from committing evil; how loudly do such Providences proclaim the truth and certainty of the Scriptures, which tell us, That the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in him that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. and that in Prov. 16. 9. A mans heart deviseth his way, but the Lord directeth his steps. Do you see adequate retributions made to those that injure or befriend the people of God? Why, when you see all the kindness and love they have shown the Saints returned with an
Overplus into their bosoms; how is it possible, but you must see the accomplishment of these Scriptures in such Providences? Isa. 32. 8. 2 Cor. 9. 6. The liberal soul deviseth liberal things, and by liberal things he shall stand. And when you see the evils men have done, or intended to do to the Lords people, recoiling upon themselves; he is perfectly blind, that sees not the harmony such Providences bear with these Scriptures, Psal. 140. 11, 12. Psal. 7. 14, 15, 16. Psal. 9. 16. O what exact proportions do Providences and Scriptures hold! little do men take notice of it. Why did Cyru contrary to all rules of State poli∣cy freely dismiss the Captives, but to fulfil that Scripture, Isa. 45. 13. So that it was well ob∣served by One, That as God hath stretcht out the Expansum or Firmament over the natural; so he hath stretcht out his Word over the rational World. And as the Creatures on earth are in∣fluenced by those heavenly bodies, so are all Creatures in the World influenced by the Word, and do inallibly fulfil it, when they design to cross it. Seventh Demand. If these things be contingent, How is it that they fall out in such remarkable nicks and junctures of time, which makes them so greatly observable to all that consider them? We find a multitude of Providences so timed to a minute, that had they fallen out never so little sooner or later, they had signified but lit∣tle what now they do. Certainly, it cannot be
casualty, but counsel, that so exactly nicks the opportunity.Contingen∣tia rerum  estè causis proximis, secundis, & particularibus, non è causa prima, & uni∣versali, respectu cujus nihil contingens est, sed omnia necessaria, necessitat immut abilitatis non causae. Wendelin. Theol. p. 183. Contingen▪ keep to no Rules. How remarkable to this purpose, was the ti∣dings brought to Saul, that the Philistines had in∣vaded the Land? 1 Sam. 23. 27. just as he was ready to grasp the prey. The Angel calls to Abraham, and shews him another Sacrifice, just when his hand was giving the atal stroke to Isaac, Gen. 22. 10, 11. A Well of water is discovered to Hagar, just when she had let the Child, as not able to see its death, Gen. 21. 16, 19. Rabshakh meets with a blasting Providence, hears a ru∣mour that frustrated his design, just when ready to give the shock against Jerusalem, Isa. 27. 7, 8. So when Haman's plot against the Jews was ripe, and all things ready for execution; On that night could not the King sleep, Esth. 6. 1. When the horns are ready to gore Judah, immediately Car∣penters are prepared to ray them away, Zech. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21. How remarkable was the relief of Rochell by a Shoal of Fish that came into the Harbour, when they were ready to perish with famine, such as they never observed before, nor after that time. Mr. Dod could not go to bed one night, but hath a strong impulse to visit, (though unseasonably) a neighbour Gentleman, and just as he came, he meets him at his door, with an halter in his pocket, just going to hang himself. Dr. Tate and his Wife in the Irish Re∣bellJon, flying through the Woods with a Sucking-Child,
which was just ready to expire; the Mo∣ther going to rest it upon a Rock, puts her hand upon a bottle of warm Milk, by which it was preserved. A good Woman (from whose mouth I received it) being driven to a great extremi∣ty, all supplies failing, was exceedingly plunged into unbelieving doubts and fears, not seeing whence supplies should come; when lo! in the nick of time, turning some things in a Chest, un∣expectedly lights upon a piece of Gold, which supplied her present wants, till God opened ano∣ther door of supply. If these things fall out casually, how is it, they observe the very nick of time so exactly? as that it is become prover∣bial in Scripture, Gen. 22. 14. In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen. Eighth Demand. Lastly, Were these things casual and contingent, how can it be, that they should fall out so immedi∣ately upon, and consonantly to the prayers of the Saints? So that in many Providences, they are able to discern a very clear answer to their prayers, and are sure they have the petitions they asked of him, 1 John 5. 15. Thus when the Sea divided it self, just upon Israels cry to Heaven, Exod. 14. 10. When so signal a victory is given to Asa, immediately up∣on that pathetical cry to Heaven, Help us O Lord our God, 2 Chron. 14. 11, 12. When Ahitophel shall go and hang himself, just upon that prayer of distressed David, 2 Sam. 15. 31. When Haman shall fall and his plot be broken, just upon the Fast kept by Mordecai and Hester, Esth. 4. 16.
Our own Speed, in his History of Britain, tells us, that Richard the First besieged a Castle with his Army, they offered to surrender, if he would save their lives; he refuses, and threatens to hang them all: upon this an Arbalaster charged his Bow with a square Arrow, making first his prayer to God, that he would direct the shot, and deliver the Innocent from oppression; it struck the King himself, whereof he dyed, and they were delivered. Abraham's servant prayed for success; and see how it was answered, Gen. 24. 45. Peter was cast into prison, and prayer was made for him by the Church, and see the event, Acts 12. 5, 6, 7, 12. I could easily add to these, the wonderful examples of the return of prayers which was observed in Luther, and Dr. Winter in Ireland, and many more; but I judge it needless, because most Christians have a stock of experience of their own, and are well assured, that many of the Providences that befal them are, and can be no other than the return of their prayers. And now who can be dissatisfied in this point, that wisely considers these things? Must we not conclude as it is, Job 36. 7. He withdraweth not his eye from the Righteous: and as 2 Chron. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, to shew himself strong in tho behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards him. His pro∣vidences proclaim him to be a God hearing prayers.
The Second General Head. HAving proved, That the Concernments of the Saints in this World, are certainly conducted by the wisdom and care of special Providence; my next work is to shew you, In what Affairs and Concerns of theirs, the Providence of God doth more especJally appear; or what are the most remarkable performances of Providence for them in this world. And here I am not led directly by my Text, to speak of the most internal and spiritual per∣formances of Providence, immediately relating to the souls of his people; though they all re∣late to their souls mediately and eventually; but of the more visible and external performances of Providence for them: and it is not to be supposed, I should touch all these neither; they are more than the sands; but that which I aim at, is to discourse to you some more special and more observable performances of Provi∣dence for you. And we shall begin at the beginning.
The first Performance of Providence. I. ANd First,Providen∣tial per∣formance in our formation and protction in the wom Let us consider, how well Provi∣dence hath performed the first work that ever it did for us, in our formatJon and protectJon in the womb. Certainly, this is a very glorious and ad∣mirable performance; it's that the Psalmist ad∣mires, Psal. 139. 15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curJously wrought in the lower parts of the earth. The Womb is so called upon this account, because as curious Artists, when they have some choice piece in hand, perfect it in private, and then bring it into the light for all to gaze at; so it was here. And there are two things admirable in this performance of Providence for us. The rare structure and excellent composition of the body;Meaphor ab acupi∣ctoribus  ope . Omia  est dominus pondere, numero, mensur▪ I am wonderfully made; that word Ruhampti—is very full. The Vulgar renders it, painted as with a needle, (i. e.) richly em∣broidered with nerves and veins. Oh the curi∣ous workmanship that is in that one part the eye! How hath it forced some to acknowledge a God upon the examination of it! Providence, when it went about this work, had its model or pat∣tern before it, according to which it molded every part, as it is, Ver. 16. In thy Book were all my members written. Hast thou an integral perfecti∣on and sulness of members? It is because he wrote them all in his Book, or limned out thy
body, according to that exact model which he drew of thee in his own gracious purpose, be∣fore thou hadst a being: Had an eye, an ear, a hand, a foot been wanting in the platform, thou hadst now been sadly sensible of the defect: this world had been but a dungeon to thee, without those windows: thou hadst lived, as many do, an object of pity to others: if thou have low thoughts of this mercy, ask the blind, the deaf, the lame and the dumb, the value and worth of those mercies, and they will tell thee. There is a world of cost bestowed upon thy very body. Thou mightest have been cast into another mould,ther in rtJum cept. here are me embers at are tical, as  liver, are and rain, in ese are laced the atural, tal and nimal irits; ese spi∣ts are rried by  Veins, rteries  Nerves. he Veins carry the natural Spirits from the Liver, the Arteries the vi∣l Spirits from the Heart, the Nerves the animal Spirits from the rain: other members are officJal, as the hands and feet: the superi∣r doth rule the inferiour, and the inferiour support the superiour▪  wisdom hast thou made them all. and created a Worm or a Toad. I re∣member Luther tells us of two Cardinals, riding in great pomp to the Council of Constance, and by the way they heard a man in the fields bitter∣ly weeping and wailing: when they came to him, they found him intently viewing an ugly Toad; and asking him, why he wept so bitterly, he told them, his heart was melted with this consideration, that God had not made him such a loathsome and deformed Creature; hoc est quod amarè fleo, said he: whereupon one of them cryes out, Well said the Father, Surgunt indocti, & rapJent Coelum, The unlearned will rise and take Heaven, and we with all our learning shall be cast into Hell. No part of the Common lump was so figured and polisht as man is. Galen gave Epicurus an hundred years time to imagine
a more commodious scituation, configuration, or composition of any one member of a humane bo∣dy. And if all the Angels had studied to this day, they could not have cast the body of man into a more curious mould. And yet all this is but the enamelling of the Case, or polishing the Casket wherein the rare Jewel lies. Providence hath not only built the house, but brought the Inhabitant (I mean the soul) into the possession of it. A glorious piece it is, that bears the very Image of God upon it, being all in all, and all in every part. How noble are its Faculties and Affections? How nimble, various and indesatigable are its Motions? How comprehensive is its Capacity? It's a Com∣panion for Angels, nay, capable o Espousals to Christ, and eternal Communion with God. It's the Wonder of Earth, and the Envy of Hell. Suppose now (and why should you not sup∣pose, what you so frequently bhold in the world?) that Providence had so permitted and ordered it, that thy soul had entered into thy body with one or two of its faculties wounded and defective: Suppose its Vnderstanding had been crackt; what a miserable life hadst thou lived in this world? neither capable of service nor comfort. And truly, when I have considered those works of Providence, in bringing into the world in all Countreys and Ages some such spe∣ctacles of pity; some deprived of the use of rea∣son, and differing from Beasts, in little more than shape and igure; and others, though sound in their understandings, yet deformed or defective in their bodies, monstrous, mishapen and loath∣some Creatures; I can resolve the design of this
Providence, into nothing beside a demonstra∣tion of his Soveraign power; except they be designed as soils, to set off the beauty of other rare and exquisite pieces, and intended to stand before your eyes, as Monitors of Gods mercy to you, that your hearts (as oft as you beheld them) might be mlted into thankfulness for di∣stinguishing favour to you. Look then (but not proudly) upon thy out∣side and inside, see and admire what Providence hath done for thee, and how well it hath per∣formed the first service that ever it did for thee in this world. And yet, this was not all it did for thee, before thou sawest this world. It pre∣served thee, as well as formed thee in the womb: else thou hadst been as those Embryo's Job speaks of, Job 3. 11, 12. that never saw the light. Abor∣tives go for nothing in the world, and there are multitudes of them, some that never had a rea∣sonable soul breathed into them; but only the rudiments, and rough draught of a body: these come not into the account of men, but perish as the Beast doth. Others that dye in, or shortly after they come out of the Womb: and though their life was but for a moment; yet that mo∣ment entails an Eternity upon them: and had this been your case, as it is the case of Millions, then (supposing your salvation) yet had you been utterly unserviceable to God in the world: None had been the better for you, nor you the better for any in the world. You had been ut∣terly uncapable of all that good which through∣out your life you have either done to others, or received from others. And if we consider the nature of that obscure
life we lived in tho womb; how small an acci∣dent (had it been permitted by Providence) had extinguished our life, like a Bird in the shell? We cannot therefore but admire the tender care of Providence over us, and say with the Psalmist, Psal. 139. 13. Thou hast covered me in my Mothers womb: and not only so, but as it is, Psal. 22. 9. Thou art he that took me out of my Mothers womb. He preserved thee there to the fulness of time, and when that time was come, brought thee safely through manifold hazards, into that place in the world which he from Eternity espied for thee. Which leads us to the second performance. The Second Performance of Providence. II. THe second great performance of Providence,Providetial per∣formanc with respect to the tim and plac of our Nativity for the people of God, respects the place, and time in which it ordered their Nativity to fall. And truly, this is no small concernment to every one of us, but of vast consequence, either to our good or evil, though it be little minded by most men. I am perswaded, the thoughts of ew Christians penetrate deep enough into this Pro∣vidence, but slide too slightly and supersicially over an Abysse of much mercy, rich and maniold mercy wrapt up in this gracious performance of Providence for them. Ah friends! can you think it an indifferent thing, into what part of the World the womb of Nature had cast you out? Is there no odds, upon what Spot of the Creation, or in what Age of the World your lot had fallen? It may be you
have not seriously bethought your selves about this matter. And because this Point is so sel∣dom toucht, I will therefore dive a little more particularly and distinctly into it, and endea∣vour to warm your affections with a representa∣tion of the many and rich benefits you owe to this one performance of Providence for you. And we will consider it under a double respect or relation, as it respects your present comfort in this world, and as it relates to your eternal happiness in the world to come. This performance of Providence for you, doth very much concern your present comfort in this world. All the rooms in this great house are not alike pleasant and commodious for the Inha∣bitants of it. You read Psal. 74. 20. of the dark places of the Earth, which are full of the habitatJonr of cruelty: and many such dismal places are found in the habitable Earth. What a vast tract of the world lies as a waste Wilderness? Suppose your Mothers had brought you forth in America, among the Salvage IndJans, who herd together as brute beasts; are scorched with heat, and starved with cold; being naked, destitute and defenceless. How poor, miserable and un∣provided of Earthly comforts and accommodati∣ons, are many Millions of the Inhabitants of this world? What mercies do you enjoy in respect of the amaenity, fertility, temperature and civi∣lity of the place of your habitation? What is it but a Garden inclosed out of a Wilderness? I may without partiality or vanity say, God hath (even upon temporal accounts) provided you with one of the healthfullest, pleasantest, and in all respects, the best furnished room in all the
great house of this world. Hear what our own Chronicler saith of it,Speed's Chron. It is the fortunate Island, the Paradise of pleasure, the Garden of God; whose Valleys are like Eden, whose Hills are as Le∣banon, whose Springs are as Pisgah, whose Rivers are as Jordan, whose Wall is the Ocean, and whose Defence is the Lord Jehovah. You are here provided of necessary and com∣fortable accommodations for your bodies, that a great part of the world are unacquainted with. It is not with the poorest among us, as it is said to be with the poor RussJans, whose poverty pinches and bites with such sharp teeth, that their poo cry at the doors, Give me and cut me, give me and kill me. Say not, The barbarous Nations in this excel you; that they possess the Mines of Silver and Gold, which it may be you think enough to salve all other inconveniences of life. Alas poor Creatures! better had it been for them, if their Countrey had brought forth Bryers and Thorns instead of Gold, Silver, and precJous stones; for this hath been the occasion of ruining all their other comforts in this world: this hath invited their cruel avaritious enemies among them, un∣der whose servitude they groan, and dye without mercy: and thousands of them have chosen death rather than life, on the terms they enjoyed it. And why might not your lot have fallen there as well as where it is? Are not they made of the same clay, and endowed with as good a nature as your selves? O what a distinction hath Di∣vine Mercy made, where Nature made none! Consider ungrateful man, thou mightest have fallen into some of those Regions, where a tainted
air frequently cloyes the jaws of death, where the Inhabitants differ very little from the Beasts in the manner of their living: but God hath provided for thee, and given the poorest among us far better accommodations of life, than the greatest among them are ordinarily provided with. O what hath Providence done for you? But all that I have said is very inconsiderable, in compaison with the spiritual mercJes, and ad∣vantages you here enjoy for your souls. Oh, this is such an advantageous cast of Providence for you, as obliges you to a thankful acknow∣ledgement of it, to all Eternity. For let us here make but a few suppositions in the case before us, and the glory of Providence will shine like a Sun-beam full in your faces. (1.) Suppose it had been your Lot to have fallen in any of those vast Continents possessed by Pagans and Heathens at this day, who bow down to the Stock of a Tree, and worship the Host of Heaven. This is the case of Millions, and Millions of Millions:Jerwoods EnquirJes, hap. 13. p. 118, 119 for Pagan Idolars (as that searching Scholar Mr. Briwood informs us) do not only fill the circumference of nine hundred miles in Europe, but almost the one half of Africa, more than the half of AsJa, and almost the whole of America. Oh how deplorable had thy case been, if a Pagan Idolatress had brought thee forth, and Idolatry had been suckt in with thy Mothers milk! then in all probability, thou hadst been at this day worshipping Devils, and posting with full speed in the direct road to Damnation: for these are the people of Gods wrath, Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know the
not, and upon the familJes that call not upon thy name. How dreadful is that imprecation against them? sal. 97. 7. which takes hold of them and all that's theirs, Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols. (2.) Or suppose your Lot had fallen among Mahometans, who next to Pagans spread over the greatest tract of the Earth: for though ArabJa bred that unclean Bird, yet it was not that Cage, that could long contain him; for, not only the ArabJans, but the PersJans, Turks and Tartars, do all bow down their backs under that grand Im∣postor. This poison hath dispersed it self through the veins of AsJa, over a great part of Africk, even the Circumference of seven thou∣sand miles, and stops not there, but hath tainted a considerable part of Europe also. Had your Lot fallen here, O what unhappy men and women had you been, notwithstanding the natural amenity and pleasantness of your native soil? You had then adored a grand Im∣postor, and dyed in a fools Paradise. Instead of Gods lively Oracles, you had been (as they now are) deceived to your eternal ruine with such fond, mad and wild dreams, as whoso considers would think, the Authors had more need of mana∣cles and fetters, than arguments or sober answers. (3.) Or if neither of these had been your Lot, but you had been emptied by the womb of Nature into this little spot of the Earth which is ChristJanized by profession, but nevertheless for the most part over-run by Popish Idolatry, and AntichristJan delusions; what unhappy men and women had you been, had you suckt a Popish breast? For this people are to be the subjects of
the VJals of Gods wrath to be poured out suc∣cessively upon them, as you may read Rev. 16. and the Scriptures in round and plain language tell us, what their fate must be, 2 Thess. 2. 11, 12. And for this cause God shall send them strong delu∣sJon, that they should belJeve a lye, that they all migh be damned who belJeved not the truth, but had plea∣sure in unrighteousness. Nay, you might have fallen into the same Land in which your habitation now is, and yet have had no advantage by it as to salvation, if he that chose the bounds of your habitations, had not also graciously determined the times for you, Acts 17. 26. For▪ (4.) Suppose your Lot had fallen where it is during the Pagan State of England, who for many hundred years were gross and vile idolaters. Thick darkness over-spread the people of this Island, and as in other Countreys, the Devil was worshipped, and his lying Oracles zealously attended upon. The shaking of the top of Jupiter's Oak in Dodona, the Caldron smitten with the rod in the hand of Jupiter's Image, the Lawrell and Fountain in Daphne: these were the Ordinances on which the poor deluded Wretches waited. So in this Nation they worshipped Idols also: the Sun and Moon were adored for Gods,ide Ver∣igan's British Antiqui∣is. with many other abominable Idols which our Ancestors worship∣ped, and whose memorials are not to this day quite obliterated among us. (5.) Or suppose our Lot had fallen in those later miserable dayes, in which Queen Mary sent so many hundreds to Heaven in a fiery Chariot▪ and the poor Protestants sklked up and down in
holes and woods, to preserve them from Popish Inquisitors, who like Blood-hounds, hunted up and down through all the Cities, Towns and Vil∣lages of the Naton, to seek out the poor sheep of Christ for a prey. But such hath the special care of Providence towards us been, that our turn to be brought upon the stage of this World was graciously re∣served for better dayes: so that if we had had our own option, we could not have chosen for our selves, as Providence hath. We are not on∣ly furnished with the best room in this great hose; but before we were put into it, it was swept with the beesom of National Reformation, from Idolatry, yea, and washed by the blood of Martyrs from Popish filthiness; and adorned with Gospel lights, shining in as great lustre in our dayes, as ever they did since the Apostles dayes. You might have been born in England for many Ages, and not have found a ChristJan in it: yea, and since ChristJanity was here owned, and not have met a Protestant in it. Oh what an Obliga∣tion hath Providence laid you under, by such a merciful performance as this for you? If you say,Object. All this indeed is true; but what is this to eternal salvation? Do not multitudes that enjoy these priviledges, eternally perish notwithstand∣ing them? yea, and perish with an aggravation of sin and misery beyond other sinners? True,Sol. they do so; and it is of very sad consi∣deration that it should be so; but yet we cannot deny this to be a very choice and singular mercy, to be born in such a Land, and at such a Time. For let us consider what helps for salvation men here enjoy, beyond what they could enjoy, had
their Lot fallen according to the fore-mentioned suppositions. (1.) Here we enjoy the ordinary means of salvation, which elsewhere men are denyed and cut off from. So that if any among the Heathens be saved and brought to Christ, it must be in some miraculous or extraordinary way: for, How shall thy belJeve in him of whom they have not heard▪ and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Rom. 10. 14. Alas! were there a desire awake∣ned in any of their hearts after a Gospel disco∣very of salvation, (which ordinarily is not, nor can be rationally supposed) yet, poor Creatures, they might travel from Sea to Sea, to hear th Word, and nt find it: whereas you can hardly miss the opportunities of hearing the Gospel: Sermons meet you frequently, so that you can scarcely shun or avoid the Ordinances and Instru∣ments of your salvation. And is this nothing? Christ even forces himself upon us. (2.) Here, in this Age of the World, the com∣mon prejudices against Christianity are removed, by the advantage it hath of a publick profession among the people▪ and protection by the Laws of the Countrey. Whereas, were your habita∣tion among Jews▪ Mahometans, or Heathen Idola∣ters▪ you would find Christ and ChristJanity the common odJum of the Countrey▪ every one de∣fying and deriding both name and thing; and such your selves likely had been, if your birth and education had been among them. For you may observe, that whatever is traditionally delivered down from Father to Son, every one is fond of, and zealous in its defence. The Jews, Heathens and Mahmetans are at this
day so tenacious of their errors, that with spit∣ting, hissing, and clapping of hands, and all other signs of indignation and abhorrence they chase away all others from among them. Is it not then a special mercy to you to be cast into such a Countrey and Age, where (as a learned Divine observes) the true Religion hath the same advantages over every false one,Mr. Pink as in other Countreys they have over it? Here you have the presence of precious Means, and the absence of soul-destroying prejudices, two signal mercies. (3.) Here, in this Age of the World, Chri∣stianity bespeaks you assoon as you are capable of any sense, or impressions o Religion upon you; and so by an happy anticipatJon, blocks up the passages, by which a false Religion would certainly enter. Here you uck in the first noti∣ons and principles of Christianity, even with the Mothers milk: and certainly, such a prepossession is a choice advantage. Quo semel est imbuta re∣cens servabit odorem Testa di. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old e will not depart from it▪ Prov. 22. 6. (4.) Here you have, or may have the help and assistance of Christians to direct your way, resolve your doubts, support your burthens, and help you through those difficulties that attend the new birth. Alas! if a poor soul had any begin∣nings or saint workings and stirrings after Christ and true Religion in many other Countreys, the hand of every man would presently be against him, and none would be found to relieve, assist or encourage, as you may see in that Example of GalacJus; the nearest relations would, in that
case, prove the greatest Enemies, the Countrey would quickly hoot at him as a Monster, and cry Away with the Heretick to the Prison or Stake. Whether these eventually prove blessings to your souls or no, certain I am, that in themselves they are singular mercies, and helps to salvation, that are denyed to Millions besides you. So that if Plato when he was near his death, could bless God for three things, viz. That he was a Man, and not a Beast: that he was born in Greece; and brought up in the time of Socrates: much more cause have you to admire Providence, that you are Men, and not Beasts; that you were born in England, and brought up in Gospel dayes here. This is a Land the Lord hath EspJed for you, as the expression is, Ezek. 20. 6. and concerning it, you have abundant cause to say, as in another case the Psalmist doth, Psal. 16. 6. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, and I have a goodly heritage. The Third Performance of Providence. III. THe next observable Performance of Providence,Providen∣ial per∣formances with re∣spect to he Stock nd Fami∣ly out of which we prang. which must be heedfully adverted and weighed, is the designatJon of the stock and family out of which we should spring and rise. And truly, this is of special consideration, both as to our tempo∣ral and eternal good; for whether the families in which we grew up, were great or small in Israel; whether our parents were of the higher or lower Class, and rank among men: yet if they
were such as feared God and wrought righteous∣ness, if they took any care to educate you religi∣ously, and trained you up in the nurture and admo∣nitJon of the Lord, you are bound to reckon it among your chief mercies, that you sprung from the loins of such parents: for from this Spring a double stream of mercy rises to you. (1.) Temporal and external mercies to your outward man. You cannot but know, that as Godliness entails a blessing, so wickedness and unrighteousness a curse upon posterity. An in∣stance of the former you have in Gen. 17. 18, 20. On the contrary, you have the threatning, Zech. 5. 4. and both together, Prov. 3. 33. The Curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked, but he Blesseth the habitatJon of the just. True it is, that both these imply the Childrens treading in the steps of their Parents, according to Ezek. 18. but how frequently is it seen, that wicked men breed their children vainly and wickedly; so that as it's said of Abijam, 1 Kings 15. 3. He walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him; and so the curse is entail'd from genera∣tion to generation. To escape this Curse, is a choice Providence. (2.) But especially take notice, what a stream of spiritual blessings and mercies, lows from this Providence to the Inner man. O it's no common mercy, to descend from pious Parents▪ Some of us do not only owe our natural life to them, as In∣struments of our Beings, but our Spiritual and Eternal life also. It was no small mercy to Ti∣mothy, to be descended from such Progenitors, 2 Tm. 1. 5. nor to. Augustine, that he had such a Mother as Monica, who planted in his mind the
precepts of life with her Words, watered them with her Tears, and nourished them with her Example. We will a little more particularly in∣spect this mercy, and in so doing, we shall find manifold mercies contained in it. (1.) What a Mercy was it to us, to have Pa∣rents that prayed for us before they had us, as well as in our Infancy, when we could not pray for our selves? Thus did Abraham, Gen. 15. 2. and Hannah, 1 Sam. 1. 10, 11. and some here like∣ly are the fruits and returns of their Parents Prayers. This was that holy course they conti∣nued all their dayes for you, carrying all your concerns, especially your Eternal ones before the Lord with their own; and pouring out their souls to God so affectionately for you, when their eye-strings and heart-strings were breaking. Oh put a value upon such Mercies; for they are precious. It's a greater Mercy, to descend from praying Parents, than from the loyns of Nobles. See Job's pious practice, Job 1. 5. (2.) What a special Mercy was it to us, to have the excrescencies of corruption nipt in the bud by their pious and careful discipline? We now understand, what a critical and dangerous season Youth is, the wonderful proclivity of that Age to every thing that is evil. Why else are they called Youthful lusts? 2 Tim. 2. 22. When David asketh, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? it's plainly enough implyed in the very Question, that the way he takes lieth through the pollutions of the world in his youth, Psal. 119. 9. When you find a David praying, that God would not remember the sins of his youth, Psal. 25. 7. and a Job bitterly complaining, that God
made him to possess the sins of his youth, Job 13. 26. Sure, you cannot but reflect, with a very thank∣ful heart, upon those happy means, by which the corruption of your nature was happily pre∣vented, or restrained in your Youth. (3.) And how great a Mercy was it, that we had Parents, who carefully instilled the good knowledge of God into our souls in our tender years? How careful was Abraham of this duty? Gen. 18. 19. and David? 1 Chron. 28. 9. We have some of us had Parents, who might say to us, as the Apostle, Gal. 4. 19. My little Children, of whom I travail again in birth till Christ be formed in you. As they longed for us before they had us, and rejoyced in us when they had us; so they could not endure to think, that when they could have us no more, the Devil should. As they thought no pains, care or cost too much for our bodies to feed them, cloath and heal them; so did they think no prayers, counsels or tears, too much for our souls, that they might be saved. They knew a parting time would come betwixt them and us, and did strive to make it as easie and comfortable to them as they could, by leav∣ing us in Christ, and within the blessed bond of his Covenant. They were not glad, that we had Health, and indifferent whether we had Grace. They as sensibly felt the miseries of our souls as of our bodies; and nothing was more desira∣ble to them, than that they might say in the great day, Lord, here am I, and the Children which thou hast given me. (4.) And was it not a special Favour to us, to have Parents that went before us as Patterns of
Holiness, and beat the path to Heaven for us by their Examples? Who could say to us, as Phil. 4. 9. What things ye have heard and seen in me, that do; and as 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of us, as we are of Christ. The Parents life is the Childs copy. O 'tis no common mercy, to have a fair copy set before us, especially in the moulding age: we saw what they did, as well as heard what they said. It was Abraham's commendation, that he commanded his Children, and his houshold after him, to keep the way of the Lord. And such mercies some of us have had also. Ah my friends, let me beg you, that you will set special remarques upon this Providence, which so graciously wrought for you: and that your hearts may be more throughly warmed in the sense of it, compare your condition with others, and seriously bethink your selves, (1.) How many Children there be among us, that are drawn headlong to Hell by their cruel and ungodly Parents, who teach them to curse and swear assoon as they can speak? Many fami∣lies there are, wherein little other language is heard, but what is the Dialect of Hell. These, like the old logs and small spray, are preparing for the fire of Hell, where they must burn toge∣ther. Of such Children, that Scripture, Psal. 49. 19. will one day be verified, except they re∣pent, They shall go to the generatJon of their fa∣thers, where they shall not see light. (2.) And how many families are there, though not so prophane, who yet breed up their Chil∣dren vainly and sensually, as Job 21. 11, &c. take no care what becomes of their souls, so they can but provide for their bodies? If they can but
teach them to carry their bodies, no matter if the Devil act their souls: If they can but leave them Lands or Moneys, they think they have ve∣ry fully discharged their duties. O what will the language be, wherewith such Parents and Chil∣dren shall great each other at the Judgement Seat, and in Hell for ever? (3.) And how many be there, who are more sober, and yet hate the least appearances of Godli∣ness in their Children? who instead of cherishing, do all that they can to break bruised reeds, and quench smoaking lax, to stifle and strangle the first appearances, and offers they make towards Christ? Who had rather accompany them to their graves, than to Christ, doing all that in them lyes, Herod like, to kill Christ in the Cradle? Ah Sirs, ye little know, what a mercy ye do or have enjoyed in Godly Parents, and what a good Lot Providence cast for you in this Concernment of your bodies and souls. If any shall say, This was not their case,Object. they had little help Heaven-ward from their Parents: To such I shall only reply three things. (1.) If you had little furtherance,Sol. yet own it as a special Providence, that you had no hinde∣rance; or, if you had opposition, yet (2.) Admire the Grace of God, in plucking you out by a wonderful distinguishing hand of mercy from among them, and keeping alive the languishing sparks of Grace amidst the floods of opposition. (3.) And learn from hence, if God give you a posterity of your own, to be so much the more strict and careful of relational duties, by how much you have sensibly felt the want of it in your selves▪
But seeing such a train of blessings, both as to this life, and that to come, follow upon an holy education of Children; I will not dismiss the Point, till I have discharged my duty, in exhort∣ing Parents and Children to their duties. And first for you that are Parents, or to whom the Education of Children is committed, I be∣seech you mind, how concerning a duty lies on you: and that I may effectually press it, consider, (1.) How near the Relation is betwixt you and your Children, and therefore how much you are concerned in their happiness or misery. Con∣sider but the Scripture account of the dearness of such Relations, expressed (1.) By longings for them, as Gen. 15. 2. Gen. 30. 1. and (2.) By our joy when we have them, as Christ expresses it, John. 16. 21. (3.) The high value set on them, Gen. 42. 38. (4.) The sympathie with them in all their troubles, Mark 9. 22. and (5.) By our sorrow at parting, Gen. 37. 35. Now shall all this be to no purpose? For to what purpose do we desire them before we have them, rejoice in them when we have them, value them so highly, sympathize with them so tenderly, grieve for their death so excessively; if in the mean time no care be taken what shall become of them to Eternity? (2.) How God hath charged you with their souls, as well as bodies: and this appears by two sorts of Precepts. (1.) Precepts directly laid up∣on you, Deut. 6. 6, 7. and Eph. 6. 4. (2.) By Pre∣cepts laid on them to obey you, Eph. 6. 1. which plainly implies your duty, as well as expresses theirs. (3.) What shall comfort you at the parting
time, if they dye through your neglect in a Christ∣less condition? Oh this is the cutting considera∣tion, My Child is in Hell, and I did nothing to prevent it; I helped him thither. Duty dis∣charged, is the only root of comfort in that day. (4.) If you neglect to instruct them in the way of Holiness, will the Devil neglect to instruct them in the way of Wickedness? No, no, if you will not teach them to pray, he will to curse, swear and lye. If ground be uncultivated, weeds will spring. (5.) If the season of their youth be neglected, how little probability is there of any good fruit afterwards? that is the Moulding age, Prov. 22. 6. How few are converted in old age? A twig is brought to any form, but grown limbs will not bow. (6.) You are instrumental causes of all their spiritual misery; and that (1.) By generatJon, (2.) ImitatJon, they lye spiritually dead of the Plague which you brought home among them, Psal. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive (or warm) me. (7.) There's none in the World so likely as you▪ to be Instruments of their Eternal good. You have peculiar advantages that none other hath; as (1.) The interest you have in their affections. (2.) Your opportunities to instil the knowledge of Christ into them, being daily with them, Deut. 6. 7. (3.) Your knowledge of their tempers: if therefore you neglect, who shall help them? (8.) The consideration of the great day, shod move your bowels of pity for them. O
remember that Text, Rev. 20. 12, &c. I saw the dead small and great stand before God. What a sad thing will it be, to see your dear Children at Christs left hand? O friends, do your utmost to prevent this misery. Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we perswade men. And you Children, especially you that sprang from religious Parents, I beseech you, obey their Counsels; and tread in the steps of their pious Examples. To press this, I offer these Conside∣ration. (1.) Your disobedience to them, is a resisting of Gods Authority, Ephes. 6. 1. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: there's the Command: your rebellion therefore runs higher than you think. It is not Man, but God that you disobey; and for your disobedience God will punish you. It may be, their tenderness will not suffer them, or you are grown beyond their correction: all they can do, is to complain to God; and if so, he will handle you more severely than they could do. (2.) Your Sin is greater than the Sin of young Heathens and Infidels; and so will your Account be also. O better (if a wicked Child) that thou hadst been the off-spring of Salvage IndJans, nay, of Beasts, than of such Parents. So many Coun∣sels disobeyed, Hopes and Prayers frustrated, will turn to sad aggravations. (3.) It's usual with God, to retaliate mens disobedience to their Parents in kind: Common∣ly our own Children shall pay us home for it. I have read in a grave Author, of a wicked Wretch that drag'd his Father along the house: the Father begg'd him, not to draw him beyond
such a place: for, said he, I drag'd my Father no farther. O the sad, but just retributions of God! And for you, in whose hearts Grace hath been planted by the blessing of Education, I beseech you to admire Gods goodness to you in this Pro∣vidence. Oh what an happy Lot hath God cast for you! How few Children are partakers of your mercies? See that you honour such Parents; the tie is double upon you so to do. Be you the joy of their hearts, and comfort of their lives, if liv∣ing: if not, yet still remember the mercy while you live, and tread in their pious path; that you and they may both rejoice together in the great day, and bless God for each other to all Eternity. The Fourth Performance of Providence. IV. THe next remarkable performance of Providence for the People of God in which I will instance,Providen∣tial per∣formances about ou Conver∣sion to God. shall be with respect to its ordering the Occasions, In∣struments and Means of their Conversion. In nothing doth Providence shine forth more glo∣riously in this world, than it doth in this perfor∣mance for the people of God. How curiously soever its hand had moulded your bodies, how tenderly soever it had preserved them, and how bountiful∣ly soever it had provided for them; if it had hot also ordered some means or other for your Conversion, all the former favours and benefits it had done for you, had signified little. This, O
this is the most excellent benefit you ever receiv∣ed from its hand. You are more beholden to it for this, than for all your other mercies. And in opening this performance of Providence, I cannot but think your hearts must be deeply af∣fected. This is a subject which every gracious heart loves to steep its thoughts in. It's cer∣tainly the sweetest History that ever they re∣peated: they love to think and talk of it. The Places where, and Instruments by whom this work was wrought, are exceedingly endeared to them for the works sake: yea, endeared to that degree, that for many years after their hearts have melt∣ed, when they have but passed occasionally by those places, or but seen the faces of those per∣sons, that were used as Instruments in the hand of Providence for their good. As no doubt, but * Jacob's Beth-el was ever after that night sweet to his thoughts:Gen. 48. 3. so other Saints have had their Bethels as well as he. O blessed Places, Times and Instrurments! O the deep, the sweet impressions, never to be razed out of the memory or heart, that this Providence hath made upon those on whom it wrought this blessed Effect at years of discretion, and in a more sensible way! But lest any poor soul should be discouraged under the display of this Providence, because he cannot remember the Time, Place, Instruments and Manner wherein, and by which Conversion-work was wrought; I will therefore premise this necessary distinction, to prevent injury to some, whilst I design benefit to others. Conversion, as to the subjects of it, may be considered two wayes; either as it is more sen∣sibly wrought in persons of riper years, who in
their youthful daies were more prophane and vile; or upon persons in their tender years, in∣to whose hearts Grace was more insensibly, and undiscernably instilled by Gods blessing upon pi∣ous Education. In the former sort, the distinct acts of the Spirit, as illuminating, convincing, humbling, drawing them to Christ, and sealing them are more evident and discernable: in the latter, more obscure and confused; they can remember, that God gave them an Esteem and liking of god∣ly persons, Care of duty, and Conscience of sin; but as to the Time, Place, Instruments and Man∣ner of the work, they can give but a slender ac∣count of them: however, if the work be saving∣ly wrought in them, there is no reason they should be troubled, because the Circumstances of it are not so evident to them, as they are to others. Let the substance and reality of the work appear, and there is no reason to afflict your selves, because of the inevidence of such Circumstances. But yet where the Circumstances as well as Substance are clear to a man: when we can call to remembrance, the Time when, the Place where, the Instrument by whom that work was wrought, it must needs be exceeding sweet: and they can∣not but yield a fresh delight to the soul every time they are reflected upon. There are many of the following occasions, which it may be, we took for straglers when they first befell us: but they proved scouts sent out from the main body of Providence, which they make way for. Now there be divers things in those Provi∣dences, that are versant about this work, which
are exceeding sweet, and taking; as namely, The wonderful strangeness and unaccountable∣ness of this work of Providence, in casting us in∣to the way, and ordering the occasions, yea, the minuest Circumstances about this work. Thus you find in Acts 8. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, &c. the Eunuch at that very instant when he was reading the Prophet Esay, hath an Interpreter, one among a thousand, that joins his CharJot, just as his mind was by a fit occasion prepared to receive the first light of the knowledge of Christ. And how strange was that Change (how far soever it went) upon Naaman the SyrJan? re∣corded 2 Kings 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. That the SyrJans in their incursion should bring away this girl, (likely her beauty was the inducement,) and shel must be presented to Naaman's Wife, and relate to her the power of God that accompanied the Pro∣phet; though you find in that particular case there had never been an instance given before, Luke 4. 27. Doubtless, the whole of this affair was guided by the signal direction of Pro∣vidence. So for the Conversion of the Samaritans, it's observed John 4. 4. Christ must needs go that way, (i. e.) it lay just in the road betwixt Judea and Galilee, and at the sixth hour (i. e.) high noon, he rests himself upon Jacob's Well, still seeming to have no other design, but his own re∣freshment, by sitting and drinking there: but O what a train of blessed Providences follow this, which seemed but an accidental thing! first the Woman of SamarJa, and then many more in that City are brought to believe in Christ, as you find Verse 29. and 41.
It is noted by MelchJor Adams in the Life of JunJus,Melch. A∣dams Vit Theol. par 2. p. 194. how very an Atheist he was grown in his younger years; but in order to his Conversion to God, first, a wonderful preservation of his life in a publick tumult at Lyons in France must make way, which forces from him the acknowlegement of a Deity. Then his Father sends for him home, and with much gentleness perswades him to read the Scriptures; he lights upon the first of John, and with it he sensibly feels a Divine Supernatu∣ral Majesty and Power seizing his soul, which brought him over by a compleat Conversion to Jesus Christ. Thus, as the Woman of Tekoa told David, doth God devise means to bring back his banished. Lavater tells us, that many Spanish Souldiers, going into the Wars of Germany, were there con∣verted to Christ, by falling into the CitJes and Towns, where godly Ministers and Christians were. Mr. Robert Bolton, though an excellent Scholar, yet in his younger years he was a very irreligious person, and a jeerer of holy men; but being cast into the company of godly Mr. Peacock, was by him brought to repentance, and proved a famous Instrument in the Church of Christ. A scrap of paper accidentally coming to view, hath been used as an occasion of Conver∣sion. This was the case of a Minister of Wales,See Fir∣min's  Christia p. 119. who had two Livings, but took little care of ei∣ther. He being at a Fair, bought something at a Pedlers Standing, and rent off a leaf of Mr. Per∣kin's Catechism to wrapt it in, and reading a line or two in it, God set it home, so as it did the work.
The Marriage of a Godly Man into a Carnal Family, hath been ordered by Providence, for the Conversion and Salvation of many therein. Thus we read, in the Life of that renowned English Worthy Mr. John Bruen, that in his second Match it was agreed, that he should have one years diet in his Mother-in-laws house: During his abode there that year (saith Mr. Clark) the Lord was pleased by his means, graciously to work upon her Soul, as also upon his Wises Sister, and half Sister, their Brothers Mr. WillJam and Thomas Fox, with one or two of the servants in that Family. The reading of a good Book, hath been the means of bringing others to Christ. And thus we find many of the German Divines converted, by reading Luther's Books: yea, and what is more strange,lyden's omment. . 475. Mr. Sleyden in his Commentary tells us, that VergerJus, though he were present an eye and ear-witness to that doleful case of Spira, which one would think should move a stone, yet still continued so firm to the Popes Interest, that when he fell into some suspicion among the Cardinals, he resolved to purge himself, by writing a Book against the German Apostates: but whilst he read the Protestant Books, out of no other design, but to conute them; whilst he is weighing the Ar∣guments, is himself convinced and brought to Christ. He finding himself thus overcome by the truth, imparts his conviction to his Brother, a zealous Papist also: this Brother deplores the misery of his case, and seeks to reclaim him; but VergerJus entreating him to weigh well the Prote∣stant Arguments, he also yields; and so both immediately betook themselves to preach Justi∣fication
by the free grace of God through the blood of Christ. Yea, not only the reading of a Book, or hearing a Minister, but (which is most remarkable) the very mistake or forgetfulness of a Minister, cap. 15. hath been improv'd by Providence for this end and purpose. Augustine once preaching to his Congregation, forgot the Argument which first he propos'd, and fell upon the Error of the Mani∣chees beside his first intention: by which discourse, he converted one Firmus his Auditor; who fell down at his feet weeping, and confessing he had lived a Manichee many years. Another I knew, who going to preach, took up another Bible than that he design'd, in which, not only missing his Noes, but the Chapter also in which his Text lay, was put to some loss thereby: but after a short pause, he resolv'd to speak to any other Scripture that might be presented to him, and accordingly read that Text, 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, &c. And though he had nothing prepar'd; yet the Lord helpt him to speak both methodically and pertinently from it: by which discourse, a gracious change was wrought upon one in the Congregation, who hath since given good Evidence of a sound Conver∣sion, and acknowledged this Sermon to be the first and only Means thereof. The accompanying of others in a Neighbour∣ly civil Visit, hath been over-rul'd to the same end. Thus many of the Jews accompanied Mary unto Bethany, (designing only to manifest their civil respect) but there they met Christ, saw the things which he did, and believed on him, John 11. 45.
Mr. Firmin in his Real ChristJan, pag. 97, 98. tells us of one, who had liv'd many years in a Town where Christ had been as clearly, and as long preached, as in any Town in England. This man when he was about seventy six years of age, went to visit a sick Neighbour. A Christian friend of mine (saith mine Author) came to see him also, and finding this old man there; whom he judged, to be one that lived upon his own stock: Civility, good Works, &c. he purposely fell into that discourse, to shew how many persons lived upon their duties, but ne∣ver came to Christ. The old man sitting by the bed side, heard him; and God was pleased to convince him, that he was such a person, who had lived upon himself without Christ to that day; and would say afterwards, had I dyed before threescore and sixteen, I had pe∣risht, for I knew not Christ. The committing of a godly man to Prison, hath been the method of Providence, to save the soul of a poor Keeper. So Paul, Acts 16. 27. was made a Prisoner, to make his Keeper a spiri∣tual Free-man. The like success had Dr. Barnes in Queen Mary's dayes, who afterwards celebrated the Lords Supper in Prison with his converted Keeper. The scattering of Ministers and ChristJans by Persecution from CitJes and Towns, into the igno∣rant and barbarous parts of the Countrey, hath been the way of Providence, to find out, and bring home some lost sheep that were found there, to Jesus Christ, Acts 8. 1. 4. The like signal Event hath since followed upon the like scattering of godly Ministers, whereof are many
A. Servant running away from his Master, (like∣ly upon no other design but to live an idle life) yet falling into such places and companies, as Providence ordered (in a design to him un∣known) hath thereby been brought to be the servant of Christ. This was the very case of One∣simus, who run away from his Master Philemon, to Rome; where by a strange Providence (possibly a meer curiosity to see the Prisoners) he there falls into Paul's hands, who begat him to Christ in his bonds, Philemon, Ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Going to hear a Sermon in jest, hath proved some mens Conversion in earnest. The above named Mr. Firmin in the fore-cited Book, tells us of anotorious drunkard, whom the drunkards called Father, that one day would needs go to hear what Wilson said, out of no other design it seems, but to scoff at that holy man: but in the prayer before Sermon, his heart began to thaw; and when he read his Text, which was John 5. 14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee: he could not contain; and in that Sermon the Lord changed his heart, though so bitter an Enemy, that the Minister on Lecture-dayes was afraid to go to Church before his shopdoor. Lo, these are parts of his wayes, but how small a portJon is known of him? The dropping of some grave and weighty word accidentally in the presence of vain carnal persons, the death of an Husband, Wife or Child, a fit of sickness, with a thousand other such like occasions, have been thus improved by Providence to the Conversion of souls. And no less remarkable and wonderful are the designs of Providence in ordering the removes,
and governing the motJons of Ministers, from place to place in order unto the Conversion of souls. Thus oftentimes it carries them to places where they intended not to go; God having (unknown to them) some Elect Vessels there, who must be Called by the Gospel. Thus Paul and Timothy (a sweet and lovely pair) when they were travelling through PhrygJa and GalatJa, were forbid to preach the Word in AsJa, to which probably their minds inclined, Acts 16. 6. and when they essayed to go into BythinJa, the Spirit suffered them not, Ver. 7. But a man of MacedonJa (i. e. an Angel in the shape or habit of a man of that Countrey) appeared to Paul in a Vision, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us, Ver. 9. and there did God open the heart of LydJa. I knew a pious Minister now with God, who falling in his Study upon a very rouzing subject, intended for his own Congregation, was strongly moved, when he had finished it, to go to a rude, vile, prophane people, about five miles off, and first preach it to them; after many wrestlings with himself, not being willing to quench any motion that might be supposed to come from the Spirit of God, he obeyed, and went to this people, who had then no Minister of their own, and few durst come among them. And there did the Lord, beyond all expectation, open a door, and several prophane ones received Christ in that place, and engaged this Minister to a Weekly Lecture among them, in which many souls were won to . ame holy Man, at another time, being a Journey, passed by a company of vain
persons, who were wrestling upon a Green near the road: and just as he came against the place, one of them had thrown his Antagonist, and stood triumphing in his strength and activity. This good man rode up to them, and turning his speech to this person; told him, Friend, I see you are a strong man; but yet let not the strong man glory in his strength: You must know, that you are not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedneses: how sad will it be, that Satan should at last trip up the heels of your hope, and give you an eternal overthrow? And after about a quarter of an hours serious discourse upon this subject, he left them, and went on his Journey; but this discourse made such an imperssion, that the person had no rest, till he opened his trou∣ble to a godly Minister, who wisely following the work upon his soul, saw at last the blessed issue thereof in the gracious change of the per∣son, whereof he afterwards gave the Minister a joyful account. O how unsearchable are the Methods of Providence in this matter? Nay, what is yet more wonderful, the Provi∣dence of God hath sometimes ordered the very malice of Satan, and wickedness of men, as an occasion of Eternal good to their souls. A very memorable Example whereof▪ I shall here give the Reader, faithfully reing what not many years past ell out in my own observation in this place, to the astonishment of many spectators. In the year 1673. there came into this Port a Ship of Poole, in her return from Virgini; in which Ship was one of that place, a lusty young man of twenty three years of age, who was Chi∣rurgeon
in the Ship. This person in the voyage fell into a deep melancholy, which the Devil greatly improved to serve his own design for the ruine of this poor man; however, it pleased the Lord to restrain him from any attempts upon his own life, until he arrived here. But shortly after his arrival, upon the Lords Day early in the morning (being in bed with his Brother) he took a knife prepared for that purpose, and cut his own throat, and withal leapt out of the bed, and though the wound was deep and large, yet thinking it might not soon enough dispatch his wretched life, desperately thrust it into his st.|mach, and so lay wallowing in his own blood, till his Brother awaking, made a cry for help: hereupon a PhysicJan and a Chirurgeon coming in, found the wound in his Throat mortal; and all they could do at present, was only to stitch it and apply a plaister, with design, rather to enable him to speak for a little while, than with any ex∣pectation of cure; for before that, he breathed through the wound, and his voice was inarti∣culate. In this condition I found him that morning, and apprehending him to be within a few minutes of Eterity, I laboured to work upon his heart the sense of his condition, telling him, I had but little him to do any thing for him, and therefore desired him to let me know, what his own ap∣prehensions of his present Condition were: He told me, he hoped in God for Eternal Life; I replyed, that I feared his hopes were unground∣ed, for that the Scripture tells us, No Murderer hath eternal life abiding in him, but this was self-murther, the grossest of all Murthers: and insist∣ing
upon the aggravation and heinousness of the fact, I perceived his vain confidence began to fall, and some meltings of heart appeared in him. He then began to lament with many tears his sin and misery, and asked me, if there might yet be hope for one that had destroyed himself, and shed his own blood. I replyed, the sin in∣deed is great, but not unpardonable; and if the Lord gave him repentancae unto life, and aith to apply Jesus Christ, it should be certainly pardoned to him: and finding him unacquainted with these things, I opened to him the nature and necessity of faith and repentance, which he greedily suckt in, and with great vehemency cryed to God, that he would work them upon his soul, and intreated me also to pray with him and for him, that it might be so. I prayed with him, and the Lord thawed his heart exceedingly in that duty: loth he was to part with me; but the duties of the day necessitating me to leave him, I briefly summed up what was most necessary in my parting counsel to him, and took my leave, ne∣ver expecting to see him more in this world. But beyond my own and all mens expectation, he con∣tinued all that day, and panted most ardently af∣ter Jesus Christ: no discourses pleased him, but Christ and faith; and in this frame I found him in the evening. He rejoiced greatly to see me again, and entreated me to continue my discourses upon these subjects; and after all told me, Sir, the Lord hath given me repentance for this sin▪ yea, and for every other sin. I see the Evil of sin now, so as I never saw it before. O I loath my self: I am a vile creature in my own eyes. I do also believe; Lord help my unbelJef. I am
heartily willing to take Christ upon his own terms. One thing only troubles me, I doubt this bloody sin will not be pardoned. Will Jesus Christ (said he) apply his blood to me, that have shed my own blood? I told him, Christ shed his blood even for them that with wicked hands had shed the blood of Christ; and that was a sin of deeper guilt than his. Well, (said he) I will cast my self upon Christ; let him do by me what he will. And so I parted with him that night. Next morning the wounds were to be opened; and then, the opinion of the Chirurgeons was, he would immediately expire. Accordingly, at his desire, I came that morn∣ing and found him in a most serious frame. I prayed with him, and then the wound in his sto∣mach was opened, but by this time the Ventricle it self was swoln out of the orifice of the wound, and lay like a livid discoloured Tripe upon his body, and was also cut through; so that all con∣cluded, it was impossible for him to live; how∣ever they stitcht the wound in the stomach, en∣larged th Orifice, and somented it, and wrought it again into his body, and so stitching up the skin, left him to the dispose of Providence. But so it was, that both the deep wound in his throat, and this in his stomach healed: and the more dangerous wound sin had made upon his soul, was, I trust, effectually healed also. I spent many hours with him in that sickness; and after his return home, received this account from Mr. Samuel Hardy, a Minister in that Town. Part whereof I shall transcribe.
Dear Sir, I Was much troubled at the sad Providence in your Town; but did much rejoice, that he fell into such hands for his body and soul. You have taken much pains with him, and I hope to good pur∣pose. I think, if ever a great and through work were done such a way, it is now; and if never the like, I am perswaded now it is. Never grow weary of such good works. One such Instance is (methinks) enough to make you to abound in the work of the Lord all your dayes, &c. O how unsearchable are the wayes of Provi∣dence, in leading men to Christ! Let none be encouraged by this to sin, that grace may abound. These are rare and singular Instances of the mercy of God, and such as no presumptuous sin∣ner can expect to find. It's only recited here, to the honour of Providence, which works for the recovery of sinners in wayes that we understand not. O what a fetch hath Providence beyond our Understandings! And as it orders very strange occasions to awaken and rouse souls at first, so it works no less wonderfully in carrying on the work to perfecti∣on; and this it doth two wayes. (1.) By quickning and reviving dying convi∣ctions and troubles for sin. Souls after their first awakening, are apt to lose the sense and impres∣sion of their first troubles for sin; but Providence is vigilant to prevent it; and doth effectually pre∣vent it sometimes, by directing the Minister to some discourse or passage, that shall fall as pat, as if the case of such a person had been studied by
him, and designedly spoken to. How often have I found this in the cases of many souls, who have professed they have stood amazed, to hear the ve∣ry thoughts of their hearts discovered by the Preacher, who knew nothing of them! Some∣times by directing them to some proper rousing Scripture, that suites their present case. And sometimes by suffering them to fall into some new sin, which shall awaken all their former troubles again, and put a new efficacy and activity into the Conscience. The world is full of Instances in all these cases, and because most Christians have experience of these things in themselves, it will be needless to recite them here. Search but a few years back, and you may remember, that according to this Account (at least, in some par∣ticulars) Providence ordered the matter with you. Have you not found some rod or other prepared by Providence, to rouze you out of your securi∣ty? Why, this is so common a thing with Chri∣stians, that they many times presage an affliction coming from the frames they find their own hearts in. (2.) It gives also great assistance to the work of the Spirit upon the soul, by ordering, supporting, relieving and cheering means, to prop up and comfort the soul, when it is over-burthened, and ready to sink in the deeps of troubles. I remember Mr. Bolton gives us one Instance, which fits both these cases, the reviving of convictJons, and seaso∣nable supports in the deeps of troubles. And it is of a person that by convictions had been fetcht off from his wicked companions, and entered into a reformed course of life; but after this, through the inticement of his old companions,
the subtilty of Satan, and corruption of his own heart, did again relapse into the wayes of sin. Then was Providentially brought to his view that Scripture, Prov. 1. 24, 25, 26, &c. this renewed his trouble; yea, aggravated it to a greater height than ever; insomuch that he could scarce∣ly think (as it seems by the relation) his sin could be pardoned. But in this plunge, that Text Luke 17. 4. was presented to him, which sweetly setled him in a sure and glorious peace. Nor can we here forget that miraculous work of Providence, in a time of great extremity, which was wrought for that good Gentlewoman Mrs. Honeywood, (and is somewhere mentioned by the same Author) who under a deep and sad desertion, refused and put off all comfort, seem∣ing to despair utterly of the grace and mercy of God. A worthy Minister being one day with her, and reasoning against her desperate conclu∣sions, she took a Venice-glass from the Table, and said, Sir, I am as sure to be damned, as this glass is to be broken; and therewith threw it forcibly to the ground; but to the astonishment of both▪ the glass remained whole and sound, which the Minister taking up with admiration, rebuked her presumption, and shewed her what a wonder Providence had wrought for her satisfaction, and it greatly altered the temper of her mind. O how unsearchable are his wayes! and his paths past finding out! Lo, these are part of his wayes; but how small a portion do we know of him?
ANd now suffer me to expostulate a little with thy soul Reader, hast thou been duly sensible of thy obligation to Providence, for this inestimable favour? O what hath it done for thee! there are divers kinds of mercies convey∣ed to men by the hand of Providence, but none like this: in all the Treasury of its benefits, none is found like this. Did it cast thee into the way of Conversion, and order the means and occasions of it for thee, when thou little thoughtest of any such thing? How dear and sweet, should the re∣membrance of it be to thy soul! Methinks it should astonish and melt you every time you re∣flect upon it. Such Mercies should never grow stale, or look like common things to you: for do but seriously consider the following parti∣culars. How surprizing the mercy was, which it per∣formed for you in that day. Providence had a design upon you, for your eternal good, which you understood not. The time of mercy was now fully come; the Decree was now ready to bring forth that mercy, with which it had gone big from Eternity, and its gracious design must be executed by the hand of Providence, so far as concerned the external means and instruments: and how aptly did it cause all things to fall in with that design, though you knew not the mean∣ing of it? Look over all the before mentioned Examples, and you shall see the blessed work of Conversion begun upon those souls, when they
minded it no more, than Saul did a Kingdom, that morning he went out to seek his Fathers Asses, 1 Sam 9. 3, 20. Providence might truly have said to you in that day, as Christ said to Peter, John 13. 7. What I do thou knowest not now, but hereafter thou shalt know it. Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts; but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his thoughts higher than ours, and his wayes than our wayes. Little did Zacheus think, when he climbed up into the Sycamore-tree, to see Christ as he passed that way, what a design of mercy Christ had upon him, who took thence the occasion of becoming both his Guest and Sa∣vJour, Luke 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. And as little did some of you think, what the aim of Providence was, when you went (some out of custom, others out of curiosity, if not worse ends) to hear such a Sermon. O how stupendious are the wayes of God! What a distinguishing and seasonable mercy was usher'd in by Providence in that day. It brought you to the means of salvation in a good hour. At that very nick of time, when the An∣gel troubled the Waters, you were brought to the Pool; to allude to that, John 5. 4. Now the accepted day was come, the Spirit was in the Or∣dinance, or Providence that converted you, and you were set in the way of it. It may be, you had heard many hundred Sermons before, but no∣thing would stick till now, because the hour was not come. The Lord did, as it were, call in the Word for such a man, such a woman; and Pro∣vidence said, Lord, here he is, I have brought him before thee. There were many others un∣der that Sermon, that received no such mercy.
You your selves had heard many before, but not to that advantage, as it is said, Luke 4. 27. There were many Lepers in Israel in the days of Elizeus, but to none of them was the Prophet sent, save unto Naaman the SyrJan. So there were ma∣ny poor unconverted souls beside you under the Word that day, and it may be, to none of them was salvation sent that day, but to you. O bles∣sed Providence, that set you in the way of mercy at that time! What a weighty and important mercy was Providentially directed to your souls that day. There are mercies of all sizes and kinds in the hands of Providence to dispense to the sons of men: its left hand is full of blessings, as well as its right. It hath health and riches, honours and pleasures, as well as Christ and Salvation to dispense. The world is full of its left hand fa∣vours; but the blessings of its right hand are in∣valuably precious, and few there be that receive them. It doth thousands of kind offices for men; but among them all, this is the chiefest, to lead and direct them to Christ. For consider, (1.) Of all mercies, this comes through most and greatest difficulties, Eph. 1. 19, 20. (2.) This is a spiritual mercy, excelling in dignity of nature all others, more than gold ex∣cels the dirt under your feet, Rev. 3. 18. One such gift, is worth thousands of other mercies. (3.) This is a mercy immediately slowing out of the fountain of Gods electing love, a mercy never dropt into any, but an Elect Vessel, 1 Thess. 1. 4, 5. (4.) This is a mercy, that infallibly secures Calvation; for as we may argue from Conversion to
Election, looking back, so from Conversion to Salvation, looking forward, Heb. 6. 9. (5.) Lastly, This is an Eternal mercy, that which will stick by you, when Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Estate, Honours, Health and Life shall fail thee, John 4. 14. O therefore set a special Mark upon that Pro∣vidence, that set you in the way of this mercy. It hath performed that for thee, which all the Ministers on Earth, and Angels in Heaven could never have performed. This is a Mercy, that puts weight and value into the smallest Circum∣stance that relates to it. The Fifth Performance of Providence. V. THus you hear, how instrumental Providence hath been, in ordering the Means and Oc∣casions of the greatest Mercies for your souls. Let us now take into consideration,Providen∣tial per∣formances with re∣spect to our Civil Calling. another excel∣lent Performance of Providence respecting the good of your bodies and souls too, in respect of that Imployment and Calling it hath ordered for you in this world; for it hath not only an Eye upon your well being in the world to come, but upon your well being in this world also; and that very much depends upon the Station and Vocation to which it calls you. Now the Providence of God with respect to our civil Callings, may be displayed very takingly in the following particulars.
In directing you to a Calling in your Youth, and not suffering you to live an idle, useless and sinful life, as many do, who are but burthens to the Earth, fruges consumere nati, the Wens of the body politick, serving only to disfigure and drein it, to eat what others earn. Sin brought in sweat, Gen. 3. 19. but now, not to sweat in∣creaseth sin, 2 Thess. 3. 12. He that lives idly, cannot live honestly; as is plainly enough inti∣mated, 1 Thess. 4. 11, 12. But when God puts men into a lawful Calling, wherein the labours of their hands or heads is sufficient for them, it is a very valuable mercy: for thereby they eat their own bread, 2 Thess. 3. 12. Many a sad Temptation is happily prevented; and they are ordinarily furnished by it, for works of mercy to others, and surely it is more blessed to give, than to receive. In ordering you to such Callings and Imploy∣ments in the world, as are, not only lawful in themselves, but most suitable to you. There be many persons imployed in sinful Trades and Arts, meerly to furnish other mens lusts: they do not only sin in their Imployments; but their very Imployments are sinful: they trade for Hell, and are Factors for the Devil. DemetrJus and the Crafts-men at Ephesus, got their Estates by make∣ing Shrines for DJana, Acts 19. 24, 25. (i. e.) little cases, or boxes with folding leaves, within which the Image of that Idol sate enshrined. These were carried about by the People in Pro∣cession, in honour of their Idol. And at this day, how many wicked Arts and Imployments are there invented, (and multitudes of persons main∣tained by them) meerly to gratifie the pride
and wantonness of a debauched age? Now to have an honest lawful imployment, wherein you do not dishonour God in benefiting your selves, is no small mercy. But if it be not only lawful in it self, but suited to your genJus and strength, there is a dou∣ble mercy in it. Some poor Creatures are en∣gaged in Callings, that eat up their time and strength, and make their lives very uncomfor∣table to them: they have not only spending and wasting Imployments in the world; but such as allow them little or no time for their general Cal∣ling: and yet all this doth but keep them and theirs alive. Oh therefore, if God have itted you with an honest Imployment, wherein you have Iess toil than others, and more time for Hea∣venly Exercises, ascribe this benefit to the special care of Providence for you. In setling you in such an Imployment and Cal∣ling in the world, as possibly neither your selves nor Parents could ever expect you should arrive to. There are among us such persons, as on this account are signally obliged to Divine Pro∣vidence. God hath put them into such a way, as neither they nor their Parents ever projected. For, look as the Flower-de-luce in the Campass, turns now this way, then that way, and never ceases moving, till it settle to the North point; just so it is in our setlement in the world. A Child is now designed for this, then for that, but at last setles in that way of Imployment which Provi∣dence designed him to. How strangely are things wheeled about by Providence! not what we, or our Parents, but what God designed shall take place. Amos was very meanly employed at
first, but God designed him for a more honoura∣ble and comfortable Calling, Amos 7. 14, 15. Da∣vid followed the Ewes, and likely never raised his thoughts to higher things in the dayes of his youth; but God made him the Royal Shepherd of a better flock, Psalm 78. 70, 71. Peter and Andrew were imployed as Fisher-men, but Christ calls them from that to an higher Calling, Matth. 4. 18, 19. to be fishers of men. Pareus when h was fourteen years old, was by the instigation of his Step-mother, placed with an Apothecary; but Providence so wrought, that he was taken off from that, and sitted for the Ministry; wherein he became a fruitful and eminent Instrument to the Church. James Andreas was by reason of his Fathers inability to keep him at School, de∣signed for a Carpenter; but was afterwards by the perswasion of friends, and assistance of the Church-stock sent to Stutgard, and thence to the Univer∣sity, and so arrived to a very eminent station of service to the Chruch. A master builder Oeco∣lampadJus was by his Father designed for a Mer∣chant; but his Mother by earnest entreaties, pre∣vailed to keep him at School: and this Man was a blessed Instrument in the reformation of Reli∣gion, I might easily cite multitudes of such In∣stances; but a taste may suffice. In securing your Estates from ruine, Job 1. 10. Hast thou not made an hedge about him, and all that he hath? This is the Enclosure of Providence, which secures to us, what by its favour we acquire in the way of honest industry. In making your Calling sufficient for you. It was the prayer of Moses fr the Tribe of Judah, Exod. 33. 7. Let his hands be sufficJent for him:
and it is no small mercy, if yours be so to you. Some there be that have work, but not strength to go through with it; others have strength, but no imployment for it. Some have hands, and work for them; but it's not sufficient for them and theirs. If God bless your labours, so as to give you and yours necessary supports, and com∣fort in the world by it, it's a choice Providence, and with all thankfulness to be acknowledged. Object. 1.Object. IF any that fear God shall complain, That although they have a Calling, yet it is an hard and laborious one, which takes up too much of their time, which they would gladly imploy in other, and better work. I answer, (1.) It's like,Sol. Wisdom of Providence foresaw this to be the most suitable and proper Imploy∣ment for you; and if you had more ease and rest, you might have more temptations than now you have: the strength and time which is now taken up in your daily labours, wherein you serve God, might otherwayes have been spent upon such lusts wherein you might have served the Devil. (2.) Hereby it may be, your health is the better preserved, and natural refreshments made the sweeter to you, Eccle. 5. 12. The sleep of a labouring man is sweet to him, whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich, will not suffer him to sleep. (3.) And as to the service of God, if your hearts be spiritual, you may enjoy much Com∣munion with God in your very Imployments, and you have some intervals and respits for that pur∣pose.
Have you not more spare hours, than you imploy to that end? Object 2.bject. 2. BVt all my labours will scarcely suffice, to procure me and mine the Necessa∣ries of life. I am kept short and low to what others are; and this is a sad affliction. Though the Wisdom of Providence hath or∣dered you a lower,. and poorer condition than others, yet (1.) Consider how many there be that are lower than you in the world: you have but little of the world; yet others have less. Read the description of those persons, Job 30. 4, &c. (2.) If God have given you but a small portion of the world; yet if you be godly, he hath promised never to forsake you, Heb. 13. 5 (3.) Providence hath ordered that condition for you, which is really best for your eternal good. If you had more of the world than you have, your heads and hearts might not be able to manage it to your advantage. A small Boat must have but a narrow Sail. You have not wanted hitherto the necessaries of life, and are commanded, having food and rayment (though none of the finest) to be therewith content. A little that a righteous man hath, is better than the riches of many wicked, Psal. 37. 16. better in the AcquisitJon, sweeter in the FruitJon, and more com∣fortable in the Account. Well then, if Providence hath so disposed of you all, that you can eat your own bread, and so advantagiously directed some of you to im∣ployments, that afford not only necessaries for
your selves and families, but an overplus for works of mercy to others, and all this brought about for you in a way you did not project; let God be owned, and honoured in this Providence. Will you not henceforth call him, My Father, the Guide of my youth? as it is Jer. 3. 4. Surely, it was the Lord that guided you to setle as you did in those dayes of your youth: You reap at this day, and may to your last day, the fruits of those early Providences in your youth. NOw see that you walk answerably to the obligations of Providence in this particu∣lar; and see to it in the fear of God, that you abuse not any of those things to his dishonour, which he hath wrought for your comfort. To prevent which, I will here drop a few needful Cautions, and shut up this particular. Be not slothful and idle in your VocatJons.1. Cautio It's said, Augustus built an Apragapolis, a City void of business; but I am sure God never erected any City, Town or Family to that end. The Com∣mand to Adam, Gen. 3. 19. no doubts reaches all his posterity: and Gospel-Commands back and second it upon Christians, Rom. 12. 11. and 1 Thess. 4. 11. If you be negligent, you cannot be innocent. And yet, Be not so intent upon your particular Callings,2. Cautio as to make them interfere with your general Calling. Beware you lose not your God in the Crowd and hurry of Earthly business. Mind that solemn warning, 1 Tim. 6. 9. But they that will be rich fall into TemptatJon, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destructJon and perditJon. The inhabitants of O Enoc, a dry Island near Athens, bestowed much labour to draw in a River to water it, and make it fruitful; but when the Sluces were opened, the waters slowed so abundantly, that it overflowed the Island, and drowned the Inhabitants. The application is obvious. It was an excellent say∣ing of Seneca, rebus non me trado, sed commodo. I don't give, but lend my self to business. Remember alwayes,. Caution the success of your Cal∣lings and earthly Imployments is by Divine bles∣sing, not humane diligence alone, Deut. 8. 18. Thou shalt remember the Lord they God; for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth. The Devil himself was so far Orthodox, as to acknowledge it, Job 1. 10, Hast not Thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side? Thou hast blessed the work of his hand, &c. Recommend therefore your affairs to God by prayer, according to Psal. 37. 4, 5. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. And touch not with that which you can∣not recommend to God by Prayer for a blessing. Be well satisfied in that Station and Imploy∣ment in which Providence hath placed you,. Caution and do not so much as wish your selves in another, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every man abide in the same Cal∣ling, wherein he was called. Providence is wiser than you, and you may be confident hath suited all things better to your Eternal good, than you could do, had you been left to your own option,
The Sixth Performance of Providence. VI. THus you see, the care Providence hath had over you in your youth, in respect of that Civil Imployment to which it guided us in those dayes. We will in the next place consider it as our Guide,Providen∣tial per∣formances with re∣spect to  our Civil Relations. and the Orderer of our RelatJons for us. That Providence hath a special hand in this mat∣ter, is evident both from Scripture assertions, and the acknowledgements of holy men, who in that great concernment of their lives, have still owned, and acknowledged the directing hand of Providence. Take an instance of both. The Scripture plainly asserts the dominion of Provi∣dence over this affair in Prov. 19. 14. A prudent Wife is from the Lord: and Prov. 18. 22. Whos. findeth a Wife, findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour of the Lord. So for Children, see Psal. 127. 3. Lo, Children are an heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the Womb is his reward. And it hath ever been the practice of holy men, to seek the Lord for direction and counsel, when they have been upon the change of their condition. No doubt but Abraham's encourage∣ment in that case was the fruit of prayer, Gen. 24. 7. His pious servant also, who was im∣ployed in that affair, did both earnestly seek counsel of God, Gen, 24. 12. and thankfully ac∣knowledge his gracious Providence in guiding it, Ver. 26, 27.
The same we may observe in Children, the fruit of marriage, 1 Sam. 1. 20. Luke 1. 13, 14. Now the Providence of God may be divers wayes displayed for the engaging of our hearts in love to the God of our mercies. (1.) There is very much of Providence seen in appointing the Parties each for other. In this, the Lord goes oftentimes beyond our thoughts and projections; yea, and oftentimes crosses mens desires and designs to their great advantage. Not what they fancy; but what his infinite wis∣dom judges best, and most beneficial for them takes place. Hence it is, that probabilities are so often dashed; and things remote and utterly improbable are brought about, in very strange and unaccountable methods of Providence. (2.) There is much of Providence seen in the harmony and agreeableness of tempers and dispositions; from whence a very great part of the tranquillity and comforts of our lives results: or at least, though natural tempers and educations did not so much harmonize before, yet they do so after they come under the Ordinance of God, Gen. 2. 24. They two shall be one flesh, not one only in respect of Gods institutJon, but one in re∣spect of love and affectJon, that those who so lately were meer strangers to each other, are now endeared to a degree beyond the nearest re∣lations in blood. Vbi supra, For this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. (3.) But especially, Providence is remarka∣ble, in making one instrumental to the eternal good of the other, I Cor. 7. 16. How knowest thou, O Wife, but thou maist save thy Husband? or
how knowest thou, O Man, whether thou shalt save thy Wife? Hence is that grave Exhortation to the Wives of unbelieving Husbands, 1 Pet. 3. 1. to win them by their conversation, which should be to them in stead of an ordinance. Or if both be gracious, then what singular as∣sistance and mutual help is hereby gained to the furtherance of their Eternal good? Whilst they live together as Heirs of the grace of life, I Pet. 3. 7. O blessed Providence! that directed such into so intimate relation on Earth, who shall inherit together the common SalvatJon in Heaven! (4.) How much of Providence is seen in Children the fruit of MarrJage? To have any Po∣sterity in the Earth, and not be left altogether as a dry tree: To have comfort and joy in them, is a special Providence, importing a special mer∣cy to us. To have the breaches made upon our Families repaired, is a Providence to be owned with a thankful heart. When God shall say to a man, as he speaks in another case to the Church, Isa. 49. 20. The Children which thou shalt have after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, the place is too strait for me, &c And these Providences will appear more af∣fectingly sweet and lovely to you, if you but compare its allotments to you, with what it hath allotted to many others in the world. For do but look abroad, and you shall find, (1.) Multitudes unequally yoked, to the im∣bittering of their lives, whose Relations are clogs and hinderances both in Temporals and Spirituals. Yea, we find an account in Scripture of gracious persons, a great part of whose com∣fort in this world hath been split upon this
Rock. Abigail was a discreet and vertuous W∣man, but very unsuitably matched to a churlish Nabal; see 1 Sam. 25. 25. What a temptation to the neglect of a known duty, prevail'd upon the renowned Moses, by the means of Zipporah his Wife? Exod. 4. 24, 25. David had his scoffing Michal, 2 Sam. 6. 20. And patient Job no small addition to all his other afflictions, from the Wife of his bosom, who should have been a support to him in the day of his trouble, Job 19. 17. No doubt, but God sanctifies such rods to his Peoples good. If Socrates knew how to improve his affliction in his Zantippe, to the increase of his patience; much more will they who converse with God under all Providences, whether sweet or bitter. Nevertheless this must be acknow∣ledged to be a sad stroke upon any person, and such as maims them upon the working hand, by unfitting them for duty, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and cuts off much of the comfort of life also. (2.) How many are there, who never enjoy the comfortable fruits of Marriage? but are de∣nyed the sight, at least, the enjoyment of Chil∣dren, Jer. 22. 30. Thus saith the Lord, write this man Childless, &c. or if they have Children, yet cannot enjoy them, Hosea 9. 12. Though they bring up Children, yet will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; who only bear for the grave, and have their expectations raised for a greater affliction to themselves. (3.) And it is no rare or unusual thing to see Children and near Relations the greatest Instruments of affliction to their Parents and Friends: so that after all their other sorrows
and troubles in the World, nearest Relations bring up the rear of sorrows (as One speaks) and prove greater griefs than any other.Mr. T. C. in his Isagog O how many Parents have complained with the Tree in the Fable, that their very hearts have been rived asunder with those Wedges that were cut out of their own bodies? What a grief was Esau to Isaac and Rabecka? Gen. 26. 34, 35. What a scourge were Absalom and Amnon to David? Well then, if God have set the solitary in Fa∣milJes, as it is Psal. 68. 6. built an house for the desolate, given you comfortable relations, which are springs of daily comfort and refreshment to you, you are upon many accounts engaged to walk answerably to these gracious Providences. And that you may understand wherein that deco∣rum and agreeable comportment with these Pro∣vidences consists, take up the sense of your duty in these brief hints. (1.) Ascribe to God the glory of all those Providential works which yield you comfort. You see a wise, directing, governing Providence, which hath disposed and ordered all things be∣yond your own projections and designs. The way of man is not in himself, nor is it in him that walketh to direct his own steps, Jer. 10. 23. Not what you projected, but what an higher counsel than yours determined, is come to pass. Good Jacob when God had made him the Father of a Family, ad∣mired God in the mercy, Gen. 32. 10. With my staff (said he) I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. And how doth this mer∣cy humble and melt him? I am not worthy of the least of all the mercJes, and of all the , which thou hast shewed unto thy servant.
Be exact in discharging the duties of those Re∣lations which so gracious a Providence hath led you into. Abuse not the effects of so much mer∣cy and love to you. The Lord expects praise, where ever you have comfort. This aggravated David's sin, that he should dare to abuse so great love and mercy, as God had shewn him in his Family Relations, 2. Sam. 12. 7, 8, 9. Improve Relations to the end Providence de∣signed them. Walk together as Co-heirs of the grace of life: study to be mutual blessings to each other: so walk in your Relations, that the parting day may be sweet. Death will shortly break up the Family; and then nothing but the sense of duty discharged, or the neglects par∣doned, will give comfort. The Seventh Performance of Providence. VII. YOu have heard how well Providence hath performed its part of you,providen∣ial provi∣ion for us nd ours. in planting you into families, who once were solitary. Now let us in the next place view another gracious performance of Providence for us, in making provisJon from time to time for us and our FamilJes. I the rather put these Providences together in this place, because I find the Scripture doth so, Psalm 107. 41. He setteth the poor on high from af∣flictJon, and maketh him familJes like a flock. You know the Promises God hath made to his People, Psal. 34. 10. The young LJons shall lack,
and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. And have you not also seen the constant performance of it? Cannot you give the same answer, if the same question were propounded to you that the Disciples did, Luke 22. 35. Since I sent you forth, lacked ye any thing? and they said, nothing. Can ye not with Jacob, call him, the God that fed you all your life long? Gen. 48. 15. Surely he hath given bread to them that fear him, and been ever mindful of his Cove∣nant, Psal. 111. 5. To display this Providence, we will consider it in the following particulars. (1.) The assiduity and constancy of the care of Providence for the Saints, Lam. 3. 23. His mercJes are new every morning. It is not the supply of one or two pressing needs, but all your wants, as they grow from day to day through all your dayes, Gen. 48. 15. The God that fed me all my life long. The care of Providence runs parallel with the line of life. See Isa. 46. 3, 4. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are born by me from the belly, which are carryed from the Womb: and even to your old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry. you: I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry, and will deliver you. So that as God bid Israel, Micah 6. 5. to remember from Shittim unto Gilgal, that they might know the faithfulness of the Lord; so would I perswade thee, Reader, to re∣cord the wayes of Providence, from first to last, throughout thy whole course of this day, that thou maist see what a God he hath been to thee.
(2.) The seasonableness, and opportuneness of its provisions for them: for so runs the promise, Isa. 41. 17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them; and so hath the performance of it been. And this hath been made good to di∣stressed Saints sometimes in a more ordinary way, God secretly blessing a little, and making it suf∣ficient for us and ours: Job tells us of the secret of God upon his Tabernacle, Job 29. 4. (i. e.) his secret blessing is in their Tabernacles; by reason whereof it is that they subsist; but it is in an unaccountable way that they do so. And some∣times in an extraordinary way it breaks forth for their supply. So you find in 2 Kings 17. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. the Cruse and Barrel sail not. Mr. Samuel Clarke,, Vol. . 342. in the Life of that painful and humble servant of Christ Mr. John Fox, re∣cords a memorable Instance of Providence, and it is this, That towards the end of King Henry the Eighth his Reign he went to London, where he quickly spent that little his friends had given him, or he had acquired by his own diligence, and began to be in great want. As one day he sate in Paul's Church, spent with long fasting▪ his countenance thin, and his eyes hollow, aft the ghastful manner of dying men, every one shun∣ning a Spectacle of so much horror: There came one to him, whom he had never seen be∣fore, and thrust an untold summ of money into his hand, bidding him, be of good cheer, and accept that small gift in good part from his Countrey-man; and that he should make much of himself, for that within a few dayes new hopes
were at hand, and a more certain condition of livelihood. Three dayes after the Dutchess of Richmond sent for him to live in her house, and be Tutor to the Earl of Surrey's Children, then under her care. Mr. Isaac Ambrose a worthy Divine, whose la∣bours have made him acceptable to his genera∣tJon, in his Epistle to the Earl of Bedford pre∣fixed to his Last things, gives a pregnant Instance in his own case; his words are these; For mine own part, (saith he) however the Lord hath seen cause to give me but a poor pittance of outward things, for which I bless his name; yet in the income thereof, I have many times observed so much of his peculiar Providence, that thereby they have been very much sweetned, and my heart hath been raised to ad∣mire his grace. When of late under an hard di∣spensation (which I judge not meet to mention) wherein I suffered conscientiously) all streams of wont∣ed supplyes being stopt, the waters of relief for my self and family did run low▪ I went to bed with some staggerings and doubtings of the Fountains let∣ting out it self for our refreshing; but e're I did awake in the morning, a Letter was brought to my bed side, which was signed by a choice friend Mr. Anthony Ash, which reported some unexpected breakings out of Gods goodness for my comfort. These are some of his lines—Your God who hath given you an heart thankfully to record your experi∣ences of his goodness, doth renew experiences for your encouragement. Now I shall report one, which will raise your spirit toward the God of your mer∣cies. Whereupon he sweetly concludes, One morsel of Gods provision, especially when it comes in un∣expected and upon prayer, when wants are most, will
be more sweet to a spirituall relish, than all former enjoyments were. (3.) The Wisdom of Providence in our pro∣visions. And this is discovered in two things: (1.) In proportioning the quantity, not satisfying our extravagent wishes, but answering our real needs; consulting our wants, not our wantonness, Phil. 4. 19. My God shall supply all your wants; and this hath exactly suited the wishes of the best and wisest men, who desired no more at its hand. So. Jacob, Gen. 28. 20. and Agur, Prov. 30. 8, 9. Wise Providence considers our condition as Pil∣grims and Strangers, and so allots the VJaticum provision, that is needful for our passage home. It knows the mischievous influence of fulness and redundancy upon most men, though sanctified; and how apt it is to make them remiss, and for∣getful of God, Deut. 6. 12. that their hearts, like the Moon, suffers an Eclipse when it is at the full; and so ats and orders all to their best ad∣vantage (2.) Its Wisdom is much discovered in the manner of dispensing our portion to us. It many times suffers our wants to pinch hard, and many scars to arise, out of design to magnifie the care and love of God in the supply, Deut. 8. 3. Providence so orders the case, that faith and prayer coming betwixt our wants and supplies, the goodness of God may be the more magnified in our eyes thereby. And now let me beg you to consider the good hand of Providence, that hath provided for, and suitably supplyed you and yours all your dayes, and never failed you hitherto: and labour to walk suitably to your experiences of such mercies. In order whereunto, let me press
a few suitable Cautions upon you. Beware, that you forget not the care and kindness of Providence which your eyes have seen in so many fruits and experiences thereof. It was Gods charge against Israel, Psal. 106. 3. that they soon forgat his wondrous works. A bad heart and a slippery memory, deprive men of the com∣fort of many mercies, and defraud God of the glory due for them. Do not distrust Providence in future exigen∣cies. Thus they did, Psal. 78. 20. Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed: can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? How unreasonable and absurd are these queries of unbelief, especially af∣ter their eyes had seen the power of God in such extraordinary effects? Do not murmur and regret under new straits. This is a vile temper; and yet how incident to us, when wants press hard upon us! Ah! did we but rightly understand what the demerit of sin is, we would rather admire the bounty of God, than complain of the strait-handedness of Provi∣dence. And if we did but consider, that there lyes upon God no obligation of Justice or Gra∣titude to reward any of our duties, it would cure our murmurs, Gen. 32. 10. Do not shew the least discontent at the lot and portion Providence carves out to you. O that you would be well pleased and satisfied with all its appointments. Say as Psal. 16. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage. Surely that is best for you, which Providence hath appointed, and one day you your selves will judge it so to be.
Do not neglect Prayer when straits befall you. You see it's Providence dispenses all, you live up∣on it; therefore apply your selves to God in the times of need. This is evidently included in the Promise, Isa. 41. 17. as well as expressed in the Command, Phil. 4. 6. Remember God, and he will not forget you. Do not distract your hearts with sinful cares, Matth. 6. 25, 26. Consider the fowls of the Air, (saith Christ) not the fowls at the Door, that are daily fed by hand; but those of the Air, that know not where to have the next meal; and yet God provides for them. Remember your relation to Christ, and his engagements by pro∣mise to you, and by these things work your hearts to satisfaction and content with all the allot∣ments of Providence. The Eighth Performance of Providence. VIII. THe next great advantage and mercy the Saints receive from the hand of Providence,roviden∣al per∣rmances  our reserva∣on from  power  Tem∣tation. is in their preservatJon from the snares, and tempta∣tJons of sin, by its preventing care over them. That Providence wards off many a deadly stroke of Temptation, and puts by many a mortal thrust which Satan makes at our souls, is a truth as manifest as the light that shineth. This is in∣cluded in that promise, 1 Cor. 10. 13. God will with the temptatJon make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Providence gives an out-let for the souls escape, when it is shut up into the
dangerous straits of Temptation. There are two eminent wayes whereby the force and effica∣cacy of temptation is broken in believers. One is by the operation of internal grace, Gal. 5. 17. The Spirit lusteth against the flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would (i. e.) Sancti∣fication gives sin a miscarrying womb after it hath conceived in the soul. The other way, is by the external working of Providence; and of this I am here engaged to speak. The Providence of God is the great Obex and hinderance to a world of sin, which else would break forth like an overflowing flood from our corrupt natures. It prevents abundance of sin, which else wicked men would commit, Gen. 19. 11. The Sodomites were greedily pursuing their lusts: God providentially hinders it, by smiting them blind. Jeroboam intends to smite the Prophet; Providence interpos'd, and wither'd his arm, 1 Kings 13. 4. Thus you see, when wicked men have contrived, and are ready to execute their wickedness, Providence claps on its manacles, that their hands cannot perform their enterprises, as it is Job 5. 12. And so much corruption there remains in good men, that they would certainly plunge themselves under much more guilt than they do, if Providence did not take greater care of them than they do of themselves: for though they make con∣science of keeping themselves, and daily watch their hearts and wayes, yet such is the deceitful∣ness of sin, that if Providence did not lay blocks in their way, it would (more frequently than it doth) entangle and defile them. And this it doth divers wayes.
(1.) Sometimes by stirring up others to in¦terpose with seasonable counsels, which effectu∣ally disswade them from prosecuting an evil design. Thus Abigail meets David in the nick of time, and disswades him from his evil pur∣pose, 1 Sam. 25. 34. And I find it recorded (as on another account was noted before) of that holy man Mr. Dod, that being late at night in his Study, he was strongly moved (though at an unseasonable hour) to visit a Gentleman of his acquaintance; and not knowing what might be the design of Providence therein, he obeyed, and went; when he came to the house, after a ew knocks at the door, the Gentleman himself came to him, and askt him, whether he had any business to him: Mr. Dod answered, no: but that he could not be quiet till he had seen him. O Sir, (reply'd the Gentleman,) you are sent of God at this hour, for just now (and with that, takes the Halter out of his pokcet,) I was going to destroy my self. And thus was the mischief prevented. (2.) Sometimes by hindering the Means and Instruments, whereby the Evil it self is prevent∣ed. Thus, when good Jehosaphat had joyned himself with that wicked King AhazJah, to build Ships at EzJon-Gaber to go to Tarshish, God pre∣vents the design, by breaking the Ships with a storm, as you read, 2 Chron. 20. 35, 36, 37. We find also in the Life of Mr. Bolton, written by Mr. Bagshaw, That whilst he was in Oxford, he had familiar acquaintance with Mr. Anderton, a good Scholar, but a strong Papist, who know∣ing Mr. Bolton's good parts, and perceiving that he was in some outward wants, took this advan∣tage,
and used many arguments to perswade him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and to go over with him to the English Seminary, assu∣ring him he should be furnished with all necessa∣ries, and have gold enough. Mr. Bolton being at that time, poor in mind and purse, accepted the motion, and a day and place was appointed in Lancashire, where they should meet and take ship∣ping and be gone: but Mr. Anderton came not, and so he escaped the share. (3.) Sometimes by laying some strong af∣fliction upon the body,Some af∣flictions are  pu∣nishments, others are ,  chastise∣ments, and these are both , tryals of grace, and , preserva∣tives from sin. to prevent a worse evil. And this is the meaning of Hosea 2. 6. I will hedge up her way with thorns. Thus Basil was a long time exercised with a violent head-ach, which (as he observed) was used by Providence to pre∣vent Lust. Paul had a thorn in the flesh, a mes∣senger of Satan sent to busset him: and this af∣fliction, whatever it was, was ordained to pre∣vent pride in him, 2 Cor. 12. 7. (4.) Sometimes sin is prevented in the Saints, by the better information of their minds at the Sacred Oracles of God. Thus, when sinful moti∣ons began to rise in David's mind, from the pro∣sperity of the wicked, and his own afflicted state, and grew to that height, that he began to think, all he had done in the way of religion, was little better than lost labour; he is set right again, and the temptation dissolved, by going into the Sanctuary, where God shewed him how to take new measures of persons and things; to judge them by their ends and issues, not their present appearances, Psal. 73. 12, 13, 17.
(5.) And sometimes the Providence of God prevents the sins of his people, by removing them out of the way of Temptations by death. In which sense we may understand that Text, Isa. 57. 1. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come; the evil of Sin as well as Sufferings. When the Lord sees his people low spirited, and not able to grapple with strong tryals and temptati∣ons which are drawing on, it is with respect to them a merciful Providence, to be disbanded by death, and set out of harms way. Now consider, and admire the Providence of God, O ye Saints, who hath had more care of your souls, than ever ye had of them. Had not the Providence of God thus wrought for you in a way of prevention, it may be you had this day been so many Magor Missabibs. How was the heart of David melted under that preventing Providence fore-mentioned in 1 Sam. 25. 34. He blesses the Lord, the Instrument, and the Counsel by which his soul was preserved from sin. Do but seriously bethink your selves of a few particulars about this case. As, (1.) How your corrupt natures have often impetuously hurried you on towards sin, so that all the inherent grace you had, could not withstand its force, if Providence had not prevented it in some such method as you have heard, Jam. 1. 14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed. You found your selves but feathers in the wind of temptation. (2.) How near you have been brought to the brink of sin, and yet saved by a merciful hand of Providence. May you not say with him in Prov. 5. 14. I was almost in the midst of all evil:
or as Psal. 73. 2. My feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slidden. O merciful Provi∣dence! that stept in so opportunely to your relief. (3.) How many have been suffered to fall by the hand of Temptations to the reproach of Re∣ligion, and wounding of their own Consciences, to that degree, that they have never recovered former peace again; but lived in the world de∣void of comfort to their dying day? (4.) How woful your case had been, if the Lord had not mercifully saved you from many thousand temptations, that have assaulted you? I tell you, you cannot estimate the mercies you possess by means of such Providences. Are your names sweet, and your Consciences peaceful, two mercies as dear to you as your two eyes? Why surely, you owe them, if not wholly, yet in great measure, to the aids and assistances Provi∣dence hath given you all along the way you have passed through the dangerous tempting World to this day. Walk therefore suitably to this Obligation of Providence also: and see, (1.) That you thankfully own it. Don't impute your escapes from sin to accidents, or to your own watchfulness or wisdom. (2.) See that you tempt not Providence on the other hand, by an irregular relyance upon its care over you, without taking all due care of your selves. Keep your selves in the love of God, Jude 21. Keep your hearts with all diligence, Prov. 4. 23. Though Providence keep you, yet it is in the way of your duty.
The Ninth Performance of Providence. IX. THus you see what care Providence hath had over your souls,Providen∣ial pre∣entions of bodily angers. in preventing the spiritual dangers and miserJes that else would have befallen you in the way of temptatJons: in the next place I will shew you, that it hath been no less careful for your bodJes,Psal. 17. 8. Thou keep∣st me as he apple f thine eye. The eye ath five Tunicks  guard it gainst danger. (1.) Ara∣ia tunica, ike a Spiders web. (2.) Retiformis, like a net. (3.) Uvea, like a ber∣y. (4.) Cornea, like an horn. (5.) Adnata tunica, the cover or lid of the eye; here is guard upon guard, resembling the various wayes Providence hath to secure us from ruine. and with how great tenderness it hath car∣rJed them in its arms through innumerable hazards▪ and dangers also. He is called the keeper of Israel that never slumbereth nor sleepeth, Psal. 121. 4. the preserve of men, Job. 7. 20. To display the glory of this Providence before you, let us take into consideration, The perils into which the best of men sometimes fall, and the way and means by which Providence preserves them in those dangers. There are manifold hazards into which we are often cast in this World. The Apostle Paul gives us a general account of his dangers, in 2 Cor. 11. 26. And how great a wonder is it, that our life hath not been extinguished in some of those dangers we have been in? For,
(1.) Have not some of us fallen, and that often into very dangerous sicknesses and diseases, in which we have approached to the very brink of the grave? and have or might have said with HezekJah,See Job 33. 18, 19, 20, 21. & 28. Isa. 38. 10. I said in the cutting off of my dayes, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years. Have we not often had the sentence of death in our selves? and our bodies at that time been like a leaky Ship in a storm (as One aptly resembles it) that hath taken in water on every side,Mr. T. Goo∣win in his Aggrava∣tion of sin against mercy, p. 30. till it was rea∣dy to sink? Yet hath God preserved, careened, and lanched us out again as well as ever. Oh what a wonder is it, that such a crazy body should be preserved for so many years, and sur∣vive so many dangers! Surely, it is not more admirable to see a Venice-glass pass from hand to hand in continual use for forty or fifty years,The Eye is but a small part of the body, yet Physicians reckon no less than thirty dis∣eases incident to it. Nascuntur in o leucoma, glaucoma, lippitudo, xerophthalmJa, sicus, lithJasis, epiphora & trignita id genus vitJa. and still to remain whole, notwithstanding many knocks and falls it hath had. If you enjoy health or recover out of sicknesses, it is because he puts none of these diseases upon thee, or because he is the Lord thy PhysicJan, Exod. 125. 26. (2.) And how many deadly dangers hath his hand rescued some of you from, in those years of confusion and publick calamity, when the Sword was bathed in blood, and made horrid slaughter, when it may be, your lives were of∣ten given you for a prey? This David put a spe∣cial remarque upon, Psal. 140. 7. O God the Lord, the strength of my salvatJon; thou hast covered my head in the day of Battel.
Beza being in France in the first Civil War, and there tossed up and down for two and twenty months, recorded six hundred deliverances from dangers in that space, for which he solemnly gave God thanks in his last Testament. If the Sword destroyed you not, it was because God did not give it a Commission so to do. (3.) Many of you have seen wonders of salva∣tion upon the deeps, where the hand of God hath been signally stretched forth for your rescue and deliverance. This is elegantly expressed in Psal 107. 23, 24▪ 25, 26, 27. (which I haveSee my Seaman's Companion, p. 41. else∣where opened at large) concerning which, you may say in a proper sense, what the Psalmist doth metaphorically, Psal. 124. 1. & 4. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul. To see men that have spent so many years upon the Seas, (where your lives have continually hang∣ed in suspense before you) attain to your years, when you could neither be reckon'd among the living nor the dead (as Seamen are not) Oh, what cause have you to adore your great pre∣server! Many thousands of your Companions are gone down, and you yet here to praose the Lord among the Living. You have bordered nearer to Eternity all you dayes than others, and often been in eminent perils upon the Seas, sure∣ly such, and so many Salvations call aloud upon you for most thankful acknowledgements. (4.) To conclude, how innumerable hazards and accidents, (the least of which hath cut off others) hath God carried us all through! I think I may safely say, your privative and positive mercies of this kind are more in number than the
hairs of your heads. Many thousands of these dangers we never saw, nor were made particu∣larly sensible of; but though we saw them not, our God did, and brought us out of danger, be∣fore he brought us into fear. Some have been evident to us, and those so remarkable, that we cannot think, or speak of them to this day, but our souls are freshly affected with those mercies. It is recorded of our famous Jewell,Clark's Lives, p. 262. that about the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, the Inquisition taking hold of him in Oxford, he fled to London by night; but providentially losing the Road, he escaped the Inquisitors who pursued him: however, he fell that night into another eminent hazard of life, for wandering up and down in the snow, he fainted, and lay starv∣ing in the way, panting and labouring for life, at which time Mr. Latimer's servant found and saved him. It were easie to multiply Examples in this kind, Histories abounding with them; but I think there are few of us, but are furnisht out of our own experience abundantly; so that I shall rather chuse to press home the sense of these Providences upon you, in order to a suita∣ble return to the God of your mercies for them, than add more Instances of this kind. To this purpose, I desire you seriously to weigh the fol∣lowing particulars. (1.) Consider what you owe to Providence for your protection, by which your life hath been protracted unto this day, with the usefulness and comfort thereof. Look abroad in the world, and you may daily see some in every place, who
are Objects of pity, bereaved by sad accidents of all the comforts of life,The learn∣ed Alsted sets him∣self to enumerate the mani∣fold ha∣zards through which the life of man is carrJed in the hand of Provi∣dence, in Theol. Catechet. p. 191, 192, &c. and pJously concludes in these words, Denique, qud ab innumeris malis, quae ab omnibus creaturis omni tempore tibi impendent, mirabiliter liberais; in his omnibus inquam, quae simus rebro evenire solita, ac proinde it a se habent, ut nobis quoque possint evenire, solam Dei providentiam debes suspicere & praedicare. whilst in the mean time Providence hath tenderly preserved you, keeping all your bones, so that not one of them is broken, Psal. 34. 20. Is not the Elegant and Comely Structure of thy Body spoiled, thy members d∣storted, or made so many seats of Torment, the usefulness of any part deprived? why, this is be∣cause Providence never quitted its hand of thee since thou camest out of the womb, but with a watchful eye and tender hand hath guarded thee in every place, and kept thee as its charge. (2.) Consider, how every member which hath been so tenderly kept, hath nevertheless been an Instrument of sin against the Lord; and that, not only in the dayes of your unregeneracy, when ye yJelded your members as Instruments of unrighte∣ousess unto sin, (as the Apostle speaks in Rom. 6. 13.) but even since you gave them up in Covenant unto the Lord, as dedicated Instruments to his service: and yet how tender hath Provi∣dence been over them! You have often provo∣ked him to afflict you in every part, and lay pe∣nal evil upon every member that hath been in∣strumental in moral evil; but O how great have his compassions been towards you, and his pati∣ence admirable! (3.) Consider, what is the aim of Providence in all the tender care it hath manifested for you;
why doth it protect you so assiduously, and suffer no evil to befall you? Is it not that you should imploy your bodies for God, and cheerfully ap∣ply your selves to that service he hath called you to? Doubtless, this is the end and level of these mercies; for else to what purpose are they af∣forded you? Your bodies are a part of Christs purchase, as well as your souls, 1 Cor. 6. 19. They are committed to the charge and Tutelage of Angels, Heb. 1. 14. who have performed many services for them. They are dedicated by your selves to the Lord, and that upon the highest account, Rom. 12. 1. They have alrea∣dy been the subjects of manifold mercies in this world, Psal. 35. 10. and shall partake of singu∣la glory and happiness in the world to come, Phil. 3. 21. And shall they not then be employ∣ed, yea, cheerfully worn out in his service? How reasonable is it they should be so? Why are they so tenderly preserved by God, if they must not be used for God?
The Tenth Performance of Providence. X. YOu have heard many and great things per∣forme for you by Divine Providence,viden∣ Assi∣ces in  work  Mortifi∣on in the former particulars; but there is an eminent favour it bestows on the Saints, which hath not yet been considered, and indeed is too little minded by us, and that is, The Aid and assistance it gives the people of God in the great work of MortificatJon. Mortification of our sinful affections and pas∣sions, is the one half of our Sanctification, Rom. 6. 11. dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God. It's the great Evidence of our Interest in Christ. See Gal. 5. 24. Rom. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. It's our safety in the hour of Temptation. The corruptions in the world are through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Our Instrumental fitness for service, depends much upon it, 2 Tim. 2. 21. John 15. 2. How great a service to our souls therefore must that be, by which this blessed work is carried on up∣on them? Now there are two Means or Instruments im∣ployed in this work. The Spirit, who effects it internally, Rom. 8. 13. And Providence, which as∣sists it externally. The Spirit indeed is the prin∣cipal Agent, upon whose operation, the success of this work depends; and all the Providences in the world can never effect it without him.
But these are secondary and subordinate means, which by the blessing of the Spirit upon them, have a great stroke in the work. How they are so serviceable to this end and purpose, I shall open in the following account. (1.) More generally. The most wise God orders the dispensations of Providence in a bles∣sed subordination to the work of his Spirit. There is a sweet harmony betwixt them in their distinct workings. They all meet in that one blessed issue which God hath by the counsel of his Will directed them to, Eph. 1. 11. Rom. 8. 28. Hence it is, that the Spirit is said to be in, and order the motions of the wheels of Providence, Ezek. 1. 20. and so they move together by con∣sent. Now, one great part of the Spirit's inter∣nal work, being to destroy sin in the people of God; see how conformable to his design external Providences are steer'd and order'd in the fol∣lowing particulars. (1.) There is in all the regenerate a strong propension and inclination to sin, and in that lyes a principal part of the power of sin. Of this Paul sadly complains, Rom. 7. 23. But I see another law in my members▪ warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members: and every be∣liever daily inds it to his grief. O 'tis hard, 'tis hard to forbear those things that grieve God. God hath made an hedge about us, and fenced us against sin by his Laws; but there is a prone∣ness in nature to break over the hedge, and that against the very reluctations of the Spirit of God in us. Now, see in this case, the concurrence and assistance of Providence, for the prevention
of sin; look, as the Spirit internally resists those sinful inclinations, so Providence externally layes barrs and blocks in our way to hinder and pre∣vent sin: and this is the meaning of those places lately cited, Hosea 2. 6. & 2 Cor. 12. 7. So Job 33. 17, 18, 19. There is many a bodily distem∣per inflicted on this very score, to be a clog to prevent sin: Oh bear them patiently upon this consideration. Basil was orely grieved with an inveterate head-ach, he earnestly prayes, it might be removed; God removed it: but no sooner was he freed of this clog, but he felt the inordi∣nate motions of lust; which made him pray for his head-ach again. So it might be with many of us, if our clogs were off. A Question may be moved here,. Whether it be the genJus and property of a gracJous spirit, to for∣bear sin, because of the rod of afflictJon? They have surely higher motives and nobler principles than these. This is the temper of a carnal and sla∣vish spirit. Indeed it is so, when this is the sole or prin∣cipal restraint from sin: when a man abhorrs not sin, because of the intrinsick ilth, but only be∣cause of the troublesome consequents and effects. But this is vastly different from the case of the Saints under sanctified afflictions; for as they have highr motives and nobler principles, so they have lower and more sensible ones too; and these are, in their kind and place, very useful to them. (2.) Besides, you must know, that afflicti∣ons work in another way upon gracious hearts to restrain them from sin, or warn them against sin, thn they do upon others. It is not so much
the smart of the rod which they feel, as the to∣kens of Gods displeasure, which affrights and scares them, Job 10. 17. Thous renewest thy wit∣nesses against me, &c. and this is that which prin∣cipally affects them. See Psal. 6. 1. O Lord, re∣buke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure: and Jer. 10. 24. O Lord, cor∣rect me, but with judgement, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing: and surely this is no low and common argument. (2.) Notwithstanding this double sence of Gods command, and preventive afflictions, yet sin is too hard for the best of men: their cor∣ruptions carry them through all to sin. And when it is so, not only doth the Spirit work internally, but Providence also works externally in order to their reductJon. The wayes of sin are not only made bitter unto them, by the remorse of Con∣science, but by those afflictive rods upon the out∣ward man, with which God also follows it; and in both these respects, I find that place expound∣ed, Eccles. 10. 8. Whoso breaketh an hedge, a Ser∣pent shall bite him. If, as some expound it, the hedge be the Law of God, then the Serpent is the remorse of Conscience, and the sharp teeth of af∣flictJon, which he shall quickly feel, if he be one that belongs to God. The design and aim of these afflictive Provi∣dences, is to purge and cleanse them from that pollution into which temptations have plunged them, Isa. 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin. To the same purpose is that place, Psal. 119. 67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. These afflictions have
the same use and end to our souls, that frosty weather hath upon those clothes that are laid a bleaching; they alter the hue, and make it whiter, which seems to be the allusion in those words, Dan. 11. 35. And some of them of under∣standing shall fall to try them, and to purge, and to make them white. And here it may be querJed,. Upon what account afflictions are said to purge away the iniquities of the Saints. Is it not unwarrantable, and very disho∣nourable to Christ, to attribute that to affliction, which is the peculiar honour of his blood? It is confessed,. that the blood of Christ is the only Lavatory, or Fountain opened for sin, and that no afflictions how many, or strong, or con∣tinual soever they be, can in themselves purge away the pollution of sin, as we see in wicked men, who are afflicted and afflicted, and again afflicted; and yet, nevertheless sinful: and the Torments of Hell, how extream, universal and continual soever they are, yet shall never fetch out the stain of one sin. But yet, this hinders not, but that a sanctiied affliction, may in the efficacy and vertue of Christs blood, produce such blessed effects upon the soul. Though a Cross without a Christ, never did any man good, yet thousands have been beholden to the Cross, as it hath wrought in the vertue of his death for their good. And this is the case of those souls that this discourse is concerned about. (3.) We find the best hearts, if God bestow any comfortable enjoyment upon them, too ap to be over-heated in their affections towards it▪
and to be too much taken up with these outward comforts. This also sheweth the great power and strength of corruption in the people of God, and must by some means or other be mortiied in them. This was the case of HezekJah, his heart was too much affected with his treasures; so that he could not hide a vain-glorious temper, as you find Isa. 39. 2. and so good David, Psal. 30. 7. he thought his Mountain, (i.e. his Kingdom, and the splendour and glory of his present state) had stood so fast, that it should never be moved. The same good man, how did he let out his heart and affections upon his beautiful Son Absa∣lom? as appears by the doleful lamentation he made at his death, prizing him above his own life, which was a thousand times more worth than he. So Jonah, when God raised up a Gourd for him to shelter him from the Sun, how excessively was he taken with it, and was exceedingly glad of it? But will God suffer things to lye thus? Shall the Creature puoin, and draw away our affe∣ctions from him? No, this is our corruption, and God will purge it. And to this end he sends forth Providence to smite those Creatures, on which our affections are either inordinately or excessively let out, or else to turn them into rods, and smite us by them. s HezekJah too much pued up with his full Exchequer? Why, those very BabylonJans to whom he boasted of it, shall empty it, and make a prey of it, Isa. 39. 6. Is David hugging himself in a fond conceit of
the stability of his Earthly Splendor? Lo, how soon God beclouds all, Psal. 30. 7. Is Absalom doted on, and crept too far into his good Fathers heart? this shall be the Son of his sorrow, that shall seek after his Fathers life. Is Jonah so transported with his Gourd? God will prepare a Worm to smite it, Jonah 4. 6, 7. How many Husbands, Wives and Children hath Providence smitten upon this very account? It might have spared them longer, if they had been loved more regularly, and moderately. This hath blasted many an Estate, and hopeful project; and it is a merciful dispensation for our good. (4.) The strength of our unmortified Cor∣ruption shews it self in our pride, and the swel∣ling vanity of our hearts when we have a name and esteem among men; when we are applauded and honoured, when we are admired for any gift or excellency that is in us, this draws forth the pride of the heart, and shews the vanity that is in it. So you read, Prov. 27. 21. As the ining pot for silver, and the urnace for▪ gold, so is a man to his praise: (i.e.) as the ornace will discover what dross is in the metal when it is melted, so will praise and commendations, discover what pride is in the heart of him that receives them. This made a good man say, He that praises me, wounds me. And which is more strange, this cor∣ruption may be felt in the heart, even when the last breath is ready to expire. It was the saying of one of the German Divines, when those about him recounted for his encouragement the many services he had done for God, auferte ignem (saith he) adhuc enim paleas habeo. Take away the sire,
for there is still the chaff of pride in me. To crucifie this corruption Providence takes off the bridle of restraint from ungodly men, and sometimes permits them to traduce the names of Gods servants, as Shimei did David's. Yea, they shall fall into disesteem among their friends, as Paul did among the CorinthJans; and all this to keep down the swelling of their spirits at the sense of those excellencies that are in them: The design of these Providences being nothing else, but to hide pride from man. Yea, it deserves a spe∣cial remarque, that when some good men have been engaged in a publick and eminent work, and have therein, it may be, too much sought their own applause, God hath withheld usual as∣sistance at such times from them, and caused them to salter so in their work, that they have come off with shame and pity at such times, how ready and presential soever they have been at other times. It were easie to give divers remarkable examples to confirm this Observation. But I pass on. (5.) The corruption of the heart shews it self, in raising up great expectations to our selves from the Creature, and projecting abundance of felicity and contentment from some promising and hopeful enjoyments we have in the world. This we find to have been the case of holy Job in the dayes of his prosperity, Job 28. 19. Then I said, I shall dye in my nest, I shall multiply my dayes as the sand. But how soon were all these expe∣ctaions dasht by a gloomy Providence, that be∣nighted him in the Noon-tide of his prosperity: and all this for his good, to take off his heart more fully from creature expectations. We
often find, the best men to over-reckon themselves in worldly things, and over-act their confidences about them. They that have great and well-grounded expectations from Heaven, may have too great and ungrounded expectations from the Earth. But when it is so, it's very usual for Providence to undermine their Earthly hopes, and convince them by experience how vain they are. Thus Haggai 1. 9. the peoples hearts were intently set upon prosperous Providences, full Harvests, and great Increase; whilst in the mean while no regard was had to the Worship of God, and the things of his House; therefore Providence blasts their hopes, and brings them to little. (6.) Corruption discovers it self in depen∣dance upon Creature comforts, and sensible props. Oh how apt are the best men, to lean upon these things, and stay themselves upon them! Thus did Israel stay themselves upon Egypt, as a feeble man would lean upon his staff; but God suffered it both to fail them, and wound them, Ezek. 29. 6, 7, 8. So for single persons, how apt are they to depend upon their sensible supports? Thus we lean on our Relations, and the inward thoughts of our hearts are, that they shall be to us so many springs of comfort to refresh us throughout our lives; but God will shew us by his Providence our mistake and error in these things. Thus an Husband is smitten, to draw the soul of a Wife nearer to God in dependence upon him, 1 Tim. 5. 5. So for Children, we are apt to say of this or that Child, as Lamech of Noah, Gen.5. 29. This same shall comfort us; but the wind passes over these slowers and they are
withered, to teach us, that our happiness is not bound up in these enjoyments. So for our Estates, when the world smiles upon us, and we have got a warm nest, how do we prophesie of rest and peace in those acquisitions, minding, with good Baruch, great things for our selves; but Providence by a particular or general calami∣ty over-turns our projects, as Jer. 45. 4, 5. and all this to reduce our hearts from the Creature, to God our only rest. (7.) Corruption discovers its strength in good men, by their adherence to things below, and lothness to go hence. This often proceeds from the engaging enjoyments and pleasant fru∣itions we have here below. Providence mortiies this inclination in the Saints, (1.) By killing those ensnaring comforts before-hand, making all or most of our pleasant things to dye before us. (2.) By imbittering this world to us, by the trou∣bles of it, (3.) By making life undesirable, through the pains and infirmities we feel in the body, and so loosing our root, in order to our more easie fall by the fatal stroke. And thus I have finished the Second General Head; but before I pass from this, I cannot but make a pause, and desire you with me, to stand in an holy amazement, and wonder at the deal∣ings of God with such poor worms as we are! Surely God deals familiarly with men! his con∣descensions to his own clay are astonishing! All that I shall note at present about it, shall be un∣der these three heads, wherein I find the matter of my present meditations summed up by the Psalmist, Psal. 144. 3. Lord what is man, that thou tkest knowledge of him? or the son of man, that
thou makest account of him? And in this Scripture you have represented, The immense and transcendent goodness of God, who is infinitely above us and all our thoughts, Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Canst thou by searching, find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as Heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than Hell; what canst thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea. 2 Chron. 2. 6. The Heaven and Hea∣ven of Heavens cannot contain him. Exod. 15. 11. He is glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders. When the Scripture speaks of him com∣paratively, see how it expresses his greatness, Isa. 40. 15, 16, 17. Behold the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold he taketh up the Isles as a very little thing. And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the Beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are ac∣counted to him less than nothing and vanity. When the holJest men have addrest themselves to him, see with what humility and deep adoratJon they have spoken of him and to him! Isa. 6. 5. Wo is me for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts. Nay, what aspects the very Angels of Heaven have of that glorJous Majesty, you may see, Ver. 2, 3. Each one had six wings, with twain e covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with twain be did fly. And one cryed un∣to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts; the whole Earth is full of his glory.
The baseness, vileness and utter unworthiness of Man, yea, the holiest and best of men before God, Psal. 39. 5. Verily every man, at his best estate, is altogether vanity. Every man, take where you will: and every man in his best estate, or stand∣ing in his freshest glory, is, not only vanity, but altogether vanity. Col Adam col Hebel, every man s every vanity. For do but consider the best of men in their ExtractJon, in their ConstitutJon, and in their outward ConditJon. (1.) In their ExtractJon, Eph. 2. 3. By nature Children of wrath even as others. The blood that uns in our veins, is as much tainted as theirs in Hell. (2.) Consider them in their ConstitutJon and atural temper, and it is no better, yea, in many a worse temper than in Reprobates: and though grace depose sin in them from the Throne; yet▪ Oh what offensive and God provoking corrupti∣ons daily break out of the best hearts! (3.) Consider them in their outward ConditJon, nd they are inferiour (for the most part) to thers, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28, &c. and Matth. 1. 25. I thank thee O Father (saith Christ) that ou hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, nd hast revealed them unto Babes. And now let us consider and admire, that ever his great and blessed God should be so much ncerned as you have heard he is in all his Pro∣dences about such vile despicable Worms as e are! He needs us not, but is perfectly blessed nd happy in himself without us. We can add othing to him, Job. 22. 2. Can a man be profitable God? No, the holiest of men add nothing to
him; yet, see how great account he makes of us. For, Doth not his eternal electing love bespeak the dear account he made of us, Eph. 1. 4, 5. How ancient, how free, and how astonishing is this act of grace! This is that design which all Providences are in pursuit of, and will not rest till they have executed. Doth not the gift of his only Son out of his bosome speak this truth, That God makes great account of this vile thing Man? Never was man so magnified before. If David could say, Psal. 8. . When I consider the Heavens the work of thy hands, the Moon and Stars which thou hast ordained, Lord, what is man? How much more may we say? when we consider thy Son, that lay in thy bosome, his infinite excellency, and unspeakable dearness to thee; Lord, what is man, that such a Christ should be delivered to death for him! for him, and not for fallen Angels! Heb. 2. 16. for him when in a state of enmity with God! Rom. 5. 8. Doth not the assiduity of his Providential care for us, speak his esteem of us? Isa. 27. 3. any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. H withdraweth not his eye from the righteous, Job▪ 36. 7. no, not a moment all their dayes; for did he so, a thousand mischiefs in that moment woul rush in upon him, and ruine him. Doth not the tenderness of his Providenc speak his esteem of us? Isa. 66. 13. as one whom his Mother comforteth, so will I comfort you. He comforts his (viz. by refreshing Providences) a an indulgent Mother her tender Child. So Isa▪
31. 5. As birds flying, viz. to their nests, when their young are in danger, so he defends his. No tenderness in the Creature can shadow forth the tender bowels of the Creator. Doth not the variety of the fruits of his Pro∣vidence speak it? Lam. 3. 23. Our mercJes are new every morning. See Psal. 40. 5. It is a foun∣tain from which do stream forth spiritual and temporal, ordinary and extraordinary, publick and personal mercies, mercies without number. Doth not the ministration of Angels in the Providential Kingdom speak it? Heb. 1. ult. Are they not all ministring spirits sent forth, &c. Doth not the Providence, which this day calls us to celebrate the memory of,Preached Novemb. V. bespeak the great account God hath for his people? O if not so, why had we not been given up as a prey to their teeth! See Psal. 124. If the Lord had not been on our side, then wicked men, there compar'd to fire, water, wild beasts, had devoured us. O blessed be God for that teeming Providence that hath already brought forth more than seventy years liberty and peace to the Church of God. I shall move in behalf of this Providence, that you would do by it, as the Jows by their Purim, Esth. 9. 27, 28. and the rather, because we seem now to be as near danger by the same Enemy as ever since that time: and if such a mercy as this be forgotten, God may say as Judges 10. 13. I will deliver you no more.
The Third General Head. HAving proved the Concernments of the peo∣ple of God to be conducted by the care of special Providence, and given Instances in the ten last named Heads, what influence Providence hath upon those Interests and concerns of theirs among the rest; we come in the next place, to prove it to be the duty of the people of God, to reflect upon these performances of Providence for them, at all times; but especially in times of straits and troubles. This I will evidence to be your unquestionable duty, by the following particulars. This is our duty, because God hath expresly commanded it, and called his people to make the most serious reflections, and animadversions upon his works, whether of mercy or judge∣ment. So when that dreadfullest of all Judge∣ments was executed upon his professing people for their Apostasie from God, and God had re∣moved the Symbols of his presence from among them, the rest are bid to go, (i.e.) by their meditations, (to send at least their thoughts) to Shiloh, and see what God did to it, Jer. 7. 12. So for mercies, God calls us to consider and review them, Micah 6. 5. Remember O my people from Shit∣tim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the faithfulness of the Lord: q. d. if you reflect not upon that signal Providence, my faithfulness will be covered, and
your unfaithfulness discovered. So for Gods works of Providence about the Creatures, we are called to consider them, that we may prop up our faith by those considerations for our own supplies, Matth. 6. 28. consider the Fowls and Lillies. It's plain, that this is our duty, because the neglect of it is every where in Scripture con∣demned as a sin. To be of an heedless inobser∣vant temper is very displeasing to God; and so much appears by that Scripture, Isa. 26. 11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see. Nay, it is a sin, which God threatens and denounces woe against in his Word, Psal. 28. 4, 5. and Isa. 5. 12, 13. Yea, God not only threatens, but smites men with visible Judgements for this sin, Job 34. 26, 27. And for this end and purpose it is, that the Holy Ghost hath affixed those notes of atten∣tion to the narratives of the works of Provi∣dence in Scripture: all which do invite and call men to a due and deep observation of them. So in that great and celebrated work of Providence, in delivering Israel out of EgyptJan bondage, you find a note of attentJon twice affixed to it, Exod. 3. 2, 9. So when that daring Enemy Rabsheka (that put HezekJah and all the people into such a consternation) was defeated by Providence, there is a note of attentJon prefixt to that Providence, 2 Kings 19. . Behold, I will send a blast upon him, &c. So when God glorifies his wisdom and power, in delivering his people from their Ene∣mies, and ensnaring them in the works of their own hands, a double note of attentJon is affixed to that double work of Providence, Psal. 9. 16.
higgaJon slah. So at the opening of every seal which contains a remarkable series or branch of Providence, how particularly is attention com∣manded to every one of them, Rev. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Come and see, come and see. All these are very useless and superluous additions in Scripture, if no such duty lyes upon us. See Psal. 66. 5. Without due observation of the work of Pro∣vidence, no praise can be rendered to God for any of them. Praise and thanksgiving for mer∣cies depend upon this act of observation of them, and cannot be performed without it. Psalm 107. is spont in narratives of Gods Providential care of men. To his people in straits, Ver. 4, 5, 6. To prisoners in their bonds, Ver. 10, 11, 12. To men that lye languishing upon beds of sickness, Ver. 17, 18, 19. To Seamen upon the stormy Ocean▪ Ver. 23, &c. To men in times of famine, Ver. 33. to Ver. 40. Yea, his Providence is dis∣played in all those changes that fall out in the world, deasing the high, and exalting the low, Ver. 40, 41. and at every paragraph men are still called upon to praise God for each of these Pro∣vidences: but Ver. ult. shews you what a necessa∣ry ingredient to that duty, observation is. Whos it wie, and will observe these things; even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. So that of necessity, God must be defrauded of his praise, if this duty be neglected. Without this, we lose the usefulness and beneit of all the works of God for us or others, which would be an unspeakable loss indeed to us. This is the food▪ our aith lives upon in dayes of distress, Psal. 74. 14. Thou rakest the
heads of LevJathan in pJeces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the Wilderness; (i.e.) food to their aith. From Providences past, Saints use to argue to fresh and new ones to come. So David, 1 Sam. 17. 37. The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lyon, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistin. So Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who hath delivered, and in whom also we trust, that he will yet deliver. If these be forgotten o not considered, the hands of aith hang down. See Matth. 16. 9. How is it that ye do not remember▪ neither consider? This is a Topick from which the Saints have used to draw their Arguments in prayer for new mercies. As Moses, Numb. 14. 19. when he prayes for continued or new pardon for the people, he argues from what was past, As thou hast forgiven them from Egypt until now. So the Church, Isa. 51. 9, 10. argues for new Pro∣vidences upon the same ground Moses pleaded for new pardons. It is a vile slighting of God▪ not to observe what of himself he manifests in his Providences. For in all Providences, especially in some, he comes nigh to us. He doth so in his Judgements, Mal. 3. 5. I will come nigh to you in judgement. He comes nigh in mercies also, Psal. 145. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, &c. Yea, he is said to visit us by his Pro∣vidence when he corrects, Hosea 9. 7. and when he saves and delivers, Psal. 106. 4. These visi∣tations of God preserve our spirits, Job. 10. 12. And it is a wonderful condescension in the great God to visit us so oten, Job 7. 18. every morn∣ing, and every moment. But not to take notice of
it, is a vile and bruitish contempt of God, Ia. 1. 3. Zeph. 3. 2. You would not do so by a man for whom you have any respect. It's the chara∣cter of the wicked, not to regard Gods favours, Isa. 26. 10. or frowns, Jer. 5. 3. In a word▪ men can never order their addresses to God in prayer, suitable to their conditions, without due observatJon of his Providences. Your prayers are to be suitable to your conditions: sometimes we are called to praise, sometimes to humiliation. In the way of his Judgements you are to wait for him, Isa. 26. 8. to prepare to meet him, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Amos 4. 12. Now your busi∣ness is, to turn away his anger which you see ap∣proaching. And sometimes you are called to praise him for mercies received, Isa. 12. 1, 2. but then you must first observe them. Thus you find the matter of David's Psalms still varied, according to the Providences that be∣fell him: but an inobservant heedless spirit can never do it. And thus you have the grounds of the Duty briefly represented; we pass on to
The Fourth General Head. LEt us next (according to our method pro∣posed) proceed to shew, in what manner we are to reflect upon the performances of Provi∣dence for us. And certainly, it is not every slight and transient glance, nor every cold, hi∣storical, unaffecting rehearsal, or recognition of his Providences towards you, that will pass with God, for a discharge of this great duty. No, no, it is another manner of business than the most of men understand it to be. O that we were but acquainted with this heavenly spiritual exercise! how sweet would it make our lives! how light would it make our burdens! Ah Sirs! you live estranged from the pleasure of the Christian life, while you live in the ignorance or neglect of this duty. Now to lead you up to this heavenly, sweet and profitable exercise, I will beg your at∣tention to the following Directions. The First Direction. LAbour to get as full and through recognitJons of the Providences of God about you from first to last, as you are able. O sill your hearts with the thoughts of him and his wayes. If a single act of Providence be so ravishing and transporting, what would many such be, if they were presented to∣gether
to the view of the soul? If one Star be so beautiful to behold, what is a ConstellatJon? Let your reflections therefore upon the acts and workings of Providence for you, be full extensive∣ly and intensively. (1.) Let them be as extensively full as may be▪ Search backward into all the performances of Providence throughout your lives. So did Asaph in Psal. 77. 11, 12. I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of old: I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings. He laboured to recover and revive the ancient Providences of God, mercies many years past, and suck a fresh sweetness out of them by new reviews of them. Ah Sirs, let me tell you, there is not such a pleasant History for you to read in all the world, as the History of your own lives, if you would but sit down, and record to your selves from the beginning hitherto, what God hath been to you, and done for you; what signal manifestations, and out-breakings of his mercy, faithfulness and love, there have been in all the conditions you have past through: if your hearts do not melt before you have gone half through that History, they are hard hearts indeed. My father, the guide of my youth. (2.) Let them be as intensively full as may be. Let not your thoughts swim like feathers upon the surface of the waters, but sink like lead to the bottom. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of them that have pleasur therein, Psal. 111. 2. Not that I think it feasible to sound the depth of Providence by our short line, Psal. 77. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great wa∣ters, and thy footsteps are not known; but it's our
duty to dive as far as we can; and to admire the depth, when we cannot touch the bottom. It is in our viewing Providences, as it was with Eli∣jah's servant, when he looked out for rain, 1 Kings 18. 44. he went out once and viewed the Heavens, and saw nothing; but the Prophet bids him go again and again, and look upon the face of Heaven seven times; and when he had done so, what now, saith the Prophet? O now, saith he, I see a cloud rising like a mans hand; and then, keeping his eye upon it intent, he sees the whole face of Heaven covered with clouds. So you may look upon some Providences once and again, and see little or nothing in them; but look seven times, (i. e.) meditate often upon it, and you shall see its increasing glory, like that in∣creasing cloud. There are divers things to be distinctly pon∣dered, and valued in one single Providence, be∣fore you can judge the amount and worth of it: as (1.) The seasonableness of mercy may give it a very great value. When it shall be timed so opportunely, and all out in such a nick, as may make it a thousand fold more considerable to you than the same mercy would have been at another time. Thus when our wants are suffered to grow to an extremity, and all visible hopes ail, then to have relief given in, wonderfully enhances the price of such a mercy, Isa. 41. 17, 18. (2.) The peculJar care and kindness of Provi∣dence to us, is a consideration which exceedingly heightens the mercy in it self, and endears it to us. So, when in general calamities upon the world, w are exempted by the favour of Provi∣dence, covered under its wings; when God shall
call to us in evil dayes, Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, as it is in Isa. 26. 20, 21. When such Promises shall be fulfilled to us in times of want and famine, as Psal. 33. 18, 19. When others are abandoned and exposed to misery, who have every way as much, it may be much more visible security against it; and yet they delivered up, and we saved: Oh, how endearing are such Providences! Psal. 91. 7, 8. (3.) The Introductiveness of a Providence, is of special regard and consideration, and by no means to be neglected by us. There are lead∣ing Providences, which how slight and trivial so∣ever they may seem in themselves, yet in this re∣spect justly challenge the first rank among Provi∣dential favours to us; because they usher in a multitude of other mercies, and draw a blessed train of happy consequences after them. Such a Providence was that of Jesse's sending David with provisions to his Brethren that lay encamped in the Army, 1 Sam. 17. 17. And thus every Chri∣stian may furnish himself out of his own stock of Experience, if he will but reflect, and consider, the Place where he is, the Relations that he hath, and the Way by which he was led into them. (4.) The Instruments imployed by Providence for you, are of special consideration. And the finger of God is clearly seen by us when we pursue hat meditation. For, Sometimes great mercies shall be conveyed to us by very improbable means, and more pro∣bable ones laid aside. A stranger shall be stirred up to do that for you, which your near relations in nature had no power or will to do for you. Jonathan, a meer stranger to David, clave closer
to him, and was more friendly and useful to him, than his own Brethren, who despised and slighted him. Ministers have found more kindness and respect from strangers, than their own people that are more obliged to them, Mark 6. 4. A Prophet (saith Christ) is not without honour, save in his own Countrey, and among his own Kin, and in his own House. Sometimes by the hands of EnemJes, as well as Strangers, Rev. 12. 16. The Earth helped the Wo∣man. God hath bowed the hearts of many wicked men, to shew great kindness to his peo∣ple, Acts 28. 2. Sometimes God makes use of Instruments for good to his people, who designed nothing but evil and mischief to them. Thus Joseph's Bre∣thren were instrumental to his advancement, in that very thing, wherein they designed his ruine, Gen. 50. 20. (5.) The design and scope of Providence must not eape our through consideration, what the aim and level of Providence is. And truly this, of all others, is the most warming and melting consideration. You have the general account of the aim of all Providences, in Rom. 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God. A thousand friendly hands are at work for them, to promote and bring about their happiness. O, this is enough to sweeten the bitterest Providence to us, that we know it shall turn to our salvation, Phil. 1. 19. (6.) The respect and relatJon Providence bears to our prayers, is of singular consideration, and a most taking and sweet meditation. Prayer ho∣nours Providence, and Providence honours
Prayer. Great notice is taken of this in Scri∣pture, Gen. 24. 45. Dan. 9. 20. Acts 12. 12. You have had the very PetitJons you asked of him. Pro∣vidences have born the very signatures of your Prayers upon them. O how affectingly sweet are such mercies! The Second Direction. IN all your Observations of Providence, have a spe∣cial respect to that Word of God, which is fulfilled and made good to you thereby. This is a clear truth, that all Providences have relation to the written Word. Thus Solomon in his prayer, acknowledges, that the Promises and Providences of God went along step by step with his Father David all his dayes; and that his hand (put there for his Providence) had ful∣filled whatever his mouth had spoken,  Kings 8. 24. So Joshuah in like manner acknowledges, that not one good thing had failed, of all the good things which the Lord had spoken, Jos. 23. 14. He had carefully observed what relation the Works of God had to his Word. He compared them toge∣ther, and found an exact harmony. And so may you too, if you will compare them as he did. This I shall the more insist upon, because it is by some Interpreters supposed to be the very Scope of the Text. For (as was noted in the Ex∣plication) they supply and fill the sense with quae promisit, the things which he hath promised; and so read the Text thus, I will cry unto God
most high, to God who performeth the things he hath promised, for me. Now though I see no reason to limit the sense so narrowly, yet it cannot be denyed, but this is an especial part of its intendment. Let us there∣fore in all our reviews of Providence, consider, what word of God, whether it be of threatning, caution, counsel, or promise is at any time made good to us by his Providences. And hereby a twofold excellent advantage will result to us. (1.) This will greatly confirm to us the truth of the Scripture, when we shall see its truth so manifest in the events. Certainly had Scripture no other seal or attestation, this alone would be an unanswerable Argument of its divinity. When men shall find in all ages the works of God wrought so exactly according to this model, that we may say, As we have read or heard, so have we seen. O how great a conirmati∣on is here before our eyes! (2.) This will abundantly direct and instruct us in our present duties under all Providences. We shall know hereby what we have to do, and how to carry our selves under all changes of conditions. You can learn the voice and rrand of the rod only from the Word, Psal. 94. 12. The Word interprets the works of God. Providences in themselves, are not a perfect guide. They often puzzle and entangle our thoughts; but bring them to the Word, and your duty will be quickly manifested, as Psal. 73. 16, 17. Vntil I went into the Sanctuary, then I understood their end: and, not only their end; but his own duty, to be quiet in an afflicted condition, and not envy their prosperity.
Well then, bring those Providences you have past through, or are now under, to the Word; and you will find your selves surrounded with a marvellous light; and see the verification of the Scriptures in them. I shall therefore here appeal to your consciences, whether you have not found these Events of Providence falling out agreeably in all respects with the Word. The Word tells you, that it is your Wisdom and Interest, to keep close to its rules, and the duties it prescribes, that the way of holiness and obedience, is the wisest way, Deut. 4. 5, 6. This is your wisdom. Now, let the events of Providence speak, whe∣ther this be true or not. Certainly it will ap∣pear to be so, whether we respect our present comfort, or future happiness, both which we may see daily exposed by departure from duty, and secured by keeping close to it. Let the questi∣on be asked of the Drunkard, Adulterer, or pro∣phane Swearer, when by sin they have ruined bo∣dy, soul, estate and name, whether it be their wisdom to walk in those forbidden paths after their own lusts? Whether they had not better consulted their own interest and comfort, in keeping within the bounds and limits of Gods commands? and they cannot but confess, that this their way is their folly. What fruit (saith the Apostle) had ye in those things, whereof you are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death, Rom. 6. 21. Doth not the Providence of God verifie upon them those threatnings that are written, in the experience of all ages? Prov. 23. 29. Prov. 23. 21. Prov. 5. 9. Job 31. 12. Prov. 5. 10. all which woes and miseries they
escape, that walk in Gods Statutes. Look upon the ruined estates and bodies you may every where see, and behold the truth of the Scriptures evidently made good in those sad Providences. The Word tells you, that your departure from the way of integrity and simplicity, to make use of sinful policies, shall never profit you, 1 Sam. 12. 21. Prov. 3. 5. Let the Events of Providence speak to this al∣so; ask your own experience, and you shall have a full confirmation of this truth. Did you ever leave the way of simplicity and integrity, and use sinful shifts, to bring about your own designs, and prosper in that way? Certainly God hath cursed all the wayes of sin; and whoever finds them to thrive with them, his people shall not. Israel would not rely upon the Lord, but trust in the shadow of Egypt; and what advantage had they by this sinful policy? See Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. David used a great deal of sinful policy to cover his wicked fact; but did it prosper? See 2 Sam. 12. 12. It is an excellent note of Livy, ConsilJa callida, primâ specJe lta, tractata dura, eventu tristJa. Sinful policies in their first appearances, are pleasant and promising, in their management difficult, in their event sad. Some by sinful wayes have gotten wealth; but that Scripture hath been verified in their experience, Prov. 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing. Either God hath blown upon it by a secret curse, that it hath done them no good, or given them such disquietness in their consciences, that they have been forced to vomit it up, e're they could find peace, Job 11. 13, 14, 15. That which David gave in charge to Solomon,
hath been found experimentally true by thou∣sands, 1 Chron. 22. 12, 13. That the true way to prosperity, is to keep close to the rule of the Word. And that the true reason why men cannot prosper, is their forsaking that rule, 2 Chron. 24. 20. It's true, if God have a purpose to destroy a man, he may for a time suffer him to succeed and prosper in his sin, for his greater hardening, Job 12. 6. But it is not so with those whom the Lord loves; their sinful shits shall never thrive with them. The World prohibits your trust and conidenc in the Creature, even the greatest and most pow∣erful among Creatures, Psal. 14 6. 3. It tells us, that 'tis better to trust in the Lord, than in thm, Psal. 118. 8. It forbids our conidence in those Creatures that are most nearly ally'd, and related in the bonds of nature to us, Micah 7. 5. It curseth the man that gives that relyance to the Creature, which is due to God, Jer. 17. 5. Consult the Events of Providence in this case, and see, whether the Word be not verified there∣in? Did you ever lean upon an EgyptJan reed, and it did not break under you, and pierce as well as deceive you? O how often hath this been evident in our experience! Whatsoever we have over-loved, idolized,☞ and leaned upon, God hath from time to time broken it, and made us to see the vanity of it; so that we find, the readiest course to be rid of our comforts, is to set our hearts inordinately or immoderately upon them▪ for our God is a jealous God, and will not part with his glory to another. The World is full of examples of persons deprived of their com∣forts,
Husbands, Wives, Children, Estates, &c. upon this account, and by this means. If Jonah be over-joyed in his Gourd, a Worm is presently prepared to smite it. Hence it is, that so many graves are opened for the burying of our Idols out of our sight. If David say, My mountain shall stand strong, I shall not be moved; the next news he shall hear, is of darkness and trouble, Psal. 30. 6, 7. O how true and faithful do we find these sayings of God to be! Who cannot put to his seal, and say, Thy words are truth? The Word assures us, that sin is the Cause and Inlet of Affliction and Sorrow, and that there is an inseparable connection betwixt them, Numb. 32. 23. Be sure your sin will find you out: (i. e.) the sad effects and afflictions that follow it shall ind you out. So Psal. 89. 30, 31, 32. If his sons forsake my Law, I will visit their iniquitJes with rods. Enquire now at the mouth of Providence, whe∣ther this be indeed so, according to the reports of the Word. Ask but your own Experiences, and you shall find, that just so Providence hath ordered it all along your way. When did you grow into a secure, vain, carnal frame, but you found some rouzing, startling Providence sent to awaken you? When did you wound your Con∣sciences with guilt, and God did not wound you for it, in some or other of your beloved enjoy∣ments? Nay, so ordinary is this with God, that from the observations of their own frames and wayes, many Christians have fore-boded and pre∣aged troubles at hand. I do not say, that God never afflicts his peo∣ple, but for their sin; for he may do it for their
tryal, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Nor do I say, that God fol∣lows every sin with a rod; for who then should stand before him? Psal. 130. 3. But this I say, that it's Gods usual way, to visit the sins of his people with rods of affliction, and this in mercy to their souls. Upon this account it was, that the rod of God was upon David in a long succes∣sion of troubles upon his Kingdom and family, after that great prevarication of his, 2 Sam. 12. 10. And if we would carefully search out the seeds and principles of those miseries under which we or ours do groan; we should find them to be our own turnings aside from the Lord, according to that Jer. 2. 19. and Jer. 4. 18. Have not all these cautions, and threatnings of the Word been exactly fulfilled by Providence in your own expe∣rience? Who can but see the infallible truth of God in all that he hath threatned! And no less evident is the truth of the Promises to all that will observe how Providence makes them good every day to us; for consider, How great security God hath given to his peo∣ple in the Promises, that no man shall lose any thing by self-denyal for his sake. He hath told us, Mark 10. 29, 30. Verily, I say unto you, there is no man that hath left House, or Brethren, or Si∣sters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake, and the Gospels; but he shall re∣ceive an hundred fold now in this time, houses, and Brethren and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands with persecutions, and in the world to come Eternal life. Though that vile Apostate JulJan derided this Promise, yet thousands and ten thousands have experienced it, and do at this day stand ready to
set their seal to it. God hath made it good to his people, not only in spirituals; inward joy, and peace; but even in Temporals also: instead of natural relations who took care for them be∣fore, hundreds of ChristJans shall stand ready to assist and help them: So that though they have left all for Christ, yet they may say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things. O the admirable care and tenderness of Providence over those that for Conscience sake have lest all, and cast themselves upon its immediate care! Are there not at this day to be found many so provided for, even to the envy of their Enemies, and their own admi∣ration? Who sees not the faithfulness of God in the Promises, that hath but an heart to trust God in them! The Word of Promise assures us, that whatever wants or straits the Saints all into, their God will never leave them, nor forsake them, Heb. 13. 5. that he will be with them in trouble,Smma haec est,  omnia  suppdit à omnibus  vitae hu∣manae o nibus no oiciier in ala tatibus  erigere  sideratio providen∣tis ti divi Alsted. Theol.  techet. P. 19. Psal. 91. 15. Consult the various Providences of your life in this point, and I doubt not, but you will find the truth of these Promises as often confirmed, as you have been in trouble. Ask your own hearts, where, or when was it that your God forsook you, and left you to sink and perish under your burdens? I doubt not, but most of you have been at one time or other plunged in difficulties, diffi∣culties out of which you could see no way of escape by the eye of reason; yea, such, as it may be, staggered your faith in the Promise, as David's was, 1 Sam. 27. 1. when he said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. All men are Lyars, (even Samuel himself) and yet notwith∣standing
all, we see him emerge out of that Sea of trouble, and the Promises made good in every tittle to him. The like doubtless you may ob∣serve in your own cases. Ask your own souls the question, and they will satisfie it. Did God abandon and cast you off in the day of your straits? certainly you must belye your own expe∣rience, if you should say so. 'Tis true, there have been some plunges and difficulties you have met with, wherein (1.) You could see no way of escape, but concluded you must perish in them. (2.) Difficulties that have staggered your faith in the Promises, and made you doubt, whether the fountain of All-sufficiency would let out it self for your relief. (3.) Yea, such difficulties as have provoked you to murmuring and impatience, and thereby provoked the Lord to forsake you in your straits; but yet you see he did not. He hath either (1.) Strengthened your back to bear, or (2.) Lightened your burden, or (3.) Opened an unexpected door of escape, according to that Promise, 1 Cor. 10. 13. so that the evil which you feared, came not upon you. You read, that the Word of God is the only support and relief to a gracious soul in the dark day of Affliction, Psal. 119. 50, 92.—2 Sam. 23. 5. That for this very purpose it was written, Rom. 15. 4. No rules of moral Pru∣dence, no sensual remedies can perform that for us, which the Word can do. And is not this a sealed Truth, attested by a thousand of undenyable experiences? Hence have the Saints fetcht their CordJals, when fainting un∣der the rod. One Word of God can do more, than ten thousand words of men to relieve a di∣stressed
soul. If Providence have at any time di∣rected you to such Promises, as either assure you that the Lord will be with you in trouble, Psal. 91. 15. or that encourage you from inward peace, to bear cheerfully outward burdens, John 16. 33. or satisfie you of Gods tenderness and mo∣deration in his dealings with you, Isa. 27. 8. or that you shall reap blessed fruits from them, Rom. 8. 28. or that clear up your interest in God, and his love under your afflictions, 2 Sam. 7. 14. Oh, what sensible ease and relief ensues! how light is your burden, compared with what it was before! The Word tells us, that there is no such way to improve our Estates, as to lay them out with a cheerful liberality for God; and that our with∣holding our hands, when God and duty calls to distribute, will not be for our advantage. See Prov. 11. 25. Isa. 32. 8. Prov. 19. 17. Prov. 11. 24. Consult Providence now, and you shall find it in all respects according to the report of the Word. O how true is the Scripture testimony herein! There are many thousand Witnesses now living, that can set their seals to both parts of this proposition. What men save (as they count saving) with one hand, Providence scat∣ters by another hand: and what they scatter abroad with a liberal hand and single eye for God, is surely repay'd to them or theirs. Never did any man lose by distributing for God. He that lends to the poor foeneratur Domino, as some expound that Text, puts his money to interest to the Lord. Some have observed how Provi∣dence hath doubled all they have laid out for God, in wayes unexpected to them.
The Word assures us, that the best expedient for a man to settle his own interest in the con∣sciences and affections of men, is to direct his wayes, so as to please the Lord, Prov. 16. 7. and doth not Providence confirm it? This the three Jews found by experience, Dan. 3. 28, 29. and so did DanJel, chap. 6. v. 20, 21, 22. This kept up John's reputation in the conscience of Herod, Mark 6. 20. So it fell out, when ConstantJus made that exploratory decree; those that were con∣scientious were preferred, and those that changed their religion, expelled. Never did any man lose at last by his fidelity. The written Word tells us, that the best ex∣pedient to inward peace and tranquillity of mind under puzzling and distracting troubles, is to commit our selves and our case to the Lord; so you read, Psal. 37. 5, 6, 7. and Prov. 16. 3. And as you have read in the Word, so you have found it in your own Experience. Oh, what a burden is off your shoulders, when you have re∣signed the case to God Then doth Providence issue your affairs comfortably for you. The difficulty is soon over, when the heart is brought to this. Thus you see, how Scriptures are fulfilled by Providence in these few Instances I have given of it. Compare them in all other cases, and you shall find the same: for all the lines of Provi∣dence lead from the Scripture, and return thi∣ther again, and do most visibly begin and end there.
The Fourth Direction. IN all your reviews and observations of Providence, be sure that you ye God as the Author or orderer of them all, Prov. 3. 6. In all the comfortable Providences of your lives, ye God as the Author or donor of them. Remem∣ber he is the father of mercJes, that begets every mercy for you, 2 Cor. 1. 3. The God of all com∣fort, without whose order no mercy or comfort can come to your hands. And think it not enough thus to acknowledge him in a general way; but when you receive mercies, take special notice of the following particulars. (1.) Eye the Care of God for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. He careth for you. Your Father knows you have need of these things, Matth. 6. 32. It is but to ac∣quaint him what you want, and your wants are supplyed, Phil. 4. 6. , torture not your selves about it: you have a Father that cares for you. (2.) Eye the Wisdom of God, in the way of dispensing his mercies to you, how suitably they are ordered to your condition, and how seaso∣nably. When one comfort is cut off and re∣moved, another is raised up in its room. Thus Isaac was comforted in Rebecka after his Mothers deah, Gen. 24. 67. (3.) Eye the free Grace of God in them, yea, see riches of Grace in every bequest of comfort to so vile and unworthy creatures as you are. See
your selves over-topt by the least of all your mercies, Gen. 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least, said Jacob. (4.) Eye the Condescension of God, to your requests for those mercies, Psal. 34. 6. This is the sweetest bit in any enjoyment, in which a man can sensibly relish the return and answer of his Prayers, and greatly inflames the souls love to God, Psal. 116. 1. (5.) Eye the Design and end of God in all your comforts. Know that it is not sent to satisfie the cravings of your sensual appetite, but to quicken and enable you for a more cheerful discharge of your duty, Deut. 28. 47. (6.) Eye the Way and Method in which your mercies are conveyed to you. They all slow to you through the blood of Christ and Covenant of grace, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. Mercies derive their sweetness from the Channel through which they run to us. (7.) Eye the Distinguishing goodness of God, in all the comfortable enjoyments of your lives. How many thousand better than you, are denyed those Comforts? See Heb. 11. 37. (8.) Eye them all as comforts appointed to refresh you in your way to far better and greater mercies than themselves. The best mercies are still reserved till last, and all these are introdu∣ctive to better. In all the Sad and Afflictive Providences that befall you, Eye God as the Author and orderer of them also. So he represents himself to us, Jer. 18. 11. Behold, I create evil, and devise a de∣vice against you. And Amos 3. 6. Is there evil in the City, and the Lord hath not done it? More par∣ticularly,
Set before you the Soveraignty of God. Eye him as a Being infinitely superiour to you, at whose pleasure, you, and all you have is, Psal. 115. 3. which is the most conclusive reason and argument of submission, Psal. 46. 10. For if we, and all we have, proceeded from his Will, how equal is it, that we be resigned up to it? It is not many years agone since we were not, and when it pleased him to bring us upon the Stage of action, we had no liberty of indenting with him, on what erms we would come into the world; or refuse to be, except we might have our being on such terms as we desired. His Soveraignty is gloriously displayed in his Eternal Decrees and temporal Providences. He might have put you in∣to what rank of Creatures he pleased. He might have made you the most despicable Crea∣tures, Worms or Toads: or, if men, the most vile, abject and miserable among men: and when you had run through all the miseries of this life, have damned you to Eternity, made you miserable for ever, and all this without any wrong to you. And shall not this quiet us under the common af∣flictions of this life? Set the Grace and Goodness of God before you in all afflictive Providences. O see him passing by you in the cloudy and dark day, proclaiming his Name, the Lord, the Lord merciful and gracJous. There are two sorts of mercies that are seldom eclipsed by the darkest affliction that befalls the Saints in their temporal concerns, sc. sparing mer∣cy in this world, and saving mercy in that to come. It is not so bad now as it might, and we deserved it should be, and it will be better here∣atr. This the Church observed, and reasoned
her self quiet from it, Lam. 3. 22. Hath he taken some? he might have taken all. Are we affli∣cted? it's mercy we are not destroyed. Oh if we consider what temporal mercies are yet spa∣red, and what spiritual mercies are bestowed, and yet continued to us, we shall find cause to admire mercy, rather than complain of severity. Eye the Wisdom of God in all your afflictions, behold it in the choice of the kind of your affli∣ction, this, and not another: the Time, now and not at another season: the Degree, in this mea∣sure only, and not in a greater: the Supports af∣forded you under it, not let altogether help∣less: the Issue to which it's over ruled, it's made to your good, not ruine. Look upon all these, and then ask thy heart that question God askt Jonah, Dost thou well to be angry? Surely, when you consider all, what need you had of these rods, that your corruptions will require all this, it may be much more to mortifie them; that without the perishing of these things, you might have perish∣ed for ever; you will see great reasons to be quiet and well satisfied under the hand of God. Set the faithfulness of the Lord before you under the saddest Providences. So did David, Psal. 119. 75. This is according to his Covenant faithfulness, Psal. 89. 32. Hence it is, that the Lord will not withhold a rod when need re∣quires it, 1. Pet. 1. 6. Nor will he forsake his people under the rod, when he inlicts it, 2 Cor. 4. 9. Oh what quietness will this breed! I see my God will not lose my heart, if a rod can prevent it; he had rather hear me groan here, than howl hereafter: his love is judicious, not
fond: he consults my good, rather than my ease. Eye the All-sufficJency of God in the day of af∣fliction. See enough in him still, whatever be gone. Here is the fountain still as full as ever, though this or that pipe be cut off, which was wont to convey somewhat of it to me. O Chri∣stians, can't you make up any loss this way? Can't you see more in God, than in any or all the Creature comforts you have lost? With what eyes then do you look upon God? Lastly, Eye the Immutability of God. Look on him as the Rock of Ages, James 1. 17. The Fa∣ther of lights, with whom is no varJableness, nor sha∣dow of turning. Eye Jesus Christ, as the same ye∣sterday, to day and for ever. Oh how quietly will you then behave your selves under the changes of Providence? It may be, two or three dayes have made a sad change in your condition: the death of a dear relation hath turned all things upside down: that place is empty where lately they were, as it is, Job 7. 10. His place shall know him no more: Well, but God is what he was, and where he was: Time shall make no change up∣on him, as it is in Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8. The grass wi∣thereth, the flower sadeth; but the word of the Lord abideth for ever. O how composing are those views of God to our spirits under dark Provi
The Fifth Direction. LAstly, Work up your hearts to those frames, and exercise those affectJons which the several Providences of God that are versant about you call for, Eccles. 7. 14. Suit your selves to answer the design and end of God in all Providences. As there are various affections planted in your souls, so are there several graces planted in those affe∣ctions, and several Providences appointed to draw forth, and exercise these graces. When the Providences of God are sad, and afflictive either upon the Church in general, or your families and persons in particular, then it is seasonable for you to exercise godly sorrow and humi∣lity of spirit: for in that day, and by those Provi∣dences God doth call to it, Isa. 22. 12. Micah 6. 9. Now, sensitive pleasure and natural joy, is out of season, Ezek. 21. 10. Should we then make mirth? If there be either (1.) A silial spirit in us, we cannot be light and vain, when our Father is an∣gry; or (2.) If any real sense of the evil of sin which provokes Gods anger, we must be heavy hearted when God is smiting for it; or (3.) If any sense and compassion for the miseries that sin brings upon the world, it will make us to say with David, Psal. 119. 158. I beheld the transgressors and was grJeved. 'Tis sad to consider the miseries tat they pull down upon themselves in this orld and that to come. (4.) If there be any care
in us to prevent utter ruine, and stop God in the way of his anger, we know this is the means to do it, Amos 4. 12. HOw sad and dismal soever the face of Provi∣dence be, yet still maintain spiritual joy and com∣fort in God under all. Though there be no herd in the stall (said Habakuck, chap. 3. 17.) yet will I re∣joyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my sal∣vation. There are two sorts of Comforts, Natural and Sensitive, Divine and Spiritual. There is a time when it becomes ChristJans to exercise both; so Hest. 9. 22. And there is a time when the former is to be suspended and laid by, Psal. 137. 2. But there is no season, wherein spiritual joy and com∣fort in God is unseasonable, as appears by those Scriptures, 1 Thess. 5. 16. Phil. 4. 4. This spiri∣tual joy or comfort, is nothing else but the cheeri∣ness of our heart in God, and the sense of our interest in him, and in his Promises. And it's sure, that no Providence can render this unseaso∣nable to a Christian. Let us suppose the most afflicted and calamitous state a Christian can be incident to, yet, (1.) Why should sad Providences make him lay by his comforts in God? when as those are but for a moment, but these eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17. (2.) Why should we lay by our joy in God, upon the account of sad Providences without, when at the very worst and lowest ebb, the Saints have infinitely more cause to rejoyce, than to be cast down? There's more in one of their
mercies to comfort them, than in all their trou∣bles to deject them. All your losses are but as the loss of a farthing to a Prince, Rom. 8. 18. (3.) Why should they be sad, as long as their God is with them in all their troubles? As Christ said, Matth. 9. 15. Can the Children of the Bride∣groom be sad, whilest the Bridegroom is with them? So say I, Can the soul be sad, whilest God is with it? Oh methinks, that one Promise, Psal. 91. 15. I will be with him in trouble, should bear you up under all burdens. Let them be cast down, that have no God in trouble to turn to. (4.) Why should they be sad, as long as no outward dispensation of Providence, (be it ne∣ver so sad) can be interpreted as a mark or sign of Gods hatred or Anger, Eccl. 9. 2, 3. There is one event to the righteous and wicked. Indeed, if it were a signification of the Lords wrath against a man, it would justifie our dejection; but this cannot be so: his heart is full of love, whilest the face of Providence is full of frowns. (5.) Why should we be cast down under sad Providences, whilst we have so great security, that even by the hands of these Providences God will do us good, and all these things shall turn to our salvatJon? Rom. 8. 28. By these God is but killing your lusts, weaning your hearts from a vain world, preventing temptations, and ex∣citing your desires after heaven; this is all the hurt they shall do you, and shall that sadden us? (6.) Why should we lay by our joy in God, when as the change of our condition is so nigh? It's but a little while, and sorrows shall flee away: you shall never suffer more: God will wipe away all tears, Revel. 7. 17. Well then, you see there's
no reason upon the account of Providence, to give up your joy and comfort in God. But if you will maintain it under all Providences, then be careful (1.) To Clear up your Interest in, and Title to God. Faith may be separated from comfort, but assurance cannot. (2.) Mortifie your inordinate affections to earthly things. This makes Providences that deprive and cross us so heavy. Mortifie your opinion and affection, and you sensibly lighten your affliction. It is strong affection that makes strong affliction. (3.) Dwell much upon the meditation of the Lords near approach; and then all these things will seem but trifles to you. Let your moderati∣on be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. EXercise heavenly mindedness, and keep your hearts upon things eternal, under all the Provi∣dences with which the Lord exercises you in this world, Gen. 6. 9. Noah walked with God, yet met with as sad Providences in his day, as any man that ever lived since his time. But alas! we find most Providences, rather stops, than steps in our walk with God. If we be under comfor∣table Providences, how sensual, wanton and worldly do our hearts grow! And if sad Provi∣dences befall us, how dedolent or distracted are we! And this comes to pass partly through the narrowness, but mostly, through the deceitfulness of our spirits. Our hearts are narrow, and know not how to manage two businesses of such diffe∣rent natures, as Earthly and Heavenly matters
are without detriment to one. Pectora nostra duas curas non admittunt. But certainly such a frame of spirit is attainable that will enable us to keep on in an even and steddy course with God, whatever befall us. Others have attained it, and why not we? Prosperous Providences are for the most part a dangerous state to the soul. The Moon never suffers an Eclipse, but at full; yet I∣hosaphat's grace suffered no Eclipse from the ful∣ness of his outward condition, who had riches in abundance, and his heart was lifted up in the way of Gods commandments, 2 Chron. 17. 5, 6. Davids life was as full of cares, turmoils and incum∣brances, as most men we read of; yet how spi∣ritual the temper of his heart was, that excellent Book of Psalms, (which was mostly composed amidst those distractions) will acquaint us. The Apostles were cast into as great necessities, and suffered as hard things, as ever men did; yet how raised and heavenly their spirits were amidst all, who sees not? And certainly, if it were not possible to maintain heavenly-mindedness in such a state and posture of affairs, God would never exercise any of his people with such Providences: he would never give you so much of the world to lose your hearts in the love of it, or so little to distract you with the cares of it. If therefore we were more deeply sanctified, and the tenden∣cies of our hearts heaven-ward more ardent and vigorous; If we were more mortified to Earthly things, and could not but keep our due distance from them; our outward conditions would not at this rate draw forth and exercise our inward corruptions, nor would we hazard the loss of so sweet an enjoyment as our fellowship with God
is, for the sake of any concernment our bodies have on Earth. UNder all Providences maintain a contented heart with what the Lord allots you, be it more or less of the things of this world. This grace must run parallel with all Providences. Learn how to be full, and how to suffer want, and in every state to be content, Phil. 4. 12. In this duty all men are concerned at all times, and in every state, not only the people of God, but even the unregenerate also. I will therefore address some considerations proper to both. And first to the unregenerate, to stop their mouths from repining, and charging God oolishly, when Providence crosses them. Let them seriously consider these four things. (1.) That Hell and Eternal damnation are the portion of their cup, according to the tenour of Law, and Gospel threatnings. Whatsoever therefore is short of this is to be admired as the fruit of Gods stupendious patience, and forbear∣ance towards them. Ah poor souls! Know you not, that you are men and women condemned to wrath by the plain sentence of the Law? Mark 16. 16. John 3. 36. 2 Thess. 1. 6, 7. And if so, ure there are other matters to exercise your thoughts, desires, fears and cares about than these. Alas! if you cannot bear a frown of Providence, a light cross in these things, how will you bear the everlasting burnings! A man that is to lose his head to morrow, is not very solicitous what bed he lyes on, or how his Table is urnisht the night before.
(2.) Consider, though you be condemned persons, and have no promise to entitle you to any mercy; yet there are very many mercies in your possession at this day. Be your condition as afflictive as it will, is life nothing? especially considering whither you must sink, when that thread is cut. Are the necessary supports of life nothing? Doth not Providence minister to you these things, though you daily disoblige it, and provoke God to send you to your own place? But, above all, is the Gospel and precious means of salvation nothing, by which you yet are in a capacity of escaping the damnation of Hell? O what would the damned say, if they were but put into your condition once more? What, and yet fret against God, because every thing else suits not your desires? (3.) Consider, that if ever you be rescued out of that miserable condition you are in, such cross Providences, as these you complain of, are the most probable means to do it. Alas! prosperi∣ty and success is not the way to save, but destroy you, Prov. 1. 32. You must be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, if ever your ear be opened to instruction, Job 36. 8, 9, 10. Wo to you, if you go on smoothly in the way in which you are, and meet with no crosses. (4.) Lastly, Consider, all your troubles under which you complain, are pulled down upon your heads by your own sins. You turn Gods mercies into sin, and then fret against God, because he turns your sins into sorrow. Your wayes and doings procure these things to you. Lay your hand therefore upon your mouth and say, Why doth the living man complain, a man for the punish∣ment
of his sin, Lam. 3. 39. But I must turn to the Lords people, who have least pretences of all men to be dissatisfied with any of Gods Provi∣dences, and yet are but too frequently sound in that temper. And to them I shall offer the fol∣lowing considerations. (1.) Consider your spiritual mercJes and privi∣ledges with which the Lord Jesus hath invested you, and repine at your Lot of Providence if you can. One of these mercies alone, hath enough in it to sweeten all your troubles in this world. When the Apostle considered them, his heart was over∣whelmed with astonishment; so that he could not forbear in the midst of all his outward trou∣bles to cry out, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath abounded to us in all spiritual blessings, &c. Eph. 1. 3. Oh, who that sees such an Inheritance setled upon him in Christ, can ever open his mouth more to repine at his Lot of Providence! (2.) Consider your sins, and that will make you contented with your Lot. Yea, consider two things in sin. (1.) What it deserves from God, and (2.) What it requires to mortifie and purge it in you. It deserves from God Eternal ruine: the merit of Hell is in the least vain thought. Every sin forfeits all the mercies you have; and if so, rather wonder your mercies are so many, than that you have no more. Besides, you cannot doubt, but your corruptions require all the crosses, wants and troubles that are upon you, and it may be, a great deal more, to mortifie and subdue them. Don't you find, after all the rods that have been upon you, a proud heart still, a vain and earthly heart still? Oh how many bitter
potions are but necessary to purge out this tough malignant lumour! (3.) Consider how near you are to the Change of your conditJon: have but a little patience, and all will be as well with you as your hearts can desire. It is no small comfort to the Saints, that this world is the worst place that ever they shall be in: things will better every day with them. If the Traveller have spent all his money, yet it doth not much trouble him, if he know himself within a few miles of his own home. If there be no Candles in the house, we do not much matter it, if we are sure it's almost break of day; for then there will be no use for them. This is your case; your salvatJon is nearer than when you belJeved, Rom. 13. 11. I have done with the directive part of this discourse; but before I pass to this fifth Head, I judge it necessary to leave a few Cautions to pre∣vent the abuse of Providence, and your miscar∣riages in your behaviour towards it. And First Caution. If Providence delay the performance of any mercy to you, that you have long waited and prayed for yet see, that you despond not; nor grow weary of waiting upon God for that reason. It pleases the Lord oftentimes to try, and exercise his people thi way, and make them cry, How long Lord, ho long? Psal. 13. 1, 2. These delayes both upon spiritual and temporal accounts are frequent, and when they befaus, we are too apt to interpret them as denyals and fall into a sinful despondency of mind, though
there be no cause at all for it, Psal. 31. 12. Lam. 3. 8. 44. It is not alwayes that the returns of prayer are dispatcht to us in the same hour they are asked of God; yet sometimes it falls out so, Isa. 65. 24. Dan. 9. 23. But though the Lord means to perform to us the mercies we desire▪ yet he will ordinarily exercise our patience to wait for them; and that for these reasons. (1.) Because our time is not the proper season for us to receive our mercies in. Now the season of mercy is a very great circumstance that adds much to the value of it. God judges not as we do; we are all in haste, and will have it now, Numb. 12. 13. But he is a God of judgement, and blessed are they that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18. (2.) Afflictive Providences have not accom∣plished that design upon our hearts they were sent for, when we are so earnest and impatient for a change of them; and till then the rod must not be taken off, Isa. 10. 12. (3.) The more prayers and searchings of heart come between our wants and supplies, our afflictions and reliefs, the sweeter are our reliefs and supplies thereby made to us, Isa. 25. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will rejoyce and be glad in his salvatJon. This re∣compenses the delay, and payes us for all the ex∣pences of our patience. But though there be such weighty reasons for the stop and delay of refreshing comfortable Pro∣vidences; yet we cannot bear it, our hands hang down and we faint, Psal. 69. 3. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. For alas! we judge by sense and ap∣pearance,
and consider not, that Gods heart may be towards us▪ whilst the hand of his Providence seems to be against us. If things continue at one rate with us, we think our prayers are lost, and our hopes perished from the Lord: much more when things grow worse and worse, and our darkness and trouble encreases, as usually it doth just before the break of day and change of our condition, then we conclude, God is angry with our prayers. See Gideon's reply, Judges 6. 13. This even staggered a Moses's faith, Exod. 5. 22, 23. O what groundless Jealousies and suspicions of God are found at such times in the hearts of his own Children! Job 9. 16, 17. Psal. 77. 7, 8, 9. But this is our great evil, and to prevent it in future tryals, I will offer a few proper considera∣tions in the case. The delay of your mercies, is really for your advantage. You read Isa. 30. 18. The Lord waits that he may be gracJous. What is that? Why, it's nothing else but the time of his preparation of mercies for you, and your hearts for mercy, that so you may have it with the greatest advan∣tage of comfort. The foolish Child would pluck the apple while it's green; but when it's ripe, it drops of its own accord, and is more pleasant and wholsome. It's a greater mercy, to have an heart willing to refer all to God, and be at his dispose; than to enjoy presently the mercy we are most eager and impatient for. In that God pleases you, in this you please God. A mercy may be given yo as the fruit of common Providence; but such a temper of heart is the fruit of special grace▪
So much as the glorifying of God is better than the content and pleasure of the creature, so much is such a frame better, than such a fruition. Expected mercies are never nearer, than when the hearts and hopes of Gods people are lowest. Thus in their deliverance out of Egypt, and Ba∣bylon, Ezek. 37. 11. So we have sound it in our own personal concerns: at Evening time it shall be light, Zach. 14. 7. When we look for increasing darkness, light▪ arises. Our unfitness for mercy, is the reason why they are delayed so long. We put the blocks into the way of mercy, and then repine, that they make no more haste to us, Isa. 59. 1, 2. The Lords hand is not shortned, but our iniquitJes have separated be∣twixt him and us. Consider, the mercies you wait for, are the fruits of pure grace, you deserve them not, nor can claim them upon any Title of desert; and therefore have reason to wait for them in a pati∣ent and thankful frame. Consider, how many MillJons of men as good as you by nature, are cut off from all hope and expe∣ctation of mercy for ever, and there remains to them nothing but a fearful expectatJon of wrath. This might have been your case; and therefore be not of an impatient spirit under the expectati∣ons of mercy.
Second Caution. Pry not too curiously into the secrets of Providence, nor suffer your shallow reason arrogantly to judge and censure its designs. There be hard Texts in the Works,ptura suit hîc ositat ae re∣laque∣, quae ingere nili. as well as in the Word of God. It becomes us modestly and humbly to reverence, but not to dogmatize too boldly and positively upon them: a man may easily get a strain by over-reaching. When I thought to know this (saith Asaph) it was too wonder ful for me. I thought to know this, there was the arrogant attempt of reason,neque ; cui  con∣tum in ju∣um vo: hinc quòd cia dei ntur  ne se ra fa∣t non summo culo in  do mens ana. there he pryed into the Arcana of Providence;mero∣ prae. p. 112 but it was too wonderful for me, it was labor iutilis, as Calvin expounds it. He pryed so far into that puzzling Mysterie of the AfflictJons of the Righteous, and Prosperity of the wicked, till it begat envy towards them, and despondency in himself, Psal. 73. v. 3. 13. and this was all he got by summoning Providence to the bar of reason. Holy Job was guilty of this evil, and ingenuously ashamed of it, Job 42. 3. I know, there is nothing in the Word or in the Works of God, that is repugnant to sound rea∣son: but there are some things in both, which are opposite to carnal reason; as well as above right reason; and therefore our reason never shews it self more unreasonable, than in sum∣moning those things to its bar, which tran∣seend its sphere and capacity. Manifold are the mischiefs which ensue upon this practice.
By this we are drawn into an unworthy suspi∣cion and distruct of the faithfulness of God in the Promises. Sarah laught at the tydings of the Son of Promise, because reason contradicted, and told her, it was natually impossible, Gen. 18. 13, 14. Hence comes despondency of mind, and saint∣ness of heart under afflictive Providences; reason can discern no good fruits in them, nor delive∣rance from them, and so our hands hang down in a sinful discouragement, saying, all these things are against us, 1 Sam. 27. 1. Hence flow temptations to deliver our selves by indirect and sinful mediums, Isa. 30. 15, 16. When our own reason fills us with a distruct of Providence, it naturally prompts us to sinful shifts, and there leaves us entangled in the snares of our own making. Beware therefore you lean not too much to your own reasons and understandings. Nothing is more plausible, nothing more dangerous. In other matters it is appointed the Arbiter and Judge, we make it so here, and therefore we are so diident and distrustful notwithstanding the fullest security of the Promises, whilest our rea∣son stands by unsatisfied.
The Fifth Head. HAving given direction for the due manage∣ment of this great and important duty, what remains, but that we now set our hearts to it, and make it the constant work of every day throughout our lives? O what peace, what plea∣sure, what stability, what holy courage and con∣fidence would result from such an observation of Providence as hath been directed to! But alas! we may say with reference to the voices of Di∣vine Providence, as it is Job 33. 14. God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not. Many a time Providence hath spoken InstructJon in duty, Convi∣ctJon for iniquity, Encouragement under despon∣dency; but we regard it not. How greatly are we all wanting to our duty, and comfort by this neglect! It will be but needful therefore to spread before you, the loveliness and excellency of walk∣ing with God in a due and daily observation of his Providences, that our souls may be fully en∣gaged to it.
First Motive. ANd First, Let me offer this, as a moving ar∣gument to all gracious souls; That by this means you may maintain sweet and sensible commu∣nJon with God from day to day. And what is there desirable in this world, in comparison therewith! Thou Lord hast made me glad through thy works: I will trJumph in the works of thy hands, Psal. 2. 4. Your hearts may be as sweetly and sensibly re∣fresht by the works of Gods hands, as by the words of his mouth. Psal. 104. per totum is spent in the consideration of the works of Providence, which so filled the Psalmist's heart, that, by way of ejaculation, he expresses the effect of it, Ver. 34. My MeditatJon of him shall be sweet. Communion with God properly and strictly taken, consists in two things; viz. Gods mani∣festation of himself to the soul, and the souls an∣swerable returns to God. This is that fellowship we have here with God. Now God manifests himself to his people by Providences as well as Ordinances; neither is there any grace in a sanctified soul hid from the gracious influences of his Providential manifestations. Sometimes the Lord manifests his displeasure and anger against the sins of his people in correcting and rebuking Providences. His rods have a chiding voice, Micah 6. 9. Hear the rod and who hath ap∣pointed it. This discovery of Gods anger kindly melts and thaws a gracious soul, and produces a double sweet effect upon it, namely, repentance for sins past, and due cautJon against future sins.
(1.) It thaws and melts the heart for sins com∣mitted. Thus David's heart was melted for his sin, when the hand of God was heavy upon him in affliction, Psal. 32. 4, 5. Thus the Captive Church, upon whom fell the saddest and most dismal Pro∣vidence that ever befell any of Gods people in any age of the world; see how their hearts are broken for sin under this severe rebuke, Lam. 2. 17, 18, 19. And then, (2. For caution against sin for the time to come; it's plain, that the re∣bukes of Providence leave that effect also upon gracious hearts, Ezra 9. 13, 14. Psal. 85. 8. Sometimes he cheers and comforts the hearts of his people with smiling and reviving Providences, both publick and personal. There are times of lifting up as well as casting down by the hand of Providence. The Scene changes, the aspects of Providence are very cheerful and encouraging▪ their Winter seems to be over: they put off their garments of mourning; and then, Ah, what sweet returns are made to hea∣ven by gracious souls! Doth God lift them up by prosperity? they also will lift up their God by praises. See Psal. 18. Title, and v. 1, 2, 3. So Moses and the people with him, Exod. 15. when God had delivered them from Pharaoh, how do they exalt him in a song of thanksgiving, which for the elegancy and spirituality of it, is made an Emblem of the doxologies given to God in glory by the Saints! Rev. 15. 3. Upon the whole, whatever effects our Com∣munion with God in any of his Ordinances doth use to produce upon our hearts, the same we may observe to follow our conversing with him in his Providences. For,
It is usually found in the experience of all the Saints, that in what Ordinance or duty soever they ave any sensible communion with God, it natu∣rally produces in their spirits a deep abasement and humiliation from the sense of divine conde∣scensions to such vile poor Worms as we are. Thus Abraham, Gen. 18. 27. I am but dust and ashes. The same effect follows our converse with God in his Providences. Thus when God had in the way of his Providence prospered Jacob, how doth he lay himself at the feet of God, as a man overwhelmed with the sense of mercy! See Gen. 32. 5, 10. And Jacob said, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercJes, and of all the truth which thou hast shewed thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now am become two bands. Thus also it was with David, 2 Sam. 7. 18. Who am I, and what is my Fathers house, that thou hast brought me hitherto! And I doubt not, but some of you have found the like frame of heart upon you, that these holy men here ex∣pressed. Can you not remember when God lift∣ed you up by Providence, how you cast down your selves before him, and have been viler in your own eyes than ever! Why, thus do all gra∣cious hearts; What am I, that the Lord should do thus and thus for me! O that ever so great and holy a God should thus be concerned for so vile and sinful a Worm! (2.) Doth Communion with God in Ordinances, melt the heart into love to God? Cant. 2. 3, 4, 5. Why, so doth the observation of his Providences also. Never did any man convers with Gods works of Providenc aright, but fnd his heart at some times melted into love to the God of his
mercies, Psal. 18. 1. compared with the Title. When God had delivered him from the hand of Saul, and all his Enemies, he said, I will love thee O Lord my strength. Every man loves the mercies of God, but a Saint loves the God of his mercies. The mercies of God, as they are the fewel of a wicked mans lusts, so they are fewel to maintain a good mans love to God; not that their love to God is grounded upon these exter∣nal benefits, Not thine, but thee, O Lord, is the motto of a gracious soul; but yet these things serve to blow up the flame of love to God in their hearts, and they find it so. Doth Communion with God set the keenest edge upon the soul against sin? You see it doth: and have a pregnant Instance of it in Moses, when he had been with God in the Mount for forty dayes, and had there enjoyed communion with him; when he came down and saw the Calf the people had made; see what an holy paroxysm of zeal and anger it cast his soul into, Exod. 32. 19, 20. Why, the same effect you may discern to follow the Saints converse with God in his Providences. What was that which pierced the heart of David with such a deep sense of the evil of his sin, which is so abundantly manifested in Psalm 51. throughout? Why, if you look in∣to the Title you shall find, it was the effect of what Nathan had laid before him: and if you consult 2 Sam. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10. you shall find, it was the goodness of God manifested to him in the several endearing Providences of his life, which in this he had so evilly requited the Lord for, that broke his heart to pieces in the sense of it: and I doubt not, but some of us have some
times found the like effects, by comparing Gods wayes and our own together. Doth Communion with the Lord enlarge the heart for obedience and service? Surely it is as oyl to the wheels, that makes them run of freely and nimbly their course. Thus when IsaJah had obtained a special manifestation of God, and the Lord askt, whom shall I send? he presents a ready soul for the employment, Isa. 6. 8. Here am I, Lord, send me. Why, the very same effect fol∣lows sanctified Providences, as you may see in Jehosaphat, 2 Chron. 17. 5, 6. and in David, Psal. 116. 12. O when a soul considers what God hath done for him, he cannot chuse but say, what shall I return? how shall I answer these engage∣ments? And thus you see, what sweet Communion a soul may have with God in the way of his Pro∣vidences. O that you would thus walk with him! How much of Heaven might be found on Earth this way! And certainly, it will never repent the Lord he hath done you good, when his mercies produce such effects upon your hearts: he will say of every savour thus improved, It was well bestowed, and will rejoyce over you to do you good for ever.
Second Motive. A Great part of the pleasure and delight of the ChristJan life is made out of the observatJons of Providence. It is said, Psal. 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein: (i. e.) the study of Provi∣dence is so sweet and pleasant, that it invites and allures the soul to search and dive into it. How pleasant is it to a well tempered soul to be∣hold and observe, (1.) The sweet harmony and consent of di∣vine Attributes in the issues of Providence! They may seem sometimes to jarr and clash, to part with each other, and go contrary wayes: but they only seem so to do; for in the winding up, they alwayes meet and embrace each other, Psal. 85. 10. Mercy and Truth have met together: Righ∣teousness and Peace have kissed each other. It is spoken with an immediate reference to that sig∣nal Providence of Israels deliverance out of the Babylonish captivity, and the sweet effect there∣of: wherein the truth and righteousness of God in the promises, did as it were kiss and embrace the mercy and peace that was contained in the performance of them, after they had seemed for seventy years to be at a great distance from each other. For it is an allusion to the usual demonstrati∣ons of joy and gladness, that two dear friends are wont to give and receive, after a long ab∣sence and separation from each other: they no
sooner meet, but they smile, embrace and kiss each other. Even thus it is here. The word may be,Occurrunt nobis, Sy∣riac. (and by some is) rendered, have met us, and that also is true; for when ever these blessed Promises and Performances meet and kiss each other, they are also joyfully embraced and killed by believing souls. There is, I doubt not, a mediate reference of this Scripture to the Mes∣sJah also, and our redemption by him: In him it is that these divine Attributes which before seemed to clash and contradict one another in the business of our salvation, have a sweet agree∣ment and accomplishment. Truth and Righte∣ousness do in him meet with Mercy and Peace in a blessed agreement. What a lovely sight is this! and how pleasant to behold! O if with Habbakuk, chap. 2. v. 3. we would but stand up∣on our Watch-Tower to take due observations of Providence; what rare prospects might we have! Iuther understands it of the Word of God, q. d. I will look into the Word, and observe there how God accomplisheth all things, and brings them to pass, and how his works are the fulfil∣ling of his Word. Others (as Calvin) under∣stand it of a mans own retiring thoughts and me∣ditations, wherein a man carefully observes what purposes and designs God hath upon the World in general, or upon himself in particular, and how the Truth and Righteousness of God in the Word work themselves through all difficulties and impediments, and meet in the mercy, peace and happiness of the Saints at last. Every Be∣liever (take it in which sense you will,) hath his Watch-Tower as well as Hbbkuk: and give me leave to say, it's an Angelical employment to stand
upon it, and behold the consent of Gods Attri∣butes, the accomplishment of his Ends, and our own happiness in the works of Providence. For this is the very joy of the Angels and Saints in Heaven, to see Gods Ends wrought out, and his Attributes glorified in the mercy and peace of the Church, Rev. 14. 1, 2, 3. & 8. (2.) And as it's a pleasant sight to see the harmony of Gods Attributes, so it is exceeding pleasant to behold the resurrection of our own prayers and hopes as from the dead. Why, this you may often see, if you will duly observe the works of Providence towards you. We hope and pray for such and such mercies to the Church, or to our selves; but God delayes the accom∣plishment of our hopes, suspends the answer of our prayers, and seems to speak to us, as Hab. 2. 3. For the visJon is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lye: though it tar∣ry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry: but we have no patience to wait the time of the Promise, our hopes languish and dye in the interim; and we say with the despondent Church, Lam. 3. 18. Our hope is perished from the Lord; but Oh, how sweet and comfortable is it, to see these prayers fulfilled, after we have given up all expectation of them! May we not say of them, as the Scripture speaks of the restoration of the Jews, it is even life from the dead. This was David's case, Psal. 31. 22. he gave up his hopes and prayers for lost, yet lived to see the comfortable and unexpected returns of them. And this was the case of Job, chap. 6. 11. he had given up all expectation of better dayes, and yet this man lived to see a resurrection of all his lost
comforts with an advantage. Think how that change and unexpected turn of Providence affe∣cted his soul: it is with our hopes and prayers as with our Alms, Cast thy bread on the waters, for thou shalt find it after many dayes, Eccles. 11. 1. or as it was with Jacob, who had given ovr all hopes of ever seeing his beloved Joseph again, but when a strange and unexpected Providence had restored that hopeless mercy to him again, Oh how ravishing and transporting was it? Gen. 46. 29, 30. (3.) What a transporting pleasure is it, to behold great blessings and advantages to us wrought by Providence, out of those very things that seemed to threaten our ruine or misery? and yet by due observing the wayes of Providence, you may to your singular comfort find it so. Little did Joseph think his transportation into Egypt, had been in order to his advancement there; yet he lived with joy to see it, and with a thankful heart to acknowledge it, Gen. 45. 5. Wait and observe, and you shall assuredly find that Promise, Rom. 8. 28. working out its way through all Providences. How many times have you been made to say as David, Psal. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. O what a difference have we seen betwixt our afflictions at our first meeting with them, and our parting from them! We have entertained them with sighs and tears, but parted from them with joy, blessing God for them, as the happy Instruments of our good. Thus our fears and sorrows are turned in∣to praises and songs of thanksgiving. (4.) What unspeakable comfort is it for a poor soul, that sees nothing but sin and vileness in
it self, at the same time to see what an high esteem and value the great God hath for him! This may be discerned by a due attendance to Providence, for there a man sees goodness and mercy following him through all his dayes, as it is Psal. 23. 6. Other men prosecute good, and it flyes from them, they can never overtake it; but goodness and mercy follow the people of God, and they cannot avoid or escape it: it gives them chase day by day, and finds them out; even when they sometimes put themselves by sin out of the way of it. In all the Providences that befall them, goodness and mercy pursues them. O with what a meling heart do they sometimes reflect upon these things! and will not the goodness of God be discouraged from following me, notwithstand∣ing all my vile aronts and abuses of it in former mercJes? Lord, what am I, that mercy should thus pursue me, when vengeance and wrath pursue others as good by nature as I am? It certainly argues the great esteem God hath of a man, when he thus follows him with sanctified Providences (whe∣ther they be comforts or crosses) for his good. And so much is plain, from Job 7. 18. Lord what is man, that thou shouldst visit him every morning, and try him every moment? Certainly, Gods peo∣ple are his treasure, and by this it appears that they are so, that he withdraws not his eye from them, Job 36. 7. I say not, that Gods favour and respect to a man, may be concluded singly from his Providences; but sanctified Providences may very much clear it to us: and when it doth so, it cannot but be matter of exceeding great joy. (5.) To conclude, what is there in all this
world, that can give a soul such joy and com∣fort, as to find himself by every thing set on and farthered in his way to Heaven! And yet this may be discerned, by an heedful attendance to the effects and issues of Providences. How cross soever the Winds and Tides of Providence at any time seem to us, yet nothing is more certain, than that they all conspire to hasten sanctified souls to God, and sit them for glory. St. Paul knew, that both his bonds and the afflictions added to them should turn to, or (as the word  imports) finally issue in his salvation, Phil. 1. 19. Not that in themselves they serve to any such purpose; but as they are over-ruled and determined to such an end, through Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. When Prayer the external, and the Spirit the internal means are joyned with them; then Afflictions themselves become excellent means to promote salvation. And have we not with joy observed, how those very things, that sense and reason tell us are opposite to our happiness, have been the most blessed Instruments to pro∣mote it? How hath God blessed Crosses to mor∣tifie corruptJon, wants to kill our wantonness, disap∣pointments to wean us from the world! O we little think, how comfortable those things will be in the review, which are so burdensome to present sense▪
The Third Motive IN the next place, I beseech you consider, What an effectual means the due observation of Provi∣dence will be to over-power and suppress the natural Atheism that is in your hearts. There is a natural seed of Atheism in the best hearts, and this is very much nourished, by pas∣sing a rash and false judgement upon the works of Providence. When we see wicked ones to prosper in the world, and godly men crushed and destroyed in the way of righteousness and inte∣grity; it may tempt us to think, there is no ad∣vantage by religion, and all our self-denyal and holiness, to be little better than lost labour. Thus stood the case with good Asph, Psal. 73. 12, 13. B∣hold, these are the ungodly that prosper in the world, they increase in riches: and what doth the flesh iner from thence? Why no less than the unpro∣fitableness of the wayes of holiness, Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocency. This irreligious Inference carnal rea∣son was ready to draw from the dispensations of outward prosperity to wicked men; but now if we would hedfully observe, either the signal re∣tributions of Providence to many of them in this world, or to all of them in the world to come; O what a full confirmation is this to our faith! Psal. 9. 16. The Lord is known by the Judgements that he executeth. The fifty eighth Psalm contains the Characters of the most prodigious sinners, whose wickedness is aggravated,
By the deliberation with which it's commit∣ted, V. 2. By their habit and custom in it, V. 3. By their incorrigibleness and persistence in it, V. 4, 5. And the Providence of God is there invited To destroy their power, V. 6. and that either By a gradual and insensible consumption of them, V. 7, 8. or, By a suddain and unexpected stroke, V. 9. And what shall the effects of such Providences be to the Righteous? Why, it shall be matter of joy, V. 10. And great confirmation to their faith in God, V. 11. Verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth. And on the contrary, how convincingly clear are those Providences, that demonstrate the Be∣ing, Wisdom, Power, Love and Faithfulness of God, in the supporting, preserving and delive∣ring of the Righteous, in all their dangers, fears and difficulties? In these things the Lord shews himself to his people, Psal. 94. 1. Yea, he shews himself to spiritual eyes in these Providences, as clearly, as the Sun manifest himself by his own beams of light, Hab. 3. 3, 4. His brightness was as the light, and he had borns coming out of his hands, and there was the hiding of his power. It's spoken of the Lords going forth for his people in their deliverance from their Enemies: and then he had horns or rayes and beams of power and mercy coming out of his hands; by his
hands, are meant his Providential administrati∣ons and dispensations, and the horns that came out of them, are nothing else but the glorious display of his Attributes in those Providences. How did God make himself known to his people in that signal deliverance of them out of Egypt? See Exod. 6. 3. then he was known to them by his name Jehovah, in giving being by his Provi∣dences to the mercies promised. Thus when Christ shall give his people the last and greatest deliverance from Antichrist, he shall shew himself to his people in a vesture dipt in blood, and his Name shall be called, The Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. His Name was the Word of God before; but then he was the Word reveal∣ing and discovering the promises and truths of God; now accomplishing and fulfilling them. That his Name is near, his wonderful works de∣clare, Psal. 75. 1. But more particularly, let us bring it home to our own experience. It may be, we find our selves sometimes assaulted with Atheistical thoughts: we are tempted to think God hath left all things below to the course and sway of na∣ture, that our prayers reach him not, as it is Lam. 3. 44. that he regards not what evils befall us. But, tell me Saints, have you not enough at hand to stop the mouths of all such temptations? O do but reflect upon your own Experiences, and solemnly ask your own hearts, (1.) Have you never seen the All-sufficient God in the provisions he hath made for you and yours, throughout all the way that you have gone! Who was it that supplyed to you what∣ever was needful in all your straits? Was it not
the Lord? 'Tis he that hath given bread to them that fear him, and hath been ever mindful of his Covenant, Psal. 111. 5. O do but consider the constancy, seasonableness, and at sometimes the extraordinariness of these provisions, and how they have been given in upon prayer, and shut your eyes if you can, against the convincing evi∣dence of that great truth, Job 36. 7. He withdraweth not his eye from the Righteous. (2.) Have you not plainly discerned the care of God in your preservations from so many and great dangers as you have escaped and been carried through hitherto? How is it, that you have over-lived so many mortal dangers, sick∣nesses, accidents, designs of Enemies to ruine you? It is I presume, beyond question with you, that the very finger of God hath been in these things, and that it is by his care alone, you have been preserved. When God had so signally de∣livered David from a dangerous disease and the plots of Enemies against him, by this (saith he) I know thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not trJumph over me, Psal. 41. 11. he gathe∣red from those gracious protections, the care God had over him. (3.) Have you not plainly discerned the hand of God, in the returns and accomplishments of your prayers? Nothing can be more evident than this, to men of observation, Psal. 34. 4, 5, 6. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. They looked unto him and were lightned, and their faces were not ashamed. This poor man cryed, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. Parallel to this, runs the experience of thousands and ten thousands
of Christians this day; they know they have the petitions they asked of him. The Mercy carries the very impress and stamp of the Duty upon it. So that we can say, This is the Mercy, the very Mercy I have so often sought God about. O how satisfying, and convincing are these things! (4.) Have you not evidently discerned the Lords hand, in the guiding and directing of your paths, to your unforeseen advantage? Things that you never projected for your selves, have been brought about beyond all your thoughts. Many such things are with God; and which of all the Saints hath not ound that word Jer. 10. 23. verified by clear and undeniable experience? The way of man is not in himself. I presume, if you will but look over the mercies you possess thi day, you will find three to one, it may be ten to one thus wrought by the Lord for you. And how satisfying beyond all Arguments in the world are these experiences, That there is a God to whom his people are exceeding dear, a God that performeth all things for them! (5.) Is it not fully convictive, that there is a God who takes care of you, in as much as you have found in all the temptations and difficulties of your lives his promises still fulfilled, and faith∣fully performed in all those conditions? I appeal to your selves, if you have not seen that Promise made good, Psal. 91. 15. I will be with him in trouble; and that 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but will with the temptatJon also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Have not these been as clearly made out by Providence be∣fore
your eyes, as the Sun at Noon day? What room then is left for Atheistical suggestions in your breasts? The Fourth Motive. THe Recording and Recognizing of the perfor∣mances of Providence, will be a singular sup∣port to faith in future exigencJes.Deligentè perpenda∣musres praeteritas, tm praesen∣tes; ut ad futur ∣rati, & ac∣ineti si∣mus:  argumenta¦re solet à praeterito, ad praesens & ab ro∣qu ad uturum. Alsted. This excellent use of it lyes full in the very eye of the Text. There never befell David in all his troubles, a greater strait and distress than this; and doubt∣less his faith had staggered, had not the conside∣rations of former Providence come in to its re∣lief. From this Topick faith argues, and that ve∣ry strongly and conclusively. So did David's faith in many exigencies: when he was to en∣counter the ChampJon of the Philistins, it was from former Providence that he encouraged himself, 1 Sam. 17. 37. And the Apostle Paul improves his experiences to the same purpose; 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. Indeed the whole Scripture is full of it: What Christian understands not the exceeding usefulness of those experiences he hath had to relieve and enliven? But I shall not satisfie my self with the common assertion, than which no∣thing is more tritc in the lips of professors: but will labour to shew you, wherein the great use∣fulness of our Recorded Experiences, for encou∣raging faith labouring under difficulties, consists. To this purpose, I shall desire the Reader to pon∣der seriously these following particulars. How much advantage those things have upon our souls, which we have already felt and tasted,
beyond those which were never relished by any former experience? What is Experience? but the bringing down of the objects of faith to the dijudication and test of spiritual sense? Now when any thing hath been once tasted, felt and judged by a former Experience, it is much more easily believed and received when it occurrs again. It's much easier for faith to travel in a path that is well known to it, having formerly trod it, than to beat out a new one which it never trod, nor can see one step before it. Hence it is, though there be a difficulty in all the acts of faith, yet scarce in any like the first adventure it makes upon Christ; and the reason lyes here, because in the subsequent acts it hath all its former experi∣ences to aid and encourage it; but in the first adventure it hath none at all of its own, it takes a path which it never knew before. To trust God without any tryal or experience, is a more noble act of faith; but to trust him after we have often tryed him, is known to be more easie. O'tis no small advantage to a soul in a new plunge and distress, to be able to say, This is not the first time I have been in these deeps, and yet emerged out of them! Hence it was, that Christ rub'd up his Disciples memories with what Providence had formerly wrought for them in a day of straits, Matth. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. O ye of little faith, why reason ye among your selves, because ye have brought no bread? do ye not yet understand, neither remember? q. d. Were yo never under any strait for bread before now? Is this the first diffi∣culty that ever your faith combated with? No, no, you have felt straits, and experienced the power and care of God in supplying them, be∣fore
now; and therefore I cannot but call you men of little faith; for a very ordinary and small measure of faith, assisted with so much experience as you have had, would enable you to trust God. There is as much difference betwixt believing before, and after experience, as there is betwixt swimming with bladders, and our first venture into the deep waters without them. What a singular encouragement to faith do former Experiences yield it, by answering all the pleas and objections of unbelief drawn from the object of faith? Now there be two things that unbelief stumbles at in God: One is his Power, the other his Willingness to help. (1.) Unbelief objects the impossibility of re∣lief in deep distresses, Psal. 78. 19. Can God fur∣nish a Table in the Wilderness? can be give bread also? can be provide flesh for his people? O vile and unworthy thoughts of God! proceeding from our measuring the immense and boundless power of God, by our own line and measure: because we see not which way relief should come, we conclude, none is to be expected. But all these reasonings of Unbelief are vanquisht by a serious reflection upon our own Experiences: God hath helped, therefore he can, Isa. 59. 1. His hand is not shortned: (i. e.) he hath as much power and ability as formerly. (2.) Unbelief objects against the Will of God, and questions, whether he will now be gra∣cious, though he hath formerly been so. But after so many experiences of his readiness to help, what room for doubting remains? Thus Paul reasoned from the experience of what he had done, to what he would do, 2 Cor. 1. 10.
and so did David, 1 Sam. 17. 36. Indeed if a man had never experienced the goodness of God to him, it were not so heinous a sin to question his willingness to do him good; but what place is left after such frequent tryals? It gives great encouragement to faith, as it answers the objections of unbelief drawn from the subject. Now these Objections are of two sorts also. (1.) Such as are drawn from our great un∣worthiness. How (saith Unbelief) can so sinful and vile a creature expect, that ever God should do this or that for me? 'Tis true, we find he did great things for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Mo∣ses &c. but these were men of eminent holiness, men that obeyed God, and denyed themselves for him, and lived more in a day to his glory, than ever I did all my dayes. Well, but what signifies all this to a soul, that un∣der all its sensible vileness and unworthiness hath tasted the goodness of God as well as they? As unworthy as I am, God hath been good to me not∣withstanding: his mercy appeared first to me, when I was worse than I am now, both in conditJon and dispositJon; and therefore I will still expect the continuance of his goodness to me, though I deserve it not. If when we were EnemJes we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, how much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life? Rom. 5. 10. (2.) Such as are drawn from the extremity of our present condition, if troubles or dangers grow to an height, and we see nothing but ruine and misery in the eye of reason before us; now umbelief becomes importune and trouble∣ome
to the soul; now where are thy prayers, hy hopes, yea, where is now thy God? But all this is easily put by and avoided, by onsulting our experiences in former cases. This is not the first time I have been in these straits, or the first time I have had the same doubts and despondencies; and yet, God hath carried me hrough all, Psal. 77. 7, 8, 9, &c. This is it that suffers not a Christian to unravel all his hopes in an hour of temptation. O how useful are these hings to the people of God! The Fifth Motive. THe Recognition of former Providences will mi∣nister to your souls continual matter of praise and thanksgiving, which is the very employment of the Angels in Heaven, and the sweetest part of our lives on Earth. See Psal. 61. 7, 8. If God will prepare Mercy and Truth for David, he will prepare Praises for is God, and that daily. So Psal. 71. 6. By thee have I been holden up from the womb, thou art he that took me out of my Mothers bowels; (there Mercies from the beginning are recognized.) My praise shall be continually of thee: there the natural result of those recognitions is expressed. There be five things belonging to the praise of God, and all of them have relation to his Providences exercised about us. (1.) A careful Observation of the Mercles we receive from him, Isa. 41. 17, 18, 19, 20. This is fundamental to all praise: God cannot e glorified for the mercies we never noted.
(2.) A faithful Remembrance of the favour▪ received, Psal. 103. 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul▪ and forget not all his benefits. Hence the Lord brands the Ingratitude of his people, Psal. 106. 13. They soon forgat his works. (3.) A due Appreciation and Valuation of every Providence that doth us good, 1 Sam. 12. 24. That Providence that fed them in the Wilderness with Manna, was a most remarkable Providence to them; but they not valuing it at its worth, God had not that praise for it which he ex∣pected, Numb. 11. 6. (4.) The Excitation of all the faculties and powers of the soul in the acknowledgement o these mercies to us. Thus David, Psal. 103. 1 Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within m bless his holy name. Soul-praise is the very sou of praise: this is the fat and marrow of that thank-offering. (5.) A suitable Retribution for the mercies received. This David was careful about, Psal. 116. 1. And the Lord taxes good HezekJah for the neglect of it, 2 Chron. 32. 24, 25. This con∣sists in a full and hearty resignation of all to him, that we have received by Providence from him: and in our willingness actually to part with all for him, when he shall remand it. Thus you see, how all the ingredients to praise, have respect to Providences. But more particu∣larly I will shew you, that as all the ingredients of praise have respect to Providence, so all the mo∣tives and Arguments obliging and engaging souls to praise, are found therein also. To this end consider, how the mercy and goodness of God is exhibited by Providence, to excite our thankful∣ness.
(1.) That the goodness and mercy of God is let out upon his people in his Providences about them: and this is the very root of praise. It is not so much the possession that Providence gives us of such or such comforts, as the goodness and kindness of God in the dispensing of them, that engages a gracious soul to praise, Psal. 63. 3. Be∣cause thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee. To give, maintain and preserve our life, are choice acts of Providences: but to do all this in a way of grace and loving-kind∣ness, this is far better than the gifts themselves: life is but the shadow of death without it: this is the mercy that crowns all other mercies, Psal. 103. 4. It's this a sanctified soul desires God would manifest in every Providence about him, Psal. 17. 7. and what is our praising of God else, but our shewing forth that loving-kindness, which he sheweth us in his Providences? Psal. 92. 1, 2. (2.) As the loving-kindness of God manife∣sted in Providences, is a motive to praise; so the free and undeserved savours of God, dispensed by the hand of Providence, oblige the soul to praise. This was the consideration that melted David's heart into a thankful praising frame, even the consideration of the free and undeser∣ved favours cast in upon him by Providence, 2 Sam. 7. 18. What am I? O Lord God: and what is my Fathers house, that thou hast brought me hi∣therto? (i. e.) raised me by Providence from a mean condition to all this dignity: from following the Ewes, to feed Jacob his people, Psal. 78. 70, 71. O this is it that engages thankfulness, Gen. 32. 10.
(3.) As the freeness of mercies dispensed by Providence, engageth praise; so the Multitudes of mercies heaped this way upon us, strongly ob∣lige the soul to thankfulness. Thus David comes before the Lord encompassed with a multitude of mercies to praise him, Psal. 5. 7. We have our loads of mercies, and that every day, Psalm 68. 19. O what a rich heap will the mercies of one day make, being laid together! (4.) As the multitudes of mercies dispensed by Providence, oblige to praise; so the tender∣ness of Gods mercy manifested in his Providence, leaves the soul under a strong obligation to thank∣fulness. We see what tender resentments the Lord hath of all our wants, straits and burdens, Psalm 103. 13. Like as a Father pitJeth his Chil∣dren, so the Lord pitJeth them that fear him. He is full of bowels, as the word  in James 5. 11. signifies. Yea, there are not only bowels of compassion in our God, but the tender∣ness of bowels, like those of a Mother to her sucking child, Isa. 49. 15. He feels all our pains as if the apple of his eye were touched, Zech. 2. 8. and all this is discovered to his people in the way of his Providences with them, Psal. 111. 2, 3, 4. O who of all the Children of God hath not often found this in his Providences? And who can see it, and not be filled with thankfulness? All these are so many bands clapt by Providence upon the soul, to oblige it to a lie of praise. Hence it is, that the prayers of the Saints are so full of thanks∣givings upon these accounts: 'tis sweet to recount them to the Lord in prayer: to lye at this feet in an holy astonishment at his gracious condescensi∣ons to poor worms.
The Sixth Motive. THe due observatJon of Providence will endear Jesus Christ every day more and more to your souls. Christ is the Channel of grace and mercy: through him are all the dcursus & recursus grati∣arum, all the streams of mercy that low from God to us, and all the returns of praise from us to God, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. All things are ours up∣on no other title, but our being his. Now there be six things in Providence, that are exceedingly endearing of the Lord Jesus Christ to his people: and these are the most sweet and de∣licious parts of all our enjoyments. The purchase of all those mercies which Provi∣dences convey to us, is by his own blood: for not only spiritual and eternal mercies, but even all our temporal ones, are the acquisition of his blood. Look, as sin forfeited all, so Christ resto∣red all these mercies again to us by his death. Sin had so shut up the womb of mercy, that had not Christ made an attonement by his death, it could never have brought forth one mercy to all eter∣nity for us. It is with him that God freely gives us all things, Rom. 8. 32. Heaven it self, and all things needful to bring us thither,Bona gr∣tiae, & glo∣riae, ac pr∣omnibus divinae tutelae opis, ac provi∣dentiae suscutum. among which, is principally included the Tutelage and Aid of Divine Providence: so that whatever good we receive from the hand of Providence, we must put it upon the score of Christs blood; and when we receive it, we may say, 'Tis the price of blood: 'Tis a mercy rising up out of the death of Christ:Poli Sy∣nopsis i loc. It cost him dear, though it come to me
freely: It's sweet in the possessJon, but costly in the acquisitJon. Now this is a most endearing consi∣deration: did Christ dye, that these mercies might live? Did he pay his invaluable blood to purchase these comforts, that I possess? O what transcendent, matchless love, was the love of Christ! You have known Parents that have laid out all their stock of money to purchase Estates for their Children; but when did you hear of any that spent the whole stock and treasure of their blood, to make a purchase for them? If the life of Christ had not been so afflictive and sad to him, ours could not have been so sweet and com∣fortable to us: 'tis through his poverty we are enriched, 2 Cor. 8. 9. These sweet mercies that are born of Providence every day, are the fruits of the travel of his soul. The sanctification of all, is by our union with Christ: 'tis by vertue of our union with his per∣son, that we enjoy the sanctified gifts and blessings of Providence. All these are mercies additional to that great mercy CHRIST, Matth. 6. 33. they are given with him, as in Rom. 8. 32. this is the Tenure by which we hold them, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Look, what we lost in Adam, is restored again with Advantage in Christ: immediately up∣on the fall, that curse, Gen. 2. 17. seized upon all the miserable posterity of Adam, and upon all their comforts, outward as well as inward; and this still lyes heavy upon them: All that Provi∣dence doth for them that are Christless, is but to feed so many poor condemned wretches, till the sentence they are under, be executed upon them: it is indeed bountiful and open-handed to many of them; and fills them with Earthly comforts;
but not one special sanctified mercy is to be found among all their enjoyments: these gifts of Providence do but deceive, defile and destroy them through their own corruptions, and for want of union with Christ, Prov. 1. 32. The pro∣sperity of fools shall destroy them. But when a man is once in Christ, then all Pro∣vidences are sanctified and sweet, Tit. 1. 15. Vn∣to the pure, all things are pure. A little that a righ∣teous man hath, is better than the treasures of many wicked, Psal. 37. 16. Now Christ becomes an head of Influence, as well as of DominJon; and in all things he consults the good of his own mem∣bers, Eph. 1. 22. The dispensation of all our comforts and mer∣cies, is by his direction and appointment. It's true, the Angels are employed in the Kingdom of Providence, they move the wheels, (i. e.) are instrumental in all the revolutions in this lower world; but still they receive directions and or∣ders from Christ, as you may see in that admira∣ble Scheme of Providences, Ezek. 1. 25, 26, &c. Now what an endearing meditation is this! What ever Creature be instrumental for any good to you, it's your Lord Jesus Christ that gave the or∣ders and commands to that Creature to do it; and without it they could have done nothing for you: It's your head in Heaven that consults your peace and comfort on Earth: these be the fruits of his care for you. So in the prevention and restraints of evil; 'tis he that bridles in the wrath of Devils and men; he holds the reins in his own hands, Rev. 2. 10. 'Twas the care of Christ over his poor Sheep at Damascus, that stopt the raging Adversary who was upon
the way, designing to destroy them, Acts. 9. The continuatJon of all your mercies and com∣forts, outward as well as inward, is the fruit of his Intercession in Heaven for you. For look, as the offering up of the Lamb of God a Sacrifice for sin, opened the door of mercy at first; so his ap∣pearing before God as a Lamb that had been slain, still keeps that door of mercy open, Rev. 5. 6. Heb. 9. 24. By this his intercession, our peace and comforts are prolonged to us, Zech. 1. 12, 13. Every sin we commit, would put and end to the mercies we possess, were it not for that caution which is put in for us by it, 1 ohn 2. 1, 2.' If any man sin, we have an Avocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the pro∣pitJatJon for our sins, &c. This stops all pleas, and procures new pardons for new sins. Hence it is he saves to the uttermost, to the last compleating act, Heb. 7. 25. New sins do not irritate our former pardons, nor cut off our priviledges set∣led upon us in Christ. The returns and answers of all your prayers and cryes to Heaven for the removing of your afflictions, or supply of your wants, are all pro∣cured and obtained for you by Jesus Christ. He is the Master of your requests; and were it not that God had respect to him, he would never re∣gard your cryes to him, nor return any answer of peace to you, how great soever your distresses should be, Rev. 8. 3, 4. 'Tis his name that gives our prayers their acceptance, John 15. 16. because the Father can deny him nothing, therefore your prayers are not denyed. Doth God condescend to hear you in the day of trouble? Doth he convince you by your own experience, that your
prayers have power with God, and do prevail? O see how much you owe to your dear Lord Jesus Christ, for this high and glorious priviledge! The Covenant of Grace, in which all your comfortable enjoyments are comprized, and by which they are secured, sanctified, and sweetned to you, is made in Christ, and ratified by him be∣twixt God and you. Your mercies are all com∣prized in this Covenant, even your daily bread, Psalm 111. 5. as well as your justification, and other spiritual mercies. 'Tis your Covenant interest, that secures to you what ever it comprizes, Isa. 55. 3. hence they are called the sure mercies of David. Nay, this is it that sanctifies them, and gives them  nature of special and peculiar mercies. One  mercy is worth a thousand common mer∣cies. And being sanctified and special mercies, they must needs be exceeding sweet beyond all other mercies. On these accounts it was▪ that David so rejoiced in his Covenant Iteres, though laden with many afflictions,  Sam. 23. 5. But now all this hangs entirely upon Christ. The New Testament is in his bloo, 1 Cor. 11. 5. and whatever mercies you reap from that Cove∣nant, you must thank the Lord Jesus Christ for them. Put all this together, and then think how such considerations will endear Christ to your souls!
The Seventh Motive. THe due observations of Providence have a mar∣vellous efficacy to melt the heart, and make it thaw and relent ingenuously before the Lord. How can a sanctified heart do less, than melt into tears, whilst it either considers the dealings of God from time to time with it: or compares the mercies received, with the sins committed; or the different administrations of Providence to∣wards it self and others! Let a man but set himself to think deliberately and closely of the wayes of providence towards him, let him but follow the Tract  rovi∣dence, as it hath led him all along the way that he hath gone, and if there be any principle of gracious tenderness in him, he shall meet with variety of occasions to excite and draw it forth. Reader, go back with thy serious thoughts (1.) To the beginning of the wayes of God with thee, the mercies that brake out early in thy youth, even the first born mercies from the womb of Provi∣dence; and thou wilt say, What need I go far∣ther? Here is enough, not only to moves, but overwhelm my heart. May I not from this time cry unto thee, my Father, thou art the guide of my youth, Jer. 3. 4. What a critical time is the time of youth? it's the moulding age; and (or∣dinarily) according to the course of those lead∣ing Providences, after Providences do steer their course. What levity, rashness, ignorance and strong propensions to sin and ruine accompanied that age? How many being then left to the sway
of their own lusts, run themselves into those sins and miseries, which they never recover them∣selves from to their dying day? These, like the errors of the first concoction, are rarely rectified afterwards. Did the Lord guide thee by his Providence, when but a Child? Did he then pre∣serve thee from those follies and miscarriages, which blast the very blossom, and nip the bud, so that no good fruit is to be expected afterwards? Did he then cast thee into such families, or among such company and acquaintance, as moulded and formed thy spirit to a better temper? Did he then direct thee into that way of employment, wherein thou hast seen so large a train of happy consequents ever since following thee? And wilt thou not from henceforth say, My Father, my Fa∣ther, thou art the guide of my youth? Or (2.) Let us but bring out thoughts close to the Providences of after times, and consider how the several changes and removes of our lives have been ordered for us: Things we never foresaw nor designed (but much better for us, than what we did design) have been all along ordered for us. The way of man is not in himself. Gods thoughts have not been our thoughts, nor his wayes our wayes. Among the eminent mercies of thy life, Reader, how many of them have been meer surprizals to thee? Thy own projects have been thrust aside, to make way for better things designed by Provi∣dence for thee. Nay, (3.) Do but observe the Springs and Autumns of Providence, in what order they have flourished and faded with thee, and thou wilt find thy self over-powered with the sense of Divine Wisdom and Goodness: when necessity required,
such a friend was stirred up to help thee, such a place opened to receive thee, such a Relation raised up or continued to refresh thee: and no sooner doth Providence deprive thee of any of them, but either thy need of them ceases, or some other way is opened to thee. O the depth of Gods Wisdom and Goodness! O the matchless tenderness of God to his people! (4.) Compare the dealings of Providence with you and others, yea, with others that sprang up with you in the same generation, it may be, in the same families, and from the same Parents, it may be in families greater and more flourishing in the world then yours, and see the difference, upon many great accounts, it hath made betwixt you and them. I knew a ChristJan, who after many years separation, was visited by his own Brother, the very sight of whom, wrought upon him, much as the sight of Benjamin did upon Jo∣seph, so that he could not refrain to fall upon his neck, and weep for joy; but after a ew hours spent together, finding the spirit of his Brother, not only estranged rom all that's spiritual and serious, but also very vain and prophane, he ha∣stened to his chamber, shut the door upon him, threw himself down at the feet of God, and with flowing eyes, and a melting heart, admired the di∣stinguishing Grace of God, saying, Was not Esau Jacob's Brother? O Grace, Grace, astonish∣ing Grace! (5.) Compare the carriage of Providence to∣wards you, with your own carriage towards the Lord; and it must needs melt your hearts to find so much mercy bestowed, where so much sin hath been committed. What place did you ever live
in, where you cannot remember great provoca∣tions committed, and manifold mercies notwith∣standing that, received? O with how many not∣withstandings and neverthelesses, hath the Lord done you good in every place! What Relation hath not been abused by sin; and yet both raised up and continued by Providence for your comfort? In every place God that left the marks of his goodness, and you the remembrances of your sinfulness: give your selves but leave to think of these things, and it's strange if your hearts re∣lent not at the remembrance of them. (6.) Or Lastly, Do but compare your dan∣gers with your fears, and both with the strange out-letts and doors of escape Providence hath opened, and it cannot do less than over power you with a full sense of divine care and good∣ness. There have been dark clouds seen to rise over you, judgement even at your door, sometimes threating your life, sometimes your liberty, sometimes your estates, and sometimes your dear∣est relations, in whom it may be, your life was bound up; remember in that day, what faintness of spirit seized you, what charges of guilt stirring up fears of the issue within you: You turned to the Lord in that distress, and hath he not made a way to escape, and delivered you from all your fears? Psal. 34. 4. Oh is your life such a continued throng, such a distracted hurry, that there is no room to be found with Christians to sit alone, and think on these things, and press these marvellous discove∣ries of God in his Providences upon their own hearts? Surely, might these things but lye upon
our hearts, talk with our thoughts by day, and lodge with us at night; they would even force their passage down to our very Reins. The Eighth Motive. DVe observation of Providence will both beget and secure inward tranquillity in your minds amidst the vicissudes and revolutions of things in this unstable vain world. Psal 4. 8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, for the Lord only maketh me dwell in safety. He resolves the sinful fears of Events shall not rob him of his inward quiet, nor torture his thoughts with anxious presages: he will commit all his concerns into that faithful fatherly hand that had hitherto wrought all things for him, and he means not to lose the comfort of one nights rest, nor bring the evil of to morrow upon the day, but knowing in whose hand he was, wisely enjoyes the sweet felicity of a resigned will. Now this Tranquillity of our minds is as much begotten and preserved by a due considera∣tion of Providence, as by any thing whatsoever. Hence it was, that our Lord Jesus Christ, when he would cure the Disciples anxious and distracting sollicitudes about a livelihood, bids them consi∣der the care Providence hath over the Birds of the air, and the Lillies of the field, how it feeds the one, and clothes the other without any anxi∣ous care of theirs; and would have them well consider those Providences, and reason them∣selves into a calm and sweet composure of spirit from those considerations, Mat. 6. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
Two things destroy the peace and tranquillity of our lives, our bewailing past disappointments, or fearing future ones. But would we once learn previ∣sion and provision to be divine prerogatives, and take notice how often Providence baffles those that pretend to it, causing the good they fore∣saw (according to their conjectures) coming to their hand, yet to balk them and lee from them: and the evil they thought themselves sufficiently secured from, to invade them. I say, would we consider how Providence daily baffles these Pre∣tensions of men, and asserts its own Dominion, it would greatly conduce to the tranquillity of our lives. This is a great truth, that there is no face of Adversity of formidable, but being viewed from this station, would become amicable. Now there be several things in the consideration of Provi∣dence, that naturally and kindly compose the mind of a Christian to peace, and bring it to a sweet rest, whilst events hang in a doubtful suspense. As First, The Supremacy of Providence, and its uncontroulable power in working. This is often seen in the good that it brings us in a way that's above the thoughts and cares of our minds, or labour of our hands. I had not thought (said Jacob) to have seen thy face; and lo, God hath shewed me thy seed also, Gen. 48. 11. There is a frequent coincidency of Providences in a way of surprizal, which from no appearance, or the re∣motest tendency of outward causes could be foreseen, but rather falls visibly cross to the present Scheme, and posture of our affairs. Nothing tends to convince us of the vanity and
folly of our own sollicitudes and projections, more than this doth. The profound Wisdom of Providence in all that it performeth for the people of God. The Wheels are full of eyes, Ezek. 1. 18. (i.e.) there is an intelligent and wise Spirit that sits upon, and governs the affairs of this world. This Wisdom shines out to us in the unexpe∣cted, yea, contrary events of things. How oten have we been courting some beautiful appearance that invited our senses, and with trembling shun'd the formidable face of other things, when not∣withstanding the issues of Providence have con∣vinced us, that our danger lay in what we couted, and our good in what we so studiously declined? This also is a sweet principle of peace and quiet to the Christians mind, that he knows not, but his good may be imported in what seemed to threaten his ruine. Many were the distresses and straits of Israel in the Wilderness, but all was to humble them, that he might do them good in the latter end, Deut. 8. 16. Sad and dis∣mal was the face of that Providence that sent them out of their own land, into the land of the Chaldeans; yet even this was a project to do them good, Jer. 24. 5. How often have we re∣tracted our rash and headlong censures of things upon experience of this truth! and been taught to bless our afflictions and disappointments in the name of the Lord. Many a time have we kissed those troubles at parting, which we met with trembling. And what can promote peace under doubtful Providences more effectu∣ally than this?
The experiences we have had throughout our lives of the faithfulness and constancy of Provi∣dence, are of excellent use to allay and quiet our hearts in any trouble that befalls us. Hitherto God hath helped, 1 Sam. 7. 12. We never found him wanting to us in any case hitherto: this s not the first: strait we have been in: the first time that our hearts and hopes have been low. Surely, he is the same God now as heretofore, his hand is not shortned, neither doth his faithfulness ail. O recount in how great extremities former expe∣rience hath taught you not to despair! The conjectures Christians may make of the way of Providence towards them, from what its former methods have been towards them, is ex∣ceeding quieting and comfortable. It's usual with Christians, to compare times with times, and to guess at the issue of one Providence by another. The Saints do know what course Pro∣vidence usually holds, and accordingly with great probability collect what they may expect from what in like cases they have formerly observed. Christian, examine thine own heart, and its for∣mer observations, and thou wilt find, as Psal. 89. 30, 31, 32. that it's usually the way of God to prepare some smart rods to correct thee, when either thy heart hath secretly revolted from God, and is grown vain, careless and sensual, or when thy steps have declined, and thou hast turned aside to the commission of iniquity. And then when those rods have been sanctified to humble, reduce and purge thy heart, it's usually observed, that those sad Providences are then upon the change, and then the Lord changes the voice of his Providence towards thee, Jer. 3. 12, 13.
Go, and proclaim these words towards the North, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, saith the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, saith the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniqui∣ty, &c. If therefore I find the blessed effects of the rod upon me, that it hath done its work, to break the hard heart, and pull down the proud heart, and awaken the drowsie heart, and quicken the slothful, negligent, lazy heart; now with great probability I may conjecture, a more com∣fortable aspect of Providence will quickly ap∣pear, the refreshing and reviving time is nigh. It is usual with Christians, to argue themselves into fresh reviving hopes, when the state of things is most forlorn, by comparing the Providences of God one with another. (1.) It is a mighty composing meditation, when we compare the Providences of God to∣wards the inanimate and irrational Creatures, with his Providences towards us. Doth he take care for the very Fowls of the air, for whom no man provides, as well as those at the door which we daily feed? Doth he so clothe the very Grass of the field? hear the young Ravens, when they cry for meat? and can it be supposed, he should forget his own people, that are of much more va∣lue than these? (2.) Or if we compare the bounty and care that Providence hath expressed to the Enemies of God, how it feeds and clothes and protects them, even whilst they are fighting against him with his own mercies; it cannot but quiet and satisfie us, that surely he will not be wanting to that people
upon whom he hath set his love, to whom he hath given his Son, and for whom he hath de∣signed Heaven it self. (3.) Or Lastly, It must needs quiet us, when we consider, what the Lord did for us in the way of his Providence, when we our selves were in the state of nature, and enmity against God. Did he not then look after us, when we knew him not? provided for us, when we owned him not in any of his mercies? bestowed thousands of mercies upon us, when we had no title to Christ or any one promise? and will he now do less for us, since we are reconciled and become his Children? Surely, such considerations as these, cannot: but fill the soul with peace, and preserve the tranquillity of it under the most distracting Pro∣vidences. The Ninth Motive. DVe observations of the wayes of God in his Pro∣vidences towards us, have an excellent useful∣ness and aptitude to advance and improve Holiness in our hearts and lives. For, The Holiness of God is manifested to us in all his works of Providence, Psal. 145. 17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. The Instruments used by Providence may be very sinful & wicked, they may aim at base ends, & make use of wicked mediums to attain them; but it's certain Gods designs are most pure, and all his workings are so too. Though he permits, limits, orders and over-rules many unholy persons and actions; yet
in all he works like himself; and his Holiness is no more defiled and stained by their impurity; than the Sun-beams are by the noisome exhalati∣ons of a dunghill, Deut. 32. 4. He is the rock, his work is perfect; for all his wayes are judgement, a God of truth, and without iniquity: just and right is he. So that in all his Providences he sets before us a perfect pattern of holiness, that we might be holy in all our wayes, as our Father is in all his wayes. But this is not all. His Providences if duely observed, promote Holiness, by stopping up our way to sin. Oh if men would but note the designs of God in his pre∣ventive Providences, how useful would it be to keep them upright and holy in their wayes? For why is it, that the Lord so often hedges up our way with thorns, as it is Hosea 2. 6. but that we should not ind our paths to sin? Why doth he clogg us, but to prevent our straying from him? 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be exalted above measure, there was given me a thorn in the slesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me. O 'tis good to attend to these works of God, and study the meaning of them. Sometimes Providence crosseth a hopeful thriving project to advance our estate, and fru∣strates all our labours and cares; Why is this? but to hide pride from man. Shouldst thou pro∣sper in the world, that prosperity might be thy snare, and make thee a proud, sensual, vain oul; the Lord Jesus sees this, and therefore withdraws the food and fuel from thy corruptions. It may be thou hast a crazy, diseased, weak bo∣dy; thou labourest under often infirmities: in this, the Wisdom and Care of God over thy soul is manifested; for wert thou not so clogged,
how probable is it, that much more guilt might be contracted? Your poverty doth but clog your pride; reproaches clog your ambition: want prevents wantonness: sickness of body conduces to the prevention of many inward gripes of con∣science, and groans under guilt. The Providences of God may be observed to conduce to our holiness, not only by preventing sin,God would no ub so hard, if  were not to fetch ou the dirt that is ingraid in our natures: loves pu∣rity so well, he had rath see a hol than a sp in his childs gament. G∣nalls Chstian Armour, p. 2. p. 22▪ that we may not all into it; but also by purg∣ing our sins when we are fallen into them, Isa. 27. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. So Dan. 11. 33, 34, 35. they are of the same use that fire and water are for purging and cleansing; not that they can purge us from sin in their own vertue and power, for if so, those that have most afflictions would have most grace also; but it is in the vertue of Christ's blood, and God's bles∣sing upon afflictive Providences, that they purge us from sin. A Cross without a Crist never did any man good. Now in God's afflictive Provi∣dences for sin there are many things that tend to the purging of it. For (1.) Such rebukes of Providence discover the displeasure of God against us: the Lord frowns upon us in those Providences. Our father is an∣gry, and these are the tokens of it; and nothing works more to the melting of a gracious hear than this. Must not the heart of a Child melt and break whil'st the father is angry. O this is more bitter to our Spirits than all the smart and anguish of the affliction can be to our flesh. See Psal. 38. 1, 2, 3. O Lord rebuke me not in thy wrath; neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure: for thine arrows stick fast in me; and thine band presseth
me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my bones be∣cause of my sin. (2.) By these rebukes of sin, the evil of sin is discovered more sensibly to us, and we are made to see more clearly the evil of it in these glasses of affliction which Providence at such times sets before us, than formerly we ever saw. Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee; and thy back∣slidings shall reprove thee, know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord of Hosts. O the Gall and Worm∣wood that we taste in it under God's rebukes for it! (3.) Providence blasts and frustrates all sin∣ful projects to the people of God: whoever thrives in them, they shall not. Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And this also convinces them of the folly that is in sin, and makes them cleave to the way of simplicity and integrity. Holiness is promoted in the soul by cautioning and warning the soul against sin for time to come. Job 34. 31▪ I have born chastisement, I will not of∣fend any more. O happy Providences, how smart soever, that make the soul for ever araid of sin! surely such rods are well bestow'd. This gives God his end: and if ever we sorrowed after a godly sort, in the day of our troubles it will work this carefulness. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, &c. O if ever a man have been under a sanctified rod which hath shewed him the evil of sin, and kindly hum∣bled him for it; and a temptation should again
sollicite him to the same evil: Why thinks he, what a madness is it for me to buy repentance at so dear a rate? Have I not smarted enough already? You may as well ask me, whether I will run again into the ire, after I have been already scorcht in it? To conclude, Providences do greatly improve and promote holiness by drawing the Soul into the presence of God, and giving it the opportu∣nity and occasion of much communion with him. Comfortable Providences will do this, they will melt a man's heart in love to the God of his mer∣cies, and so pain his bowels that he shall not be quiet till he have found a place to pour out his Soul in thankfulness to the Lord. 2 Sam. 7. 18. Afflictive Providences will drive us to the feet: of God, and there make us to judge and con∣demn our selves. And all this hath an excellent use to destroy sin, and promote holiness in the Soul. The Tenth Motive. LAstly, The ConsideratJon and study of Providence will be of singular use to us in a dying hour. Hereby we treasure up that which will singularly sweeten our death to us, and greatly assist our faith in the last encounter. You find when Jacob dyed, what re∣flections he had upon the dealings of God with him in the various Providences of his life. See Gen. 4. 8. 3, 7, 15, 16. In like manner you ind Joshua recor∣ding the Providences of God when at the brink of the grave: they were the subject of his dying dis∣course.
Josh. 24. And I cannot but think it a sweet close to the life of any Christian: It must needs sweeten a death-bed to recount there the several remarkable passages of God's care and love to us from our beginning to that day: to reflect upon the mercies that went along with us all the way, when we are come to the end of it. O Christians, treasure up these instances for such a time as that is; that you may go out of the world blessing God for all the goodness and truth he hath performed to you all your life long. Now the meditations of these things must needs be of great use in that day, if you consider the following particulars. The time of Death is the time when Souls are usually most violently assaulted by Satan with horrid temptations and black suggestions. We may say of that igurative, as it's said of▪ the na∣tural Serpent, nunquam nisi morJens, producitur in longum, He never exerts his utmost rage till the last encounter; and then his great design is to perswade the Saints, that God loves them not, hath no care nor regard for them, nor their cryes; though they pray for ease and cry for sparing mercy, they see none comes. He handles them with as much roughness and severity as other men; yea, many of the vilest and most dissolute wretches endure less torments, and are more gently handled than they. Psal. 73. 4. there are no bands in their death, when as thou must go through a long lane of sickness to the grave, and endure many deaths in one. But what credit can these plausible tales of Sa∣tan obtain with a Christian who hath been trea∣suring up all his life long the memorJals of God's
tender regard both to his wants and prayers, and that hath careully remarked the evi∣dent returns of his prayers, and gracious con∣descensions of God to him rom his beginning to that moment? In this case his saith is migh∣tily assisted by thousands of experiences which back and encourage it, and will not suffer the soul to give up so easily a truth which he hath so often sensibly felt and tasted. I am sure (saith he) God hath had a tender fatherly care of me ever since I became his: he never fail∣ed me yet in any former strait; and I cannot believe he will do so now. I know his love is like himself, unchangeable. Job. 13. 1. having loved his own which were in the world he loved them unto the end: for this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death. Psal. 48. 14. Did he love me in my youth, and will he cast me off in my decrepit age? O God, (saith the Psal∣mist) thou hast taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works, now also when I am old and gray headed, O God, forsake me not, Psal. 71. 17, 18. At death the Saints are engaged in the last, and one of the most eminent works of faith, even the committing themselves into the hands of God, when we are lanching forth into that vast Eterni∣ty, and entring into that new state which will make so great a change upon us in a moment. In this Christ sets us a pattern, Luke 23. 46. Father into thy hands I commend my spirit; and having said thus he gave up the Ghost. So Stephen at his death, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit, and immedi∣ately fell asleep, Act. 7. 59. There be two signal and remarkable acts of
faith, both exceedingly difficult, viz. its first act, and its last. The first is a great venture that it makes of it self upon Christ: and the last is a great venture too, to cast it self into the Ocean of Eternity upon the credit of a Promise. But yet I know the first adventure of the Soul upon Christ is much more difficult than the last adventure upon death; and that which makes it so is in great measure, the manifold recorded ex∣periences that the Soul hath been gathering up from the day of its espousals to Christ unto its dying which is (in a sense) its marriage day. Oh with what encouragement may a Soul throw himself into the arms of that God with whom he hath so long conversed and walked in this world! Whose visits have been sweet and frequent, with whom the soul hath contracted so intimate ac∣quaintance in this world; whom it hath com∣mitted all its affairs to formerly, and still ound him a faithful God; and now hath no reason to doubt, but it shall find him so in this last distress and exigence also. At death the people of God receive the last mercies that ever they shall receive in this world by the hand of Providence, and are immediately to make up their Accounts with God or all the mercies that ever they received from his hand. What can be more suitable therefore to a dying person, than to recount with himself the mer∣cies of his whole life, the manifold receipts of favour for which he is to reckon with God spee∣dily: and how shall this be done without a due and serious observation and recording of them now? I know there are thousands of mercies forgotten by the best of Christians: a memory of brass cannot
contain them: And I know also that Jesus Christ must make up the Account for us, or it will ne∣ver pass with God; yet it is our duty to keep the Accounts of our own mercies, and how they have been improv'd by us, for we are Stewards, and then are to give an Account of our Stewardship. At death we owe an Account also to men, and stand obliged (if there be opportunity for it) to make known to them that survive us what we have seen and found of God in this world, that we may leave a testimony for God with men, and bring up a good report upon his ways. Thus dying Jacob when Joseph was come to take his last farewell of him in this world, strengthened him∣self and sate upon the bed, and related to him the eminent appearances of God to him, and the places where, Gen. 48. 2, 3. as also an account of his afflictions, Verse 7. So Joshua in his last speech to the people makes it his business to vin∣dicate and clear the truth of the Promises, by re∣counting to them how the Providence of God had fulfill'd the same to a tittle in his day. Josh. 23. 14. And behold (saith he) this day I am going the way of all the earth, and ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls, that not one thing hath failed of all the good things which the Lord your God spake concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath failed thereof. And certainly 'tis of great importance to the world, to understand the Judgements, and hear of the Experiences of dying men. They of all men are presumed to be most wise and most se∣rious: Besides, this is the last opportunity that ever we shall have in this world to speak for God. O then what a sweet thing would it be
to close up our lives with an honourable Account of the ways of God! to go out of the world bles∣sing him for all the mercies and truth which he hath here performed to us! how would this encourage weak Christians, and convince the Atheistical world, that verily there is a reality and an ex∣cellency in the ways and people of God! At death we begin the Angelical life of praise and thanksgiving. We then enter upon that everlasting sweet employment; and as I doubt not but the Providences in which we were con∣cerned in this world will be a part of that Song which we shall sing in Heaven, so certainly it will become us to tune our hearts and tongues for it whil'st we are here, and especially when we are ready to enter upon that blessed state. O there∣fore let it be your daily meditation and study what God hath been to you, and done for you, from the beginning of his way hither∣to. And thus I have spread before you some en∣couragements to this blessed work. Oh that you would be perswaded to this lovely and every way beneicial practice. This I dare presume to say, that whoever finds a careful and a thank∣ful heart to record and treasure up the daily ex∣periences of God's mercy to him, shall never want new mercies to record to his dying day. It was said of ClaudJan that he wanted matter sui∣table to the excellency of his parts; but where is the head or heart that is suitable to this matter? who can utter the mighty works of the Lord? who can shew forth all his praise? Psal. 106. 2.
Thus I have through the aid of Providence dispatched the main design I aimed at in the choice of this subject. All that remains will now be speedily finished in some few Corollaries to be briely noted upon the whole, and three or four practical Cases to be stated. You have heard how Providence perormeth all things for you▪ Learn thence, First Corollary. THat God is therefore to be owned by you in all that befalls you in this world, whether it be in way of success and comfort, or of trouble and afflictJon. O 'tis your duty to observe his hand and dispo∣sal: When God gives you comforts, 'tis your great evil not to observe his hand in them. Hence was that charge against Israel, os. 2. 8. She did not know that I gave her Corn and Wine and Oil, and multiplJed her Silver and Gold (i. e.) she did not actually and affectionately consider my care over her and goodness to her, in these mer∣cies. And so for afflictions, 'tis a great wick∣edness, when God's hand is listed up not to see it. Isa. 26. 11. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, Isa. 1. 3. the most dull and stu∣pid creatures know their benefactors. O look to the hand of God in all; and know, that neither your comforts nor afflictions do arise out of the dust, or spring up out of the ground.
Second Corollary. IF God perform all things for you, how great is his condescensJon to and care over his people! What is man (saith Job, chap. 7. v. 17, 18.) that thou shouldst magnifJe him, and set thine heart upon him? and that thou shouldst visit him every morning, and try him every moment? Such is his tender care over you that he withdraws not his eye from you. See Job 36. 7. lest any hurt you, he himself will guard and keep you day and night. Isa. 27. 3. Should he withdraw his eye or hand one moment from you, that moment would be your ruine. Ten thousand evils watch but for such an opportunity, to rush in upon you, and destroy you and all your comorts. You, are too dear to him to be trusted in any hand but his own. Deut. 33. 3. All his Saints are in thy hand. Third Corollary. LEarn hence how you are obliged to perform all dutJes and services for God, who performeth all things for you. It was the wish of a good man, optarem id me esse Deo, quod est mihi ma∣nus mea, Oh that I could be to God what my hand is to me, Viz. a serviceable useful in∣strument. Shall God do all things for you, and will you do nothing for God? Is Provi∣dence every moment at work for you, and will you be idle? To what purpose then is all that God hath done for you? Is it not the
aim and design of all, to make you a fruitful people? If God plant, and fence, and water you by Providence, sure he looks you should bring forth fruit. Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. O that in return for all the benefits of Providence, you would say to God, as grateful Elisha said to the Shunamite, behold thou hast been careful for us with all this care, what is to be done for thee? 2 Kings 4. 13. and with David, Psal. 116. 12. what shall I ren∣der unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me! He is ever doing you good; be you always abounding in his work. His Providence stands by you in your greatest distresses and dangers; don't you flinch from God when his service and your duty is compassed about with difficulties. O be active for that God who is acting every mo∣ment for you. Fourth Corollary. DOth God perform all things for his people? Do not distrust him then as often as new or great difficultJes arise. Why should you think he that hath done so many things for you, will now do no more? Surely, the Lords hand is not short∣ned that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it cannot hear; if any thing put a stop to his mercy, 'tis your iniquities, your distrust and infidelity. Isa. 59. 1. How long will it be ere you belJeve him? If a thousand and ten thousand of tryals and experiences of his tender care, faithfulness and love will cure this distemper in you, you have them at hand to do it. If the frequent con∣futations of this your distrust by the unexpected
breakings out of mercy for you under like discou∣ragements will cure it, look back and you may see them. Certainly you have been often forced by Providence with shame and repentance to re∣tract your rash censures of his care; and yet will you fall into the same distemper again? Oh that you would once learn this great truth, That no man ever wanted that mercy, which he wanted not an heart to trust and wait quietly upon God for. You never yet sought God in vain, except when you sought him vainly. The Fith Corollary. DOth God perform all things for you?onsilia & reces non  fine adhi∣eri, ut dei,  h a ec quasi mpedimen∣, muten∣r decreta  destin  provi∣ntie. e cur∣s inibe∣ur: sed  obsequi∣i divine , & suetum viden∣ ordi∣ obser∣do, con∣ntia nquill∣, & spe  im∣atur. ende Theol. 186. then seek God for all by prayer, and never un∣dertake any design without him: Certainly, if he do not perform it for you, you can never have what you desire and labour or: and though he have designed to perform this or that mercy for you, yet for these things he will be enquired of that he may do it for you: Ezek. 36. 37. I reckon that business as good as done, that mercy as good as if it were in hand, that trouble as good as over, for the doing, enjoying, or re∣moving whereof we have engaged God by pray∣er. 'Tis our olly to engage this instrument and that for us, to attempt this way and that to com∣pass our design, and all the while forget him up∣on whose pleasure all instruments and means entirely depend. That which begins not with prayer, seldom winds up with comfort. The way of man is not in himself; if it were, prayer might then be reckon'd lost labour. O let him that
performs all, be owned and acknowledged in all. The sixth Corollary. LAstly, If God perform all things for us, then it is our great Interest and concernment in all things to study to please him, upon whom we depend for all things. It is a grave and weighty observation of Chry∣sostome.Chrys. Hom in 2 Cor. 7 Nothing (saith he) should be grievous and bitter to a Christian, but to provoke the displeasure of God. Avoid that, and no affliction or trouble whatever can cast down such a prudent Soul; but even as a spark is easily extinguish'd in the Sea, so will the favour of God extinguish those troubles. It is with such a Soul (saith he) as it is with the Heavens; we think the Heavens suffer when they are over-spread with clouds, and the Sun suffers when it is eclip∣sed; but there is no such thing, they suffer not when they seem to suffer. Tranquillus Deus, tranquillat omnJa. Every thing is well, and shall be well, when all is well betwixt us and God. The great consolation of the Saints lyes in this, that all that concerns them is in the hands of their father. Pene desperassem nisi Christus esset ca∣put EcclesJae. I had utterly despair'd (said Luther) had not Christ been head of the Church. When he that performs all things is our God, even our God that delights in our prosperity, that rejoyces over us to do us good, what ample security is here in the greatest confusions and dangers? When one told Bouromeus that there were some
that laid wait for his life, his answer was, An Deus est in mundo pro nihilo? What, is God in the World for nothing? And as notable was the reply of SilentJarJus in a like case, si Deus mei curam non ha∣bet, quid vivo? If God take no care of me, how do I live, how have I subsisted hitherto? Though it seems a Romance to many (saith a late grave Author) yet we must either quit the Scripture,thor of  fulfil∣g of ripture. ar. pag. 3. or give credit to this, that the most infallible Rules for one to raise his fortune and ensure a destiny that can con∣troul the stars, are given forth there (viz. in the Scriptures) where that evidently is found, Sapi∣ens dominabitur Astris, & quomodo unusquis{que} faber potest esse fortunae suae. A good man may even be his own Carver. O that we would but steer our course according to those rare politicks of the Bible, those divine Maxims of Wisdom. Fear nothing but sin. Study nothing so much as how to please God. Warp not from your integrity under any temptation. Trust God in the way of your duty. These are sure Rules to secure your selves and your Interest in all the Vicissitudes of this life. MY last work will be to state three or four practical cases about this subject, and so I shall shut up this discourse of Providence.
First Case. HOw may a Christian discover the will of God and his own duty under dark and doubtful Pro∣vidences? In order to the clearing of this Case, we are to consider, what is meant by the will of God; what by those doubtful Providences, that make the discovery of his will difficult, and what rules are to be observed for the clearing up of Gods will to our selves under such difficult and puzzling Providences. As to the Will of God, it falls under a two∣fold consideration, of his secret and revealed Will; this distinction is found in that Scripture, Deut. 29. 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us, &c. The first is the rule of his own actions; the later of ours: and this only is concerned in the Quere. This Revealed Will of God is either mani∣fested to us in his Word, or in his Works. The former is his commanding Will, the later his ef∣fecting or permitting Will; the one versant about good, the other about evil. In these wayes God manifests his Will to men, but yet with great variety and difference, both as to the things revealed, the persons to whom he reveals them, and the degrees of clearness in which they are revealed. (1.) As to the things revealed, there is great differenc: for the great and necessary duties of
Religion are revealed to us in the Word, with greatest perspicuity and evidence. About these there can be no hesitation; but things of a lower nature and lesser concern are left more obscure. (2.) As to the persons to whom God reveals his Will, there is great difference; some are strong men, others babes, 1 Cor. 3. 1. Some have senses exercised, others are of weak and dull un∣derstanding; and we know every thing is receiv∣ed according to the ability and measure of the person receiving it. Hence it is, that one mans way is very plain before him, he knows what he ought to do: the other is ever and anon at a loss, bivious and uncertain what to do. (3.) The manner of Gods revealing his Will to men is also very different. Some have had special, personal, and peculiar discoveries of it made to them. So had Samuel about the choice of the person whom he should anoint King, 1 Sam. 9. 15. And so had David, 1 Sam. 23. 2, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12. where you find upon his enqui∣ry of God (likely by the Vrim and Thummim) God told him what was his duty as to that ex∣pedition, and what would be the event of it. But now, all are tyed up to the ordinary standing rule of the written Word, and must not expect any such extraordinary revelations from God. The way we now have to know the Will of God concerning us in difficult cases, is to search and study the Scriptures, and where we find no particular rule to guide us in this or that particular case, there we are to apply general rules, and govern our selves according to the Analogy and proportion they bear towards each other.
But now it often falls out, that in such doubtful cases we are entangled in our own thoughts, and put to a loss what course to take. We pray with David. that God would make his way plain before us, Psal. 5. 8. Afraid we are of displeasing God, and yet doubtful we may do so; whether we re∣solve this way, or that. And this comes to pass not only through the difficulty of the case, but from our own ignorance and inadvertency; and very frequently from those Providences that lye before us, wherein God seems to hint his mind to us, this way or that, and whether we may safely guide our selves by those intimations of Providence, is doubtful to us. That God doth give men secret hints and in∣timations of his Will by his Providence, cannot be doubted; but yet Providences in themselves, are no stable rule of duty, nor sufficient discove∣ry of the Will of God. We may say of them, as it is, Job 23. 8, 9. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there: and backward, but I cannot perceive him: an the left hand where he doth work, but I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him. If Providence in it self be allowed to be a su∣icient discovery of Gods Will to us, then we shall be forced often times to justifie and con∣demn the same cause or person, forasmuch as there is one event happens to all, and as it falls out to the good, so to the wicked, Eccles. 9. 2. Be∣side, if Providence alone were the Rule to judge any action or design by; then a wicked under∣takement would cease to be so, if it should succeed well; but sin is sin still, and duty is duty still, what ever the events and issues of either be.
The safest way therefore to make use of Provi∣dence in such cases is, to consider them as they follow the commands or promises of the Word, and not singly and separately in themselves. If you search the Scriptures with an indifferent and unbyassed spirit, in a doubtful case, pray for counsel and direction from the Lord, attend to the dictates of Conscience. And when you have done all, shall find the Providences of God falling out agreeably to the dictates of your own con∣science, and the best light you can find in the Word, you may in such cases make use of it as an encouragement to you, in the way of your duty: But the most signal demonstrations of Providence are not to be accepted against a Scripture rule; no smiles or successes of Providences may in this case encourage us to proceed; and on the other side, no frowns or discouragements of Providence should dishearten us in the way of our duty, how many soever we should encounter therein. Holy Job could not find the meaning of God in his Works, yet would he not go back from the com∣mandments of his lips, Job 23. 9. The like reso∣lution you ind in David, to proceed in his duty, and cleave to the Word, how many stumbling blocks soever Providence should permit to be laid in his way. I am become (saith he) like a bottle in the smoke (not only blackt, but withered up by troubles) yet do I not forget thy Statutes, Psal. 119. 83. and again Ver. 87. They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy precepts. Paul by the direction of the Spirit was en∣gaged to go to Jerusalem, Acts 20. 22. After a clear revelation of the mind of God to him in
that matter, how many difficult and discouraging Providences beell him in his way? The Disciples at Tyre said to him by the Spirit (though in that they ollowed their own spirits) that he should not go to Jerusalem, Acts 21. 4. Then at Cesarea he met Agabus a Prophet, who told him what should beall him when he came thither, Chap. 21. 10, 11. all this will not dis∣swade him. And after all this, how passionate∣ly do the Brethren beseech him to decline that journey? Ver. 12, 13. Yet knowing his rule, and resolving to be faithful to it, he puts by all and proceeds in his journey. Well then, Providence in concurrence with the Word may give some encouragement to us in our way; but no testimony of Providence is to be accepted against the Word. If Scripture and Conscience tell you, such a way is sinful, you may not venture upon it, how many opportunities and encouragements soever Providence may suf∣fer to offer themselves to you, for they are only permitted for your Tryal, not your encou∣ragement: Take this therefore for a sure Rule, That no Providence can legitimate, or justifie any moral evil. Nor will it be a plea before God for any man to say, The Providence of God gave me encouragement to do it, though the Word gave me none. If thereore in doubtful cases, you would discover Gods will, govern your selves in your search after it by these Rules. Get the true fear of God upon your hearts, be really afraid of offending him, God will not hide his mind from such a oul, Psal. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
him, and he will shew them his Covenant. Study the Word more, and the concerns and interests of the World less. The Word is a light to your feet, Psal. 119. 105. (i. e.) it hath a discovering and directive usefulness as to all duties to be done, and dangers to be avoided: it is the great Oracle at which you are to en∣quire: treasure up its rules in your hearts, and you will walk safely, Psal. 119. 11. thy word have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against thee. Reduce what you know into practice, and you shall know what is your duty to practise, Joh. 7. 17. If any man do his will he shall know of the do∣ctrine. Psal. 111. 10. A good understanding have all they that do thereafter. Pray for illumination and direction in the way that you should go; beg the Lord to guide you in straits, and that he would not suffer you to fall into sin. This was the holy practice of Ezra, chap. 8. 21. Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river Ahava, that we might afflict our selves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance. And this being done, ollow Providence so far as it agrees with the word,ad the cure sxts Provi∣nce th the mment  the rd, and  cannot ake a se inter∣etation  them. and no farther. There is no use to be made of Providence against the word, but in subserviency to it. And there are two excel∣lent uses of Providence in subserviency to the word. (1.) Providences as they follow Promises and Pray∣er are Evidences of God's faithfulness in their Ac∣complishment. When David languished under a disease, and his Enemies began to triumph in the hopes of his downfall; he prays, Psal. 41. 10. that God would be merciful to him, and
raise him up; and by that, he saith, he knew the Lord favoured him, because his Enemy did not tri∣umph over him, ver. 11. this Providence he look∣ed upon as a token for good, as elsewhere he calls it, Psal. 86. 17. And (2.) Providences give us loud calls to those duties which the Command lays upon us, and tell us when we are actually and presently under the obligation of the Com∣mands as to the performance of them. Thus when sad Providences befall the Church or our selves, they call us to humiliation; and let us know that then the command upon us to humble our selves at the feet of God is in force upon us, Micah 6. 9. The Lords voice cryeth to the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name, hear the rod, and who hath appointed it. The Rod hath a voice; and what doth it speak? Why now is the time to humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. This is the day of trouble in which God hath bid you to call upon him. And  contra, when comfortable Providences refresh us, it now in∣forms us, this is the time to rejoyce in God accor∣ding to the rule, Eccles. 7. 14. in the day of pro∣speriy be joyful. These precepts bind always,Praecepta airmati∣va obligant semper, non ad semper. but not to always. It's our duty therefore and our wisdom to distinguish seasons, and know the proper duties of every season: and Providence is an Index that points them out to us. Thus of the first Case.
The Second Case. HOw may a Christian be supported in waiting up∣on God whil'st Providence delays the perfor∣mance of the mercies to him for which he hath long pray'd and waited? Two things are supposed in this Case. (1.) That Providence may linger and delay the performance of those mercies to us that we have long waited and prayed for. (2.) That during that delay and suspension, our hearts and hopes may be very low, and ready to fail. Providence may long delay the performance of those mercies we have prayed and waited upon God for. For the right understanding of this, know that there is a two-fold term or season fixed for the performance of mercy to us. One by the Lord our God, in whose hand times and seasons are, Acts 1. 7. Another by our selves, who raise up our own expectations of mercies sometimes meerly through the eagerness of our desires after them, and sometimes upon uncertain conjectural grounds and appearances of encouragement that lye before us. Now nothing can be more precise, certain and punctual, than is the performance of mercy at the time and season which God hath appoin∣ted, how long soever it be, or how many obsta∣cles
soever lye in the way of it. There was a time prefixed by God himself for the perfor∣mance of that Promise of Israel's deliverance out of Egypt; and it's said, Exod. 12. 41. At the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day it came to pass, that all the host of the Lord went out of the Land of Egypt. Compare this with Acts 7. 17. and there you have the ground and reason why their deliverance was not, nor could be delayed one day longer, because the time of the Promise was now come. Promises like a preg∣nant woman must accomplish their appointed months, and when they have so done, Provi∣dence will Midwife the mercies they go big withal into the world, and not one of them shall miscarry. But for the seasons which are of our own ixing and appointment, as God is not tyed to them, so his Providences are not governed by them: and hence are our disappointments. We looked for peace, but no good came; for a time of health, and behold trouble, Jer. 8. 15. And hereupon is it that we fret at the delays of Providence, and suspect the faithfulness of God in their perfor∣mance. But his thoughts are not our thoughts, Isa. 55. 8. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise as men count slackness, 2 Pet. 3. 9. It is slackness if you reckon by our own rule and measure, but it is not so, if you reckon and count it by God's. The Lord doth not compute and reckon his seasons of working by our Arithmetick, You have both these Rules compared, and the ground of our mistake detected in that Scripture, Hab. 2. 3. The VisJon is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lye: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry.
God appoints the time: when that appointed time is come, the expected mercies will not fail: But in the mean time, though it tarry (saith the Prophet) wait for it, for it will not tarry. Tarry, and not tarry, how shall this be reconciled? The meaning is, it may tarry much beyond your expectatJon, but not a moment beyond God's ap∣pointment. During this delay of Providence, the hearts and hopes of the people of God may be very low, and much discouraged. This is too plain from what the Scriptures have recorded of o∣thers, and every one of us may find in our own experiences. We have an instance of this in Isa. 40. 13, 14. in the 13. verse you have God's faithful Promise, that he will comfort his people, and have mercy upon his afflicted. Enough one would think to raise and comfort their hearts. But the mercy promised was long in coming, they waited from year to year, and still the bur∣then pressed them, and was not removed. And therefore ver. 14. ZJon said, the Lord hath forsa∣ken me and my Lord hath forgotten me, q. d. It's in vain to look for such a mercy, God hath no regard to us, we are out of his heart and mind, he neither cares for us nor minds what becomes of us. So it was with David, after God had made him such a Promise, and in the time thereof so faithfully performed it, that never was mercy better secured to any man; for they are call'd, the sure mercJes of David, Isa. 55. 3. yet Provi∣dence delayed the accomplishment of them so long, and suffered such difficulties to intervene, that he even despaires to see the accomplishment
of them, but even concludes God had forgotten him too, Psal. 13. 1. How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? And what he speaks here by way of questJon, he elsewhere turns into a positive conclusJon, Psal. 116. 11. All men are Lyars, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. And the causes of these despondencies, and sinkings of heart are partly from our selves, and partly form Sa∣tan. If we duly examine our own hearts a∣bout it, we shall find that these sinkings of heart are The immediate effects of unbelief. We do not depend and rely upon the word with that full trust and confidence that is due to the infalli∣ble word of a faithful and unchangeable God. You may see the ground of this faintness in that Scripture, Psal. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had belJeved. Faith is the only Cordial that re∣lieves the heart against these faintings and de∣spondencies. Where this is wanting, or is weak, no wonder our hearts sink at this rate, when dis∣couragements are before us. Our judging and measuring things by the rules of sense, this is a great cause of our discourage∣ments. We conclude, According to the Appea∣rances of things will be their Issues. If Abraham had done so, in that great tryal of his faith, he had certainly lost his footing; but against hope, (i. e.) against natural probability, he belJeved in hope, giving Glory to God, Rom. 4. 18. If Paul had done so, he had fainted under his tryals, 2. Cor. 4. 16, 8, we faint not (saith he)whil'st we look not at the things that are seen, q. d. That which keeps up our spirits, is our looking off from things present and visible, and measuring
all by another rule, viz. the power and fidelity of God irmly engaged in the Promises. In all these things Satan manages a design up∣on us. Hence he takes occasions to suggest hard thoughts of God, and to beat off our Souls from all confidence in him, and expectations form him. He is the great make-bate betwixt God and the Saints. He reports the difficulties and fears that are in our way with advantage, and labours to weaken our hands, and discourage our hearts in waiting upon God. And these suggestions gain the more credit with us, because they are con∣firm'd and attested by sense and feeling. But here is a desperate design carrying on un∣der very plausible pretences against our souls. It concerns us to be watchful now, and maintain our faith and hope in God. Now blessed is he that can resign all to God, and quietly wait for his salvation. To assist the soul in this difficulty, I shall offer some farther help beside what hath been formerly given under the first CautJon, pag. 158. in the following Considerations. First Consideration.Consid. Though Providence do not yet perform the mercies you wait for, yet you have no ground to entertain hard thoughts of God; for it's possi∣ble God never gave you any ground for your ex∣pectation of these things from him. It may be you have no Promise to bottome your hope up∣on; and if so, why shall God be suspected and dishonoured by you in a case wherein his truth and faithfulness was never engaged to you? If we are crossed in our outward concernments, and see our
expectations of prosperity dashed; if we see such or such an outward comfort removed, from which we promised our selves much; why must God be accused for this? these thing you promised your∣selves: but where did God promise you prospe∣rity, and the continuance of those comortable things to you? produce his Promise, and shew wherein he hath broken it. It is not enough for you to say, There are general Promises in the Scripture, that God will withhold no good thing, and these are good things which Providence withholds form you; for that Promise, Psal. 84. 11. hath its limitations, it is expresly limited to such as walk uprightly; and it concerns you to exa∣mine whether you have done so, before you quarrel with Providence for non-performance of it. Ah friend, search thine own heart, reflect upon thine own ways; seest thou not so many laws in thine integrity, so many turnings aside from God, both in heart and life, that may ju∣stice God, not only in withholding what thou lookest for, but in removing all that thou enjoy∣est? And besides this limitation as to the Object, it's limited (as all other promises relating to ex∣ternals are) in the matter or things premised by the Wisdome and Will of God, which is the on∣ly Rule by which they are measured out to men in this World, (i.e.) such mercies in such proporti∣ons as he sees needful and most conducible to your good; and these given out in such times and seasons as are of his own-appointment, not yours. God never came under an absolute unlimited ye for outward comforts to any of us; and if we be disappointed, we can blame none but our selves. Who bid us expect rest, ease, delight,
and things of this kind in this world? He hath never told us, we shall be rich, healthy and at ease in our habitations; but on the contrary, he hath often told us, we must expect troubles in the world, John 16. 33. and that through many tribulatJons we must enter into his Kingdom, Acts 14. 22. All that he stands bound to us by Pro∣mise for, is to be with us in trouble, Psal. 91. 15. to supply our real and absolute needs, Isa. 41. 17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them; and to sanctifie all thes Providences to our good at last, Rom. 8. 28. All things shall work together for good to them that love God. And as to all these things not one tittle ever did, or shall fail. Second Consideration. Consid. But it you say you have long waited upon God for spiritual mercies to your souls according to the Promise, and still those mercies are deferred, and your eyes fail whilst you look for them; I would desire you seriously to consider of what kind those spiritual mercies are, for which you have so long waited upon God. Spiritual mer∣cies are of two sorts; such as belong to the Essence, the very being of the new creature, without which it must fail: or to its well being, and the comfort of the inner man; without which you cannot live so cheerfully as you would. The mercies of the former kind are Absolutely necessary, and therefore put into Ab∣solute Promises, as you see, Jer. 32. 40. And
I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. But for the rest they are dispensed to us in such measures, and at such seasons as the Lord sees fit, and many of his own people live for a long time without them. The donation and continuation of the Spirit, to quicken, sanctifie and unite us with Christ is necessary, but his joyes and comforts are not so. A Child of light may walk in dark∣ness, Isa. 50. 10. He lives by faith, and not by feeling. Third Consideration.3. Consid. You complain, Providence delayes to perform to you the mercies you have prayed and waited for; but have you right ends in your desires after these mercies? It may be that's the cause, you ask and receive not, James 4. 3. The want of a good aim, is the reason why we want good success in our prayers. It may be we pray for prosperity, and our end is to please the flesh; we look no higher than the pleasure and accom∣modation of the flesh; we beg and wait for deli∣verance from such a trouble and affliction, not that we might be the more expedite and pre∣pared for obedience, but freed of what is grievous to us, and destroyes our pleasure in the world. Certainly if it be so, you have more need to judge and condemn your selves, than to censure and suspect the care of God.
Fourth Consideration.4. Consid. You wait for good, and it comes not; but is your will brought to a due submission to the Will of God about it? Certainly God will have you come to this before you enjoy your desires. Enjoyment of your desires is the thing that will please you, but resignation of your wills, is that which is pleasing to God: if your hearts cannot come to this, mercies cannot come to you. David was made to wait long for the mercy promised him, yea, and to be content without it before he enjoyed it, Psal. 131. 2 he was brought to be as a weaned Child, and so must you. Fifth Consideration.5. Consid. Your betters have waited long upon God for mercy, and why should not you? David waited till his eyes failed, Psal. 69. 3 The Church waited for him in the way of his judgements, Isa. 26. 8. Are you better than all the Saints that are gone before you? Is God more obliged to you than to all his people? They have quietly waited, and why should not you? Sixth Consideration.6. Consid. Will you lose any thing by patient waiting upon God for mercies? Certainly, not at all: Yea, it will turn to a double advantage to you to continue in a quiet submissive waiting posture upon God. For, (1.) Though you do not yet enjoy the good you wait for, yet all this while
you are exercising your Grace; and it's more excellent to act Grace, than to enjoy comfort. All this while the Lord is training you up in the exercise of faith and patience, and bending your wills in submission to himself; and what do you lose by that? Yea, and (2.) When ever the desired mercy comes, it will be so much the sweeter to you: for, look how much faith and prayer hath been employed to produce it, how many wrestlings you have had with God for it, so many more degrees of sweetness you will ind in it, when it comes. O therefore, aint not, how long soever God delay you. Seventh Consideration.7. Consi Are not those mercies you expect from God worth the waiting for? If not, it is your folly to be troubled for the want of them: If they be, why don't you continue waiting? Is it not all that God expects from you for the mercies he be∣stows upon you, that you wait upon him for them? You know you have not deserved the least of them at his hands. You expect them not as a recompence, but a free favour, and if so, then certainly the least you can do, is to wait upon his pleasure for them. Eighth Consideration.8. Consid▪ Consider how many Promises are made in the Word to waiting souls. One Scripture calls them blessed that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18. Ano∣ther tells us, none that wait for him shall be ashamed, Psal. 25. 3. (i.e.) they shall not be finally disap∣pointed,
but at last be partakers of their hopes. A third Scripture tells us, they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, Isa. 40. 31. a Promise you had need make much use of in such a faint∣ing time, with many more of like nature; and shall we faint at this rate in the midst of so ma∣ny cordials as are prepared to revive us in these Promises? Ninth Consideration.Consid. How long hath God waited upon you when you will comply with his commands, come up to your engagements and promises? You have made God wait long for your reformation and obedience; and therefore have no reason to think it much, if God make you wait long for your consolation. We have our How longs, and hath not God his? We cry, Psal. 6. 3. But thou O Lord, how long? Psal. 13. 1, 2. How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long wilt thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart dai∣ly? How long shall mine enemy be exalted over me? ut surely we should not think these things long, when we consider, how long the Lord hath exer∣cised his patience about us. We have made him say, How long, how long? Our unbelJef hath made him cry, How long will it be ere they belJeve me? Numb. 14. 11. Our corrupt hearts have made him cry, How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14. Our impure natures and wayes have made him cry, How long will it be ere they attain to innocency? Hosea 8. 5. If God wait
upon you with so much patience for your duties, well may you wait upon him for his mercies. Tenth Consideration.10. Con. This impatience and infidelity of yours, ex∣prest in your weariness to wait any longer, as it is a great evil in it self, so very probably it is that evil which obstructs the way of your ex∣pected mercies: you might have your mercies sooer, if your spirits were quieter and more submissive. And thus of the Second Case. The Third Case. HOw may a Christian discern when a Providence is sanctified, and comes from the love of God to him? There are two sorts or kinds of Providences versant about men in this world, the issues and events of which are vastly different, yea, contra∣ry to each other. To some all Providences are over-ruled and ordered for good, according to that blessed Promise, Rom. 8. 28. not only things that are good in themselves, as Ordinances, Graces, Du∣ties and Mercies; but things that are evil in themselves, as Temptations, Afflictions, and even their Sins and Corruptions shall turn in the issue to their advantage and benefit.
though sin be so intrinsecally and formally evil in its own nature, that in it self it be not capable of sanctification; yet out of this worst of evils God can work good to his people; and though he never make sin the Instrument of good; yet his Providence may make it the occasJon of good to his people; so that spiritual benefits may by the wise over-ruling of Providence be occasioned to the people of God by it. And so for afflictions of all kinds, the greatest and sorest of them; they do work in the influ∣ence of Providence a great deal of good to the Saints, and that not only as the occasions, but as the Instruments and means of it, Isa. 27. 9. by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, (i. e.) by the instrumentality of this sanctified affli∣ction. To others nothing is sanctified either as an Instrument or occasion of any spiritual good; but as the worst things are ordered to the bene∣fit of the Saints, so the best things wicked men enjoy do them no good. Their Prayers are turn∣ed into sin, Psal. 109. 7. The Ordinances are the savour of Death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. The Grace of God turned into wantonness, Jude v. 4. Christ him∣self a rock of Offence, 1 Pe. 2. 8. Their Table a snare, Psal. 69. 22. Their Prosperity their ruine, Prov. 1. 32. As persons are, so things work for good or evil. Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure, but to them that are defiled and unbelJeving is nothing pure. Seeing therefore the Events of Providence fall out so opposite to each other upon the Godly, and Ungodly; every thing farthering the eter∣nal good of the one, and the ruine of the other; it cannot but be acknowledged a most important
case in which every Soul is deeply concern'd, whether the Providences under which he is, be sanctified to him or no? For the clearing of which I shall premise two necessary Considerations, and then subjoyn the Rules which will be useful for the determination of the question. And first, Let it be considered, that we cannot know from the matter of the things before us, whether they be sanctified or unsanctified to us; for so consider'd, all things come alike to all; and no man knoweth either love or hatred by all the things that are before him. Eccles. 9. 1, 2. We cannot under∣stand▪ the mind and heart of God, by the things he dispenseth with his hand. If prosperous Pro∣vidences befall us, we cannot say, Herein is a sure sign that God loves me; for who have more of those Providences than the people of his wrath? Psal. 73. 7. They have more than their hearts can wish. Sure that must be a weak Evi∣dence for Heaven, which accompanies so great a part of the world to Hell. By these things we may testifie our love to God; but from ten thou∣sand such enjoyments we cannot get any solid as∣surance of his love to us. And from adverse afflictive Providences we can∣not know his hatred. If afflictions, great afflictions, many afflictions, long continued afflictions should set a brand, or fix a Character of Gods hatred upon the persons on whom they all; where then shall we find Gods people in the world? We must then seek out the proud vain sensual wan∣tons of the world, who spend their days in plea∣sure, and say these are the men whom God loves▪
Outward things are promiscuously dispensed, and no man's spiritual estate is discernable by the view of his temporal. When God draws the Sword, it may cut off the righteous as well as the wicked, Ezek. 21. 3. Though the Providences of God materJally con∣sidered afford no evidence of Gods love to us, yet the manner in which they befall us, and the effects and fruits they produce in us, do distinguish them very manifestly; and by them we may discern whe∣ther they be sanctified Providences, and fruits of the love of God, or no. But yet these effects and fruits of Providences by which we discern their nature, do not always presently appear; but time must be allowed for the souls exercise under them. As it is Heb. 12. 11. Now no afflicti∣on for the present seemeth joyous, but grJevous: ne∣vertheless afterwards it yJeldeth the peaceable fruits of Righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. The benefit of a Providence is discern'd as that of a medicine is, for the present it gripes, and makes the stomach sick and loathing; but after∣wards we find the benefit of it in our recovery of health and chearfulness. Now the Providences of God being some of them comfortable, and others sad and grievous to nature, and the way to discern the sanctification and blessing of them, being by the manner in which they come and their operations upon our spirits; I shall consider the case as it respects both sorts of Providences, and shew you what effects of our troubles or com∣forts will speak them to be sanctified and blessed to us.
And first for sad and afflictive Providences in what kind or degree soever they befall us, we may warrantably conclude, they are blessings to us, and come from the love of God, when They come in a proper season, when we have need of them, either to prevent some sin we are falling into, or recover us out of a remiss, u∣pine, and careless frame of spirit into which we are already fallen, 1 Pet. 1. 6. if need be, ye are in heaviness. Certainly, it is a good sign that God designs your good by those troubles which are so fitted and wisely order'd to nik the opportunity. If you see the Husbandman lopping a tree in the proper Season, it argues he aims at the fruitful∣ness and flourishing of it; but to do the same thing at Midsummer speaks no regard to it, yea, his design to destroy it. When they are fitted both for quality and de∣gree to work properly upon our most predomi∣nant corruptions, then they look like sanctified strokes. The Wisdom of God is much seen in the choice of his rods. It is not any kind of trouble that will work upon and purge every sin; but when God chuses for us such afflictions as like Physick are appropriated to the disease the soul labours under; this speaks divine care and love. Thus we may observe,☜ it's usual with God to smite us in those very comforts which stole away too much of the love and delight of our souls from God: to cross us in those things from which we raised up too great expectatios of comfort. These Providences speak the jealou∣sie of God over us, and his care to prevent far worse evils by these sad but needful strokes. And so for the degrees of our troubles, sancti∣fied
strokes are ordinarily fitted by the wisdome of God to the strength and ability of our inherent grace, Isa. 17. 8. in measure when it shooteth forth thou wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind. It is an AllusJon to a Phy∣sicJan who exactly weighs and measures all the in∣gredients which he mingles in a potion for his sick patient; that it may be proportionate to his strength and no more: and so much the next words intimate, by this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged. It is a good sign our troubles are sanctiied to us, when they turn our hearts against sin, and not against God. There be few great affli∣ctions which befall men, but they make them quarrelsome and discontented. Wicked men quarrel with God, and are filled with discontent against him. So the Scripture describes them, Rev. 16. 9. They were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues. But Godly men to whom affli∣ctions are sanctified, they justifie God, and fall out with sin, they condemn themselves and give glory to God, Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto thee, but unto us confusJon of faces, &c. And Lam. 3. 39. Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Happy afflictions which make the Soul fall out and quarrel only with sin. It is a sure sign afflicting Providences are sancti∣fied when they purge the heart from sin, and leave both heart and life more pure, heavenly, mortified, and humble than they found them. Sanctified afflictions are cleansers, they pull down the pride, refine the earthliness, and purge
out the vanity of the Spirit. So you read, Dan. 11. 35. it purifies and makes their Souls white: Hence it's compar'd to a furnace which separates the dross from the pure metal, Isa. 48. 10. Be∣hold I have refined thee, but not with Silver: I have chosen thee in the furnace of afflictJon. But for wicked men, let them be never so long in the Furnace, they lose no dross, Ezek. 24. 6. How many Christians can bear witness to this truth! After some sharp affliction hath been upon them, how is the earthliness of their hearts purged! they see no beauty, taste no more relish in the world than in the white of an Egg. Oh how serious, humble, and heavenly are they, till the impressions made upon them by afflictions be worn off, and their deceitful lusts have again entangled them! And this is the rea∣son▪ why we are so often under the discipline of the rod. Let a Christian (saith a late writer) be but two or three years without an affliction, and he is almost good for nothing: he cannot pray, nor meditate, nor discourse at that rate he was wont to do: but when a new affliction comes, now he can find his tongue, and come to his knees again, and live at another rate. It is a good sign afflictive Providences are sanctified to us, when we draw near to God un∣der them and turn to him that smites us. A wick∣ed man under affliction revolts more and more, Isa. 1. 5. turns not to him that smites him, Isa. 9. 13. but grows worse than before; formality is turned into stupidity and dedolency. But if God afflict his own people with a sancti∣fied rod, it awakens them to a more earnest seek∣ing of God: it makes them pray more frequent∣ly,
spiritually and fervently than ever. When Paul was buffeted by Satan, he besought the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12. 8. We may conclude our afflictions to be santifi∣ed, and to come from the love of God to us, when they do not alienate our hearts from God, but inflame our love to him. This is a sure rule, Whatever ends in the increase of our love to God, proceeds from the love of God to us. A wicked man finds his heart rising against God when he smites him; but a gracious heart cleaves the closer to him: he can love, as well as justifie an afflicting God. All this is come upon us: yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsly in thy Covenant▪ our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way: though thou hast sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and co∣vered us with the shadow of Death, Psal. 44. 17, 18, 19. Here you have a true account of the temper and frame of a gracious soul under greatest affli∣ctions. To be broken in the place of Dragons and covered with the shadow of death imports the most dismal state of affliction: yet even then a graci∣ous heart turns not back (i. e.) doth not for all this abate one drachm of love to God: God is as good and dear to him in afflictions as e∣ver. Lastly, We may call our afflictions sanctified when divine teachings accompany them to our souls, Psal. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy law. Sanctified afflictions are eye-salve, they teach us sensibly and effectually when the Spirit accom∣panies them; the evil of sin, the vanity of the creature, the necessity of securing things that can∣not
be shaken. Never doth a Christian take a truer measure both of his corruptions and graces, than under the rod. Now a man sees that ilthi∣ness that hath been long contracting in prospe∣rity, what interest the Creature hath in the heart, how little faith, patience, resignation, and self-denyal we can find, when God calls us to the exercise of them. O 'tis a blessed sign, that trouble is sanctified, that makes a man thus turn in upon his own heart, search it, and humble himself before the Lord for the evils of it! IN the next place let us take into consideration the other branch of Providences which are comfortable and pleasant. Sometimes it smiles upon us in successes, prosperity, and the grati∣fication of the desires of our hearts. Here the Question will be how the sanctification o these Providences may be discovered to us? For reso∣lution in this matter, I shall for clearness sake lay down two sorts of Rules; one Negative, the o∣ther positive. First Negative. It is a sign, that comfort is not sanctified to us, which comes not (ordinarily) in the way of Pray∣er. The wicked boasteth of hi hearts desire, and blesseth the covetous whom the Lord abhorreth. The wicked through the pride of his countenance will sk after God; God is not in all his thoughts, Psal. 10. 3, 4. Here you see Providence may give men their hearts desire, and yet they never once
open their desires to God in prayer about it. But then those gifts of Providence are only such as are bestowed on the worst of men, and are not the fruits of love. Whatever success, prosperity or comfort men acquire by sinful medJums, and indirect courses, are not sanctified mercies to them. This is not the method in which those mercies are bestowed. Better is a little with righteousness, than great revenews without right, Prov. 16. 8. better upon this account, that it comes in Gods way, and with his blessing, which never follows the way of sin. God hath cursed the wayes of sin, and no blessing can follow them. Whatever prosperity and success makes men forget God, and cast off the care of duty, is not sanctifJed to them. It is unsanctifJed prosperity which lulls men asleep into a deep oblivJon of God, Deut. 32. 13, 14, 15, 18. He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oyl out of the flinty rock, butter of Kine, and milk of Sheep, with fat of Lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and Goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, and thou didst drink the pure blood of the grape; but Iesurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast for∣gotten God that formed thee. Rarè fumant foeli∣cibus arae. When prosperity is abused to sensuality, and meerly serves as fuell to maintains fleshly lusts,
it is not sanctifJed. See Job 21. 11, 12, 13. They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their Children dance. They take the Timbrell and Harp, and rejoyce at the sound of the Organ. They spend their dayes in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. It's a sign that prosperity is not sanctifJed to men, when it swells the heart with pride and self-conceitedness, Dan. 4. 29, 30. At the end of twelve moneths he walked in the Palace of the Kingdom of Babylon. The King spake and said, Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honour of my Majesty? That success is not sanctified to men, which takes them off from their duty, and makes them wholly negligent, or very much indisposed to it, Jer. 2. 31. O generatJon, see the Word of the Lord; have I been a Wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? Wherefore say my people, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Nor can we think that prosperity sanctifJed, which wholly swallows up the souls of men in their own enjoyments, and makes them regard∣less of publick miserJes or sins, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. They lye upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall. They chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of musick like David. They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments; but they are not grieved for the af∣flictions of Ioseph.
But then Positively. Those mercies and comforts are undoubtedly sanctified to men, which humble their souls kindly before God in the sense of their own vileness and unworthiness of them, Gen. 32. 10. And Jacob said, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercJes, &c. Sanctified mercies are commonly turned into Cautions against sin, Ezra 9. 13. they are so ma∣ny bands of restraint upon the soul that hath them, to make them shun sin. They will engage a mans heart in love to the God of his mercies, Psal. 18. 1. compared with the Title. They never satisfie a man as his Portion, nor will the soul accept all the prosperity in the world upon that score, Heb. 11. 26. Esteeming the reproach, of Christ greater riches than the trea∣sures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recom∣pence of the reward. Nor do they make men regardless of Publick sins or miseries, Nehem. 2. 1, 2, 3. compared with Acts 7. 23. It's a sure sign that mercJes are sanctifJed, when they make the soul more expedite and enlarged for God in duty, 2 Chron. 17. 5, 6. Therefore the Lord stablished the Kingdom in his hand, and all Iudah brought to Iehoshaphat pre∣sents, and he had riches and honour in abundance. And his heart was lift up in the wayes of the Lord, &c. To conclude, That which is obtained by pray∣er, and returned to God again in due praise
carries its own testimonials with it, that it came from the love of God, and is a sanctified mercy to the soul. And so much of this Third Case. The Fourth Case. HOw may we attain unto an evenness and steddi∣ness of spirit under the Changes, and contrary Aspects of Providence upon us? Three things are supposed in this Case. 1. That Providence hath various and contrary Aspects upon the people of God. 2. That it is a common thing with them, to experience great disorders of spirit under those Changes of Providence. 3. That these disorders may be (at least in a great measure) prevented, by the due use and application of those rules and helps that God hath given us in such Cases. That Providence hath various, yea, contrary Aspects upon the people of God, is a case so plain, that it needs no more than the menti∣oning, to let it in to all our Understandings. Which of all the people of God have not felt this truth? Providence rings the changes all the world over. He encreaseth the NatJons, and de∣stroyeth them; he enlargeth the NatJons, and strait∣neth them again, Job 12. 23. The same it doth
with persons, Psal. 102. 10. Thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down. See what a sad Altera∣tion Providence made upon the Church, Lam. 1. 1, 12. How doth the City sit solitary that was full of people! How is she become as a Widow! She that was great among the NatJons, and Princess among the Provinces, how is she become tributary! Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord hath af∣flicted me in the day of his fJerce anger. And how great an Instance was Joh of this truth, Job 29. per tot. and 30. compared? How many thou∣sands have complained with Naomi, whose con∣dition hath been so strangely altered, that others have said as the people of Bethlehem did of her, Is this Naomi? Ruth 1. 19, 20, 21. These Vicissitudes of Providence commonly cause great disorders of spirit in the best men. Look as intense heat and cold try the strength and soundness of the constitution of our bodies, so the alteratJons made by Providence upon our conditions, try the strength of our graces; and too often discover the weakness and corruption of holy men. HezekJah was a good man; but yet his weakness and corruption was bewrayed by the alterations Providence made upon his conditions. When sickness and pains summon∣ed him to the grave, what bitter complaints and despondencies are recorded? in Isa. 38. per tot. and when Providence lifted him up again into a prosperous condition, what ostentation and vain glory did he discover? Isa. 39. 2. David had more than a common stock of inherent grace, yet not enough to keep him in an equal
temper of spirit under great alterations, Psal. 30. 6, 7. In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved; thou hidest thy face and I was troubled. It is not every man can say with Paul, I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound every where, and in all things I am instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need, Phil. 4. 12. He is truly rich in grace, whose riches or poverty neither hin∣ders the acting, nor impoverisheth the stock of his graces. Though the best men be subject to such disor∣ders of heart under the changes of Providence; yet these disorders may in a great measure be prevented by the due application of such Rules and helps, as God hath given us in such cases. Now, these helps are suited to a threefold Aspect of Providence upon us: viz. 1. Comfortable, 2. Calamitous, 3. Doubtful. To all which I shall speak particularly and briefly. Quest. 1.Quest. 1. HOw may we attain to an Evenness and Steddiness of heart under the comfortable Aspects of Providence upon us? Under Providences of this kind, the great danger is, lest the heart be lifted up with pride
and vanity, and fall into a drowsie and remiss temper. To prevent this, we had need urge humbling and awakening Considerations upon our own hearts; such are these that follow. First Consideration.. Consid. These gifts of Providence are common to the worst of men, and are no special distinguishing fruits of Gods love. The vilest of men have been filled even to satiety with these things, Psal. 73. 7. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more than heart could wish. Second Consideration.. Consid. Think how unstable and changeable all these things are. What you glory in to day, may be none of yours to morrow, Prov. 23. 5. Riches make themselves wings, and flee away as an Eagle towards Heaven. As the Wings of a Fowl grow out of the substance of its body, so the cause of the Creatures transitoriness is in it self: It's subjected to vanity, and that vanity, like Wings, carries it away: they are but fading flowers, James, 1. 10. Third Consideration.. Consid. The Change of Providences is never nearer to the people of God, than when their hearts are lifted up, or grown secure by prosperity. Doth HezekJah glory in his Treasures? The next news he hears, is of an impoverishing Pro∣vidence at hand, Isa. 39. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Others
may be left to perish in unsanctified Prosperity, but you shall not. Fourth Consideration.4. Consid. This is a great discovery of the Carnality and corruption that is in thy heart: it argues an heart little set upon God, little mortified to the world, little acquainted with the vanity and ensnaring nature of these things. O you know not what hearts you have, till such Providences try them. And is not such a discovery matter of deep humiliation? Fifth Consideration.5. Consid. Was it not better with you in a low condi∣tion, than it is now? Reflect, and compare state with state, and time with time. How is the frame of your hearts altered with the alterati∣on of your condition? So God complains of Israel, Hosea 13. 5, 6. I did know thee in the Wilderness, the land of drought; according to their pasture, so were they filled: they were filled, and their heart was exalted, therefore have they for∣gotten me saith the Lord: q. d. You and I were better acquainted formerly when you were in a low condition; Prosperity hath estranged you, and altered the case. How sad is it, that Gods mercies should be the occasion of our estrange∣ment from him?
Quest. 2.Quest. 2. UPon the other side, it's worth considering how our hearts may be establisht and kept steddy under Caamitous and adverse Providences. Here we are in equal danger of the other Ex∣tream, viz. despondency and sinking under the frowns and strokes of cross Providences. Now to support and establish the heart in this case, take three helps. First Consideration.1. Consid. First, Consider, That afflictive Providences are of great use to the people of God, they cannot live without them. The Earth doth not more need chastening frosts, and mellowing snows, than our hearts do nipping Providences. Let the best Christian be but a few years without them, and he will be sensible of the need of them; he will find a sad remissJon and declining upon all his graces. Second Consideration.2. Consid. No stroke of Calamity upon the people of God, can separate them from Christ, Rom. 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall TribulatJon? There was a time when Job could call nothing in this world but trouble his own: he could not say, my Estate, my Honour, my Health, my Children; for all these were gone;
yet then he could say, my Redeemer, Job 19. 25. Well then, there is no cause to sink whilst Interest in Christ remains sure to us. Third Consideration.3. Consid▪ All your calamities will have an end shortly. The longest day of the Saints troubles hath an end; and then, no more troubles for ever. The troubles of the wicked will be to Eternity; but you shall suffer but a while, 1 Pet. 5. 10. If a thousand troubles be appointed for you, they will come to one at last, and after that no more: Yea, and though our troubles be but for a mo∣ment, yet they work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Let that support your hearts under all your sufferings. Quest. 3.Quest. LAstly, Let us consider, what may be useful to support and quiet our hearts under doubtful Providences, when our dear concernments hang in a doubtful suspence before us, and we know not which way the Providence of God will cast and determine them. Now the best hearts are apt to grow solici∣tous and pensive, distracted with thoughtfulness about the event and issue. To relieve and settle us in this case, the following Considerations are very useful.
First Consideration.. Consid. First, Let us consider the vanity and inutility of such a solicitude, Matth. 6. 27. Which of you (saith our Lord) by taking thought can add one Cubit? We may break our peace, and waste our Spirits, but not alter the Case. We cannot turn God out of his way, Job 23. 13. He is in one mind. We may by strugling against God increase, but not avoid or lighten our troubles. Second Consideration.. Consid. How often do we afflict and torment our selves by our own unquiet thoughts, when there is no real cause or ground for so doing? Isa. 51. 13.—And hast feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of the oppressor? O what abundance of disquiet and trouble might we prevent, by waiting quietly till we see the issues of Providence, and not bringing as we do the evils of the morrow upon the day? Third Consideration.. Consid. How great a ground of quietness is it that the whole dispose and management of all our af∣fairs and concerns is in the hand of our own God and Father? No Creature can touch us without his commission or permission. I know (saith Christ) thou couldst have no power against
me, except it were given thee from above, John 19. 11. Neither Men nor Devils can act any thing without Gods leave; and be sure he will sign no order to your prejudice. Fourth Consideration.4. Consi▪ How great satisfaction must it be to all that believe the Divine Authority of the Scripture, that the faithulness of God stands engaged for every line and syllable found therein? And how many blessed lines in the Bible may we mark, that respect even our outward concerns, and the happy issue of them all? Upon these two grounds, viz. that our outward concerns with their steddy direction to a blessed end is ound in the Word; and this Word being of Divine Authority, the faithfulness and honour of God stands good for every Title that is found there. I say these are grounds of such stability, that our minds may repose with greatest security and confidence up∣on them even in the cloudiest day of trouble. Not only your eternal salvation, but your tem∣poral Interests are there secured. Be quieted therefore in the confidence of a blessed issue. Fifth Consideration.5. Consid▪ How great and sure an expedient have the Saints ever found it to their own peace, to com∣mit all doubtful issues of Providence to the Lord, and devolve all their cares upon him, Prov. 16. 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established. By Works he means any doubtful, intricate, perplexing business▪ about
which our thoughts are rackt and tortur'd. Roll all these upon the Lord by faith, leave them with him, and the present immediate benefit you shall have by it (besides the comfort in the last issue) shall be tranquillity and peace in your thoughts. And who is there of any standing or Experience in Religion that hath not found it so? The Fifth Case. HOw may a Christian work his heart into a resign∣ing frame unto the will of God; when sad Pro∣vidences approach him, and presage great troubles and afflictions coming on towards him? For the right stating and resolving of this im∣portant case, it will be needful to shew (1.) What is not included and intended in the Question. (2.) What it doth suppose and include in it, and lastly, what helps and directions are necessary for the due performance of this great and diffi∣cult duty. First, Negatively. As to the first, It must be premised that the Question doth not suppose the heart or will of a Christian to be at his own command and dis∣pose in this matter: we cannot resign it, and subject it to the will of God whenever we desire so to do: the duty indeed is ours, but the power by which alone we perform it is Gods: We act as we are acted by the Spirit. It is with our hearts▪ as with meeors hanging in the air▪
by the influence of the Sun; while that conti∣nues they abide above, but when it fails they fall to the earth: We can do this, and all things else be they never so difficult, through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4. 13. But without him we can do nothing, John 15. 5. he doth not say, without me ye can do but little, or without me ye can do nothing but with great difficulty, or without me ye can do nothing perfectly; but without me ye can do nothing at all. And every Christian hath a witness in his own breast to attest this truth: for there are cases frequent∣ly occurring in the methods of Providence, in which notwithstanding all their prayers and desires, all their reasonings and strivings, they cannot quiet their hearts fully in the dispose; and will of God; but on the contrary do find all their endeavours in this matter, to be but as the rolling of a returning stone against the Hill: till God say to the heart be still, and to the will give up, nothing can be done. Secondly, Affirmatively. Next, Let us consider what this case doth suppose, and include in it, and we shall find That it supposeth the people of God to have a foresight of troubles and distresses approach∣ing and drawing near to them: I confess 'tis not always so, for many of our afflictions, as well as comforts, come by way of surprizals upon us: but oft times we have forewarnings of trouble both publick and personal, before we feel them: as the weather may be discerned by the ace of the Sky, when we see a morning Sky red and
lowring, this is a natural sign of a foul and rainy day, Matth. 16. 3. and there are as certain signs of the times, whereby we may discern when trouble is near, even at the door: And these forewarnings are given by the Lord to awaken us to our duties, by which they may either be pre∣vented, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. or sanctified and sweetned to us when they come. These signs and notices of approaching troubles are gathered partly from the observatJon and collation of parallel Scripture cases and examples, God generally holding one tenour and steddy course in the administrations of his Providences in all ages, 1 Cor. 10. 6. partly from the ReflectJons Christians make upon the frames and tempers of their own hearts, which greatly need awakening, humbling and purging Providences. For let a Christian be but a few years or months without a rod, and how formal, earthly, dead and vain, will his heart grow? And such a temper presages affliction to them that are beloved of the Lord, as really as the gi∣ving or sweating of the stones doth rain. Lastly, The ordering and disposing of the next causes in∣to a posture and preparation for our trouble, plainly premonisheth us that trouble is at the door. Thus when the symptoms of sickness be∣gin to appear upon our own bodies, the wie of our bosome, or our children that are as our own souls, Providence herein awakens our expecta∣tions of death and doleful separations: so when enemies combine together and plot the ruine of our liberties, estates, or lives, and God seemeth to loose the bridle of restraint upon their necks, now we cannot but be alarmed with the near ap∣proach of troubles, especially when at the same
time our conscience shall reflect upon the abuse and non-improvement of these our threatned comforts. The case before us supposeth, that these pre∣monitions and fore-runners of affliction, do usu∣ally very much disturb the order and break the peace of our souls, they put the mind under great discomposure, the thoughts under much distra∣ction, and the affections into tumults and rebel∣lion. Ah how unwilling are we to surrender to the Lord the Loan which he lent us! to be disquieted by troubles when at ease in our enjoyments! How unwelcome are the messengers of affliction to the best men! we are ready to say to them as the Widow to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O man (O messenger) of God, art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? 1 King. 17. 18. And this ariseth partly from the remains of corruption in the best souls, for though every sanctified person is come by his own con∣sent into the Kingdom, and under the govern∣ment and Scepter of Christ, and every thought of his heart de jure, and of right must be subject∣ed to him, 2 Cor. 10. 5. yet de facto the con∣quest and power of grace is but incompleat and in part, and natural corruption like Jerobam with his vain men riseth up against it, and au∣seth many mutinies in the soul, whil'st grace like young Abijah is weak handed, and cannot resist them. And partly from the advantage Satan makes upon the season to irritate and assist our corruptons: he knows that which is already in motion, is the more easily moved. In this con∣fusion and hurry of thoughts he undiscernedly
shuffles in his temptations. Sometimes aggrava∣ting the evils which we fear with all the sinking and overwhelming circumstances imaginable. Sometimes divining and fore-casting such events and evils, as (haply) never fall out. Sometimes repining at the disposes of God as more severe to us than others. And sometimes reflecting with very unbelieving and unworthy thoughts upon the promises of God, and his faithfulness in them, by all which the affliction is made to sink deep into the soul before it actually comes. The thoughts are so disordered, that duty can∣not be duly performed. And the soul is really weak∣ned, and disabled to bear its tryal when it comes indeed: just as if a man should be kept waking and restless all the night with the thoughts of his hard journey which he must travel to mor∣row, and so when to morrow is come, he faints for want of rest, mid-way his jour∣ney. It is here supposed to be the Christians great duty, under the apprehensions of approaching troubles to resign his will to Gods, and quietly commit the events and issues of all to him, what∣ever they may prove. Thus did David in the like case and circumstances, 2 Sam. 15. 25, 26. And the King said unto Zadock, carry back the Ark of God into the City. If I shall find favour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, and shew me both it and his habitatJon: but if he shall thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him. O lovely and truly Christian temper! q. d. go Zadock, return with the Ark to its place, though I have not the symbol, yet I hope I shall
have the real presence of God with me in this sad journey: how he will dispose the events of this sad and doubtful Providence I know not: Either I shall return again to Jerusalem, or I shall not: If I do, then I shall see it again, and enjoy the Lord in his ordinances there. If I do not, then I shall go to that place where there is no need or use of those things. And either way it will be well for me, I am content to refer all to the divine pleasure, and commit the issue, be it whatever it will be, to the Lord. And till our hearts come to the like resolve, we can have no peace within. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established, Prov. 16. 3. By works he means not only every enterprize and business we undertake, but every puzzling, intricate, and doubtful event we fear. These being once committed by an act of faith, and our wills resigned unto his, besides the com∣fort we shall have in the issue, we shall have the present advantage of a well composed, and peace∣ful Spirit. But this resignation is the difficulty; no doubt of peace, could we once bring our hearts to that. And therefore I shall here subjoyn such helps and directions, as may through Gods blessing, in the faithful use of them, assist and facilitate this great and difficult work. First Help. And first, Labour to work into your hearts a deep and fixed sense of the infinite wisdom of God, and your own folly and ignorance. This will make resigna∣tion easie to you: whatsoever the Lord doth is
by counsel, Eph. 1. 11. his understanding is infinite, Psal. 147. 5. his thoughts are very deep, Psal. 92. 5. but as for man, yea the wisest among men, how lit∣tle doth his understanding penetrate the works and designs of Providence? And how oft are we forced to retract our rash opinions, and confess our mistakes? acknowledging that if Providence had not seen with better eyes than ours, and looked farther than we did, we had precipitated our selves into a thousand mischiefs, which by its wisdom and care we have escaped. It's well for us that the seven eyes of Providence are ever awake, and looking out for our good. Now if one creature can and ought to be guided and go∣verned by another that is more wise and skilful than himself, as the ClJent by his learned Counsel, the PatJent by his skilful PhysicJan, much more should every creature give up his weak reason, and shal∣low understanding to the infinite wisdom of the omniscient God. It's nothing but our pride and arrogance over∣valuing our own understandings that makes resignation so hard. Carnal reason seems to it self a wise disputant about the concerns of the flesh, but how often hath Providence baf∣fled it? The more humility, the more resigna∣tion. How few of our mercies and comforts have been foreseen by us? our own projects have come to nothing, and that which we never thought on, or contrived hath taken place; not our choice of the ground, or skill in weighing and delivering the Bowl, but some unforeseen Providence, like a rub in the Green was that which made the cast.
Second Help. Deeply consider the sinfulness and vanity of tor∣turing your own thoughts about the issues of doubtful Providences. (1.) There is much sin in so doing: for, all our anxious and solicitous emotions, what are they other than the immediate issues and fruits of pride and unbelief? There is not a greater discovery of pride in the world, than in the con∣tests of our wills with the Will of God. It's a presumptuous invading of Gods Prerogative, to dictate to his Providence, and prescribe to his Wisdom. (2.) There is a great deal of vanity in it: all the thoughtfulness in the world will not make one hair white or black: all our discontents will not prevail with God to call back (or as the word may be rendered) make void his Word, Isa. 31. 2. he is in one mind, Job 23. 13. the thoughts of his mind are from everlasting, Psal. 33. 11. Third Help. Set before you those chice Scripture patterns of sbmission to the Lords Will in as deep, yea, much deeper points of self-denyal than this before you, and shame your selves out of this quarrelling temper with Providence. You know what a close tryal that Providence was to Abraham, that called him from his native Countrey and Fathers house, to go he knew not whither; and yet it's said in Isa. 41. 2. he came
to Gods foot, as readily obeying his call, as a ser∣vant when his Master knocks for him with his foot. Paul's voyage to Jerusalem, had a dismal aspect upon himself, he could expect nothing but bonds and prisons, as he tells us, Acts 20. 23. and a great tryal it was to the Saints, who could not tell how to give up such a Minister, yet he resigns up his will to Gods, Acts 20. 22. and so do they, Acts 21. 14. The Will of the Lord be done. But far beyond these, and all other patterns, what an example hath our dear Lord Jesus set before us in the deepest point of self-denyal that ever was in the world. When the Father gave the Cup of sufferings into his hands in the garden, Mark 14. 36. a cup of wrath, the wrath of the great and terrible God, and that without mixture: the very taste whereof, put Nature in∣to an Agony and astonishment, a sore amaze∣ment, a bloody sweat; and forced from him that vehement and sad cry, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass; yet still with submission, never∣theless not my will, but thine be done. O blessed pattern of obedience, and resignation to the plea∣sure of God! What is your case to this? Fourth Help. Study the singular benefits and advantages of a Will resigned up, and melted into the Will of God. (1.) Such a Spirit hath a continual Sabbath within it self: the thoughts are established, Prov. 16. 3. and truly, till a man come to this, he doth but too much resemble the Devil, who is a rest∣less Spirit, secking rest, but finding none.
It was an excellent expression of Luther, to one that was much perplexed in his spirit about the doubtful events of some affairs of his that were then depending: Dominus tua omnJa fa∣cJat, & tu nihil facJas, sed sis Sabbatum Christi: (i. e.) The Lord shall do all for thee, and thou shalt do nothing, but be the Sabbath of Christ. It is by this means that the Lord gives his beloved sleep, Psal. 127. 2. he means not the sleep of the body, but of the Spirit. Fideles (saith One upon that place) etsi vitam agant laborJosam, com∣posiris tamen & tranquillis animis in fidei silentJo se continent, ac si dormirent: (i. e.) Though be∣lievers live in the midst of many troubles here, yet with quiet and composed minds they keep themselves in the silence of faith, as though they were asleep. (2.) Besides, it fits a mans spirit for com∣munion with God in all his afflictions, and this alleviates and sweetens them beyond any thing in the world. (3.) And surely a man is never nearer the mercy he desires, or the deliverance he expects, (as One truly observes) than when his soul is brought into a submissive temper. David was never nearer the Kingdom, than when he became as a weaned Child. Fifth Help. Lastly, Think how repugnant an unsubmissive temper is both to your prayers and professions. You pray that the Will of God may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, and yet when it seems to cross your wills or interests, you
struggle and fret against it. You profess to have committed your souls to his keeping, and to leave your eternal concerns in his hands; and yet cannot commit things infinitely less valu∣able unto him. How contradictory are these things! Your Profession as Christians, speaks you to be led by the Spirit, but this practice speaks you to follow the perverse counsels of your own spirits. O then regret no more, dispute no more, but lye down meekly at your Fathers feet, and say in all cases and at all times, the Will of the Lord be done. ANd thus I have through the Aid of Provi∣dence, performed what I designed to speak from this Scripture. I acknowledge, my per∣formances have been accompanied with much weakness, yet have endeavoured to speak of Providence the things that are right. Blessed be the Lord, who hath thus far assisted and pro∣tected me in this work. How Providence will dispose of my life, li∣berty and labours for time to come, I know not, but I cheerfully commit all to him, who hath hi∣therto performed all things for me. FINIS.
Postscript. IN consideration of the great and maniold advantages resulting from an humble and heedful observation of Providence, I can not but judge it the concernment of Chri∣stians that have time and ability for such a work, to keep written Memorials, or Journals of Provi∣dences by them; for their own and others use and benefit. For want of collecting and communica∣ting such observations, not only our selves, bu the Church of God is damnified and impo∣verished. Some say, the Art of Medicine was thus ac∣quired and perfected: when any one had met with some rare Physical Herb, and accidentally discovered the vertues of it, he would post it up in some publick place; and so the PhysiJan attained his skill, by a Collection of those posted Experiments and Receipts. I am not for posting up all that a Christian knows or meets with in his Experience, for (as I have said before) Non est religJo, ubi omnJa pa∣ent. Religion doth not lay all open; but yet there is a prudent, humble and seasonable com∣munication of our Experiences and observations of Providence, which is exceeding beneficial both to our selves and our brethren. If Christians in reading the Scriptures, would judiciously collect and record the Providences they shall meet with there, and (if destitute of
other helps) but add those that have fallen out in their own time and experience; O what a precious Treasure would these make? How would it antidote their souls against the spread∣ing Atheism of these dayes, and satisfie them, beyond what many other Arguments can do, that The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God. Whilst this Work was under my hand, I was both delighted and assisted by a Pious and Useful Essay of an unknown Author, who hath to very good purpose improved many Scriptural pas∣sages of Providence, which seem to lye out of the road of common observation: Some passages I have noted out of it, which have been sweet to me. And O that Christians would every where set themselves to such work! Providence carries our lives, liberties and concernments in its hand every moment. Your bread is in its Cupboard, your money in its Purse, your safety in its en∣folding Arms; and sure it is the least part of what you owe, to record the favours you receive at its hands. More partiularly, (1.) Trust not your slippery memories with such a multitude of remarkable passages of Pro∣vidence as you have, and shall meet with in your way to Heaven. It's true, things that greatly affect us, are not easily forgotten by us; and yet, how ordinary is it for new impressions to rae out former ones? It was a saying of that Worthy man Dr. Hrris, My memory (said he) never failed me in all my life; for indeed, I durst never trust it. Written memorials se∣cure us against that hazard; and besides, makes them useful to others when we are gone. So that you carry not away all your treasure to
heaven with you, but leave these choice Lega∣cies to your surviving friends. Certainly it were not so great a loss, to lose your Silver, your Goods and Chattels, as it is to lose your Expe∣rienes which God hath this way given you in this world. (2.) Take heed of clasping up those rich treasures in a Book, and thinking it enough to have noted them there: but have frequent re∣course to them, as oft as new wants, ears or dif∣ficulties arise, and assault you. Now, it's seaso∣nable to consider and relect, Was I never so distress before? Is this the first plunge that ever befell me? Let me consider the dayes of old, the years of acJent times, as Asaph did, Psal. 77. 5. (3.) Lastly, Beware of slighting former straits and dngers in comparison with present nes. That which is next us, alwayes appears greatest to us: and as time removes us farther and farther from our former mercies or dangers, so they lessen in our eyes, just as the Land from which they sail, doth to Sea-men. Know that your dangers have been as great, and your fears no less formerly than now. Make it as much your business, to preserve the sense and value, as the memory of former Providences, and the fruit will be sweet to you. FINIS.
THE TABLE. A. ABuse of Scripture punished by Providence, Pag. 28 Abuse of Providence cautioned, 95, 96 AfflictJons preventive of sin, 99 AfflictJons restraints from sin, 110 AfflictJons how they purge Corruption, 112 Adherence to creatures checked, 117 AffectJons must suit Providence, 148 Afflictive Providences when sanctiied, 23 Ambrose his providential relief, 9 Andreas how called to the Ministry, 80 AnticipatJons by Religion advantageous, 47 Assiduity of providential care, 91 Aspects of Providence contrary, 247 AssocJatJon of natural causes, 18, 19 Atheism checked by Providence, 174 Augustin's strange deliverance, 24 Augustin's converting a Manichee, 63 B. BArbarous Nations their sad state, 40, 41 Bible providentially mistaken, 63 Body its Elegant structure, 35, 36 Bolon's Conversion, 61 Brethren their different tempers, 10 Bruens happy Marriage, 62
C. CAllings ordered by Providence, 77, 7 Callings sinful in themselves, 7 Callings poor, some mens advantage, 82 CautJons about Civil Callings, 83, 84 Care of God to be eyed in Providence, 143 Christ hath his hand six wayes in Providence, 187 Children setled providentially in Callings, 79 Childrens duties pressed, 56, 57 CommunJon with God in Providences. Rules for it, and the sweetness of it, 163 Committing to God quieting to us, 142 Complaints of painful Callings answered, 81 Comparing Providences how melting, 194 CondescensJons of God admirable, 119, 120, 212 ConversJon two wayes, 58, 59 ConversJon endears places and instruments, 57 ConversJon how great a mercy, 74, 75 Content under all Providences, 153 Crying to God what it imports, 4 Craft sinful providentially defeated, 135 CurJosity in prying into Providence, 160, 161 D. DAngers in extremity, 3 Dangers of death providentially prevented, 102 Dependance on Creatures checked by Providence, 116 Delayes of Providence relieved, 156, 157 Delayes sink our hearts, 226, 227 Devil busie with dying Christians, 206 DJana's shrines what they were, 78 Distrust not God in new difficulties, 213 Dod's strange impulse, 98 Duty to advert Providence, 122 Dying hour sweetned by Providence, 205
E. EAvenness of spirit how attained, 247 Embryoes their condition, 38 Encouragements to wait on God, 228, 229 Englands Encomium, 41▪ 46, 47 Epicureans why they denyed Providence, 14 ExpectatJon from creatures dashed, 115, 116 Eye how guarded by nature, 102 F. FAcultJes sound a choice Providence, 3 Faithfulness of God eyed in Providence, 14 Faith two signal acts of it, 207 FamilJes providentially assigned us, 49 Foresight of troubles how taken, 25 Fox his wonderful relief, 9 G. GOd leaves not his in straits, 13 God to be owned in all Providences, 21 Good mens affections over-heated, 11 Greatness of God discovered, 11 H. HArmony of conjugal affections providential, 8 Harmony of Gods attributes, 16 Heavenly-mindedness in all providences, 15 Heart how melted by Providence, 192, 19 Heart ballanced under prosperity, 25 Heart cheered under sad Providences, 25 Heart quieted in doubtful Providences, 25 Heart not under our Command, 25 Henry the Second punished by Providence, 2 Holiness improved by eying Providence, 20 I. IDJots the design of Providence in them, 37, 3 Idle life a sinful life, 7 Jewel's strange preservation, 10
nterpositJons of Providence seasonable, 98 nobservance of providence sinful, 125 ntroductive Providences remarkable, 130 nstruments of Providence to be noted, 131 mmutability of God in changeable Providences, 147 oy in God under all Providences, 149 nterest how best secured, 142 unJus his Conversion how effected, 61 K. KEepers converted by their prisoners, 164 L. LIberality the best frugality, 141 M. MArrJages the appointments of Providence, 86 Ministers removes ordered by Providence, 66, 6 MortificatJon promoted by Providence, 108, 109 N. NAtural causes suspended by providence, 15, 16 Naaman's change how effected, 60 Nativity its place providentially ordered, 40, 41 Neighbourly Visits improved by Providence, 63 Notes of attention why affixt to Providence, 123 O. OBjectJons of Vnbelief solv'd by Providence, 181 ObservatJons of Providence matter of praise, 124 ObservatJons of Providence endear Christ, 187 OcolampadJus designed for a Merchant, 80 ObligatJons to duty from Providence, 212 P. PArents godly what a mercy, 50, 51 Papists their doom, 43, 44 Parents advantages opened, 52 Parents suffering from Children, 89
Pareus designed for an Apothecary, 8 Pleasures of a Christian in Providence, 1 Places of sinning places of suffering, Pleasing God our interest, 2 Persecutors baffled by Providence, 21, Pride check'd by Providence, 114, 1 Prayer must preface business, 2 Prayer furnished by Providence, 1 Prosperity when sanctified, 2 Prosperity when unsanctified, 2 Providence working good out of evil, 1 Providence pursues the Saints, 1 Providence stops the way to sin, 2 Providence must follow Scripture, 2 Providence nicks the opportunity, 30, Providence consonant to prayer, Providence breaks AegyptJan reeds, 1 Providence fails none that trust it, 138, 1 ProvisJon for us and ours, what a Providence, Q. QUJeting considerations under sad Providences, 1 QuJeting arguments drawn from Providence, 1 R. REcognitJons of Providence supports to faith, 1 RecognitJons of Providence must be full, 1 Records to be kept of Providences, 9, RelatJonal duties pressed, 89, Rebukes of Providence how useful, 203, 2 RelJance on God pleadable in prayer, RelatJons ordered by Providence, 85, 8 ResurrectJon of prayers pleasant to observe, 17 RetributJons of Providence very signal, 25, 2 ResignatJon to God our duty, 26 ResignatJon facilitated five wayes, 261, 26 Rochel providentially relieved,
les to discover the Will of God, 221, 222 S. SAmaritans Conversion how wrought, 60, 61 Satans malice over-ruled by Providence, 67, 68 nctificatJon of Providence how discerned, 135 offing at purity punished by Providence, 27 ope of Providence very Considerable, 131 asonable provisions of Providence, 92, 93 amens admirable preservation, 104 elf-denyal no damage, 138 Shepherds pious observation of Providence, 36 panish Souldiers how converted, 61 ul its excellent nature, 37 eason set for mercy twofold, 224, 225 rings and Autumns of Providence, 193, 194 rvant's running from his Master improved, 65 piritual mercies of two sorts, 230 T. TArtars and Turks their sad state, 43 Dr. Tates strange experience of Providence, 31 emptatJons prevented by Providence, 96 TemptatJons narrowly escaped, 100, 101 Tenderness of Providence to the Saints, 186 Thanksgiving includes five things in it, 183 Tranquillity promoted by eying Providence, 196 Trusting God before tryal Noble faith, 180 V. VAlue of Providence in diverse things, 129 Venice-glass how used by Providence, 73 VergerJus his strange Conversion, 62 VJews of Providence twofold, 10, 11, 12 Vileness of man discovered, 119 Vicissitudes of Providence disorder thoughts, 248 Unequal marriages what a misery, 87, 88 Ungodly Parents their sin and misery, 52, 53
Unwillingness of good men to surrender their Comforts at th call of Providence, 25 W. WAles a strange conversion there, 6 Wars, how Providence preserves in them, 10 Waiting on God prest by ten arguments, 22 Weak means succeeded by Providence, 2 Will of God how distinguished, 21 Will of God how revealed, 21 All Winds serve Providence, 17 Wicked men how quieted under crosses, 15 Wisdom of God to be eyed in Providence, 14 Word of God the best support in trouble, 14 Word of God fulfilled by Providence, 132, 13 Wisdom of providential appointments, 9 Y. YOuth, Providences then received greatly to be a mired, 19
ERRATA. Reader, THe Commendable Care of the Printer hath lest but little correcting work for thy Pen, what is, may be thus ickly rectified: In the Title Page read : p. 118. l. 3. r. great∣ss: p. 146. l. 14. blot out made: p. 150. l. 7. r. bride∣amber: ibid. l. 16. for anger, r. enmity: p. 152: l. 31. ot out not. FINIS.
