f1750a 13031568 96752
THE Arraignment OF POPERY BEING A Short COLLECTION, taken o of the CHRONICLES, and other Books of the State of the CHURCH in the Primitive Times. Also, The State of the Papists; and how long It wa before the Universal POPE and MASS was set up; and t time of bringing in all their Rudiments and Traditions, Beac and Images, Purgatory, Tythes and Inquisitions. Also, A Relation of their Cruelties they acted after the Pope got up, being worse then the Heathen and Turk: New Rome having proved like Old, Also, What the People of England worshipped before they were Christians. With several other things, which may be profitable for people to read over, wherein they may see the Worship of the Beast and Whore; where all that fear God, may see, read, try, and give judgment by the Spirit of Truth. o which is added, The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the CHƲRCH. By G. F. and E. H. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1667.
The Contents. Rulers makes Ministers, and none must preach ex have a Licence from them. Chap. 24. Pag Concerning the Priests turning, as the Rulers turned, to  Power that came up, rather then they would lose their ∣fices; and how they petitioned several Parliaments and F∣lers, that they might have their Tythes paid them, and that they would suppress the People called Quakers. Ch. 2 Pag. 73. A Relation of some of the Cruelties insticted on the Christi∣ans by the Heathen. Chap. 26. Pag. 81. An Abstract of the Bloody Massacre in Ireland, by the Insti∣gation of the Jesuits, Priests, and Fryars, &c. in the year 1642. Chap. 27. Pag. 84. In the History of the Churches of Piedmont, collected and compiled by Samuel Morland, in the year 1658. Chap. 27. Pag. 96. List of some of the Accusations for which the aforesaid people suffered in the Valleys of Piedmont, by the Papists. Chap. 28. Pag. 99. Te Doctrines of Christ and Antichrist distinguished. Chap. 29. Pag. 103. A Discourse betwixt a Quaker and a Papist. Ch. 30. P. 106.
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF POPERY. CHAP. I. The State of the Church in the Primitive Times; and tho Time when the Apostacy from the Truth began. Also a Relation of those few that were raised up from time to time, to testisie against the Idolatry brought in, and set up in every Age since the Apostles dayes. From the Year Sixty four, to the Year One Hun∣dred and Fifty. CHristianity was first brought into England in the Year 64, by Joseph of Aramathea and twelve Disciples, sent by the Apostle Philip; so that Christianity came into Eng∣land long before the Universal Pope was, Euseb. lib. 3. John for preaching the Gospel, was banished by Do∣mitian into the Isle of Pathmos, about the Year 97; and after the death of the aforesaid Domitian, was released again under Peru the Emperor, and came to Ephesus, Anno 100, where he continued until the time of Trajan, and lived until he was ninety nine y of age.
Between the Years One hundred, and One hundred and fifty, Ig∣natius, in the Persecution of Trajan the Emperor, was for the Chri∣stian Faith delivered to wild Beasts to be devoured. Euseb. lib. 3. chap 35, 36. It is written of him, That as he passed through Asia, being under the most strict Custody of his Guarders, he strengthned and con∣firmed the people every where as he went, and admonished them especially, and before other things, to beware and shun Heresies and vain Superstitions newly risen up, and that they should cleave only to the Apostles Doctrine. Ex Hierom in Calassanct Eccles. The Church at Jerusalem, in or about One hundred and ten years after Christ, writeth, That until that time, she was as an uncorrupt Virgin, there was no false Doctrine sown there. From the Years One hundred and fifty, to Two hundred. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, resisted Annasetus Bishop of Rome, nd withstood divers Ceremonies then beginning to be set on foot. Iraneus Bishop of Lyons in France, wrote in the name of his Bre∣thren in France, unto Victor Bishop of Rome, reproving him for of∣fering to excommunicate the Churches of Asia, who withstood his Traditions touching the time of the Celebration of Easter; he was reprehended of divers Bishops, but sharply of Iraeneus. About this time there was six Synods held in Asia, touching the Celebration of Easter, where the Bishop of Rome had no more Au∣thority then the other Bishops; and when he challenged Authority, Iraeneus reproved him. From the Year two hundred, to the Year two hundred and fifty. Polycrates Bishop of Antioch, was a married Bishop; he, together with divers other Bishops of Asia, withstood Victor Bishop of Rome, and opposed certain Constitutions by him urged, about observation of Dayes, Meats, Drinks and Vestures, Euseb. lib. 5. chap. 26. From the Year Two hundred and fifty, to Three hundred. Fabian Chanimon of Nilus, and Fructuosus of Tarracona, were married Bishops.
Asclepiades a Bishop of Antiochia, of whom Alexander Bi Jerusalem (being the Prisoner of Christ in Caesaria) wro the people in Antiochia, That it was a comfort unto him,  made his imprisonment the more easie, that he heard of the  constancy of Asclepiades. Euseb. lib. 6. chap. 11. Note, in th the true Bishops were no Persecutors, but persecuted. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, was a great Enemy to Super on. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 6. From the Year Three hundred, to Three hundred and fifty. Silvester Bishop of Rome, Three hundred and fourteen years  Christ, when Constantine offered him a Golden Scepter, he ref it, as a thing not fit for a Priests Function. Sabel. Euseb. Chron: And you may see there was a great difference between this Bishop, and Popes when they got up: And do you think that a Protestant Bishop Priest would refuse to take a Golden Scepter, if it were offered him? The same Bishop also ordained in the year following, That ∣ry Priest should be the Husband of one Wife, according to th postles Doctrine. This was before the Popes Laws were made ag Marrying. The Councils of Ancyra, Nice, Tyrus, Gangra, (in which condemned the Heresie of Eustatius, speaking against Marri and eating of flesh, &c.) Eliberis, Carthage, (where the Bisho Rome was stoutly withstood) Antioch and Sardica, were all su∣ed at the Commandment of the Emperors, not of the Pope.  Concil. Basilius Magnus, Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia, in his ∣tings he complaineth of the pride of the Western Churches, and ∣demneth their seeking of Supremacy. Basil. Transmarin. Epist.  and Epist. 10. ad Eusamos. Gregorius Nazianzenus, testified against the pride of Pre seeking Supremacy over others. Zozam. lib. 7. cap. 5. Gregorius Nyssenus was a married Bishop. Niceph. Chalist. I cap. 19. Eusebius Caesariensis wrote against the Bishop of Romes ∣cy. Lib. 2. de vit. Const. 3, & 37. He wrote against Images, Lib 3. de presp. Evang. And
against Popish Injunctions of Fasting. Lib. 5. Eccles. Hist. cap. 23. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, whose Name was famous in the Church, wrote much against Traditions, (Epist. de Synod. Nicen. Decr.) and against Invocation of Saints, (Epist. ad Adelph.) against their Seven Sacraments, against Images, and against the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and many other things. Orat. 2. Contr. A∣rian. Epist. ade it. Fom the Year Three hundred and fifty, to Four hundred. In the Year Three hudred fifty one, Liberius Bishop of Rome, was banished by Constantius the Arian Emperor. In the Year Three hundred fifty four, the same Liberius made a Law, That no Priest should forsake his Cure for any Persecution or Trouble, though Death should ensue. This was before there was a Pope; but since, they will change any way for to save their Benefices, as their practises have manifested, turning from Popery to Protestantism, and after to Popery again. Flavius, against whom Damatius, Syricius, and Anastatius, Bi∣shops of Rome, were mighty Opposites, who mis-informed the Em∣peror Theodosius against him; before whom, when Flavius appear∣ed, he said, O Emperor, if the Disputation be only concerning Prin∣cipality and Eminent Places, I will not contend with any man, but deny my self of all Superiority, and commit the Charge of Antioch to whom ye like best. Theod. Lib. 5. Chap. 23. Cyrillius was an Enemy to the Pomp of the Clergy, and had more regard to feed the poor, and to preach the word, then to the out∣ward garnishing the Churches. Zozomen, Lib. 5. Chap. 25. Nictarius Bishop of Constantinople, in his time Auricular Confes∣sion was abrogated in Constantinople, upon occasion of Adultery com∣mitted between a Penitentiary, and a Woman confessing her sins to him. Socrat. Lib. 5. Chap. 19. Letotius Bishop of Meletina in Armenia, was a great Opposer of Monkish Profession, whose Society he called a Den of Thieves. Theod. lib. 14. cap. 11. Gregory the first, restored Marriages again to the Priests, which before had been denied; and when they would have made him Uni∣versal Bishop, he denyed the Title, alledging it was a proud Name.
From the Year Four hundred, to the Year Four hundred and fifty Accatius was Bishop of Constantinople Seventeen Years; in  time the Roman Church contended for Superiority: This Accat resisted the same, and little regarding the pride of the Roman B∣shop, excommunicated Foelix, and razed his Name out of th Roll of Bishops. Histor. Magd. Cent. 5. chap. 10. Note, at this time there was no universal Pope at Rome; for the Bishop of Rome was excommunicated. Hillarius Bishop of Arles, opposed Leo Bishop of Rome, and de∣nied Superiority over other Churches, and went to Rome, and with∣stood the Bishop of Rome to his face. Leo. ad Gal. Episc. Epist. 77, & 89. From the Year Four hundred, to the Year Four hundred and fifty. John, called Tabenesiota, Bishop of Alexandria, he kept the true Faith, and was bamshed by Anastatius, because he would not damn the Council of Chalsedon. Magd. Cent. 6. From the Year six hundred, (about which time the Pope got up) to the Year Six hundred and fifty. Mellitus Brockmaile, and about Eleven hundred men more, were miserably slain, because they withstood the proceedings of Austine the Monk, who from the Pope was sent over into England. iticus 20. Martyrology, page 107. Serenus Bishop of Marceles in France, opposed the bringing in of Images, and brake down all the Images where he had power. Al∣phons. 2. Imag. The whole Grek Church complained of Phocas, when first he gave the Supremacy to Boniface. Plat. Bonifac. 3. Gregory a Bishop, concested against the Supremacy of the Pope, taxing the desire thereof, as a Character of Antichrist. Greg. E∣pist. 32, 34, 38, 39. About the Year Eight hundred, Albertus Ballus, a Bishop in France, was excommunicated by Pope Zachery, because he held di∣vers
things contrary to the Romish Superstitions. Hist Magd. Cent. 8. cap. 10. Lotha ius Emperor of Germany. about this time reduced the Pope to the obedience of the Empire, and sent some of his Clergy to di∣spute with the Pope, who confuted him. And here the Papists are proved lyars, who say the Pope is Infallible. Anaestus vit. Pont. in Seg. 2. The Waldenses so called, from one Waldens, a man of great sub∣stance in the City of Lyons in France, who about the Year One thousand one hundred and sixty, taking occasion by the sudden death of one with whom he was walking, began with a careful study to reform his life, and to this end studied the Scriptures diligently, and taught amongst people the Word; and some thousands in a short space joyned with him, who were dispersed abroad into di∣vers parts of the world. These Waldenses were miserably persecu∣ted by the Pope and his Faction. See the History of the Waldenses. Raymond Earl of Tholouse, for taking part with them, was wrong∣fully vexed, and dis-inherited by the Pope. Mat. Paris. The Religion of the WALDENSES. They held, That the Pope is not greater then another Bishop; and that there was no Purgatory: That it was in vain to pray for the dead: That the Masses for the dead are the Inventions of the coverous Priests: That Images, hallowing of Water, and other Creatures, are superstitions. They contemned the Masse, and all that appertained to it. They misliked the distinction of Days and Meats; they defended the reading of the Scripture by the Laity. Naur. vel. 2. pag. 900. Evarardus Invanensis, a Bishop in Germany, spake thus of the Pope (about the Year One thousand two hundred) in an Assembly of Bishops at Regensburg: He under the colour of Religion, layeth the foundation of the Kingdom of Antichrist. These Priests of Baby∣lon will reign alone; they can endure no equal: They will never rest, until they have trampled all things under their feet: He sitteth in the Temple of God, and is exalted above all that is worshipped; in whose fore-head is written the Name of Blasphemy, I am a God, and cannot erre.
CHAP. II. A Brief Relation how the ancient Christians were no Persecu∣tors in the beginning, but sussered by the Heathen for the first Three hundred years after Christ. The First Persecution. NEro was said to be the first Tyrannical Emperor that persecuted the Christians; it was called the First Persecution, because it was under the Emperors Power; and it begun in the Year Sixty six after Christ, and at that time was chiesly within the City of Rome. In the latter end of his Reign, Paul was put to death for the Testi∣mony of the Faith of Christ, in the year Sixty nine. Act. & Mon. The Second Persecution. In the year Ninety three, did the Second Persecution begin un∣der the Emperor Domitianus, under whom several Christians were put to death; and about the same time was the Apostle John banish∣ed into the Isle of Pathmos, where he wrote his Revelation: In those dayes the Christians were so little esteemed, that the people called, them Coblers, Weavers, Combers of Wool, illiterate, and exceeding Rustick and Clownish, yea, such as knew no good fashions. Origen lib. 30. ad Cels. The Third Persecution. In the Year One hundred and two, did the Third Persecution be∣gin under the Emperor Trajanus, who though he was called  good Emperor, did nevertheless persecute the Christians, out of his, mility to the gods; in which persecution several Bishops were put to death: And at that time the Bishop of Antioch testified, That sufferings made them like unto Christ, who had suffered for them, himself, preparing a way through suffering, unto eternal life. A∣bout the same time did a Governor write unto the Emperor in the,
Christians behalf; whereupon the Emperor wrote, That they should, seek no more of them, but those they had in prison, should they put to death. The Fourth Persceution. In the Year One hundred sixty four, was the Fourth Persecution of the Christians, which arose under the Emperors Macus Aure∣tius, and Lucius Verus; in which Polycarpus, Bishop of Smy na, was put to death, who had been a Disciple of John, and had been many years in the service of the Lord, as he himself acknowledge. A∣bout the same time was Julianus put to death at Rome, in whose time the Christians were accused to have a fleshly conversation one with another, which he marked to be lyes, by their willingness to dye; and thereby he coming to be converted, became an Eminent Teacher of the Christians. Baron. Anno 164. numb. 2. Enseb. l.b. 4 cap. 6. At Lyons in France, there did go forth a Proclamation, That the Christians might not dwell in their houses, nor that they must not converse in the streets, nor shew their faces; which being impossi∣ble for them to perform, their sufferings became exceeding great, and in the mean time some of the slaves gave out, that the Christians lived in filthy lasciviousness among themselves. In this persecution there was one Lucius put to death for reproving the Judg for put∣ting the Christians to crueller deaths then any Transgressor. The Fifth Persecution. In the Year Two hundred and one did the Fifth persecution be∣gin, under the Emperor Severus, which was thus in part occasioned, to wit, When the Emperor had a Warr, and had gotten the Victory, the Christians kept themselves still and quiet, without making tokens of joy with I ires; or May-poles, or other Triumphs, according to the manner of the Heathen: Whereupon they accused the Chri∣stians our of envy, as if they despised and hated the Emperor; and the rather, because the Christians would not swear by his Fortune, Tertul. pag. 30.127. In those dayes it was the manner among the Christians, not to go to any Comedies or Stage-playes; for they understood, that if they
did forsake the Devil and all his works, with the world, that then they must forsake Comedies and Stage-Playes. Moreover, the Christians said, We renounce your Shews, as we condemn their divers Originals, by the knowledg we have, that they are effects of Superstition and Idolatry. The Sixth Persecution. In the Year Two hundred thirty seven, did the Sixth Persecution under the Emperor Maximinus arise, who partly out of envy to his Kinsman Alexander, who had been favourable to the Christians, did persecute the Christians; in which Persecution there were many put to death; for the Heathen in those dayes were so spightful against the Christians, that when there was an Earthquale, or a Storm, or the like, they laid the blame upon the Christians, saving, Their gods were angry because their honour went to nothing through the Christians. This Em∣peror did not Reign very long, therefore did this persecution cease the sooner. The Seventh Persecution. In the Year Two hundred fifty three, did the Seventh Persecution arise under the Emperor D cius, who with excessive Cruelty did perse∣cute the Christians: In this Persecution several of the Bishops were put to death; and such as were the chief among the Christians, did theytorture with many torments, and plundered the Christians houses, and that which the Plunderers did not esteem; they burn'd. In this Per∣secution many suffered Martyrdom, some being burned, some behead∣ed, (women as well as men) some whipt to death; and some Soldiers fo: encouraging these Martyrs in their sufferings, were put to death. In this terrible Persecution, several departed from the Faith for fear of the Torments, yet after wards came to be restored again. The Sufferings of the Christians were great under this Emperor; but his days were also shortned; for he had not reigned Two years, but was caught in a Quag-mire, where he met with a check or reproof for his Cruelty. Note, a particular account of the terrible Trments, is mentioned to∣wards the end of this book. The Eighth Persecution. In the year Two hundred fifty nine, did the Eighth Persecution arise
under the Emperor Valerianus, who put forth a Proclamation against the Christians, wherein he forbad their Meeting; and when this Pro∣clamation or Order was not observed, then did there follow a great Persecution of the Christians, in which there was very many put to death, and some were banished; and the Christians converted some of the Heathen in the places to which they were banished. But the Emperor under whom the Christians thus suffered, did not go unpunish∣ed for his cruelty; for he was taken Prisoner by the King of Persia, who made use of him for a Foot-stool when he got upon his Horse. The Ninth Persecution. In the Year Two hundred seveaty three, did the Ninth Persecution, arise under the Emperor Aurelianus; but this Persecution was not so great as the other, because he was cut off by death soon after he had determined the same: yet in this Persecution was Foelix Bishop of Rome put to death, with several others. The Tenth Persecution. In the Year Three hundred and two, begun the Tenth Persecution, which was so great, that it exceeded all that had been before it, not, only in Cruelty, but in Continuance; for it contiued Twelve years. Eusebius (who lived at that time) writes of it at large in his Ecclesiasti∣cal History, saying, It was occasioned through the freedom of the Christians, who were come into great Reputotion, and were put in Places of Office to Rule in Countries and Cities; but through their prosperity and voluptuousness, brotherly love came to decrease, and haughtiness and pride got up; and instead of Worshipping of God, an insolent Authority begun to get up in the Church of the Christians. And at that time the Emperor Dioclesian gave forth a Proclamation, wherein he commanded, that all the Christian Churches should be pull'd down, and the Holy Scriptures burned, and that the Christians should be turned out of their places; with other such like things. After that, there came another Order, That they should cause the chief of the Church to offer unto Idols, or else such as resisted, were to be put to death; and some were constrained to offer. This Persecution begun as a little spark, but it spread over the whole
Church; and the Persecution was so hot and great, that the Persecu∣tors themselves were troubled, if not wearied. In Syria there was so many of the Christians in hold, that rheir Prisons were filled with them, and with joy they went unbound to their death. Eusebius writes, how that many of the Christians had their Ears cut off, and their Noses slit, and others of their Members our off also. But they who caused it to be thus done unto the Christians, did not escape the hand of the Lord; for Dioclesian, who had endeavoured to root out the Name of Christianity, did nevertheless see in his old age, that the Christians flourished; at which he was troubled, and killed him∣self. Baron. An. 3.6. Num. 1. Chron. fl. 80. Enseb. lib. 8. cap. 18. lib. 9 cap. 10. And Maximininus, another Persecutor, was terribly perplexed with pain in his bowels, and other misery which came upon him; and the hand of the Lord was heavy upon others who had persecuted the Chri∣stians; yea, and some were made to confess, that they deserved those Judgments from the hand of the Lord. Thus it is evident, that while the Emperors ruled, and had power, the Christians suffered, and were persecuted; but afterwards growing nu∣merous, and coming to have the outward Power in their hands, they be∣came Persecutors of such as they counted Hereticks, and were rather crueller then the Heathen, as may be seen by the Cruelties they instict∣ed upon the Protestants, a particular Relation of which is at the latter end of this Book. CHAP. III. Concerning Councils gathered before there was a Pope. what Deerees they made; and Papists reproved that say, None gathered Councils since Peter, but the Pope. THE first Council was of the Apostles, (Acts 16.) Anno 46. amongst whom James gave his Judgment; unto whom they all agreed, and wrote accordingly to the Brethren. So that Peter was not the Hood of the Church, as the Papists preted, and cause many to be∣lieve Ag when Pau came to Jerusalem, (Acts .), A e
went with the Brethren unto James, where all the Elders were Assem∣bled; and there they determined what they thought best to be done. Anno 63. After the Death of James, the Apostles from every place gathered themselves together at Jerusalem, and chose Simon Cleo∣phas in his stead. Ninety nine years after Christ, there was two Synods summoned in Asia, where John the Evangelist was present. One hundred and sixty three years after Christ, there was a Synod in Ancyra in Galatia, gathered together of the faithful, not by the Uni∣sal Pope. In the Year One hundred seventy nine, the Brethren in France as∣sembled together. Anno 128, A General Council was called at Nice in Bythinia, of Three hundred Bishops, by Costantius Magnus, not by the Universal Pope. Anno 350, A General Council was summoned at Sardis by Constan∣tint and Constance the Emperors. Anno 355, Constantine the Emperor commanded the Eastern Chur∣ches to meet at Nicomedia in Bythinia, the Western at Armenium in Italy. Anno 299, A Council of a hundred and fifty Bishops met at Con∣stnople, by the Commandment of Theodesius Magnus the Emperor. Anno 450, A Council of Six hundred and thirty Bishops held at Chalcedon, by the Commandment of Martianus the Emperor. CHAP. IV. Concerning some of the Decrees of the General Councils, af∣ter the Apostacy began to spread over the Church; and how they contradicted and excommunicated one another; and what Idolatrous Institutions some of them set up, contrary to the Councils and Assemblies of the Apostles and Brethren we read of in the Scriptures. IN Asia sundry Synods were held, in which Montanus wa xcom∣municated, (and his Heresie condemned. Eusb. lib. 5. cap.
Anno 193, There was a Synod held at Rome touching the cleb∣tion of the Feast of Easter, where Victor excommunicated all the Ea∣stern Churches. Eus. lib. 5 c. 23. Anno 195, There was five or six Synods held in sundry parts of the World, about the Celebration of the Feast of Easter, in which the Bi∣shop of Rome had no more Authority then the other Bishops. He in his City, and they in theirs, were chief; and when he went about to challenge Authoritie over the Eastern Churches, Ires Bishop of Lyons in France, reproved him for it. Euseb. lib. 5. cap. 23. There vvas a Synod held at Carthage, which is said to have erred about the re-baptizing of Hereticks. Anno 287, There vvas a Council of Three hundred Bishops cal∣led together at Sinuessa, where the Bishop of Rome was condemned for denying Christ, and sacrificing to Idols. Anno 311, There was a Council held at Neocasarea, where among other things, it was decreed, That none should be made a Priest before he was thirty years old. Constantine called a Council to remove the Dissention risen among Bishops. Anno 330, A General Council was called at Nice, of Three hun∣dred and eighteen Bishops, by Constanti us Magnus, where they con∣demned Arrius, debated the Controversie about Easter, and laid down a Form of Faith, &c. Sylvester called at Rome Two hundred and eighty four Bishops in the presence of Constantine, where they laid down Canons for the Go∣vernment of the Clergy. Anno 336, A Council held at Eliberis in Spain, in the time of Con∣stantine, Decreed, That the Usurer should be excommunicated. That Tapers should not burn in the day-time in Church-Yeards. That Ima∣ges should be banished the Church. That nothing should be painted upon the Wall to be worshipped. Anno 340, The Council of Grangra condemned the Heretical O∣pinions of Tustathius and allowed the Marriage of Priests. A Council held at Carthage, Decreed, That there should be no re∣baptizing; and that Clergy-men should not meddle with Temporal Affairs. A Council of Arrian Bishops met at Antioch, where they end avou∣red to abrogate the Nicent Creed. Note, one Council throw down what auther Council sets up.
nno 350, A General Council was fummoned at Sardis, for the heating of them whom the Arrians had exiled; the Council restored them, and deposed their Accusers, condemned the Arrias, and confirmed the Nione Creed. Anno 355, A Council of Arrians held at Sermium, sccurged among them Osius, and made him subscribe unto Arrianism. A General Council was summoned to meet at Millain, where the East and Western Churches brawled about Athanasius, and dissolved the Council, agreeing upon nothing. Anno 368, A Council at Laodicea Decreed, That the Laity or com∣mon people should not chuse the Priest. That Lessons should be read in the Church between certain Psalms, and Service should be read mor∣ning and evening. That the Gospel should be read, with other Scrip∣tures, on the Sundays. That Lent should be observed righteously; and that Christians should not dance at Bride-houses. A Council was called at Illyricum, where the Trinity, Three joined in one, was confessed. A Council held at Valentia in France, Decreed, That Priests should not marry. The First Council held at Tolledo in Spain, Decreed, That Priests should marry. Nte, Oe of these Councils have erred, though the Papists say they could not erre. There was a Council held at Chalcedon, where Chrysostom was con∣demned of spight, and for no crime. A Council was called at Cyprus, where through the spight of Theo∣philus, Bishop of Alexandria, the Books of Origen were condemned. The Third Council held at Carthage, Decreed, That the Clergy in their years of discretion, should either Marry, or vow Chastity; and that the chief Bishop should not be called Prince of the Priests, or Highest Priest, but only the Bishop of the chief See (that is Seat.) A Council held at Hippo, Decreed, That Bishops and Priests should look well to their Children. That the Head-Bishop of the Head See should not be called the chief Priest: and that no Scripture should be read in the Church, but Canonical; that is, such as they approved by exact Rule. The Council held at Taurinum, was for the Reformation of the Clergy, which then was corrupted; but now much more.
The Council of Malta condemned the Pelagians, and D and concluded that Infants were to be baptized. The Council of Agatha decreed, that none should be made Prie before they were thirty years old; and that the Clergy should  such attire as became their Profession; with many other Con∣tions. The first and second Council held at Vasio, decreed, that in such Churches where Preachers were not, the Deacons should read ∣milies. A Council held at Carpentoracte, decreed, that the Bishop sh not poll the Parishes. A Council held at Venice, decreed, that no Clergy-man should  at Wedding-Dinners, Dancing, and hearing of wanton Sonnets,  vain Songs. All the Bishops of Africk came together by the commandment of Hororicus the Arrian, where his Heresie was confirmed, and Four hundred forty four Bishops exiled or banished. Anno 490, A Synod of Seventy Bishops were called together at Rome, where the Canonical Scriptures were severed from such as rhey counted Apocrypha. A Synod met at Epaunis, decreed, that no Clergy-man should ei∣ther Hunt or Hawk; and that throughout the Province, such Divine. Service at the Metropolitan or chief City liked of, should be retain∣ed. Euseb. Note, the Apostles decreed no such things as this, that we read of  Scripture. A Council held at Aurelia, decreed, that Lent should be solemnly kept before Easter; the Rogation, with the Ember-Dayes, about the Ascention. A Council held in Gerundia in Spain, decreed, that every Province should observe one Order of Divine Service; that Baptism should be Ministred only at Easter and Whitsuntide, and at other times, is ne∣cessity so required; and that the Lords Prayer should be said at Eve∣ning and Morning-Prayer. Euseb. A Council held at Caesar Augusta, accursed such as received the Sa∣crament, and eat it not in the Church. A General Council was held at Constantinople, which decreed, that Mary should be called the Mother of God.
The First and Second Synods were called at Lyons, for the removing of Schism raised in the Church. Six Synods were held at Rome touching the Election of a Bishop, and the Preservation of Church-Goods. CHAP. V. Concerning the state and condition of the Church, as it was before there was a Ʋniversal Pope: Also what Decrees and Institutions were made by Bishops for the first six hundred years after Christ; and how the Apostacy be∣gun to overspread the Church. NOvatius a Priest of Rome, two hundred fifty four years after Christ, abhorred second Marriage; he was condemned as an He∣retick, at a Synod held at Rome the same year. Eusb. lib. 6. cap. 48. Apostalici were Hereticks in Pisidia, who, two hundred and fifty five years after Christ, condemned Marriage, and said the Apostles were unmarried men; Which is a lye, for several of the Apostles were married men Aug. lib. de Haeres. Ephip. Haer. 61. Originiani were Hereticks, (Anno 273) they prohibited Marriage, but committed Fornications, and all uncleanness and filthiness, and re∣jected some Books of the Old and New-testament, which made against them. Ephip. Haeres. 63. About three hundred and ten years after Christ, one Lucina a holy Maid of Rome, dying, made Macellus Bishop of Rome, her heir, and gave him all her great Substance. From that time forth (saith Pollidore Lib. 6.) the Bishops of Rome were greatly enrched, and then came to be pust up in pride. Which riches the Apostles denyed. Pol. lib. de Invent. cap. ult. In the year three hundred and ten, Macarius was Bishop of Jerusa∣lem, he was the means, with Helena, that the Cross of Christ was found: So there was no Cross before among the Apostles. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6.9. In the year 308, Dioclesian the Empetor of Rome, was so puffed up with pride, that he would needs be worshipped as God, saying,
brother to the Sun and Moon; and adorned his shoes with  and precious stones; he commanded the people to kiss his  which practice the Popes afterwards followed. And this E caused the Christians to be persecuted in the Tenth Persecution. Euseb. lib. 7. c. 29. lib. 8. c. 2, 3, 14, 19. Soc. lib. 1. c. 2. In Three hundred and eighty years after Christ, the Name Ca∣tholick beginneth, being instituted by Damacius a Bishop of Rome. In the year 391, Set-hours to Prayers instituted by St. Jerome. In the year 394, in Bishop Ciricius time, the word Mass was brought first into the Church. In the year 398, Anastatius Bishop of Rome, decreed, That men should stand up at hearing the Gospel read. In the year 412, Cirilius succeeded Theophilus in the See of Alex∣dia, and withall, he challenged to himself more Authority than ever any other Bishop before him. From that time forth he took to himself also the Government of Temporal Matters, and banished all the Jews. And this Bishop went contrary to Christs command, which saith, You are Brethren. Foelix Bishop of Rome, appointed the Feast of Michael the Arch-Angel, called Michaelmas. In the year 528; Justinian instituted swearing by the Gospel. Hore swearing came in. In the year 533, Agapetus Bishop of Rome, first commanded the people to go a Procellioning, and to follow the Cross. Plat. Polid. Deborus, &c. This is contrary to Christ and the Apostles. Philosophy was not taught in Christian Schools before (nor in the time of) Justinian the Emperor, who began to reign in the year of Christ 527. Part. 2. Chap. 26. Pag. 89, 90. In the year 560, Gregory Bishop of Rome commanded, That nei∣ther flesh, nor any thing that hath affinity with flesh, as Cheese, Butter, Milk, Eggs, &c. should be eaten on such dayes as are ap∣pointed to be fasted on. In the year 569, King Conwall had alwayes a silver Cross carri∣ed before him; and caused Crosses to be first set upon every Stee∣ple in England. In the year 578, Pelagus Bishop of Rome, decreed, That Sub. Deacons should either leave their Wives, or else their Offices. All this is contrary to the Apostles.
In the year 590, Gregory Bishop of Rome approved and allowed the Feast of Trinty. Gulielm. Durand. In the same year he set up Prayers for Saints, Sacrifices for the Dead, and Purgatory, in the Church. In the year 595; a certain wicked woman, an Emperess, request∣ed of Theodore Bishop of Rome, that Images might be set up in their Churches; and it was agreed that it should be, by the said Theodore and his ouncil. This is contrary to the Primitive Church. In the year 600, Benedictus was the first Founder of the Order commonly called St. Benedicts: He presumed to invent new wayes, which all the godly Fathers before him never thought of. Johannes, Patriarch of Constantinople, put forth himself, and would needs be called the Universal Bishop of the World: But the Bishop of Rome in no case would suffer that, but put a stop to it; but after, the Bishop of Rome could take it to himself. CHAP. VI. Concerning the several Reliques and Superstitious Practises in the Church of Rome; Who were the first Institutors of them; and what, and how much of their Idolatry is still upheld by the Protestant Professors in England at this day, which was set up since there was a Ʋniversal Pope. IN the Year after Christ Six hundred and two, Phocas murthered Mauritius his Master, the Emperor, and slew two of his Sons, and put his Daughters and his Wife to death. And then this Phocas, this Murderer, was crowned Emperor, and Boniface the third, Bi∣shop of Rome, he obtained of this Murderer Phocas, to be the Uni∣versal Bishop over all the Bishops; and so, that the Bishop of Rome should be called Pope. And here got in the Pope, by murder. Platina Christ. Misseus Hen. Panteleon, &c. Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 32, 33, 34. cap. 76, 77. See Becon. sol. 295. And then the Bishop lost the greatest part of Christendom, and all the Churches went together by the ears about him, and the Emperor lost the greatest part of his
Empire. And here you may see the Pope was set up six hundred and  years after Christ. And this Pope (in the year 605) first decreed. That white Linnen Clothes should be laid on the Altar. And further (in another Author concerning Phocas which mur∣thered Mauritius his Master, who was a Noble and Virtuous Mn) he obtained, through Treason, the Empire; he also treacherously slew his Children, that none of his should claim the Crown  him. This Murdering Tyrant set up the Bishop of Rome, contraa  Chists command, who said, You are all Brethren. And so the Bishop of Rome, Boniface the third, Lucifer-like, ex∣alted in pride above all his fellow. Bishops, challenged to himself the Supremacy and Authority, that he and his Successors after him for ever, should be taken for the chief Bishop, and Universal Head of the Church throughout all the world. And that, from that day forward the Church of Rome should be called the Head Church of all the whole World. And that the Church of Rome should be in subject on to no other Church, but that all other Churches should be in subjection to it: For until that time, Constantinople Church was counted the highest, where the Emperor dwelt; (and before that time, the Church in Jerusalem was called the highest) for Con∣stantine was a Christian, but in Rome there was Heathen Emperor a long time after Christ. Otho frisin Gen. Chron. lib. 5. cap. 8. Mar∣rian Scot. in Anno 608. Ʋsperg. in Phoca. Becon. fol. 295. It is before recorded, that Joseph of Arimathea, first preached the Gospel in England amongst the Britans, in the year sixty four, and about six hundred and two, the Pope sent over to them Augusti to spread his Doctrine, with his silver Cross, his Letany, his Pro∣cession, Images, Reliques, Canticles, and Books of Ceremonies, charging the Britans that they did many things contrary to the Cu∣stom of the Church of Rome, in their preaching Baptism, and keep∣ing of Easter, &c. and that they regarded not mans traditions but the Britans refusing to follow his Commands, he threaed them with Warr, and to revenge it by death, which immediately ensued. Read Beda in his Ecclesiastical History of England, the second Book and second Chap. Here all people may see that Christianity was planted in  some hundreds of years before the Popes Rudiments, Cand,  Letany, Procession and Images, with the rest of his Trumpery,
into England; who lyeth in saying that Christianity came fist in by them, who came in by Murder and the outward Sword, and hath held up his outward Tradition by Murder, and the outward Sword, ever since. Chron. Ranulph. Chest. Bec. fol. 323. In the year 606, Boniface the fourth he instituted the Feast of All-Souls, and All-Saints, and he got the Temple of Phocas, built by A∣grippa; and consecrated it to the Virgin Mary, and all the Martyrs. Plat. volat. Polydore Bec. fol 355. In the year 645, At Rome (where Meletus was present) it was or∣dered that Monasteries should be erected in England, in Boniface the fourth's days; and this Boniface the fourth instituted the Feast of All-Souls. In the year 637, England first divided into Parishes. In the year 640, Lent was first set up in England, in Pope Seve∣rinus's time. Carcumbertus King of England, commanded the peo∣ple to keep Lent in England. Segeb. in Chron. Pautal. In the year 643, Pope Martin the first ordained that a man should not lye with his Wife, till the Priest had hallowed or blest his Bed; and the same year he ordained Mass to be sung openly with a loud voice; and that Churches should be trimmed and dressed on Holy∣days. Pol. Paulel Bec. fol. 322. In the year 650, Pope Eugenius the first, ordained that Monks should be shut up in Cloisters; for before that time they did go up and down. Euseb. Chron. Cantz. In the year 603, Pope Sabiniani commanded Lamps should be kept continually burning in the Church; he also instituted Bells in the Church, and called them Saints Bells. Plat. Albert. Crantz de Barns, &c. He also decreed, (in the same year) That the People should be assembled together to their Servce, by ringing of Bells. Plat. Du∣rand. de Barns Plantal. Bec. fol. 322. In the year 636, the University of Cambridg founded or enlarg∣ed by Segebert King of the East-Angles. So these things were not set up by the Apostles, but by the Pope. In the year 622, Honorius decreed, That none should keep com∣pany with excommunicated persons. He also devised the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross. Plat. Pant. Bec. fol. 355.
In the year 622: About this year, being fifteen years after the Pope, came Mahomet the Turk. In the year 635, the first Cross was set up in England by Oswald King of No thumbeland, who fighting against Cadwalda, in the same place set up a Cross, kneeling and praying there for Victory. In the year 653, Pope Vicilianus brought in Organs first into the Church, to make the people merry. Chron Volat. Plat. &c. Eugenius the fourth was the first that appointed Bshops to have Prisons of their own to punish people in. In the year 664, a Controversie was in England about the obser∣ving of Easter. In the year 676, Pope Leo the second, devised the Pax, and that it should be kissed of the people. Plat. festi temp. In the year 684, the Election, or chusing of Popes without the Emperors approbation, was granted by the Emperor. Whereby it may be noted, that before that time the Emperor had power to chuse the Pope. In the year 666, Pope Bennet the second obtained of the Empe∣ror Constantine, that the Bishop of Rome for ever after should be taken of all men for Christs true Vicar on Earth, and Saint Peter's lawful Successor. Anselmus Rid. Achilles Rerminius Sebastianus Franc. &c. Bec. fol. 295. This Pope also brought it to pass, that the Bishop of Rome only should be called Pope, that is to say, the Father of Fathers; for be∣fore that time, all Bishops generally were called Popes. In the year 684, Pope Sergius the first invented the Agnies Dei; and commanded that it should be sung of the Clergy and People to∣gether at the Communion. Flat. Durand. de Barns, Bec. fol 341. The same Pope in the same year, devsed first the Clothes of the Saints to be kept for Relques, and confirmed the Feast of the Puri∣fication of the Virgin Mary. Segeb. Pant. Bec. fol. 356. In the year 714, a Council of Pope Gregory the second, was against Marriages of Priests, and was for the worshipping of Images in England. In the year 729, the same Pope confirmed the having of Images in Churches, and excommunicated the Emperor for abolishing them, and stirred up his Subjects to rebel against him. Blondus Chron, Bec. fol. 324.
In the year 752, Pope Zachary devised Oyl for the Lamps, and invented the Priests Apparel. Chron. Achil Bee. fol. 304. In the year 768, Pope Paul the first, devised the Service for Lent. The same Pope also commanded, that in the time of Lnt the Divine Service should be done before the sixth hour in the Morn∣ing. Pope Constantine the second, decreed, That no Lay-man should be Pope. Also he condemned the seventh Council of Constantinople as Heretical, for condemning the worshipping of Images; and wrote a Book of worshipping Images, calling them Lay-mens Ca∣lendars. In the year 769, Pope Constantine he condemned the Emperor for destroying Images, and made a Decree to establish them in their Churches. Plat. Pol. Bec. fol. 324. In the year 740, Gregory the third commanded Oblations and Sa∣crifices to be offered by the Priests at their Mass for the dead, and made a Law that Images should not only be had in Churches as Lay-mens Books, but that they should be worshipped, and had in greater Reverence then ever they were; and whoever was of the contrary Opinion; should be condemned for a Heretick. Seg. Bland. Plat. Sabel. Becon. fol. 324. In the year 772, Pope Stephen the third, decreed, That Images should not only be had in Churches, but that they also should be senced. Seg. Plat. volat. Bee. fol. 324. In the year 796, Pope Adrian the first, in his time there was a Council held at Frankford, in the which it was decreed, That who∣soever did any Service in the Church, he should wear a Surplice upon his back in Service time; and no man to go in his common Apparel without a Surplice, no not so much as the Sexton, Christ. Massaeus Becon. fol. 323. These things are all contrary to Christ and the Apostles. The same Pope, about the same time, ordained the Impropriati∣on of Benefices, and granted Priviledges to Monks, Nunns, Ca∣nons and the Gloisters. In the year 817, Pope Leo the third ordained Sencing, and a Council held at Rothemage, commanded that the Altar should be Senced after the Gospel. Lib. Conc. Durand. Beo. fol. 338.
The same Pope; in the same year, decreed, That all Sundays should be kept holy. Volat. Pantal. Sabel. Pope Leo the third appointed, That when the child is either Christned or Bishopped, he should have but one Godfather, be it a Man-child, or a Woman-child. De Consect. dist. cap. 4. Guil Durand. Joan. Stell. &c. These things are all contrary to the Scriptures. In the year 827, there was a Council held in the time of Pope Paschalis, at Aquisgranum, who ordained that no Ecclesiastical persons should wear any sumptuous Garments or Rings, nor Ou∣ches on their fingers, but Bishops only, when they were saying Mass in their High-Priests Robes. Christian. Massaeus. lib. Concil. Becon fol. 303. In the year 834, the Feast of Holy Trinity instituted by Gre∣gory. In the year 848, Pope Sergius the second, his Name being O∣sporci, that is, Swines-snout, or Hogs-mouth, he changed his Name to Sergius. And after that, the Popes of Rome took it fo special priviledg to change their Names: So that if he had been a Malefa∣ctor before he was a Pope, he called himself Boniface, which signi∣fies Goodness. And if he had been a Coward, then he termed himself Leo, a Lyon. And if he had been a defamed person, then he called himself Benedictus, which signifies good Name and Fame. Chron. Polichron, &c. Lib. 4. cap. 10. de Inventor Cerum. In the year 850, Pope Leo the fourth, he ordained that no Lay∣man should come near to the Priest in the time of the Mass, nor In∣to the Quire. Seg. Plat. Becon. fol. 343. This Pope was the first that had the Golden Cross carried before him: Which is contrary to the Apostles. In the same year, in the same Popes time, the Monkish Religion of the Camaldinenses was devised, their Cowle and Cloak, and all that ever they wear from top to toe, was white. They were to go bare∣footed, and lye on the ground. He also instituted the Heart of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, that it should be kept holy eight dayes. Pol. Chron. Lib Germ. Bec. fol. 313. Lib. Concil. Seg. . oan, Functius. In the year 858. this Pope Leo was the first that offered his eet to kiss to Princes. Volat. Plat. rant. Becon. fol. 298.
In the year 870, Pope Nichelas about this time, was the first that decreed, That the Popes Laws and Letters should be of equal Au∣thority with the Scriptures. He a so decreed, that the Service should he in Latin, and that Priests should not marry. He also decreed, that Gloria in Excelsis, that is, Glory in the Highest, should be sung on Maurday Thursday, in Lent. De Consist. dist. 1. glor. Becon, fol. 343. In the year 863, Pope Bennet the third commanded that Priests should wear Apparel meet for their degree. He also ordained, that the Priests should be present at the Burial of the Bishops, and sing prayers for their souls; and that Bishops should do the like for them. Fascit. temp. Chron. Becon fol. 304. Chron. Rlat. In the year 871, Pope Nicholas made a Law, That no Wife should be held lawful, except she was first blest with a Priest. The same year, the same Pope first decreed, That no Marriage ought to be in the time of Lent. Gret. Chron. Bec. fol 331. Which is now observed, and is contrary to the Apostles. There was also a Decree made in the Council at Illerdonse, That from Septuagessima unto the Octaves of Easter, and three weeks be∣fore John Baptist: and again, that from Advent to Twelftide after Christmas, Marriages was forbidden to be solemnized; and if any did marry in those forbidden times, they should be separated. Quest. 23. Chap. 4. non oporte. In the year 891, was the University of Oxford sounded by King Alfed, which was before a place Dedicated to the Muses. Isaack∣son Chron. In the year 913, In Pope Sergius the thirds time, the Order of Clunasences Monks came up, and their clothing and rule. In the year 936, Pope Theodore decreed, That Priests should marry, and have their lawful Wives. Note, this Popes decree is con∣trary to some former Popes; so that people may see that one of them must needs erre. In the year 956, Pope John the thirteenth, whose Name was Octa∣vian he changed his Name, and was a vicious Pope, and made a Law that others might change their Names. In the year 958, Abbingdon Abbey in Beck-shire, built by Ethel∣wold. Isaacson Chron. In the year 958, Pope John the twenty second, made a Decree.
That whosoever did affirm that Christ and his Apostles had no pos∣sessions, neither in proper, nor in common, the same should be ta∣ken for a Heretick. In the year 960, John the thirteenth, being Pope, lived not like a Bishop, giving himself wholly to all manner of pleasure; so that in his dayes it became a proverb, As merry as Pope John. He gave himself to Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, Masking, Mumming, Hunt∣ing, Maygames, Playes, Robberies, Firing of Houses, Perjury, Dice, Cards, Robbing of Churches, even from his youth; he mis∣used his Cardinals, in cropping their Noses, thrusting out of their eyes, chopping off their Fingers and Hands, cutting out their Tongues, and Gelding them, which was openly laid to his charge in a Synod; and that he committed Incest with two Harlots, being his own Sillers; that he played at Dice, and prayed to the Devil to send him good luck; he ravished Virgins and strange women; he made the Palace of Lateran a Stew-house, and set up Stews and Brothel-houses; that he had defloured Stephana his Fathers Con∣cubine, and one Raveria a Widow; that he had put out the eyes of Benedict his Ghostly Father, and used common Hunts; that he wore armour; that he took a Cup of Wine, and drunk to the Devl. But as he was solacing himself without Rome on a certain night, with the wife of a valiant man, he was taken by him in adultery, and wounded by him with a Dagger, so that he dyed in eight day of Pageon of Popes. Yet this was one of the Papists infallible Popes which they say cannot erre. In the year 962, the Monastry of Tavistoak in Devonshire, foun∣ded by Ogar Earl of that Country. Isaack. Chron. In the year 966, the Cathedral of Worcster built by Oswald Bi∣shop. Isaack. Chron. In the year 969, the said Oswald built Ramsey Abbey in Hunting∣tonshire. In the year 968, John the fourteenth was the first that consecra∣ted Bells, upon the casting of a new Bell in the Lateran, the lee where the Popes go their procession; which Bell he called John by his own name. In the year 970, Thorney Abbey sounded for Monks,  Bishop of Winchester.
In the year 972, Rumsey Abbey in Hampshie, built by King Ed∣gar for Nunnes. In the year 973, Wilton Nunnery in Wiltshire, built by King Ed∣gar and his Daughter Edith, who was made the first Abbess. In the year 976, Amsbury Nunnery in Wiltshire, built by the Wife of King Edgar. Acts and Men. p. 1021. The Pope had three Crowns set on his head: Which exceeds Christ who was crowned with thorns. In the year 1049, Pope Leo the ninth appointed the Priests hou∣ses to be built near unto Churches. Quest 12. chap. 1. Neces. Nau∣clerus Joan Stel. de Barns, Bee. fol. 305. In the year 1038, Pope Gregory the sixth, in his time the shadow∣ed Valley order of Monks, under Bennets Rule, with changing of black coats into grey, were set up. Chron. Poll. lib. Germ. Bec. fol. 314. In the year 1040, Pope Leo the ninth made certain songs of the Saint. Segeb. Chron. In the year 1086, Pope Ʋban the second, made a Decree, that Subjects are not bound to keep their Oaths unto Princes, if they be excommunicated either by the Pope or Bishop. Yet the Papists say the Pope is infallible. He also ordained that priests should say every day Ladies Mattens openly in the Church, and on Saturday the whole Service should be of the Lady. Sabel. Joan. Stell. Nauc. Guil. Durand. In the year 1073. Pope Gregory the seventh ordained, that from Easter-day unto the Saturday before the Feast of the Trinity there should be said at Mattens but three psalms, and three Lessons only, and at all other times nine Lessons. In the year 1049, Leo the ninth was the first that presumed to make Saints, who made Gerrardus a Bishop, a Saint. Christ. Massaeus Bec. fol. 356. In the year 1050, worshipping of the Virgin Mary was first occasioned by the impiety of Nestorius, which now is held amongst the Papists for Catholick Doctrine, and confirmed by the Popes, to∣gether with the worshipping of Images, and painting Christ as a Babe in his Mothers Arms, to put people in mind, as they say, of the Worship due unto him; which in process of time was turned into the Worship of the Mother without the Son. The Papist preachers
and writers inventing praises, epitaphs, and religious services to be said unto her, insomuch that about the year one thousand and fifty, a daily Office was instituted to the blessed Virgin, distinguished by seven Canonical hours. In the year 1059, in the Council of Lateran, under Pope Ni∣cholas the second, was hatched and invented the term of Transub∣stantion. And so not by Christ. In the year 1089, a Council in Pope Ʋrban the second's time, decreed, that Priests should be contented with one Benefice at one time. In the year 1100, Pope Leo, Pope Victor, Pope Honorius, and Pope Nicholas, with others, invented and made the Sacrament of the Sign of Christs body and blood; the true, natural, real, corpo∣ral, carnal, substantial, &c. and Body of Christ, God-man, flesh, blood, bones, sinews, guts and loins, even as he was born of the Virgin Mary, and hanged on the cross; so the substance of bread and wine is turned into the natural body and blood of Christ, and so they handled him with their hands, and put him in their mouthes. In the year 1125, about this time the Popes Legate envying a∣gainst married priests at London, was found in bed the same night with a Strumpet. Isaack. Chron. p. 318. Ranulphus Cestrensis. Pol. in Hist. Angl. Chron. In the year 1120, Callixtus Pope, ordained that no Lay-man should meddle with the tenths, under pain of a great curse. Pope Innocent the second, decreed, that Sub-Deacons, Deacons, and Priests should not marry; and if they married, they were to lose their Benefices. Dist. Chap. 18. decrevinus Joan. Lizard. Bec. fol. 306. In the year 1106, Pope Paschal the second being chose Pope, would not take the place till the people had cryed three times, Saint Peter chuseth thee: then having a purple Robe on him, and a Mitro on his Head, he was brought on a white horse to Lateran, where he received the Popes Scepter, and had the Girdle put about him, whereon were hanged seven keys, and as many seals. Pageon of Popes. Here peoples ignorance may be seen: Was Paul or Peter ever deckt in this manner, with the pomps of the world? No; no, poor igno∣rant people! Peter denied the glory of the world,
In the year 1110, Petrus Heremita, a French man, of the City of Annias, first of all devised Beads to say Ladies Psaltery on. Chri. Pol. Bec. fol. 334: and not Christ, no the Apestles. In the year 1120, Pope Calixtus the second, pronounced all such excommunicated, at took money either for baptizing or bu∣rying. In the year 1161, Pope Alexander the third compelled the Em∣peror to he down, and the set his soot upon his neck, crying out with a loud voice, It is written, Ʋpon the Adder and Cockatrice, Lyn and Dragon thou shalt tead. Nauclerus Sabel Jac. char. Bec. fl. 298 Harkn people what he calls the Chriscian Emperor. In the year 1170, Pope Honorius the third, in his time were set up the White-Fryers and Grey-Fryers, with Cloaks, and no Shoes. Lib. germ Pol. In the year 1161, the same Pope ordained, that none should be Saints, except they were first canon zed and admitted to be Saints by the Bishop of Rome's bull; and from that time the Popes began to make Saints. Under the Reign of Pope John the twenty second, they made above five thousand Saints as they called them; so not Christ: Der. 3. tit. chap. 46. Reli{que} Pelid. Panteleon. Becon. fol. 357. In the year 1195, Pope Innocent the third decreed, that all the Apostles Eves should be fasted on, except Philip and Jacob, and John; and this Pope invented the Pixes, and boxes to put the Sacramental bread in. Paul. volat. Phi. Pol. Pantal. In the year 1195, the same Pope crowned Otho the Emperor, and afterwards deposed him again, and said, It lyes in my! power to set up and pluck down Emperors, Kings and Princes at my pleasure; for all power is given unto me both in Heaven and in Earth. Sebast. Frank. Chron. teton. fasc. temp. Paulisphrig. &c. Becon. fol. 298. Mark people, this is Lucifer in his pride, this is not Peter in his Chair; Peter used no such language nor authority. In the year 1193, the same Pope decreed, that the Cardinals should for ever wear red Hats on their heads. Joan. Loz. Chron. Sel. Christ Massaeus. In the year 1195, the same Pope ordained, in the Council of La∣teran, that whensoever the Sacrament of the Altar is carried a∣bout, there should be born before it a Bell ringing, with a Light,
to cause the people to kneel down and worship it. Jacobus de Vi∣saco Becon fol. 329. In the year 1204, Guido Aretinus devised first of all prick-song in the Church, (viz.) these six notes, ut, re, my, fa, so la. Christia∣nus Massaeus Bec. fol. 335. In the year 1214, Pope Honorius the third, commanded that the Missal Bread should be heaved and lift up above the Priests head, at a certain time, and that all the people should fall down and wor∣ship it; and so not God. Extra de Seleb. Miss Biel. super Can. Mis∣saeus, Lect. 4.9. Dec. 3. chap. 10. In the year 1214, the same Pope commanded, that the Sacrament of the Altar should be worshipped and kneeled unto, and that it should be born unto the sick in a most reverent sort, yea, and that with with Candles lighted, though at noon-day. This was in a time of darkness. In the same year, Pope Honorius, aforesaid, decreed, that a woman might be separated from her Husband, if she did not like him. In the year 1215, Pope Innocent the third did first of all forbid that the Lay-people should receive their Communion in both kinds. In the same year, the same Pope disallowed the Decrees of Pope Julius and Pope Gregory. See (these counted infallible, that cannot erre) how they contradicted one another. The same Pope Decreed, that Fonts should be hallowed, and Bells christned; and no priests should wear a Beard, or long hair. In the same year, Pope Innocent the third ordained Auricular Confession, that all men, women, and children, as they are at age, should confess their sins to the priest, at least once in the year Pau∣lus phri. Maess. Polyd. Bec. fol. 332. In the same Pope's time, the crossed Fryers Order was set up, who wore a black cope, and carried a cross in their hands. Chron. lib. Germ. In the year 1225, in the same Popes time, was the order of the Nunnes of St. Clare invented. These things Christ and his Apostles did not decree.
The same Pope, amongst other devices in his time, brought in this, That Lights should burn in the Church before their God's Body. In the year 1220, in the same Popes time, the Order of Black-Fryers came up. Lib ger. Joan Laz. Pol. &c. In the year 1225, Gregoy the ninth appointed the Feast of the Nativity of John Baptist to be kept holy; and the same year he ordained Salva Regira to be sung in Churches with all Devoti∣on. Chron. ger. Bec. fol. 355. In the year 1242, Pope Innocent the fourth ordained the Feast of the Nativity of Mary the Virgin, with the Octaves thereof. Vo∣lat. Sabel. Pant. Bec. fol 355. In he year 1254, Pope Ʋrban the fourth ordained the Feast of the Sacrament of the Altar, with indulgences and pardons, and or∣dered to be kept holy the Thursday after Trinity Sunday, and the Feast of Copus Christi. Christ. Mass. Joan. Stel pol. Pant. Becon. fol. 354. In the year 1242, Pope Innocent the fourth, in his time it was a∣greed in one Council at Lyons, what holy-days should be kept holy, viz. Sunday should be kept from Saturday at noon, to Sun∣day night; and the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, of Saint Ste∣phen, and St. John the Evangelist, and Childermas-day, called Inno∣cents, and Saint Sylvester, and Circumcision, and Epiphany, with Ea∣ster, and the whole weeks that go before and after; and the Ascen∣tion of Christ, of Whitsuntide, and the two dayes following, Saint John Baptist, and the twelve Apostles dayes; Saint Lawrence the Martyr, his day; St. Michael, called Michaelmas day, All-Saints day, St Martin. All these the Pope set up to be kept holy (but not the Apostles) One thousand two hundred forty two years after Christ. And a Councilat Tollatain decreed the keeping holy the ☞ Feast of the Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary, called Lady-day, and the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, called Christmas. Lib. Concil. Pollyd. Guilielmas Durandus Bec. fol. 356. See, you Prote∣stants, who were the first setters up of your Holy-days. In the year 1252, in Innocent the fourth's time, the Bible was di∣vided into Chapters. In the year 1250, the Priory for Grey-Fryers, founded in Not∣tingham by King Henry the third.
In the year 1253, the Prioy of Austin-Fryers, founded by Hum∣phry Earl of Hereford. In the year 1254, Pope Alxander the sourth, in his time was the Order of Begging-Fryers confirmed. This is contary to the Apo∣stles, wh said, Those that did not work, should not at. In the year 1272, Pope Gregoy ordained, That at the chusing of a new Pope, the Cardinals should be shut up in a house, and should neither eat nor drink, till they had chosen a new Pope, when the old one was dead. Christ. Mass This was unt the way of Chist and the Apostles, in making Ministers. And Boniface the second ordained, that the Pope should be cho∣sen in three days, lest the Church should lack a Head. So it seems Christ is not the Head of their Church. In the year 1272, at a Council held at Lyons, the Conclave was set up, and bowing the knee to the Name of Jesus instituted; which practice the Protestants follow. In the year 1276, Pope Innocentius the fift, was crowned in Pe∣ter's Church: This is contrary to Scriptures, and contrary to the Apostles, and Peter, when Christ chose them, or they chose others. In the Primitive times they had not tripple Crowns set on their Heads, no, nor Christ himself, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who testified against the World, that their works were evil. In the year 1286, Pope Boniface the eighth ordained the Feast of the sour Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, to be kept Holy. Fasc. tenus Christ. Mass. Joan. Stel. Bec. fol. 356. In the year 1290, Pope Boniface the eighth, appointed the year of Jubile to be kept every hundretd year, and granted that all them that would go to Rome in the year of Juble, to visit the Temple of Faul and Peter, he would pardon them all their sis. This Pope said he was Lord of all the World, and all the Emperors, Kings and Princes owed Obedience unto him: Here is the Whore got on the Beast: But this Pope reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog; Here was the end of this Lucifer. Ranulphus Cistrenis Folli∣dor. Bec. Fol. 358. In the year 1290, The same Pope Boniface was carryed on  shoulders, exalted Lucifer-like, with a naked Sword before  and he lived like a Lion, and died like a Dog; he called him
Lord of the World, both Temporal and Spiritual; and this Pope Boniface spake through a Reed through a Wall to the Old Pope of Rome, to leave his Popedom; and the Old Pope thought it had been a Voice from Heaven, and so left his Popedom, and Boniface got it. Now ae these fellows fit for Peter's Chair, or Sodom's To∣wer; here's the Beast with his two Horns like a Lamb, spoken of in the Revelation. Albetus Trantzius Fascic. temp. Pantelion. Becon Fol. 298. In the year 1300, Pope Boniface the eighth made a Prayer to be said daily before the Image of the Cross, and as many days pardon as there are gravel-stones in the Sea, and grass on the Earth. In the year 1297. Pope Celestinus the fifth, in his time, the Order of Monks came up, that their cloak, coule and cap should be blew. In the year 1286, Pope Gregoy the eighth made a Decree, That none should take a Nunne out of the Cloister to marry her. In the year 1336, in Pope Clement the third's time, sprung up a sort of Monks, their manner was to go from place to place, having a Banner upon a Crucifix born before them; they did penance by scourging themselves with a great cord-whip. Joan. Laz. Mat. Palm. Christ. Mass. Bec. fol. 315. In the year 1368, Pope Ʋrban the fifth, in his time the Order of Jesuits was invented, and they were Lay-men addicted to prayer. In the year 1390, Pope Ʋrban the sixth made the Visitation of Mary Holy day. In the year 1309, Pope Iohn the twenty second ordained, that Bells should be tolled every day thrice in the Evening, and that eve∣ry man should kneel down straitwayes, and say three Ave-Ma∣ries. Chron. Ioan. Stel. Bec. fol. 322. In the year 1410, Iohn Wickliff was excommunicated at Rome, though he dyed in the year 1386. In the year 1425, Pope Callixtus the third invented the Feast of the Transfiguration of Christ, and commanded it to be kept with as large indulgences as the Feast of Corpus Christi. Mat. Pol. Ioan. Stel. pant. Bec. fol. 355.
In the year 1438, Pope Alexander, and Pope Eugenius, granted that there is a Purgatory to purge Souls after this life, and that they should confess the Bishop of Rome to be the Vicar of Christ, the Successor of Peter, and the Supreme Head of the Church throughout the world. In the year 1455, Pope Callixtus the third, made a Decree, that every day at twelve a Clock, the Sexton should toll Noon; and so ma∣ny as hear the Bells, straightwayes should say an Ave-Mary. Phil. Bergom. Bec. fol. 322. Durandus saith, That Bells be of such vertue, that they stirred men to devotion, and preserved the minds and bodies of the faithful from all danger; and it was his opinion, that they drove away all wicked spirits and devils. Ralion. di. off. Bec. fol. 322. This is a lying imagi∣natio, ad denes Christ (wh destroyed the Devil) and set up a Bell instead of Christ. In the year 1469, Pope Sixtus the fourth ordained the Feast of the Conception of the Virgin Mary to be kept holy, and the Feast of Ann her Mother, and Joseph her Husband, to be kept holy. Decrest, Ex∣travagant. Joan. Liz. Bec. fol. 356. In the year 1488, Brazen-Nose Colledg in Oxford was founded by William Smith, Bishop of Lincoln. In the year 1479, the cruel Inquisition first began in Spain by King Ferdinandus, and Elizabeth his Wife. The Papists hold, that the Fa∣thers the Inquisitors, cannot erre. In the year 1490 Pope Leo the ninth holding a Council at Vercel∣lis, was one the presumed to make Saints. So he put Christ aside, and denied him. 1493, Pope Innocent was the first that preferred his Bastards to ho∣nour; he made one of his Bastards a Prince of Cicilia, and another a Cardinal, and another the Duke of Spain. He said, Either the Pope shall spoil Philip of his Crown and Empire, or else Philp shall take from the Pope his Apostolical Dignity. Amongst many other Decrees made by him, he decreed Marriage of the Clergy to be disannulled for ever. Isaack. Chron. p. 368. Note, here Warrs arose from the lusts, as saith James; and here's the fruits of him that denied Marriage. In the year 1513, in Pope Le the tenth's time, they curs by Bell, Book and Candle. Book of Martyrs, Volume the sword, p. 312.
And another Author sayes, It was brought up by a Council held at London. In the year 1537, the Concubines of the Priests are of Ecclesiasti∣cal Jurisdiction; by the Popes Law they might have Concubines. Yet these Popes do deny Priests Mariage, and yet allow them Concu∣bies. In the year 1003, the Opinion, to think the Mass to help Souls in Purgatory, was confirmed by Pope John the nineteenth, by reason of a dream, wherein he dreamed that he heard and saw the Voices of the Devils lamenting and bewailing that souls were delivered from them, by saying of Masses and Digresses; therefore he did approve the Feast of All-Soul, brought in by another Pope; moreover he ordained the Feast of Allhallows, in the year One thousand and three. The Papists Conjurations of Salt. I conjure thee, thou Creature of Salt, by the (Cross) living God, and by the (Cross) true God, and by the (Cross) Holy God, &c. that thou mayest be made a Conjured Salt, to the salvation of them that be∣lieve; and that unto all such as receive thee, thou mayest be health of soul and body; and that from out of the place thou shalt be sprinkled, may flye away all Fancy, Wickedness and Craftiness of the Devils subtilty, and every foul spirit. The Papists Conjurations of Water. I conjure thee, thou Creature of Water, in the Name of (Cross) God the Father Almighty, and in the Name of (Cross) Jesus Christ his Son our Lord, and in the Vertue of (Cross) the Holy Ghost, that thou become a Conjured Water to expel the power of the Enemy. Here the Pope is smothered with his own smoak. Pope Leo the thrid, Pope John the seventh, Pope Adrian the first, with others, made Decrees for establishing of Images. Leo the third, Emperor of Greece, decreed that Images should be ta∣ken out of the Churches, and burnt openly at Constantinople. The said Emperor threw out of the Temple all the Images, and burnt them in the open Market. This was contrary to the Pope. Pope Eugenius decreed, that Children which were to be Christned, should have a God-father, and a God-mother. A Council held at Rotomage, decreed, that their Sacrament, the Priests should put it into the Lay-peoples mouths, and that they should not touch it with their hands; contrary to the use and practice of the
primitive Christians; many hundred years after Christ. Lib. Concil. Bec. fol. 329. In Pope Urban the First's time, was the Order of the Nunnes of Saint Briget, invented by Brigeta, and that the Nunnes should be clo∣sed above in a Closet, and the men beneath. Pop Nicholas the first, ordained that no temporal man, whether King or Emperor should have ought to do with those things that ap∣pertain to the Priest. In the time of Pope Alexander the third, there was one Victr a Pope; so Alexander got his Popedom by money, and force of Ships and Arms, in the year One thousand one hundred sixty one. And this Pope compelled Lewis King of France, and Henry King of England, to be his Lacquies, and to run on foot by him, holding his horse bridle, one of the right hand, and the other of the left, leading him thorough the street in his pomp. This is like the Glory of the world, this is not like Peter. In the year 757, Stephen the third, he was the first Pope that was carried on mens shoulders. Where was Christ or Peter so carried. Pol. vit Pant. In the year 1075, the Emperor deposes the Pope, and the Pope ex∣communicates the Emperor, and ill requites the Emperor for his love, who gave him power to be chosen Pope without his Election. Pope Gregory the ninth ordained that the Sacring-Bell should be rung when the Priest lifteth up the Mystal-Bread and Chalice above his head, to move the people to behold that new-found god which they worshipped in knocking, kneeling, and lifting up of hands to a piece of Bread. Crates Malleotes a Heathen, he brought the study of Gramar into Rome, in the year of the World Three thousand seven hundred eighty nine. Pope Boniface the seventh procured a company of men to take his part, by whose means he took Pope John the fifteenth, and put out his eyes, and then threw him into prison. Boniface dyed not many days af∣ter, who after his death, was drawn by the feet through the streets of Rome, in the year Nine hundred seventy-six. Pope Stephen the sixth, so envied the Name of his predecessor For∣osus, that he abrogated and dissolved his Decrees; and taking up his body after it was buried, he cut two of his fingers off his right hand,
and commanded them to be cast into the River Tyber. Pope Sergius caused the body of Formosus where it was buryed, to be taken up; and afterwards sitting in the Papal See, first degraded him, then commanded his head to be smitten off, with the other three fingers that were left, (as Sigeberius writeth) which done, he caused his body to be thrown into Tyber, deposing all such as by the said Pormosus before had been consecrated and invested. By this Murderer Pope Serius, first came up the use to bear about Candles on Candlemas-day, for the purifying of the Virgin Mary. Anno 684. Durand. G. Achil. Becon. fol. 351. It is recorded of Pope Hidlebrand, tha he enquired of the Sacra∣ment a Divine answer against the Emperor; and because it did not speak, he threw it in the fire, and burned it. Sure the Papists will allow this Pope erred. After the death of Pope Clement the fifth, the Romish See stood va∣cant two years and three months. Book of Mart. vol. 1 p. 487. Pope Gregory the third was the first that brought into the Masse the Canon or clause for Reliques; also he brought into the Memorial, the Offering and Sacrifice for the dead. Pope Zachary brought in the Priests Vestures and Ornaments. Constantius was the first that gave his feet to be kissed of the Empe∣rors, about the year Seven hundred. Book of Mart. Volume 1. p. 176. Henricu the Emperor, with his Wife and Child, bare-footed and bare-legged, waited on Pope Hidlebrand three days and three nights, at the Gates of Conusium, before he could be suffered to come in. Pope Sylvester the second, was accounted a great Sorcerer. Pope Alexander the second was forced into a Chamber by Soldiers, and there beaten by Pope Hidlebrand. This is contrary to the Apostle, who said, A Bishop must be no striker King Ines ordained in England, before the Conquest, that Infants should be baptized within thirty days. Pope Ʋrban the second, amongst many other Enormities, concluded, that no Priests son should be capable of Orders: And yet Priests must not marry. Pag, of Popes, fol. 87. Bishop Bonner said, If an Image be made a god, it is no Idol. Thus you may see, the Papists are contrary to the Scriptures, and God, who forbid∣deth to make Images of him, or the likeness of any thing in He bo,  Earth beath. Fox. Vol. 3. p. 262.
CHAP. VII. Concerning Hereticks. Judas Iscariot was the first Apostate that fell from the truth; who sold his Master to the covetous Priests for thirty pieces of silver; and slew his Father, married his Mother, and in the end, hanged him∣self. Read Euseb Chrn. In the year 163, Demas which Paul spake of, forsook the truth, and became an Idol-priest at Thessalonica: Pilate that gave sentence upon Christ, afterward slew himself. Mrcellina the Heretick, worshipped and offered Incense unto the Images of Jesus and Paul, &c. In the year 81, Cerinthus the Heretick dreamed that the Kingdom of Christ should become Earthly; and that Christ should reign on the Earth a thousand years. Montanus the Heretick forbad Marriage, and commanded absti∣nence from certain meats, as unlawful. In the year 287, Marcellnas the Heretick, Bishop of Rome, deni∣ed Christ, and offered sacrifice unto Idols; for which he was condem∣ned by a Council of three hundred Bishops called together at Sin  Whereby it appears the Bishop of Rome erred, and was fallible. In the year 340, Eustathius the Heretick forbad Marriage,  Laws of Fasting, and parted married souls asunder; he abhorred the Offering of the Married Priests; he was condemned by three Council for his cursed Doctrine. And ho cometh this Doctrine now to be blessed after the six hundred years, when the Poe got up, which before was cur∣sed? but it seems the Pope doth bless th Doctrine of the Hereticks now, which formerly the Councils cursed. In the year 351, Liberius Bishop of Rome yeilded to the Arrias, (as Jrom saith in his Chron. and C talog. &c.) and subscribed nto their Heresie to save his place. It seems he was not infallible. In the year 383, Collydrians were Hereticks which worshipped the Virgin Mary, as the Papists do now, like them Hereticks which  condemned. In the year 401, The Monks of the Deserts of Egypt, in their  Imagination, thought that God had a Carnal Body; from whom
crose that invention of painting God the Father like an old man with a grey beard; which is still used to this day by the swage-worshippers. In the year 404, Pelagius a Heretick, said, that the Grace of God was given to us according to our merits: the Hereticks corrupted the Works of the Ancient Writers. A Sect of Hereticks went always bare-foot. In the year 47, And Simon Magus the Sorcerer was honoured it Rome with a Picture; And wherein do the Papists differ (who are worshippers of Images) from those that worship the Image of Simon Magus? are not they likewise Idolaters? CHAP. VIII. Something concerning Indulgences, Pardons, Priviledges and Stations of Rome, truly Copied out of two old Books, one in Latin, the other in English; See Becons Works, out of which all these things are extracted. IN Rome seven of the Steeple-houses, called by the Papists, Churches, are priviledged above all others, with great Holiness and Pardons. The first is called Saint Peters Church, which has twenty nine steps up to it, and as oft as a man goeth up and down them stairs, he is re∣leased of the seventh part of Penance enjoyned: This was granted by Pope Alexander. And above the door is an Image of Christ, and between his feet standeth one of the Pence that God was sold for; and as oft as any looks upon that Peny, they have fourteen hundred years of pardon; and in the same Steeple-house are eleven Altars, and at every Altar is forty eight years of Pardon. Also the Priests say, that as many times as a man goeth through the Crowds at the same Steeple-house, he hath four hundred years of Pardon. At one of the Altars in the said Steeple-house, is five hundred years of Pardon; and every high Feast a Soul out of Purgatory. And as oft as a man followeth that they call their Sacrament to sick bodies, he hath one thousand four hundred years of Pardon for his sins.
Pope Sylvester granted to all them that daily go to the said Steople∣house, the third part of all his sins relealed. And upon the one side of the said Steeple-house, lyeth a Yard called Gods Field, and there they bury none but poor-Pilgrims. In the Chappel at Rome called Jerusalem, Women do not enter, but only once in the year, at which time they have a full Remission granted of their sins, none excepted. In the Church of Saint Cater is two hundred years of Pardon. In the Church of Saint Foelix is forty years of Pardon. Unto every one of them called Churches, have they ordained a cer∣tain number of Pardons, to all that come to them, and in Lent the Pardons are double. Part of their Stations are as followeth. In the Circumcision of Christ, the Stations are to the Church of their Lady, so called. On the Epiphany, the Stations are to St. Peters. On the Sunday called Septuagessima, the Stations are to Saint Law∣rence without the Walls. On the Sunday called Sexagissima, the Stations are to Saint Paul the Apostle. On Ash-Wednesday, the Stations are to Saint Sabine. On the first Sunday in Lent, the Stations are to Saint John Latrint. On Christmas-day, the Stations are at the first Mass, unto Saint Mary Major in the Chappel, in the Manger of their Lord, as they call him, into the which Women do not enter. And for every day called Holy-day, they have Stations appointed to what place to go; which Stations Pope Gregory, Pope Cornelius, and divers other Popes of Rome, from time to time have invented and devi∣sed, and that all that come to them, and give any thing towards the maintenance of them, they have ordained, that they shall have Remis∣sion and Pardon of sins. Also, certain did grant Indulgences and Pardons to all such as de said certain Prayers, or Ave-Maries; which is contrary to Christ and the Apostles. Pope Six us granted to all them that should say this Prayer  the image of our Lady, (as they called her) and her Son, one the
one hundred years of pardon, Ave-Sanctissina Maria, &c. The Bishop of York, and Bishop of Canterbury, and nine other Bishops, in he days of King Henry the seventh, granted forty days of pardon for every Ave-Maria, and for Gratia Plen, one hundred days. The Hallowing of Candles. Upon Candlemas-day the Priest turning himself to the South, desireth his God, that his Candles which he had there in his hand, might receive such a strength and blessing through the token of the Holy Cross, that being lighted, the Devil might sly away, and tremble for fear; and after Even-Song, the Priests distributed to the people their portion of Candles, which they esteemed highly of; and if any Thunder, Light∣ning or Tempest arose, then their Candle was lighted with faith, that that would quiet the Tempest, and drive away bad spirits. They also Hallowed Fire and Bowes, and Hallowed ashes on Ash-Wednesday, and Hallowed Incense, Myrthe, and other Perfumes, and many other things. The priests also hallowed Cheese and Butter. CHAP IX. The manner of the Priests Hallowing the Font. FIrst he makes two Crosses in the Water with his right hand, and then says a short Prayer, saying, Wherefore I bless (Cross) thee, thou Creature of Water, by (Cross) the living God, &c. And then he makes a Cross in the Water again, and says another short prayer as before, and then takes a burning Candle, and drops it into the Water after the manner of a Cross, and then crys'aloud a few words over it, That the Holy Ghost would descend into it, to make it fruitful, that it might have power to regenerate and beget a new. This being done, he breathes thrice into the Font, and then he puts Oyl into the VVater, and then Cream, and says some few words over them, crossing them, &c. People, you read none of this in Scripture, in the Primitive Church. Of the Papists Hallowing the Marrying Ring. For Hallowing of the Womans Ring at her Wedding, this Prayer following, is appointed to be said by the Priest.
Hallow thou (Cross) Lord, this Ring, which we bless (Cross) in thy holy Name, that what Woman soever shall wear it, may stand all in thy peace, and continue in thy will, and live, and grow, and was  in thy love, and be multiplied into the length of dayes; and  sprinkles holy Water on the Ring. The Papists pray for Souls departed. The Priest while he sayes his Prayer, stands with his face Eastward, and looks unto; the high Altar, and then turns him to the people, and sayes, Ye shall pray for all Christian souls, for all Bishops, Clerks, Cu∣rates, and for the souls of all Christian Kings and Queens, and especi∣ally for the Kings of England, and for all souls that to this Church have given Book, Bell, Chalice or Vestment, or any other thing by which the Service of God is the better done. Did you ever hear such Trumpery. CHAP. X. Concenning Hallowing the Church. VVHen any Church is to be hallowed, first all the people must depart out of the Church, and the Deacon must remain there only, having all the Doors shut fast to him, the Bishop, with the Cler∣gy, stand at the door, and make holy Water mingled with Salt: In the mean season, twelve Candles must be set up within the Church, burn∣ing before twelve Crosses, that are appointed upon the Church  After the Bishop, accompanied with the Clergy and people, go  times about the Church without, the Bishop having in his hand a  with a bunch of Hysop on the end, with which he casts Holy Water upon the Church-Walls; and as the Bishop goes round, every time he comes at the door, he strikes the Threshold with his Staff, and sayes in Latin: Lift up your Gates, O ye Princes, and be ye lift up, O ye ∣lusting Gates, and the King of Glory shall enter in. Then the Deacon rayes, who is this King of Glory? Then the Bishop answers,  Lord  and Mighty, even the Lord Mighty in Battel  the Bishop, and the Everlasting Gates
The third time the Deacon opens the door to him, and he and the Clergy enters, but the people stand without still; and then the Bishop sayes the Letany; and then a Cross of Ashes and Sand is made on the Pavement, whereon the Alphabet or Christ-cros ow is written in Greek and Latin; and then the Bishop with Salt, Ashes and Wine, consecrates the Altar, and then annoints the aforesaid twelve Crosses on the Wall with Cream, and then the people may come in, and ring the Bells for joy. This is to be noted, That if the Wine be frozen in the Chalice, th Priest, must so long breathe upon it, till it be molten, and the Ice disso∣ed; and if it cannot be dane so, he my put, fine to it. CHAP. XI. Concerning Hallowing of Beads. IN their Prayer to their God, they say, We beseech thee that thou wilt vouchsafe from the Seat of thy Majesty, with thy blessing to sanctifie, replenish and fulfil these Bead  pray on, which are apt and meet for devotion of thy Servants, to honour that most glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of God. You read none of this in Scripture. Concerning Christining and Hallowing of Bells. The Bishop, puts upon him a Surplice, and having a Cross born, before him, and accompanied with the Clergy and people, they go to the place where the Metal shall be, shed, which the Bell is made of, and while the Bell is casting, that it may have right shape: The Bi∣shop begins to sing, and all the Clergy sings forth aloud, and so conti∣nue till the Bell is cast, and then they sing six Psalms, and in the mean time the Bishop washes the. Bell with holy Water, and then he goes to, prayer, and then he wipes it with a Towel, (People, did you ever hear such deceit, which is contrary to Scriptures) and then sayes a Psalm, and then annoints the Bell seven times without, and four times within, with Oyl and Cream; then the Bishop prayes again, saying to his God, Vouchsafe to replenish this Bell with thy Heavenly
before the m and sound thereof, the fiery darts of the  the Lightnin's and Tempests may be chased away. And then he sprinkles the Bell with Holy Water; then the God-fathers and God-mothers draw nigh, and lay their hands on the Bell, to whom the Bishop sayes, Name the Bell; who gave the Bell what name they thought good, and then the Bishop, and the God-fathers and God-mothers put upon the Bell a Linnen Vesture, white and large. These be the works of the Pope and the Papists, who are gotten up since Christ and the Apostles, and are not the wrks of Christ, as you may read in the Scriptures. That the Primitive Christians had no Bells, is proved by Vosius in his Commentary upon the two Epistles of Pliny, and Trajan, and Ber∣nardinus de riu concionandi Guido Pncirolus saith, they were invented by one Paulinus Bishop of Nola, and that they were called Nolae in Latin, from Nola the place where they were first made; and Campa∣nie, because invented in Campaniae; Hospinian de Orig. temp. saith, they were not used for certain, in the first five Centuries, almost, of Christianity: And who were the first that caused them to be set up in Churches, as things appertaining to the Worship of God, is before re∣lated. CHAP. XII. A short Relation of some of the Ceremonies of the Pope and his Followers, taken out of the Works of Christopher Marcellus, Bishop of Corcira, Dedicated to Pope Le the Tenth. AND first as to the Popes Election: All people are shut out of the Election-house, saving the Fathers, and the Ministers, the Senior of the Cardinals exhorteth the other Fathers, that they  mind and consider the highness of the matter whereof the must p∣senly  then which matter and business, nothing  or more excellent, for he saith. They are about to provide  the  of Christ the Successor of Peter, the Pastor  Leader of Christ Flock, the Key bearer, Pottet, and  of  the Prince of the Apostolick
and the chief Pre  Christendom. There is four kinds of Election; but to make the Work short, I will only relate one of them, (though they are all Wayes which Christ never instituted, neither did his Apostles ever practice such things) viz. First, all the Colledg of the Cardinals agree upon Three, Upon one of the Cardinal-Bishops, on one of the Cardinal-Priests, and upon one of the Cardinal-Deacons, (Mark people, we never read in the Scri∣ptures of Cardinal-Bishops, and Cardinal Priests and Deacons) to which three, they give Pover and Authority to chuse the High Bishop after this sort: They let up, and light a candle of a certain appointed quantity, that it may burn a certain space; and their power to chuse, lasteth no lon∣ger then the piece of candle lasteth; for they must chuse him before it be burnt out; and the same being so chosen, is right Pope. Then the Senior of the Cardinals, and Colledg, do shew their joy, and do their duty of reverence to him; and putting off his Senate-Robe, called Caprea, and his little Hood, called Capuium, they cause him to set down in his Rochet, where the Seniors do put upon his sin∣ger the Fisher's Ring (so called) and ask him by what Name he is cal∣led: Then the Senior of the Cardinal-Deacons opening a little Win∣dow, by which the people there waiting, may see and be seen, faith with a loud voice, (holding out the cross) I show you glad tydings, we have a Pope, and he chuses his Name to be Innocent the Eighth, &c. or what Name he liketh: Then the Cardinal-Deacons do put off the Popes common Apparel, and put him in a white Woolen Gown, and in red Hose, and red Shooes, embroidered with a Golden oss in a red Girdle, with Golden Bucklers, in a red cowle also upon his head, and above all, in a fair white Rochet; then they put upon him his upper Garments, viz. A long Albe, a Girdle, and a Stool set full of Pearls, hanging down from about his Neck; but if he were but a Deacon be∣fore he was elected, then the Stool must lye on his lest shoulder only, and come down with both ends fasned under his right arm. Then af∣ter, they put upon the Pope a red Cope, called a Pluvial, and Mitre set and deck with precious stones, and they make him sit upon the Altar, and then they kiss his feet, and then he is consecrated; and the Con∣secrator blesseth a precious Ring to be put on his singer, saying O Lord God, Creator and Conservator of Mankind, giver of spiritual Gifts and Graces, and greater of  health and  thou, O Lord,
send down thy blessing upon this Ring, &c. and while this Prayer is said, the Pope stands up; and in the mean time one of the Colliters holdeth the Ring in his right hand, kneeling down at the beginning of the blessing thereof; and the Consecrator (the Prayer being ended) sprinkleth it over with holy Water, and then puts it on the Popes sin∣ger, saying, Take this Ring as a sign and token of Faith, &c. and Oyle being poured upon his Head by the Consecrator, the Cardinal-Deacon dryeth it up again with crumbs of Bread, and then setteth on the Mitre, and then he gives the Cardinals his feet and hands to Rite; and so the Consecrator saith forth the Mass, and before he is crowned, the Cardinals, Deacons, Sub deacons and Colliters, apparel him in a white Amise, and long Girdle, a Stool, and a red Pluvial, and a Mitre, and being thus decked, he goeth down to the place called St. Peters, the Cross being carried before him, the Cardinals and Deacons on ei∣ther side, bearing up the skirts of his Pluvial, and the noblest of the Laity being present, though it be the Emperor, or a King, must bear up the train of the same; and next before the Pope, goeth the Minister of the Ceremonies, with Reeds in his hand, upon the one tow, and up∣on the other a burning candle; and when the Pope is past the Chppel of St. Gregory, so called, the aforesaid Minister turning him to the Pope, setteth fire on the tow, kneeling down, and saying with a loud Voice. Holy Father, so passeth away the glory of the world; which he doth three times, and then the Gospel-book is laid upon the Popes shoul∣ders, and afterwards he goeth up the Altar, and the Prior of the Cardinal-Deacons taketh the Robe called Pollium, from the Altar, and putteth it upon the Pope, saying, Receive the Pall, which is the sacred Plenitude, and holy perfection of the Pontificial Office, to the honour of Almighty God, of the blessed Virgin Mary his Mother, of the holy A∣postle Peter, and Paul, and of the holy Church of Rome, and then ma∣keth it fast about the Pope with Buckles and Pins. And when the Pope first receiveth this Robe, he goeth to the Altar, and kisseth it, and then kisseth the Gospel-Book, and then putteth Incense into the Censers. Then they proceed to crown him after this sort. The Pope receiving the Gloves and Rings, with the other Imple∣ments, goeth upon a high Stage made for the purpose, and when all the La people are gone out of the Church (so called) and the Pr are cme together, the Deacon on the left hand taketh off the Popes Mi∣,  Deacon on the right hand, taketh the Tiare, or Cro, cal∣led
a Triple Crown, and setteth  on the Popes bead, and thn going to the Church of Latte an, so called, he goeth up into the Gallery or Cloi∣ster of the same, where the Prior of the Cannons holdeth him the cross to kiss, and the triple Crown is taken off, and the Mitre put on; and then he is had to a place or seat without the Gate on the left hand, called Stercoraria, which signifies a Dunghil; and setting down on the said seat, and leanning down so low, that he seemeth rather lying, then sitting, the Cardinals come to him, and lift him up, saying, He lifteth up the needy from the dust, and from the dunghil exalteth the poor, that he may sit among the Princes, and possesss the Throne of Glory. Then the Pope rising up, taketh so much money in his hand out of the bosome of his Chamberlain, as he can grie, and casteth among the people, saying, Argeum & Aurum non est mihi quod autem habeo, hoc tibi do; I have neither Gold nor Silver, but that that I have, that I give thee; and at the Popes Feast, after he is crowned, when he drink∣eth, all the Assistants and Servitors kneel down. So great is the pride of this Prelate. These things are truly extracted out of the First and Second Secti∣ons of the First Book of Ceremonies, aforesaid, written by a Pa∣pist. CHAP. XIII. The time when the Tythes were first given in England; by whom, and by whose Authority a Law for payment of Tythes was first established. First, Whereas it is alledged, that Abraham paid the tenth of the spoil (that he got by the Sword) to Melchisedeck, and Melchi∣sedeck made him and his Soldiers a Feast: this was not by the com∣mand of God, nor an example that all Kings and Princes should pay tythes of all their spoil, nor the tenth of their Estates: For you ne∣ver read that Abraam paid it afterwards, as you may read in Josephus and Genests the twenty third; and Jacob saying to the Lord, when he went from Esau, at his return he would surely give him the tenth of all
that he gave unto him when he vowed a vow: This is no example for Christians to pay Tythes, no more then it is to offer Sacrifice, for he f∣fored Sacrifices. And again, Whreas it is alledged that Levi took ythes, and Aa∣ron, which was called a Heave-offering, or a Shake-offering, which tythes was for the Priest, Levi, and the Widow, and the Fatherless, and the Stranger, that there might not be a Beggar in Isael. So you that hold up tythes, must hold up the first Priesthood which ordined to of∣fer Sacrifices. and hold up the Shake-offering, and the Heave-offering, and so deny, Christ come in the flesh, and to be offered up, one Offer∣ing once for all. For if the Levitical Priesthood be standing, which came after the Order of Aaron, then your tythes and Offerings is standing; for Levi who received the Office of the Priesthood, had a command to take tythes, according to the Law of the Brethren, but not of the Gentiles. But we must tell you, Christ is come in the flesh, who is offered up once for all their Offerings, and ends all the Jews Offerings, the Heave-Offerings, and Shake-Offerings, and tythes, as well as other Offerings; and Christ came not after the Order of Aa∣ron, which Levi came of that had the tythes; but after the Order of Melchisedeck, without Father or Mother. beginning of dayes, or end of life, who has ended the Levitical Priesthood, and changed the Law by which it was made, and disannulled the commandment that gave him his tythes, Heb. 7. And now if you say you take tythes as you are the Successors of the Apostles; I say, that Christ gave no command to his Apostles to take tythes, but on the contrary said, Freely you have received, freely give. And also if you say you receive tythe from the Martyrs; being their Successors; I answer, they denyed the Papists and their Idolatrous. wayes, and their Maintenance by tythes; and therefore they huned them to ashes. Now who are you like? Papists or the Jews? not like the Disciples or the Martyrs. No use of tythes occurres. nor can be proved to be in use, till about the end of three hundred years after Christ; but the Church-mainte∣nance in that time was the free benevolence and contribution of the people, as Tertullian, Origen, and Cyprian do testifie; and in the next three hundred years, Heathenism and Paganism did totally overspread this Land, until about the year six hundred, when Gregory the Great  Augustin the Monk into England (assisted with forty Preach∣ers)
to convert the Saxons from Paganism to Popery, which was in the time of Ethelbert King of Kent, who was the first called a Chri∣stian King; who being turned to the Profession of the Christian Reli∣gion, was afterwards an Instrument for the conversion of his Nation the Saxons. This Ethelbers is reported to have been very bountiful to the said Augustin the Monk, and gave him the Lordship of his chief City Cantebury; but that he gave him any tythes, or ever command∣ed tythes to be paid to him, or to any other, or made any Law for pay∣ment of tythes, it doth not appear by any History. Christians at the first gave tythes upon no other account, then they did Alms, as Austin said; which was divided by the Bishop, part to the Priest, and part to the poor; and these things which at first were voluntarily given, through custom and usage hath at last become in∣forceable, and Laws and Decrees made to compel them to another use then they were at first given. Gratian. Cans. p. 16. r. c. Deci∣nuce. Selden in his History of tythes, saith, that before the year Eight hun∣dred, or thereabouts, there is not any General Law that yet remains in publick, and is of credit, which ordained any payment of tythes or tenths, in the Western churches; for in the Eastern, said he, I never ready any Law that mention'd them, p. 67. And in the Council of Lateran, in the year one thousand two hun∣dred and fifteen, a Relation is of some Nations, who although Chri∣stians. did not by their own Rights and Customs pay Tythes: These are abserved by Innocent the fourth, to have been Greeks, Armenians and the like; And Antonius expresly remembers the general non-pay∣ment of them in the Eastern Churches. Summa Part 3. Ti. 4. It is further observable, that of old, Tythes nor Offerings were not paid to the Priests, But to the Bishop or his Deputy, who was Steward to distribute them to the Presbyters and poor; the Curates or Presby∣ters in City and Country, were such as the Bishop appointed to have cure of souls; and where they kept their cure, the offerings of devout Christians were received, and disposed of in maintenance of the Cler∣gy, and relief of the poor, by the Stewards thereunto appointed, called Oeconoms or Deacons. And all that was received in the Dioces o Parish, was put in a common Treasury. to be dispensed, one pr was for the maintenance of those that took care of peoples souls and mo∣ther part for the releif of the poor, and sick, and strangers. Sldn  6. pag. 80.81.
The Bhemians, being descended from the Waldenses, did profess that all Priests ought to be poor, and to be content with alms only; so saith Enias Silvius, as it is cited by Bishop Usher, De Chr. Ecc. Succes. Chap. 6. Page 155. And Wickliff in his Complaint to the Parliament, in Richard the seconds time, he saith, Ah Lord God! where this be reason, to con∣strain the people to find a worldly Priest, sometimes unable both of life and cunning, in pomp and pride, covetous and envy, gluttonness and drun∣kenness, with fat Horse and jolly, and gay Sadles, and Bridles ringing by the way, and their Neighbours perish for hunger, cold, and other mis∣chiefs of the world. Ah Lord Jesus Christ! sith which in few years, men paid their Tythes and Offering at their own free-will, to good men and able to great Worship of God, to profit, and fairness of holy Church fighting on Earth, why it were lawful and needful, that a worldly Priest should destroy this holy and approved custom, constraining men to leave this freedom, turning Tythes and Offerings into wicked uses. And one of the Articles of John Wick liff for which he was censu∣red, was, That Tythes are pure Alms, and that the Parishioners may for the use of their Curates, detain and keep them back, and bestow them up∣on others at their own will and pleasures.Acts and Mon. p. 435. And the Proposition aforesaid, is largely defended by John Hus, in the said Book of Martyrs, p. 461. and in the conclusion of the Di∣course it is affirmed, That the Clergy are not Lords and Possessors of Tythes, or other Ecclesiastical Goods, but only Stewards, and after the necessity of the Clergy is once satisfied, they ought to be given to the poor. The Examination of William Thorpe Martyr, in the days of King Henry the Fourth, Anno Dom. 1407, concerning Tythes, and the Maintenance of a Gospel-Ministry. See Acts and Mon. pag. 536, 537. And the Arch-Bishop then spake to me angerly; What saist thou to this fourth point that is certified against thee, preaching whenly and bodily in Shrewsberry, that Priests have no Title to Tythes. Thorpe said, I named there no word of Tythes in my preaching; but more then a month after that I was arrested, and in prison, a man
came to me, asking me what I said of Tythes? I said, in this Town are many Clerks and Priests, of which some are called Religions men, though many of them be Secular; therefore ask ye of them this Que∣stion. And this man said to me, Sir, our Prelates say, That we also are ob∣liged to pay our Tythes of all things that accrue to us; and that they are accursed that withdraw any part wittingly from them of their Tythes. Thope aid, I wonder that any Priest dare say men to be accursed without the ground of Gods Word. And the man said, Sir, our Priests say, That they curse men thus by Authority of Gods Law. And I said, Sir, I know not where this sentence of Cursing is Au∣thorized now in the Bible; and therefore, Sir, I pray you that you will ask the most cunning Clerk of this Town, that ye may know where this sentence of cursing them that tythe not, is now writ in Gods Law, for if it were written there, I would right gladly be learned where; and I said to this man in this wise, In the old Law, which ended not fully till the time that Christ rose up again from death to life, God com∣manded tythes to be given to the Levites, for the great business and daily travel that pertained to their Office; but Priests, because their travel was mekil, more easie and light, then was the Office of the Le∣vites: God ordained the Priest should take for their livelihood, to do their office, the tenth part of those tythes that were given to the Le∣vites: But now, I said, in the new Law, neither Christ nor any of his Apostles, took Tythes of the people, nor commanded the people to pay Tythes neither to Priests nor Deacons; but Christ taught the peo∣ple to do Alms, that is, Works of Mercy, to poor, needy men, of sur∣plus, that is, superfluous of their temporal Goods, which they had more then them needed, reasonably to their necessary livelihood; and thus I said not of tythes, but of pure alms to the people. But as Cisterniensis telleth, in the year 1274, one Pope Gregory the tenth, ordained new Tythes first be given to the Priests: Now in the new Law the words of the Law are these, That it should not from thenceforth be lawful to give their Tythes as their own pleasure where they would, as it had been before; but pay all their Tythes to the Mother-Church.
The Judgment of David Pareus of Hidleburgh, in the Palatinate, concerning Tythes. He saith, that Tythes or Tenths were free, and Arbitrary before the Law, as appears by the Example of Abraham and Jacob, a man might give them, a man might now them, or he might not, as he pleased; un∣der the Law they were commanded by God to be given to the Priest, Lev. 27. And the reasons thereof are clear: First, The tenths were a compensation unto the Levites for the twelfth part of the Land, which ought to have fallen otherwise to their shares. Moreover, they were the Sallaries of Priests and Levites, and maintenance of the poor; for God instituted three tenths: First the tenths of the Levites, Lev. 27. Secondly, the tenths of tenths, or the hundredth, to be paid by the Levites to the Priests, Numb. 18.26. Thirdly, the poor mans tenths, which was to be paid every three years after the Jubile, unto the Poor, Strangers, Widows and Orphans, Deut. 14.28. Therefore saith he, when the Levitical Priesthood did cease, then did the right of that Priesthood cease, and the right of Tythes did revert to the giver of them. Laws and Canons for Tythes among the Saxons. In the year 786, in the time of Off, which was in the time of Hep∣terchy in England, there was a great Couned holden in Merci by two Legats sent from Pope Adrian; the first wherein (as it is reported) tythes were first established in England; so that the first Law for pay∣ment of tythes: came from the Pope, and decreed by his Agents in Mercia, being but a seventh part of England; and afterwards as Po∣pery encreased, so tythes also were established in other parts of Eng∣land, by the several Kings thereof. King Ethelbert King of Kent, coming to the Court of Off King of Mercia, the said Offa murthered him in or about the year 793, and at length understanding the innocency of the said Ethelbert, and to miti∣gate the hainousness of the Fact, gave the tenth part of his Good to the holy Church, and to the Church of Hereford, in the remembrance of this Ethelbert; and after wards went up to Rome for his Po , where he gave to Peter's Church (so called) a penny through every
House in his Dominion, which is called Peter's pence, or Romes shot, and there was transformed from a King to a Monk, and this was 794 years after Christ; so was not set up by Christ and his Apostles. See Seldens History of Tythes. This Pope Adrian bestowed cost on Altars, dead mens Tombs, bones, and Steeple-houses; he attributed more Worship to Images then ever any did, and wrote a Book of the honour and profit of them, and appointed them instead of Scriptures, to be Lay-mens Calenders. He condemned in a Council, those that detested Images. This Adrian clothed the Image of Peter all in silver, and covered the Altar of Paul with a Pall of Gold. And this Pope set up Tythes 794 year, after Christ. In the year 797 after Christ, Alchwin (School-Master to Charles the Great in his Letter to the said Charles, who was a Romish Em∣peror, and had ordained Tythes to be paid) wrote touching the Exaction of Tythes, which he calls Jugum decimarum, that is, The Yoke of Tenths, and Exaction of something from every house of the Huns and Saxons, who were but then lately conquered by the said Charles, and had newly made profession of the Christian Faith. And the said Alchwin further advised in his Letter for the Christian Cause, to omit it amongst them, and not to put the yoke of Tythes (as he said) upon the people, and not to exact some∣thing from every house, but to shew that we are the Apostles sent of God and Christ into the world to preach; and rather to give to them that ask or want, then to exact Tythes; for it is better to lose them, then to destroy the peoples faith. See Seldens History of Tythes. King Athelstone, King of the West-Saxons about the year 940. to pacifie the Ghost of his murthered Brother Edwin, (to whose death he is said to have consented) did not only undergo seven years pennance, but also built certain Monasteries, and made a Law, that people should pay Tythes, (viz. himself, his Bishops and Officers) hoping thereby to expiate his sins; These following are the words of the Law. Book of Martyrs, p. 193. vol. 1. I Athelstone King, Charge and Command all my Officers thorough my whole Realm. to give Tythes unto God, of my proper Goods, as well in living Cattel, as in Corn and fruits of the ground, and that my Bishops likewise of their proper Goods, and mine Aldermen, and mine Officers, and Head-men shall do the same. Item, This I will, That
my Bishops and other Head-men do declare the same to those that be in their Subjection, and that to be accomplished at the Term of St. John the Baptist. This was in the time of Popery. Edmund King of England, ordained Tythes to be paid for eve∣ry Christian man, in the year 941. Book of Martyrs vol. 1. p. 195. Edgar about the year 959, is said to have confirmed the pay∣ment of Tythes upon as bad a ground as Athelstone did. See Osburn's Case of Tythes. This Edgar was of a vicious life, favourable to the Monks, he dis∣plac'd the marryed Priests, and brought in Monks of single life to possess their places; he built and prepared several Monasteries and Nunneries. He was cruel to Citizens, and a deflowerer of Mai∣dens: he was joyned in the Act in shedding the blood of Earl E∣thelwold, that he might enjoy Elfida his Wife. Canutus also the first Danish King, who being guilty of the blood of Edward and Edmund, Sons of Iron-side, and Heirs to the Crown, about the year 1016, confirmed Tythes, and built the Abbey of St. Bennet (so called) in Norfolk, and in Suffolk; he with great Devotion built the Monastery of St. Edmund, so cal∣led, which Saint he most dreadfully feared; for the seeming Ghost of him often affrighted him; for which cause, as also to expiate the sins of his Fathers, he confirmed Tythes. See Osburn's Case of Tythes. Thus its plain, that Tythes were given for the satisfaction of the sins of the Donor, and to maintain the Popish Clergy to say, and sing Mass, to pray for the souls of the Donors. Ethelwolfe King of England, in the year 844, in his Devotion to holy Church and Religious Orders, and for the remedy of their souls, and that their sins might be remitted, he gave the Tythe of all his Goods and Lands in West-Saxony, with liberty and freedom from all servage and civil charge, in the days of Pope Jone, which Pope fell in labour as she was going a Procession, (and died) being accompanied with Cardinals, Patriarchs, Arch-Bishops, Bi-Deacons, Monks, Fryars and Nuns. Pope Paschal about the year 1110, a Council being held in his time by his order, it was decreed, that it should be Heresie for a∣ny to deny obedience to the Pope; and made a Canon for paying
of Tenths to Priests, concluding it sin against the Holy Ghost, to sell the Tenths; he renewed an Excommunication against the Emperor, and thrust him from his Crown and Princely Title, and provoked his Son Henry the Fifth, and armed him to rebel against his Father. The great Decree which speaks most plainly, and till which no∣thing was given forth which did directly constitute them, but rather still supposed them as due by some former right, was made at the Council of Treat, under Pope Plus the Fourth, about the year 1560; and yet that great Council followed the Doctrine of their Fathers, and said they were due to God, and had no new Authority for their great Decree, which they commanded to be obeyed under the penalty of Excommunication. But notwithstanding the many Laws, Canons, and Decrees of Kings, Popes, and Councils, and Bishops, that every man ought to pay the tenth part of his encrease, yet was it left to the Owners to ofter it where they pleased; which made so many rich Abbeys and Mo∣nasteries. And till the year 1200, or thereabouts, every one gave their ythes as their own pleasure; which made Pope Innocent the third send his Decretal Epistle to the Bishop of Canterbury, commanding him to enjoin every man to pay his temporal goods to those that ministred spiritual things to them, which was enforced by Ecclesiastical Censures. And this was the first beginning of general Parochial payment of tythes in England; and this Popes Decree is recorded by Cook in the second part of his Institutes; who saith, That because the Popes Decree seem∣ed reasonable, it was admitted and enjoyned by the Law of the Nation, the King and People of England being then Papists. Yet notwithstanding, our English Parliaments not willing wholly to forget the poor, for whose sakes tythes were chiefly given, did make divers Laws, that a convenient portion of the tythes should be set a∣part for the maintenance of the poor of the parish for ever. 2 R. 15, 16.4 H. 4: as the Statutes at large do witness. The Pope having brought in tythes, and made a pretended Title by prescription, set up Courts to recover them, which were called Eccle∣siastical Courts, where his own Creatures were Judges. Afterwards Henry the Eighth, King of England, being a Papist, and believing the Popes Doctrine, as also did his Parliament, That Tythes were due to God and holy Church, made a Law that every one should set out, and pay Tythes.
He made a second Law in his time to the like purpose, in pursuance of the former, and great reason he had, and need there was for them; for having dissolved many Monasteries, after he denied the Pope to be the Supream Head of the Church; and took it to himself; which Mo∣nasteries had many Tythes and Rectories appropriated to them, and ei∣ther had them in his own hands, or sold them to others to be held as Lay-possessions And they having no Law to recover them by, the Popes Laws not reaching to Lay-persons (so called) he was nocessitated to make new Laws to enfore the payment of them, but still restrained the Tryal of Tythes to Ecclesiastical Courts. After him, Edward the Sixth, in pursuance of his Fathers Laws, and upon the same grounds, makes another Law for the payment of Predial and Personal Tythes, uader penalty of double damages and cost; who also restrains the Tryal of them to the Ecclesiastical Courts. So here you may see the Papists were the first that set up Tythe, and forced Maintenance, and the Spiritual Courts, contrary to Christ and the Apostles in the primitive times. CHAP. XIV. Concerning the Religion and Customs of the old Bri∣tans, before they were Christians, and after they were Christians. VVHen they were Heathen in old time in England, in their Worship, they offered mens blood, thinking that to be the most precious Sacrifice of all others; and when the Priest by Lot cast who should dye, they had all their brains knockt out at one  and then they sought out the veins of the heart, and drew  blood, and struck it upon the head of his friend, then they hoed up the Sails. And this they thought pleased their God. The Danes and Normans, in the Province of Selon, every ninth year sacrificed and killed unto their gods ninety nine men, and as ma∣ny horses, and dogs, and cocks, for Hawks, which their gods sent
them; and said by the same they should please them. And the blind ignorant people the Britans, had Altars, and they worshipped the Heads of great Rivers, Camb. p. 698. Crysanthus was Bishop in Bitan, and of all his Ecclesinstical Re∣venues and Prosits, was wont to reserve for himself but two toaves of bread only on the Lords day Camb. p. 84. But u w-a-dayes neither Bi∣shop nor Priest will think this sufficient, but they would scorn it, being grown so old in oppression In the River called Swale in Yorkshire, Augustin baptized an innu∣merable multitude of Women and Children. Camb. p. 136, 137. Then they had no Fonts. Augustin the bishop, caused the people to enter into the Water, and they were baptized: And here was no talk of a Cross, nor God-fa∣thers. Pauli us Bishop of York, baptized the Inhabitants of Notting∣hamshire in the River Irent. Cah. p 549. And not in a Font in the Stple-house; and they baptized men and women after they be∣lived. In the first plantation of Christianity among the Gentiles, such on∣ly as were of full age, after they were instructed in Christian Religi∣on, were admitted to Baptism, and that but twice in the year, at Ea∣ster and Whitsuntide, except upon urgent necessity. Cambd. pag. 768. In Northumberland, Paulinus baptized many thousands at a River. Here was no Font. King Sigebert proffered them in old time that preached the Gospel, Worldly Wealth, and riches descended by inheritance; but they refu∣sed and contemred them, saying, It became not them to embrace other mens riches, who for Christs sake had forsaken their own. Cambd. Re∣cord of Ireland. p. 67, 68. And the Bishops of Britan seemed no less to have despised riches, and was but poor, and had nothing of their own. But now they are altered from that, who will take all they can lay their hands on, and imprison and persecute them they do not preach to, if they will not give them Goods and Money; and so will have both their own, and other mens, but forsake neither for Christs sake. King Agharus, being grievously diseased in his body, and incurable by the skill of man, was cured by Thadeus, one of Christs Disciples,
without Medicine; for which, King Agharus commanded Gold coin∣ed and uncoined, to be given him; but he received it not, saying, I so much that we have forsaken our own, how can we receive other mens? This is not like the Pope and the Bishops, wit is their great Parsonages and Revenues. And the Irish Bishops had no more, nor no other Rents and Reve∣nues, then three Milch-kine, which the Parishioners charged for three other Kne when they were dry. Camb. p. 16. But the Bishops of our age, and te Priests, are changed from them sh age. One Patrick, a Britan orn, (Saint Martin's Sisters Son) he was sold into Ireland, where he became a Hereiman to King Milne, and he Catechised there in the Christian Faith; nd about that time he cryed ut against the shaving of Friens, and said it was Simon Magus his shaving, and not Saint Peters. Can b. p. 10, 108. Paulinus aforesaid, came into Northumberland with the King and uen, and abde thirty six dayes there, employed wholly in Catech∣sing, Baptizing and Instructing the people from; Morning to Evening; and being instructed, he baptized them to the forgiveness of their sins, in the River of Glen, which was hard by the Kings Mannor-House. Camb Brit. page 815. Here was no Fonts used at this time. One Malachy in Ireland, was the first that denied riests should marry; where Armachanas detested against such voluntary Begging-Fryars, p. 109. Robert Abbot of Molisme in Burundy, perswaded his own Disci∣ples to live with their handy-labour, and to forsake Tythes and Obla∣tions, p. 110. At ell, the Steeple-houses in Ireland were built with Timber; but when one Malachy caused them to be built with stone, the people cry∣ed out, saying, What mean you to bring into our Countrey this new fa∣shion? for we are not French. The first Duke in England, was made by Edward the third, who made his Son Duke of Cornwall. The title of Marquess came in by Richard the second, of late years. Earls came in by the Gemns, who ordered the Earls should always give attendance to their Princes, and be at band in matters of Council. Afterwards came in the Viscounts, new title, not heard of with us, till Henry the Sixth. Barons signifeth in the Geman tongue, Hard Soldiers. Knights took their Names se
the No man Conquest, by serving with Horses. Esquire doth signifie Shield-bearer. Yeoman signifies Free-born, or Freeholder, lawful men of Forty shillings a year of Free-land. Gentlemen, some are from great Famillies, and some take the Name from being raised in Wealth. The Normans began the first Sealing with Print and Wax. But be∣fore, men made Bargains of Lands and Houses, without Script, Chart, or Deed, and many Tenements were demised with a Spur, or Horse-Curry-comb, with a Bow, and some with an Arrow, being given as a token of the thing. Camb. p. 444. And when the King made any free, and granted liberty, these were the words, without writings, As free make I thee, As Heart may think, or Eye may see. The Heathen-Priests, under pretence of Religion, wasted the Bri∣tant Goods; and Claudius had a Temple in Britan, whom they prayed to as God. Canutus King of England and of Denmark, said, All things in his Realm was at his Command, and therefore commanded his Chair to be set on the Sea-shore, and when the Sea began to flow (in the presence of many, he said to the Sea as it flowed, Thou art part of my Dominion; and the ground on which I set, is mine; neither was there ever any that durst disobey my Command, and went away free, and unpunished; where∣fore I charge thee, that thou come not upon my Land, neither wet the clothes or body of thy Lord. But the Sea, according to its usual course, flowing still, without any reverence of his Person, wet his feet: Then he retiring back, said, Lt all the Inhabitants of the Earth know, That vain and frivolous is the power of Kings; and that none is worthy of the Name of a King, but he to whose Command the Heaven, Earth, and Sea (by bond of an Everlasting Law) are subject and obedient. And never after that time, set he the Crown upon his Head. Cambd. Brit. p. 262.
CHAP. XV. Concerning Singing of Psalms. IN the Year 383, Psalms begun to be sung, brought in by Damasius Bishop, though not turned into Meeter. Benedictus an Abbot of the Monastery of Peter and Paul at Wirr, brought with him from Rome one John the Arch-Chanter, who first taught in England how to sing in the Quire, after the manner of Roe, Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 164. Anno 724. Laews made by the Saxon Kings in England, concerning singing Psalms. In the year 747, at the beginning of King Edgberts Reign, the Sy∣nod of Bishops disputed the profit of singing of Psalms in the Church, and made a Decree, that with a modest voice they should sing in the Church so called. In the year Nine hundred twenty four, King Ethelston, alias, Atel∣ston, made a Law, That fifty Psalms should be daily sung in the Church as he called it, for the King. Beza being much diverted with Poetry, made his pastime to become a part of the vulgar devotion: Hence th have been stiled by some Geneva-Jigs. These are the express words of the Injunction, given to the Clergy and Laity, by Queen Elizabeth: Item, Because in divers Collegiate, and also some Parish Chur∣ches heretofore, there hath been Livings appointed for the mainre∣nance of men and children, to use singing in the Church, by means whereof, the Laudable Science of Musick hath been had in estima∣tion, and preserved in knowledg; the Queen willeth and command∣eth, that first no alteration be made of such assignments of Living, as heretofore hath been appointed to the use of Singing or Musick in the Church, but that the same so remain, and that there be a modest and distinct Song so used in all parts of the Common-Prayers in the Church, that the same may be as plainly understood, as if it were read without singing: And yet nevertheless, for the comforting of such
as delight in Musick, it may be permitted that in the beginning or end of Common-prayers, either at Morning or Evening, there may be sung an Humn, of such like Song, to the praise of Almighty God, in the best sort of Melody or Musick that may be conveniently devi∣sed. CHAP. XVI. Concerning Swearing. THE Form of words which Christ hath laid down in Mat. 5, and the Apostle James taught in his general Epistle, Chap. 5, is as followeth: Christ said, Ye have heard that it hath been said f old time, Thou shalt not forswear thy self, (which was the false Oath) but perform thy Oaths to the Lord, which was the true Oath, which were to be ta∣ken before the Judges, Officers and Magistrates, to end Controversies, and be performed to the Lord. Put Christ said, Now I say unto you, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and nay, nay; for whatso ver is more then this, cometh of evil. Therefore this yea, yea, and nay, nay, wherein Christ doubles his words to make them of force, sets them over, and above an Oath. And also in James 5.12. the Apostle taught, and said, Above all things my brethren, swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, (mark) nor by any other Oath; but he also sets up that which is above an Oath, which is Christs words, Let your yea be yea, and nay, nay; which form of sound words the Apostle doubles, (as Christ did) when he said, in his repeating over Christs words, Ye shall swear no Oath, lost ye fall into condemnation. These are the Commands of Christ and the Apostle, which we are to stand by, to wit, yea, yea, and nay, nay.
Some Ex ples of the Primitiv? Christians, and Holy Martyrs that kpt the Commands of Christ and the Apostles, which spoke the truth, an both denied, and gave their Testimony against Sear∣ing. Folycarpus a Martyr, who was, as it is said, John's Disciple, and Bi∣shop of Smyra, being Eighty nine years of Age, when he was requi∣red by the Proconsul to swear, he denied it, and said he was a Christian. So it appears, a that tme Christians did not swear. Acts and Mon. fol. 55. Vol. 2. And also Basillides Martyr, who was an Officer among the Soldiers, being required to swear before a Judg, said plainly, That it was not law∣ful to swear. Lib. 6. Chap. 6. tage 98. So it appears plainly, That it was the mark of a Christian no to swear. And the Waldenses, whose Names are so famous amongst the Refor∣med Churches, and who are said immediately to succeed the Apostles, and were the most ancient and true Protestants, professed it to be no wayes lawful for a Christian to swear. And Bishop Ʋsher, late of Ar∣magh, Primate of Ireland, pleaded their Cause against the Jesuits, in his Book De Successione, chap. 6. The Ploughman in his Complaint, saith, Lord, thou gavest us a Com∣mand of truth, in bidding us to say yea, yea, and nay, nay, and swear no∣thing; but Lord, he that calls himself thy Vicar on Earih, hath broken thy Commandment; for he maketh a Law, and compelleth men to swear. Book of Martyrs, Vol. 1. p. 527, 528. And John Wickliff, whose Works are so much esteemed by the Pro∣testants, his judgment was, That all Oaths which be made for any Con∣tract or Civil Bargain betwixt man and man, be unlawful; and John Hus and Jerom of Prague, were burnt (for holding his Opinion) by the Papists. Fol. 653. And Walter Brute, who was a Teacher of Gods people, saith con∣cerning Swearing, I believe and obey the Doctrine of Almighty God, and my Master Christ Jesus, which teacheth, that Christian men in af∣firming the truth, should pass the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees of the Old Testament, or else he excludes them from the Kingdom of Heaven; for he saith, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharises, you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and as concerning Oaths, he saith, It hath been said by them of old time, thou shalt, of forswear thy self, but peform thy Oaths to the Lord; but I say to you now, Swear not at all; bt let your yea be yea, and nay, nay; for whatsoever is moe then thes, cometh of avl. And merefore as the perfection of the ancient men in the Old Testament, was not to forswear themselves, so the perfection of Chri∣stian men, is not to swear at all; because they are so commanded of Christ, whose command in no case must be broken. Origen saith, It behoves a man, who lives according to the Gospel, not to swear at all: And Jerome an ancient Father, and Teacher of the Church, which the Protestants own, saith, That the great Evangelical sincerity and truth, admits not of an Oath, since every true saying is equivolent thereunto Theophilact an ancient Father of the Church, whom the Protestants own, saith (Mat. 5.) concerning Oaths, Learn hence, that under the Law it was no evil for one to swear; but since the coming of Christ it is evil, as is Circumcision. And was it not the principal solution gi∣ven by Ambrose, That a Christian should not swear at all? And Bishop Gauden saith, A true Christians Oath is needless; and an evil mans Oath is worthy of no more credit then a lyar, p. 17, 41. of his Book concerning Swearing. Otho Bishop of Banbergenses in Germany, and Basilius of Calcedon, refused to swear; and afterwards there was an Act granted to tender Christians, that their yea and nay might be taken to testifie the truth, instead of an Oath; and the Essaeans amongst the Jews, refused to swear, as Josephus witnesseth. Likewise Basil commends Chinas a fa∣mous Greek, who suffered a Fine of three talents, rather then he would save it by swearing, to the loss of his honour. And also in Queen Ma∣ries dayes, many that suffered Martyrdom, refused to swear. And in Mat. 18.17. Christ saith in the Gospel-times to the Church, that by the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every word may be established, and not in the mouth of two or three Swearers; and this Christ spoke in matter of differences that might happen among Christians; but said nothing of an Oath, for Oaths he forbad be∣fore.
The Examination of William Thorpe Martyr, in the days of King Henry the Fourth, Anno Dom. 1407 concerning Swearing. The Arch-Bishop said, Lo it is certified against thee, that thou preachedst openly at Shrewsberry, that it is not lawful to Swear in any case. Book of Martyrs p. 701. Vol. 11. Thorpe said, I preached openly, that it is not lawful in any case to swear by any Creature, and that by the Authority of the Epistle of St. James. Then the Clerk asked me, if it were not lawful to a Subject, at the bidding of his Prelate, to kneel down and touch the Holy Gos∣pel-Book, and kiss it, saying, So help me God, and this Holy Doom. And I said to them, Sirs, ye speak here full, generally and largely; What if a Prelate commandeth his Subject to do an unlawful thing? should he obey thereto? The Arch-Bishop said, That a Subject ought not to suppose that a Prelate will bid him do an unlawful thing. Thorpe said, But to our Purpose: And I related that a Master of Divinity had said, That it was not lawful either to give, or take any charge upon a Book, for every Book is nothing else but divers Creatures, of which it is made: Therefore to swear upon a Book, is to swear by Creatures, and this swearing is ever unlawful. This sentence witnesseth Chrysostome plainly, blaming them greatly that bring forth a Book to swear upon, charging Clerks, that in no wise they constrain any body to swear, whether they think a man swear true or false. And the Arch-Bishop and his Clerks scorned me, and blamed me greatly for this saying, and threatned me with great punishment except I left this opinion of not swearing. And then I said, this is not my opinion only, but it is the opinion of Christ, and St. James, and of Chrysostome, and of other Saints. And the Clerk said to me, Wilt thou submit thee here meekly to the Ordinance of holy Church, and lay thy hand upon the Book, touching the Holy Gospel of God? And I said, have I not told you here, how that I heard a Master of Divinity fay, that in such a Case it is all one, to touch a Book, and to swear by a Book? And the Arch-Bishop said, There is no Master of Divinity in England so great, but if he hold this opinion before me, I shall
punish him, as I shall do thee, except thou swear. And I said, Was not Chrysostome an Eetive Doctor? The Aca-bishop ad, Yea. And I said, If Chrysostome proveth him orthy of great blame that bringeth forth a Book to swear upon, it must needs sollow, that he is more too blame that sweareth upon that Book. The Clesk said, Lay thine hand upon the Book, touching the Holy Gospel of God. (Here the ignorance of the Papists may be cen, who be ieved the Leter was the Gospel. And these lind Protestants and Fro∣fessors in our age still hold the ame.) I said, I understand that the Holy Gospel of God may not be touch∣ed with mans hand. The Clerk said I said not truth, &c. I said, By Authority of Saint Hierome, the reading of the Letter is not the Gospel, but the belief that men have in the Word of God, that is the Gospel that we believe, and that is the virtue of Gods Word; and David saith, Through the Word of God the Heavens were for∣med. In the year 47, King Hunderck, in the time of the ten Persecu∣tions, put an Oath to the Christians, and they refused it; but some a∣mongst them being simple men was willing to take it; and the King said unto them which would have taken the Oath, Because that you, contrary to the Rule of the Gospel, which saith, Snear not at all, would have sworn, the Kings will is, that you shall never see your Churches more, but shall be banished into the Wilderness, and never perform any Ministerial Office more; and there you shall till the ground; and the King sad to them that refused the Oath, You shall be immediately sent away to the Isle of Cross, to hew timber for Ships. E seb. p. 80. The Christians that were put to cruel tortures by the Papists, in the Valley of Piedmont, about the year 1655, of which a particular Rela∣tion is herein following; one of the Articles against these Christians was, that they could not swear at all. Pontius, of the age of fifteen years, was cruelly tormented, and martyred by the Heathen in the primitive times, because he could not swear. And many now in these dayes suffer much for the like cause. The false Christians would have people swear, like the Hethen.
CHAP. XVII. Concerning the Title of Doctors, and concerning their Habits. A Bout three hundred years ago, then the Name and Title of Do∣ctor began to be conferred solemnly: It was an Article of John Wickliffs (condemned at Constance) that Graduations and Doctor∣ships in Universities and Colledges, as they were in use then, did con∣duce nothing to the Church. The Genevians in their Annotations upon Rev. 9. ver. 3. where the Locusts came out of the smoak, say, they were, and are false Tea∣chers, Hereticks, and worldly-subtile Prelates, with Monks, Fryars, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Arch-Bishops, Doctors, Batchellors and Masters. Didoclavius in his Book called Altare Damascenum, p. 891, saith, that Hoods, Tippets and square Caps, were introduced by Antichrist to promote his splendor. Philpot chose rather to be secluded the Convocation of the Cler∣gy, then to wear a Hood and Tippet. Stat. Arad. Oxon. Tit. 14. Parag. 1. The words of the Statutes are in English thus: It is ordered that all Heads of Colledges, all Fel∣lows and Scholars, wear black, or sad-coloured Clothes; and all that are initiated into holy Orders; as it becomes those of the Clergy to do. There were of old a certain sort of people among the Jews, cal∣led Chemarims, or Black-coats, as it may be read in Hosea the 5th: But our Translators have rendred them Priests, instead of Chema∣rims; which Priests were smutted by the Heathens black Sacri∣fices.
CHAP. XVIII. Concerning the Heathen Idolaters naming their Dayes and Months. THE old Pagan-Saxons in their Idolatry, were the first that brought in the Names of the Dayes, which those called Chri∣stians have retained to this day; for they adored Idols, and unto them offered Sacrisices, and worshipped the Planets. See Vestigans Antiquities, and Cambdens Brit. As touching the Idols which these Saxons adored, they were di∣vers; and though they had many, yet seven among the rest they especially appropriated unto the seven dayes of the week. That day which is the first day of the week, they worshipped the Idol of the Sun, which was placed in a Temple, and there acrifi∣ced unto, and to the special adoration of which Idol, they gave the Name of Sunday. The second day of the week they dedicated to the Idol of the Moon, and from whence these called Christians retain the Name of Monday, instead of Moonday. The next was the the Idol of the Planets, was the Idol of Tuisco, who was the first and chiefest man of Name among the Germans, unto whom the Name of Tuesday was especially Dedicated. The next was the Idol Woden, whom the Saxons honoured for their God of Battel. And after this Idol these called Christians do yet call the fourth day of the week Wednesday, instead of Woddens∣day. The next was the Idol Thor, from whence the Name Thursday is retained, instead of the fifth day of the week. The next Idol was the Goddess Friga, to which Idol they dedi∣cated the sixth day of the Week, and called it Friday; which is re∣tained to this day. The last day was the Idol Seater, from whence is called the se∣venth day, Saturday. And as these called Christians have sollowed the Heathens Exam∣ples in naming their Days, so they followed them in naming their Months; for the Heathen they called Mars the God of Battel, and
from thence they calleed the first Month March. And Venus they called the Goddess of Love and Beauty, and from thence they called they called the second Month April. And Maja a Heathen Goddess called Flora; Flora and Cloris were called the Goddesses of Flowers; unto Maja the Heathen Idolaters use to sacrifice; from thence was the third Month called May. And upon the first day of the same Month they used to keep Floralia Feasts to the two Goddesses of Flowers, viz. Flora and Cloris; and Flora was a Strumpet in Rome, that used on the first day of that Month to set up a May-pole before her door to entice her Lovers: From whence came May-poles and May-day to be since observed by these called Chri∣stians. And Juno, whom the Heathen called the Goddess of Kingdoms and Wealth; from this Juno the fourth Month was called June; And Julius Caesar a Roman Emperor, in honour to him was the fifth Month called July. And in honour to Augustus Caesar an Emperor, was the sixth Month called August. And four of the other Months are called after the Latin Names; as, September for the seventh Month, October for the eighth, November for the ninth, December for the tenth. And one Jnus a King of Italy, was for his wisdom pictured with two faces, whom they honoured as God; and from this Name J was the eleventh Month called January. And Saturnus, Pluto, Februs, were called the Gods of Hell, wh the Heathen said had the Rule of evil Spirits there; and from  Februs, was the the twelfth Month called February. And by all there Idolatrous Names, do these called Christians call their Dys to this any which is contrary to the Scriptures, the Prophets, and the Apo∣stles. The Saxons also had a Goddess, (whom they sacrificed to m Month of April) called Ester: Hence they called April, E Month; and hence in process of time came Easter. Page 135. Ca  Brit.
CHAP. XIX. Concerning Burying-places. IN the year 1198, Gaudentius de Mor, (See Justin, Part 1. Ch. 26.) proves, that they did of old bury privately their dead in their Grounds; which custom was taken away by Pope Innocent the third, who decreed that none should be buryed in unconsecrated places; and then after, people began to desire to be buryed within the Church, out of a Superstitious respect to the Saint whose Name that Church did bear, and because their Kindred and Relations did pray for them there; besides, they hoped to be benefited by the merits of the Mar∣tyrs: And it may be read in Austin de cura pro Mortuis, chap. 5. That the believing Mother did desire that the body of her believing Son might be buryed in the Church of the Martyrs, for so much as she did believe that his soul did reap benefit through the Merits of the said Martyrs. And about this time the Clergy began to appropriate to themselves the prerogative of taking money to let people be buryed in Churches, and is at this day used in England. It was one of the Articles of the Wldenses, That the use of Church∣yards is supersluous, and invented only for lucres sake; and that it was no matter in what ground any one was laid or buryed. Bish. Ʋsher de Succes. Eccles. Chr. c. 6. CHAP. XX. Concerning Ministers. VVHen Christ bid them go into all Nations, he bid them wait at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high; and they was not to go to be seven years at Colledges, as they are now, like an Apprentice; but some of them were Tradesmen, as
Moses was a keeper of Sheep, and Jacob was a keeper of Sheep, and David was a keeper of Sheep, and Elisha a Plough-man, and Amos a Herdsman, and Peter and John Fisher-men, and unlearned men, and Paul a Tent-maker. And the Teachers of the Waldenses were said to be Weavers and Coblers; of which, when they were told of it, they replied, they were not ashamed of their Priests, because they laboured with their hands, according to the Example of the Apostles. CHAP. XXI. Concerning Marriage with the King. IT was the Romans that first brought up marrying with a Ring, it being their practice and custom, that the man should give in token of good-will a Ring unto the woman. Alex. Gen. Lib. 2. Anti{que} Romani, p. 72. And before they would bsgin the Ceremonies of their Contract, the man procured a Southsayer, and the woman another, to cast their Fortune; and the token or sign that these Southsayers ac∣counted most fortunate, was a Crow. And this practice of marying with a Ring, do these called Christians retain to this day, amongst many other of the Heathen Idolatrous practices. And this practice is contrary to the practice of the holy men of God in the Scriptures; for Boaz took Ruth to Wife, before the Elder of the people, and said, Ye are witnesses this day, that I take Ruth to Wife; and the people said, We are witnesses this day; and the Lord mke the woman in thy house, like the house of Rachel, &c. and tha thou may∣est do worthily in Ephrta, and be famous in Bethlem. And of the stock of Boaz, came Christ. Ruth 4. And Isaiah was to take Witnesses, and write in a Rll when he went to the Prophetess. So here (you may see) was no Southsayers nor Rings used.
CHAP. XXII. Concerning Churches and Ʋniversities, so called. AND the Names that the Papists gave the Steeplehouses, are still used by Protestants; they called their Churches Cathedral Churches, and Kings Chappel, and Queens Chappel. And Pope Faelix the third, he decreed, that Churches should be de∣dicated to the Saints; and so they came to be called, one Christs Church, and another they called Saint Peters Church, and another Saint Pauls Church, and another they called Saint Jame's Church, and another Saint George's Church, and Saint Bennets Church, &c. And them called Protestants, calls them so still. And the Protestants still call the Colledges by the same Names the Papists gave them, who first set them up. The Papists called them Christ Church Colledg, Emanuel Colledg, Trinity Colledg, Corpus Christi Colledg, that is, the Body of Christ Colledg; Jesus Colledg, Brazen nose Colledg, Magdalen Colledg, All-Souls Colledg, Saint Johns Colledg. The two Universities, as they are called, were founded by Popish Saxon Kings, and other Kings, Bishops, and other men and women. Tindal, who was a Martyr, said, (concerning Universities) that whosoever ordained Universities, be it Alexander at Halis, Saint Tho∣mas, or any other, he was a Starr that fell from Heaven to Earth; for there are brought in (said he) moral virtues for Faith, and Opinions for Truth; and said they were a confused Cloud. Tindal in his Book of the Revelation of Antichrist. CHAP. XXIII. How the Bishops and Clergy heretofore, have been the cause of cruel Laws against those that differed from them, whom they called Hereticks. ERasmus testified, that for above Four hundred years after C the Bishops did not seek the help of the Emperors again
Hereticks, and when they did seek it against the insufferable wickedness of the Donatists, it did not please the good people, that they should then seek the help of the Civil Powers; for they then judged that it became not the Bishops to use any other Weapons, or to have any other help then the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, although the evil was incurable, yet would they have excluded it by Excommu∣nication, which is said to be the greatest Judgment or Punishment that then the Church had. The Histories also sheweth, how that some of the Clergy have said, That the Princes ought to kiss the Son, and to use their power for to preserve and defend Religion against all their Enemies, though their Lands should therefore be spoiled. In the year 553, Pelagius Bishop of Rome, instituted first of all That Hereticks and Apostates should be forced by external compulsion And Clement the fifr made Laws that Hereticks should be bur¦ned. Gerandus Naviomagns sheweth, how that the Laws for putting He∣reticks to death, came not by the free-will of the Emperors, but through the earnest importuning of blood-thirsty Bishops, whose constant recourse was a burden to the Emperors, so that finally, they obtained what they desired; but when the Clergy could not preval with one Emperor, they excluded him out of Italy, and excommuni∣cated him, and brought him in suspension, and freed the Subjects from the Oath, and stirred them up against the Power. And thus have the Clergy handled, when they could not have their wills. And it might be plentifully manifested, how that it hath been blood-thirsty Bishops, with others of the Clergy, that have provoked Kings, and Potentates of the Earth to cruelty, and who have counselled them to make bloody Laws, like the Bishop Nestorius, who in his Sermon spake unto the Emperor, and said, Oh Emperor, give me a Land clean∣sed of Herticks and I will give thee Heaven; help me against he Hereticks, and I will help thee: O subdue the Persians thy Ene∣mies. In the years 1538, and 1546: In like manner the Inquisitors and Clergy stirred up the Emperor, the Kings of Spain and France, to ter∣rible persecution, laying it upon their consciences to quit themselves severely against Hereticks, if they would escape the Lords re∣po.
In the year 1545, Pope Paul the third, counselled and entreated the Emperor Charles, and King Ferdinandus, to compel the Protestants to forsake their error. CHAP. XXIV. How since the Apostacy from the Truth, the Pope, Kings and Rulers makes Ministers; and none must preach, except they have a Licence from them. IN the days of King Henry the Fourth, it was agreed upon by the King and the Bishops, with other Lords, that no man within this Realm, or other of the Kings Majesties Dominions, presume to take upon him to preach privily, or otherwise, without special Licence of the Ordinary of the same place Statute Ex Officio Rg. Hen. 4. And in the dayes of the same King Henry the Fourth, Constitutions were made by Tho: Arundel, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and others, That no person (being authorized to preach) shall take upon him to preach in English to the Clergy and Laity, except he first present himself, and be examined of the Ordinary of the place. For first, the King, he nominated who should be Bishop of such a Diocess, and then being presented to the Pope, he was to approve of him; and being approved, he was consecrated by the Arch-Bishop in England. But when King Henry the Eighth cast off the Pope, then it was enacted by King and Parliament, that no Bishop should be com∣mended to the Pope, but that the King should both nominate them, and approve of them to be sufficient Ministers In the year 1547, in Edward the Sixth's time, Injunctions were set forth, That none should preach except sufficiently Li∣censed: In the Reign of King James, Injunctions were made, That none should preach, except they were lawfully Licensed thereunto by the King or the Bishop. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol 2. And likewise in the dayes of Queen Mary, none was to preach but such as should be licensed or allowed by her Authority, or by the Arch Bishop, &c. or by the Universities of Oxford and Cambridg Anno 1. Mary, 1 Pat C. 1.
In the year 1559, Injunctions were likewise made in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, that none should appear to preach, not be admit∣ted thereto, but such as should be Licensed thereto by the Queen, or the Arch Bishops or Bishops And thus she followed the Papists, who were the first that set up this Oder. In the year 1644, the Parliament made an Ordinance, to give power to the Presbyter-Assembly of Divines, for the Ordination of Ministers according to the Directory for Ordination; and they gave the Assm∣bly of Divines, Rules for Examination of them they ordained. He that was to be ordained, was to bring a testimony that he had sworn, and taken the Covenant of the three Kingdoms; and how long he had been in the University, and what Degrees he had taken, and whether he was twenty fur years old, &c. Note, This was up∣olding Popery still, notwithstanding there was a pretence of Reforma∣tion. And an Ordinance was made by Oliver Cromwel and his Council, for Approbation of publick Preachers; and for this end Commision∣ers were appointed, and were authorized to judg of the Ability and Fitness of any man, before he was admitted to any publick place to preach. O. C. 1653, Can. 39. and Can. 57. CHAP. XXV. Concerning the Priests turning, as the Rulers turned, to eve∣ry Power that came up, rather then they would lose their Benefices; and how they petitioned several Parliaments and Rulers, That they might have their Tythes paid them, and that they would suppress the People called QƲA∣KERS. IN the year 1531, Pope Julius being angry with the King of France, sent King Henry the Eighth the Cap of Maintenance and the Sword, and gave him the title of Christianssimo, that is, The most Christian King. And because King Henry wrote a Book against Luther, the Pope ave him the title of Defender of the Faith.
In the year 1531, (being the twenty second year of Henry the Eighth) Tyndal did translate the New-Testament into English; for reading of which, many were sharply punished; and the reading of it was forbidden by the Chancellor of England; and the Papist-Bi∣shops then in power, caused all the Books to be brought into Pauls-yeard, and there to be burned; and the said Tyndal was shortly after burned beyond Sea for translating the same. In the same year, one Camphjus being sent Legate from the Pope in. to England, was at first in great request with King Henry the Eighth, and had many honours conferred on him, and great Benefices; but the King taking dislike of the Popes proceedings with him, concerning a Divorce the said Legate brought from the Pope, to Divorce the King from his Wife, who was the Relict of his Brother, made an Act that no more Annal; should be paid for Bulls or Pardons to the Pope, nor no Appeals be made to him, but that all should appeal to the King for pardon. Abut this time the whole Clergy of Englad was charged by the Kings Council to be in a Praemunire, for supporting and maintaining the Popes power, and were called to answer in the Kings Bench; but before their day of appearance came, they in their Convocation con∣cluded an Humble Submission in Writing, and offered the King One hundred thousand pounds to pardon them; which after some labour, the King promised them pardon; in which Submission the Clergy cal∣led the King Supream Head of the Church. Bakers Chron. This Pardon was signed by the Kings hand. Mark, The King tur∣ning, and denying the Popes Supremacy, the Priests turn and deny their old Head of the Church, called Peter's Successor. And in the year 1535, the Popes Authority in England was abolish∣ed by Parliament; and about two years after, an Act was made, which gave the King all Religious Houses, and all their Lands and Goods. And then an Oath was ministred to the Clergy, which they took: That they should renounce the Popes Authority, and swear to be true and faithful to the King, his Heirs and Successors, of life and limb, and to live and dye with him, against all people; and to acknowledg their holding their Bishopricks of the King only, beseeching him to make restitution of the temporalities of the said Bishoprick. So God me help, and aell Saints, said they.
About this time the Bible was first permitted to be read in English, and Injunctions were set forth by the Lord Cromwel, That the Creed, Lords Prayer, ten Commandments, and Articles of the Christian Faith, should be read in English; which caused twenty thousand peo∣ple to rise in arms in Lincolnshire, being headed by a Monk, and others; and they were scarcely appeased, but there arose forty thousand in the North; where on one side of thir Ensigns they had Christ hanging on the Cross; and on the other side the Cup and Bread of the Sacra∣ment; but they were suppressed. In September 1537, by the special motion of the aforesaid Cromwl, all the Images unto which were made any special Pilgrimages and Of∣ferings, were taken down and burnt; and forthwith by the means of the said Cromwell, all the Orders of Fryars and Nunns, with their Cloisters and Houses, were suppressed and put down. After all this, and notwithstanding this Reformation, Popery had so much power in the hearts both of King and people, that one Nichol∣son, alias, Lambert, being accused for denying the presence in the Sa∣crament, he appealed to the King, and the King heard him openly; but all would not do, neither would the King pardon him; and shortly af∣ter, he was drawn to Smithfild, and there burnt; and this was done about the thirteenth year of his Reign. And in the thirty seventh year of his Reign, the Parliament gave him all the Colledges and Chantries. And one John Smith was burnt in Smithfield, and one Andrew Howet a Taylor, for denying the Real presence in the Sacra∣ment. And further, in the thirteenth year of his Reign, was set forth by the Bishops, the Book of the six Articles, condemning all for Here∣ticks, and to be burnt, that should hold, 1. That the Body of Christ was not really present in the Sacrament after Consecration. 2. That the Sacrament might not truly be administred under one kind. 3. That priests entred into holy Orders, might mary. 4. That vows of Chstity entred into, upon mature deliberation, were not to be kept. 5. That private Masses were not to be used.
6. That Auricular Confession was not necessary in the Church. These Articles and the Penalty annexed to them, were called a whip with six strings, which penalty was, they were to be burned to death, and forfeit their Estates real and personal to the King. After King Henry the Eighth, succeeded Edward the Sixth, Son to King Henry the Eighth in whose time new injunctions were set forth, for pulling down and removing all Images out of Churches, al∣so Homilies wee appointed to be read for peoples instruction, and that the Sacrament should be ministred to lay-people in both kinds. Also Marriage was allowed to the Clergy, Auricular Confession was forbid∣den, and prayer for the dead; and in his fifth year the Book of Com∣mon prayer was established. After King Edward, succeeded Queen Mary, about whose coming to the Crown, there was some combustion, to whom first the Suffolk men resorted; who being always forward in promoting the proceedings of the Gospel, and promised her their aid, and to help her, so that she would not attempt the alteration of the Religion which her brother King Edward had before established. To make the matter short, unto this condition she agreed, and made promise to them, that no alterati∣on should be of Religion; being a Papist, and setting Popery up, the people and priests generally turned that way; and all Bishops that had been deprived in the time of Edward the sixth, were restored to their Bishopricks, and all Beneficed men that were married, and would not forsake their opinion and turn, were turned out of their Livings; and in her time the Mass was again sung in Latin, and the Popes authori∣ty was by Act of Parliament restored in England, and the Mass com∣manded in all Churches to be used. In her second year, the Realm was absolved, and reconciled to the Church of Rome by Cardinal Pool; and the first Fruits and tenths were restored to the Clergy; but this was soon revoked, the Council finding the necessity of it, for the Queens support. In her fourth year, Monastaries were begun to be re-edifi∣ed: the number of those that dyed for Religion in her time, which was but six years, was two hundred fourscore and thirteen men and women.
Now see the Oath which the Clergy took to the Pope. They swore to be true to Saint Peter, the holy Church of Rome, and to the Pope the holy Father, and to defend it against all men, and to ac∣knowledg the Rules of the holy Fathers Decrees, which to my power, say they, I shall keep, and cause to be kept, and all Hereicks and Schismaticks to our Holy Father, I will persecute to my power, So help me God, and the holy Evangelists. In the year 1559, Queen Mary being dead, Queen Elizabeth be∣gan to reign; and she with the advice of the Parliament, soon made an Act for Uniformity of prayer, and administration of the Scra∣ments. And the title of Supream Head of the Church, was confirmed to Queen Elizabth by the Parliament, and they gave first fruits and tenths to her. The Supremacy thus confirmed to the Queen, the Oath was tendred to the Bishops and others who had been Papists in Queen Maries dayes; and as many as refused to take it, were deprived of their Li∣vings; and of the number of above Nine thousand Priests, Bishops, Deans, Prebends, Masters of Colledges, Arch-Deacons, Abbots, who had then been in place in Queen Maries time, not above One hun∣dred and twenty of them refused to take the Oath, but turned from their Religion to Protestantism, because the Queen set it up, not∣withstanding they in Queen Maries days had burned some hundreds because they would not bow to Popery. And in the first year of her Reign, a Book of Injunctions to the Clergy was published, some of which are as followeth. That every Holy-day throughout the year, when the people had no Sermon, the Priest should recite the Pater-noster, the Creed, and ten Commandments, to the intent the people might learn the same by heart, &c. Item, That they should keep Holy-dayes. Item, That the Church-Wardens at the common charge of the pa∣rishioners, shall provide a comely and honest pulpit to be set in a con∣venient place, and to be there seemly kept.
Some of the Articles published in the yar 1610, by the Arch-Dacon of Rochester. Whether is your Minister a Preacher Licensed? if yea, then by whom. Whether doth he bid Holy-days, and Fasting-days. Item, Whether have you in your Church or Chappel, a seemly Pul∣pit, a decent Communion table, with meet Clothes to cover it; a Font of Stone set in the old usual place, a Communion-Cup of silver, with a Cover, a large Surplice with Sleeves, &c. Some of the Articles published in te year 1636. 1. Whether is your Church or Chappel sufficiently repaired, the Walls and Covering thereof, strong and close? Are the Bells unbro∣ken, and their Frames strong and safe, and fit for use? Are the Win∣dows well glazed, and Floors well paved, and seats decent, without dust, in such decent manner as becomes the House of God? 2. Have you a Font of stone in the ancient usual place, and a de∣cent Pulpit, with a decent Cushion, and a decent comely Surplice with wide sleeves, for your Ministers use? 3. Have you a decent Communion-table, and a Carpet of silk, or other decent stuff? for this Table also a fair Linen Cloth? And is the said Table covered therewith? &c. And after Queen Elizabeth, in King James his time, the Book of Common Prayer was confirmed by the King, and then the Bishops and Clergy in England, by the Kings Licence, set forth Canons and Consti∣tutions in the Church, some of which are as followeth. That there should be a Font of stone in every Church and Chappel, according to former Constitutions. Also, that in all Churches there should be decent tables, and cover∣ed in time of Divine Service, with a Carpet of silk, or other decent stuff, and in the time of administration, a fair linnen cloth on it; and that the ten Commandments should be set up on the East end of every Church and Chappel.
Also, that a comely and decent Pulpit should be provided in every. Church and Chappel. Also, they set forth a Form of Prayer that they should say beore Sermon. And that in Cathedrals and Collegiate Churches, he that administred the Communion on principal Feast-dayes, should wear a decent Cope. And when there was no Communion in Cathedral Churches, they should wear Surplices and Hoods. Also, that the Letany should be said or sung on Wednesdays and Fri∣dayes weekly; and that Sundays, and all holy-dayes should be observed. Also, that Ministers according to their degrees, should wear decent and comely apparel, to have them known to the people, thereby to re∣ceive honour, &c. Gowns with standing-Collars, and sleeves strait at hands; or wide sleeves, with Hoods or Tippets of Silk or Sarsenit, and square Caps; also, some Ministers were to wear the like apparel, but no tippets. Also, that they should wear in their Journeys, Cloaks with sleeves, commonly called Priests cloaks, with sleeves, welts, long buttons, or cuts. Also, that no Ecclesiastical person should wear any Coif, or wrought Night-Cap▪ but only plain Caps of black Silk, Satin or Velvet. Also, that in publick they go not in their Doublet and Hose without Coats or Cassocks; also, that they wear not any light-coloured stockins; likewise, that poor-beneficed Curates that could not provide themselves long Gowns, may go in short Gowns. And in the time of the Long-Parliament (which was ended in the year 1652.) they having denied the Common-Prayer, and a Directo∣ry for the publick Worship of God being set out in the year 1644, by a Synod of Priests sitting at Westminster; the generality of the Prie is, rather then they would leave their Benefices, conformed to that power likewise: and the truth being then broke forth in the people called Quakers, the Priests rage was so hot against them, that they joyned together, and petitioned the Parliament against the spreading of the tuth in the aforesaid people, and clled the truth heresie and blsphemy, In the year 1653, a Council of State was called by Oliver Crom∣well, unto whom the Priests cemonstrated their great willingness to conform to: and in the same year a Parliament was chosen, which was called the Little Paliment, unto whom the Priests in several Counties
presented several Petitions against the people called Quakers. In the same year was Oliver Cromwell made Protector, to whom the Priests were read also to join; the Priests of Cumberland etion∣ed, that some present course might be prescribed for the enforcing the payment of tythes, and other Des to Munisters, to which the people in these parts (said they) are extremly averse. And Oliver Cromwe upheld their interest, and made an Order how they might she the people called Quakers, for tythes, there being no Ecclesiastical Courts to efor them in, as it had been formerly ordained they should be sued for in no other Courts. In the year 1658, Richard Cromwell was made Protector, whom the priests flckt to as their Rock of Defence; that he, whom they called in their petition, their Joshua, might lead them into their promised Land, which indeed was but a Benefice of tythes or augmentations, and they told him that the Gospel was bound up in him; and so cleaved to him by flatteries, as they did in all ages. And on the twelfth of the eighth month, 1658, the Independents made a Form of Faith in the Savoy, and published it. In which Form of Faith they laid down, (in chap. 13.) that they that are united to Christ, effectually called and regenerated, having a new heart, and a new spirit created in them through the virtue of Christs death and resurrection, are also further sanctified, really and personally, through the same virtue, by his Word and Spirit dwelling in them, the dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the several lusts thereof are more and more weakned and mortified; and that this sanctification is throughout in the whole man. Yet in the conclusion of the same article, they say, That it is im∣perfect in this life, and that there abideth still some remnants of cor∣ruption in every part. Note, sure these peoples Faith is one with the Pa∣pists, who hold a Pugatry (that is, a place to purge from sins after this life) for the Scriptures say, As the Tree falls, so it lyes; and as death leaves us, so judgment shall find us. And in chap. 23, they laid it down as part of their Faith, That it was a sin to refuse an Oath, being lawfully imposed by authority. So are in the same path as the Papists and other apostates from the Truth, are in, for Christ said, Swear not at all, Mat. 5. And the Apostle James sad, Above all things my Brethren, swear not, &c. Jam. 5.
And then after Richard Cromwell; the Long-Parliament sate again, under whose time the Priests were in great fear they should have lost their Tythes and Maintenance, that they (some of them) got in Arms; but being routed, they petitioned the Parliament for pardon, and by their subtilty, got them to establish their Tythes, and then they were quiet. And when the King came in, and the Common-Prayer Book was again set up, how many of these Priests turned in the Nation, is well known in the Countrys; and some of them cryed, They would preach in a Surplice, or a Fools Coat, rather then the Gospel should not be preached. Here you may see the Turn-Coat Priests, which mind∣ed more their Benefice, then the Gospel. CHAP. XXVI. A Relation of some of the Cruelties inflicted on the Chri∣stians by the Heathen. AND these called Papists have acted their Cruelties upon Christi∣ans, like unto their Fathers the old persecuting Roman Hea∣thens, who acted many such Cruelties as follow; though they profess Christianity in words, yet the actions of the young Romans are like the old, who have in their actions denied Christ, who saith, Love  ∣ther. One was wrackt upon a Wheel, and beat with a Bulls-p. One hanged, and her skin fleyed off. One bound about a Globe, and her skin fleyed off her head and face. One had his tongue cut out. One broken in a Mortar. One bound to a Pillar, his head downward, and One fryed The Mother Some
Some bound to Axel-trees, and so burned. Some thrown to Lyons, Beasts and Tygers. One put into a Caldron of boyling Oyl. Some Christians crucified with their heads downwards. Some gored upon stakes, one end fastned in the ground, the other end coming out of their mouths. Some tossed upon the horns of wild Bulls. Some Women stript, and hung by the hair of the head, and scourged. Some Christians brains beaten out with Clubs. Some broiled upon Gridirons; some beheaded with the sword. Some burned at Stakes. Some thrown down from Rocks, and broken to pieces. Some prest to death with great weights of Lead. Some stoned to death; some hanged upon Gibbets. Some Christians hung up by the heels, and choaked with smoak. Some had sharp Reeds thrust under their nails, and other parts of their bodies. Some hung upon trees by the middle, until they dyed of hun∣ger. Some hung up by one hand, with Weights of Lead at their heals. Some roasted upon Spits by a soft fire. Some naked women hung up by one Legg upon Trees till they dyed. Some had all their flesh torn with claws of wild Beasts. Some were hewn in pieces with swords. Some were sawn asunder in the middle. Some hid their naked bodies annointed with Honey, and then hung up in Baskers, to be devoured of Wasps and Flyes: Some Ministers loaden with great burdens, and prickt forward with swords and spears. Some tyed by the feet, and haled thorough rough places till they were torn in pieces. Womens bellies ript open, and Barley put into them, and so devour∣ed by Swine. A Ship set on fire with fourscore Ministers in it.
Some Christians cut in pieces from the Fundament. Some had stinking Water, Vinegar and Grease, poured down their hroats. Some smothered in Caves on the Mountains; some racked until their bowels brake out. Some Womens bellies ript up, and their children trodden under∣foot. Two and two tyed together and slain. Some had their bowels pulled out, and put into a Bason. Fourscore slain, and their Quarters set on stakes thirty miles toge∣ther: Some murthered at the time and place of their Worship. Some had Boots of Oyl put on their legs over a small fire. This was invented by a Monk. Some had their heads miserably torn with Gunpowder put into their mouths and fired. Some thrown out at windows, upon spears. Some, their bellies burnt, till their bowels fell out. Some, their ears and cheeks cut off, and holes burnt in divers pts of their bodies. Some had their mouths slit up to their Ears. Some had their Eyes bored out. A Minister had Hens and Geese tyed about his body, and was torn with Dogs. Some were tormented in a Trough. A Minister tormented by a Cat on his belly. Somehad their Faces plained. Some had their Arms cut off. Some had Noses and Ears cut off, to make Hatbands, Some had their Eyes twisted out with Cords. Some had Corns drawn through their Arms and Legs. Some cast into Dungeons amongst Frogs and Toads. Some were let down with a Pulley into the fire by degrees. Some had their hearts pulled out, which the Papists   teeth. had their their throats cut with Butchers Knives, other   with Axes.
Some had their Breasts and Noses pluckt off with red hot Pinch∣er. A Smith had his brains beat out on an Anvil with a Hammer. Some had their right hands and feet crushed between red hot I∣rons. Some were hanged up by one foot, and their heads and breasts in the water. Some were torn in pieces by Horses. Some hung upon Tenterhooks. Some had their Infants cut out of their Wombs, and thrown to dogs and swine. Some were set in the ground up to the Chin, to be starved to death. Some were pistolled to death. Some thrown down from Bridges into Rivers. Some burned with straw tyed about them to cover their naked∣nesse. Some buryed alive. A woman and her daughter hanged in their hair. CHAP. XXVII. An Abstract of the Bloody Massacre in IRELAND, by the Instigation of the Jesuits, Priests and Fryars, &c. in the Year 1642. VVHen their Plots were ripe for Execution, we find, their first proceedings against the English various; some of the Irish only stripping and expelling them; others murdering men, women and children, without mercy; all resolving universally to root out all the Protestants out of Ireland; so deeply malicious were they against the English Protestants, that they would not so much as endure the found of their language. The Irish, when the Massacre began, perswaded many of their Pro∣testant Neighbours to bring their Goods to them, and they would secure them; and hereby they got abundance peaceably into their
whereof they cheated the Protestants, refusing to restore them again; yet so confident were the Protestants at first of them, that they gave them Inventories of all they had, and dgged up their best things that were hidden in the ground, and deposited them in their custody. They also got much into their hands by fair promises, deep Oaths and En∣gagments, That if they would deliver them their Goods, they would suffer them, with their Wives and Children, quietly to depart the Country; and when they had got all they could, they afterwards murdered them. Having thus seized upon their Goods and Cattel, ransackt their hou∣ses, got their persons, stript Man, Woman, and Child naked, and so turned them out of door, strictly prohibiting the Irish under great pe∣nalties, not to give them any relief; by means hereof many misera∣bly perisht through cold, nakedness and hunger. In the Town of Coloraine, many of these poor people that had fled thither for succour, many thousands dyed in two dayes, so that the li∣ving could not bury the dead, but laid their Carcasses in ranks in wast and wide holes, pyling them up as if they had been Herrings. One Magdalen Redmn deposeth, That she, and divers other Prote∣stants, amongst whom were two and twenty Widows, were first rob∣bed, and then stript naked, and when they had covered themselves with straw, the bloody Papists threw in burning straw amongst them, on pur∣pose to burn them; then they drove them out into the Woods in frost and snow, where many of them dyed with extream cold; and those  survived, lived miserably by reason of their many want. Yet though these bloody Villains exercised such inhumane cruelties towards the poor Protestants, they would commonly boast, That these were but the beginnings of their sorrows; for indeed they made it good; for having disarmed the English, robbed them of their Goods,  them of their clothes, and having their persons in their power, they furiously broke out into all manner of abominable Cruelties, horrid Mas∣sacres, and execrable Murders. For there were multitudes murdered in cold blood, some s they were  Plough, others in their Houses, others in the High  without my provocation, were suddenly  Castle of Lisgool; were about One hundred and fifty men en and children censumed with sire.
At the Castle of Moneah, were One hundred slain. At the Castle of Tullah, which was delivered to Mac Guie, upon composition, and faithful promises of fair quarter, as soon as he and his entred, they began to strip the people, and most cruelly put them to the sword, murdering them all without mercy. At Lissenskeath, they hanged and killed above one hundred of the Scottish Protestants. In the Counties of Armagh and Tyrone, where the Protestants were more numerous, their Murthers were more multiplied, and with great∣er cruelty. Mac Guire coming to the Castle of Lissenskeath, desired to speak with one Middleton, who admitted him in; he first burnt the Records of the County, then demanded One thousand pounds which was in his custody, of one called Sir William Balsores; which as soon as he had, he caused the said Middleton to hear Masse, and to swear that he would never alter from it; and then hanged him up with his Wife and Chil∣dren; hanging and murthering above One hundred persons besides in that place. At Portendown Bridg, there were One thousand Men, Women and Children, carried in several Companies, and all unmercifully drowned in the River. Yea, in that Country there were Four thousand persons drowned in several places. In one place, One hundred and forty English were taken and driven like Cattel for many miles together. Other Companies they carried out to a place fit for Execution, and then murthered them. One hundred and fifteen Men, Women and Children, they sent with Sir Philem. Oneales Passe, till they came to Portendown Bridg, and there drowned them. At another time, One hundred and forty Protestants, being thrown in at the same place, as any of them swam to the shore, the bloody Villains, with the But-ends of their Musquets knockt out their brains. At Armagh, O Came got together all the Protestants thereabout, pretending to conduct them to Clrains; but before they were a lay journey, they were all murthered, and so were many others, though they had Protections from Philem Oale. The aged people in Ar∣magh were carried to Charl, and there murthered.
Presently after, the Town of Armagh was burnt, and Five hundred persons murthered and drowned. In Killoman, were Forty eight Families murthered. In one house twenty two Protestants were burned. In Kilmore, all the Inhabitants were stript and Massacred, being Two hundred Families; the whole County was a common Butchery; ma∣ny thousands perished by Sword, Famine, Fire, Water, and all other cruel deaths that rage and malice could invent. At Casel, they put all the Protestants into a loathsome Dungeon, kept them twelve weeks in great misery. Some they barbarously mangled, and left them languishing; some they hanged up twice or thrice; o∣thers they buried alive. In Queens County, an English man, his Wife, five Children and a Maid, were all hanged together. At Clowns, seventeen men were buried alive; some were wounded, and hanged upon Tenter-hooks. In Castle-Cumber, two Boys wounded, and hung upon Butchers Tenters. Some hanged up, and taken down to confess money, and then murthered. Some had their Bellies ript up, and so left with their guts about their heels. In Kilkenny, an English Woman beaten into a Ditch, where she dy∣ed; her Child about six years old, they ript up her belly, and let out her Guts. One they forced to Mass, then they wounded him, ript his belly, took out his guts, and so left him alive. A Scottish man they stript, and hewed to pieces; ript up his Wifes belly, so that her Child dropt out. Many other Women with Child, they hung up, ript their bellies, and let their Infants fall out; some of the Children they gave to Dogs. In the County of Armagh, they robbed, stripped, and murthered a∣bundance of Protestants, whereof some they burned, some they slew with the sword, some they hanged, some they starved to death; and meeting two women with six of their Children, and themselves both with Child, they murthered them all, ript open the womens bellies, took out their Children, and threw them into a ditch. A young Scottish Womans Child, they took by the heels, and dash out its brains against a Tree. The like they did to many other Chil∣dren. Anne Hill going with a young Child on her back, and four more
by her side, they pulled the Child off her back, trod on it till it dyed, stripped her and he other four Children naked, whereby they dyed of cold. Some others they met with, hanged them up upon a Windmill, and before they were half dead, cut them in pieces with their Skeins. Many other Protestants, especially Women and Children, they prick∣ed and stabbed with Skeins, Forks and Swords, slashing, cutting, and man ling them in their Heads, Faces, Breasts, Arms, and other parts; yet killed them not, but left them wallowing in their blood, to lan∣guish, starve, and pine to death. The Castle of Lisgoole, being set on fire by these Papsts, a Woman lepr out at a Window to save her self from burning, whom they pre∣sently murthered; many sled to Vaults and Cellars, where they were all murthered. One Jean Addis they stabbed, and then put her Child of a quar∣ter old, to her breast, and bid it Suck English Bastard; and so left it to perish. One May Barlow, had her Husband hanged, her self with six Children, stript stark naked in frost and snow; after which, sheltring themselves in a Cave, they had nothing to eat for three weeks, but two old Calve-skins, which they beat with stones, and so eat them, hair and all. In the cold weather, many thousands of Prot stants of all ranks, a∣es, and sexes, being turned out naked, perished of cold and hunger. Thousands of others were drowned, cast into Ditches, Bogs, and Turf-pits: Multitudes miserably burnt in houses; some that lay sick of Feavers, they hanged up; some men, women and children, they drove into Boggy-pits, and knockt them on the heads. Some aged men and women, these barbarous Papists enforced their own children to drown them; yea, some children were compelled un∣paturally to execute their own, Parents; Wives forced to hang their own Husbands, and Mothers to cast their own children into the wa∣ters, after which themselves were murthered. In Sligo they forced a young man to kill his Father, and then hanged him up, In another place they forced a Woman to kill her Husband, then cau∣sed her son to kill her, and then hanged the son; yea, such was their ma∣lice against the English, that they taught their children to kill English children.
The Irish women that followed the Camp, cryed out, Kill them all; spare neither Man, Woman nor Child. They took the Child of Thomas Siratton, being about twelve years old, and boiled him in a Cauldron. One Good-wife Lin, and her Daughter, they carried into a Wood, first hanged the Mother, and then the Daughter in the hair of her Mothers head. In some places they plucked out the Eyes, and cut off the Hands of the Protestants, and turned them into the Fields, where they perished. The Women, in some places, stoned the English Women and Chil∣dren to death. One man they shot through his Thighs, digged a hole in the ground, set him in upon his feet, sill'd up the hole, left out only his head, where he languished to death. Another man they held his feet in the fire till he was burnt to death. In Munster they hanged up many that were called Ministers, in a most barbarous manner. One they stripped naked, and drove him tho∣rough the Town, pricking him with Darts and Rapiers, till he sel down dead. These barbarous Villains vowed, That if any Parents digged graves to bury their Children in, they should be buried therein themselves. They stripped one William Loverden naked, then killed him before his Wife and Children. Divers (of those called) Ministers bones that had been buried some years before, they digged up, because they were, as they say, Patrons of Heresie. Poor Children that went out into the fields to eat Weeds and Grass they killed without all pity. A poor Woman, whose Husband was taken by them, went to them with two Children at her feet, and one at her breast, hoping to beg her Husband, but they slew her, and her sucking-Child, brake the neck, of another, and the third hardly escaped; and all this wickedness they ex∣ercised upon the English, without any provocation given them. Alas, who can comprehend the fears, terrors, anguish, bitterness, and perplexity that seized upon the poor Protestants, sinding themselves so suddenly surprised without remedy, and wrapt up in all kind or onward miseries which could possibly by man be inflicted upon humane Crea∣tures? What sighs and groans, trembling and astonishment; what shrieks, cryes, and bitter lamentations of Wives, Children, Servants and Friends, howling and weeping, finding themselves without all hope of deliverance from their present miseries? How inexorable were
their barbarcus Tormentors, that compassed them in on every side, with∣out all bowels of compassion, or the least commiseration or pity; yea, they boasted upon their success, That the day was their own; and that ere long they would not leave one Protestant Rogue living; but would ut∣terly destroy every one that had but a drop of English blood in them. Their women crying out, Slay them all, the English are sit meat for Dogs, and their Children are Bastards. These merciless Papists having set a Castle on fire, wherein were many Protestants; they rejoycingly said, O how sweetly do they sry. At Kilkenny, when they had committed many cruel Murthers, they brought seven Protestants Heads, (one the Head of a Minister) all which they set upon a Market-Cross, on a Market-day, triumphing, slashing and mangling them; they put a Gag in the Ministers mouth, slit up his Cheeks to his Ears, and laid a leaf of a Bible upon it, and bid him Preach, for his mouth was wide enough. At Kilmore they put many Protestants, men, women, and children, into a Thatched House, and thee burnt them. They threw one Max∣wel into the River, when in Labour, the Child being half born when the Mother was drowned. In one place they burnt two Protestant Bibles, and then said, It was Hell fire they burnt. Other Bible they took, cut in pieces, and then burnt them, saying, They would do the like to all Puritan Bibles. They ook the Bible of a Minister, called Edward Slack, and opening it; they laid it in a puddle of Water, and then stamped upon it, saying, A Plague on it, this Bible hath bred all the Quarrel. At Glastow, a Priest, with some others, drew about forty English and Scottish Protestants to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and then told them, They were in a good Faith; and for fear they should fall from it, and turn Hereticks, he, with his Companions, presently cut all their throits. In the County of Tipperay, near the Silver Works, some of these Barbarous Papists met with eleven English men, ten women, some children, whom they first stript, and then with Stones, Pole-axes; Skeins, Swords, &c. they most barbarously massacred them all. In the County of Mayo, about sixty Protestants, whereof fifteen were Ministers, were upon Covenant, to be safely conveyed to Galway, by one Edmund Burk and his Soldiers; but by the way, this Burk and his Company began to massacre these Protestants, some they shot to
some they stabd with Skeins, some they thrust through with their Pikes, some they drowned, the women they stript naked, who lying upon their Husbands to save them, were run through with Pikes, so that very few of them escaped with life. In the Town of Sligo, forty Protestants were stript, and locked up in a Cellar, and about midnight, a Butcher provided for the purpose, was sent in amongst them, who with his Axe, butchered them all. In Tirawly, thirty or forty English, who had yeelded to go to Mass, were put to their choice, Whether they would dye by the Sword, or be drowned? They chose the latter; and so being driven to the Sea-side, these barbarous Villains with their naked Swords forced them into the Sea; the Mothers, with their Children in their Arms, wading to the Chin, were overcome by the Waves, where they all perished. The Son of one Mntgomery a Minister, aged about fifteen years, met with his School-Master, who drew his Skein at him, whereupon the Boy said, Good Master, whip me as much as you will, but do not kill me. Yet this merciless man, barbarously murthered him without all pity. In the Town of Sligo, all the Protestants were first robbed of their Estates, then cast into Gaol, and about midnight were all stript naked, and were there most cruelly and barbarously murthered with Sword, Axes, Skeins, &c. some of them being Women great with Child, their Infants thrust out their Arms and Legs at their Wounds; after which execrable murthers, they laid the dead naked Bodies of the men, upon the naked Bodies of the women, in a most immodest posture, where they left them till the next day, to be looked upon by the Irish, who beheld it with great delight. Also Isabel Beard, great with Child, hearing the lamentable crye of those that were murthering, ran out into the streets, where she was murthered, and the next day was sound with the Childs feet coming out of the wounds in her sides. Many others were murthered in the ou∣ses and streets. About Dungannon were three hundred and sixteen Protestants in the like barbarous manner murthered. About Charlemont above four hundred. About Tyrone two hundred and six. Mac Crew, murthered thirty one in one morning.
Two young men, murdered one hundred and forty poor women and children, that could make no resistance. An Irish woman with her own hands murthered forty five. At Porterdown-Bridg were drowned above three hundred. At Lawgh were drowned above two hundred. In another place were drowned three hundred in one day. In the Parish of Killamen, there were murthered one thousand and two hundred Protestants. Many young Children they out in quarters: Eighteen Scottish In∣fants they hanged upon a Clothiers Tenter-hooks: One fat man they murthered, and made Candles of his Grease. Another Scottish man they ript up his belly, took one end of his small Guts, tied it to a tree, and forced him round about it, till they had drawn them all out of his body, saying, That they would try whether a Dogs or Scottish mans Guts were the longer. By the command of one called Sir Philem O Neale, James Max∣wel was drawn out of his Bed, being sick of a Fever, and murthered, his Wife being in Child-birth, the Child being half born, they stript naked, drove her about a flight shot, and drowned her in the black wa∣ter. The like, or worse, they did to another English woman in the same Town. Oe Watson they roasted alive. A Scottish woman great with Child, they ript up her Belly, cut the Child out of her womb, and so left it crawling on her Body. One Starkey, a School-Master at Armagh, being above One hun∣dred years old, they stript him naked, then took his two Daughters, be∣ing Virgins, whom they also stript naked, and then forced them to lead their aged Father to a Turf-pit, where they drowned them all three. To one Henry Cowel, a gallant Gentleman, they proffered his life, if he would marry one of their women, or go Mass; but he chose death rather then to consent to either. Many of the Protestants they buried alive, solacing themselves whilst they were digging down old Ditches upon them. They brake the back-bone of a youth, and left him in the Fields; some dayes he was found, having eaten the Grass round about him; nei∣ther then would they kill him out-right, but removed him to better pa∣sture, wherein was fulfilled that saying, The tender nurcis of the wick∣ed are cruelty.
In the County of Antrim, they murthered Nine hundred fifty four Protestants in one morning; and afterwards about twelve hundred more in that County. Near Lisnegarry, they forced twenty four Protestants into a house, and burnt them all. Sir Philem O Neale boasted, That he had slain above six hundred at Carvagh, and that he had left neither man, woman, nor child alive in the Barony of Munterlong. In other places he murthered above two thousand Persons in their houses; so that many houses were filled with dead bodies. Above twelve thousand were slain in the High-wayes, as they fled towards Down. Many dyed of Famine, many dyed for want of Clothes, being stript naked in a cold season. Some thousands were drowned, so that in the Province of Ʋlster, there were about one hundred and fifty thousand murthered by sundry kinds of torments and deaths. The Popish English were no whit inferior, ye rather exceeded the natural Irish in their cruelty against the Protestan's that lived amongst them, within the Pale, being not satisfied with their blood, till they had seen the last drop thereof. Anne Kinnard testified, That fifteen Protestants being imprisoned, and their Feet in the Stocks, a Popish Boy, being not above fourteens years old, slew them all in one night with his Skein. An English woman, who was newly delivered of two children, some of these Villains violently compelled her, in her great pain and sick∣ness, to rise out of her bed; and took one of the Infants that was li∣ving, and dashed his brain against the stones, and then threw him into the River of Barrow. The like they did by many other Infants. Ma∣ny others they hanged up without all pity. The Lord Mont Garret, caused divers English Soldiers that he had taken about Kilkenny, to be hanged, hardly suffering them to pray be∣fore their death. One Fitz Patrick, an Irish Papist, enticed a rich Merchant that was a Protestant, to bring all his Goods to his house, promising safely to keep them, and to re-deliver them to him; but when he had gotten them into his possession, he took the Merchant and his wife, and hang∣ed them both. The like he did by divers others.
Some Englsh mens heads they cut off, and carried them to Kil∣kenny, and on the Market-day, set them on the Cross, where many e pecially the Women, stab'd, cut and slashed them. A poor Protestant Woman, with her two Children, going to Kilkenny, these bloody Papists baited them with Dogs; abbed them with Skeins, and pulled out the Guts of one of the Children, where∣by they died; and not far off they took divers Men, Women, and Children, and hanged them up; one of the Women being great with Child, they ripped up her Belly as she hanged, so that the Child fell out in the Cawl alive. Some after they were hanged, they drew up and down till their Bowels were torn out. How many thousands of Protestants wore thus inhumanely but∣chered by sundry kinds of deaths, we cannot ascertain. In the Province of Ʋlster, we find about a hundred and fifty thousand murthered, as before; what the number of the slain was in the three other Provinces, I find not upon Record, but certainly it was very great, for you have these passages in a general Remon∣strance of the distressed Protestants in the Province of Munster. And thus in part you have heard of the merciless cruelties which the bloody Papists exercised towards the Protestants: Let us now consider, at least, some of God's Judgments upon the Irish, whereby he hath not left the Innocent blood of his Servants to be altogether unrevenged. These bloody Papists themselves confessed, That the Ghosts of dvers of the Protestants, which they had drowned at Portendown-Bridg, were daily seen to walk upon the River, sometimes singing of Psalms, sometimes brandishing naked Swords, sometimes shreeking in a most hdecus and fearful manner. So that many of the Popish Irish which dwelt near thereabouts being affrighted therewith, were forced to remove their Habitations further off into the Country. Divers Protestants were thrown into the River of Belterbert, and when any of them offered to swim to the Land, they were knocked on the head with Poles, after which their Bodies were not seen of six weeks; but after the end thereof, the murtherers coming again that way, the Bodies came floating up to the very Bridge where they were. Sir Con Mac Gennis so caled, with his Company, slew one Turge.
Minister of the Newry, with divers other Protestants, after which the said Mac Genis was so affrighted with the Apprehension of the said Turge's, his being continually in his presence, that he com∣manded his Soldiers not to slay any more of them, but such a should be slain in Battel. A young Woman being stript almost naked, there came a Rogue to her, bidding her, Give him her mony, or he would run her though with his Sword. Her answer was, You cannot kill me, except God give you leave; Whereupon he ran three times at her naked body with his drawn Sword, and yet never pierced her skin; whereat he be∣ing confounded, went his way and left her. This was attested by divers Women that were present and saw it. As for the Protestant Ministers whom they surprized, their man∣ner was first to strip them, and after bind them to a Tree or post, where they pleased, and then to ravish their Wives and Daughters before their faces (in sight of all their merciless rabble) with the basest Villains they could pick out, after they hanged up their husbands and parents before their faces, and then cut them down be∣fore they were half dead, then quarter'd them, after dismember'd them, and stopped their mouths therewith. They basely abused one Mr. Trafford a Minister in the North of Ireland, who being assaulted by these bloody Wolves of Romes, brood, that know not God, nor any bowels of mercy. This di∣stressed Minister desired but so much time as to call upon God be∣fore he went out of the World: but these merciless wretches would admit no time, but instantly fell upon him, hackt and hewed him to pieces. Sir Patrick Dunstan, so called, his Wife ravished before him, slew his Servants, spurned his Children till they dyed, bound him with Match to a board that his eyes burst out, cut off his ears and nose, teared off both his cheeks, after cut off his arms and legs, cut, out his tongue, and after run a red hot Iron into him. These particulars, with many more, were attested before the Commissioners appointed for that purpose.
CHAP. XXVII. In the History of the Churches of Piedmont, collectd and compiled by Samuel Morland, in the year 1658. WHerein you may see the cruel Massacre and Murthering of several Christians (both men and women) by the bloody Antichristian Papists, who cut off the heads of men, and boiled them, and eat their brains until they vomited again; as in page 336, in the year 16; 5. And also in page 339, you may read the bloodiness and cruelty of the persecuting Papists, who ript up a womans belly from the bottom to the navel with a Sickle, because she would not say the Papists Prayers: and this woman had bid her self in the snow for two days, having no nourishment; and when they had ript up her belly, they barbarously cut off her head. And yet they say in the Book called Fiat Lux, (being a Relation between-Papists and Pro∣testants) that they do no hurt to no one; but their actions do de∣clare both in this, and in the days of Queen Mary, and at other times, what they have done. And in page 640, The Papists cut off a womans breast, and part of her rivities, and carryed the same to Maes in Piedmont, and fried them; and eat them; and other people thought they had been Tripes: Yet these Papists say, they do no harm: But soon after they had eaten, some of them fell sick, and some died; and afterwards they put this woman to a cruel death, having ravished her before they cut off her tetts. And in page 341. These bloody Papists cut off a mans privy∣members, and afterwards put a lighted-candle to the wound, which man had received of them divers stabs in the soles of his feet and ears; then they hanged him up by the hands, tearing off his nails with hot pinchers. Yet for all this, they could not cause him to for∣sake his Religion; and then they tyed him by one of his legs, and drew him wih cords, draging him about the streets, until his eyes and brains dropt out, and then cast him into a River. And also in page 342, they tyed a man with his neck and heels toge∣ther, being about eighty years old, and cast him down a hill, and there
he hung in a Tree several dayes, in a lameatable state to the be∣holders. And in the same page, An old man about Ninety years old, and a woman, they hackt their bodies, and chopt them to small pieces, and strewed them along the High-wayes, and hanged it upon hedges when they had cut it so small. Page 343, They took two poor old women, and ript up their bellies, and left them upon the Snow. And also four women the Papists cut off their Noses, their Fin∣gers and their Hands, and many Infants they threw down steep pla∣ces. And one women they tyed her head between her legs. And ano∣ther woman, her flesh was taken from her bones, and chopt as small as Herbs to the pot. And another old blind woman they cut in pieces in a certain Cave; as you may see in page 344. And in page 345, they set a woman upon a stake, putting her upon a pole through her privities, and carried her upon their shoulders. And these are the Papists which carry their Hoast upon their shoulders. And then they stuck the stick down, and let her hang in the air. And page 646, Another woman had three children torn in pieces, tearing them by the legs one from another. And one of six weeks old, they took from the Mother, dashing the brains out against the Rocks. And also, they took a man out of his bed, plucking the skin off his Arms and Legs, and then starved him to death in prison. And a man they dragged by one Leg, with a Mule, through the streets, and stoned him, after they had cut off his privy members; and afterwards they stopt his mouth, and crambed things down his throat, and cut off his head; and called themselves Catholicks a∣gainst the Protestants. And page 348, There was a beautiful young Maid about ten years old, whom these wicked Papists held, and did such horrid things to her, even out of the bounds of humanity to speak; so that after, she was found half dead, wallowing in her blood. And p. 349, A Woman carrying her Child in a Cradle, being pur∣sued by the Papists, she left her Child, whom they took and  into four quarters, and afterwards finding the Mother; they  and cut off her head, leaving her in the Snow.
And in page 350, A young woman, about eighteen years old, was taken (as she was flying) upon the Snow, and they thrust a Pike through her alive, and roasted her, and brought a piece to make a meal of; but she not being roasted enough, stopt their sto∣macks. And thus the Papists are Beasts. And the Papists took a Protestant; and tyed his hands to his pri∣vy-members, hanging him upon a Gate by his hands, to make him renounce his Religion. And also they tyed two more in the same manner; only they, after they had tyed their hands to their privy∣parts, they tyed their hands behind them, until their very bowels were torn out, and so they dyed: Besides other cruel barbarous usage to prisoners. And in page 352, a man about fourscore years old, they cut off his Nose, his Ears, and other parts of his body, and left him in the Snow, who dyed there. And page 353, the cruel Papists put Gunpowder into many men and womens mouths, and cramb'd it down their throats, and set it on sire, and tore their heads to pieces. Fol. 354, They stript one naked, and tore off his Nose with Pin∣chers, and made holes in his hands, and dragged him with a Cord by the middle, and they cut off his flesh as they dragged him, and struck him, saying, Wilt not thou go to Mass? and then they cut off his head, and threw him into a River. And page 355, these bloody Papists pluckt out another mans eyes, and cut off his privy-members, putting them into his mouth; and then they cut off his skin, and hung it up in four Windows of their principal houses. And page 356, they took a man, and cut off his head, and fryed his brains, and eat them up, and took out his heart, frying it, and took it and eat it also. And page 357, several aged people they burnt alive. Page 358, they dragged a woman and her daughter with Horses through the streets, stabbing them with Pitch-forks, and threw them into a River, throwing Batts at them. And page 359, Others as they were passing from the bloody per∣recating Papists, they shot one in the neck, and after, they slit his Chin and Nose, throwing of him to the Dogs. And page 360, and 361, Eleven men they forced to throw one
another into the Flery Furnace, and forced them to carry one ano∣ther on their backs, and the Papists themselves carried the last man. And these bloody Papists hunted the Protestants up and down the Rocks upon their bare feet, when were cut with Ice and Flinty-Rocks, until they bled grievously. And yt these bloody Papists, like one that Solomon speak  their mouths, and say they have done no hurt: but they that desire to rea more of their Cruelty and Wickedness, let them look in the said Book. And as for the Papists Pow∣der-Plot in King James's time, and their Massacring of many thou∣sands in Ireland, it is not out of memory yet. At Guttenburg in Bohemia, where were deep Metal-Mynes, the Papists threw into one of them 1700 persons, and into another 1038, in the year 1420. The Papists killed of the Waldenses about a thousand men, wo∣men and children in one place, and robbed and spoised the poor Christians; and when that the Christians would not receive their Hoast, they gagged them, and thrust it down their mouths. The King of Nordan Humbers, slew twelve hundred Christians, because they prayed to Christ for assistance. CHAP. XXVIII. A List of some of the Accusutions for which the afore∣said People suffered in the Valleys of Piedmont, by the Papists. FOr that they believed the Church of God was without spot or wrinkle. Also they believed that it was not lawful for the Prelates of the Roman Church, to have temporal Jurisdiction in the world, and that none hath a greater degree of Power and Authority in the Church, then he hath of Holiness. Also, that they believed that the Sacraments administred by the Priests of the Romish Church, are of no Efficacy. Also they believed that tythes ought not to be paid to the said Priests.
Also, they believed that the Romish Church is a House of Con∣fusion, and the Synagogue of Satan. Also, they believed that it was not lawful to swear any thing, be it true or false. Also, they believed that it was as prositable to pray to God in a Stable, as in a place called a Church. Also, they believed that rain-water ad as greant virtue as holy water in the Church. Also, for that they believed that no man ought to observe the Festival-days of Saints; but that it was lawful to do work upon them. Also, for that they believed that it was lawful to eat flesh every where, and at all times; and that Lent was not to be kept. See page 217, and 218. And for these causes, and some other Decrees, which are con∣trary to Scriptures, did the Papists murther them in the year 1655. Here followeth a List of some of the Article for which the Martyrs suffered in Queen Maryes Reign, in the year 1556, and by other Papists. 1. First, For confessing that an evil man doth rot receive Christs body. 2. That it is Idolatry to creep to the Cross; John for bids it, and saith, Beware of Images. For confessing that they should not pray to Mary and other Saints; For these things, and denying the Papist Principles, were five men and women burnt, in the year 1558. The Article against Margaet Marringe Martyr, was, That she had refused to come to Church; that she had not come to the Parish-Church for the space of one year; neither did she mean to come any more unto the same in those Idolatrous dayes.
Articles exhibited against R Lusse, Martyr. 1. For refusing to call the Lords Supper by the Name of the Sa∣crament of the Altar. 2. For denying Purgatory, Prayers and Alms, and saying, they did not profit the dead bodies. 3. For holding that Images are no to be suffered in the Church, and that all that kneel to Images, are Idolaters. 4. That they which are burn'd of late for denying these things, are Gods Servants and Martyrs. 5. For denying the Church of Bome to be Universal. Articles against other Martyrs. Henry Crimses for marrying his Wife on Palm-Sunday in Lent, was punished, as some are now. Also, that they would not follow the Cross, or confess to a Priest. Also, that they did not believe the Pope to be the Supream Head of the Church. Also, that they did not believe that Bread, Water, Ashes and Palms, were Holy Ceremonies in the Papists Church. Also, the Martyrs confessed that the Popish Mass was Blasphe∣my. Some of the Papists Canons or Decrees which the Martyrs suffered for, and which those called Church-Wandens and Priests, wee by the Command of the Bishops to make Enquiry into, in their several Parishes. 1. Whether they see the Font be comely kept, and have Holy∣water always ready for Children to be Chrisned. 2. Whether the Priests do go decently in their Apparel, and have their Crowns and Beards shaven. 3. Whether they do keep the Names of their God fathers and God mothers.
4. Whether they refrain to come to Church to hear Divine Service on Sundays and Holy-days. 5. Whether the Church be adorned and garnished with Orna∣ments; and whether they have a Rood in it, with Mary and John, and an Image of the pattern of the same Church. 6. Whether they do not keep Fasting in Ember-dayes. 7. Whether the Sacrament be carried with a Candle to the sick, with a little Bell. 8. Whether any Candle and Lamp do burn before the Sacra∣ment. 9. Whether Infants and Children are brought to be Bi∣shopt. 10. Whether any do labour on Holy-dayes. 11. Whether any do contemn the authority of the Pope and See of Rome. All these are coutrary to Scriptures. Articles objected against Doctor Ferrer, Bishop of St. Davids. 1. That he ploughed a Pasture of ten dayes Work, in Lent, 1549. 2. That he had thirty two Ploughs in one day, and the priest bid it in the Church. Here followeth some of the Church-Wardens Accounts of Waltham-Abbey in Queen Maryes time. Taken out of Fox's Acts and Mo∣numents, p. 1474. Imprimis, For a stock of Brass for the Holy Water, 7. s. Item, For a Cloth for the Sacrament, 7 s.—8 d. Item, For May and John that stands in the Rood-Loft, 1 l. 8. d. Item, For the priests white Garment down to his feet, and Gir∣dle about his middle These are more like unto Players, then Mini∣sters of the Cospel. Item, For watching the Graves and Sepulchres, 8 d. Item, For a Vessel to put the Consecrated Oyl in, used in their Baptism, Confirmation, and Extream Unction, 3 s.—4 d. There was never such things found among the Apostles.
CHAP. XXIX. The Doctrines of Christ and Antichrist distinguished. Christ fought against Satan with Gods Word. Antichrist fights against his Enemies with the Temporal Sword. Christ chuseth the poor, and meek, and simple. Antichrist chuses none but the subtile and crafty. Christ compels no man against his will to believe his Gospel. Antichrist with his Suspentions, Excommunications, Apprehen∣sions, Persecutions, Fire, Faggot, Sword, Halter, enforces men to receive his Devillish Decrees, and trifling Traditions. Christ sayes he is the Head of the Church, and sayes, Give Cae∣sar his due. Antichrist sayes he is the Head of the Church, over all Kings, Princes and Emperors, and they must all obey him. Christ by his holy Apostles calls Marriage honourable, and the Bed undefiled, yea among all men, none excepted. Antichrist calls the Marriage of his Bishops, Priests, and himself, filthy, fleshly, and unclean living; yet Pope Innocent the third had three Bastards, Anno 1493. Christ teacheth that we should not swear at all, but that we should use in all our communications, yea, yea, and nay, nay; and saith, whatsoever is more, comes of evil. Antichrist teacheth, that if any man will receive any Office un∣der us; he shall be sworn that he will be true and faithful to us. If any man will have any thing to do in his Courts, he must first of all swear by God, and by the holy Gospel, that this or that is true; and again, that he shall truly and fathfully answer to all such things as are required of him. Cap. signif Crasti de Elect. See Be∣cons works, fol. 403. Christ saith, That no man can come unto him (that is to say, to believe in him) except his holy Father by his holy Spirit draw him.
Antichrist saith, If any will not believe, Fire, Faggot, Sword and Prison, shall make them believe. Christ saith, Blessed are the peace-makers. Antichrist saith, Blessed are they that fight, and go together by the eare, to defend the Pope, and hold up the Pope. and breaks Oaths to destroy Subjects and Princes, to hold the Pope up; for they shall be called the Children of the Mother-Church of Rome. Christ saith, My Kingdom is not of this world. Antichrist will have a Triple Crown on his head, and treads up∣on the necks of Emperors, and lets Kings run like Lacquies by his Hose side. The Brethren of the Lord had Wives, and so had the Apostles and Peter, and did not put away their VVives; and Peter's VVife continued with him to his dying-day, and went with him to his ex∣ecution; and he exhorted her, and said, Oh my Wife, remember the Lord. But the Pope, who sayes he is Peter's Successor, he denies Marri∣age, and calls it a filly thing, and fleshly thing for the Clergy to marry, and makes Laws against Marriage, which is the Doctrine of Devils. Christ and his Ministers took the Supper in their common daily apparel. Antichrist has made a Law, that they must have Garments like Players, a Tippet, a white Cat, and a black Coat, and decked with gorgeous Turniture, and great Pomp, wonderfully setting out his Merchandize, to sell his Mass-mongers his stuff. The Chuch of Christ honourech God in spirit and truch The Synagogue of Satan honoureth their God with the Surplice, Copes, Vestment, Bells, Organs, Sencers, Candles, Candlesticks, Fire, Palms, Ashes, Bread, VVater, Oyl, Cream, Building of Mo∣nasteries, and Chantries, See Becons Preface. Christ rathed upon his Disciples, and gave them the Holy Ghost. Antichrist breatheth the Sprit of Satan into his Priests, that they should be known to be his Priests by their long Gowns, Horned Caps, and flaring Tippets; and he breaths into his Font, and up∣on his VVine when it is ozen.
Christ sent forth his Disciples to preach the Gospel to all Na∣tions. Antichrist sends forth his Disciples to be Mass-Mongers, Soul-carryers, Purgatory-rakers, God and Christ-makers of Bread and Wine, and Conjurers of Water, Bread and Fire; and to gather the Tenth of all Estates to himself. Christ in all his adversities fled to prayer. Antichrist in his troubles flyes to his Armour. Christ fought against Satan with Gods Word. Ant christ sights against his Adversaries with a temporal Sword. Christ by no means could abide that his Disciples should strive for Supremacy. Antichrist challengeth Supremacy, not onely over the Clergy, but also over Kings and Emperors, yea, over the whole world. Christ appointeth no certain days or times of fasting, and that they should not eat flesh on; but leaveth people to their freedom in such things. Antichrist prescribeth certain dayes to be fasted on, and not to eat flesh on, as the time of Advent, Lent, Ember-dayes, Saints Eve∣nings, &c. Christ in his Doctrine taught, That whosoever believed in him, should have everlasting life; as it is written, He that believeth on the Son of God, hath everlasting life; but he that believeth not, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth in him: And he said, I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and Whosoever liveth and believeth in me, he shall neve dye. And Paul said, I am now eady to be offered, nd the time of my depating is at hand. I have sought a good fight, I have fulfil∣led my course, I have kept the faith; from hencefth there is laid up for me a Cown of Righteousness; and I know, and I am sue, said he, That be in whom I have trusted, is able to keep me till that day Antichrist saith. No man in this wold can be wholly free from sin, nor certain and sure of his salvation and therefore he ought to doubt and stand in fear whether he shall be saved or not.
CHAP. XXX. A Discourse betwixt a Quaker and a Papist. QƲake. Why did you forsake your Religion in Queen Eliza∣beths time, seeing you had burned to ashes, and persecuted to death the Martyrs for not joining to your Religion in Queen Maries time; and in Queen Elizabeths time the most of your Priests and People turned to Queen Elizabeth. Papist. Why, our Masse-Book was but turned into English, which was in Latin before; and now we hear it in English, only there is Purgatory, and praying to Saints and Angels, and some few odd things lest out, and Sacrament and Altar. But Tythes, and Organs, and most of our old Ceremonies is held up still, which we first decreed; and our Priests in the days of Queen Mary, might not marry; and if there was one hundred or two hundred a year belonging to him, he was to have but forty pound a year of it, and the rest went to maintain the poor; and the Popes Revenue was the Peters-pence, that is Smoak-penny; and when the Priests turned to Queen Elizabeth, then they might mar∣ry, and had all the Tythes, and Smoak-penny too, and the poor were from that time turned to a Sessions business. Quaker. What, had the Pope a penny for every Chimney in England that smoakt? Papist. Yes. Quake. Then there was never a Freeholder; but all were the Popes Tenants. Sure this time the smoak and darkness went overall. Papist. Your Scripture is a false Scripture, which you have min∣ced and clipt; for in our Scripture it's said, all the Fathers and the Patriarchs went down into Purgatory, and there they lay all in Pur∣gatory till Christ came; and he went into Purgatory, and was three days and three nights in Purgatory; and when Christ went into Purgatory, the Devn said, What dost thou come hither for, to break open our strong holds? and when Christ came out of Purga∣tory, he brought all the Fathers and the Patriarchs out of Purga∣tory with him.
Quaker. This is neither in your Scripture nor our Scripture; for I think I have read your Scripture more then thou hast done; I know your Scripture, there is no such thing in it, as that the Patri∣archs went into Purgatory, nor the Fathers, nor Christ; so it is a whimsey and a phantasie of your own brain; and as for Christs being crucisied, and lying three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, the Scripture doth not call it a Purgatory; and when Christ was crucified, there was two thieves crucisied, and one of the thieves reviled Christ, when he saw the chief Priests and the Phari∣sees revile him; and the other thief reproved him, saying, Why dost thee do so, seeing thou art in the like condition? for this man (mean∣ing Christ) has done nothing worthy of death, but we suffer for our deserts: and therefore he desired Christ to remember him when he came into his Kingdom: Saith Christ, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradice; mark, the same day that he suffered: and what, Papists, is Paradice become a Purgatory with you? and so how could he be three days and three nights in Purgatory, when he said that day he should be in Paradice? Quaker. What Religion art thou? Papist. A Catholick. Quaker. Catholick signisies Universal. Papist. Yes, it doth. Quaker. I deny you Papists to be Catholick in the Universal power of God; and I deny you Papists to be in the Catholick. Faith, which works by love, to love one another, and Enemies, which is the Faith of the Son of God, and the Apostles. And I deny you Papists to be in a Catholick Wisdom, that is pure from above, but in an earthly, sensual, devillish, bel; d I deny you to be in the Catholick Fellowship, and unity in the it of God, the fruits of which is Love; and I deny you  be in the Catholick Church, which is the pillar a ground of truth, but of the Whore and Beast that drunk the blood of the Marty and Saints. I deny all your Popes, Minister, Bishops, o be made by the Catholick Universal power, as the Prophets and Apostles  made; and I know you to be our of the Catholick Univer pir, and power, and life of Christ, the Prophets and the Apostles. Papist What Religion are you Quakers of
Quaker. We are of the Religion the Apostles were of, which was before you Papists was. Papist. I deny that; for you don't own a Visible Head to be your Church. Quaker. Prove a Visible Head, Papist. Christ says to Peter, Ʋpon this Rock will I build my Church, (and this was Peter a Visible Head) and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Quaker. VVhat, will Christ build his Church upon Peter, av si∣bleman, of flesh and blood? Papist. Yes, how could it be a Visible Head else? and there has been a Visible Head ever since Peter, which to him was given the Keys, and he was Head of all the Apostles; and so the Popes sate in Peters chair ever since, and are infallible, and cannot err; and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against this Church. Quaker. Christ says to his Disciples, Who do men say that I am? His Disciples said, Some say thou art Elias, one of the Prophets; and some say thou art John Baptist risen from the dead Christ said, But whom do you say tha I am? Peter said, Thou art the Christ the Son of tho living God. Christ said to him, Thou t Peter, flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto the, but my Father which is in Heaven, signifying that flesh and blood may reveal, but flesh and blood had not revealed that unto Peter, but his Father, which was in Heaven. So the Church was not built upon Peter as a visible man, nor flesh and blood, but upon that which is revealed; and what was the Re∣velation to Peter, but Christ the Son of the living God, who destroys the Devil and his works? and upon this his Church is built, who is the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. The next Pope after Paul, the Papits say was Clement; that is false, for Paul commends Lynus. The next thing is, thou sayest the Popes are infallible, and cannot err, and neve erred since Peter. Three hundred years after Christ, the Bishop of Rome denied Christ, and sacrificed to Heathenish gods: whether was this an error, yea, or no? and then  made a noise in French and Latin, and did conclude that the Bishop of Rome did err. And it was six hundred years after Christ, before Boniface the third got up to be first Universal Bishop, who was set up by Pho
the Murtherer; for all the Churches before had been ruled by Council. Papist. Those Councils was gathered by Popes. Quaker. The Councils was gathered some by the Christian Em∣perors; were them Emperors, Popes? Dost thee believe the Chro∣nicle six hundred years after Christ? Papist. I do; then there was no Universal Bishop, until six hun∣dred years after Christ. Quaker. And one Council was gathered by the Emperess: and was she a Pope? Nay, this was before the Universal Pope was; and Christ said to the Apostles, that the Gentiles exercise Lordship one over another, but it should not be so amongst them, for they are all Brethren; and the Gentiles were called gracious Lords; which ti∣tlethe Bishop of Rome, and other Bishops, had from the Heathen, and not from the Apostles, for they was not be called of men Master. And so Peter was not set over the rest of the Apostles as Head over them; and what was said to Peter concerning having the Keys, and binding, and loosing, was said to the rest of the Apostles, as you may read in Scriptures. And as concerning the Church, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church of the Papists; when Phocas got up to be Emperor, did not the Emperor lose most part of his Empire, and the Pope most part of Turky, and Egypt, and Jerusalem, and the Land of Canaan? Has he not lost England, Ireland and Scot∣land, and part of Germany, Holland, Denmak and Swerden  and yet the old man, the Pope, tells people, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church! Let him look about him, and see what he has lest, and what he would have had left, if he had not set up his Inquisitions to torture Christians, in the time of the Coun∣cil of Trent; and when that the Princes of Germany in the time of Luther, when they defired that for every tristing businesse they might not be summoned down to Rome, was it not the Popes an∣swer, If it should not be so, their Courts would be made or no authority, but would go down. And did not the German Princes desire that the Concubinary priests might marry? For though by the Law they had Concubines, yet they desiled other mens wives, & did not the ope say, If I should
suffer the priests to marry, then they would not go where I would have them, but would sit down with their wives. And when the German Princes and others, desired a free General Council, such a Council as was in the time of Constantine; (mark, that was before the Pope was, three hundred years: See Council of Trent, p. 2.) did not the Pope chuse a Council of his own Legates and people, contrary to the mind of the Germans and others? and then did not many of them fall from the Pope, and many in France, who got the victory over he Pope? and yet he says the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church. Consider people, see what he has lest. And after the Pope got up, and had lost most of Christendom, and the Emperor had lost most of his Empire; for the Emperor's seat was at Constantinople before the Turk got up, which was after the Pope; and then after a time the Emperors came to be thrust up into Germany, and called the Emperors of Germany. So here see whether the Pope is not he that loveth and maketh a lye, Rev. 22. Papist. You speak as if you could tell our principles; if you know them, what is our principles? Quaker. I'le tell thee, I'le begin with one. There was a woman in Kent, one of your Religion, and by her Wisdom and Books she had brought many into your way; and upon a time, it pleased the Lord to convince this woman to see your way was false, and Christ was to be her Way, her Teacher and Salvation: and so she went and declared this among the Papists. And upon a time, a Taylor that she had brought to be a Papist, came to work at her house, and she declared to him how Christ was her Way, her Teacher, and Salvation; and he got betwixt her and the door, and drew his knife at her; it was askt her, why did he draw his Knife? she said, he would have stabb'd me; why would he have stabb'd thee? why, it is their principle. What, is it their principle to stab people? Yes, said she, if they turn away from their Religion: and the woman said, Put up thy Knife, I know thy principles. Papist. VVhat, do you declare this abroad? Quaker. It is declared abroad, and the women since dyed in the belief of the truth of God, and forsook your way: and so the Papist went away, and never denyed but that it was his principle.
Papist. The Papists say the Quakers are Antichrist and false Prophets. Quaker. VVhy are they Antichrist and false Prophets? Papist. Because they say they do prophesie and say, Christ is in you, &c. Quaker. Then thou may say, the Apostles were false Prophets, which shews thy ignorance; for they said, Christ is in you except you be Rep obates; and we preach Christ in you; and I will pour out of my Spirit on all flesh, and my sons and my daughters shall prophesie. Read Cor. Col. and Acts.
POSTSCRIPT. AND you Papists, that say there hath been a Head of the church, and therefore the Pope must be Head of the Church; for Aaron was Head, and Moses was Head: To which I say, Moses was a married man, and Aaron was a married man; and Eleazer and Ithamer; and Aaron was a Priest, and Eleazer; and Eli the Priest was a married man, and Samuel was a Priest, and was a married man, and had Sons, 1 Sam. 8. And by the Law of God the Priests were to marry, as you may read in the Books of Moses. But your Pope, whom ye say is Head of the Church, makes a Law contrary to Law and Gospel, That Priests must not marry, and Popes must not marry; but the Popes have bastards and by the Law the priests may have Concubines; and this is contrary to the Law, to have Bastards; and contrary to the Gospel to have Concubines; for every man must have his own Wife. And you Popes and Papists, who say that you brought over the Bible first in England, and you preserved the Bible; think you not that all people sees you in this? For you have been them that have kept the Bible from people in an unknown Tongue; and though all profess to be believers in Christ, yet they must not have the Scriptures in their own Language; in this you are contrary to the Apostles, shewing you are dege∣nerate from them who judged them that spoke in an unknown Tongue: And Christianity was planted many hundred years in England, by Joseph of Aramathea, before Austin the Monk brought over his trifling Traditions and Ceremonies.
And whereas you Papists call some Lay-people, and some Spiritual, which was not the way of the Apostles to do so; and such that be under some Oaths, Vows or Orders, or has the natural Languages which began at Babel, these you call spi∣ritual, which be in swearing, vowing, and natural Langua∣ges. And others that be not in these things. you call Lay-peo∣ple. Judge people of the Papists distinctions, which is contra∣ry to the Apostles; and do not you think that Pilare that set Hebrew, Greek and Latin a top of Christ when he cruci∣fied him, would not have made the Pope a fine spiritual man? For does not the Pope crucisie Christ afresh? Has he not put him to open shame, and persecuted Christ in his Members, and set his spiritual mens Tongues over him, to watch his Sepul∣chre from Christ arising, with all his Guards and Inquifiti∣ons: And is it not said in the Revelation, The Beast has power over the Tongues, and the Wohre she sits upon the Tongues, which are waters: So here all may see your spiri∣tual men are waters. and the Where and the Beast has pow∣er over your spiritual Function: And doth not the Apostle say Tongues must cease? Then your spiritual men must cease, and the Lay-people will remain; And none but such as they of your spiritual Function, as you call it, must meddle with Divine things; and all the rest that be not of your Orders, you call Lay-people, and such must not meddlewith those things which you call Divine, which indeed are nothing but your own Inventions and Traditions, and pelting Ceremonies, which you have not from the Apostles, as your Canons mani∣festeth; but in this your ignorance is seen of the mind of God, Christ and the Scriptures. So Jacob, Moses and Da∣vid were keepers of sheep, and Amos a Herdsman, and Eli∣sha a Plough-man, and Peter, John and Andrew. fishermen, and Luke a Physician, Matthew a Tole-gatherer, Paul 4 Tent-makor. Was not all these lookt on as Lay-people by the
Priests of their Ages? And would not they all be lookt o n as Lay-people by you, had they been in your age, because they were not bred up in your Schools which you have set up, and there made your spiritual men, since the Apostles days, who are made of man, and by man, and not of God or Christ, nor by him, nor of him: yea, would not you have burnt these Trades∣men to ashes, if they had been in your days? Was not the Ʋniversities first set up by the Roman Empe∣ror, when he conquered this Nation of England, to learn Philosophy, where he brought the people to learn the Laws and manner of the Roman-Heathen? And then after he did turn to make them Priests, and serve seven years time like a Prentice Lad, and so become a Company like other Company of Trades-men. Did not the Papists make his Je∣suits and Priests there? And doth not the Protestants still make their Priests there? Is it not the Philosophy that was set up there by the Roman Emperor, the Heathen? Whether or no did not the Heathen-Romans there teach the Gramar, the Logick, and most of the seven Arts, except it be the patcht∣up Divinity? The Cross of Christ it is the Power of God: This was the Cross in the Primitive Times, and was for about Three hun∣dred years after Christ. And then after came up the Wooden Stone, and Iron Cross; and then the true Church went into the Wilderness, which was persecuted by the Dragon, and the woman was fed of God a Time, and Times, and half a Times a Time a Year; Two Times, Two Tears; Half a Time, Half a Year, One thousand two hundred and threescore days. Then the Prophets prophesied in sackeloth and ashes, which is a mournful state, One thousand two hundred and sixty Dayes; the Dragon having given his power to the Beast, and he per∣secuted the Saints, and power was given to him over all
Kindreds, Tongues and People; and all that dwelt up∣on the Earth should worship him; and the Whore and false Church got on the Beast, which had got two Horns like a Lamb, and he should continue forty two Months, which is One thousand two hundred and sixty days. Then came up the Wood, and the Stone Church, when the true Church was sted into the Wilderness, which wore the fine lin∣nen, going in white, which is the righteousness of Christ, and the righteousness of the Saints: Then the false Church set up the Surplices, as you may read what Pope he was. And also you may see how the Popes and Papists, who say they are infallible, and cannot err, how they contradicted one ano∣ther, and killed one another; and many things might be mentioned, which is out of the bounds of Civility and Mo∣desty to mention, which might be instanced out of Records of them. But here you may read how all these things came up by the Papists and others, and never set up by Christ and his Apostles, as you may read in the Scriptures of the New-Testament. These things which have been decreed by the Popes, were not decreed by Christ and his Apostles, which they have persecuted people for not observing, which Christ and the Apostles did not persecute any for not observing that which they commanded. Where is plainly seen, that the Po∣pish Church is a Schism rent from the True Church in the A∣postles dayes, and to be out of the Power and Spirit of Christ and the Apostles, and their Faith. And so their Sacrifices is not like Abels, but Cains, which God has no respect to; and so with the Life, Spirit and Power the Apostles were in, they are seen over, and comprehended. Glory to the Lord God for ever, whose Righteousness and Glory shines and spreads over all: Glory be to God, blessed for ever, who is over all, King of Saints, the Beginning of all, the Creator of all, whose Omnipotent Power is seen by such that are on
the Rock of Ages, who was the First and the Last, Be∣ginning and Ending; who hath revealed the knowledg of the Father to them, who is the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, which slayes with the Sword, and kills with the Sword, the words of his mouth; and the Lamb shall have the victory, who destroys the Beast, the Dragon, the false Church, the Devil and his works, who reigns, whose Right it is. Ninus the Son of Bealus, was the Third King of Baby∣lon: He set up his Fathers Image, and proclaimed free par∣don to all Offenders, if they would fall down and worship it; which they did; and after that, many simple people in plain Devotion did the like. This Ninus was the first that began this gross Idolatry. He began to Reign in the year of the world 1906, and before Christ 2056. He built Niniveh, and after he was slain. And by Ninus his ill president, other Princes set up their Fathers Images, and caused people to commit Idolatry with them; and the Devil in his willingness to procure man unto wickedness, would often times give answer by these Iaols, and thereof came the Name of Bell, Baal, Bell-Phyor, and Belzebub. Read Jerom, Austin, Eusebuus, Pliny, and Be∣risus. From Heber came the Jews, which are called Hebrews after his Name; at the Division or Confusion of Languages, the Hebrew Tongue remained only in his House. In this time the Hebrew Speech was called Human, or Mans Speech, be∣cause all men spoke the same. John Stow's General Chrono∣logy, p. 15.
THE BLOOD of the MARTYRS Is the SEED of the CHURCH. In a short Relation of the Preaching, Sufferings, and Martyrdom of many of the Righ∣teous, before the Birth of Christ: And also, the Preaching and Sufferings of Christ and the Apostles. SAMƲEL the Prophet was a Priest and Judg: He lived in Heli, Saul, and David's time; he dyed, and was buried in Rama. Nathan the Prophet, lived in David's time, (in the year of the World 3009.) he dyed, and was buried in Gibeon, his own Land. Gad the Prophet, lived in David's time. Ahias prophesied to Solomon, That a woman would draw his mind from the Lord. He dyed, and was buried nigh the Oak in Silon. Asaph was a Prophet in the time of David, and the appointed him chief of those that praised the Lord. Idithum was one of David's Prophets, whom he appointed to prophesie with the Harps, Psaltries and Cimbals. Iddo was a Prophet in the time of Solomon, Roboam, and his Son Abia. Semeia prophesied in the days of Roboam, and said, Thus saith the Lord, Ye have left me, and therefore have I left you in the hands: sk King of Egypt.
Jam was of Samaria; he prophesied in the days of Jeroboam, and cryed against his Offering: and Joam was deceived by the old Prophet, and a Lyon smote him, that he dyed, and was buried in Bethel. Obed the Prophet, and Father of Azarias the Prophet, he lived until the time of Achas King of Judah, and he cryed against their sins. Azarias was of Synatha; he put away from Israel the Captivi∣ty of Judah: He dyed, and was buried in his own Country. Haani prophesied in the days of Asa King of Judah; and Asa was wrath with the Prophet, because he told him the truth, and put him in prison, for he was displeased with him because of his Pro∣phesie. Jehu the Son of Hanani the Prophet, lived in the days of Josa∣phet King of Judah, about the year 3134; he prophesied against Boza King of Israel, That God would root him out, with all his peste∣rity, for Murthering of Nadab, the Son of Jeroboam. Jehazel prophesied in the days of Josaphat King of Judah, and instructed the people. Fliezer prophesied in the days of Josaphat King of Judah, and prophesied against him, saying, Because he did wickedly, the Lord had broken his works. Elas the Prophet lived in the year of the World 3130; he was of the Tribe of Aaron, and was taken up into Heaven. Zachary the Son of Jehoida the Priest, prophesied in the days of Joas King of Judah; and he said, Because you have forsaken the Lord, therefore he hath forsaken you; and they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the Commandment of the King, even in the Court of the House of the Lord. Elisaus the Prophet, who overthrew their carved Images, and molten Idols, he dyed, and was buried in Samaria. Sophonie prophesied of Christ, and said, That the Lord would de∣stroy all the gods in the Land, and all the Isles of the Heathen should worshp him, every man in his place; and I will cleanse the lips of the people, that they may every one call upon my Name, and serve me under one yke: This Sophonie was of the Tribe of Simeon, he prophesied of the end of Israel, and confusion of the wicked: He dyed, and, was buried in his own Land, Sabarthata.
Jeremy prophesied of Christ, and the New-Covenant in the heart, and of Judas thirty pieces of Silver: He was of Anathoth The people at Taphuis in Egypt, stoned him to death, and lieth bu∣ried where Pharoah his Palace stood. He came of the Line of the Priests. Hulda the Prophetess, the Wife of Sallun, dwelt in Jerusalem in the time of Josias the King, who sent the Priests, with many others, unto her, for to understand the will of the Lord touching their do∣ings: And her answer was to them, That the Lord will bring, evil upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants thereof; for they had forsa∣ken the Lord. Nahum prophesied of Christ; He was of Eltesis, beyond Betha∣bar, and of the Tribe of Simeon: He prophesied after that Jonah had prophesied Niniveh should be destroyed: And Nahum said, That they of Niniveh should be all destroyed by sweet waters, and fire from under the ground: Which so came to pass upon. Niniveh. Nahum dyed in peace, and was buried in his own Land. Habbakkuk prophesied of Christ, Behold, saith he, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish; for I do a wok in your dayes, which ye shall not believe, though a man declae it unto you. He was of the Tribe of Si∣meon, and the Land of Bithichar: He foresaw the taking of Jeru∣salem by Nebuchadonozer. He dyed two years before the children of Israel came out of Babylon, and was buried in his own Land. Ezekiel prophesied in Babylon, of the Mystery of Christ, and that God would be their God, and set one Shepherd over them all. He was of the Country of Caesaria, and lineage of the Priests. He dyed in Caldea, in the time of Captivity, after he had prophe∣sied much unto the Captivated Jews. The Prince of the peope slew him at Babylon because he reproved him for Idolatry; and he was buried in the field Maur, in the Sepulchre of Sem. And this Pro∣phet judged Israel; and in Babylon he judged the Tribes of Dan and Gad. Daniel prophesied of Christ in Babylon; He was of the Tribe of Judah, a Nohle-man born, and young when he was led captive out of Judah; He was in the upper Betheron, and he said, If my blood un out, there will be great slaughter throughout the world. Daniel li∣ before the birth of Christ, Five hundred years.
Ose prophesied of Christ rising the third day; He was of the Tribe of Isachar of Belemoth: He dyed, and was buried in peace in his own Country. He dyed before the Birth of Christ about Six hundred thirty years. Obediah prophesied, and said, Ʋpon Mount Sion there shall be deli∣verance. He was of Sychem, and the Town Bethacaran: He was a Disciple of Elias, and endured much for his sake. He was the third of the fifty Sons of the Prophets. He dyed, and was buried with his Fathers. Micah prophesied of the coming of Christ out of Bethlem, and that out of Judah there should come a Governour in Israel: He was of Marathi, of the Tribe of Ephraim, and had much ado with Achab, whose Son Joram threw him down to break his neck, be∣cause he did rebuke him for living in the sins of his Fathers. He was buried in his own Land, in the common Burial, in Ephraim. Amos the Prophet, (was the Father of the Prophet Esay) he prophesied of the coming of Christ: Amazias King of Judah, per∣secuted him very often, and at length the Son of Amazias struck him with a Club on the temples of the Head, and while he drew breath after his wounds, they brought him into his own Countrey, and within two days after, he dyed, and there he was buryed. Isaiah prophesied of the coming and suffering of Christ; he was of Jerusalem, where he also lost his life, being most cruelly sawed asunder, in the Reign of King Manasses; and when his breath near failed him, he called for a little water to drink, which was given to him out of the Brook; therefore is the place called Siloam, as much as to say, Sent. Joel prophesied of Christ, and that God would pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, and his Sons and Daughters should prophe∣sie: He dwelt near unto the City Bethomeron, in Rubim, where he dyed, and was buried in peace. Jonas the Prophet shewed the Mystery of Christ, and his resur∣rection, being three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, who cast up Jonas uncorrupted: Even so the Son of man was three dayes and nights in the bowels of the Earth, uncorrupted, and rose again Jonas was of Cariathmaus, nigh Azotus, on the Sea-coast. towards the Gentiles: But he went out of the Land because  Infamy that was come upon him by prophesying against
he dyed, and God raised him to life again by Elias; then he went into the Land of Judah, and there dyed, and was buried in the Cave Cenzenm. Baruch lived in the time of Jeremy, and was his Scribe: He wrote from Jeremy his mouth; and he read the Book to Joacim the Son of Josia King of Judah; and after he had read it to him, he was fain to flye, and hide himself. And when Jeremy went down into Egypt, he wrote that Book that beareth his Name, which was sent from thence to Jerusalem, to be read in the Temple. Ʋias was of Cariathjarim the Son of Semei, he prophesied a∣gainst Jerusalem, and the whole Lad of Judah, as Jeremiah did; and Joachim King of Judah, sought to kill him; but he fled into Egypt, from whence the King sent for him, and killed him with the Sword, and laid his body where the common sort of people were buried. Aggaus prophesied of Christ in the time of Zorababel; he being a young man, came from Babylon to Jerusalem, and prophesied of the return of the people, and of the building the Temple; and he saw it built again. He dyed, and was buried nigh the Sepulchres of the Priests. Zacharias prophesied of Christs coming, and riding upon the Foal of an Asse, and of Christs wounds in the house of his own Friends. He being very aged, came out of Chalde to Jerusalem, where he executed the Priestly Function. He blessed Salathiel his Son, and called his Name Zorababel: The Land where he lieth, is called Betharia, from Jerusalem One hundred and fifty Fur∣longs Malachi prophesied of Christ; he saith, From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place they shall offer a pure offering to my Name; and the Son of righteousness shall aise with healing in his wings. He was born after the return of the people out of Babylon. He dyed very young, in the prime of his years, and was laid with his Fathers in his own field. Before the Birth of Christ Four hun∣dred and twelve years. John Baptist, (the Son of Zachary and Elizabeth) was of the Tribe of Levi; he was the greatest Prophet, born of a woman, he  the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
He was beheaded of Herod the Tyrant. And these Prophets shewed how that all Nations are blessed in the Seed of Abraham, and so the Seed of Abraham to be the Saviour of the world. Now when the Lord would take up Elija into Heaven by a Whirlwind, Elija went to Gilgal, and from thence the Lord sent him to Bethel, and from thence to Jericho; and the Lord sent him to Jordan, and he went over Jordan; for is a River, dan is Judg∣ment; and so he went over, and through the River of Judgment: and then he was taken up into Heaven by the Lord, in a Chariot of Fire. And the Lord commanded Abraham to go out of his Native Country, and his Father's House, which was in Caldea, and he de∣parted from Haran, and passed through Sechem and Moreia, and went to Canaan, and at Bethel he built an Altar, (Bethel, which sig∣nifies the House of God) and then he went into Egypt, which is anguish and tribulation. How to resist the Devil. WHen Christ had fasted forty days, and forty nights, the De∣vil came to him, and tempted him when he was hungry, to make the stones bread; but Christ said to him, Man doth not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God; that is it, on which whomsoever liveth, that is able to re∣sist the Devil, the Word of God dwelling in the heart, by which Christ spake, is that which gives power to resist the Devil; which word refresheth those that dwell in the Counsel of God, and not bread only. Then the Devil tempted Christ to destroy himself, under a pre∣tence that the Angels had charge over him; and this the Devil in presumption would have had Christ to try whether he had been the Stu of God. But Christ answered him, It was written,
not tempt the Lord his God. And when the Devil could not prevall with him in these things, then he tempted him with the glory of the world, and took Christ into an exceeding high Mountain, and shewed him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said to him, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me: But Christ said, Get thee behind me Satan for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. Then the Devil left him, when he saw there was no room for him, there was nothing of him in Christ, therefore his temptations could not prevail; for where the Word of God rules in the heart, the Devil hath no power. Therefore every one, live in the Power of God, that you may be able to resist the Devil. The Form of Christs Words when he did MIRCLES. CHrist said, Daughter, thy Faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy Plague; and he said to the dead Mai∣den. Arise. And he said, Come out of the man, thou untlean spiris. And he said, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee; arise, take up thy bed, and walk. And he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying, Come out of him, hold thy peace; and he took her by the hand, and lift her up. He said to the blind man, Co thy way, thy faith hath saved thee. Jesus put forth his hand, saying, I will, be thou clean: And said to the woman, Great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou desireth: He said co d blind man, Receive thy sight, thy faith hath, saved thee. And to ano∣ther, Go thy way, thy Son liveth. Jesus said As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. And as soon as be had spopus, be spit on the ground, and made Clay of the spittle, and ann the  of the blind man, and said Go wash in the pool of Siloa  interprettion, Sent. Jesus said when be raised L  the Stone; and he lift up his ; and said; Fat h I
thank thee that thou hast heard me; and I know that thou hearest me alwayes: But for the people that stand by, I said it, that they might believe that thou hast sent me; (and be groaned twice) and said, Laza∣rus come forth. And Jesus gave his Apostles power to heal every disease, and to cast out Devils. The Arm and Power of the Lord is the Strength of his People, and not the Arm of Flesh. GOD overthrew the Philistines, and their god Dagon, without an Army of men, 2 Sam. 5. God over brew the Egyptians whole Host, and drowned them without an Army of men, Exod. 14. The Walls of Jericho fell without any Blows or Cannons; and therefore people are to mind the Power of God, and to trust in it. Joshua 6. Gideon with Three hundred men overthrew the Midianites, and all the men of the East, whose Armies were like Grashoppers, in which the Power of the Lord was known. Judg. 7. The Philistines came to fight against Israel, and they cryed to the Lord to save them, and to help them; and the Lord heard their prayers, and thundred that day upon the Philistines with a great thunder, and discomfited them, and they were smitten before Is∣rael. Therefore it is good to trust in the Power of the Lord, and not in the Arm of flesh, 1 Sam. 7. For this Victory was obtained by prayer, and the people forsaking of their sins. And in the dayes of Saul, the Philistines came against Israel, and the Lord made an uproar among the Philistines, that every mans Sword was set against his fellow, and they destroyed one another, 1 Sam. 14. So mind the power of God.
And often the Lord delivered David out of Saul's hands, and his Armies, without weapons of Warr, but by the power of God, and trust therein. And the Lord delivered Jacob from Esau, which came against him with Pour hundred men. And so it is good to trust in the power of the Lord. Gen. 32. And God delivered Elisha from the Armed Host, and struck them with blindness, 2 Kings 6. And also, when the Assyrians besieged Samaria, the Famine was so great, that an Asses Head was sold for Fourscore pieces of silver; and the Fourth part of a Cab of Doves Dung, for Five pieces of silver; and some did eat their own Children: but the Lord did cause a noise in the Camp of the Assyrians, as of Chariots and Horses, and of an Army, so that they were greatly afraid, and fled, and left their Tents. Thus the Lord helped them without any stroke of man. Therefore it is good to trust in the Power of the Lord, and in his strength, and not in the Arm of flesh, 2 King. 7. Also the Lord delivered Abigal from David, and his Four hun∣dred men, 1 Sam. 25. And God sent Lyons to destroy the Assyrians, because they fearld him not, 2 King. 17. In the dayes of Hezekiah, when the Assyrians came against Je∣rusalem with a Mighty Host, which made the Jews afraid, and cry unt) the Lord; and the same night the Lord sent his Angel into the Camp, and smote of the Assyrians One hundred four∣score and five thousand: Which was done by the Arm and Strength of the Lord; in which it is good for people to trust, and not in the Arm of Flesh.
Concerning CHRISTS Preaching and Sufferings. CHrist was born in the Two and fortieth year of Augustus his Reign: He was conceived in Nazareth, and born in Beth∣lem; and the eighth day he was circumcised: Forty days after his birth, he was presented in the Temple, which was the time of his Mothers purifying. The third year after his birth, he was carryed into Egypt, where he remained two years, and then went to Galilee, and when he was twelve years of age, went with his Parents to Je∣rusalem, at the Feast of the Passeover, and was found disputing a∣mong the Doctors. He was baptized the thirtieth year of his age, by John, in the River of Jordan. He was baptized in the first year of his Preaching. He was led into the Wilderness; and having falled forty dayes and nights, was seen of John, who pointed at him with the singer, and said, Behold the Lamb of God: And when An∣drew heard, he followed him. The next day the Lord found Philip, and said to him, Follow me. The third day there was a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, where Christ wrought his first Miracle. Then the Jews Passeover was at hand, and Jesus went to Jerusalem, and threw the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple. And he came from thence into Judea, and walked about the Sea of Galilee; he chose his twelve Disciples, whom he called Apostles; he appointed also, other seventy Disciples: He went about the Country Preaching many Sermons, and did many Miracles, about which time John Baptist was imprisoned. And in the second year of Christs preaching, he came to his own Country, and Herod (who caused John Baptist to be beheaded in Prison) was desirous to see him; and Jesus went from thence in∣to the Wilderness, and he and his Disciples went into the Land of Genezereth, and through Bethsaida, and passed through the Coasts of Tyre and Sidon, and went up to Jerusalem at the Feast of Pente∣cost,
(the Apostate Christians Whitfuntide) and esin went from thence, and came near unto the Sea of Galilee; and from thence he went and took ship, and came to the parts of Magdala: and af∣terwards into Cesaria and Philippi, and after eight dayes he tranfi∣gured himself in Mount Thabor, and from thence he went to Ca∣pernaum, and went into Galilee again, where the people bid him de∣part from thence, for Herod sought to slay him. And Jesus went to the Feast of Tabernacles at Jerusalem, where he preached many Sermons, and wrought many Miracles. And in the third year of his Preaching, he was at the Feast of Dedication at Jerusalem, it was Winter, and he walked in the Temple, in Solo∣mon's Porch; and from thence he went beyond Jordan, and after∣wards he came to Bithinia, where he raised Lazarus. In the beginning of the Four thousand and second year of the World, on the tenth day of the Month called March, Christ went over Jordan into Bethobara. The eleventh day he heard of the di∣sease of Lazarus. The thirteenth day Lazarus dyed, and Christ took his journey to go and raise him. The fourteenth day he en∣tred into Jericho, and healed the Son of Timeus. The fifteenth day he spent by the way. The sixteenth day he came to Bithinia, where he raised Lazarus, being dead four dayes. The seventeenth day he went near the Desart, into the City of Ephram. The eighteenth day he continued in the Desart: And the nineteenth day, being six days before the Passeover, he returned to Bithinia, and supped with Lazarus. The twentieth day he goeth from Bethani, and cursed the Fig-tree. The next day he passed by the withered Fig-tree, and that night he supped in Bethania, in the House of Simon the Leaper, and two dayes after was the Feast of Passeover. The twenty third day Judas covenanted to betray Christ. The twenty fourth day in the Evening, Christ celebrated the Jews Passeover, and afterwards his own, called the Lord's Supper. He washed his Disciples feer. He went to Mount Oliver; he prayeth, and sweateth drops of blood. He is taken, and brought to Caiphat. Peter denied him. Pilate delivered him to the Jews, to crucifie him. He was Thirty three years of age, and somewhat more, when he suffered for the Salvation of Mankind: Who rose from the dead the third day and then shewed himself first to Mary Magaalen, and then to two other women, and afterwards to his Apostles and Disciples, when
the doon were shut, and after that, to more then Five hundred Brethren: And he appeared to Thomas, and shewed himself at the Sea of Tiberius; and afterwards he ascended into Heaven, and he sent the holy Ghost upon his Apostles. ABEL was murthered by Cain in the false Religion. Noah was hated and mocked by the old ungodly world. Abraham was persecuted because he would not joyn to hs Fathers Countrys Religion, and was commanded of God to forsake it. Isaac was persecuted and hated by Ishmael. Jacob was hated and persecuted by Esau, a prophane man. And Nimrod was a Tyrant to the Righteous. And the Children of Israel were persecuted and oppressed by Pharoah the false Worshipper. And Elias was persecuted by Iezzabel, which followed false gods. And the Prophet was threatned by Jeroboam. Zachary was stoned to death. Micha was thrown down, and his neck broken. The three Children were thrown into the Fiery Furnace, but the Fire did them no harm; and this was because they would not yeeld to the Kings Worship. Baruch was fain to flye away, to save his life from King Joachas hands. The Prophet Ʋrias was flain wsth the Sword by King Joachim. John Baptist was beheaded by Herod the Tetrach. The Preaching and Sufferings of the Apostles. SImon Peter preached Christ in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Bi∣thinia, and in the end, at Rome, where he was crucified under Nero, with his head downward, and there was buried.
Andrew, Simon Peter's Brother, preached Christ to the Scythi∣ans, Sogdians, Sacians, and in the middle Sebastopolis, inhabited of wild Ethiopians: He was crucified by Egeas King of the Edesseans, and buried at Patris, a City in Achaia. James the Son of Zebedee, a Fisherman, he preached Christ unto the twelve Tribes; he was slain with the Sword by Herod the Tetrack of the Jews in Judea, where he was also buried. John the Brother of James, preached Christ in Asia; the Em∣peror Trajan banished him into the Isle of Patmos, and there be wrote his Gospel; he was thrown (at Rome) into a Tun of hot boyling Oyl, and took no harm, but came forth. Philip, of the City Bethsaida, preached Christ in Phygia; he was buried at Hierapolis, and his daughters: they say he was cruci∣fied at Painnims. Bartholomew preached Christ unto the Indians; he was buried in Albania, a City of Armenia the Great; and they say he was beaten to death with a Club: And some say that he was crucified with his head downwards, and that he was flean alive; and some, that he was beheaded at the Commandment of Polemis, King of India. Thomas preached Christ unto the Parthinians, Medes and Persi∣ans; and to the Caamans, Hivcans, Bactrians and Magicians; he rested at Calamina, a City in India, being slain with a Dart, which they call a Spear of Javelin; and they say that an Idol-Priest run him thorow. Matthew preached Christ in Ethiopia, which is called the King∣dom of Presbiter John: but Hurtychus commanded him to be thrust thorow with a Sword: he dyed at Hieopolis in Porthia, and was buried. Simon Zelotes preached Christ throughout Mauritania, and A∣frick the less; at length was crucified at Betania, slain and buri∣ed; and he preached in Persia and Egypt. Judas, the Brother of James, preached unto the Edesseans, and throughout all Mesapotamia; he was slain in the time of Agbarus King of Edesse, and was buried. Matthias, one of the Seventy Disciples, was numbred among the eleven Apostles, in the room of Judas: he preached in Ethio∣pia, about the Haven Hyssus, and the River Phsis, unto the batha∣ Nations, and ravenous of flesh; and he dyed at Sb
nigh the Temple the Jews stoned him; and at last of all he was be∣headed with an Ax, after the Romans manner. He preached first in Macedonia. Paul preached Christ in Jerusalem, and Illyricum; Italy; Spain; he was beheaded at Rome under Nero, and so dyed, and there lieth buried with Peter. Mark preached Christ at Alexandria, and all the bordering Re∣gions from Egypt unto Pentapolis, in the time of Tramin; he had a Cable-rope tyed about his neck at Alexandria, by which he was drawn from the place called Bucolus, to the place called Angeles, where he was burned to Ashes by the furious Idolaters, in the Month called pril Luke the Evangelist, of the City of Antioch, he accompanied the Apostles in their travels; he dyed at Ephesus, where he was buried. James, the Brother of the Lord after the flesh, called Justus, he preached at Jerusalem; the Jews stoned him to death, and buried hm there in the Temple, near the Altar. Tmothy preached at Ephesus and Illyricum, and throughout Hellas in Achaia, where he dyed, and was buried. Titus preached Christ in Creet, and in all the Country about; he dyed, and was buried. Pchus, one of the seven Deacons, was Minister of Nicomedia, a City in Bithinia. Barnabas preached Christ with Paul, at Rome. Annanias which baptized Paul, preached at Damascus. Stephen, one of the seven Deacons, was stoned at Jerusalem by the Jews, for preaching Christ, and denying the Temple, and the Shadows, and they stoned him to death. Philip was one of the seven Deacons; he baptized Simon Magus, who turned to be a Sorcerer. Nicanor, one of the seven Deacons, was martyred with Stephen, and with two thousand faithful Christians Simon, one of the seven Deacons, preached in Arabia, and there the Heathen burned him to ashes. Nicholas, one of the seven Deacons, a Teacher at Suptaria, and he fell from the Faith. Parmenas, one of the seven Deacons, a Minister, he dyed in the presence of the Apostles.
Cleophas, called Simon, he was with Luke; he saw the Lord af∣ter he was risen; he was the second Minster at Jerusalem. Silas was a Minister with Paul, he was made Minister at Co∣rinth. Silvanus was a Minister with Paul; he was Minister of Thessa∣lonica. Crescens, whom Paul remembred to Timothy, was Minister at Chalcedon in France, and there was martyred in the time of Thra∣cian, and was buried. Epenetus, whom Paul mentions to the Romans; he was a Minister at Carthage. Andronicus, whom Paul remembers to the Romans, he was a Mi∣nister of Panonia. Amphis, whom Paul saluted to the Romans, he was a Minister of Odissa Ʋrbanus, mentioned by Paul to the Romans, he was Minister of Macedonia. Etachys, remembred by Paul to the Romans, he was the first Mi∣nister of Byzantium, and was Minister of Argyropolis in Thracia. Apelles, mentioned of Paul to the Romans, he was Minister of Smyrna. Aristobilus, whom Paul spake of to the Romans, was Minister of Bretannia. Narcissus, of whom Paul spake to the Romans, he was Minister of Patra in Achaia. Herodian, named by Paul to the Romans, he was Minister of Pa∣tra. Rufus, one that is reckoned by Paul to the Romans, was Mini∣ster at Theba. Assincritus, rehersed by Paul to the Romans, he was Minister of Hicania. Plagon, whom Paul remembred to the Romans, he was Minister of Marathen. Hermes, whom Paul mentions to the Romans, he was Minister of Dalmatia. Hermes, whom Paul saluted to the Romans, he was Minister of Philippi. Patrohas, of whom Paul made mention, he was Minister of Ne∣poliolis.
Agabus, of whom is made mention in the Acts, he was indued with the spirit of Prophesie. Linus, remembred of Paul, he was the first Minister at Rome af∣ter Peter. Paul made mention of Gaius, he was Minister of Ephesus afer Ti∣mothy. Paul remembers Olympus, he was beheaded at Rome with Peter. Paul made mention of Rodyon, he was beheaded at Rome with Peter. Jason is remembred in the Works of the Apostles, he was Mini∣ster of Tarsus. Sosipater is remembred of the Apostles, he was Minister of I∣conium. Lucius is remembred of Paul, he was Minister of Laodicea in Syria. Tertius wrote the Epistle of Paul to the Romans; he was second Minister of Iconium. Paul made mention of Erastus to the Romans; he was Steward of the Church of Jerusalem, and afterwards he was Minister of Pa∣neas. Paul remembred Phygellus; he was Minister at Ephesus. The Apostles made mention of Hermogenes, as one that brought false Doctrine to the Church; he was Bishop of Ephesus. Paul wrote of Demas that fell from the Faith; this Demas be∣came an Idol Priest of Thessalonica. John saith, They went out from us, for they were not of us. There is mention made of Quartus to the Rom us; he was Mi∣nister of Berytus. Paul made mention of Apollos, in his first Epistle to the Corinthi∣ans; he was Minister of Cesaria, and of Iconia. Paul remembred Sosthenes, he was Minister of Colophoni. Paul makes mention of Epaphroditus; he was Minister of Adriana. Paul remembers Cesar; he was Minister of Dyrhachium. Paul made mention of Marcus, he was Cousin-German of Bar∣nahas, a Minister of Apollonias. THE END.
