G1099D 18447123 107665
The First Apparition of Bishop Goodman's Ghost, BEING A New strange Sight, Or: A Late strange Vision. Making a wofull Repetition, of his former Confession; in 1653. Upon the Extirpation of Bishops: in 1642. Now Occasionally Revewed, and seasonably Renewed. 1681. For an Adhortatory Admo∣nition to all Bishops, and their Courts. I Confess, that God would never have permitted us, to have Suffer'd in such a manner, as we have done, had we not provoked Him with our Sins. And that I may be our own Accuser, I think our greatest Offence did consist in these two things. First, That many of Us, did not spend our Church-means in a Church-like manner; but converted them to our own private Vses: Or otherwise, Misimploy'd them: Therefore, God justly takes them away; and permits Sacriledge: we our Selves having first Offended in the same kinde. For certainly, Church-means should have relation as well to the Vses as to the Persons: and a Church-man in mispending them, commits Sacriledge. And whereas many excuse it, in regard of their Wives, and Children; God forbid, but regard should be had to Them: yet still with moderation. I cannot excuse the Excess of Apparel, and some other courses of Expence. Yet, This I must testifie for a Truth, that speaking privately with some Bishops, they told me, and I believed them; that they laid not up, one Far∣thing of their Bishopricks: and This may appear, for many of them, died very Poor: As Worcester, Hereford, Peterborough, Bristol: and not unlike, but others will do so. Another great fault in the Church, was the intollerable Abuse, of the Ecclesiastical Iurisdiction: therefore God hath made us now Uncapable of Any Iurisdiction. So just and wonderful is God in all his Iudgements. I confess, in mine own particular, I did as much desire, and labour to reform it, as any man could do; yet I could never prevail. Herein a little to excuse the Church; I have it, and can produce it at this time, under the Kings own Hand, and Seal: wherein he forbids, that any Church-man, or Priest in Holy Orders, should be a Chauncellour: and This was the Occasion, of all the Corruption, in the Spiritual Courts. For the Judges at the Common Law have their Pensions, and Allowances: but Chauncellours have none at all: They live only upon the Fees of the Court: and for Them to Dismiss a Cause; it was to lose so much blood. Now if they be naught in Themselves; then they must for their own Advantage and Profit, have Instruments and Agents accordingly: so the Registers, Proctors, Apparators; they were— Pessimum genus hominum. While the Spiritual Court was only Govern'd by Church-men and Priests; [as it ought to be, and hath ever been so heretofore:] they had their Spiritual Benefices, and Dignities to live upon; and did scorn the Fees of the Court. Besides the Holiness of the Profession, kept them from Bribing, and Corruption. Little do men think, how much they suffer, by this own Position;—That Church-men should not Interpose in Civil and Moral Affairs: whereas formerly, Bishops, and Church-men were only trusted with Last Wills and Testaments; and granting out Administrations:—and certainly, if there be any Honesty amongst men; it must be supposed to be rather in them, then in others. But there having been such an Abuse; it must be acknowledged, that God is most Just in all his wayes: and what hath befallen us, it is according to the Deserts of our Sin. The Book in which this Confession is, was by that Right Reverend Bishop, Dr. Godfrey Goodman: late Bishop of Glocester; given with his own hand to me ANTHONY SADLER: At that time Chaplain to the Right Honourable Letticia Lady Pagett Dowager. Printed by H. B. in the Year 1681.
