G411 99829918 34365
EPULAE OXONIENSES. Or a Jocular Relation of a BANQVET Presented to the Best of Kings, by the best of Prelates, in the Year 1636, In the Mathematick Library at St. Iohn Baptists Colledge. The Song. I. IT was (my Staff upon't) in Thirty Six, Before the Notes were wrote on Great Don Quix That this huge Feast was made by that High Priest, Who did Caress the Royalist of Guests. Oves and Boves, yes and Aves too Pisces, and what the whole Creation knew. II. For every Creature there was Richly drest, As numerous as was great Nevils Feast, Here we crave leave only to make you smile (For in the Terme we must be grave a while) At the Exhibit of a Banquet brought Where all our Gown-men, were in Marchpane wrought. III. The Ladies waterd ('bout the Mouth) to see And tast so sweet an Universitie. In mighty Chargers of most Formal Past A Convocation on the Board was plac't: In Capp and Hood and Narrow-sleeved Gown Just as you see them now about the Town: IV. With this Conceited Difference alone, The Scholars now do Walk but then did Run There might you see in Honour of his place Mr. Vice-Chancellor with every Mace. The greater Staffs in Thumping Marchpane made In smaller, the small Stick of the small Blade. V. And after these, as if my Brethrens Call Had fetch't them up, (Sol, Hal, & stout Wil: Ball) In humble postures of a Bowing Leg, Appear'd the Doctors, Masters, Reg. non Reg. Then in a Mass a sort of Various Capps, (But could not Hum, for sealed were their Chaps) VI. Crouded the Senate, as if they'd mind to heare Some speech, or fall upon Themselves the Cheare, It put their Majesties unto the Laugh, To see the Bedels resigne up every Staff, And were eat up, not as it us'd to be Returned by his Gracious Majestie. VII. I think that Ieffry waiting on the Qeen. Devoured at one Champ the Verger clean. But then (O rude!) as at a Proctors Choice In run the Masters, just like little Boyes. So did the Ladies, and their Servants fall, Upon the Marchpane-shew, Doctors and all. VIII. The Noble Men like to Clarissimos, Grandees of Venice, did adorne these shews In Velvet round Caps some, and some in Square, (A spectacle most excellent and rare) But their good Ladyships most curteously Simperd, and eat the Soft Nobilitie. IX. Never was Oxford in such woful Case, Unless when Pembroke did expound the place: Here lay a Doctors Scarlet, there a Hood Trod under foot, which others snatch'd for Food Capp, Gowns, and all Formalities were Rent, As if the shew had been ith' Schools at Lent. CHORUS. If in the Trojan Horse inclosed were Men of the Helmet, Target, Sword and Speare, If by Ingenious Pencil ere was cut The Learned Homers Illiads in a Nut, Why in a Bisk or Marchpane Oleo Might not a Convocation be a shew. Where for to please the Beauteous Ladies Bellies, Masters were set in past, Scholers in Iellies. Ed. Gayton.
It was (my Staff upon't) in Thirty Six, Before the Notes were wrote on Great Don Quix That this huge Feast was made by that High Priest, who did caress the Royalist of Guests, Oves and Boves, yes and Aves too, Pisces, and what the whole Creation knew.
3. Voc. The Chorus at last. If in the Trojan Horse inclosed were, Men of the Helmet, Target, If by In—genious Pencil ere was cut, The Learned Homers Illiads If in the Trojan Horse inclosed were, Men of the Helmet, Target If by In—genious Pencil ere was cut, The Learned Homers Illiads If in the Trojan Horse inclosed were, Men of the Helmet, Target, If by In—genious Pencil ere was cut, The Learned Homers Illiads Sword and Speare: Why in a Bisk of Marchpane Oleo in a Nut. Sword and Speare. Why in a Bisk of Marchpane Oleo in a Nut. Sword and Speare: Why in a Bisk of Marchpane Oleo in a Nut. Might not a Convocation be a shew, Where for to please the beauteous Might not a Convocation be a shew, Where for to please the beauteous Might not a Convocation be a shew, Where for to please the beauteous Ladies Bellies, Masters were set in Past, Scholars in Jellies. Ladies Bellies, Masters were set in Past, Scholers in Jellies. Ladies Bellies, Masters were set in Past, Scholers in Jellies.
