J1042 15618783 104181
London's Triumphs: Express'd in sundry Representations, Pageants and Shows, performed on Monday Octob. 30. 1676. at the Inauguration and Instalment of the Right Honourable Sir THOMAS DAVIES Kt, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON. Containing a true Description of the several Scenes and Habits of the Representers, with the Speeches spoken on each Pageant. All the Charge and Expences of the Industrious Designs, being the sole Undertakings of the Ancient and Right Worshipful SOCIETY of DRAPERS. Being the Second Year without Intermission. Devised and Composed by THO. JORDAN. Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. Mart. Epigr. London, Printed for John Playford at the Temple Church. 1676.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE Sir THOMAS DAVIES Kt, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON. MY LORD, SInce Prudence, Truth, and Loyalty relate To the Just Function of a Magistrate, Joyn'd with Succession, and Election too, The City's pleas'd, finding all these in You: 'Tis these, may't please Your Lordship, in a word, That have advanc'd You to the City-Sword, And Seat of Magistrates; where, next to th' KING, You have a complete Power of Governing: And may You prosper in it this whole Year, And to the general Citizens appear, Rather the Object of their Love than Fear (The best Obedience.) Terror may controll The Body, but 'tis Love that rules the Soul: And may that Love so efficacious be, You may allure Men to Civility. Such are the Wishes and the Prayers of Your True Servant, and most humble Orator, MY LORD, The most Faithful and Fervent of Your Honourers, Tho. Jordan.
To the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS. Gentlemen, WIth as much Splendour, Magnitude, Variety, and Aptitude, as the brevity of my Limitations would allow for Designation, Direction, Composition, Correction, and Transcription, I have accom∣plished Your Commands in the punctual Performances of this Days Triumphs; wherein, although I have squared all my Inventions (ac∣cording to my ability) by the Rules of Art, I confess I have been more sedulous to indulge and oblige the Worthy Society and Ancient Com∣pany of DRAPERS (my Worshipful Patrons, by whom I am employed and gratified) than to humor the querulous dispositions of any private Observator whatsoever. This Show being Calculated for the Meridian of Cheapside, whose numerous Applause in the Publick will prove more prevalent to me than the nicer Investigations and peevish Censures of the most curiously currish Criticks. If any Person shall make Objection, that my Lines are home-spun, let him qualifie the qualms of his tender Judgment with a Consideration that my subject matter is Wool, Cloth, the Wealthy and Worthy English Drapers: In the Interim, I submit my Labours to your Judgments, and my Fortunes to Your Friendship, contented with the Honour of having permission to subscribe Octob. 29. 1676. Gentlemen, Your faithfully Humble Servant, Tho. Jordan.
In proper Habits orderly Array'd, The Movements of the Morning are display'd. SElect Citizens i' th' Morning all At Sev'n a Clock, do meet at. Drapers-Hall. The Masters, Wardens, and Assistants, Joyns For the first Rank, in their Gowns fac'd with Foyns. The second Order do, in merry moods, March in Gowns fac'd with Budge and Livery Hoods. In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods Thirdly appears A youthful number of Foyns Batchellors. Forty Budge Batchellors the Triumph Crowns, Gravely attir'd in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns. Gentlemen. Ushers which white Staves do hold Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold. Next, Thirty more in Plush and Buss there are That several Colours Wave, and Banners bear. The Sergeant Trumpet Thirty six more brings, Twenty the Duke of York's, Sixteen the Kings, The Sergeant wears Two Scarfs, whose Colours be One the Lord Mayors, t' other's the Company. The King's Drum-Major follow'd by Four more Of the Kings Drums and Fifes, make London roar. Seven Drums and Two Fifes more in Vests of Buff March with Waste-Scarfs, and Breeches of Black Stuff. Two City Marshals mounted and attended, Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended. And (next to th' Drums) do Troop it in the Reer. But the Foot Marshal doth the next appear; Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears A Shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs. Attended by Six persons that dare do What e're their Marshal may Command them to,
Next the Fence-Master troops, and (to defend him) Divers with drawn broad bright Swords do attend him. Many poor Pensioners that march ith' Rear, With Gowns and Caps, Standards and Banners bear; A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor, In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more, With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors, And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors. Being thus prepar'd: By the Foot Marshals Judgment they are guided, And into six Divisions are divided. Rank'd out by two and two: The first that stirs Are the poor Company of Pensioners; But in the front of them orderly be Placed the Ensigns of the Company. Ith' Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more, Then Pensioners in Coats describ'd before. Persons of worth who do in Martial manner, Bear each of them a Standard, or a Banner. Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear (As by the Herald Painter is exprest) The Draught of their Supporters, and their Crest: Six Gentlemen-Vshers in order trudge, And after them the Batchelors in budge: Marching in measur'd distance, and endu'd With Order, This Division doth conclude. I'th' Rear of them six Trumpets do appear, And after them two Gentlemen, that bear Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be To th' City and the Drapers Company. Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears The Golden Chains, then the Foins Batchelors, In amicable measure, move like Friends Fill'd with one Joy: So this Division ends.
Two Gentlemen in Velvet Coats array'd, March after them with two Banners display'd; Then succeed them Ten Gentlemen-Ushers more, In Coats and Chains of Gold describ'd before; And gradually after them you'l see A very worthy large Society; With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood, And all Lord Mayors in the Potential Mood. I'th' Rear of these (with silver sounds to fit ye) Do fall in divers Trumpets of the City; And after them two Gentlemen accord, To bear the Arms o'th' City and my Lord: And then the Gentlemen with equal distance That usher in the grave Court of Assistants. I'th' Rear of them, four Drums, six Trumpets, be Order'd to bring up the Catastrophe. Three Gallants gradually follow them, Bearing the Banners of the Diadem. Kings, Queens, and Cities Ensigns, which engages Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages; The Masters and the Wardens bring up all. And thus equipp'd, they march from Drapers-Hall To my Lords House, where th' Aldermen and He Take Horse, and rank according to Degree: Which being done, the whole Body in State Doth move towards Guild-Hall, but at the Gate The new Lord with the old Lord Mayor unites, Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights. Then thus attir'd, with Gown, Fur, Hood, and Scarf, March all through Kings-street down to Three-Crane-Wharf; Where the Lord Mayor and th' Aldermen discharge A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge At the West end o'th' Wharf; and at the East The Court Assistant, Livery, and the best Gentlemen-Ushers: Such as stay on shore Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budge Batchelor:
Who for a time, repose themselves and Men, Until his Lordship shall return again: Who now with several Companies make hast To Westminster, but in the way is plac't A Pleasure-Boat that hath great Guns aboard, And with Two Broad-sides doth salute my Lord. They Row in Triumph all along by th' Strand, But when my Lord and Companies do Land At the New Palace-Stairs orderly all Do make a Lane to pass him to the Hall; Where having took an Oath that He will be Loyal and faithful to His Majesty, His Government, His Crown and Dignity, With other Ceremonials said and done, In Order to his Confirmation; Sealing of Wris in Courts, and such like things, As shew his power abstracted from the King's, He takes his leave o'th' Lords and Barons, then With his Retinue he re-treats again To th' Water-side and (having given at large To th' Poor of Westminster) doth Re-imbarge, And scud along the River 'till he comes To Black-Fryers Stairs, where Guns and thundring Drums Proclaim his Landing; when hee's set ashore, He is saluted by three Vollies more By (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Ar∣tillery-men, under the Conduct of the most accomplished for Arms and Arts, the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Player, Knight, they being all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry; some in Buff with Head∣pieces, many of Massy Silver. There is also the old Warlike Honour of this Nation, bravely revived, and is at this time a most Heroick Rarity; which is, that divers Gentlemen Archers, compleatly Arm'd, with long Bows and Swords, with War Arrows, and Pallisades, with Hats turn'd up on one side, on which are tied large Knots of green Ribon, formed into a Regiment, march under the Command of the
Right Honorable Sir Robort Peyton Knight, and Colonel of the said Regiment. From Black Fryers Stairs they march through a Gallery of the aforesaid Batchellors and Gentlemen-Ushers, who did not go to West∣minster; and likewise the Pensioners and Banners being set in Order, ready to march, the Foot-Marshal leads the way, and in the Rear of the Companies up Black-Fryers Stairs by the Channel up to Fleet-Bridge, and sothrough Ludgate-Street and S. Pauls Churchyard, into Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant, as followeth. The First Pageant described. A Temple erected according to the Composite Order in Archite∣cture, on whose extremity, eminently elevated, standeth the Figure of Atlas bearing a Monde. The whole Structure is artfully beautified with proper, various, and rich Gilding and Painting; in the Medium of the Frontispiece of this Temple in a Throne-like Seat, ma∣jestically sitteth MINERVA the Goddess of Arts and Arms, and round about her are properly and distinctly placed the Seven Liberal Sciences, viz. Grammar, Logick, Rhetorick, Arithmetick, Musick, Astro∣nomy, and Geometry, all of them attired in apt significant Habits as Ladies, according to their several Functions, as followeth. 1. Grammar, In a Cloth of Silver Robe, a green Mantle, dark brown Hair; on her Head a Wreath of Bays, the leaves tipt with Gold; Scarlet-colour'd Silk Stockings; white Buskins laced with green Silk and Silver Ribon; in her hand the King's Banner. 2. Logick, In a Purple Robe semined with Stars of Gold; a car∣nation Mantle, fringed with Gold; a light brown Hair; on her Head a Wreath of Myrtle; Pearl-colour'd Silk Hose; red Buskins laced and surfled with Gold Ribon; holding in her right Hand the Cities Banner. 3. Rhetorick; In a florid Robe of divers colour'd Sarsnet, on it a Gold Mantle; a fair Hair, and on her Head a Chaplet of Flowers elegantly interweaved; Rose-colour'd Silk Hose; yellow Buskins, laced with Sky-colour'd Ribon; and in her Hand a Banner of my Lord Mayors.
4. Arithmetick; Enrobed with Cloth of Gold; a white Sarsnet Vail, maculated with divers Figures; a bright Hair; a Coronet of Gold, on which are many Characters in black; watchet-colour'd Silk Hose; purple Buskins, laced and surfled with Aurora-coloured Ri∣bon, bearing the Companies Banner. 5. Musick; In a Rose-coloured Robe; a Shoulder-Scarf embroi∣der'd with Flowers, fringed with Gold and Silver; a bright flaxen Hair, entramel'd with various-coloured Ribon, on which is a Garland of Roses, Lillies, Carnations, Tulips, Pansies, with all variety of Blossoms; bearing a Banner of the Kings. 6. Astronomy; In a sky-colour'd Robe sprinkled with gold Stars; a Scarf of Gold; a black long curl'd Hair; an Imperial Crown, the Moon in front, gold Stars round about, and, on the top, in the room of the Cross, a Figure of the Sun; watchet Buskins starrified with Silver, laced with gold Ribon surfled; Bearing a Banner of the Vir∣gin, the Drapers Patroness. 7. Geometry; In a grass-green Robe; a Scarlet Mantle fringed with Silver; black-brown Hair; on her Head a Coronet of Battle∣ments and Towers like a Fortification in Silver, and Gold, viz. the Battlements Gold, and the Towers Silver; purple Silk Stockings; Gold Buskins laced with Scarlet Ribon; bearing the Banner of Sir Henry Fitz-Alwyn, a Member of this Company, and the first Lord Mayor of London, who continued in that Dignity 24 Years without intermission. Lastly, in front, at the Foot of Minerva, sitteth a very grave Per∣son representing GOVERNMENT, in a long purple Robe lined and faced with Ermin; a short Border of grey Hair, on which is a close Cap embroidered with Gold; and upon that a purple Velvet four-corner'd Cap; in his Hand a Book well bound and strung, a pair of Cordivant Gloves with rich large tops embroider'd with Gold, per∣sonating the old Roman Orator CICERO. The SPEECH. BY great Minerva's Charms, from Shades below I'm rais'd from rest, to Celebrate this Show; My Name is Marcus Tullius Cicero;
A Roman, One, whom Providence did please T'illuminate with all the Sciences, (Which here are circumsedent) I am sent To personate a Civil Government, And here to meet (as I do understand) A Praefect arm'd with a Praetorian Band; I mean, his Censors and grave Senators. The Praetorship, my Lord, this Year, is yours; I wish you good success, Sir, in th'Event, For there's no living without Government. Let Justice guide your Heart; you'll have to do With many Men, and many Natures too: Let nothing byass you, Friendship nor Pelf; Give good Example; live upright your Self: The Ruine of a Nation then begins, When Purple Robes do cover Scarlet Sins; Old Rome experienc'd it, her fatal Story Can say, it made her sink in all her Glory. Let all your Passions and Affections be Confin'd within the bounds of Equity. Correct those Knaves, who by false force and might, Would Hector modest men out of their Right. Let not your Pleaders, at what rate they please, Daunt, and discourage honest Witnesses; Cut off Offenders; let that gawdy Witch The silken Miss, be lash'd out of her Itch: Purge this fair City from such foul Pollution, The Laws are good, put them in Execution. If Malefactors be not kept in aw, Lust, Theft, and Murder will become a Law. Vail not your Virtues; I have understood By Fame, that your Abilities are good In points of Learning, therefore I bring these, Minerva, and the Seven Sciences, To gratulate your Dignity, and be A happy Omen to your Maioralty.
Distribute Right to all, be it friend or foe: These were the Maxims of old Cicero. The Speech ended, the Scene sails through the Ocean of the turbulent Spectators, who like Billows dash themselves against one another, with as much noise and no less anger: And his Lordship, with his Right Worshipful Retinue, advanceth through Cheapside, where against Milk-street End his passage is obstructed, and his Patience invited to behold a second Pageant, the particulars of which are manifested in these succeeding Explanations. The Second Pageant IS a Chariot of Triumph (according to the Scythian mode of Buil∣ding) lostily erected, and curiously imbellished, in accurate deco∣ration, with variety of rich work in Gilding and Painting, with divers Landskips and Martial Trophies, upon whose eminent Seat is mounted in mighty Majesty a proper Person, every way adapted to represent Victorious TAMBERLAIN, who at the first was no more than a common Shepherd, with his gray Coat, Scrip, Sheep-hook, Bottle, Bag, Dog, and Tar-box, and kept Sheep on the Mountains of Scythia; but in process of time, as Fortune would have it, he rose to the height of a great General, who with 900000 Souldiers overcame Bajazet the Great Turk who had 500000 Souldiers, and after the Victory put him in an Iron Cage, which was carried about to be his Foot-stool when he got on his Horse (as Bajazet told him he would have done to him if the Victory had been his). This Battel was fought Anno Christi 1398. Tamberlain's Habit, Person, Nature, and Shape described. A Person of middle Dimensions, of terrible Aspect, morose Dispo∣sition, yet seldom passionate, cool and attentive in Counsels, patient in Designs, wise in Direction, bold in Execution, just in Government, austere in Commands, severe in Punishments, and liberal in Rewards;
in a Vest of silver, with a purple silk Shash about his waste, a Scimiter by his side, a large Cloth of gold Tunick down to the ground, white Buskins with gold Ribon, a bare white Neck, a pendent Jewel in his left Ear, a very small black Beard, no Hair on his Head, a silver Turbat, with a rich Jewel, a Sprig, and three Falls, blew, white, and aurange-colour; a Coronet of Gold round about the top of his Turbat; in his Hand a Banner of the King's: Attended with all those Warlike Representators which properly wait on so great a Conqueror, who sit beneath him in his Chariot, viz. Discipline, Conduct, Courage, and Victory, thus properly arrayed. 1. Discipline; A Man, in a scarlet-coloured silk Robe; a silver Mantle fringed with gold; black curl'd Hair, with a Coronet of Tro∣phies; a Scimiter by his side; silver Buskins laced with watchet Ribon on yellow Stockings; bearing the King's Banner. 2. Conduct; In a Robe of French green, a Scarf of gold, bright brown Hair, on his Head a Wreath of Oak, a Scimiter by his side, purple Hose, red Buskins laced and surfled with silver Ribon; with a Banner of the Lord Mayor's. 3. Courage; A Person of Heroick Visage, with short brown Hair, on it a golden Coronet, a flame-colour'd short Robe, a sky-colour'd Scarf fringed with Silver, blush-colour Hose, blew Buskins with carnation Ribon; in his Hand a Banner of the Cities. 4. Victory; In a Purple Robe, a Scarf of Gold; bright Hair, on it a Wreath of Laurel tipt with Gold; yellow Buskins surfled with purple Ribon; a Scimiter drawn, and on it several Gold Crowns and Laurel Wreaths; bearing a Banner of the Drapers Company. This Chariot is drawn by the Supporters of the Companies Arms, which are two golden Lions pellited; on which are mounted two Negro Princes in Robes of Gold, girt about with carnation Scarfs, crowned with Coronets of divers-coloured Feathers, which are Tamberlain's Postilions, and advance, one the King's, the other the Lord Mayor's Banners; these Lions are led by two Asian captived Princes, in Royal Robes and Crowns of Gold. Tamberlain rising up, makes this Address to his Lordship.
The SPEECH. THough I in this Victorious Garb appear, Arm'd with a Gauntlet and my Scimiter, I was a Shepherd, that with watchful pains Kept divers Flocks of Sheep on Scythian Plains: And hearing that the worthiest of all Trades Triumph today, I come from silent Shades Of Rest, to add some lustre to the Day, And without ostentation display The Grandeur of a Shepherd: My Great Name (Long since recorded in the Book of Fame) Is TAMBERLAIN, who march'd with no lessthen An Army of Nine hundred thousand Men, Took BAJAZET Pris'ner, with all his Power, Their Great and August Turkish Emperour, Caged him, and dragg'd him, order'd him as he Freely confess'd he would have order'd me, Had he been Victor. Thus with my Shepherds Life I did begin, I govern'd Flocks of Sheep and Fields of Men. But here's a Person, by whose reverend hue I can discover is a Shepherd too. That Title, Sir, cannot impair Your Fame, Kings, Princes, Priests, and Prophets own that Name. You have a Flock that may, for ought I know, Try both Your Conduct and Your Courage too: In this Great Fold many fierce Spirits lurk, As hard to be reduc'd as the Great Turk. There is a Wolf doth neither bark nor grin, Which eats the Sheep, and puts himself i'th' Skin. When such as these break in, You may, my Lord, Like me, lay down Your Hook, take up Your Sword. But if Love will reduce such as do stray, I must confess it is the happiest way.
These Lions which in Triumph now draw me (Rid on, and led by Captive Princes) be Supporters to the DRAPERS COMPANY; Who do with liberal Expence display Their Love in Triumphs for Your Lordship's Day; To whom You now are an united Brother: Long may You live to honour one another. This Oration concluded, my Lord gave evident demonstrations of Acceptation, and with the Right Worshipful His Praetorian Retinue, the Scarlet Senators, they troop it through the throng; but by the way my Lord is civilly intercepted with The Third Pageant, BEing FORTUNES BOWER, which is an elegant beautiful Square Edifice, erected in the Center of a Spring-Garden, deco∣rate and adorned with the delectable Embroidery of Festoons and Cornucopia's, containing all varieties of Flowers and Fruits which every Season of the Year produceth. In the most eminent and conspicuous position of this Structure, sitteth the benevolent and generally adored Goddess BONA FORTUNA, in a Robe of Gold interweav'd with Purple, a Carnation Mantle richly adorned and embroidered with variety of precious Jewels, a long curl'd bright lovely brown Hair, a triple Crown upon her Head clowded and beam'd, (in the form of that Charge which is upon the Worshipful Drapers Corporation Coat) Carnation silk Hose, purple Buskins laced and surfled with Sky-colour and Gold Ribon; in her right hand a green silk Banner charged with Crowns, Scepters, Globes, Myters, and Crosiers, Or. and in distinct vicinities about her sit her Triumphant Favourites, viz. Prosperity, Gladness, Peace, Plenty, Honour, and Riches. 1. Prosperity, In a Scarlet colour'd silk Robe, a Mantle of Silver, flaxen Hair long and curl'd, a Wreath of Lawrel pointed with Silver, Pearl Hose, Purple Shooes with Aurenge-colour'd strings, holding a a Banner of the Virgin, the Drapers Patroness.
2. Gladness, A Lady of smiling Countenance, in a green Robe, a Mantle of divers Colours, embroidered with Flowers, a bright brown Hair, curl'd, with all colour'd Ribon, a Garland of Myrtle, yellow Silk Hose, Sky-colour'd Buskins laced with Carnation Ribon, bearing a Banner of the Kings. 3. Peace, In a white Robe semined with gold Stars, a Carnation Mantle fring'd with Gold, a dark brown Hair, a Crown of Olive, Gold-colour'd Hose, silver Buskins laced with Carnation Ribon, with the Cities Banner. 4. Plenty, In a Vest of Gold and Silver upon Roman Bases of Car∣nation, richly adorned with silver and gold Lace, a green silk and silver Mantle, purple Buskins laced up with gold, a blackish curl'd Hair, a Wreath of Fruits, Leaves, and Flowers, in one hand a Cor∣nucopia, in the other the Golden Fleece. 5. Honor, In a purple Robe powder'd with Stars of gold, a scarlet Mantle sringed with gold, black Hair, on it a Diadem, watchet silk Hose, white Buskins laced with gold Ribon; bearing a Banner of my Lord's. 6. Riches, In a Robe of Silver embroidered with Gold and Jewels, a watchet Mantle fringed with Gold, fair Hair, a Dukes Crown, Carnation silk Hose, gold Buskins laced with silver and gold Ribon, bearing the Companies Banner. In the Front of this Stage, before the Bower, is planted the Ram, being the Golden Fleece, which is the Companies Crest, on which rideth a beautiful Boy with flaxen Hair, crown'd with Roses, in a Robe of white Sarsenet, and a Carnation Mantle fringed with Gold, white Shooes and Stockings, bearing the Banner of the Virgin. His Lordship coming to a convenient Stand, Fortune maketh an Address to him in this Speech: The SPEECH of FORTUNE. THough I appear now in Great Plenty's Bower, I ne're was here presentially before, Yet am that Goddess the whole World adore. I fill the Seaman's Sail, and guide his Keel, When in the Raging Ocean he doth reel: Before my Shrine the Greatest Princes kneel.
When Jason with his Argo fetch'd the Fleece, Assisted with his Demi-Gods of Greece, By my Great Power 'twas gain'd, and there it is. My Name's Bona Fortuna: It is I That wait on every good Society, And am the Genius of this COMPANY, The Ancient Famous DRAPERS, Men of Treasure, That are beatified with Peace and Pleasure; Who Govern by Right Rule, and Live by Measure; That temperately Trade upon the Growth Of their own Nation, hating Pride and Sloth, Cutting their Coat according to their Cloth. Their Manufacture doth in England grow: And in the Winter, when Boreas doth blow, And all the City wears a Veil of Snow, For Cloth and Books Men will have more to do In Paul's Church-Yard than Pater-Noster-Row: Fortune has said it, and it shall be so. 'Tis for Your sake, My Lord, that I appear: When You launch'd forth, 'twas I was at the Steer To guide You hither, and I'le guard You here. When CAESAR'S Seaman a strong Storm sail'd through, He calm'd His Pilots Fears, letting him know, He carried CAESAR, and His Fortune too. I am the Emblem of a POWER Immense, Fortune by Name, but (in the Sacred Sense) I Typifie ETERNAL PROVIDENCE. My Honour'd Lord, the KING Embarks You now For a Year's Voyage; doubt not, though Storms blow, The Power that brought You on, will bring You through. And as Your Power doth from CAESAR spring, Assume His Courage too in every thing: He's blest, that doth obey GOD and the KING.
His Lordship moving further, shewing manifest Symptoms of his Acceptation in the Pageant and Speech, meeteth another Scene of Drolls near St. Laurence-lane end. The Fourth Pageant. WHich is a kind of Chase, artfully contrived with Trees, Grass, Bushes, Birds, Flowers, Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Sheep on one part of the Stage; and on the other side Persons at Work, as, an Old Woman Spinning of Yarn for woollen Cloth, another as busie Carding of Wool, a third is Picking of it; and in the middle of them are a crew of mad frolick Shepherds, piping, dancing, tumbling, curvetting, with many ridiculous gestures, which the worse it is done, the better it pleases, being intended for a description of Disorder, and an elaborate expression of Confusion; where since no Song can be heard, I have omitted it, because it would be rendred as ineffectual as the sound of a Lute in a Whirlwind. This Droll being past, the Foot-Marshal having placed the As∣sistants, Livery, and the Companies on both sides of King's-Street, and their Pensioners with their Targets hung on the tops of their Javelins; in the rear of them the Ensign-bearers, Drums and Fifes in the front; and hasten the Foins and Budg-Batchelors together with all the Gentlemen-Ushers to Guild-Hall; where his Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-men with three Vollies more, which conclude their duty: His Land Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane so made, into Guild-Hall; after which the Companies repair to the Hall to Dinner; and their several Silk-works and Triumphs are likewise conveyed into Blackwell-Hall; and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the Pageant, there refresh themselves, until his Lordship hath dined at Guild-Hall; where, to make the Feast more famous, his Lordship is illustrate with the splendor and presence of Their most Excellent Majesties, The Duke of York, Prince Rupert, the Duke of Mmouth, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all the other Bishops, (at this time in London.) all the Resident Ambassadors and Envoys, all the Lords of the Privy Council, all the principal
Officers of State, all the Judges, Serjeants at Law and their La∣dies. His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the Musick of the City are in readiness to express their skill, and finger their Violins and Lutes with good skill and excellent humour, and aster a new Lesson or two being playd, a Person of a good Fancy with a Musi∣cal mouth, begins a new Song in Commendation of the Founders of New Bethlehem. SONG. I. THis is a Structure fair, Royally raised; The pious Founders are Much to be praised, That in such times of need, When Madness doth exceed, To build this House of Bread, Noble New Bedlam. II. 'Tis beautiful and large In Constitution, Deserves a Liberal Charge Of Contribution. If I may reach so high, To sing a Prophecy, Their Names shall never dye That built New Bedlam.
III. Methinks the Lawyers may Consult together, And Contribute, for they Send most Men thither; They put'em to much pain, With Words that cramp the Brain, Till Bedlam's fill'd with Plain∣tiff and Defendant. IV. Quacking Physicians shou'd Give Money freely, They maculate Mens Blood, And make them feely; With Hydrargyrum Pills, Their Reasons and their Wills They ruine, and this fills Most part of Bedlam. V. So good a Work as this, Cannot want Actors; But I'll no more insist On Benefactors, But hint, such as I see Hypochondriack be, And are in some degree Fit for New Bedlam.
VI. That Amorous Soul that is In Love a Quaker, And doth adore a Miss More than his Maker, Decks her in Silk and Furr, Then turns Idolater, Kneels down and Worships her, He's fit for Bedlam. VII. The young Man that has got A golden Talent, And hath a brain-sick Plot To seem a Gallant; That richly is array'd, Spends Land, and Shop, and Trade, To be a Hector made; Is fit for Bedlam. VIII. The City-Lad that sings, Rhimes, drolls, and dances, And all his business flings Away for Fancies; He that lets his Angels fly, 'Til he's not worth one Peny, To study Poetry, Is fit for Bedlam.
IX. Whil'st some with Brandy burn Their Guts with drinking, Philosophers do turn Their Heads with thinking; He who is such a one, As studies for the Stone, Til's Brains and his Money's gone, Prepares for Bedlam. X. That Churl who Gold hath won, And dares not use it; But hath a squandring Son Doth game and lose it: His Brains do greatly err, He that with Water cleer Would fill a Colander, Must do't in Bedlam. XI. He that with an Estate Weds a poor Beauty, Who to Disdain and Hate, Turns Love and Duty; It doth his Reason daunt, He has a Bargain on't, Worse than the Elephant, And's fit for Bedlam.
XII. I could tell many more, (I have enroll'd um) Should I declare my store, As I have told um; With Morter, Brick and Stone, Could they their Building run From thence to Islington, 'Twould never hold um. Dinner being ended, and Night approaching, his Lordship being attended by a private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is conducted to his Mansion House in Lumbard-street (where Sir Robert Vyner and Sir Ioseph Sheldon kept their Maioralty) without that troublesom Night Ceremony which hath been formerly, when St. Paul's Church was standing. When his Lordship is housed, those that attend on him depart with order and convenience; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by the care of the Masters Artificers lodged for that Night in Blackwel-Hall, till the next Day following, and then they are to be convey'd to Drapers-Hall. To close up all, the Artists and Artificers (each of them deserving ample Commendation) bid you Good Night. FINIS.
