J1210 12728539 66400
THE POLICY OF THE CLERGY of FRANCE, TO Destroy the Protestants OF THAT KINGDOM. Wherein is set down the Ways and Means that have been made use of for these twenty Years last past, to root out the Protestant Religion. In a Dialogue between two Papists. Humbly offered to the Consideration of all sincere Protestants; but prin∣cipally of his Most Sacred Majesty and the Parliament at Oxford. London, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel-street Covent-Garden, near the Piazza. MDCLXXXI.
THE POLICY OF THE CLERGY of FRANCE. The First Conference. The Parisian. THIS, Sir, is a happy Ren∣counter for me; who thought you were at Paris: Methinks you very much neglect your ancient Friends. I ought not to have been the last to whom you ought to have made known your arrival, since there is no body more disposed to do you Service than my
self. What brings you hither? Does it lye in my Power to serve you? The Provincial. I am infinitely obliged to you, Sir, for all your Civilities and Offers. But I have not at present any Affair of Im∣portance; the design of diverting my self, of seeing my Friends, of learning what passes in the World, and of losing some of the rust of the Province, has brought me to Paris. And I am over-joyed that my good For∣tune has made me meet with the man I honour the most, and whom I have ever had in my memory; but out of whose thoughts I feared I had been a long time banished. Par. I knew you as soon as I saw you, and have ey'd you this quarter of an hour, to be sure my sight had not deceived me. I likewise ob∣served you was in earnest Discourse in that Book-sellers Shop, with a Gentleman I had never seen before. Who is he? He seems to be well bred, and appears like a Person of Quality.
Prov. It is an old Hugonot Gentle∣man, and a great Friend of mine. We have made several Campaignes toge∣ther, and having found much Vir∣tue and Sincerity in him, I never re∣pented the great engagements I have had with him. Par. Have you much Commerce with People of that Religion? Prov. Some: The most part of my Neighbours are of it; and there are few of them that I know, but who are honest People. Par. For my part I have no deal∣ings with them: Not but that I inform my self very particularly of their Af∣fairs, and hear them often spoken of; but I have no acquaintance amongst them. And besides, by what I have heard say, I believe that such a Com∣merce is dangerous. Prov. I am not of your Opinion: I pretend to be as good a Catholick as another; but I never found in those People any thing that ought to oblige me to avoid them. They are of a very grateful and easie Communication; they do not
act the part of Converters in the World: We hardly ever discourse of Religion together; and when it is mentioned, it is always after a very modest manner. We talk pretty of∣ten of their Affairs, but without heat and passion. As to the rest I have always found them good French-men, brave, sincere, faithful in their Com∣merce, true Friends; and you know this is all that is demanded for Con∣versation and Civil Life. For the rest, I do not penetrate into their in∣sides, to know if they do their Duty towards God. Par. I am very glad to hear you talk thus; for I am not unwilling to have a good Opinion of all the World. But if you have Friends in that Party, counsel them to retire betimes; it falls, and those who do not quickly abandon it, run the risque of being oppressed under its Ruines. It is a Religion very much decryed, which every where runs into decay, but e∣specially in this Kingdom. Some memory that had been preserved of the Services they had done the Crown,
had hitherto upheld them: At pre∣sent this is absolutely worn out. The Disgusts they meet with at every step, discourages the most zealous. They quit a Party that is an invincible Ob∣stacle to their Fortune: And as things go, morally speaking, they are not to last ten Years longer: They will be brought back without doubt into the Bosome of the Church, from whence the boldness of their preten∣ded Reformers has drawn them. This is a thing that is made no longer a mystery of. You see how P. Maim∣bourg speaks of it in his Epistle to the King, at the head of the History of Lutheranism. I hope, says he, to write suddenly the Rise and De∣struction of Calvinism at the same time; and is mightily tickled with these hopes. Prov. I am over-joyed you are fal∣len upon the Point. It makes a great noise in the Provinces, and I have spoke of it often to persons who have not intirely satisfied me. You are here at the Source of Affairs, and I must beg you would be so kind as to
instruct me therein. But we must chuse a more Convenient place than the Pavement of St. James's Street, which is not much better than the Sea Shore, where P. B—makes Aristus and Eugenius to have so long Conferences, notwithstanding the heat of the Sun. You know the Au∣thor has been rallied for it; and though we were not acquainted with this Story, the season and hour would oblige us to seek a shade and shelter. Par. Let us go to my House, which is but three steps from hence; and be so kind as to take part there of a mean Dinner, after which we will spend the Afternoon as you shall think fit. Prov. I accept the offer without more ado; by which procedure, I fan∣cy, you will perceive me to be still the same man, without Ceremony, you know I formerly was. They enter the Parisian's House, they Dine there, and after Dinner they go into a Parlour, where the Conver∣sation is thus renewed.
Prov. Since you have assured me you have no business to day, and that we shall see no body: I demand of you this Afternoon, for the instru∣cting me with the manner that is pre∣tended for the reducing the Hugonot-Party to the Catholick Religion. This Affair holds all France in suspence. The Catholicks are in great impati∣ence to see the Success of the hopes that are given them therein. The Hugonots on their part say not all they think; I see them very much a∣larm'd. They chear up themselves: We hope, say they, that God will not abandon the Party of truth. They re∣call into their memories what they stile their Deliverances. But with all this, I do not believe them very safe. Par. They have certainly no great reason to think themselves so, for great Designs are on foot against them. Prov. But the King, is he of the Party? Par. Do not doubt it. The King is a good Catholick, and wishes the
Reduction of the Hugonots to the Church, with as much zeal as any of his Subjects. But besides that, he is more than any man possessed with that noble passion which is called the love and desire of Glory. It is represented to him, That after ha∣ving made all Europe tremble, con∣quer'd so fair Provinces, taken so ma∣ny Cities, made so many Sieges, and won so many Battels, nothing can be more worthy of him, and more capa∣ble of rendering the memory of his Reign Glorious, than the re-uniting the Religions in France. He has hearkned to it, and will forget no∣thing for the accomplishment of this Design. The King does not naturally love to vex his people, and if he was left to act according to his inclina∣tions, things would not be carried on so violently; but he is pushed on, and is not left at quiet. Prov. It is not however believed that violent means shall be em∣ployed; that is to say, Sword, Fire and Banishment. Par. If some Bigots were listened
to, nothing should be spared. But the general vein of the Kingdom does not go so: The King does not love violence: Besides, how weak soever a Party may be, when it is pusht to extremity, it is capable of giving a desperate blow: It was not observed that this Conduct succeeded in the last age. And in fine, the King, whose principle aim is to make himself formidable to his Neighbours, does not design to depopulate his Coun∣tries: And doubtless they would be considerably depopulated. if the Hu∣gonots were destroyed by the Sword, or chased away by Banishment. Prov. It is well known, that the Kings Prospects are very opposite to those; for he has made several Ordonnances to hinder his Subjects from leaving the Kingdom. It is likely that the Hugonots have a very great share in them; they are not al∣lowed to go seek reose elsewhere: They must stay and be exposed to the ills that are designed them; and that they may at length change, being wearied with so many Fatigues, or invited by such hopes.
Par. It is so, it is not to be dissem∣bled. See here then the manner by which it is pretended to compass the great Design of re-uniting them to the Church. It has been observed by experience, that there are two things that give root to Heresie in a State. The first is, the great Liberty that the Hereticks have of preaching their Doctrines. The Second is, the Conveniency of Life, when they are suffered to live in a profound Peace, and enjoy Charges, Employes, and all the other Dignities and Priviledges which the other Subjects enjoy. Prov. It is certain, when a man is born of a Religion, and that he finds therein all the Repose, Riches, Plea∣sure and Honour that he could wish, he has no great mind to change it, how little zealous soever he may be. Par. That's true, and therefore during fifty Years there was not so many Conversions seen, as within these five Years. The Edicts given in favour of the Hugonots by Henry the 4th. and confirmed by his Suc∣cessour Lewis the 13th. granted
them great Liberties. In the Cities, where they were most numerous, they possessed one part of the Magi∣stratures; they had Chambers of the Edict in the Parliaments, and likewise divided Chambers in the Provinces, where they were most numerous. They avoqued all their Causes to these Chambers, that the zealous Catho∣lick might not do them injustice. They exercised all manner of honoura∣ble and gainful Professions, with the same liberty as the Catholicks. They were Counsellors and Attorneys at Law, Physicians gathered in a Bo∣dy of the Faculty. They were recei∣ved into Arts, they carried on Trade; they likewise entred into the Kings affairs as well as others. In War no distinction was made between them and the Catholicks: Nothing was considered, but Merrit and Fidelity, and Service, and Courage. They were received into all the Military Dignities, and had Pensions. They were Collonels, Brigadeers, Major-Generals, Lieutenant-Generals, and even Marshals of France, comman∣ding
Armies in Chief. On the other part, as for what concerned the exer∣cise of their Religion, they very free∣ly enjoyed what had been granted them: They had places appointed from the time of the Edict, for their Sermons: Every Gentleman, having High Justices, was as a little Soveraign in his House: He might assemble by the sound of the Bell, all the Religio∣naries thereabouts; he made a Parish in his House, and no body disturbed him. The Bishops were used to suf∣fer those people in their Diocesses: They had even engagements with the Principals of this Party. The Hugo∣not Lord made no scruple of visiting my Lord the Prelate; and the Prelate, on the other part, lookt with a good Eye upon the Hugonot Gentleman. Thus they lived in a very great Peace. But it was visibly perceived that the Heresie took deep root by the favour of that repose, as ill Herbs are increa∣sed by the gentleness of the Spring. Prov. The State the Kingdom had been in for a long time, had without doubt contributed to the tranquility
the Hugonots enjoyed. A War of thirty Years with Spain, a long Mino∣rity, Civil Broiles, and Forreign Af∣fairs, had hindered the thoughts of them. Par. That is certain: For, after all, our Kings, who bear with justice the name of most Christian and Eldest Sons of the Church, have never lost the design of destroying Hereticks. But their Prudence has obliged them to suspend the use of the means they designed to make use of for that end. Prov. As for Henry the 4th. I do not think this can be said of him. He had treated with them with sincerity. He was of opinion he had received great services from them; he had been a long time of their Religion: He only quit∣ted it, that he might quite dissipate the League which covered it self with the Cloak of Catholicity. And we very well know, that this remnant of Inclination that he had preserved for them, cost him his Life. After his Death, during the minority of Lewis the 13th. and the Ministry of the Marquess d' Ancre, the Affairs of
Court and State were in such disor∣der, that there were few thoughts of extirpating the Hugonots. It is true, that Cardinal Richlieu took from them their Cities of Surety; but it was ra∣ther out of a Politick prudence, than any zeal of Religion. He saw that it was a State in a State, and that those Cities were retreats for Rebels and the Discontented; but in the bottom he sought not their ruin. His en∣gagements were too small with the Court of Rome, and was too able a Politician to ruin a Party, of whose Fidelity he might always be assured. It may likewise be said, with more as∣surance, that Cardinal Mazarin never thought of extirpating Heresie. The Good man, though an Italian, and a Neighbour of the Church, had no great zeal for it, Riches were his only Divinity. It is very well expressed in one of his Epitaphs, Si Coelum ra∣pitur, habet. He never sought any o∣ther way to go to Heaven thn that of Rapine. Especially he never thought of this way to Heaven, which is cal∣led the Conversion of Hereticks. Be∣sides,
his Ministry was attended with so many Traverses, and he was so hard put to it to defend himself against so many Enemies, that it cannot be imagined he had ever any other Pro∣spects than such as tended to the esta∣blishment of his Family, and the Pre∣servation of his Fortune. Thus I be∣lieve it may be said, that the Design of ruining the Party of the pretended Reformed in France, has been laid since the Year 1660. Par. I grant that the Project was not well formed till after the Peace of the Pyrenees; and see after what manner it was resolved they should proceed in it. Those people, said they then, must be deprived of the Liber∣ty they have of preaching their Reli∣gion. By these means they will be no longer instructed, and will become ignorant of their own Tenets. Their Temples must be raised, and the liber∣ty of their Exercise taken from them. Their Ministers must be persecuted, some of them banished, others im∣prisoned, others deprived of their Goods by great Fines. Every thing
they do must be imputed as a Crime. Nothing is more easie than the surprizing them. They cannot preach their Religion without preach∣ing against the Catholick Religion; and there is not an Expression, but what might produce a Process. By this means the people will be terrified, Fathers and Mother disgusted, and will not easily put their Children to the studying Divinity for the making them Ministers. Besides this, they must likewise be disturbed in all kinds, and be deprived of their Charges; and expelled from all Employes both of Peace and of War, and removed from Court, and banished from the Kings House, and likewise from the Armies both by Sea and by Land. Their Children must be taken from them, and be instructed in the Ca∣tholick Religion. They must be daunted by threatnings, and tempted by hopes, terrified by sufferings, and invited by benefits; when they have once changed Religion, they shall be forbidden upon great punishments to return to the Religion they have quit∣ted.
Their liberties must be dimini∣shed by little and little, and when it is reduced to a small thing, and that their number is very much lessened, on a sudden all their Edicts shall be revoked. Prov. This seems to be very well concerted. The first thing that this Design produced, was the Declarati∣on that the King made shortly after the Peace of the Pyrenees, by which he ordered Commissioners to take Cognisance of the Infractions of the Edict of Nantes. Par. That is true: The Hugonots fell then into the Snare that was laid for them. They imagined that this Declaration was advantagious to them, and fancied, that by the means of these Commissioners, they should have satisfaction for all the Contra∣vensions that had been made for the Edicts and Declarations which were favourable to them; and such Con∣traventions from that time were in no small number. Prov. I can assure you, that there were but few who were thus trap∣panned.
They were before very well acquainted, that a great deal of mis∣chief was designed them, and the most penetrating judged that there was something more couched under it than they could think of. Par. It was a thing the best imagi∣ned that possibly could be: For by Virtue of this Declaration, they were obliged to represent before these Com∣missioners, all the Titles by which they enjoyed their Temples, and the liberty of exercise of Religion in each place. And by these means, more than the half of their Temples were Condemned, and above the third part of them were raised: And after the manner they proceed in this Case, it is impossible any should subsist; at least there will so few remain, as not to make a number. Prov. How so? Par. First, You know that a long Peace makes People negligent; no sureties are taken, when no danger is seen. The Hugonots lived under the Faith of the Edicts and the Decla∣rations for above sixty Years. They
imagined they had no need of Titles, because they had been so long in possession: Insomuch that they took but little care to preserve the Titles of their establishment. After the Edict of Nantes, Commissioners were no∣minated by the King, for the Execu∣ting this Edict. They went to the Places where there was any difficulty. They gave Acts of establishment for some places to Preach in, but not for all. For where there was no difficulty nor Process to be tryed, they gave no judgment. In the places where the Commissioners had given Acts of e∣stablishment, because they were not necessary, having found the establish∣ment wholly made, they laid hold of the advantage, and condemned them because they could not shew a Title they never had, and which was thought they had no occasion for. In the places where the Commissioners had given acts of establishment, if those acts were not shewn; though they gave very evident marks of them, and that they had other pieces to which those referred, no regard
was had of them. In such places where the first Titles were found, they found nullities in them; and you know it is not difficult to bring this to pass where there are none. The most part of their Temples are founded upon a certain Right that they call Possession, founded upon one of the Articles of the Edict of Nantes, which says. That in all the Places where the exercise of the R. P. R. shall have been in the Years 1596, and 1597, it shall be made there, and continued. Proofs were demanded of them, that Ser∣mons were Preached in such a place in the Years mentioned by the E∣dict. Prov. I stop you there. Had they need of Proofs and Titles, for a benefit they had been in Possession of above sixty Years? Was not there Prescripti∣on for them? It is so general a Right, that it may be called the Law of Na∣tions. There is even Prescription for Crimes. Thirty Years makes Prescription every where, and the Hugonots had been in possession above twice thirty Years.
Par. They laughed at all this. Such Temples were raised as were more ancient than the Edict. To return to what I said they were demanded proofs of their Possession, and it was impossible for them to produce them. First, the proof by Inquest is im∣possible, because there are no people living of that time. The proofs by writing are, either Registers of Mar∣riage, or of Baptisme, or Consistorial Papers, or Acts of their Synods. As for Registers of Baptismes and of Mar∣riages, they will not receive them; they say that they Marry and Baptize every where, and that this cannot be a proof that they have had in a certain place, a Temple and a Publick Exer∣cise. As for Acts of Consistories, and of Synods, it is difficult for them to produce any; because that that time was Calamitous in the highest degree, by reason of the War of the League. They had not the liberty of assembling, nor of making acts of the Resolutions they took: However they did not fail to produce a considerable number of them. But all this did nothing, no
regard was had to them; nay, there is even no regard to the Resolutions of the Counsel and the Parliament made for the establishment of their Temples. And to tell you it in a word, the Catholick Commissioner has se∣cret orders, not to find any Title good, and to condemn all. It is true, that there is one of the R. P. R. joyned in Commission with him, without whom nothing ought to be judged. But it is only for form sake; this Catholick Commissioner does all. He alone instructs the Processes, and often∣times judges them alone. If Hugonos complains of a Contravention to the Edicts, he is not heard. If a Catho∣lick will complain of a pretended Contravention, he obtains all that he demands against them. In the Judg∣ments of their Temples, the Hugonot Commissioner is either corrupted, or frightned; they deceive him, and pro∣mise him to confirm one Temple, if he will consent to the demolishing of an∣other. And in fine, if nothing can be obtained of him, the Catholick Commissioner condemns, the Decision
is made, and this Decision is sent to the Counsel, where they ordinarily pronounce upon the judgment of the Catholick Commissioner, without further examination. Only for the keeping some appearance of justice, sometimes of thirty Decisions they will let the Hugonots gain one, that they may say to them, you see that Justice is done, when it is found that you have reason on your side. Prov. I likewise oftentimes hear the Country Gentlemen complain of the troubles they are put to for the Sermons they caused to be preached in their Houses. Par. Neither have they been spa∣red upon that Article. Henry the 4th. believing he had received great Ser∣vices from the Nobility of this Party, granted to all the Lords of High Ju∣stice the power of causing Sermons to be preach'd in the places of their a∣bode, to receive there all people, and even to assemble them by the ringing a Bell: This occasioned them a great number of Sermons. Not that at Court great stress is laid upon these
establishments, because they pe∣rish with the Gentleman's Family, who maintains them, or cease when he turns Catholick. Now Gentle∣men ruin themselves by the expence they are at; and oftentimes to reco∣ver themselves by some Employ, which gives them the means of Subsisting, they change Religion, and are con∣verted. Thus the Family decaying, or becoming Catholick, the Hugonots are chased away. However it has been indeavoured by several Decrees, to ruin these sorts of establishments. It has first been declared, that High Justices newly erected, were not granted to have this Priviledge, when they fell into the Hands of Hugonot Lords. They have enlarged this e∣ven to the time of the Edict, decla∣ring they will not allow that publick exercise to be made in all the Lands e∣rected in High Justice since the Edict. But interpret the Article of the Edict of the Lands which were at that time in Right of High Justice: They e∣ven proceeded much farther, for it is pretended that the Lords have no
Right of causing Sermons to be preach∣ed in their Houses, at least if they do not shew that the Lands which they possess in High Justice, were at the time of the Edict in the hands of Lords of the R. P. R. and in possession of causing Sermons to be held there. It is true  is last Article has not been yet  every where with the  rigour; but it is an Affair that i easily returned to. In the mean time these Hugonot Lords are forbidden to have any sign of publick exercise in that part of the House where preach∣ing is performed. They have caused the Bell and Seats to be taken away: And this is done, for fear that in time it might take the form of a place of possession. They are likewise forbid∣den to have preaching out of their House, and the Precincts of their Court. And for the more safety, a decree was made by which it was for∣bidden to the Ministers Preaching in the High Justices and in the Houses of Piefarons to come to their Synods, and to enter themselves in the Tables of these Synods. It is true, that they
have obtained respite to the executi∣on of this arrest; as also to the exe∣cution of another Order, which com∣manded their Ministers to reside in the Places where they preached, which had obliged the Ministers who preach at Charinton to stay there, and quit Paris. Prov. These respites that the King has granted, make appear that this Prince is good natur'd, and that he would give them much more repose, if he was not continually solicited by the Clergy. Par. I do not at all doubt it: But happily we have near his Majesty such persons as never leave him at rest up∣on that point. It is the whole busi∣ness of the Counsel of Conscience. The Clergy has Informers, who only employ their thoughts for the inven∣ting new Edicts as the Financiers have, who think of nothing but the means of augmenting the Kings Revenues. Prov. Will you make an end of in∣forming me what is done to destroy their Temples? Par. I should be too long if I would say all. For within these twenty
years so many orders have been issued to that end, that a great Volume is composed of them, and there is not one but what tends to their ruin: I assure you that nothing is neglected and that our people are watching on all sides to destroy them. Prov. I hear them often complain of the deceitfulness of their Antago∣nists. Par. The th is, they cry up the Maxim against them; Dolus, an vir∣tus quis in  requirat? I see that by those who sollicit me, and who put affairs into my hands against them. False pieces are produced which of∣tentimes pass for good. I'll give you an Example which will make you laugh. The Clergy of Niort, a City of Poitou, solicited the destruction of a Temple that the Hugonots have there. Their Deput presented an Order of Parlia∣ment, dad the Year, 1601, or 1602. which ordered that the Temple of that City should be raised; because it had been only suffered in the City by Toleration, for the safety of the Hu∣gonots; who could not do their Exer∣cise
in the Field, because of the Lea∣guers. This Order having been com∣municated to the Advocate of the Party, he discovered that there was upon the Banks of the Loire between Orleans and Blois, a great inclosed Burrough, or little City, called Mer, in which were many Hugonots. This Order had been made against them. The Clergy of Niort had met with this piece by chance: They had in the word Mer, parted the last stroak of the m, and made it an i, they had made the e an o, insomuch that af∣ter these changes it was read Nior. But the misfortune was, that in this Order there was mention made of the Lea∣guers of Orleans, who made incursions, and came to pillage. There was like∣wise mention made of a certain Lord of Mer, and several other things of that Nature, which had no more refe∣rence to Niort than to Rome. Thust he piece was convicted of forgery. Prov. This is a strange Cheat; the Curate who had falsified this piece, and had produced it, was not he pu∣nished?
Par. And what punishment should have been inflicted on him? All the ill he came to by it, was, that he lost his Process. Prov. Since we have seen the Principal things that are employed to ruin the Temples of the P. Reformed, be plea∣sed to inform me of the other means that are, or will be made use of, to oblige them to quit their Religion. Par. You know that Fears and Hopes are the two great Machins that set minds a going. It was believed, that in doing them a great deal of hurt while they remained Hugonots, and a great deal of good after their Conversion, would draw in a great Number. Prov. This is an infallible means. How many people are there, who are of a Religion by chance, rather than by choice; who are not at all fixed in the Religion of their Fathers? who continue of it because they were born so, and that they find therein their Conveniency? Having neither Piety nor Devotion, they little care of what Religion they are. How ma∣ny
Catholicks do you believe we have, who are not of Gods Religion but of the Kings, and who would in∣continently change if they were in a State where they could not have Em∣ployes but upon that Condition? Par. I know there are but too ma∣ny. Wherefore these people are de∣prived of their Charges, and all hopes of coming to them. Their Nobility has consumed themselves as well as ours by their great Expences. Being become poor, they continue however vain and ambitious. You know that the most part of the Grandees have no other Divinity than their Grandeur, and that they would Sa∣crifice all things for the maintaining it. These people have appeared at Court, the King has graciously received them, they have been cares∣sed, they have had part in all the pleasures, and have had none in the Employs; that is to say, they have been permitted to ruin themselves still more in the great Scene of the Court, and by great expences: By this means they have took a relish to the
World. It is there that the zeal of Religion usually diminishes: For there is no surer Remedy to Cure Bigottry than to come to Court. In the mean time they were perpetually told, you are of a Religion that is no longer of the mode; as long as you continue of it, nothing will be done for you; turn Catholick, and you are sure to have Pensions, and Governments, and Regiments, and Brevets of Duke and Peer, and Staffs of Marshalls of France. Prov. I easily conceive that young ambitious minds, libertins and the un∣godly, cannot resist such temptations, and thus they have been deprived of all their persons of Note. Par. They have been a long time put to trouble about Civil Charges and Magistrature. When they had purchased any such Employ, they were stopt at the Seale, they were consumed in Sollicitations, and were oftentimes after this sent back, if they were not recommended by some Ca∣tholick Lord, who made their busi∣ness his own. But in sine, this was tiresome, and of a sudden they were
rendred incapable of all Charges of Magistrature: Their divided Con∣sulats were taken from them in Langue∣dock, insomuch that a small Mayor of a Village is not suffered of that Religion. Prov. 'Tis true, I saw the other day a man from Cevennes, who told me hat in their Mountains they are all Hugonots, and that there be great Burrough Towns, where there is not a Catholick besides the Curate. Inso∣much that it is not known how the Kings Edict shall be executed in those places, for they will be obliged to cause Persons to come 24 leagues from thence to exercise the Consulats. Par. There were a great many people who had part in the Kings Af∣fairs and Finances, which raised Fa∣milies amongst them. They had had Intendants of the Finances, who maintained by their Commissions a multitude of mean people. The King has newly taken from them this means of subsistance, and they have been forbidden to have any part in the Affairs of the Finances, either dire∣ctly or indirectly. Which is the most
terrible blow for them that can be imagined. For in sine, it may be said that it was the only way that was left them, to raise themselves, to make a Fortune, and to acquire Riches. Prov. This puts me in mind of what I heard an old Minister say the other day, in a Hugonot House where I was. The King, said he, does us more good than he believes, in depriving us of Charges, and removing us from the Finances. The first entertained to our Vanity, and ruined our Families: and the Second brought us base Riches, which caused great mischief our Party. So soon as a Citizen by his Traffick and Management, or by the means of his Parents had gained four or five hundred pounds a Year, he would needs be distinguished. To that end he bought a Charge, and to maintain the Dignity of it, he spent beyond his Revenue. The best Managers laid nothing up: Their Riches, which in a heap was some∣thing considerable, was no longer so, being shared amongst several Children. Thus the Son of the very first Gene∣ration
ruined a Family his Father had raised. Whereas had they lived privately, they would have aug∣mented their Stocks, and left their Children at their ease. As for em∣ploys in the Finances, the ill they have done us, is not to be expressed. They are certain means of enriching our selves by stealing from the King, or sucking the blood of the people; both of them odious Crimes, and which draw the Curse of God. These people acquired money with great ease, wherefore it cost them nothing. They fell into all manner of expences Luxury, and Vanities. The rich Branches of their Family, who were raised higher by Birth, and by Rank, would not suffer themselves to be sur∣passed by these upstart Families. Wherefore they exceeded in their expences, and ruined themselves out of emulation. When we are poorer, perhaps we shall be more sober and modest, since we cannot be so by in∣dignation. It is a great honour that is done us, not to suffer us to be Publi∣cans and Levyers of Taxes. This was what that Minister said.
Par. This is fine for a Sermon, but few people would be of this Mi∣nisters Opinion. In the bottom they will see how many persons this de∣prives them of. There are already great ones of the Hugonot Party, who are turning Catholicks, they will be followed by several others, and these great Heads will draw a Multitude of ordinary people, who labour and live under them. Prov. My Minister foresaw this; and added that it would immediate∣ly happen, but that it would not con∣tinue Par. The truth is, that its a blow once given, whose effects will not last long for Conversions: Neither is it what is looked upon as most conside∣rable. It is a great point, that ha∣ving taken from them the Chambers of the Edict, and the divided Cham∣bers. These bodies having been ex∣presly established for them and in their favour, rendred them considerable, without reckoning that they had Presidents, and the half of the Coun∣sellors in the divided Chambers: This
made appear they were still held in consideration. At present they are abandoned to injustice and violence. When they have a Catholick Anta∣gonist they are sure to lose their Pro∣cess; and when both Parties are Hu∣gonots, that which gives hopes of changing Religion is certain to gain his Cause. Prov. I was in Languedock when the divided Chamber of Castelnauda∣ry was surpressed, and that the Hugo∣not Counsellors were ordered to go to Tholouse to be parted in the Cham∣bers. These poor people were in a consternation that cannot be descri∣bed. They said the King sent them to Slaughter. They related to me se∣veral Tragical Events which had hap∣d either by the fury of the people  injustice of the Parliament of  against them. Amongst things they told me that two  Counsellors, going one day  their Chamber, were hanged up  Court without any form .
Par. The truth is that City is much changed since the time of the Albigen∣ses; it is passed into another extremi∣ty: For it must be confessed that the zeal for the Catholick Religion is there accompanied with too much violence. To return to the Subject of our Conversation, What has been done to become Masters of the Hugo∣nots Children is extreamly well con∣certed. First it has been ordered that Maids at the age of Twelve Years, and Boys at Fourteen, shall have the liber∣ty of making choice of their Religion. You know that it is at that age that the Yoke appears heavy to Children; because it is the age in which they must make choice of a Profession, they are obliged to work, and it is requi∣red of them to begin to leave off the liberties of Child-hood. They have not yet any love for Religion, and of∣tentimes they have but very little knowledge of it. The Yoke of obedi∣ence, and that of punishments being hard to them, they seek only the means to shake them off. To help them in the Execution of this Design,
there is established in the Cities where the Hugonots are most numerous, Houses of the Mission, and Propagati∣on of the Faith, into which the Re∣bellious Children retreat under pre∣text of turning Catholicks. When they are in these Houses, their Pa∣rents are not permitted to see them, and they are lightly instructed; some days after they make abjuration of Heresie, and they are made to sign the act: After this they have some li∣berty given them, because they are hindred by the Declaration against Relapses, from returning into their former Religion. They are often times returned to their Fathers and Mothers, who are obliged to answer for them. And if the Children escape, and go away out of a Libertine hu∣mour, their Fathers and Mothers are accused of having sent them out of the Kingdom; and upon this pre∣text a Process is formed against them, and they are ruined. Prov. I have likewise heard some∣thing of Schools, now you are talking of Children.
Par. There is an Order issued out, by which it is forbidden them to have more than one Master of a School, in every place where they have exercise. It is to oblige them to send their Children to Catholick Schools, be∣cause there are places where it is abso∣lutely impossible that six School. Ma∣sters can teach all the Children. And those who shall go to Catholick Schools, endeavours are used to in∣struct them privately, and make them turn. Prov. For my part I avow to you, that I find that Article which regards Children very severe: I can hardly comprehend how liberty can be given to a Maid to make choice of a Reli∣gion at an age we would not give her leave to chuse a Petticoat. But be∣sides, I hear them very often complain that they proceed farther than the Kings Declaration permits. They say that their Children are took from them before the age appointed by the Edicts; and when they demand the reason of it, they are laughed at. The Intendants who are Judges of these
and other Infractions, put them off for whole Years, till that the Children may have attained the age of 12 or 14 years, and then they cause them to make their Declarati∣ons. When the Mother is a Catho∣lick, the Widdow of a pretended Re∣formed, according to the last Decla∣rations the Children ought to be instructed in the Religion of the Fa∣ther. But the Mother makes sure of them, causes them to be instructed in her Religion, and no satisfaction can be had for it. They likewise say that their Children are often taken up in the Streets, are shut up in Cloisters, and they never hear more of them. Par. All these complaints are not without ground. But what injury does this do them? Their Children are saved, and endeavours are used to save them themselves. Prov. I am told that a Decree has been lately made, which concerns the holding of their Synods. Par. It is that henceforwards Ca∣tholick Commissioners shall be given them on the Kings part. It is a step
towards the depriving them of all li∣berty of holding their Synods. By which means will be known their strength and weakness; it will be known what Ministers are capable of being gained. Divisions will be sown amongst them, some will be won by promi∣ses, others daunted by Fear: In fine, their very Intrails will be known; and it will be a great means for the destroy∣ing them. Besides the Decrees that are made for the ruining them, others are obtained for the rendring of them infamous. They are forbidden to set up Flower de Luces, either within, or without their Temples, as if they were unworthy of bearing those marks of honour; and as if they were not good French-men. All their principal Seats are ordered to be taken down in their Temples, and all the [Ballisters and Rails raised. The Bishops have obtained a Decree, by which it is ordered, that during their visit in the places where there is exer∣cise of that Religion, it shall be inter∣rupted out of respect to the Catholick Religion, as if those people were
Turks and Mahometans. This seems but a small thing; but however it helps forward, and strikes deep into the minds of the people, augments the aversion they have against the Hugonots, and disposes them to quit a Religion, for which they see there is so much Aversion and Contempt. Prov. The Decree that has been lately made to forbid their Midwives, and all others of their Religion to lay Women, is a thing that terribly vexes them. It is not to be described the terrour this has cast in most places into the minds of most part of their Women with Child. For there are a great many Cities, where there is not one Catholick Midwife, who has any skill in that Art; and there are some where there are none at all. I have it from good hands, that in places, where this Order has been open∣ly published, the terrour of it has cast several Women in Labour before their Times, and occasioned their Death. Par. This Arrest is an essential point; wherefore all the former dif∣ficulties must be passed over to put it
in execution. When their Women are recovered from their first frights, it will be as convenient for them to be laid by Catholicks, as by Women of their own Religion. Prov. But what will they do in those places where there are no Ca∣tholick Midwives? Par. Send for them from other places. Did you never know that Jewish Mid∣wives have been sent from Avignon to several Cities in Languedock? It is till that Catholick ones can be sent thither. They will not at first be so very expert, and will cost some Women their Lives; but for a greater good, some ill is to be permitted. For in fine, by these means they will be used by little and little to lose the Liberty of Con∣science they are to be deprived of. It is one of their Articles of Faith, that the Baptisme of Faith is not good. They must at present suffer this Arti∣cle of Faith to be forced from them. But there is another mystery couched thereunder which is not yet time to reveal, and which will be manifested in its time. Shall I tell you my Opi∣nion?
We have not yet touched the most important Declarations that have been rendered against them; it is the Declaration against Relapses, and the Decree which was lately made, forbidding any Catholick, upon pain of Banishment, loss of Honour, and con∣fiscation of goods, to turn and be of the pretended Reformed Religion. Prov. I have seen these Declarati∣ons, and make the same judgment as you do of them. Par. It may be said that thus two thirds of the affair is done. The Liber∣ty of Conscience that had been grant∣ed them, consisted only in these three points. The first of being permitted to live in the pretended reformed Religi∣on, when born of it. The second, having leave to change and be of it; though not born of it. The third, the being free to turn to it again; though they had once abandoned it. The last is extinguished by the Decla∣ration against Relapses. The Second, by this last Declaration, which forbids a Catholick to turn Hugonot. There remains only the first point,
which ought not to last long accor∣ding to all appearances. Thus all the other Decrees that have been made against them does only retrench the Branches; but these cut up the very roots. Which may make them com∣prehend that their ruin is directly and speedily aimed at. Prov. And I assure you they per∣fectly comprehend it; and those I have seen, seem to me extreamly al∣larm'd. But I know not if you are acquainted that there are several Ca∣tholicks who are much discontented, and say, We will be Catholicks out of Conscience, and not out of con∣straint. What! the Inquisition is brought upon us, we are depriv'd of that Liberty of Conscience, that is the most precious thing in the World: If we were so unhappy as to be mi∣staken, and fall into Heresie; the King, would he save our Souls with detaining us by force in the Catholick Church? We should be damned not∣withstanding the King; as well in quality of concealed Hereticks, as in quality of Hypocrites. Besides, the
King will thereby lose all those of his Subjects, who would change Religion. It will not be difficult for a Catholick, who will turn Hugonot, to dispose of his Goods before he declares, and af∣terwards to into a Forreign Coun∣try. Par. Besides, these extraordinary means, which are made use of to Convert them, there are a great num∣ber of others which make less noise, that are Employed however with great success: As much mischief is done them as can be; they are depri∣ved of all means of gaining their live∣lihood: They are not allowed to be of Arts and Trades; though the Decla∣rations and Edicts expresly bear they shall be received into them. Injustice is done them; they are drove from most part of the Bars; they are not allowed to be of a Body of Phisicians, they are offered Money, and sums are put into the Hands of the principal Judges and Governours to be distri∣buted to the Converted: Those have it by advance, who promise to turn. When by all these means they have
been induced to change Religion, the Declaration against Relapses fixes them in such a manner, that they dare not return to their first Religion, though their Consciences often solli∣cit them to it. Prov. I hear them particularly com∣plain of the ills their Ministers suffer: They say that people are sent to hear their Sermons; that these ignorant and faithless people, impute to them things they never said, and even make Crimes of the most innocent expressions: Whereupon their Mini∣sters are troubled, are put into Prison, are condemned to some shameful sa∣tisfaction, and to unsay it in open Sessions; some to be drawn upon Sledges with the Executioner, others to be banished, others to suffer Con∣fiscation, and the loss of all their Goods. It is but some few years since that the Prisons in the Province of Poictou, were all full of their Ministers, and their Ancients, because they had preached upon the ruines of the Temples that had been destroyed.
Par. Do you find this strange? Is it not the Ministers who keep them in their errour? In fleecing these peo∣ple, and driving them away, by the troubles they are put to, their flocks will be no longer instructed in their Religion, and will be easily reduced to the Catholick Religion. Prov. But to the purpose. Have not you heard talk of what has been done against the Ministers in the Pro∣vince of Xaintonge, by the Lieutenant General of Xaintes? Par. Yes, the business has come to our Ears: You see that all the world is let loose upon them. All is permitted, provided it tends to do them mischief. Neither does the Court any longer make a Mystery of the hatred it has, and is desirous the people should have for them. You may have observed in the Declaration which forbids Catholicks to turn Hu∣gonots, that the King is made to say, that the liberty of Conscience which had been granted to the pretended Re∣formed, had augmented the hatred that the Catholicks had against their persons and their Religion.
Prov. I avow to you that that part suprized me. In all the other De∣clarations it was always said that the design of the Edicts was to establish peace between the Subjects of one and the other Religion; and the Kings have ever commanded an uni∣on and good intelligence between them. But it is at present clear that these people are abandoned to the ha∣tred and fury of the Catholick people. The King is too good and too wise to have caused this Clause to be inserted, he was certainly surprized; but let us return to the affair of Xaintonge. Par. Thus then it was. The Ci∣vil Lieutenant of Xaintes caused a re∣quest to be presented him by the Kings Sollicitor of that place, de∣manding that the Ministers might be held to the observation of the eleventh Article of Charles the Ninth's Decla∣ration, of the 17th of January, 1561. Thus run the terms of the Article; The Ministers shall be obliged to ap∣pear before our Officers of Places, and take Oath of the observation of these Presents, and promise not to preach
any Doctrine which is contrary to the pure Word of God, as it is con∣tained in the Symbol of the Council of Nice, and in the Canonique Books of the Old and New Testaments, that our Subjects may not be filled with new Heresies. According to this Arti∣cle, the Lieutenant-General of Xaintes has ordered that the Ministers of his Province should be obliged to make Oath before him; and upon refusal he has forbidden them all Function of their Ministry to the very visiting the Sick. To which several have impru∣dently submitted: for it was very ea∣sie for them to have gone on and not have obeyed, because it belongs on∣ly to the King and his Intendants of Justice to silence Ministers. Prov. But why do the Hugonot Ministers make a difficulty of taking the Oath? Par. Because that under pretext of the Oath, that they should have taken, of preaching nothing contrary to the Word of God, they might have been hindred from preaching against the Catholick Religion: You know ve∣ry
well that the points which sepa∣rate Us from the Hugonots are in the Word of God, and all our Doctors prove them by Scripture, as well as by the Fathers, and by Reason. Be∣sides, by this means a Declaration was revived that is not favourable to them, which was extinguished above an Age ago, and which was likewise never executed. In reviving one Article of it all the others were re∣vived: and likewise by renewing this Declaration, they would have a right of recalling also all the others which were much more favourable to them. They still add, that it doth not belong to a little particular Judge to aggra∣vate their Yoke; that they live un¦der the Priviledge of the Kings Edicts, and that the King is their only Ma∣ster in things that concern Religion. But I must acquaint you with what has been imagined against them in Brittany, which is well worth that of aintonge. A Curate bethought himself to give out a  pain of Excommunication for the ∣ging his Parishioners to reveal all  who had spoken irreverently of the
Catholick Religion. There was a prodigious number of Witnesses, ei∣ther false or true found; who deposed against the Hugonots of those parts: Insomuch that they were all obliged to fly to avoid Imprisonment. I be∣lieve the place is called Quiatin; it is a Lordship which belongs to the Fami∣ly of the Moussays. Prov. This Affair of Britany, as well as that of Xaintonge brings into my mind another of Dauphine, which has this in Common with those, as to make appear that generally all that is done against those people comes from the same principle that we have already enough remarked; that no∣thing is spared, even to believe that it is a work grateful to God, to im∣pute to them false Crimes for the casting them into certain ruin: But perhaps you know the Story as well as I; it is what passed some years since in the pursuit of the Recollects of Nions, have you not heard of it? Par. Being one day by chance at the late Chancellour N's House, I heard them talk of a Bell, that the Religi∣ous
would have taken from the Hu∣gonots of that place, and I also remem∣ber that they made so much noise with their Bell, that the Counsel was stun'd: But I know nothing more of it. Prov. What I am going to relate to you, has made much more noise than the Bell of Nions. It came into those good Fathers Heads that the Mi∣nister of Vinsobres, a small neighbour∣ing Village of their Convent, kept secret Correspondence with the Eng∣lish: They so well represented this idle imagination to the Kings Attor∣ney General of that Province, that he immediately declared himself his Ac∣cuser. The whole Parliament of Gre∣noble sell into this Snare; one of the most able Counsellors of their Body, was deputed Commissioner to inform incessantly upon the Places, The Grand Provost took the Field with him, followed by all the Com∣pany of Serjeants, the Sieur B— (thus is the Ministers Name) choosing rather to be a Bird of the Forrest than the Cage, frighted at their March, fled as soon as he had notice of it. His
Evasion fortified the suspicions that were given them of him. They fan∣l the Syndio of the Consistory might likewise be of the Party, and that the Minister had done nothing without his Participation. He was the Cock of the Parish, and a man likewise very well to pass, who at all adventures could pay the Fidlers. His person was szd without other form of Process. He was conducted with Irons upon his Hands and Legs into the Conciergery of the Palace. The people cryed every where against him all along the way. He was to have been shed alive at least and they sck'd  all parts to Grenoble to see the Execution; but in fine, Parturiunt Montes exit  Mus. Par. How! Did it all go into smoke? Prov. Even so: After they had ex∣amined the business, there was found nothing in it, and those that had been concerned were the Publick laughter. The truth is, that the Parliament, in some manner to save their honour, de∣tained this Syndie two whole years
in Prison; but that time being expi∣red, he was released, without being condemned or absolved. The Door was opened to him one day when he least expected it. And all the Fruit that was gathered from this  Process was that this good man turn∣ed Catholick during his detention. Par. This is pushing the zeal of Religion very far, and becoming strangely ridiculous. What likeli∣hood is there, that in Dauphine, which is the farthest Province of France from England, they should undertake to keep Intelligence with England, while that in Guyenne and in Norman∣dy, which are its Neighbours, they had no thoughts of it? Neither can I conceive how that a Minister of a Village can be bold enough to under∣take, and able enough to carry on an Affair of that importance. But were not these Recollects punished for their false Accusation? Prov. They had no great thanks for having occasioned this Sally; but what is to be done with people of the Frocks? Their Excuse was their
good intentions, and they were freed with a small Reprimand▪ that the Chief President de la Berchere made them, who is certainly a Magistrate of the greatest Integrity, and one of the best Servants the King has in France. Par. And what became of the Mi∣nister, was not he Condemned out of Contumacy? Prov, Very far from that, he was suffered to take away his Goods, an account of which had been taken, and would have returned to his Vil∣lage, if that Tempest had not drove him into a good Port in Swizzerland. He possesses a Post incomparably better than that of Vinsobres; and these Reve∣rend Fathers have procured him Ri∣ches and Repose, without thinking on it. Within these two years another Minister of the same Province has done as much. The Religious of St. Anthony of Vienois persecuted him, he retired into Holland, where he was very well received. Par. Is it not the Minister of—who was seen rouling a long
time at St. Germains and Verseilles, after the Courts Taile? I have heard it confusedly said, that he was accu∣sed of Treason, and detained several Months in Prison; but that he pur∣ged himself, and yet was silenced by a decree of the Parliament of Greneble. I know nothing of the particulars of his business, if you are informed of them, I pray you tell me what they are. Prov. You have divined him, it is the same; his adventure has something very singular. The Hugo∣nots of Dauthine had kept a Fast in all their Churches; and the Synod that had ordered it, had enjoyned all the Ministers that belonged to it, assisted with their Ancients▪ to visit Families, and put them in mind of what had been promised God on the Fast day. These are the terms of the Article, which was Printed and Divulged. This Minister did not fail to execute this Order in his District. It was during the heat of the War with Holland: The Religious of St. Anthony, who had lain in wait for him a long time,
laid hold on this occasion, to insinu∣ate themselves with the Court, to his Cost. They writ to M. le Tellier then Secretary of State, that some∣thing was contriving against the Kings Service; that the Hugonots had celebrated a Fast through all Dauphi∣nate; that there was a Plot Couch∣ed under this Fast, and that Devoti∣on was only the pretext of it: That the Minister of—had held secret Assemblies at the Houses of the Prin∣cipals of his Parish; that he had pray∣ed God for the success of the Hollan∣ders Arms, and that he had gathered great sums of Money from those of of his Party to send to the Prince of Orange. Par. Good! Could this come into rational Heads? though all the Hu∣gonots of the Kingdom should have contributed to this gathering, it would not have been sufficient to have furnished Oats to the Cavallry of the Army the Prince of Orange Com∣manded: They can hardly maintain the six or seven hundred Ministers they have, since the Seal and Sub∣vension
Moneys were taken from them, that were destined to that use, without any thinking of gatherings for forreign Countries. Prov. I knew very well you would also cry out upon this. Yet as strange and as unlikely as the thing is, it caused this Minister a great deal of trouble: There came Orders from the King to seize his Person. He was kept in Prison for above four Months, false Witnesses were raised to main∣tain the Accusation, and if he had not had the Address to Convince them in the Confrontation, he would certainly have passed his time very ill. Par. This is horrible! It is rather fury than zeal. But it is with our Re∣ligious as with Angels, when they are Corrupted, they are Devils. There is no manner of ill, but what they are capable of. Those of St. An∣thony surpass in this all the other Or¦ders. They have appropriated to themselves vast Riches of St. Laza∣rus, under pretext of Serving the sick. Monsieur de Louvois, who is
chief of this Order, designs to make them restore these Goods, and to ap∣ply them to the Hall of Mars, destined to the maintenance of the maimed, without doubt these Reverend Fa∣thers to fence off this , with which they were threatned and to insinuate themselves into the Kings favour, bethought themselves of gi∣ving this advice to the Court, and sacrificing this Minister to their Inte∣rest. Prov. You have hit the mark, and methinks so many Monks ought not to be suffered. The Policy of France observes there are too many. It would be convenient to retrench at least the two thirds of them, and to apply the Revenues of their Houses, which are immense, to the necessities of the State, and to the ease of the people. And the other Thirds Wings ought likewise to be clipped, and hindred from growing great, by forbidding them, as is done at Venice, to acquire stocks and receive considerable Gifts and Legacies. It is the same with their Fraternities as with the Den of Esops Lyon, all goes in
and nothing comes out, and it is not otherwise possible, but that at length they must become yet more powerful and formidable. Par. I am impatient to know the issue of this Process, I beg you would tell it me. Prov. The false Witnesses were freed for a Years absence from the Province, and the Religious for some Reprimands from the Judges. As for the Minister, he was fined without a∣ny Note of Infamy, and condemned to pay the Charges, by reason of the visits he had made, which they called Assemblies, and the silencing of his Ministry too, happy to have thus es∣caped from the Snare that was laid him. I saw the Sentence in Print, and fixed up by Order of the Bench. You see by all these Stories that all man∣ner of ways are tryed for the tiring out those people; their ruin comes on a∣pace; consider how many Declarati∣ons there be against them, within these two Years. Par. Two things are the cause of this. The first is the Peace; while the
King has less forreign Affairs he em∣ploys himself in the reforming the disorders that may be in the State, and in the Religion. Moreover the di∣sputes the King has had with the Pope, has obliged him to appear severe against the Hugonots. Prov. What Mozeray has observed in the Life of Henry the 2d, is very true, that the disputes of the Kings of France with the Popes, have ever cost the Hugonots dear. As soon as a Prince thinks of defending himself a∣gainst the enterprizes of the Court of Rome, he is accused of being an Abet∣tor of Heresie; and Princes to clear themselves of this suspicion redouble their severity against the Hereticks. Par. You see that the Pope, in the Briefs he has written to the King, praises him for his zeal against Here∣sie, and gives him joy for having de∣stroyed so many Temples; and the King on his part, to appease the Pope, has not failed to make him observe, that in few Weeks he has made three very strong Declarations against the Hugonots.
Prov. Since we are fallen upon this, tell me in short, what were the disputes the King had with the Pope? Par. There were two, The first was upon the account of the Regali∣ty; and the second upon the account of the Urbanists. The Regality is a Right our Kings have over vacant Bishopricks, upon the Decease, or the Demission of those who posses∣sed them. During the vacancy, the Fruits of them belong to the King; and even till that the new Bishop has taken the Oath of Fidelity in Person, all the Benifices which would be at the Bishops Nomination, are at the Kings. The most part of the Bishop∣ricks in France have submitted to this Right. However there are some who pretend not to be in the Regali∣ty; and, amongst others, those of Guyenne and Languedock. Of which kind is the Bishoprick of Pamiers near the Pyrences. The King pretended he had the Right of Regality over that Bishoprick; the Bishop pretended not His Temporals were seized on, of which he complained to the Pope,
who proceeded so far in this affair, as to threaten the King to make use of the Arms of the Church against him. The Urbanists are the Maidens of S. Clair, whose Rule was mitigated by Pope Urban the 5th. and there∣fore have retained the Name of Ur∣banists. These Maidens had kept the Right of Electing Superiours, and Regular Abbesses, according to the Canons: The King on the contrary pretended he had the Right of Nomi∣nation to these Abbeys, as well as to all the other Great Benefices. The Bishop of Pamiers maintained the Rights of these Maidens, and ob∣liged the Pope to maintain it. Prov. This Bishop of Pamiers seems to me a terrible man. Par. He is dead; but I assure you he was an honest man: He was for the Observation of the ancient Ca∣nons; and if he might have been be∣lieved, he would have re-established the vigour of the ancient Discipline. Not that his own Genius of it self was proper to maintain a great affair: But he was an Admirer of M. d' Alet,
who was one of the Chief men of the Age for Purity of manners, and Ob∣servation of Discipline. The Bishop of Pamiers did nothing but by his Or∣ders, and followed all his Maximes; he has ever followed them, even since the Death of M. d' Alet. They were both most zealous Jansenists. You know the great troubles they have had about signing the Formulary, which they so long resisted: They were both great Enemies of the Je∣suits, and of varying from Morality. Wherefore Father le Cheise, a Jesuit, who governed the Kings Conscience, was not sorry to find an occasion to revenge his party, and he perswaded the King as much as was possible to vex this good Bishop, who was likewise a declared Enemy of the Court Bishops: which brought upon his back the Archbishop of Paris. For perhaps you know that this Archbi∣shop is the Original, of whom a little Book intituled, the Court Bishop, is the Copy. Some fancied it was the Bishop of Amiens, whom the Author principally aimed at, but this is a mi∣stake;
it was the Archbishop of Rou∣en, who had been Bishop of Seer, and who is at present Archbishop of Paris. The Author of this little Book that has made so much noise in the World, and that has so much enraged my Lords the Bishops, is one called le Noir, and has been Arch-Deacon of the Church of Seer. Prov. But do you not look upon it as a very singular thing, that at present the Court of Rome favours the Janse∣nists against the Jesuits? Par. It is what never would have been foreseen: for the interests of the Court of Rome, and those of the Je∣suits have been so interwoven, that they were believed inseparable. The Jesuits make a fourth Vow to the Pope: they carry his Authority as far as it it can go: they place him both above Councils, and above all Kings, as well in Temporals as in Spirituals; and therein pass to such excesses as the other Catholicks do not approve. The Court at Rome for its part has regards for them that it has not for any other Order. But it appears that the pre∣sent
Pope is favourable to the Do∣ctrine of S. Augustin upon Grace. He is especially a great Enemy of those varyings from Morality, of which the Jesuits are the principal Authors. He has caused a Bull to be published which Condemns 65 Propositions of this loose Morality. Prov. Good God! But I am scan∣dalized, that this Bull was not received in France; and that it was forbidden by an Act of Parlia∣ment. I know very well the pretext; which is, That the Bull issued from the Tribunal of the Inquisition, which is not acknowledged in France. But, in fine, an expedient might have been found not to have scandalized a whole Nation. Who would not imagine that the detestable Propositi∣ons are approved of, which are con∣demned by this Bull, since that the Publication of the Bull is forbidden? Par. Certainly the Credit of Father le Cheise, and the Jesuit Party, has appeared therein. And this goes much farther than you think of; for in the first minute of the Declaration,
these words were put, Though that these propositions are justly condem∣ned; Father le Cheise has caused these words to be raised out, and has put in their stead, That even the good things which come to us from the Tribunal of the Inquisition ought not to be received. Prov. But what do you think of the present Pope? Par. For my part I believe he is the honestest of all the Church-men. The Holy See has not for a long time been possessed by a Person of so great Pro∣bity: He is perfectly of an Apostolick Character. Prov. I have seen Hugonots who had an esteem for him, and who be∣lieved him capable of indeavouring a good Reformation, if he was aided and followed; but he has every where found a surprizing opposition. The Bull he has published against some In∣dulgences was so ill received in France, that all good Souls have been scanda∣lized. The King is made to say upon the Subject of this Bull, that the Pope had newly done more hurt to the
Church than the Hugonots could do it in fifty Years. Par. There is however one thing in this good Pope, that I cannot ap∣prove of, which is, that he will not bate any thing of those high and su∣perb pretensions of the Court of Rome, touching the infallibility of the Holy See, and the superiority of the Pope over the Temporals of Kings. You perhaps know that he has caused to be put into the expurgatory Index, by the Congregation of the Inquisiti∣on, the lives of Father Maimbourg, and amongst others the History of the fall of the Empire, because there were found therein some Propositions that were not conformable enough to the Italian Theology, and which render∣ed Princes too Independant on the Pope in Temporals. Methinks that a Pope of his Character ought to have humility, and by consequence ought not to entertain the haughty senti∣ments of his Predecessours, who brought down Crowned Heads under their feet.
Prov. What you tell me I was igno∣rant of. This is very singular, a Jesuite cry out against the Pope. Ah! without doubt it is to revenge the So∣ciety of the Jesuites, and punish the Pope for favouring their Enemies. These Gentlemen know how to say, God save the King, and the same of the League, according to Junctures. Par. The hatred certainly of Fa∣ther Maimbourg against the Janse∣nists, might well oblige him to write after a contrary manner to the Popes interests; for this Father is one of the greatest Enemies of Port-Royal. But besides that the Glory of the King, and the great Success of his Armes, engages that Society into this Conduct; one would say that Father Maimbourg delights and is proud to see his Books in the Index, and that he had composed his History of Luthe∣ranisme on purpose to enlarge the Catalogue of forbidden Books at Rome; for he loses not any occasion of censuring the Popes Conduct; and has likewise found the means of doing one to the purpose, in his Hi∣story
of Luther, for to Condemn the sentiments and actions of the present Pope, upon the dispute he had with the King about the Regality. In the bottom the Jesuits have not abandon∣ed their Theology: They are as zea∣lous Partizans of the Holy See, as they have ever been, but they dissem∣ble and tollerate Father Maimbourg, because he flatters a Prince whom they are afraid to offend. The King is very jealous of his Authority and his grandeur; he is glad to find peo∣ple who maintain the right of Kings against the pretensions of the Court of Rome. He flatters the Jesuites ve∣ry much, he lets Father le Cheise reign, who is of that Order; it is just they have some Complaisance for him. But in the bottom they disa∣vow Father Maimbourg, and in ano∣ther reign he would not have esca∣ped for an easie Discipline. Father le Cheise is likewise as much out with the Court of Rome, as one can be; wherefore it is his interest to mannage the Kings mind, without whose pro∣tection he cannot stand; and it is he
who upholds Father Maimbourg. In the mean time the Protectours of the Liberties of the Gallicane Church pre∣tend, that this Father does a great deal of honour to his Society, and that he makes appear that the Italian Theology, touching the Popes Autho∣rity, does not pass amongst the Jesu∣ites for an Article of Faith, as was hi∣therto believed; but for the reasons I have told you, I do not think that a great advantage can be drawn from it. The General of the Jesuites has very nearly explain'd himself therein. The Pope having made great complaints to him of Father le Cheise, and of Father Maimbourg; he answered, he could do nothing against two persons who were under the Protection of so great a King; that is to say, That if the Times, or the Govern∣ment changed, the Pope should have satisfaction for the Enterprizes of those two Jesuits. Prov. I am surprized that the Pope, of the Character I fancy him, is so jealous of that false Authority that his Predecessors have usurped over the
Church, and over Kings; and I am the more astonished at it, for that the Book of the Bishop of Condom had persuaded me, that the Controver∣sies concerning the Popes Authority were no longer considered at Rome as Affairs of importance. You know that in that work, he passes very lightly over the Popes Authority, and says only general things, which all Catholicks agree to. I have al∣ways that little Book about me, let us see what it is. As to things which are known to be disputed of in the Schools, though Ministers do not cease to alledge them for the ren∣dring that Power odious, it is not necessary to speak of them, since they are not of the Catholick Faith. It is sufficient to acknowledge a Head e∣stablished by God for the guiding his flock in his ways. This signifies clearly enough, that all that is said to excess concerning the Popes Authority by the Monks and Italians, ought to be reckoned as nothing. And you see how all the Court of Rome ap∣proves this Book; and there is even
a Brief of the Pope, which com∣mends both its Method and Doctrine. Par. What you say is like an ho∣nest Country-man, and one real. How came you to fall into this Snare? Could you believe that the Court of Rome would renounce those pretended Rights which have cost it so much trouble, and even blood to acquire! believe me, the pleasure of reigning is too sweet to re∣nounce it. This Empire that the Pope ex∣ercises over the Kings of Christendom raises him too high to abandon it. The truth is, that some Princes, in imitati∣on of the Kings of France, indeavour to cast off the Yokes. The Empe∣rours are no longer Crowned by the Pope; the Vatican Thunderbolts are no longer so formidable. The Kings of Portugal have not abandoned their Crown, though the Popes would take it from them. But be it as it will; though the Court of Rome should have lost the Body of that Power, it would keep the Shaddow to the last. Prov. So that this pretended yiel∣ding of the Court of Rome, upon the point of its Authority, is a snare laid for the P. Reformed.
Par. You may judge by the delica∣cy of that Court, in regard of the Writings of Father Maimbourg: For in fine, this Father has written after a very respectful manner for the Ho∣ly See; yet it is imputed to him as a Crime, that he has not uttered matters as the other Writers of his Society. Prov. Since we are upon the Book of M. de Condom; I must ask your Opinion of it. You promised to ac∣quaint me with all the means by which they pretend to reduce the Hu∣gonots suddenly to the Bosom of the Church, and you tell me nothing of those mild ways so much talked of, and which are looked upon as sure means to Convert all those of that Party, who are neither obstinate nor prejudiced. Par. Nothing can be more witty, better turned, and more delicate than the Book of M. de Condom: But I said nothing of it to you, be∣cause I do not believe it useful for the guiding to what it tends. In the bottom that method is worth no∣thing,
and in the sequel will do more hurt to the Catholick Church, than it does it good at present. Prov. I see, however, that several persons who read that Work speak of it as a Master-piece; and I have seen several Hugonots whom that Book has Converted. Par. Believe me, dear Sir, that those people would have been Con∣verted without the Book of M. de Condom. This Book only Converts those who were willing to abandon their Religion, and who seek for pre∣text to defend themselves against the Accusation of lightness. The late M. de Turene was the first who took a great deal of pains to raise the val∣lue of that Action. He turned Ca∣tholick after having grown gray in the Hugonot Party. He feared to be accused of having quitted his Religi∣on out of Interest. As he was extream nice upon the point of honour, and that Glory was his Idol, he was de∣sirous to persuade all the Earth that he turned out of a principle of Consci∣ence. From a Convert he even be∣came
a Convertor; and because that he could not be persuaded that several things that are taught and pra∣ctised amongst us were good, he was glad to meet with Abbe Bossuit, who turned things as he would have them, and who disguised what he could not look upon without a disguise. Where∣upon the world became Charmed with this piece, and it was reported that it made several Converts. Several Hugonots got themselves instructed ac∣cording to that Method, they were glad they could say that their Ministers were notorious Libellers, having represented to them the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, wholly diffe∣rent from what it is. The fame of this Book passed into Italy: The Court of Rome was persuaded all France would become Catholicks, and fall into this snare. But the truth is, that Book is only good to cause Relapses. For if the Hugonots were really Con∣verted upon the assurances that this Book gave them, that we do not serve Images, and invoke Saints, but as we pray the Faithful upon the Earth,
to beseech God in our behalf; what would they say, when they came into our Churches, and that they saw there the Images Served, and the Saints invoqued by all the external acts of a Religious adoration? They would certainly cry out upon us, for having deceived them, and would re∣turn to the sink of Heresie. It would be better to act Faithfully, tell things as they are, and make known to Hereticks the naked truth. But I avow to you this is not the greatest mischief this Book may do. Prov. What is that so terrible mis∣chief which you foresee, and which makes you so afraid? Par. That mischief is, that such Books are capable of multiplying a Party that is in the bosome of the Catholick Church, and which will one day be its ruin, if care be not ta∣ken. You must know then, that the Church had never so many ill Catho∣licks as it has at present. The Town, Country, Court, and Armies are full of Deists, a sort of people who be∣lieve that all Religions are the inven∣tions
of humane Wit. These rash Heads doubt of all; they are armed with wicked difficulties, against the Books of the Old and New Testament, that they may not be obliged to be∣lieve that those Books were really written by the Authors whose Names they bear. From hence it proceeds, that such as pretend to any Capacity in writing, have bethought them∣selves of defending the Christian Re∣ligion against the incredulous; all their works turn that way; and thus if a Bedunt makes a Collection of Scraps and Criticisme upon the Books of the Old and New Testament, or upon some particular Texts, he calls that Evangelical Demonstrati∣on: Reflections upon the Truth of the Christian Religion. And the most part of these Collections, are fitter to confirm these Deists in their increduli∣ty, than to make them return; because such Compilations are not regulated by Judgment: What's good is mix∣ed with what's ill, and force with weakness; and those incredulous minds are the more confirmed in this
incredulity, by the ill reasons and weak Conjectures that are given them for solid Remarks, and are not touched with the good Reasons that are mingled with the ill. Besides, such kind of Works, wherein are re∣lated a hundred several Opinions up∣on one and the same Subject; do but furnish a new pretext to their incredu∣lity: They conclude that all is uncer∣tain; that the most enlightned knew not what to hold to, and whose Opi∣nions were quite contrary. The truth is, that some of these Writings that are made for the defence of the Chri∣stian Religion, are of a Bulk to fright those Libertines, who are not capable of a long Application: Thus never reading those great Volumes, they do not draw Conclusions disadvanta∣geous to the Christian Religion. But as for Books of the size of that of M. de Condoms, all the world reads them. Now you cannot believe how much the Method those Gentlemen make use of, who have invented these gentle ways, confirms these Li∣bertines in their sentiments. Religi∣on
is therein represented to them with a Face wholly new; and thereupon they tell us, here is a man who tran∣sports us into another Country: In this new Religion Images are not made use of, Saints are not invoqued, they are only prayed to, as we pray the faithful upon the Earth to beseech God in our Regard. I had hither∣to believed that the Devotions for the Virgin Mary, and for the other Saints, were things of importance: I see that most part of the Devout lay great stress upon these things; and yet these say that they are nothing, that they may be let a∣lone, and that it is sufficient to invoke God and Jesus Christ; they evident∣ly give ground; they acknowledge that the Church has erred, and that it is in the wrong to recommend the Service of Images and the invocation of Saints upon pain of Anathema. If the Church has erred in those Articles, why should it be infallible in the o∣thers? It was mistaken, when it or∣dered us to adore Images, build Tem∣ples, institute Feasts, and make Sa∣crifices
to the honour of Saints; and why may it not likewise have been mi∣staken in that it has given us for Di∣vine, a Book which perhaps is not so? It has no other surety to give us for the truth of those Books, and of that Religion which is founded upon those Books, than its Authority and infalli∣bility; here are Catholick Authors, who evidently make a breach in that infallible Authority; and thus they open the door to all our Doubts. Prov. I understand you. But is this the Party you think capable of ru∣ining the Catholick Religion? Par. No: These are not our most dangerous Enemies: They are such Catholicks, as I call the third Party, who make profession of believing that the Roman Church is the true Church, that we ought to be inseparably fixed in it, and that we ought never to se∣parate from it, but who, however, do not act as it commands, nor have any respect for its Worship. These sort of people were never so nume∣rous as they are now in this Kingdom. There be some amongst them who
push their incredulity so far, as to doubt of the most important truths of Christianity. They are Socinians, they neither believe the Mystery of the Trinity, nor that of the Incarnation. I know such particular instances, that I do not doubt thereof. I shall not tell you them, because they would only help to make you abhor them. And what is most terrible is, that it is not only the Religion of our young Ab∣bots, it is the Divinity of some grave and wise Societies, and who make parade of the purity of their manners, and of their zeal for the Catholick Faith. Judge you whether such per∣sons as doubt of the mysteries of the Trinity, and the Incarnation, which all Christians receive, have respect for that of the Real Presence and of Transubstantiation, which has been exposed to so many Contradictions within these seven or eight hundred years? Without reckoning these So∣cinians, it is certain that several Ca∣tholicks are in no manner persuaded of the truth of this Mystery; neither do they make any difficulty of open∣ing
themselves to the Enemies of our Religion, when they are one to one, and that they cannot be troubled for it. When they are asked how they can adore an Object which they only look upon as a Creature? they say, that they do not adore the Sacrament, but that their adoration has respect to Jesus Christ, who is seated in the Heavens upon the Throne of Glo∣ry. Prov. Not long since I happened to be in a place, where I was Witness of a very warm debate between Di∣vines, who accused certain new Phi∣losophers, of being very ill Catho∣licks, and of being of Intelligence with the Calvinists upon the point of the Eucharist. Are not these the peo∣ple you spoke of? Par. Yes; at least those you menti∣on are part of those I spoke of; for there are several others, besides these new Philosophers, who have no faith for the mysteries of the Eucharist. Those new Philosophers you speak of are called Cartesians and Gassendists. I never much concerned my self with
those Philosophical disputes; but I have heard them so often debated, that I remember some of them. I have often heard say, that these Philoso∣phers believe, some that the Essence of the Matter and of Bodies consists in the actual space, and others that it consists in the impenetrability. Thereupon the zealous Catholicks tell them that this Philosophy ruins the mystery of the Real Presence; for if the Bodies are essentially extended, and impenetrable, it is impossible that the Body of Jesus Christ can be in the Eucharist without extent and penetracting it self; that is to say, hav∣ing its parts thrown into one another. Now it is the Faith of the Church, that the Body of Jesus Christ is in the Sacrament included under a point. Prov. This difficulty is sensible; it is not necessary to be a Philosopher to comprehend it: What answer do they make to it? Par. They reply to it by great protestations of the purity of their Faith, and of their Submission to the
Church; they say that they speak thereof as Philosophers, and not as Divines; that they consider Matter in its natural state, when they define it by extent, or that they declare it to be essentially impenetrable; that they do not trouble themselves with what it may be in its supernatural E∣state, wherein God can put it by his Power: They turn themselves a hun∣dred ways. Some say, that extent is the Essence of Bodies, but not such an extent; that the Body of our Savi∣our Jesus Christ had at the age of one Year, was the same Body that he had at the age of thirty Years: That the Body of Jesus Christ may be in the Eucharist, having only the greatness of a Hand-worm; and that this extent is sufficient to save this truth, that the essence of Bodies consists in extent. They likewise say, that the essence of the Body of Jesus Christ consists in a certain little part of the Brain, which is almost insensible, in which the Soul is fixed: And that by sup∣posing that in the Eucharist there is only that essential part of the Lords
Body, he may be there Corporally without taking up much Room. O∣thers say, that God deludes the Senses, and that after the Consecration, that which appears bread, is really the body of Jesus Christ, that this Body of Jesus Christ is extended; but that God by his Power causes this extent to remain invisible; that bodies keep often their extent, and yet that exten∣sion is not to be perceived. When we see a Gyant from the top of a Mountain, he appears to us a Pigmy, yet he keeps all his bulk. In fine, they say such strange and improbable things, that it is clear that they themselves are not at all persuaded of them, and have no hopes of persua∣ding others. In a word, being we cannot renounce Common sense, nor believe that such able men have lost theirs, we cannot be persuaded that they really believe Transubstantiation possible. The misfortune is, that such people as are engaged in these Princi∣ples, are not ordinary men; but the most Illustrious Societies of the Church, and the purest, and the
chiefest Wits of the age. The Di∣vines of Port-Royal are men who have distinguished themselves as much as can be by their probity, by the pu∣rity of their Morality and Divinity, by their solitary and retired way of living from the world, by their vast inlarged knowledge, by the penetra∣tion of their Wit, by the beauty and fertility of their imagination, by the beauties they have inriched our Tongue with, and by Productions that are a great honour to France, and of great use to the Republick of Letters. All these so able men have as much Inclination for Cartesianisme as for Christianity. That great So∣ciety of the Fathers of Oratory have the same Principles. I know not whether you have heard talk of a Book called, The Search of Truth. This age has not produced a piece wherein there is more subtilty of argument, more penetration of Wit, and more solid Metaphysicks. The Author of this Book, as well as all those of his Society, seems to have a very great zeal for that Philosophy. The truth
is, that the Fathers of the Oratory have promised neither to speak nor write thereof any more; but they have not promised not to think thereof; and as long as they shall think they cannot forbear communicating their thoughts. After all, this Method of hindring the teaching a Doctrine, is not so proper as is believed for the hindring its progress; especially when Philosophy is concerned, concerning which the Wits are persuaded their li∣berty ought not to be limitted: And we are the more violently inclined to things that are forbidden us. Prov. I have hearkned very atten∣tively to all you have said, and have well enough comprehended it; though it is not at all my Trade. But I do not understand what refe∣rence all this has to the Book, of M. de Condom; and how this Book, which seems to have so much respect for the Mystery of the Eucharist, can serve to increase the Party of those people who pretend to be the great wits, and who raise their reason against our Mysteries.
Par. I will make you presently comprehend it. All the Catholicks of the third Party, who have not too much respect for our Mysteries, have a profound Contempt for all popular Devotions. They look upon the In∣troduction of Images into Churches as a thing that might very well be laid aside; the invocation of Saints as a superfluity in the Worship, and is the Obstacle to the re-union of all Christians; and the Excesses that are committed in that invocation of Saints, as terrible superstitions that stain Religion: They blame the wor∣ship of Relicks, they laugh at all the Miracles that are made by Images. They say that Pilgrimages, Indulgen∣ces, Stations, the visits of Priviledg∣ed Churches and Altars, Scapularies, Rosaries, Fraternities, are Monachal Devotions, and are only good to main∣tain the cheats of begging Monks. I my self heard one of these Gentle∣men say, that the Doctrine of the Catholick Church was good, but that three parts of the Catholicks were Idolaters, by the abuse that they
made of the invocation of Saints, and the Service of Images. You are not such a stranger in the world, as not to have heard talk of a little Book called, Salutary Advices of the blessed Virgin to her indiscreet Votaries. This Book introduces the Virgin as speaking, and condemning all the De∣votions, and condemning all the De∣votions, by which she is usually honou∣red: The Bishop of Tourney has made an Apology for this work, in his Pa∣storal Letter. These Opinions have found more approvers in France a∣mongst our great Clergy than is cre∣dible. But neither is it credible how much all the good and simple Souls amongst the Catholicks have been scandalized at them. These Libertine Writings have been refuted by other very Catholick Writings. Messire Lewis d' Abelly, Bishop of Rhodez, and Father Crasset the Jesuite, have Learnedly and Solidly defended the Doctrine and Practice of the Church, in what concerns the honour that is done the Mother of God. But this does not hinder the contrary Party from increa∣sing, to the great scandal of all good
Catholicks. Now it is certain, that nothing has more helped to augment that Party, than M. de Condom's piece, which reduces the Service of Images to nothing, the invocasion of Saints and veneration of Holy Relicks to ve∣ry little; speaking very faintly of In∣dulgences, saying nothing of Purga∣tory, and giving no great Idea of the Fruits of the Sacrifice of the Messias. It cannot be doubted, but that M. de Condom, and all the Divines of his Party, are of the same sentiments with the Author of the Salutary Ad∣vices of the blessed Virgin to her undi∣screet Votaries, and by Consequence they look upon all Popular Devoti∣ons as great Superstitions. Now cer∣tainly this is not edifying; it makes Hereticks Triumph, and helps to confirm them in their aversion to the Church. Though it should happen, that the people and the Religious should carry a little too far the hon∣our and Service that are rendred to the Friends of God and his Mother, it would be better to dissemble it, than to confess these excesses, and condemn
them. These Gentlemen are likewise so imprudent, as to bring to light such scandalous Histories as rejoice Here∣ticks. By example, can any thing be more terrible than what they have caused to be Printed against Indul∣gences and Relicks, with that Bull of Innocent the 11th. which condemns some supposed Relicks, without design of injuring those that are real? Amongst others, this is one of the Stories they have published; In the year 1668 Pope Alexander the 4th sent into France three Chests of Relicks, to be put in∣to the Hospital Church. These three Chests were bound up with red silk Cords, and sealed with the Seal of Cardinal Ginetti, Commissary for the Relicks, and with the Seal of the Popes Sacristain. These Relicks were ac∣companied with a Bull, which said, that they might with all safety be ex∣posed to the veneration of the People. Magnificent Bills were set up in all parts to invite the People to this De∣votion. The Bishops of Bayeux, and Cahors, Father Don Cosme, Father Crassot, and the Abbot Fromentieres,
were to preach during the Octave. It It was however ordered, they should be search'd. In the third Chest was found a Head, which at first appear∣ed to be a real one: It had this Inscri∣ption, Caput Sancti Fortunati: In searching it, there was perceived above the ear a piece of painted Cloth: The Physician whose name was M. de Ger∣main, took an Instrument, scraped it, and thrust it in, and found it was a Paist-board Head. They put a lighted Candle into the Head, but the light did not penetrate; at last they cast the Head into hot water, which took away the Paint, and the Paist-board fell in pieces. M. de St. Germain made his verbal Process thereof; but by a sealed Letter he was forbidden to shew it, upon pain of being sent the same moment to the Bastille. Is not it insupportable, that Hereticks must learn such like stories from Catholicks? and what kind of Catholicks are these? After all, these Catholicks of the third Party have passed by that bound of respect which was the safety of the Church;
which is, the Opinion of its infallibi∣lity. It is impossible that such people, as look upon with so much contempt the Devotions that the Church autho∣rises, hold that Church for infallible. If they give the liberty of believing that it has err'd in some things, they will not stay to examine the rest; and perhaps that their false Lights will car∣ry them much farther than they at present design to go. Thus I con∣ceive that these mild ways, that are believed of so great use for the Con∣version of Hereticks, may one day ruin the Church of France, and the Low Countries, if God and the Holy See do not take care in it. Prov. I am very well satisfied with having heard you, and you have learnt me several things that I was de∣sirous to know. There remains some difficulties, touching the means that are to be made use of, for reducing Hu∣gonots to the Church; but I must take some time to think of those diffi∣culties, for the digesting them, before I ask your instructions. Since to day is your weekly day of repose, be
pleased, Sir, to come Dine with me at my Lodging this day seven night. VVe will there have a Room only for us two, and you shall make an end of informing me. Par. I willingly consent to it, and shall not fail to be at the Rendezvous. The End of the First Part.
THE POLICY OF THE CLERGY of FRANCE. The Second Conference. The Parisian. YOU see, Sir, how exact I am in keeping my word, I am only afraid I have made you wait too long. I had much a-do to get from a crowd of People who have troubled me all this Morn∣ing. Prov. Persons so agreeable to Com∣pany cannot be seen too much. But the Cook belonging to the House ex∣pected
your coming the more pati∣ently, for I fancy his Dinner is not yet ready. Before Dinner they discourse of the News of the Time, after Dinner the Conversation is thus renewed. Par. Tell me, Sir, what you have done since I had the honour to see you? Prov. I have hardly done any thing, but I have suffered a great deal. In going from your House I found at my Lodging a Hugonot Gentleman waiting for me; After some indiffe∣rent Conversations, I made him fall upon that of Religion, and was wil∣ling to make use of the Counsel you had given me; that is to say, I mo∣ved him to quit his Religion, consi∣dering the approaching ruine with which it is threatned. But, alas! I have extreamly repented I brought him upon that point, he has almost stunn'd me with Complaints and Rea∣sons. He is yet much more knowing than you in the particulars of the means that are employed for the de∣stroying
his Party; since our Confe∣rence I have seen him daily, it being impossible for me to avoid him; for he was at my Bed-side before I was awake. Being a person of Quality, and distinguishing himself both by his Me∣rit and Riches, I durst not order my Valet▪ de Chambre to deny him en∣trance. Thus I have been obliged to suffer his persecution, and give him audience three or four times every day. Par. Good God! How could he find so many things to say upon one and the same point? Prov. He has repeated to me all that you told me, and has very much en∣larged, by maintaining it with several stories that neither you nor I knew. He has shown me how much the Con∣duct that is held against their Party is contrary to Honesty, Humanity, Good-faith, and even to the true In∣terest of the King and State. In sine, I fancy a Book might be made of all he told me. Thus, far from convert∣ing him, he had like to have pervert∣ed me.
Par. I should be glad to know some of the particulars of your Conversa∣tions. Prov. I waited with great impati∣ence to impart them to you; for he has very much fortified the difficulty that I intend to propose to you. To speak seriously, I must assure you, he sometimes moved and touched me. For example, he told me yesterday; Must so many efforts be used to force from us that French heart that God and Birth has given us? What have we done to merit so many misfor∣tunes, and such severe punishments? We are hunted, we are drove up and down as if we were the Plagues of the Republick; We are treated as the enemies of the Christian Name. In places where the Jews are tolerated, they have all manner of liberty, they exercise Arts and Merchandize; they are Physicians, they are consulted, the health and life of Christians is put into their hands: And as for us, as if we were infected, we are forbid∣den to approach Children that come into the World, we are banished from
the Bars and Faculties, we are remo∣ved from the King's Person, we are banished from Societies, our Charges are taken from us, we are forbidden the use of all means that might se∣cure us from being famished; we are abandoned to the hatred of the Peo∣ple, we are deprived of that precious liberty that we had purchased by so many Services; our Children are ta∣ken from us, who are a part of our selves; we are made to lead a languish∣ing life, in lowness, in poverty, and often in dark Prisons. Formerly, when Declarations were made against us, they were at most contented with Registring them in the Rolls. They are at present fixed up, they are cry∣ed about the Streets as if they were Gazettes, to inspire the People with a spirit of fury against us. And they have been so successful, that in the great Cities of France we expect to have our Throats cut, one time or a∣nother, by a popular Sedition; so that we are very near the Inquisition. Can it be said, that there is Liberty of Conscience in a Kingdom, where the
People are banished, lose their Ho∣nour, and their Goods are confiscated for Religion's sake? There needs no∣thing more than Fire; and that terri∣ble Tribunal of the Inquisition, which France has been hitherto so much a∣fraid of, will be established there. Are we Turks, are we Infidels? We believe in Jesus Christ, we believe him the eternal Son of God, we invoke him solely; and we have no Idols. We have a soveraign respect for the Sacred Scriptures, we believe there is a Hea∣ven and a Hell, the Maxims of our Morality are of so great a purity, that they dare not contradict them. We have a respect for Kings, we are good Subjects, good Citizens, faithful in Commerce: Let us be tryed accord∣ing to Law, and it will appear if we have been engaged in any Conspiracy against the State, and if we have any ways failed in our duty. Thanks be to God, nothing can stagger our fide∣lity, and the stock of love we have for our Prince is not to be drain'd: if it depended on our Enemies, we should be Enemies of the State we
make a part of; they design to push us on to Crimes, that the King may have a just occasion of ruining us; but they have hitherto missed their aim, and are like to do so still; the King may see it, whilst that they so successfully turn the effects of his goodness from us, there is not one of us but who is ready to lose his life for his sake; we are Frenchmen as well as we are Reformed Christians; we would shed to the very last drop of the blood of our veins to serve our King, and for the preserving our Re∣ligion, even to Death. Par. If your Hugonot Gentleman has studied Rhetorick, he has not wholly lost his time. Prov. I know not if he has stu∣died much, but I easily perceive that passion is the source of his Eloquence; for he told me what I have newly re∣lated to you, with a zeal and passion that would have moved you. Par. But could not you have stop∣ped that Orators Mouth with one word, in telling him, that if the con∣dition of the Catholicks in Holland
and England was described, and in all the Places where the Hugonots are Masters, one might make a represen∣tation of their miseries, much more touching than that they make of the ill Treatment the Religionaries re∣ceive in France? Prov. I did not fail to lay that be∣fore his Eyes; but he had a hun∣dred things to tell me thereup∣on. Par. You would oblige me by relating some of them. Prov. I will tell you them. First, in regard of Holland, He told me that I supposed a thing very far from truth; that the Catholicks are there in op∣pression. I know, said he to me, that you have been in that Country, and you cannot deny, but that they go there with as much liberty to Mass, as at Paris. Would to God, added he, that our Reformed had the same Conveniences; there is not a City where the Catholicks are in a con∣siderable number, but that they have ten or twenty Houses, wherein Mass is openly said, and with an intire
liberty. They are seen to go in there, they are seen to come out from them; and no body dares say to them a word against it. All that they are troubled at, is that they are not Masters of the Churches, and that they are obliged to do their Service in particular Houses. There is in Holland, a Country of small extent, ten times more Ecclesi∣asticks than there are Ministers in all France, which is very large. There is a compleat Clergy and Hierarchy. Amsterdam, and all the other great Cities have their Bishops. These Bi∣shops have their Chapter and their Priests: There are even Religious Houses. It is true, that all these peo∣ple are something disguised; but are they the less known? Would it be diffi∣cult to unkennel them? They are as well known as the Ecclesiasticks are in France, and are not in the least insul∣ted. It is likewise true, that at the solli∣citation of some of the most zea∣lous of the people, the States former∣ly issued out Placates from time to time, which forbad the exercise of the Catholick Religion; but this is no
longer so, and it never caused one Stone to be took up against them. It cost them about twenty or thirty Pi∣stols for the Sheriff, who put those Placates into his Pocket, and no more talk was heard of them. He added to this, That it is unheard of, that in that Country the Catholicks have been fatigued for the being Convert∣ed; they are not at all disturbed in their Commerce. They are Mer∣chants, Physicians, Artizans, Advo∣cates; and, except the Charges of the Government of the State, they are received without distincti∣on into all Professions, without so much as enquiring of what Re∣ligion they are. No Body has Acti∣ons brought against them upon the account of Relapses, or for having changed Religion. In a word, Li∣berty of Conscience is entire there, as well as in all other places where the Reformed Religion Rules. I avow to you that I had nothing to reply to this Article; for I had seen with my Eyes all that he said. There was one
day with me in a long-Boat, or Schupe, a Priest drest in black Cloaths, who was not otherwise disguised, than that his Coat was short, who said his Breviary before a hundred persons, with as much liberty as he could have done in France. Par. And what said he of Eng∣land? Prov. He said, that at London there are five and twenty Houses, without counting those of the Ambassadours of Catholick Princes, wherein Mass is publickly said, without any search be∣ing ever made; that the truth is, the liberty is not so great in the Coun∣try; but that all Gentlemen had their Almoners and Priests in their Houses, and that all the Catholicks went thi∣ther to Mass. But that this was not what he had principally to oppose me with. But I'll allow, said he, that Catholicks have less liberty in Hol∣land, and in England, than the Refor∣med have in France. But is there a∣ny Justice to compare, in this regard, France with England? Why is not
England compared with Spain, Italy, Hungary, and all the Territories of Germany, subject to the House of Au∣stria? They oppose us with the Seve∣rity of the English against the Catho∣licks, and we oppose the cruelty of the Spaniards against our people. Is there any Comparison! The Ca∣tholicks have not the liberty of exer∣cise in England; but they live there, they Traffick there, they exercise Arts there, they are known there without danger, they even perform their Ser∣vice there without other hurt, if they be discovered, than that they are for∣bid to return. In Spain and Italy, those they call Calvinists and Luthe∣rans are chased away like Lyons and Bears: They go in quest of them, and if they be discovered they are burnt alive. If they have the bold∣ness of making any publick act of their Religion, there are no punish∣ments cruel enough to be inflicted up∣on them. It is sufficient that they are suspected, or only accused of Luthe∣ranisme, for to be cast into the Pri∣sons of the Inquisition, where they
must perish without Remedy. Par. That is not ill imagined. For, in fine, it is certain that the Inquisiti∣tion has not yet been established a∣gainst the Catholicks, in the Coun∣tries where the Heresie of Luther and Calvin Govern. But did he say nothing to you of more force? Prov. You shall hear; what he ad∣ed appeared considerable to me, which was, that Hugonot Princes can∣not have the same toleration for Ca∣tholicks in their States, that Catho∣lick Princes can have for Hugonots; because that Protestant Princes can∣not be assured of the fidelity of their Catholick Subjects, by reason they have taken Oaths of fidelity to ano∣ther Prince, whom they consider as greater than all Kings. It is the Pope; and this Prince is a sworn Enemy of the Protestants. He obliges the Peo∣ple to believe that a Soveraign turned Heretick has forfeited all the Rights of Soveraignty; that they owe him no Obedience; that they may with im∣punity revolt against him, that they may fall upon him as an Enemy of the
Christian Name, even to assassinate him. [See the Jesuits Morals, cap. 3. Book the Third.] And thereupon he cited to me, Mariana, Carolus, Scribanus, Ribadnera, Tolet, Gretser, Hercun, Amicus, Lescius, Valentia, Dicatillus, and several others, that are cited by the Jansenists, in the Book of the Jesuits Morals, and by the Ministers. All these Authors, said he to me, teach conformably to the Divinity of Rome, that a Heretick Prince, and Excommunicated by the Pope, is but a particular person, a∣gainst whom Armes may be taken; that he may be likewise Assassinated, or poysoned. He added to this, the examples of so many Parricides that have been committed, or attempted according to these Maximes. How many times, said he, would they have Assassinated Queen Elizabeth? Prince Willam of Orange was twice Assassinated, and lost his Life the Se∣cond time. Henry the Third, was not he killed by a Jacobin, as Excommu∣nicated by the Pope, and stript of the Royal Dignity? John Chastel, did
not he attempt the same thing upon Henry the Fourth: And did not Ra∣villiac out of a false Zeal Assassinate him. After which he gave me an account of the Gun powder Plot in England; by which, in the year 1606. the Catholick had undertaken to blow up the King and all the Gran∣dees of the Kingdom, by a Mine they had made under the Parliament House. He told me of the Jesuits Garnet and Oldcorn, Chief of that Conspiracy, who were put into the number of the Martyrs, whether they would or no; for the Jesuit Garnet going to Execution, some one of his Companions telling him softly in his Ear, that he was going to be a Mar∣tyr, he answered, Nunquam audivi parricidam esse Martyrem, I never heard that a Parricide was a Martyr. He related to me a hundred scanda∣lous Stories of that nature. Amongst others, he told me one that extreamly surprized me; he read it to me with all its circumstances, in a little Book that had been published by an English Mi∣nister, who calls himself the King of
Englands Chaplain. Thus it is in short: A Divine, who had been the Chaplain of King Charles who was be∣headed, turn'd Catholick some time before his Masters Death, and the English Jesuits put such confidence in him, that they imparted to him a ve∣ry terrible thing; It was a Consulta∣tion allowed of by the Pope, about the means of re-establishing the Ca∣tholick Religion in England. The English Catholicks, seeing that the King was a Prisoner in the hands of the Independants, formed the Resolu∣tion of laying hold on that occasion to destroy the Protestant Religion, and re-establish the Catholick Religion. They concluded, that the only means of re-establishing the Catholick Reli∣gion, and of cashiering all the Laws that had been made against it in Eng∣land, was to dispatch the King, and de∣stroy Monarchy. That they might be authorized and maintained in this great Undertaking, they deputed eighteen Father-Jesuits to Rome, to demand the Popes advice. The mat∣ter was agitated in secret Assemblies,
and it was concluded, that it was per∣mitted and just to put the King to Death. Those Deputies, in their pas∣sage through Paris, consulted the Sorbonne, who, without waiting for the Opinion of Rome, had judged that that enterprise was just and legiti∣mate; and upon the return of the Je∣suites, who had taken the Journey to Rome, they communicated to the Sorbonnists the Popes Answer, of which several Copies were taken. The Deputies, who had been at Rome, being returned to London, con∣firmed the Catholicks in their Design. To compass this point, they thrust themselves in amongst the Indepen∣dants, by dissembling their Religion. They persuaded those people that the King must be put to Death; and it cost that poor Prince his Life some Months after. But that Death of King Charles not having had all the Consequences that had been hoped; and all Europe having cryed out with horrour against the Parricide commit∣ted in the Person of that poor Prince; they would have drawn in again all
the Copies that had been made of the Consultation of the Pope, and of that of Sorbonne; but this English Chaplain who had turned Catholick would not restore his; and he has communica∣ted it, since the return of the Family of the Stuarts to the Crown of England, to several persons who are still alive, and were Eye-witnesses of what I have now told you. Par. I never heard this before. But the English Calvinists not producing any authentick pieces to prove this ac∣cusation, it may be looked upon as a Calumny. Prov. My Hugonot Gentleman would not answer for it, for he is very just; However he added, that what rendred it very probable, is, that this Conduct is a sequal of the Divinity of the zealous Catholicks of Spain, Italy, and even of France: Moreover there are several Circumstances which ren∣der the thing apparent. By example, he that lately published this story, had already once published it in the year 1662, to answer a little Book that in∣sulted over the English Calvinists, in
that they had put to death their King. The Divine, who knew the story that I have related, published it to prove that the Catholicks were guilty of the Crime which the Calvinists were accused of. When this story came to light, there was a great emo∣tion in the House of the Queen-Mo∣ther of the King of England, that House being full of Jesuits; and even that great Lord, who had lead the Jesuits to Rome, and had made him∣self chief of that Conspiracy, was one of the principal Officers of the House. They immediately demanded Justice of the King, by the means of the Queen-Mother, for the outrage that he who had published this scandalous story had done them. The Doctor offered to prove his Accusation, and to produce his Witnesses, who were still living. The great Lord and Of∣ficer of the Queens House, and the Jesuits, seeing the resolution of this Man, durst not push him on; they only obtain'd from the King, by the means of the Queen-Mother, that he should be silenced. You must avow
that there are but few that are inno∣cent, who would have been so easie in so terrible an Accusation. Besides, it is certain that this Consultation of Rome has been seen by several persons. If it is false, it must have been forged by this Chaplain who was turned Ca∣tholick, and who shewed it since; now it must be confessed that this is not very likely. However, as all this is reduced to a single Witness, my Gentleman acknowledged that the proof was not wholly in the forms; but he stood much upon the late Conspiracy of England, which was discovered two years ago, by which half the Kingdom was to have had their Throats cut for the becom∣ing Masters of the rest. Par. You had a fine opportunity to stop him there; for you know ve∣ry well that our Catholicks maintain, that it is a perfect Calumny invented by the Calvinists, for the having an oc∣casion to persecute the Catholicks. The Jesuits of St. Omer, have they not made appear that their Witnesses, Oates and Bedlow, are false Witnes∣ses?
Prov. I did not fail to make him that reply; but I avow to you, that my Conscience did not permit me to rely much upon that Answer; for to tell you the truth, I am very much perswaded that it is false: I know that the mistaken zeal and fury that the false Religion inspires, are capable of a great many things. I easily con∣ceive, that it might come into the head of forty of fifty false Zealots to lay a train for the ruine of the Party they would destroy; but I shall never per∣swade my self, that a whole Kingdom should enter into such a Conspiracy; and that a Parliament, composed of five or six hundred persons assembled from all the parts of a great State, can en∣ter unanimously into the Infernal Spi∣rit of supposing such a Crime against Millions of Innocents, for the having a pretext to persecute them. And my old Hugonot, who is full of fire, and has a great deal of good sense, took me up immediately with much vigour, saying, Is it possible that such a man as you can say such a thing? Ah! leave such stories to the Jesuits
of St. Omers; they are accused, it is not strange that they defend them∣selves; and the action is so black and so detestable, that they cannot do less than disavow it: If it had had a hap∣py success, they would have been proud of it; at present, now they are discovered, they deny it. If there needs no more than denying to be ju∣stified, never any one would be guil∣ty. They justifie themselves after a pretty manner, they send about Cer∣tificates and Attestations to prove the Contradictions they impute to Oates: which are things very hard to make and obtain. In a severe Morality, as is that of the Jesuits, it is a great point for the persons who are instructed in their Schools to give false Certificates for the saving the Honour of all the Society of the Jesuits, and even of all the Roman Church. Though we had not the Tryals of Hill, Green, Ber∣ry, Coleman, Ireland, Grove, and Pic∣kering, which justifie the truth of that Conspiracy; is it credible, that there can be such wicked Judges, as to con∣demn to death so many innocent per∣sons?
If they had only had a design of dispatching those seven persons, they had clandestine way to compass it: But they must have renounced good Sense, as well as Conscience, to try o∣penly, and in the face of all Europe, peo∣ple whose innocence appearing to the eyes of all the Earth, would have co∣vered with shame and infamy those who should have condemned them. If it be only a pretended quarrel a∣gainst the Catholicks, for the having a pretext to ruine them, why are they not ruined? All that has been spread abroad on this side the Sea are Fables: It has not cost the life of one person, besides these Wretches. The Roman Catholicks have been for some time obliged to remove from London, a ve∣ry great punishment indeed for so de∣testable a Conspiracy! I am certain, that if such a Conspiracy of the Pro∣testants has been discovered in France against the Catholicks, which God forbid, there would not be at this time one only Hugonot in the King∣dom; and the People could not have been hindred from Massacring those
who should have escaped from the ri∣gours of the Justice. The Murder committed in the person of Sir Ed∣mondbury Godfrey, the first Justice who took the Depositions▪ and Parti∣culars of the Conspiracy, is so speak∣ing and strong a proof, that it alone is capable of confounding those who would charge the Protestants with the horrible Crime of having invented all that Tragedy, for the aspersing the Roman Church. What had that poor Justice done to merit the being assas∣sinated? Is it not clear, that those Gen∣tlemen who so well know how to make use of the Ponyard and the Knife, had a mind to terrifie all the Judges, and hinder them from pur∣suing an Inquest which should cost the Lives of all those who should make Information and pass Sentence? Oates and Bedlow are false Witnesses! They are then false Witnesses of an admirable Character, false Witnesses who agree perfectly well amongst themselves, and never contradict one another: But for all this, they are false Witnesses who have concerted
their business very ill! If it is a Con∣spiracy, it is a trick invented for the dishonouring the Society of the Jesu∣its, to hang and quarter their Com∣panions: Methinks these false Wit∣nesses ought to understand themselves something better. On the Seven∣teenth of December five that were Accused were brought to be Examin∣ed, and have their Tryal, Whitebread the Provincial of the Jesuits, William Ireland, John Fenwick, Thomas Picker∣ing, and John Grove: Oates and Bed∣low were produced against them as Witnesses: These two Witnesses were found to know enough, and to have said enough to cause three of those persons to be condemned, Ireland, Pickering, and Grove: Oates equally charged the five, but Bedlow knew not enough to cause Whitebread and Fenwick to be condemned; insomuch that they were obliged to send back to Prison these two last, both of them Jesuits, and to put off their Tryal till farther Information. This is strange, these two false Witnesses are great Fools; Whitebread is the chief
of the Conspiracy, the Provincial of the Jesuits, he whom they had the most reason to ruine, and they are so imprudent as not to be of intelligence to tell one another what is capable of causing him to be condemned, this is not to be comprehended. Oates is a false Witness, he says too much to be believed, as is reported. It must be confessed, that if the Depositions of that Man are false, it is the strangest and most unheard of thing in the World. All the examples of fury of past Ages wrapt together, do not ap∣proach that which is observed in this false Witness. Never was there a link of such terrible Crimes as that Man charges the Accused with. They have, says he, burnt London several times, they would assassinate the King, the Prin∣ces, the Grandees, and almost two thirds of the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, over∣turn the State, destroy the Religion, change the Government, and to that in∣tent set whole Rivers of blood a flowing. Is it credible, that there is so wicked a Man in the World, as to charge those that are innocent with so many
Crimes? Perhaps that a passion of re∣venge might move a Man to lay so In∣fernal a train, to satisfie himself for some outrage he had received. But what outrage does there appear, that Oates and Bedlow had received from the Roman-Catholicks? The most part of those that are accused maintain that Oates and Bedlow are unkown to them. If they are unknown to them, they have not then done them any out∣rage which might more them to so prodigious a revenge: Moreover, by the Testimony of those amongst the accused, who confess they know their Accusers, it is certain that both of these Witnesses were Roman-Catho∣licks; They had not changed their Re∣ligion, had it not been for the horrour of the Plot; they had not become A∣postates, had not they been pricked in their Consciences; they had not any other reason to be pushed on by a spi∣rit of hatred against the Catholick Re∣ligion, and against those who profess it: wherefore it was only the hor∣rour of the Fact which struck them, and obliged them to prevent so hor∣rible
effusion of blood. Methinks that false Witnesses should not charge themselves with so great a number of Facts, lest they should be exposed to contradict one another: There need∣ed no more to be said than, in two or three Articles, that such People have Conspired against the State, and a∣gainst the Religion, and might have been executed after that manner. But it appears that Oates  our∣score heads of accusation, and makes a History of more than fifteen years, well pursued, and well . It is requisite to have an  tion that has hardly the like, vent such a Romance so well pur. I likewise find, that those Witnes are very bold to invent such horrible De∣positions against People who so well know how to make use of the Knife for the dispatching their Enemies, as appears by the Death of Godfrey. The good Nature of those good Fathers would be very great, if they did not revenge themselves on Oats and Bed∣low, in case that their Depositions were true; but it is hardly credible,
that it would reach so far as to let two Impostors live peaceably, who had charged them with the most horrid Calumnies that Hell had ever imagi∣ned. And if they have a design to destroy them, it is hard if they do not succeed in it sooner or later: The King's Safe-guards, and the Protecti∣on of the Parliament, will little help them. Wherefore if Oates and Bed∣low were false Witnesses, they are great Fools to expose themselves into so great a danger in this life for the damning themselves also in the other. In fine, my Hugonot Gentleman told me, What have we to do with Oates and Bedlow to prove the Truth of that Conspiracy? Let us take them, if you will, from off the Scene, and judge of the business by Coleman's Letters to Father le Cheise, and to some others. These Letters have been acknowledged, the accused have not denied them. There is one to the Pope's Nuncio at Brussels, Dated the 9th of August, 1674. which says in proper terms, That their design advan∣ced apace, and that they should quickly
see the ruine of the Protestant Party. Is any thing of more force than what Coleman says to Father le Cheise, in one of the Letters he wrote to him; We have undertaken a great Work; it is no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and the entire subversion of that pestilent Heresie which has for so long a time rul'd over this Northern part of the World: And we have never had so great hopes since the Reign of Our Queen Mary. And towards the end of the Letter, he powerfully sollicites Fa∣ther le Cheise to obtain succours of Money and Arms for putting in exe∣cution this great Design. It is perhaps by the way of Preaching that Coleman pretended to Convert those three Kingdoms! Arms and Money are ve∣ry necessary to give efficacy to Grace and Preaching! It is certainly, in that spirit of Zeal and well regulated De∣votion, that Coleman says; Though I had a Sea of Blood, and a thousand Lives, I would willingly lose them all for the execution of this Design; and if to bring it to pass, it was requisite, to destroy an hundred Heretick Kings, I
would do it. These words are pretty strong: It is Bedlow who has report∣ed them, and says, he heard them. If he invented them in cold Blood, and without being moved with Anger, I find him admirable in the art of feign∣ing Passions: For it must be avowed, that these expressions give us a lively image of a Man the most moved and the most concerned that has ever been seen. For a Man of War, as Bedlow. I find he would be very Eloquent, and that he would succeed admirably well in composing the Character of a Stage-Hero. Let us speak seriously, one must have renounced all Modesty to dare to maintain that all this great action is only a Comedy and a Ficti∣on. Par. But as concerning Father le Cheise, whom your Hugonot spoke of in the affair of Coleman, I have admi∣red how the English have aspersed him by the publication of Colemans Tryal. For this Father is every where there∣in, in the middle, beginning, and the end; and it is upon him that the most convincing proofs turn that are pro∣duced
against Coleman. It appears that this F. Jesuit was of the Party, and that he was engaged very deep into the design of re-establishing the Roman Catholick Religion in England, by fire and by the effusion of Blood. Prov. My Gentleman made me that remark, and told me thereupon, Methinks that the King's Equity ought to move him not to hearken to such a Man in what regards the Inte∣rests of the Subjects of the Reformed Religion. What may not the Prote∣stants of France fear from a Man who has been so deeply engaged in the de∣sign of cutting the Throats of so ma∣ny millions of Protestants? What Counsels may not he give to the King against us, who would have set whole Rivers of the Blood of our Brethren a∣slowing, and make a St. Bartholomew beyond the Seas? Though he was in∣nocent of the Affair of England, the advices he gives against us ought to be suspected. For it is clear, that he ought to have a great resentment of the fierce accusations that have been formed against him, and that he
would have the intention to revenge himself on the Protestants of France, for the outrages that he might pre∣tend to have receiv'd from the Prote∣stants of England. Wherefore it is cer∣tain, that the King ought to consider him as our declared enemy, and as a passionate enemy, and not as a zea∣lous Catholick. However, this Fa∣ther Jesuit brags he is the Master of all the King's Resolutions in what con∣cerns us. It is he, if he may be be∣lieved, to whom the Catholick Church is indebted for all the severe Declara∣tions that have been made against us. And when the Declaration was ob∣tained, which forbids Catholicks to turn to the Reformed Religion, he en∣tred into the Assembly of the Clergy with that Declaration in his hand, with a triumphing air, and said, Here is the piece that has been so long a sol∣liciting; it is I that have obtain∣ed it. If this man be so powerful o∣ver the King's mind, as he brags he is, the Protestants of France could not be secure of their lives. We know from good hands, added he, that the
Members of the Council are not too well satisfied in, that the affairs His Majesty was used to consult them a∣bout, and believe them in, are at pre∣sent put into the hands of a Jesuit. Par. For my part, I avow to you, I am not too well perswaded no more than you, that this Conspiracy of the English Catholicks is a fiction: But I endeavour to perswade it to others, because that I wish it were so for the honour of the Catholick Religion, which never ought to inspire such Designs. Prov. Be it as it will, my Hugonot Gentleman concluded from all this, that a Protestant Prince can never be assured of the Fidelity of his Catholick Subjects. On the contrary, said he, the Protestants are subject to their Prince out of Conscience, and out of a Principle of their Religion: They acknowledge no other Superiour than their King. and do not believe that for the cause of Heresie it is permit∣ted, either to kill a legitimate Prince, or to refuse him obedience.
Par. You might have asked him, if what the English do at present a∣gainst the Duke of York, agrees well with that Divinity? Because that he is said to be Catholick, they would declare him uncapable of succeeding his Brother. Prov. I had not time to propose to him that difficulty, for he prevent∣ed it. It is true, said he to me, that the troubles which are in England seem to tend towards the refusing O∣bedience to the Duke of York, be∣cause he is a Catholick. When a So∣veraign is mounted upon the Throne by legitimate means, it seems, said I to him, that he ought at least to have as much priviledge as his Subjects, and enjoy as well as them the Liberty of Conscience. That is true, answered he me, when he has not bound his hands by his own Laws. But by the Laws of the Kingdom of England, which are the Laws of the King as well as of the State, the King is obliged not to suffer any other Reli∣gion in the State, than the Protestant Religion. These Laws cannot be re∣pealed
but by the Parliament jointly with the King; because that in that Kingdom, for the making or re∣pealing Laws, the King can do no∣thing without the Parliament, nor the Parliament without the King. Wherefore if the Parliament is a∣gainst the Repealing of these Laws, if they must subsist, and while that they subsist, the King has not power to establish in his Family a different Religion from that of the State. You know, said he to me, that the peo∣ple of England have great Priviledges, and that the Kings have not the Right to do all that they please. Particu∣larly, added he, when there is a Prince to be established, the States of the Kingdom, who are obliged to be careful of the Preservation of the Religion, are authorized to take all their Sureties, that no change may be made therein: Thus they must ei∣ther remove from the Throne, if they have the Right to do so, he who would mount into it to ruin the Reli∣gion; or at least, they ought to bridle his Authority for the hindring
him from making changes. The Re∣ligion of Henry the 4th, before he turned Catholick, was an Obstacle to his establishment upon the Throne, which he would never have sur∣mounted though he was the legiti∣mate Heir of the Crown. Par. This man is very knowing. He certainly came prepared upon the matter: For, extempore, he could not have given to his reasons so great an air of likelihood. Prov. He came, without doubt, prepared; and I likewise perceived that he daily consulted people more knowing than himself: For he clea∣red and argued strongly the next day, upon such points as I had found him weak in the day before. One of the points of which he spoke to me with the most zeal and passion, was that of good Faith. They oppose against us, said he to me, the English and Holland Catholicks: But what has been promised to those people that has not been performed? The United Provinces of the Low Countries are entred into the Union with this Con∣dition,
of not suffering any other Religion in their States, than the Pro∣testant. Though England was refor∣med under Edward the 6th, after∣wards under Elizabeth, by several Acts of Parliament, which are the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, it was ordered that no other Religion should be suffered than that the An∣glicane Church made choice of, and that they would not suffer the Assem∣blies of those, whom they at present call Nonconformists. It was even forbidden to the Priests and Monks to set Foot in England, and to make any abode there. However they have not kept up to this rigour, and every one knows that there is at pre∣sent above ten thousand Priests and Monks disguised in England, and that there has ever been so. Where∣fore more has been given to the Ca∣tholicks, than was promised them. But in France, where we live under favourable Edicts, they have promi∣sed us what they have not performed: It is only against us that they make profession of not performing what
they have promised. The Edicts of Pacification are in all the Formes that perpetual Laws ought to be; they are verified by the Parliaments, they are confirmed by a hundred De∣clarations, which followed by Conse∣quence, and by a thousand Royal Words: In fine, they have been laid as irrevocable Laws, and as founda∣tions of the Peace of the State. We rely upon the good Faith of so many promises; and on a sudden we see snatcht from us, what we looked upon as our greatest security, and which we had possessed for above a hundred years. Thus there is nei∣ther Title, nor Prescription, nor E∣dicts, nor Arrests, nor Declarations which can put us in Safety. This is what he told me, and I avow to you, that this part put me in pain, for I am a Slave of my Word, and an Ido∣later of good Faith: I look upon it as the only Rampart of Civil Society; and I conceive that States and Publick persons are no less obliged to keep what they promise, than particular men.
Par. That is true. But do not you know that the health of the people, and the publick good, is the Soveraign Law? Very often we must suffer, and even do some Evil, for the good of the State. Peaces and Trea∣ties are daily broken, which have been solemnly sworn, because that the publick interest requires it should be so. Prov. My Hugonot made himself that difficulty, and told me thereupon, When War is declared against Neigh∣bours, to the prejudice of Treaties of Peace and Alliances, this is done in the Forms. They publish Manife∣sto's; they expose, or at least, they suppose Grievances and Infractions in the Articles of the Treaty, that have been made by those against whom War is declared. When a Soveraign revokes the Graces that he had done his Subjects, it is ever un∣der pretext that they have rendered themselves unworthy of them. But are we accused, or can we be accu∣sed of having tampered in any Con∣spiracy, of having had Intelligence
with the Enemies of the State, of ha∣ving wanted Love, Fidelity and O∣bedience towards our Soveraigns? If it be so, let us be brought to Tryal, let the Criminals be informed against, and let the Innocent be distinguished from those that are Guilty. We speak boldly therein, because we are cer∣tain they can reproach us with no∣thing; and we know that his Maje∣sty himself has very often given Testi∣mony of our Fidelity. He knows that we did not enter into any of the Parties that have been made against his Service, since he has been upon the Throne. During the troubles of his minority, it may be said, that none but those Cities we were Masters of remained Loyal. When the Gates of Orleans were shut upon the King, he went to Gien; and that City was go∣ing to be guilty of the same Crime, without the vigour of a Hugonot, who peirced with his Sword in his hand to the Bridge, and let it down himself: This action was known, and recom∣penced; for the King immediately made him Noble who had done it.
VVe had not any part in the distur∣bances of Bordeaux, in those of Brit∣tany and Auvergne, nor in the Conspi∣racy of the Chevalier de Rohan: Not one Hugonot was engaged in these Criminal Cases. The King has been pleased to acknowledge it; and we look upon the Testimony of so great a King as a great Recompence. But our Enemies, who continually solli∣cit him to our ruin, ought to be mind∣ful, that it would be more civil in them, to leave the King the liberty of following his inclinations: These would without doubt move him, to preserve the effects of his kindness for people who have preserved for him an inviolable Fidelity. This is what he told me upon that point; and I confess I was in great perplexity how to answer him; for I durst not make use of that Maxime that I have seen often maintain'd by some people, that one is not obliged to keep Faith with Hereticks. I have ever admired that saying of Charles the Fifth: He cau∣sed Martin Luther to come to Worms, and gave him safe Conduct, and his
Imperial word, that no hurt should be done him. But not having been able to obtain from him what he de∣sired, he sent him back; some one would have persuaded Charles, That he ought to cause Luther to be sei∣zed, without having regard to the safe Conduct, because that this man was of the Character of those to whom one is not obliged to keep ones word. Though good Faith were banished from all the Earth, an∣swered he, it ought to be found in an Emperour. A saying very worthy of so great a Man! But tell me, Sir, is it not an Opinion very contrary to that of Charles the 5th, that is the cause that so little Conscience is made of keeping with those people what has been promised them? Par. This Doctrine that one is not obliged to keep Faith with Hereticks, is taug by some Casuists, and they pretend  it is founded upon the Authority of the Council of Constance, because that that Council caused John Hus to be burnt, contrary to the Faith of the safe Conduct that the
Emperour Sigismond had granted him; and Jerome of Prague, not∣withstanding the safe Conduct that the same Council had given him. Prov. This Morality ever appeared to me terrible; and I have been often scandalized at the Conduct of that great Council of Constance. Par. The most part of the Catho∣licks reject that Morality, and main∣tain we are obliged to keep Faith with all the World, without excep∣ting Infidels and Hereticks; other∣wise there would never be any Trea∣ty between the Turks and the Chri∣stians, that were real. It is pretend∣ed that the Council of Constance has not established this Maxime, That we are not obliged to keep with Here∣ticks what we have promised them. John Hus had no safe Conduct from the Council, he had only the Empe∣rours; and thereupon the Council in the Nineteenth Session declared, That any safe Conduct, granted by the Emperour, by Kings, and the o∣ther Secular Princes to Hereticks-could not do prejudice to the Catho∣lick
Faith, and to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and could not hinder from proceeding in the Tribunal of the Church, to the punishment of Hereticks, who had provided them∣selves with such a safe Conduct. Thus the Council did not violate its promise, for it never gave any; neither did it oblige the Emperour to violate his Faith: But the Ecclesiastical Tri∣bunal, that had not given any word, made John Hus his Process. Prov. That distinction seems plea∣sant to me: I have heard say, that the Church does not put its hand into blood: When John Hus was convi∣cted of Heresie by the Council, he was delivered without doubt to the secular Arm to be burnt. Those Se∣cular Judges, were not they Imperi∣al Judges? Thus the Emperour vio∣lated his safe Conduct, in permitting his Judges to put a Man to Death, to whom he had promised all security. But what do they say of Jerome of Prague, to whom the Council it self had given a safe Conduct, and yet was burnt?
Par. They say that the Council, in the safe Conduct that was given to Jerome of Prague, had inserted this Clause, Salva Justitia; that thus they had only promis'd to warrant Jerome of Prague from violence, and not from the arrests of Justice: But I avow to you that all this is not capa∣ble of justifying the Conduct of that Council. Neither does it pass in France for a Rule that they will fol∣low. If they do not keep with the Hugonots all that has been promised them, it is not that they ground themselves upon the Morality and the Conduct of the Council of Constance. They do not pretend to depart from good Faith; they make profession of keeping the Edict of Nantes: Do you not see this at the Head of all the Declarations which are made against them? And now lately, in that by which the Catholicks are forbidden to embrace the P. R. Religion, upon pain of Confiscation of goods, loss of Honour, and Banishment; though that never any Declaration was made that was more contrary to the Edicts
of Nantes. We have one called Bernard, and another Lawyer of the City of Poictiers, called Tilleau, who have made large Commentaries upon the Edict of Nantes, for to make ap∣pear, that without formally revo∣king that Edict, the Hugonots may be deprived of all that Edict grants them, in giving to every one of the Articles Interpretations and Glosses that would never have been imed: And these are the . Prov. This is good for aning But after all, this does not satisfie the Conscience, and one is no less con∣vinced of having violated his word: For those who obtain Arrests against the Hugonots, according to the Glos∣ses of Bernard and Tilleau, are well perswaded that they are Glosses of Orleans, which overturn the Text. But do you know what I told my Hu∣gonot, to stop his Mouth, upon these Infractions in the Edicts? Par. Perhaps you told him, that one is not obliged to keep a word that has been extorted by violence; that
the Hugonots have obtained those E∣dicts by main force: That ours were constrained to yield to the misery of the times; but that at present the King is in Right of Nulling those promises. Our Advocates plead daily thus at the Bars, and there are likewise grave Authors who write it. Prov. You have guessed right: but thereupon my Hugonot grew strangely passionate. Ah! this is, said he, a cruelty we cannot suffer. This is our strength, and they are so bold as to attacque us in this part, as if it was our weak side. It is true, that we were armed some years before that the Edict of Nantes was made. But in favour of whom did we bear those Arms? It was to establish the Illustrious branch of Bourbon upon the Throne, that belonged to it. VVe shall ever be proud of having shed the purest of our Blood, to restore to France it's legitimate Kings there was a design of depriving it of. After this growing more cool, he made me an abridgement of the Hi∣story
of the League. He made me see that the House of Lorrain, in that time, aimed less at Heresy than at the Crown. He made me remember that from the time of Charles the 9th, the Princes of that House caused a Book to be Printed, for the proving their Genealogy, and to make appear that they were descended in a direct Line from the Second Race of our Kings, for the making way to the Crown. He acquainted me that there was at the same time a Concordat pas∣sed between the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Montmorency, and the Mar∣shall de St. Andrew, which was cal∣led the Triumvirate. One of the Ar∣ticles of that Concordat boar, in ex∣press terms, that the Duke of Guise should have in charge to deface intirely the name of the Family and Race of the Bourbons. Henry the Third, said he to me, could he be sus∣pected of Heresie, or aider of Here∣ticks? Never was any man more linked to the Catholick Church than he. Yet the House of Guise had sworn his ruin: They would have
shaved him, which they highly threat∣ned him with, and they one day writ upon the Chappel of the Battes, to the Augustins of Paris, these four French Verses. The Bones of those who here lye dead, Like a Burgundy Cross to thee are shown, Do make appear thy days are fled; And that thou shalt lose thy Crown. They are of the same sense with those two Latin Verses which were found set upon the Palace Dyal. Qui dedit ante duas, unam abstulit, altera nutas; Tertia tonsoris nunc facienda manu. The Faction of the House of Guise caused this to be done: And this poor Prince, after a thousand delays and troubles, resolved at length to make that execution so famous in our History; it is that of the Duke and Cardinal of Guise, who were execu∣ted
at the States of Blois. That Prince must needs have seen his ruin approa∣ching, and inevitable to come to that, since that he well foresaw that this blow would raise him so many storms, and give him so much trouble. Who knows not that the Faction of Rome, and of Spain, had a Design of rasing the House of Lorrain upon the Throne of France, for the excluding the House of Bourbon? In the year 1587. the Pope sent to the Duke of Guise a Sword engraven with flames, telling him by the Duke of Parma, that a∣mongst all the Princes of Europe, it only belonged to Henry of Lorrain to bear the arms of the Church, and to be the Chief thereof. Almost all the Kingdom was engaged in that Spirit of revolt: The King found no other support, than the King of Navar and of his Hugonots. It was Chastillon, the Son of the Admiral de Coligny, who saved the King from the hands of the Duke of Mayenne at Tours. This Chief of the League cryed to him, re∣tire you white Scarfs; retire you Chastillon, it is not you we aim at, it
is the Murderer of your Father. And in truth, Henry the Third, then Duke of Anjou, was President in the Coun∣cil when the Resolution was taken of making the Massacre of St. Bartholo∣mew, in which the Admiral Coligny perished. But his Son, forgetting that injury, to save his King, answered those Rebels; You are Traytors to your Country; and when the Service of the Prince and State is concerned, I know how to lay under my feet all revenge and particular interest; he added, that after the Assassinate com∣mitted by the League, in the person of Henry the Third, Henry the Fourth was ready to see himself abandoned by his most faithful Servants, because of the Protestant Religion, which he made profession of; which appears by a Declaration that this Prince made in the form of an Harangue to the Lords of his Army, on the 8th day of August, 1589, in which he says, that he had been informed that his Ca∣tholick Nobility set a report on foot that they could not serve him, unless he made profession of the Roman Re∣ligion,
and that they were going to quit his Army. Nothing but the firm∣ness and fidelity of the Hugonots up∣held this wavering Party. He must be, said my Gentleman, the falsest of men, who dissembles the Ardour and Zeal with which those of our Religi∣on maintained that just Cause of the House of Bourbon, against the at∣tempts of the League: And to prove, said he, that their interest was not the only cause of their fidelity, we must see what they did when Henry the Fourth turned Roman Catholick. It cannot be said but that they then strove to have a King of their Reli∣gion: However, there was not one who bated any thing of his Zeal and Fidelity, the King was peaceable pos∣sessour of the Crown, the League was beaten down, he was Master in Paris, he was reconciled to the Court of Rome when the Edict of Nantes was granted and published: Our Hugo∣nots were no longer armed, nor in a condition of obtaining any thing by force of arms, since that the Change of Religion had reduced all the Ro∣man
Catholicks to him, he would have been in a State of resisting their vio∣lence. It was the sole acknowledg∣ment of the King, and of good French∣men, that obliged all France to give Peace to a Party that had shed their Blood with so much Zeal and Profes∣sion for the conserving the Crown, and the restoring it to its legitimate Heirs. I avow that we did our Duty; but are not those to be thanked who do what they ought? How is it possible that these things are at present worn out of the memory of men? I am certain, that if the King was made to read the History of his Grand-father, he would preserve some inclination for the Children of those who sacrific'd themselves to the glory of his House. Par. It cannot be denied that this Party has rendered great Services to Henry IV, and to the Crown. But the Question is, to know whether much be owing them upon that Account. Have not they been well paid, by a repose of so many years, which they have enjoyed since that time? Prov. I said to my old Gentleman,
after all, in the bottom you have no reason to complain: All that is done, is with design of Converting and Sa∣ving you; You ought to consider that it is the Interest of a State to have but one Religion: Every one knows, that the diversity of Religions is the source of Divisions, and that often it causes great troubles. You need on∣ly read the History of the last Age to be assured of it. He thereupon answered me, You open me a great field, permit me that I stop a little here, and that I make you see, first, That that is a misunderstood Zeal which endeavours at present the Con∣version of the Protestants of France: in the second place, That this Design can never have the success that is ex∣pected: and in fine, that nothing is more opposite to the true Interests of the King, than the Conduct they at present hold with us. When I had promised him Audience, he spoke to me much to this purpose. First, As for the Zeal which moves, at present, so many People to make what they call Conversions, I must
tell you, that I never conceived that real Conversions were to be procured by such means: They would save us you say, in good time, but let us be saved by honest means: They damn us by endeavouring to save us, even though the Religion to which they would bring us were good: They make us sell our Religion, they make a traffick of Souls, threatnings and promises are employed; no employ is given, no grace granted, without adding to it for Condition the Change of Religion: The simple are surpriz∣ed, the Children are taken away, they lay hold on the irreligion of cer∣tain people, either Libertines or Brutes, who having no sense of God, are ever ready to betray their Con∣sciences for Money; In effect such people are paid, the King is put to great Charges to recompence the Converts, that is to say, for the en∣tertaining persons who have neither Religion nor Piety. It is certain, that of a thousand which turn Catholicks, there is perhaps not one who does it out of a motive of Conscience: The
one has lost his suite at Law, and his Goods, and knows not where to put his head; another ready to lose an Employ which kept him alive, and which they would have taken from him, sacrifices his Conscience for the preservation of his Fortune. A Child angry with its Parents, who had punished it, revenges it self on them, by becoming of another Reli∣gion than theirs. A young Woman, who has lost her honour, goes to seek it in the strongest Party, and is wil∣ling to cover all her infamy with the vail of Conversion. If the Grandees be excepted, who are tempted by plea∣sures, and invited by hopes of some considerable advancement; these Con∣verts are almost all such persons as are the dreggs of the people, who are drawn in by motives worthy of the baseness of their Birth and their Cou∣rage: Let the holy Writ be read, and see if the Apostles and their Succes∣sours ever made use of such-like means for the Converting Pagans and Infi∣dels. And with all the pains that are taken, they will never succeed in the
design of reducing by these kind of ways all the Protestants of France in∣to the Roman Church. Great Progres∣ses have been made for some late years, but do they believe that that will always last? A long Peace had retained in our Party a great num∣ber of the ungodly, who stuck to our Religion, because they did not find themselves better elsewhere. Those people who never had any Religion, make no difficulty now to change it; But our Party will purge it sell, and when it is drained of the ungodly ones, and when there is none amongst us but honest people who have per∣severed out of Principle of Conscience, it will be no longer seen that so many persons yield to promises and threat∣nings; thus the numerous Conversi∣ons will cease. Moreover, you must know, Sir, that they take you to be very credulous, when they tell you of numerous conversions. There are five or six Bigots in France, who have erected themselves into Converters, keeping a Register of their Converts, and from time to time shew the King
these Registers; but they fill up these Catalogues after a strange manner. Besides, these Gentlemen Converters are plaid upon, and they are even willing to be cheated, that they may afterwards cheat his Majesty; because they know that he is liberal, even to rofusion, to those who turn Catholiks. here are Rogues, who never having  Protestants, not so much as by  on, go and put themselves up∣ the Catalogue of Converts, that they may be rewarded for their pre∣tended Conversion. And in fine, where are these Conversions made? It is at Paris, and in some other great Cities of France, where there are Missions and Houses of propagation established, where the people are per∣petually sollicited by Promises and by Threatnings. But in all the Pro∣vinces, and particularly in the Coun∣try, there are hardly any Conversi∣ons seen: perhaps within twenty years one might count ten or twelve thousand persons, who from Hugo∣nots have turned Catholicks; what is this to near two Millions of Souls of
that Religion, there are in France, and when will they then have done? I know not, continued he, how they can hope to draw in so great a number of people; there is nothing more difficult to be forced out of the mind than sentiments of Religion, and nothing more difficult to be root∣ed out of a Country than a Sect that has had time to fortifie it self there, and which is setled in its Opinions: Fire and Sword cannot extirpate it. Do we not see it proved in the Spanish Low-Countries? From the time that the exercise and profession of the Pro∣testant Religion was forbidden there, ought it not to be extinguished? yet there are still found a great number of those People, whom they call Guises. And for my part, I cannot forbear believing, That the Doctrine and Opinions of the Albigenses have been preserved in Languedock, as a Fire hid under Cinders, from the time of those Albigenses even to Calvin's time. And it is to this that I attribute, that our Reformation has made greater Progresses in that Province, than in
the others. All those who would make serious reflections upon what I have now said, will grant, that they will never compass the reducing the Pro∣testants of France into the Roman Church: And thus all the pains that are taken, and all the ills they suffer, will only make them miserable and raise Malecontents. Par. This is certainly all that your Orator could imagine for the main∣taining his two first Propositions? I am very impatient to know what he could say for the maintaining the third, that the design of re-uniting the Religions in France is against the Interests of the King and State; for it is a strange Paradox, common sense dictates that there is not a greater good in the World, both for Tempo∣rals and Spirituals, preferable to that of seeing in a State an unanimous consent in matters of Religion. Prov. When my Gentleman was at the part I left you at, I perceived his forces failed him: You have put me, saith he, upon a Chapter that requires something more knowledge
than I have. A Souldier is not obli∣ged to know more than the History of his Age; but give me leave to bring you to morrow a man who will tell you more therein than I can. Par. You was not sorry at this oc∣casion of breaking off a Conversation that gave you time to breath. Prov. You are in the right, I wil∣lingly granted him what he desired; we parted, and the day after at the hour we had appointed, I saw him en∣ter, accompanied with an old Civil Lawyer of his Party; who in the se∣quel seemed to me a pretty able man. After the first Complements, he be∣gan with telling me; You are gene∣rous, Sir, in permitting a man, who found himself too weak, to go seek for succours. This Gentleman has informed me of the subject of the Con∣versations you had with him. He told me where you stopped, and if you think fit, we will renew it in the same place. Par. Methought he had done with proving, that they would never suc∣ceed in the design of reducing all the
Hugonots of France into the bosom of the Church. Prov. I thought so as well as you. But this Gown-man did not judge that the Souldier had said enough up∣on that point; wherefore he continu∣ed the matter thus. You must grant, Sir, that in the rise and fall of Here∣sies and Schisms, there is something Divine, and which passes our under∣standing: They are deceived, who imagine that the wounds of the Church are to be cured by Humane means. God for the punishing the coldness and negligence of the Peo∣ple and Pastors, suffers the Devil to sow Weeds in the field of the Church; and when his anger is appeased, he causes those Schisms to cease, and ex∣tinguishes those Heresies that his Ju∣stice had permitted; and he does it by means which he alone is Master of. It is true that thousands of He∣resies which were in the first Ages, are no longer in being: Arrianisme, that made so much noise in the World, is quite gone. But to whom do we owe this? It is neither to violence nor pu∣nishments:
Good Emperours never made use of them; and the effusion of blood is contrary to the good Spi∣rit of the Church. The Arrians in∣deed were persecutors, but were ne∣ver persecuted. It is not by such-like means as those by which they pretend at present to Convert the Hugonots of France, to wit, by depriving them of their Temples, and removing them from Charges, and doing them injustices, and violating the promises that were made them, and reducing them to die of Hunger: Humane will does the more strive against these sort of Oppositions. Neither was it by the way of Councils: For after the Decrees of the Council of Nice, of that of Sardica, and of seve∣ral others that have been held against the Arrians, their Sect has multiplyed and has reigned with more insolence than before; that Sect is insensibly extinguished of it self, and no one knows how, after having exercised its furies in Asia, Greece, and Africa, during more than two hundred years. But this Heresie being thus extin∣guished,
to conclude from thence, that with the cares that might be ta∣ken, all other Heresies might be sti∣fled, and affirm that a Schism cannot last long; that after having subsisted some time it must necessarily cease, is to be but little acquainted with the History of the Church. The Schism and Heresie of Nestorius, have not they still lasted to this day in the East, from the year 430, that is to say, for above twelve hundred years? The Schism of the Eutychians is of no la∣ter a date than that of the Nestori∣ans, than about twenty or five and twenty years: for Eutyches and Diosco∣rus were condemned in the year 451. in the Council of Chalcedon; and from that time the followers of those two Men have filled all the East and the South, under the names of Euty∣chians, Severians, Auphalans, Arme∣nians, Jacobites, Cophtes, and even of Abyssyns. For all these People who still at this day make the greatest part of the Asian and African Churches, ad∣here to the Schism of Eutyches. It is above seven hundred years that the
Latins are in Schism with the Greeks, and all the pains that the Popes and Eastern Emperours have given them∣selves at several times, have not been able to extinguish this Schisme. If Prudence, Cares and Vigilance have not been able to bring to pass the ruine of Sects that were not founded upon Truth, and who had violated Chari∣ty by their Separation; they ought not to hope to ruin the Party of the Reformed, which is supported by Truth, has purged the Church of so many errours, and has in no manner violated Charity, in separating it self from a Church, that chose rather to chase away from its bosome, than suffer any Reformation. The con∣clusion of all that great affair will make appear, that those who have Sworn the ruin of the Hugonots, fall upon God himself, which will not be for their advantage. Par. This new Preacher carries it very high, but what did you an∣swer to all this? Prov. As he had more advantage over me, than I had over my Gentle∣man,
I was obliged to suffer; the match being unequal. But I resol∣ved to let the discourse continue, and to retain the principal things he should oppose me with, to be infor∣med of by you. Is any thing of these Facts false, that this man laid, thus as I have recited them? Par. No: But though the Facts that he told you be true, it is not cer∣tain that the Conclusions he draws from thence are very good; which we will examine at one time. But for the present I will not interrupt you. Prov. Since you desire it, I will continue to tell you what I can re∣member of a Conversation, which appeared to me in some places some∣thing above my Capacity. I hear, continued our Civil Lawyer, that this Gentleman has obliged himself to prove to you, that the course they take at present in France, against our poor Protestants, is quite contra∣ry to the Interests of the King and State. Give me leave, Sir, to re∣present you several things upon that
point. First, is it not true, that it is against the Kings Interests to depo∣pulate the Kingdom. There are still in France, near two Millions of Souls of the Reformed Religion: If all these persons were away, their absence would certainly make a considerable Breach. There is no body but knows, that the force of States depends on the multitude of Inhabitants: It is this that makes the United Provinces so powerful. It is incredible that so little a State can resist so powerful E∣nemies, and carry it's name to the end of the World; which only pro∣ceeds from the prodigious multitude of Inhabitants which are there. It is this that makes Arts flourish there, Neces∣sity being the Mother of Industry. It is the cause of the Commerce, be∣cause the Territory being too little to nourish so many Men, they have been obliged to go seek to the very ends of the World, the necessaries that their own Country could not furnish them with. And in seeking wherewith to keep them alive, and that they might not be famished, ad∣dress
has made them find out immense Riches. The King knows very well, that the force of a Prince consists in the multitude of Subjects. Where∣fore he has made several Declarations in favour of those to whom God grants great Families, and who there∣by the more contribute to populate the Kingdom. He has ordered, that those Victuallars who have have two Children, should enjoy exemption from all Taxes, Imposts, Subsidies, Collects, and quartering of Souldi∣ers. It is his will, that the Nobles who have the same number of living Children, have two thousand Livers of yearly pension out of the publick Revenues; and for the exciting young people to marry themselves be∣times, he orders by another Decla∣ration, that the young married shall not be subject, till the age of five and twenty years, to any publick Charges. It is to this intent, that such diverse Declarations have been made by his Majesty, which forbid all his Subjects to leave the Kingdom, and go inhabit else-where. By all
these Courses the King would get and keep Subjects. But his Majesty by the Declarations which have been made against the Reformed, has lost twenty times more Subjects than he can have gained, or kept by those other ways, which his prudence, or that of his Ministers had suggested to him. It will be made appear to him, if he pleases, that within these fifteen years, his Declarations against the Hugonots, have drove away of them out of France, above sixty or four∣score thousand. All the Frontiere Provinces of England, Holland, and Germany, as Normandy, Campagne, and Picardy, are already sensible of this; particularly the City of Ami∣ens. Since the Temple has been ta∣ken from the Hugonots of that City, it is certain, that the most part of their Merchants have retired them∣selves into forreign Countries, and that they have carried with them, at least twelve or fourteen hundred thousand Livers of Riches out of the Kingdom, and which will never re∣turn into it. In case they would but
make the least attention upon this point, it would appear, that it is im∣possible, but that the Kingdom will be deserted by this Course. It is cer∣tain, that all the Reformed who lose their Goods and Estates, by what is called the disgraces of Fortune, do quit the Kingdom; because that their Religion hinders them from re∣covering themselves by any means. In chacing away all those who bear the Arms of the Guards du Corps, of the Musqueteers, and the Gendarmes, and all the Kings Household; in taking the Commissions from several thousands of Commissaries, who li∣ved upon their Commssions, in neg∣lecting the Officers, and refusing them advancement: In a word, in taking away, as they do, the means of subsisting from an infinite number of Hugonots, who cannot subsist of them∣selves; they are drove out of the Kingdom; and all forreign Coun∣tries are seen covered with French-men, who seek for employ, and the means of subsisting, that are refused them in their own Country. I look∣ed
upon it as a certain thing, that of 50 thousand, that the Rigour which is exercised against us, reduces into this estate, there are not five hun∣dred who turn Catholicks, all the others are as many lost Subjects for the King. They are much deceived, if they believe that little is lost in losing people who have hardly any thing. For it is certain, that the Armies of a State are almost wholly compo∣sed of such sort of people; It is the industry of such persons who keep up Commerce and Arts. There is a City upon the Frontiers of Champagne, which formerly belonged to the Dukes of Bouillon, touching which I am informed, they make great brags to the King, that when he took possession of it, that City was almost wholly Protestants, and that at present the number of the Catholicks much surpasses that of the others. But they tell not the King what was told me; that the severity with which they treated the Reformed, has obliged them to retire; that the Catholicks which they fill the City with are Beg∣gers
and poor Wretches: That of a good City, they have made of it a re∣treat for people who have nothing, and who are a charge to the Commo∣nalty; that those Catholicks the Ci∣ty is filled with, by expelling the an∣cient Inhabitants, come from the Bur∣roughs and neighbouring Villages. Thus the King gains no new Subjects, though the City gains new Inhabitants; and he loses all the good Subjects, who go away and seek for repose elsewhere, and carry with them what Riches they have. The same thing happens in the Provinces, bordering upon Swizzerland and Geneva: They are not sensible yet of this diminution, but they will one day find it. Besides, they may assure the King, that all those zealous Convertours, who brag to him, that they increase the Catholick Church, will much con∣tribute to desart his Kingdom. It is certain, that of those who change Religion to become Catholicks, there is not the fourth part, I dare say the sixth, who persevere in the Religion that they have embraced: They
changed out of Interest, Lightness, Fear, Love, or some other passion which surprized them. When passi∣on is cooled, reason returns, those people are ashamed of their change, and their Consciences become awake. And as the most part have as little be∣nefit in France, as in another State, it little imports them where they are, and they go away to avoid the Ri∣gour of the Edicts against Relap∣ses. At that place our Doctor stopped a little, appeared pensive, and thus renewed. I am going to enter upon a nice Subject; I have no mind to offend any one, but I cannot forbear telling the truth. We are all good French-men; but the King has much more interest to preserve his Hugonot Subjects than all the others, since it is the only Party of whose fidelity he can be secured. Give me leave, Sir, to handle this point more particular∣ly. it is certain, that the great dis∣putes that France can have, are with Spain and with the Emperour: There is not a Family in Europe, that can
give ombrage to that of France, be∣sides the House of Austria. Since Charles the 5th, that House has ever aspired to the Universal Monarchy. It is true that the King has brought it very low at present, and made it fall very much from its High preten∣sions. But in fine, it is the Course of the world, which is humbled to day to be raised again to morrow. The House of Austria has raised it self from a very low Degree; it still reigns in Spain, Germany, and Italy, that is to say, almost over the half of Europe; and when these large territories become sensible of their force, and to be animated by a great Chief; they may put Fance as hard to it as they did formerly. It is therefore certain, that the great Interest of our State, is to be always on the Guard on the side of the House of Austria, and deprive it of its Allyes, and wea∣ken its Subjects, and manage Allian∣ces, and form Adherences against it, and extirpate out of France all that might favour it, and entertain there all that is most opposite to it. And
this already makes appear how much interest the King has not to ruine a Party, that can never enter into Intel∣ligence with Spain. The House of Austria has conserved so great a fury against the Protestants, and the Pro∣testants conserve so much resentment for the violences that they have suf∣fered by the Princes of that House, that those two Parties are absolutely irreconcilable. It is not the same thing with the other Parties of the State. It is true, that there is some natural antipathy between a French-man and a Spaniard; but you are too well acquainted with the History of our age, Sir, to be ignorant, that notwithstanding those antipathies the Interests of the Grandees has of∣ten made such great engagements with Spain, that they had like to have ruined the State. The Histo∣ry of the League, the entry of the Duke of Parma into France, and the intentions that the wicked French-men then had, to receive a King foom the hands of the Spaniards, are Warrants for what I advance. I
could say something more new, and add several stories of our Grandees, who dissatisfied with the Court, put themselves into the Spanish Party, made Treaties with that Crown, and would have been of very ill conse∣quence to the Kindom, if the preser∣ving Genius of the state had not fen∣ced off it's effects. But though all the rest of France should enter into such a mind, the Hugonots Party alone would be a Barriere to the State, and would shed to the very last drop of its blood that it might not fall under the Dominion of Spain. Par. The King, in the State he is, has little need of keeping measures with any one for the becoming formi∣dable to the House of Austria, he who makes all Europe tremble, and car∣ries the terrour of his Armes even into Africa. Prov. That is true: But wise Prin∣ces as the King is have longer pros∣pects; they do not onely consider themselves and their present State, they consider Posterity and the future, and take their Sureties against all
that may happen. Be it as it will, our Civil Lawyer proceeding farther upon the matter told me, Let me beg of you, Sir, that we may speak freely. Is it not true, that the Court of Rome has engagements infinitely greater with Spain and the House of Austria, than with France? Spain renders submissions to the See of Rome, that France does not render it; Spain does not talk of the Liberties of its Church, as they talk in France of the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, as these Liberties pass at Rome for Here∣sies, or attempts against the Holy See. Spain is submitted to the Tribunal of the Inquisition, France rejects it, e∣ven in what it has of Good. In fine, Spain keeps Faith and does Homage to the Court of Rome, for one part of its States, as the Kingdoms of Na∣ples and Arragon; and on the con∣trary the Kings of France will not de∣pend on the Pope for Temporality, and hold only their State of God and their Swords. In one word, these engagements between Spain and the Court of Rome are such, that this
Court does not at all ballance, when it is to take the French or Spanish side; and never kept it self neuter, but when it feared the Forces of France. Wherefore the Italian Par∣ty, and the Spanish Party, are to be looked upon as the same Party. The King of Spain is Master of most part of Italy: The Popes are often Spani∣ards by Birth, and they are ever so by inclination; the Spanish Faction amongst the Cardinals is ever the most numerous. Thus the great In∣terest of the King and of France, is to be ever upon the Guard against the Ita∣lian Faction, which can easily become Spanish. Now this Italian Party is not only in Spain and in Italy; it is in Germany, in France, and every where else; it is the Body of the Clergy. One cannot be ignorant of the engage∣ments that all the Roman Catholick Clergy has necessarily with the Court of Rome. This Court is the Head, the Clergy is the Body, the Ecclesi∣asticks and Monks are the Members, and all these Members move by the Orders of the Head. Again, I have no
Design to chocque the Gentlemen Clergy, whose persons I respect; I do not doubt but that they have good French Hearts; But in fine, they have their Maximes of Conscience; they are of a Religion, and they must fol∣low its Principles. Now the Princi∣ples of their Religion binds them to the Holy See, and its preservation preferably to all things; moreover, Interest makes illusion in Hearts and Minds. Their Interest obliges them to take the Popes part, who is their Preserver and Protectour; and what they do out of interest, they persuade themselves that they do it out of Conscience. First, it may be said of the Monks, that all the Hou∣ses they have in France, are as many Citadels that the Court of Rome has in the Kingdom. Those great Societies have withdrawn themselves from the Dominion of the Bishops, they de∣pend immediately on the Holy See; they have all their Generals of Or∣ders at Rome; and those Generals who are Italians and Spaniards, are the Soul of the Society; they are
obliged to follow their Opinions and their Orders; the Italian Divinity is the Divinity of the Cloisters. Thus the King may reckon, that all the Monks look upon him as the Pope's Subject, as being lyable to be Excom∣municated, his Kingdom put under an Ecclesiastical Censure, his Subjects dispensed and released from the Oath of Fidelity, and his States given by the Pope to another Prince. And every time that this happens, they will believe themselves obliged, out of Conscience, to obey the Pope. If in those Orders of Monks there hap∣pens to be some particular One, who follow other Principles, it is certain that they are in no Number, and do not hinder that the Body of the Monks is absolutely in the Interests of the Court of Rome, and by consequence in that of Spain. Thus you see al∣ready a considerable Party of whose Fidelity the Kings of France cannot be assured. And what is this Party One may say that it is all France: for the begging Monks and the Jesuits are Masters of all the Consciences; they
are Confessors, they are Directors, they persuade what they will to those that are devoted to them. The House of Bourbon ought not to doubt of this truth, if it never so little calls to mind the endeavours that were used by the Monks for the forcing from it the Crown, when the Race of the Va∣lois came to fail. It is against this so considerable Party that the State ought to take its Precautions, in pre∣serving that other Party which can never be of intelligence with this; it is that of the Reformed. History tells us how impossible it is to be long without having Disputes with the Court of Rome. It is always attempt∣ing, and one is obliged to defend ones self against its enterprises. It is capa∣ble of setting great Engines a going, of making Engagements and Allian∣ces: It had twenty times like to have ruined Germany, it has dethroned great Emperours, it has likewise caus∣ed great troubles in France, and one cannot be too secure against its ambi∣tion.
Par. I fancy that your Hugonot's Advocate would not spare the rest of the Clergy, and that he endeavoured to prove that we can be no more assu∣red of their Fidelity than of that of the Religious. Prov. What you have already heard may make you easily divine that, for the giving the more force to what he had to say against our Divines, he prevented what might have been ob∣jected. If you understood these mat∣ters, Sir, said he to me, you could tell me that our Clergy of France teach a Divinity wholly different from that of Rome; that all make profession of holding for the Liberties of the Gallicane Church; the princi∣pal Articles of which are, 1. That the King of France cannot be Excommu∣nicated by the Pope. 2. That an Ec∣clesiastical Censure cannot be laid up∣on their Kingdome. 3. That it can∣not be given to others. 4. That the Pope has nothing to do with the Tem∣porality of Kings. 5. That he is not Infallible. 6. That he is inferiour to the Council. These, you would tell
me, are the Maximes of the Sorbonne, that have often censured the contra∣ry Propositions. This Divinity is maintained by the Authority of the Parliaments, who have often declared the Bulls of the Pope abusive, null, scandalous and impious, and have ap∣pealed from the Execution of these Bulls, when they found them con∣trary to the Liberties of the Gallicane Church. The Court of Parliament assembled at Tours, during the League, caused the Bulls of Excommunication to be burnt by the hands of the Execu∣tioner, that had been published a∣gainst Henry the Third and Henry the Fourth. This is all sine and mag∣nificent, if you please, but these fair appearances have no stock; I do not speak of the Divinity of the Parlia∣ments, which is that of the Politici∣ans; I speak of the Divinity of the Clergy. Once more, added he, I do not at all doubt of the Fidelity of the Di∣vines of France to their King; but they shall never perswade me, that this Fidelity and Zeal for their Prince
is without exception; and I make no other exception against it than what they themselves make: Will you hear they themselves speak? Read the Harangue that Cardinal du Perron made to the third Estate, in the name of all the Clergy of France, in the States, 1616, and remember that it is not the Cardinal du Perron who speaks, it is the Clergy of France as∣sembled in a Body who speak by the mouth of that Cardinal. All France seised with an horrour of the two hor∣rible Parricides that had been com∣mitted in the persons of the two late Kings, both of them assassinated out of a false Zeal of Religion, would draw up a Formulary of Oath, and establish a Fundamental Law of the State, which all the Subjects were to swear to; and this Law bore, that e∣very one should make Oath of ac-acknowledging and believing, that our Kings for their Temporalities do not depend on any one soever but on God; that it is not lawful for any cause soever to assassinate Kings; that even for causes of Heresie & of Schism
Kings cannot be Deposed, nor their Subjects Absolved from their Oath of Fidelity, nor upon any other pretext soever. This Law, methinks, is the security of Kings, this is a Doctrine which all the Hugonots are ready to sign with their Blood. What did the Clergy of France do thereupon? It formally opposed that Law; (divers Works of Cardinal du Perron, p. 600 and following) they were willing to acknowledge the Independancy of Kings, in regard of the Temporalty; they consented that Anathema should be pronounced against the assassinates of Kings. But they would never pass the last Article; that for what cause soever it was, a King cannot be Deposed by the Pope, stript of his States, and his Subjects absolved from the Oath of Fidelity. He who spoke for them, alledged all the examples of Emperours and of Kings, who had been Deposed and Excommunicated by Popes, upon account of refusing Obedience to the Holy See, & appro∣ved them; he alledged the example of St. Ʋrban the Second, who Excom∣municated
Philip the First, and laid an Ecclesiastical Censure upon his Kingdom, because he had repudiated his Wife Bertha, Daughter of a Count of Holland, to Marry Bertrade Wife of Foulques Count d' Anjou, then still alive. He made use of the testimo∣ny of Paul Emile, who said, that Pope Zacharias dispensed the French from the Oath of Fidelity that they had made to Chilperick. These two Prin∣ces were not Hereticks; yet the Cler∣gy of France approved their having been stript of their States by the Popes; which makes appear, that the Clergy in the bottom judges that the Pope has Right to lay an Ecclesiasti∣cal Consure upon the Kingdom of France, and to depose its Kings for any other cause as well as that or Herese. Is it not to abuse the World, to con∣fess on one side that the Temporalty of Kings does not depend on the Pope, and establish on the other, that the Pope may in certain occasions Inter∣dict these Kings, Excommunicate them, and Absolve their Subjects from the Oath of Fidelity? In sine, this is
the result of that famous Opinion of the Clergy of France. So that if Christians are constrained to defend their Religion and their lives against Heretick Princes or Apostates, from their Fidelity to whom they have been Absolved, the Politick Christian Laws does not permit them any thing more than what is permitted by Military Laws, and by the Right of Nations, to wit▪ open War, and not Assassina∣tion and Clandestine Conspiracies: that is to say, that when a Pope has decled a Prince deprived of his tates, his Subjects may set up the Standard of Rebellion, declare War against him, refuse him Obedience, and kill him if they can meet him, provi∣ded it be with arms in their hand, and by the ordinary course of War. I cannot comprehend how one can be secured of the Fidelity of those who hold such like Maximes. For in fine, Kings are not insallible, and if they happen to do any thing that the Court of Rome judges worthy of Ex∣communication and Interdiction, they are Kings without Kingdoms and
Subjects, according to our Clergy of France, as well as according to the Divines of Italy. But perhaps that the Sorbonne, which is the Deposito∣ry of the French Divinity, does not receive these Maximes so fatal to the safety of Kings: Let us see what it has done. In the Month of Decem∣ber, 1587, because that Henry the Third, for the security of his Person and of his State, made a Treaty with the Resisters, or the German Prote∣stants, the Sorbonne, without staying for the Decisions of Rome, made a secret Result, which said, That the Go∣vernment might be taken from Prin∣ces, who were not found such as they ought to be, as the administration from a suspected Tutour: This was known by the King, he sent for the Sorbonne some days after, and com∣plained of it. After the death of the Princes of Guise, which happen'd at Blois, the Sorbonne did much worse: they declared and caused to be pub∣lished in all parts of Paris, That all the People of that Kingdom were Ab∣solved from the Oaths of Fidelity that
they had sworn to Henry of Valois, heretofore their King: they razed his name out of the publick Prayers, and made known to the People that they might with safe Conscience unite, arm and contribute to make War a∣gainst him, as a Tyrant. If I would add to that the Story that I know this Gentleman told you concerning the Death of the late King of England, we should find that the Sorbonne has ever been of the same Opinion. Let things be told as they are, every time that our Kings shall have assairs that will carry them to extremity a∣gainst the Court of Rome, the Clergy of France will suppress the discon∣tents while that affairs go well for the Court of France; but if things turn otherways, the dictates of our Divines against the King will not fail to break out. Every sincere person will al∣low, that it has never been otherwise than so, and that it will be always thus; which may be observed in the very least disputes. By example, in that the King has now lately had with the Pope upon the account of the
Regality and of the Ʋrbanists, the publick has seen a Letter from the Clergy Addressed to the King when he departed to visit the Frontiers of the Low-Countries; In that Letter these Gentlemen promise the King, let whatever be the issue of his Dis∣putes with the Pope, they will be al∣ways inviolably fixed to his Maje∣sties Interests. But we know from good hands, that the Archbishop of Paris and the Sieur Rose Secretary of the Cabinet, are the sole Authors of that Letter; the Bishops have almost openly disavowed it. And this makes it apparent enough, that in this Dis∣pute they were of the Popes side. Must it not then be confessed, that it is the King's Interest to preserve the only Party that makes Oath of Fideli∣ty to him without exception and without reserve, that can never have engagements contrary to his Service, either with Spain or the Court of Rome, or with the revolted Clergy favouring the Enemies of the State? And it is well known, that in the time of Henry the Third, while that all
the Corporations of the Kingdom were in an actual Rebellion against their Prince, the Hugonot was the on∣ly one which remained Loyal. If it was necessary to add any thing more, pursued our Civil Lawyer, for to prove that it is the King's Inte∣rest to protect the Reformed in his States, one might say that the Alli∣ances that have been made with Fo∣reign Protestants have not been dis∣advantageous to the State. Since the year, 1630, its engagements with England, Holland, Sweden, and the Elector of Brandenburg, have been a great help towards its humbling the House of Austria. Cardinal Richlieu successfully employed the King of Sweden, for to punish the pride to which that House was mounted after the defeat of the Palatine House that had accepted the Crown of Bohemia. And it is well enough known, that the Protection that the King gave the Protestants in his Territories, facili∣tated those Foreign Engagements and Alliances. Thus our Orator ended and made a pause at this place.
Par. He has forgot a great Arti∣cle, That which is against the Peace of a State is ever against his Interests who governs it: Nothing is more in∣compatible with Peace, than diversity of Religions. Prov. He did not forget it, but he thought he had said enough for one time, and referred what he had more to say till the next day. This morn∣ing sour Gentleman returned, and as what was said is fresher in my memo∣ry, perhaps I shall give you a more exact account. I know very well, continued our Hugonot Civil Law∣yer, that I am to Dispute to day a∣gainst a pompous Maximed that has all appearances for it, that covers it self with the habit of Devotion, and against which the Bigots say one can∣not declare without impiety. But provided we be heard, and that we are permitted to distinguish and ex∣plain our selves, we shall appear no∣thing less than impious. If it be said that nothing is more desirable by a good Prince, than to see all his Sub∣jects live in the true Religion; we
grant it; if it be added, that for the reuniting minds, and bringing them all to think the same thing in matters that may be controverted, he ought to employ all the means that Christian Morality suggests and approves; we will likewise avow it. But all this can neither make us affraid, nor do us any hurt. Moral Christianity does not suf∣fer that ill be done, that good may come on it: It will never Counsel the Re∣union of Religion, by violence and breaking of Words. If it be added, that this Maxim is as true in Policy, as it is in Morality; and that it is the interest of a State, for its Conservation, to have but one Religion, in such a manner, that it cannot be great, flouri∣shing and peaceable, while that Di∣versity of Religions are suffered and tolerated, we shall say that nothing can be advanced more false. First of all, those Gentlemen who maintain that Maxime with so much confi∣dence, do not think of what they do; they do not perceive that they make an Apology for all persecuting Princes. If it be so, the Pagan Emperours had
reason to arm against the Christians, and to set whole Rivers of their blood a flowing. The Christians separated themselves from their Society; they looked upon others as Enemies of God, and as the Devils Subjects; and good Policy, according to the Maxime that is taught our Kings, cannot per∣mit that such people should be suffer∣ed to live. If these Gentlemen might be believed, the Grand Seignior is but very ill Counselled, to tollerate in his Territories the Christian Reli∣gion; he could not be blamed if he let loose his Janizaries upon the Chri∣stians, and caused all their throats to be cut. Par. That's a pretty fancy, to com∣pare a Christian Prince, who is of the true Religion, to a Pagan Prince or Infidel. It is a Crime to persecute the true Religion; but it is a work of great merit to extirpate Heresie. Prov. Stay, and you shall know what he told me thereupon. There is not a man, said he, but who's per∣suaded that he's of the true Religion. The Grand Seignior believes himself
in the way of Salvation, as the most Christian King persuades himself he is. Thus according to the principles of Morality, his Conscience orders him do all that is possible for him to save his people, by forcing them to be∣come of a Religion, which he believes to be the only way to Salvation. But you must especially take notice, that we examine this Maxime according to the Rules of Policy. Now, accor∣ding to these Rules, the Grand Seig∣nior is as well obliged to endeavour the Peace and Preservation of his Ter∣ritories, as the Christian Princes are to endeavour the Preservation of theirs. To refute this Maxime, I will only mention that so common saying, Divide & Impera; Nourish Division, and you will easily remain Master. When there are several Par∣ties in a State, provided that the Prince espouses none of them; that Division obliges each of the Parties to hold fast to the Princes interests, for the having his Favour and Protection. If one of the Parties gets much ground of the other; and that the Prince
likewise happens into this strongest Party, provided that he hinders the weakest from being oppressed by the strongest, it is clear that he cannot fail to be beloved and considered by all his Subjects. He would be belo∣ved by the strongest party, because he himself was of it; the fear of losing him would make them manage him. The weakest party would have love and acknowledgement for a Prince, whom it was indebted to for its Tran∣quillity by the Protection it received. Add to all this, that such people as are of contrary Religions cannot enter into the same Rebellion. Thus the Prince is always sure to have a faithful Party. It is ever difficult that, in a State divided thus, great Conspiracies can be contrived; for the one party continually watches the paces of the other. [Plutarchs Treatise of Isis and Osiris.] The Ancients have observed to us, that in Egypt there was almost as many Religions; as Cities, because that they had diffe∣rent Animals for Gods. At Mem∣phis they adored the Oxe Apis, at Leon∣topolis
the Lyon, at another place a Wolfe, in another City a Sheep, at another a Goat. And they were of so contrary Religions, that some eat the Annimals that their Neighbours adored, with design to vex them, and turn their Religion into Ridicule. [Diodorus, his 1. Book of his Biblio∣thiques.] The Kings of Egypt nouri∣shed this Division, and found that it was the security of the State, because that it hindred Conspiracies. I leave it to Politicians to push the Specula∣tions farther that may be made upon it, and content my self with the ex∣perience, by which I make appear that it is very false, that a State can∣not be both peaceable and happy, when it tolerates several Religions. It would be requisite to make the Hi∣story of the World, to say all that can be said upon it: We should speak of those great Empires, which inclu∣ded so many several Nations, and full as many Religions. It is certain, that one Paganisme was more different from the other, than the Sects of Christi∣ans are different from one another;
yet the Romans did not fail to render their Empire glorious and flourish∣ing, and it was never the Diversity of Religions that troubled it's Peace. It has been observed, that they carried away the Gods and Spoils of the Na∣tions whom they rendered Tributary, and that they adopted those strange Gods, and built them Temples in Rome. So that they nourished this Diversity of Religions, even in the very bosome and Capital of the Em∣pire, without the Peace being any way altered. If from the Conduct of the Pagans we pals to that of the Christian Emperours, we shall see therein the same thing: That is they have tolerated the Diversity of Sects amongst the Christians, without pre∣judicing the good of the State. The Novatians had their Churches, their Bishops and their Priests, even in Constantinople that was the Capital of the Empire. They were not only tolerated there, but were likewise e∣steemed. Constantine did the honour to their Bishop Acesius, to call him to the Council of Nice, and to ask his
Opinion upon the Decree that had been made, touching what day Ea∣ster ought to be celebrated upon. And when he the Great Theodosius took the Resolution to try to recon∣cile all the Sects by amicable confe∣rences, he Communicated his De∣sign to Nectarius, Bishop of the Ca∣tholicks in Constantinople: Nectarius, who had not been brought up in Ec∣clesiastical Affairs, consulted able per∣sons, and amongst others, he did the honour to Agelius, who was then Bi∣shop of the Novatians, to ask him his advice. Agelius had a Deacon called Sisinnius, able and knowing, to whom he gave Commission to con∣fer with Nectarius; and this Sisinni∣us gave thereupon such Counsel, as was approved by Nectarius and the Emperour. But as concerning Theo∣dosius, they object against us the Con∣duct of that Great Prince, in regard of the Arrians; they have composed his History, they have put it into the hands of the Children of our Kings; they give them for a Model of their Conduct with us, that of Theodosius
with the Hereticks of his time. In truth they do us a great deal of ho∣nour, to compare us with the Arrians, who were sworn Enemies of Jesus Christ, and by Consequence of the Christian Religion; and who had persecuted the Church, even to effusi∣on of blood: Yet we receive the six first General Councils, and detest all the Heresies that the Church has con∣demned. I leave equitable people to judge if such sentiments as these are fit to he inspired into young Princes. I add, that Theodosius had promised nothing to the Arrians, he had not made any Treaty with them, nor had he given them any Edicts. And in fine, I say, that though Theodosius made some severe Declarations against the Arrians; the most part of them were not executed. Socrates, his Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 2. The Conduct of Gratian a most Christian Emperour, who gave liberty of Conscience and exercise to all the Sects, except the Eunomians, Manicheans and Phoniti∣ans, merits to be considered, for it is the Model wise Princes ought to regu∣late
themselves by. That is to say, that when they are obliged to tolerate Divers Sects, their toleration ought not to reach to those who ruin the very foundations of Christianity, as the Eunomians, or Arrians, the Ma∣nicheans, and the Photinians did, who were what the Socinians are at present, I could pursue the History of the Em∣pire, and make appear how in the fol∣lowing ages, the Religion was shared into several Branches, by the Schismes of Nestorius, of Eutychus, and of the Monothelites, which filled the East; and yet the Empire kept still stand∣ing. It was not those Schismes in Religion, that gave Birth to that ter∣rible Empire of the Sarazins that cal∣led in the Turks from the North, and caused those Inundations of the Bar∣barous Nations, by which the Empire has been ruined. They will tell me that those Schismes in Religion have often caused very great dissorders in the State, I avow it. But from whence did that proceed? Because that one party would have oppressed the other, and for that the Emperours and the
Grandees of the Empire maintained those several Parties, and armed them the one against the other. Thus the Toleration of several Religions was far from causing any disorder, the troubles were only occasioned by their not suffering Diversity of Opini∣ons. If the Eutycheans would have tolerated those that were Orthodox, and that the Orthodox would have to∣tolerated the Eutycheans, the Peace of the State had not been in the least altered. It becomes those Gentlemen to object the State France was in in the last age, for to prove that the toleration of several Religions in a State is very dangerous. From whence proceeded our Wars of Religion in France? Did they not arise from the violence that the Catholick Party would have used upon the Protestant Party? If they would have suffered one another, and if the Princes who governed the State had not conspi∣red to ruin the Protestants by Sword, and by Fire, all the State would have been in a perfect Tranquillity. All this that I have said does not hin∣der
me from avowing, that there are occasions in which a Prince may employ the Rigour of the Edicts, for to hinder the diversity of Reli∣gions; which is at the first Birth of Schisms. But when a Schism is once formed, when a Sect is become nu∣merous and strong, it is to go a∣gainst the Spirit of the Gospel to em∣ploy either violence or deceit to re∣medy this evil: especially when a Prince who mounts upon the Throne, finds that diversity of Religions e∣stablished and tolerated: I maintain that for the Peace of the State he is obliged to continue that toleration which those Sects are in possession of. The United Provinces of the Low Countries can learn us, what ill the diversity of Religions produces in a State when it is tolerated. They are daily reproached for including in their bosom all the Religions of Europe. I do not examine at present if that so general toleration for all sorts of Sects is according to the principles of Religion; I am not very much of that Opinion. But I boldly main∣tain,
that, according to the Rules of Policy, this general toleration is what makes the strength and Pow∣er of that Republick: it is that which invites thither so great a number of people; and it is what keeps up Trade there. All those Sects have different Interests in regard of Reli∣gion; but all conspire to the good and preservation of a State in which they enjoy a repose that they would not find elsewhere. In fine, since it is the Religion of France that is in dispute, let us draw our Exam∣ples from France it self. Had not the State like to have perished in the last age by the fury of those who were resolved to suffer but one Religion in France? Never was this State so glo∣rious, as since the Peace was re-esta∣blished by the Edicts of Pacification. Shew me an age in our History, in which France was so glorious and so Triumphing as within these fourscore years; that is to say, since that the two Religions were obliged to suffer one another by the disposition of the Edicts? After that Henry the Fourth
had pacified the affairs of Religion, it may be said that he had all manner of advantage over his Enemies. When Cardinal de Richlieu had finished what he designed against the Protestants, in depriving them of their Cities of Surety, and that he had restored Peace to them, he raised the glory of the Monarchy by the Alliance with the Swedes higher than it had ever been. The diversity of Religions that is still in France does not hinder our glorious Monarchy from being the admiration of all the Universe, and the terrour of all Europe. In a word, the State will never come to any trouble by the diversity of Reli∣gions, as long as the Protestants are protected and tolerated. As long as the King pleases he will have in them Subjects of an inviolable Fidelity; and for the least kindness he has for them, he might draw from their veins to the very last drop of their blood for his Service. It was thus that our Conversations ended. For my part I was not versed enough in Ancient and Modern History to an∣swer
all this. You would oblige me, Sir, to tell me your thoughts upon it. Par. These Gentlemen took time to think of their Difficulties before they proposed them to you, it is just that we do the like to think of our Answers. It is enough for this day that we have heard them. The End of the Dialogues.
SInce that these Dialogues were fi∣nished, there fell into the Authors hands a Letter from the Sieur Pelisson a famous Convert, and a more famous Convertour: It was believed to be worthy of the Publick curiosity, and that nothing was more proper to make appear how Apostolical the manner is that is made use of for the Conver∣ting of Souls. Nothing more resem∣bles the Conduct of the Apostles, who went from place to place spreading the Riches of Grace to the contempt of those of Nature, than the Charity of these Gentlemen, who spread eve∣ry where the Riches of Nature, to in∣vite men to Grace. Versailles the 12. of June, 1677. Sir, To answer the Letter you did me the honour to write me on May the 21th. besides what M. de le Tour Dalier sends you, I send you a Co∣py of a Memorial, that I have sent to some of my Lords, the Bishops of Languedock, upon such Informations as they required of me. You will therein see, Sir, that I have propos'd
you as an example to all the others, being but what you merit; and in the second place, without limiting any sum, you may with the same Oeco∣nomy, and in the Conditions of this Memorial, proceed as far as you please, as well at Pragelas, as in all the rest of your Diocess, in point of little Gratifications to the New Con∣verts. M. Dalier has took upon him to send you a Letter of Credit for the taking up those little sums which may become great ones, according as you shall have occasion; and for my part I heartily wish, Sir, to dis∣charge several of your Bills of Ex∣change, not only for three or for six thousand Livers, but for ten and for fifteen, and for as much as you please. I shall not be so happy as to have rea∣son to complain of their being too much. If you ask me, Sir, how this agrees with the smallness of our Stocks, and the design of endeavour∣ing the same through all the King∣dom; I shall place at the beginning of my Story that which made the
Widows Oyland Flower increase, and which multip lied the five Loaves. Besides, all Conversions are not made in a day: that while the time runs, the stock advances: that these good successes have made the King determine to dispose of St. Germains and Cluny only to these sort of good works; that Credit will be found to make ordinary advances at need up∣on these Abbeys: that if we saw so great success and so much of stock en∣gaged in the future, we might stop. or demand other helps from the King which his Piety would hardly refuse the furnishing, without reckoning those of which some overtures have been made to him that he has not re∣jected. As for M. de Gilliers, I do not see in your Letter, Sir, if he is to be Con∣verted, or is already a Convert; in the first case I can charge my self with proposing to the King what you shall judge most convenient, in making it known to me more precisely. In the second case, that is to say, if he or his Family have been Converted for some
time, you must get some other to speak to the King than I who have solemnly renounced, and as by Con∣tract, not to propose to him on my part any other expence than that of making Conversions. I admire, Sir, the work that God has wrought by your hands, and by M. Dalier, for your General Hospital. I fancy it to be as much as the taking of Valenciennes, Cambray, and St. Omers. I shall have the honour to write more particularly to you at the little Assem∣bly that Whitson holy-days has disper∣sed, insomuch that I have not yet seen the Chief President, who returns but to morrow from Basville. Be pleased, Sir, to continue to honour me with some part of your favour: and if you will do me a great deal of good, and a very great kindness, with some part likewise in your most secret Prayers, be it in the Cell, or be it at the Altar. I am with all possible respect. Sir, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant Pelisson Fontanier.
A POSTSCRIPT. THere has ben a great number of Conversions made in the Valleys of Pragelas, by the Cares of M. de Gre∣noble, and the Company of the Propagati∣on of the Faith in the same City, and by some Missionaries of the Company of Jesus: Insomuch that without other di∣stribution than about two thousand Crowns in all, sent at several times, there are are well certified Lists of seven or eight hundred persons returned to the Church. Some of my Lords the Bishops having done me the honour to write me word, that they likewise saw several Conversions that might be made in their Diocesses, if moneys were sent them. I made answer by order from the King, that it was not possible to send Moneys into so many places; but that every one should labour on his side, and give notice of the Conversions that were to be made in the considerable Families, that the King might think of it and provide accord∣ingly: Neither should any occasion be let slip for the converting the Families of the
people, when it costs but little, as had been seen in those Vallies, that for two, three, four or five Pistols, very nume∣rous Families had been gained. I even told them they might mount to an hundred Francs, without my needing to have any New Order from his Majesty to acquit the Bills of Exchange that should be drawn upon me. This was very reli∣giously performed in regard of those to whom I had written. I said the same thing to M. Potel Se∣cretary of the Commands of the Duke of Vernuil, at his going to the States of Lan∣guedock, that he might make it known to my Lords the Bishops who should be assembled there; and I have since con∣firmed him by Letters, and so much the more willingly, being the King, excited by the good success, had lately made a new Fond, which is the third of all the Oeco∣nomats expedited or to be expedited since the Month of December last, which he only designs for this use, which will not begin to produce before the beginning of the next year: but from which may be hoped a perpetual succour for the future. Things are in the same state, and though
that this Fond is not yet come, means will be found to pay the Bills that shall be drawn upon me for that effect. But the following conditions must be observ∣ed. 1. That they be not unknown persons, or little known, and without Character, who draw those Bills of Exchange upon me. 2. That every one be accompanied with an abjuration certified by the Bi∣shop of the Diocess. M. l'Intendant, or any other person in a considerable Em∣ploy, and with an Acquittance from a publick hand for the discharge of the Sieur Soutain, Commissary for his Ma∣jesty for the receiving the Temporalties of the Abbeys of Cluny and St. Ger∣main des Prez, together with the thirds of the Oeconomats design for New Con∣verts. 3. That these abjurations be since the Month of November last, 1676. 4. That though they might mount to an hundred Francs that is not to say that it is intended they always should do so, it being necessary to be as wary therein as can be; first for the spreading
this dew upon the more people; and then again, because that if an hundred Francs be given to lesser persons without any Fa∣mily that follows them, those who are raised the least higher or train after them a number of Children, will demand much greater sums. My Lords the Prelates, or others, who shall charitably take upon them these kind of Cares, cannot better make their Court to the King, before whose eyes all these Lists of the Converts pass, than in imitating what has been done in the Diocess of Grenoble, where they hardly ever mounted to that sum of an hundred Francs, and were almost al∣ways much below it. Which does not however hinder, that for more considerable performances, I having first notice, greater sums shall be furnished, according as his Majesty, to whom it shall be made known, shall iudge convenient. FINIS.
ERRATA. PAge 11. l. 8. for evoqued, r. removed. p. 19. l. 15. for had given, r. had not given. p. 22. l. 2. for regard to, r. regard had to. p. 25. l. 26. for Fiefarons, Fee-farms, p. 31. l. 22. for scale, r. seal. p. 33. l. 12. for to our, r. our. l. 15. for our, r. to our. p. 34. l. 25. for modest, r. modest by force. l. 26. for indignation, r. inclination. p. 43. l. 22. for Baptism of Faith, r. Bap∣tism of Laicks. p. 69. l. 14. for Lives, r. Books. p. 78. l. 14. for Bedunt, r. Pedant. p. 107. l. 1. for Schupe, r. Schuyt. p. 146. l. 14 for nutas, r. nutat. p. 150. l. 7. for Profession, r. Profusion.
