L2852y 18368344 107416
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guild∣hall Civitatis London, vicesimo primo die Junii, Anno Domini, 1665. Annoque Regni Domini nostri CAROLI Secundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei defensoris, &c. decimo septimo, coram Jo∣hanne Lawrence Milite, Majore Civitatis London, Thoma Adams, Richardo Brown, & Thoma Aleyn, Mil' & Baronet', Aldermannis, Johanne Frederick, Willielmo Bolton, Wil∣lielmo Turner, & Richardo Rives, Militibus, Aldermannis, Willielmo Hooker Aldermanno, & Georgio Waterman, & Carolo Doe, Milit' & Aldermannis, nec non Vicecomitibus ejusdem Civitatis, ac majore parte Communiariorum de Communi Concilio ejusdem Civitatis tunc & ibidem Assemblat'. WHereas the right of ordering and disposing of Carrs, Carts Carrooms, Carters and Carmen, and of all other person or persons whatsoever working any Carr or Carts within the City of London and Liberties thereof, is and (from the time whereof the memory of Man is not to the contrary) hath been in the Mayor and Commu∣nalty and Citizens of this City; and in pur∣suance thereof, the Government of the said Carrs, Carts, Car∣rooms, Carters and Carmen, hath from time to time, by several Acts of Common Council, been disposed and committed, sometimes to the President and Governours of Christ's Hospital, and at other times to the Master, Wardens and Fellowship of Woodmongers London, and in the year 1658 to the late President and Governours for the Poor of the said City, and last of all, was again committed
to the Master, Wardens and Assistants of the said Fellowship of Woodmongers, by an Act of Common Council made the 10 day of May 1661, in the Mayoralty of Sir Richard Brown Knight and Baronet, and divers Rules, Directions, Provisions and Penalties thereby given, made and set down, touching the Licencing and Re∣gulation of Carmen, and several other matters, and the Master Wardens and Assistants of the said Company of Woodmongers by the same Act impowered for Licencing and allowing of the Car∣men, and to several other purposes, as in and by the said Act more fully may appear: And forasmuch as complaint hath been made by divers Citizens and others, of sundry Abuses committed in the Government of the Carmen, and of many Inconveniences and Grievances brought upon the Citizens and Inhabitants of this City and Liberties, and parts adjacent, in raising the Price and using Deceits in the weight and Measure of Couls, by means and pretence of the Priviledge and power granted in and by the said Act of Common Council; as in and by a Report of certain Com∣mittees (appointed to examin the said Grievances and Abuses) read and allowed in this Court, more particularly and fully may ap∣pear. Be it therefore Enacted, Granted and Agreed, by the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons in this Common Council assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the before-mentioned Act made in the Mayoralty of Sir Richard Brown, and every Clause, Article and Thing therein contained, shall from henceforth be utterly repealed, and made void to all intents and purposes; and that the President and Governours of Christ's Hospital London, shall from time to time hereafter have the Rule, Oversight and Government of the said Carrs, Carts, Carters and Carnien, and of all other person or persons whatsoever working any Carrs or Carts within the City of London and Liberties thereof, during the pleasure of this Court, and no longer, and according to the Rules, Directions and Provisions in this present Act mentioned and com∣prised, and such other Orders, Rules, Directions and Limitations, as by this Court, or the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, shall hereafter upon farther consideration, be made and provided in this behalf. And it is Enacted, That no more than four hundred and twenty Carrs shall by the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of this City, or any other person or persons claiming by, from, or under them, be allowed or permitted to work within this City and Liberties thereof; and that seventeen shillings and four pence per Annum, and no more, shall be received or paid for a Carroom, and twenty shillings, and no more or greater Fine, upon any admittance or alienation of a Carroom; and that if any person or persons shall
presume to work any Cart or Carrs, by himself or Servants, not being duly allowed as aforesaid, such person or persons, for every time so offending, shall forfeit and pay the sum of forty shillings, to be recovered, received and obtained, as is hereafter mentioned. Also it is Enacted, That there shall not hereafter be any Carr, Cart or Carrs, permitted or allowed to any Wharf, Wharfingers or Woodmongers, or kept or worked by any Whatfinger or Wood∣monger, after the first day of August next, but by Licence of the said President and Governours of Christ's Hospital, and the same to be part of the said number of four hundred and twenty Carrs; and that all the Street-Carrs, or residue of the said four hundred and twenty Carrs, to be Licensed as aforesaid, shall or may be used or allowed to work within this City and Liberties thereof, for the Carriage of all Wood, Coals and other Fewel, within the same City and Liberties, at such Rates and in all other respects as other Goods and Commodities have used and ought to be car∣ried, and not otherwise. Provided nevertheless, that it shall be lawful for every person and persons to send his and their own or other Cart or Carts out of the Countrey, to bring Coals from Wharfs, and also to bring his and their own Coals home to his and their house and houses in London, with his and their own Cart or Carts, not being Traders in Fewel by retailing the same. And if any Wharfinger, Woodmonger or other, shall pre∣sume to keep and work any Carr, Cart or Carrs, contrary to the true meaning hereof, such person and persons, for every time so offending, shall forfeit and pay for the first offence the sum of forty shillings, to be recovered and obtained as is hereafter mentioned; and for the second, and every other offence afterwards, the said Carr or Carrs to be seized, and carried to the new Storeyard on the Postern, and there kept and detained, according to the Custom of London. And be it hereby farther Enacted, That such as have any Car∣room or Carrooms duly allowed, shall not directly or indirectly lett them out for hire at any time hereafter, without the approbation and allowance of the said President and Governours of Christ's Hospital for the time being first had, obtained, and attested in wri∣ting under the said Presidents hand, to the end that none may be admitted to work any Carr, but such as shall be found of civil carriage and able and meet for that Imployment, upon pain that every person offending therein shall forfeit the sum of ten shillings a day for every day he shall lett to hire the said Carr, to be recovered as is hereafter mentioned. And that the Prices of Carriages may be moderate as well for the People as for the Carmen, It is Enacted, That forthwith this present year, and hereafter always from year to year, in the month of September, the Rates and Prices of Carriages within
this City and Liberties shall be set and appointed by the Court of Aldermen, and such of the Commons and others as they shall think fit to call before them for their Information; and the said Prices to be printed, and set upon Posts in publick places: And if any Carman shall demand and take more than according to such Rates and Prices so to be set down, such person or persons so offen∣ding shall forfeit and pay for every such offence the sum of ten shillings, to be had and recovered as is hereafter mentioned. And it is hereby farther Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for any one of the Marshals of this City, and their men respectively, (who are hereby authorized and appointed to assist the said President and Governours of Christ's Hospital, and whom they the said President and Governours shall appoint from time to time) to take and seize all the supernumerary Carrs, not allowed, which shall be found working in this City and the Liberties there∣of, and, according to the ancient Custom of this City in that behalf used, to impound them in the new Store-yard at the Postern belonging to this City, there to remain till the respective Owners of them shall conform themselves to the Government of the said President and Governours. It is also hereby farther Enacted, That if any person or per∣sons authorized to work any Carr or Carts, by himself or Servant, shall neglect or refuse duly to pay the said yearly Rent of seventeen shillings and four pence apiece to the said President and Gover∣nours, for all and every the laid Carr and Carts, as is before mentioned, the Carroom, that is, the Licence of such person or persons to work such Carr or Carrs, shall forthwith be suspended, and such person and persons be disabled to work any longer by virtue of the same Licence, until he or they shall conform to the payment of the said duty of seventeen shillings and four pence re∣spectively: And if any person or persons for the cause before men∣tioned being so disabled before conformity, shall presume after such disallowance to use and work any Carr or Carrs, either in their own person or persons, or by his or their Servant or Servants, Agent or Agents, then such person or persons shall respectively for∣feit and lose the sum of forty shillings for every time they shall so work, as in working without Licence or Allowance. And for the prevention of such Deceit hereafter as divers Wood∣mongers have practised in the Sale and Measure of their Coals, It is Enacted, That all Sea-coals hereafter to be sold or uttered by retail, by any person or persons whatsoever, shall be filled and brought home to the Buyers in the Sea-coal-metors Sacks, or such other Sacks as contain the full measure of the Sea-coal-metors Sacks, and are and shall be marked by the Keeper of the Guild-hall for the time being, according to an Order of the Court of Aldermen made the twenty fifth day of October, in the time of
the Mayoralty of Sir Thomas Cambell Knight deceased, and car∣ried by some Street-Carr or Carrs of persons duly Licenced and allowed as aforesaid, and bearing upon the same Carrs the mark of the red Cross for a note of their Allowance, as hath anciently been accustomed. And that all person and persons vending or uttering Seacoals by retail, and their Carmen, Servants or Agents, shall hereafter from time to time, and at all times when they carry or send abroad any Coals within the City of London or Liberties thereof, carry along in their Carr or Carrs together with their Seacoals a good and lawful Bushel, sealed according to the Bushel in the Guid Hall, allowed for measuring of Seacoals, which agreeth with the Fatt anciently used for measuring of Seacoals, which Bushel shall be and contain in breadth from out to out the ring, not exceding half an inch, nineteen inches and a half, and in depth within the Bushel seven inches and a half. And if any person or persons shall bring home in his or their Carr or Carr, to any Buyer, any Coals in any other Sack or Sacks, and without such Bushel as are before mentioned and appointed, such persons so offending shall forfeit and pay ten shil∣lins for the first and second offence respectively, for the third and every other offence the Carr or Carrs of the Offender to be seized and carried to the new Store-yard on the Postern, as is afore∣said. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said President and Governours of Christ's Hospital shall for time to come observe, perform and execute such Acts, Orders and Rules, as have been or shall hereafter from time to time be farther made, published or enjoyned by Common Council, or by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of this City for the time being, for, touch∣ing and concerning the Government and Regulation of Carrs, Carts, Carters and Carmen, touching or concerning the Price, Measure, or Assize of Coal-Sacks, Coals or other Fewel, or any matter or thing to the same or any of them in any wise belonging or appertaining. And for a constant Store and Provision of Seacoals to be had and made hereafter for supply of this City, and especially for the benefit and relief of the Poor in times of Dearth and Scarcity, which hath happened in this and many other years heretofore, by reason of Wars and Troubles at Sea, or by the subtil combi∣nation and practice of the Retailers at home for their private gain and profit, to the common Abuse and detriment of the Citizens, and others His Majesties Subjects, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That besides the general Stock imployed by this City for Provision of Coals for the benefit of the Poor within the said City and Liberties, there
shall be provided yearly hereafter at the best hand, betwixt Lady∣day and Michaelmas, by the several Companies of this City, the several Chaldrons of Seacoals hereafter mentioned: That is to say, Mercers, four hundred eighty eight. Grocers, six hundred seventy five. Drapers, five hundred sixty two. Fishmongers, four hundred sixty five. Goldsmiths, five hundred twenty five. Skinners, three hundred and fif∣teen. Merchant-tailours, seven hundred and fifty. Haberdashers, five hundred seventy eight. Salters, three hundred and sixty. Ironmongers, two hundred fifty five. Vintners, three hundred seventy five. Clothworkers, four hundred and twelve. Dyers, one hundred and five. Brewers, one hundred and four. Leathersellers, two hundred and ten. Pewterers, fifty two. Cutlers, seventy five. White-bakers, forty five. Wax-chandlers, nineteen. Tallow-chandlers, ninety seven. Armourers, nineteen. Girdlers, one hundred and five. Butchers, twenty two. Sadlers, ninety. Carpenters, thirty eight. Cordweiners, sixty. Barbersurgeons, sixty. Painterstainers, twelve. Curriers, eleven. Masons, twenty two. Plumbers, nineteen. Innholders, forty five. Founders, seven. Poulters, twelve. Cooks, thirty. Coopers, fifty two. Tylers and Bricklayers, nineteen. Bowyers, three. Fletchers, three. Black-smiths, fifteen. Apothecaries, forty five. Joyners, twenty two. Weavers, twenty seven. Woolmen, three. Woodmongers, sixty. Scriveners, sixty. Fruiterers, seven. Plaisterers, eight. Brown-bakers, twelve. Stationers, seventy five. Imbroyderers, thirty. Ʋpholders, nine. Musicians, six. Turners, thirteen. Basket-makers, six. Glasiers, six. And that the said quantity of Seacoals shall be stored or laid up in convenient places by every the said Companies respectively, and brought out, sold and uttered, at such other hard and deer seasons of the year, in such manner and at such Price as the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of this City for the time being shall judge most requisite and convenient, and by their Precept in writing shall direct and require, for the ends and purposes before mentioned,
so as such Companies as aforesaid be not by such Prices ordered to sell the same Coals to Loss. And whereas divers Woodmongers and others using to sell and utter Coals by retail within this City and Liberties, in design to raise and inhance the Prices thereof for their own private Gain and Commodity, have commonly heretofore gone or sent down the River of Thames, or otherwise travailed and imployed their Agents to meet the Ships and Vessels coming from Newcastle and other parts toward this City loaden with Coals, and at distant places from the said City, or by Precontract within the same City and Liberties, have bought up, forestalled and ingrossed great quantities of Coals, which should have been brought to the said City by the Owners and Sellers thereof, to be there sold and uttered at reasonable Prices, and the same have conveyed and brought to the said City, to sell again at high and excessive Prices, against the Custom and Priviledges of this City, and to the pub∣lick Detriment, Oppression of the Poor, and great charge of all others inhabiting and dwelling within the said City and Liberties thereof: For Reformation hereof, Be it Enacted, Ordained and Esta∣blished by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or persons whatsoever inhabiting or dwelling, or that hereafter shall inhabit and dwell within the said City or the Liberties thereof, shall, from and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist now next ensuing, either by themselves or any for them or to their use, provide, buy, bargain or contract for any Seacoals, Scotch-coals, Pit-coals, or other Coals coming towards this City to be sold, other than such as shall be provided and bought to be spent within their own private houses, nor shall sell or utter the same by retail or in gross within this City or Liberties to any person or persons, but that the Owners and Sellers thereof, at their own costs and charges, shall and may bring the same Coals to the City them∣selves, here by them to be sold; upon pain that all and every person and persons whatsoever that shall offend contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, shall forfeit and lose five shillings for every Chaldron of Seacoals, and the like sum for every Tun of Scotch or Pit-coals, that shall be bought, bargained or contracted for contrary to the intent and true meaning of this Act, to be reco∣vered as is hereafter mentioned. And it is Enacted, That the Yeomen of the Wood-wharfs of this City for the time being, shall from time to time diligently over∣see, that all persons coming and repairing to this City with any manner of Coals before mentioned to be sold, do and shall observe and keep the Orders, Rules and Directions before going, and shall use like diligence for the discovery and punishment of all Offen∣ders in or about any particular thereof, according to the intent and meaning of this Act,
And lastly it is Enacted, That all Peins, Penalties and For∣feitures, in and by this Act before limited and appointed, shall and may be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill or Information, in the name of the Chamberlein of this City for the time being, in His Majesties Court holden before the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City in the Chamber of the Guild-hall of the City of London, wherein no Essoign or Wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant: And after Recovery thereof, one moiety (after all Charges deducted) shall be to the Intormer, and the other moiety to the Poor of Christ's Hospital in London, to be imployed for and toward their relief. In all which Suits to be brought by this Act, the Chamberlein shall recover his ordinary Costs and Charges, to be expended in and for recovery of all such Forfeitures against the Offender or Offenders. Weld. LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, for the Use of CHRISTS-HOSPITAL.
