N1076 12171540 55409
THE UNREASONABLENESS OF A SEPARATION From the New Bishops: OR, A TREATISE OUT OF Ecclesiastical History. SHEWING, That although a Bishop was unjustly deprived, neither He nor the Church ever made a Separation; if the Successor was not a Heretick. Translated out of an ancient Greek Manuscript in the Publick Library at Oxford, by Humfrey Hody, B.D. Fellow of Wadham College. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Church-yeard, MDCXCI.
Viro Summo, Sapientissimo, Sanctissimóque, R. R. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno JOHANNI, Divinâ Providentiâ Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Totius Angliae Primati & Metropolitano, ANTISTITI verè ORTHODOXO, Tractatum hunc contra Schisma, Sincerissimo affectu, Animóque Pacis ac Tranquillitatis Ecclesiae cupientissimo, è tenebris suis jam editum, Reverentiâ maximâ, quâ{que} per est humilitate, Dicat consecrátque HVMFREDVS HODIVS.
THE PREFACE. THE Greek Manuscript, from which this Treatise is translated, is in that part of the Publick Library at Oxon, that is called the Baroccian; the CXLIId in number, according to the order those Books are set in at present; where it may be seen by any, that either out of Cu∣riosity may desire satisfaction; or have any Suspicion, that the whole may be an Imposture, or any part of it an Interpolati∣on. For as for the exactness and fidelity that has been used in this English Interpretation, we appeal to the Original Greek; which is now in the Press, and will speedily be published with a Latin Version. 'Tis very likely that this at Oxford is the only Copy of this Book now remaining in the World. And that it should be pre∣served till our Times, and yet hitherto be overlooked; and at this very Juncture be taken notice of, and so opportunely brought to light, seems to be more than a fortuitous Hit; it appears to have something of  and a singular Providence in it. God grant, it may have that good effect upon those unsa∣tisfied persons of the Church of England; which so many ex∣amples and authorities of Antiquity (that Antiquity, which they profess to imitate, and pretend to allege) may give us reason to expect. Surely no uncharitable aspersions of Time∣serving, courting Preferment, or the like, that might be cast upon any that should write now in this Cause, can take
place against this Author, so remote from the present Age and Controversie. 'Tis pity we cannot know, whom we are obliged to for this Excellent Tract. There's no Name prefixt before it; nor any Characters in it, that may lead us to a probable conjecture about the Author. But for his Age, without question he li∣ved CCCC Years ago: Seeing that the last History he pro∣duces, is in the XII Century; and the latest Author he cites, was in the beginning of the XIII. And as to his Authority and Credit, though we need be less concerned about that, because he relates every thing from the Testimonies of others; and much more than is here said, may be easily made out from approved and authentick Historians: yet He himself ap∣pears to have been no inconsiderable person, and, I believe, no less than a Bishop. That this Treatise was a Sermon, may be manifestly dis∣cover'd from two passages in the 18 , and, . and 19 pages; where he addresses himself to his Auditor, and not his Reader. And the bulk of it is agreeable to a Greek Homily. And that the Author li∣ved under the Jurisdiction of the See of Constantinople, will be granted without difficulty; because he has confined himself to the Histories in the Succession of those Patriarchs, and from his own words, page 22. That from five Con∣stantinopolitan Bishops the Ordinations of all the Clergy were conveyed down to his time. The occasion of composing our MS. seems to have been this. A Patriarch of Constantinople (right or wrong) was de∣posed, and another preferr'd to the See. Vpon this some Friends and Dependants of the Deprived began to make a Party, and stir up the people to a Schism: giving out, That the former was still their genuine and Canonical Bishop;
that it was sinfull to have Communion with the New one; and that all his Ordinations would be invalid. Whereupon our Author, probably one of the Bishops that assisted at the New Patriarch's Consecration (forty or fifty were often pre∣sent on such occasions) one that had a tender concern for the Peace of the Church, and was apprehensive of the sin and danger of such a Separation, made this Historical Discourse to the People, as 'tis credible, in the Cathedral Church of Sophia; wherein he has included all the memorable and pa∣rallel examples, that had happen'd to that See within the space of near a thousand years. He allows those Advocates for a Separation all that they would have; he puts the case with all the advantage on that side. Admit, that the deposed Bishop was unjustly depri∣ved; suppose, that the New one was uncanonically promoted: even in these circumstances, if he was not a Heretick, nei∣ther the People nor the ejected Patriarch himself ever refu∣sed Communion with him; the sufficience of his Ordinations was never question'd by any Council; there was no Prece∣dent for Schism upon those accounts in all the History of the Church; the Concord and Tranquillity and Prosperity of the Whole were of more consideration in those Ages, than private Interest or hidden Resentment, or the more tempting Plea∣sure of being Head of a Party. God forbid, that the Case thus stated by our Author should be thought parallel to that of our New Bishops; or that this Book should be now publish'd, as if they needed that kind of defence. But we propose and recommend our Treatise as an Argumentation a fortiori. If in the cases of Unjust Depri∣vation and Uncanonical Succession a Separation is without Example in Ecclesiastical Story; how inexcusable will they be, that shall make Faction and Schism, where neither of those hard circumstances can be found?
As to the Exception of S. Chrysostom's Case; which, it seems, could not be comprehended in so short a Discourse, and was put off therefore by our Author to a particular Disquisi∣tion; which, if ever it was publish'd, is either lost or yet undiscover'd: We must confess there was something singular in the misfortune of that great and popular Man. The We∣stern Churches did a long time refuse Communion with some Bishops; that out of envy and malignity, by sinister inter∣pretations and the falsest calumnies, deprived Him of the See, and the Church of one of the best Prelates it ever had: Those men they justly detested, as the actors and contrivers of a good Patriarch's ruin: for the. Pallad. p. 80. Emperor (the Civil Power) was blameless in a manner, and but passive in the business. Thus it was in the West at a distance, in which case the renouncing Communion was only, as it were, a breaking off a Correspondence. But how were matters carried nearer home? 'Tis well known, that most of the Eastern Bishops, though they . Theod. C. 5. L. 34. would not be accessory to that unjust Deprivation, however were not so far transported as to make a Schism in the Church. But then the Populace of Constan∣tinople, they were so enraged at it, that they not only forsook, but (like Recusants, or a Rabble?) set fire to the Church, which took hold also of the. Socrat. VI. 8. Par∣liament House, and laid it in ashes. But as that case is quite foreign to this of our New Bishops; so was the Separation no less contrary to the Spirit of S. Chrysostom. That Good Man (as a Bishop that was then present, has related it) when he saw he must be deposed, advised and
charged the Bishops his Friends more than once;Pallad. vita Chrys. p. 67. . That as they loved Christ, none of them should leave his Church upon his ac∣count: p. 69. . That they must keep Communion with his Deposers, and not rend and divide the Church. And he injoyn'd some Devout Women, that attended there, ThatPall. p. 90. . as they hoped to obtain mercy from God, they should pay the same Service and Good-will to his Suc∣cessor by a fair Election, that they had done to himself: . FOR THE CHURCH COULD NOT BE WITHOUT A BISHOP. How could he, if he had now been alive, have more clearly and expresly given his opinion in our Case. If a man, otherwise never so worthy, will acknowledge no duty to the Civil Magistrate, which pro∣tects him; if he shall refuse to act in his Function; if he will not be the Bishop, somebody else must be: For the Church cannot be without a Bishop. This is not being deprived, but relinquishing; and a Successor does not invade, but is placed in the Chair by the united Efficacy of Ca∣nons, Law, and Necessity. 'Tis supposed the Reader knows, that for several Ages the Greek Churches have erroneously maintain'd, That Adorati∣on is to be paid to the Images of our Saviour; and therefore needs not be offended at one or two passages in this Treatise, to which it is now time to dismiss him.
Imprimatur. Georgius Royse, R. R. in Christo P. ac Dno, Dno Johanni, Ar∣chiepisc. Cantuar. à Sacr. Domest. July 6th. 1691. ERRATA. PAg. 13. l. 10. read He's constrain'd by. P. 19. l. 13. read, Syncellus or. P. ibid. l. 16. read Nicolaus. P. 21. Marg. l. 7. read .
A TREATISE Out of Ecclesiastical Histories, concerning such as at several times have been promoted to the Patriarhal See contrary to the Ca∣nons, the rightfull Patriarchs being depos'd and yet living. Amongst whom we may observe, that not one of those that were un∣justly depos'd, did ever separate himself from the Communion of the Church upon the account of his being depos'd; provided that he, that was uncanonically promoted after him, was Orthodox. Excepting onely the Case of Chrysostome, which requires a parti∣cular Consideration. THE great John Chrysostome, a most holy and excellent person, living within the Jurisdiction of the Antiochian See, was ordain'd Deacon by Meletius Patriarch of Antioch. This Meletius having formerly been made Bi∣shop of Sebastia by the Arians, and afterwards translated to the Throne of Antioch by the Suffrages both of the Arians and Orthodox, Eustathius [late Bishop of Sebastia] being yet
in banishment, was nevertheless because of his Orthodoxy both accepted by and beneficial to the Church. Even the great Basil was or∣dain'd Deacon by the said Meletius. Now Chrysostome being call'd from Antioch, and seated upon the Throne of Constantinople, was afterwards unjustly depos'd, and thrust out of the City: and after him there was con∣secrated Arsacius, the Brother of Nectarius, who was Patriarch there before Chrysostome. Add. *This Arsacius, be∣cause of his Brother Necta∣rius's Jealousie towards him, had formerly sworn, that he would never accept of the See of Constantinople. So the MS. which in this place is written erroneously. He held the Patriarchate 14 months, and, as can∣not but be supposed, or∣dain'd Presbyters, Bishops, and Deacons; none of whom were rejected by the Church. After his death the Blessed Atticus was consecrated, Chry∣sostome, being yet alive and in exile. He raised a Persecution against those that adher'd to Chrysostome: and possessing the Patriarchate 20 years, was approved by the Church, both he himself, and those that he had ordain'd; no one being troubled or called in question upon the account of his Ordination. These things are deliver'd in the History of So∣crates.
The words of the MS. are these.  Which in an un∣common acceptation of the word  may be thus translated. Now they that had been ordain'd by At∣ticus, ordain'd Sisinnius. For that Sisinnius, when Atticus died, the 10th of October, was only a Pres∣byter, and was consecrated Patriarch the 28th of Fe∣bruary following; appears from Socrat. lib. VII. c. 26. See the Gr. and Lat. Edition. From Atticus, Sisinni∣us, [who succeeded him] de∣riv'd his Ordination; and by Sisinnius Proclus was consecrated Bishop of Cy∣zicus. Now if you would be certain that Atticus was own'd and receiv'd by the Church; the divine Cele∣stine, Bishop of Rome, is a witness of that matter, who in an Epistle to Nestorius, praises and owns both Atticus himself, and Si∣sinnius, who was Patriarch after him; and ranks them as Patriarchs after Chrysostome. After Si∣sinnius, Nestorius was plac'd in the Throne. And the Third General Council did not narrowly examine into the promotions of those Patri∣archs, orMS. *, i. e. or those that were ordain'd by them, as before. about their Or∣dinations: but only depo∣sing the Heretick Nestori∣us, it receiv'd and own'd all those that had been made Priests or Bishops by Arsacius, Atticus, and Sisinnius, and even by Nestorius too, provided that they profess'd the Orthodox Faith, and confess'd the Blessed Virgin to be , or the Mother of God.
After the Council, Maximian was consecra∣ted Patriarch by such as had receiv'd their Or∣dinations from the aforesaid four Patriarchs. After him the Bl. Proclus, who deriv'd his Or∣dination from the same Hands, was advanc'd to that Dignity. These things are related in the History of Zonaras. Now the Bl. Proclus, and not only he, but likewise Maximian before him, and Atticus, and Sisinnius, were receiv'd into Communion by S. Cyril. After Proclus, by the same suc∣cession of Ordination, Flavianus obtain'd the Patriarchate. See now the Succession. MS. *. Which may be thus translated. They that deposed Chrysostome, consecrated Arsacius; the same, and those consecrated by Arsacius, Atticus; those by Arsacius and Atticus, Sisinnius; and those by Sisinnius, Proclus. They that depos'd Chryso∣stome consecrated Arsacius; the same, together with Arsacius, consecrated Atti∣cus; Arsacius and Atticus, Sisinnius; and Sisinnius, Proclus; who, as I said, held Church-communion with S. Cyril. Observe moreover, that Severianus Bishop of Gabala, and Acacius Bi∣shop of Berrhea, who were the chief Authours of all the Calamities that befell Chrysostome,
being afterwardsOr, Discovered to Pope Innocent, MS. . call'd in question by Pope Inno∣nocent, were neither de∣pos'd nor reprehended by him; the Pope leaving their punishment to God. The Bl. Flavianus having condemn'd and de∣priv'd the Heretick Eutyches, the Emperour Theodosius commanded Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria to inspect and examine again into the matters between them. Dioscorus thereup∣on having call'd a Council at Ephesus; the se∣cond of that place, judg'd, condemn'd, de∣pos'd and murder'd the B. Flavianus, con∣trary to all Ecclesiastical order; absol∣ving Eutyches, and consecrating Anatolius in Flavianus's room. You see that Anatolius was consecrated contrary to the Canons, see∣ing it was by Dioscorus, a Murderer and a Heretick, that espous'd the Cause and the Heresie of Eutyches. But observe further: Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusa∣lem, Basil Bishop of Seleu∣cia, MS. * which is a mistake of the writer, and must be thus corrected. . i. e. Basil Bp. of Seleucia in Isauria, and Photius Bp. of Tyre See the Gr. & Lat. Edit. Photius Bishop of Isauria in Epirus, Eustathius Bishop of Berytus, Thalas∣sius Bishop of Cesarea in
Cappadocia, and, in a word, all that whole Council concurr'd and acted with Dioscorus in the unjust ejectment of Flavianus, and the un∣lawfull Ordination of Anatolius in his place. Yet none of them were rejected in the Fourth General Council of Chalcedon, only Eutyches and Dioscorus, that persisted in their Heresie. For that Holy Synod concerned not it self about the Ordinations of uncanonical and illegal Pa∣triarchs, but onely requir'd of every one the profession of the Orthodox Faith. Now that Anatolius was promoted against the Canons, Pope Leo attests; writing thus concerning him to the Emperour Marcian: That therefore he would make no inquiry about Anatolius's Conse∣cration, because he profess'd the Orthodox Belief. These things are written in the Acts of the Second Council concerning Flavianus. In the Reign of the Emperour Anastasius, when the Heresie of the Acephali was rife, the Emperour himself became addicted to it, and expell'd out of the City three Patriarchs; because they refus'd to embrace his false Opinion, and anathematize the Fourth General Council, and communicate with Seve∣rus: the first,So the MS. . An errour of the Writer, for , as all Histori∣ans call him. Euthymius; the second, Macedonius,
who succeeded him; (unlawfully indeed, but because he was an assertour of the Catholick Be∣lief, he was not rejected by the Church, neither did Euthymius himself recede from his Commu∣nion) and the third, Timotheus; who himself likewise was unlawfully promoted in the room of Macedonius: who yet was not rejected by Macedonius, because he was a maintainer of the true Faith. Nay, even the great Elias Bp. of Jerusalem, embrac'd the Communion of all these three Patriarchs, when all were alive to∣gether; being troubled indeed at the ejectment of him in possession, but receiving the Suc∣cessour also, because of his Orthodox Faith. The same Emperour Anastasius deposed and banished the said B. Elias from the See of Jerusalem, because he would not come over to his Heretical Opinion, and constituted John in his place: whom, because he publickly preach'd the Orthodox Belief. contrary to the Emperour's Expectation, Elias in no wise re∣jected, but continued in Communion with him. And Theodosius and Sabas, those Reve∣rend Fathers, the Heads and Chief of all the Monks of the Holy City, visiting and relieving Elias in his exile, both lov'd him and com∣municated with him, as an injur'd Patriarch;
and yet they communicated with John too, (that sate then in the Throne of Jerusalem,) as their Patriarch. And therefore the Names both of John and Elias were written in the sacred Diptychs of Jerusalem, in these words: May the memory of Elias and John be everlasting. These things are written in theWritten by Cyril of Scy∣thopolis, c. 56, 57, &c. Cotelerii Ecclesiae Graecae Monum. Tom. 111. Life of the holy and great Sabas. In the days of Athana∣sius the Great, Maximus the Confessour was Pa∣triarch of Jerusalem. Now when a Synod was called at Tyre by the Emperour Constantine, to consider of the matters relating to Athanasius; and laying false things to his charge hadMs. *. i. e. had condemned him when he was absent: or, had condemned him for not making his Ap∣pearance. condem∣ned and deposed him; Atha∣nasius flies to Maximus at Jerusalem. Maximus there∣upon calls a private Synod, and repeals what was done by the Synod of Tyre against Athanasius, and restores him to his See, and establishes likewise the Doctrine of the Homoousion. Upon that theAcacius. Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine unjustly ejects Maximus, and sets up Cyril in his room, one that was then the
chief of the Arian Party; but afterwards be∣coming a Convert to the Homoousion (or Or∣thodox Faith,) he was willingly receiv'd and allowed as Patriarch by the Church; and was stiled, The great, and, The holy Cyrill. And ob∣serve that even Maximus himself did not with∣draw from Cyrill's Communion; therefore both were acknowledged as Saints [(that is, had their Names in the Diptychs of the Church)] as both Assertours of the same Faith. These things are deliver'd in the Life of the great A∣thanasius. In the Emperour Justinian's Reign, Eutychius of Amasia, being constituted Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, a Man holy and belov'd of God, was unjustly depos'd and expell'd the City, and John was preferr'd to the See. But Euty∣chius did not upon that account separate him∣self from the Communion of John; and both therefore were receiv'd by the Church. In the same Emperour's time, Athimus Bp. of Trebisond was translated to the See of Constantinople. He being discover'd to be an Heretick, was depos'd by Pope Agapetus; who set up in his place the most holy Menas: But his Ordinations were allowed of, as valid.
Afterwards, when the Heresie of the Mono∣thelites spread it self, and four Patriarchs suc∣cessively, MS. . Which is corrupted, the true reading being,  in stead of  i.e. Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paul & Peter. See the Gr. and Lat. Edition. Sergius, Pyr∣hus, Paul and another, were of that Sect; and as it must needs be suppos'd, ordain'd and consecrated many: Not one so or∣dain'd or consecrated, provided he relinqui∣shed and anathematiz'd his Heresie, was re∣jected by the Church; but all were receiv'd by the sixth General Council, and by George, Patriarch of Constantinople. The Emperour Justinian, surnam'd Rhinot∣metus, coming the second time to the Throne, depos'd and banish'd unjustly the most holy Patriarch Callinicus, and plac't Cyrus a Recluse of Amastris in the See. Now observe, that Calli∣nicus did not separate himself from the Church and from Cyrus, upon the account of his unjust deprivation: and that Cyrus, together with those he had ordain'd, were received by the Church. Artemius, otherwise nam'd Anastasius, being advanc'd to the Imperial Throne,So indeed the MS. , i. e. the Bishop of Constantinople be∣ing dead: allowing  (which I do not remember to have read) to be for . But this being not true in matter of fact, (Zonaras Tom. 2. p. 98. ) I believe the Author might write thus; , or, . i. e. ejecting the present Patriarch out of the See. upon the death of the Patriarch of Con∣stantinople, constituted in
his place the most holy Germanus Bp. of Cyzicus. Then Leo Isaurus obtaining the Empire, and furiously raging against the Sacred Images, banishes the holy Germanus, and places Ana∣stasius in his Throne. Fifty six years after, the sixth General Coun∣cil was call'd, which Tarasius was President of, who had been consecrated Patriarch before the Council was appointed; but whether by Bishops that were for or against Images, is un∣certain. And all that opposed the Adoration of Images, upon renouncing their Heresie, were received by that Council. Now in the time of this holy Tarasius there happen'd that which follows. Constantine, then Emperour, after he had put away hisMaria. lawfull Wife, and shut her up in a Nunnery, against her will, espousedTheodote. MS.  i.e. One that was a Nun too. Theophanes and Zonaras call her , Lady of the Bed-chamber. ano∣ther, that had her self
been a Nun; and so be∣came, according to the express Declaration of the Gospel, a manifest Adulterer. Upon this the Patriarch Tarasius refusing to officiate in so unlawfull a Marriage, Jo∣seph, Ms. : Which was the high∣est Ecclesiastical Office un∣der the Patriarch. the Steward of the Church, was so hardy as to perform the Office, and render'd himself thereby obnoxious to depri∣vation. The Patriarch attempting to deprive him, was deterred by the Emperour, who de∣clared that, if Joseph was ejected, he would set up the Heresie of the Iconomachi again; which forc'd the Patriarch to receive him, though much against his will. But the Bl. The∣odorus, Abbot of the Monastery of Studium, withdrew himself from the Communion both of Church and Emperour too: from the Em∣perour, as being Adulterer; from the Church; because it received Joseph, the Confirmer of that adulterous Match: And upon that ac∣count, he suffer'd a thousand Injuries from the Emperour. After this, Constantine had his eyes put out; and his Mother Irene took the Go∣vernment upon her: She recalls the Bl. The∣odorus, commends both him and Tarasius;
the former, for his prudence in his care for the Church; and the latter, for his exact obser∣vance of Discipline. Then the Patriarch ejects Joseph, the cause of all this Schism; and he and Theodorus are at unity again. After this, Irene is depos'd, and Nice∣phorus theMS. . Treasurer u∣surps the Throne, and Ta∣rasius dies, and the holy Patriarch Nicephorus succeeds him: He constrains the Emperour to receive Joseph again, whom Tarasius had deprived. Upon which Theodorus a second time withdraws from the Church. A while after, that Emperour and his Son Stauracius dying, Michael Curopalates gets the Sceptre; and the Patriarch Nicephorus taking hold of that opportunity deprives Joseph again, and so he and Theodorus are reconciled. But those opprobrious invectives, that Theodorus during his banishment had used against the holy Ta∣rasius and Nicephorus, were by no means ap∣prov'd of by the Church, So indeed the MS.  Perhaps our Author might use an innovated word, , i. e. that those contumelious Aspersions pro∣ceeded from the bitterness and vexation of his mind, occasioned by his great suffe∣rings. So Demosth. Orat. in Midiam, . Or even  may ad∣mit of that interpretation: seeing that S. Chrysostom seems to use it for quarrels and discontents between Husband and Wife, 17. Hom. ad 1 Cor. . Take which word you please, we may be certain that this is our Author's meaning. as proceeding from lit∣tleness of mind. For the holy Methodius, in his E∣pistle to the Monks of Studium, has these words;
If your Bl. Abbot had not retracted what he spoke a∣gainst the holy Tarasius and Nicephorus, he should not have been Fellow-minister with us; we would not have receiv'd him into our Com∣munion. These things are found in the second Book of the holy Nicon, in one of the Epistles of Methodi∣us. The same holy Me∣thodius, in his last Testa∣ment, which he made at his death, makes this Ordinance concerning the Monks of Studium that refused to join in Communion with the Catholick Church; If they repent and come over to the Catholick Church, and renounce their Schism, let them be receiv'd as barely Christians, but by no means be advanc'd to the Priesthood. ThusMS. . i. e. in the Sy∣nodicon of the Church. By which is peculiarly under∣stood that Decree that was made against the Iconoma∣chi by the Synod at Con∣stantinople under Michael and Theodora, A.D. 842. appointed to be read in the Greek Churches every year upon the first Sunday in Lent. in the Volume of Councils, which is read in the Church, as every body knows, all those things that were spoken and writ∣ten against the holy Pa∣triarchs,
Tarasius and Ni∣cephorus, are made an A∣nathema. And moreover, concerning the same Affair of (Theodorus) Stu∣dites, this also is written, That the holy Theo∣dorus did not do well in separating himself from the Communion of the Catholick Church, and the holy Patriarchs, Tarasius and Nicepho∣rus; . for they were then the Church. For if we can∣not withdraw our selves from the Commu∣nion of any ordinary PriestMS. . which may be thus interpreted; If we may not separate from the Communion of any ordi∣nary Priest, except it be for Heresie. Agreeably to the first and last Paragraphs of this Tract., without the sin of Heresie; how much less may we separate from the Communion of such holy, orthodox Patriarchs, the Luminaries of the World? And although the holy Theodorus, now with God, was so far hurried away, as to make this Schism; yet afterwards he relin∣quisht it, and set himself right again, as the holy Methodius manifests in the foresaid E∣pistle. And the saying of the Prophet Da∣vid was fulfilled in this holy Man, Though
he fall,Psal. 37. 24. The MS. has here , inspead of . he shall not be ut∣terly cast down; for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. After this, during the Reigns of Leo Arme∣nius, Michael Traulus, and his Son Theophilus, successively for the space of twenty six Years, there was not one orthodox Patriarch; but all were of the Sect of the Iconomachi, and main∣tained the Opinion of the Emperours. But after the death of Theophilus, his Wife the blessed Theodora, together with a Synod, plac'd the holy Methodius in the See; who was suceeded by the great Ignatius. This whole Paragraph is thus in the MS. . Where, as such mistakes are too fre∣quent in ancient MSS.  is put instead of . So that the passage must be read thus; , &c. Caesar in those ages was not a proper name, but the Title of one of the highest Dignities of the Empire. Zo∣naras, Tom. 2. p. 161.  The same is said by Leo Gram∣maticus and Cedrenus, &c. So that this passage ought to be transla∣ted thus; In the reign of Michael, Bardas the Caesar was sharply reproved and excommunicated by Ignatius, because he lived ince∣stuously with his Daughter in Law. The Caesar having all the pow∣er in his hands, and leading the King's facility and 'dissoluteness whither he pleased, gets Ignatius to be ejected, and Photius set up in his place. All Historians mention, that Michael minded nothing but his pleasure, leaving all serious affairs to Bardas, his chief Mi∣nister of State. Then Michael reign∣ing with his Mother Theo∣dora, was, together with her, corrupted, and was therefore sharply reprov'd by the holy Ignatius, and excluded the Communi∣on of the Church: Cae∣sar therefore, being able to doe what he pleas'd by his Imperial power, depos'd and banish'd Igna∣tius,
and establish'd Photi∣us in his stead. After this came Basilius Macedo to the Crown, and he presently deposes Photius, and reestablishes Ignatius; but after the death of Ignatius, he again restores Photius. Which in∣deed is a thing to be wonder'd at. For if Photius was depos'd as an Adulterer and Usur∣per of the Throne, how comes he again to be promoted as innocent? But be it as it will, the Church however receives and acknow∣ledges and honours them both, because Or∣thodox: and thus she says (in her Diptychs) May the memory of Ignatius, Photius, Stephanus, and Antonius, the most holy Patriarchs, be ever∣lasting:
and whatsoever is spoken against Ignati∣us, and Photius, and Stephanus, and Antonius, the most holy Patriarchs, is an Anathema. Now let the Hearer observe again, that e∣ven the holy Ignatius did not, because he was unjustly thrust out of the See, either recede from the Communion of Photius, or perswade the People to do so. For this is the scope and design of all the Histories that are here produ∣ced, To shew, that not one of all those Patri∣archs, that were unjustly and uncanonically thrust out of their proper Sees, did ever with∣draw himself from the Communion of his Successor, or perswade the People to separate from the Church; but that both they and the People continued in Communion, if so be their Successors were Orthodox. After this, Leo, the Son of Basilius, being possess'd of the Imperial Sceptre, depriv'd that orthodox Patriarch whom he found in the See, and promoted Stephanus, his own Brother, in his room; one that was sound indeed in the Faith, but nevertheless was made Patriarch con∣trary to the Canons. But no Schism was made in the Church upon that account. For Stepha∣nus likewise was own'd and receiv'd by her. So that thus she speaks (in her Diptychs) May the
memory of Ignatius, Photius and Stephanus, the most holy Patriarchs, be everlasting. The same Emperor Leo, surnamed the Phi∣losopher, ejected the most rightfull Patriarch Nicolaus, a Man renowned for his Orthodoxy, out of the See; because he refused to consent to his fourth Marriage; and oppos'd him ear∣nestly in his design of making it lawfull to marry the fourth time; MS.  That is; and to enact a general Allowance of it for the future: or perhaps thus, adding  to bring his Son after him into the Administration of the Government. The Case was this, Leo had buried three Wives without any Issue that lived; but had a natural Son Constantine by one Zoe, his Concubine. Being willing therefore that an heir of his body should succeed him, he marries this Zoe, to legitimate the ba∣stard Son. But the fourth Marriage had been declared by the Canons to be down∣right Fornication. Leo therefore endeavoured to have those Canons superseded by a new Law, that should permit the fourth Marriage: Which the Patri∣arch Nicephorus endeavour'd to obstruct, and forfeited his Dignity for it. Or, it may be our Authour wrote  i. e. to publish and promulgate it for the future. and yet to continue in government, though in his room he advanc'd Euthy∣mius, who was Syncellus's or Nicolaus's Assessor. Here observe again, that the Patriarch Nocolaus did not separate him∣self from the Catholick Church or from Euthymi∣us, nor teach the People to do so; and that un∣doubtedly because Euthy∣mius was orthodox.
Nay, when after the decease of the Empe∣ror Leo, his Brother Alexander, that succeeded him, deposed Euthymius, and replaced Nicola∣us, who was yet living, in the See, yet the Ordi∣nations of Euthymius were not rejected, seeing that they were orthodox, and by an orthodox Patriarch. These things are written in the Hi∣story of Zonaras. The Emperor Manuel very wrongfully e∣jected Cosmas Atticus the Patriarch, a Man full of Piety and Goodness, and advanc'd another to his See. But Cosmas, though highly resen∣ting this injustice, did not however either himself break off from the Communion of the Church, or incite the People to such a Schism. But he made this denunciation; That the Empress should never have any male Issue; which accordingly came to pass; for the Emp. Alexius was born of the second Wife Mary, that that was descended from the Latins. Upon this imprecation of Cosmas, MS.  Which pro∣bably is an Abbreviation of  and must be thus translated, When one Ste∣phanus, surnamed Conto∣stephanus, that stood by. So Nic. Choniates, pag. 52.  And Cinnamus, p. 55. . Contostephanus of Scio, one of the By-standers, out of zeal for the Em∣press, pressed toward him, to strike him, but was stopt by some body. Let
him alone, says Cosmas, for he himself suddenly shall have a stroke from a stone; which accordingly came to pass. For not long after Contostephanus was kill'd with the blow of a Stone in the War at Corcyra. This is in the Hi∣story of Choniates. The Emperor Isaacius Angelus finding Ba∣silius Camaterus in the Patriarchal Chair, de∣posed him without any just cause, and pro∣moted Nicetas,MS. . The second Ecclesiastical Office under the Patriarch, next to the  mentioned p. 12. of this Tract. the Chaplain of the Church to the See. A year after, he deposes him too, upon pretence of his simplici∣ty and old age, and promotes Leontius, protesting that the Bles∣sed Virgin () appear'd to him, and bid him prefer Leontius, who was called from that occasion. Soon after not liking this Leontius neither, he again averrs the Blessed Virgin had appear'd to him, and bid him depose him too; which accordingly he does, and sets up Dositheus Bishop of Jeru∣salem in his room. This giving general dis∣satisfaction,
Dositheus also is ejected, andGeorgius Xiphilinus. another put in his place. So in the space of nine years, that Isaacius reign'd he made five Patriarchs successively: By whom, as must needs be sup∣pos'd, there were many persons ordain'd. And from them the whole order of the Priesthood and all the Church is brought down to our days. And 'tis a matter of admiration, that in the reign of that Emperor, five Patriarchs succeeding one another, and all alive toge∣ther, should not separate from one anothers Communion; because one was put in and another was put out, purely at the Emperor's pleasure. To conclude all in a word; One thing on∣ly was required by the Church, that the new Bishop should profess the same (Orthodox) Faith with the other that was depos'd; but as for other Complaints and Accusations, that ever and anon were made upon such Pro∣motions, except it were Heresie, she never made any strict examination into them.
AN ABSTRACT OF This TREATISE: Being an Account, in short, of such Patriarchs as at several times have been unjustly depos'd by the Emperors, yet did not separate themselves from the Communion of their unlawfull Successors, nor perswade the People to do so, because the Successors were Orthodox. IN Arcadius's Reign the great Chrysostom was unjustly depos'd: his Successors were Ar∣sacius, and the divine Atticus. In Theodosius Junior's time the holy Flavia∣nus was depos'd by the Heretick Dioscorus: his Successor was Anatolius. In Anastasius's Reign,MS. , read , as before. Euthymius was de∣pos'd: his Successor was Macedonius; and his, Ti∣motheus.
In the same Reign Elias, Bishop of Je∣rusalem, was depos'd: his Successor was John. In the Reign of Constantine the Great, Maxi∣mius, Bishop of Jerusalem, was depos'd by the Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine: his Successor was Cyrill. In the Reign of Justinian, Eutychius of Ama∣sia, Patriarch of C. P. was depos'd: his Suc∣cessor was John. In the same Reign, Anthimus, once Bishop of Trebisond, then Patriarch of C. P. was de∣pos'd: his Successor was the most holy Me∣nas. In the Reign of Justinianus Rhinotmetus, Callinicus was depos'd: his Successor was Cy∣rus, a Recluse of Amastris. In the Reign of Michael, the Son of Theophi∣lus, the great Ignatius was depos'd: his Suc∣cessour was Photius. In the Reign of Basilius Macedo, Photius, the Successor of Ignatius, was depos'd: he
was succeeded by the foresaid Ignatius; and Ignatius again by him. In the Reign of Leo the Philosopher, Photius was again depos'd, upon some false accusations which the Emperor brought a∣gainst him: his Successor was Stephanus the Emperor's Brother. Under the same EmperorMS. , which may be inter∣preted Nicolaus, one of the Privy-Council. Nicolaus the Mystical (Philosopher) was depos'd: his Successor was Euthymius the Syncellus. In the Reign of Alexander the Brother of Leo, Euthymius the Successor of Nicolaus was depos'd, and Nicolaus again restor'd. In the Emperor Manuel's Reign, Cosmas At∣ticus was depos'd, and succeeded by Theodo∣sius. In the Reign of Isaacius Angelus, Basilius Camaterus was depos'd, and succeeded by the Chaplain Nicetas Mundanes. Under the same Emperor Nicetas was de∣pos'd, and succeeded by Leontius Theotocites.
In the same Reign, Leontius Theotocites was depos'd, and succeeded by Dositheus B. of Je∣rusalem. In the same Reign, Dositheus likewise was depos'd, and succeeded by Georgius Xiphi∣linus. FINIS.
