O77 R11909 12646509 65143
THE OATH Taken by the Parliament of ENGLAND. Concerning the maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and the dvancement of His Majesties Honour and Regall Prerogative. Whereunto is annexed the OATH of the Dukes, Erles, Barons, Gentry and Commonalty of is Majesties Kingdome of SCOTLAND. Wherein is declared their great care to maintaine and de∣fen he Gospell, and the professors thereof; And al∣so their Loyall intentions towards His Majesty and his Heires, promising to use all carefull meanes, to ful∣fill his Majesties just and Royall Commands. Ordered by the House of Commons that this be printed &c. Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com, Also a Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, con¦cerning severall matters of great importance. And Ordered to be Printed. Iohn Browne, Cler. Parliament. LONDON, Printed by T. FAVVCET. 1642. June, 17.
The Oath taken by the Parliament and by them prescribed to b taken by all his Maiesties loyall Subiects. AT all Nationall Assemblies, Parliaments, and Councels, it hath beene customarily usd mong the Members thereof, at their first comming together, to take a Oath both before God and Man, Protesting not to de∣termine or execute any thing, contrary to the word of God, or prejudiciall to the Honour of His Ma∣iesty, onely that all their Studies, ceavours▪ cun∣cels, and determinations, shud be implyed to the increase of Gods Glory, the advancemet of his Maiesties Honour, and the Peace and quiet free∣dome and blest prosperity of Church and Com∣mon-Wele. Which Oath and Protestation, is as well for the inducement of others (to wit, all his Maiesties loy∣all Subiects,) as themselves, since 'tis not in their power to performe what they protest, witut the
assistance of such his Miesties Subiects as shll be commnded by them, to the fulfilling of whose commands such an Oath and Protestation binds. And to the End that none may be ignorant or plead excuse, after that they have themselves taken the said Oth or Protestation, they cause it to be publihd in pri, that every mn may know what they have promised, and what they are to command, and likewise what his owne dutie is, and must be, if he desire to have any share or portion in their religious Protection. An exact testimony I will give you, of this, which has been lately done, and is at this day fresh in your memories. At the late Prliament held in Scotland, in the yeare of our Lord 1641. At the Nationall Assembly, they tooke an Oath, which I have here published for your better satis∣faction. The Oath taken by the Parliament in Scotland. FOr so much, as the honour, greatnesse, and hap∣pinesse of the Kings Royall Maiesty, and the wel∣fare of the Subiects, dependeth on the purity of Re∣ligion, (as it is now establishd in this Kingdome) the Lawes, Liberties, and peace thereof, which ought to be sought after b all good Christians, loy∣all Subiects, and true Ptrios; And to be furthe∣red and maintained by them, aginst ll such, as by any means endeavour to shke or subvert the same. Therefore we under Subscribrs nd every one of Us, doe in the presence of Almighty God, pro∣mise
and vow that in this present Parliament, We shall faithfully and freely speak, answer, & expresse our selves upon all and every thing, which is, or shall be proponed so farre as we thinke in our Consci∣ence, may conduce to the glory of God, the good and peace of the Church, and State of this King∣dome. And imploy our best endeavours to promove the same: And shall in no wayes advise, voice, nor consent to any thing which to our best knowledge we think not most expedient & conduceable there∣to. As also that we shall maintaine and defend with our lives, poer, and estate, his Majesties Royall Per∣son, honor, and estate, as is exprest in our Nationall Covenant. And likewise, the power and priviledges of Parliaments; And the lawfull rights and liberties of the Subjects: And by all good means and waies, oppose and endeavour to bring to exact tryall all such as either by force, practise, counsell, plots, con∣spiracies, or otherwise have done, or shall doe any thing in prejudice of the purity of Religion, the Lawes, Liberties, and peace of the Kingdome: And further, that We shall in all just and honourable wayes, endeavour to preserve Union and Peace be∣twixt the three Kingdomes, Scotland, England, and Ireland: And neither for hope, feare, nor other respect, shall relinquish this Vow and Promise. REad in the Audience of Parliament, who approveth the ame, and appointeth the same to be taken by all members of this Parliament, and in all Parliaments hereafter, before they passe to any Act or determination.
This I have done with intent to silence some ma∣licious tongues, and malignant Spirits who hold it unlawfull for a Parliament to impose an Oth (by themselves taken) on the Subiect, for it is apparant∣ly knowne, that this Oath was with willingness ta∣ken by the Cleargy and Layity, of that Kingdome, and at this present is justified by the whole body of the Kingdome, witesse the true Petiion Presen∣ted to the Lords of the privy Councell of Scotland. Now give me leave, having shewne you by what president the Parliament of England hath, nd taken an Oth themselves, and imposeth it on other his Maiesties loving Subiects, and although some Ma∣liciously obiect that such an Oath ought not to be impos'd, but when necessity requires it, and pretend that at this time there is no such necessity, I answer, that if the obiectors heart were loyall, or his Judge∣ment grounded on reason, he would not, nor could not be ignorant of the necessity, and of the beefit received, by the taking such an Oath, if seriously weigh'd, and conscionably applyed, since the duties were lawfull in themselves before this imposition, not taking Law and Authority fm their present commands, but their commads taking Authority from precdent Lawes, which the high Court of Parliament observig, thougt it necessary (having presidents from times pst, and present Examples for the future) to take this Oath themselves, and to recommend it to all his Maiesties loving Sub∣iects, tha thy might with the like affection mani∣fest their Zeale towards God, and their loyaltes to his Maiesty.
The manner and Exact Forme of which Oath I have set downe as followeth. I A. B. doe in the presence of Almighty God, Pro∣mise, Vow, and Protest, to maintain and defend as afully J may, with my life, power, and estate, the lue Reformed Protestant Religion, expresed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Pope∣ry ad Popish Innovations within this Realme contra∣ry to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His Majesties Royall Person, Honour and Etate; as also the Power and Priviledges of Par∣liament; The lawfull Rights and Liberties of the Suject▪ and every person that maketh this Protestati∣on, in whasoever he shall doe in the lawfull pursuance of the same. And to my Power, and as farre as lawful∣ly I may, I will oppose, and by all good wayes and meanes edavu to bring to condigne punishment, all such a sall ether by Force, Practice, Counsels, Plots, Cosi∣racies, or otherwise, doe any thing in this present Pro∣testation continued. And further, that I sall in all just and Honorable wayes endeavour to preserve the V∣nion and Peace between the three Kingdomes of Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland; And neither for hope, feare, or her respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation. This I leave to ty consideration, desiring thee seriously to consider the necessity of the Oath im∣posed by the High Court of Parliament, with all the Efficacy and Benefit thou sal receive by the cheerefull performance of what thou hast Prote∣sed.
Thus hoping that all doubts will cease, and a Religious Faith increase, I leave thee to GOD, who no doubt will guide thee through this Labo∣rinth, and convert all our feares to a Religious Joy. Die Sabbathi 11. Junii, 1642. IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parlia∣ment assembled, That a strict Search and Exa∣mination shall bee made by the Justices of Peace, Majors, Bayliffes, Constables, and o∣ther His Majesties Officers, inhabiting, or neere ad∣joyning to all the Northern Roads, for the stopping and staying of all Armes, Ammunition, Powder, Light-horses, or Horses for Service in the Warres, and great Saddles that are, or shall be carryed to∣wards the North parts of England, but by the pri∣vity and direction of one, or both of the Houses of Parliament; And that the said Officers shall stay them accordingly, and speedily give Information thereof unto one of the said Houses of Parliament. Dio Mercurii, 15 Junii, 1642. Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this be Printed and Published. Iohn Browne, Cler. Parliament, FINIS.
