P2254B R2544 11878749 50285
A Pindarique ODE, ON THEIR Royal Highnesses HAPPY RETURN FROM SCOTLAND AFTER HIS Escape at Sea. LONDON, Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford for Jos. Hindmarsh at the Sign of the Black Bull near the Royal-Exchange in Cornhill, 1682.
A Pindarique Ode. I. WIth the same joy (those poor deserted men On Greenland-shore beheld the Sun agen After being left a prey To Night, wild Beasts, and all devouring Sea) Forth from our dark Recesses are we come, Illustrious Prince to bid Thee welcome home, And at thy Feet our selves and wishes lay: Long hath the cold congealed North been blest With thy warm Beams, which have dissolv'd each brest, And melted down with Art, Each Frozen and Rebellious Heart, Then bound them up in bands of Love, and Loyal Interest. II. Since Thou wert there, The Salvage High-lands like a Court appear, So civil, so obliging ever where; Thus Rome of old was fam'd When Africk She, and barbarous Scythia tam'd, But 'twas her Arms subdu'd: Whilst unto Thee (Without th' inforcement of thy Sword) Each stubborn Rebel bows the Knee, Thy only presence gains a Victory, And every place fresh Lawrels doth afford, As if with Caesar Thou Hadst nothing more to do, Then come, and see, and overcome us too. III. As when some lusty Bridegroom doth attend That happy minute shall his joys compleat, And sighing thinks that Day will never end, Whose envious hours debarrs his hopes to meet In the Embraces of the Genial Sheet: So every minute did an hour seem, Each hour a Day, each Day an Age, whil'st we Only injoy'd Thee in a Dream, Like sleeping Virgins in Loves Extasie: Plebeian Souls, who know no difference Between a Peasant and a Prince, Like Aesop's Dunghil Cocks are only born To prize a single Barly-Corn
Beyond the richest Jem, And yet Each known and able Artist thinks it fit To Adorn some mighty Princes Diadem: So our great Monarch who doth move In the sublimest Sphear, above Such vulgar Orbs, knows how to value Thee, Whil'st in his Breast thou shalt a Relique be Of Honour, and untainted Loyalty. IV. When the Gygantick Sons of Earth, (Who from the Chaos first took Birth) Heap'd Hills on Hills, and Rocks and Mountains threw Against Heaven's Battlement, The Gods a while sat smiling for to view Their fond intent, And then at once their forked Thunder sent, Which head-long drove to Hell that impious Crew: Thus when the Hair-brain'd Sons of Ignorance did Level their Darts of Envy at thy Head, Thou with a generous disdain Did'st view that giddy train, And thy own single Virtue did'st oppose Against thy raging Foes: So fixt and solid Rocks when Boreas Raves, With silent scorn repel th' invading Wayes. But when more insolent they grew, And Mountains of reproaches threw, When they did rear Rocks of Rebellion in the Air, And pure Religion by the Roots did tear: At once Thou didst thy Princely rage let go, At once their Malice over-throw, And head-long them, and their black Crimes hast sent, To howle in Regions of Despair, and Flames of Discontent. V. Ah! rash and inconsiderate Phaeton, What made thy fond desire So much aspire, To guide the flaming Char'ot of the Sun? It would have safer been, If with the Golden mean, The Lower Orbs thou had'st survey'd, And let thy Father his own Day have sway'd: Well knew his fiery Coursers how to trace Those usual Paths of Light, Which through the Mornings Gates with wonted pace, Led them to Thetis cooling Streams at Night, But when thy feeble hand no more Their fury could restrain, then they
Through Seas of Clouds sought their forbidden way, And numerous Worlds of distant Starrs survey, Starrs only known to Gods themselves before, Whilst the whole Heavens with threatning Flames do roar: Jove from on high Beheld the scorching Earth, and flaming Sky, Jove shook the World with Thunder: but dismay'd; The Youth shrunk in his Guilty Head, And now too late, Laments his daring Crime, and wretched Fate; But all in vain his rashness he doth own, For from his glorious Height he tumbl'd down, Quitting at once his Life and Hopes, together with a Throne. VI. Yet we have seen thy Head Great JAMES out-brave The thundering Cannon, when the Neighbouring shore Affrighted stood to hear those Monsters roar, As wondering what the God of War would have, Whil'st unconcern'd, as if thou didst command The sole great Empire both of Sea and Land, Like Jove amidst his Thunders thou hast stood, Disposing Fate, Then swum to Victory through a Sea of Blood, Commanding her upon thy Sword to wait; So march't Alcides to his He Conquer'd, so return'd agen, As when from Battel our great Admiral came, Cover'd with Lawrels, and inrich't by Fame; Only in this, Jove's Off-spring is out-done, Thou hast beyond his Ne Plus Ultra gone, Since thy more glorious Trophies be As on the Land erected on the Sea. VII. But Aged Neptune views with jealous Eyes His growing Glory, and in passion cryes: Now Jove defend the Empire of your Skyes, The World's too little grown For his great Mind, Nor will it be confin'd Within the limits of our Liquid Throne, How oft with furious Keels hath he Plough'd up the Foaming Billows of the Sea? Riding in Triumph, whil'st his daring Prow Knocks at Heaven Gates, then tilts at Hell below, And all our silent Subjects of the Main Swim round, as proud they can augment his Train; But he shall know what e're his power's on Land, We in our Watry Kingdoms will command: This said, his awful Trydent he doth shake, The Seas do roar, but gentle Rivers quake,
And in their Channels shrowd, Whil'st from a sullen Cloud Unruly Boreas raves, And Troops of nimble Winds do wing Battalions of the Waves. Thus Arm'd the Trytons Sound a Charge, when all Th' imbattell'd Surges on the Heroe fall, The mighty Waves, like mighty Hills appear, Yet his bold Course he thorow them doth stear, Looks on the danger, but disdains the fear. VIII. Yet brave Obryan, and great Roxborough fell, With Valiant Hopton, Douglas, Hyde and Hume, Who all deserv'd a Nobler Fate and Tomb: But yet in vain ye mighty Billows swell, Since 'twas their choice, not you which made them fall, As willing Victims to their Admiral: Heaven view'd the Inraged Sea, Their generous danger, and their piety, Heaven smil'd to think that they Would rob the envious Waters of their prey, And through those traceless paths to bliss would find their way, Whil'st with a shout they mount the Sky, And as they cut the Ambient Air Look from on high Upon the DUKE, the Subject of their Cor Whom seeing safe, The happy Souls at angry Neptune laugh, And then with Songs of Triumph, take their flight Into blest Mansions of Eternal Light: But Royal YORK, do thou in safety go, (Guarded by Angels free from harms) To Loves desir'd Port, thy lovely Consorts Arms: And thou O Barque which do'st include him, know, Thou carriest Caesar, and his Fortune too. IX. Amongst those happy Spirits that look'd down From the Arch'd Skys Carulean Throne, Th' exalted Soul of Cowley did descend, Cowley to learned Scarbrough still a friend, From whose inspir'd numbers he Hath reach't (whilst mortal) immortality, And if we passion may ascribe To those who dwell above, Of all that bright, and blest Celestial Tribe, His Vehicle was most compos'd of Love, Whilst with his wonted Raptures thus he sues, To wise Apollo Patron of his Muse: Father of Light, O Phoebus, dear To Gods, and Men, look down and see Thy Son, thy Aesculapius in despair,
Opprest and lost if not releiv'd by thee; Scarbrough, whom Fame doth Natures Darling call, For he hath found and knows her secrets all, From lofty Cedars to sweet Hysop on the Wall He in Arts mysterious maze Hath discover'd various ways, Only: known to Gods before: Whom poor Mortals think to be Some compassionate Deity, Sent down enfeebled Nature to restore. Some gracious Act then of deliverance send, And save thy Son, and save thy Cowley's Friend. X. He spoke, the God inclin'd his sacred head, And with a smile confirm'd, what his great Prophet said, Then with his richest Rays, He gilds Seraphick Cowley's Bays, And as a farther Signal of his Love, Himself descends, and doth the Waves reprove, The winds nto their wonted Caves retire, The trembling Waves fly from his scorching fire, Rocks sweat for fear, and each devouring Sand Dreads his reproof, and waits on his command; The God now stops his foaming Team, And from his Radiant Char't draws a Beam, Which like a Plank in seeming form he darts, Which Plank became the saving Ark, to Learning and the Arts. XI. Forbear my Muse, let Tragick Scenes alone, And turn to yonder silver Cloud, whereon A Brace of harmless Doves, Trac'd to a bright Etherial Throne, Do gently draw the Queen of Beauty down, Attended by a thousand little Loves: 'Tis not the Cytherean Dame, That frothy Beauty of the Sea, Whose known, but subtile Arts, Engender in our hearts None but a loose and wanton flame, Worthy of such a Deity, But all the Goddesses in One are here: She's chaste with Pallas, with Minerva wise, Venus 'tis true doth on her Cheeks appear, But Juno's Majesty shines through her Eyes, Virtues and Graces round about her move, There's Musick in the motion of her treads; Hugging his happy fate, the God of Love In triumph (chain'd with smiles) She Captive leads, Who since YORK's Lovely Dutchess grac'd our Shore, His once admir'd Psyche Courts no more.
XII. See, mann'd by her great Admiral she is come, Laden with such a Blessing home, As doth surmount our joy, And with a happy Omen speaks the Princely Boy: Heaven grant him live, Our wonted Peace, and Glory to retreive, And by a just renown, Within its Lawful Center fix the Crown: Then smile Great Britain's Genius once again, And Musick's Daughters lofty numbers sing, Let every Beauteous Nimph and Amorous Swain, The greatful Tribute of affection bring, Only let Impious men That happy Birth contemn, (As once they did the Ark) which will give end To all our Fears, doth all our hopes portend: Then let Caballing Discontents beware, And know, whatever their pretentions are, Heaven will of Princes and their Thrones take care, Since none but Gods to Govern Worlds are fit, And those whom they as Substitutes admit. FINIS.
