P275 R11101 13790602 101834
News from Hell: OR A SPEECH of a GHOST of one of the old Kings of Ormus, who being damn'd for his Luxury, was for his punishment sent to Earth to ruin his own Family, and disturb the State. Being a Mirror for Monarchs, Miters, and Ma∣gistrates, to direct their Steps into the Ways of Peace and Truth. Let the King live; but let Ill Government die. By E. F. Philopatris. LONDON, Printed for the Booksellers, in the Year, 1680.
A SPEECH OF A Ghost, &c. THou Monster horrible, under whose ugly Doom, Down in Eternity's perpetual Night, Man's temp'ral Sins bear Torments Infinite: For change or Desolation must I come, To tempt the Earth, and to prophane the Light; From mournful Silence, where Pain dares not roar With liberty, to multiply it more; Nor from the loathsom Puddle Acheron, Made foul with common Sins, whose filthy Damps Feed Lethes Sink, forgetting all but Moan; Nor from that foul Infernal shadowed Lamp, Which lighteth Sisiphus to rowl his Stone; These be but Bodies Plagues, the skirts of Hell, I come from whence Death's Seat doth Death excel. A Place there is, upon no Center plac'd, Deep under Depths, as far as is the Sky
Above the Earth, dark, infinitely spac'd; Pluto the King; the Kingdom, Misery. The Christal may God's Glorious Seat resemble; Horror it self these Horros but dissemble. Privation would reign there, by God not made, But Creature of an uncreated Sin; Whose Being is all Beings to invade; To have no ending, though it did begin: And so of past, things pesent, and to come, To give depriving, not tormenting Doom. But Horror in the Understanding mixt, And Mem'ry by Eternity's Seal wrought, Unto the Bodies of the Evil fixt, And into Reason by our Passion brought, Here rack'd, torn, and exil'd from Unitie, Though come from nothing, must for ever be. The Sins that enter here are capital, Atheism, where Creatures their Creator lose; Unthankful Pride, Nature and Graces fall, Bane of Mankind, in Man unnatural. Hyp'crites, which Bodies leave and Shadows ose, The Persons, either Kings by Fortune blest, Or Men, by Nature made Kings of the rest. Here Tyrants, that corrupt Authority, By Plots which they contriv'd in Wickedness, Cunning in Mischief, proud in Cruelty, Are Furies made, to plague the weaker Ghosts; Whose Souls enticing Pleasure only lost. The weaker Kings, whose more unconstant Vice, Their States unto their Humours made a prey; For suffering more than Kings to tyrannize, Are damn'd, though here to be, yet not to stay: For back they go to tempt with ev'ry Sin, Which easiest is the World to enter in.
My self sometimes was such, Ormus my State; I bare the Name, yet did my Bashaw's reign. Trusts to few Windows are unfortunate; For Subjects growing full, are Princes wane. Lo, all misdeeds procure their own misfate: For by my trusted Bashaws was I slain; Now sent to tear down my Posteritie, That have their Sins inheritance from me. My first Charge is, the Ruine of mine own; Hell keeping knowledg still of Earthliness; None coming there but Spirits overgrown, And more imbodied into Wickedness: The Body by the Spirit living ever; The Spirit in the Body joying never. In Heav'n perchance no such Affections be, Those Angel Souls in Flesh imprisoned, Like Strangers, living in Mortalitie, Still more and more themselves inspirited; Refining Nature to Eternitie, By being Maids in Earths Adulterous Bed, And idely do forget all here below, Where we our Parents, but to plague them, know. My next Charge is, from this dark Regiment, With Wiles to scourge this Age effeminate, Not open Force, or Humours violent, Time fashions Minds, Minds Manners, Manners Fate; Where Rage gives place, Wit must rule ill intent; Proud Honour being an Evil for this State Too strong; Sleight must mislead the Innocent; Craft, the Corrupt: for though none dares be just, Yet Coward ill, with Care, grow wicked must. This present King, weak both in Good and Ill; Loving his Trust, and trusting but his Chefs, Shall perish in his own Faith's Wantonness;
Betray'd by Alaham, whom he knows ill, Yet to beware lacks active Constantness, The Destiny of well-believing Wit, That hath not strength of Judgment joyn'd with it. Al'ham his Son, fond of the Father's Throne, Desire his Idol, Liberty his Might, As overborn with Error infinite, Shall find that Fate all secret faults can hit: For he, that for himself would ruine all, Shall perish in his Craft unnatural. Hala his Wife, diverse and strong in Lust, Lib'ral out of Self-Love, of Error proud; When shameless Craft and Rage have serv'd her turn, In Pride's vain-glorious Martyrdom shall burn. Zophi the eldest Son, whose Reason is With Frailty drown'd, and Silliness confus'd; Born but to live, and yet denied this; (So well knows Pow'r what Spir'ts may be abus'd) Becomes the Prey of factious crafty Wit, Which stirs that Ruine up, which ruines it. Cain Bashaw (like the Clouds, who live in Air, Th'Orb of Natures constant inconstancy) Now Fame, now Shame shall in his Fortune bear; His Vice and Vertue still in Infancy; Change for his Wisdom, and Chance for his Ends; Harm'd by his Hopes, and ruin'd by his Friends. Mah'met with Honour fain would change the Tide, Oft-times corrupt; here stopping Violence; There countermining Craft, and pleading Right; But Reason sworn in general to Sense, Make Honour Bondage, Justice an Offence; Till Liberty, that fair deceiving Light, Turns Mischief to an Humour Popular, Where goo Men catch'd in Nets of Duty are.
Caelica (because in Flesh no Seeds are sown Of Heav'nly Grace, but they must bring up Weeds) Death in her Father's Murder she affects; Seduc'd by Glory, whose excess still feeds It self upon the barren steeps of Mone; For humane Wit wants Power to divide, Whereby Affections into Error slide. Heli the Priest, who teaching from without, Corrupted Faith, bound under Laws of Might; Not feeling God, yet blowing him about In ev'ry Shape and Likeness but the right; Seeking the World, finds Change there joyn'd with Chance, To ruine those whom Error would advance. Now mark your Charge; Each Fury work his part In sensless Webs of Mischief over-thwart. You are not now to work on private thoughts, One instant is your time to alter all; Corruption Universal must be wrought, Impossible to you is Natural; Plots and Effects together, must be brought; Mischief and Shame at once must spring and fall; Use more than Pow'r of Man to bring forth that, Which (it is meant) all Men shall wonder at. Craft go thou forth, work Honour into Lust; Malice, sow in Self-love Unworthiness; Fear, make it safe for no Man to be Just; Wrong, be thou cloath'd in Powers Comliness; Wit, play with Faith; take Glory in Mistrust; Let Duty and Religion go by ghess; Furies, stir you up War; which follow must, When all things are corrupt with Doubleness. From Vice to Vice let Error multiply, With uncouth Sins, Murders, Adulteries, Incorp'rate all kind of Iniquity,
Translate the State to Forreign Tyrannies; Keep'down the Best, and let the Worst have Pow'r, That War and Hell may all at once devour. Tophet prepared was for Kings of old: For States grow old, when Princes leave the Ways Of Honour, and take Pleasure for their Ends; For that a large is, this a narrow Way; That wins a World, but this a few dark Friends: The one improving Worthiness, spreads far; Under the other Good things Prisoners are. For when Respect, which is the strength of States, Declines without, by Kings descent within, And that Pow'rs Baby-Creatures dare set Rates Of Scorn on Worth, and Honour upon Sin; Then, though King's-Player-like, act Glory's Part, Yet all within them is but Fear, and Art. If Joys of Heaven cannot invite, Nor Plagues of Hell our Senses fright, We may ev'n bid our Souls Good-night. FINIS.
