p3630 12117309 54345
THE PROCESSION: OR, THE Burning of the Pope In EFFIGIE, IN SMITH FIELD-ROƲNDS, On the 17th of November 1681. BEING Queen ELIZABETH'S Birth-day. DESCRIBING The several Pageants, and rare Devices of the Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, Friers, and many others. As likewise a Pageant of several Effigies in a Pillory drawn by Horses upon a Sledge. Several painted Pieces, and Fire-works, &c. Far exceeding whatever has been ex∣posed in this nature. With the signification of the seve∣ral Hieroglyphicks. Humbly dedicated to his Holiness. November 17. THis day being usually observed as the Anniversary or Birth-day of the ever Renowned Princess Queen E∣lizabeth, the burning of the Pope in Effigie has for some years past been observed, especially in the City of London;
this present year several new Pageants and Devices have been prepared at the cost of such Loyal Citizens and others as have thereby shewn their Aversation and Detestation a∣gainst Popery, and all the superstitious Trumpery of Rome, the manner and form being as followeth. First, Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey on Horse-back all besprin∣kled with Bloud, having a Jesuit behind him to support him, in the same manner as he was carried to Primerose-hill, after he was basely and cowardly murdered by Hells Incendiaries, having a twisted Napkin about his neck, and his head hang∣ing on one side. After him the Effigies of a monstrous Animal with his face reverst, making Observations upon the Horse-tail; or an amphibious Creature made up of Ribaldry, having a Paper pinn'd upon his Sleeve, to be the better known when he comes neer Sam's Coffee-house, inscribed, I am an Observa∣tor. The next a certain Typographer, with his Holiness Cross-Keys at his Girdle, and a bundle of Popish Catechisms un∣der his right Arm, making a thousand wry faces at the sight of a Pillory. After him a discarded Reformado, or scandal to his Fun∣ction, who indeed looked very thin, as having been obliged to feed upon Queries and Scrupulosity for Three Months, and to this hour lives upon the Extraction of Questions and Answers; and therefore the better to be known, he is mar∣ked upon the back with large Characters, viz. Tookeship, and thereby noted to be the Laughing Philosophers Fool, or the Popes drudge. These being the Forlorn-hope, about eight Horsemen more, usher on his Holiness. As for the Foot, first six Fryers going two and two, bearing Crosses, Beads, and other Popish Trumpery, being dressed in their proper Habit. After them a like number in Jesuits Habit, with Daggers in their hands, being dressed up in black Gowns, and Three-corner'd Caps, having their Crucifixes hanging by their sides. After them Four Popish Bishops, with Miters and Croziers, Copes and Sleeves, according to the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, or Synagogue of
Satan, which you please. Then several Cardinals in Red Hats, Rowls of paper, pretended Bulls, Pardons, and Indul∣gences. Then a Pillory high erected upon a Sledge, and in it the Effigies of Two Outlandish-men, and two others, three of them standing in the Pillory, and one fitting upon a Chair, having a paper pinned upon his Breast, with this In∣scription, I am not P. Then Musick, with several Pictures. In fine, the Pageant of his Holiness fixed upon a Sledge, and drawn by Four Horses, as the former, he having as it were for his Charioteer a Jesuit, who carries great bundles of Papers; and behind him for his Tutor or Privy-Coun∣sellor a Devil, the fittest Companion that he can be coupled with, had been at the choosing of his Mate, he having in one hand the pretended Keys to Hell and Purgatory, and in the other a Tripple Crosier, his Robes being Crimson-silk, Laced with Tinsel, and Lined with Ermyns, upon his Head a Tripple-Crown; upon the Canopy of his Holinesses Chair are placed several Streamers of White Silk, and on them written in Bloody Characters, Murther, Treason, Massacres, Assassination, Adultery, Subornation, Perjury, &c. upon the seats before him two sit displaying of Banners, on which in large Characters are Inscribed, the Popes Titles, and Babilon the Mother of Harlots; between his legs a large Spannel∣dog, with a Fiddle between his fore-feet; and most affirm, before he was Hanged, he was called by the well-known name of Touzer. Before his Holiness was a Bloody-heart carried upon a Dagger; all the way the Devil bobs him, and takes him by the Nose with a pair of Pincers; and this af∣ter the most decent order of a Popish Procession, set for∣wards from Cattern-wheel-alley in White-Chappel, attended by many thousands of people, and at least Three hundred Links carried before them, to pass through Aldgate, so through Leaden-hall-street, up Cornhill, through the Poultery, and Cheapside, then through Ludgate to Temple-bar, and from thence to Smithfield; where a large fire being prepared by the Gentlemen of the Loyal Inns of Court, his Ho∣liness in all his Pontificalibus, together with the rest of the Effigies, 18 Edmond-bury Godfrey excepted, will be Sacrificed up to Moloc, in the view of a number of per∣sons
of Honour, who will be spectators of his downfal. Nor will there be wanting Fire-works, according as has formerly been used, both upon Lines and in the Air, where several new Inventions will be experimented; insomuch, that the design of this day exceeds whatever hath been of the like nature, the which past doubt, may occasion some simple Bi∣gots to laugh on the wrong side of their Mouths till their heart akes. Nor is it less imagined, but the news will quick∣ly fly to Rome; though many conjecture, that his Holiness is not ignorant of the Project, and that he will give order to his Lubbers to Curse the promoters of it with Bell, Book, and Candle; as he is wont to serve damned Souls, who make their escapes from Purgatory without paying their Fees. And thus much shall suffice for this time, only let me admonish his Holiness to keep on the other side the Herring-pool, lest if he fall into the hands of those that burnt him in Effigies, they serve him the same sauce, and turn it into a real Tragedy. For English-men that love their King, dare still Cross Romes dire Plots, and maugre all her Ill. FINIS. Printed for William Coble. 1681.
