S2760 R37378 16412591 105383
The several DECLARATIONS, Together with the several DEPOSITIONS Made in Council, On Monday the 22d of October, 1688, con∣cerning the Birth of The Prince of Wales. N. B. Those mark'd thus * were Roman Ca∣tholicks. LONDON: Printed and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, 1688.
AT THE COUNCIL-CHAMBER IN WHITEHALL. Monday the 22d of October, 1688. THIS Day an Extraordinary Council met, where were likewise Present, by his Majesty's Desire and Appointment, Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, and such of the Peers of this Kingdom, both Spiritual and Temporal, as were in Town. And also the Lord-Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London; the Judges, and several of their Majesties Council Learn'd, hereafter Named. The King's most Excellent Majesty. Her Majesty the Queen Dowager in a Chair placed on the King's Right Hand. His R. H. Pr. George of Denmark, Lord Chancellor, Lord President, Lord Privy Seal, Earl of Craven, Earl of Berkeley, Earl of Rochester, Earl of Moray, Earl of Middleton, Earl of Melfort, Duke of Hamilton, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Oxford, Earl of Huntingdon, Earl of Peterborow, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Clarendon, Earl of Cardigan, Earl of Ailesbury, Earl of Burlington, Earl of Litchfield,
Earl of Castlemain, Viscount Preston, Lord Bellasyse, Lord Godolphin, Lord Dover, Mr. Chancellor of the Ex∣chequer, Master of the Rolls, L. Ch. Justice Herbert, Sir Thomas Strickland, Sir Nicholas Butler, Mr. Titus, Lord A. B. of Canterbury, Duke of Norfolk, Duke of Graston, Duke of Ormond, Duke of Northumberland, Marquess of Halyfax, Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Feversham, Earl of Nottingham, Viscount Newport, Viscount Weymouth, Bishop of London, Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of Rochester, Bishop of Chester, Bishop of St. Davids, Lord North, Lord Chandos, Lord Montagu, Lord Herbert of Chirbury, Lord Vaughan Earl of Carbery, Lord Colepeper, Lord Churchill, Lord Waldegrave. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London. Sir Robert Wright, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Sir Thomas Powel, Justices of the Kings Bench. Sir Robert Baldock, Justices of the Kings Bench. Sir Thomas Street, Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Edward Lntwich, Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Thomas Jennor, Justices of the Common Pleas. Sir Richard Heath, Barons of the Exchequer. Sir Charles Ingleby, Barons of the Exchequer. Sir John Rotheram, Barons of the Exchequer. Sir John Maynard, His Majesties Serjeants at Law. Sir John Holt, His Majesties Serjeants at Law. Sir Ambrose Philips, His Majesties Serjeants at Law. Sir Thomas Powis, His Majesty's Attorney General. Sir William Williams, His Majesty's Solicitor General. Sir James Butler. Mr. North, the Queens Attorney. Mr. Montagu, the Queens Solicitor. Sir Charles Porter.
To whom His Majesty spake to this Effect. My Lords, I Have called you together upon a very extraordinary Occasion; but extraordinary Diseases must have ex∣traordinary Remedies. The Malicious Endeavours of my Enemies have so poisoned the Minds of some of my Subjects, that by the Reports I have from all Hands, I have Reason to believe, That very many do not think this Son with which God hath blessed Me, to be Mine, but a Supposed Child. But I may say, that by parti∣cular Providence scarce any Prince was ever Born where there were so many Persons present. I have taken this time to have the Matter Heard and Examined here, Expecting that the Prince of Orange, with the first Eastwardly Wind, will Invade this King∣dom: And as I have often ventured My Life for the Na∣tion before I came to the Crown, so I think My Self more obliged to do the same, now I am KING; and do intend to go in Person against him, whereby I may be exposed to Accidents, and therefore I thought it ne∣cessary to have this now done, in order to satisfie the Minds of My Subjects, and to prevent this Kingdom's being engaged in Blood and Confusion after My Death, desiring to do always what may contribute most to the Ease and Quiet of My Subjects, which I have shewed by Securing to them their Liberty of Conscience, and the Enjoyment of their Properties, which I will always preserve. I have Desired the Queen Dowager to give Her Self the trouble to come hither, to Declare what she knows of the Birth of My Son, and most of the Ladies, Lords, and other Persons who were present, are ready here to Depose upon Oath their Knowledge of this Matter. Whereupon the Queen Dowager was pleased to say, THat when the King sent for her to the Queens La∣bour, she came as soon as she could, and never stirred from her till she was Delivered of the Prince of Wales. Catherina R.
And the following Depositions were all taken upon Oath. Elizabeth Lady Marchioness of Powis, Deposeth, THat about the 29th of December last, the Queen was likely to Miscarry; whereupon she immediately went unto her, and offered her some effectual Remedies, which are made use of on the like Occasion; which the Queen ordred this Deponent to acquaint the Doctors with. The Day following the Queen Dowager sent this Deponent to see how the Queen did; who replied, She had a pretty good Night, and did think she had Quickned, but would not be positive till she felt it again; That after this the Deponent did frequently wait on the Queen in the Morning, and did see her Shift her several days, and generaely saw the Milk, and sometimes Wet upon her Smock. That some time, after this Deponent went into the Country, and came not up till a few days be∣fore the Queen was brought to Bed; and from the time of this Deponents Return, she saw the Queen every day till she was brought to Bed, and was in the Room a Quarter of an hour before, and at the time of her Deli∣very of the Prince by Mrs. Wilks Her Majesty's Mid∣wife, which this Deponent saw, and immediately went with the Prince, carried by Mrs. Delabadie in the Queens little Bed-chamber, where she saw Sir Thomas Witherly sent for by the Midwife, who gave the Child Three Drops of something which came into the World with him, which this Deponent saw done; And this Depo∣nent doth Aver, this Prince to be the same Child which was then Born, and that she has never been from him one day since. * Eliza. Powis. Anne Countess of Aran Deposeth, THat she went to the Queen from Whitehall to St. James's as soon as she heard that her Majesty was in Labour; when she came, she found the Queen in Bed, complaining of little Pains; The Lady Sunderland, Lady Roscomon, Mrs. Labadie, and the Midwise, were on that side of the Bed where the Queen lay; and this Deponent,
with a great many others, stood on the other side all the time till the Queen was Delivered; as soon as her Ma∣jesty was Delivered, she said, O Lord, I don't hear the Child Cry, and immediately upon that, this Deponent did hear it Cry, and saw the Midwife take the Child out of the Bed, and give it to Mrs. Labadie, who carried it into the little Bed-Chamber, where she, this Deponent, followed her, and saw that it was a Son, and that like∣wise she, the Deponent, hath several times seen Milk run out upon the Queens Smock during her being with Child. A. Aran. Penelope Countess of Peterborow Deposeth, THat she was often with the Queen, while Her Maje∣sty was last with Child, and saw the Milk often upon her Majesty's Smock, when she, the Deponent, took it off from the Queen; and often saw her Majesty's Belly so as it could not be otherwise but that she was with Child. That the said Deponent stood by the Bedside on the 10th of June last in the Morning, while the Queen was Delivered of the Prince of Wales. P. Peterborow. Anne Countess of Sunderland Deposeth, THat June the 10th 1688, being Trinity Sunday, the Deponent went to St. James's Chappel at eight of the Clock in the morning, intending to Receive the Sa∣crament; but in the beginning of the Communion Ser∣vice, the Man which looks to the Chappel came to the Deponent, and told her she must come to the Queen; The Deponent said, she would as soon as Prayers were done; In a very little time after, another Man came up to the Altar to the Deponent, and said, the Queen was in Labour, and the Deponent must come to her Maje∣sty, who then went directly to the Queens Bed-Cham∣ber. As soon as the Deponent came in, her Majesty told her, this Deponent, she believed she was in Labour. By this time the Bed was warmed, and the Queen went into Bed, and the King came in. The Queen asked the King, if  sent for the Queen Dowager; He said he had
sent for every Body. The said Deponent stood at the Queen's Boulster, the Lady Roscomon, Mrs. Delabadie, and the Midwife on that side of the Bed, where the Queen was Delivered. After some lingring Pains, the Queen said, she feared she should not be brought to Bed a good while; but enquiring of the Midwife, she assured her Majesty, that she wanted only one thorow Pain to bring the Child into the World; Upon which the Queen said, It is impossible, the Child lies so high, and com∣manded this Deponent to lay her Hand on her Majesty's Belly, to feel how high the Child lay, which the Depo∣nent did; but soon after a great Pain came on at past Nine of the Clock, and the Queen was Delivered; which the Midwise by pulling the Deponent by the Coat, as∣sured her was a Son, it being the Sign she told the De∣ponent she would give her, the Queen having charged her not to let her Majesty know presently, whether it was Son or Daughter. As soon as the Midwife had given the Deponent the Sign, the Deponent made a Sign to the King that it was a Son. When the Midwife had done her Of∣fice, she gave the Child to Mrs. Delabadie, which was a Son, and she carried it into the little Bed-Chamber. A. Sunderland. Isabella Countess of Roscommon Deposeth, THat on the 10th of June last, she stood by the Lady Sunderland in the Queens Bed-Chamber, while the Queen was in Labour, and saw the Prince of Wales, when he was taken out of the Bed by the Midwife. I. Roscommon. Margaret Countess of Fingall Deposeth, THat she waited on the Queen Dowager her Mistress into the Queens Bed-Chamber at St. James's, when the Queen was in Labour, and stood by the Bed's Feet, when her Majesty was Delivered of the Prince. That the Deponent saw the Prince carried away into another Room, and soon after follow'd, and saw him in that Room. * Marg. Fingall.
Lady Sophia Bulkeley Deposeth, THat she was sent for on Trinity Sunday last past about Eight a Clock in the Morning to go to St. James's; for the Man that came, said the Queen was in Labour and he, and others were sent to call every Body. That this Deponent made as much hast as she could to rise and be dress'd, but did not get to the Queens Bed-chamber until a little after Nine a Clock, and then this Deponent found the Queen in her Bed, and the Queen Dowager there set upon a Stole, and some of the Ladies about her. After this Deponent having staid a little while, and think∣ing the Queen in no strong Pain, she, this Deponent, went out, and, being next to the Room where the Queens Linen was a warming, heard a Noise, and look'd to see what was the matter, and finding no Body there, this Deponent ran and found the Lord Faversham in the Queens little Bed-Chamber, who told this Deponent the Child was just born; This Deponent ask'd him, what is it? His Lordship said he could not tell. So this Deponent ran on to the Queens Bed-side, and heard the Queen say to the Midwife, Pray, Mrs. Wilks, don't part the Child (which signifies, don't cut the Navel String, until the after-Birth is come away.) And while the Queen was with Child, this Deponent had heard her Majesty Command her Midwife not to do otherwise, it being counted much the safest way; but to what the Queen said just then (to the best of this Deponent's Remembrance) Mrs. Wilks replied, Pray Madam, give me leave, for I will do no∣thing, but what will be safe for your Self and Child; The Queen answered, Do then, and then cry'd where is the King gone? His Majesty came immediately from the other side of the Bed (from just having a sight of the Child) and answered the Queen, Here I am; the Queen said, Why do you leave me now? The King kneeled on the Bed, on that side where the Deponent stood, and a little after the Midwise said, all is now come safe away; Upon that the King rose from the Bed, and said, Pray my Lords, come and see the Child: The King follow'd Mrs. Labadie, and the Lords His Majesty, into the little
Bed-Chamber, where this Deponent follow'd also, and saw as well as they, that it was a Prince, and that Mrs. Wilks was in the right to desire to part the Child, For the Prince's Face, especially his Forehead was blackish, be∣ing stunn'd, as I have seen some other Children, when they have been just newly come into the World; but God be thanked, in two hours time that he was dress'd and wash'd, (which the Deponent staid by and saw done) the Prince look'd very fresh and well. This Deponent doth further add, That all the while, the Queen was with Child, this Deponent had the honour to pay her Duty very often Mornings and Nights, in waiting upon her Majesty in her Dressing Room and Bed-Chamber, and for the last three or four Months, this Deponent hath of∣tentimes seen the Queens Milk, as well as when this Deponent hath had the honour to put on her Majesty's Smock, * S. Bulkeley. Susanna Lady Bellasyse Deposeth, THat on Trinity Sunday the 10th of June last, the De∣ponent's Servant seeing the Queen Dowager's Coaches in St. James's at an unusual hour, went and asked the Occasion, and was told the Queen was in Labour; where∣upon he came into the Deponent's Chamber, and awaked her; That the Queen having come to Lodge at St. James's but the Night before, they being in a great hurry, for∣got to call the Deponent as her Majesty had ordered; That the Deponent made all the haste she could into her Majesties Bed-Chamber; and found the Queen in Bed, and Mrs. Wilks her Majesty's Midwife, sitting by the Bedside, with her Hands in the Queen's Bed; The Queen asked her, the said Midwife, what she thought? Mrs. Wilks assured her Majesty, that at the next great Pain the Child would be born; Whereupon the King ordered the Privy-Councellours to be called in; That this Depo∣nent stood behind the Midwife's Chair, and immediately after the Queens having another great Pain, the Prince was Born; That this Deponent saw the Child taken out of the Bed with the Navel-string hanging to its Belly; That this Deponent opened the Receiver, and saw it was
a Son, and not hearing the Child cry, and seeing it a little black, she was afraid it was in a Convulsion Fit. S. Bellasyse. Henrietta Lady Waldgrave, Deposeth, THat she was in the Queen's Bed-Chamber a quarter of an hour before her Majesty was delivered, and standing by the Bedside, she saw the Queen in Labour, and heard her cry out much. * Henrietta Waldgrave. Mrs. Mary Crane, one of the Gentlewoman of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen Dowager, Deposeth, THat she went with the Queen Dowager to the Queen's Labour on the Tenth of June last, and never stirred out of the Room till the Queen was Delivered. That this Deponent did not follow the Child, when it was first carried out of the Room, but staid in the Bed-Chamber, and saw all that was to be seen after the Birth of a Child. That she, the Deponent, then went to see the Prince, and found him look ill, and immediately went to the King, and told his Majesty she feared the Child was sick; That his Majesty went immediately to the Prince, and came back and said it was a Mistake, the Child was very well. * Mary Crane. Dame Isabella Wentworth, one of the Gentlewoman of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen, Deposeth, THat she often saw the Milk of her Majesty's Breast upon her Smock, at which the Queen was troubled, it being a common saying, that it was a sign the Child would not live. And that she, the Deponent, did once feel the Child stir in the Queens Belly while her Majesty was in Bed, and that she was present when the Child was Born, and staid till she heard it cry, and then went to fetch Vinegar for the Queen to smell to; she, the Depo∣nent, heard the Queen command the Midwife not to tell her of what Sex it was, for fear of surprizing Her Majesty: When the Deponent brought the Vinegar, she did desire to see the Child, Mrs. Delabadie having it in her Arms. The Child looked black, whereupon the Deponent desi∣red
Doctor Waldegrave to look to it, believing it was not well: That the Deponent saw the Navel-string of the Child cut, and three drops of the Blood, which came fresh out, given to him for the Convulsion Fits. Isabella Wentworth. Dame Catherine Sayer, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen Dowager, Deposeth, THat she waited on the Queen Dowager to the Queen's Labour, and was all the time by the Bedside, and stood there, till the Queen was Delivered, and follow'd the Child, when it was carried by Mrs. Delabadie to the little Bed-Chamber, and took a warm Napkin and laid it on the Child's Breast, believing the Child was not well. Catherina Sayer. Dame Isabella Waldegrave, one of the Gentlewoman of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen, Deposeth, THat she was constantly with the Queen, her Majesty was likely to miscarry, and had often seen Milk in her Majesty's Breast, and was with the Queen at the time of her Labour with the Prince, and saw the Prince taken out of the Bed, and went after Mrs. Delabadie with the Prince in her Arms into the little Bed-chamber, and was by when the Child was shewn to the King that it was a Son; and this Deponent took the After-burden, and put it into a Bason of Water, and carried into the Queen's Closet. * Isabella Waldegrave. Mrs. Margaret Dawson, one of the Gentlewomen of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen, Deposeth, THat on the Tenth of June last, in the Morning, she was sent for by the Queen out of St. James's Chap∣pel, where she was at Prayers, and that coming up into the Queens Chamber, she found her sitting all alone upon a Stool by the Beds-head, when the Queen said to her, this Deponent, she believed her self in Labour, and hid her, the Deponent, get the Pallat Bed, which stood in the next Room, to be made ready quickly for her; but that Bed having never been aired, the Deponent per∣swaded
the Queen not to make use of it: After which the Queen bid the Deponent make ready the Bed she came out of, which was done accordingly. The Deponent fur∣ther saith, That she saw fire carried into the Queen's Room in a Warming-Pan to warm the Bed, after which the Queen went into her Bed, and that the Deponent stirred not from the Queen until her Majesty was deli∣vered of a Son. That she this Deponent, well remem∣bers, that on the 29th of December last her Majesty was afraid of Miscarrying, which was about the time she quickned; and that after the Queen had gone 22 Weeks with Child, her Majesty's Milk began to run, which she the Deponent often saw upon her Smock, and that the 9th of May her Majesty apprehended miscarrying again with a Fright. Margaret Dawson. Mrs. Elizabeth Bromley, One of the Gentlewomen of the Bed-chamber to the Queen, deposeth, THat she was sick all Winter, till a little before Easter last, when she the Deponent came into Waiting; That from that Time till the Queen was brought to Bed, she the Deponent saw the Queen put on her Smock every Morning, by which means she saw the Milk constantly fall out of her Majesty's Breasts, and observed the Big∣ness of her Majesty's Belly, which could not be counter∣feit. That the Deponent came from Whitehal to the Queen's Labour to St. James's the Tenth of June last, and remained in the Room till the Queen was delivered and afterwards; but did not follow the Child, till some time after, when she the Deponent went to see what co∣lour'd Eyes he had. Elizabeth Bromley. Mrs. Pelegrina Turini, One of the Gentlewomen of the Bed-chamber to the Queen, deposeth, THat she constantly attended the Queen, when she was last with Child, and that on the Tenth of June last, she was in Waiting on her Majesty, who called her on the said Tenth of June in the Morning, and told her the Deponent, she was in Pain, and bid her send for the Midwife, her Ladies and Servants, after which she the
Deponent stay'd with the Queen during her Labour, and until she was delivered of the Prince of Wales. * The Mark of Pelegrina X Turini. Mrs. Anna Cary, One of the Gentlewomen of the Bed-chamber to the Queen Dowager, deposeth, THat she waited on the Queen Dowager from Somerset∣house to St. James's the Day the Queen was brought to Bed, and went into the Queen's Bed-chamber, where she this Deponent stay'd, till the Queen was deliver'd, and saw the Prince as soon as he was born. * Anna Cary. Mrs. Mary Anne Delabadie, Dry Nurse to the Prince, deposeth, THat she was with the Queen all the time her Majesty was with Child, and dress'd her every Day, and in all the Nine Months did not miss above Six Days, and that at several times by reason of Sickness. That on Sunday Morning the Tenth of June last, she the Deponent was sent for to the Queen, who was in La∣bour, That the Deponent came presently, and was with the Queen all the Time of her Labour, and that kneeling down by the Midwife, giving her Cloaths for the Queen, the Midwife told this Deponent, that immediately on the next Pain, the Queen would be delivered, which accord∣ingly she was. That this Deponent whisper'd to the Midwife, asking whether it was a Girl, she answer'd No; whereupon the Midwife parted the Child, and put it into the Receiver (that the Deponent had given her) and then delivered the Child to the Deponent, and bid her go and carry it to the Fire, and take care of the Navel, which this Deponent did, and the King and Council followed her, and the King asked this Deponent, what it was, who answered, what he desired; the King replyed, But let me see, whereupon the Deponent presently shewed his Majesty that it was a Son, and the Privy Counsellours then present saw it one after another. The Deponent sat with the Prince in her Lap, till the Midwife had done with the Queen, then the Midwife came and took the
Prince from this Deponent, and asked for a Spoon for to give it Three Drops of the Blood of the Navel-string, which the Midwife cut off by the Advice of the Physi∣cians, who said, it was good against Fits. That the De∣ponent held the Spoon when the Midwife dropp'd the Blood into it, and stirr'd it with a little Black Cherry Water, and then it was given to the Prince; that the Queen sent for this Deponent, and gave her the Prince to take care of him in quality of Dry Nurse, which she has hitherto done; and further deposeth it to be the same Child that was born of the Queen. And that Mrs. Dan∣vers, One of the Princess of Denmark's Women, and formerly Nurse to the Lady Isabella, coming to see the Prince, she told this Deponent, she was glad to see the same Marks upon his Eye, as the Queen's former Chil∣dren had. * Mary Anne Delabadie. Mrs. Judith Wilks deposeth, THat being the Queen's Midwife, she came often to her, especially when her Majesty was in any Dan∣ger of miscarrying, and many times felt the Child stir in her Belly, and saw the Milk run out of her Majesty's Breasts; That on Trinity Sunday last in the Morning a∣bout Eight of the Clock, the Queen sent Mr. White, Page of the Back-stairs, to call her this Deponent, believing her self in Labour; when the Deponent came, she found the Queen in great Pain and Trembling; the Queen told her she feared it was her Labour, it being near the Time of her first Reckoning, she the Deponent desired her Ma∣jesty not to be afraid, saying, she did not doubt that it was her full Time, and hoped her Majesty would have as good Labour as she always had; and whilst her Ma∣jesty was sitting trembling, her Water broke, and im∣mediately she sent for the King, he being gone to his own Side, and let him know in what Condition she was, and desired him to send for whom he pleased to be pre∣sent. The Queen ordered this Deponent to send for Mrs. Dawson and the rest of her Women; Mrs. Dawson came presently, and the Countess of Sunderland with her, and the rest of the Women also; that most of them saw her
this Deponent make the Bed fit for the Queen to be deli∣vered in; which when it was ready her Majesty was put into, and about Ten a Clock that Morning, the Queen was delivered of the Prince of Wales by her this Depo∣nent's Assistance, and afterwards she the Deponent shewed the After-burthen to the Physicians, and before them the Deponent cut the Navel-string, and gave the Prince Three Drops of his Blood, to prevent Convulsion Fits, accor∣ding to their Order. And this Deponent further saith, That when the Child was born, it not crying, the Queen said she thought it was dead, this Deponent assured her Majesty it was not, and desired Leave to part the Child from the After-burthen: Which the Queen was unwil∣ling to have done, thinking it might be dangerous to her self; but the Deponent assuring her Majesty it would not, her Majesty gave Consent; whereupon the Child presently cryed, and then the Deponent gave it to Mrs. Labadie. * Judith Wilkes. Mrs. Elizabeth Pearse, Laundress to the Queen, deposeth, THat about Nine of the Clock on the 10th of June last in the Morning, she came into the Bed-chamber, and heard the Queen cry out, being in great Pain, in which she continued until her Delivery; after which she the Deponent saw the Prince of Wales given by the Midwife to Mrs. Labadie; That immediately after the Deponent saw the Midwife hold up the After-burthen, shewing it to the Company, and then the Deponent fetch'd her Maids, and with them took away all the foul Linnen hot as they came from the Queen; That for a Month after her Majesty's Lying in, the Deponent well knows by the washing of her Linnen, that the Queen was in the same Condition that all other Women use to be on the like Occasion; And that some time after her quick'ning it appeared by her Smocks, that her Majesty had Milk in her Breasts, which continued until she was brought to Bed, and afterwards during the usual Time. Elizabeth Pearse.
Frances Dutchess of Richmond and Lenox, deposeth, THat she the Deponent was not at the Queen's Labour, because she did not know it Time enough, but as soon as she did, she made all the Haste she could to dress her; but the Queen was delivered before she the Depo∣nent came; And that at a Time when the Queen appre∣hended she should miscarry, and the Physicians made her Majesty keep her Bed for that Reason, the Deponent went one Evening to wait upon her Majesty, and as she stood by her Bed-side, her Majesty said to her, My Milk is now very troublesome, it runs out so much. The Depo∣nent asked the Queen if it used to do so; who answered, It used to run out a little, but now the Fright I am in of miscarrying, makes it run out very much, as you may see, throwing down the Bed Cloaths to the Middle of her Stomach, and shewing her Smock upon her Breast to the said Deponent, which was very wet with her Milk. * F. Richmond and Lenox. Charlotte, Countess of Litchfield, deposeth, THat she was not at the Queen's Labour, (being in Child-bed her self) but that she was almost con∣stantly with the Queen, while she was with Child, and hath put on her Smock, and seen the Milk run out of her Breast, and felt her Belly; so that she is sure she could not be deceived, but that the Queen was with Child. * C. Litchfield. Anne Countess of Marischall, deposeth, THat she was several times in the Queen's Bed-chamber when she shifted her self, and hath seen her Smock stain'd with her Milk; That she was not at the Queen's Labour, tho' sent to by One of her Ladies, being sick of a Fever; but does in her Conscience believe her Majesty was with Child, both by her Belly and her Milk. A. Marischall. George Lord Jeffreys, Lord Chancellour of England, deposeth, THat he being sent for to St. James's on the Tenth of June last by a Messenger that left Word the Queen was in Labour; soon after, he, this Deponent, came to
St. James's, and was sent for into the Queen's Bed∣chamber, and to the best of his, the Deponent's Appre∣hension the Queen was in Labour, and had a Pain or two to the best of the Deponent's Remembrance, before the rest of the Lords were called in. The Deponent stood all the time at the Queen's Bedside, and heard her cry out several Times as Women in Travail use to do, and at length after a long. Pain, it was by some of the Women on the other Side of the Bed said the Child was born. The Deponent heard the Queen say, she did not hear it cry. The Deponent immediately ask'd the Lord Pres∣dent what it was, he whispered it was a Boy, which the Deponent understood he had hinted to him by the Lady Sunderland. Immediately the Deponent saw a Gentle∣woman, who he hath since heard her Name to be Mrs. Labadie, carry the Child into another Room, whither the Deponent followed, and saw the Child when she first opened it, and saw it was black and reeking; so that it plainly seemed to this Deponent to have been newly come from the Womb. The Deponent doth therefore depose, he doth stedfastly believe the Queen was delivered of that Child that very Morning. Jeffreys C. Robert Earl of Sunderland, Lord President of His Majesty's Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State, deposeth, THat on Sunday Morning the 10th of June last, he was sent to, to come to St. James's, the Queen being in Labour. The Deponent immediately went, and found many Lords of the Council there. After having been some time in an outward Room, first the Lord Chancel∣lour, and then the rest of the Council were called into the Queen's Bed-chamber, where in a short time her Ma∣jesty was brought to Bed. The Deponent saw Mrs. La∣badie carry the Child into the next Room, whither the Deponent followed, with many more, and saw it was a Son, and had the Marks of being new born. Sunderland P.
Henry Lord Arundel of Wardour, Lord Privy Seal, deposeth, THat on the 10th of June last, being Sunday, he had Notice given him that the Queen was in Labour; whereupon the Deponent repaired to St. James's betwixt Nine and Ten of the Clock in the Morning, where he found several Lords of the Council; in a little time after they were all called into the Queen's Bed-chamber; in less than a Quarter of an Hour after, she fell into the Sharpness of her Labour, her Cries were so vehement, and especially the last, that the Deponent could not for∣bid himself the being concern'd for her great Pain; which the Deponent expressing to the Lord-Chancellour, he told the Deponent it was a Sign Her Majesty would the sooner be delivered, or Words to that Purpose, which proved very true, for presently after she was so; the Deponent heard a Whispering up and down that it was a Prince, for no Man was permitted to speak it aloud, lest the sudden Knowledge of it might have discomposed the Queen; the Deponent did not go in with some Lords when the Child was carry'd into the next Room, which was the Occasion the Deponent did not see him when he was uncovered and dress'd. * Arundel C. P. S. John Earl of Mulgrave, Lord Chamberlain of His Ma∣jesty's Houshold, saith, it is not to be expected one of his Sex should be able to give full Evidence in such a Mat∣ter, but deposeth, THat he was just at the Bed's Feet, and heard the Queen cry very much, then the Deponent followed the Child into the other Room, and it seemed a little black; the Deponent also saw it was a Boy. Mulgrave. William Earl of Craven, deposeth, THat he attending the King at St. James's, the 10th of June last, in the Morning, to receive the Word of his Majesty; the King had Notice brought him, that the Queen was upon the Point of falling into Labour, upon which the King commanded this Deponent's Stay
and Attendance; and after the Space of One Hour and something more, this Deponent was, with some other Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, called into the Queen's Great Bed-chamber to be present at her Deli∣very, and as near as this Deponent can remember, the Queen made Three Groans or Squeeks, and at the Last of Three was delivered of a Child; the which was car∣ry'd out into the Little Bed-chamber; and there by the Fire this Deponent saw it cleansing: And this Deponent further saith, That he took that particular Mark of this Child, that he may safely averr, that the Prince of Wales is that very Child that then was so brought out of the Queen's Great Bed-chamber, where this Deponent and others were present, as aforesaid, at her Majesty's La∣bour and Delivery. Craven. Lewis Earl of Feversham, Lord Chamberlain to Her Majesty the Queen Dowager, deposeth, THat being in Bed upon the 10th of June between 8 and 9 a Clock in the Morning, Mr. Nicholas, One of his Majesty's Grooms of his Bed-chamber, came into this Deponent's Room, and told him that the King had sent him to tell the Queen Dowager, that the Queen was in Labour, and told him further that the Queen Dowager had given Order for her Coach, as soon as she heard the News of the Queen's Labour. The Deponent dressed himself with all speed, and came to wait upon the Queen Dowager, who was ready to go into her Coach, as she did; the Deponent went into One of her Coaches to wait upon her Majesty as he us'd to do, having the Honour to be her Lord Chamberlain; we went to St. James's, and then led her Majesty into the Queen's Bed-chamber, and finding the Queen in Pain, the Deponent went into the next Room, where were several Lords of the Privy Council, from whence the Deponent heard the Queen cry out several times, and a very little after the Lords of the Council were called in, and the Deponent followed them into the Bed-chamber, and a very little after the Queen cry'd louder, and then said, Pray do not tell me what it is yet. The Deponent went out of the Room, to tell the
News, that the Queen was brought to Bed; and when the Deponent came in again, the News was, that it was a Prince; and immediately the Deponent saw Mrs. La∣badie with the Child wrapp'd up in her Hands, and in the Crowd; upon which the Deponent desired to make room for the Prince, and followed her into the Little Bed-chamber, where the Deponent saw the Prince as a Child newly born, as he believed it. Feversham. Alexander Earl of Morray deposeth, THat he came not to St. James's till half an Hour after the Queen was brought to Bed, and only heard that her Majesty was brought to Bed of a Prince, which the Deponent verily believes, as he is alive, she brought into the World that very Morning, being the 10th of June last, 1688. * Morray. Charles Earl of Middleton, One of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, deposeth, THat the 10th of June last past, betwixt 8 and 9 of the Clock in the Morning, he had Notice that the Queen's Majesty was in Labour, whereupon the Deponent made what Haste he could to St. James's; the Deponent found the Earl of Craven waiting at the Queen's Bed-chamber Door towards the Drawing-room, which was then shut; just after the King opened it, and called the Earl of Craven and the Deponent in; the Deponent asked his Ma∣jesty how the Queen was? He was pleased to answer the Deponent, you are a married Man, and so may know these Matters; the Water is broke or come away, or to that effect; and then bid the Deponent go into the Dres∣sing-room within the Bed-chamber, where the Deponent found several Persons of Quality; above half an Hour after, to the best of this Deponent's Memory, all the Com∣pany in that Room were called into the Bed-chamber; the Deponent stood near the Bed's Feet on the left Side, where he heard the Queen's Groans, and presently after several loud Shrieks; the last, the Deponent remembers continued so long, that he then wondred how any Body
could hold their Breath so long; presently after, the Deponent heard them say, the Queen was delivered: Whereupon the Deponent stepped up to the Bed-side, and saw a Woman, he supposes, the Midwife, kneeling at the other Side of the Bed, who had her Hands and Arms within the Bed-cloaths for a pretty while, then the Deponent saw her spread a Cloth upon her Lap, and laid the End of it over the Bed-cloaths, and then fetch a Child (as the Deponent firmly believes, for he could not then see it) out of the Bed into that Cloth, and give it to Mrs. Labadie, who brought it round to the Side where the Deponent stood, and carry'd it into a little Room, into which the Deponent immediately followed the King, and saw her sit down by the Fire, and heard her say, It is a Boy; upon which the King said, Let me see it; thereupon she laid open the Cloth, and shewed all the Child, saying, There's what you wish to see; The Deponent doth not charge his Memory with the very Words, but the Sense of what he heard. The De∣ponent looked upon the Child at the same time, which appeared to be very foul. This Deponent desireth Par∣don if he doth not know the proper Expression, but hopes his Meaning is plain. Middleton. John Earl of Melfort, deposeth, THat on Sunday the 10th of June last, betwixt 8 and 9 in the Morning, the Deponent was informed, that the Queen was in Labour; The Deponent went to St. James's and waited in the Queen's Drawing-room till some of the Gentlemen told him he might go in; the Deponent scratched at the Door of the Bed-chamber, and finding no Answer, he ran down by the Garden Side and came to the Queen's Back-stairs, and finding the Dressing-room Door open, the Deponent went into the Queen's Bed-chamber where he saw a great Number of Company, Lords and Ladies standing about the Bed: The Deponent heard the Queen cry out in great Pain, as Women use to do when they are near being brought to Bed; the Deponent heard her complain, and a Wo∣man's Voice which the Deponent thought to be the Mid∣wise,
telling her, she would be quickly well, she would be brought to Bed immediately; within a little the De∣ponent heard the Ladies behind the Bed say, the Queen was brought to Bed, and the Queen cry out, The Child is dead, I do not hear it cry, and immediately the Child cryed; within a little the Deponent saw a Woman bring a Child from within the Bed; the Deponent looked so earnestly at the Child, that he knew not what Woman it was; the Child was in the Condition of a new born Child, lapp'd up in loose Cloaths; the Deponent saw him carried into the Little Bed-chamber, and went about by the Dressing-room, and entred by the other Door into the Room where the Prince was, and saw him in the Condition of a new born Child; and the Deponent by the Oath he hath taken, believes him to be the Queen's Child. * Melsort. Sidney Lord Godolphin, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, deposeth, THat he was called into the Queen's Bed-chamber, with the rest of the Lords of the Council, being one of the last; and the Queen Dowager being there, and seve∣ral Ladies, the Room was so full that the Deponent could not get near the Bed, but stood by the Chimney; There the Deponent heard the Queen cry out several times, as Women use to do that are in Labour; and the last Cry that the Deponent heard, was much greater than the other; immediately upon that, the Deponent was called out of the Room, to give some Directions about the Lodgings that were preparing for the Child, which were not ready; the Deponent made hast back again, but as he was coming he met People running with the News that the Queen was Deliver'd of a Son, whereupon the Deponent went into the little Bed-cham∣ber, and saw the Child. Godolphin. Sir Stephen Fox, Knight, Deposeth, THat on Sunday the 10th of June last past, about 9 of the Clock, as he came out of the Chappel at White∣hall after the first Sermon, hearing that the Queen was
in Labour, he, the Deponent made haste to St. James's, because in waiting, as an Officer of the Green Cloth, to warn the several Servants below Stairs to be in their Offices, that upon that occasion there might not happen to be any thing wanting of Houshold Provisious and Ne∣cessaries under his, this Deponent's, Command; but first going up by the Back-Stairs into her Majesty's Dressing-Room, and being there with many others, he heard her Majesty cry out very loudly; whereupon this Deponent hastned to the Green-Cloth, and ordered the several Ser∣vants to deliver out of their several Offices whatsoever should be called for, and as this Deponent was returning back to the Queen's said Dressing-Room, he was told, A Prince was Born: Upon which News, He, this Depo∣nent, went into the Queen's Little Bed-chamber, and saw the young Child before he was dress'd. Ste. Fox. Lieut. Col. Edward Griffin, deposeth, THat upon Sunday the 10th of June last, he had the Honour to be in waiting upon the King with the Stick, and between 8 and 9 in the Morning, this Depo∣nent was in the Queen's Dressing Room at St. James's, with several Lords of the Council, and after some time we were there, the King came out of the Queen's Bed∣chamber, and called all the Lords in, and this Deponent went in along with them, being in waiting; imme∣diately after the said Lords and this Deponent were in the Room; the Queen cryed out extremely, and said, Oh, I die; you kill me, you kill me: And the Midwife (as this Deponent believeth) answered, This one Pain, Madam, and 'twill be over; then presently Mrs. Dawson made this Deponent the Sign that the Child was born: Then this Deponent heard the Queen say, Don't tell me what it is yet; and Mrs. Dawson came to this Deponent, and whispered him in the Ear, 'Tis a Prince, but don't take notice of it yet. Then Mrs. Delabadie brought away the Child from the Bed-side, and carry'd it into the Little Bed-chamber, and the King and the Lords of the Council went after her, but this Deponent did not follow them. Edward Griffin.
Sir Charles Scarburgh, First Physician to the King, deposeth, THat upon the Deponent's coming to Visit her Majesty then lying at St. James's on Sunday the 10th of June, 1688. as the Deponent went up the Back-stairs, he heard the joyful Acclamation that a Prince of Wales was born, upon which the Deponent hastned presently into the Little Bed-chamber, where the Deponent found Mrs. Labadie just sitting down before the Fire, with the new born Prince wrapped in the Mantles, lying in her Lap. Then passing to the Queen in the next Bed-chamber, the Deponent congratulated the happy Birth of the Prince, and her Majesty's safe Delivery. The Queen was wea∣ried and panting, but otherwise in good Condition: Then the Midwife brought to the Deponent the After∣birth reeking warm, which Sir Thomas Witherley with the Deponent examined, and found very sound and perfect. After a while the Deponent understood that a Medicine was mentioned among the Ladies for a certain Remedy against Convulsions: It was some Drops of Blood from the Navel-string; the Deponent consulted Sir Thomas Witherley and the other Physicians; and to satisfie the Women it was allowed of; there being, as was conceived, no Danger in the thing. Whereupon, the Midwise, with a small Knife slit the Navel-string beyond the Ligature, from which came some Drops of fresh Blood, taken in a Spoon, and given the Child, being mixed with a little Black-cherry-water. Thus much the Deponent hath to say upon her Majesty's present Delivery. Now for the Time of the Queen's Conception, she often told the Deponent and others, that she had two Reckonings; One, from Tuesday the 6th of September, when the King returned from his Progress to the Queen then at Bath; and the other, from Thursday the 6th of October, when the Queen came to the King at Windsor; but for some Reasons the Queen rather reckoned from the latter; tho' afterward it proved just to agree with the former. Moreover, her Majesty, when, according to her Reckoning, she was gone with Child 12 Weeks, said, That she was quick, and perceived the Child to move;
the Deponent returned no Answer to the Queen, but pri∣vately told those about her, that in truth it could not so be in so short a Time. Yet the Queen was in the right, only mistook her Reckoning; for she was then full Six∣teen Weeks gone with Child; about which time she usually quickned with her former Children, and accor∣dingly was brought to Bed on the 10th of June 1688, and within Three or Four Days of full Forty Weeks. Charles Scarburgh. Sir Thomas Witherley, second Physician to the King, deposeth, THat on Sunday the 10th of June, the Deponent was present in the Queens Bed-chamber, when the Prince of Wales was born; the Deponent saw Mrs. Labadie bring the Child from the Midwife, and carry him into the next Room, whither the Deponent followed her, and saw the Child before he was cleaned; and having a Com∣mand from the Queen, that there should be Two Drops of the Blood of the After-burthen given the first thing; we the said Deponent and the other Physicians did take Two Drops of Blood from the Navel-string which re∣mained upon the Child, and gave it in a Spoonful of Black-cherry-water, as the Queen commanded. After this the Deponent saw (as also did the other Physicians) the After-burthen entire. Tho. Witherley. Sir William Waldgrave Knt. Her Majesty's first Physi∣cian, Deposeth, THat in the Progress of Her Majesty's being with Child, the Deponent having the Honour to wait upon Her as usual, upon the 13th of February 1687. a∣bout Ten in the Morning, she told the Deponent, she had Milk in her Breasts which dropp'd out; it was then thought the 19th Week according to One Reckoning, but according to Another Reckoning, it was the One or Two and Twentieth Week; The Deponent also Affirmeth, that Her Majesty took such Adstringent Medicines, du∣ring the most part of her being with Child, in order to avoid Miscarriage; That if she had not been with Child,
they must have been Prejudicial to her Health, and of dangerous Consequence. Upon the 10th of June 1688, the Deponent was call'd at his Lodging in Whitehall, to wait upon the Queen, being told she was in Labour, upon which the Deponent immediately went to St. James's, and so into the Queen's Bed-chamber, and found her beginning her Labour, it being about Eight of the Clock in the Morning. The Deponent stirr'd not from thence, but to get such Medicines as were fit for Her Majesty, and then return'd again, and was in the Bed-chamber when she Cry'd out, and was Deliver'd; The Deponent followed Mrs. Delabadie, who took the Prince in her Arms so soon as he was Born, and carried him into the little Bed-chamber, where the Deponent saw him upon her Lap, and was by when he took two or three drops of the Navel-string fresh warm Blood, which was mix'd with Black-Cherry-water, then returned into the great Bed-Chamber, where the Deponent saw the After-burthen fresh and warm. * William Waldgrave. Dr. Robert Brady, one of His Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary, Deposeth, THat a little before Ten of the Clock in the Morning, on the Tenth of June 1688. the Deponent was in the Queen's little Bed-Chamber at St. James's, where the Deponent saw the Prince of Wales in Mrs. Labadie's Lap by the Fire side; the Deponent desired to see the Linnen and Blankets opened in which he was wrapped; which being done, the Deponent saw it was a Male Child, and the Navel-string hanging down to, or below the Virile parts, with a Ligature upon it, not far from the Body, but did not see any After-burthen, hanging at, or joined to it, not being at the Birth; The Deponent asked how long he had been Born, the standers by told him, At three Quarters of an Hour after Nine of the Clock, the Queen was delivered. Robert Brady. James St. Amand, their Majesties Apothecary, Deposeth, THat from the beginning of November last, he hath generally every day, till the 9th of June 1688.
given, by the Physicians Orders, Restringent and Cor∣roborating Medicines to the Queen's Majesty; That on the 10th of June he was sent for in haste to come to St. James's to her Majesty, who, the Messenger told him, was in Labour; That the Deponent then received a Note from the Physicians for Medicines for her Majesty, which the Deponent was obliged to stay and prepare, and so came not to St. James's till the Queen was Delivered; the De∣ponent meeting, just as he was going into the Bed-Chamber, Mrs. Labadie with the Young Prince in her Arms; the KING, and several of the Lords, soon after following into the little Bed-Chamber; where the Depo∣nent saw the Child Naked, before it was Cleansed from the Impurities of its Birth; and also saw the Navel∣string cut, and some drops of fresh Blood received into a Spoon, which the Deponent mingled with a little Black-Cherry-Water, and saw given by the Physicians Orders to the Child; And afterwards going into the Great Bed-Chamber, where the Queen was delivered, he saw the After-burthen, &c. fresh. Ja. St. Amand. After these Depositions were taken, His Majesty was pleased to acquaint the Lords, That the Princess Anne of Denmark would have been present; but that she being with Child, and having not lately stirred abroad, could not come so far without hazard. Adding further, AND now, My Lords, although I did not question but every Person here present was satisfy'd before in this Matter; yet by what You have heard, You will be better able to satisfie Others. Besides, if I and the Queen could be thought so Wicked as to Endeavour to Impose a Child upon the Nation, You see how impossible it would have been; neither could I My Self be imposed upon, having constantly been with the Queen during Her being with Child, and the whole Time of her Labour. And there is none of You but will easily believe Me, who have suffered so much for Conscience-sake, uncapable of so great a Villany, to the Prejudice of My Own Children, And I thank God, that those that know Me, know well that it is My Principle to do as I would be done by, for
that is the Law and the Prophets: And I would rather die a Thousand Deaths, than do the least Wrong to any of My Children. His Majesty further said, IF any of my Lords think it Necessary the Queen should be sent for, it shall be done. But their Lordships not thinking it Necessary, her Majesty was not sent for. IT is order'd this Day by his Majesty in Council, That the several Declarations here before made by His Majesty, and by Her Majesty the Queen-Dowager, together with the several Depositions here entred, be forthwith Enrolled in the Court of Chancery. And the Lord Chancellour is ordered to cause the same to be Enrolled accordingly. IN Pursuance of which Order in Council, the Lord Chancellour on Saturday the 27th. day of October fol∣lowing in the High Court of Chancery (many of the No∣bility and Lords of his Majesty's most Honourable Privy Council being there present) caused the aforesaid Order of Council and Declarations of his Majesty, and likewise that of her Majesty the Queen Dowager to be openly and distinctly Read in Court, as the same are Entred in the Words aforesaid, in the Council Book. And the Lords and Ladies, and other Persons who made the respective Depositions aforesaid, being present in Court, were Sworn again, and having heard their several Depositions distinctly Read in the Words aforesaid, and being severally Inter∣rogated by the Court to the Truth thereof, they all upon their Oaths affirmed their respective Depositions to be True; and did likewise depose (except some few, who came in late to the Council Chamber, or some who stood at too great a distance) that they heard His Majesty, and her Majesty the Queen-Dowager, make the several Declarations aforesaid, and that the same as they had been Read, were truly Entred as they did believe, in the Council Book, according to the Sense, Intent and Meaning of what His Majesty the King, and Her Ma∣jesty the Queen-Dowager did then declare. And for as
much as the Earl of Huntingdon and the Earl of Peterbo∣row, who were able to depose to the Matters aforesaid, had not been Examined at the Council Board, but had brought their several Depositions in Writing, which they delivered into Court, the said Lord Chancellor, after the said Earls were severally Sworn, Ordered their Deposi∣tions to be openly Read in these Words following. UPon Trinity Sunday, 10th. June, 1688. I went to St. James's House about Nine a Clock in the Morning, and followed my Lord Chancellour, through the Lodg∣ings to the Dressing-Room, next to the Queen's Bed-Chamber, where divers Lords of the Council were met upon occasion of the Queen's being in Labour, the King came several times into the Room, and amongst other things was pleased to tell us, that the Queen came exactly according to Her first Reckoning, which was from the King's Return from His Progress, to Bath in September, 1687. After this the Counsellours were ordered to come into the Bed-Chamber, and I stood on that side of the Bed, that had the Curtains drawn open, I heard Her Majesty Cry out several times. I staid in the Room during the Birth of the Prince of Wales. I saw him carried into the little Bed-Chamber, whither the King, the Lords and my self in particular did follow him. Huntingdon. I Had the Honour to be in the King's Chamber in the Morning, when Word was brought him, the Queen was not well, and followed him into the Drelling Room next Her Majesty's Bed-Chamber, where I staid till His Majesty called me to come in, which was about the be∣ginning of Her Pains. I Confess the Compassion I had for Her Majesty, hearing her Cries, made me stay there very uneasy, One of the last especially seemed to me so Sharp, as it really forced me for a little time to stop my Ears with my Fingers to avoid hearing more of the like; when setting them at Liberty, I heard no more but perceived a sudden Satisfaction in the Faces of the Assistants, several saying, that the Queen was delivered, and soon thereupon I saw the Prince brought from about
the Bed, and carried into the little Bed-Chamber, whi∣ther I went afterwards, to behold him more particularly, where I saw him as a Child newly Born. * Peterborow. AFter which the said Earls did severally upon their Oaths affirm their Depositions to be True as they had been Read, and that they were present in Council, and heard His Majesty and Her Majesty the Queen Dowager make the several Declarations aforesaid, and that the same were Entred in the Council Book as they did be∣lieve according to the Effect true Sense and Meaning of what their Majesties declared in Council; Whereupon His Majesty's Attorney General moved the Court, that the said Declarations of His Majesty, and of Her Majesty the Queen-Dowager, and the several Depositions, and the Order of Council should be Enrolled in the Petty-Bag Office, and in the Office of Inrolments in the Court of Chancery, for the safe Preservation and Custody of them, which the Lord Chancellour Ordered accordingly. Published by His MAJESTIES SPECIAL COMMAND.
