T2902 12075847 53592
A True RELATION OF Colonell Cromwels PROCEEDINGS against the CAVALIERS. Wherein is set forth the Number of those that were Taken, Kil'd, and Maimed, at his late Victories obtained over them. Sent in a Letter from a Gentleman in his Army (Dated July, 24. 1643.) to a Friend in LONDON. Published according to Order. LONDON Printed for Bejamin Allen, 1643.
A TRVE RELATION OF Colonell CROMVVELS PROCEEDINGS Against the Cavaliers. VVherein is set forth the Number of those that were Taken, Kil'd, and Maimed, in his late Victories obtained against them. Good Captaine, I Received yours last week, &c. for which I thanke you, and which did much mode∣rate the anxiety of our soules, wherein we were in the apprehension of the utter rou∣ing, and infinite losse of Sir William Wal∣ter, as it was before related and represented to us, the
best I confesse is bad, but as it pleaseth the L, so things come to passe, and  times to receive evill at his hande  yet laying aside our confidence in him,  downe to the Grave, and raiseth up  to doe his worke intended by small  by great, and hath ,  strength of flesh) and he will bring it to p;  is faithfull, he hath promised and he will doe . I should be glad to heare some good newes of the Kentish busi∣nes, &c. in the meane time, I shall now tell you our own great danger, and therefore great deliverance, (the Lords name be praised for it.) About Tuesday last the Cavaliers came from Bever Castle, and Newark, to ord, about 1000. of them, as was informed us; they set also that day mem∣ber) upon Peterborough, but were repelled by Colonell Palgrave and his Company, who lay about Whittlesey and Peterborough, and sallyed out to them with some Ordnance, they retired to Stamford, whither they d in the Countrey, and began to fortifie apace, but it pleased God to interrupt them, by sending Colonell Cromwell to them from Northampton side, or Buckingham, with 6. or 7. Troops, and some few Foot. On Wednesday they had some Skirmishes, first at a great house called Wothrop House,  whence driving them, they retired to  stately house, by Stamford also called  and getting within the Parke Walls, ( round with a stone Wall) they made that ; so for that time the W seased, for the Colo∣nell
had few Foot, and no Ordnance. We lost not a man, or but a man at most, he slew of theirs a Captain, a Lievtenant, and a Cornet, and some 10. or 12. more, and took one Colour, and some 20. men, so there was a True, at least no more fighting till this morning: though the Colonel was within a mile and halfe of the Towne, intending to set downe against it on Saturday morning last betimes, but the sad raine forbad him. Yesterday God sent also to his assistance, Colonell Ho∣bard, (and some say also, Sir Samuel Luke,) Colonell Pal∣grave also came to him with his men and Ordnance, so together they made a considerable strength, of 3. or 4000. and they say 12. or 14. Pieces of Ordnance. They stay not, but presently that night advance all to Burgh∣ly House (whither the Enemy was againe gone for sanct∣uary) sit downe before it, shot with their Ordnance 2 or 3. houres, (beginning at 3. of clock this morning) but could do no good that way, the house was so strong; they sound a Parley, offer quarter for the men only to have life and Liberty to depart without their weapons &c. The Enemy refuses, answers, they would neither take nor give quarter: They fall then upon them with their Musquets, a difficult taske, and full of danger, the fight was very hot and well performed (they say) on both sides, the Enemy being very confident, active, and tryumphing, till about one of clock this after∣noone; But then their Spirits began to faile them; And they sounded a Parly, the Colonell most Christi∣anly commanded presently that none of his should dare to shoot or kill any man during the parly, upon paine of death, (forgetting their former cruell answer) pre∣sently
they concluded upon quarter for their lives; for they tooke them all (being two Colonells, six or seven Captaines, three or 400. Foote▪ 150. or 200. Horse) with all their Armes, &c. And the pillage of the House and how they will deale with Stanford now also at their mercy) we know not; but if the report be true which we have, that they rung the Bells back∣ward on Wednesday, when the first Skirmish was, to call in the Country to assist the Cavaliers, against the Colonell, his mercy will be admirable it they escape: for the Providence of God hath beene in this busi∣nesse, that in all this hot fight for nine or elven houres, we are credibly informed by one that was a Spectator all the while, that not above sixe or seven men were slaine, (though many hurt) in the Battell; onely about two miles beyond Stamford, towards Grantham, some 400. Club-men comming in to the aid of the Cava∣liers, and having killed some of the Colonells  hee sent three or foure Troopes to meet them they al∣most killed one of the Captaines; upon which being inraged, they presently slew some 50. of them, the rest fled (they say) into the Woods; This is the effect of what we yet hear: Thus it pleaseth God yet to preserve us; blessed be his name: I should be glad to heare some good newes of Sir William Waller : you heare (I question not) of the taking of Gains-berry; and the rich price there 15000. (they say) in the Earle of Kitones∣house with himselfe, and abundance of other Knights, and Gentlemen and of brave Horses, &c. It was since besieged againe by the Earle of New-Castle; and the Siege raised againe (wee heare this day) by my Lord
Fairefax; If it bee true, It's good newes to heare also that Noble Lord is in the field again. The Stage of war (you see) is now become on our side, the Lord be mer∣cifull unto us; what heare you yet of the Scots? Are the Commissioners gone? Here is a muttering about the Lievtenant of the Tower; how goes on your busi∣nesse for your new Army? What does my Lord Gene∣ralls Army? &c. We have had terrible Alarms last weeke, but I was at Cambridge almost all the week with my Wife: The Lord be with us and for us, preserve, fit, and use us for his Glory. My love to you both. FINIS.
