T3193 17351220 106407
A Pocket-Companion; CONTAINING Things Necessary to be Known, By all that Values their Health and Happiness: BEING A plain Way of NATURE'S own Prescribing, to Cure most Diseases in Men, Women and Children, by Kitchen-Physick only. To which is Added, An Account how a Man may Live Well and Plentifully for Two-Pence a day. Collected from The Good Housewife made a Doctor,By THO. TRYON. Licensed, Octob. 25th. 1693. LONDON, Printed for George Conyers, at the Golden Ring in Little-Britain, 1694.
Notable Things. Of Consumptions. COnsumptions are Decays of the Radical Moi∣sture, whereby the natural Heat of the Sto∣mach is so weakened, that it cannot make a due Separation of Meats and Drinks received, which causes from thence to arise abundance of bad Juices or Phlegm; so that no good Nourishment can be bred, let the Food be never so Rich▪ nor the Drink Cordi∣al, which all People afflicted find by Experience. But these Distempers proceed likewise from various Causes. As, 1. From over-charging Nature with too great Quantities of Rich Food: or in Others, by drinking much Brandy, Wine, and strong Drinks, which weak∣ens the natural Heat, and destroys the Action of the Stomach. In Others, and idle, sedentary Course of Life, or want of proper Exercises; lying in bed too long, too warm Cloathing, and too soft Feather or Down Beds, which proves always prejudicial to to the Health of all Persons. It is caused some∣times by too much frequenting the School of Venus, provoking Nature beyond her Ability, and oft-times corrupts her, in her very Radix. Young married People, as well as the most lewd, are oft caught in this Snare, and let this be a Caution. Others by excessive Heats or Colds, Surfeits and the like Accidents: Some by Fe∣vers and long Fits of sickness; to some through Me∣lancholly, Grief, or Trouble of Mind, or Despair and
Envy. Some have Consumptions Hereditary, which is the hardest of all to cure. Now when thou findest thy self indisposed, and thy Stomach to grow weak, and a general Disorder to run through thy whole Body, and that thy Strength decays; consider what it was that caused it, whether Temperance, or Intemperance in Meats or Drinks, in respect of the Quantity or Quality, as also their Exercises, and all other Extreams thou hast inured thy self to: Consider further, what Air thou hast lived in, where the Disease was bred, and by this means thou mayest guess at the Cause of thy Distemper. And when this is done, thou ought∣est gradually to alter for the better, the whole Course of thy Life; not in the nature and quality of the Meats and Drinks only, but in their quantity; as al∣so thy Exercises and the Air, as far as the Conditi∣on of thy Life will admit thereof: for change of Food, Exercises, and Airs, work wonders. If withal, you betake your selves to meer simple Meats and Drinks that are easier of Concoction, and generate a freer and firmer Substance. I shall now set down what Food, Drink and Pre∣parations are agreeable to the Stomachs of sick and languishing Persons: And first of Milk. Which is an incomparable Food, and the best way for weak consumptive People to eat it, is Raw▪ Take what quantity of Milk you please, let it stand open to the Air one Hour or two, then skimm off the Top of it, and eat it with well bak'd Bread; neither toast your Bread, nor warm your Milk; except the weather be cold, and then you may make it blood warm, but then do not toast your Bread: You may if you please, eat Bisket with your Milk,
but do not eat too great a quantity at once: some∣times you may mix a little Water with the Milk, and sweeten it with good white Sugar: you may eat this three times aday, if you make it your sole Food. Continue this six or eight Months at least▪ and you will find great Benefit by it: for Distem∣pers that have been many years generating, can∣not be cured in a moment, To prepare Milk with Wheat-Flower, an Excel∣lent Way. Take a quart of New Milk, after it has stood five or six Hours from the time it was milk'd, put to it a third part of River or Spring Water, set it on a clear fire; then take some Wheat-Flower, and temper it with either Water or Milk into a Batter, and when the Milk is ready to boyl, put in your Thickning, and stir it a while; and when it is ready to boyl again, take it off; then put as much Salt and Bread to it as you please, then let it cool with∣out stirring it, and it will eat much sweeter: Two spoonfuls of Flower is enough for a quart of Milk and Water, make it about the thickness of ordinary Milk-pottage. This keeps your Body in excellent Temper, neither binds nor loosens too much, and it never tires nor clogs the Stomach. Another way. Take a Quart of Milk and a Pint of Water, add to it as much Oatmeal as you please to have Thickness, Thin is best. Set it on a  fire, and when it begins to boyl, take it off, and brew it in two Porringers eleven or twelve times, then set it on the fire again, and when it begins to boyl take it off, and let stand a little, and the large Oat∣meal will settle to the Bottom; then add Bread and
Salt to it, and eat it when it is blood warm: this is an Excellent Food, agrees well with weak Natures, and affords firm Nourishment. And if you add at any time to this a new-laid Egg or two, beaten with your Thickening, and put it in as aforesaid, it will make a rich Dish. If you would add Eggs to Milk-pottage, first put your Milk and Water into your Swce-Pan, take a spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and beat it up with your Egg or Eggs, with either a little milk or water, and when it is ready to boil, stir it in, as in flowr'd milk, and then you need not brew it; put a little Bread and Salt to all your milk meats, but no Su∣gar be sure: This is a Substantial and Friendly Food. Observe that Milk is best the first half year after the Cow hath Calv'd, but not so good after taking Bull, or Conception. Milk boil'd by it. it self▪ is not so good, as when mixt with Oatmeal, Flower, or Water as aforesaid, being not of so cleansing a quality  the best time to begin Milk-Diet I think is about March or April. Of Furmety, viz. VVheat and Milk are in themselves two good things; but ordered with Sugar, Spice, &c. is not at al to be commended, nor near so good as Milk, Flower and VVater; the same is to be understood of VVheat butter'd and spiced. Of Boniclabber. Bonic is made by letting your Milk stand till it sowers, which will be in Twenty-fours hours, if the weather be very hot. It has a pleasant sow∣erish Taste, and must be eaten only with Bread, especially by Consumptive People. It is Excellent a∣gainst Stoppages, and it's easie of Concoction. and
igests all hard or sweet Food; it cools and clean∣eth the whole Body, and quencheth Thrist to a onder, it is the best Spoon-meat for Consumptive People that I know. And though it may not be so agreeable to the Pallat at first, yet a little Custom will make it familiar and pleasant. Of Water-Grewel. This is good for Consumptive People, and is made as followeth. Take a quart of Spring or River Wa∣ter, put to it two Spoonfuls of Oatmeal, then stir it well together, set it on the fire, and when it is ready to boil, take it off, and brew it out of one thing into another; then let it stand, and the great∣est Oatmeal will sink to the Bottom: then pour it off, and add Bread and Salt to it, and Butter if you please, then eat it when it has stood till it is blood warm. This is an Excellent sort of Food. Observe that Milk boiled, is nothing so good as either Raw or Scalded. An Excellent Food for all sorts of People, ut more-especially▪ for Children and sick People. Take a quart of Water, two Spoonfuls of Wheat-flower, and two or three Eggs, beat the Flower and Eggs together with a little water, and when the water begins to boil, stir in your Thickning, and keep it stirring till it is ready to boil; then take it off, and put Bread and Salt to it, when it has stood till it is blood warm, eat it; you may put some Butter to it, or an Egg if you like it best: This is an incomparable Food for all sorts of people, it breeds good Blood, opens the Passages, sweetens the Blood, pre∣vents windy Distempers and griping Pains; it is next to Breast-milk for Children, and it is excellent for Consumptive People, if they keep to it four or five
months or more, and eat nothing else, and drink∣ing three our four Glasses of good Ale; let them use gentle Exercise, and moderate Cloathing, and good sweet hard Beds. This, and all other Spoon-meats made thin, are best. Flummery▪ Is thus made. Take three Spoonfuls of Oatmeal more or less, and put to it a convenient quanti∣ty of water, then let it stand till it begins to be sowerish, then take this Water and Oatmeal, and put it into a Vessel, stirring it, and making it boil∣ing hot with a quick fire and when it does begin to rise, brew it to and fro with your Ladle to keep it from boiling; this do about four or five minutes, then take it off the fire, and it's prepar'd. Some eat it with Ale, others with Cream, Milk, and the like, but I think it most beneficial to be eaten with Bread only. It removes Obstructions, strength∣ens the Stomach, cools the Body, openeth the Pas∣sages, and is excellent good for Breakfast in all hot Climates: This is good more-especially for weak Stomach'd People, and those whose Breast, and Passages are obstructed by though phlegmy matter. Another way to make Flummery. Take two or three Spoonfuls of Oatmeal, more or less, and put to it a convenient quantity of Water, and let it stand a day more or less; then pour off that water, and put on fresh four, five, six, seven, eight, nine or ten times; letting each water remain on your Oatmeal a certain time, then they take it off, boil it up, some mix it with Cream, and what they please. But this way is not near so good as the former.
Of Bread. The best sort for sick People, is that which is made of Wheat-flower, but not too fine dres∣sed; for then it will be dry and husky; and your Leaven'd Bread is much better than that made with Yiest; you may make it after this manner. Take what Flower you please, make a hole in the middle of it, break then your Leaven in; take as much blood-warm Water, as will wet a∣bout half your Flower, mix the Flower and Lea∣ven well together, cover it with the remaining Flower close; this do in the Evening, and by Morning the whole will be well Leavened: then add some more blood-warm water as is sufficient, and knead it up very stiff and firm, the more pains you take, the better: when you have so done, let it lie warm by some fire, near two hours, till the Oven is ready, then bake it, but let not the Oven-mouth be close stopp'd, that the Air may have more or less Egress or Regress. But the best way is to make it into thin Cakes, and bake them on a Stone, with a Wood-fire under. Of Rye, Barley, Oats, you may make Cakes after the same manner; put no Salt into your Bread. Of Butter Butter affords good Nourishment; the best that is for the Stomach, is made from May to August: It's very wholesome, if eaten moderately with Bread, or with Herbs, Roots or the like. Take good Butter and melt it thick, and put it to your Herbs, as you do Oyl, and it eats as well and plea∣sant, and can scarce be distinguished from Oyl: this I believe a great many may have cause to thank me for: all Butter ought to be well seasoned with Salt.
Cheese Affords good Nourishment, for healthy, work∣ing People, if eaten with good store of Bread, and a Cup of good Drink be not wanting▪ It is altogether as nourishing as Flesh; it is clean, and of a stronger, firmer Substance, and digests a Cup of Drink better: and he that lives on Bread and Cheese, intermix'd now and then with flower'd Milk, Water-Grewel, Milk-pottage, and Raw Sallads, seasoned with Vinegar, Salt and Oyl; and drinks good sound Ale and Beer not over strong, shall exceed in Health and Strength him that lives on Bread and Flesh, and drinks the same Liquor. Of Puddings. The best way of making them is thus. Take Milk and Water, Wheat-flower, and Eggs, of each a convenient quantity, and put a little Salt in; beat them well together, put this Batter into your Bag, boil it in good store of Water, your Potlid off, and over a quick clear fire; when boil'd sufficient, take it off, butter it, and eat it. Bak'd Puddings are not so good. Of Eggs, and their best way of Dressing. They are an Excellent Food, friendly and inno∣cent in Operation. Dress them as followeth. Let your Eggs be boiled soft, then break the Shell and put them into a Dish, and let them stand till they are Blood-warm; then with Bread and Salt only eat them: A strong Stomach may eat them with Bread and Butter spread upon it, not melted. Or you may boil them hard, then pill off the Shell, and eat them with Salt, Bread and Vi∣negar.
Poaching is a very good way. Take an Egg, a spoonful of Wheat-flower, and beat it well together, then put it into a Pint of Water boiling hot. stir it together; then take it off, and eat it with a little Bread, Salt and Butter, and it will make an excellent Meal. Eggs in a Morning supp'd off raw, and Bread eaten after them, is very whol∣some. Of Pyes. Pear and Apple-pyes are wholesome and healthy Food, if the Fruit be thorough ripe, and made as they ought to be: The best way is thus. Take good Wheat-flower, make it into a Paste with a little Leaven or Yeast, with Milk and Water, or blood warm Water only, then put it in your Ap∣ples or Pears, and if you please add some Carraway or Fennel-seeds. In baking, let the Oven stand almost open, that some Air may come in. When baked, draw them, and cut holes in the top, that the sulphur∣ous Atoms, and fiery Vapours may pass away, eat them not hot, for they are much better cold. Ap∣ples raw and ripe, eat with Bread, sometimes are wholesome; and so are Peaches Plumbs, Gooseberries, Currants, Apricocks and the like, very good Food eaten with Bread▪ sometimes. And observe by the way, that hot Bread ought not to be eaten, for it is very injurious to the health; and your Bread ought to stand two days before you eat it. Of Raisins. Raisins is a good sort of Food, if rightly used; but I think we might well be without them, though they have their uses: For being eaten with Bread, they'll make a wholesome Breakfast or Supper. As for Currants, they are of little worth to any person
besides the Seller; nor any other sort or Outlandish-Spices, unless they be used physically. The same may be said of Brandy and other Spirits, which often proves profitable, taken in a physical way: But is of fatal consequence, when drunk at every turn. Of Oyl. It is a brave nourishing clean nature, and friend∣ly to most Constitutions: It is very proper to be eaten with Herbs and Fruits. Bread and Oyl make a delicate Breakfast or Supper; for it cleanseth the passages, breeds good Blood, and is easie of concocti∣on. With Fish it is very good, more especially with Salt-fish; for it allays the fierce keen property of the salt, and sweetens the lean body of the Fish; for these purposes it is better then Butter. Observe that toasted Bread is not so good as cold Bread, Olives are not so good as Oyl, nor ought to be free∣quently eat, for then they obstruct the Stomach, and Passages. The best way of eating them is with Bread only; but we might as well be without them. Of Sugars. Sugars is an excellent rich Fruit, but in my opinion fit only to be taken physically, and not at every turn to be mixt with our common Food and Drinks, the use whereof, makes it of eil consequence, par∣ticularly all sweetned Drinks and Food, forward the Generation of the Gout, and other Diseases of the Body, which simple innocent Food would pre∣vent, if Temperance be but observ'd: But if Sugar be used in Milk-meats for Old people, it may prove beneficial, but I thing to none else.
Of Sugar-Candy. It is made thus: First they boil it as high as other Sugars, then out of the Pans they take this Syrup, and put it in an Earthen Pot; then they set it in a hot Stowe, there to stand 9 or 10 days; in that time the fierceness of the sulphureous heat coagulates it into an hard tough substance, then you take it out from the Syrup, and put the Candy or hard Lumps into the Stowe again, but made about 2 or 3 degrees hot∣ter, where it must remain 9 or 10 days longer, and then 'tis done. There is two sorts of it, one White, the other Brown, but they are both of one nature and opera∣tion; they are much made use of for Coughs, Colds and Stoppages, which in my opinion there is nothing more contrary and burthensome to Nature in such cases than this very thing, and therefore ought to be abandoned; for in truth the best Food for those that are invaded with these Colds, &c. are thin brisk Grewels and Pottages, made as I have taught before; also good raw Sallads with Bread and Oyl, but eat Oyl sparingly: likewise Bread and But∣ter, and all sorts of lean Food, light of digestion; and for Drinks, Water and Rhenish-wine, Toast and Water, or Water and White-wine, two-parts Water, and one Wine, or good small Ale with moderate ex∣ercise and cloathing, walking in the open Air some∣times, which will gradually cleanse the passages, and open all Obstructions, and soon remove these Di∣stempers. Of the Occasion of Colds and Coughs; and of their Cure. Coughs and Colds are produced by intemperance in Meats, Drinks, Exercises and Habits, or by eat∣ing or drinking too much in quantity, and things of a contrary quality, or improperly prepar'd, and not
from thin cloathing, as many imagine: for if the in∣side be sound and clean, there is little danger of out∣ward Inconveniencies. The best way to prevent out∣ward Colds, and the Evils that happen through thick and thin Cloathing, and by heats, sweatings, and the like, is to change your Cloaths often. As for Example: Put on when you stay at home in a morning one sort of Cloaths, and when you go out, put off your Cloaths to your Shirt, and put on fresh and cold Cloaths, and again at night pull off them to the Shirt, and put on the others. And for those that sweat much by their labour, let them pull off all their Cloaths, Shirt and all, and put on fresh Shirts, and cold Cloathing; and for those that over∣travel themselves, let them do the like; but observe that both sit still a while, before they either eat or drink. Observe farther by the bye, the Pruens, Figs, and Nuts, and Almonds, and many other such like things, ought not be eaten at all, except only with common Bread, or in Physical way, in opening Drinks. Also Candied-Gingers, all sorts of Conserves, and Preserves, and all Confections, Hodge-Podge, Cakes, Buns, are very prejudicial for, and obstruct the Passages, generate Crudities, spoil the Sto∣mach, and prepare Matter for a multitude of Di∣seases. Of Canary. Canary is an excellent cordial Liquor, eat a good piece of Bread, and drink a Glass of Canary ater it, and it will make a rich meal. It is in my opinion the best Cordial an Apothecary has in his Shop; for any man in time of Disorder and Sick∣ness.
Of Sherry. It is a fine cordial Wine, as good for common Drinks as Canary, being mixt with Water, it begets Appe∣tite, cleanseth the Passages, and helps Concoction; it purges by Urine more than Canary: But this, as all other Liquors, must be drank with discretion and temperance, and not too frequent. Of White-wine. White-Wine is an excellent cleansing Liquor, it begets Appetite, and purges by Urine; but let it not be too frequently drunk, left it indispose the body, by putting it into an unnatural Flame. Of Rhenish-wine. Rhenish-Wine is an excellent cleanser of the Sto∣mach, somewhat a-kin to White-Wine, it begets Ap∣petite, and helps Concoction. As for Old-Hock, esteem'd by some, it is the most prejudicial of any Liquor, and therefore ought to be forborn. Of Claret. Claret is a good Stomach-Wine, moderately drunk; it helps concoction, and begets appetite, it is the best of Wines for those that eat abundance of Fat-flesh, and succulent Foods: But it purges not by Urine so much as White. Take notice that this as all other Liquors, are not to be frequently used, for then they are prejudicial; but a Glass of Claret, or a Dram of Brandy▪ or the like, are good Cordials when you have eat too much in quantity of any Foods, too foul or gross in quality.
Of Cyder. Cyder if well made and fermented, is a fine brisk Li∣quor, and altogether as good as Claret or White-Wine, and perhaps better for English Bodies, if drunk temperately. Note, that no Cyder ought to be Kept above one year, if you regard your health. Of Mum. Mum if temperately drunk, is very wholesome for melancholly Flegmatical people, and for those whose Food is coarse Bread and Cheese, Flower'd Milk, Herbs, and Lean Pottages; but I think it not near so wholesome as well brewed Ale. Of Coffee. Coffee ought to be used only in a Physical way by them that are troubled with Fumes and dulling Va∣pours that fly into their heads: it is likewise good after hard Drinking, Weariness, Labour and Fasting: but for others, I think it best to forbear it: Yet a Dish will do no man harm. Tea Is an innocent harmless Liquor, that purges by U∣rine, and is of an opening Quality; but it is not comparable to an Herb call'd Dandelion; which be∣ing infused in boyling hot water about half an hour, and then pour the Liquor from the Herbs, and sweetned with white Sugar, is a much better Drink. It purgeth by Urine, and cleanseth the Stomach. Sage, Penyroyal, Thyme or Mint, dried in their pro∣per season, and kept in Bags, make as good Liquor as Tea.
Of Sallads. Take Sorrel, Parsly and Spinnage, Lettice, and some few Onions; then add salt, Vinegar and Oyl, a good quantity; if you cannot get Oyl, good Butter melted may serve as well, for it is scarce dicernable from Oyl; but let the Salt predominate. Eat Bread only with the Sallad, which is better than if you eat Bread and Meat, or Bread and Butter, or Cheese. Another. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Pepper, Grass, Spin∣nage, Tops of Mints, and Onions, seasoned as be∣fore. Another. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Cellery, Spinnage, Oni∣ons, and Endive seasoned as before. Another. Sage, Mint, Penyroyal, Balm and some Lettice and Sorrel; eat them as before: This is brave Sallad. Another. Young green Buds of Coleworts with Onions, is a good Sallad, seasoned as before. Another. Taragan, Nettle-tops, Penyroyal, Mint, Parsly, Sorrel, Lettice, and Leaves of Coleworts eat as be∣fore, is an excellent Sallad, if seasoned to the high∣est degrée.
A Sallad for Winter. Parsly, old Onions, Endive, Cellery, Lettice, Sor∣rel and Colewort▪ plants, Seasoned with Salt, Oyl and vinegar, is an excellent warming and cherishing Sallad. Another. Take Cellery, Endive, Spinnage and Lettice, and half a head of Garlick in it, seasoned with Salt, Vi∣negar and Oyl, this is a brave Sallad. Sallads are good at all times, but most proper from end of Ia∣nuary to the 1st of Iuly: Then again from Sep∣tember till December; and indeed all Winter, if the Weather be open. In Spring. Spinnage, Corn-sallad, Nettle-tops, and the Buds of young Cabbage, and others the like nature, being boil'd▪ is an excellent corrective to them that eat Flesh-meat; they loosen the Belly, and open Obstru∣ctions. In April, May and Iune eat Spinnage, Parsly, Lettice, Mint-tops, Borage, Scurvy, Dandi∣lyon, Comfory, and the like, boil'd in plenty of Water over a brisk Fire; add to them Butter melt∣ed, and some Salt; then eat with Bread, or Bread and Flesh is good Food. The best way to make Herb-Pottage. Smallage, Clivers, Watercresses, Elder-buds and Nettle-tops; put water to them proportionable to your Herbs; then add Oatmeal as much as you think fit to leave it in thickness: when the Water is ready to boil, put your Herbs in, cut, or uncut; then when it is again ready to boil, take a Spoon or Ladle and lade it, so that you keep it from boiling; do this
eight or nine minutes, then take it off and eat it blood-warm, with the Herbs in it, or strained; adding a little Butter, Salt and Bread, This is an admira∣ble cleansing Sallad. Another. Spinnage, Corn-sallad, Tops of Pennyroyal and Mint, ordered and eat as before. To make the best Herb Diet-drink. Supposing your Herbs well gather'd, and dry and kept in Bags; take what Herb you think fit, put it in a Linnen Bag and steep it 7 or 8 hours in Beer, Ale, or Wine, or other Liquor, and then take it out, and it is done: Let not your Wormwood be steep'd above three or four hours; observe that one sort of Herb by it self is much better than Com∣pounds. To prevent the Scurvy. Eat not Meat and Drinks too strong for Nature, for Nature ought to be stronger than the Food. Meat and Drink ought not to be eat that are of a contrary Quality to the Constitution. Have a care of eating to Fulness, or to Excess. Take care that your Victuals be in all respects properly prepared, for some will but half doe it, o∣thers over doe it. Let all sorts of Flesh and gross food be boiled in plenty of Water, and over a brisk fire. Forbear eating too much flesh. It is most unwholsome in Iu∣ly, August, September, October. Forbear eating too much Fish. Remember you eat not before the former Food be digested. Drink moderately; let your or∣dinary Drink not be hard, stale, nor sowre, nor too new. Let your Clothing be moderate. Let your
Houses be airy, your Beds hard, clean and sweet; use proper Exercise and Labour in open airy places; take Walks often by River-sides, or on Plains and Downs; observe the Rules of Chastity, avoid all compounded Foods; avoid Carking Cares, Hates, Revenge, Envy, Violence, Oppression; keep a good Conscience, for that's a continual Feast: Heark∣en to the Voice of Wisdom, and the Dictates of Reason and Nature, and that will bring thee to end∣less Felicity. An Excellent Poultice, Which cures scalded Limbs, Burns, Boils, Fel∣lons, Tumors▪ proceeding from choler, phlegm or me∣lancholly. It also cures all Contusions, Inflammations or Bruises, either with▪ or without a Wound; old Wounds, Ulcers, or running Sores: Excellent also against the Gout, and Inflammation of the Eyes; admirable against sore Breasts, and Bites of Dogs, or any other hurt of what kind or nature soever: which is thus. Take two Pints of Water, River, Rain, or Spring▪ their take as much ground Oatmeal as will make it thick, fit for a Poultice; add to it two ounces of good Sugar, a handful of Dandelion cut small, then place it over the fire in an open and convenient Vessel, keep it stirring till it is boiling-hot, and then it is made. Another. Take about a Quart of Water, then take as much Houshold-bread as will make it thick, and three Ounces of beaten Raisins of the Sun, and one Ounce of Sugar, and about half a Pint of new Ale;
stir all together, and make them boiling-hot o∣ver a clear fire, and it's done, Another. One quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it Thick, Five Ounces of Raisins of the Sun, and one Ounce of Coriander Seeds, beaten with a Glass of Ale, made boiling-hot, and then it is prepared. Another. One quart of Water and Bread, to make it as thick as a Poultice; of Sugar two Ounces, a Glass of Sack, or for want of that, other Wine, make it boiling-hot. Apply these Medicines to the Part afflicted, by spreading the Poultice pretty thick on a Linnen Cloth, that will cover the whole part, somewhat warmer than milk from the Cow; but let it not be so hot as is usual, for Extreams prove generally prejudicial. Apply these Poultices every two hours at least in the day, and three or four times in the night, if the Wound be dangerous; otherwise ten times in a day and a night will do: when you take the Poultice off, put that away, and put a fresh on every time, and keep a constant Repeti∣tion for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, or 11 days, if occa∣sion be; but it will cure most Distempers in less time, if you observe this method: But be sure wash your sores 'twixt whiles, with Water and Sugar, and sometimes with Water and fresh Butter beaten together, which will keep it clean and pliant.
How a Man may Live for Two Pence or Three Pence a Day very well. A Man in the Countrey may Live Plentifully for Two Pence a Day; for in many Countries you may have Two quarts of milk for a Penny, to which add a Pint of Water, and not half a penny∣worth of Flower, and make it into Flower'd-milk, ac∣cording to our Directions, and you will have a Noble Dish, sufficient for Four People, and this stands but in Three-half-pence; eat some Bread with it, and there is no Victuals affords better Nourishment, and that to all Ages, but especially young people. The like is to be understood of other Foods, where every one observes his time of eating, and his weight and measure of Food, and a great Trouble and Waste will thereby be avoided. As to Quantity of other Foods, we suppose that Sixteen Ounces, solid Food, to wit, Bread, Cheese, Butter, and Eggs, may be sufficient Twenty-four hours for a la∣bouring man, and the best time for eating, we suppose to be about Eight in the Morning, and Four in the Afternoon. If the Food be Flower'd-milk, then a Pint of it, and four Ounces of Bread and Butter or Cheese, is sufficient: If Water-Grewel or Pottage, a Pint and four Ounces of Bread and Cheese: If Raw milk, the same; but if Flower'd-milk with an Egg in it, Three Ounces of Bread and Butter or of Cheese, will be sufficient. If you eat Raw Sallad, weigh only your Bread, nd about Five Ounces will be sufficient, with an Ounce of Cheese or Butter to eat after your Herbs▪ As for Puddings, Apple-Pies, and the like, I leave o every ones Discretion, but you must be sparing nd temperate.
As for Drink, Water has the first place; and a quart of Water mixt with two Spoonfuls of ground Oatmeal, and well brew'd together, Ten or Twelve times out of one Porringer into ano∣ther, make an Excellent Drink, and in Summer∣time 'tis very pleasant. In Winter-time if you make it blood warm, it will drink well; milk and water is an Excellent Drink. Thus you see a Small Matter sufficeth a Moderate Man. How the Poor may Subsist well these Hard Times for Two Pence a Day, and Less. Take a Peck of good Wheat-flower, make half of it into a Loaf, the other half keep for to use as followeth. Put to a quart of water a spoonful or two of Flower, and make it as we before drected you to make Milk-pottage; eat the Brea in quantity, so much as that it may last till your Pottage is spent. This is an Excellent Food, and ffords good Nourishment; and by this, the Poor ay Subsist well these Hard Times for less than wo Pence a Day. If you put a Quart of Milk, and a Pint of Wa∣er, a Spoonful of Flower, and order it as before rected; it will be Excellent and Pleasant Food. Another Cheap way for the Poor. Take a Pint of Pease, and put to them Three Quarts or a Gallon of Water, let them stand on a slow Fire two Hours, but let them not boil: then ake an Onion and a little Sage shred well, and ut into the Pease, and stir them a little; then ake a Spoonfull of Flow or Oat-meal ground, and beat it well together with a little Water, and
put to it, and then let your Pottage boil up a little, then put a little Salt to it. Eat with this a little Bread, and you will find it an excellent▪ nourishing and pleasant Food. To take Ink out of Paper. Take Aqua-Fortis, and dip a little of it upon the Blot, or Writing you would take out, and imme∣diately it will disappear; then take a little Water steep'd in Allom, and wash it over with it, and whe dry, it will make it look as clear and white as a first; otherwise, the Aqua-Fortis alone will make yellow Stain. How to Bottle Cyder. In March Bottle your Cyder, and if you put in a∣ut half a Spoonful of Spirit of Clary, it will make e Liqu so perfectly resemble the best Canary, hat few good and exercis'd Pallats, will be able to distinguish it. How to make Copper-look▪ as well as the Best Silver. Take Crema Tartar, two Drams, the best Leaf-Silver one Dram, and Aqua-Fortis four or five Drops: make it into a Paste, and rub it on your Copper, and immediately it will look well. FINIS. *** Lithgow's Nineteen Years Travels through the most Eminent Places of the Habitable World. Con∣taining an Exact Description of the Customs, Laws, Religions, Policies, and Government of Emperors, Kings, and Princes; also of the Countries and Ci∣ties, Trades, Rivers, ad Commerce in all Places where he Travell'd, &c. Printed for George Conyers at the Golden-Ring in Little-Britain.
