W122 R6903 13506484 99817
The Key of Knowledg, Opening The PRINCIPLES of RELIGION; And The Path of Life, Directing The PRACTICE of true PIETIE: Design'd For the Conduct of Children and Servants, in the right way to Heaven and Happiness. By T. W. D. D. Prov. 22.6. Train up [or, Chatechize] a Child in the way he should go: and when he is Old he will not depart from it. Psal. 119.9. VVherewith shall a Young man cleanse his way? By taking heed thereto according to thy VVord. LONDON. Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap∣side, near Mercers Chappel. 1682.
The Preface. To all young Persons, who desire a happy life here; and, in the end, Eternal life in Heaven. REmember thy Creatour in the Daies of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1. is the wise Coun∣sel of the wisest of men, Solomon. A multitude of young People neglecting this great Duty, and never seriously thinking of that God that made them, have run headlong into Hell fire. And what a wofull thing is it for any to spend their time in vain Pleasures here, and then to lie roaring in intolerable pains in Hell for ever and ever! Take heed lest this be thy state, who now readest these Lines. Know, tho' thou perceivest it not, thou now standest upon the very edge and brink of E∣ternity. The least touch of God's
hand may send thee into another world. Thou art a mortal Crea∣ture. As sure as thou livest, thou must at length die: and then what shall become of thy Soul to Eternity? When thy Body drops into the dust, thy Soul which never dies, will go to Heaven or Hell, there to remain for ever and ever. And how soon thou may'st die thou knowest not. If thou vainly flatterest thy self with hopes of long life, Luk. 12.20. God may say to thee, Thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee, And then where art thou? Do'st thou yet know thy State? Thou wast born in Sin, Joh 9.34. Eph. 2.3. being by Nature a Child of Wrath, and Heir of Hell. If thou art still in this state (as thou certainly art, unless thou art born again) thou standest upon the Brink of Hell, Joh. 3.3. and art every moment in danger of eternal Damnation. Nothing but the Patience of God, upon which thou do'st daily trespass by every Sin thou committest, keeps thee out of the burning Lake, Rev. 21.8. that
place of torment which is prepa∣red for Sinners. And tho' thou canst eat, drink, and be merry, and when the night is come, lie down in thy Bed and sleep secure, certain it is thou art all this while within an hand's-breadth of Hell∣fire. For what's thy Life? Psal. 39.5. Be∣hold (saith David) thou hast made my daies as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. And again saith he, the wicked shall be turn'd into Hell. Psal. 9.17. So that while thou art in the guilt of Sin, thou hangest by a brittle thread, a frail Life, over the burning Lake; and by every Sin thou committest, thou pro∣vokest God to cut this thread in two. How canst thou live secure, when there is nothing but this poor Paper-wall of a mortal body between thy Soul and Hell∣fire? Now if thou art not strangely stupid, and one whom God hath already sealed up under hardness of heart to Damnation, Rom. 2.5. Acts 28, 27. thou
may'st plainly perceive, that thou art infinitely concern'd, with all possible speed, to take care that thy Soul may be saved, that so, whenever it shall please God to take thee hence by death, thou may'st be for ever happy in hea∣ven. How happy would'st thou be all the rest of thy days, if thou had'st but once secur'd the salva∣tion of thy Soul, and wast but well assur'd thou should'st be happy for ever? But what shall I do to be saved? Acts 16.30. What must I do that I may go to heaven when I die? If I knew how to secure the salvation of my Soul, it should be the first thing I would do. Is this thy Enquiry and Re∣solve? Art thou in good earnest? Then know that this little Book is very happily come into thy hand. For the very Design of it is to make plain the way to Hea∣ven to thee, and to tell thee what thou must know, and do to be saved, and give thee a plain direction for the doing of it, so that, if thou do'st not wilfully destroy thy self,
thou may'st certainly be ever∣lastingly happy. Know then that there are some things which God hath made ne∣cessary to be known and beleiv'd to Salvation: and some things ne∣cessary to be done. The know∣ledge of God and Christ, and Obe∣dience to the Gospel, requiring Re∣pentance, Faith, and Holy life, are altogether necessary to Salva∣tion. For the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who is the one∣ly Saviour of lost men, hath plain∣ly declar'd that he will not save any but upon these terms, And therefore tho' This is a faithfull saying and worthy of all acceptation, 1 Tim. 1.15. that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: yet it is no less certain, that He shall at length be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in fla∣ming Fire, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Je∣sus Christ; 2 Thess. 1, 7, 8, 9. who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power. Now these things which are so necessary to salvation, are here briefly comprehended in a short Scripture-Catechism, which there∣fore I advise thee to get perfectly by heart. Know the Answers are the very words of Scripture, which is the very Word of God, on which thou may'st safely venture thy Soul. And when thou canst readily repeat these words, with the mention of the places of Scripture where they are to be found, thou wilt be able to give any man that asks thee, 1 Pet. 3.15. a Reason of thy Faith, or Hope, by a ready mention of that Scripture on which it is grounded. But that thy Hope may not make thee asham'd, Rom. 5.5. rest not in the bare repeating of these words, and bearing them in thy memory, but be sure thou knowest well the meaning of the things required of thee for thy Salvation, by thy own sense and experience; as of Repentance and Regeneration or being born of the Spirit, faith in
Christ, and Obedience to the Gospel. Do the things, and so shalt thou best know the meaning of the words, for thy Souls good. To do God's will is the only way to have a saving knowledge of his word. Joh. 7.17. If any man (saith our Saviour) will do his Will, he shall know my Doctrine to be of God. Act. 3.19. Repent therefore and be con∣verted; break off thy sins with a hearty sorrow that thou hast thereby offended a good God, and lead a new life: Act. 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and trust in him alone for thy Salvation. Mat. 12.21. Sub∣mit thy self to him, and seriously endeavour to do all those things which he requires of thee in his word and Gospel, and thou shalt be saved, and inherit life Eter∣nall. What Duties God requires of thee, whether as a Child or a Servant, I have plainly shew'd thee from the word of God▪ Read thy Duty oft, and never sail to do it. This is the way to bring down God's Blessing upon
thee, and to become happy in his favour. When thou comest to be of a competent Age (that of sixteen years is the ordinary time) pre∣pare thy self for the right recei∣ving of the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Know that in thy Baptism a solemn Covenant was sealed, whereby thou wast obliged to forsake the World, the Flesh, and the Devill, and to be∣lieve in God, Iack. 1.74, 75. and serve him, in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of thy life. Now know, if the Vanities and Pleasures of this world, gratifying thy natural ap∣petites and Inclinations, have drawn off thy mind and heart from the Remembrance, Love and Service of God, thou hast bro∣ken thy Baptismal vow. For in stead of forsaking the World for God, thou hast forsaken God for the world, and thereby gra∣tified thine own Flesh and Satan, to the certain hazard and hin∣drance of the salvation of thy Soul. But in the Holy Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, God is pleased to invite thee to renew thy Covenant with Him, for thy Re∣instatement in thy forfeited Feli∣city, and thy more firm establish∣ment in a happy state of Grace and Salvation. For herein upon thy hearty Repentance, and sted∣fast Faith in Christ, he will seal un∣to thee the free and full Pardon of all thy past Sins, and a Right to all the Priviledges of the Covenant of Grace, and Felicities of the Kingdom of Glory. Oh think it a happy Opportu∣nity, wherein thou may'st begin the world anew with God and be in as fair a State of Favour with him, and have as firm a Hope of Happiness in Heaven, as if thou hadst never sinn'd against him. For the Bloud of Christ is exhibit∣ed in its Virtue in that Sacrament, Mat. 26.28. to cleanse thee from all Sin; 1 Joh. 1.7. Isa. 1.18. so that tho' thy Sins were as Scavlet or Crimson, thy Soul shall become as white as wool, or snow in Sal∣men, in the sight of God. And moreover hereby thou mayst ex∣pect
a Communication of those gra∣ces and comforts of the Spirit of God, which may enable thee to that chearfull obedience to his ho∣ly Commands, which will fit thee for the fruition of all the Privi∣ledges of the Covenant of Grace, and prepare thee for all the Feli∣cities of the Kingdome of Glo∣ry. That thou may'st not fail of these inestimable Benefits, do not neglect this Blessed Ordinance; but when thou hast an opportu∣nity to receive it, seriously pre∣pare thy self for it. For this pur∣pose get by heart the Catechism for Communicants. And when the time of the Administration ap∣proaches, withdraw thy self from all Company into thy private chamber, or some convenient place, and there setting thy self as in the sight and presence of Al∣mighty God, seriously set upon the necessary work of Self-Exa∣mination. This I have made very plain and casie to thee, in that Pattern
or example of it which I have set before thee. Read it only with a serious attention and Self-applica∣tion, and thy work is done. For hereby thou may'st clearly discern thy Spiritual State, which is the great end of Self-examination. And when hereby thou discove∣rest thy Sins and Defects, humbly and heartily bewail them before God, and earnestly beg Mercy and Grace, stedfastly resolving to lead a new Life, and to ho∣nour God by a better obedience for the time to come. This thou may'st doe in the use of that Con∣fession and Prayer, which is here fitted for that purpose. Fall down on thy knees therefore, and with all the seriousness, humility, and devotion thou canst, make thy Confession and Prayer to God; and so may'st thou with safety and comfort go to the Lords Table, that the Pardon of thy sins, and the Promises of the Covenant may be seal'd up to thy Soul, in the Bloud of thy Saviour; and that all thy Defects and VVants may be
supply'd from his abundant Grace; and so thou mayst be fur∣nished with strength for his ser∣vice, and filled with comfort and Joy in the hopes of his Salva∣tion. Having thus seriously engag'd thy self in a holy course of life, persevere in it to the end. Know now, Heaven is before thee, Hell behind thee: it's wofull to draw back to Perdition; and there∣fore persevere to the saving of thy Soul. Heb. 10.39. To this end be instant in Pray∣er, Rom. 12.12. and endeavour to make a con∣stant Progress in Piety, to grow in knowledge and Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. whereby thou wilt daily make a nearer ap∣proach to the Kingdome of Glo∣ry. Let no day pass without Pray∣er. Consider in the morning, it was God that kept thee the last night; and if he do not keep thee and sustain thee, thou canst not live another day. And why should he keep thee, if thou wilt not praise him for thy preserva∣tion,
nor pray to him to preserve thee? Go not out then without Prayer, lest God be angry; and either cut off thy life from the Earth, or shut thee out of Heaven. At night, kneel down on thy knees to pray, before thou liest down on thy bed to sleep; lest presuming to sleep in the guilt of sin, thou should'st awake in the flames of Hell. Make thy peace with God therefore by a hearty sorrow for the sins of that day, with an earnest Prayer for pardon. So mayst thou lie down in peace, Psal. 4.8. and sleep in safety, under God's protection. But still think this night, this day may be my last, and so demean thy self as if at the end thereof thou wast to appear before God in judgment. For thy help in this holy course I have here furnished thee with certain Forms of Prayer and praise: do thou add Spirit and life to them by offering them up daily with a holy fervour of affection to God. The tongue may repeat the
words, but 'tis the heart must make the Prayer. For that's no Prayer to God, which is not of∣fer'd up with a holy motion, a pious affection of the heart and Soul of man. Pray then that thou mayst have grace to live well, and then live as thou prayest, and live for ever. And that thou may'st so live here, as that thou may'st for e∣ver live with God in glory, dili∣gently observe those Rules of good life, which I have given thee out of the word of God. Read them often on the Lord's Daies, and especially on those daies on which thoureceivest the Holy-Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and there∣in renewest thy resolution and o∣bligation to honour God by a Holy life. Live according to these Rules: carefully shun eve∣ry known sin, and neglect no known Duty, that thou may'st be able to say (with St. Paul) herein do I exercise my self to have alwaies a conscience void of off ence, Act. 24.16. hoth toward God, and toward men.
And that thou mayst proceed in this path of Piety with more pleasure, I have furnisht out a short Banquet for thy Entertain∣ment with Holy Delight, in a brief Collection of some few pie∣ces of Divine Poems, which may serve to imbellish the me∣mory, and delight the mind. Having thus begun, and procee∣ded, Heb. 6.4. endeavour to go on to Perfecti∣on. Not to go forward still in Gods way, is to go backward. The path of the just is as the shi∣ning light, Prov. 4.18. that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. To this end daily read the Holy Scrip∣tures, wherein God has revealed his will to man, unfolded the mysteries of Grace, and made plain before us the path to eternal Life and Glory. This is God's Book, and therefore to be read with Reverence, and preferr'd before all other Writings in the world. On the Lord's Day e∣specially spend some time in rea∣ding God's word. And when thou takest this Blessed Book in∣to
thy hand, lift up thy heart to Heaven, and pray for the Illu∣mination of the Spirit, Eph. 1.17, 18. Act. 8.30. that thou mayst understand what thou rea∣dest Meditate on what thou hast read and heard, and endeavour to turn it into practice, and im∣prove it to thy comfort and joy in the hope of glory. And thus I have shew'd thee the Way to Heaven, a plain path to an eternal Paradise. If thou lo∣vest thy soul, delay not to enter into it, and walk in it. Doubt∣less there are thousands of young people, who sometimes resolved to repent and lead new lives: but being loath so soon to leave off the Pleasures of sin, alas! they were surpriz'd with Death, and must now suffer eternall pains in Hell. Be warn'd; be wise: be good betimes, and be happy for e∣ver. Assure thy self by setting with seriousness upon the Practice of true Pietie, thou shalt not loose the pleasures of life, but exchange them for purer and sweeter. So
much joy springs up in a truly pious Soul, in the sense of God's Favour, and in the hopes of Hea∣ven, that it far exceeds all the Pleasures and Delights of this world; and the delight of well∣doing surpasses the pleasures of sin, Heb. 11.25. Prov. 14.9. & 10.23. Psal. 40.8. Eccl. 7.6. that are but for a season. They are Fools that make a mock and sport of sin: but 'tis the speech of a serious Saint, I delight to do thy will, O my God! yea, thy Law is within my heart. The laughter of a fool (and such is the Sinner, that laughs while he stands on the brink of Hell and Destruction) is but as the crackling of thorns un∣der apot; 'tis but a flash of vain mirth, which will end in bitter pangs of long-abiding Sorrow. What reason has he to laugh here, that shall weep and mourn in Hell? But the joy of a good man is as the Day-break of eternal Bliss: Psal 34.8. 1 Pet. 2, 3. Oh taste, and see then that the LORD is good and gracious. He that may freely drink pure wine, will never be persuaded to quench his thirst with puddle∣water.
He that pursues the plea∣sures of Lust and sin, seeks to quench his thirst at a vile puddle; when in the Practice of true Piety, he might daily drink of the wine of Paradise. Such are those ho∣ly Comforts and Joys which spring up in a pious Soul, in com∣munion with God and Christ. Certainly a Holy life is the hap∣piest life of man on earth, and the certain way to everlasting hap∣piness in Heaven. Thus live then, and when thou diest, be happy for ever. Jude v. 24, 25. Now unto him that is able to keep thee from falling, and to present thee faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the onely wise God our Saviour, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen.
The TITLES of the se∣veral TRACTS, or PARTS of this Book. I. A brief Compendium of Scripture-Catechism, exhibi∣ting the first principles of the Oracles of God. II. The Scripture-Monitor, declaring the duties of Chil∣dren and Servants. III. A Catechism for Com∣municants, for the Instructi∣on of those who are to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. IV. Self-Examination; shewing the Qualification of a worthy Communicant. V. Christian Devotion, in Forms of Prayer and praise, for Children and Servants.
VI. Christian Conversation, or directions for leading a good Life. VII. Apples of Gold in Pi∣ctures of Silver; or some choice Pieces of Divine Poesie, for the Ʋse and Delight of young people.
A Brief Compendium of Scripture-Catechism: Exhibiting The first PRINCIPLES of the OR ACLES of GOD Heb. 5.12.. § 1. Of God. Q. WHAT must you do that you may be happy for ever? A. Know God, and serve him; 1 Chron. 28.9. Q. What is God? A. God is a Spirit, and the Father of Spirits; John 4.24. with Heb. 12.9. Q. But what is he for Excel∣lency and Dominion? A. The King eternal, immor∣tal, invisible, the onely wise God; 1 Tim. 1.17. Q. Are there more Gods than One?
A. There is but one God; 1 Cor. 8.6. Q. But how many Persons are there in the Godhead? A. There are three; 1 Joh. 5.7. Q. By what names are they cal∣led? A. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; Mat. 28.19. Q. Are these three but one God? A. These Three are one; 1 Joh. 5.7. Q. By what name hath this one true God manifested himself to men? A. By the name of God Al∣mighty; Exo. 6.3. Q. Is he not as well Merciful as Mighty? A. The LORD is Merciful and Gracious; Psal. 103.8. Q. What is he for Counsel and Execution? A. Great in Counsel, and Mighty in work; Jer. 32.19. Q. What great work hath God done? A. God made the World; and
all things therein; Acts 17.24. Q. Is he then Lord of all? A. He is Lord of Heaven and Earth; Acts 17.24. Q. And doth he govern all as King? A. His Kingdom ruleth over all; Psal. 103.19. Q. Is it he then that hath made us, and all men? A. It is he that hath made us, and not we our selves; Ps. 100.3. Q. And are we all sustain'd in life by him? A. In him we live, and move, and have our being; Acts 17.28. Q. And doth he give us all we have? A. He giveth to all Life, and Breath, and all things; Acts 17.25. § 2. Of Man. Q. OF what did God at first form man A. The LORD God formed
man of the dust of the ground; Gen. 2.7. Q. In what likeness did he make him? A. God created man in his own Image; Gen. 1.27. Q. Wherein was man made like to God? A. In Knowledge, Righte∣ousness, and true Holiness; Col. 3.10. with Eph. 4.24. Q. When God had thus made man, where did he put him? A. Into the Garden of Eden; Gen. 2.15. Q. And what Charge and Com∣mand did he give him? A. Of the Tree of the know∣ledge of Good and Evil thou shalt not eat; Gen. 2.17. Q. Did he notwithstanding eat of it? A. He did eat; Gen. 3.6. Q. Were many the worse for this fault of one? A. By one mans disobedience many were made Sinners; Rom. 5.19.
Q. What evil came upon all men hereby? A. By the offence of one judg∣ment came upon all men to Con∣demmation; Rom. 5. 18. Q. Shall all men then, being thus condemn'd, everlastingly pe∣rish? A. There is no Condemnati∣on to them that are in Christ- Je∣sus; Rom. 8.1. § 3. Of Christ. Q. VVHo is this Jesus? A. Jesus is the Son of God; 1 Joh. 5.5. Q. And was he sent to be our Saviour? A. The Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the World; 1 Joh. 4.14. Q. And did he accordingly come to save us? A. Jesus Christ came into the world to save Sinners; 1 Tim. 1.15.
Q. After what manner did he come into the world? A. He took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; Phil. 2.7 Q. Is he not true God? A. He is the true God; 1 Joh. 5.20. Q. Being true God; how was he made in the likeness of men? A. Being made of a woman; Gal. 4.4. Q. What was this woman? A. A Virgin espoused to a man, whose name was Joseph; Luk. 1.27. Q. And what was the Virgin's Name? A. The Virgins Name was Mary; Luk. 1.27. Q. Being a Virgin, how came she to be with child? A. By the Holy Ghost; Mat. 1.18. Q. And where was he Born of her? A. Jesus was born in Beth∣lehem; Mat. 2.1. Q. What was this Bethlehem?
A. The City of David; Luk. 2.11. Q. Being thus made man, what did he for mans Salvation? A. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, e∣ven the death of the Cross; Phil. 2.8. Q. What was done to him after his death? A. He was buried; 1 Cor. 15.4. Q. But did he not rise again? A. He rose again the third day; 1 Cor. 15.4. Q. And whether did he then go? A. He was received up into Heaven, and sate on the right hand of God; Mark. 16.19. Q. What mean you by his sit∣ting on the right hand of God? A. God hath highly exalted him; Phil. 2.9. Q. What power hath he given him? A. All Power is given to him in Heaven and in Earth; Mat. 28.18. Q. Is he then fully able to save lost Sinners?
A. He is able to save them to the uttermost that come to God by him; Heb. 7.25. Q. And is there no Salvation in any other? A. Neither is there Salvation in any other; Acts 4.12. Q. Who shall be saved by him? A. He that Believeth, and is Baptized, shall be sased: but he that Believeth not, shall be dam∣ned; Mark 16.16. § 4. Of Duties. Q. IF Believing be so necessary to Salvation, tell me how we must come by this Faith? A. Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; Rom. 10.17. Q. What call you the word of God? A. The Holy Scriptures, which are able to make me wise to Salvation; 2 Tim. 3.15. Q. Is Baptism ordinarily neces∣sary to Salvation?
A. Except a man be born of Water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; Joh. 3.5. Q. What mean you by being born of water and the Spirit? A. The washing of Regene∣ration, and the renewing of the Holy ghost; Tit. 2.5. Q. Does the promise of the Ho∣ly ghost, which is the ground of Baptism, belong to us that be∣lieve only, or to our children al∣so? A. The promise is to you, and to your children; Acts 2.39. Q. In whose name is baptism to be administred? A. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Mat. 28.19. Q. How should we walk who have been baptized? A. We should walk in new∣ness of life; Rom 6.4. Q. How should we walk in new∣ness of life? A. Denying ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; Tit. 2.12. Q. That we may so live here then, as that we may enter into life eternal in the end, what must we do? A. Keep the Commandments; Mat. 19.17. Q. VVhich is the first and great Commandment of the Law? A. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind; Mat. 22.37. Q. VVhich is the second that is like to it? A. Thou shalt love thy neigh∣bour as thy self; Mat. 22.39. Q. But what need is there of our Obedience? Did not Christ by his sufferings become the Saviour of all Sinners? A. He became the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him; Heb. 5.9. Q. VVhat hath he in his Gos∣pel said to us, to engage our Obe∣dience unto him? A If ye love me, keep my
Commandments; Joh. 14, 15. Q. VVhat special Command∣ment hath he given us? A. To love one another; 1 Joh. 3.23. Q. And what charge hath he given us concerning our enemies? A. Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you, Luk. 6.27. Q. What must he do that will become Christs Disciple indeed? A. Deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow Him; Luk. 9.23. Q. And what hath he said to encourage us to his Service? A. Where I am, there shall also my Servant be: and if any man serve me, him will my Fa∣ther honour; Joh. 12.26. Q. Besides Baptism for our ad∣mission into the Church, what are we enjoyn'd for our holding Com∣munion with the Church? A. To eat the Lord's Supper; 1 Cor. 11.20. Q. VVhat charge hath Christ gi∣ven us concerning this?
A. This do in remembrance of me; 1 Cor. 11.24. Q. Do not we hereby shew forth the Death of Christ? A. As oft as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew the Lord's Death till he come; Cor 1.11.26. Q. That a man may rightly re∣ceive this Holy Supper, what must he do? A. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup; 1 Cor. 11.28. § 5. Of Priviledges. Q. VVHAT special Bene∣fits have we by Christ upon Believing? A. Being justify'd by Faith, we have peace with God; Rom. 5.1. Q. But when we have offended God, what must we do, that our sins may be forgiven us?
A. Repent and be converted; Acts 3.19. Q. But what hath our Saviour said, shall become of us if we repent not? A. Except ye Repent ye shall all — perish; Luk. 13.3. Q. VVhat other Benefits besides Remission of Sins, do we receive by Christ? A. The Adoption of Sons; Gal. 4, 5. Q. And what do we receive hereupon? A. The Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, Rom. 8.15. Q. And does God hear our prayers? A. If we ask any thing accor∣ding to his Will, he heareth us; 1 Joh. 5.14. Q. That you may obtain all good things then at his hand, what must you do? A. Watch and pray; Mat, 26.4. Q. That having done all these things, you may not fall short of
eternal life, what must you do? A. Be faithfull unto death; Rev. 2.10. Q. Must you then and all men die? A. It is appointed unto men once to die; Heb. 9.27. Q. But shall not the dead rise again? A. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; 1 Cor. 15.22. Q. Shall the dead then be rai∣sed by Christ? A. All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; Joh. 5.28, 29. Q. When the dead are thus rai∣sed, what shall we all do? A. We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; Rom. 14.10. Q. How shall he then Judge all men? A. He will render to every man according to his deeds; Rom. 2.6. Q. Shall not men then be call'd to account for their words?
A. Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account in the day of Judgment; Mat. 2.36. Q. What will God bring into Judgment at that day, besides men's words and deeds, which have been openly spoken and done? A. Every secret thing whether it be good or evill; Eccl. 12.14. Q. VVhether shall the Righteous go thereupon, and what shall become of the wicked? A. These shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the Righteous into Life Eternal; Mat. 25.46. Rev. 22.20.21. He which testifieth these things, saith, surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
THE Scripture-Monitor. Declaring The Duties of children and servants, which are required of them by the express Com∣mands of God himself, in his Word and Gospel. The Duties of Children. COME, Psal. 34.11. ye Children, hear∣ken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. I will plainly tell you what the God that made you requires of you, If ye mind not these things to do them you despise the Word of God which re∣quires them. And remember, Whoso despiseth the World shall be destroyed: but he that feareth the Commandment shall be re∣warded; Acts, 17.31. Eccl. 12.14. Prov. 13.13. And there is a Day of Judgment appointed, wherein God will certainly call you
to account for these things, and ei∣ther punish your Contempt, or re∣ward your Obedience. Now if you will indeed hearken to the Voice of God, Psal. 81.8. Mat. 7.21. hearken to the Voice of God, and obey his Will (as you must do, if you would go to Heaven when you die) These are the Things which you must do. I. You must honour your Pa∣rents, carrying your self reverent∣ly towards them. For it is said, Honour thy Father, and thy Mother, Exo. 20.12. Deut. 5.16. (which is the first Com∣mandment with Promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may'st live long on the Earth. Eph. 6.2, 3. II. You must obey your Pa∣rents, readily doing what they bid you to do, unless it be any Thing which you know is for∣bidden of God. For it is said, Children obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right. Eph. 6.1. And again, Children, o∣bey your Parents in all things: for this is well-pleasing unto the Lord. Col. 3.20.
And remember what further Charge is given you, Do all things without Murmurings and Dispu∣tings, Phil. 2.24. And know, If you may not murmur, youhnust not rebell, Absalom rebell'd against his Father, and came to an un∣timely End. 2 Sam. 15.14. with Chap. 18.14. III. You must hearken to the Instruction of your Father and Mother, and be willing to be taught by them. Saies Solomon to his Son, My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. For they shall be an Ornament of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about thy Neck. That is, the Virtues they teach you, will make you more lovely in the eies of all men, than the richest Jewels and Ornaments. IV. When they chastize you for your faults, you must bear this Correction with patience and humble Submission; and amend what is amiss. For saith the A∣postle,
We had Fathers of our Flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence. Heb. 12.9. You must know, if they do not cor∣rect you for your faults, they do not indeed love you, For, He that spareth his Rod, hateth his Son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes; Prov. 13.24. For if they should let you go on in Sin without Correction, you might at length fall into Hell, and be de∣stroy'd without Remedy. And there∣fore God hath said, With-hold not Correction from the Child: for if thou bea∣test him with the Rod he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the Rod, and deliver his Soul from Hell. Prov. 23.13, 14. And is it not better that your Pa∣rents should chastize you for your Faults with a gentle Rod, than that God should deliver you up for your Crimes into the hand of the Devil, to torture you with a flaming scourge in the dark Mansions of Hell for e∣ver? Its surely better for you to ask Forgiveness for your Faults and
to amend what ever is amiss, than to murmur against them that cor∣rect you for your Good. It is not a∣gainst them you murmur but against God, who has commanded them to chastise you, when you do amiss, that you may do so no more. And there fore if a Son was stub∣born, and would neither hearken to the Admonition of his Father or Mother, nor be reclaim'd from his ill Courses by their Correction, he was by Gods appointment, under the Law of Moses, to be put to Death. For it is said, If a man have a stubborn and rebellions Son, which will not o∣bey the Voice of his Mother, and that when they have chasten'd him, will not hearken unto them: then shall his Father and his Mo∣ther lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the Elders of his Ci∣ty, and unto the gate of his Place: and they shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our Son is stub∣born and rebellious; he will not obey our Voice: he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And all the
men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Deut. 21.18.—21. Tho' this Law doth not take place amongst us, God is no less offended with such stubbornness of Children now, than he was then: and therefore tho? such a one may escape a Temporal Death, he can∣not escape Eternal Damnation. V. You must learn to know God, and be careful to serve him. Said David to Solomon. And thou Solomon my Son, Know thou the God of thy Fa∣ther, and serve Him with a per∣fect Heart, and a willing Mind: for the LORD searcheth all Hearts, and understandeth all the Imaginations of the thoughts: If thou seek Him. He will be sound of thee; but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee off for e∣ver. 1 Chro. 28.9, 10. VI. You must not mock God's Ministers; but observe them with due Reverence. Remember what
befell the Children of Bethel, who mocked the Prophet Elisha. For, As he was going up by the way, there came forth little Children out of the City, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go up thou bald-head, go up thou bald-head. And he turned back and looked on them, and cursed them in the Name of the LORD: and there came forth two She-Bears out of the Wood, and tare fourty and two Children of them, 2 Kin. 2.23, 24. VII. You must not mock your Parents, nor despise them; no, not in their old Age; much less curse them, or strike them: but cover their Infirmities, and do all you can to preserve their Ho∣nour. Hearken unto thy Father, that begat thee; and despise not thy Mother, when she is old. Prov. 23.22. Remember Eli's two Sons were wicked, and they despised their Fa∣ther in his old Age, not regar∣ding his Reproof, and God de∣stroy'd
them both. For it's said, Eli was very old, and heard all that his Sons did unto all Israel, and how they laywith the women, that assembled at the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? For I hear of your evil Doings by all this people. Nay, my Sons; it is no good Re∣port that I hear; ye make the LORD's people to transgress. If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him. But if a man sin against the LORD, who shall entreat for him? Notwith∣standing they hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, be∣cause the LORD would slay them. 1 Sam. 2.22.25. And accordingly it came to pass. For the Philistines sought, and Is∣rael was smitten, and they fled every man into his Tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty Thousand footmen. And the Ark of God was taken; and the two Sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas were slain, 1 Sam. 4.10, 11. To despise the Admonition and Reproof of your Parents is a great Sin: but to mock at your Father or Mother is a greater. And therefore it is said, The Eye of him that mocketh at his Father, and despiseth to o∣bey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it Prov. 30.17. It is written in the Law, Cursed be he that setteth light by his Fa∣ther or his Mother: and all the people shall say; Amen. Dent. 27.15. And, every one that curseth his Father, or his Mother, shall surely be put to Death: he hath cursed his Father, or his Mother; his Bloud shall be upon hun. Lev. 20.9. And again, Whoso curseth his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obsecure dark∣ness. Prov. 20.20. That is, he shall have no Child to call him Fa∣ther,
and so dying without Chil∣dren, his Memorial shall perish, and his Name shall be blotted out from under Heaven. And, He that smiteth his Fa∣ther, or his Mother, shall sure∣ly be put to Death. Exo. 21.15. Remember how the Sons of Noah carried themselves towards him, and take Notice why that one was Cursed, and the other Blessed. As it is said. Noah began to be an Hus∣bandman, and he planted a Vi∣neyard, and he drunk of the wine and was drunken, and he was un∣covered within his Tent. And Ham, the Father of Canaan, saw the Nakedness of his Father, and told his two Brethren without. and Shem and Japheth took a Gar∣ment, and layd it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and they saw not their Fathers Nakedness. And Noah awoke from his Wine, and knew what his younger Son had done unto him. And he said, Cursed be Canaan, a Servant of Servants
shall he be unto his Brethren. And he said, Blessed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his Servant. God shall en∣large Japheth, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem. Gen. 9.20—27. VIII. If your Parents fall into wants you must be ready to re∣leive and support them. Thus the young Storks feed and sustain the old ones. Thus in the years of Famine, Joseph nourished his Father, and his Brethren, and all his Fathers Houshold with Bread, Gen. 47.12. Our Saviour thus blames the Pharisees; Ye say; If a man shall say to his Father or Mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a Gift [to the Temple] by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me, he shall be free [from an Obligation to relieve them.] And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his Father or his Mother, making the Word of God of none effect thro' your Tradition. Mark 7.11.—13.
IX. You must not wrong your Parents, by taking away any thing of theirs without their Consent. For, Whoso robbeth his Fa∣ther, or his Mother, and saith it is no Trangression, the same is the Companion of a Destroyer. Prov. 28.24. X. You must be kindly affecti∣oned towards your Brethren and Sisters. There must be no strife nor Anger amongst you, and you must not call one another by any bad Names. For saies the Psal∣mist, Behold how good, and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Psal. 133.1. And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no Strife, I pray thee, between me and thee; for we are Brethren. Gen. 13.18. Said Joseph to his Brethren (whom he treated with great Kindness notwithstanding their ill usage of him) See that ye sall not out by the way. Gen. 45.24. Mind the words of our Blessed
Saviour Jesus Christ. I say unto you that whosoever is angry with his Brother without a Cause, shall be in Danger of the Judgement; and whosoever shall say to his Brother, Raca [that is, Thou vain or empty fellow] shall be in danger of the Council: but who∣soever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in Danger of Hell-fire. Mat. 5.22. Thus, Children, you see your Du∣ties. Now be it your Care to do them: And then you shall not on∣ly be beloved of your Parents, but God himself will love you, and bless you, and give you the King∣dom of Heaven for your Inheri∣tance. The Duties of Servants. NOW you that are Servants, Know, if you will fear God and serve him, God will accept you and honour you; He will take you to be His Sons and Daughters, and
great shall your Reward be in Hea∣ven. But if not; it will not be pos∣sible for you to escape His VVrath and Hell-fire. Know then, These are the Du∣ties which God in his Word requires from you. I. You must honour your Ma∣sters, giving a due Respect to them. For saith the Scripture, A Son honoureth his Father, and a Servant his Master. Mal. 1.6. And therefore, Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all Honour; that the Name of God and his Doctrine be not blasphem'd. And they that have believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are Brethren; but rather do them Service, because they are faithful, and beloved, Partakers of the Benefit. 1 Tim. 6.1.2. II. You must readily obey their lawfull Commands, without Gain-saying or Contradiction. For the Gospel requires Servants to be obedient to their own Masters,
and to please them well in all Things: not answering again. Tit. 2.9. Again saith the Apostle, Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the Flesh, with Fear, and Trembling, in singleness of your Heart, as unto Christ. Eph. 6.5. III. You must be subject to them, and serve them diligently and heartily. Yea, tho' your Ma∣sters are of a froward Disposition, and hardly pleased, you must not∣withstanding be subject to them. For saith the Apostle, Servants be subject to your Masters with all Fear, not onely to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto men; knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the Re∣ward of Inheritance: For ye serve the Lord Christ. Col. 3.23, 24. VI. You must be faithfull in your trust, and not do them the least Wrong in any thing. For he that doth wrong, shall
receive for the wrong which he hath done; and there is no respect of Persons. Col. 3.25. Servants therefore must be care∣full to preserve their Masters Right, not purloyning, but shewing all good Fidelity, that they may a∣dorn the Doctrine of God our Sa∣viour in all things. Tit. 2.10. V. You must be very carefull and diligent to do your Masters work and Will, as well when he is ab∣sent, as when he is present. For God in the Gospel requires Ser∣vants to serve their Masters, Not with Eye-Service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ. Eph. 6.6. Remember when you are not un∣der your Masters Eye, the Eye of God is upon you, who will call you to Account for whatsoever you do. Eccl. 12.14. VI. You must carefully shun ill Company, and ill Courses; as Fighting and Quarrelling, Drin∣king and Revelling in your Ma∣sters Absence, especially if you have any chief Place or Charge in the Family.
Who then is that faithfull and wise Servant (saith our Blessed Saviour) whom his Lord hath made Ruler over his Houshold, to give them Meat in due Season? Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he cometh, shall find so ding. Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him Ru∣ler over all that he hath. But if that evil Servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his Coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow-Servants, and to eat and drink, and to be Drunken, or to eat and drink with the Drun∣ken: the Lord of that Servant [even his Lord that is in Hea∣ven] shall come in a Day when he looketh not for him, and at an Hour that he is not aware of; and shall cut him asunder, [or mar∣gin cut him off] and appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gna∣shing of Teeth. Mat. 24.45.— 51. with Luk. 12.42.—46. VII. If ye are rebuked, buffe∣ted or beaten by your Masters,
tho' it be without just cause, you must take it patiently. For this is thank worthy, if a man for Conscience-sake towards God, endure Grief suffering wrongfully. For what Glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your Faults, ye shall take it pa∣tiently? But if when ye do well and suffer for it, ye take it pati∣ently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were you cal∣led: because Christ also suffe∣red for us, leaving us an Example that ye should follow his steps: who did no Sin, neither was guile found in his Mouth: who when he was revil'd revil'd not again; when he suffered he threatned not; but committed himself to him that jud∣geth righteously. 1 Pet 2.19.—23. Thus you now know your Duty: be carefull to do it; and so in ser∣ving your Masters, you shall serve God; and the Reward you shall re∣ceive from Him, will be infinitely better to you than the wages you ex∣pect from them. Know, it's no small Glory to be a good Servant.
A Christian Servant is the Lord's Free-man. Every Star shines in its own Sphaere. A good Servant is in God's Eye more honourable and glorious than a bad King. It's a higher Honour, a greater Glory to serve God, than to Command over men. If in the Discharge of the Duty of your Place, you faithful∣ly serve Christ here, 2 Tim. 2.12. you shall reign with him in Heaven, to whom be Glory for ever and ever, Gal. 1.5. Amen.
A Catechism for Communicants: WHEREIN The Nature and Ʋse of the Sa∣craments of the New Testiament are explain'd, for the Instruction of those who are of competent Age, to receive the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Q. VVHAT doth God re∣quire of man in Order to his Salvation and eternal Hap∣piness? A. Deut. 32.46.47. The serious Exercise of the true Religion. Q. Which is that true Religion, which is the onely sure way to Sal∣vation? A. 2 Thess. 2, 13, 14, 15, The Christian Religion, which was instituted by Christ himself, and is prescrib'd in his Holy Gospel.
Q. What doth the Christian Re∣ligion comprehend? A. Faith, Obedience, Prayer, and Sacraments. Q. What is the Sum of your Faith? A. I believe in God, the Fa∣ther Almighty, &c. Q. How must you manifest the Truth of your Faith? Jam. 2.18 A. By Obedience. Q. What is the Rule of your O∣bedience? A. The Law of God, which is briefly comprehended in Ten Commandments. Deut. 27.9, 10. Rom. 3.31. Deut. 10.4. Q. Rehearse them. A. God spake all these Words, saying, I am the LORD thy God, &c. Exod. 20.1—17. Q. Have you kept all these Com∣mandments? A. 1 Joh. 1.8. Exod. 36.27. No, I have not; neither can I so keep them as I ought, without the help of God's Grace. Q. What must you then do? A. Hos. 14.2. Earnestly pray to God for pardon, and Grace.
Q. What is the most excellent Pattern of your Prayers? A. The Lord's Prayer. Q. Rehearse it. A. Our Father, which art in Heaven, &c. Mat. 6.9—13. Q. In whose Name and Medi∣ation must you make your Addresses to God in your Prayer? A. Joh. 16.23, 24. 1 Tim. 2.5. Mat. 21.22. Jam. 1.6. Rom. 12.14. Jum. 5.16 In the Name of our onely Mediator, Jesus Christ. Q. But how must you pray that you may prevail? A. I must pray in Faith, with Fervency of spirit. Q. What is the Ground of your Faith? A. The Word and Promises of God. Q. Hath God afforded you any special Helps of Faith? A. Yes, the Sacraments. Q. VVhat are the Sacraments? A. Signs of things not seen, Rom. 4, 11 Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and visible Pledges of the Perfor∣mance of all God's Promises. Q. VVhy were they appointed? A. That Faith might be relie∣ved.
by Sight, and Devotion as∣sisted by Sense. Q. How many Sacraments are there? A. Onely two, Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Q. Of what special Ʋse are these to us? A. Acts 2.41 42 1 Cor. 12, 13. By Baptism we have Ad∣mission into the Church, and hold Communion with it in the Lord's Supper. Q. But what's their different Ʋse in respect of the Covenant of Grace? A. By Baptism we enter into Covenant with God, and renew it in the Lord's Supper. Q. How else do they differ? A. Joh. 3.5. & 6.48—58. Baptism is a Sacrament of our New Birth, and the Lord's Supper of our spiritual Nourish∣ment and growth in Grace. Q. How oft must we receive these Sacraments? A. Baptism but once; the Lord's Supper often: for we can be but once born, but must be oft fed.
Q. What must we consider in the Sacraments? A. The outward Signs, the Things thereby signify'd, and the spiritual Benefits thereof. Q. VVhat is the outward Sign in Baptism? A. Water. Joh. 3.23. Acts 8.36, 38. Ezek. 36.25, 26. Q. VVhat doth the VVater in Baptism signify? A. The renewing Grace and purifying Virtue of the Spirit of God. Q. What doth the washing of the Body with water signifie? A. Acts 22.16. The cleansing of the Soul from Sin. Q. VVhat is the Spiritual Be∣nefit of Baptism? A. A Regeneration, Joh. 3.5; or a New Birth. Q. VVhat mean you by Regene∣ration, or the New Birth? A. A Change of our Nature, Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. which being depraved by Sin, is therein renew'd by the Spirit of God. Q. How is Baptism to be admi∣nistred, and by whom?
A. Mat. 28.19. By the Ministers of Christ, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Q. VVho are to be Baptiz'd A. Acts 2.38, 39. Converts to the Christian Religion, and the Children of Christians Q. To what are we bound by our Baptism. A. Rom. 6.3—13. To forsake our Sins, be∣lieve in Christ, and lead our Lives according to the Laws of God, and Rules of the Gospel. Q. Wherein stands the Lord's Supper, and how is it to be celebra∣ted? A. Mat. 26.26, 27. Luk. 22.19, 20. In a solemn blessing, brea∣king, and cating of Bread, and Drinking of Wine, with Thanks∣giving, in Remembrance of Christ. Q. VVhat is the Intent and Meaning of this? A. 1 Cor. 11.28. The setting forth of the Death and sufferings of Christ, whose Body was broken on the Cross, and his Bloud shed for our Sins. Q. VVhat are the outward Signs in the Lord's Supper?
A. Bread and Wine. Mat. 26.26, 27.28. Q. What do this signifie? A. The Body and Bloud of Christ. Q. Hath Jesus Christ a true Bo∣dy? A. Yes; Phil. 3.21. the same Body which was crucified on Earth, is glori∣fied in Heaven. Q. Luk 22.19, 20. & 24.39. Is the Bread in the Sacra∣ment the very Body of Christ, and the Wine his Bloud? A. No; they are but the signs of his Body and Bloud, and Pled∣ges of the Benefits we receive thereby. 1 Cor. 10.16. Q. What doth the breaking of the Bread signifie? 1 Cor. 11.24. Gal. 3.1. A. The breaking of Christ's Body in his Crucifixion. Q. What doth the Minister's giving the Bread and Wine to the Communicants represent? A. Christ's giving himself, Luk. 22; 19. with the Benefits of his Body and Bloud, to Believers. Q. VVhat doth the receiving, eating, and drunking signifie? A. Our receiving and apply∣ing
of Christ, Joh. 5.12. & 6.48—58. and his Benefits to our selves by Faith. Q. What are the Benefits of this Holy Supper? A. Mat. 26.28. Remission of Sins, and Ra∣tification of the New Testament. Q. What mean you by the New Testament? A. Heb. 8.6. & 9.15, 16. The Covenant of Grace under the Evangelical Admini∣stration, which is now establisht as the last Will and Testament of Jefus Christ, whereby he hath bequeath'd unto us an eternal In∣heritance. Q. What follows upon the Ra∣tification of it? A. Heb. 8.8, 9.10. An assured Right to all the Blessings of the Covenant, with a renewed Obligation to Obedi∣ence: for herein Christ gives himself with all the Benefits of his Death to me; and I give my self up to serve him all the Daies of my life. Q. How must you receive this Sacrament? A. Heb. 12.22—29. With great Reverence and Devotion, in Remembrance of
Christ crucified, who is herein lively set forth before mine eies, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. Gal. 3.1. as broken, bleeding, dying on the Cross. Q. But that you may be meet to receive it, and partake of the Be∣nefits thereof, what must you do? A. I must examine my self, 1 Cor. 11.28. concerning my spiritual State. Q. Herein what must you chiefly inquire after? A Whether I consent to the Covenant of Grace, lead my life according to the Law of God, and obey the Commands of the Gos∣pel. Q. Jer. 31.33. with Heb 8.10. What is the Tenour of the Covenant of Grace. A. I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Q. What does the Law of God require of you? A. Exod. 20.2, 3, 8, 12. To acknowledge the true God, and worship him alone as God; to fanctifie the Sabbath, and honour my Parents. Q. And what does it forbid? A. Idolatry, Exod. 20.4, 5, 7, 13—17. and Abuse of God's Name, Murder, Adultery,
Thest, Lying, and coveting what is another man's. Q. What does God in the Gos∣pel require of you? A. Mark 1.15. 1 Joh. 3.23. 2 Pet. 1.7. Repentance, and Faith; Brotherly Love, and Charity. Q. In examining your self con∣cerning these Evangelical Graces, what must you inquire? A. 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. Whether I am heartily sor∣ry for all my sins, and stedfastly resolved to lead a new Life; Gal, 3.21, 22. Rom. 15.12. Acts 16.31. 1 Pet. 1.22. & 4.8. whe∣ther I stedfastly believe the Pro∣mises of the Gospel, and put my whole Trust in Christ for my Salvation; whether I unfeigned∣ly love the Children of God, as my Brethren in Christ, and am in Charity with all men. Q. But wherein must you exer∣cise this Charity? A. Mat. 5.44. & 6.14, 15. Rom. 12.20, 21. Epb. 4.28. Gal. 6.10. In loving mine Enemies, in forgiving of Wrongs, in doing Good against Evil, in releiving (according to my Ability) them that are in want, and doing Good (as I have opportunity) to all men. Q. But why are these Graces of
Faith, and Brotherly Love, and Charity, especially required for the right receiving of the Lord's Sup∣per? A. Mat. 26.28. Luk. 24.47. Mat. 18.34. & 6.14. Because the Bloud of Christ is therein exhibited for the Re∣mission of Sins, and without Re∣pentance there is no Remission; and if we do not from our Hearts for give them that have trespassed against us (which is an Act of Christian Charity) God will not forgive our Trespasses against him: And lastly, nothing can be more necessary than brotherly Love in the Lord's Supper, which is a Feast of Loves, and the Com∣munion of Saints, 1 Cor. 10.17. Gen. 43.16. wherein (as the Brethren of Joseph, with him.) we feast with our Elder Brother, Jesus. Q. When you have thus exa∣min'd your self concerning your spi∣ritual State, what must you further do, that you may rightly receive this Holy Supper? A. 1 Pet. 5, 6. I must cast my self down before God, and with Sorrow in my Heart, 1 Joh. 1.9. make an humble Con∣fession
of my Sins, and earnestly implore Mercy in the free pardon of them in the Bloud of my Savi∣our; 1 Thess. 3.10. I must bewail my weak∣nesses and wants, and earnestly crave of God those Aids and Sup∣plies of his Grace, which may enable me to honour him by a Holy Obedience for the time to come; I must put forth in my Soul the Acts of Faith, Mat. 5.6. brotherly Love and Charity, and stir up in my Heart hungring Desires after Christ, and the Participation of his saving Benefits in his Holy Supper. Q. Why must you thus examine and prepare your self, before you come to the Lord's Supper? A. Lest I should receive it un∣worthily. Q. What is the Sin and Danger of unworthy receiving? A. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28. He that receiveth unwor∣thily is guilty of the Body and Bloud of the Lord (as the wicked Jews, Acts 7.52. who were his Betrayers and Murderers) and eateth and Drinketh Gr. , render'd in the Marg. Judgment. See v. 30, 31, 32. Judgment or Damna∣tion
to himself, being for this Sin liable to temporal Afflictions, yea, to eternal Damnation, in the just Judgment of God. Q. When doth a man receive unworthily? A. When he presumeth to come to the Lord's Table in the guilt of any known Sin unrepen∣ted of, or wanting that Faith, Love, and Charity, which are required in a worthy Receiver. Q. If the Sin and Danger of unworthy Receiving be so great, is it not safer to forbear, than to come to the Lord's Table? A. He that forbears to come to the Lord's Table, incurs a grea∣ter guilt and Danger: for to the guilt that would make him an un∣worthy Receiver, Luk. 22.19. he adds the Contempt of Christ's Command, and of the Benefits of his Bloud, 1 Cor. 10.16. freely offer'd to him in this Holy Supper. Q. What then must you do, that you keep your self clear from this Guilt, and safe from this Dan∣ger?
A. I must be very carefull and serious in examining my self, and finding my self guilty, 1 Cor. 11.28, 31. I must judge and condemn my self, that I may be graciously acquitted by the Lord, and accepted as a wor∣thy Receiver. Q. If you rightly receive this Blessed Sacrament, what Benefit shall you have thereby? A. Mat. 26.28. God will seal to my Soul the Pardon of all my Sins in the Bloud of Christ, with a Right to all the Blessings and Priviledges of the Covenant of Grace. Q. If after you have received this Holy Sacrament, you should return to your former sins, what will your State and Condition be? A. Luk. 22.20. Heb. 10.28, 29. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. VVorse than before: For I shall greatly provoke the wrath of God, by the Breach of a so∣lemn Covenant, ratifi'd with the Bloud of Christ. Q. How must you demean your self then after you have received? A. 1 Joh. 5.18 Col. 2.6, 7. I must carefully keep my self from Sin, that Sin especially to which I am most inclin'd; and
humbly walk with God in the ways of Holiness, Psal. 18.23. being diligent in every good Duty. Q. What will be the Issue of this Holy Course? A. I shall at length see my Blessed Saviour Jesus Christ glo∣rified in Heaven, 1 Joh. 3.2. Joh. 17.22—24. who was Cru∣cifid for me on Earth, and shall for ever live and reign with him in Glory. COL. 11.6, 7. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in Him: rooted and built up in Him, and established in the Faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with Thanksgiving. If any by reason of the Weak∣ness of their Memory, or want of Ability to read, cannot learn by Heart the fore-going Cate∣chisin, that they may not be kept from the Lord's Table, nor come
unprepar'd, I have comprehen∣ded the most necessary things in the following Abridgment. Let such then, when they can re∣peat the Creed, the ten Command∣ments, and the Lord's Prayer, learn this Shorter Catechism. But if they learn this onely at their first Admission, they shall do well for an Increase of Knowledge, to endeavour to learn the other also, for their greater Benefit in their after-receiving.
A Shorter Catechism for the Younger Communicants. Q. WHAT Religion is the onely sure way to Salvation? A. The Christian Religion. Q. What doth the Christian Re∣ligion comprehend? A. Faith, Obedience, Pray∣er, and Sacraments Q. What is the Sum of your Faith? A. I believe in God the Fa∣ther Almighty, &c. Q. What is the Rule of your O∣bedience? A. The Law of God which is comprehended in Ten Command∣ments. Q. Rehearse them. A. God spake all these Words, &c. Exo. 20.1—17.
Q. What is the Pattern of your Prayers? A. The Lord's Prayer. Q. Rehearse it. A. Our Father, which art in Heaven, &c. Mat. 6.9—13. Q. What are the Sacraments? A. Seals of the Covenant of Grace. Q. What is the Tenour of the Covenant of Grace? A. I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Q. How many Sacraments are there? A. Onely two; Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Q. Of what Ʋse are these to us? A. By Baptism we enter into Covenant with God, and renew it in the Lord's Supper. Q. How else do they differ? A. Baptism is a Sacrament of our New Birth; the Lord's Sup∣per of our Spiritual Nourishment and Growth in Grace. Q. How oft must we receive them? A. Baptism but once, the Lord's
Supper often: for we can be but once born, but must be oft fed. Q. What must we consider in the Sacraments? A. The outward Signs, the Things thereby signifi'd, and the spiritual Benefits thereof. Q. What is the outward Sign in Baptism? A. Water. Q. What doth the water in Bap∣tism signifie? A. The Grace of God's Spi∣rit. Q. VVhat doth the washing of the Body with water signifie? A. The cleansing of the Soul from Sin. Q. VVhat is the Benefit of Bap∣tism? A. Regeneration, or a New Birth. Q. VVhat is Regeneration? A. A Renewing of the Nature of man, by the Spirit and Grace of God. Q. In whose Name is Baptism to be Administred? A. In the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Q. VVho are to be Baptiz'd? A. Converts to the Christian Religion, and the Children of Christians. Q. To what are you bound by your Baptism? A. To forsake my Sins, be∣lieve in Christ, and obey him. Q. VVhat are the outward Signs in the Lord's Supper? A. Bread and Wine. Q. VVhat do they signifie? A. The Body and Bloud of Christ. Q. Hath Christ a true Body? A. Yes; the same Body which was crucified on Earth, is glori∣fied in Heaven. Q. Is the Bread in the Sacra∣ment the very Body of Christ, and the Wine his Bloud? A. No; They are but the Signs of his Body and Bloud. Q. What doth the breaking of the Bread signifie? A. The Breaking of Christ's Body in his Crucifixion.
Q. What doth the Minister's gi∣ving of the Bread and Wine to the Communicants represent? A. God's giving of Christ, and His Benefits to Believers. Q. What doth the receiving, ea∣ting, and Drinking signifie? A. Our receiving and apply∣ing of Christ by Faith. Q. What are the Benefits of this Holy Supper? A. The strengthening and re∣freshing of our Souls by Commu∣nion with Christ in the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit. Q. Why was this Sacrament instituted? A. To shew forth the Death of Christ. Q. How must we receive it? A. In Remembrance of him. Q. But that you may receive it aright what must you do? A. Examine my self whether I live in any Sin. Q. Why so? A. Because if I live in any known Sin I shall be an unworthy Receiver.
Q. What is the Sin and Dan∣ger of unworthy Receiving? A. He that receiveth unwor∣thily is guilty of the Body and Bloud of the Lord, and eateth and drinketh Damnation to himself. Q. What must you then do? A. Repent of my Sins, and resolve to lead a new Life. Q. But with what Graces must you be furnisht, that you may be fit to come to the Lord's Table? A. With Faith in Christ, bro∣therly Love, and Charity. Q. Wherein must you specially shew this Charity? A. In loving mine Enemies, doing good to them that hate me, and forgiving them that wrong me. Q. If you rightly receive this Blessed Sacrament, what Benefit shall you have thereby? A. God will seal up to me the Pardon of my Sins, and the Sal∣vation of my Soul. Q. But how must you demean your self after you have received? A. I must carefully keep my selt
from every known Sin, and be di∣ligent in every good Duty. Q. What will be the Issue of this Holy-Course? A I shall at length see my Sa∣viour in Heaven, and for ever live, and reign with him in Glory. Joh. 14.5. If ye love me, keep my Com∣mandments.
Self-Examination, Directed by way of Example: wherein The Qualification of a Worthy Communicant is disclosed by the Answer of a good Conscience, to some Necessary Inquiries. The Apostle's Precept. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a mau EXAMIN himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. The Christians Practice. IHAVE now an Opportuni∣of receiving the Blessed Sa∣crament of the LORD'S SUPPER. I cannot neglect it without the Guilt of a great Sin; the Breach of Christ's Command, Luk. 22.10. who hath said, This do in Remembrance of
me; yea, the Contempt of Christ crucifid, who therein offers him∣self freely, with all the Benefits of his Body and Bloud, to my Soul; and the Resusal of the Re∣newall of my Covenant with God, whereby as I am bound to a Ho∣ly Obedience, so I am assured of everlasting Blessednefs. And yet if I receive it unworthily, I shall be guilty of the body and Bloud of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.27.29. and eat and drink to my self Judgment, and become liable to Damnation. Yet I know the neg∣lect of my Duty, is no way to e∣scape this Danger. But the way both to escape the Danger, and to enjoy the Benefit, is to Exa∣mine my self, 1 Cor. 11, 28. and so to come to the Lord's Table. This then, with the Help of God, will I do. I will here set my self as before God, and as in his sight and Pre∣sence examine my self, as he hath commanded. Now the Lord direct and as∣sist me in this Work, that I may so know the State of my own Soul, as that I may rightly dis∣pose
my self for the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament of Christ's Holy Supper, and the Participa∣tion of the inestimable Benefits of his Body and Bloud. This Holy Supper, 1 Cor. 11.25. I know, is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, or New Testament, which is rati∣fi'd in the Bloud of my Saviour. Now if I rightly receive this Sa∣crament, I must heartily consent to this Covenant, the Tenour whereof is this; Jer. 30.22. Heb. 8.10. Ye sahll be my People and I will be your God. Now, Q. Examina∣tion of 1 Consent to the Co∣venant. Psal. 42. 11. & 37.26. 1. Do I heartily take God for my God, and am I really wil∣ling to be one of his People? Am I really willing to renounce all my Lusts and Sins, and to love, serve, honour, and obey God all the daies of my Life; and do I rest satisfi'd in Him, as my God and my Por∣tion for ever. A. O Lord my God! I have grievously sinned against Thee; I have forgotten Thee Daies with∣out Number: Jer. 2.32. but now I return to Thee, and here most seriously
and heartily give my self up to Thee, both Body and Soul, to be Thine for ever. I desire not to live a Day longer, than I may serve and glorifie Thee. I hearti∣ly rejoyce that Thou art pleased to give thy self to me, Jer. 32.40. by an ever∣lasting Covenant, to be my God and Portion, my Shield and ex∣ceeding great Reward. Gen. 15.1. I thank∣fully take Thee to be my God, and I rest fully satisfied in Thee, as the chief est Good, and my one∣ly Happiness. For whom have I in Heaven O God! but Thee? Psal. 73.25. And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides Thee. But, alas! I am a guilty Sin∣ner. But having now a happy Opportunity of getting the Par∣don of all my Sins seal'd to me, in the Bloud of my Saviour, I am re∣solv'd to review the Actions of my Life, Lam. 3.40. and to make a diligent Search for the Discovery of my Sins, that upon my penitent Con∣fession of them, I may obtain a gracious Pardon, according to God's faithfull Promise, who hath
said, He that cooereth his Sins shall not prosper, but whoso confesseth and for saketh them, Prov. 23.13. shall have Mer∣cy. Q. 2, Sin. 2. What then are the Sins I am guilty of before God? If I was sure I should not live to see the Light of another Day, what Sin would make me affraid to die? What Good have I omitted that I might and ought to have done? What Evil have I committed? Wherein have I transgress'd, and of∣fended God, the Great Governour, and Just Judge of the whole World, in whose Hand my Life is? Ah Lord! How many are mine Ini∣quities and my Sins? Joh. 13.23. Oh that God would make me, to know my Transgressions, and shew me my Sins! And then as for these Ene∣mies of my Soul, Oh that (as the Egyptians in the Red Sea) they might be all destroy'd by my Savi∣our's. Exod. 14.13. that henceforth I might see them again no more for ever. For the finding of them out, in Order to this End, I will now
make a diligent Enquiry. And for the Discovery of my Trans∣gressions, I will lay the Law of God, even the Ten Command∣ments before me, and consider whether I have led my Life ac∣cording to God's Law, or not. GOD hath said in his LAW, Exod. 20.2, 3, 4, &c. I am the LORD thy God, &c. Thou shalt have no other Gods be∣fore me. Thou shalt not make unto Thee any graven Image, &c. See Exod. 20. 1—17. Now 1. The Breach of 1. Com∣mandment 1 Joh. 2.15, 16. Have I so taken God for my God, as to love and honour Him above all? Have I not loved the World, and the Things of the World, Riches and Honours, Plea∣sures and worldly Delights, more than God? Have I not lived in much Forgetfulness of God, Jer. 2.32. and estrangement from Him? Have I not feared men more than God? Mat. 10.28. Have I not set my self up above God, serving my own Will, Joh. 5.30. Rom. 15.1, 2, 3. more than His; and seeking to please my self more than him? 2. Tho' I have not worship∣ped Idols, II. Com. ave I not neglected
the Worship of God, or shew'd less Reverence to Him, than the poor Pagans do to dead and dumb Idols? Have I diligently attended the Ordinances of God's Worship, and so demeaned my self therein, as under his Eye? Have I watch'd over my Heart, and not suffer'd my Thoughts to wander from the Holy Service I have had in Hand? Have I been very serious and sin∣cere in the Service of God? Isa. 29.13. Have I not oft drawn near to God with my Mouth, and honour'd him with my Lips, when my Heart hath been removed sar from Him? III. Com. 3. Have I not taken the Name of God in vain, using it lightly and customarily in my Communi∣cations, saying, O Lord, and O God, when I have not thought of Him; or abusing it in Oaths and Curses? Mat. 5.34. Has my Heart accompanied my Tongue as oft as I have used the Name of God in my Prayers? Have I never made a Jest of any Thing that is Sacred? Have I en∣deavour'd so to adorn the Doctrine of God my Saviour in all things, Tit. 2.10.
that the Name of God might not, 1 Tim. 6.1. thro' me, be blasphem'd by any? 4. Have I remembred God's Day, IV. Com. and disposed my self to the keeping of it Holy? Have I with as much Diligence and Serious∣ness, Constance, and Chearful∣ness, attended the Service of God, and the blessed Means of the Salvation of my Soul, on the Lord's Day, as I have my world∣ly Business or Disports on my own Daies? Have I not been soon weary of the Service and pre∣sence of God, Mal. 1.13. Am. 8.5. wishing the Ser∣mon ended, and the Sabbath done, that I might be let loose to my worldly Employments or Recre∣ations? Have I not oft spent the most part of that Day, which is consecrated to the Service of God, in idle Talk, or worldly matters, Isa. 58.13. or carnall Delights, without se∣rious minding of the great Con∣cerns of my immortal Soul. V. Com. 5. Have I so honour'd and o∣bey'd my Father and Mother, my Master and Superiours, as I ought to have done? Have I not
despised their Authority, and re∣fused to obey their Commands? Phil. 2.14. Have I done all things without Murmurings and Disputings? Have I hearkened to their Ad∣monitions, and received their Re∣proofs without Cavilling; Tit. 2.9. or an∣swering again? 6. VI. Com. Mat. 5.22. 1 Joh. 3.15. Tho' I have not been guil∣ty of gross Murder, or killing a∣ny body, yet have I not been an∣gry with my Brother without a Cause? Have I not hated him in my Heart, and so been a Murde∣rer in the Sight of God? Gal. 5.20. Prov. 12.18. Rom. 12.19. Col. 3.13. Have I not been given to Quarrelling and Contention? Have I not given provoking Words? And when I have thought my self wrong'd, have I not born Malice in my Heart, and meditated Revenge. 7. VII. Com. Have I not by wanton Looks or Gestures, Words or Thoughts, Mat. 5.27, 28. committed Adultery in my Heart, or by any vile Acts or Provocations of Lust, made my self unclean in the Sight of God? Eph. 4.19. Have I endeavour'd by Tempe∣rance and Sobriety, to keep my
Body pure, and my Mind chast and undefiled? Col. 3.8. Have no vile Lusts lodg'd in my Heart, and has no filthy Communication at any time come out of my mouth? 8. VIII. Com. Have I injur'd any one by Theft, Deceipt, or Cousenage? Have I been just and true in all my Trusts and Dealings? Have I not wasted much Time in sloth, Idleness, and Vanity? Eph. 4.28. Have I not wasted what I had in Sports and Gaming? Have I not consented to or conceal'd the Frauds or Wrongs that have been done by others? Psal. 50.18. 9. IX. Com. Have I not been guilty of Lying and Slandering? Have I not taken pleasure in hearing my Neighbour reproacht and evil spo∣ken of behind his back? Psal. 15.3. Have I not abetted to the injuries done him by others, by bearing false witness against him? Have I not sometimes scoft at men for those Infirmities, which I ought to have cover'd in Love? 1 Pet. 4 8. Have I been carefull to keep my word, and to perform all my Promises to e∣very man?
10. X. Com. Have I been truly content with my own State and Conditi∣on, without coveting any Thing which is another man's? Have I not envy'd others their Happier Estate, and repin'd at the mean∣ness of my own Condition? Have I not more complain'd of the Wants and Evils I have sus∣tain'd according to my Deserts, than I have been thankfull for ma∣ny undeserved Mercies and Bles∣sings. A. Jam. 3.2. I confess I have offended in many Things. I am guilty of very many Transgressions, in so much as if God should enter into Judg∣ment with me, Psal. 143.2. He might most justly condemn me. But I hope in His Mercy, who hath promised Pardon to all that truly repent. Acts 3.19. But Q. 3. Repen∣tance. Do I truly and heartily re∣pent of all my Sins, and am I sted∣fastly resolved, by the Grace of God, to lead a new Life? A. I am heartily sorry for all my Sins, which I have commit∣ted against that God to whom I
owe my Life and Being, and who hath been very good and gracious to me all my Life long; and I do stedfastly resolve forth∣with to forsake all my Sins, and to endeavour to lead my Life in all Things according to the Holy Law of God, and Rules of the Gospel, for the Time to come; and I do heartily beseech Almigh∣ty God to enable me by his Grace so to do. Q. 4. 4, Faith in Christ. Do I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ? Am I fully persua∣ded that He is the Son of God, and Saviour of the World; and that all. He hath revealed and said in his Holy Gospel is most certainly true? Do I heartily take Him for my Lord and Redeemer, and trust in Him alone for my Salvation? Jam. 2.18. And can I shew my Faith by my Works? A. I do stedfastly Believe that God the Father sent his Son to be the Saviour of the World; 1 Joh. 4.14. Acts 8.37. that Je∣sus Christ, who died at Jerusalem, is the Son of God; and I do hear∣tily take Him to be my Lord and Col. 2.6.
Saviour; and submitting my self to his Soveraignty, I trust in Him alone for my Salvation. Mark 1.15. I am ful∣ly persuaded that whatsoever He hath said or revealed in his Gos∣pel is most true. And I shall en∣deavour, by God's Grace, to per∣sist in this Faith, and to demon∣strate the Truth of it by my Works, Jam. 2.18 and constant Obedience to His Holy Commands all the daies of my Life. Q. 5. 5. Brother∣ly Love. Do I entirely love all the Children of God, as my Brethren in Christ, even because they are God's Children, bear His Image and are beloved by their Heavenly Father. A. I have a Love for all men, Rom. 13.9. and do Desire to love my Neigh∣bour as myself; 1 Joh. 3.14. but for those who truly fear-God, I have a great e∣steem of them, and a hearty Love to them; Psal. 16.3. I account them the onely excellent Ones in the Earth. And the more excellen∣cy I see in them, the more my Heart is endeared to them. I chiefly delight in their Compa∣ny; and when I can enjoy mine
own Choice, psal. 119.63. I am a Companion of them that fear God, and keep his Commandments. Q. 6. 6. Charity. Luk. 6.37. Mat. 5.44, Rom. 12.21. 1 Cor. 5.8. Am I in Charity with all men? Can I freely forgive them that have wrong'd me, and find in my Heart to do good to them who hate me, and ahve done and would do me Hurt. A. I thank God, I bear no Malice in my Heart to any man. I do freely forgive them who have wrong'd me, and account it but a very small matter, if my Lord will graciously be pleased to re∣mit me a Debt of Ten Thousand Talents, Mat. 18.23—35. to forgive to my fellow-Servant a Debt of an Hundred pence. And God knows my heart if it lay in my power, I could free∣ly do Good to the worst Enemy I have in the World. If he was in Danger, I would do my best to preserve him: If I knew him to be in any Extremity, I would to my Ability, Rom. 12.20. very freely relieve Him. I know I more need mer∣cy from God, than any man can need Mercy from me: and I am
ready and willing to shew Mercy to any man, Jam. 2.13. as I do expect and desire to obtain Mercy from God, in the Forgiveness of my Sins, and the Salvation of my Soul. Q. 7. Defire of Christ. 7. Have I an Appetite to my Spiritual Food? Have I an earnest Defire to have Communion with Christ, and to partake of his sa∣ving Benefits in his Holy Supper.? A. Without Christ, alas! I am an undone Creature. Ah Lord God! What wilt thou give me, if I go Christless? Give me therefore, O give me Christ, or I die. It is Pardon, and Grace, and spiritual strength, and Com∣fort, which he is pleased to com∣municate to Believers in his Holy Supper. These I want; these I earnestly defire. 1 Cor. 15.10. I must have Pardon, or perish: Without Grace I can do no good. Peace with God is an inestimable Privi∣ledge: without this I cannot hope to see His Face in Heaven. I want Strength to do my Duties, con∣quer my Corruptions, bear my Burdens, and withstand my
Temptations. And my Soul thirsts after those Holy Comforts, which are far sweeter than all worldly Joys. Psal, 4.7. These are the Bles∣sings I earnestly defire. These are the Benefits of my Blessed Lord and Suviour Jesus Christ. And I am willing to part with the Pleasures of Sin for ever, to par∣take of these Holy Comforts; and there is no Treasure in the whole World that I prize or desire in comparison of these inestimable Priviledges, which I beseech God to communicate to me in this Ho∣ly Feast. Psal. 63.5 Luk. 1.47. Jude v. 25. So shall my Soul be sa∣tisfi'd as with Marrow and Fat∣ness, and I shall greatly rejoyce in God my Saviour, to whom be Glo∣ry and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever. A∣men. Now if upon this serious Self-Examination, thou canst from thy Heart make these Answers to these Questions, doubt not but God will accept thee as a worthy Communi∣cant,
and thou shalt be.  Guest to the Lord's Table. God in that Blessed Ordinance of Christ's Holy Supper, will seal up to thy Soul the Pardon of all thy sins, and that Covenant of Grace. whereby he assures thee of a Kingdome of Glory for thine etenal Inheri∣tance. Conclude this Work of Self-Ex∣amination with that Confession and Prayer, which is fitted for that Purpose.
Christian-Devotion. IN Some short Forms of PRAYER & PRAISE. Prayers for Children. A Prayer for the Morning. O LORD God, and my Heavenly Father, I give Thee humble and hearty Thanks, for that Thou hast preserved me this Night past, and rais'd me up in Health and Strength this Mor∣ning; whereas Thou mightest in the Darkness of the Night, have cut me off for my Sins, and cast me into everlasting Darkness in Hell. Pardon, O Lord, all my past Sins, and keep me from sin∣ning for the time to come. Guide, bless, and keep me
this Day in Thy Fear; and grant that I may demean my self alwaies as in thy Sight. And seeing I must at length appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to re∣ceive according to my Works, and must then give an Account of every idle VVord, grant that I may keep my self this Day from all foolish-speaking & evil-doing: Especially grant that I may keep my Heart with all Diligence, see∣ing out of it come those evil Things which defile both Body and Soul. Keep me, O Lord, by thy Grace, from all wanton thoughts, Words, and Looks, and from all those fleshly Lusts, which will defile my Soul, and make me loathsome in thy Sight. Oh keep me from my special sin, and quick∣en me to every good Duty. Keep me from mispending my precious Time in Vanity and Idleness, see∣ing upon this little Moment of my Life depends an Eternity of Joy or Torment. Sanctifie me throughout by
Thy Holy Spirit, and enable me by thy Grace to live to thy Glo∣ry. Plant in my Heart a Hatred of Sin and Love to Holiness; that I may delight to do Thy Will O my God! Psal. 40.8. Joh. 4.34. and account it my Meat and Drink to be employ'd in well∣doing. Grant I may love Thee with all my Heart and Soul, and serve Thee with all my Strength, all the Daies of my Life; that in the End I may be happy for ever. Make me like Christ in meek∣ness, Patience, Humility, that I may be like to Him hereafter in Glory. Keep me this Day from Sin and Danger, and give me all things both for my Soul and Body, which Thou seest to be needfull and good for me. Make me e∣ver Thankfull for Thy Mercies, and truly contented with my Con∣dition. Do good, O Lord, Psal. 125.4. to them that are good, and convert Sinners from their evil waies that they may be saved. Bless my Parents;
Give them Health, Prosperity, and Length of Days here, and everlasting Happiness in Heaven. Bless all my Friends and dear Re∣lations; give them Grace and all good things both for Body and Soul. Bless me, even me also, O my Father, with the Blessings of thy Love and guide me in thy Holy ways to Life eternal, through Je∣sus Christ my Lord and Saviour, to whom with Thy Self, and Holy Spirit, be all Honour and Glory, now and for evermore, Amen. A Prayer for Noon. BLessed be Thy Name, O Lord my God, that Thou hast preserved me this Day hitherto. Blessed be Thy Name for all the Blessings which Thou hast bee stowed upon me. Forgive me all the Sins which I have committed, and keep me the rest of this Day from all evil. Grant O Lord,
that I may continue to serve Thee faithfully and truly this Day, and all the Days of my Life, that it may be well with me for ever and ever, thro' Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour, to whom with Thy self and Holy Spirit be Glory and Honour, Power, Praise, and Thanksgiving, both now and for evermore; Amen. A Prayer for Night. O Lord my God, I humbly and heartily bless and praise Thy Holy Name, for thy mer∣ciful Preservation of me this Day past; and for all the Blessings which Thou hast bestowed upon me. I bless Thee for my Health and Strength, Food and Rai∣ment, Peace and Safety, and a∣bove all for my Redemption by Jesus Christ, and my Hopes of Salvation by Him. Forgive me, I beseech Thee, all the Sins which either in
Thought, Word, or Deed I have committed against Thee this Day. Forgive me that I have neglected any good which I might and ought to have done, or neg∣ligently done it. I have forgot∣ten Thee, O Lord, and I have done evil in Thy Sight. But I am heartily sorry for all my Sins, and do earnestly desire, and seriously resolve to serve Thee better for the Time to come. Remember not against me any of my past of∣fences, but be in Christ fully re∣conciled unto me. And give me Thy Grace, that I may hence∣forth walk in thy Ways, and obey Thy Will in all Things. Take me into Thy Tuition this following Night. Keep me when I cannot keep my self. Keep me, O Lord, from all evil Thoughts, and hurtfull Lusts. Keep me from the Power of Sa∣tan, the Prince of Darkness. Let Thy Holy Angels be my Guard, and thy mighty Power my De∣fence. Defend me from all Dan∣gers and Disquiets. Hide me un∣der
the Shadow of Thy Wings, Psal. 17.8. and keep me as the Apple of the Eye. When I am awake, let me re∣member that Thine Eye is upon me; Psal. 139.2. and that Thou see'st my down-lying, and discernest my se∣cret Thoughts. Give me, O Lord, quiet Rest and Sleep, and raise me up the next Day with renew∣ed Health and Strength to do Thee Service. Continue thy Fa∣vour to me through all my Life, and in Death shew me thy Salva∣tion. Bless and keep Thy whole Church, Continue Truth and Peace in this Land. Bless and preserve my Parents in Life and Health. Let all my dear Friends and Relations be Happy in Thy Love and Favour. Bless me, O Father, and save me for Thy Mercies sake, in Christ Jesus my Redeemer; To whom, with thy Self and Holy Spirit, be Honour, Glory, and Praise, for ever and ever, Amen.
Prayers for Servants. A Prayer for the Morning. O Lord God, I heartily bless Thy Holy Name for kee∣ping me this Night past in Safe∣ty, and raising me up with renew∣ed Health and Strength this Morning Hadst Thou dealt with me, O Lord, according to my Deserts, Thou might'st have sent me into the Land of Dark∣ness, and I might have made my Bed in Hell. But, O Lord, as Thou hast mercifully kept me when I could not keep my self, so take me, I beseech Thee, into Thy Holy Tuition, and keep me henceforth from all Evil: Par∣don my Sin, and preserve me to Thy everlasting Kingdom. Direct me, O God, and lead me forth in Thy Fear; and so bless and prosper me in all the Works and Businesses of this day.
Grant that I may faithfully and di∣ligently discharge the Duties re∣quired of me, in the Place where∣in Thy Providence hath set me. Keep me, O Lord, from all evil Thoughts, which may defile my Heart, and from all evil Words and Actions, whereby I may of∣fend Thee, and deprive my self of Thy Blessing and Favour. Grant that I may so remember Thine All-seeing Eye, as to demean my self always as in Thy Sight, stu∣dying and endeavouring to please and honour Thee in all things, that at the last Day I may give up my Account with Joy. Protect Thy whole Church by thy Power, and bless all Thy People with Peace. Bless this Land, and preserve the true Re∣ligion. Bless this House and Fa∣mily wherein I live, with all Temporal and Spiritual Blessings. Bless, guide, and keep thy Ser∣vants to whom Thou hast com∣mitted the Care and Govern∣ment thereof. Give me Grace, O Lord, to look upon them as
standing in Thy stead to me, that by the Honour and Obedience which I yield to them according to Thy Command, I may serve and honour Thee; and, according to thy Promise, receive my Re∣ward in Heaven. Grant, O Lord, that the Beauty and Goodness of Thy Government of Thy Hou∣should the Church may appear in their wise and good Govern∣ment of this House and Family committed to their Charge; that this House may be to me, and all that live therein, as the Gate of Heaven, and Way to everlasting Happiness. Let thy Blessing, O Lord, crown all the Labours of thy Servants with good Success, that whatsoever they do may prosper; and man may have Oc∣casion to say. The Lord be mag∣nified which hath Pleasure in the Prosperity of His Servants. Psal. 35.27. Bless all my Friends and Re∣lations, and all that have been Instruments of Good to me: let all who have shew'd any Kindness to thy unworthy Servant, be e∣ver
Happy in Thy Love and Favour. Now, O Lord, be with me I beseech Thee this Day, and bless me both in Body and Soul. Put Thy Fear into my Heart, that I may not sin against Thee: Give me Health and Strength, that I may chearfully serve Thee. And when Thou hast finished Thy Will with me on Earth, fulfill my Desire, O Lord, and make me perfectly happy with Thee in Heaven, thro' the Merits of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; To whom, with Thy Self and Holy Spirit, be Glory, Power, and Praise, now and for evermore; Amen. A Prayer for Night. O Lord God, who art Great in Power and rich in Mer∣cy, I Thy Poor Creature do here humbly cast my self down at Thy Footstool, beseeching Thee for
the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to forgive me all the Sins of the Day past, yea, all the Sins which I have ever committed against Thee. Forgive me, O Lord, all my loose Thoughts, all my rash Words, all my irregular Actions, whatsoever Thy pure Eye hath at any time seen amiss in me, and be in Christ fully reconcil'd to me. For I confess my Trans∣gressions, and am heartily sorry for my Sins. Give me Grace, O Lord, for the time to come, to serve and honour Thee by a bet∣ter Obedience. Heb. 8.10. Put Thy Laws in my Mind, and write them in my Heart. That I may know and do Thy Commandments. Re∣strain me, O God, by Thy Grace from those sins to which I am most inclin'd, and keep me from those Evils which I am most apt to commit. Help me to with∣stand Temptations, and make me wise to avoid all Occasions of sin. Seeing my life is but short on Earth, Lord suffer me not to sin my Soul into Hell.
Bless all those I am bound to pray for; my Friends and Kind∣red in the Flesh. Do good to all that are good, and requite all those who have done me Good: let all the Benefits I have received from them, be redoubled into their own Bosoms. Bless this House and Family wherein I live: Preserve thy Ser∣vants to whom Thou hast com∣mitted the Care and Government of the Family, and all that be∣longs to them in safety. Grant Lord, that I may so shew all good Fidelity to them, that I may find Favour with Thee, who alone canst make me truly Happy for ever. And now Blessed be thy Name O Lord, who hast as well ap∣pointed the Night for Rest as the Day for Labour. Keep me, I be∣seech Thee, this Night from all Evil. Give me that comforta∣ble Rest and Refreshment, which may fit me for the Duties of the following Day. And grant, Lord, that where after a few days I shall
sleep in the Dust, my Soul may rest with Thee in Glory, through the Merits of my Blessed Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, to whom with Thee, O God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost be Glory and Majesty, Domini∣on, Power, and Praise, now and for evermore; Amen. If thou art weary and sleepy, or not being able to Read, canst not learn the foregoing Prayers by Heart, rather than lie down at Night like a Beast, and rise up in the Morning, and go out to thy Work, without any serious Remem∣brance of God; or pious Acknow∣ledgment of thy Dependance on Him, Acts 17.28. in whom thou livest, mo∣vest, and hast thy Being, and without whose up-holding Hand thou canst not subsist a Moment, without dropping into Dust, and (if in thy Sins) into Hell, Kneel down on thy Knees, and say,
At Night. Blessed be Thy Name, O Lord God, who hast kept me this Day past. Forgive me, I beseech Thee, all my Sins, and keep me from Sin and Danger this Night, and raise me up, re∣fresht with quiet Rest and Sleep, to serve Thee better the follow∣ing Day, to Thy Glory and my Salvation, thro' Jesus Christ my onely Lord and Saviour; Amen. In the Morning. Blessed be thy Name, O Lord, who hast kept me in Safe∣ty, and refresht me with Rest and Sleep this last Night. Now be with me, I beseech thee, and keep me this Day from all Evil. Guide me in all my ways, and bless me in all my Works, and bring me in the end to everlasting Life in Heaven, thro' Jesus Christ, my Lord and Redeemer: Amen.
A Prayer for the Lord's Day. O Most Holy and Glorious Lord God, Thou art great in Thy Self, and yet good to man: Thou art gloriously exal∣ted above the greatest of Kings, and yet hast a gracious Regard to the meanest of Thy Creatures. The Heavens, O Lord are the Work of thy Hands, and Thou hast made the Earth, and all things therein Thou art great in Pow∣er, Dreadfull in Majesty, and glorious in Holiness. Psal. 8.4. Lord, what is man, that Thou remembrest him? or the Son of man, that Thou re∣gardest him? & 39.5. Verily every man at his best State is altogether Vanity. And yet how wonderfull are Thy Works, & 107.8. O God, which thou hast wrought for the Children of men! For man thou hast made the World, and replenisht it with a rich Variety of Creatures, both for his Use and Delight. Thou hast appointed all things to serve him, that he might with more
chearfulness and Delight serve Thee. For man thou hast sent and slain Thine own Son; that guilty, lost man, whom Thou mightest have justly thrown into everlasting Darkness in Hell, might for ever live with Thee, in a Paradise of Divine Pleasures, in a Heaven of Bliss and Glory. O Lord, grant that I, thy poor Creature, may so love Thee and serve Thee here, that I may at length enjoy Thee fully, and praise Thee eternally in heaven. In Order to this End, I bless Thy Name, O Lord, that Thou hast appointed a Day of Rest from all worldly Labours, that I might attend upon Thee in the Duties of thy solemn Worship and Ser∣vice. O Lord, make this Day of rest, to be to me a day of spiritual Refreshment and ho∣ly Delight. Grant that I may this Day hear the Voice of my Saviour calling to all that la∣bour and are heavy laden to come to Him, that he may give them Rest; Mat. 11.28. and make me so sensible of the
Burden of my Sins, that I may betake my self to Him by a hear∣ty Repentance and lively Faith, and may obtain a Holy Rest, in the Remission of my sins, and the salvation of my soul. Keep me this Day, O Lord, from Vanity and Idleness, from foolish-speaking and evil-doing; and make me very diligent and serious in the Duties of Thy ser∣vice, that I may not let slip a hap∣py opportunity of insuring my salvation, nor mispend that Time, which Thou vouchsafest me for the Good of my soul; but seri∣ously employ it in the Duties of true Piety, for the getting and encreasing of Knowledge and Grace, and treasuring up for my self Glory in Heaven. Keep me, O Lord, from all vain, worldly, and wanton Thoughts, which may take off my Minde from a serious Atten∣tion to Thy Word, and hinder me from joining with a Holy De∣votion in Thy worship: Grant that I may enter into Thy House
as into Heaven, and demean my self there as in Thy sight and Presence; and Lord send me not away without Thy Blessing. Grant, O Lord, that to Day, Heb. 3.13.18. even while it is called to Day, I may hear Thy Voice Thy word, with a serious Resolution to obey Thy will in all Things, lest Thou swear in Thy Wrath, that I shall never enter into Thy Rest. O let me not go from Thy House, Gen. 28.17. the Gate of Heaven into everlasting Darkness in Hell. But, Lord, speak to Thy servant this day, those words which may effectually con∣duce to my salvation. Grant, I humbly beseech Thee, that I may so serve Thee this Day, and all the dayes of my Life, that in the End I may be truly Blessed for ever, through the Merits of my onely Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom, with Thy self and Holy Spirit, Be Glory and Honour, Dominion and Power, Thanksgiving and Praise, now and for evermore, Amen.
A Prayer before Reading the Holy Scriptures. OPen my Ʋnderstanding O Lord, Luk. 24.45. 2 Tim. 3.15. that I may understand the Scriptures, which are able to make me wise to Salvation. Grant that I may so believe Thy word, as to do Thy will, and walk in that way, which will bring me in the end to Life eternal Eternal, through Jesus Christ, my Lord and Saviour. Amen. A Prayer at the first En∣trance into the Church. LOrd, Luk. 18.13. be merciful to me a sinner, and forgive me my sins, that make me unworthy to come into Thy Holy Presence. Assist me, O God, by Thy Grace, to the duties of thy Service. Grant that I may serve Thee acceptably, Heb. 12.28.
with Reverence and Godly Fear. Oh send me not away without a Blessing. And as Thou hast now brought me into Thy House, in the End bring me to Heaven, through the Merits of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Saviour; Amen. At Departure from Church. Forgive me, O Lord, all my wandring thoughts, and want of due seriousness in thy holy ser∣vice. O let not my infirmities hinder thy Acceptance, and de∣prive me of thy blessing. Joh. 14.26. Teach me, O Lord, by Thy Spirit what thou hast taught me by thy word, and grant that I may so remember and do thy Will, that I may be Blessed in my Deed, Jam. 1.25 and in my End Happy for ever, through Je∣sus Christ, my Lord and Saviour; Amen.
A Confession and Prayer to be used after Self-Examina∣tion, in Order to the Re∣ceiving of the Blessed Sa∣crament of the Lord's Sup∣per. O Lord my God, Ezr. 9.6. I have just Cause to be asham'd to lift up mine eyes to Heaven, or once to look up towards Thee, whom I have so grievously offended by my sins. Psal. 58.3 & 51.5. For, O Lord, I have gone astray from the Womb; yea, I was conceived and born in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity. It might have been just with Thee to have snatcht me from the Bo∣som of Mother, and cast me in∣to the Belly of Hell. But, O Lord, Thou wast pleased to pre∣vent me with the Gifts of Thy Grace, and Fruits of Thy Good∣ness. For before I was capable to know Thee, or to discern be∣twixt Good and Evil, Thou wast pleased, by Thy Holy Baptism,
to admit me into Thy House and Family, and to accept me for one of Thy Children. Thou wast pleased to take me into a Holy Covenant with Thy self, and to promise me the Kingdom of Heaven for mine Inheritance: and Thou hast been very Good and Gracious to me from that Time to this very Day. But, O Lord my God, I have grievously sinned against Thee, by too great a Complyance with the World, the Flesh and the Devil, contra∣ry to that mighty obligation which was laid upon me in my Baptism. I have not, O Lord, so stedfastly believed Thy Truth, and obeyed Thy Will, as lought, I have daily offended Thee by the Breach of Thy Holy Com∣mandments, and have justly de∣served Thy Wrath and Hell-Fire. I am no more worthy to be called Thy Son, Luk 15.19. or to be accounted one of Thy servants. But, O Lord, I am heartily sorry for my sins, and stedfastly purposed by Thy Grace to lead
a New life. Psal. 57.1 Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, and pardon all my sins, for thy Names sake; and seal that Pardon to my soul, in the Blood of my Saviour. Thou hast promised Pardon, Acts 3.19 Joh. 3.16. O Lord, to the truly penitent; and to him that believeth in thy Son Jesus Christ, life eternal. Be∣hold, O Lord, I heartily repent of all my sins, and stedfastly be∣lieve in the Lord Jesus Christ, putting my whole Trust in him alone for my Salvation. Behold, I give my self up intirely to him, being desirous to live to him, and willing to dye for him, rather than by denying his truth, or dis∣obeying his Voice, to dishonour him. For his sake speak Peace to my soul in the Pardon of my sins and the Assurance of my sal∣vation. And, O Lord, so renew me by thy Grace, and uphold me by Thy Spirit, that I may not relapse into any of my former sins, but continue to glorifie Thee by a holy Obedience all the days of my life.
Grant, O Lord, that I may love my Brethren, 1 Pet. 1.22. that bear thine Image with a pure heart fervent∣ly; and that (whatsoever usage I receive in the World) I may be in Charity with all men. Be∣hold O Lord, I heartily forgive all them, who at any time have done me wrong, and I beseech thee to give them, that still live in the guilt of their sins, true Re∣pentance, and a gracious pardon, that their Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. Draw forth my Heart, O Lord, in hungring desires after Christ, and satisfie my Soul as with Marrow and Fatness, with plentiful Communications of Grace from his fulness. Fit me, O Lord, for a Holy Com∣munion with him, and raise me to a nearer Conformity to him, in all his imitable excellencies, that I may at length be made like to him, and live with him in Glo∣ry. Furnish me, O Lord, with all those Heavenly Graces, and
Holy Affections, which may make me meet to Feast with my Blessed Saviour in his Holy Sup∣per. Therein seal up thine Ever∣lasting Covenant of Grace to my Soul, Communicate to me the benesits of my Saviour's Body and Blood, and refresh me with the Holy comforts of thy Spirit. And grant that, all the rest of my life, I may seriously endeavour to answer a renewed Obligation to Obedience, by a constant Ho∣ly care to keep all thy Command∣ments. Enable me, O God, by thy Grace to persevere to the end, that I may be certainly Bles∣sed for ever, through the merits of my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom with thy self, and Holy Spirit, be all Honour and Glory, now and for ever∣more; Amen.
A Prayer before Receiving of the Lord's Supper. GOod Lord, pardon my sin, and seal that pardon this day to my Soul, in the Blood of my Saviour; Give me a lively Faith in him, that as I shall re∣ceive the Bread and Wine, I may partake of the saving bene∣fits of his Body and Blood, in his Holy Supper. Strengthen and refresh my Soul, O God, with Spiritual Food, and pre∣serve me both Body and Soul to Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ my onely Lord and Saviour; Amen. At the receiving of the Bread, say with your self. O Lord, I heartily accept thy Son to be my Saviour; and as he gave his Body to be broken for me, I give my self, Body and Soul to him for ever.
O Blessed Jesus, let me rather be broken in pieces, than ever do any thing which may disho∣nour thee, my Dear Redeem∣er. At the Receiving of the Cup▪ say, Now Lord, wash away all my sins in the Blood of my Saviour, and save my Soul for thy Mercies sake. Then having drunk of the Wine, say, How sweet is thy Love, O Dear Jesus, who hast shed thy Blood for my Salvation? O let me rather shed my dearest Life∣blood for thee, than ever willing∣ly sin against thee. Behold, Lord, I now give my self up to thee, and thy service: O let me see thy Salvation.
Having Receiv'd, say with your self, Now, O Lord, thou art my God, and I am thine, both in Body and Soul, by a perpetual Covenant, sealed with the Blood of my blessed Saviour. O let my soul be furnished with thy Grace, and fill'd with thy Spirit, that I may chearfully serve thee, while I live, and when I dye, fully enjoy thee for ever; Amen. When you depart from the Lord's Table, labour to feel your Heart inflam'd with love to God and Christ, and fill'd with satis∣faction and joy in his Love to you, and to find your Soul fixed in a firm Resolution of Holy Obedience to your Lives end. Take heed your heart do not entertain Earth∣ly Thoughts, and that you do not open your ears, or loose your tongue to Worldly Discourse. But medi∣tate on the mercies of God to you
in Christ, on the Promises and Priviledges of the Covenant of Grace, on the duties of Obedi∣ence, whereby you must glorifie God on Earth, and on the Glory and Blessedness reserved for you in the Kingdom of Heaven. Being return'd home, retire your self to give thanks to God for his Mercy in Christ. A Thanksgiving after Receiv∣ing of the Lord's Supper. BLESS the LORD, Psal. 103.1. O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name; who hath sealed up to me this day the for∣giveness of my sins in the blood of my Saviour; who hath enter∣tain'd me with Heavenly dainties at his Holy Table. Grant, O God, that in the strength of this Spiritual Food, I may walk be∣fore thee in the wayes of a Holy obedience, till I shall at length attain to Eternal Blessedness, through my only Saviour and Re∣deemer,
Jesus Christ; Amen. As oft as thou receivest the Sa∣crament of the Lord's Supper, be sure to read thy Duty, as a Child or Servant, before declar'd, and the Rules of good Life here follow∣ing. Grace before Meat. Bless and Sanctifie thy good creatures to me, O my God, through Jesus Christ; Amen. After Meat. Blessed be thy Name, O my God, for these, and all other thy good gifts, through Jesus Christ; Amen.
In Company with others. Before Meat. God be merciful to us, and bless us, and give us a Sanctified use of these, and all other his Blessings, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen. After Meat. Blessed be God for these, and all his Blessings. Give us Grace, O Lord, to spend the strength we receive from them in thy ser∣vice, to thy Glory, and our Sal∣vation, through Jesus Christ our Lord; Amen.
Christian Conversation; IN Some necessary Cautions and Di∣rections to Young People for the Government of their Thoughts, Words and Actions: Or, RULES of Good LIFE. I. HAve a great care of your Thoughts. These are the springs of Action; Though the thoughts of mens heart are secret, and indiscernible, they ost become very visible in their Lives. Words and Actions are but the Apparel of the Thoughts, These appear upon the open Stage of the world, and proclaim what was before done in the secret Chambers of the Soul. Evil Thoughts are the seeds of sin and vice, which not sup∣press'd, will (as noxious weeds) overgrow the whole Life; These
little sparks first kindle the fire of Lust, and then of Hell. Know thoughts are not free; God's Law limits them: nor are they hidden; God's eye sees them. Ps. 139.2. Thou understandest my Thoughts afar off, saith David. Remember God's eye is upon your heart, and so do not har∣bour any evil thoughts. Heb. 13.2. Be not forgetful (saith the Apostle) to en∣tertain strangers: for thereby some have entertain'd Angels un∣awares. Be careful say I, not to entertain evil thoughts: for so may you entertain the Devil un∣awares. The Devil by evil thoughts, insinuates himself into the hearts of men, that he may corrupt their Lives, and destroy their Souls. Vain Thoughts, though little regarded (as the swarms of Flies that corrupted the Land of Egypt) are very pernicious. Exod. 8.24. Jer. 4.14. O Jeru∣salem (saith the Lord) wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest be saved: Psalm 119.113. how long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within
thee? Cease not then, till you can say with David, I hate vain Thoughts, but thy Law do I love. II. Keep a constant watch against all evil words. By evil thoughts you defile your own Soul, by evil words you may defile others also. The malignity of the heart is oft diffus'd by the tongue, to the infection of many: And therefore let David's resolution be yours; Psal. 39.1.4. I said I will take heed to my waies, that I sin not with my Tongue. Remember the wise and Holy God hears all the words you speak. There is not a word in my Tongue (saith Holy David) but lo, O LORD, thou knowest it altogether. Let your words be few there∣fore, Eccl. 5.2. and free from Folly. A fool's voice, (saith the wise man) is known by a multitude of words, Prov. 17.27. but he that hath knowledge spareth his words. Think before you speak, silence is usually safe: whereas rash words oft recoile to the hurt of him that spake
them. Eccl. 5.7. However, in the multi∣tude of dreames, and many words, there are also diverse vanities: but fear thou God. Temperance of Tongue is a necessary virtue of true Religi∣on; And therefore saith the Apostle, Jam. 1.26. If any man among you, seem to be Religious; and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's Religion is vain; c. 3.2. But, If any man offend not in Word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. Especially take heed of all fil∣thy and impure speeches; Re∣member how strict a charge is given you in the Gospel. Eph. 2.29. Let no corrupt Communication come out of your Mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may Minister Grace unto the Hear∣ers. 31. Let all clamour and evil∣speaking be put away from you. And as for Fornications, . 4.3. and all Ʋncleanness or Covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becometh Saints; 4.Neither fil∣thiness,
nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks. And that your words may be Holy, keep the heart pure; Mat. 12, 34, 35, 36, 37. For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth good things: and an evil man, out of the evil treasure, bringeth forth evil things. But I say unto you (saith our Saviour) that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned. III. Psal. 119.163. Count it a great wickedness to tell a lye. I hate and abhor ly∣ing, (saith David) but thy Law do I love. And he that loves God, and his Law, Prov. 12.22. must needs hate and abhor Lying; For Lying Lips are an abomination to the LORD: but they that deal tru∣ly are his delight. Yea, a Lyar is hated both of God and men: men hate him because he seeks to
deceive them, and God hates him, because he plainly despises him, whom he knowes he cannot deceive. The sin of Lying subjects men to punishment, both from God and men. The common punish∣ment amongst men is this, he that is known to have told a Lye, shall not be believed when he speaks Truth. God for one Lye struck Ananias and Sapphira with sudden death; Act. 5.1. — 10. And yet the greatest punishment of Lying remains in Hell; Rev. 22.15. For whosoever loveth or maketh a Lye, shall be shut out of the Kingdom of Hea∣ven. Joh. 8.44. Lying is the Devil's sin, and subjects man to his punish∣ment; Rev. 21.8. For, All Lyars shall have their part in the Lake, which burneth with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second death. Lye not to excuse a Fault: What will it avail you to seem innocent before men, if you be∣come doubly guilty before God? To escape a rebuke from man, will you venture to incur the
wrath of God? What folly is it for one to avoid the pricking of a Pin, to run upon the point of a Sword? Though God do not punish the fault, are you sure he will pardon the Lye? To pre∣sume is the way to perish. Know God will not pardon it, except you repent; And what desperate Folly is it for a man to do that, which he knowes before he shall either certainly repent, or must Eternally perish. Lye not for gain; Its a woful gain which is acquired by the loss of God's favour, and an immor∣tal Soul. Lye not at all. He that tells a Lye strikes at God, and stabs his own Soul. When Lying shall mourn in Hell, Truth shall fit triumphant in Heaven. IV. Shun swearing and cursing as much as you do Hell and Dam∣nation; For if you become guil∣ty of the sin, Mat. 5.34 37. how can you escape the punishment? Swear not at all (saith our Saviour) but let your Communication be yea, yea, nay,
nay; Yea, (saith the Apostle) Above all things, Jam. 5.12. my Brethren swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath: but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation; For most certain it is, Exod. 20.7. God will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Curse none of God's creatures, least God curse you; Its the Character of a wicked wretch, Psal. 10.7.109.17. His mouth is full of cursing, as he loved cursing, (saith the Divine Prophet) so let it come unto him; as he delighted not in Blessing, so let it be far from him. How dreadful will the State of Swearers and Cur∣sers be, when Christ Jesus the Judge of the world shall say to them, Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels. Let not your words then swell with the poyson of Oaths or Cur∣ses. He that shoots these impoi∣son'd arrowes up towards Hea∣ven, shall at length find they will
fall down on his own head. I saw saith St. John, Rev. 16.13. three un∣clean Spirits like frogs, come out of the Mouth of the false Prophet. Surely an Oath or a Curse com∣ing out of the Mouth of a Chri∣stian, is as monstrous, as if you should see a Toad coming out of the Mouth of a man. If the Spirit of God be in the heart, how can the Language of Hell fall from the lips? V. Provoke not any to Anger, and be not your self soon or long Angry. A man in Anger is as a House on fire; If a fire be kind∣led in a house, you should endea∣vour to quench it: but when there is none, its a great wicked∣ness to kindle it. He is a very mischievous Fool, that sets his own house on fire. When An∣ger is join'd with desire of re∣venge, the house is set on fire of Hell. Matt. 5.21.22. Rash Anger is a degree of Murder; And therefore though provoked by an injury, Be not hasty in thy Spirit to be an∣gry: Eccl. 7.9. for Anger resteth in the Bo∣som of Eools.
Anger in excess opens a door to the Devil; where some evil there, that is a just cause of an∣ger, Eph. 4.26. is done, Be ye Angry, and sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the Devil. He that lies down to sleep in his Anger, hath the Devil for his Bed-fel∣low. Consider, there is none can so much provoke you to anger, as you daily provoke God. If he, who is so great, bear with you, how much more ought you to bear with others? If you be∣come a Fire-brand on earth, take heed least God make you one in Hell. Know, nothing does bet∣ter become a Christian, than the meekness and gentleness of Christ. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, Col. 3.12.13. Holy and Beloved) Bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffer∣ing; Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.
VI. Flee youthful Lusts, 2 Tim. 2.22. and endeavour to preserve a chast mind in a pure Body. Defile not that Body with Lust, which was washt with Christ's Blood in Bap∣tism. Know your Body is the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. &c. which was con∣secrated by Baptism to his Holy Service; Now, 3.17. if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: Now the body of man is not left defil'd by fleshly lusts, then the Temple of God by be∣ing turn'd into a loathsome stie for filthy swine. As he therefore who hath call'd you to the Profession of Christi∣anity is Holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. so be ye Holy and pure, both in Body and Mind. For this is the will of God, 1 Thes. 4.3.4, 5, 7. even your Sanctification, that ye should abstain from Fornication: that everyone of you should know how to possess his Vessel his [ 1 Sam. 21.5. Body the Vessel of his Soul, and for his Food] in Sanctification and Ho∣nour, not in the Lust of concupis∣cence, even as the Gentiles which know not God: for God hath not
call'd us unto Ʋncleanness, but un∣to Holiness. If Saints, 1 Joh. 3.2. ye are the Sons of God, the Brethren of Christ, and Heirs of Heaven. Rom. 8.17. Col. 3.4. And when Christ, who is our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Now; every man that hath this hope in him pu∣rifieth himself, . keepeth himself chast, even as he is, . chast and pure. The happiness of such chast and pure persons in the presence of God in Heaven, was repre∣sented to St. John in Vision. I looked, Rev. 14.1—5. (saith he) and lo a Lamb [the Lord Jesus Christ] stood on the Mount Sion, and with him an Hundred Fourty and Four Thou∣sand, having his Fathers Name written in their Foreheads; And I heard a voice from Heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great Thunder: and I heard the voice of Harpers, harping upon their Harps: and they sung as it were a new Song, before the Throne, and before the
four Beasts, and the Elders, [the Angels and Saints in Heaven:] and no man could learn that Song, but the Hundred and Fourty and Four Thousand, which were Re∣deemed from the Earth. These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are Virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb, which way soever he go∣eth: these were Redeemed from among men, being the first Fruits unto God; and to the Lamb; And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the Throne of God. Now if you desire to share in the happiness of this Virgins-Company in Heaven, you must endeavour to prefer an immaculate purity here on earth. To this end, keep a strict guard upon your Senses. Open not your ears to impure Speech∣es, nor suffer your eyes to be∣hold vanity; For whosoever look∣eth on a woman to lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5.28. saith our Bles∣sed Saviour; For the prevention
of this danger saith Holy Job, Job. 31.1. I made a Covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a Maid? Wanton looks, as flash∣es of Lightning, and wanton Thoughts, as sparks of Fire, often kindle those Flames of Lust, wherein both the Body and Soul is offer'd up as a Holocaust to Satan. And therefore saith our Saviour, Mat. 5.29. if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole Bo∣dy should be cast into Hell. But especially shun the com∣pany of a wanton woman, which is as a Murtheress that lies in wait for the life of a man. Prov. 7.13, — 18, — 21, 22, 23. Such was the Harlot of which Solomon speaks, who caught the young man, and kist him, and with an impudent face said unto him, come let us take our fill of love until the Morning, let us solace our selves with Loves. With her much fair Speech she caused him to yield; with the flattering of her Lips she
forced him; He goeth after her straight way, as an Ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the correction of the Stocks: Till a dart strike through his Liver; as a Bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his Life. Carefully shun therefore all occa∣sions of falling into the company of such a woman. Take the Counsel of Solomon; Prov. 5.8. & 7.27. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her house; For, her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of death. VII. Shun Revelling and Drunk∣enness; These are sins so incon∣sistent with the Christian Religi∣on, which oblige all that em∣brace it, to Temperance and Sobriety, that whosoever gives himself up to Revelling and Drunkenness, does in effect re∣nounce his Christianity; And he is certainly a desperate wretch, who for a little sensual pleasure, will quit all his hopes of Heaven, and sell the joyes of Paradise. He that lives in these sins, tra∣vels
in the common Road to Hell. Lasciviousness, 1 Pet. 4.3. Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries, were the sins of the Gentiles, before their Conversion to Christianity. How unworthy is it of a Christi∣an, to stain the Glory of his Ho∣ly Profession with the guilt of the sins and vices of Heathens. Christians know there is a day appointed, Act. 17.31. wherein they must give an account to God for the time they have spent in the world, and for all the Actions of their lives; And therefore saith our Saviour; Luk. 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be overcharged with Surfetting and Drunkenness, and cares of this Life, so that day come upon you unawares. Surfetting and drunk∣enness breed diseases in mens Bo∣dies, and shorten their Lives. The punishment is here linkt to the sin; whereas Temperance and Sobriety are a fair and plea∣sant path to Heaven; by Surfetting
and Drunkenness, men take the foulest way, that they may make the shortest journey to Hell. Drunkenness is a vile debase∣ment to a man. No person, that has but the heart of a Man, would suffer himself to be so vilely abused and debased by another, as by Drunkenness he abuses and debases himself. A Sober Servant is to be preferred before a drunken Son. A drunk∣en Servant is no better than a ve∣ry Beast. In Drunkenness a man commits two or three sins in one; For he at once abuses God's Blessings, and his own Body, and dishonours and wrongs any to whom he owes Service and Obedience, which, having transformed himself into a brute beast, a raging Bedlam, or a sensless stock, he is not capable to perform. How woful is it, that he, that is call'd to be a Chri∣stian, should cease to be a man! And how just is it, that God should cut him off in his sin, and cast him into Hell, who has made
himself uncapable to answer the end of his Calling, as a Christi∣an, yea, of his Being, as a man. Know, you were born in a Night of darkness, a state of ignorance and sin: but by insti∣tution in the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, you may perceive the dawning of a day of Light, a State of Knowledge and Salvation by Jesus Christ. Let the Apostle's Exhortation then prevail with you for a suitable demeanour. Rom. 13.12, 13.14. The night (saith he) is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armour of Light. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wanton∣ness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof. VIII. Avoid ill Company. The keeping of ill Company hath
been the utter undoing of many Young men. For while they have been carried on hereby in an idle, licentious course of life, they have destroy'd themselves Bodies and Souls for ever. He that once engages himself in that society of sinners, which is as the Corporation of Hell, shall hardly ever recover so much freedom and honour as to become a Citi∣zen of Heaven. Happy is the man then that carefully keeps himself from evil Company, yea, this is the man who is pronoun∣ced Blessed by an Oracle of God. Blessed is the man that walketh not in the Counsel of the ungodly, Psal. 1.1. nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scorn∣ful. And therefore David, to clear his Integrity, thus makes his Profession; Psal. 26.4, 5. I have not sate with vain persons, neither will I go in with Dissemblers. I have hated the Congregation of evil do∣ers: and will not sit with the wicked. But, Psal. 119.63. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of
them that keep thy Precepts. Man's a sociable Creature, and mutual converse is the delight and sweetness of Humane Life. But then it greatly concerns us to make choice of good company. For, Prov. 13.20. he that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a Companion of fools shall be destroyed. If it be known that a man has the plague, or some infectious disease upon him, will not every man shun his society? Sin is the disease of the Soul, not less infectious than the Plague. Should you not have more care of your Soul than of your Body? Is a Temporal Life in this World, to be preferr'd before Eternal Life in Heaven? Can you touch pitch, and not be de∣fil'd? familiarly and delightfully converse with sinners, and not contract the guilt of sin? 'Tis impossible. Do you seriously re∣prove them for all their Oaths and Curses, all their evil words and actions, all their vanities and vitious excesses? If so, their company will soon become un∣pleasant
to you, and yours to them. If not, know you go away guilty of all their sins in the sight of God. Oh! What a load of guilt do men carry home with them from ill Company? Now are not thine own sins enough to damn thee? How then wilt thou hold up thy head at the Judgment Seat of Christ, when thou shalt be charg'd with all the horrible sins of that Company, with which thou didst delight∣fully converse? For he that keeps another Company in sinning, heartens and hardens him in his sins, and so at once promotes his and his own Damnation. Sure∣ly, if thou saw'st the Wrath of God, and his Judgments hang over the heads of these sinners, if thou saw'st those Black Devils that stand at their Elbowes, to prompt them to wickedness, if thou saw'st the burning Lake which is kindled underneath, them, into which they are rea∣dy to fall every step they take, every sin they commit, thou
would'st be afraid to come into their Company, and no Gold should ever bribe thee to become one of their Society? If thou art wise, and hast any regard to thy own welfare; Eph. 5.11, 12. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather re∣prove them. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret. Keep thy distance then from them, and bind thy self with firm resoluti∣ons, altogether to refrain their Society. Hear the Counsel of the wisest of men, Solomon, and know therein thou hearest the voice of God; Prov. 4.13, 14. Enter not into the Path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Observe here, the wise man repeats expressions of the same import, no less than six times, to engage thee to shun the Society of sinners, as if he should cry out aloud to thee, and say, fly, fly, fly, fly, fly, fly evil Company, if thou lovest the life
of thy Soul; or otherwise thou art a dead man, utterly undone for ever. Know for certain, such as the Company is, in which thou de∣lightest in this World, such shall thy Company be hereafter, ei∣ther the Saints in Heaven, or the Damned in Hell. If thou knowest not where to have Society with good men, know its far better to remain so∣litary, and to hold converse with God, wherein the Pious Soul as∣cends to Heaven, than to be tra∣velling on with a great deal of merry Company towards Hell. IX. Be very serious and con∣stant in the Duties of God's Ser∣vice. Know the service of God, and the Salvation of your Souls, are your great work and business in this World, which you are to mind above all other things. And be sure what you do in these mat∣ters, you do with all your might. No man will endure a negligent and slothful servant, who is still
mindless and heedless in what he goes about. Trifling with God, in matters of Eternal Conse∣quence, is utterly intolerable. Be very diligent in attendance on the solemn Worship and Ser∣vice of God, on the Lord's Dayes, and be constant in the per∣formance of the duties of Reli∣gion, Prayers and Praises to God on your own daies also: but be sure you serve God in both, with all humble Reverence, Holy Se∣riousness, and hearty Devotion. God's Service is the most excel∣lent employment, and you must alwaies attend it with the great∣est earnestness of Spirit. Stir up your self to serve God with all your strength: employ all the powers of your Soul in the duties of Religion. Gen. 32.24 — 30. Hos. 12.4. Jacob wrest∣led with God in Prayer, and so gain'd a Blessing. If you play the Hypocrite in your Prayers, you must expect nothing but the Portion of Hypocrites in Hell-fire. Mat. 24.51.
When you approach the pre∣sence of God, remember he is that great and dreadful God, who is Glorious in Majesty, and Infinite in Excellency, and so ad∣dress to him with all possible Re∣verence and Humility. Heb. 12.28. Let us have Grace (saith the Apostle) whereby we may serve God accep∣tably, with Reverence and Godly Fear. For our God is a consuming fire. Psal. 95.6. And O come (saith the Psal∣mist) let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the LORD our Maker. How intolerable is the Pride and Arrogance of some Persons in this duty of Prayer! The greatest Subject of the Kingdom, if he have a request to the King, presents his Petition to him on the Knee. But you shall see a sorry Servant to a Mortal man, that will not be perswaded to bow his Knees to Almighty God, when he should joyn with the Assembly in Publick Prayers. The rude Carriage of such per∣sons in the special presence of the
All-Glorious God, plainly disco∣vers a profane and Atheistical Spirit. Such an one, though he be come to God's House, Gen. 28.17. which is the Gate of Heaven, sits there upon the brink of Hell. 'Tis a great instance of the Divine Patience, that such a Per∣son is not smitten with death in the place where he sits. Lev. 10.1, 2, 3. Na∣dab and Abihu the Sons of Aaron, we know for a like presumption, were both punished with sudden Death. For, saith the LORD, I will be Sanctifi'd in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be Glorifi'd. And therefore as you tender the Honour of God, and the good of your own Souls, ap∣proach Gods presence with great Reverence and Humility, and serve him with great seriousness and sincerity of heart, in all the Duties of Religion. X. Let all your Actions and Employments, your Labours and Delights, even your most plea∣sant Recreations be season'd with
the Fear of God, and a serious Remembrance of Death and Judg∣ment. Where ever you are, whatsoever you do, remember the Eye of God is upon you, and so demean your self as in his sight and presence. For, His Eyes are upon all the wayes of the Sons of men, Jer. 32.19. to give to every one according to his wayes, and ac∣cording to the Fruit of his Do∣ings. Remember the day is com∣ing, when you must give an ac∣count before all the World, for whatsoever you have done in the Flesh. Do nothing now, which you would be afraid or asham'd to own then. When in the most secret place, you are tempted to any wicked deed, remember, though no man beholds you, the Eye of the great God is upon you, and so say with Joseph; How can I do this great wicked∣ness, and sin against God? Thus, Gen. 39, 9. Psal. 4.41. stand in aw, and sin not. Let the fear of God restrain you from whatsoever is evil; and let the
Love of God carry you on with Delight, to whatsoever is good. And though God do not deny you those innocent Delights and Recreations, which are agrea∣ble to your youthful years, and which may fit you for a more chearful discharge of your re∣spective duties, yet you must be careful that those very De∣lights be season'd with the re∣membrance of God, and the day of Judgment. Mind, what the wise man sayes to you, and what charge he gives you con∣cerning this matter. Eccl. 11.9. Rejoyce, O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart chear thee in the dayes of thy Youth, and walk in the wayes of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: but know thou that, for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment. Know, thou art Mortal: and consider that every Action thou dost is a step to Eternity, and every day thou livest, sets thee a day nearer to thy death. And
therefore live so now, as thou wilt wish thou hadst done when thou comest to dye. The time of death is uncertain; But most certain it is, Christ Jesus will shortly come to call every one that has been faithful in his fer∣vice, from Labour to Rest, and Sorrow to Joy. Then happy shall he be who has been most serious in God's Service; His Rest shall be sweet, and his Re∣ward Glorious. Make good use then of this inch of time, upon which depends the follow∣ing Eternity. Thy Glass is run∣ning: be sure thy work be done before the last sand drop. Spend thy Life in God's Service, and in Death thou shalt see his Salva∣tion. Think still, my Lord is at hand, and so be ever well-doing. Blessed is that servant, Mat. 24.46, & whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. He will say to him, Well done good and faithful servant; 25.21. thou hast been faithful in a little, take Possession of much; Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.
Now the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. who hath called us to his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you; To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Thou shalt do well to repeat these Rules of Life (as also thy Duty before declar'd, as a Child or Servant) upon the Lords Day once a Month, for the better pre∣serving them in Memory for thy direction in thy daily Practise. For certainly, the most of the sins that men commit, to the dishonour of God, and wounding of their own Conscience, are committed through want of a present remem∣brance of their Duty, or a due consideration of the mighty Obliga∣tions that lye upon them to do it. This great mischief may be hap∣pily prevented by a frequent read∣ing of these Rules of Life. Read therefore, and Remember, and do these things, that it may be well with thee for ever.
Apples of Gold IN PICTƲRES of SILVER, FOR The Ʋse and Delight of Children and Servants: BEING A Collection of certain Verses, from some of our Divine Poems, more fit to be Imprinted on the Memories of Young People, than Prophane Songs. The Preface. FOR the close of your en∣tertainment, I here pre∣sent you with a Delicate Dish. 'Tis choice Fruit, which
grew in a Rich Soil. 'Tis as the Fruit of Eden, that Tempted Eve, good for Food, Gen. 3.6. pleasant to the Eyes, and desirable to make one Wise. Only here is the difference; She could not eat of that without Sin against God, and Hurt to her self: your eating of this may keep you from Sin, and prove the Health of your Soul. Freely feed then on this Fruit; 'tis not less whole∣some than pleasant. 'Tis not as the Banquet of Midas or Plut. Mor. Py∣thes, a Mock-Feast; 'tis Gold for worth, Prov. 25.11: but Food for use. A Word fitly spoken (saith Solo∣mon) is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver. And instru∣ction in virtue, to Persons in the Flower of their Age, is a word fitly spoken. Such are these pie∣ces of Divine Poesie, wherewith I here present you, Read, Remem∣ber and Practise them: so shall you learn that Knowledge and Wisdom, which is better than Silver and Gold; seeing it will at once make you Rich and Happy. Prov. 3.18. For Wisdom is a Tree of Life
(saith Solomon) to them that lay hold upon her; and Happy is every one that retaineth her. And therefore, Receive my In∣struction, (saith He) and not Silver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold. For Wisdom is better than Rubies; and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it. Here you have the Words of Wisdom, which are Golden Apples, by the curious Art of Divine Poesy, set in Silver Frames. Take and eat: for here you have both Food and Treasure. What can you desire more than what is here offer'd to your Acceptance? Accept and Im∣prove, and you shall not fail at once, to find both Profit and De∣light. And Profit with Delight com∣bin'd, Is Meat and Musick to the Mind.
The Names of the Authors, from whose Poems the following Verses are Col∣lected. G. H. Mr. George Herbert's Sa∣cred Poems, called the Tem∣ple. R. C. Mr. Richard Crashaw's steps to the Temple. F. Q. Mr. Francis Quarles, his Emblems and Divine Fancies. J. D. Dr. Donne's Poems. G.F. Mr. Giles Fletcher's, Christ's Victory and Triumph. G. S. Mr. George Sandy's, his Paraphrase of the Psalms and Scripture Hymns: A. C. Mr. Abraham Cowley's Sacred Poems. Some few others of less note, are signified by the first Let∣ters of their Names.
Counsel to Young men. G. H. THou, whose sweet youth, and early hopes in∣hance Thy rate and price, and mark thee for a Trea∣sure; Hearken unto a Verser, who may chance Rhyme thee to good, and make a bait of Pleasure. A Verse may find him, who a Sermon flies, And turn Delight into a Sacrifice, Beware of Lust: it doth pollute and foul Whom God in Baptism washt with his own Blood. It blots the Lesson written in thy Soul; The Holy Lines cannot be understood. How dare those eyes upon a Bible look, Much less towards God, whose Lust is all their Book? Drink not the third glass, which thou canst nottame, When once it is within thee; but before Mayst rule it, as thou list: and pour the shame, Which it would pour on thee, upon the Floor. It is most just to throw that on the ground, Which would throw me there, if I keep the round. He that is drunken, may his Mother kill Big with his Sister: he hath lost the Reins, Is out-law'd by himself: all kind of ill Did with his Liquor slide into his Veins.
The Drunkard forfeits man, and doth divest All worldly Right save what he hath by Beast. Take not his name, who made thy mouth, in yain: It gets thee nothing, and hath no excuse. Lust and Wine plead a pleasure, Avarice gain: But the cheap swearer through his open sluce Lets his Soul run for nought, as little fearing: VVere I an Epicure, I could bate swearing. VVhen thou dost tell anothers Jest, therein Omit the Oaths, which true wit cannot need: Pick out of Tales the Mirth, but not the sin. He pares his Apple, that will cleanly feed. Play not away the virtue of that name, VVhich is thy best Stake when griefs make thee tame. Lie not; but let thy heart be true to God, Thy mouth to it, thy actions to them both: Cowards tell Lies, and those that fear the Rod; The stormy working Soul spits Lies and Froth. Dare to be true. Nothing can need a Lye, A fault, which needs it most, grows two thereby. Fly Idleness; which yet thou canst not fly By Dressing, Mistressing and Complement. If those take up thy day, the Sun will cry Against thee: for his light was only lent. God gave thy Soul brave wings: put not those feathers Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill weathers. When thou dost purpose ought (within thy power) Be sure to do it, though it be but small. Constancy knits the bones, and makes us stowre, When wanton pleasures becken us to thrall. Who breaks his own Bond, forseiteth himself: What nature made a Ship, he makes a shelf.
Do all things like a man, not sneakingly: Think the King sees thee still; for his King does. Simpring is but a Lay-hypocrisie: Give it a corner, and the Clew undoes: VVho fears to do ill, sets himself to task: Who fears to do well sure should wear a Mask. Look to thy Mouth: Diseases enter there. Thou hast two Sconces, if thy Stomach call; Carve, or discourse, do not a Famine fear. VVho carves is kind to two; who talks to all. Look on Meat, think it dirt, then eat a bit; And say with all; Earth to Earth I commit. By all means use sometimes to be alone. Salute thy self: see what thy soul doth wear. Dare to look in thy Chest; for 'tis thine own: And tumble up and down what thou findest there. VVho cannot rest till he good fellowes find, He breaks up house, turns out of doors his mind. In Conversation boldness now bears sway. But know that nothing can so foolish be, As empty boldness: therefore first assay To stuff thy mind with solid bravery; Then march on gallant: get substantial worth, Boldness gilds finely, and will set it forth. Laugh not too much: the witty man laughs least: For wit is Newes only to Ignorance. Less at thine own things laugh; lest in the jest Thy person share, and the conceit advance. Make not thy sport abuses: for the Fly That feeds on Duug, is coloured thereby. Pick out of Mirth, like stones out of thy ground, Profaneness, Filthyness, Abufiveness.
These are the scum, with which course wits abound: The fine may spare these well, yet not go less. All things are big with Jest: nothing that's plain But may be witty, if thou hast the vein. Towards great persons use respective boldness: That temper gives them theirs, and yet doth take Nothing from thine, in service, care or coldness Doth ratably thy Fortunes marr or make. Feed no man in his sins: for Adulation Doth make thee parcel-Devil in Damnation. Scorn no man's Love, though of a mean degree; (Love is a Present for a Mighty King) Much less make any one thine Enemy. As Guns destroy, so may a little sling. The cunning workman never doth refuse The meanest tool, that he may chance to use. Render to God his due, part of thy time: Treasure purloin'd cankers the whole Estate. Sundays observe: think, when the Bells do chime, 'Tis Angels Musick; therefore come not late. God then deals Blessings: If a King did so, VVho would not hast, nay give, to see the show. Let vain or busie thoughts have there no part: Bring not thy Plough, thy Plots, thy Pleasures thi∣ther Christ purg'd his Temple, so must thou thy heart. All worldly thoughts are but thieves met together To cozen thee. Look to thy Actions well: For Churches are either our Heav'n or Hell. Judge not the Preacher; for he is thy Judge: If thou mislike him, thou conceiv'st him not. God calleth Preaching Folly. Do not grudge
To pick out treasures from an Earthen pot. The worst speak something good: if all want Sense, God takes a Text, and Preacheth Patience. He that gets Patience, and the Blessing which Preachers conclude with, hath not lost his pains. He that by being at Church escapes the ditch, Which he might fall in by Companions, gains. He that loves God's abode, and to combine With Saints on Earth, shall one day with them shine. In brief, acquit thee bravely, play the man. Look not on pleasures as they come, but go. Defer not the least virtue: life's poor span. Make not an Ell, by trifling in thy wo. If thou do ill, the Joy fades, not the pains: If well, the pain doth fade, the joy remains. The Confession. G.S. in Psal. 51. LORD, to a sinner Mercy show: Which since in thee so infinite; Let all thy streames of Mercy flow, And purifie me in thy sight. My sins unmaskt, before thee lye; Who have deserv'd thy wrath alone: VVhich I confess, to testifie Thy truth, and make thy Justice known. In sin conceiv'd, brought forth in sin; Sin suckt I from my Mothers Breast: Thou lov'st a heart sincere within, VVhere wisdom is a constant guest.
Blot out my crimes; O scparate My trembling guilt far from thy view! A clean Heart in my Breast Create; A Mind, to thee confirm'd, renew. Nor cast me from thy Presence, Lord; Nor, O! Thy Holy Spirit withdraw: But thy Life-quickning Grace afford; Inlarge my will, t' embrace thy Law. The Resolution. G. S. in Psal. 119. YOung man thine Actions by God's Precepts guide: From these let not thy zealous servant slide. Thy word, writ in my heart, shall curb my will. Lord, teach me how I may thy laws fulfil. Those by thy tongue pronounc't I will unfold. Thy Testaments by me more priz'd than Gold. On these I meditate, admire; there set My Souls delight: these never will forget. O let me live, t'observe thy laws: mine eyes Illuminate to view those Mysteries. Me, a poor Pilgrim, with thy truth inspire: For which my Soul even fainteth with desire. The proud is curst, who from thy Precepts straies, Bless and preserve my soul, which them obeyes. No hate of Princes from thy law deters: My Study, my Delight, my Counsellers.
The Bible. A. C. THis Holy Book, like Heaven it self, doth shine, VVith thousand lights of truth Divine. So numberless the Stars, that well they may To Heaven's Gate make a Milky way. Yet reason must assist too; for in Seas So vast and dangerous as these, Our course by Stars above we cannot know, VVithout the compass too below. Tho Reason cannot through Faith's Mysteries see, It sees that there, and such they be; Leads to Heav'n's Door, and there does humbly keep And there through chinks and key-holes peep. Though it like Moses, by a sad command, Must not come into th' Holy Land; Yet thither it infallibly does guide, And from a far 'tis all descry'd. Charms and Knots. G. H. Who read a Chapter when they rise, Shall ne're be troubled with ill eyes. A poor man's Rod, when thou dost ride, Is both a weapon and a guide. VVho shuts his hand hath lost his Gòld: Who opens it, hath it twice told. VVho goes to Bed, and doth not pray, Maketh two nights to ev'ry day. VVho by aspersions throw a stone At th' head of others, hit their own.
VVho looks on ground with humble eyes, Finds himself there, and seeks to rise. VVhen th' hair is sweet, through Pride or lust, The Powder doth forget the dust. Take one from ten, and what remains? Ten still, if Sermons go for gains. In shallow waters Heaven doth show: But who drinks on, to Hell may go. God's Greatness. G. S. in 1 Sam. 2. GOD our secret thoughts displayes; All our works his balance weighs; Giants bows his Forces break; He with strength invests the weak. Who were full, now serve for bread; Those who serv'd, infranchised. Barren wombs with children flow; Fruitful Mothers Childless grow. God frail man of life deprives: Those who sleep in death revives: Leads us to our filent Tombs; Brings us from those horrid Rooms: Riches sends, sends Poverty: Casteth down, lifts up on high. He from the despised dust, From the dunghil takes the just; To the height of honour brings; Plants them in the Thrones of Kings. Man's Meanness. G. S. Psal. 8. LORD, how illustrious is thy Name! Whose power both Heav'n and Earth proclaim!
Thy Glory thou hast set on high, Above the Marble-arched Sky. The wonders of thy power thou hast In mouths of Babes, and Sucklings plac't; That so thou might'st thy Foes confound, And who in Malice most abound, When I pure Heaven, thy Fabrick see, The Moon and Stars dispos'd by thee; O what is man, or his frail Race, That thou should'st such a shadow Grace! Next to thy Angels most renown'd, With Majesty and Glory Crown'd; The King of all thy Oreatures made; That all beneath his feet hast laid: And that on Dales or Mountains feed; That shady woods or deserts breed; What in the Aery Region glide, Or through the rowling Ocean slide. Lord, how illustrious is thy Name, Whose Pow'r both Heav'n and Earth proclaim! Humility. G. S. Psal. 131. THou Lord, my witness art: I am not proud of heart; Nor look with lofty eyes; Nor envy, nor despise; Nor to vain pomp apply My thoughts, nor soar too high: But in behaviour mild; And as a tender child, Wean'd from his Mothers Breast On thee alone I rest.
The word of God. G. S. in Psal. 19. GOd's laws are perfect, and restore The Soul to life, even dead before. His Testimonies, firmly true, With wisdom simple men indue. The Lord's Commandments are upright, And feast the Soul with sweet delight. His Precepts are all purity, Such as illuminate the eye. The fear of God, soil'd with no stain, Shall Everlastingly remain. Jehovah's Judgments are Divine, With Judgment he doth Justice join. Which men should more than Gold desire, Than heaps of Gold refin'd by fire: More sweet than honey of the Hive, Or Cels, where Bees their treasure stive. Thy servant is inform'd from thence, They their observers recompence. The World. F. Q. O VVhat a Crocodilian world is this, Compos'd of treacheries and imnaring wiles! She cloaths destruction in a formal kiss, And lodges death in her deceitful smiles; She hugs the Soul she hates, and there does prove, The veryest tyrant, where she vowes to love: And is a Serpent most, when most she seems a Dove: Thrice happy he, whose nobler thoughts despise To make an object of so easie gains;
Thrice happy he, who scorns so poor a prize Should be the Crown of his heroick pains; Thrice happy he that ne'er was born to try, Her frowns or smiles, or being born did lye In his sad Nurses Arms an hour or two, and dye. The Quip. G. H. The merry world did on a day, VVith his Train-bands and Mates agree To meet together where I lay, And all in sport to jeer at me. First, Beauty crept into a Rose, VVhich when I pluckt not, Sir said she, Tell me I pray, whose hands are those? But thou shalt answer, Lord, for me. Then Money came, and chinking still, VVhat tune is this, poor man? said he; I heard in Musick you had skill; But thou shalt answer, Lord for me. Then came brave Glory puffing by, In Silks that whistled, who but he? He scarce allow'd me half an eye. But thou shalt answer, Lord, for me. Then came quick wit and Conversation, And he would needs a comfort be, And to be short, make an Oration. But thou shalt answer, Lord, for me. Yet when the hour of thy design, To answer these fine things shall come; Speak not at large, say, I am thine: And then they have their Answer home.
The Rest. F. Q. How is the anxious Soul of man befool'd In his desire, That thinks a Hectick Fever may be cool'd In flames of Fire; Or hopes to rake full heaps of burnisht Gold From nasty Mire! A whining Lover may as well request A scornful Breast, To melt in gentle tears, as woe the world for rest. VVhose Gold is double with a careful hand, His cares are double; The Pleasure, Honour, VVealth of Sea and Land Bring but a trouble; The world it self, and all the world's command Is but a bubble: The strong desires of man's insatiate breast May stand possest Of all that earth can give, but earth can give no rest. The world's a seeming Paradise, but her own And man's Tormenter; Appearing fixt, but yet a rowling-stone: VVithout a tenter It is a vast circumference, where none Can find a Centre: Of more than earth can earth make none pos∣rest; And he that least Regards this restless world, shall in this world find rest. The Retreat, Return. F. Q. Lord, when we leave the world, and come to thee, How dull, how slug are we!
But when at earth we dart our wing'd desire, VVe burn, we burn like Fire. If pleasure becken with her balmy hand, Her beck's a strong command. If honour call us with her Courtly breath, An hours delay is death. If Profits Golden finger'd-charms inveigle's, VVe clip more swift than Eagles. Lord, stop our Flight, and turn our Course, that we May fly as fast to thee. Sunday. G. H. O day most calm, most bright; The Fruit of this, the next world's Bud; Th' Indorsment of supreme delight, VVrit by a Friend, and with his Blood; The Couch of time, cares Balm and Bay; The week were dark but for thy light: Thy torch doth show the way. The other dayes, and thou Make up one man, whose face thou art, Knocking at Heaven with thy brow: The worky dayes are the back part; The burden of the week lies there, Making the whole to stoop and bow Till thy release appear. Man had straight forward gone To endless death: but thou dost pull And turn us round to look on one, VVhom, if we were not very dull VVe could not choose but look on still; Since there is no place so alone, The which he doth not fill.
Sundayes the Pillars are, On which Heaven's Palace arched lies: The other dayes fill up the spare And hollow room with vanities. They are the fruitful Beds and Borders In God's rich Garden: that is bare VVhich parts their ranks and orders▪ The Sundayes of man's Life Threaded together, on time's string, Make bracelets to adorn the wife, Of the Eternal Glorious King. On Sunday Heaven's Gate stands ope; Blessings are plentiful and rife, More plentiful than hope. This day my Saviour rose, And did inclose this Light for his: That as each Beast his Manger knowes, Man might not of his Fodder miss. Christ hath took in this piece of ground; And made a Garden there for those VVho want Herbs for their wound. The Rest of our Creation Our great Redeemer did remove VVith the same shake, which at his Passion Did earth, and all things with it move. As Sampson bore the doors away, Christ's hands though nailed, wrought our Salvation, And did unhinge that day. The brightness of that day VVe sullied by our foul offence: VVherefore that Robe we cast away, Having a new at his expence, VVhose Drops of Blood paid the full price,
That was required to make us gay, And fit for Paradise. Thou art a day of Mirth: And where the week dayes trail on ground, Thy Flight is higher as thy Birth. O let me take thee at the bound, Leaping with thee from seven to seven, Till that we both, being toss'd from Earth, Fly hand in hand to Heaven. The Church. G. S. in Psal. 84. O how amiable are Thy abodes, great God of war! Happy men who spend their dayes In thy Courts, there sing thy praise. Happy, who on thee depend; Thine their way, and thou their end. One day in thy Courts alone, Far exceeds a Million. In thy house contemn'd and poor, I had rather keep a door, Than with wicked men possess, All that they call happiness. O thou Shield of our defence! O thou Sun, whose influence Sweetly glides into our hearts! Thou, who all to thine imparts! Happy! O thrice happy he, VVho alone depends on thee. The Young Man's Mirth. F. Q. Eccl. 11.9. Young man Rejoyce: what jolly mirth is here! Let thy heart chear thee: what delicious chear!
In thy Young dayes: thy cares will relish sweeter. Walk thy own wayes: thy cares will pass the fleeter. Please thine own heart: carve where it likes thee best. Delight thine Eyes: and be a joyful Guest. But know withall, the day will come, whereon Thy Judge will doom thee for the deeds th'hast done. O what a Feast! O what a reckoning's here! Thy cates are sweet; the shot's extreamly dear. Grace. G. H. My Stock lies dead, and no increase Doth my dull Husbandry improve: O let thy Graces without cease Drop from above. If still the Sun should hide his Face, Thy house would but a Dungeon prove, Thy works nights Captives; O let Grace Drop from above. The Dew doth every Morning fall; And shall the Dew out-strip thy Dove? The Dew, for which Grass cannot call, Drop from above. Death is still working like a Mole, And digs my Grave at each remove: Let Grace work too, and on my Soul Drop from above. Sin is still hammering my heart Unto a hardness, vold of love: Let suppling Grace, to cross his Art, Drop from above.
O come! for thou dost know the way: Or if to me thou wilt not move, Remove me where I need not say, Drop from above. Contentment. R. S. I dwell in Grace's Court, Enricht with Virtue's rights: Faith guides my wit, Love leads my will; Hope all my mind's delights. In lowly vales I mount To pleasure's highest pitch: My honest meanness Honour brings, My poor Estate is rich. My Conscience is my Crown, Contented thoughts my rest. My heart is happy in it self; My Bliss is in my Breast. Enough, I reckon wealth; A mean, the surest Lot; That lies too high for base contempt, Too low for envies shot. My wishes are but few; All easie to fulfil: I make the limits of my power, The bounds unto my will. I feel no care of Coin; VVell-doing is my wealth: My mind to me an Empire is, VVhile Grace affordeth health. Prosperity. F. Q. Take heed, thou prosperous sinner, how thou liv'st In sin, and thriv'st.
Thou that dost flourish in thy heaps of Gold, And Sums untold. Thou, that hadst never reason to complain Of Cross or Pain: VVhose unafflicted Conscience never found Nor check, nor wound. Believe it, Prosper, thy deceitful lease Affords thee neither wealth, nor joy, nor peace. Thy Golden heaps are nothing but the price Of Paradise: Thy flatt'ring pleasures, and thy aery joyes, But painted toyes: Thy peaceful Conscience is but like a dog, Ty'd in a clog. Believe it, Prosper thy deceitful Lease Allows thee neither wealth, nor joy, nor peace. Thy heaps of Gold will stand thee in no steed. At greatest need: Thy empty pleasure will convert thy laughter To groans hereafter. Thy silent Conscience when inlarg'd, will roar, And rage the more. Believe it, Prosper thy deceitful lease Affords thee neither wealth, nor joy, nor peace. Paradise. G. H. I bless thee Lord, because I GROW Among thy trees, which in a ROW, To thee both Fruit and Order OW. What open Force, or hidden CHARM Can blast my Fruit, or bring me HARM, While the inclosure is thine ARM. Inclose me still for fear I START, Be to me rather sharp and TART Then let me want thy hand and ART.
When thou dost greater Judgments SPARE, And with thy knife but prune and PARE. Ev'n fruitful trees more fruitful ARE. Such sharpness showes the sweetest FREND: Such cuttings rather heal then REND: And such beginnings touch their END. Several sins. F. Q. Drunkenness. It is a Thief, that oft before his face, Steals man away, and layes a beast in's place. Cross sin. It is a show'r, which e're we can get in, And find a shelter, wets us to the skin. Sin of Infirmity. Is like the falling of an April-show'r: 'Tis often rain, and sun-shine in an hour. Sin of Custom, Is a long show'r beginning withthe light; Oft-times continuing till the dead of night. Sin of Ignorance, It is a hideous mist, that wets amain, Though it appears not in the form of rain. Crying sin. It is a sudden show'r that tears in sunder, The cope of Heaven, and alway comes with thun∣der. Sin of Delight. Is like a feather'd show'r of snow, not felt, But soaks to th' very skin when e're it melt. Sin of Presumption, Does like a show'r of hail, both wet and wound With sudden death, or strikes us to the ground. The sin of Sins. It is a sulph'rous show'r, like that which fell. On Sodom, strikes, and strikes to th' pit of Hell.
Lord, let thy saving Grace thy servants shrow'd, Till we arrive where's neither show'r nor cloud. Repentance. F. Q. 'Tis not to cry God mercy, or to sit And droop; or to confess that thou hast fail'd: 'Tis to bewail the sins thou didst commit, And not commit those sins thou hast bewail'd. He that bewails, and not forsakes them too, Confesses rather what he means to do. Praise. G. H. King of Glory, King of Peace! I will love thee: And that love may never cease, I will move thee. Thou hast granted my request, Thou hast heard me: Thou did'st note my working breast; Thou hast spar'd me. Therefore with my utmost art, I will sing thee: And the cream of all my heart I will bring thee. Though my sins against me cry'd, Thou didst clear me: And alone, when they reply'd, Thou didst hear me. The Offering. Since my sadness Into Gladness Lord thou dost convert, O accept What thou hast kept As thy due desert.
Had I many, Had I my, (For this heart is none) All were thine, And none of mine, Surely thine alone. Yet thy favour May give savour To this poor Oblation; And it raise To be thy praise, And be my Salvation. Light. A. C. Hail active nature's watchful life and health! Her joy, her ornament and wealth! Hail to thy Husband heat, and thee! Thou the world's beauteous Bride, the lustry Bride∣groom he. Say from what Golden quivers of the Sky, Do all thy winged arrows fly? Swiftness and Power by Birth are thine: From thy great Sire they came, thy Sire the word Divine. 'Tis I believe, thine archery to show, That so much cost in colours thou, And skill in painting dost bestow Upon thine antient arms, the gaudy Heavenly bow. Swift as wing'd thoughts their light carrier do run Thy race is finisht when begun: Let a Post-Angel start with thee, And thou the Goal of earth shalt reach as soon as he, Thou in the Moons bright chariot proud and gay, Dost thy bright world of Stars survey; And all the year doth with thee bring A thousand flowry lights, thine own Nocturnal spring
Thou Scythian like dost round thy lands above The Suns gilt tent for ever move; And still as thou in pomp dost go, The shining Pageants of the world attend thy show. Nor amidst all these triumphs dost thou scorn The humble glow-worms to adorn, And with those living spangles gild (O greatness without pride) the bushes of the field. Night, and her ugly subjects thou dost fright; And sleep, the lazy Owl of night: Asham'd, and fearful to appear They skreen their horrid shapes with the black He∣misphere. At thy appearance fear it self growes bold; Thy sun-shine melts away his cold: Enconrag'd at the sight of thee, To the Cheek colour comes, and firmness to the Knee. Ev'n lust, the master of a harden'd face, Blushes, if thou be'st in the place; To darkness Curtains he retires, In sympathising night he rowls his smoaky fires. When Queen of Beauties, thou list'st up thy head, Out of the Mornings purple bed, The quire of birds about thee play, And all the joyful world salutes the rising day. All the worlds brav'ry that delights our eyes, Is but thy several liveries; Thou the rich dye on them bestow'st, Thy nimble pencil paints this landshape as thou go'st. A crimson garment in the rose thou wear'st: A Crown of studded Gold thou bear'st; The Virgin-lillies in their white, Are clad but with the lawn of almost naked light. The Violet like a little Infant stands, Girt in thy purple swadling bands:
On the fair Tulip thou dost dote: Thou cloth'st it in a gay, and party colour'd coat. But when firm bodies thy free course oppose, Gently thy source the Land o're flows; Takes there possession, and does make Of colours mingled, light, a thick and standing lake. But the vast Ocean of unbounded day, In th' Empyraean Heaven does stay: Thy Rivers, Lakes and Springs below From thence took first their rise, thither at last must flow. Success. G. S. Psal. 127. Unless the Lord the house sustain, They build in vain, In vain they watch unless the Lord, The City Guard. In vain ye rise before the light, And break the slumbers of the night: In vain the bread of sorrows eat, Got by your sweat; Unless the Lord with good success Your labours bless: For he all good on his bestows. And crowns their eyes with sweet repose. Hope. A. C. Hope of all ills that men endure, The only cheap and universal cure! Thou captives freedom, and thou sick mans health! Thou loosers vict'ry, and thou beggars wealth! Thou Manna, which from Heav'n we eat, To ev'ry tast a several Meat! Thou strong retreat! thou sure intail'd Estate, Which nought has power to alienate! Thou pleasant, honest flatterer! For none Flatter unhappy men but thou alone.
Hope, thou first fruits of happiness! Thou gentle dawning of a bright success! Thou good preparative, without which our joy Does work too strong and whilst it cures destroy; Who out of tortures reach dost stand, And art a Blessing still in hand! Whilst thee, her Earnest-money we retain, We certain are to gain, Whether she her bargain break, or else fulfil, Thou only good, not worse for ending ill. Brother of Faith, 'twixt whom and thee The joyes of Heaven and Earth divided be! Though faith be Heir, and have the first Estate, Thy portion yet in moveables is great. Happiness it self's all one In thee, or in Possession: Only the future's thine, and present his: Thine's the more hard and noble bliss. Best Apprehender of our joyes which hast So long a reach, and yet canst hold so fast. Good Conscience. Q. A Conscience pure, unstain'd by sin, Is Brass without, and Gold within. The Holy Heart. F. Q. The Royal Off-spring of a second Birth, Sets ope to Heaven, and shuts the doors to Earth. If Earth (Heavens Rival) dart her idle Ray, To Heaven 'tis wax, and to the world 'tis Clay. If earth present delights, it scorns to draw; But, like the Jet unrubb'd, disdains that straw. No hope deceives it, and no doubt divides it; No grief disturbs it, and no errour guides it. No fear distracts it, and no rage inflames it; No guilt condemns it, and no folly shames it. No sloth besots it, and no lust inthrals it; No scorn afflicts it, and no passion galls it.
It is a Carknet of immortal Life; An Ark of Peace; the lists of sacred strise; A purer piece of endless transitory; A shrine of Grace, a little Throne of Glory. A Heaven born Off-spring of a new born Birth; An earthly Heaven, an ounce of Heavenly earth. Man's Life. F. Q. Our life is nothing but a winters day: Some only break their fast, and so away: Others stay dinner, and depart full sed; The deepest age but sups, and goes to bed. He's most in debt that lingers out the day: Who dies betime has less, and less to pay. Man's Folly. I. C. Lord, what a foolish thing is man! How fond is he of toyes! How does he spend that little span Of his in empty joyes! But for that precious soul of his, He takes no further care To fit it for immortal bliss Such thoughts too serious are. Himself to every pleasure gives, And drowns his soul in lust: In all destructive sins he lives; 'Till levell'd with the dust. Give me, O Lord, that pious care, And that obsequious love; That all my actions may declare, I seek that place above. Where we from sin exempt shall be; From sorrow and from tears: And where no trouble we shall see, Nor be disturb'd with sears.
Christ Crucified. R. F. Behold and see, if ever any pain Did match his sorrow who for us was slain! Lo, God bleeds on the Cross! high Heav'n descends In blood to make man and his Maker friends. When guilty man lay doom'd Eternally To Death and Hell, ev'n God himself could dye, And smile upon those wounds, that spear, that grave, Which our Rebellion merited and gave. This love exceeds all height: yet I confess 'Twas God that did it, how could it be less? Death. J. D. Death, be nor proud, though some have called thee Mighty and dreadful: for thou art not so. For those, whom thou think'st thou dost over∣throw, Die not, poor death; nor yet canst thou kill me. From rest and sleep, which but thy picture be, Much pleasure, then from thee much more must flow: And soonest our best men with thee do go, Rest of their bones, and souls delivery; Th' art slave to fate, chance, Kings and despe∣rate men; And dost with poyson, war and sickness dwell: Hard pains or poppy make us sleep as well, And better then thy stroke: why swell'st thou then One short sleep past, we wake Eternally; And death shall be no more, death, thou shalt dye. The Resurrection. I. D. At the round earth's imagin'd corners blow Your trumpets, Angels: men arise, arise From death; you numberless infinities Of souls unto your scatter'd bodies go; All whom one floud did, and fire shall or'ethrow; All whom war, death, age, agues, tyrannies, Despair, law, chance hath slain, and you whose eyes Shall behold God, and never tast death's wo.
But let them sleep, Lord, and me mourn a space, For if above all these my sins abound, 'Tis late to ask abundance of thy Grace, When we are there. Here on this lowly ground Teach me how to repent: for that's as good As if th' 'adst seal'd my pardon with thy blood. The Judgment-Day. R. C. Hear'st thou my Soul, what serious things, The Prophets say, the Psalmist sings Of a strict Judge from whose sharp ray, The world in flames shall fly away. O that fire! before whose face Heav'n and Earth shall find no place. O those eyes! whose angry light Must be the day of that dread night. O that trump! whose blast shall run, An even round with th' circling sun, And urge the murm'ring graves to bring Pale Mankind forth to meet their King. Horrour of nature, Hell and Death! When a deep groan shall from beneath Cry out, We come, we come; and all The caves of night answer one call. O that book! whose leaves so bright Will set the world in severe light: O the Judge! whose Hand, whose Eye, None can endure, yet none can fly. Yet thou giv'st leave, dread Lord, that we Take shelter from thy self in thee; And with the wings of thine own Dove Fly to thy Sceptre of soft love. Mercy, my Judge, mercy I cry, With blushing cheek, and bleeding eye: The conscious colours of my sin Are red without, and pale within.
O let thine own soft bowels pay Thy self, and so discharge that day. If sin can sigh, love can forgive: O say the word, my soul shall live. O when thy last frown shall proclaim The flocks of goats to folds of flame; And all thy lost sheep found shall be, Let come ye blessed then call me. Heaven. G. F. Behold this house where man doth now reside. The flow'rs pour out their odours in his way: To serve him all the creatures take a pride: The winds do sweep his chambers ev'ry day, And clouds do wash his rooms: the ceiling gay Starred alost the gilded knobs imbrave. If such a house God to another gave, How shine those glitt'ring Courts he for himself will have? And if a sullen cloud, as sad as night, In which the Sun may seem imbodied, Depur'd of all his dross we see so white, Burning in melted Gold his watry head. Or round with Ivory edges silvered, What Lustre super-excellent will he Lighten on those that shall his sun-shine see, In that all glorious Court, in which all glories be. If but one Sun with his diffusive fires, Can paint the Stars, and the whole world with light; And joy and life into each heart inspires; And ev'ry Saint shall shine in Heaven as bright As doth the Sun in his transcendent might, (As saith may well believe what truth once sayes) What shall so many Suns united Rayes But dazle all the eyes, that now in Heav'n we praise? Here that bright band, that now in triumph shines, And that (before they were invested thus)
In earthly bodies carried Heavenly minds, Pitch, round about a Throne most glorious, Their sunny tents, and houses luminous; All their Eternal day in Songs employing, Joying their end, without end of their joying, While their Almighty Prince, destruction is de∣stroying. Full, but yet never cloy'd with what might whet And dull the keenest craving Appetite: Where never Sun did rise, nor ever set; But one Eternal day, and endless light Gives time to those, whose time is infinite: Speaking with thought, obtaining without see; Beholding him whom never eye could see, And magnifying him, that cannot greater be: How can such joy as this want words to speak? And yet what words can speak such joy as this? Far from the world that might their quiet break, Here the glad souls the face of beauty kiss, Pour'd out in pleasure on their beds of bliss: And drunk with Nectar-Torrents, ever hold Their eyes on him, whose Graces manifold, The more they do behold, the more they would behold. Happiness. F. Q. I love, and have some cause to love the earth: She is my Makers creature; therefore good: She is my Mother; for she gave me birth: She is my tender Nurse; she gives me food. But what's a creature, Lord, compar'd with thee? Or what's my Mother, or my Nurse to me? I love the Air; her dainty sweets refresh My drooping soul, and to new sweets invite me: Her shrill-mouth'd quire sustain me with their flesh, And with their Polyphonian notes delight me. But what's the air, or all the sweets that she Can bless my Soul withal, compar'd to thee?
I love the Sea; she is my fellow-creature, My careful Purveyor; she provides me store; She walls me round; she makes my diet greater; She wasts my treasure from a forreign shore. But Lord of Oceans, when compar'd with thee, What is the Ocean, or her wealth to me? To Heaven's high City I direct my Journey, Whose spangled Suburbs entertain mine eye; Mine eye, by contemplations great attorney, Transcends the Crystal pavement of the Sky. But what is Heav'n great God, compar'd to thee? Without thy presence Heav'n's no Heaven to me. Without thy presence earth gives no refection; Without thy presence sea affords no treasure; Without thy presence air's a rank infection; Without thy presence Heav'n it self's no pleasure. If nor possest, if not enjoy'd in thee, What's earth, or sea, or air, or Heav'n to me? The highest honours that the world can boast, Are Subjects far too low for my desire:. The brightest beams of Glory are (at most) But dying sparkles of thy living fire. The proudest flames that earth can kindle, be But nightly Glow-worms, if compar'd to thee. Without thy presence, wealth are bags of cares; Wisdom, but folly; joy, disquiet sadness: Friendship is treason, and delights are snares; Pleasures but pain, and mirth, but pleasant mad∣ness. Without thee, Lord, things be not what they be; Nor have they being when compar'd with thee. In having all things, and not thee, what have I? Not having thee, what have my labours got? Let me enjoy but thee, what farther crave I? And having thee alone, what have I not? I wish nor Sea, nor Land, nor would I be Possest of Heav'n, Heav'n unpossest of thee. FINIS.
