W1915 99826860 31269
THE CHRISTIANITY OF THE PEOPLE Commonly Called QUAKERS ASSERTED. Being a brief Account of their Faith in Relation to divers Matters where∣in their Christian Belief is Questioned. Published in behalf of the People of GOD called Quakers by some of them. Luke 6. 22. Blessed are ye when Men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you from their Company, and shall Reproach you, and cast out your Name as evil for the Son of Man's Sake. Acts 24 14 After the way which they call Heresie, so Worship I the GOD of my Fathers. Printed in the Year, 1696.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. THere hath been of late Years many Aspersions cast upon Vs, whereby the People in some Places (especially in the West of this Nation of Scotland) have been much stirred up against us, and much hard and cruel Vsage have we Suffered; and have often been in danger of our Lives, both in our Meetings and in the Streets, and sometimes in our own Houses: And since the Sitting of the Late General Assembly at Edinburgh, what a mighty Clamour hath been among the People through a great part of the Nation concerning us? Some saying, we must be all Excommunicated, and that none must Converse or Deal with us, others saying, we must all be Banished, The rude Multitude that abuse us often threatning us with the General Assembly, and taking occasion from thence (especially in our Meeting at Edin∣burgh) to be more Wicked, Prophane and Loose in their Carriage towards us than they were before: And the only Reason that is
given for this Confused Noise about us, and for all the Cruel and Vnchristian Vsage we meet with, is it not the same that was al∣ledged against the LORD and his People by their Adversaries and Persecutors in former Ages? that is, under pretence of being Deceivers, Deluders, Hereticks, Schismaticks, possessed with the Devil &c.? Did not the Chief Priests and Pharisees tell People that Christ was a Deceiver, and that he had a Devil? John. 7. 47. Mat. 2. 63. Luke 11. 15. John 8. 48. and did not the People revile and per∣secute Him under that pretence; and were not the Apostles accoun∣ted Deceivers, Turners of the World upside-down, and deemed un∣worthy to Live upon the Earth; 2 Cor. 6. 8. Acts 27. 50. And was not Paul called a Pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition, a Ring∣leader of the Sect of the Nazarines? &c. Acts 17. 6. Acts 24. 5. And were not all the Revilings, Scoffings, Stonings, Imprisonments, and other hard usage that they met with, inflicted upon them un∣der those hatefull Names and Epithites aforementioned; where∣by the dark Priests, benighted Elders and Proud Pharisees and others stirred up the People against them? and did not the Heathens put Wild-beasts Skins upon the Christians to make them appear like Beasts that the Dogs might be stirred up to Devour them? And was it not under the black and detestable Names of He∣reticks; Deluders, Schismaticks, (and sometimes of) Socerers (or Witches) That the Popish Clergy incensed the People against the An∣cient Protestants, prohibiting them all Trade and Commerce, ex∣posing them to cruel Scoffings and Revilings, and at last Murthering many Thousands of them (as may be seen at large in the Books of Martyrs) Was ever Christ or his Apostles found in such cruel pra∣ctices or stirring People up thereunto. Did he not rebuke those Disciples that desired the destruction of some that would not receive Him, telling them they knew not what Spirit they were off, and that he was not come to destroy mens lives but to save them? Joh. 9. 55, 56.
And were not the Stoners, Abusers, Scoffers and envious Mur∣thering Persecutors, and the Priests and Teachers that stirred them up thereunto, such as were filling up the measure of their ini∣quity and drawing down the Righteous and terrible Judgments of God upon themselves? Mat. 23. 32, 33, 34, 35, Acts. 7. 51. 52. So our earnest desire is, that they who have shown themselves so eager to be found in such cruel Practices in this our Age, may seriously consider what Spirit they are off, and whose Steps they are tread∣ing in, and that they may Repent before it be too late. Now we having often been wrongfully accused (and from thence hatefull Names put upon us) with denying the Trinity, the Ho∣ly Scriptures, that we undervalue the Merits and Sufferings of CHRIST; Some saying, we deny His Divinity, others saying, we deny His Humanity, The Ordinances, The Resurrection, and the Great Day of Judgement &c. We have therefore found a Concern upon us to Publish a brief Re∣lation of what our belief hath been & still is concerning those & o∣ther weighty points of Christian Doctine, & so leave it to the serious Consideration of the empartial Reader what ground there is for that mighty Clamour that hath been and yet continues against us, and whether it be not like theirs of Old that cryed out, Men of Israel Help? &c. Acts 21. 28.
The CHRISTIANITY of the People commonly called QVAKERS Asserted. Being a Brief account of Their Faith in Relation to several weighty Matters, where∣in Their Christian Belief is Questioned. Question. WHat's your Belief concerning the Blessed Trinity, as our Term is? Answer, Our Belief is, that in the Unity of the God-head there is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being those Three Divine Witnesses that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and that these Three are One, according to Holy Scripture Testmony. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Joh. 5. 7. Quest. Do you Believe the Divinity and Humanity of Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, or that Jesus Christ is truely God and Man? Answ. Yes, we verily believe that Jesus Christ is truly God and Man, according as Holy Scripture Testifies of Him, God over all blessed for ever, he true God and Eternal Life, the One Mediator between God and Men, even he Man Christ Jesus. Joh. 1. 1. 2. Rom. 9. 5. 1 Joh. 5. 20. 1 Tim. 2. 5. Quest. Do you believe and expect Salvation, and Justification, by the Righteousness and Merits of Jesus Christ, or by your own Righteousness or Works? Answ. By Jesus Christ his Righteousness, Merits and Works, and not by our own, God is not indebted to us for our deservings, but we to him for is free Grace in Christ Jesus, whereby we are saved through Faith in Him not of our selves) and by his Grace inabled truly and acceptably to serve and ollow Him as He requires; He is our All in All, who worketh all in us at is well pleasing to God. Rom. 3. 24. Eph. 2. 8. 9. Quest. Do you believe Remission of Sin, and Redemption through the Sufferings, Death, and Blood of Christ? Answ. Yes, through Faith in Him as he Suffered and Died for all Men, ave himself a Ransom for all, and His Blood being shed for the Remission f Sins; so all they who sincerely believe and obey Him, receive the Benefits d blessed Effects of his suffering and dying for them, they by Faith in His ame, receive and partake of that Eternall Redemption which he hath tained for us, who gave Himself for Vs that he might Redeem us from Iniquity; He died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification; and if walk in the Light as He is in the Light, we have fellowship one with
another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all Sin, 1 Joh. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 5 14. 1 Joh. 1. 7. Quest. Do you believe and own the Divine Offices of Jesus Christ in his Church? Answ. Yes, verily we sincerely believe and own Christ, not only as He is the Light of the World, enlightning every Man coming into it; but also that he is given for a Leader, and for a Commander. And that He is both King, Priest, and Prophet to and over His Church and People. He is the Minister of the Sanctuary which the Lord pitched, and not Man, and we are to hear Him in all things. Isa. 55. 4. Zech. 9. 9. Heb. 3. 1. Deut 18. 15. 18. Heb. 8. 2. Quest. Do you believe or own Baptism as Essential to Christianity, or necessary to Salvation, and for the Ingrafting us into Christ and His Church? Answ. We believe and are fully perswaded, That Baptism which is Essential to Christianity, and the saving Baptism, or the Cause without which none can be true Christians, or saved, is the Inward Spiritual washing of Regeneration by the Word of Life. This is the saving Baptism into Christ and His Church, which produceth the Answer of a Good Conscience towards God, of which the outward was a Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. This is that One Baptism of Christ by one Spirit into that one Body, whereof Christ is Head. Eph. 4. 5. As to Dipping or Sprinkling Infants, or Young Children we find no Precept or Precedent in Holy Scripture for the practice thereof, and therefore we cannot think our not believing it Essential (or necessary) to Salvation, or making Christians; a sufficient Argument to prove us no Christians (unless it can be proved that none are saved without it, and that all are saved that have it.) Considering also what's positively affirmed in the 39 Articles of the Church of England as in the 6th. Article, That whatsoever is not Read in the Holy Scriptures, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, That it should be believed as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. And in the 20th. Article, That the Church ought not to Decree or Enforce anything against or besides Holy Writ, to be believed for necessity of Salvation; And in Article 21. That things ordain'd by General Councils as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor Authority, unless that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. And in the Westminster Confession of Faith professed by the Kirk of Scotland Chap. 20. It is Said. God alone is Lord of the Conscience and hath left it free from the doctrins and Commandments of men, which are in any thing contrary to his word [i. e.] The holy Scripture or beside it, if matters of Faith or Worship so that to believe such doctrines or obey such Commands out of Conscience, is to betray true liberty
of Conscience, and the requiring of an implicit faith, and an absolute and blin obedience. Quest. Do you believe or own the Lords Supper, either as a sign of the Love that Christians ouht to have among themselves, or as a Seal of the Saints Communion and Commemoration of Christs Death for us, or as Figurative of Christs Body and Blood Spiritually received by Faith? Answ. The Supper of the Lord we own, and tenderly consider in a twofold Sense, 1. In the Figure. 2. In the Substance. 1. That our Lord Jesus Christ at his Supper with His Disciples, did Eat the Passover (which was for the Fulfilling and Consummation of the Fasts under the Law:) see Luke 22. And at this Supper He did take and Minister Bread and the Cup to his Disciples (for there was no Transubstantiation) saying, This do in Remembrance of Me; and said the Apostle, As often as ye shall Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup, ye shew the Lords Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. After this they did more clearly know His coming: and Christ after the Spirit; Jesus Christ in them. 2 Cor. 13. 5. and 5. 16. 2. And Christ sald to His Disciples, I will not Drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine until that day I Drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, Matth. 26 29. And likewise of the Bread, I will not any more Eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, Luke 22. 16. And he further said, I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father hath appointed to me that ye may Eat and Drink at my Table in my Kingdom, &c. Luke 22 29. 30. In these things we believe he spoke Mysteriously, and that every Member of his Spiritual Church, doth daily Spiritually partake of His Body and Blood by Faith, as the Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many are ONE Bread, and ONE Body, for we are all partakers of that ONE Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16. 17. The Son of God saith, Behold, I stand at the Door and knock, if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come into him, and will SVP with him, and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. And Wisdom calleth to the Simple, Come, Eat of my Bread, aud Drink of my Wine, Prov. 9. 4, 5. And saith Christ, The Bread of God is He that cometh down from Heaven, and giveth Life unto the VVorld, I am that Bread of Life; my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, He that Eateth my Flesh, and Drinketh my Blood, dwelleth in Me, and I in him, John 6. We believe that all who thus do truly partake of Christ by Faith, are in true Communion and Love among themselves, which they do
want, who are only in the outward Observations of Sign and Shadows. Quest. Do you own the Seals of the New Covenant? Answ. Yes, as the New Covenant is Spiritual, so are the Seals thereof (as they may be Termed) proper to it, and therefore we believe they stand not in any external Shadow, Sign or Figure, but in Spirit and Substance, the Seals of the New Covenant (which is Inward and Spiritual) must needs be the Evidence, Testimony and Work of the Holy Spirit, giving us Assurance through Faith of our share and Interest in that Covenant. See what the Holy Scripture saith in this Case; see 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who hath also Sealed us and hath given us the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. Ephes. 1. 13. After that ye believed ye were Sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise. And Ephes. 4. 30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are Sealed unto the day of Redemption. Our Christian Sense and Belief in these Matters may be briefly summ'd up in what follows, viz. 1. We believe, That the spiritual appearance, and living enjoyment of Christ in spirit, is above all outward signs, shadows, or figures, or Remembrance only of him thereby. And that Christ more clearly discovers himself by his spirit in the New Covenant, then by any outward Representations in the Old, or thereunto appertaining. 2. That the One Baptism of the spirit, is a seal or confirmation of the New Covenant to true Believers, and of them in it; and so is their spiritual Eating and Drinking with him in his Kingdom a certain assurance, Seal or Evidence of their spiritual Communion with Him, and in Him. 3. As all outward shadows and figures were of a decreasing nature, so there is the substance thereof, which they pointed at, and wherein they ended, though the names given to the shadows were carried along to the substance also, that it might the more plainly appear in Scripture how the shadows were fulfilled in the substance Christ; as in the Old Covenant there was outward Circumcision of the flesh; in the New, there is the Inward Circum∣cision of the Spirit. In the Old, there was diverse Washings or Baptisms Heb: 9: 10: In the New, the One Baptism of Christ; in the Old, the Feast o the outward Passover kept with unleavened Bread, and other Feasts observed &c. In the New Covenant, Jesus Christ is our Passover, and the Feast i to be kept with unleayened Bread of sincerity and truth; and here the O Bread of Life is known and received. 4. We do not read nor find in Scripture, that One outward Type o
shadow, was a Type of another Type outward, but alwayes of the thing Typified ot shadowed forth, which was the substance and end of that shadow or Type, as may be shewen at large, if any undertake to shew us any shadow or thing that is figurative in its own nature (mentioned in Scripture) which they suppose we cannot shew the substance of, under the same Name or Title. Quest. Do you believe and own the Holy Scriptures contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, to be given by Divine Inspiration, and to contain all Matters of Doctrine and Testtmonie, &c. necessarie to be believed and practiced in order to salvation, and Peace with GOD? Answer. Yes, we do, and by the assistance of the Grace and good Spirit of GOD, which gives the true understanding of the Mind of GOD, and meaning of Holy Scripture, we always desire to live in the Faith, Knowledge and Practice of them in all things appertaining to Life and Godliness, Holy Scripture being given by Divine Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, Correction, and Instruction, that the Man of GOD may be perfect, thorowly furnished unto every good Work, able to make the Man of GOD wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus. A Further Declaration of what our Christian Belief and Profession hath been and still is, in Respect to JESUS CHRIST, the Only begotten Son of GOD, his suffering, Death, Resurrection, Glory, Light, Power, Great-day of Judgment &c. WE Sincerely Profess Faith in GOD, by his only begotten Son JESUS CHRIST, as being our Light and Life, our only way to the Father.Heb. 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Joh. 14. 6. 1 Tim. 2▪ 5. That GOD Created all things, He made the Worlds by his Son JESVS
CHRIST; He being that Powerful and Living Word of GOD by whom all things were made,Eph. 3. 9. Joh. 1. 1. 2. 3. Heb. 1. 2. And that the Father the Word and the Holy Spirit are one in Divine Being, inseparable; One true living and eternal GOD▪ blessed for ever.1 Joh. 5. 7. Yet That this Word or Son of GOD in the fulness of time, took flesh▪ became perfect man according to the flesh, descended and came of the Seed of Abraham and DavidRom. 1. 3, 4. but was miraculously Conceived by the Holy Ghost and born of The Virgin MaryMat. 1. 2. 3. and also further declared to be the Son of GOD with Power according to the Spirit of Sanctification by the Resurrection from the Dead.Rom. 1. 3, 4. That in the Word (or Son of GOD) was Life and the same life was the Light of men, and that he was and is that true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the WorldJoh. 1. 4, 9. and therefore that men are to believe in the Light that they may become Children of the LightJoh. 12. 36. Isa. 2. 5. Hereby we believe in Christ the Son of God as he is the Light and life within us, and wherein we must needs have sincere respect and honour to (and belief in Christ as in his own unapproachable and incomprehensible Glory and fulness 1 Tim. 6. 16. As he is the Fountain of Life and Light, and Giver thereof unto us▪ Christ as in himself, and as in us being not divided. And that as man Christ dyed for our sins and rose again, and was received up into Glory in the Heavens1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Tim. 3. 16. Mat. 19. 28. and 25. 31. Luke 9. 26▪ and 24. 26. He having in his dying for all bee that One and great universal Offering and Sacrifice for peace. Atonement and Reconciliation between God and Man;Rom 5. 10. 11. Heb. 2. 17. 18. Eph. 2. 16. 17. Col. 1. 20▪ 21. 22. and he is the Propitiation not for sins only but for the sins of the whole world1 John. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 9. we were reconciled by his death, but saved by his Life. That Jesus Christ who sitteth at the right hand of the Throne of th Majesty in the Heavens, yet is he our King, High Priest and ProphetZech. 9. 9. Luke 19. 38. John 12. 15. Heb. 3. 1, 6. Deut. 18. 15, 18. Acts 3. 22. and 7, 37. his Church, a Minister of the Sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man:Heb. 8. 1. 2. He is Intercessor and Advocate wit the Father in Heaven and there appearing in the presence of God for usHeb. 7. 25. Heb. 9. 24.
being touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Sufferings and sorrows, and also by his Spirit in our hearts, he maketh Intercession according to the Will of God, crying Abba Father.Rom. 8. 2, 6, 27, 34. Gal. 4. 6. For any whom God hath GiftedEphes. 3. 7. 1. 13, 14, 10. and Called sincerely to Preach Faith in the same Christ, both as within and without us, cannot be to Preach two Christs, but one and the same Lord, Jesus Christ1 Cor. 8. 6. Chap, 15. 3, 8. having respect to those degrees of our spiritual Knowledge of Christ Jesus in usJohn 15. 26. and Chap. 16. 13, 14, 15. and to his unspeakable fulness and GloryJohn 1. 16. as in himself in his own intire Being wherein Christ himself and the least measure of his light and life as in us or in Mankind are not divided nor separable, no more than the Sun is from its Light. And as he ascended far above all Heavens that he might fill all thingsEph. 4. 10. his fulness cannot be comprehended or contained in any finite CreatureCol. 1. 19. and 2. 9. But in some measure known and experienced in us as we are capable to receive the same; as of his fulness we have received Grace for Grace, Christ our Mediator received the Spirit not by measure,John. 3. 34. but in fulness but to every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the Gift of ChristEphes. 4. 7. That the Gospel of the Grace of God should be preached in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy GhostMatth. 28. 19. being OneJohn 1. 1, 2, 3. 4. in Power, VVisdom, and Goodness, and indivisible (or not be divided) in the great Work of Mans Salvation. We sincerely confess (and believe) in Jesus Christ both as he is true God and Perfect ManJohn 1. 1, 2. Romans 9. 5. 1 John 5. 20. 1 Tim. 2. 5. and that he is the Author of our living Faith in the Power and Goodness of God, as manifest in his Son Jesus Christ, and by his own Blessed Spirit (or divine Unction) revealed in us1 John 2. 20, 27. and Chap. 1. 1. whereby we inwardly feel and taste of his goodness1 Peter 2. 3. John. 6. 33, 35, 51, 57, 58. life and Vertue; So as our souls live and Prosper by and in him. And the inward sense of this Divine Power of Christ and faith in the same, and this inward experience is absolutely necessary
to make a true sincere and perfect Christian in spirit and life. That divine honor & worship is due to the Son of GodJohn. 5. 23. Heb. 1. 6. & that he is in true faith to be prayed unto, and the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ called upon as the primitive Christians did1 Cor. 1. 2. Acts 7. 59. because of the Glorious Union or oneness of the Father and the SonJohn. 10. 30. 1 John. 5. 7. and that we cannot acceptably offer up prayers or praises to God the Father, not receive a gracious answer or blessing from him but in and through his Dear Son Christ. That CHRIST's Body that was Crucified was not the God-head, yet by the Power of GOD was raised from the Dead, and that the same CHRIST that was therein Crucified, ascended into Heaven and GlorieLuke. 24. 26. is not que∣stioned by us. His Flesh saw no CorruptionPsal. 16. 10. Acts 2. 31. 13. 35. 37. it did not corrupt, but yet doubtless his Body was changed into a more GloriousPhil. 3. 21. and Hea∣venlie Condition that 'twas in when subject to divers Sufferings on Earth; but how and what manner of Change it met withall after it was raised from the Dead, so as to become such a Glorious Body (as 'tis declared to be) is too wonderfull for Mortals to Conceive, Apprehend or Pry into, (and more meet for Angels to see) The Scripture is silent therein as to the man∣ner thereof, and we are not Curious to Enquire or Dispute it, nor do we esteem it necessary to make our selves Wise above what's written1 Cor. 4. 6. as to the Manner and Condition of Christ's Glorious Body as in Heaven, no more than to Enquire how Christ appeared in divers Manners of FormesMark 16. 12. John 20. 15. 1 John 20. 19. Luk. 24. 36, 37. and Chap. 24. 31. or how he came in among the Disciples the Doors being shutl or how he vanished out of their sight after he was risen: However, we have cause to believe his Body as in heaven is changed into a most Glorious Condition far transcending what it was on Earth, otherwise how should our low Bo∣dy be Changed, so as to be made like unto his Glorious BodyPhil. 3. 21. For when he was ou Earth and attended with Sufferings, he was said to be like unto us in all things, sin only exceptedHeb. 2. 17. and 4. 15. which may not be so said of him as now in a state of Glory, as he prayed for,John 17 5. otherwise where would the Change be both in him and in us?
True and living Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of the Living GodJoh. 14. 1. has respect to his entire Being and Fulness, to him entirely as in himself, and as all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto himMatth. 28. 8. Chap. 11. 27. Joh. 17. 2. Heb. 1. 4. Chap. 2. 8. and also an Eye and Respect to the same Son of GodJohn 14. 23. and 17. 21, 22, 23, 24, 26. verse as inwardly making himself known in the Soul in every Degree of his Light, Life, Spirit, Grace and Truth, and as he is both the Word of Faith and a Quickning Spirit in us1 Cor. 15. 45. Rom. 10. 7. 8. whereby he is the immediate Cause, Author, Object and Strength of our Living Faith in his Name, and Power, and of the Work of our Salvation from Sin and Bon∣dage of Corruption; and the Son of God cannot be divided from the least or lowest Appearance of his own Divine Light or Life in us, (or in Mankind) no more than the Sun from its own light; nor is the sufficiency of his Light with∣in by us set up in opposition to him the Man Christ, or his Fulness considered as without us, nor can any Measure or Degree of Light received from Christ, as such, be properly called the Fulness of Christ, or Christ as in Fulness, nor ex∣clude him so considered from being our Compleat Saviour for Christ himself to be our Light, our Life, our SaviourJohn 1. 4. 9. and Chap. 3. 19 and Chap. 12. 35, 36, 49. and Chap. 8. 12. is so consistent, that without his Light we could not know life nor him to save us from sin, or deliver us from darkness, condemnation or wrath to come: And where the least degree or measure of this Light and Life of Christ, is sincerely waited in, followed and obeyed, there's a blessed encreass of Light and grace known and felt, as the path of the Just it shines more and more untill the perfect day,Prov. 4. 18. Psal. 36. 9 Col. 1. 23. and thereby a growing in Grace and in the knowledge of God and of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ hath been and is truely experienced, and this Light, Life or spirit of Christ within (for they are one Divine Principle) is sufficient to lead into all Truth, having in it the diverse Ministerations both of Judgement and mercy, both of Law and Gospel, even that Gospel which is Preached in every intelligent Creature under Heaven, it does not only (as in its First Ministeration Manifest Sin, and reprove and condemn for sin, but also excites and leads them that be∣lieve in it to true Repentance and thereupon to receive that mercy, Pardon and Redemption in Christ Jesus which he hath obtained for Mankind on those Gospel terms of Faith, (in his name,) true repentance and Conversion to Christ there∣by required.
Now, though we had the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament and a belief of Christ crucified and raised &c. We never knew the mystery thereof until we were turned to the Light of his Grace and Spirit within us, We knew not what it was to be Reconciled by his Death, and Saved by his Life, or what it was to know the fellowship of his Sufferings, the Power of his Resurrection, or to b made comformable to his Death, we knew not untill he opened our eyes, and turned our minds from darkness unto his own Divine Light, and Life within us. Notwithstanding we do sincerely and greatly esteem and value the Holy Scrip∣tures; Preaching and Teaching of faithful divinely inspired, gifted and qualified persons & Ministers of Jesus Christ as being great outward helps and Instrumen∣tal in his hand and by his spirit for Conversion where God is pleased to afford those outward helps & means as that we neither do nor may oppose the suffici∣encie of the Light or Spirit of Christ within to such outward helps, so as to reject disesteem or undervalue them, for they all proceed form the same Light and Spirit and tend to turn Peoples minds thereunto and all center therein. Nor can the Holy Scriptures or true Preaching without be Justly set in oppo∣sition to the Light or Spirit of God or Christ within; for his Faithful Messenger are Ministers thereof being sent to turn People to the same Light and Spirit i them. Acts 26. 18. Rom. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 4. 6. 1 Peter 2. 9. 1 John 2. 8. 'Tis certain that great is the Mystery of Godliness in it self in its own Being excellency, namely that God should be and was Manifest in the Flesh, Justifie in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, Believed on it th World, and received up into Glory. And it is a great and precious mystery of Godliness and Christianity also th Christ should b spiritually and effectually in mens hearts to save and deliv them from sin, Satan and bondage of Corruption, Christ being thus reveall in true Believers and dwelling in their hearts by Faith, Christ within the ho of Glory, our Light and Life who of God is made unto us, Wisdom, Righteouness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. And therefore this Mystery of Godliness both as in its own Being and Glor
and also as in men (in many hid and in some revealed) hath been and must be Testified, Preached and believed where God is Pleased to give Commission (and prepare Peoples hearts for the same) and not in mans will. Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Great day of Judgement yet to come, beyond the Grave or after Death, and CHRISTS Comming without us to Judge the Quick and the Dead; (as diverse Questions are put in such Terms) what the Holy Scriptures plainly declare and testifie in these matters▪ we have great reason to Credit and not to Question, and have been alwayes ready to Embrace with Respect to CHRIST and his Apostles own Testimony and Prophecies. 1. FOR the Doctrine of the Resurrection; If in this Life onely we have Hope in Christ, we are of all Men most Miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. We sincerely believe not only a Resurrection in Christ from the fallen, sinfull State here, but a Rising and Ascending into Glory with Him hereafter, that when he at last appears, we may appear also with him in Glory, Col. 3. 4. 1 John 3. 2. But that all the Wicked, who live in Rebellion against the Light of Grace, and Die finally Impenitent, shall come forth to the Resurrection of Condemnation. And that the Soul or Spirit of every Man and Woman shal be reserved in its own distinct, proper Being, (so as there shall be as many Souls in the World to come as in this) and every Seed; (yea every Soul) shall have its proper Bo∣dy as GOD is pleased to give it, 1 Cor. 15. A Natural Body, is sown a Spi∣ritual Body is Raised; that being first which is Natural, and afterwards nat which is Spiritual; And though it's said, this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall put on Immortality, the Change shal be such, as Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of GOD, neither doth Corruption inherit Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. Chap. We shall be Rais∣ed out of all Corruption and Corruptibility, out of all Mortality; and he Children of GOD and of the Resurrection shall be equal to the Angels of GOD in Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. Mark 12. 25. Luke 20. 36.
And as the Celestial Bodies do far excell Terrestriall; So we expect ou Spirituall Bodies in the Resurrection shall far excell what our Bodies now are, and we hope none can Justly blame us for thus expecting better bodie than they now are. Howbeit, we esteem it very unnecessary to Dispute or Question how the Dead are Raised, or with what Body they come? But rather submit that to the Wisdom and Pleasure of Almighty GOD. Secondly, For the Doctrine of Eternal Judgement. GOD hath committed all Judgement unto His Son JESUS CHRIST, and He is Judge of both Quick and Dead, and of the States and Ends of all Mankind. John 5. 22. 27. Acts 10. 42. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Peter 4. 5. That there shall be hereafter a Great Harvest which is the End of the World; A Great Day of Judgement, and for the Judgment of that Great Day the Holy Scripture is clear, Matthew 13. '39, 40, 41. Chap. 20. 15. and 11. 24. Jude 6. When the Son of Man cometh in His Glory, and all the Holy Angels with Him; Then shall He sit upon the Throne in his Glory, and before Him shall be gathered all Nations &c. Matthew 25. 31. 32. to the end compared with Chapter 22. 31. Mark 8. 38. Luke 9. 26. and 1 Corinthians 15. 52. 2 Thessalonians 1. 7, 8. to the end. 1 Thessalontans 4. 19. Revelation 20. 12, 13, 14, 15. That this Blessed Heavenly Man (this Son of Man, who hath so deep∣ly Suffered and Endured so many Indignities and Persecutions from his Ad∣versaries, both to Himself and his Members, and Brethren) should at last▪ even in the Last and Great Day, Signally and Manifestly Appear in Glory and Triumph, attended with all his Glorious Heavenly Host and Retinue, before all Nations, before all his Enemies, and those that have denyed him▪ this will be to their great Terror and Amazement; that this most Glorious Heavenly Man and his Brethren, that have been so much Contemned and set at Nought, should be thus Exalted over their Enemies and Persecutors in Glory and Triumph, is a righteous thing with GOD; and that they that Suffer with Him, should Appear with Him in Glory and Dignity▪ when He thus Appears at Last. CHRIST was Judge of the World and o the Prince thereof when on the Earth, John 9. 39, and 12. 31. He is still Judge of the World, the Wickedness and Prince thereof by his Light, Spirit and
Gospel in Mens Hearts and Consciences, John 16. 8, 11. Matthew 12. 18, 0. Isaiah 42. 1. Romans 2. 16. 1 Peter 4. 6. And he will be the Judge and inal Determiner thereof in that Great Day appointed; GOD having ap∣pointed a Day wherein he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he hath ordained. Christ foretold, it shall be more tolerable for them of the Land of Sodom and Gommorah in the Day of Judgement, than for that City or People that would not receive his Messengers or Ministers &c. Matthew 10, 15. and ee Chap. 11. 24. and Mark 6. 11. Luke 10. 12. 14. It is certain that GOD knows how to deliver the Godly out of all their Trials and Afflictions, and at last to bring them forth, and raise them up into Glory with CHRIST; So, he knoweth also how to reserve the unjust and finally Impenitent unto the Day of Judgement to be Punished, 2 Peter 2. 9. He will bring them forth unto the Day of Destruction, Job 21. 30. The LORD can and will eserve such Impenitent, Presumptuous and Rebellious Criminals as bound under Chains of Darkness (as were the fallen Angels) unto the Judgment of the Great Day, Jude 6. Matthew 25. 30. 'Tis not for us to Determine or dispute the Manner how they shall be so reserved; but leave it to GOD, He knows how. Something further Relating to this Doctrine of the Resurrection and eternal Judgment. AT the last Trump of GOD and Voice of the Arch Angel the Dead shall be raised incorruptible, the Dead in CHRIST shall rise first, 1 Corinthians 15. 52. 1 Thessalonians 4. 16. Compared with Matthew 24. 31. Many are often allarm'd in Conscience here by the Word and Voice of GOD who Stop their Ears and slight these warnings; But the Great and inal Alarm of the last Trumpet, they cannot Stop their Ears against, nor scape, it will unavoidably Seize upon and further awaken them finally to udgement; They that will not be alarm'd in their Consciences to Repentance or out of their Sins here, must certainly be alarmed to Judgment hereafter, whosoever do now wilfully shut their Eyes, hate, Contemn or Shun the Light of CHRIST or his appearance within shall at last be made to see and not be
able to Shun nor hide themselves from his Glorious and Dreadful appearance from Heaven with his Mighty Angels as with Lightning and in flaming Fire to render Vengeance on all them that know not GOD and obey not the Gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 1 Thess 7. 8. Matth. 24. 27. Luke 17. Dan. 10. 6. Job 37. 3. And though many now Evade and Reject the inward Convictions and Judgment of the Light and shut up the Records or Books thereof in their their own Consciences, they shall all be at last opened and every one Judged of these things Recorded therein according to their Works, Revelation 20. 12, 13, 14, 15. FINIS. Published in behalf of the People of God called QVAKERS by some of them.
ADVERTISEMENT. Any sober Enquirer that Desires to be fur∣ther informed concerning the Principles and Doctrines of the aforesaid People, and to see how they clear themselves of the Calumnies and Envious Aspersions that are cast upon them by their Adver∣saries may be pleased to read Their Confession of Faith and Catechism, and The Apology for the true Christian Divinity, also the Apology Vindicated being an Answer to John Broun, Truth Cleared of Calumnies, William Mitchel Vnmasked, all Written by Robert Barclay; a little Book called The Key by G. P. a Book Written by One Elizabeth Bathurst, Rusticus and Clericum being a late Answer to William Jamison by John Robertson &c.
