W1947A 12291546 58908
George Whitehead's PROTESTATION against Francis Bugg's PERSECUTION and Abuse of the People call'd Quakers, his (Quondum) Beloved Friends; occasioned by his late scandalous Paper, stiled, Some Reasons, &c. Memorandum, 1st. THat the said Francis Bugg, to his perpetual Infamy, invented and divulged in print a famous Piece of scandalous Forgery, in his extra judical Judicature, Trial and Condemnation of divers Honest Men of Good Reputation in and about the City of London, as Perjured Persons, for their Testimony against some of his notorious Falshoods and Perversions, staging them as set in a Pillory, Pictured, under the Title Perjury, with the first Letters of their Names over their Heads; as the notorious shew thereof, may be seen at large in the said Bugg's New Rome Arraigned, Anno 1693. And the Persons thus defamed, their patiently forbearing, hitherto to enter their particular Actions of Defamation against him, he has ungratefully requited, by his persisting to accumulate Calumnies, and repeat Reproaches a∣gainst the said People, to render them obnoxious. 2dly. The said Francis Bugg has also been detected for his presumptuous Impiety and Piece of insolent Forgery, in his diabolically inventing, forming and divulging a Sermon in George Whitehead's Name, stiling the same G. Whitehead's Sermon, to ridicule, defame and scandalize him and the said People, and their Annual Meeting, which he terms their Convocation; in which notorious Piece of Forgery and profane Romance, he the said F. B. useth the Sacred Name of God and Christ, the Light within, &c. adding there unto, another Piece of abominable Forgery and Impiety, in William Bingley's Name, as if he preached in Confirmation of the other. This prophane impious Romance, may be seen at large, in Francis Bugg's Book, stiled, The Pilgrim's Progress from Quakerism to Christianity; and answered by G. Whitehead, in his Book Entituled, The Rambling Pilgrim, or Prophane Apostate Exposed, Anno 1700. To his often repeated false Story against G. Whitehead, viz. That he put in his Answer upon Oath, i. e. To a Bill exhibited in the Lord Mayor's Court, April 9. 1695. And not only so, but that they (i. e. the Quakers) can take a Legal Oath to serve their private Interest; and that there are many Instances thereof in the Courts of Chancery. Answ. I who was Defendant, as I did (in my former Answer to F. B.) deny that I put in my Answer upon Oath, so (in good Conscience) I do still; for neither did I take an Oath, or Swear at all; for I openly signified, that for Conscience sake I could not Swear; and it was made appear that the Suit was vexatious; for I produced an effectual Release from the Plantiffs, under their own Hands and Seals, pleaded by Counsel in Court in barr of their unjust Claim; and my Answer was accepted only in these Words, viz. I verily believe my Answer is a True Answer: And if Jurat was Recorded or Endorsed, that was none of my Act; for it has been a known Form, that some Clerks have used and entred Jurat, or Juratus, when no Oath, Impreca∣tion or Ceremony of an Oath has been taken or used by the Persons concerned; and I am not of Opinion that Verily is an Oath, as some are. As to F. B's. old refuted unjust Imputations against the said People, viz. That they are mor∣tal Enemies to the Christian Religion, denying Jesus Christ of Nazareth to be the Christ, the Son of God, vilifying and contemning the Holy Scriptures, Contempt of Authority, &c. with many more injurious Aspersions of the like Nature, often repeated by him; unto which our plain Answers have long been extant; being printed and sold by T. Sowle in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street. But this implacable Adversary will Not be answered; he'll take no Answers, but re∣peat accumulate, and multiply his refuted Calumnies over, and over; turn and modelize them into several Shapes; sometime into History, sometime into Dialogue, sometime into Catechism, sometime into a Sermon, Prophane Romance, Scandalous Trial, &c. and all or mostly but the same Scurrilous Rubbish, like a mercenary Agent, he will be at work to defame and scandilize the People called Quakers: And when he hears of any of them attending the Parliament, he goes about peeping and prying, like a busie Body, in other Mens Matters; and if he hears Relief in any Case is proposed, or requested by them; then he rakes up some of his old repeated Calumnies and Slanders (which he can easily do out of his old Books and Pamphlets stuff'd there∣with) to asperse and persecute them with lying Papers, thereby imposing on (and abusing) Authority; which has been his Practice for many Years since he left the Quakers, and turned Persecutor against them. It has been manifest of old, that invidious and perfidious Apostates, are the worst sort of Persecutors. It appears, this Adversary would have no Favour shewn the said People, which is an Indication of his Persecuting Spirit, and Implacable Envy. Thus he treats the People call'd Quakers, since he was above 20 Years in Communion with them, and they esteemed his Beloved Friends; his Dear Friends, &c. Friend F. Bugg I wish thou mayest yet find a Place of Repentance before thy approaching Judgment comes inevitably upon thee. However know this, That thy Reverend Abetters will never gain Honour or Credit to them∣selves by thy irreverend Actions, nor be thy Advocates before the Barr of Divine Justice, (where you must all be accountable) nor will all their Bounty toward thee, excuse thy presumptuous Impiety before the Righteous Judge of all.
The QUAKER's PROTESTATION Against Francis Bugg's PERSECUTION, &c.
