W238 13100671 97409
A DEFENCE OF THE Missionaries Arts: WHEREIN The Charge of Disloyalty, Rebellions, Plots, and Treasons, asserted Page 76 of that Book, are fully proved against the Members of the Church of Rome, in a brief Account of the several Plots contrived, and Rebellions rai∣sed by the Papists against the Lives and Dig∣nities of Sovereign Princes since the Refor∣mation. By the Authour of the Missionaries Arts. LONDON, Printed for Richard Wilde, at the Map of the World in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1689.
TO THE READER. IT is strange, that of all men Papists should calumniate Protestants with Treason and Rebellions; were Modesty an Essential in the Complexion of a Jesuite, surely they would forbear, or Charity they so much talk of, and so little practise, to be found among them. Are horrid Massacres, villanous Assassinations, or Poisonings, the Effect of Charity? Or, Is Malice inveterate, Traducing or Ly∣ing the Fruit thereof? Yet nothing is more obvious in the whole course of History than those diabolical Machinations and hellish Con∣spiracies of Priests and Jesuites, especially within this last hundred and fifty years; and, generally speaking, Princes, and crowned Heads, have been most the objects of their Fury; and lest the palliation of Villany should pass on the weaker sort, and this Objection any way obtain, That forsooth most of these Contrivances were against Here∣tical Princes, excommunicated by the Pope and Church, and by con∣sequence delivered over to Satan, and that the killing of them really was no Murther, no more than of Wolves or Bears. To this I answer, That Princes of the same Communion, as Hen∣ry the Third of France, could not escape their fatal Stab, who never made profession of any other; and though Henry the Fourth was first a Protestant, and by them constrained to change, nay, and highly indulging them in his latter years, and as Mathieus says in his Life, to all appearance was devout, I mean in their way; yet from Ravilliac's Hand all this could not defend him. We need not long here fix, but look on former times, where for five or six hundred years nothing hath been more common, or more lamentable, than the story of se∣veral Princes, struck with the Lightening of the Court of Rome, and others wholly ruined by the Vatican Thunder, the consequences be∣ing either their own Tragical Ends, or, at the most favourable, strong and lasting Rebellions, which all conversant in History may plainly see; and so dextrous were they in translating to the other
World, that in the very Host it self was Poison given to one of the erman Emperours, so that Silence to none is a more necessary Vir∣tue, especially in this Case, than to regular Monks and Friars, who for several Ages have been the very Pest and Bane of Secular Princes, acting not only their Villanies in the Time of the Holy War, but in the time of their Antipopes also. But to return to our own Nation: What Barbarities have they not committed? What Impieties have they not been guilty of? What Cruelties have they left unattemp∣ted? and yet with a brazen Front daily bespatter Protestants, accu∣sing them of what themselves were Authours of; imitating herein the very Skum of Mankind; for none shall sooner call another Rogue than he that really is one; In whose mouth is Whore and Bitch more frequent, than hers that is a common Prostitute? And to proceed: What Disorder did they not cause, to plague and pester Harry the Eighth? What Commotions did they not raise all the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, besides the Attempts upon her Person? What Divisions did they not nourish all the time of Edward the Sixth, and in his death had no small share? How horridly desperate they were in King James's time, appears by their inhumane Powder-Treason; how intriguing they were in his Cabinet Councils is but too sad a Truth to relate; fomenting his humour in the Spanish Match, a ble∣mish inglorious to his Memory, leaving the Pallsgrave (though his Son in Law) a Victim to the House of Austria; and after by the Match with France, how did he embroil his Son! they managing under∣hand the Queen, and she by her powerfull Influence did the King; so that all the mischievous Evils of Charles the First they, like a Mole, wrought under ground, spotting his Life with that business of Rochell, and the Attempt of the Isle of Rhee, from whence the Protestants ge∣nerally date the ruine of their Church in France, and by the rising of the French Monarchs since that time has endangered the ruine of the whole Protestant Interest all over Europe, as of late years has been manifestly evident; and lastly they drew a Civil War upon him, though the Effects proved fatal, as well to themselves as others, (Priests generally being no reaching Politicians;) the consequence of which all men here do know: But that which most surprizes is their Villany in conclusion; for when his farther Life could yield them no advantage, they then conspired his Death; and to that end was a Correspondence kept with Ireton and some others, not doubting, he being gone, to have the bringing up of the Children, the Queen be∣ing wholly theirs, and managed to their Devotion; and how fatal this has been I need not farther speak; and if any are desirous of far∣ther
satisfaction, let them read Dr. Moulin's Answer to Philaa An∣glicus, written by an Apostate Protestant, who found not his Ac∣count by turning Papist, as indeed few of them have done; a man I must needs say of very good natural parts, though in several things but ill applied them; and his Conversation spoke him a Gentleman, but withall of a violent and impetuous Temper to whatever he took, and unfortunate in most things he projected. I am the longer on this Character, because most of our whiffling Priests and noisie Jesuites have raked for their Clamours against Protestants about the business of Rebellion, for many years last past, out of the Dunghill of that Book, written not long after the King's coming in; so that 'tis plain, that by their legerdemain Tricks in the Parliament Army they made them mutinous against their Lords and Masters; and in the time of the Agitatour's being rampant, meeting, as they say, in Putney Church, they were very brisk in Masquerade among them, several Priests, some as Troupers, others private Soldiers then listed, and though these Agitatours were first set up by Ireton, yet in process of time they became so unruly, and so beyond measure insolent, that they were by force necessitated to suppress them, and they were the occasion of breaking up that separate Party of Cromwell and Ireton in the name of the Army which they had entred into with the King, and by reason of them the King was frighted from Hampton-Court, making his Escape to the Isle of Wight, which did not long precede his death. Now after a lapse of some years his Son Charles the Second, with the rest of the Royal Family, were restored, and let us take a short view of their Transactions under him, where no sooner he was settled, but there came in whole Shoals of Priests from several parts beyond Seas, and Ireland, who for several years before had scarce any, and those that were skulking and lying close, was in a little time almost over∣stocked; and Father Walsh, who was a kind of a Trimmer among them, and, to speak truth, an honester sort of a man than most of them were, and willing to introduce the King's Authority as well as that of the Popes, to that End went over with the Duke of Ormond; and being countenanced by him, summoned an Assembly in Dublin to be held, of the most principal of them, where what a stir he had, and how strangely bigotted those Irish Understandings were to the See of Rome, is by himself at large set forth in his loyal Formulary: But one thing which himself notes is not unworthy the recital, The General among them were so strongly possest with some strange Cata∣strophe that was to arrive (eminently no doubt) to their Advantage, in the year approaching of Sixty six, that they generally expressed
themselves so averse from complying with the King in those matters, a violent presumption that the firing of London had been for some years in contriving; and the mention that is made of a Plot in the April Gazette, —65. was put into the Heads (by some Rascally Priests) of those poor little Rogues that were hangued, one of the main things charged upon them being the Firing of the City of London, and what influence their Councils had in that Prince's Reign, is obnoxious to all considering Men, by the breaking the triple League by that close Alliance between France and England for the Extirpation of Protestancy out of Heretical Holland, and no doubt, had it succee∣ded, out of England also, and the reason why it was not effected, was the Parliament's and People's Aukwardness to the War; but notwithstanding they were so not discouraged, but they resolved to go on with their Designs still in England, keeping, by the means of Cole∣man and Father le Chaise, a constant Correspondence with the Court of France, and so strong was their Ascendent with Charles the Se∣cond, that he publishes a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, by which, as Coleman in his Letters says, he doubted not the bringing in of their Religion; but this so allarmed the Parliament, that they were strangely uneasie and restless with him, resolving to give him no more Money untill he had recalled it, which at last with regret he did. This strangely nettled our Roguish Catholicks, who by this thought their Game cock sure; but being frustrated, used him in their Discourses as if he had been a Cobler, as pitifull, irresolute, nothing of Honour, his Word no ways to be relied on, and not wor∣thy of a Crown; and from that day forward plotted his removal, to make way, as they supposed, for a Man of Honour and Resolu∣tion, and who would not be balked with any thing of a Parliament; which at the last, as a great many suppose, they effectually did. And now James the Second ascended the Throne, and how the Scep∣tre by him was swayed, needs no long characterising; for Father Petre, with his Ghostly Associates, managed most things under him, who with that Priestly Violence so hurried on things, that on him at last the Tower of Siloam fell, and so weak and ridiculous were their Politicks, that they are not worth blurring Paper. Now to sum up all, it is plain by what precedes, That she several Popes and Court of Rome, in places where they power had, have been most Imperious and domineering, and nothing so bloudy, base, or cruel, but by their Priests has acted been, not in other Countries only, but in this our Nation too, for since the twelfth year, or thereabouts, Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Popery we may compare to an Imposthume bree∣ding
in the very Trunk of this Political Body, and broke in the year forty two into a Civil War, discharging only part, not all the cor∣rupt matter; and since regathering head, and filling up, about four years ago broke the second time, casting forth Filth and Corruption in quantity abounding, the Stench thereof offending almost all Men in the Nation, but I do not doubt but our State Physicians will use such detersive or cleansing Medicines, as well as sanative, as shall not ef∣fect a Palliative but a real and thorough Cure, and that the Countrey may be restored to its sound habit of Body. Now therefore as to the ensuing Treatise, it was occasioned by that Hero of English Jesui∣tism, Mr. Pulton, who being strangely nettled at those stinging Truths contained in the Missionaries Arts, challenges the Authour to make good his Assertion in page 76. viz. That the Romanists Treasons owned by their Popes, and by their great Men approved of since the Reformation, do far outnumber all the Plots and Insurrections that the Papists, or Malice itself can lay to the charge of Protestants; all which notwithstanding have been wholly condemned by the Body of our famous Divines: To satisfie therefore this Savoy Champion, and vindicate the Assertion aforesaid, the Authour of this Account with no little pains has endeavoured to give entire satisfaction: But such has the Misfortune been of Writers Protestant, that in dealing in Controversies they have to doe with a sort of Men, that when they have, yet will seemiugly take no Answer; and their last refuge is generally Banter and Whiffle, if downright Railing will not doe the feat. The Subject of this Treatise is most matter of Fact, and the Citations, though from their own selves no way unfairly used; for if otherwise they appear, let them openly be exposed, that all that are impartial may see and judge, whether any thing of Passion, Envy, or Malice, has Prepossed the Authour, I know 'tis natural for Men, when they have a bad Cause to manage, to be froward and testy, and where they are galled to kick and wince, and instead of argu∣ing closely to the purpose, to seek Evasions that may seem plausible, at least to the less refined Understanding, which has been the great Masterpiece of Romish Priests and Jesuites for many years together; for by their little Witticisms and Jokes upon Names, they keep up among their Party a kind of Reputation, not unlike Jack Pudding's on a Stage, they please (though at the same time delude) the foolish and gazing People; and if it happens that one slip falls from a Pro∣testant Pen, or a Citation carelesly passed, that has not proved true, what a Clutter have they not made about it, though the main of the
Subject still remains good. This, as a demonstration, plainly proves the Weakness of their Cause; and had Mr. Pulton but candidly read the History of the last Hundred Years, he must have acknowledged that this his great Challenge was a vain and frivolous Motion, and never needed to have given the Authour this Trouble; which being done, it's hoped will be to his firm conviction, and not only his, but any other who have been imposed on by false Notions. The truth is, this Treatise has been written above this year, but such was the Ini∣quity of the Times, that they would not bear, much less permit its then Publication; however its hoped 'tis not too late the World in this point to satisfie, the only Scope, Design, and End of this Dis∣course.
Advertisement of BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Richard Wilde at the Map of the World in St. Paul's Church-yard. THE Child's Monitor against Popery: written to preserve the Child of a Noble-man from being seduc'd by his Popish Parents, now made publick to prevent others being drawn aside from the Protestant Religi∣on: By the Author of the Country Parsons Advice to his Parishioners. Price. 1. d. The Countrey Parson his Admonition to his Parishioners, in Two Parts; persuading them to continue in the Protestant Religion: with Dire∣ctions how to behave themselves when any one comes to seduce them from the Protestant Religion: By the Authour of The plain Man's Re∣ply to Catholick Missionaries, in Two Parts: Very fit to be given by Mi∣nisters and others to such as shall want such helps. Price 2. d. The plain Man's Devotion in Two Parts; being a Method of daily Devotion. 24to. A Defence of the plain Man's Reply to Catholick Missionaries. 24to. Mr. King Chancellor of St. Patrick's, Dublin, his full Answer to Peter Manby, Dean of London-Derry, his pretended Motives to embrace the Romish Religion; clearly proving his Considerations were frivo∣lous and groundless, and that he had no just cause to leave the Com∣munion of the Church of England. 1687. The Missionaries Arts (to gain Proselytes) discovered: worthy the pe∣rusal of all Protestants. 4to. A Defence of the Missionaries Arts, being a brief History of the Romanists Plots, Insurrections, and Treasons, carried on to extir∣pate the Protestant Religion, and other evil Designs, for the last 600 years; wherein is fully proved that the Papists have far exceeded any that can be laid to the Protestant's Charge, notwithstanding their false pretences of being free from Disloyalty and Rebellion: By the Au∣thour of The Missionaries Arts. 4to. 1689. A plain Defence of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the meanest Capacity; being an Answer to 125 ensnaring Questions, often put by the Papists to pervert Protestants from their Holy Religion: By the Authour of The Missionaries Arts, in 8vo. Mr. Shaw's New Syncritical Grammar, teaching English Youth the Latine Tongue, according to the Rules in the Oxford Grammar. 1687. Manuductio in Aedem Palladis: quâ utilissima Methodus Authores bonos legendi indigitatur, sive Tractatus utilissimus de Usu Authoris: By Thomas Horne, M. A. formerly chief School master of Tunbridge, afterwards of Aeton School near Windsor. This Book is highly approved of and recommended by the learned School-Masters to their Scholars, for their Instructions not only in Reading good and usefull Authours, but also for their Imitation of those excellent Authours, recommended by this ingenious Authour, who may well be esteemed a competent
Judge of good Latine; having by the consent of all Composed this Book so Elegantly that it's admired by most. Price 1s. 6d. 1687. All the Works of that famous Historian Salust, containing the Hi∣story of the Conspiracy and War of Catiline, undertaken against the Government of the Senate of Rome. 2dly, The War which Ju∣gurth many years maintained against that State, with all his Histori∣cal Fragments: Two Epistles to Caesar, concerning the Institution of a Common-wealth; and one against Cicero with Annotations; with the Life of Salust. This excellent Book, written by so faithfull an Hi∣storian, will certainly gratifie the Curious, being written with grea∣ter fidelity than others; and the Style of it being adapted to the present Idiom of Speech, and the Orations worded in a Style not much infe∣riour to the sublime Originals. 1687. The Academy of Sciences; being a short and easie Introduction to the Knowledge of the Liberal Arts and Sciences, with the Names of those famous Authours that have written on every particular Science; a Book highly usefull for the end it proposes: By D. A. Doctor of Physick. 1687. Observations in Chirurgery & Anatomy; with a Refutation of Mistakes and Errours in Anatomy and Chirurgery. Written chiefly for the bene∣fit of Tyroes & Students in Chirurgery. By James Young, Chirurgion. 1687. Plutarch's Morals, 3d. Vol. Translated from the Greek by sev. Hands. Wit Revived; or, A new way of Divertisement, in Questions and Answers: By Asdryasdust Tossoffacan. The Vanity of the Creature: By an eminent Hand. Octavo. Guy Miege's English Grammar. 8vo. Sir John Tlyer's Touchstone of Medicines. 8vo. 1687. The complete Planter and Siderist; or, choice Collections for propagating all manner of Fruit Trees, and making Sider. The Art of Pruning Fruit Trees. 8vo. 1685. Guy Miege's present State of Denmark. 8vo. A New Three-fold Grammar, for the English-man to learn French and Italian. For the French-man to learn English and Italian. For the Italian to learn French and English. 8vo. 1688. Montaign's Essays the third and last Volume. 8vo. The Gentlewoman's Companion for Cookery and Behaviour. Ovid's Epistles, Englished by the Wits of the Age, with the Additi∣tions of three new Epistles, and seven Cuts. 8vo. Dyer's Works. 12mo. Dr. Burnet against Varillas. 12mo. Cornelius Tacitus in 24to. Juvenal & Pertius. 24to. Mr. Petit of the Rights of Parliament. 8vo. Sir John Pettus of the Constitution.
A Brief Account of the several Plots Contriv'd, and Rebellions Rais'd by the Pa∣pists against the Lives and Dignities of Sovereign Princes, since the Reformation. IN the yearFowl. p. 287. 1520. about three years after Lu∣ther began to preach,Anno 1520. was that almost univer∣sal Rebellion in Spain, against the Emperour Charles the Fifth,1523. which lasted four years. Three years after, the Earl of Desmond entred into aFowl. p. 301. 302. Conspiracy against our King Henry the Eighth, and had procur'd a promise of assistance from King Francis the First of France; the Articles of which Agreement are yet extant; whereby it appears that the Design was, to make the Duke of Suffolk (then in France) King; but King Francis being taken Prisoner at the Battel of Pavia the year following,1524. and the Duke of Suffolk slain, the Design fell. The next year the Irish rebell'd,1525. and murther'd many of the English Inhabitants. ButFowl. p. 315. See the Bull at the end of Brutu Fulmen. Lond. 16. 4to. Ten years after,1535. the Pope drew up his Bull against K. Henry, though he did not publish it till 1538. wherein he asserts his Authority over Kings,1538. to plant and destroy as he sees good; and then pro∣ceeds with the Advice of his Cardinals to summon the King and all his Adherents, to appear before him at Rome on a day appointed; threatening them with the greater Excommunication, in case of Non∣appearance; and declaring Him and his Posterity incapable of any Honours, Possessions, or even of
being Witnesses; absolves all his Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, and commands them upon pain of Excommunication, not to obey him or his Officers; enjoyning all Christians to have no Com∣merce with him, all Ecclesiasticks to leave the Land, and all Dukes, Marquesses, &c. under the same pe∣nalty, to drive him out of his Kingdom; declares all Leagues made with him by any Princes void, ex∣horting them to endeavour his Ruine with their whole power; bestowing all the Goods of his Ad∣herents upon such as would seize them; command∣ing all Bishops to declare the King and his Follow∣ers Excommunicate, and denouncing the same Cen∣sures against whosoever should hinder the publicati∣on of this Bull. This piece of prodigious Impudence and Vanity would not satisfie the Pope, but he immediately set his Instruments to work to prosecute the design of his thundering Bull; so that the beginning of the next year this Letter was written from Paris to one Fryar Forrest.1536. Hunting of the Romish Fox. p. 3, 4, 5. Brother, WE behold how the King is changed from a Christian to an Heretick; and how he hath robb'd Christ's Vicar of his Rights and Privileges, by placing himself in his Holiness's Seat there, as Su∣preme over the Catholick Church within the Realm. It was the late damn'd Assembly of Lords and Commons furthered his Pride, otherwise he could not nor durst not assume it to himself: We have thought of these passages, and do agree, That there is no way to break this Tyrant's Neck but one; Puff him up in his Pride, and let our Friends say unto him, That it is beneath so mighty a Monarch as he, to advise with Parliaments, but to act all in Person; and that it be∣hooveth
his Majesty to be chief Actor himself. If he assumes this, it will take off great Blemishes from the Nation, which the Church holds them guilty of, and doe our Business: For then the People (it being contrary to their Laws) will fall from him; also the Catholick Party of his Council will be too strong for the Here∣ticks, and then the Common sort will be the abler to de∣clare his Tyranny. This is to be contriv'd with the Church's Members, and cautiously, because it is ob∣served that the Parliaments of England have hindred the Church in most of the Kings Reigns, otherwise She had held her Party better than She does now. You have our Convent's hearty Prayers for your Guide. From St. Francis at Paris Primo. Id. Jan. 1536. Thomas Powell. This Letter was found two years after among Father Forrest's Papers, together with an account of vast Summes which he had expended for the Church of Rome and her Designs. Fowlis Hist. of Romish Treas. p. 316. But this Design not being sufficient, the Pope offered England to James the Fifth, King of Scots, and presented him with a Cap and consecrated Sword. When that Offer of what was none of his suc∣ceeded not according to his Desires, the same Pope Paul the 3d. by his Bull of theFoxes & Fire-brands, part. 2. p. 34. Dublin, 1682. Mr. Ma∣son Minister of Finglas, in the year 1566. copied the substance of the Bull out of the Records at Paris. year following,1537. ab∣solv'd in general, all Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, unto Heretical Kings, Princes and States, as they be Enemies unto the Holy See of St. Peter; all Men from the tye of their Heretical Wives; Wives from their Heretical Husbands, &c. which was accompanied with aFowlis's Hist. p. 316. Surii Commentar. p. 314. Speed's Chron. p. 1033. Rebellion in Lincolnshire, under the Conduct of one Mackarel, a Monk, to the number of Twenty thousand; a∣gainst
whom the King prepar'd to march in Person: but their first Fury being over, they embraced the King's Pardon, and returned home. But this Commotion was succeeded bySurii Com∣ment. brevis. p. 314. another more dan∣gerous, led by the Lord Lumley,Fowlis's Hist. p. 316. several Knights and Gentlemen,Speed's Chron. p. 1034. with most of the Clergy: this Ar∣my in the North consisted of 40000 Men, well Ar∣med, who call'd themselves the Holy Pilgrimage, and the Pilgrimage of Grace; they had the Five Wounds of our Lord, the Chalice, and the Host, painted in their Standard, and the Name of Jesus upon their Sleeves; their whole pretence was for Religion: in their March they took Pontefract Castle, but were at length appeas'd. ButSpeed's Chr. p. 1041, 1042. soon after the same Per∣sons raised another Insurrection, in which several Monks came armed into the Field as Souldiers, who were taken, and with the Ring-leaders of the Re∣bellion Executed. Speed's Chr. p. 1044. Two years after (if not the next year to the last Rebellion,1539. for some place it in the year 1538.) the Marquess of Exceter, the Lord Montacute, and his Brother, Sir Edward Nevill, and others, enter'd into a Conspiracy to depose the King, and advance Reynold Pool, then Dean of Exceter, and afterwards Car∣dinal to the Throne; for which, the Marquess, Lord Montacute, and Sir Edward Nevill, were Be∣headed upon Tower-Hill. In the year 1546.Bulla Qarta Pauli Terti. Jesuitis conces∣sa apud Hospin. Histor. Jesuit. p. 104, 105, 106. this Bull is called by the Jesuits, Mare magnum. Pope Paul the Third,1546. not con∣tent with his shewing his pretended Authority over Kings in the two Bulls mention'd before, published another in favour of the Jesuits, whereby he ex∣empts them and their Goods from the Power of any but himself; and commands all Princes to swear not to molest the Society, or invade their Privile∣ges; and pronounces an Anathema against all who will not obey the Bull.
Speed's Chro∣nicle. p. 1110, to 1114. Two years after this,Anno 1548. King Edward the Sixth being settled in the Throne, one Body, a Commissio∣ner, pulling down Images by the King's Order, was stabbed by a Priest, and a Rebellion was rais'd in Cornwall, Humphrey Arundell, Governour of the Mount, with other Gentlemen, gathering together Ten thousand Men, besieged Exceter, and reduc'd it to very great Extremity; declaring they would have Popery and the Six Articles restor'd: They fought four several Battels with the King's Forces, but at last were entirely Routed, and their Leaders Executed Yet the next year inSpeed's Chronicle. p. 1114, 1115, 1116. Norfolk they Re∣bell'd again,1549. and when the King sent them his Par∣don they refus'd it: after which, they took the City of Norwich, and fir'd it, beat the Marquess of Northampton, and were very near Defeating the Earl of Warwick, whose Cannon they took, and refus'd the King's Pardon a second time, but were at length Defeated; and so wereSpeed's Chron. p. 1116, 1117. another Party, who took Arms upon the same Account, that year in Yorkshire. There were other Insurrections in this King's time, which I will not at present menti∣on, only observe what is confess'd by a late noted Authour of the Romish Church,Fifth part of Church Govern∣ment. p. 139. Oxford. 1637▪ That these Risings of the Laity in such numbers, for their former way of Religion, would not have been, had not their Clergy justified it unto them. Hist. of the Council of Trent, p. 262, 263. London. 1684. 8vo. After this,1555. we find that Pope Paul the Fourth; following the steps of his thundering Name-sake, when the Dyet of the Germans at Ausburgh made an Edict for full Liberty of Conscience, whereby the Protestants were maintain'd in the Possession of their Church Revenues, fell into a furious rage; publickly threatening the Emperour and King of the Romans, That he would make them repent it; pro∣testing, that if he did not recall the Edict, he would
proceed against them with as severe Censures as he intended to use against the Protestants; telling all the Ambassadors in his Court, That he was above all Princes, that he expected not that they should treat with him as with their Equal, that he could alter and take away Kingdoms as he thought good: And one day at Dinner, in the presence of many Persons of the highest Quality, he affirmed, That he would subject all Princes under his Foot. No wonder then that the same Spirit of Opposition to Princes actuate the Members of the Church, which possess'd their Head in such a degree, that upon the Resignation of the EmperourFowl. Hist. of Romish Trea∣sons. p. 287. Charles the Fifth,1558. Ferdinand his Brother was rejected by the Pope; who affirmed, That none had power to Resign but into his hands; and so it belong'd to him to nomi∣nate a Successor, not to the Electors: but he kept the Imperial Crown, though the Pope would never acknowledge him for Emperour. With the same Haughtiness did he demean himself towardsIdem. p. 329. Sir Edward Karn, the English Agent at Rome; who ac∣quainting him, by order from her Majesty, of Queen Elizabeth's Accession to the Crown, the Pope an∣swer'd, That the Kingdom of England was held in Fee of the Apostolick See, that she being Illegitimate could not succeed, and therefore it was great boldness in her to assume the Government without his leave; yet if she would renounce her Title, and refer all to him, he would act as became his Honour. But the Queen took no care to satisfie this blustering Gentleman, who soon after dyed. Fxes and Firebrands. part. 2. p 20. But the Pope who succeeded him,1560. Pius the Fourth, issued out a strict Bull, commanding all the Learned of that Church to find out Arguments to persuade Subjects to break their Oaths of Allegi∣ance, in favour of the Apostolick See; in order to
which, he granted several Dispensations to preach among the Protestants of England, and to marry, if need were. And the same year his good Sons in Ire∣land, by their example, shewed their Obedience to it; Fowlis's Hist. p. 302. for Shan O Neale, Earl of Tyrone, rebelled, but fin∣ding himself too weak, submitted and had his Par∣don, though not till two years after. In the mean while,1561. viz.Idem. p. 329. the next year, the Pope's Nuncio in Ire∣land joyn'd himself to the Rebels, publickly assist∣ing them; and by his Authority pronounced the Queen deprived of that Kingdom. But the year following,1562. though the Irish submitted, yetIdem. p. 330. Arthur Pool and others, contriv'd to joyn themselves with the Duke of Guise, land an Army in Wales, and Proclaim the Queen of Scots: to which, theGabut. Vit. Pii Quinti. l. 3. c. 9. apud. Fowl. ubi supra & Thuanus. lib. 44. ibid. fol∣lowing Pope afterwards added his endeavours to get our Queen Murthered, as the Writer of his Life in∣forms us. But in the mean time,1563. that it might not be said of this, that he neglected any thing for the advan∣tage of his Supreme Power, to keep his hand in ure, Fowl. Hist. p. 367. he published a Monitory against the Queen of Na∣varre, declaring, That if she did not turn Romanist within six Months, he would deprive her of her Dominions, and give them to any that would con∣quer them; but the King of France promising to stand by her, his terrible Threat serv'd only to shew how ready he was to Depose all Princes that offended him, if his Power had been equal to his Will. Concil. Trid. Sess. 25. c. 20. Decemb. 4. 1563. And in this year it was that the Council of Trent made that excellent Decree, whereby they confirmed all the Canons of Popes and Councils; which set the Pope above Princes, gave him Power over them, and exempted the Clergy from being subject to them; thereby endeavouring to Depose
all Princes, who knew themselves and their Rights too well to truckle under the usurped Power of their Supreme Head. Fowlis's Hist. p. 366. But though the Pope could not send any Sove∣reign Prince of his Errand to destroy the House of Navarre,1564. yet such obedient Sons were the Cardinal of Lorrain, and the rest of the House of Guise, that they resolv'd its Ruine. To which End they sent Captain Dimanche into Spain, to get Assistance, there, designing to fall upon Bearn, seize the Queen of Navarre, the young King, and his Sister, and send them to the Inquisition in Spain, to be pro∣ceeded against as Hereticks: but this Design was discovered, and so came to nothing. But in the same year we are informed by one of the English Spies at Rome,Edward Den∣num, See his Letter to the Lord Cecil of April. 13. 1564. in Foxes and Firebrands, p. 51, to 56.—out of the Memo∣rials of the Lord Ce. That the Pope granted Indulgences and Pardons to any Person that should assault Queen Elizabeth, either in private or publick; or to any Cook, Baker, Vintner, Physician, Brewer, Grocer, Chirurgion, or any other Calling, that should make her away; together with an absolute Remis∣sion of Sins to such Person's Heirs, and an Annuity for ever, and to be one of the Privy Council, suc∣cessively, whosoever Reigned. Speed's Chr. p. 1162. To the Endeavours of the Pope, O Neale like∣wise added his, by rebelling again, and murthering the English;Fowlis Hist. p. 302. committing the most barbarous Cruel∣ties imaginable;1565. but his Power was broken in a pitcht Battel the year following; notwithstanding which, he continued his Rebellion till two years af∣ter, when he was Stabb'd by Alexander Oge, whose Brother he had slain before.1567. But though the Rebels had such ill success,1568. yet the Pope will not be disheartened, but the next year sends oneFowlis's Hist. p. 130, 131. Rodolpho, a rich Florentine Gentleman, into England, to stir up the People against the Queen:
To him the King of Spain joins the Marquess of Ce∣tona, who,Import. Consi. p. 57. under the pretence of an Embassy, was sent over to countenance the Rebellion, and com∣mand the Forces which the Duke of Alva should send from the Low Countries; in order to which La Motte, Governour of Dankirk, had come pri∣vately, iu the Habit of a Sailer, to sound the Ports. Rodolph was furnished with plenty of Money from the Pope, which he distributed to make a Party; in∣to which they drew the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, with others, who, perceiving their Plot discovered, submitted, and begged Par∣don. This Design the Pope was so zealous for, that he assured the Spaniards he would go along with them himself, if need were, and engage all his Goods and Treasure in the Service. Nor was this the only Design of the PopeId. p. 368. at this time; for in pursuit of his Predecessour's Bull against her, he ad∣vised the Queen-Mother of France to seize on the Dominions of the Queen of Navarre, because she was an Heretick; offering (if she approved of it) by his Papal Authority to appoint one of the House of Valois to be King of those Territories; which if she did not like, he was resolved to give them to the King of Spain; but that Prince, knowing they must be won by the Sword, declined accepting the Pope's Bounty. Sir Ed. Coke at the Tryall of the Gunp. Trait. Hist. of the Gunp. Tr. p. 109. Hitherto the Members of the Church of Rome made no scruple to resort to the Protestant Churches,1569. both for Prayer and Preaching; but this Year Pope Pius Quintus published his Bull against the Queen, upon which they all withdrew from any such Com∣munion with us.See the Bull in Fowlis Hist. p. 331. and Speed's Chron. p. 1171. In this Bull the Pope calls the Queen the pretended Queen of England, a Servant of Wickedness; affirms that her Council consisted of obscure, heretical Fellows, declares her an Here∣tick,
and cut off from the Unity of Christ's Body; that she is deprived of her Title to her Kingdoms, and of all Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege what∣soever, and her Subjects absolved from all manner of Duty and Obedience to her; and that by the Au∣thority of this Bull he doth absolve Them, and depose Her; and forbidding all her Subjects, under pain of Anathema, to obey her: With this Bull he sendsSurii Com∣ment. p. 770. Mor∣ton, a Priest, into England, to spread this Censure, and persuade the People to back it with an Insurrec∣tion; upon which, asId. Surius tells us out of Sanders, many Persons of Quality resolved to execute it: Ac∣cordingly theSpeed's Chr. p. 1169, 1170. Fowl. Hist. p. 335. Earls of Northumberland and West∣morland, who were pardoned but the year before, took Arms in the North, trampled under feet the English Bible and Service-Book, bearing in their Standard the Cross and five Wounds of our Saviour, and being betwixt five and six thousand men, they grew so insolent, that they would give the Queen no better Title, than the Pretended Queen; but the Pope being too slow in sending the hundred thou∣sand Crowns he promised them, and they at length finding their numbers too small to cope with the Queens Army, dispersed, and every one shifted for himself.Execut. of Justice for Treason. Pr. Lond. 1583. 4to. The Earl of Westmorland escaped into Flanders, where he dyed miserably; but Northum∣berland being taken, was beheaded at York; who was nevertheless looked upon by the Romanists as a glorious Martyr, and the drops of his bloud kept by them as holy Relicks. That this Rebellion had no better success, Sanders, and from himSurii Com∣ment. p. 770. Non illos habu∣ere successus, co∣natus illorum nobilium, quos peraverant, for∣tassis quod Ca∣tholicis omnibus ea denuntiatio, needum innotu∣isset. Surius, give this Reason, Because the Catholicks had not timely notice of the Pope's Bull: And the sameIdem. p. 771. Noluerunt Eli∣zabetham legi∣timam Reginam confiteri. Person in∣forms us, That those that were executed for this Treason, refused to the very last to acknowledge the Queens Authority. Among which Sanders mentions
Plumtree, and others, as well as the two Earls, who are termed glorious Martyrs of the Catholicks by Bristow in his Motives, and several others. To correspond with the Pope's Intentions in his Bull,Fowl. Hist. p. 302, 303. Ireland puts in for a share this year, where Jame Fitz-Morice, of the House of Desmond, and two of the Botelers, raised a Rebellion; but the lat∣ter being drawn to a submission by the loyal Earl of Ormond, Fitz-Morice, after many shifts, followed their Example, and was pardoned. But though the two Earls and their Accomplices had sped so ill, yetSpeed's Chr. p. 1170. Leonard Dacres renew'd the Rebellion in the North,1570. and fought a bloudy Battel against the Queens Forces with great obstinacy, though in the end he was forced to fly into Scot∣land. And now, that the Catholicks might no lon∣ger remain in ignorance of the Queens being depri∣ved of the Kingdoms by the Pope,Fowlis's Hist. p. 335. one Felton this year had the hardiness to fix the Bull at the Bishop of London's Gates;Speed's Chron. p. 1174. for which being apprehended, he confessed the Fact, and gloried in it, at his death affirming the Queen had no right to the Throne, be∣ing deposed by the Sentence of the Pope: Yet doth Surii Com. p. 786, 787, 788. Surius affirm, that he dyed a Martyr for the Ca∣tholick Faith, justifying the Action as done out of Zeal for the Church, and in Obedience to the law∣full Commands of the Pope: The same is affirmed byResp. ad Fli. Regin. Angl. Parsons,Ad An. 1570. Sect. 4. Spondanus, andSee Fowlis ubi supra. Hilarion de Coste, who styles him the valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ, commends his invincible Courage and Zeal for the Faith; and affirms, that his Martyrdom is one of England's most glorious Trophies; though the same Person can afford the Queen no better a Title than the Impious and wicked Queen▪ the true Iezebel of our days: And that all the World may see what
they thought of him at Rome, no sooner could Thu∣anus affirm that it was a very rash Action, but the Index Expurgatorius commands that passage to be blotted out; so jealous are they of the Honour of this grand Traitor. With as great Encomiums do we find the Memo∣ry of Dr. Story celebrated by the Writers of that Church:Surii Comment. p. 794, 795, 796. This man was one of the most violent Persecutours in Queen Mary's days,1571. for which cru∣elties being questioned in Parliament in the begin∣ning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, he answered, that he knew no Fault he was guilty of, but only that he busied himself in cutting off the Branches, while he neglected to pull up the Root it self; which if he had done, Heresie had not got up again: For this being imprisoned, he found means to escape into Flanders; but being apprehended and brought into England this year, he rejoiced that he should suffer Martyrdom: Upon his Tryall he declined the Jurisdiction of the Court, affirming that he was a Subject to the King of Spain, and acknowledged no lawfull Judge in England; for which he gave this Reason, That seeing the Pope had declared the Queen deprived of her Right, he durst not acknow∣ledge her Authority, lest he should fall under the Censures of that Bull: And at the moment of his Execution, being asked by an Earl whether the Queen was his Sovereign, he replied, She was not; yet is he reckoned among the Martyrs for the Ro∣mish Faith. The next Year was that bloudy Massacre of Pa∣ris, 1572. though contrived two years before, Hist. p. 68. wherein (it being carried over all France) above 100000 Protestants were butchered in cold bloud; the Duke of Guise and his Party did all they could to
have the King of Navarre, and Prince of Conde, slaughtered with the rest; but they being preser∣ved by the King, the chief Design of the Papalins in that bloudy Action was prevented. But four years after was that desperate Confede∣racy entred into by that Duke and his Adherents in France,1576. which they and the Pope afterwards ter∣med the Holy League,Fowl. Hist. p. 371. which had all the parts of a most desperate Rebellion; and continued for so many years, to the Destruction of one Prince, and infinite vexation of another: It was first begun atSee the In∣strument of that Confede∣racy in Maim∣bourg's Hist of the League. p. 42. Lond. 1684. 8vo. Peronne, and afterwards formed into a moreSee the In∣strument in Fowlis, p. 372, 373, 374. strict Union, by which, under a shew of maintaining the King, they took from him all his Authority, to confer it upon the Head of their Conspiracy: Nay, the zeal for this rebellious Association was so great, that they subscribed it with their Bloud; and in order to the prosecution of what they had there promised, they sent Nicolas David, an Advocate of the Parlia∣ment of Paris, to Rome; but he being slain by the way on his return, Cardinal de Pellive afterwards managed their business with the Pope. But among the Memoirs of that Advocate there was found an Account of the Transaction between the Pope and the Duke of Guise,See the Ac∣count of this Transaction in the Appendix to the Vindi∣cation of the sincerity of the Prot. Relig. wherein the Design laid down is to pull down the House of Valois, then reigning, from the Throne, and set up the Duke of Guise: In this Transaction the Liberties of the Gal∣lican Church are called a damnable Errour, nothing else but the shift of the Waldenses, Lutheranes, and Calvinists; and it is affirmed that France shall never prosper as long as the Crown continues in that line. The whole Platform of the Design is there laid down, and the Pope is to advance that Duke to the Crown of France, as the Successour of Charlemagne; in con∣sideration whereof the Duke is bound to cause the
See of Rome to be plainly acknowledged by the States of the Kingdom, without Restriction, or Modification, abolishing the Privileges and Liber∣ties of the Gallican Church. Thus do we find the Pope promoting the most rebellious Designs, to ad∣vance his own usurped Greatness. And his Missionaries not desiring a better exam∣ple than that of their holy Father,1577. in prosecution of his Designs Cuthbert Mayne came into England,Speed's Chr. p. 1176. dis∣persing Libells to maintain the Pope's Authority over the Queen; and he confessed under his own Hand, that he brought with him several holy grains to distribute among the Catholicks, which they should keep as so many Preservatives, by the produ∣cing of which they should be safe, when the Prote∣stants were to be destroyed. In the same business severalNelson, Hance, Lacies, Briant, &c. others were employed, and one Hemford sent over with a Dispensation of the Pope's Bull, whereby the Romanists had liberty to yield outward Obedience till an opportunity offered itself for the execution of that deposing Sentence. And one Hay∣dock was employed to prepare things against such a time, and to note the fittest places for landing an Army, as himself wrote to Allen the Jesuite. Be∣sides these one Paine, a Priest, and fifty others, were furnished at the Pope's Charge, who undertook to kill the Queen as she went to take the Air. And yet these are the men whomSee his Let∣ter in Speed. Sanders, in his Let∣ter to the aforenamed Jesuite, terms chosen Vessels. But our Countrey was not the onely Nation af∣flicted with these Plots and traiterous Contrivances; for about the same time wasHist. Jesuit. p. 244, 245. Sebastian, King of Portugal, betrayed by the Jesuits to the loss both of his Life and Kingdom, which they had before en∣gaged to transfer to the Spanish King, in which they were as good as their word; (though near fifty
years since it is returned to the Obedience of its law∣full Heir;) during which War, attempting to deli∣ver one of the Isles of the Azores to the Spaniards, they were discoved, and treated as their Wickedness deserved; but of this more hereafter. The Pope's Designs upon the Queen's Life being by the good Providence of God frustrated,1578. the holy Father,1579. Gregory the 13th. carried on the projects of his Predecessour,Anat of Po∣pish Tyr. in the Ep. Dedi▪ Lond. 1603 4to. (who had willingly lent an Ear to the advice of Thomas Stukely, an English Fugitive,) and in hopes of getting the Kingdom of Ireland for his own Son, the Marquess of Vineola, (where we find,Fowlis's Hist. p. 303, 304. though Popes do not marry, yet they can get Children,) created Stukely Marquess of Leinster, adding several other Titles, and assisting him with Forces and a plenary Indulgence, dispatcht him a∣way for Ireland; but by the way being persuaded by the King of Portugal to join with him against the Moors, he was slain in the Battel together with that King. But though Ireland was delivered from this Dan∣ger, yet soon afterFowlis ubi su∣pra. James Fitz-Morice, who was pardoned in the Year 1569. went over into France, where he desired Assistance to beat the English out of Ireland, and reduce that Nation to the French Obedience, but King Henry the Third then reign∣ing, having sufficient Employment for his Forces at home; Fitz-Morice addressed himself to the Pope and the King of Spain; the former embraced this opportunity, and sent Sanders with him as his Nun∣cio, with a consecrated Banner; and the latter as∣sisted them with Men and Money; the Pope in the mean while raising Souldiers in his Countrey for their Assistance and Relief. Fitz-Morice and Sanders,Fowl. p. 305. with the Spaniards,1580. landed in Kerry in Ireland, and committedall manner
of Outrages, in one of which Fitz-Morice was kil∣led by the Sons of William a Burgh, soon after made Baron of Castleconnel; in his place succeeded his Bro∣ther John E. of Desmond, to whom the Pope sent an Indulgence, dated May 13. 1580. wherein he highly magnifies the Piety of James, laments his Death,See the Bull at large in Fow∣lis, p. 306. and exhorts all the Nobility, Clergy, and People of the Land, to follow this John, in fighting a∣gainst the Hereticks for the Catholick Cause; and to encourage them in that good work, he grants a Eandem ple∣nariam Pecca∣torumvestrorum indulgentiam & Remissionem, quam adversus Turcas, pro re∣cuperanda terra Sancta bellantes consequuntur, tribuimus, &c. Plenary Indulgence and Remission of all their sins, in the same extent as was granted to those who were engaged in the Holy War. And when the Spaniards were required by the Lord Gray, then Deputy of Ireland, to express their Intention in thus invading her Majesties Dominions, they re∣turned Answer, That they were sent from the Pope and King of Spain, to whom his Holiness had given Ireland; for that Elizabeth had justly for∣feited her Title to the Kingdom by Heresie, that they would keep what they had got, and get more if they could: But in a small time after they were glad to surrender upon Mercy, the Earl of Desmond having been routed before, and Allen, the Priest, who came with the Legate Sanders, slain. This ill success put a stop to the Recruits the Pope was preparing to send after them. Sanders dyed of hunger in the Woods, and the Earl of Desmond was slain two years after by a common Soldier. And to encourage these Rebels, and to excite to more such Attempts, this Pope Gregory the Thir∣teenth, the same year, renewed the Bull of Pius Quintus against the Queen: There were five hun∣dred Copies of it printed at Rome, and the Bull it self dispersed over all Italy, Spain, and part of Ger∣many, as is attested by one who was then in the
English College at RomeJohn Nichols in his Declara∣tion of his Re∣cantation, apud Fowlis, p. 336. and Reniger de Pii Quinti, and Greg. 13. Fu∣roribus, c. 8. Lon. 1582. 8vo.; who likewise assures us, that one of their Readers in Divinity, before a∣bove two hundred Scholars, affirmed, That it was lawfull for any man of Worship in England to give Authority to the vilest wretch that is, to endeavour the Queen's death; but that this Pope did excom∣municate the Queen we find in our excellentCambd. Eliz. l. 3. ad an. 1588. An∣nalist, and is acknowledged by theImportant Consideration, p. 62. Romish Priests in theirSee them reprinted in the Collect. of Trea. concerning the Penal Laws. Lond. 1675. this passage is p. 76. Important Considerations, printed the last year of that Queen's Reign. But though he pronounced that terrible Sentence against her, yet (as is observed byAuth. Tyrrell in his Recan∣tation, p. 29. one who had been a great stickler for the Romish Church,) he dealt a great deal more subtilly, and more dangerously than his Predecessour; for finding the danger the Romanists were daily exposed to, by their endea∣vouring the Destruction of the Queen, whom they durst not obey, or cease to hurt, for fear of the Curses denounced in the Bull; he qualified it in such a manner, that the Jesuite Hart (as the Lord Burleigh tell us) acknowledg'd,They are his own words, see Execution of Justice, &c. p. 16. The Bull of Pius Quintus, for so much as it is against the Queen, is holden by the English Catholicks for a lawfull Sen∣tence, and a sufficient Discharge of her Subjects Fi∣delity, and so remains in force; but in some points touching the Subject, it is altered by the present Pope: For where in that Bull all her Subjects are commanded not to obey her, and she being excom∣municated and deposed, all that do obey her are likewise accursed, which point is perilous to the Catholicks; for if they obey her, they are in the Pope's Curse, and if they disobey her, they are in the Queen's Danger: Therefore the present Pope,
to relieve them, hath altered that part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serve her, without peril of Excommunication: which dispen∣sation is to endure but till it please the Pope other∣wise to determine. Here we have a plain Confession of that learned Gentleman, (who is by them termed aSee Reynolds Conser. with Hart, Pref. to the Egl. Se∣minaries, p. 2 Lond 1609. 4to. Noble Champion of Christ, and Holy Priest, one that had taken deep root in the Foundations of the Faith, and of sound Learning,) that the Loyalty of the Roma∣nists depends upon the Will of man, (except they will affirm their Pope to be more than man;) which is a point they have been put in mind of from Rome itself, since His Majesties Restauration, as we shall observe anon. This Qualification of the Bull was granted to Par∣sons and Campion, two Jesuites, upon their coming into England, when among other things they desi∣red of the Pope,Petatur à mo Domino nostro, explica∣tio Bullae quam Catholici cu∣piunt intelligi hoc modo, ut obliget semper illam & Hereticos, Catholicos verò nullo modo obliget, rebus sic stantibus, sed tum demum quaudo publica ejusdem Bullae Executio fieri poterit. Execut. for Trea. p. 15, 16. That the Bull should always oblige Elizabeth, and the Hereticks, but by no means the Romanists, as Affairs now stand, but hereafter, when the publick Execution of the Bull may be had or made. Furnished with this and other Faculties, those two GentlemenImportant Considerations, p. 62, 63. repared into England, setting themselves to contrive a way how to set Her Maje∣sties Crown upon another head:Hunting of the Romish Fox, p. 137, 138. out of Cecil's Memoirs. at first they came in the Habits of Soldiers, afterwards they went about in the Garb of Gentlemen, and in the North they altered their Habits into the Vestments of our Ministers, preaching there, and being secretly en∣tertained by the Popish Gentry and Nobility, cou∣rageously executed their Commission; in discharge
of which Parsons exhorted the Roman Catholicks of those parts to deprive Her Majesty of the Crown; and the way being thus broken, many flocked after them for the same purpose. At this timeImport. Con. p. 66. & Fowl. Hist. p. 54. Mr. Sherwin being apprehended, and asked whether the Queen were his lawfull So∣vereign, notwithstanding any Sentence of the Pope's, he desired no such questions might be demanded of him, and would give no other Answer: But the Pope well knowing that this Generation of sturdy blades would in time be all gone, for the breeding up of more to succeed them, assisted Allen in setting up the Seminary at Doway for English Romanists, al∣lowing an annual Pension for their maintenance, purposely for to plot and contrive ways to expulse the Queen, and demolish the Church of England, in obedience to the Pope's Bulls,Hunting of the Rom. Fox, p. 129, 130, 131, 132. out of Cecu's Me∣moirs. for which end every Scholar among them, at his Education, took this Oath: I A. B. do acknowledg the Ecclesiastical and Political Power of His Holiness, and the Mother Church of Rome, as the chief Head and Matron, above all pretended Churches throughout the whole Earth; and that my Zeal shall be for Saint Peter and his Successors, as the Founder of the True and Ancient Catholick Faith, against all Heretical Kings, Princes, States, or Powers, repugnant unto the same. And although I may pretend, in case of Persecution or otherwise, to be Heretically disposed, yet in Soul and Conscience I shall help, aid, and succour the Mother Church of Rome, as the True, Ancient, Apostolical Church. I farther do declare not to act or contrive any manner of thing prejudicial unto her or her sacred Orders, Doctrines, Tenents, or Commands, without the leave of her su∣preme Power, or the Authority under her appointed, or
to be appointed; and when so permitted, then to act or further her Interest more than my own earthly Gain and Pleasure, as she and her Head, His Holiness and his Successours, have, or ought to have, the Suprema∣cy over all Kings, Princes, Estates, or Powers what∣soever, either to deprive them of their Crowns, Scep∣tres, Powers, Privileges, Realms, Countreys or Go∣vernments, or to set up others in lieu thereof, they dissenting from the Mother Church, and her Com∣mands, &c. Thus by all imaginable ways did this Pope pro∣vide for the Death or Deposition of that Virgin Queen;1581. in order to which he had so possess'd the Missionaries with his power to dethrone Princes, that it was offer'd to be prov'd to the World, That the Priests which were apprehended and executed for Treason,Declaration of the favou∣rable Dea∣lings of Her Majest. Com∣missioners, p. 4. 1583. 4to. always restrained their confession of Allegiance only to the permissive form of the Pope's Toleration; as for Example: if they were asked whether they did acknowledge themselves to be the Queen's Subjects, and would obey her, they would say Yes, for so they had leave for a time to doe; but being asked if they would so acknowledg and obey her any longer than the Pope would so permit them, or notwithstanding such Command∣ment as the Pope would or might give to the con∣trary, then they either refused to obey, or denied to answer, or said they could not answer to those Questions without danger: And at their very Ar∣raignment, when they laboured to leave in the minds of the People and standers by, an opinion that they were to dye, not for Treason, but for matter of Faith and Doctrine, they cried out that they were true Subjects, and did and would obey Her Majesty. Immediately to prove whether that
speech extended to a perpetuity of their Obedience, or so long time as the Pope so permitted, they were openly in the place of Judgment asked by the Q's learned Counsel, whether they would so obey, and be true Subjects, if the Pope commanded the contrary; they plainly disclosed themselves in An∣swer, saying by the mouth of Campion, This place (meaning the Court of Her Majesties Bench) hath no Power to enquire or judge of the Holy Fathers Au∣thority; and other Answer they would not make. The very same Account, with some other parti∣culars, is given us by theImportant Consid. p. 68. Secular Priests them∣selves, of the Behaviour of Mr. Campion, and the rest; some of whom being asked which part they would take, if the Pope, or any other by his ap∣pointment, should invade the Realm, or which part ought a good Subject to take, answered, when that case happened, they would then consider what they had best doe; others, that they were not yet resol∣ved what to doe; and others positively, that if such a Deprivation, or Invasion should be made for any Matter of Faith, they were then bound to take part with the Pope. Nay, so zealous was Mr. Campion in defence of that rebellious Doctrine, that being visited in Pri∣son by some Gentlemen ofHunting of the Romish Fox. p. 146, 147. Oxford, one of them asked him whether he thought the Queen lawfull Heir or no; to this he made no Answer; but when the question was put, whether if the Pope invaded the Land, he would take part with him or the Queen, he openly replied, he would join with the Pope, and very earnestly demanded Pen, Ink, and Paper, with which he signed his Resolution; which Principle he was so rooted in, that he affirmed in the Tower to severalFowlis, p. 54. Persons of Quality, who de∣manded whether he did acknowledge the Queen to
be a lawfull Queen, or did believe her deprived of her Right, that this Question depends much on the Fact of Pope Pius the Fifth, whereof he is no Judge, and therefore refused to answer farther. The same loyal Doctrines were vented by several other Priests the ensuing year,1582. who affirmed un∣der their Hands to the Commissioners who exa∣mined them, That the Pope had power to depose Princes, and that Her Majesty was not be obeyed against His Holiness's Bull,Fowlis, p. 55, 56, 57, 58. who hath Authority to discharge Subjects of their Allegiance; which all of them, viz. Kerby, Cottom, Richardson, Ford, Shert, Johnson, Hart, and Filbee, agreed in, two of them only sheltring themselves with this General Asser∣tion, That they held as the Catholick Church held. Johnson particulary affirming, That if the Pope in∣vaded her Majesty upon a civil Account, he would take part with Her, but if upon a Matter of Faith, it was his Duty to assist the Pope. In which diligence to poison the Members of their Church, these zealous Priests did but follow the Example of their Holy Father, who this very year, (as Mr Gage,Hunting of the Romish Fox, p. 184. Agent for the Spanish Match at Rome, informs us, out of the Records of the Dominican Convent there,) laid out one hundred fifty two thou∣sand pounds, and some odd money, for maintaining his Designs here; of which Sixty thousand was al∣lotted to foment Disturbances in Scotland and Ire∣land; so very desirous was the Pope to regain his usurped Power over these Nations. And it was not long before the end of all that Labour and Charge was found to be the Murther of that excellent Princess, which oneSpeed's Ch p. 1175. Sommerville of Eslow in Warwickshire undertook to effect, at the instigation of Hall,Execut. for Trea p. 27. a Priest, who finding this de∣sperate young man to waver, and that his Resolu∣tion
was much shaken with the horridness and dan∣ger of the attempt,Anno 1583. advised him to proceed,Anat. Popish Tyr. p. 84. promi∣sing his prayers for good success; but the design being discovered, Sommerville strangled himself, af∣ter condemnation. But this was not the only Plot which the Ene∣mies of England had laid for its destruction;Speed's Chron. p 1176. 1177. for Throgmorton,Foxes & Fire∣brands, part. 2. p. 59. one of Sommerville's accomplices, was the same year discovered, having been employ∣ed to sound the Havens, and procure a list of such Gentlemen in the several Counties as were disposed to joyn the Spanish Forces, who were to land un∣der the conduct of the Duke of Guise; all which was confessed by Throgmorton, before his death. Thus we find how vast summs were expended by the Pope;Fowlis's Hist. p. 307. which had the same influence in Ireland, where Desmond continued so desperately in rebel∣lion, that he swore he would rather forsake God than forsake his Men; but neither the Pope's bles∣sing nor purse could protect him from that deserved death which after long wandring in a miserable con∣dition he suffered the latter end of this year. But though the Pope could not preserve his re∣bellious instruments from the just punishment of their Treasons, yet he would (for the encourage∣ment of others) doe honour to their memories:Anat of Po∣pish Tyranny, p. 97. thus the Rector of the English College of Jesuits at Rome, in presence of all the Students, sung a Collect of Martyrs in honour of Campion, of whose Treasons we gave an account before; and his relicks, with Sherwin's and others executed for Treason, were kept and worshipped by our English Papists. And because those positions which were found so usefull for the propagating Sedition,1584. might (if tru∣sted only to the Missionaries to instill them into the People by their Sermons and Discourses) be in time
forgotten, and neither believed nor obeyed; the Romish Factors considering that Litera scripta ma∣net, to provide against the ill consequences which the fearfulness of the Priests, or diligence of the State might produce, by hindring the preaching of the former, caused Gregory Martin's Treatise of Schism to be reprinted this year, in which he exhor∣ted the Ladies of the Court to deal with the Queen as Judith did with Holofernes;Fowlis Hist. p. 338. for the Printing of which, Carter, the Romish Printer, was executed, and is reckoned among their Martyrs. At the same time there was one Harper in Nor∣wich, (a great Friend of Throgmorton's, who was ex∣ecuted the year before,) who though pretending to be a zealous Puritan, preaching with great diligence and fervour, kept a constant correspondence with that Traitor, among whose Papers was found a Let∣ter, in which he desired Throgmorton to let him know how their Friends in Spain and London did correspond,Foxes and Firebrands. part. 2. p. 59, 60. and whether that King continued in his purpose, that the Engagers might be satis∣fied, and have notice; upon this Discovery a Pur∣suvant was sent to apprehend him, but he escaped just as the Officer arrived at Norwich. And now was discovered a Design, in which the Pope was particularly engag'd, if we may believe Parrie's own Confession, who in his Travels fal∣ling into acquaintance with Palmio,Fowlis's Hist. p. 338. a Jesuite, told him that he had a great desire to doe something for the Romish Cause in England, by whom he was encouraged, his Zeal commended, and the Lawful∣ness of Assassinating Her Majesty was maintained; but being somewhat dissatisfied, the Jesuite recom∣mended him to Campeggio, his Holiness's Nuncio at Venice; by this means he wrote to Pope Gregory, informing him of his Design, and desiring a Pass∣port,
that he might confer of it with his Holiness at Rome;Idem. p. 339. in the mean while he went to Paris, where he was animated by Thomas Morgan, who sollicited the Queen of Scots Affairs, when recei∣ving such a Passport as he desired, he resolved to kill the Queen, if it were warranted by some lear∣ned Divines, and he could procure a full Pardon for it from the Pope. That the first might not be wanting, Cedretto, a noted Jesuit, and Provincial of Guyenne, approv'd his Resolution, and Ragazzani, the Nuncio, recom∣mended him to the Pope, promising that his Prayers should not be wanting for the success of the At∣tempt: with which encouragement he came to Lon∣don, See the Letter in Fowlis, p. 339, and Speed 1178, 1179. where he received a Letter from Cardinal Co∣mo, wherein the Cardinal informs him, That His Holiness did exhort him to persevere, and bring that to effect which he had promised; and that he might be the better assisted by that good Spirit which moved him thereto, His Holiness granted him his Blessing, a plenary Indulgence and Remission of all his sins, assuring him that he should merit highly by the Action, which he terms holy and honourable; to which the Cardinal added his Prayers and Wishes for its success. This he confessed confirmed his Resolution to kill his Sovereign,Idem. p. 340. and made it clear to his Conscience, that it was lawfull and meritorious; which redoun∣ding so highly to the Dishonour of that bloudy Church, the whole Relation is by the Index Expur∣gatorius commanded to be left out of Thuanus's Hi∣story: And well they might; for as it shewed the Pope's Inclination to Bloud and Treason, so it was one of the greatest instances of Ingratitude imagina∣ble, Parry owing his life to the Mercy of this Prin∣cess,Idem. p 338. who had four years before, pardoned him,
when he was tried and condemned for Burglary. But though the Divine Goodness was so conspicu∣ous in the many wonderfull preservations of that great Queen, yet it pleased the all-wise Providence to permit the devilish Designs of the Jesuites to be attended with success in Holland, where the renow∣ned Prince, William of Nassaw, was this year mur∣thered byHistor. Jesuit. p. 366. Balthasar Gerard, a Burgundian, who confessed that a Jesuite,Speed's Chr. p. 1193. Regent of the College of Trers, told him, that he had conferred with three of his Brethren,Jes. Cat. P 134, 135. who took the Design to be from God, assuring him, that if he dyed in that quarrel, he should be enrolled in the Kalendar of Martyrs. This Method of satisfying their Consciences with their Confessour's Authority, was so generally ta∣ken by the zealous Assassins of those times,Fowl. Hist. p. 377. that the Leaguers in France kept several Priests in pay, who daily preached and asserted, That Princes ought to be deposed who do not sufficiently perform their Duty; and a Bachelour in Divinity of the Sorbonne maintained in a publick Disputation, That it was lawfull for any private man to depose or kill any Prince, who is a wicked man, or an Heretick: which opinion had so entirely possest theId. p. 376. Cardi∣nal of Bourbon, that because the King of Navarre was an Heretick, he had the Confidence to tell King Henry the Third, that if his Majesty should dye, the Crown would belong to him, and he was re∣solved not to lose his Right: But because these Do∣ctrines without force to practise them would prove but empty speculations,Id. p. 378. the Duke of Guise had the latter end of this year a Conference with the King of Spain's Commissioners, whereby he associated himself with the Spaniards against his Sovereign, obliging his party to maintain War against the King as long as the King of Spain pleased.
To promote which Design Cardinal Pellevee solli∣cited the Pope for his approbation of it;Anno 1585. and when the Duke of Nevers,Fowl. Hist. p. 379. declared his Resolutions to have nothing to doe with them, unless he had the Opinion both of Eminent Divines, and the Pope too, in favour of the Undertaking; his Con∣fessour, and Monsieur Faber, told him, that he ought to take up Arms with the Leaguers, by which he would be so far from sinning,Id. p. 380. that he would merit highly, and perform an Action very acceptable to God; and the aforesaid Cardinal, with other Di∣vines, assured him that the Pope approved of it, declaring it lawfull to fight against Hereticks, and such as favour or adhere to them, though it were the King himself; he indeed advised them not to attempt his Life, but to seize his Person, and force him to promote their Ends; In obedience to which the Cardinal of Bourbon published a Declaration,Id. p. 381. dated March 31. 1585. justifying his Arms, but professing great Respect to the Royal Person. This Pope dying, his Successour, Sixtus the Fifth, was more open in avowing the Leaguers Cause, and therefore published his Bull against the King of Navarre,Sep. 9. 1585. declaring him an Heretick, depriving him and his Posterity of all their Rights, absolving his Subjects from their Allegiance, and excommu∣nicating all such as should obey him. While this Pope was making Tryall of his Thun∣derbolts in France,Speed's Chron. p. 1180. he had his Agents privily endea∣vouring to execute the Commands of his Predeces∣sour in this Nation,Anat. of Pop. Tyr. Epist. Dedicat. for which Henry Piercy, Earl of Northumberland, being apprehended, shot himself through the heart during his Imprisonment; he had been pardoned for a former Rebellion, and be∣ing found a prosecutour of Throgmorton's Design, became this year his own Executioner.
But a more formidable,Anno 1586. because more threache∣rous and secret,Cad. Annal. ad an. 1586. Design was managed by some En∣glish Seminaries at Rhemes, who thought it meri∣torious to destroy the Queen; where one Savage was so wrought upon by the Persuasions of Dr. Gif∣ford, the Rectour, and two other Priests, that he vowed to murther her; to whom Ballard, another Priest,Fowlis's Hist. p. 343, 344 joining, treated with Mendoza, the Spanish Embassadour in France, about an Invasion; after which he drew in Mr. Babington, a rich and well accomplish'd Gentleman, who desired that five more might be joined to Savage, to make sure work; Speed's Chro∣nicle. p. 1180. Babington affirmed, that several Counties in En∣gland were ready; and being assured of Assistance from Spain, they resolved that the Usurper (so they termed the Queen) should be sent to the other World,Anat. of Pop. Tyr. p. 85. assoon as the Invaders landed;Speed's Chr. p. 1181. but Bal∣lard being taken, Babington resolved to effect her death immediately, though Divine Providence pre∣vented it by his apprehension, who, with the rest of his Companions, freely confessed the Fact, for whichFowlis's Hist. p. 344. sixteen of them suffered death. Yet did not this deter Mr. William Stafford, at the Sollicitation of the French Ambassadour, from en∣gaging in an Enterprise of the same horrid nature; which though he refused to act himself,Fowl. Hist. p. 346, 347. yet he di∣rected them to one Moody, who willingly embraced the motion upon Promise of Preferment from the Duke of Guise; but while he was contriving a way to effect it, Stafford discovered all, and justified it to the Ambassadour's Face, who at first denied any knowledge of it. With the same diligence were the Romanists in France driving on their treasonable Designs;Id. p. 387, 388. for at a Council, held by the chief Conspiratours at the Je∣suites College near St. Pauls in Paris, they resolved
to surprise Boloign, there to receive the Spaniards who should land to their Assistance: A Plot was laid to secure the King, as he returned from hunting, and another to seize the Bastile, assault the Louvre, and put the King into a Convent; during which Action their word was to be, Let the Mass flourish; and the King of Navarre was to be cut off by the Spaniards; but these Designs being discovered, as also another Plot to seize the King in the Abby of St. Germains, their hopes were disappointed; in which Conspiracies Cardinal Pellevee, a French man, then at Rome, was so deeply concerned, that the King ordered his Revenues to be seized and distri∣buted to the Poor. But His Majesty going from Paris,1578. they propo∣sed the seizing of the City in his absence,Fowlis, p. 388. the Duke of Guise designing to secure the King in the Coun∣trey; and for the exciting those rebellious Spirits to some Action, the Preachers at Paris generally ven∣ted nothing but Sedition, affirming that the King was a Tyrant, and an enemy to the Church and Peo∣ple; and when the King sent to apprehend one of these furious Leaguers, he retired into the house of one Hatte,Id. p. 389. a Notary, where Bussy, and his men, fought in his defence against the King's Officers, headed by the Lieutenant Civil: And the Sorbonne Doctours made a Decree, That Princes might be deposed from their Government, if they did not what became them, as the charge taken away from a negligent Guardian. And that there might want no Encouragement, the Pope presented the Duke of Guise, the Head of the Rebels, with a rich Sword, thereby declaring his approbation of his Procee∣dings.
The same yearSpeed's Chr. p. 1195. Anat. Popish Tyr. p. 85. Sir. William Stanley being made Governour of Deventer,Anno 1587. and Rowland York of Zut∣phen, for the Queen, they betrayed both these pla∣ces to the Spaniard, upon which the former begin∣ning to sink in his Reputation, lest the sense of his Treasons should put him upon thoughts of returning to his Loyalty,Fowl. p. 62. Dr. Allan, afterwards Cardinal, wrote to him and his traiterous Accomplices, tel∣ling them that the Queen being deposed by the Pope,Coll. of Trea. Conc. the Pe∣nal Laws, p. 71, 72. Def. of Eng, Cath. p. 114, 115. cited Shy Fowl. p. 62. could make no just War, and all her Subjects were bound not to serve or obey her in any thing: And in another of his Books he affirms, That God had not sufficiently provided for our Salvation, or the Preservation of his Church, if there were no way to restrain or deprive Apostate Kings: Therefore (saith he) let no man marvel, that in case of Heresie the So∣vereign loseth his Superiority and Right over his Peo∣ple and Kingdom. And now we are come to the Year Eighty eight,1588. wherein as the Conspirators acted more publickly, having prepared all things ready for their designed Subversion of the Government, and being aided by that Armado of the Spaniards, which they vainly thought invincible; so the Divine Providence as openly declared against them, notwithstanding their Navy was blessed by the famous Nun of Lisbon,Fowl. p. 350. and the Assistance given by the fiery Pope, who publi∣shed his Crusado as against the Turks,Speed's Chr. d. 1199 and promi∣sed to contribute a Million of Gold; to which he added the Apostolical Benediction, covenanting that the Crown of England should be held as feudata∣ry to the See of Rome; and for encouragement to those who should assist his Cause, heFowl. p. 350. gave plena∣ry Indulgences to them all; neither did he stop here, but having provided for the Invaders, by securing them of Money and Heaven, he thundred out his
Speed's Chr. p. 1197. Fowlis, p. 350, 351. Bull against the Queen, whereby he deprived her again of her Dominions, confirming the Censures of Pope Pius, and Gregory, his Predecessours; com∣manding all, under penalty of God's Wrath, to render her no obedience, or assistance, and enjoi∣ning them to aid the Spaniards against her; con∣cluding all with declaring it both lawful and com∣mendable to lay hands on her, and granting a full Pardon to all Undertakers. To second which Bull Cardinal Allen (advanced to that Dignity the year before) published a Book at Antwerp, wherein he enlarges upon the Bull,Id. p. 350. Speed's Chron. p. 1197. and tells the World, that it was at the vehement desire of some English men, that the Pope engaged the Spaniard, and appeared in the Cause himself. This Book is said to be writ∣ten by one Parsons,Import. Consid. p. 73. though it was owned by the Cardinal; and therein it is affirmed,Id. p. 75. That the Roman Catholicks in England were destitute of Cou∣rage, and erroneous in Conscience, or else they had never suffered Her Majesty to reign so long over them. The way thus prepared, the Spanish Armado put to Sea, while the Prince of Parma was prepa∣ring a great Army in Flanders, where theFowlis, p. 351. Speed, p. 1199. Earl of Westmorland, and the Lord Pagit, and Sir William Stanley, lay with seven hundred English, ready to be transported; and the hopes of the Romanists came nothing short of what was to be expected in men elevated by such great Preparations; insomuch that theFowlis Hist. p. 352. Jesuites at Rome had appropriated several Palaces in London to themselves, and were so sure of Success, that they would have had Te Deum sung in the College Church for joy, upon the news of the Spaniards being arrived in the narrow Seas; and the secular Priests acknowledge the like Dispo∣sition in the Party hereImportant Consid. p. 63. We had (some of us great∣ly
approved the said Rebellion, many of our Affections were knit to the Spaniard.—In all these Plots none were more forward than many of us that were Priests. With the same zeal towards the Action were the foreign Clergy actuated,Fowl. p. 353. among whom Johannes Osorius, the Jesuite, preached two Sermons in De∣fence of the Attempt, and in Commendation of the Spaniards for thus fighting against Hereticks; in one of which his Confidence of the Success trans∣ported him so far as to give Thanks for the Victo∣ry; but he and his Party trusted too much in the Arme of Flesh, they thought themselves so power∣full, that they forgot one that was above them, who made that terrible Fleet the scorn of the world, and so protected the just Cause of the Queen, and assisted her Navy, that most of that Armado perished in the Sea, or were taken, or burnt; so vain a thing it is to forget and fight against the Almighty, who blessed where the Pope cursed, and turned the Ha∣rangues of the Thanksgiving-Jesuite into three Ser∣mons of Humiliation, for so great a Disappointment of the Papal Designs, and the entire Destruction of its strongest Forces. In the beginning of the year several Missionaries were sent into Scotland,Fowlis's Hist. p. 287, 288. to get the Assistance of the Papists there: The Lord Maxwell actually took the Field with a small Party, who were defeated: The Lord Bothwell secretly listed Soldiers; and Col∣lonel Sempill arriving at Leith, in order to the De∣sign, was seized, but soon rescued by the Earl of Huntley. Yet could not these wonderfull Disappointments work any remorse in the Papists, who still la∣boured, by means of the JesuiteFowlis's Hist. p. 353. Holt, and others, to persuade the King of Spain to another Invasion; whichId. p. 288. Parma comforted the Romanists in Scotland
with promises of effecting, and sent them ten thou∣sand Crowns to prepare matters against the next Spring. As busie were the Leaguers in France, prosecu∣ting their intended Rebellion with all diligence, Fowl. p. 389. the Duke of Guise and his Council resolved to put the King in a Monastery; in order to which, when he went his usual Processions in the time of Lent, they designed to seize him; but being prevented by a Discovery,Id. p. 391. another Resolution was agreed on, to secure his Person at his return from Bois de Vincen∣nes, slenderly accompanied; but failing in this al∣so, the Duke of Guise came to Paris, contrary to the King's express Order, where he was received with great joy, and soon after, his Party being numbred, and found considerable, he openly rebel∣led, barricadoing the Streets,Id. p. 392, 393, 394. and forcing the King to flie, who made his Escape with very few Atten∣dants: Soon after the King of Spain sent six hun∣dred thousand Crowns to the Rebels, and the Pope by solemn Letters applauded the Duke's Zeal, com∣pared him to the Maccabean Heroes, and exhorted him to go on as he had begun; but here the insig∣nificancy of the Pope's Blessing again appeared, the Duke of Guise being soon after slain at Blois, and so receiving the just Reward of his continued Rebel∣lions. Thus were the Designs of wicked men, who prosti∣tuted the holy Name of Religion to serve their Lusts, baffled and defeated, both in their Attempts against the incomparable Queen Elizabeth, and the French King, as also inId. p. 390. a Plot against the K. of Navarre, which by the same Divine Providence, was this year discovered. But the Scotch Papists were so possessed with Spa∣nish Promises,1589. and influenced by their Gold, and
the persuasions ofFowlis's Hist. p. 288. Holt, Creighton, and other Je∣suites, that several Noblemen conspired to seize the King (afterwards King James the First of England) at his Palace in Edinburg, where Huntley coming before the others, was upon Suspicion apprehended, which terrified the rest; but being set at liberty, joined himself to the Earl of Crawford, and others, in open Rebellion, entred Aberdeen, but were so terrified by the approach of the Royal Army, that they retreated, were taken, and after Tryall impri∣soned. And here I find such an Account of the Conver∣sions made by the Jesuites in Scotland,Vide Praef. as fully con∣firms the Observation made before of their Design, in their diligent Endeavours to make Proselytes; For Mr. Bruce, the chief Agent for the Spaniards, in hisId. p. 291. Letter to the D. of Parma, commending the Zeal of the Missionaries in Scotland, tells him that they had converted the Earls of Arroll and Crawford who were very desirous to advance the Catholick Faith, and Spanish Interest in this Island, and resol∣ved to follow entirely the Directions of the Fathers Jesuites; whence it appears their main design is to enlarge their Empire, for as the same Gentleman af∣firms, Ibid. no sooner any person of Quality is conver∣ted by them, but they forthwith encline and dis∣pose their affections to the Service of the King of Spain, as a thing inseparably conjoined with the ad∣vancement of true Religion in this Countrey; so that by the Confession of this great Man, Popery and Treason were inseparable at that time; the Ro∣manists being so in love with it, that they made their AddressMr. Bruce in the same Let∣ter, ibid. to the broken Fleet of the Spaniards the last year, to land what Forces they had, several great Persons being ready to receive them. And the two new Noble Converts wrote to the Duke of Par∣ma,
testifying their entire devotedness to the Spa∣nish Interest.Fowlis, p. 294, 295. Nor was Scotland alone thus infected; for in En∣gland theSpeed's Chronicle. p. 1180. Fowlis Hist. p. 351. Import. Con∣sid. p. 76. Earl of Arundell was this year tried, and dyed in the Tower, who rejoiced at the Spaniards coming, prayed for their Success, and exceedingly grieved at their Overthrow: And the Jesuite Par∣sons prevailed to have a Seminary, wherein to in∣struct Youth in such treasonable Principles as his own, founded at Valedolyd. But though this Island was sufficiently pestered this year by the Papal Agents and Factours for Re∣bellion, yet were we favourably dealt with, in com∣parison of the Treasons and Insurrections in France against Henry the Third, a Prince of their own Communion, who, after the Death of the Duke of Guise, was opposed by an almost universal Rebel∣lion, Fowlis Hist. p. 397. the Priests calling on their Auditours to swear to revenge the Duke's Death, and railing with all manner of virulency against the King; insomuch that Father Lincestre affirmed, that if he were at the Altar, and the Eucharist in his hand, he would not scruple in that very place to kill him. The Re∣bels styl'd him Tyrant, & Heretick;Id. p. 40. and to have his Picture, or to call him King, was crime enough to deserve death; they threw down his Arms and Sta∣tues, and practised all sort of Magick, Incantations, and Charms, to hasten his death.Id. p. 399. 400. where see the Letter. The Parisians wrote to the Pope, desiring to be absolved from their Allegiance, with several other requests of the same nature; and in theirId. p. 402, 403, 405. Letters to the Cardinals styled their Sovereign, The late King of France, and sent Agents to Rome, giving them, among other Instructions, Orders to desire the Pope not to enter∣tain or hear the King's Ambassadours, and Messa∣ges, and to excommunicate all that join with him,
and having chosen the Duke of Mayenne for their General, would have had him take the Title of King, but he refused it; yet they broke the King's great Seal, and made a new one. To these the City of Lyons joined, affirming that Kings ought to be resisted,Fowlis's Hist. p. 403, 404. and they will resist the King in conjunction with the Holy Union, to whom the Parisians sent a Letter, exhorting them to de∣fend their Religion, &c. against that prodigal, per∣jured, cruel, and murthering Prince; the Duke of Mayenne refusing to have any Peace, or admit so much as of a Truce, and prosecuting the War with the utmost vigour. To these Attempts and Perseverance in them they were encouraged by the Sorbon Doctours, who in a Decree made Jan. 7. 1589.Conclusum est, nemine re∣fragante, Primùm, Quod Populus hu∣jus Regni solutus est & libera∣tus à Sacramento Fidelitatis & Obedientiae, &c. Deinde, Quod idem Populus licitè, & tutâ Conscientia, ar∣mari, uniri, & Pecunias colli∣gere & contribuere potest, ad defensionem & conservationem Religionis Apostolicae, Catholi∣, & Romanae, adversus nefa∣ria Consilia & Conatus praedicti Regis, &c. See the whole Decree in Fowlis, p. 398, 399. resolved, That the People were freed from their Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity, and that they may legally, and with a safe Consci∣ence, take Arms for the Defence of the Roman Religion, against the wicked Coun∣sels and Practices of the King. Which Decree they ordered to be sent to the Pope for his Confirmation; and this they affirm was concluded on and re∣solved by an entire consent of the whole Faculty, not one dissenting. And with the same Zeal, and no more Loyalty, they licensedId. p. 403. a Book, which asserted that the King ought to be assassined; affirming, that there was nothing in it contrary to the Roman Church: To promote which they con∣cluded that the King ought to be no longer prayed for, declaring all such of the Body as should not agree to this, to be guilty of Excommunication, and deprived of the Prayers and Privileges of the Facul∣ty.
And that there might remain no badg of Royalty to put them in mind of their Duty,Fowlis, p. 410. the Cordeliers struck off the Head of the King's Picture which was in their Church, and the Jacobins defaced those in their Cloisters: But this was done after the Pope had once more publickly owned the Rebels and their Cause,See the Bull at large in Fow∣lis, p. 408. who by his Bull asserted his Power of Rule over all Kingdoms and Princes of the Earth, pro∣ceeded to admonish the King, to release the Cardi∣nal of Bourbon, and Archbishop of Lyons, in thirty days, and within sixty days to make his Submission to His Holiness for the death of the Cardinal of Guise, or he would proceed to absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance; which so pleased the Leaguers, that they reported Stories ofIbid. p. 409. God's immediate Judgment against the opposers of this Thundering Bull. But the King's Army pressing the Parisians, and having reduced them to the last Extremity, they found an instrument for their purpose;Ib. p. 410, 411, 412. who was so wrought upon by the fiery Preachers, that he resol∣ved to kill the King:That he was set on by the Jesuites, see Hospin. Histor. Jesuit. p. 180, 247. He was a Jacobin Friar, and confessing it to Father Bourgoin, Prior of the Con∣vent, he encouraged him in it, telling him he should be a Saint in Heaven, and accounted an holy Mar∣tyr by the Church; which so emboldened him, that with a Knife, given him by that Father, he stabbed the King into the Belly, and was himself slain upon the place. This Jaques Clement was accordingly honoured by the Clergy of the League,Fow. p. 411. as they had promi∣sed, his Picture was made, and shewed publickly, and they were about setting up his Statue in the Churches instead of the King's,Hist. Jesuit. p. 169, 248. 255. and pared off the very ground where he was slain to preserve as Re∣licks; and several Divines preached and wrote in
his Praise, compared him to Ehud, and affirmed he had done a greater work than Judith. The Cardi∣nal de Montalto rejoiced at it, and the Pope made a long Oration in its Praise,See it at large in Fowlis Hist. p. 413. and decreed that no Fu∣nerals should be celebrated for the King. Immediately upon this Murther the Leaguers at Paris would have made the Duke of Mayenne King, but he declining it,Ib. p. 422▪ 423. they proclaimed the Cardinal of Bourbon by the name of Charles the Tenth; and the Parliament of Tholouse commanded all the Bi∣shops within their Churches to give Thanks to God for this Deliverance; and that the first day of Au∣gust (on which the King was slain) should be kept for ever in remembrance of that Action; and that their Rancour against the King of Novarre might the better appear, they forbad any to accept him for their King. And not the Leaguers only, who had been in open Rebellion against Henry the Third,Ib. p. 422. but the Roman Catholicks of his Army, refused to obey him any longer, unless he would become a Romanist; nay, there were many of that Party found, who absolute∣ly renounced him, and joined with the Rebels, some few only remaining loyal; by which defection of the greatest part of his Army, he was forced to raise the Siege for his own Security. Things standing in this posture, the Pope, fear∣full lest any Rebellion should be prosecuted without his assistance,Ib. p. 423. sent a Legate into France, with great Summes of Money for the Leaguers, who was ac∣companied with Bellarmine, afterwards Cardinal, and a famous Defender of the Deposing Power. To encourage them farther,1590. the King of Spain by his Declaration exhorted all to join with him against the Hereticks of France,Ibid. protesting he de∣signed nothing but the advancement of the Catho∣lick
Religion, and Extirpation of Heresie: And the Parisians were so poisoned in their Principles, that the City being straitened by the King's Forces,Fowl. p. 427. and Provisions failing, they threw several into the Ri∣ver, for murmuring at the hardships they endu∣red. About this time the Cardinal of Bourbon,Ibid. their pretended King, dyed; upon which the States were summoned to meet for the Election of ano∣ther; and for the encouragement of the People the Legate ordered a Procession of all the Religious Or∣ders, who, to shew their Zeal, marched in order, armed like Soldiers, the Bishop of Senlis leading them▪ and their Relicks carried before them; at which the Cardinal Legate was present in his Coach; and the Parliament forbad any, upon pain of Death, to talk of any agreement with the King; in which madness the Parliament of Roan had led the way,Id. p. 424. who decreed, That whoever joined with the King should be guilty of High Treason, and put several Prisoners to death, only because they were the King's Servants. Nor could all the prodigious straits to which Paris was reduced, incline that headstrong People to Obedi∣ence; Idem. p. 428. the Famine was so great as no Age can shew the like; all eatable things were devoured, and but one little Dog to be found in all the City, which the Dutchess of Montpensier kept for her self, and refused two thousand Crowns only for its Brains; yet was the Rebels Obstinacy as great as ever, ac∣counting those who dyed of Famine Martyrs, and continuing as intent upon the War as in their plen∣ty; but finding force not successfull, they again employed Assassins; of whom two Franciscan Friars and a Priest were seized by the King at St. Denis in a Secular Habit, who confessed there were three and
twenty more, besides themselves, who had sworn the King's Death; at length the City was relieved by the Duke of Parma's Army, and the King rai∣sing the Siege retired. But as we have not hitherto found a Plot without a Priest in it, so they contributed all they could to the vigorous resistance which the Leaguers made; Fowl. p. 423, 424. For the Doctours of the Sorbon finding some Pro∣positions spread about the City, importing, that Henry of Bourbon ought to be King, and that the Pope hath no Power of Dominion over Sovereign Princes, presently condemned them; which Decree was confirmed by the Legate, and sworn to by the Bishops and Curates. But not content with this, the same Faculty, on May 7. this year, decreed by an unanimous Vote,Jure divi∣no prohibentur Catholici haere∣ticum hominem, aut futorem Haeresecos, ad regnum admit∣tere. Quod si e∣jusmodi absolu∣tionem à crimi∣nibus impetra∣verit, & tamen subsit manife∣sum simulatio∣nis, is nihilomi∣nus eodem jure excludi debet. Quicunque autem satagat, ut is ad Regnum perveniat,—est Religioni atque Ecclesiae perniciosus, contra quem eo nomine agi potest & debet, cujuscun{que} gradus & eminentiae sit.—Cùm igitur Henricus Brbonius Haereticus fit, & si forte absolutionem in foro exteriore impetraret, mani∣festum appareat simulationis— Regni aditu,  absolutionè obten,—Franci prohibere, & a Pace cum eo facienda abhorrere tenentur—Qui dicto Henrico ad Regnum aspiranti favere, suppetiásve, quovis modo ferunt, Religionis desertores sunt, & in continuo Peccato mortali ;—Qui e alli opponunt quocùn{que} modo, zelo Religionis, plu∣rimum apud Deum & homines merent—si ad Sanguinem us{que} resistant, eos aeternum in Praemium, & ut fidei Propugnatores Martyrii Palmam, consecutros, judicare fas est. Con∣clusum, nemine repugnante,  Congregatione General, &c. septimo die Maii, 1590. Fow. p, 425. &c. That all Catholicks by divine Law are forbid to admit any Prince that is an Here∣tick, or a favourer of Hereticks; That if he should pro∣cure an Absolution for his Heresie, yet if there be evi∣dent danger of his Hypocrisie, he is by divine Law to be rejected: That whosoever endeavours that he should be King ought to be opposed: And then they apply all to Henry of Bourbon, affirming, That there is evident danger of Hypocrisie, and therefore though he should obtain Sentence of Absolution, yet the French are obliged to keep him from the Crown, and abhor the
thoughts of making peace with him: That those who favour him are deserters of Religion, and remain in continual mortal Sin; but such as oppose him every way they can invent, do merit very much both of God and Man; and they who are slain in the Cause, are to be re∣puted Champions for the Faith, and shall obtain an ever∣lasting Crown of Martyrdom. And soon after they Fowl. p. 427. renewed this and their former Decrees; and when the City was so very much straitened, they wrote a Letter to the Pope, complaining that his Legate had not proceeded with severity enough against the King, commending Bourgogn, and other Rebels, who were executed,Fowl. Hist. p. 429, &c. calling them Maintainers and Defenders of the Truth; and earnestly supplicating for assistance from his Holiness, who, besides what Power he exerted by his Legate, sent themId. p. 427. fifty thousand Crowns for a Supply. Thus they went on with an excessive Spleen a∣gainst the King in France, but the Jesuites attempt∣ing to doe the same things inOb hanc cau∣sam etiam pub∣lico ordinam de∣creto extra Pro∣vincia ejecti sunt, an. 1590. sub mensis Ja∣nuarii initium. Histor. Jesuit. p. 332. Fowlis, p 295. Jesuites Catec. p. 173. Transilvania, were expelled the Countrey; yet in Scotland their De∣signs went on, from whence William Creighton, the Jesuite, went into Spain, into whose King he so insinuated himself, that he resolved to be guided by his Advice, both for the invading England, and the alteration of Religion in Scotland; which was the Account himself gave of his Negotiation by a Mes∣sage to the Earl of Huntley, desiring as many blanks and Procurations as could be had of the Scottish Noblemen, for the greater Credit of his Agita∣tions. In the mean time the Duke of Mayenne solicited the Pope and Spaniard for aid,Fowl. Hist. p. 434, &c. and entred into an Obligation with the Duke of Lorrain,1591. and others, not to admit any to the Crown except he were of their Family; but if they failed in that, to exclude
all, who were not of the Roman Catholick Religi∣on: But the Leaguers drew up a Letter, and sent it to the King of Spain, affirming that it was the desire of all the Catholicks to see his Catholick Ma∣jesty sway the Sceptre of that Kingdom, and reign over them; or that he would appoint some of his Posterity, offering the Crown to the Infanta Isabella, that King's Daughter, in particular: And to make all sure within themselves, they contrived a new Oath, whereby not onely the King, but all the Bloud Royal were excluded from the Crown; and set up a Court of Justice to proceed against the Roy∣alists. In which rebellious Actions they were encoura∣ged by the Pope,Fow. p. 433. Greg. 14. who sent a Nuncio into France with two Bulls, one interdicting the Clergy, if within 15 days they forsook not the obedience and Part of the King; and depriving them of all their Benefices, if they left him not within thirty days; the other threatening the Nobility, and all others, with the Papal Curse, if they assisted that Heretick, Persecutour, Excommunicated Person, who was justly deprived of his Dominions; which were the mild Expressions with which this meek Servant of Servants treated that great Prince: And farther, to shew his Fatherly care of the Rebels, he sent an Army to their relief, under the Command of his Ne∣phew, and allowed them fifteen thousand Crowns a month; whose steps were followed by his Succes∣sour,Id. p. 438. Innocent the 9th, who remitted them fifteen thousand Ducats every month of his Popedom, which was but short; for he sate not much above eight weeks in that Chair. Yet were not these Designs of the Leaguers, and Mayenne,Id. p 433, 438. sufficient to content the Pope, but the young Cardinal of Bourbon hoped for the Crown,
and so formed another Party of seditious Persons, called Thirdlings, among whom was Perron, after∣wards Cardinal; and this Faction also had the coun∣tenance of the last Pope, who, to advance this Car∣dinal, exhorted the States to chuse a Roman Catho∣lick for their King. And his Example was so far approved of by Cle∣ment the Eighth,1592. who was chosen in his room,Fowlis's Hist. p. 438, 439. that he continued the same allowance to the Leaguers, renewed the same Exhortations, and declared any other but a Romanist incapable of the Crown. The Parliament of Roan published a severe Edict against all who adhered to the King; and Discourses were spread abroad, maintaining, That it was unlawfull to desire his Conversion, and that such as proposed or endeavoured it were excommunicated, and ought to be driven away, lest they should infect the rest; and the Parliament of Paris enjoined Obedience to the Pope, and his Legate, declaring that the Con∣vention of Estates designed to chuse a Popish King: And by this time those few Romanists who had con∣tinued with the King, became rebellious too, re∣quiring him to change his Religion within a time which they prescribed, otherwise protesting they would elect another of their own Persuasion. Thus Rebellion and the Roman Catholick Cause went on prosperously in France; but not having the same strength and opportunities in England, the more secret Methods were made use of;Important Consid. p. 81. the Spa∣niard was importuned to make another Invasion, which he prepared for; but the Romanists, unwil∣ling to trust to that alone, took a shorter course, and byIbid. Anat. of Po∣pish Tyranny, p. 22. Mr Hesket's means attempted to persuade the Lord Strange,Fowlis's Hist. p. 354. afterwards Earl of Derby, to take upon him the Crown, which they pretended he had a Title to; and soon after Father Holt, and others,
employed Patrick Cullen, an Irish Fencer,Important Consid. and Anat. of Pop. Tyr. p. 22. Speed's Chron. p. 1181. to mur∣ther the Queen, which he readily undertook, and for a very small reward; but his barbarous Inten∣tion was discovered, and he, upon apprehension con∣fessing the Design, and who set him on, was exe∣cuted. Two years before this the Jesuite Creighton, up∣on his going into Spain, had desired blanks, to be filled up with Credentials and Procurations,Fowlis's Hist. p. 296. from the Noblemen of the Popish Party in Scotland; and this year he received them; the Persons who sent them farther engaging, that all the Romanists in Scotland should assist them, upon the arrival of the Army, which the King of Spain promised should be with them by the End of the Spring, to the num∣ber of thirty thousand, whereof some were to re∣main in Scotland, and the rest march directly into England: These Blanks were sent by a Servant of the King's, with Letters from several Jesuites, but he was apprehended, and some of the Conspiratours imprisoned and executed;Fowlis, p. 297, 298. The Jesuites complai∣ned in their Letters, that the Spaniards were too slow, and therefore desired the Invasion with great earnestness. Upon this Discovery,1593. the Earls of Angus,Idm. p. 299. Hunt∣ley, and Arrol, rebell'd, but the King's Army mar∣ching against them before they had formed any con∣siderable Body, they fled into the Mountains, sub∣mitted, and were imprison'd in Order to a Tryall. At the same time, Tir Oen in Ireland, after having persuaded,Idem. p. 37. and underhand maintained several In∣surrections, openly declar'd himself for the Rebells, taking on him the Title of O Neal; which by an Act of Parliament was declared Treason for any to assume.
Nor was England long free from open Rebellion, yet clear'd of a Treasonable Generation, who were daily employ'd in new Conspiracies against the Queens Life; forSpeed's Chr. p. 1181. Anat. Popish Tyr. p. 22. Fowl. Hist. p. 354, &c. Import. Consid. p. 81. Fowlis's Hist. p. 356. Speed's Chr. p. 1182. Lopez, one of the Queens Phy∣sicians, undertook to Poison her, for which he was to have Fifty thousand Crowns; but being discove∣red, confessed all, and with two of his Accomplices was Executed. But being unwilling to depend wholly on this Doctour, the Jesuite, Holt, Dr. Worthington, and others, employed Edmond York, Nephew to him who six years before had betrayed Zutphen to the Spaniards, and Richard William, with others, to Kill the Queen; who upon their Apprehension con∣fessed, That after several Consultations among the Priests and Jesuites in Flanders, Holt threatned, That if this Plot failed, they would take this honourable Work out of the Hands of the English, and employ Strangers for the future; that they had vowed to Murther the Queen; and that one Young, Tipping, Garret, with two others, had undertaken the same Design. While God was thus confounding the Designs of these bloudy Men in this Nation, the Leaguers in France seemed to have forgotten, that an all-seeing Eye beheld their Actions,Fowl. p. 439. &c. where the Duke of May∣enne put forth a Declaration, affirming, That Henry of Bourbon could not be lawfull King, because he was an Heretick; and therefore they cannot be blamed for opposing him in obedience to the Pope's Bulls, and Admonitions: to which, his Holiness's Legate added another, assuring the Romanists that the Pope would never consent to the admission of an Heretick, that such who assisted the King were in a desperate Condition, and exhorting all to be o∣bedient to the Pope; and when the Estates were
met, he proposed that all should take an Oath, ne∣ver to acknowledge the King, though he should be converted to their Church; nay, so great was his Fury, that when the Romanists with the King sent to the States some Propositions for a Treaty, he de∣clared the very Proposals to be Heretical, and by his influence the Doctours of Sorbon asserted the same, as intimating a declared Heretick might be King; but the Proposition was accepted, and a Conference agreed on, but with this Clause in the Answer to the Proposal, That to fight against an Heretical King is not Treason; yet the Legate entred his Pro∣testation against the meeting, and the Parisians at∣tempted to make the young Duke of Guise King: Nor were things better in the Royal Army, where the Romanists, whom the King most trusted, were falling from him; upon which resolving to change his Religion, his Intensions were no sooner pub∣lished, than the Legate forbad all Bishops to absolve him, pronouncing all that should be assisting to his reception into the Roman Church excommunicated, and deprived, and all their Actions in that Affair null and void. But hower the King was reconciled, and sent his Ambassadours to Rome;Fowl. p. 441, 442. but the Pope, who had formerly refused to admit any Message from him, prohibited their Entrance, neither would he receive the Prelates that absolved him. In the mean while the Leaguers stormed at the King's reconciliation, and set themselves to destroy him by private Treason, now Force could doe no good; for which purpose one Barriere, or Le Barr, was employed,Id p. 443. who confessed that the Curate of St. Andrews of Arts in Paris commended the Design, es. Catech. . 3. c. 6. telling him he would merit Heaven and Glory by the Act, and recommended him to Varade, Rectour
of the Jesuites College, who affirmed that the Enter∣prise was most holy,Histor. Jesuit. p. 251. exhorting him with good con∣stancy and courage to confess himself, and receive the B. Sacrament, and then leading him to his Chamber, gave him his Blessing: He mentioned also another Preacher of Paris, who counted it meritorious. Thus encouraged, he bought a knife seven Inches long, and went to St. Denis where the King then was, but being discovered was executed, affirming at his death, that there were two black Friars that went from Lyons upon the same Account. It is probable the Preacher at Paris, mentioned in his Confessions, was FatherJes. Cat. l. 3. c. 6. Histor. Jesuit. p. 251. Sumptura est de Barrierio supplicium, 31. Aug. die verò 29. qui erat do∣minicus, Pater Commoletus, Jesuita Parisiensis, in Epilogo Concionis suae mnuerat & adhor∣tatus fuerat Auditores, ne paululùm adhuc obdurarent, & quietis essent animis, siquidem brevi miraculum à Deo magnum ipsos esse percepturos, atque oculis suis visuros. Commolet, the Je∣suite, who two days before this Barriere's Execu∣tion at St. Denis, in a Sermon at Paris (which yet continued obstinate against the King) exhorted his Auditours to have Patience, for they should see in a few days a wonderfull Miracle of God. But the next Year Paris was reduced to its obedi∣ence,1594. soon after which the University endeavoured the Expulsion of the Jesuites,Histor. Jesuit, p. 148, &c. accusing them of all manner of Injustice, of the ruine of Families, and many other Crimes, but insisting particularly on their Treasons, charging them with being abettors to the Spaniard, Fomenters of Civil Wars, and al∣ways ready to assassinate the French King, whom they omitted to pray for, while they extolled the Spaniard; that they taught and asserted the Pope's deposing Power; that they refused to give Absolu∣tion to several Persons of Quality, because they would not renounce the King; that they had been
the cause of the Death of Twenty-eight Barons, Fifty Noble-men of France, and above Five hundred Monks and Friars in the Tercera Islands, and had refused to renounce the League. Which Spirit of Rebellion was so strong amongst the Leaguers,Fowlis Hist. p 443, &c. that a little before the Seduction of Paris, the Pope's Legate published a Declaration, exhorting all Catholicks to oppose the King; assu∣ring them that the Pope would never grant him Ab∣solution; and upon the Rendition of Aix to his Majesty, the famous Genebrard was so vext at the Loyalty of the Place, that he left it, resolving not to live among the Royalists; nay, when the King entered Paris the Cardinal Pellivee, lying upon his Death-bed, very angrily told those about him, That he hoped the Arms of the Spaniards, and good Ca∣tholicks would yet drive the Huguonots out of Paris:Hist. Jes. p. 258. And Hay, a Scotch Jesuite, affirmed, That if the King passed by their College,Jes. Cat. l. 3. c. 20. he would leap from the top of it upon him,Fowlis, p. 447. and did not doubt to go directly to Heaven. But to return to the Jesuites, who finding their Banishment out of the Kingdom thus zealously endeavoured, and fearing lest the King, to whom they had been such bitter Enemies, should consent to it, resolved to dispatch him; *Fowlis Hist. p. 445. Hist. Jesuit. p. 259. Fowl. p. 445. Jesu. Cat. l. 3. c. 18. Histor. Jes. p. 154, 155, 252. Francis Jacob one of their Scholars at Bourges had boasted that he would doe it; but John Chastel who was bred under them at Paris, went farther, and with a knife struck the King in the Mouth, and beat out one of his Teeth, he was immediately apprehended, and on Examination, confessed,Id. p. 252. Ratus id Religioni con∣ducere. That he esteemed it an Act highly conducing to promote Religion; and that Father Gueret, his Master in the Jesuites School, had taught him those Doctrines; upon which Sen∣tence of Death was pass'd upon him, by which al∣so
so theConstituit in∣super ut omnes Sacerdotes Col∣legii Clermon∣tii, & omnes a∣lii praedictae So∣cietati addicti, tanquam Corruptores Juventutis, Perturbatores publicae Tranquillitatis,—toto Regno exeant. Illorum auem mobilia & immobilia bona vertentur, &c.—secundùm arbitrium & decretum Curiae. Hist. Jes. p. 253. Jesuites were banished as Corrupters of Youth, Disturbers of the publick Peace, Enemies to the King and Kingdom; and enjoined to depart the Realm with∣in fifteen days; and all their Goods confiscated, to be disposed of as the Court should see sit. This Sentence was published after the search made in the Jesuites College,Histor. Jesuit. p. 256, 257. wherein was found a Book of T. Guignard's,Where you may see the summe of his Book, and the arrest of Parliament a∣gainst him. which he confessed to be his own writing, lamenting that the King was spared in the Parisian Massacre, applauding the Murther of King Henry the Third, affirming, that if the King were shut up in a Monastery,See also Fowlis, p. 446, &c. he would be treated more gently than he deserved; and conclu∣ding, that if he could not be deposed without force of Arms, they ought to be taken up against him; for which, and his other Treasons, he was execu∣ted; butOf him see Hist. Jesuit. ubi supra. Gueret, Chastell's Master, of the same Order, was only banished with the rest; in memo∣ry of which Fact, and to the perpetual Ignominy of that Order, Chastell's House was demolished, and a Pillar erected in the place; on one side of which was engraven the Decree of the Court,Speaking of Chastell, there are these lines, Malis magistris usus & schola impia, Sotericum eeu nomen usurpan∣tibus. Expressing by whose Instiga∣tion he under∣took the Murther. on another a Copy of Verses expressing the Crime, and disco∣vering to the World that it was attempted by the Persuasions of the Jesuites; on the third another In∣scription to the same purpose; and on the fourth a summary Account of their banishment, and the rea∣sons of it,Pulso tota Gallia hominum genere novae & maleficae superstitionis qui Rempublicam turbarunt, quorum instinctu particularis adolescens dirum facinus instituerat. Hist. Jes. p. 156. wherein the Jesuites are termed, A mis∣chievous and novell sort of superstitious Men, and Di∣sturbers
of the Nation, by whom that young man was encouraged and persuaded to that horrid Fact. This Pillar, as appears by the date of the Inscri∣ptions, was not erected till the following year; however, having such a relation to their banish∣ment, which was decreed the 29th. of December, 1594. I thought it most proper to give an account of it in this place. One would think that if any Fact would render men ashamed, this murtherous Attempt was so horrid as to make those concerned in it blush; but so far were they from that, that Francis Veron,Sand. Hist. of K. James, p. 156. a Jesuite, wrote an Apology for the Murtherer, cal∣ling the EnterpriseC'st un acte tres sainct, tres humaine, tres digne, tres lou∣able, & tres re∣commendable.—conformement à Dieu, aux Loix, au Decrets, & à l'Eglise. Apolog. pour. J. Chastel, p. 147. 156. See also Hist. Jaes. p. 255. a most holy, most humane, most laudable and worthy Act; that it is acceptable to God, and conformable to all Laws and Decrees of the Church; and in the same Book he extolls Clement, that stab∣bed the former King. Thus Fruitfull were the French Romanists in their Contrivances of Rebellion and Murther, and as willing were their Brethren in these Nations to promote Enterprises of the same nature; forFowl. p. 307. Speed's Chron. p 1191. Tir-Oen in Ireland, continued in the Rebellion which he began the year before, but distrusting his own power, submitted himself to the Lord Deputy; yet the very same Month he rebelled again, several Pro∣vinces revolting to him; by which accession of Forces he grew very powerfull:Fowlis's Hist. p. 299, 300. And in Scotland the Noblemen who were imprisoned and condemned for their Insurrection the last year, having been par∣doned by the King, took Arms again, being assisted with Money from the Spaniards, and defeated the King's Forces under the Earl of Argyle, though
much superiour in number to them, but were at length reduced so low, that they begged leave to depart the Land, which was granted them; so pro∣mising to enterprise no more against the King, they left the Kingdom: Bothwell, the chief of them went to Naples, where he lived miserably; the rest about three years after got their Pardons, and returned home. Yet were not these all the Popish Enterprises up∣on the Estates and Persons of Princes which were discovered this year;Hist. Jesult. p. 336. for I find that about this time they employed Le Four, and others, to murther Prince Maurice of Nassaw, General of the Forces of the United Provinces. But the indefatigable Romanists,1595. though so often disappointed,Fowl. p. 358. would once more apply themselves to the Spaniard, to favour their cause in England; who to correspond with their Desires and satisfie his own Ambition, sent Diego Brocher, upon the Eng∣lish Coast, who with four Gallies put into Mounts Bay in Cornwall, fired St. Paul's Church, andMousehole, Meulin, and Pensans. three small Fish Towns; and this was all the King of Spain made of his vast expences and preparations a∣gainst England. Tyr-Oen having the two last years strengthned him∣self, 1596. writes this year to the King of Spain,Fowl. p. 307. desiring him not to give ear to those who affirmed, that he design'd any Accommodation with the English; as∣suring him, that he was resolved never to submit to, or have any Treaty with them. About the same time the Jesuites at London had laid a Plot to seize the Tower,A. P. Reply to a notorious Libell, p. 81, 82. cited by Fowl. p. 358. and keep it till the Spaniards arrived to their Assistance; in one of their Letters from their Correspondents in Spain, dated June the 20th. 1596. they are put in hopes that the Spanish Armada should be with them about the
August following; cautioning them to advise all the Romanists of the Design before-hand, and Pro∣clamations were ready Printed in Spain, to be dis∣persed at their Arrival here; and the better to se∣cure the Spaniards landing in Scotland,Fowl. p. 300. the Conspi∣ratours fortified the Isle of Elsay in the Western Seas, for their Reception; but were surprized be∣fore they had proceeded far, so the Enterprize mis∣carried. And now we are come to the last Conspiracy that hath been discovered against the Life of Queen Eli∣zabeth,Speed. p. 1183. which was the attempt of Edward Squire,Fowl. p 357. a Servant in her Stables,Import. Con∣sid. p. 81. to whom Walpoole,Anat. of Pop. Tyran. p. 26. the Je∣suite,1597. gave a very strong Poison, which Squire un∣dertook to press out upon the Pommel of her Sad∣dle; but before he could bring himself to undertake so horrid an Action, he had several conflicts in his own mind; which the Jesuite perceiving, told him, Speed, p. 1183. That the Sin of Backsliding did seldom obtain pardon, and if he did but once doubt of the lawful∣ness, or merit, of the Act, it was enough to cast him down to Hell; exhorting him to go through with it;Jes. Cat. l 3. c. 4 for if he failed, he would commit an un∣pardonable Sin before God; and at parting, after having bless'd him, he used these words, My Son, God bless thee, and make thee strong; be of good cou∣rage; I pawn my Soul for thine; and being either dead or alive, assure thy self thou shalt have part of my Prayers. Thus satisfied with the Jesuites, he, upon the first opportunity, poisoned the Pommel of the Queens Saddle, but it pleased God the Poison had not the expected effect; upon which the Jesuites not hea∣ring of her Death in some time, suspected Squire of Unfaithfulness, and got him under-hand accused of some Design against the Queen; upon which being apprehended he confessed all, and was executed.
But Tyrone created more trouble to the Queen in Ireland,Speed, p. 1121, 1122. where daily he encreased his strength, took fortified Places from the English, and in several Skir∣mishes got the better of the Queens Forces. And continuing his Rebellion,1598. slew Sir Henry Bagnall,Id. p. 1123. and routed the English under his Com∣mand, took the Fort of Black-water, and in it great store of Ammunition and Arms, and created James Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond, and got several Ad∣vantages over the Forces of the Kingdom. In England Anthony Rolston was employed by the Jesuite Creswell to prepare things for an Invasi∣on, Cambd. Annal. ad an. 1598. which the Spaniard intended to make very sud∣denly; in order to which a Fleet was prepared, and a Proclamation drawn up by the Admiral, justi∣fying the Action, and declaring his Intention to be, to reduce these Kingdoms to the Obedience of the Ca∣tholick Roman Church. This year also was apprehended in Holland one Peter Pan, a Cooper of Ipres, who confess'd, That his Design was to murther Prince Maurice of Nas∣saw, Jes. Cate. l. 3. c. 1. that the Jesuites of Doway,Hist. Jes. p. 336. for his encourage∣ment, promised to make his Son a Prebend, and the Provincial gave him his Blessing in these Words, Friend, go thy ways in peace, for thou goest as an Angel under God's safeguard and protection. But almost innumerable were the Conspiracies a∣gainst King Henry of France,Fowl. p. 449, 450. against whom (after Mayenne and all others had submitted) the Dukes of Aumale, and Mercent continued obstinate, refu∣sing to acknowledge him; and the Pope's Agent at Brussels, first employed Ridicove, a Dominican of Ghent, to murther the King; assuring him, That the Pope and Cardinals approved of the Action; but he, after two Journeys into France about it, was apprehended, and executed; confessing, That the
daily Sermons he had heard in praise of Clement, who stabb'd the former King, and was esteemed a Martyr a∣mong them, had so enflam'd him, that he resolv'd to follow his steps. Besides this Man, one Arger, of the same Order, undertook the same Exploit; to whom the Pope's Agent added Clement Odin, another Son of St. Dominick; but God defeated all their Designs, and preserv'd that great King's Life some years lon∣ger. In the mean while Tir Oen continued his Rebel∣lion in Ireland,1599. having received Assistance from the Spaniard,Fow. p 308. and a Plume of Phoenix Feathers from the Pope;Speed. p. 1225. and the new Earl of Desmond wrote two See them at large in Fow∣lis, p. 308. 309. Letters to the King of Spain, begging his Assi∣stance to drive the English out of Ireland, and to advance the Catholick Cause, which he was resol∣ved to maintain. What effect these and other Ad∣dresses had, we shall see presently. But Tir Oen not resting wholly on the Spaniard,1600. wrote a very earnest Letter to the Pope, subscribed by himself, Desmond, and others;Desideramus ut quem dmo∣dum faeliis re∣cordationis Pius V. P. M. con∣tra Reginam Angliae—Bul∣lam excommu∣nicationis edi∣derat, necnon Greg. 13. eandem continuaverat—Similem quoque sententiam ad hoc bellum promovendum, & ad felice exitum deducendum sanctitas vestra emittere dignetur. Fowl. p. 478. Desiring his Holiness to issue out a Bull against the Queen, as Pius the Fifth, and Gregory the Thirteenth had done; which they press him to doe, because the Kingdom be∣longed to his Holiness, and next under God depended solely on him. In the mean while, the Rebellion went on, and daily conflicts happen'd; but lest the tediousness, or danger of the War should discourage them, Pope Clement the Eighth sent a Letter, directed to all the Prelates, Noblemen, and People of. Ireland, whereinCùm Rom. Pontificum prae∣decessorum no∣strorum, & no∣stris & Aposto∣licae sedis co∣hortationibus adductis—Hugoni O Neale—conjunctis animis & viribus praesto fueritis. See the Letter at large in Fowlis, p. 479, 480. he owns, That they had taken up Arms by his advice, for recovering their Liberty, and op∣posing
the Hereticks, commends the Fitz-Geralds who headed former Insurrections, highly extolls Tyrone, and grants a full remission of all Sins to him and his Assistants. Yet could not this Concurrence,Speed, p. 1125. 1126. and Benediction of the Pope preserve their strength from being bro∣ken by the Lord Mountjoy, who this year arrived Lord Deputy in Ireland; insomuch that several of the chief Rebels submitted,Fowlis p. 480. but at the same time sent to Rome to crave Pardon for their outward com∣pliance: This year Col. Sempill betray∣ed Lyer in Flanders to the Spaniards. Wadsw. Engl. Span. Pilgr. p 61. Lond. 1630.—4to. but Tyrone continued obstinate, which forced the Lord-Deputy to proclaim him Traitor, setting a Reward of Two thousand Marks upon his Head; however the Spaniard sent a Ship to his Re∣lief, laden with Arms and Monies, as an earnest of more Supplies. It is certain from the Confession of the Traitors themselves,Delr. Disquis. Magi. l. 6. c. 1. Lov. 1600. 4to. that the foundation of the Gun-powder Treason was laid the following year; but it is very probable that there was a rough draught of it made in this, as appears by the Case resolv'd by Delrio the Jesuite; whether if one discover in Confession, that he hath laid Gun-powder under an House, by which the House is to be blown up, and the Prince destroy∣ed, the Priest ought to reveal it? upon which he con∣cludes, that he ought not; it was a Case that had ne∣ver happened before and so not likely to have been thought of by a Person not cautious of such a De∣sign; Account of the Procee∣dings against the Gunp. Trait. p. 215. Lond. 1679. 8to. and this Resolution Garnet after served him∣self of, alledging, That all the Knowledge he had of the Treason was communicated to him in Confessi∣on, which he was bound not to disclose, upon any Account whatsoever.
Soon after his last Letter in Tyrone's behalf,Anno 1601. the same Pope sent his Breves into England,Foxes & Fire∣brands, pt. 2. p. 62. comman∣ding all the Roman Catholicks not to admit, after the Queen's death,Fowl. p. 499. Acct. of the Proceedings against the Gunpowder Trait. p. 159. any Prince whatsoever, unless he would bind himself by Oath to promote the Ro∣man Catholick Religion to his utmost Power: In prosecution of which, knowing that King James, the next Successour, was a firm Protestant, several Designs were formed against his Life;Foxes & Fire∣brands, ubi supra. Hay and Ha∣milton, two Papists, were sent into Scotland, to stir up the Jesuites there, who were received and cherished, notwithstanding the King had by his Pro∣clamation forbidden any to harbour them, affirming that if any did, he would look upon them as De∣signers against his Life. But while these Jesuites, and others of the same stamp, were endeavouring to prepare matters for a Rebellion, oneFowlis's Hist. p. 498. Mowbray, Son to a Scotch Nobleman; undertook to destroy the King, but was ap∣prehended at London, and sent Prisoner into Scot∣land by the Queen; and about the same time the Walton's Life of Sir Henry Wotton, p 14, &c. Duke o Tuscany, by some Letters he had inter∣cepted, discovered another Design against his Life, which was to be effected by Poison, an Account of which he sent immediately to the King by Sir Hen∣ry Wotton, then in his Court, with several Anti∣dotes against the Poison, if it should be given him, notwithstanding all his diligence to prevent it. During these Designs in Scotland the Pope sent a Letter to Tyrone, calling his Rebellion an & Prin∣cipes, &c. Holy League, ex his  in Domino —Laudamus egregiam pietatm & fortitudinem tuam.—Conservate filii hanc Mentem, conservate Vnionem,—& Deus erit vobium, & pgnabit pro vobis. Vbi opus prit, scribemus efficaiter ad Reges & Principes Catholicos,—ut vobis & Causae vestrae omni ope suffragentur. Cogitamus etiam propeiem mittere ad vos peculiaerem nuncium nostrum. Tibi & cateris qui tibi unanimes pro sidei  Propugnatione adhaerent, nostram & Aposto∣liam benedictionem benig impertimur. Fowl. p. 482. assuring him that he was exceedingly pleased at their Courage and Zeal, extolling his Pi∣ety,
exhorting him to go on as he had begun, and pray∣ing that God would fight for him; promising to write to all Catholick Princes to assist him, and to send a Nuncio to reside with him; and giving his Blessing to him and all his Followers, who should hazard themselves for the Catholick Cause. Besides which he sent aWalsh's Hist. of the Irish Rem. Pref. p. 11. Breve to the whole Bo∣dy of the Irish Nation, requiring them to join with Tyr-Oen against the Queen; and if we may believe See his De∣claration in Fowlis Hist. p 484, &c. Don Juan de Aquila, General of the War in Ireland for defence of the Faith, he went farther than this, and excommunicated, and (as far as in him lay) de∣posed Her Majesty. This Spanish Commander arrived at Kingsall with a great Fleet, and began to fortifie the Town; and published a Declaration, affirming, That the War made against Queen Elizabeth by his Master, in Conjunction with Tyr-Oen, was just, She having been excommunicated, and her Subjects absolved from their Fidelity by several Popes; exhorting them, that now Christ's Vicar commanded them, they would in obedience to him take Arms;Speed's Chr. p. 1226. prote∣sting, that if any continued in obedience to the En∣glish, they should be prosecuted as Hereticks, and hatefull Enemies of the Church. Soon after Don Alonso del Campo landed with a Supply of Soldiers,Fowlis's Hist. p. 486. but suddenly after his arrival was taken Prisoner,Speed's Chr. p. 1226. the Army of the Spaniards and Rebells in conjunction routed, and the former glad to be permitted to return home. Yet were the English Papists as diligent as ever to introduce the Spaniards, and therefore dispatched awayHist of the Gunpow. Tr. p. 2, 3. Thomas Winter, to trie what could be done for their assistance, who were ready to sacrifice their Lives for the Catholick Cause; and to assure the King of Spain, that if he would send over an Army,
they would have in a readiness Fifteen hundred or two thousand Horses for the Service; being intro∣duced by the means of the Jesuite Creswell, the Duke of Lerma assured him of Assistance, and the Count de Miranda told him, that his Master would bestow two hundred thousand Crowns for that use, and would have an Army in England by the next Spring. With this gratefull Account of the posture of Affairs he returned,1602. and great preparations were made, that they might be ready against the arrival of the Forces; but all their measures were broken by the Queen's death,Hist Gunp. Tr. p. 3. yet was Mr. Wright sent into Spain, and Guy Faux after him; but the King re∣fused to meddle, having sent his Ambassadour to conclude a Peace with King James; upon which disappointment they entertained new Designs, which we shall have account of in a little time. While these Matters were transacting in Spain and England, Tyr-Oen and Osulevan continued their Insurrection in Ireland, the latter keeping the Ca∣stle of Dunboy for the King of Spain,Fowl. Hist. p. 486, &c. to whom he sent to desire him to accept it, which he did, and sent Osulevan twelve thousand pounds, with a sup∣ply of Arms and Ammunition; and the rest of the Rebells received Encouragement from their Corre∣spondents in Spain, who assured them, his Catho∣lick Majesty would not omit the winning of Ireland, if it cost him the most part of Spain; and that an Army of fourteen thousand men, with a Nuncio from the Pope, were set Sail for their Relief, which News rendered them so obstinate, that they endu∣red all Extremities; but the taking of Dunboy by the Lord Deputy put a stop to those succours, there being no place for to receive them at their landing; yet did Mac Eggan, the Apostolical Vicar, revive the fury of the Rebells, but he was slain the latter end
of this year, fighting at the head of his Men, with a Sword drawn in one hand, and his Breviary and Beads in the other. We have seen the Pope approving this Rebellion, so that the Divines of his Church could doe no less than follow the Dictates of their Supreme Head, which the Jesuites of Salamanca did this year by a Declara∣tion of theirs; in which they resolve,Tanquam certum est acci∣piendum, posse Rom. Pontif. sidei desertores, armis compell∣re ac coercere;—posse quoscunqe Catholicos Hu∣goni O Neal in praed. bello fave∣re, idque magro cum merito, & spe maxima re∣tributionis aeter∣nae; cùm enim bellum gerit au∣thoritate sum∣mi Pontificis.—Eos omnes Ca∣tholicos peccare mortaliter, qui Anglorum ca∣stra—sequun∣tur; nec posse illos aeternam salutem conse∣qui, nec ullo Sa∣cerdote à suis peccatis absolvi, nisi prius resipiscant, ac Castra Anglorum deserant. Idemque de illis censendum est qui illis tribuunt, praeterea Tribua consueta quae ex Summi Pont. Indulgentia & Permissione eis licet Anglis Regibus—solvere—Surreptio intervenire non potest, nulla narratur Petitio eorum in quorum favorem expeditur; at Summus Pont▪ aperte in illis literis docet se & Antecessores suos sponte exhortates fuisse ad illu bellum gerendum Hibernos.—Permissum est etiam Catholi∣cis Haereicae Reginae id genus obsequii praestare quod Catholicam Religionem non oppugnet.—Daum Salamanticae, 7. Martii. 1602. That we must hold for certain that the Pope hath power to bridle and suppress those who forsake the Faith: And having far∣ther stated the Question, they proceed to affirm, That it is lawfull for any Catholick to assist Tyr-Oen, and that with great Merit, and good Hope of eternal Reward, because it is by the Pope's Authority, that all such Romanists as take part with the English sin mor∣tally, and cannot be saved, or receive Absolution, till they forsake the English Army; and those are in the same condition who give the English any Tribute, ex∣cept such as the Pope hath given them leave to pay, (so that they are to be Subjects no longer than the Pope pleases.) And then they proceed to shew, That the Bull in favour of the Rebells was not procured by sur∣reption, but proceeded from the Pope's own Inclination to them, and that the permission given to the Roman Catholicks to obey her, extended only to such Obedience as doth not oppugn the Catholick Religion, which the assisting Her against Tyrone doth. And this Decla∣ration is dated the seventh of March. 1602.
And it could be nothing less than such an extra∣ordinary encouragement, that could render the Irish so audacious as they were upon the Queen's Death;Fowl. p. 495. in Limrick they seized the Churches, and set up Mass in them; the same they did at Water∣ford, in the Cathedral, and at the Sessions House they pulled down the Seats of Justice; in Cork they refused to proclaim the King, and by Force oppo∣sed the Commissioners; they went in a solemn Pro∣cession, took the Sacrament to spend their Lives in defence of the Roman Catholick Religion; wrote to several Cities to assist them, seized upon the King's stores, and assaulted his Forces, alledging that he could not be lawfull King, because he was not appointed by the Pope. And for their farther satisfaction the University of Salamanca,Fowl. p. 494. subscribed the Declaration which the Jesuites made the year before;Hist. of the I∣rish Remon. Pref. p. 11. and the Divines of Valedolid did the same.1603. About this time the Jesuites laboured to get the Sentence of their Banishment out of France rever∣sed, the Pope interposing his Mediation in their Fa∣vours, upon which the Parliament of Paris at∣tempted to dissuade the King from consenting to it by a longSee it at large in Hist.  p. 160.  reula in∣ditata habent quod ille ex∣communicando∣rum Regum po∣testatem habeat, quod Rex ex∣communicatus nihil sit aliud quam Tyrannus, cui Populus rebellare possit;—quod omnes Regnicolae qui mini∣mum in Ecclesia ordinem habeant, si quodcunque crimen committant, illud pro laesae Majestatis  haberi non possit, propterea quod Regum subditi non sint, nec ad eorum jurisdictionem pertineant. Oration; alledging, That it was their avowed Doctrine, That the Pope hath a Power of Ex∣communicating Kings; that a King so Excommunica∣ted by his Holiness, is no other than a Tyrant, whom the People may oppose; that Clergy-men are exempt from the Prince's Power, are none of his Subjects, and can∣not be punish'd by him for any Crimes: And having
enumerated several of their Treasons, they af∣firm, Oportet igi∣tur ut illi qui tenent, & in regno vestro manere volunt, eas publicè in suis Collegiis abjurent. That it is absolutely necessary for them to re∣nounce these Doctrines, or else France cannot with safety admit them to return. But though they were very desirous of Admis∣sion, they would not renounce those Positions for it; however by importunity, and the solicitation of the Pope, and others, they were at length received, but upon Conditions,Hist. Jes. p. 494. Ne ulla Collegia—sine expressa Regis permissio∣ne insticuant.—Vt semper ali∣quem habeant, natione Gallum, qui Regi à Sacris concionibus esset, & de omnibus negotiis rationem totius Societatis nomine ipsi redere possit. Two of which were, That they should build no Colleges without express Permission from the King; and that one of their number should be always near the King, to be accountable for the Acti∣ons of the Society. Thus were they admitted, but marks of Distrust set upon them; though they have, by their Address, turn'd the latter of these Conditions, which was at first design'd for their Disgrace, into a mark of Honour, the King's Confessour being ever since a Jesuite. Though the Gun-powder Plot was not ripe for Execution till two years after,Account of the Proceed, p. 164. yet they were con∣sulting about it at this time; when after a long com∣plaint of their Grievances, Mr. Percy told Mr. Cates∣by, that there was no way but to kill the King, and he was resolv'd to doe it: But to that Gentleman desi∣red him not to be so rash, for he had laid a surer De∣sign, which would certainly effect it, without any danger to themselves; and then imparted to him the Contrivance of blowing up the King and Par∣liament.
Which Design in May,Hist. of the Gun-powder Plot. p. 5. the following year,Anno 1604. the Conspiratours obliged themselves by Oath upon the Holy Sacrament to keep secret;Acct. of the Proceedings, p. 67. Catesby ju∣stifying the Action by the Breves which the Pope had sent to exclude King James; it being as lawfull to cast him out as to oppose his Entrance; and Bates, another of the Conspiratours, was assured by the Je∣suite Greenwell, that the Cause and Action were good, and therefore it was his Duty to conceal it. Upon the approaching of the Parliament they be∣gan to work,. endeavouring to make a Mine under the Parliament-house; but soon after Percy hired a Cellar, in which they stowed the Gun-powder, with Billets heap'd upon it, to hide it in case of search. The May before the Plot was to be executed there was an Insurrection of the Romanists in Wales,Fowl. Hist. p▪ 513. but it was soon supprest;An Account of the Proceed. p 168. yet all things went on in or∣der to the fatal blow;1605. when about a week before the Parliament was to sit, the Design was discovered, and so prevented; upon which the Conspiratours flew intoIb. p. 58 59. Hist of the Gun-powder Treason p. 17. Wilson's Hist. of K. J. p. 31. Rebellion, but were all either killed or taken by the Sheriff of Worcestershire TheAccount of the Proceed. p. 6. King in his Speech to the Parliament soon after, told them that Faux confessed that they had no other cause moving them to the Design, but merely and only Religion; which was acknow∣ledged by Sir Everard Digby at his Tryall, to be the chief Motive which enduced him to make one a∣mong them, and which he resolved to hazard his Life,See his Papers at the end of the Account, p. 241, &c. his Estate, and all, to introduce; protesting, that if he had thought there had been the least sin in the Plot, he would not have been of it for all the World; and the Reason why he kept it secret, was because those who were best able to judge of the Lawfulness of it, had been acquainted with it, and
given way unto it; and therefore afterwards he calls it the best Cause. The Persons,Account of the Proceedings, p. 105, 172. upon whose Authority he so much relied, were the Jesuites, who asserted the holiness of the Action; for Garnet, their Superiour, had af∣firmed that it was lawfull, and Father Hammond ab∣solved them all after the Discovery, when they were in open Rebellion; and Greenwell, the Jesuite, rode about the Countrey to excite as many as he could to joyn with them; nay,Causab. Ep. ad Front. Du∣aeum, p. 99. Lond. 1611. 4to. Garnet confessed that Catesby in his name did satisfie the rest of the Law∣fulness of the Fact.Account of the Proceed. p. 175. Parsons had kept a Corre∣spondency with that Jesuite to promote it, and at the same time (not willing to discover it to them, and yet desirous of their Prayers,)Fow. p. 509. ordered the Stu∣dents of his College at Rome to pray for the Inten∣tion of their Father Rectour: And after the Disco∣very, Account of the Proceed. p. 172. Father Hall, encouraged some of the Trai∣tors, who began to doubt that the Action was un∣lawfull, seeing God had defeated it in so providenti∣al a manner, telling them, that we must not judge of the Cause by the Event; that this was no more than what happened to the Eleven Tribes when they went up at first to fight against Benjamin, and that the Christians were often defeated by the Turks; nay, so highly was it approv'd by that Order, that, not to mention here the Honours done to the Con∣spiratours, since their Deaths, several Jesuites glo∣ried in, and bragg'd of it; for a little before the Discovery,Robins. Anat. of the English Nunnery at Lisbon, p. 8. Lond. 1630. 4to. Father Flood caused the Jesuites at Lis∣bon to spend a great deal of Money in Powder, on a Festival day, to try the force of it, and persuaded one John How, a Merchant, and other Catholicks, to go over into England, and expect their Redemption there:Fowl. p. 510. And Father Thompson was wont afterwards to boast to his Scholars at Rome, how oft his Shirt
was wetted with digging under the Parliament House. And that the Pope himself was concerned in the Design is more than probable,Fowlis, p. 509. for it is confessed by a Jesuite that there were three Bulls granted by him, which should have been published if the Conspiracy had succeeded;In his Papers ubi supr. p 250. and Sir Everard Digby hath left it under his hand, that it was not the Pope's mind that any Stirs should be hindered which were un∣dertaken for the Catholick Cause. The Pope's carriage after the Discovery is ano∣ther shrewd Argument that he was privy to the Plot, for he not only made no Declaration either by Word or Writing in abhorrence of it, but when Copley's Rea∣sons, p. 22. Greenway, one of the Conspirators, escaped to Rome, he advanced him to the Dignity of Penitentiary, and Vindication of the History of Gunp. Tr. p. 74. Gerard, another, was a Confessour at St. Peters in the same City. This execrable Conspiracy appeared so horrid and unworthy, not only of religious Men, but contra∣ry to humane Nature, thatFowl. p. 509. sixteen of the Students under the Jesuites at Rome, forsook the College, and some of them renounced the Roman Church; andCopley's Reas. p. 21. Mr. Copley, who had been a Priest some years, (as appears by his Reasons, one of sound Learning and judgment,) assures us, that it was one of the Causes of his Conversion. Yet were there many found among the Roma∣nists who justified the Design,Ib. p. 23. hardly any condem∣ning it: Thus the same Gentleman professes, that though some termed it an inconsiderate Act, yet he could never meet with any one Jesuite who bla∣med it. TheK. James Premon p 21. of his works▪ Conspiratours justified themselves, and even at their deaths would acknowledge no fault: And whenAccount of Proceedings, p. 126. Faux and Winter were admit∣ted to discourse together in the Tower, they affir∣med,
they were sorry that no body set forth a De∣fence or Apology for the Action; but yet they would maintain the Cause at their Deaths; nay there was one who had the hardiness to attempt See Key for Cathol. p. 434. to justifie the Design from the imputation of Cruelty, because both Seeds and Root of an evil Herb must be destroyed; And when some of the Plotters escaped to Callis,Hist. of the Gun-powder Treas. p. 29. the Governour assured them of the King's Favour, and that though they lost their Country they should be received there; they replyed, That the loss of their Country was the least part of their Grief; but their sorrow was that they could not bring so brave a Design to per∣fection. And notwithstanding Garnet was so deep in the Con∣spiracy, yetCopley's Reasons, p. 22. Mr. Wilson placed him among the Mar∣tyrs, in his English Martyrology; and it is affirmed byRobins. Anat. p. 3. one who liv'd among them, that he and Campi∣on are beatified by the Pope, which is the next de∣gree to Canonization, and that every one of them is painted in the Jesuites Churches, with the Title of Blessed Father;Primarius quidem Baro S∣tus, idemque spectatissimae in Re∣ligione constantae, cum Romam venisse, in Templo ilio Jesuita∣rum, inter alios sodalitatis illius Martyres,  Garetti effi∣giem vidit. Bernard. Giral. Pa∣tavi. pro Repub. Ven. Apolog. p. 107. and we are assured that Garnet's Picture was set up in their Church at Rome, among their Martyrs, several years af∣ter; andSt. Amor's Journal. p. 58. Lond. 1664. Fol.—Pater Henricus Gar∣ettus Anglus, Lndini pro Fide Catholica su∣spensus, & sectus. 3. Maii. 166. St. Amour, a Doctour of Sorbon, found his Pictures commonly sold at Rome, in the year 1651. with this Inscription, Father Henry Garnet, hang'd and quarter'd at London, for the Catholick Faith; by which they shew themselves either Approvers of the Design, to that degree as to count it a point of their Faith, or else they must appear Deceivers of the People, and Slanderers of the English Nation, in affirming, that he dyed for his Religion, when he justly suffered for the most hellish Conspiracy
that was ever laid; yet Delrio, and Gordon, two Jesuites, went farther; the first in Prosecution of his Determination in the point which we mentio∣ned before,Fowl. p. 520. compares him to Dionysius, the Areopa∣gite; the latter placing him in Heaven, desires him to intercede there for the conversion of England, and it was once publickly prayed in Louvain, O holy Henry! Intercede for us. But they had designs elsewhere at the same time that this their holy Martyr was promoting their Cause in England; King Henry of France his Life was so burthensome to the Jesuites, that they were impatient, so that Father Coton, the King's Con∣fessour, Vindc. of the Sincer. of the Prot. Relig. p. 132. out of Thuanus ad an. 1604. or rather Hostage for his Society, to be sa∣tisfied in the point, wrote down several questions which he had propounded to a Maid said to be pos∣sessed, one of which was how long the King should live; which is a capital Crime in itself;Tertul. Apol. c. 35. For (as Tertullian long since argued) who hath any business to make such an Enquiry,Cui autem opus est scrutari su∣per Caesaris sa∣lte, nisi à quo adversus illum aliquid cogitatur, aut post illam speratur & sustinetur.— except he hath designs against his Prince, or hath some hopes of advancement by his death. And as busie was the Pope Paul the Fifth for the advancement of the Roman Cause, he fell out with the Duke ofFowl. p. 455. Savoy this Year, for presenting an Abbey to Cardinal Pio; and to shew his Authority over Princes and States, (which is a kind of depo∣sing them, and clear Evidence of Popish Principles,) when the Commonwealth of Luca made an Edict against the Protestants, though he liked the thing, yet he pretended they had no power in those mat∣ters, Idem. p. 456. and therefore commanded them to raze the Edict out of their Records, and he would publish one for the same purpose by his own Authority;
and when the State of Genoa prohibited some sediti∣ous Meetings of Ecclesiasticks, he threatened them with Excommunication, and forced them to recall their Order. But the Venetians would not be frighted by his Thunders,Fowl. Hist. 456, &c. Histor. Jes. p. 306. though he threatened them with the same Censure, if they did not speedily revoke their Decrees concerning the building of Churches, and giving Lands to the Church, (which they had pro∣hibited any to doe without the Senate's Order,) and required them to deliver two Clergymen, whom they had imprisoned for many horrid Crimes; con∣cluding his Breve with an Assertion of his Power to deprive Kings, and that he had Legions of An∣gels for this Assistance. But when the Senate would not gratifie him in thus yielding their Rights to an Usurper,1606. the Pope told their Ambassadour,Fowl. p. 458. that the Exemption of Cler∣gy-men from the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate was Jure divino, that his Cause was the Cause of God, and he would be obeyed; and therefore in a Consi∣story of one and forty Cardinals he published a Bull of Excommunication against that State, wherein he declares,Authoritate omnipotentis Dei, ac B. Petri & Pauli Aposto∣lorum ejus, ac nostra, nisi Dux & Senatus in∣tra viginti qua∣tuor dies a die publicationis praesentium—computandos praedicta Decre∣ta omnia, &c. revocaverint, &c.—xcommunicamus, & excommunicatos nunciamus & de∣claramus. Et si di i Dux & Senatus per tres dies post lapsum dictorum viginti quatuor die∣rum, excommunicationis sententiam animo sustinuerint in lurato,—universum temporale Do∣minium dict. Reip. ecclesiastico Interdicto supponimus,—ilidsque etiam Pens contra ipsos—juxta sacrorum Canonum dispositionem—leclarandi facultatem reservamus.—Dat. Apr. 18. Anno 1606. That by the Authority of Almighty God, and the Apostles Peter and Paul, the Duke and Senate of Venice, if within four and twenty days after the publication of the Bull they do not revoke their Decrees, are excommunicated; and if they continue obstinate three days more, he lays an Interdict upon the whole State, forbidding the Clergy to perform Divine Offices in any part of their Dominions, and threatens far∣farther
Punishments, according to the sacred Ca∣nons. This Bull he expected would gain his point, by causing the Ecclesiasticks to withdraw themselves, and that the People, seeing themselves deprived of Church-Offices, would run into Sedition; but the Event answered not his Expectation, for the People joined unanimously with the Senate; but the Jesu∣ites, and others, refused to celebrate Mass, upon which they were banished the Dominions of Venice; afterFowlis Hist. l. 4▪ 3, &c. which they did all they could to stir up the Common People: But not succeeding in this, the Pope published a Jubilee, granting Indulgence to all but those of Interdicted places; this he expected would make the People murmur, but he was decei∣ved in that point too; so that he declared in a full Consistory that he would have War with the State of Venice, and called the Spaniards to his aid; but finding the Senate resolute in Defence of their Rights, he was glad to recall his Bull, and make a Peace with them, and though he earnestly pressed for the Restauration of the Jesuites, yet he could not obtain it. About this time the Oath of Allegiance being established by Law,Ib. p. 526, 527. the Romanists sent to Rome to know what they should doe in this Case, where it was consulted by seven or eight of their learnedest Divines, who all agreed, that the Pope's Power of chastizing Princes is a Point of Faith, and conse∣quently cannot be denied without denying of the Faith; and the Pope told Father Parsons, and Fitz∣herbert, he could not hold those for Catholicks who took the Oath; which he soon after declared by his Breve, addressed to the Romanists of England, Sep∣temb. 22. 1606. wherein he affirms,Non potesis absque eviden∣tissima gravissi∣mque divini honoris injuriâ obligare vos ju∣ramento,—cùm multa contineat quae fidei & saluti apertè aversantur. That they cannot, without most evident and grievous wronging
of God's Honour, bind themselves by the Oath, seeing it contains many things contrary to Faith and Salva∣tion. But when some Romanists who had taken it be∣gan to question the Breve,1607. willing to think it was obtained from his Holiness by surreption; he sent †Aug. 23. 1607. another to undeceive them, wherein he blames them for entertaining such thoughts, and assures them,Decrevimus vobis significare Literas illas post longam & gravem de om∣nibus quae in il∣lis continentur deliberationem dhibitam fuisse scriptas; & b id teneri vos illas omnino observare, omni interpretatione se∣cùs suadente rejectà. That it was written upon mature deliberation, and therefore they are bound fully to observe it, rejec∣ting all interpretation to the contrary; upon which several who were willing before refused it, some of whom were imprisoned. It is an hard thing for men accustomed to doe evil to learn to doe well, which Truth Tyr-Oen is a great Example of, for notwithstanding after his fre∣quent Rebellions he was pardoned by King James,Fowlis's Hist. p. 495. and received into favour, yet returning into Ireland he began new Contrivances, and fearing he was dis∣covered, fled this year into Flanders, which caused the King to publish a severe Proclamation against him; from thence he went to Rome, where he was maintained at the Pope's charge till his death. This same Year Parsons published his Treatise tending to Mitigation,Treatise of Mitigation, p. 176. wherein he labours to take off the imputation of rebellious Principles from the Romanists, and yet he tells us in the same Book, That this is Catholick Doctrine, that in publick Perils of the Church, and Common-Wealth, Christ our Saviour hath not left us wholly re∣mediless, but besides the natural Right which each Kingdom hath to defend themselves, in cer∣tain
cases, he left also supreme Power in his High Priest, and immediate Substitute, to direct and moderate that Power, and to add also of his own when extraordinary Need requireth, though with great deliberation. Where we have a plain justi∣fication of the Pope and People's Power to depose and resist their Princes, a most excellent Argument to clear the Papists of Disloyalty. Though we find no Plots discovered this year in England,Hist. Jesuit. p. 332. yet in Transilvania the Jesuites were em∣ployed in poisoning Stephen Potscay the Prince:Hist. Jes. p. 261. And in France Father Cotton recommended a Spaniard to the King,Vindicat. of Prot. Relig. p. 1133. who had not been in the Court many hours, when the King had Intelligence of his coming from Barcellona purposely to poison him; upon this he sent for Father Coton, who desired his Majesty not to give any Credit to the advice; and when the King ordered him to produce the Spaniard, he pre∣tended to seek him, but at his return told his Ma∣jesty that he was escaped, and he could not find him. This year the Pope sent another Breve into England,1608. directed to the Arch-Priest,Fowl. p. 529 530, 531. forbidding him to take the Oath,Si intra tempus hoc facere distu∣lerint, eos  tibus & privilegiis om∣nibusrives. and commanding him to deprive all Priests of their Faculties who took it, except they immediately re∣nounc'd it; prohibiting likewise the resort of any to the Protestant Churches. At the same time Divines of Italy, Germany, and France, wrote against it, all grounding their Excep∣tions upon this, that it takes away the Pope's Power of Deposing Kings. So rebellious had the Writings and Practices of the Jesuites been,1609. that the Bohemians petition'd the Emperour against them;Histor. Jesuit. p. 297. and the Valesian Magi∣strates refused to admit them,Idem, p. 226, 227, 228. because wherever they came they distrurbed the publick Peace, and
were under such a tie of blind Obedience,Anno that if their Superiour enjoin'd them a treasonable Attempt they must obey. They had made it their Business,1610. for some time, to endeavour to get footing in Transilvania,Hist. Jesuit. p. 332. 333. Vindic. of the Sincer. of the Plot. Relig. p. 135. but when all their Importunity could not prevail, they engaged several of the Nobility in a Design against the Prince's Life, which proceeded so far that one of the Conspiratours attempted to run him through, but was prevented, and several of his Companions taken, the rest escaped. And now King Henry the Great of France having amassed a very considerable Treasure, prepared for some great Design, which the Romanists grew so jealous of, that they secretly caused several to subscribe their Obedience to the Pope,Fow. p. 471. in a Book which was kept on purpose; it was half written through, and some names subscribed in bloud; se∣veral Designs were formed against his Life,I. p. 470, &c. four Pi∣edmontiers, a Lorrainer, and three others, conspired his Death; advice was given of several other Plots from many other places, and Reports were spread in foreign parts that he was killed: Father Hardy, in his Sermon at St. Severius in Paris, reflecting up∣on the King's Treasure, said,Hist. Jesuit. p. 261. That Kings heaped up Treasures to make themselves feared,Hic quidem mos est Regum, ut ingentes Thesauros ad sui amplitudinem & aliorum terro∣rem colligant, at rustliculum u∣num ad Regem supprimendum sufficere. but there needed but a blow to kill a King. All these were but Fore-run∣ners of that horrid Murther which was committed in a few Weeks after by Ra∣villiac, once a Monk, who stabbed him to the Heart with a poisoned Knife,Histor. Jesuit. p. 260, 261. as he was go∣ing to the Arsenal in his Coach, so that he expired in an instant;Fowlis's Hist. p. 471, 472. upon his Examination he confesed that he resolved to murther the King, who he sup∣posed had a Design to make War upon the Pope, be∣cause
making War against his Holiness is the same as to make War against God, seeing the Pope was God, and God was the Pope; and that he had re∣vealed his Design to the Jesuite d' Aubigny in Con∣fession, and shewed him the Knife, and that he had heard several of that Order maintain the Lawfulness of it in their Sermons. No sooner was the King dead,1611. but the Jesuites desired leave to teach Schools in their Colleges;Histor. Jesuit. p. 219, &c. which acquest the Parliament took into considera∣tion, and required that they should first declare, That it is unlawfull for any Person to conspire the death of the King; that no Ecclesiastick hath any Power over the Temporal Rights of Princes; and that all are to render the same Obedience to their Governours, which Christ gave to Caesar. These Positions were proposed to them to subscribe, but they refused to doe it without leave from their Ge∣neral; upon which they were prohibited by a De∣cree of Parliament to teach, and threatened with a farther Deprivation if they would not obey. The Romanists had tried all manner of ways to deprive King James of his Life or Crown,1613. but fin∣ding none successfull,Fowl. p. 348. they had the Impudence to publish a Book this year, affirming, that His Maje∣jesty was a counterfeit, and not the Son of Queen Mary of Scotland. The Year following Cardinal Perron,1614. who had been one of the young Cardinal of Bourbon's Party against King Henry the Fourth, in the Assembly of Estates in France, asserted not only that Subjects may be absolved from their Allegiance, and Princes deposed in case of Heresie,See his Speech at large in his Diverses O∣vres, Paris, 1633. fol. but that they who hold the contrary are Schismaticks and Hereticks. This Speech was made to divert the Estates from impo∣sing an Oath like our Oath of Allegiance; which
Design so disturbed theFow. p 52. Pope, that he affirmed the Voters of it were Enemies to the common Good, and mortal Adversaries to the Chair of Rome. And about the same time Suarez printed his Book at Colen,His Defens. Fi∣dei Catholicae.— wherein he teaches,See Brutum Fulmen, p. 205. &c. that Kings may be put to Death by their own Subjects; which Treatise came into the World with the Approbation of the Bishop of Conimbria, of Silvis, and Lamego, and the University of Alcalum, with several others. In Scotland one Father Ogelby, a Jesuite, was ta∣ken, who being asked whether the Pope be Judge in Spirituals over His Majesty, refused to answer, except the question were put to him by the Pope's Authority;Frankl. Annal. p. 6, 7. but affirmed that the Pope might excom∣municate the King; at his Trial he protested against the Judges, that he could not own them, for the K. had no Authority but what was derivative from his Predecessours, who acknowledged the Pope's juris∣diction; adding, If the King will be to me as they were to mine, he shall be my King, otherwise I value him not: And as for that Question, Whether the K. deposed by the Pope, may be lawfully killed, Doctours of the Church hold the affirmative not improbably, and I will not say it is unlawfull to save my Life. In France several of the Princes raised Commoti∣ons, Nani's History of Venice, p. 33, 34. which were appeased with conferring places of Trust and Honour upon the chief among them, who were headed by the Prince of Conde; Fruits (as the Historian observes) accustomed to be reaped in France, from that which in other places is punished by the Executioner. Not satisfied with their Honours,1615. they took arms again under the same Leader,Ib. p. 58, 59. and passed the Loire; but the Prince of Conde falling sick, Matters were composed by the Endeavours of the English Am∣bassadour, and some others.
In Savoy Conspiracies were formed against that Duke's Life,Anno 1616. 1617. and to deliver up the Prince,Nani's History of Venice, p. 65, 99. his Son, to the Spaniards, but timely discovery prevented them, and preserved the Duke from another De∣sign of some who undertook to poison him. The next Year the Jesuites were banished Bohe∣mia, 1618. and Moravia,Hist. Jesuit. p. 297, 299. for coining Money, and sowing Dissentions between the Magistrates and People, and a Plot was discovered atNani, p. 121, 122. Venice, against the Senatours, whom the Conspiratours designed to murther, by a sudden Insurrection, (assisted by the Marquess of Bedmar, Ambassadour from Spain, and the Duke of Ossuna, Viceroy of Naples,) and make an utter subversion of the State;Consp. of the Span. agt. the State of Venice, p▪15, 16. Lon. 1675. 8vo. this was carried on, in conjunction with the Spaniards, by those Ci∣tizens, and others, who were the Pope's Partisans, and a number of Factious Persons, discontented with the Actions of the Senate, who longed for a change, and would stick at nothing to effect it. And in France theNani p. 124. Queen Mother being imprisoned, the Duke D'Espernon, with a strong Party, rebelled in her Defence; but before the King's Army was come up against him, he procured his Pardon, and the Liberty of the Queen. Soon after this the Jesuites were driven out of Hist. Jesuit. p 300, 301. Hungary,1619. and Silesia, for their seditious Practices; andNani, p. 151. another Rebellion broke out in France,1620. which the King marched in Person to suppress:Id. p. 159. In the Valteline the Revolt was universal, the Governours of Provinces, and the Heads of Families, were all murthered, and under pretence of defending the Ro∣man Catholick Religion, all manner of outrages were committed, and a new form of Government erected; these Broils continued some time, and the bitterness of the Papists was such, that they would make no accommodation, if the Protestants were
tolerated there;Burne's Trav. p. 81. so that if a Protestant Bailiff be sent among them, he cannot publickly exercise his Religion. At this time the Match between Prince Charles and the Infanta was prosecuted,1622. at least with a see∣ming willingness on both sides, and being to have some Romish Priests of her Houshold,Wilson's Hist. of Great Brit. p. 203. the Pope ur∣ged very earnestly that they might be exempt from His Majesty's jurisdiction, so very diligent he was in catching at any shadow which might seem to fa∣vour the Exemption of the Clergy. Three Years after this Sanctarellus his Book was printed at Rome,1625. wherein the Deposing Power was asserted in its utmost latitude, and though Father Coto,Fowlis, p. 476. Mister. Pret. 60, 61. and two other Jesuites, were required to an∣swer it, yet no reply appeared; the former affir∣ming before the Parliament, that though he disap∣proved the Doctrine in France,Sen. Quid si esse∣tis Romae? P. Coto. Mut∣retur nobiscum coelo animus, sentiremus ut Romae. yet he would assent to it if he were at Rome. The Oath of Allegiance being vigorously press'd in England,1626. the Pope sent a Bull to the Romanists, exhorting them to continue firm,See Baiting of the Pope's Bull, in init.—ad haereat lin∣gua vestra fau∣cibus vestris, priusquam au∣thoritatem B. Petri eâ juris∣jurandi formulâ imminutam de∣tis. and let their Tongue rather cleave to the Roof of their Mouth then permit the Authority of St. Peter, to be diminished by that Oath; and commanding them strictly to observe the Breves of Pope Paul the Fifth; andJesuits Rea∣sons unreasona∣ble, p. 116. Father Fisher justified Suarez, and the Doctrine of his Book, asking, what could be found prejudicial in it to Princely Authority; and affirming that if it con∣tained any such thing it would not be permitted in Catholick Kingdoms.1627. We have mention'd that the exemption of the Clergy was desired by the Pope in the Treaty forRushworth's Collect. part. 1. p. 427.
the Spanish Match; and now his Emissaries in this Nation affirmed that the King could have nothing to doe with her Majesties Chaplains, because he was an Heretick; and his Holiness threatned to declare those to be Apostates who should seek their Esta∣blishment in the Queens Family from the King. But though these were plain Indications of what they desired,1628. yet they kept their Designs so secret, that they were not discovered till some time after;Nani's History of Venice, p. 283. but there was a Conspiracy detected at Genoa, which, if it had not been prevented, would have ended in the Murther of the Nobility, and Alteration of the Government. And the next Year a Plot was detected in Mantua against the Life of the Prince,1629. and some Officers ap∣prehended,Idem. p. 32. who would have betray'd Viadana to the Governour of Millan. In Ireland the Papists assaulted the Archbishop of Dublin,Foxes & Fire∣brands, pt. 2. p. 72, 73. wounded several of his Followers, and for∣ced him to fly for his Life; following him in a tu∣multuous manner along the streets; and that they had several seditious Designs in hand at the same time,1620. is evident from the Confession ofHunting of the Rom. Fox, p. 216, 217. Mac-Enerry, a Dominican, who for this very reason left the Church of Rome, because of her rebellious Doc∣trines, and the many Conspiracies he had taken an Oath of Secrefie to conceal, which he observed in∣violably; and though he informed the Bishop of Limrick, that there were many Plots then contri∣ving against his Majesty's Government, yet for his Oaths sake he would not name any Persons who were concerned in them. The Duke of Orleance had retired in disgust from Court some years since,1632. and was received by the Duke of Lorrain;Nani's History of Venice, p. 310, &c. but being forced this year to leave that retreat, he went to Brussells, from whence,
aided by the Spaniards,Anno he marched at the head of an Army into France, but was defeated, and several of his Adherents executed. While France was thus almost continually peste∣red with Rebellions,1633. the Designs of the Papists ri∣pened apace in Ireland,;Bp. Bedell. they had erected Friaries, in the Countrey instead of those which were dissol∣ved in Dublin; and even in that City they had a College of Students,Long's History of Plots, p. 100. whereof Father Paul Harris was Dean, and at a Synodical meeting of their Cler∣gy, they decreed, that it was not lawfull to take the Oath of Allegiance. If it were not that all the Designs of that Party from the Year 1630. to 1640.1640. were summed up, and perfected in the Rebellion in Ireland, and the exe∣crable Civil Wars of England, I should wonder how they came to be so still, and that no more Conspi∣racies were discovered, besides that great one which Andreas ab Habernsfield was informed of in Holland, and of which he sent the King an Account, under the hand of the Discover,See whole Ac∣count publish∣ed under this Title, The Designs of the Papists, Lond. 1678. 4to. who affirms, that one Maxfield was sent into Scotland, to stir up a Rebel∣lion there, and that the King was to be poisoned; for which end they kept a strong Poison in an Indian Nut, which he had often seen: They had likewise another Design, if they could prevail upon the Scots, or discontented English, to rebell, that thereby the King should be straitened, and forced to depend on the Papists for assistance, and then they would make their own Terms, and secure to themselves a pub∣lick Liberty, which if he refused to consent to, they would not only desert him, but dispatch him with the Indian Nut, which they reserved on purpose. He gives also an Account of the Persons concer∣ned in the Plot, among whom were several Ladies of Quality, for whose Encouragement the Pope sent
a Breve to Sir Toby Mathews, one of the principal Conspiratours,See it in Frank∣land's Annals, p. 865, 866. wherein he exhorts him, and the Women engaged with him, to proceed with dili∣gence in the Design; assuring them, That he did not despair to see the Authority of the Holy See (which was subverted in England by a Woman) again restored in a very little time,Non diffidi∣mus,—quia sicut occasione unius Foeminae Authoritas Se∣dis Apostolicae in Regno Augliae suppressa fuit, sic nunc per tot Heroicas Foeminas,—brevi modò restituen∣da sit,— by the Endeavours of those Heroick Ladies. This Breve is an unanswerable Evidence that the succeeding Troubles derived their original from the insatiate Lust of Rule which possessed the Pope,1641. who herein approves of those very Methods which after∣wards proved the Ruine of that excellent Prince, and so miserably distracted these poor Nations. But he appeared more publickly an Abbettor of the Irish Massacre and Rebellion,See the Histo∣ry of the Irish Rebellion, fol. wherein so many thousand Protestants were murthered in cold bloud, sending his Nuncio to assist, and affording them all the aid that he was able to give; a Design laid with so much secrefie, and executed with so much cruel∣ty, that nothing but the very Spirit of Popery could be barbarous enough to engage in it; in prosecu∣tion of which they did all they could totally to beat the English out of the Kingdom. The same year the Marquess de Villa Real, the Duke de Camina,Nani's Hist. p. 493. and the Marquess d' Armamar, who by the Instigation of the Archbishop of Braga, had undertaken to kill the King of Portugal, Father to Her Majesty the Queen Dowager of England, and to fire the Ships and the City in several places, that they might have the better opportunity to promote the Interest of the Spaniards, were put to death.
Nor did France yet enjoy any more quiet, where the Count de Soissons,Nani's Hist. p. 495, &c. and the Duke of Guise; and others, raised a Rebellion, and routed the King's Army, but the Count being slain with his own Pi∣stol, the Confederacy was soon broken. Yet the very next Year the Duke of Orleance com∣bined with the Spaniards,1642. who were to assist him with Forces for a new Rebellion.Id. p. 535. The Pope had involved Ireland in Bloud the for∣mer year, and in this the Wars began in England, where severalLong's Hist. of Plots, p. 64. Priests were found among the dead at dghill Battle; but the Endeavours of his Holi∣ness to encrease those miserable Confusions, were managed with all imaginable Secrefie, while the Irish were openly commended by him, andNos divlnam Clementiam indesinenter orantes, ut adver∣sariorum conatus in nihilum re∣digat, &c. See it at large in the Ap∣pend. to the Hist. of the Irish Rebel. p. 59. assured of his Prayers for their success in his Breve to Owen O Neal, dated Octob. 8. 1642. and so willing was he to lay hold on all occasions for the exercising his Deposing Power, that because theNani's Hist. p. 515. Prince of Parma offended him, he declared him to have incurred the greater Excommunication, and deprived him of all his Dominions and Dignities. But not content with sending the forementioned Breve to O Neal,1643. his Holiness granted a Bull of plenary Indulgence,Hist of the I∣rish Remon. Pres. p. May 25. 1643. to all the Ca∣tholicks in Ireland,1644. who joined in the Rebellion; which was prosecuted as fiercely as the Pope could desire, and a defence of it set forth by anDisputatio Apolog. de ju∣re Reg. Hibern. pro Cath. Hi∣bern. advers. Heret. Anglos, p. 65. cited by Walsh in the History of the Irish Remon∣strance, p. 736, 737. in these words: Ordines Regni optimo jure poterant ac debebant omni do∣minio Hiberniae privae tales Reges, postquam facti sunt Hae∣retici atque Tyranni—Hoc enim jus & potestas in omni Re∣gno & Republica est.—Jam si consensui Regui in hac re ac∣cederet Authortas Apostolica, quis nisi Hareticus, vel Stul∣tus au lebit negare quod hic af∣firmamus, & Doctores Theolo∣gi, & Juris utriusque periti passim docent, rationes probant, exempla suadent. Irish Jesuite in Portugal,1645. (though the Title-page mentions Franckfort,) who asserts, That the English Kings have no Title or Right to Ireland; that if they had, yet it is the Duty of the Irish to deprive them of their Rights, seeing
they are declared Hereticks,Anno 1607. and Ty∣rants; that this Power of deposing such Princes is inherent in every State; but if the Authority of the Holy See be ad∣ded to that Power, none but a Fool, or an Heretick, will deny what the Doc∣tours of Divinity, and of the Civil and Canon Law, do generally teach, and which is confirmed by Reasons and Ex∣amples. And so far did the Pope approve of the Contents of this Book, that when, soon after its publication, the Irish had submitted to the King, and promised to assist him in his Wars,d. Clarendon against Cressy, p 246. His Holiness by his Nun∣cio took upon him to be their General, absolved them from their Oaths, and imprisoned and threa∣tened the Lives of those who had promoted the peace, and desired to return to the King's Subjecti∣on, which renewed the Rebellion again, and brought infinite Miseries on that bigotted Na∣tion. At the same time aboveBp. Bramhali's Letters to A. P. Vsher, ap▪ Vsher's Life & Letters, p. 611. an hundred of the Ro∣mish Clergy were sent into England by Order from Rome, who, the better to promote the Divisions there, were instructed in several Trades, both han∣dicraft and others; these, upon their arrival, were ordered to disperse themselves, and give Intelli∣gence every month to their Superiours abroad; ac∣cordingly they listed themselves in the Parliament Army, and kept a constant correspondence with their Brethren, who for the same end served under the King.1609. The next year many of these Missioners were in consultation with those in the King's Army,Id. p. 612. to whom they shewed their Bulls, and Licenses, for taking part with the Parliament about the best me∣thods
to advance their Cause;Anno 1647. and having concluded that there was no way so effectual as to dispatch the King, some were sent to Paris, to consult the Faculty of Sorbonne about it, who return'd this Answer, That it is lawfull for Roman Catholicks to work Changes in Governments, for the Mother Church's advancement, and chiefly in an Heretical Kingdom, and so they might lawfully make away the King;Vindic. of the sincerity of the Prot. Relig. p. 59. which Sentence was confirmed to the same Persons by the Pope, and his Council, upon their going to Rome to have his Holiness's Resoluti∣on in the Point. And now those of them who had before follow∣ed the King after his flight from Oxford,Mutatus Pole∣mo. p. 4, 5. agreed to desert the Royal Cause; and, as one of them in∣form us, to ingratiate themselves with the Enemy, by acting some notorious piece of Treachery; and Father Carr, who went by the name of Quarter-Master Laurence, declared, that he could with a sa∣fer Conscience join with and fight for the Round∣heads than the Cavaliers; in prosecution of which Resolve they dispersed themselves into all the Ga∣risons of the King's Party,I. p. 6. 18. 26. 32. to endeavour the Revolt of the Soldiers to the Parliament; in which they succeeded as they had projected, my Authour being one of those who seduced the Wallingford Horse from their Obedience; and in Scotland the Lord Sin∣clare, a pretended Presbyterian, but a real Papist, commanded a Regiment of his own Religion, and it being a Maxim receiv'd among them, That the surest way to promote the Catholick Cause was to weaken the Royal Party, and advance the other, they bent all their Endeavours to expedite and accelerate the King's Death;Vindic. of the sincer. of the Prot. Relig. p. 65. and His Majesty having in the Trea∣ty of the Isle of Wight consented to pass five strict Bills against Popery, the Jesuites in France, at a gene∣ral
meeting there, presently resolved to take off his Head; and this His Majesty had notice of by an Ex∣press from thence, but two days before his removal from the Isle of Wight. This Year Mr. Cressy published the Reasons of his leaving the Church of England,Cressey's Exo∣molog. p. 72. Paris, 1647. 8vo. and turning Roma∣nist, wherein obviating the Objection so often made against the Romanists about their rebellious Prin∣ciples and Practices, he sets down a Declaration, which he affirms that they were all ready to sub∣scribe, and which differs but little from our Oath of Allegiance: But here we may see what Credit can be given to the representations of their Doctrines, which their Writers study to make as favourable as possible: For though Mr. Cressy thought himself a good Representer in this point, yet his Superiours were of another mind; and therefore that Edition was soon bought up, and in the next the Profession of Obedience quite left out;Ld. Clarendon against Cressey. p. 76, 77. and that this was not an omission of the Printer, but the action of his Su∣periours, we are assured by an honourable Person from Mr. Cressy's own mouth, and we shall find in a little time, that the same form hath been condem∣bed by the Pope himself. But the ensuing year,1648. as it was dolefull to the En∣glish Nation, so it brought great disturbances to the most potent Princes of Europe; in France the Parisians rose in Arms,Priorato's Hist. of France, p. 11, &c. Lond. 1676. fol. shot at the Lord Chancel∣lour Sequier, and wounded his Daughter, barrica∣doed the Streets, and forced the King to set the Counsellour Broussell, and other factious Persons, at Liberty. And at the Treaty at Osnebrugh, when by several Articles of the Peace the possession of Church Lands were assured to the Protestant Princes; the Pope displeased with it, took upon him to make void
the Peace by aDeclaratio SS. Dom. nostri Innoc. divinâ Providentiâ Pa∣pae 10. nullita∣tis articulorum nuperae paci Germaniae, Re∣ligioni Gatholi∣cae, Sedi Apo∣stolicae, & quo∣modo libet prae∣judicialium,—See it in Hoornbeck Disputat. ad Bull. Inn. 10. special Bull, declaring all those Ar∣ticles unjust, and of no Force, and commanding the Princes concerned to observe his Bull, in which he renews his Claim to the superiority over Princes, and particularly the Emperour, not only by the Bull in general, but by asserting, thatNumerus septem Electorum Imperii—Apostolicâ Authoritate praefinitus.— the Electours of the Empire were established by the Authority of the Bi∣shop of Rome. But to come to their Contrivances in England; where, when several Papists had subscribed to some Propositions,Hist of the Irish Remon. p. 523, 524. importing the unlawfulness of mur∣thering Princes, and breaking Faith with Hereticks; and that the Pope hath no power to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance; the very same with the De∣claration published the year before by Mr. Cressy, this Action was condemned at Rome, where by a Congregation it was decreed unlawfull. And now in prosecution of the Pope and Sorbon's Sentence the last year, that excellent prince, King Charles the Martyr, was by their contrivances brought to the Block; which though they were willing to disown now, yet at that time they were very sollicitous to let the World know that they were the promoters of it;Vindic. of the Sincer. of the Prot. Relig. p. 66, 67. the Friars of Dunkirk expressed great resentment that the Jesuites would engross to themselves the Glory of that Work, whereas they had laboured as diligently and succes∣fully as any, and in several other places the Friars were very jealous, lest that Order should rob them of their part of the Honour: And the Benedictines were not a little carefull to secure their Land in En∣gland from the Jesuites, for they thought their re∣turn sure upon the King's Death; so that the Nuns
contended vigorously among themselves who should be Abbesses in their own Countrey. At the time of His Majesty's Execution Mr. Hen∣ry Spotswood,Foxes & Fire∣brands, part 2. p. 86. riding casually that way, saw a Priest on Horseback in the Habit of a Trouper, with whom he was well acquainted, flourishing his Sword over his Head in triumph as others did; he told Mr. Spots∣wood, that there were at least forty Priests and Jesu∣ites present in the same equipage, among whom was Preston, who afterwards commanded a Troup of Horse under Cromwell. Father Sibthorp, in a Letter to Father Metcalfe, owns that the Jesuites were contrivers of this mur∣ther, Vindication of the Prot. Rel. p. 65. and that Sarabras was present, rejoycing at it; one of the Priests flourishing his Sword, cryed, Now our greatest Enemy is cut off. When the News of this Tragedy came to Roan, they affirmed,Id. p. 8▪ 66. that they had often warned hi Ma∣jesty, that if he did not establish the Romish Religi∣on in England, they should be forced to take such courses as would tend to his Destruction; and now they had kept their words with him: And in Paris a Lady having been perverted from the Reformed Church by a Jesuite, upon hearing her Ghostly Fa∣ther affirm, that now the Catholicks were rid of their greatest Enemy, by whose Death their Cause was much advanced, and therefore she had no reason to lament, left that bloudy and rebellious Church, and continues a Protestant ever since. But though, as Secretary Morris affirms, there are almost convincing evidences,In his Letter to Dr. du Mou∣lin, Aug. 9. 1673. that the Papists Irreligi∣on was chiefly guilty of the murther of that excellent Prince; yet we are beholden to the guilty Consci∣ences of those Gentlemen,Idem▪ p. 64. that the World hath not been long since more fully satisfied, as to every par∣ticular; for Dr. Du Moulin in the first Edition of his
Book Ann. 1662. had challenged them to call him to an Account for affirming, that the Rebellion was raised and promoted, and the King murthered by the Arts of the Court of Rome; the Book came to a fourth Edition, in all which he renewed the Chal∣lenge, and in the last in these words: I have defied them now seventeen years to call me in question before our Judges,Ib. p. 61, &c. and so I do still; affirming that certain Evidence of what he asserted should be produced whenever Authority shall require it. I remember once a Jesuite attempted to prove the truth of the Nag's-Head Ordination, because that Charge had been laid to our Church some years be∣fore any offered to confute it, or to produce the Lambeth Record, which he affirmed was an evident sign that the thing was true, or else having such means to confute it they would not have been so long silent; what then may we think of those Gen∣tlemen who had so heavy a crime charged on them, and yet for near twenty years together never called the Accuser to account?Id. p. 60. The Doctour always refused to produce his Evi∣dences, till required by Authority; only he gives us this Account, That the Papers of Resolution in fa∣vour of the Murther, when it was found to be ge∣nerally detested, were by the Pope's Order gathered up and burnt; but a Roman Catholick in Paris re∣fused to deliver one in his possession, but shewed it to a Protestant Friend, and related to him the whole carriage of the Negotiation. And I am sure if the Protestants had been under such an Imputation, the Papists would make good use of their silence to prove their Guilt. But farther to shew their aversion to the Royal party, no sooner had the Rebels of Ireland, in con∣sideration of the straits they were in, made a cessa∣tion
for some time with the Lord Inchequin, but the Nuncio excommunicated all who observed it;See the Ex∣communicati∣on in the Ap∣pendix to the Hist. of the Irish Rem. p. 34. and upon the conclusion of a second Peace with the Duke of Ormond, His Majesty's Lieutenant, the As∣sembly of the Bishops and Clergy at James-Town re∣nounced it, and as much as in them lay, restored the former confederacy anew;Wals's Letters in the Pref. but of this we shall have a farther account in its due place. In the mean while Reilly,1649. Vicar General to the A. B. of Dublin,Hist of the I∣rish Remon. p. 609. betrayed the Royal Camp of Rath∣mines to Coll. Jones, Governour of Dublin for the Parliament, which service he afterwards pleaded for himself to the safety of his Life, which was in dan∣ger for his cruel Actions in the Rebellion, and he well deserved more than bare safety from those men, that defeat being the total ruine of His Majesty's Af∣fairs in Ireland. At the same time the Rebels in France encreased both in Insolence and Power daily,Priorat's Hist. of France, p. 49, &c. the Coadjutour of Paris going to St. Germains, in obedience to the Queens Commands, was tumultuously stopt by the People, who hindered the Nobility from following the King, and broke their Coaches; the Parliament forbad all places to receive any Garisons from the King, listed men, and resolved upon a War; the Duke D'Elbease, Duke of Lonqueirlle, Prince Marsil liack, afterwards D. of Rochfecault, the Prince of Conty, and many other persons of the greatest Qua∣lity joining with them. Soon after Normandy and Poictou declared for the Parisians, who sent Depu∣ties to call in the Spaniards to assist them; but these Troubles being in a little time appeased, new ones began in Provence, and Guienne, the Parliaments of those Provinces, prosecuting the War with great fu∣ry, declared they would have no pardon from the King; and one Gage, a Priest, endeavoured to per∣suade
them to take the Sovereign Power on them∣selves, which they declined; but to maintain the War they treated with the Spaniards for Assistance, both of Men and Moneys. This Year the Prince of Conde joined himself to the Troudeurs,1650. which was the usual Nickname of the discontented Party;Id. p. 117, &c. but finding that they in∣tended the advancement of Chasteau Neuf, his mor∣tal Enemy, he left them in disgust; however the Pa∣risians made several Insurrections; and upon the Imprisonment of that Prince an open Rebellion broke out in Berry, whose Example was followed by Normandy, and Burgundy, to support which the Spaniards agreed to contribute 2000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, besides great Summes of Money; and soon after the Parliament of Bourdeaux declared for the Rebells. During these Transactions the Popish Bishops of Ireland met at James-Town,See it at large, ad the Duke's Answer to it, Hist. of the Irish Remonst. Ap. p. 65. published a Declaration against all that should adhere to the D. of Ormond, His Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant in that Kingdom; upon which myHist. of the Irish Rebell. p. 261. Authour makes this remark, that if the Archbishops, &c. in Ireland will take upon them to declare against the King's Authority where His Majesty hath placed it, they assume an Authori∣ty to themselves that no other Clergy ever preten∣ded to, and declare sufficiently to the King, how far they are from being Subjects, or intend to pay him any Obedience longer than they are governed in such manner, and by such Persons as they think fit to be pleased with. But not satisfied with refusing Obedience to the King's Commissioner,Id. p. 276. the Confederates agreed, that if compounding with the Parliament should be best for the People they should doe it: And presently af∣ter the Marquess of Clauricard had at their request
taken the Government upon him in his Majesty's Name, it was proposed in their Assembly, that they might send to the Enemy to treat with them upon surrendring all that was left into their hands. Thus did they chuse rather to submit to the Par∣liament, than obey the King, for they were not for∣ced to that Submission; the army of the Enemy ha∣ving made no progress at that time, neither had it been flusht with any new Success. As forward was Father Bret to persuade the Gen∣tlemen who had defended the Castle of Jersey for the King,1651. to renounce the Royal Family,Vindic. of the Prot. Relig. p. 69. and King∣ly Government, by taking the Engagement; affir∣ming, that they were not to acknowledge any Su∣preme but the prevailing Power. All this while the Rebellion in France increased, the Parisians took Arms,Priorato's Hist. of France, p. 245, 285, 308, 333. designing to seize the King; and the Prince of Conde fortified several places, and confederated with the Spaniards, whom, under the Conduct of the Duke of Nemours, he called into France to his Assistance, with which he maintained the War all this Year, to whom the Duke of Orle∣ance joined himself, and with all his Interest increa∣sed the Party. The next year Mr. Tho.1652. White published his Book of the Grounds of Obedience and Government,Lon's Hist. of Plots, p. 15, 16. wherein he asserts, That if a Prince governs ill he becomes a Robber, and the People may expell him, in which case they are not bound by any Promise made to him;Vindic. of the Prot. Relig. p. 67, &c. and that they have no Obligation to endeavour the Restauration of a Prince so dispossessed of his Dominions, but rather to hinder it; nay, though he were wrongfully driven out; and such a Prince is absolutely obliged to renounce all Right and Claim to the Government; and if he doth not, he is worse than an Infidel. Thus after their De∣signs
had effected the death of that good King, and expulsion of his late and present Majesty, they con∣tributed their Endeavours to hinder their return, and debauch those who might attempt it; yet had some the confidence to commend this Gentleman to his late Majesty, though the King knew him too well to take any notice of him. That they designed to hinder the Restauration of the King,Jesuites Rea∣sons unreaso∣nable, p. 103, 104. by an absolute compliance with the usur∣ping Power, is affirmed by one of their Commu∣nion, who tells them that they were refractory to the Queen's Desires at Rome for His Majesty's As∣sistance, and that Collonel Hutchinson could discover strange Secrets about their treating with Cromwell. And it is certain that in Ireland there were seve∣ral Precepts granted by the Archbishop of Armagh, and others, to pray for the success of that Usurper's Forces;Hist. of Irish Rebellion, p. 241. while Dominick Decupsy, a Dominican, e∣steemed a Person of great Holiness, and Long, the Jesuite, asserted, that the King being out of the Ro∣man Church, it was not lawfull to pray for him particularly, or publickly on any other day except Good Fryday, as comprehended among the Infidels and Hereticks; and then only for the spiritual Wel∣fare of his Soul, not for his temporal prosperity. The Civil Wars continuing still in France,Priorato's Hist. of France, p. 358, &c. our present Sovereign, then Duke of York, went into the King's Army; and the Princes being straitened, called in the Duke of Lorrain, who with his Army marched to their Succour, so that they kept the Field all this and the ensuing Year. Anno 1654.1654. there was a Discourse written by Be∣noist de Treglies,St. Amour's Annals, p. 448. Collateral of the Council, or Re∣gent of the Chancery of Naples, in which this Pro∣position was maintained, That when a Pope intends to exercise any Jurisdiction in a Countrey, he ought to
let his Writs be examined by the temporal Prince, that so it may be known whether the Causes and Persons contained therein be of his Jurisdiction: Which Pro∣position having been examined by the Inquisition at Rome, at the express command of the Pope, that Congregation declared it to be Heretical and Schis∣matical, prohibiting the Book, and threatening the severest censures against the Authour. The following year affords us a farther evidence of the hopes the Romanists had conceived of the re¦stauration of their Religion here;1655. for Dr. Baily,Baily's Life of Fiher, p. 260, 261. London, 1655. 8vo. at the end of the Life of Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, speaking of the Lord Cromwell, and the great influ∣ence he had upon the proceedings in the beginning of the Reformation, expresses their hopes of his Party from the Usurper, and his Counsels, in these words: Who knows but that the Church may be healed of her Wounds by the same Name, sit hence the Almigh∣ty hath communicated so great a Secret unto Mortals as that there should be such a Salve made known to them, whereby the same Weapon that made the Wound should work the Cure. Oliva vera is not so hard to be construed Oliverus, as that it may not be believed that a Prophet, rather than a Herald, gave the common Fa∣ther of Christendom, the now Pope of Rome, (Inno∣cent X.) such Ensigns of his Nobility, (viz. a Dove holding an Olive Branch in her mouth,) since it falls short in nothing of being a Prophesie, and fulfilled, but only his Highness running into her Arms, whose Em∣bleme of Innocence bears him already in her mouth. Three years after this Popish Loyal Flattery,1658. Fa∣ther Ferrall,Hist. of the Irish Remonst. p. 740. a Capuchin, presented a Treatise to the Cardinals of the Congregation, de Propaganda Fide, proposing some Methods to revive the Rebellion in Ireland, and drive out not only the English, but al∣so all the Irish who were descended from the old En∣glish
Conquerours, as not fit to be trusted in so ho∣ly a League; and about the same time FatherThe same who had be∣trayed Rat∣mines to Jones. Rei∣ley, the Popish Primate, coming through Brussels, refused to kiss the King's Hand, though some offe∣red to introduce him: And to obtain favour with Richard Cromwell,1659. he alledged that the Irish Natives had no affection to the King,Hist. of the I∣rish Remon. p. 610. and his Family; and therefore were fit to be trusted by the Protectour; and upon his Arrival in Ireland, he made it his bu∣siness to gain a party there to hinder the King's Re∣stauration, promising them great assistance; upon which the King gave notice of those Contrivances to Don Stephano de Gamarro, the Spanish Ambassadour, in Holland, so that he was recalled to Rome, to a∣void the danger of the Law. And (which is a farther Evidence of the Enmity of that party to the Royal Family) when General Monk was at London, in prosecution of that great and good Design which he afterwards completed, and had by his prudent Conduct gained the Affecti∣ons of the People Monsieur de Bourdeaux, the French Ambassadour, told Mr. Clergis,Long's Hist. of Plots, p. 87, 88. That Cardinal Mazarine would be glad to have the Honour of his Friendship, and would assist him faithfully in all his En∣terprises; and that the General might be more confident of the Cardinal, he assured him that Oliver Cromwell kept so strict a League with him, that he did not assume the Government without his Privity, and was directed step by step by him, in the progress of that Action; and therefore if he resolved on that course, he should not on∣ly have the Cardinal's Friendship and Counsel in the Attempt, but a safe Retreat, and honourable Support in France, if he failed in it. Soon after His Majesty's Restauration,1662. which all the Contrivances of these men could not hinder, the Jesuites presented a Paper to several persons of
Honour, pleading to be included within a favoura∣ble Vote which had been made with reference to all other Romanists; in which they acknowledge, that no party in their Church think the Deposing Doc∣trine sinfull,Jesuites Rea∣sons unreaso∣nable, p. 112, &c, but themselves, who are by Order of their General forbidden to meddle with it: But, as their Answerer observes, this makes them but the more guilty, seeing their Loyalty depends upon the Will of their General, which is all they pretend to be influenced by in this matter: But this is not all, for they impose upon the World in that Assertion, there being no such Decree which respects any other Countrey but France; and whereas (if we should grant them that) they pretend to be bound by it under pain of Damnation, this likewise is false; for none of their Constitutions oblige them under so much as a Venial Sin. Therefore the same person advised them to join in a Subscription of Abhorrence of those Deposing Do∣ctrines, Id. p. 127. which had been too often maintained by them; but this was a piece of Loyalty to which they could never arrive. The former year some of the Irish Clergy and Gentry, to make some amends for their Rebellion, had subscribed that Declaration which Mr. Cressy published in the year 1647. which hath since been called the Irish Remonstrance, and made a great noise in the World for some years; for no sooner was an Account of this Loyal Action transmitted to Rome,Hist of the Irish Remon. p. 16, 17, 18. but the Internuncio De Vecchiis, then Resi∣dent at Brussels, by the Pope's Order declared, that his Holiness had condemned it;Where see the Letters, and p. 513, 514. and Cardinal Bar∣berini, in a Letter to the Noblemen of Ireland, af∣firmed, that such as subscribe it do, to shew their Fidelity to the King, destroy their Faith; and there∣fore exhorted all to beware of those Seducers who
promoted the Subscriptions to it, andId. p. 43. Father Ma∣cedo, a Portugueze, who had formerly made a La∣tine Panegyrick upon Cromwell, was employed to write against it. Thep. 52. Dominicans refused absolu∣tion to some of their Order, because they would not retract their Approbations; and the Provincial box'd another for the same cause;p. 54. The Augustinians ab∣solutely refused to sign it; so did thep. 49. Franciscans, andp. 60. the Jesuites.p. 91. Anthony Mac Gheoghegan, Po∣pish Bishop of Meath, and several others, sent Father John Brady to Rome, to get a direct Censure pub∣lished against it: And the Theological Faculty at p. 102. Lovain, declared that it contained many things con∣trary to the Catholick Faith, and ought not to be signed by any; But Father Shelton, and several o∣ther Priests, were more particular, who told Father Walsh, the Procurator for the Irish Clergy in this Affair,p. 84. that they would not subscribe that form, nor any other, denying a power in the Pope to de∣pose the King, or absolve Subjects from their Alle∣giance, because this is a matter of right, controver∣ted between two great Princes. Two years afterp. 116. de Riddere,1664. Commissary Gene∣ral of the Franciscans for the Belgick Provinces, in a National Congregation of all the Provincials of that Order subject to him, declared the Subscribers of the Remonstrance to be Schismaticks, reserving a Power to their Superiours to proceed against them when it should be convenient. And the Nuncio de Vecchiis,1665. in a Letter to Father Caron,p. 531. calls the Remonstrance a Rock of Offence; but the Bishop ofp. 617, &c. Ferns he declared himself more positively for the Deposing Power in his Letter to Dr. James Cusack, Jun. 18. 1662. and therefore in his Letter to thep. 620, 629. D. of Ormond, Sep. 22. this year, he justifies all that was done at James-Town by the
Romish Bishops,Anno who broke the Peace of 1648. and two years after they excommunicated the Duke, then His Majesty's Lieutenant there, refusing to o∣bey him any longer. And the same Bp. in twop. 624, &c. Letters to Father Walsh the next year,1666. seriously professed that he durst not re∣nounce the Pope's Deposing Power, which was main∣tained by 7 Saints, (St. Thomas one,) 7 Cardinals, 1 Patriarch, 3 A. Bps. 10 Bps. and 31 Classical Authors, with other eminent Divines; and chose rather to con∣tinue a banisht man, than declare against them. And when His Majesty had granted liberty to the R. Clergy of that Nation to hold a national Synod that year, to try if they would give any assurance of their Loyalty,p. 633. Card. Barberini wrote to them not to subscribe that Protestation; and thep. 634. Internuncio Rospigliosi affirmed, that to sign the Remonstrance rendered the Subscribers Instruments of the Damna∣tion of others.Ld. Clarend. against Crssy, p. 247, 248. The Cardinal minded them that the Kingdom remained under Excommunication, and therefore advised them to consider what they did. At length the Assembly me,Hist. of the Irish Remonst. p. 647, &c. and the Card. fent Letters dissuading them to give any such assurance of their Loyalty, as being prejudicial to the Cath. Faith, which was seconded by another from the Internuncio, and the Bp. of Ipres, directed to some of the Synod, who were very obedient to these Admonitions; for when Father Walsh endeavoured to prove that seve∣ral great Divines had opposed the Deposing Doctrine, p. 657. Father Nettervile interrupted him, affirming that none had asserted the contrary, but a Schismatical Historian, and a Poet, meaning Sigibertus Gembla∣censis, and Dantes Aligherius;p▪ 666. soon after which they resolved not only not to sign the Remonstrance, but not to suffer it to be read in the House: And when the Procuratour desired them to beg his Maje∣sty's
Pardon for the late execrable Rebellion,Id. Pref. p. 3, 4. they not only refused to ask pardon but so much as to acknow∣ledge there was any need of it; affirming publickly that they knew none at all guilty of any Crime for any thing done in the War. And when the Lord Lieutenant de∣sired them to give his Majesty some assurance of their fu∣ture Obedience, in case of any Deposition or Excommu∣nication from the Pope, they refused even this without so much as putting it to the Question. They offered indeed several Forms instead of the Remonstrance,Idem. p. 763. but in none of them renounced the De∣posing Power; in that the Assembly signed at their breaking up, they disowned the Doctrine, but would not declare that Doctrine which abetts it unsound and sinfull; wherein they have been imitated by some late Writers, who though called upon to affirm it such, never did it. Once indeed they seemed to come something near what was expected, when theirp. 675. Chairman told Fa∣ther Walsh, That it was not out of any prejudice against the Remonstrance they would not sign it, but because they thought it more becoming their Dignity and Liberty to word their own sense; for the rest, they were far from condemning that Remonstrance or the Subscribers there∣of: Yet would they not own this when desired un∣der their Hands, but refused; so that no good being expected, they were dissolved, leaving an undeniable Evidence of their aversion to Loyalty, and approba∣tion of the treasonable Doctrine of the Ch. of Rome. Soon after the Dissolution of this Synod the E.p. 746. of Sandwich, Ambassadour in Spain, informed His Ma∣jesty that Primate Reilly was emplyed to stir up his Countrey-men to rebell, upon which a Gurd was set upon him, and in a little time was sent into France. The Bp.1674. of Ferns still justified the Rebellion,Walsh's Letters p. 54. de∣fending the Actions of the Clergy for laudable, ver∣tuous,
meritorious Deeds, and becoming good Men;Anno and therefore needing no Repentance: And this is the last Account I find of him, for he soon after dyed. And now the Controversie about the Regale grow∣ing hot between the King of France and the present Pope,1679. His Holiness had so much of the Spirit of his Predecessours, who were for asserting their Power over all the Kingdoms of the World, as to threaten the King with Excommunication, and that speedily, if he would not renounce his Claim,1682. and he was as good as his word; for the King not being affraid of his Thunders, and refusing to lose his Right, and the Assembly of the Clergy joining with his Maje∣sty, the Pope sent a Bull of Excommunication to his Nuncio,News from France, p. 37. Lond. 1682. 4to. requiring him to publish it in the Assem∣bly; but by the diligence of the Cardinal d'Estree, the Assembly was adjourned before the Arrival of the Bull. At the same time Szlepeche, my Primate of Hun∣gary, Walsh's Letters in the Pref. with his Clergy, maintained the Deposing Power, by a Censure of the contrary Opinion; and the next year the Spanish Inquisition at Toledo did the same;1687. which was followed three years after by four Theses,1686. publickly maintained by the Jesuites at their College of Clermont in Auvergne, wherein it was defended; and even among our selves the Authour of Popery Anatomised defends the Decree of the Council of Laterane,Popery Anat. p. 14. Lond. 1636. 4to. in that the Kings and Princes of Europe by their Ambassadours consented to it, af∣firming that the Christian World apprehended no in∣jury, but rather security in that Decree. FINIS. Advertisement of two other Books writ by the Authour of this Book. 1. THE Missionaries Arts discovered: or, an Account of their Ways of Insiruation, their Artifices, and several Methods of which they serve themselves in making Convert to the Church of Rome. With a Letter to A . 2. A Plain Defence of the Protestant Religion, fitted to the meanest Capacity, being a full Answer to the Popish Net for the Fishers of Mn, that was writ by two Converts; wherein is evidently made appear, that their Departure frm the Protestant Religion was without Cause or Reason. Fit to be read by all Protestants.
