W3772 R34100 13764605 101712
CLAVSTRVM REGALE RESERATVM or, The Kinges Concealment at Trent, published by A. W. engraved title page border depicting the escape of King Charles II from Parliamentary troops, and his hiding place at Trent. In vmbrâ alarum tuarum sperabo donec transeat iniquitas LONDON, Printed for Will Nott at the Queens Arms in the Pell:Mell. 1667. P. Williamson fecit
TO THE QUEEN'S Most Excellent MAJESTY. THis little Book having ob∣tained liberty, after a long Imprisonment, to walk a∣broad, prostrates it self at Your Majesties feet for patronage and protection. In it Your Majesty may behold GOD's wonderful Mercy and Providence, in keeping and preserving our Gracious Soveraign from the hands of His Enemies, when they so pleased
themselves with the hopes of seising His Sacred Person after the Battel of Worcester, As they had invented and prepared new ways to afflict His Majesty, such as till then never entred into the hearts of the worst of Tyrants before them. But it pleased God to frustrate the hopes and designs of the Kings Adversaries, and to restore His Majesty to His Fathers Throne: Which that He may long enjoy with Your Majesty, in Health, Peace and Happiness, Is, and shall be the prayers of Your MAJESTIE's Most obedient, and most Faithful Servant, ANNE WYNDHAM.
Claustrum Regale Reseratum: OR, The KING'S Concealment AT TRENT. HOw that after the Battel of Worcester, His Sacred Majesty most wonderfully escaped the hands of his blood-thirsty Ene∣mies, and (under a Disguise, in the company of Mrs Jane Lane) safely arrived at Abbots-Leigh in Somersetshire, (the seat of Sir George Norton, lying near to the City of Bristol) hath been fully published unto the World. His Majestie's Journey from thence to the house of Colonel Francis Wyndham at Trent in the same County, his Stay there, his En∣deavour
(though frustrate) to get over into France, his Return to Trent, his final De∣parture thence in order to his happy Trans∣portation, are the subject of this present Relation. A Story, in which the Constel∣lations of Providence are so refulgent, that their light is sufficient to confute all the Atheists of the world, and to enforce all persons (whose faculties are not pertina∣ciously depraved) to acknowledge a watch∣ful Eye of GOD from above, looking upon all Actions of Men here below, making even the most wicked subservient to his just and glorious designs. And in∣deed, whatsoever the Antients fabled of Gyges's Ring, by which he could render himself Invisible, or the Poets fancied of their Gods, who usually carried their chief Favourites in the Clouds, and by drawing those aerial Curtains, did so conceal them, that they were heard and seen of none, whilst they both heard and saw others, is here most certainly verified. For, the Al∣mighty so closely covered the King with the wing of his Protection, and so clouded the Understanding of his cruel Enemies,
that the most piercing Eye of Malice could not see, nor the most Barbarously-bloody Hand offer Violence to his Sacred Person: God smiting his pursuers (as once he did the Sodomites) with blindness, who with as much eagerness sought to sacrifice the Lords Anointed to their fury, as the other did to prostitute the Angels to their lust. But before the several Particulars of this Story are laid open, two Questions (easily foreseen) which will be readily asked by every Reader, call for an Answer. The one is, Why this Relation so much expect∣ed, so much longed for, has been kept up all this while from publick view? And the other, How it comes to pass, that now it takes the liberty to walk abroad? Con∣cerning the first, it must be known, that a Narrative of these Passages was (by espe∣cial command from his Majesty) written by the Colonels own hand, immediately after the Kings return into England; which (being presented to his Majesty) was laid up in his Royal Cabinet, there to rest for some time, it being the Kings pleasure (for
reasons best known to his Sacred self) that it should not then be published. And as his Majesties command to keep it private, is a satisfactory answer to the first; so, his licence now obtained that it might travel abroad, may sufficiently resolve the second question. But besides this, many prevalent reasons there are, which plead for a publication; the chief of which are briefly these. That the implacable Enemies of this Crown may be for ever silenced and ashamed; who having neither Law, nor Religion to patronize their unjust under∣takings, construed a bare Permission, to be a Divine Approbation of their Actions; and (taking the Almighty to be such a one as themselves) blasphemously entitled God to be the Author of all their wickedness. But the arm of God stretched out from heaven to the rescue of the King, cutting off the clue of their Success, even then when they thought they had spun up their thred, hath not left them so much as an apron of fig-leaves to cover the nakedness of their most shameful proceedings. The next is, That the Truth of his Ma∣jesties
Escape (being minced by some, mis∣taken by others, and not fully set forth by any) might appear in its native beauty and splendor: That as every dust of gold is gold, and every ray of light is light; so every jot and title of Truth being Truth, not one grain of the treasure, nor one beam of the lustre of this Story might be lost or clouded; it being so rare, so excellent, that aged Time out of all the Archives of An∣tiquity can hardly produce a Parallel. Sin∣gularly admirable indeed it is, if we con∣sider the Circumstances and Actors. The Colonel (who chiefly designed, and moved in this great Affair) could not have had the freedom to have served his Majesty, had he not been a Prisoner; his very Confinement giving him both a liberty, and protection to act. For, coming home from Weymouth upon his Parole, he had the opportunity to travel freely and safely, without fear of be∣ing stopped, and taken up: And being newly removed from Sherborne to Trent, the jealous eye of Somersetshire Potentates had scarce then found him out, whose ma∣levolent Aspect afterwards seldom suffered
him to live at home, and too too often fur∣nished his house with very unwelcom guests. Others, who contributed their assistance, were persons of both sexes, and of very dif∣ferent conditions and qualities: And al∣though their endeavours often proved suc∣cessless, though they received discourage∣ments on one hand, were terrified with threats on the other; That a seal of silence should be imprinted upon the lips of Wo∣men, who are become proverbial for their garrulity; That faithfulness and constancie should guard the hearts of Servants, who are usually corrupted with rewards or af∣frighted with punishments; That neither Hope nor Fear (most powerful passions, heightned by Capital animadversions pro∣claimed against All that should conceal, and large Remunerations promised to such as should discover the King) could work no∣thing upon any single person, so as to remove him or her from their respective duty, but that all should so harmoniously concenter, both in the Design, and also afterward keep themselves so long close shut up under the lock of secrecy, that nothing could be disco∣vered
by the most exquisite art and cunning, till the blessed Restauration of his Majesty to his glorious Throne, so filled their hearts with joy, that it broke open the door of their lips, and let their tongue loose to tell this Miracle to the amazed World, would (were not the Persons yet alive, and the Story fresh in memory) rarifie it into a Romance. The reproaches and scandals, by which some envious persons have sought to dimi∣nish and vilifie the faithful services, which the Colonel out of the integrity of his soul performed unto his Majesty, shall not here be mentioned: Because by taking up dirt to bespatter him, they defile their own hands, and the gun they level at his Repu∣tation, recoils to the wounding of their own. These things thus premised, by way of Introduction, open the Gate, through which you may enter, and in the ensuing Pages (as in several Tables) take a full view of the Particulars. The Disguise his Majesty put on, secured him from the Cruelty of his Enemies; but
could not altogether hide him from the pry∣ing eyes of his dutiful Subjects. For in the time of his stay at Leigh, one John Pope (then Butler to Sir George Norton, but for∣merly a Soldier for the King in the West) through all those clouds espied the most Illustrious Person of the King. With him his Majesty (after he saw himself discovered) was pleased familiarly to discourse; And speaking of the great Sufferings of very many of his Friends in the Western parts, (most whereof were well known to Pope) his Majesty enquired if he knew Colonel Francis Wyndham, who (in the time of the late Wars) was Governor of Dunster-Castle? Very well, Sir, answered Pope. The King then demanding what was be∣come of him? Pope replies, That the Co∣lonel had married Mrs Anne Gerard, one of the daughters and heiresses of Thomas Gerard Esq; late of Trent in Somersetshire, and that he had newly brought thither his Mother (the Lady Wyndham) his Wife and family, and that he believed the Colonel intended there to reside and live. His Majesty having received this intelligence concerning the
Colonel, together with an exact information of the scituation of Trent, sought an op∣portunity to speak with Mrs Lane, (from whom, the better to conceal himself, he then kept at a distance) and by means of Mr Lassels (who accompanied the King in this journey) obteining his desire, his Ma∣jesty with much contentment imparted to Mrs Lane what Pope had informed him con∣cerning Colonel Wyndham, and his habita∣tion; telling her withall, That if she could bring him thither, he should not much doubt of his safety. In this very point of time comes the Lord Henry Wilmot (since Earl of Rochester) from Dirham in Gloucestershire (the seat of John Winter Esq; a person of known loyalty and integrity) to Leigh. My Lord had attend∣ed his Majesty in his passage Westward, and on Friday morning (September the 13.) met accidentally Captain Thomas Abington of Dowdswell in the County of Gloucester, at Pinbury Park; and being known by the Captain, (who had served under his Lord∣ship in the Wars) was that night by him conducted to Mr Winter's, from whom his
Lordship (as he hath often since acknow∣ledged) received great Civilities. Mrs Lane presently reveals to the Lord Wilmot the Kings resolution to remove to Trent: where∣upon my Lord demanded of Henry Rogers (Mr Winter's servant, and his Lordships guide from Dirham to Leigh) whether he knew Trent? He answered, That Colonel Wyndham and his Master had married two Sisters, and that he had often waited on his Master thither. These things so happily concurring, his Majesty commanded the Lord Wilmot to haste to Trent, and to ascertain the Colonel of his speedy Ap∣proach. His Lordship took leave, and continuing Rogers for his guide, with one Robert Swan, arrived at Trent the sixteenth of September. Rogers was sent in forthwith to the Colonel to acquaint him, that a Gentleman a friend of his, desired the favour of him, that he would please to step forth and speak with him. The Colonel enquiring of Rogers, whether he knew the Gentleman or his business? answered, No, he understood nothing at all, but only that he was called
by the name of Mr. Morton. Then without further discourse the Colonel came forth, and found the Gentleman walking near the Stable; whom as soon as he approach∣ed, (although it was somewhat dark) he saluted by the Title of My Lord Wilmot. His Lordship seemed to wonder that he should be known, but it was nothing strange, considering the Colonels former acquaint∣ance with him, being one of the first that engaged under his Command, in his late Majesties service: Besides, his Lordship was not in the least altered, except a Hawk on his fist, and a Lure by his side might pass for a Disguise. This Confidence of his Lordship really begat admiration in the Colonel, calling to mind the great danger he was in, and whose Harbinger he was; For he advertised the Colonel, that the King himself was on his way to Trent, in∣tending that very night to lodge at Castle-Cary (a Town six miles thence) hoping by Gods assistance, to be with him about ten of the clock next morning. At this joyful news the Colonel was trans∣ported, (there having run a report, that his
Majesty was slain in the Fight at Worcester) and giving God thanks for his wonderful mercy, he assured his Lordship, That for his Majesties preservation he would value neither his life, family nor fortune, and would never injure his Majesties confidence of him; Not doubting, but that God who had led his Ma∣jesty through the midst of such inexpressible dangers, would deliver him from all those barbarous threats, and bloody intentions of his Enemies. With these and such like ex∣pressions, the Colonel brought the Lord Wilmot into his parlour, where he received an exact account of his Majesties condition, and present affairs. Next morning, the Colonel found it necessary to acquaint the Lady Wyndham his mother, and also his own Lady, with the particulars the Lord Wilmot had over∣night imparted to him, concerning the King. The relation he gave them, did not (through the weakness of their sex) bring upon them any womanish passion, but surprized with joy, they most cheerfully resolve (without the least shew of fear) to hazard all, for the safety of the King. And so (begging Gods
blessing upon their future endeavours) they contrive how his Majesty might be brought into the house, without any suspition to their family, consisting of above twenty persons. Among them therefore, Mrs Julian Coningsby (the Lady Wyndham's Neece) Elianor Withers, Joan Halsenoth, and Henry Peters (whose loy alty to the King, and fidelity to themselves, they had sufficiently experienced) are made privy to their de∣sign. Next they consider what Chambers are fittest for his Majesties reception. Four are made choice of; amongst which, the Lady Wyndham's was counted most con∣venient for the day-time, where the servants might wait with most freedom upon his Majesty. Then a safe place is provided to retreat unto, in case of search, or imminent danger: And lastly, Employments are de∣signed to remove all others out of the way at the instant of his Majesties arrival. All which after a while, answered their desires, even beyond their expectation. Between nine and ten the next morning, the Colonel and his Lady walking towards the fields adjoining to the house, espied the
King riding before Mrs Lane, and Mr Lassels in their company. Assoon as his Majesty came near the Colonel, He called to him, Frank, Frank  how dost thou do? By which gracious pleasance the Colonel per∣ceived, that though his Majesties habit and countenance were much changed, yet his Heroick spirit was the same, and his mind immutable. The Colonel (to avoid the jealous eyes of some neighbours) instantly conveyed the King and Mrs Lane into the Lady Wyndham's Chamber, where the pas∣sions of Joy and Sorrow did a while combat in them, who beheld his Sacred Person: For what loyal Eye could look upon so Glorious a Prince thus eclypsed, and not pay unto him the homage of tears? But the consideration of his Majesties safety, the gracious words of his own mouth con∣futing the sad reports of his untimely death, together with the hope of his future pre∣servation, soon dried them up. In al short time the Colonel brought the Lord Wilmot to the King, and then the Ladies withdrew into the Parlour, having first agreed to call Mrs Lane Cousin, and to entertain her with
the same familiarity as if she had been their near Relation. That day she stayed at Trent, and the next morning early Mr Lassels and she departed. His Majesty, after he had refreshed him∣self, commanded the Colonel in the pre∣sence of the Lord Wilmot, to propose, What way he thought most probable for his Escape into France; for thither he de∣sired with all speed to be transported. The Colonel (the King giving him this oppor∣tunity) entertained and encouraged his Majesty with this remarkable passage of Sir Thomas Wyndham (his Father) Who, not long before his death [in the Year 1636] called unto him his five Sons, (having not seen them together in some years before) and discoursed unto us [said he] of the long Peace and Prosperity this Kingdom had enjoyed un∣der its Three last Glorious Monarchs: Of the the many Miseries and Calamities which lay sore upon our Ancestors, by the several Inva∣sions and Conquests of Forein Nations, and likewise by Intestine Insurrections and Rebel∣lions. And notwithstanding the strange mu∣tations and Changes in England, He shewed,
how it pleased God in love to our Nation to preserve an undoubted Succession of Kings, to sit in the Regal Throne. He mentioned the healing Conjunction of the two Houses of York and Lancaster, and the blessed Ʋnion of the two Crowns of England and Scotland, stopping up those fountains of Blood, which by National feuds and quarrels kept open, had like to have drowned the whole Island. He said, he feared the beautiful garment of Peace would shortly be torn in pieces through the Neglect of Magistrates, the general Cor∣ruption of manners, and the prevalence of a Puritanical faction, which (if not prevented) would undermine the very pillars of Govern∣ment. My sons! We have hitherto seen se∣rene and quiet Times: but now prepare your selves for cloudy and troublesom. I command you to honour and obey our Gracious Sove∣raign, and in all times to adhere to the Crown; and though the Crown should hang upon a Bush, I charge you forsake it not. These words being spoken with much earnestness, both in gesture and manner extraordinary, he arose from his chair, and left us in a deep consul∣tation what the meaning should be of—The
Crown hanging upon a Bush. These words, Sir, (said the Colonel) made so firm an im∣pression in all our breasts, that the many af∣flictions of these sad Times cannot raze out their undelible characters. Certainly these are the days which my Father pointed out in that Expression: And I doubt not, God hath brought me through so many dangers, that I might shew my self both a dutiful Son, and a loyal Subject, in faithfully endeavouring to serve your Sacred Majesty, in this your greatest Distress. After this Rehearsal, the Colonel (in obedience to his Majesties command) told the King, That Sir John Strangways (who had given many testimonies of his loyalty, having two Sons, both of them Colonels for his Royal Father) lived but four miles from Trent; That he was a person of great fortune and interest in Dorsetshire, and there∣fore he supposed that either Sir John, or his Sons, might be serviceable to his Majesties occasions. The King, in prosecution of this proposal, commanded the Colonel to wait on them; and accordingly the next morn∣ing he went over to Melbury; the place
where Sir John dwelt. No sooner was he come thither, but he met with Colonel Giles Strangways, and after usual salutations, they walked into the Park adjoyning to the house, where Colonel Wyndham imparted the reason and end of his present Visit. Colonel Strangways his answer was, That he was infinitely grieved, because he was not able to serve his Majesty in procuring a Vessel according to expectation; That he knew not any one Master of a Ship, or so much as one Mariner that he could trust: All that were formerly of his acquaintance in Weymouth, being for their loyalty banish∣ed, and gone beyond the sea; and in Pool and Lime he was a meer stranger, having not one Confident in either. A hundred pounds in Gold he delivered to Colonel Wyndham, to present to the King; which at his return, by command was deposited in the hands of the Lord Wilmot, for his Majesties use. About this time the Forces under Crom∣well were retreated from Worcester into the several Quarters of the Country; some of which coming to Trent, proclaimed the
Overthrow of the Kings Army, and the Death of the King, giving out that he was certainly killed; And one of them affirmed that he saw him dead, and that he was buried among the rest of the slain, no injury being offered to his body, because he was a Vali∣ant Soldier, and a Gallant man. This wel∣come News so tickled the Sectaries, that they could not hold from expressing their joy by making Bonfires, firing of Guns, Drinking, and other jollities: And for a close of all, to the Church they must, and there ring the Kings knell. These rude Ex∣travagancies moved not his Majesty at all, but onely (as if he were more troubled for their madness, than his own misfortune) to this most Christian and compassionate Ex∣pression, Alas poor people! Now though the King valued not the menaces of his proud Enemies, being con∣fident they could do him no hurt; yet he neglected not to try the faithfulness of his Friends to convey him out of their reach. Thus the former design proving unsuccess∣ful, and all hope of Transfretation that way being laid aside, the Colonel acquainted
his Majesty, that one Captain William El∣lesden of Lime (formerly well known unto him) with his Brother John Ellesden, (by means of Colonel Bullen Reymes of Wadden in Dorsetshine) had conveyed over into France, Sir John Berkley (now Lord Berkley) in a time of danger. To this Cap∣tain therefore his Majesty sends the Colo∣nel, who lodging at his house in Lime, took an opportunity to tell him, That the Lord Wilmot had made his escape from Worcester; that he lay privately near to him; and that his Lordship had earnestly solicited him to use his utmost endeavours to secure him from the hands of the pursuers. To this purpose he was come to town, and assured the Captain, if he would joyn in this affair, his courtesie should never be forgotten. The Captain very cordially embraced the moti∣on, and went with the Colonel to Char∣mouth (a little place near Lime) where at an Inne, he brought to him a Tenant of his, one Stephen Limbry, assuring the Colonel that he was a right honest man, and a per∣fect Royalist. With this Limbry Colonel Wyndham treated under the name of Cap∣tain
Norris, and agreed with him to trans∣port himself and three or four friends into France. The conditions of their Agreement were; That before the two and twentieth day of that instant September, Limbry should bring his Vessel into Charmouth-Road, and on the said two and twentieth, in the night should receive the Colonel and his company into his Long-boat from the Beach near Charmouth, from thence carry them to his Ship, and so land them safe in France. This the Colonel conjured Limbry to perform with all secresie, because all the Passengers were of the Royal party, and intended to be shipped without leave, to avoid such Oaths and Engagements, which otherwise would be forced upon them: And there∣fore Privacie in this transaction would free him from Danger, and themselves from Trouble, the true cause why they so earnestly thirsted (for some time) to leave their native Country. Limbry's Salary was Sixty pounds, which the Captain engaged to pay at his return from France, upon sight of a Certificate under the Passengers hands of their landing there. To the performance
of these Covenants, Limbry with many vows and protestations obliging himself, the Colonel with much satisfaction, and speed came back to his Majesty and the Lord Wilmot to Trent, who at the narrati∣on of these passages expressed no small con∣tentment. The business being thus far successfully laid, the King consults how it might be prudentially managed, that so there might be no miscarriage in the prosecution. Neces∣sary it was that his Majesty and all his At∣tendants (contrary to the use of Travellers) should sit up all the night in the Inne at Charmouth; that they ought to have the command of the house, to go in and out at pleasure, the Tide not serving till twelve at night. To remove therefore all suspicion and Inconveniencies, this Expedient was found out. Henry Peters (Colonel Wyndham's ser∣vant) was sent to Charmouth Inne, who in∣viting the Hostess to drink a glass of wine, told her, That he served a very gallant Master, who had long most affectionately loved a Lady in Devon, and had the happi∣ness
to be well beloved by her; and though her Equal in birth and fortune, yet so un∣equal was his fate, that by no means could he obtain her Friends consent: And there∣fore it was agreed between them, that he should carry her thence, and marry her among his own Allies. And for this purpose his Master had sent him to desire her to keep the best Chambers for him, intending to be at her house upon the two and twen∣tieth day of that moneth in the evening; where he resolved not to lodge, but only to refresh himself and friends, and so travel on either that night, or very early next morning. With this Love-story (thus con∣trived and acted) together with a Present delivered by Peters from his Master, the Hostess was so well pleased, that she pro∣mised him, her house and servants should be at his Masters command. All which she very justly performed. When the day appointed for his Maje∣sties journey to Charmouth was come, he was pleased to ride before Mrs Julian Co∣ningsby (the Lady Wyndham's Neece) as formerly before Mrs Lane: The Colonel
was his Majesties Guide, whilst the Lord Wilmot with Peters kept at a convenient distance, that they might not seem to be all of one company. In this manner travelling, they were time∣ly met by Captain Elesden, and by him conducted to a private house of his Brothers among the hills near Charmouth. There his Majesty was pleased to discover himself to the Captain, and to give him a piece of forein Gold, in which in his solitary hours he made a hole to put a ribbin in. Many like pieces his Majesty vouchsafed the Co∣lonel and his Lady, to be kept as Records of his Majesties favour, and of their own fidelity to his most Sacred Person in the day of his greatest Trial. All which they have most thankfully treasured up as the chiefest Jewels of their Family. This Royal Company from thence came to the Inne at Charmouth, a little after night; where Captain Elesden solemnly engaging to see the Master of the ship ready, (the wind blowing then fair for France) took leave of his Majesty. About an hour after came Limbry to the Inne, and assured the
Colonel all things were prepared, and that about midnight his Long-boat should wait at the place appointed. The set hour draw∣ing nigh, the Colonel with Peters went to the Sea-side (leaving his Majesty and the Lord Wilmot in a posture to come away upon call) where they remained all night expecting; but seeing no Long-boat, nei∣ther hearing any message from the master of the ship, at the break of day the Colonel returns to the Inne, and beseeches the King and the Lord Wilmot to haste from thence. His Majesty was intreated; but the Lord Wilmot was desirous to stay behind a little, promising to follow the King to Bridport, where his Majesty intended to make a halt for him. When the King was gone, the Lord Wil∣mot sent Peters into Lime, to demand of Captain Elesden the reason why Limbry broke his promise, and forfeited his word? He seemed much surprised with this mes∣sage, and said, He knew no reason, except it being Fair-day, the Seamen were drunk in taking their Farewell; and withall ad∣vised his Lordship to be gone, because his
stay there could not be safe. But since that, Limbry himself hath given this account un∣der his own hand:— That according to an Agreement made at Charmouth, September the 19. 1651. be∣twixt himself and one Captain Norris, (since known to be Colonel Francis Wyndham) he put forth his Ship beyond the Cobs-mouth into Charmouth-rode, where his servants on the 22. of the same moneth were all ready in her, waiting his coming; That he going to his house about ten that night, for linen to carry with him, was unexpectedly locked into a chamber by his Wife, to whom he had a little before revealed his intended Voyage with some Passengers into France, for whose Transportation, at his return, he was to receive a considerable sum of money from Captain Elesden. This woman (it seems) was frighted into a panick fear by that dreadful Proclamation (of the tenth of September) set out by the Men of Westminister, and published that day at Lime. In this, a heavy Penalty was thun∣dred out against all that should conceal the King, or any of his party who were at Wor∣cester
Fight; and a Reward of a Thousand pounds promised to any that should betray him. She, apprehending the Persons her husband engaged to carry over to be Roy∣alists, resolved to secure him from danger, by making him a Prisoner in his own cham∣ber. All the perswasions he used for his li∣berty, were in vain: For the more he in∣treated, the more her violent passion in∣creased, breaking forth into such clamors and lamentations, that he feared if he should any longer contend, both himself and the Gentlemen he promised to transport, would be cast away in this storm, without ever go∣ing to Sea. Thus a Design in a business of the highest nature, carried on with industry and pru∣dence, even to the very last, still promising full hope of a happy production, by one mans single whisper (the bane of Action) proved abortive. For no doubt, had Lim∣bry kept his counsel, he had gained the ho∣nour of Conveying over his Majesty; of whose Noble Courage and Vertue, God was pleased to make yet farther trial, as the sequel will inform.
The King passing on upon London Road from Charmouth, met many travellers, among whom was one of his Fathers servants, well known both to his Majesty and the Colo∣nel; who were very well pleased that he was not guilty of so much Civility, as to give either of them the complement of a Salutation. As they drew near to Bridport, the Colonel riding a little before, and entring the town, perceived it full of Soldi∣ers: whereupon stopping his horse till the King came up, he inreated his Majesty to keep on, and by no means to put himself into the mouth of them, who gaped gree∣dily after his destruction. Nevertheless, the King having engaged to the Lord Wilmot to expect him there, (without the least ap∣prehension of danger) rode into the George, and alighting in the Court, was forced to stay there, and in the Stable, near half an hour, before the Colonel could procure a Chamber. All this while his bloody Ene∣mies were his onely Companions, with whom he discoursed freely without fear, and learned from them their intended Voy∣age for Jersey and Guernsey, and their
Design upon those Islands. Here may you see the Pursuers overtaken, and the bitterest of Enemies friendly discoursing with Him, whose utter Ruine they accounted would compleat their Happiness. He that sate in Heaven certainly laughed them to scorn, and by the interposition of his mighty Arm eclypsed their glory, and by his admirable Wisdom reproved and confuted their ma∣lice against the King, and their blasphemies against Heaven. No sooner had the King withdrawn him∣self from this dangerous Company into a Chamber (with much difficulty obtained) but Mrs Coningsby espied Peters riding into the Inne. He (being beckned up) acquaint∣ed his Majesty, that the Lord Wilmot hum∣bly petitioned him to make haste out of that place, and to overtake him slowly passing on the road, and waiting his Ma∣jesties coming. Presently upon the dismis∣sion of Peters, the King having taken some small repast, not far from the Town joyned in company again with the Lord Wilmot, and discoursing of the several Adventures of that hopeful, and (as it fell out) most
perilous Journey, concluded that London-Road was very unsafe, and therefore re∣solved to follow the next Turning which might probably lead towards Yeavill or Sherborn, neither of which is computed to be above two miles distant from Trent. Providence (the best of Guides) directed these Strangers (for so they were all to those parts) to a way, which after many hours travel brought them into a Village, in which was a small Inne for entertainment. This entred these masqued Travellers, to en∣quire where they were. And to this purpose calling for some Beer, the Host of the house (one Rice Jones) came forth, and informed them that the place was called Broadwinsor. The Colonel knew the Innkeeper and his wife to be very honest, loyal persons, and that for their fidelity to the King and his party, they had (according to their con∣dition) undergone their share of troubles. The King understanding the affection of the people, resolves to lodge in the house that night, it being already somwhat dark, and his Majesty and Company sufficiently wearied with their former nights watching,
and that days travel. The Colonel (while the horses were put up) desired Mr. Jones to shew him the most private rooms; the reason he gave was, Because his Brother-in-law Colonel Reymes (whom the Lord Wilmot personated) had been a long time imprison∣ed, as well as himself; That they had late∣ly obtained their Paroles, and to be seen together so far from their homes, might create new jealousies, and so consequently crush them with new troubles. The good Host upon this brought them up into the highest chambers, where Privateness recom∣pensed the meanness of the Accommoda∣tion, and the pleasantness of the Host (a merry fellow) allayed and mitigated the weariness of the Guests. Now the face of things began to smile, which all the day and night preceding looked so louring and ill-favoured. But this short Calm was on a sudden interrupted by a violent Storm. For in comes the Constable with almost Forty Soldiers to be billeted that very night in the Inne: All the lower Receptacles were thronged up with this unexpected Com∣pany; so that the King was in a manner
besieged, there being no passage from a∣bove, but through those suspected Guards. Thus every place brought forth its troubles, and every period of time disclosed fresh dangers! Shortly after the Soldiers had taken up their Quarters, a Woman in their company fell in labour in the Kitchin. The pangs she endured, made the Inhabitants of that place very ill at ease, fearing lest the whole Parish should become the reputed Father, and be enforced to keep the Child. To avoid this charge, the chiefest of the Parish post to the Inne, between whom and the Soldiers arose a very hot conflict con∣cerning provision to be made for the mo∣ther and the infant. This dispute continued till such time as (according to orders) they were to march to the Sea-side. This quar∣relsom Gossipping was a most seasonable diversion, exercising the minds of those troublesom Fellows, who otherwise were likely to have proved too too inquisitive after the Guests in the house; the sad con∣sequences of which, every loyal heart trembles to think on. Surely we cannot, except we wilfully
shut our own eyes) but clearly see, and with all reverence and thankfulness adore the Divine Goodness for his Majesties signal Deliverances in this Voyage. Especially if looking back upon Charmouth, we consider the dangers that threatned him, occasioned by the Lord Wilmot's short stay there, after the Kings departure. For one Hamnet a Smith, being called to shoe his Lordships horse, said, He well knew by the fashion of the shoes, that they were never set in the West, but in the North. The Hostler (a bird of the same feather) hearing this, began to tell what Company had been there, how they sate up, and kept their horses sadled all the night; and from hence they conclude, That either the King, or some Great Persons had certainly been at the Inne. The Hostler (whose heart was soured against the King) runs presently to one Westley (of the same leaven) then Mi∣nister of Charmouth, to inform him of these Passages, and to ask counsel what was to be done. This Westley was at his Morning Exercise, and being somthing long-winded, [And by the way it may be observed, that
long Prayers proceeding from a Traiterous heart, once did good, but by accident onely] the Hostler, unwilling to lose his reward at the Gentlemans taking horse, returns with∣out doing his errand. As soon as my Lord was mounted and gone, Hamnet tells Westley of the discourse between himself and the Hostler. Away comes Westley upon full speed to the Inne, and (almost out of breath) asks the woman of the house, what Guests she had entertained that night? She said, They were all strangers to her, she knew them not. I tell you then (said he) one of them was the King. Then hastily turning away from her, he and Hamnet ran to Mr. Butler of Commer (then Justice of Peace) to have him dispatch abroad his Warrants to raise the Country for the apprehending of the King, and those persons the last night with him at Charmouth. But he spends his mouth in vain, a deaf ear is turned upon him, no Warrant would be issued forth. This check given to his zeal so vexed him, that it had like to have caused a suffocation, had not Captain Massey (as errant a Hotspur as himself) given it vent, by raising a Party
and pursuing the King upon London-Road. But God preserved his Majesty by divert∣ing him to Broadwindsor, whilst Massey and his hot-mettled company outran their Prey as far as Dorchester. And indeed, the report of the Kings being at Charmouth, was grown so common, that the Soldiers (lying in those parts) search'd the houses of several Gentlemen, who were accounted Royalists, thinking to surprize him. Amongst which, Pilesdon (the house of Sir Hugh Wyndham Uncle to Colonel Francis Wyndham) was twice rifled. They took the old Baronet, his Lady, Daughters, and whole Family, and set a Guard upon them in the Hall, whilst they examine every corner, not sparing either Trunk or Box. Then taking a particular view of their Prisoners, they seize a lovely young Lady, saying, she was the King disguised in womens apparel. At length being convinced of their gross and rude mistake, they desisted from offering any farther violence to that Family. And here it is much to be observed, that the same day the King went from Charmouth, Captain Elesden came to Pilesdon, and enquired of
Sir Hugh and his Lady for the King and Co∣lonel, confidently affirming that they must needs be there. His Majesty having with an evenness of spirit gotten through this rough passage, safely anchored at Broadwindsor: Where at length enjoying some rest, he commands the Colonel to give his opinion what course was to be taken, as the face of affairs then looked. The Colonel (seeing Forces drawn every where upon that shore) thought it very hazardous to attempt any thing more in Dorsetshire; and therefore humbly be∣sought his Majesty, that he would be pleased to retreat to Trent: He hoped his Majesty was already satisfied in the fidelity of his servants; and that he doubted not, his Ma∣jesty might lie securely in that Creek, till it was fair weather, and a good season to put forth to Sea. He humbly advised, that Peters might conduct the Lord Wilmot to Mr Huit's house at the Kings-Arms in Sarum, where he and many of his friends had been sheltered in the time of troubles. That Peters (being at Sarum) should by a private token bring his Lordship to Mr John Coventry (his Kins∣man)
a Person Noble, Wise, and Loyal, with whom he had kept Intelligence in order to the Kings service, ever since his Majesty had set foot in Scotland; That he was assured Mr Coventry would think himself highly ho∣noured to correspond in this matchless em∣ployment, The King's Preservation. He de∣sired the Lord Wilmot to be confident of ly∣ing concealed; And likewise to treat with Mr Coventry, and by Peters to return his Ma∣jesty an account how he found that Gentle∣man affected towards this service. This counsel being well relished and ap∣proved, 'twas resolved, That between Sarum and Trent (lying 30 miles distant and better) an Intercourse should be kept by trusty mes∣sengers, and a secret way of writing, to avoid danger in case of interception. All things being thus concluded, the King left his jovial Host at Broadwindsor, and returned with the Colonel and Mrs Coningsby to Trent. The Lord Wilmot with Peters went that night to Sherborn, and the next morning was waited on by Swan (who attended his Lordship to the Colonels) and that day got into Sarum; where he soon saluted Mr Coventry, in all
things fully answering his Lordships expecta∣tion: And (the 25. of September) Peters was sent back with this joyful message from the Lord Wilmot to his Majesty, That he doubted not (by Mr Coventry's assistance, and those recommended by him) to be able in some short time to effect his desires. Whilst his Sacred Majesty enjoys his peace at Trent, and the Lord Wilmot (with those other Worthies) is busied at Sarum to pro∣cure its continuation, It cannot be imperti∣nent to mention a Circumstance or two, which inserted in the midst of the web and texture of this Story would have looked un∣handsom, but added as a fringe may prove ornamental. Upon the Sunday morning after the King came to Trent, a Tailor of the Parish inform∣ed the Colonel, That the Zealots [which swarmed in that place] discoursed overnight, that Persons of Quality were hid in his house, and that they intended to search and seise them; and therefore he desired the Colonel (if any such there were) to convey them thence, to avoid surprisal. The Colonel (re∣warding the good man for his care and kind∣ness
towards himself and family) told him, That his Kinsman (meaning the L. Wilmot) was not private, but publick in his house, (for so his Lordship pleased to be) and that he believed he would shew himself in the Church at the time of Prayers. When the honest fellow was gone, the Colonel ac∣quaints the King what had passed between himself and the Tailor, and withall besought his Majesty to perswade the Lord Wilmot to accompany him to Church, thinking by this means not only to lessen the jealousie, but also to gain the good opinion of some of the Fa∣naticks, who would be apt to believe, that the Colonel was rather brought to Church by my Lord, then his Lordship by the Co∣lonel, who seldom came to that Place, since Faction and Rebellion had justled out, and kept possession against Peace and Religion. He alledged moreover, that he sate in an Ile distinct from the body of the Congregation, so that the Parishioners could not take a full view of any of his company. These reasons, joined with his Majesties command, prevailed with his Lordship; and (though he thought it a bold adventure, yet) it not only allayed the
fury, but also took out the very sting of those wasps; insomuch that they who the last night talked of nothing but searching, began now to say, that Cromwell's late success against the King, had made the Colonel a Convert. All being now quiet about home, the Co∣lonels Lady (under a pretence of a Visit) goes over to Sherborn to hear what news there was abroad of the King. And towards evening, at her return, a Troop of horse clapt private∣ly into the town. This silent way of entring their Quarters, in so triumphant a time, gave a strong alarm to this careful Lady, whose thoughts were much troubled concerning her Royal Guest. A stop she made to hearken out what brought them thither, and whither they were bound: But not one grain of In∣telligence could be procured by the most in∣dustrious enquiry. When she came home, she gave his Majesty an account of many stories, which like flying clouds were blown about by the breath of the people, striving to cover her trouble with the vail of cheerfulness. But this the King perceiving to be rather forced then free, as at other times, was earnest to know the cause of her discomposure. And
to satisfie his Majesties importunity, she gave him a full relation of the Troop at Sherborn: At which his Majesty laughed most heartily, as if he had not been in the least concerned. Yet up∣on a serious debate of the matter, the Colonel and his Lady supplicated the King to take a view of his Privy chamber, into which he was perswa∣ded to enter, but came presently forth again, much pleased, that upon the least approach of danger, he could thither retreat with an assurance of security. All that night the Colonel kept strict watch in his house, and was the more vigi∣lant, because he understood from Sherborn, that the Troop intended not to quarter there, but only to refresh themselves and march. And ac∣cordingly (not so much as looking towards Trent) about two of the clock next morning, they removed towards the Sea-coast. This fear being over, the King rested all the time of his stay at Trent, without so much as the apprehen∣sion of a disturbance. The strangeness of which will be much in∣creased by the addition of what a Captain who served under Cromwell at Worcester, reported to two Divines of undoubted veracity, long before the King's blessed Restauration: That he was followed and troubled with Dreams for three
nights together, That the King was hid at Trent near Sherborn, in a house nigh to which stood a Grove or patch of trees, and that thither he should go and find him. This suggestion thus reiterated, was a powerful spur to prick him for∣wards: But the hand which held the reins and kept him back, was irresistible. Now the hands of his Majesties enemies were not only restrained from doing him evil, but the hands of his friends were strengthened to do him good. In order to which, Colonel Eward Phe∣lips of Montacute in the County of Somerset, came from Sarum to his Majesty (Septemb. 28.) with this intelligence, That his brother Colonel Robert Phelips was employed to Southampton to procure a Vessel, of whose transaction his Ma∣jesty should receive a speedy account. In the mean time, Captain Thomas Littleton (a Neighbour of Colonel Wyndham) was dis∣patch'd up into Hampshire, where by the aid of Mr. Standish he dealt with the Master of a Ship, who undertook to carry off the Lord Wilmot and his company, upon the condition his Lord∣ship would follow his direction. But the hope of Colonel Phelips his good success at Hampton dash'd this enterprise, and the Captain was re∣manded to Trent, and to make no progress till farther order.
Upon the first of October, Mr. John Sellick (Chaplain to Mr. Coventry) brought a Letter to his Majesty. In answer to which the King wrote back, That he desired all diligence might be used in providing a Vessel; and if it should prove difficult at Hampton, trial should be made farther: That they should be ascertained of a Ship before they sent to remove him, that so he might run no more hazards then what of ne∣cessity he must meet with in his passage from Trent to the place of his Transportation. October the fifth, Colonel Phelips came from the Lord Wilmot and Mr. Coventry to his Majesty with this assurance, That all things were ready; And that he had informed himself with the most private ways, that so he might with greater probability of safety guide his Majesty to the Sea-side. Assoon as the King heard this message, He resolved upon his Journey. Colonel Wynd∣ham earnestly petitions his Majesty, that he might wait on him to the shore: But his Majesty gave no grant, saying, It was no way necessary, and might prove very inconvenient. Upon the renewing his request, the King commanded the contrary, but sweetned his denial with this pro∣mise, That if he were put to any distress, he would again retreat to Trent.
About ten next morning (October the sixth) his Majesty took leave of the old Lady Wynd∣ham, the Colonels Lady and Family; not omit∣ting the meanest of them that served him. But to the good old Lady he vouchsafed more then an ordinary respect, who accounted it her highest honour, that she had three Sons and one Grand∣child slain in the defence of the Father, and that she her self in her old age had been instrumental in the protection of the Son, Both Kings of England. Thus his Sacred Majesty, taking Mrs Juliana Coningsby behind him, attended by Colonel Robert Phelips, and Peters, bade Farewel to Trent, the Ark in which God shut him up, when the Floods of Rebellion had covered the face of his Dominions. Here he rested Nine∣teen days, to give his faithful Servants time to work his deliverance: And the Almighty crowned their endeavours with success, that his Majesty might live to appear as Glorious in his Actions, as Couragious in his Suf∣ferings. FINIS.
