L136A R223644 99833933 38412
AN HISTORICAL AND Geographical DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE, Extracted from the best Authors, both Ancient and Modern. By J. De LACROSE, Eccl. Angl. Presb. LONDON: Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King's-Arms, near St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-street. 1694.
To His Most Excellent MAJESTY WILLIAM III. By the Grace of God, King of Great Bri∣tain, France and Ire∣land, Defender of the Faith, &c. May it please Your Majesty, THE Kingdom of France, tho' never so large and pow∣rful, has formerly belong'd, either n part or in whole, to Your glorious Ancestors. The vast Dutchies of Normandy and Guyenn, Maine, Touraine, Perche and Poictou;
the Counties of Ponthieu and Guis¦nes, Calais, Boulogne, Ardres  and their dependencies, were th Patrimonial Estates of the King of England; besides many Countie and Lordships that Your Predeces¦sors the Princes of Orange hav enjoy'd in Dauphine, Provence Languedoc and Burgundy;  that, tho the pretended Salick Law by which the Houses of Valois an Bourbon, endeavoured to main¦tain their usurpation, should tak place; Your Majesty has still th lawful claim of inheritance to th best part of the French Terri¦tories. All the World knows that n such motives have ingaged You Majest in this present War: You generous Mind aims at nothing else than to get restor'd to your Allie what an ambitious Prince has usur¦ped from them. But as when So¦lomon prefer'd Wisdom to Riches
God gave him the latter too as an Overplus: So it may be that the just Distributer of Kingdoms, being pleased with that act of Justice of Your Majesty, will add to Your Do∣minions the vast Estates of Your Fore-Fathers, and lt us se another Henry of England Crown'd in Paris. A great nmber of those who appear Your inveterate Ene∣mies are most concern'd for Your Majesty, and trust to Your Inter∣est. The Secular Clergy of France depriv'd of their Authority, the Nobility of their Power, the Gentry of their Estates, the Parliaments reduc'd to be only the unworthy Mi∣nisters of the Passions and Pleasures of a few arbitrary Courtiers: the Learned overloaden with Superstiti∣ons; the persecuted Protestants forc'd to a Worship, which they de∣test in their Heart; most or all the French Cities or Countries robb'd of their Liberties and Privileges,
and even the whole Kingdom beg∣gar'd and famish'd, sigh and long for such a Deliverer as Your Ma∣jesty, who is not afraid of the tem∣pests of the Sea, and bids defiance to the Fire of Canon's who has e∣ceiv'd so many Wounds, and loo'd so many Dangers in the Face for our Security. May Almighty God animate Your Subjects with so uch Zeal, and bless Your Arms with so great a Success, that Your Majesty may afford an occasion to Your se∣cret Friends to declare themselves, and procure them such a settled Wel∣fare, and constant Liberty, as may have no other end, but the Con∣summation of the World: Which is the earnest Desire, Of Your Majesty's Most humble, most obedient And most faithful Servant, J. De LACROSE.
THE PREFACE. SOme Readers may imagine that it is no hard matter to describe a Country so near, so full of Learned men and so stor'd with excellent Books as France is, espe∣cially for a Native of it, because of the many helps an Author may meet with. I have made use of all those I could come at, Books, Maps, Memoirs, Inquiries of living persons, besides what I knew of my own. But I was soon aware, that the Description of those who have Written before me, even in the middle of that Kingdom, are very imperfect. All the Journeys into France I have read, as du Verdier, Sinceri Accii Itinerarium Galliae, Le Grand Tour de France, les Delices de la France, and the late Voyages Historiques de l'Eu∣rope observe neither order nor method, confound∣ing not only the several Counties into which each great Government is subdivided, but even the great Governments themselves. As to Geographers Comminges and Darity are too old and confus'd. The Maps of Sanson the Father and the Son, are excellent, those
of Du Val next to them, and by comparng them together, as I have done, one may be pretty sure of the Longitude and Latitude, situation and distance of places. But neither of the Sansons has made a modern and particular Description of France, and that of Du Val is too short and not methodical enough. As to Anti∣quities. Andre du Chesne in his curious Inqui∣ries concerning the Towns of France is full of Fables, and ought not to be follow'd but very cautiously, tho he is a Man of a vast reading and much to be commended for having pu∣blished several Historians of the middle Age that have Written of the French affairs, and made use of them in his Antiquities of that Country and Monarchy. Joseph Scaliger, how Learned soever he may be in other things, does not come near Du Chesne in this, and proposes many bold conjectures, concerning the ancient names of the French Cities and Countries, for which he often gives no other authority but his bare saying. Baudrand is but a pitiful compiler of modern Books, who never look'd into ancient Authors. Sanson in his Pharus Galliae Antiquae is more accurate than the fore men∣tioned Writers, and has made many curious and useful discoveries. But the most exact of all in my Judgment is Adrian de Valois in his Notitia Galliarum, as to the Latin names of Places, for there is hardly any thing else in that huge Folio, besides some few hints of History to be gther'd here and there with great trouble. I have perus'd three other modern Geogra∣phers which I must not forget, viz. Robbe's Memoires Geographiques, Morery's Grand Diction∣naire
Historique and Geographique, with the sup∣plement of Perayre, and De la Croix's Geographie Ʋniverselle. As to the first, he cannot commit many faults, for he has almost nothing besides French names; but as soon as he presumes to say something more, for instance to determine the extent of a Government or its Latitude and Longitude, one may very near be sure to find him in an error. As to Morery, it is pity he did not live long enough, or had not the conveniency to read ancient Authors. His want of Learning in Ecclesiastical History and Mysteries of State makes him too passionate, when he speaks of the Protestants, and leads him into many mistakes as to Latin names and other Antiquities. As to De la Croix, all his performance consists in ha∣ving put an abidgment of Morery into Robe's method, and a very unjudicious one too, for he leaves out what is most curious and essential in the Great Dictionary; and the rest he takes it word for word, unless it be to corrupt and abridg it again, but for the most part he is so faithful as to transcribe the very faults of the press, as p. 200. l. 29. Anvers for Ant. Whatever he adds of his own here and there, as the Latitude and Longitude and the distance of places is always fale, for he never took the  of looking into one of Sanson's or du Val's Mas. For instance, p. 201 he says that, No-gent-le-Roy is situated on the River Eure, be∣twixt Dreux and Chartres, which is true. Then he adds Dreux or Drocum is upon the Blaise, &c. The worst Map in the World might have shewn him that those three Towns are seated on the same River. It's true Morey has lead
him into that mistake, but what his pardona∣ble in the compiler of a great Dictionary, who is ird out by the length and tediousness of the Work, and distracted by the ariety of matters, is not so in a Geographer. Besides that, there is a River call'd Baise in Guienne, but no River Blaise in all France. A Vocabulary of this Authors Faults would make up a small Volume, and therefore I shall only add an instance or two more. P. 309 he calls twice after Robbe, Briancon a Bishoprick Neither Morery nor any other Author that I know of mentions any such thing: For the Brianconnois were ever as they are still a de∣pendency of the Caturiges and the Prelate of Ambrun. P. 320. He puts after Robbe, Serres in Viennois, that is in the Northern part of Dauphiné, tho it lies in Gapencois or in the South of that Province. This as true as what he says p. 17 that, at the beginning of this War, the French King put 700000 Men in Arms; and that he alone has more Religion, Merit, Glory, Revenus and Soldiers, then all the Crown'd Heads of Europe together, without excepting his dear Ally the Turk. The former Description of France being so faulty, I let the Reader judg what trouble I have been at in chusing the best, and including what ever seem'd to me most essential in the Compass of this Book. It is divided into two parts, whereof the first is an introduction to the Second, a general survey of the whole Country, and an explication of several Offices and terms that can scarce be fully undestood without it. Tho this part be very short, yet
you will find there several things concerning the French Monarchy and Politicks, the power of their Parliaments, the state of their Nobility and Gentry, the increase of Popery, the breaking up of the Reformation, the causes that retarded its progress, and have altogether eclips'd it in that Kingdom; all which is not easily to be met with any where-else. The second contains an Historical and Geographical Descrip∣tion of the twelve Great Governments, into which France uses to be divided, besides Lor∣raine and the County of Burgundy. There I treat of the different Revolutions of Each Go∣vernment, of its ancient Inhabitants, of its Gaulish and Latin names and other Antiquities, of its borders, extent, subdivisions, Air, Cli∣mate, Fertility, Rivers, Lakes, Mountains, natural Curiosities, &c. I set down the di∣stance of the Capital Cities from Paris or from each other, and of the most considerable Towns in each Government from their Capital, their Latin names, Antiquities, Lords and Titles, their Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, with the several Changes they have undergone, their most remarkable Buildings, Trade, Inhabitants, the Great Men they have produc'd, their Soyl and Territory, &c.
Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury, at the Kings-Arms next St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-street. THe Reformed Gentleman, or the English Morals rescued from the Immortalities of the present Age; shewing how in∣consistent those pretended Genteel Accomplish∣ments of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring and Sabbath-breaking are with the true Generosity of an Englishman. With an account of the pro∣ceedings of the Government for the Reforma∣tion of Manners. By A. M. of the Church of England. Bound in 8. Price 1 s. 6 d. 2. An Essay against Ʋnequal Marriages, in 4 Chapters. 1. The Introduction. 2. Against old. Persons Marrying with Young. 3. Against Per∣sons Marrying without Parents or Friends Con∣sent. 4. Against Persons Marrying against their own Consent. By S. Sufford, in 12's. bound Price 1 s. 20. The safety of France to Monsieur the Dauphin, or the Secret History of the French King, proving that there is no other way to secure France from approaching ruin, but by deposing his Father for a Tyrant, and Dostroyer of his People. Done out of French. 12. bound, price 1 s. 21. The History of the late great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the Causes and Means by which it was accomplished, with a particular account of the Extraordinary Occu∣rences which happened thereupon, as likewise the settlement of both the Kingdoms under their most serence Majesties King William and Queen Mary, with a List of the Convention. 8. bound, price 5. s.
A General and Particular DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. PART I. THE Method I shall observe in this Description, is, To give at first a General View of this ancient and large Kingdom; To speak of its old and modern Bounds and Divisions; Of its Soil, Inhabitants, Government, Policy, Magistrates, Religion, &c. And then to give a Particular Description of each of its Provinces.
CHAP. I. Of the ancient and modern Bounds and Di∣visions of France; Of her Mountains, Ports, Rivers and Forests. FRANCE has not changed her ancient Limits to the South, West and North; seeing, as Gallia of old, it has to the West, the Ocean of Aquitain; to the North, the British Ocean as far as Calis, by which Sea it is divided from England; the Mediterranean Sea on the South, which is also called the French Sea, with the Pyrenaean Mountains that part her from Spain. As to her Limits on the East and North-East, they are very uncertain, especially in this time of War: Before the late Conquests, it was bounded by the County of Burgundy Elzas, the Dukedom of Lorrain and Barrois, and part of the Spanish Netherlands; viz. the Province of Luxembourg, Hainault, Bra∣bant, and Flanders, But at present the French King is Master of all those Countries, except of a little part: So that his Kingdom has al∣most recover'd its ancient Limits on that side viz. the Rhine and the Mouth of the Meuse. Her Form is almost round, and in a man∣ner oval, so that she is as broad as long, and may be of 25 days Journey in length, from Brest to Strasbourg, and of as many in breadth
from Dunkerque to Perpignan, that is 250 Leagues, which make about 1000 Leagues in circuit. The ancient Galli, called Celtae, transplant∣ed themselves into Asia, where they gave their Name to a whole Country, called Ga∣latia, Gallo-Graecia, or Gallia Minor, and now Chiangare, being part of Natoly, or Less Asia. Another Colony of the Gallick Nation having passed the Alpes, conquered a good part of Italy, which made the Romans to di∣stinguish them into Cisalpins and Transalpins. However, the Country on this side the Alpes retained the ancient Name of Gallia; and falling afterwards under the Power of the Romans, was divided by Augustus into four Parts, viz. Gallia Narbonensis, called also Gallia Braccata, because of the Braccae, a kind of broad long Coats the Inhabitants wore. The other Parts were, the Celtick Gallia, or that of Lyons; the Belgick, and the Aquitanick, which had all three the common Surname of Gallia Comata, because the People of those Provinces suffered their hair to grow long. Aquitain at Julius Caesar's time was com∣prehended between the River Garumn, the Sea, and the Pyrenaean Mountains; but was afterwards extended by Augustus as far as the River Loire on the North, and the Mountains of the Cevennes on the East, and subdivided into first, second and third Aqui∣tain. Its ancient Inhabitants had several
different Names, which we shall mention in the particular Description of that part of France. It suffices at present to observe, that it is now wholly in the French King's hands, but heretofore belong'd for the most part to the English. The Celtick Gallia, or that of Lyons, was included between the Ocean on the West and North-West, the Belgick on the North-East and East, Aquitain and the Province of Narbonne on the South. It was divided into first, second, third, fourth and fifth; in which Division, 'tis worthy our Notice, that a good part of the 2d and 3d was either the ancient Patrimony of our English Kings, as Normandy; or fell to them by Marriage and Inheritance, as Le Maine, Anjou, and Tou∣raine. As to the fifth Lugdunensis, call'd also Provincia Sequanorum, before the last Peace of Nimeguen the French King possessed no∣thing in it: but the Spaniards having yielded him the County of Burgundy, and he being Ma∣ster of Savoy, Newchastel, Elzas and Sungow, the Republick of the Suitzers, which lays in∣closed in his Dominions, must necessarily de∣pend upon him. The Narbonensis had Aquitain on the West, the Celtick on the North, the Alpes on the East, the Mediterranean Sea and the Pyre∣naean Mountains on the South. It was divi∣ded into first, second and third; but after∣wards extended farther on the East, beyond
the Alpes & to the Appennin Mountains: then it was called Viennensis, and subdivided into first, second, third, fourth and fifth. The French having conquered during this present War the Dukedom of Savoy, and the County of Nice, are now Masters of all that large Country; except the County Venaisin, which they have restored to the Pope, the Principali∣ty of Piedmont, and the Land of Valais, called by the Ancients Gallia Subalpina, possessed by the Warlike Duke of Savoy. The Belgick, divided into first and second, was of a vast extent, comprehending not only the Seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries, except Friese, Groeningen and Overyssel, but also Picardy, Champaign, part of the Isle of France, Lorrain, Elzas, the Bishoprick of Liege, the four Electorates along the Rhine, and the Dukedoms of Cleves and Juliers. The French, who in the former Reigns possessed but a small part of the Belgick, have almost swallow'd up all that Country, there remain∣ing nothing entire, but the Dukedoms of Cleves and Juliers, and the Dominions of the States-General; for the Bishoprick of Liege and the four Electotates are either dis∣membred, or lie open before them. The Division of France, as to the Civil Government, may be made into certain Pro∣vinces: The twelve Ancient, whose Deputies had their Seat in the general Assemblies of the Kingdom, are, 1. Picardy. 2. Normandy.
3. The Isle of France. 4. Champaign. These four lie Northward of France. 5. Britanny. 6. Orleanois. 7. The Dutchy of Burgundy. 8. Lyonnois. are scituated on each side of the Loire. 9. Guienne. 10. Languedock. 11. D∣phine. 12. Provence. in the Southern Parts of the Kingdom. To these have been added, 1. The Government of Navar and Bearn. 2. Of Elzas. 3. Of the three Bishopricks of Metz, Toul and Verdun. 4. Of Lorrain. 5. Of the County of Roussillon. 6. Of the Province of Pignerol. 7. Of the French Plantations in America. In reference to the Courts of Justice, France is divided into ten Parliaments, to which the Seneschalships or Bailywicks do answer. The Names of those ten Parliaments are, Paris; Toulouse, for Languedock and part of Guienne; Dijon, for the Dutchy of Burgundy and Bresse; Roan, for Normandy; Bourdeaux, for Guyenne; Rennes, and lately Vannes, for Britanny; Grenoble, for Dauphiné; Aix, for Provence; Pau, for Bearn and Navar; Mets, for the Country of Messin and Lorrain, which extends its Jurisdiction over all the conquer'd Netherlands. There are Sovereign Courts of Justice at Brisach, Arras, Tournny, Perpignan and Pigne∣rol; they depend, for the most Part, on the Government of Picardy; but the Dutchy of Luxemburg is annexed to that of Lorrain; however, bares not the Title
of Parliament. The Parliament for the County of Burgundy is at Bezançon, whi∣ther the Spaniards transferr'd it from Dole, after that Province had been restored to them by the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle, An. 1668. There are sixteen Archbishopricks in France, nine of which pretend to the Right of Primacy; the seven others are, Paris, Tours, Auch, Alby, Tolouze, Ambrun, and Aix; the Primates are, Sens, Lyons, Bourges, Nar∣bonne, Roan, Bourdeaux, Vienne, Arles, and Rheims. The New Conquests have since added two Archbishopricks, viz. Cambray and Bezançon. The Pyrenaean Mountains do not so much belong to France, which they do part from Spain, as the Cevennes, which are in the heart of the Country, and have been known to the ancient Greeks and Latins under the Name of , and Gebenna, or Cebenna. They reach along Low Languedock to Au∣vergne, where they are extremely high. France has also her Promontories upon the Coast of her Seas, as well Ocean as Mediterranean. On the West-side looking towards Britanny, and the North over∣against Kent, are those of the Ocean Sea; That of Talmond, or Talon du monde, is toward the South in the same Sea, with that of Buts, which has divers Names, and some others. Upon the Medi∣terranean
Sea are the Cape of St. Sigo, which is on the Coast of Provence, the Cape of Sete, on the Coast of Agde in Languedock. She has but two Gulfs, the Aquitanick or Tarbellick, on the Ocean toward the West; and the great Gulf, called by the Ancients Sinus Gal∣licus, in the Mediterranean Sea. France wants no good Ports, whether in the Ocean or Mediterranean Sea. In the Ocean, on the Coast of Britanny, are, Brest, Conquest, Blavet; and Rochell on the Coast of Poictou. In the Mediterranean Marseille and Toulon, on the Coast of Provence, good and renowned Havens, by the Galleys which the French King keeps there. That on the Coast of Agde is also considerable. The Rivers of France are many, very beautiful, and of long Course. The Chiefest are, the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, and the Rhosne. The Garonne springs from the Pyrenaeans, and has always been the separa∣tion of the Aquitains from the Celtae, re∣ceives the Dourdogne, the Tart and Loth, and is lost in the Ocean. The Rhosne comes from the Alpes, crosses the Country of Valais, then the Lake of Geneva, through which it runs without mixing its Waters with it, receives the Saone at Lyons, the Isere that runs at Grenoble, the Droume and the Durance, a dangerous River, and which has no certain wading; and lastly, empties it self into the Mediterranean Sea at the
Three Maries, within three Leagues of Arles, by six Channels. The Seine, which has its Original in Burgundy, in the Woods of the Abbey of St. Seine, runs by Paris, Roan, Honfleur and Harfleur, and disgorges it self into the Sea at Havre de Grace, with a delicate Channel, where it ebbs and flows. It receives, amongst other Rivers, the Marn, and the Oyse, which crosseth Picardy, and under Pont Oyse, towards Poissy, mixes with the Seine. The Isle of France is inclosed by the Seine to the East and South, and by the Oyse to the West. The Loire springs forth in Vivarez, a small Country of Languedock, passes by Velay, comes into Forest, to Nevers, Orleans, Blois, Amboise, Tours, Saumur, and disburthens it self in the Sea near Nantes in Britanny, with a Channel of four Leagues breadth. It is the largest River of France, as the Rhosne is the most rapid. It receives the River of Allier, which cometh out of Gevaudan in Languedock, and several o∣thers. France abounds in lofty and pleasant Forests, that are not like those of Germany, Poland, and Transilvania, which by reason of their greatness and thickness are not so commodious for Hunting. That of Orle∣ance is the biggest and broadest. Besides those of Montargis, there are a great many in the Country of Maine, in Lower Britanny, in
Poictou, in Berry, in the Country of Angiers, in Boulonois, Vermandois, Picardy, in Angou∣mois, where the Forest of Brancome is of great extent. The Provinces of Burgundy, Dauphine, Languedock, Guyenne, and chiefly Rouergue and Quercy, abound also with great Woods. CHAP. II. Of the Air and Soil of France, and its various Productions. FRANCE every where enjoyeth a ve∣ry wholsom and temperate Air, whence it proceeds that the Plague and contagious Diseases are not so frequent and dangerous there as in other Countries. She is praised for her Fertility from all imes, not only in her fair and spacious Plains, and in her Vallies, but also in her Mountains, which are Cultivated and bring forth Corn in such abundance; that besides the Provision of her Inhabitants, Spain is supplied with it from Burgundy and Langue∣doc. To these Provinces ought to be added those of Normandy, Beausse, Poictou, Xainconge, Picardy, which are also very plentiful in Corn. All sorts of Wines grow in France, and such as are Excellent too: Britany, Nor∣mandy,
and Picardy, by reason of the cold Air produce none; but all the other Pro∣vinces do abound with it. Those of Beausse grow especially about Orleance, and Toury: An∣jou has her White-Wines, which are in a par∣ticular Esteem; Those of Burgundy are sold off at Baulne, Sens, and Auxerre, whereof great Quantities are brought to Paris. Guy∣enne is very well provided with Wines, but those of Grave at Bourdeaux, those of Gailla and Rabestens, are most esteemed; and by the Garonne, Charante, and Loire, are Tran∣sported to England, Flanders, and Germany. The Muscadine Wines of Frontignan, and other Places near Montpellier in Languedoc, are carried to Paris, and Foreign Nations. The Salt-Pits make the Third Wealth of that Kingdom, in which they are both good and plentiful. The King draws vast Revenues out of them, for the Inhabitants of every Province are furnished therewith at a very high Rate; and they are exported to Foreign Nations, as the Switzers, Dutch, English, and other Northern People. The Salt Pits of Languedoc at Pecais are the excellentest of all. There are some in Provence, Poictou, Xaintonge, Brouage, whither the Dutch come to fetch them. The Hemp and Linnen of Lower Britany, Calis, Berry, Quercy, Rouergue, and other Places, bring likewise a great Trade, and a power of Money into France: Hreof
are made Cables and Sails for Shipping, with a prodigious quantity of Cloath, which is carried very far. There are but some of her Provinces that produce Oyls, whose Air is the hottest and sweetest; Such as are Provence and Languedoc: Of these is a great Trade, not only in the very Kingdom, but even amongst Strangers. Fine Wool abounds in several Places of the Kingdom, especially in Berry, Soloigne, Normandy, and Languedoc; in all which Provinces very good and fine Cloaths are Woven, with Serges that are carried all over the Kingdom; and into Spain, Italy, Piedmont, and others Nations. She abounds in all manner of Fruit: In Normandy, Britany, and Picardy, is a huge quantity of Apples, of which they make Cyder, that supplies the want of Wine. Pears and other Winter-Fruit are better in these Provinces, and the Isle of France, where the Air is thickest, than in those that are more to the South; Which on the other hand are plentiful in choice Raisins, Figgs, Granads, Musk-Mellons, Apricots, Peaches, Nectarins, Almonds, and Nutts. Chesnuts are in the most Mountainous Countries; such as are Dauphiné, the Cevennes, Langue∣doc, Auvergne, the Country of Limoges, and Perigord. Wood is found there in some Places, which is Exported into several Fo∣reign Countries to Dye in Blue. Several of her Provinces do bear Saffron. Silk-Worms
are fed in Languedoc, Provence, Dau∣phiné, at Tours, at Caen in Normandy; and for this purpose a great number of Mul∣berry-Trees are kept. She is not lacking in good Pastures, both in the even and hilly Soil, to feed Cattle; whence comes abundance of Meat, as also Milk, Butter and Cheese: Capons, Pullets, and all manner of Fowl are here in Store; And Turky-Cocks and Hens are fed by Flocks; Hares, Conies, Partridges, and Thrushes do swarm. There is Rice to be seen in Provence, Pulse of all sorts, Flowers, Herbs, and Simples; Rose∣mary, Juniper, Myrtle-Trees, Sage, and all other Plants are to be found in it. Box grows to a great thickness in Normandy, Languedoc, and other Places, wherewith are made several small Moveables for Service, which Strangers make use of. Stones do grow in the Quarries; And here are ve∣ry fine Slates, especially in Anjou; and Marbles in Foix, and in some Places of Lan∣guedoc. All big Beasts for Game, as Fallow Deers, Chamois, Stags, Wild-Goats, are to be found in her Forrests; besides several good Races of Horses, of Burgundy, Norman∣dy, Britany, Auvergne, Poictou, the Country of Limoges, Gascony, Foix, and Languedoc; yet they are not so strong as those of Ger∣many, whence they are brought to draw Carts and Coaches. Spain has Mules from Auvergne and Gevaudan.
The Corn and Wines of France, with the Salt-Houses, and other Wares, are the most assured Mines she has; yet those of Gold and Silver are not wanting, though they are not wrought at. And it is not to be doubted but that in the Pyreneans, and other Moun∣tains of Auvergne, Rouergue, Gevaudan, Lan∣guedoc, and in the Cevennes, may be found Veins of Gold and Silver; as Germans who have visited and found them out have Related. There are Mines of Iron in Au∣vergne and Britany, of Coals, Lead, Pewter, Azur, Copperas, &c. in other Places. Add to these the Mineral Waters, as those of Pougues, Mayne, Bourbon, Vals, and the Baths of Hot Waters at Vichy, Barlaruc, Bagneux, Encausse, &c.
CHAP. III. Of the Inhabitants of France, and of their Language. THE French are Endowed with more Virtuos than Vices, by the Confession even of Strangers, who praise them for their Charity, hospitality, Courtesie, Valour, and Bravery; and for their being fit, and as 'twere, born to all that they are minded to Undertake in Learning, War, or Mecha∣nicks; wherein they very Expeditiously imi∣tate whatever they see perform'd by Stran∣gers. They are very cleanly in their Diet and Apparel, and very apt in the one or the other to go beyond their Means, Quality, and Birth; which, by comparing them to Spaniards, Italians, and other Nations, has been taken notice of. Their Cloathing, as to the Making, is never certain, no more as to the Mode then as to the Stuff, wherein continually they change, at least from year to year. The Men here are Comelier and Stronger, and of a finer size than Spaniards and Italians, but not then the Germans, Dutch, or Eng∣lish. As to the Women, they are Hand∣somer In some Provinces than others; For in Normandy, Picardy, and on this side the Loire, they are commonly more agreeable
than in the ancient Aquitain; that is, in Auvergne, Perigord, the Country of Limoges, Gascony, and Ʋpper Languedoc. The other part of Guienne, especially at Bourdeaux, part of Dauphiné, Lower Languedoc, and Provence, shew more pleasing Faces, and even exquisite Beauties: As we have said that the French Man renders himself fit for every Thing, he is chiefly so in Arms and War-fare: He likewise gives himself over to Study, Eloquence, to all Arts, and to Merchandize: He carries freely his Trade to Foreign Nations, and there Manures the Land, and knows not to be Lazy: He is very Industrious, and Works merrily, though he is found fault with for not being Patient and willing to endure in War. The French Nobility are above all most rare Horsemen, and have a particular Care of their Honour, even to excess: witness, the damnable custom of Duels, which the Edicts of the present Prince have not yet been able totally to suppress. The People of France are generally Meek and Good every where, except in some few places, where they are a little too Blunt and Rustick. The Vulgar bears an extream Respect to great Persons, whether they be of the Nobility, Officers of Justice, or of the Revenues. Ecclesiasticks, and other Men of Long Gown, are especially Honoured; And there is hardly any Nation in the World that has so many Officers of all sorts
as the Kingdom of France. The Merchant, nay, and the very Tradesman, if at any time he becomes Wealthy, pushes his Children to it: And into several Parliaments of France, and other Courts of Justice, the Nobility Sues for Offices too; whence comes that in∣finite number of literate Men, though their Reward be but small, and that all Offices be Sold; which is not usual in other States of Europe. Thence also proceeds a swarm of Advocates, Sollicitors, Registers, Notaries, and other Men of Business, whose number has been extraordinarily increas'd by the late Edicts of Lewis XIV, and his Creation for Money of an incredible number of new Officers, which must needs impoverish the Kingdom, and bring it at last to an utter Ruin. For either these new Offices will be suppress'd in time of Peace, and consequent∣ly a great many Families will be Ruin'd that have bestow'd their ready Money, and some their Estates upon these Employments: Or, if they be continued, the common Peo∣ple will be oppress'd by the multitude of Officers, and the number of Merchants, Trades and Husbandmen mightily dimi∣nish'd. Another great Abuse that may prove at last the Ruin of France, is the extraordi∣nary increase of the Gentry; For whereas in England, younger Brothers even of the greatest Noblemen make no difficulty of
becoming Merchants, nay and Tradesmen too, if they have no inclination to Learn∣ing: The youngest Son of a simple Gen∣tleman in France would account it a great Dishonour to his Birth to do any thing but to wear a Gown, or a Sword; which makes that the French Gentry, who is almost as numerous as the other Inhabitants, can hard∣ly subsist in time of Peace. Besides the Faults which the French have common, with other Nations, as to be too much given to Play, to Women, Debau∣chery, Blasphemies, and Cursings, it cannot be deny'd but that they are Hasty and Cho∣lerick; However you will find amongst 'em very few instances of those secret and awful Revenges that are so often practis'd by some of their Neighbours. As to their Levity, we may in their behalf make use of Charles the Fifth's saying, That they are Wise with∣out making any shew of it: For though they are not so Crafty as the Italians, nor so Vain and Proud as the Spaniards, yet do they not want Policy and Cunning. Finally the French are very Religious, and have al∣ways feared their Gods; and whatever Re∣ligion they Embraced, they firmly stick'd to it. The frequent Wars which they have Undertaken or Suffered upon this account, shew the Truth of this Assertion. They are very Respectful to Ladies, and give them large Liberty; neither do they shut them
up as the Italians and Spaniards do; whence it comes that they are cordially Beloved and served by their Wives; and that the Visits and Practises of young Women end generally in a happy Wedlock. The French Tongue for the most part is a Branch of the Latin: The Romans be∣coming Masters of the Country, and intro∣ducing their Laws in it, changed the Speech of the Natural Inhabitants, or by little and lit∣tle made them loose it. If the German Tongue had been there spoken before, or the Bri∣tish, they were at last totally routed, and a kind of corrupted Latin took their place. Now a days each Province has its peculiar manner of Speaking and Dialect; However there is still a difference of Speech betwixt the Provinces on this side the Loire, and those beyond it: The first Speak French, and the last Gascon, taking this Word as usually taken at Paris; for those of Languedoc and Dauphiné, Provence, and Guyenne, the Latin Tongue having left deeper Footsteps of its Residence in those four Provinces than a∣mong the other French, whose Language is purer, especially about Blois, Orleance, and Paris.
CHAP. IV. Of the Riches, Strength, and Govern∣ment of France. THE Kingdom of France is Rich and Po∣tent by its Situation, by the great num∣bers of its Cities and Inhabitants, and by its Wares of all Sorts, of which there is a great Trade. As to the Riches, the King takes what he pleases in his Taxes, Excise upon Salt, Impositions upon Merchandises that go out and are brought into France, be∣sides his Patrimony, whereupon the Kings have lived during a long time. The Reve∣nues of the Kingdom before the Dutch War of 1672, were deem'd to amount to 170000000 Livres, that is, about 15000000 Sterling, but have ever since still diminish'd, partly by the continual Taxes that impove∣rish the People, and partly by the stop which the Wars have put to Trade; but much more by the Persecution of the Protestants, which has made the price of the Lands con∣siderably fall, disturb'd the Traffick of the Realm, and depriv'd it of great Sums of ready Money, which the French Refugees have brought over with 'em into Foreign Coun∣tries. The French Monarchy strove many Ages before it came to that high Point of Gran∣deur to which it has attained of late. The
Weakness of Charlemaign's Successors, and the Incursions of the Normans, had reduced it to so narrow Limits, that the French King was hardly Sovereign in Paris. The Go∣vernors of the several Counties and Provinces taking hold of the occasion, made their Charges Hereditary; and soon after ren∣der'd themselves Lords of the Countries they Govern'd: So that France at that time was rather an Aristocracy, or a Confederacy of several Petty-Princes under the French King their Head, as Germany now is under the Emperor, then a Monarchy properly so call'd. But the Victories which Charles VII got over the English in the Fifteenth Age, during the Wars of the Houses of York and Lancaster, gave him means to Unite to his Crown the large Provinces of Guyenne and Normandy; together with Poictou, le Maine, and Tourain. Lewis XI. his Son and Succes∣sor, after the Death of Charles the Rsh, last Duke of Burgundy, in 1477, usurp'd upon his Sole Heiress Mary, Spouse of Maximi∣lian of Austria, the Dutchy of Burgundy and some part of Picardy. Charles VIII. and Lewis XII. by their Marriage with Ann Daughter to Francis II. late Duke of Bri∣tany, United that Dutchy to their Crown Anno 1514; Then it was that France began to look as a mighty Kingdom: So that Francis I. King of France, was a sit Match even for Charles V. Emperor and King of
Spain, Naples, and Sicily, Duke of Milan, and Lord of all the Low Countries, The ex∣tent of the French Kings Jurisdiction was yet increas'd by the Accession of Bearn or Lower Navarre, of which Henry IV. was in Possession when he came to that Crown; And by his Acquisition of the Province of Bresse, with the Lands of Bugey, Valromey, and the Bailwick of Gex, which he Ex∣changed with Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, for some Pretensions on the Marqui∣sate of Salusses in 1601. Lewis XIII. his Son Divested the Duke of Lorrain of his Dutchy; the Emperor and the King of Spain of a good part of Elzas and the Ne∣therlands; and this present King has not only Conquer'd the County of Burgundy, and the rest of Elzas, but push'd so far his Con∣quests in the Low Countries, that what now remains in the Hands of the King of Spain is not able to withstand him any long time. The Authority of the French Monarchs grew stronger and more absolute within their Kingdom, as the Bounds of it were extended without; at least in this latter Age. For in former times, even that mighty Em∣peror Charlemaign would do nothing without the Advice of his Barons; no, not so much as establish and endow a Bishoprick: and by their means it was, that his Son, Lewis the Pious, was re-inthron'd. The Power of the French Lords lasted not only under the Se∣cond
Race, but three or four Ages too under the Third. And as these petty Princes were extinguished, their Authority was transferr'd to the States of the several Provinces, under whose hands it remained, till the Civil Wars, under the pretence of Religion, gave a mighty check to it; and the shrewd Policy of the Cardinals Richelieu and Mazarine made it altogether arbitrary. Now the French Kings pretend that they are Emperors in France, as Bodin and du Tillet have endeavoured to prove; That their Authority is Absolute and Sove∣reign, and that as to the Temporal they have no other Superior than God alone, up∣on whom their Crown immediately depends, it not being in the Power of the Prelates of their Kingdom either to excommunicate them, or to publish them to be such. By reason of their Consecration, they are look'd upon to be of the Body of several Cathedral Churches in France, where they hold the Prebends. The nominating to Bishopricks, Abbeys, &c. belongs to them, even by the Pope's Consent, and the Concordat made be∣twixt Francis I. and Leo X. They alone can make Laws in their Kingdom, grant Favors and Pardons, naturalize Strangers, and legi∣timate Bastards. They build Colleges, Uni∣versities, Courts and Companies of Justice, create Offices, and provide for the same.
The Males only, by Salique Law, which the French call the Fundamental of the State, have Right to Succession, and the Crown always is devolved to the next Heir, that is, to the eldest Son of the King, and to the Issues of the eldest Infinitely. This First-born, during his Father's Life, is commonly called the Dauphin, by the Donative of Humbert, last Dauphin of Viennois, of his Lands of Dau∣phiné, to Philip of Valois, King of France, upon condition, that his eldest Son should be call'd Dauphin, and bear quarterly the Arms of France, with those of Viennois. It was in the year 1343. Philip at the in∣treaty of John his Son, who reigned after him, gave the Land to his Grandson, who reigned under the Name of Charles called the Wise, and was the first Son of France who bore the Title of Dauphin. The Arms of France are, Three Flowers de Luce Or, in a Field Azure. King Charles VI. reduced them to Three, his Predecessors having had them without number, contrary to the Custom even of the first Kings. The Consecration of the Kings is solemn∣ly performed at Rheims, where they are anointed with Oyl of the Holy Ampoule, kept religiously in the Abbey-Church of St. Remigius, whence it is carried under a Canopy by four Knights of the Holy Am∣poule, created by Clovis IV. The Royal Ornaments are kept at St. Denis, from King
St. Lewis's time. The twelve Peers of France assist at the Consecration; six whereof are Ecclesiastical, to wit, the Archbishop and Duke of Rheims, who consecrates the King; the Bishop and Duke of Laon, the Bishop and Duke of Langres, the Bishop and Earl of Bonvais, the Bishop and Earl of Chaalons, the Bishop and Earl of Noyon. The Six Lay Peers were formerly, the Duke of Burgundy, the Duke of Normandy, the Duke of Guyonne, the Earl of Tolouse, the Earl of Flanders, and the Earl of Champagne: but these Peers subsisting no more, they are represented by as many French Princes or Lords. The King's Guards are composed of two strange Nations, viz. Scots and Switzers, and of his French Subjects. The Scotch Guard is the first Company of the King's Guard du Corps. However, it ought to be observed, that this Name is but a remainder of the an∣cient Alliance between the Scotch and the French: for since the Reformation, and the Union of England and Scotland, there has hardly been a Scotch Man among these pre∣ended Scotch Guards. However, as this Company is the ancientest, so it enjoys the greatest Privileges, for their Captain pre∣cedes the three others, and begins always to sere the first Quarter of the Year; and when the Guard du Corps are quartered, they chuse the first Lodging. This Company was at first composed of 100 Gentlemen, or cho∣sen
Soldiers; 24 of whom have yet a good Stipend, are Privileged, and have at their Head the first Man at Arms of France, who makes the 25th; and these are the Archers of the Guard du Corps, who wear Hoquetons, or white Cassocks, covered with gilt Silver-Shells, whence they are commonly called Hoquetons. The three French Companies have been instituted by three several Kings, and wear upon their Arms and Cassocks the Livery, Colours and Devices of the Reigning Kings. Those that are called Exempts of the Guards, precede the other Archers; they wear nei∣ther Hoquetons nor Cassocks, and command the Guards in the absence of their Officers: They carry a Stick, as a Mark of their Pow∣er and Employment. The hundred Switzers wear the King's Livery, with a Halbert, and are cloathed after their own Country fashion. These four Companies have their Captains, who are all qualified Lords. And besides these, the King has a Regiment of Switzers, and another Re∣giment of French Guards, with all their Of∣ficers. These make as 'twere a small com∣pleat Army, kept ordinarily with a Company of Musqueteers, or Horse-Guards, whom King Lewis XIII. had instituted, and whose Head he was. During the Minority of the Kings, which ends so soon as they are 14 years old, a Re∣gent
or Protector was provided by the Ge∣neral States of the Kingdom, or by the Court of Parliament of Paris. He was com∣monly the King's nearest Kinsman, or the Queen his Mother, as Queen Catherine of Medicis was to King Charles IX. Queen Ma∣ry of Medicis to King Lewis XIII. But since the Monarchy is become Absolute, the Will of the deceased King has only been regarded. And Ann of Austria, Mother to K. Lewis XIV. now Reigning, carried the Regency against the Princes of the Blood, who disputed it with her, though they had the Parliament of Paris on their side, whence ensued a bloody War, in which the Queen and Cardinal Mazarine got the better of the Princes. Pa∣tents, Edicts and Arrests are expedited un∣der the Name of the King, with this Title, By the King, and Queen-Regent. The Queens of France have often been Crowned, whereof History gives several Ex∣amples. They were anointed with another Chrism than that of the Holy Ampoule. Queen Mary of Medicis was Consecrated and Crowned at St. Denis in the year 1610. on the 13th of May, by Cardinal de Joyeuse. In their Widowhood they have been formerly called White Queens, but that has not been used for some Ages. There is no sharing in the Royal House and Succession, since the Third Stock of the Kings of France; so that second Brothers
must be contented with a Patrimony in Land, bearing the Title of Dutchy, Peer∣dom, and County. They may have in their House such Officers as the King himself has, viz. Chancellor, Secretary, and others, with the Title of Grandees; and they are stiled Your Highness, as if they were Sovereign Princes. The youngest Sons of the French King subscribe only with the proper Name, as well as the King himself: but their Po∣sterity take their Title of the principal Coun∣try that makes up their Portions, as being henceforward accounted a separate Branch of the Princes of the Blood. The Daughters of the French Kings have not any other Portions than Sums of Money, instead of Lands, which they have had here∣tofore. It is They alone who properly are called Dames, or Ladies, in France. The Princes of the Blood who become Church-Men keep the Rank belonging to their Birth, and not to the Ecclesiastical Order. The King's Natural Sons have no share in the Succession either of the Crown or of the Royal Patrimony, but have an Entertainment at the King's Pleasure. They do not bear the Surname of France, but that of the Land given them, or of the Branch which they come from; as now the Duke of Longueville is called of Orleance, He or his Predecessors being descended from Lewis Duke of Orle∣ance, Brother to King Charles VI. The Duke
of Engoulême, was called de Valois, as being born of Charles IX. of the Branch of Valois: The Duke of Vendosme and his Issue bear the Name of Vendosme, because of that Land which King Henry IV. gave to their Fore-father. CHAP. V. Of the Chief Officers of the Crown and Kingdom. THE greatest Office of the King's House, is that of Grand Master of his House, before whom, all the Officers that serve therein take the Oaths, and whom they are to obey. There is a Chief Steward of the Household, and a Steward of the House∣hold in Ordinary, and others that serve quarterly, having a Stick in their Hands, set in Silver gilt at both Ends. They precede the Serving Gentlemen, when the Kings Meat goes by. There is a Grand Provost of France, or Provost of the Houshold, which is a very ancient and authorized Office: Justice is exercised, under his Name, by two Lieu∣tenants, the one in a long, and the other in a short Gown, by Serjeants, and by fifty Archers, cloathed in Hoquetons or Cassocks of Livery, that follow him, attend the Court,
and prosecute the Guilty six Leagues there∣abouts. He also makes the Procedures of criminal Causes betwixt the Officers of the King's Houshold, and others that follow the Court; and when the King is on his March, he sets a Price upon Bread, Wine, Flesh, Hay, Oates, and other Provi∣sions. The Place of great Chamberlain is also very ancient, honourable and priviledged. He is Superintendant of the King's Cham∣ber, of his Cloathings and Moveables. He lyes at the King's Feet, when he holds his Bed of Justice, or at the General States of the Kingdom, when the Kings used to call them. There are four Chief Gentlemen of the King's Chamber that serve quarterly, a Ma∣ster of the Wardrobe, a Master of the Ceremonies, a Leader of Ambassadors, who all take the Oaths in the King's Hands. There was formerly a Grand Queux, or a Great Master of the King's Kitchin; but this Charge is now abolished, there having been none since Lewis of Prie, Lord of Bu∣zanco who died under Charles VIII. An. 1490. There are yet four Masters Queux or Cooks, who serve quarterly in the King's Kitchin. The Great Master of the Pantry, and the Grand Butler, or Cup-bearer of France, do
discharge their Duty but in great Solemni∣ties, as at the King's Coronation, and the like; but there are Gentlemen of the King's Table, and Cup-bearers in ordinary, who make the Assay of the Meat and Drink that is presented to the King. There is a great and little Stable of the King, the Gentlemen of the Little, pass up∣on the King when he is on Horseback. The Great Master of the Horse is constitu∣ted upon them all, and bears the Sword in a Velvet Scabbard, marked with Flower-de-Luces, on great Solemnities, before his Prince. The Marshals of France judge of all Military Causes, and have their Lieutenants and Provosts to inform against, and seize upon Vagabonds and Deserters. They or∣dinarily wear a Stick, as a Badge of their Dignity, and when they receive it from the King, they take the Oath of Allegiance to him, in the High Court of Parliament at Paris. The Seat of their Jurisdiction is at the Marble-Table in the Palace of that Court, where their Power is very conside∣rable, since the Suppression of the Charge of Lord Constable, upon whom they were formerly depending. However, this Pow∣er is somewhat counterballanced by their great Increase in Number of late years. The Lord Chancellor is the Head of all the Courts of Justice, and presides in all
the King's Councils in his Absence. Be∣sides, he cannot be destituted, but by Death or Trespass. And therefore the Kings, to keep this great Minister in awe, have a Lord Keeper of the Seals, whom they cause to discharge the Chancellor's Functions, by giving him the Seals; in which Occasion, the Chancellor retains no more but the bare Name of his Office. He has under him the Masters of the Requests, who serve quarterly, judge the Differences between the Officers of the Crown, and pre∣pare such Matters as are to come before the King's Great Council. This Council is now a Soveraign Court of Justice, whose Sentences are executed throughout the whole Kingdom; it's com∣posed of the Chancellor and eight Masters of Requests. From this Court issue all the Placates, Ordinances and Proclamations. There are also a Council of State, a Coun∣cil of the Exchequer, a Privy-Council, to de∣termine Appeals and Contests about the Ju∣risdiction of Judges, and the Cabinet Coun∣cil, who manages all the Affairs, and is as the Soul of the Realm. Besides the twelve ancient Peers of France, there are near a hundred more created since two or three Centuries; but though they have the Priviledge to sit in the Parlia∣ment at Paris, and not to be judged by any other Court, yet they fall short of
the Lustre and Power of the first Peers. The Knights of the Order of St. Michael instituted by Lewis XI. in 1469, are in no extraordinary Repute; and this Order is now only considered as a step to that of the Holy Ghost, instituted by Henry III. in 1570, whose Knights are fewer in number and more respected, it being given as a token of special Favour, and to such as are already of St. Mi∣chael's Order, and considered by their Birth or Merits. I supersede to speak of the Lord Admi∣ral, the Vice-Admirals, and Rear-Admi∣rals; Of the Generals, Lieutenant Gene∣rals, Masters de Camp, Collonels, &c. Of the Masters of the Ordnance, of the Lord Treasurers, Counsellors, and Secretaries of State; of the Ambassadors, Lord Almoner, Under Almoners, Chaplains in Ordinary, and other Officers, either Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical, who are little or nothing dif∣ferent from the like in England. But I must not forget to speak a word of the King's Confessor, who, though he has ori∣ginally no more Power than the Clerk of the Closet here; yet, through the supersti∣tious Condescension of the late Kings, and the shrewd Management of those cunning Politicians, Cotton, Annat and La Chaize, are become so powerful, as to get into their Hands, the Direction of the most impor∣tant
Affairs of the Kingdom, under pre∣tence of Conscience. When the Jesuits were recalled into France, King Henry IV. was advised to take one of these Fathers for his Confessor, who should be as an Hostage for the Fidelity of the whole Club. But this very Caution proved his Ruine, for Fa∣ther Cotton, whom he pitched upon, having first seduced his Queen, laid his Plot so well with Spain and his Fellow-Jesuits, that the King was murthered by Ravaillac: And that Henry's Ghostly Father and Queen had a Hand in this horrid Business, can hardly be doubted, after the Insinuations the sincere Mezeray gives of it. There are two Charges in France, the like I don't know that we have in England, or at least they are not here in such a Con∣sideration as in that Kingdom. The Offi∣cers who discharge them, are always Counts, or Dukes, or Princes of the Blood, and are called the Great Huntsman, and the Great Falconer of France. They have large Ap∣pointments, Gifts and Profits, and several Officers under them, whose Places are at their Disposal. The Captain General of the Hunting-Nets, and the Great Wolf-Hunter, keep likewise an honourable Rank, and all four are sworn by the King himself. I shall finish this Chapter with mention∣ing the Way of administring Justice in France. Suits are for the most part com∣menced
before the ordinary Judges of the Place, which are called Royal, or Seigneurial, according as the Town or Village depends mmediately upon the King, or a private Lord, except in some particular Cases, or when one of the Parties concerned is ex∣empted from their Jurisdiction. Thence hey are brought before the Baylives or Se∣eschals, who are Chief Justices of a certain Precinct, called Baylwick, Vriguory, Provost∣ship, or Seneshalship. These Baylives are Noble Men, who bear a Sword instead of a Gown, and seldom discharge their Office themselves, but have two Lieutenants un∣der them, one for Civil, and the other for Criminal Causes. The last, and Supream Jurisdiction, is he High Court of Parliament, each of which is composed of ten, twelve, or fifteen Presidents, and well near eighty or an hun∣dred Counsellors. The Power of this Court, s yet very great, because of the many No∣ble and Priviledged Men, whose Causes im∣mediately resort to it. But it was much greater in times past, especially that of the Parliament of Paris, which was in some manner a standing Assembly of the General States: For no Edict or Proclamation of the King had the Force of a Law before t was enteriné, or ratify'd by them; and they might reject such as were not, in their Judgments, fit for the Publick Good. A
Boldness of which History furnisheth us with several Examples, even under the most powerful and respected Princes, as Lewis XI. Francis I. and Henry IV. But the late Ministers, Richelieu, Mazarin, Col∣bert and Louvois, have so far undermined the Authority of these Courts, that they not only dare not reject any of the King's E∣dicts, but dare not so much as make use of the Word Enteriné, their Style being now Lû & verifié en Parlement: That is, Read and acknowledged for a true Writing, or Or∣der of the King. The Intendants are the Men, whom the Promoters of Arbitrary Power have made a special use of to bring down the Power of Parliaments. They are a kind of Overseers, whom the French Kings began to send into the several Provin∣ces of their Dominions fifty or sixty years ago, and who, under pretence of setling the King's Revenues, reconciling Differences about it, or seeing Justice well done, have considera∣bly encroached upon the Jurisdiction of Par∣liaments, without that the Complaints of the last were ever regarded at Court. The preposterous Zeal of these Magistrates a∣gainst the Reformed, was none of the least Causes of their Decay; for as often as any Suit, wherein both Churches seemed to be concerned, came before them, we were sure to get an Arrêt de Partage; or that the Pro∣testant President and Counsellors would
give their Voice in favour of the Defenders, whereas the Roman Catholicks would de∣cide for the Plaintiffs, how ill grounded soe∣ver their Actions might be. This of course brought the Decision of the Matter before the King's Council; so that our Reformed seeing that no Justice was to be hoped from the Parliament, made an Interest to remove the Cause before the King's Council, that they might avoid expences, which many other imitated, not without the secret Sup∣port of the Court. CHAP. VI. Of the Religion of the French. THE Reader must not here expect an Account of the Bardes and Druides, or of the Idolatrous Worship of the ancient Gauls; neither am I minded to assert, or con∣fute what has been said concerning St. De∣nis, the Areopagite, being Bishop of Paris, or St. Martial, Bishop of Limoges, and both Apostles of the Gauls, about the Year 70. By whomsoever the Christian Religion has been first preached in France, sure it is, that it was early enough, since in the middle of the second Century, there were two con∣spicuous Churches at Lyons and Vienne, who endured a long and bloody Perse∣cution,
under the Empire of Marc. Aurele. An. 176. By what Means and Degrees Popery corrupted Christianity, is not a My∣stery in this Protestant Kingdom; but I have some Observations to make upon the Progress and present State of that Supersti∣tious Worship in France. It's well known that Superstition be∣gan to creep into the Church by the over∣great Honour the Faithful rendered to those Christian Heroes, the Martyrs, who, con∣trary to the Heathen, that got a Name by their being troublesome to others, signaliz∣ed themselves by their own Sufferings. And with great reason were they so much reve∣renced, since the Pagan Antiquity, which mentions so many Hercules, can hardly sup∣ply us with an Anaxarchus. While these couragious Athletes lay in Prison, Sinners were released of their Penances upon their Intercession; after their Death, their Tombs were the Gathering-place of the Faithful, and when God had given Peace to his Church, Temples were built upon, or near their Graves, and called after their Names. And as the Vulgar doth not know how to keep the golden middle Path, hates or loves, despises or praises to excess; So this due and lawful Remembrance soon degenerated into an Idolatrous Worship. Perhaps at the beginning it had been easie to Clergy-Men to put a Stop to that Superstition; but the
Generality found, it seems, their Reckon∣ing by it, and pious Men durst not oppose the Current. However the Gauls had the Honour to produce one Jovinian, a Monk of Milan, who endured a long Persecution for openly disproving the creeping Practices of Coelibacy, Vows, and the Veneration of Reliques, in the time of St. Ambrose. But a greater Man than Jovinian whom neither Italians nor Spaniards can challenge, is Vi∣gilantius; for he was born at Calaguri, a small Borough near Cominges in Gascony. True it is, that St. Jerom disputed against him with much Violence; but the Learned know, that the Conduct of this Father is not so much commended as his Science; and not∣withstanding his Out-crys, Vigilantius qui∣etly died in the Communion of the Church, and left a great many Disciples, who seem to have been the Fore-fathers of the Albi∣genses; as those of Jovinian maintained the Truth in the Churches of Italy, till Claudius, Archbishop of Turin arose, and was succeeded by the Vaudois. The second Step of Superstition, was the Worship of Images, which when the Em∣perors of the East could no longer oppose, God raised Charlemaign in the West, who caus'd it to be condemned, together with the second Council of Nice; in another held at Francfort, Ann. 794. At the same time Agobard, Archbishop of Lyons, and
Claudius of Turin, preach'd and wrote again these Idolatrous Practices; which prevail' at last, during the Weakness and Division of Charlemaign's House and Successors. Transubstantiation was a casual Off¦spring of Image-Worship; for when th Orthodox told the Iconolatre's that God' Son had left us but an Image of himself namely, the Holy Sacrament, which not∣withstanding he never commanded to a∣dore; the last, after many Subterfuges, final∣ly bethought themselves of this Answer  That the consecrated Bread and Wine were not a simple Image of our Lord, but his true Body and Blood. Against this strange Doctrine, Bertram, or Ratramn, Priest and Monk of Corby in Picardy, composed a Book about the Year 850. and a little after, John Scot Erigeene, Professor of Divinity in the University of Paris, wrote of the same Matter, both by Order of Charles the Bald, Emperor. By the Opposition of these great Men, this monstrous Tenet was somewhat suppressed; but as it lifted up its Head a∣gain, after their Death, Berengarius, Arch-Deacon of Angers, arose for the Truth, in 1035; was a long time maintained by several French Bishops, against the Power and Persecution of the Popes, and dy'd in the Communion of the Church Ann. 1088, not without solemnly recalling the nonsensical Confession which the Popes Ni∣colas
II. and Gregory VII. had forced upon him. After Berengarius, the Assertors of the Truth had more dreadful Storms to go through; however, France was never want∣ing such Christian Heroes. Some rejected all the Popish Errors, as Peter de Bruys, and Henry of Tolose, the Waldenses and Albigen∣ses. Some confuted Transubstantiation, as John Dr. of Paris, known under the Name of Joannes de Parisiis; others bewailed the Corruption of the Church, as Nicolas of Clemangis; others inveighed against the Monks, their Luxury and Covetousness, especially William of St. Amour. As to those that opposed the Tyranny and Usurpations of the Popes, it would be too tedious to e∣numerate them, and I refer my Reader to the Learned Richer and Du Pin. De potest. Eccles. L. 1. c. 3. De Antiq. Eccles. Discipl. Diss. 7. The French Soyl being so well prepared to receive the Seed of the Gospel, 'tis not to be wondered at, if the Disciples of Luther, and the Writings of Calvin caused such a Harvest in that Kingdom; one ought ra∣ther to be surpriz'd that it was not fruit∣ful every where, and that, against all Ap∣pearance, in less than 200 Years, the Ro∣man Tare has outwardly covered the whole Realm again. I say, against all appearance, for it seems somewhat strange, that some
Northern Countries have generally i¦brac'd, and hitherto preserved the Refo¦mation, and that the quick-sighted Fren have suffered themselves to be imposed u¦on so far, as to let Popery and Tyran prevail, after they had spilt so much Bloo to obtain at least a Liberty of Conscienc I will not presume to enter the Secrets  God: but as the ways of his Providen may sometimes be discovered after the ¦vent, and the Faults of our Fore-fathers,  the Frauds of our Enemies may make  wiser for the future, so it will not, m¦thinks, be amiss, to observe the Causes tha have put a stop to the Reformation i France. 1. In most of the Countries that reforme themselves, the Church-Revenues were no all disposed of, according to the pious In¦tent of the Givers; but a good part wa appropriated to Secular Uses; which alie¦nated the Hearts of the Clergy in othe Countries, and gave them occasion to insi∣nuate to the People, that Covetousness, an not the Love of the Truth, was the chie Motive of their Change. This Inconveni∣ence might have been prevented by some Foundations for promoting Learning and Piety, and erecting up Schools, Colledges, and Places for the Retirement of the Learn∣ed, who had served the Church a certain time, or were fitter for Writing than Preaching.
2 Calvin chancing to light upon Geneva, established there a Form of Ecclesiastical Go∣vernment, very suitable to a Common∣wealth, but not at all to a Kingdom: The French Protestants however set up the fame amongst them, which was pardonable enough during the Persecution, since they had not the Means to keep up Bishops, and that they had been more exposed than simple Ministers, both because of their Dignity, and their Opposition to the Roman Pre∣lates. But when God had given them a Protestant King, who conquered a good part of his Realm with the Dint of his Sword; when so many of the Bishops and Nobility resorted to Henry IV: 'tis a won∣der that his Presbyterian Ministers never thought of submitting to the Prelates, pro∣vided the Prelates would submit to the Truth. 3. Thence arose another Evil, for there being no Means of Subsistence for Dignita∣ries amongst the Reformed, no, not so much as an honorable Recompence for the Learned; after the Separation was made, very few came over to them out of the Ro∣man Church, and a greater Number of their Ministers was seduced to the Popish Tenets. 4. To cheat People of their Money, the Monks had invented, or adorned with fabu∣lous Stories, the Doctrine of Purgato∣ry,
and made them believe at the sa time, that they might redeem themsel either with Money, or painful Satisfactio which the Reformers perceiving, drove perhaps too forwardly the Doctrines absolute Predestination, and free Grace. T subtil Controvertists of the Roman Chur let not slip this Occasion of ridiculing th Adversaries, and traduced them as Enem to good Works, and such as overthrew  Moral of the Gospel. These Accusatio how false soever they were, being set up  able Pens, were sufficient to amuse the V¦gar, and to hinder them from opening th Eyes to see the gross Errors of Pope which in the mean time were not urged. 5. It's well known, that there has bee pretended Holy League in France, for mai¦taining the Roman Catholick Religion, a that the Dukes of Guise were Chieftena and Promoters of it; but they who ha not read the Books of those Times, are  so well acquainted with the Artifices th used to draw in so many of the Nobilit They perswaded them that the Huguen were Commonwealth-men, who intend to subvert the Kingdom, and dismember  into several petty Principalities and Repu¦licks, just as their Brethren the Switzers,  the Free Towns and Princes of German By these Insinuations, great and aspiri Men, who cannot make considerable Fo¦tunes
under a weak Government, stuck close them. 6. As to the last Persecution of the French testants, as it has been long, and in a nner insensible, during Thirty or Forty ars, but at the latter end extreamly cru∣ sudden, and unfore-seen, so it could  be prevented, either by any Forreign wer, or any Insurrection within. The ench Cardinals and Jesuits no less cruel d cunning than the Wolves of the Fable, ok from the Reformed their Places of rety, seduced their great Men, invaded eir Priviledges, and fell upon Dragoon∣g them; when they were disarmed, and t of state of making any Defence: But will smart them, I hope, before it be long, or besides that, God never left such a per∣iousness unpunished; they are so far om having extirpated the Reformation, at they have spread it farther, by mingling e Protestants amongst them. And any one ay easily suppose, that, during the Separati∣n, the Reformed had not so many fair Occa∣ons of instilling into them a secret Horror r superstitious Practices, as they have now. And let this suffice to the First Part of ur Description: I had resolved to follow  the Second Part, the ordinary Division f France, in Twelve Governments; but nce I considered that this Method would e troublesome both to me and my Readers,
and perhaps make me overskip some of th Countries included in the general Gover¦ments: Besides that, there are now Ninetee and not Twelve of them, so that I thought more convenient to begin at one End,  with Lorrain, then pursuing my way Nort¦wards, to make the Grand Tour of Franc and go out of it through the County  Burgundy, than to puzzle my self and ¦thers with unnecessary Bounds and Div¦sions. However, I will not fail to ma the Extent of each Government, and th Countries belonging to it.
A DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE. PART II. WHEREIN ach of its great Provinces, smaller Coun∣ties, Cities, Towns, Royal Houses, Fo∣rests, Mountains, Coasts, Rivers and Lakes are Geographically and Historically described. CHAP. I. LORRAIN, the Three Bishopricks, and the Dutchy of BAR. THIS Province is called thus from Lothaire, Grand-Son of Lewis the Meek, Emperour and King of France, who was Soveraign thereof, when it was far greater, and bore the Name of Kingdom.
The whole Dutchy belongs now to th King of France, who has usurped the grea¦est part of it upon Charles III. the true S¦veraign, and forced him to make over  Right to him. The present Bounds of th Province, are Elzas and the Palatinate o the East, Champaign on the West, Luxe¦bourg and the Electorate of Triers on th North, and the County of Burgundy on th South. The Inhabitants are Warlike, an the Country for the most part covered wit Woods and Forests, yet well stock'd wit Corn, Vines and Minerals; nor does it wa pleasant Rivers, and good Waters. Its Town are well built, strong and rich. NANCY the Capital of Lorrain was the or¦dinary Residence of the Dukes, whose Cour was crouded with great Numbers of Nobilit and Gentry. It was here that those Princes Riches made a fine Sight, especially two Ta¦bles of a great Length and Breadth, one Mar¦ble, the other Silver-gilt, or washed over wit Gold, with several Figures and Emblems and Latin Verses most artificially engrave upon them. There were also costly Hang¦ings, and the Effigies of a Man in Wood whose Muscles seemed to move, and wer interwoven with so much Art, that it wa a perfect Wonder. The Dukes Tombs ar likewise here, amongst which that of Re¦natus, who overcame the Burgundians, is mo considerable; that of Charles Duke of Bu¦gundy
is there also. The Arsenal was well pro∣vided with all Necessaries, and its Fortificati∣ons seemed to render it impregnable, before the French took it. There is a Bog or fenny Place pretty nigh the Town, in the midst of which, is a Cross of Stone, with an Inscription in French, that marks the Defeat of the Burgun∣dians under Charles the Rash, their last Duke, An. 1477. The Town is situated about an hundred Steps from the Meurte, which dis∣charges it self into the Moselle, four or five Miles from thence. Nancy is divided into Old and New Town; the Old has the Pala∣ce of the Dukes, but the New is greater, and better fortified. The French destroy'd its Fortifications in 1664, and afterwards repaired them. There is a Chamber of Ac∣counts, and a Seneshalship. This Province has also Bar le Duc, Capi∣tal of the Dutchy of that Name: It was built by Frederick, Duke of the Mozellane Lorrain, in 951, and fortified with a strong Castle, to prevent the Incursions of the Champenois. There were several other strong Places, amongst the rest, Marsal and Moyen∣vic, whose Fortifications the French have destroyed, as well as the Castle of Bar le Duc. Near Moyenvic are commodious Salt-Pits. I must not forget the three Bishopricks taken from Charles V. in 1552. viz. Toul, Mets and Verdun, because they are included in this Province, and are nearly ty'd to it,
especially in what concerns Spiritual Juris∣diction, though as to the Civil, they make a separate Government. Toul, Tullum Leucorum, is a Town well built, situated upon the Mosell, twelve Miles from Nancy. It's pretty big, and boasts of St. Bernard's Tomb, over which is a Crown extraordinary well worked; its Diocess is pretty large. Verdun, Verodunum, a very pleasant City, situated in a fruitful and good Soil on the River Meuse, Twenty six Miles from Mets, Its Bishops take the Title of Counts of Ver∣dun, and Princes of the Holy Empire. It has a strong Citadel and Baylwick, and is renowned for its Aniseed. Mets is also a very pleasant Town, both for its Houses, its Cathedral of St. Stephen, a true Master-piece of Architecture, and the River Moselle and Seille that wash it. It is a very ancient City, since Ce∣sar, Plinius, Tacite and Ptolomy mention it under the Name of Divodurum Mediomatri∣cum, and speak of it as the chief Town of that Country, and of the People called Medio∣matrices, now Les habitans du pais Messin. In process of time, it became still more and more Famous; and under the French Kings of the first Race, was Capital of the Kingdom of Austrasia, called also the King∣dom of Mets; since Theodoric, Son to Clovis the Great, had chosen it for the Seat of his
Empire. In the Decay of Charlemaign's House, Mets erected it self into a free Im∣perial Town, under the Government of its own Magistrates, who had Power of Life and Death, and of Coining of Money. And so jealous they were of their Liberty, that Charles VII. King of France, besieging them n 1444, on the behalf of Renatus Duke of Lorrain, they rather chose to see their Country wasted during seven Months, and to redeem themselves with 300000 Livres, than to loose their Liberty. Thus they kept it till the Year 1552, that their City was taken by the Lord of Montmorency, High Constable of France. In the Month of October, of the same Year, Charles V. be∣sieged it in vain, and as it was the last Un∣dertaking of this Emperour, it gave occasi∣on to this Verse, alluding to the modern Name of this Town in Latin, Metae. Siste viam Metis, haec tibi meta datur. There is seen in St. Stephen's Church, a Ves∣sel of Red Porphyry, ten Foot long, and all of a piece, which serves to keep their Holy Water in. This great Town has no Sub∣urbs, and is all surrounded with a strong Rampier, and deep and wide Ditches, that can be filled at pleasure, only opening a Sluce to let in the Moselle: Yet for its great∣er Strength, a Cittadel with four Bastions,
have been built there of late. The People are well bred, Civil and Numerous, and drive a great Trade into Germany. The Circumference of the Town is pretty big; its Bishop entitles himself Prince of the Em∣pire, and has four Arch-Deacons under him, with 623 Parishes. In 1633, Lewis XIII. established there a Parliament, which the Commissioners of the Emperour opposed, saying, That the French King was only Protector of the three Bishopricks, and not absolute Sovereign thereof; and conse∣quently, that he might not deprive the Inhabi∣tants of their ancient Laws, and the Right they had to bring their Appeals before the Im∣perial Chamber at Spire. These Complaints lasted to the Peace of Munster, in which the three Bishopricks and Moyenvic were yield∣ed unconditionally and for ever to the Crown of France, save only the Right of Me∣tropolitan to the Archbishop of Triers. This Parliament, as it was the last, so it was at first the least considerable next to that of Pau, the three Bishopricks only resorting to it. But since the Conquest of Lorrain, Luxemburg, and adjacent Coun∣tries, its Jurisdiction is mightily inlarged. It made a great Noise some time after the Peace of Nimeguen, about the Year 1680 when the French King erected there a Chamber of Dependencies, whose Judges summoned the Spanish Subjects to come and
swear Allegiance to the French King, under pretence that they were depending upon some of his new Conquests. By this Shrewdness, he got more Lands during the Peace, than he had done in the War. The Dukedom of Luxemburg is under the Governour of Lorrain; but I supersede to make a particular Description of it, be∣cause the Low-Countries deserve a Treatise by it self. I shall only observe, that there is a Soveraign Council in the Capital, whereunto the whole Province resorts. At a League's distance from the Town, is a Village called Jovy, where are still to be seen some Remains of an Aqueduct, built by the Romans, with Arches of a fine white Stone, cut in Form of Bricks, and above Sixty Foot high. Besides this, there is another considerable Place near Nancy, called St. Nicolas, that should deserve rather to be called one of the greatest Towns of Lorrain, for the Number of its Inhabitants, and considerable Traffick, than a simple Borough, if it were walled in. The other most considerable Places near the Capital, are Fruart, which is but a League off it; Ormes, Bayon, Pont a Mousson, famous for its University, found∣ed by Charles, Cardinal of Lorrain, on be∣half of the Jesuits; An. 1573, and very pleasant by reason of its fruitful Soil, and of the Mosell, which runs through the mid∣dle
of the Town, and is passed with  Bridge; whence, and from a neighbouring Mountain, called Mousson, is derived th Name of Pont à Mousson. Then Veze¦lize, Roziere, Blancmont, Gerbevillier, Charmes Chastenoy, Moranges, Vaucouleur, the Birth-place of Jane d' Arc, called the Virgin, or Mai∣den of Orleans, Mexan-sous-Bresse, Dompaire Deneure, Hoden, Chasteau-Rambervillier, Raon Bellemont, Neuf-chastel, Magstat, Marchain∣ville, Espinal Bruyeres, Darney, Ormont, Val∣derfing, Beauzains, Vaigni, Estraye, Esti∣val, Luneville, Fauquemont, Sare-Louïs, a new Fortress, with a Presidial, Vandervange, the Seat of a Baylwick, &c. Its Counties are Vaudemont, Chaligni, A∣mence, formerly the Chancery of Lorrain, Mi∣recourt, Remiremont and La Mothe. At Remi∣remont, upon the Mosell, is a famous Mona∣stery of Canonnesses, where Noble Mens Daughters are only received. The Abbess is not suffered to leave the Habit, but all the Nuns can go out and marry if they please. La Mothe was a small Town on the Frontiers of Champaign; but being built on a steep Rock, washed by a Brook, it was accounted impregnable, before the Ma∣shal de la Force took it, Ann. 1634, for the French King Lewis XIII. who caused it afterwards to be demolished. Its Lord∣ships, are Marsal, Remereville, S. Ballemont, Ramberville, Homburg, Mariemont and San∣dacourt.
Phalzburg has the Title of Princi∣pality: It is situated at the Foot of the Mountains, on the Frontiers of Elzas, se∣ven or eight Leagues from Strasburg; but is not so considerable as it was formerly. Lorrain also comprehends the Dutchy of Bar, which reaches to Neuf Chastel, or New-Castle, whereof the principal Town is Bar le Duc the less considerable, S. Mihel, a strong Town, whose Inhabitants made bold to rebel against King Lewis XIII. in behalf of their Duke Charles III. for which, some of them were sent to the Gallies, after the Year 1633. Then Ligni, Moigneville, Lon-champ, Commercy, &c. The Mountains of Vauge, Vougesi Montes, who separate Lorrain from the County of Bur∣gundy and Elzas, take up about an hundred Miles in length from West to East, and from South to North. Thence springs the Mo∣sell, near a Village called Bussans, on the Frontiers of Franche-County and Elzas, takes its Course towards Remiremont, where it receives several Brooks; amongst others, the Vologne, or Voloye, increased with the Nany at a Village called Chamery; then it goes down to Espinal, Chastel, Charmes, Bay∣on and Chaligny, where the Modon, with the Waters of the Illon, Vezelize, &c. discharges it self into it. Afterwards, it washes Toul and Pont à Mousson, and between these two Ci∣ties, receives the Meurte, which comes also
from the Mountains of Vauge, goes by S. Dioy, Raon, Luneville, Roziere, S. Nicolas. Then being Increased with several other Rivers, washes Nancy, and looses it self into the Mosell, near the Castle of Condé. As to the Mosell, it pursues its Course towards Mets, where it receives the Seille, that seems to issue from a Lake near Marsal; then goes down to Thionville and Triers. There it is increased with the Sare, that springs like∣wise from the Mountains Vauge, near Salms, and washes several Places, to which it gives its Name, as Sarburg, Saralbe, Sargomine, and Sarpruch. Finally, having made several Windings and Turnings, and received some other Rivers, it goes to Coblentz, and mixes there with the Rhine. The Saone takes its Source on the other side of these Mountains, which had given the thoughts of digging a Channel to joyn these two Rivers, that there might be a Communication between the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. The Project was begun under the Emperor Nero, but was not followed. In fine, this Dutchy comprehending the Barrois, is four Days Jour∣ney, that is, about forty Leagues in length from Stenay to Darnay, and near so many in breadth from Bar le Duc to Biche; the whole abounding in Wheat, Wine, and all other Ne∣cessaries for Man's Sustenance; as in Beasts or Cattle of all Kinds, Fish in their Rivers and Ponds, Baths that are much esteemed, and
Salt-pits that are none of the worst. It's also rich in Mines of Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin and Lead; and at the Foot of the Mountains of Vauge, are found Azure-Stones, with some Pearls, and the best Stuff in the World to make Looking-glasses of; besides, Cassidonies of such considerable big∣ness, that Drinking-Cups are made of them. Neither Turkey, nor the Kingdom of Naples can furnish better Horses than Lorrain, nor is there better fresh Water-Fish in the World than its Trouts, Salmons, Pearches, Carps and Tenches are. The Carps in a Lake that is fourteen Leagues in circuit, are some of them three or four foot long. As for the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants, they have been observed to be a Mixture of the German and French. The People will drink hard, are free and open, and not as cunning or ingenious as other Nations: Yet the Gentry, as they are stout and brave, so do they likewise pretend to Wit and good Breeding, some taking to the German Fashion, but a great part living af∣ter the French. Under their Dukes, as they were not overburthened with Taxes, and lived pretty rich and easie, so they denied themselves no Pleasures or Diversions, and Feasts, Plays, Balls, Musick, &c. were very frequent, and in great request amongst them. However the Country is still very good and pleasant; for Men of Business may imploy
themselves in Trafficking, and they who nee not to take so much Trouble, may Hunt, Feas and rejoyce as pleasantly here as in any o∣ther place whatsoever. CHAP. II. The Principality of SEDAN and Dukedom of BOUILLON and RETHEL. I Put here this Principality, because it i in my way from Lorrain to Champaign though it belongs now to this last Govern∣ment. But before I enter into it, I must describe the famous Forest of Ardenne. Ar∣duenna Sylva, apparently so called, because 'tis so rugged and craggy, and the Ways in some places so narrow, that Carters go a∣long winding a Horn, to hinder that others should meet with them. In Cesar's time, it reached from Rheims in Champain to the Rhine, and thence to Tournay on the Scheld; so that it was extended an hundred and thirty Miles in length, fifty or sixty in breadth in some places, and covered part of Champaign and Lorrain, of Luxemburg and the Bishoprick of Liege, and of the Counties of Namur, Haynaut and Flanders, which are now filled with so many fair Cities. Now this Forest has not above forty Miles in length from Thionville on the Mosell, in the
Dutchy of Luxemburg, to Donchery and Se∣dan. The Emperours Charlemaign and Lewis the Meek took a Delight in Hunting there, e∣specially in Autumn, that they made a Royal Sport of Gaming, with great Prepa∣rations. Sigebert, King of Austrasia, had built two Abbies in the midst of it, which are now in the Neighbourhood. This Principality, which is but four Leagues in square, is included between Champaign, Lorrain and Luxemburg. It be∣long'd formerly to the famous Family of the Dukes of Bouillon, and Viscounts of Tu∣rene, well known for their many and great Exploits, untill Lewis XIII. or rather his ambitious Minister, Cardinal Richelieu, made bold to deprive them of it, in the Year 1642. It's true, they have had some Lands in exchange, but they are not to be compared to these, either for Profit or Honour, were it but for the Title of Soveraignty. This Country, though it is covered with Woods, as I have hinted, does not want, however, a Competency of Corn, which makes the Abode both agreeable and cheap. The chief Town is Sedan, whose Situation is pleasant enough, because the Mosell runs by it, though of one side it has a Mountain; both these, with its good Castle, render it impregnable. It's said, the Platform is so great, that 2000 Men might be drawn up upon it; and its Maga∣zins
so well furnished, that few in the King¦dom can equal them. The Town is not ver big and has but three principal Street There was an University that has been fo¦merly famous, and filled up with gre Men, as Du Moulin, James Chappel Le Bla and Jurieu; nor ought the Professor Tilen to be forgotten, though he lost his Plac because he maintained Arminius's Tene The Principality of Raucourt, and the Pr¦vostship of Donchery are depending upon S¦dan; the first lying North, and the Secon South-West of it. 2. The Dutchy of Bouillon, between S¦dan, Luxemburg and Liege, belongs yet t the Dukes of that Name: It is of no grea extent, and the Capital Bouillon is but  good Burrough, situated on the River S¦moy; but has a Castle built on a steep Rock with Lodging-rooms even in the Rock, s that Bombs and Mines can have but littl effect upon it. In the Year 1683, the Sp¦niards having declared War against France that they might ingage the Hollanders to do the same; the French King, by derision caused the Duke of Bouillon to give out a Declaration of War against Spain. 3. At the coming out of Sedan, is seen th Town and strong Castle of Mesieres, where the French King always keeps a good Gar∣rison; and then you come into the Dutchy of Rethelois, which belongs to the Duke o
Mantua, whereof the Capital called Rethel is one of the strongest Places in the Kingdom. It's now called Mazarin, and makes part of the Government of Champaign. The Prince of Condé, who was then on the Spaniards side, took it in 1653. In the same Dutchy, is Charleville, a very pleasant and strong Town, built upon the Meuse by Charles Gonzague, Duke of Nevers and Mantua. On the other side of the River is Mount Olymp, with the Ruins of an old Castle, that was, as 'tis be∣lieved, a Temple of the Heathens, and where the French King keeps a Governour. Rocroy was also a very strong Town, whence the Spaniards made Incursions into Cham∣paign, but since besieged it in vain, and were defeated near it in 1643, by the Duke of Anguien. Stenay, upon the Meuse, was one of the Keys of Lorrain, but having been taken from his Duke, was united to Champaign in 1633. Mouson, on the other side of Meuse, between Sedan and Stenay, belonged formerly to the Empire, having been taken from the French by Count, Nassau General of Charles V. but was re∣taken Thirty Years fter, and a small Hill, which commands it, was extreamly fortified. The French King keeps there a Gover∣nour too.
CHAP. III. Champaign. THIS Province is one of the best and largest of the whole Kingdom, it has Franche-County, Lorrain and Barrois to the East, Burgundy to the South, Picardy, the Isle of France, and the Gastinois to the West, Luxemburg and Hainaut to the North. It is about Ninety Miles East and West, from Tilly to Claye in Brie, and an Hundred twen∣ty six North and South, from Rocroy in Rhetelois to Fontaine-Françoise in Burgundy. It's called Champaign from its great Plains, and divided into upper and Lower: the Upper, which is more Northerly, has great Chalky Plains, without Trees, Rivers or Fountains; and produces no other Corn but Rye, with great Woods towards the North. The Lower is more fruitful, especially in Wines. Champaign is likewise divided into eight Baylwyks or Precincts. Proper Cham∣paign, or the Country of Troyes, Rhemois, Perthois, Rethelois, Vallage, Bassigny, Senonois, Brie-Champenoise: For the Province of Brie is partly a Dependance of this Goverment, and both were, in Caesar's time, part of the Belgick. Three of the ancient Counts of Champaign have been Kings of Navarre, viz. Thibaud IV. Thibaud V. and Henry III. that
left but a Daughter called Jane, married in 1284 to Philip the Fair, King of France, who united this County to his Crown, after it had been separated from it 326 Years, since Robert, the first Soveraign Earl of Cham∣paign in 958. These Counts have been once so powerful, that they made bold to war against the French Kings, and at other times against the Kings of Burgundy, and the Emperours of Germany. They had se∣ven Counts for their Vassals, called the Peers of Champaign; namely, those of Joigni, Retel, Brienne, Rouci, Braine, Grand-Pré and Bar upon the Seine. Champaign has yet two Archbishopricks, Rheims and Sens, four Bishopricks, Chalons upon the Marne, Langres, Troyes, accounted by most the Ca∣pital of the Province, and Meaux, the chief Town of Brie. Its Rivers are, 1. The Seine, which receives the Yonne, the Marne, the Aube, and has been already described. The Yonne comes from the Nivernois, three Leagues from Clemessi, receives the Cure, the Armançon and the Venne, goes by Auxerre and Sens, and falls into the Seine at Montereau. The Marne Ma∣trona has its Source in Champaign, in a Place called the Marmote, washes Langres, Roland-Pont, Chaumont, Joinville, S. Dizier, Vitry, Chalons, Espernay, Dormans, Chateau-Thierry, La Ferté under Jouarre, Meaux and Lagni, and being encreased with the Waters of Vannori, St. Geome, the Mousche, the Swize,
the Blaize, the Saude, the Roignon, the Moyvr the Soupe, and great and little Morin mixe with the Seine at the Bridge of Charento about a League off Paris. The Aube, Alb and Albula, springs in the Diocess of La¦gres, at a Place called Auberive, washes L Ferté, Clervaux, Bar, Romeru, and discharge it self into the Seine near Marcilly. 2. The Aisne, Axonia is formed from two Foun∣tains, the one comes from Beaulieu in Ar∣gonne, up higher S. Menehould, whereby i passes; the other from the Dutchy of Bar, beyond Clermont, which it goes by. The both Fountains being united at Mouron wash Rethel, Chateau-Porcien, Soissons, and having received the Vesle, that passes through Rheims and Fismes, it mixes with the Oys above Compiegne. 3. The Meuse springs in Champaign, near a Village of that Name, and Montigni le Roi, but goes soon out of it through Lorrain and Barrois, the County of Namur, the Bishoprick of Liege, Gueldres and Holland, where it falls into the Sea be∣low Rotterdam, and near the Briel. 1. Rheims. RHeims, esteemed by some Capital of Champaign, is a very ancient Town, as appears by Caesar's Fort, that is not far off it. Its Compass is wide, surrounded with good Walls, of about a League in circuit,
and embellished with very magnificent tructures, especially the Archiepiscopal Church consecrated to our Lady, which is ne of the most sumptuous, and most ac∣omplished Buildings in the whole King∣om. Its Portail Raising as high as the very Towers: Sixty seven Canons officiate day∣y in this Church; besides, there is another onsecrated to St. Remy, with the Title of Abby, wherein the Ampoule, pretended to e brought from Heaven, at the Consecra∣ion of Clovis, and since destined for anoint∣ng the Monarchs of France, is carefully kept, with several other Curiosities, as the Representation of the Twelve Dukes and Peers of France, dressed as when they assist at the King's Coronation; which Ceremo∣y is for the most part performed in this Town. Its Archbishop is the first Duke, and Ecclesiastical Peer of France, and has for Suffragans, Soissons, Chalons, upon the Marne, Laon, Senlis, Beauvais, Amiens, Noyon and Boulogne; and before Cambray was erect∣ed into an Archbishoprick, this City, toge∣ther with Arras and Tournay, depended upon the Metropolitan of Rheims. The ancient Latin Authors called it Duricortorum, and Duricortora Remorum, and the Modern, Re∣mi and Remensis Civitas. Besides the Ca∣thedral, that bears the Name of our Lady, and the Abby of St. Remy; there are three other Abbies, and several Parochial Churches
and Monasteries, a Presidial and Baylwi and an University, founded by Charles Lorrain, one of its Archbishops. In 1677, was discovered at Rheims a ¦mous Monument of Antiquity, a triu¦phal Arch, which formerly was the No¦thern Gate of the City, called the Port Mars. This Arch is composed of three ther Arches, 1. The Arch of the Seasons the middle represents the four Seasons four Children and a Woman, who deno Abundance, sitting amongst them; rou about are drawn the Twelve Months, in many Pictures, with several Ornaments th time has partly defaced. 2. The Arch Romulus, on the right side has a Square e¦riched with Trophies, including the Pictur of Remus and Romulus sucking a She-Wolf near which are two Figures, having each Stick in their Hand; but one is covere with a Helm, and the other with a Lawre Crown: It's thought they were the Image of the Shepherd Faustulus and Acca Lauren∣tia his Wife. 3. The Arch of Leda, on the left side represents Leda, Castor and Pollux's Mother, together with a Swan, and Cupi holding a Link in his Hand. The Inhabi∣tants are courteous and witty; but they and the Briois are accused of being obstinate and headstrong in their Sentiments.
Going out of Rheims towards the South-west, one finds a fruitful Soil, good Mea∣dows, pleasant Gardens, and plenty of Vines. The City is Capital of a small Country called he Rhemois, which contains Fismes, Cormicy, Pont-Favergue and Machauld. 2. Precinct of Chalons and Troyes. ON the South-East, and South of Rhemois are the Precinct of Chalons and Troyes, which make up Champaign, properly so call∣ed. There you will find the Towns or Boroughs of Chastillon, Damery, Dormans, Condé, Espernay, Montmaur, Ay, Avesnay, S. Menehoud, Chalons. Then you will meet with Vertus, Fere-Champenosie, Plancy, Arcy, Pont-sur-seine, Mery, Romeru, Pongy, Piney, Vandeure, Troyes and Villemaur. Chalons. THIS Town, called Catalaunum by the Latins, is one of the Chiefest of Cham∣paign in Beauty, Bigness, Wealth and Pri∣viledges. Its Situation is very pleasant, be∣cause the River Marn runs by its Walls, and parts it from one of the Suburbs; besides the Conveniency it gives them of transport∣ing their Wares and Commodities to Paris. Its Buildings are very neat, the Streets wide, and the Walks pleasant, by reason of Trees
planted on each side. It has the Ti of a County, and its Bishop one the Twelve ancient Dukes and Peers France, is Suffragan to the Archbishop Rheims. The Cathedral of St. Stephen both great and well built, as are likewi its twelve Parochial Churches and thr Abbies. All this, with the Fertility of  Plains, the Cheapness of Provisions, and ¦vility of the Inhabitants, makes the Tow much frequented: They that delight  Whiteness, shall find here, besides the Ho¦ses, several Towers in form of Pyrami and the very Walls all of that Colo This Town is divided into three Parts, ca¦ed, the City, the Isle, and the Boroug and has a Generality of Treasurers, and Presidial. It was near this City that M¦roüee and Aëtius, General of the Roman overcame Attila, King of the Huns, in 45 and gave a total Overthrow to his Army whereof 90000 were killed on the Spo Others affirm, that this happened in Ca¦pis Secalaunicis at Solougne, near Orlean. However Chalons is a very ancient Tow since in the time of Julian the Apostate,  was already considerable.
Troyes. SOme Authors affirm, that this Town, which is a Bishoprick, under the Metro∣olitan of Sens, and Capital of all Cham∣aign, was built upon the Seine after the De∣ruction of the ancient Troy; but without aving recourse to Fables, sure it is, that Troyes  of great Antiquity, and known to the ancient Historians and Geographers under the Names of Treca, Tricassis, Tricassium, Augusta Tricassinorum and Augustobona. Its advan∣agious Situation, with the Strength of its Walls, and Courage of the Inhabitants, ve∣y well train'd up to Arms, renders it ca∣pable of maintaining a long Siege. It has a very fine Palace, pretty good Buildings, wo Collegial and six Parochial Churches, be∣sides the Abby of S. Loup, and of the Nuns of S. Bernard, called our Lady of the Mea∣dows, Nôtre-dame des Prez, and the Cathe∣dral of St. Stephen, which has forty Canons. Here they make a shew of many fine Rari∣ties, as some of our Saviour's Hair, a Piece of the true Cross, a Dish used in his last Supper, one of St. John's Fingers, one of St. Peter's Teeth, the Body of St. Helena, &c. not forgetting the Tomb of one of the Counts of Champaign. Its Baylwick and Presidial have a large Jurisdiction, and the last consists of eight Counsellors and a Register.
Money is coyn'd in this Town. It's though St. Amateur was the first that Preached th Gospel to its Inhabitants. Troyes was ruine by the Normans in the ninth Century, b since repaired by Count Robert. The plac is pleasant enough, and Provisions cheap. 3. Senonois. ON the South-West of Troyes is the Coun¦try of Sens, whose Archbishop is on of the Pretenders to the Primacy of Gaul an Germany. This City, which the Latins call' Senones and Agendicum Senonum is very an¦cient; and if not ancienter than Rome, a some pretend, at least 'tis sure that its Inha¦bitants were famous long before the coming of our Saviour: for they sent Colonies int Greece and Italy, where they took Rome, an built Sienne and Senigaglia, that retain ye somewhat of their Founders Name. Unde the Second Race of the French Kings, som Lords erected Sens into a Sovereign County till King Robert made himself Master of it in 1005. The Town is large, well built and washed with two Rivers, Venne and Yonne, that mix their Waters here. The Cathedral of St. Stephen is a sumptuous Buil∣ding, adorned with two great Towers. A the foot of the principal Altar is a Golde Table, enrich'd with precious Stones; upo it are engrav'd in basso relievo the four Evan¦gelists,
with a St. Stephen on his knees in the dle of 'em. The Chapter has nine Dig∣ries, a Dean, five Archdeacons, a Prae∣tor, a Treasurer and a Purveyor; and in  whole Diocese are reckoned above 900 ishes, besides 25 Abbeys. The Bishops of is, Chartres, Meaux, and Orleans, depend∣ upon this Prelate, before the first was de a Metropolitan; but now it has no re than Troyes, Auxerre and Noyon for Suf∣gans. Sens has a Presidial and a Baylwick, ich is one of the four Ancient of the gdom, and the Country depending upon is 16 or 17 Leagues in length, and 8 in adth. There are several walled Towns and roughs, as Pont sur Yonne, Joigny, that has the tle of County, St. Floretin, Tonnerre, Cha∣s, a County between which and Fontenay s given a famous Battle among the Sons Lewis the Meek; besides several places of ser Note, as Ville-Neuve-l'Archevèque, Ville∣uve le Roy, S. Julien du Sant, Cerny, la rté Loupiere, Aillant, Brignon, &c. 4. Langres. Ome put this Town in Bassigni, and others account Chaumont for the Capital of it. shall here follow the last, in order to make particular Description of this ancient City, lled by the Latins Lingonae, and Andoma∣inum Lingonum, and famous ever since
the Irruption of Sigovese and Bellovese i Italy, that is, since 3464 of the World, 164 of Rome. Langres is seated upon Mountain near the source of the Marne, a its Territory, which is not far from B¦gundy, is accounted the highest of France, b¦cause five or six Rivers spring out of The Vandals wasted this City, and put St. ¦dier, its Bishop, to death, in 704; but si it was so well repaired, that in the 12th Ce¦tury Peter the Venerable calls it, the N the Great, and the Renowned: and therefo its Bishops were not forgotten in the Instit¦tion of the ancient Dukes and Peers France. The Cathedral is dedicated  St. Mammez Martyr; but St. Savinian w its first Bishop, for ought we know, about  end of the fourth Age. 5. Of Bassigni, Vallage, and Perthois. THE Country of Bassigni is included b¦twixt that of Langres and Vallage  the South and North, the Dutchy a County of Burgundy on the West and Ea Vallage has Bassigni on the South, the P¦cinct of Troyes on the East and North-Ea Lorrain on the East, Barrois and Rhemois  the North. Perthois has Vallage on the Sout the Dutchy of Bar on the East, the Territ
y of Rheims on the North, and that of Troyes n the West. Chaumont is the Capital of Bassigni, and is situated upon a Hill near the Marne, between Langres and Chalons. It has  very strong Castle built upon a Rock, with a Tower called the Donjon. There are likewise Montigni, Gaeffi, Nogent∣e Roy, Bourbonne-les-Bains, Monteclar, Ande∣t, Bisnay, Choyseul, Clermont, with several thers, that have strong Castles for their De∣ence. Vallage for its chief Towns has Vassi nd Joinville, erected into a Principality by King Henry II. for the youngest Sons of the House of Guise, an. 1552. It is situated up∣n the Marne. The other Towns of Vallage, re Brienne County, Vignoris, Montirandel, onlevand, le Chasteau aux Forges, Esclairon, ar upon the River Aube, which is renown∣d for its excellent Wines, and had formerly s particular Counts. The Country of Perthois has Vitri  François, fortified the modern way, or its Capital. It was built by King rancis I. whose Name it bears, in the Neighbourhood of Vitri le brulé, that was  former times a considerable Castle. The ther less considerable Towns are, Argilliers, arzicourt, Louvemain, St. Dizier, a strong own on the Frontiers of Barrois, Ser∣aize, &c.
6. The Country of Brie, and mor especially Brie Champenoise. THis Country is included between th Marne, the Seine, and the Diocese o Chalons, and is extended about 10 or 1 Leagues in length and breadth. It's fer in Fruits, Meadows, Corn and Wines tha are delicate near Château-Thierry, but mor rough about Meaux. Brie is divided int French Brie, depending upon the Governme of the Isle of France; and Champaigne's Brie divided again into Ʋpper, Lower and Lou Brie, or the Land of Glandevesse, wherei are the Boroughs of Gandelu, Montmor Tresmes, Orbay, &c. The whole Province h MEAƲX for its Capital, whose scituation up¦on the Maine is very pleasant, and its Dispos¦tion or Order no less, being divided in tw by a little River that runs through and se¦parates the Town quite from the Marke called otherwise the Fort. It's so consider¦ble, that it deserv'd a Bishoprick, Bailwic and Election. Its Cathedral, is dedicated  St. Stephen. Besides that, there is the Colle¦giate Church of St. Sanctin, first Bishop  Meaux, the Abbey of St. Faron, belonging  the Benedictins of St. Maur, and several Pa¦rochial Churches and Monasteries, both i the Town and the three Suburbs. Mea
had formerly its particular Counts, whose Country was united to the Crown with the est of Champaign. During the Imprisonment f King John, the Dauphin Charles V. his on, fell at variance with the Parisians, and etired to Meaux, thence to Sens. The Pari∣ans would make use of the occasion, to eize upon this Key of the Marne, and sent ome Troops thither under the Conduct of a rocer: but notwithstanding the Treason f the Mayor, who opened them the Gates, ey could not master the Market; and aston-Phebus, Count of Foix, cut them in∣ pieces, then ransack'd and burnt the Town. However, it was in few years so ell repair'd, that it maintained a Siege of ree months against the English, who at last ok it upon Charles VII. then only Dau∣hin of France, in 1421. Meaux was one f the first Cities of that Kingdom, wherein e Reformation was Preached; for which ohn le Clerc and James Pavanes got the rown of Martyrdom, the first being burnt  Metz, and the other at Paris, about the ear 1525. CHATEAƲ-THIERRY is eight or ten eagues Eastwards of Meaux, upon the same iver; has the Title of a Dutchy, a Bail∣ick, a Presidial, Provostship and Election, and  accounted the Chief Town of Ʋpper Brie. 's strong and pleasant by its situation, has good Castle, and several Churches. The
Duke of Mayenne took it in the last Age fo the League, at which time it was plundere by the Spaniards. MONCEAƲX is a Royal Castle an Pleasure-house built upon the River O near its meeting with the Marn. It's ador¦ed with Parks, Forests, Rivers, and Garde that yield to none in the Kingdom for Beau¦ty or Pleasure. Queen Catherine of Medi begun, and Henry IV. finished it. PROVINS, Capital of Lower Brie, an formerly of the whole Province, is situate upon the little River Ʋuzie. It has a Bai¦wick, and is renowned for its Roses, and t Conserve that is made of them. The othe Towns and Boroughs of Brie are, Nogen l'Artaud, Vieux-Maisons, Crecy, Colommie la Ferté-Gaucher, and Sezanne, all four upo the Morin; Nogent sur Seyne, which has fine Bridge upon that River; Montere¦faut Yonne, so called because the Yonne fa there, and mixes with the Seine. It has Bridge too, upon which John Duke of B¦gundy was murthered by the Faction of O¦leance, in 1419.
CHAP. IV. Of the Isle of France, and its Dependencies. ISLE of France is properly the Name of a small Country included between the Ri∣vers Seine, Oyse and Aysne, Picardy, Brie, nd the Territory of Rheims; but to make of it a Government somewhat suitable to he bigness of the Capital of so great a King∣dom, part of the adjacent Countries have een taken from them, and added to this Peninsula, viz. out of Champaign, part of Brie, betwixt the Marne, the Seine, and the small River Yere, with the Towns of Lag∣y, Ville-neuve-S. George, Brie-Comte-Robert, built by the first Count of Champaign, which as yet a Seat of Justice resorting to the Châte∣et of Paris; and Rosoy. Out of Beausse, have been taken three Countries, namely, Hure∣oix, on the South of the Seine, with the Towns of Corbeil, Melun, La Ferté-Alais, and Fontaine-bleau. The French Gastinois, South∣wards of Hurepoix, has the Dutchy of Ne∣nours, the Counties of Rochtfort and Moret, and the Towns of Montlehery, Dourdan and Courtenay. The Mantois, westwards of Pa∣ris, contains Mante, S. Germain, Poissy, Meu∣an and Montfort-L' Amaury. The French Vexin lies North-west of the Oyse and Seine, is separated from the Norman Vexin by the
River Epte, and has the Towns of Pontoys Magny and Chaumont. From Picardy, fi Countries or Diocesses have been separated viz. Beauvaisis, about the River Terrai containing the Bishoprick of Beauvais, and th Towns of Clermont, Gerberoy and Merlo The Dutchy of Valois, has Crespy, Senli Compiegne, La Ferté-Milon, Pont S. Maix¦ence, and Villers-Cotterets, and is included between the Oyse and Marne. The Territo∣ry of Soissons lies about the Aysne, and con∣tains Soissons, Braisne and Vesly. The Lao¦nois, which lies on the North of that River has Laon, Coucy, Neuf Châtel, and Notre-Dame de Lesse. Beyond the River Oyse, is the Territory of Noyon, with the Town of Chauny. However, all these small Parcels taken together, do hardly make an Extent of Ninety Miles East and West, from Neuf-Châtel upon the Aisne, to Gisors in Norman∣dy, and about as many North and South from Ham in Picardy, to Courtenay in Ga∣stinois. The Isle of France, in the stricter Sense, is also called Parisis by some, and has the City of Paris, and the Towns of St. Denis, Montmorency and Dammartin; but consider∣ed as a Government, it has Picardy on the North, Champaign and Brie on the West, the Orleanois on the South, and Normandy on the West. The Country brings forth excellent Wheat, Wine indifferent good,
abundance of Fruits, and Game, both in its Plains and Woods. This, with the Con∣veniency of many Rivers, and the Neigh∣bourhood of the Capital, has made it ex∣traordinary Peopled, and filled with Royal and Pleasure-Houses, some of which I shall set down hereafter. As to its Rivers, besides the Seine, the Marne, and the Aisne, which have already been described, you have the Oyse, which comes from Picardy, on the Frontiers of Haynault and Luxemburg, washes Guise and Noyon, receives the Serre, the Dellette, and the Mas, mixes with the Aisne at Compiegne, then increased with the Waters of the Aronde, Ottenette, Bresche, Terrain, Nonnette, Aise, and going by Pont S. Maixence, Creil, Beau∣mont, L' Isle-Adam, falls into the Seine un∣der Pontoise, about Thirteen Miles off Paris: Besides several small Rivers which dis∣charge themselves into the Seine on the West Side, as the Bievre in the Suburbs of Paris; the Orge, which comes from Mont∣lehery, and washes Long-Jumeau, Juvizy, and Savigny, and the Juyne, which comes from about Estampes, passes by Dourdan, and falls into the same River at Corbeil.
1. Paris. PARIS, Capital of the Isle and Kingdo of France, is one of the biggest, riches and most Beautiful Cities in Europe. I Houses very high, well built, and as we inhabited: Its Streets and Places large an regular, its Churches magnificent, its Pala¦ces, and especially the Louvre, great an sumptuous; its Colledges, Universities Bridges, Hospitals, Abbies, Churches an Monasteries worthy to be seen. There are Forty four Parishes: Its Ca∣thedral Notre-Dame, or Our Lady's Church though it be built upon Piles, is extraordi∣nary high, Sixty Paces wide, and an Hun∣dred seventy four long, and is said to in∣clude Forty five small Chappels. The Fron∣tisepiece has the Figures of the Thirty eight Kings that have reigned between Childebert and Philip Auguste, and the two Towers that serve as Belfreys, are Three hundred eighty nine Steps high, and have Eight great Bells, whereof the biggest re∣quires Twenty Men to ring it, and is heard Seven or Eight Leagues of. There is a Crucifix over the greatest Door of the Quire, all of one piece, with the Feet form∣ing an Arch, that is a Masterpiece in that Kind. The Quire, the Chappel and Body of the Church, are adorned with rich
Paintings, fine gilt Cornishes, and other Or∣aments. It has Eight Dignitaries, a Dean, a Singer, Three Arch-Deacons, an Under-Singer, a Chancellor, and a Penitentiary. Sixty nine Canons, six Grand Vicars, Two Rectors of St. John the Round, Two Vicars of St. Aig∣an, Twelve Singing Boys, besides the Clerks or Matines of Morning-Service, and n Hundred and forty Chapplains. The Sainte-Chapelle, or Holy Chappel, is a∣nother fine Building: It consists of two Chap∣pels, both supported by such small Pillars, that it's thought very strange they can bear such a great weight as their Disposition and Order makes them do. The Canons here have the same Priviledges with them of our Lady, and depend immediately on the See of Rome, but the French King has the Nomination of them all. It's called Sainte Chapelle, by reason of the great Number of Reliques laid up therein; amongst the rest, they make a Shew of part of our Saviour's Crown of Thorns, some of the Nails that stuck him to the Cross, with some part of the Wood, &c. Near this is the Place that Philip the Fair built to keep Parliaments in. This Place is considerable for its Bigness and Beauty, but more for its great Hall for Hearing, or Audiences, very beautiful and rich. That of the Attorneys, is very spacious, and was formerly adorned with
all the Kings Statues done to the Life, be¦sides the Marble-Table, estemed one of th most curious Pieces of all Europe; its Gal¦leries and Avenues well stock'd with ric Shops, furnished with all manner of Mer∣chandize. Monasteries are here almost numberless The most considerable are these that fol∣low, 1. That of the Templers, inclosed wit a good Wall, has a great square Tower, a fine Church with curious Chappels, and Lodgings for a King; a Place so considera∣ble, that part of the Town still retains the Name of Marets-du-Temple, though this ancient Order was abolished by Pope Cle∣ment V. under Philip the Fair, in 1309. The Abby of St. Germain deserves the se∣cond Place, great in all things, and Head of its Suburb, where the Abbots Officers exercise Justice. 3. The Convent of the Canon Regulars of St. Augustin, in the Sub∣urbs of St. Victor, built by Lewis the Burly. Those of Sainte Geneniefue, Franciscans, Dominicans, Augustins, Celestins, Cartu∣sians, Feuillans, Jesuits, Les Filles-de-dieu, Val de grace; especially these last are curious Buildings. The Church-Yard of St. John in Greve, and of St. Innocents, are the most remarkable of this Kind. Bodies are quite consumed in the last in the space of eight days.
The Parish Churches are not less magni∣ficent, St. Eustache has at least 35 or 40000 Communicants. To St. Nicholas des Champs, or in the Fields, St. James, St. Sulpice, and St. Saviour, do likewise resort a great num∣ber of People. Its Colledges are also very fair, especial∣ly those of Du Plessis, Sorbonne, and of Master Gervais, the First founded in 1322, and the Second in 1870. Nor is Clairmont, the Jesuits Colledge less considerable, either for its Building, or the Number and Quality of Students. It's also well worth while to visit St. Lewis's Church, built by these Fathers in St. Antony's-Street. Sorbonne is but the first House, or Col∣ledge of Divinity at Paris, though this Name be sometimes given to the whole U∣niversity, founded by Charlemaign about the Year 791; but since increased and made more commendable by Lewis VII. and Phi∣lip August. It is divided into four Facul∣ties, Divinity, Law, Physick, and Arts. This last is the most ancient, and composed of four Nations, French, Picards, Normans and Germans: Out of their Body is taken the Head of the University, called Rector, who, in publick Solemnities, immediately follows the Princes of the Blood, and at the King's Burial, walks by the Archbishop's Side. His Robe of Ceremony is a Purple
Gown, tyed up with a Girdle that has go¦den Hangings, and an old fashioned Purse which denotes his Priority and Power ove all the Pursers of the University. He als wears a short Purple Mantle, lined with a Ermine-Skin, and has a Tribunal compose of the three Deans in Divinity, Law and Physick, and of the four Attor¦neys of the four Nations. A new Rect may be elected every three Months, but h that is in Office is often continued, and ha such an Authority upon all the Faculties that he may cause all publick Acts to cease and four times in the year, at his Processio Day, actually forbids all Preachers to as∣cend the Pulpit. As to the House of Sorbonne, it's very anci∣ent, being founded by Robert Sorbonn, St. Lew∣is's Almoner, in 1252, or 1253. This Col∣ledge is one of the most rigorous of Eu∣rope, none being admitted to the Degree of Batchelor, unless he studies three years in Divinity in it; after he has been received Master of Arts, and sustains nine or ten publick Theses. Neither is the Degree of Doctor given to any, without going through the Sorbonique Act, that holds from Sun-rise to Sun-set, the Candidate answering all that time to such as come to dispute against him. The Dean of the Faculty is commit∣ted to oversee these Theses, and each Doctor that Disputes is to have a Crown from the
Answerer, who must satisfie all their Ar∣guments without any body's Help; so that he ought to be an able Scholar, and have a strong Purse too. Those that are admit∣ted that way, take the Title of Doctors of the House and Society of Sorbonne; but the others, that only of Divinity's Doctor in the Faculty of Paris. As for the Building, it's enough to observe, that Cardinal Riche∣lieu has taken care to make it one of the most sumptuous of Paris, in enriched it with vast Revenues, and a good Library. The second House after Sorbonne, is that of Navarre, founded by Jane, Queen of Na∣varre, Soveraign Countess of Champaign, and Wife to Philip the Fair, King of France. Humane Learning, Philosophy and Divini∣ty are taught in this House, which has the Priviledge of making Doctors as well as Sorbonne. There are a great many other considera∣ble Colledges, founded by Kings, Princes, Popes, &c. which I pass by, to speak of that called of The Four Nations, founded by Cardinal Mazarin, and built over against the Louvre. His Design in this sumptuous Building is said to have been to encourage Strangers to come to this Capital of the Kingdom, to make them have an Esteem and Love for France, use themselves to its Ways, and learn its Fashions. Of these four Nations are kept Sixty Gentlemen,
Fifteen from Pignerol, for Italy; Fifteen fro Elzas, for Germany; Twenty Flemings, an Ten Spaniards from Roussillon. The Hotel-dieu, or Hospital destined fo the Poor, is also very ancient, being buil since the Year 660, and well worth th seeing. It's very spacious, and kept very clean, considering the vast number of Sic always attended there by religious Wo∣men, that make their Vows in the Hands of the Dean of our Lady-Church. Behind the House of these Ladies, is a Statue of Stone, which most People believe to be that of Esculapius. The Hospital of the Quinze Ʋints, or Twenty Score, founded by St. Lewis, in Memory of the Three hundred Christians that had their Eyes put out by the Saracens, ought not to be forgotten. That of St. Lew∣is, founded by Henry IV. for those that should be sick of the Plague, is renowned for its Building, Courts, Offices and Foun∣tains. That of La Charité, kept and served by Fryars of that Name, is very neat, and the People well attended. Besides these, there is the Incurable, and 25 other Houses for the Sick and Poor. The great and little Chastelets are the two ancientest Buildings in that City, said to be built by Caesar, or at least by Julian the Apostate, who called Paris, his Delight and well beloved Town; now they are Prisons
of the Civil Lieutenant and Presidial, that keep their Courts there. The Palace of Cluni, in the Maturins Street, where the Pope's Nuncio's generally Lodge, deserves to be seen. It was formerly Julian the A∣postate's Baths, and the Water was convey'd thither by Aquaeducts, from the little Vil∣lage of Arcueuil near Paris, as may still be seen by some Remains of the Ruines. The Bastille is a very strong Castle, built above the Gate of St. Anthony. Its Form is square, with four great Towers that defend it of every side; its Ditch ve∣ry deep, and other Fortifications as regular. Here Persons of Quality, suspected of Crimes against the State are imprisoned, and there is a Governour to take care of it. The Arsenal built just by the River, is a great Building with store of Arms, fine Gardens, and curious Sets of Elm-Trees; the Great Master of the Ordnance has his Apartment, and keeps his ordinary Resi∣dence there. The Town-House built by Francis I. was new built by Henry the Great; the Front is extraordinary well worked, the Cham∣bers spacious, the Pavilions uniform, and the Pillars and Clock-Tower magnificent. Its Revenues are so great, that the King very often orders Payments of vast Sums hence. They must be able Men that are
received Sheriffs here, and sometimes the whole Court move to have the Man they like, chosen Lord Mayor or Provost of Merchants, because the Place is of such con∣sequence, and he that has it has so much Authority over the People,, that he may raise them against whom he pleases. The Government of the Town is in his and the four Sheriffs Hands, who stand but two years in their Office. Besides these, there are twenty six Councellors, and ten Serge∣ants that serve the Provost and his Sheriffs with sixteen Quaterniers and their Com∣missaries, and other under Officers, to hinder any Disorder or Tumult; an hundred and twenty Archers or Watch-men, who with six∣ty Arbalestiers, or Cross-bow-men, an hundred Arquebusiers, or Small-shot-men, the Foot and Horse Watch, go the Rounds every Night, commanded by the Captain of the Watch, called the Knight of the Watch, Le Chevalier du guet. The Town's Attorney takes the Title of King's Attorney. The Company of Wine-Cryers, to the Number of twenty four, are imploy'd in Funerals and twenty four Salt-Porters, that carry the King's Bodies, are a sort of other Offi∣cers of this Town, where the Provost of Merchants and Sheriffs are allowed Noble∣men, and Knighted after two years Em∣ployment.
As for the Justice of Paris, there is the Provost, a Man of the short Gown, three Lieutenants, viz. the Civil, Criminal and Particular, and several Counsellors, who compose the Presidial, and keep Court in he Great Chastelet. The Judge and Con∣suls of Merchants drawn out of that Body, o the number of five, being sworn before the Parliament sit in St. Mederic's Cloister. As to the Parliament of Paris, called also he Court of Peers, because the Dukes and Peers of France, and the Officers of the Crown take their Oaths there, and cannot be judged elsewhere, especially for any Crime; at least according to Law; for Cardinal Richelieu passed by this formally, when he gave Commission to try the Mar∣shall of Marillac, and afterwards the Duke of Montmorency, purposely perhaps to dero∣gate the Parliaments Authority, and make the Monarchy more absolute. However, Paris has yet the first and noblest Parlia∣ment in the Kingdom, having been found∣ed by Pepin, Head of the Second Stock of the French Kings in 755 or 756, and made se∣dentary by Philip the Fair, in 1302. The whole Governments of the Isle of France, Picardy, Champaign, Orleannois and Lionnois, and the Diocess of Macon depend upon it; and this Court only knows of the King's Regalia, Peer∣doms and Portions given to the Royal Chil∣dren. It's composed of eighteen Presidents,
and an hundred sixty nine Counsellors, a divided into eight Chambers. The gr Chamber has seven Presidents, besides  first, and twenty nine Counsellors. Du and Peers, and Counsellors of Honour, m sit and vote there, as well as the Arc¦bishop of Paris, since his Church was ere¦ed into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 167 and the Abbot of St. Denis in quality  Counsellor of Honour. The King's M¦sters of Requests have the same Priviledg but four only of them may sit there at o time. The five following Chambers, a called Chambres des Enquêtes, or Inquiri and have each two Presidents, and twent eight Counsellors. The two last Chambe bear the Name of Tournelle, because the have no proper Magistrates, but are fille up by turns with those of the other Cham¦bers. Thus the Criminal Tournelle has fou Presidents, and eighteen Counsellors of th Great Chamber, and ten of the Inquiries and the Civil Tournelle has four Presidents and six Counsellors of the Great Chamber and twenty of the others. In 1587, King Henry IV. had established a Chamber of th Edict in that Parliament, on behalf of hi Protestant Subjects, and bestowed the Dig∣nity of Counsellor on six of their Men; but this commendable and impartial Institution was suppressed by the present King in 1669 During the great Vacations, beginning on
the 7th. of September, and ending at the 2th. of November, there is a Chamber e∣tablished to make an end of Suits that can∣ot be deferred. Besides these, there are several other Courts, as the Court of Accounts, fixed at aris at the same time as the Parliament. The Court of Aides, erected by Charles VI. nd increased with two other Chambers by Henry II. and Lewis XIII. The Court of he Mint: The Chamber of the Treasure, where the General Treasurers of France eep their Court. That of the Marshals of rance, of the Admiral, of the Great Ma∣ters of Waters and Woods is kept at the Marble-Table. The Baily of the Palace as his Chamber in the Great Hall; and he Great Council have theirs without the alace, in the Cloister of St. Germain 'Auxerrois, &c. The Bishoprick of Paris was erected into an Archbishoprick, in 1622. nd has for Suffragans, Meaux, Chartres, nd Orleans. The Place Royal, is one of the finest of he whole Town, both for the Symmetry nd Magnificence of the Buildings, and for he Piazza's and Arches that environ it, with the cast Copper Statue of Lewis XIII. n the middle, on a Foot-stall of white Marble, with Inscriptions. Here stood for∣merly an Hôtle, or Palace called des Tour∣elles; but because Henry II. died there of
the Wound he received in his Eye at Turnament, Catharine of Medicis got th stately Building pulled down. Carrous were kept in this Market in 1612, up the Subject of the King's and his Siste Marriage with the Infanta and Prince  Spain. The Louvre, that was the ordinary Re¦dence of the Kings of France, from Le XII. till Lewis XIV. was built by Phil August in 1214, to keep his Papers, an Noble Men Prisoners. It has been increa¦ed and beautified since Francis I. by most  his Successors. At present it comprehen the Louvre, properly so called, and the P¦lace of the Tuilleries, joyned together by o of the finest Galleries in Europe; the Build∣ing and Ornaments are considerable, th Depth of the Foundations being taken fro the Heighth and Thickness of the Work with Conveniency of Apartments and Offi¦ces. Its Form is rather long than square and, 'tis said, this present King ordered  Piece of Tapistry to be made, that should reach from one end to the other, repre∣senting the chief Towns he has taken, an the Battels fought and gained by his Armies There is another Monument of this Princes Vanity and Pride, but I don't know whe∣ther it's finished: viz. His Brazen Statue o Horse-back upon a Rock, looking as unac∣cessible, as though nothing had been able to
withstand him. His Enemies are represent∣d under his Feet, and amongst the rest, he pretended Hereticks, Rebels and Duel∣ists. At the foot of the Rock, are the four rincipal Rivers which he is gone over, as he Rhine, the Scheld, the Meuse, and the Moselle. The Royal Printing-House is in the Gal∣ery of the Louvre, and the French Acade∣my have Lodgings in this Palace. There is lso a Place prepared for the King's Library and Closet of Rarities. The Palace of Orleance is a magnificent and regular Building, enriched with seve∣al fine Statues, and adorned with excellent Paintings, which, with its fine Gardens, Fountains, Grotto's and Water-works, makes it a very pleasant Place. The others are, that which Mary of Medicis built in the Suburb of St. Germain, and still has the Name of Luxemburg; those of Bourbon, Na∣varre, Soissons, Angoulême, Longueville, Es∣pernon, Maine, Montmorency, Bouillon; but especially that of the Cardinal of Richelieu, whereof the Riches and Ornaments are sur∣prising. Those of Vendôme, Guise, Chevreuse, Nevers, Sulli and Schomberg, are sit to lodge any Prince in. As for publick Places, these that follow are the chief, the Place Royal, which has been already mentioned; St. John's Church-Yard, the Grêve, the Vally of Misery, the Place Dauphine, the Parvis of Nôtre
Dame, the New Market, and Place Maube A Market called La Place des Victoires, ¦tuated in that part of the Town whi bears the Name of Richelieu, is become f¦mous since the mad and blasphemous Flatt¦ry of the Duke of La Feuillade. In 168 this Lord erected to the present King,  brazen Statue washed over with Gold, up¦on a Marble Foot-stall, underpropt by fou Slaves, and adorned with cast Copper Tr¦phies of embossed Work, representing th most memorable Events of that Reig The Statue is properly a Groupe, or a Compl¦cation of three Figures; namely, of the Kin in his Royal Robes, of the Victory behin him, who puts a Crown on his Head, an of Cerberus, or the infernal Dog kick'd under the Feet of this Sham-conqueror; by the three Heads of which, they would signifie the triple Alliance of England, Holland and Swede; or perhaps the House of Austria The Victory has one of her Feet on a Globe, the other in the Air, and with her two display'd Wings, seems ready to fly. There are besides, a Hercules's Club, a Ly∣on's Skin, and a Helmet; so that the whole weighs above thirty thousand, though 'tis said that it was all made at one Cast. On the four Avenues, or Sides of the Market, are so many Marble-Columns, adorned with Bass-Relievo's of Brass, representing this Prince's Actions. Upon each of these
Pillars, is a Lanthorn of gilded Brass, where∣ Light is perpetually kept, to venerate is new Idol, which is sufficiently denoted y this Inscription amongst others, Viro im∣ortali, to the immortal Man. Paris, as to its Form is rather square than ng, and divided into three Parts, the City,  ancient Town built in the Isle of the Pa∣ce, formed by the Seine: The new Town, lled La Ville, which is the Northern, or west part of Paris; and the University, hich is the highest. They were shut up ith seventeen Gates, leading unto ten Sub∣rbs, whereof that of St. Germain likes to e a goodly Town; but some of their Gates ave been demolished. These several Parts re joyned, and communicate together by en Bridges, most of which are filled with uildings. Paris lies so convenient, that Rouen sup∣lies it with what it has occasion of from ther Countries, and the neighbouring Pro∣inces with all Home-Necessaries. Besides his, its Situation is so very advantagious, hat there is no place in the Kingdom so fit or so great a City, or such a Court. The Houses generally are high and spacious, the Streets kept very clean, Fountains whole∣some, and in great numbers. The Air mild and healthful, and Provisions cheap; so that People may live there and spend much less than what is generally thought. Besides
these, there is another great Convenien in that City, that Men may go any time  the Night about their Occasions, as safe  by Day; because the Watch are so exa that no Thieves or Rogues can scape; the being Lanthorns very close, that give gre Light, and Chains in every Street to  drawn up upon such Occasions. Physicia have the Liberty of the Royal Garden  the Suburbs of St. Victor, where they w find many rare Simples. The Learned c visit the Royal Library at the Cordeliers of St. Victor, in the Abby of that Name, we furnished with ancient and curious Man¦scripts; that of Navarre, but especially th of the President of Thou; that is well look¦ed after, and in good Order. Besides thes each Religious House, as poor as it is, h its own particular Library. I shall conclud this Article by mentioning Val de Grace, th sumptuous Monastery in the Suburbs  St. James, belonging to the Nuns of St. Be¦net's Order, and built by the Queen Mothe Ann of Austria. It's one of the finest Place of this great City, which a famous Poet ha commended thus: Vrbs orbi similis, toto celeberrima mundo, Musarum sedes, Regina Lutetia salve, Francigenae tu Metropolis pulcherrima Gentis, Hospitio regum grato regis que ministros, Excipis & reliquas das jura suprema per urbes
Towns and Places of Note in the Parisis, or the Territory of Paris. ON the South Side of Paris, entring into the Deanship of S. Cel, is the Village f Gentilly, upon the River Bievre, or des Gobelins, where the Kings of the first and econd Race kept their General States, and ometimes their Parliaments; but it was estroyed by the Normans, and is now on∣y renowned for its many fine Gardens. At he top of this Village was the Royal Castle f Winchester, corruptly called Bicestre, be∣ause in the time of the English it belonged o John Bishop of Winchester. It has been ft ruined and rebuilt: King Lewis XIII. aused there an Hospital to be built for Lame Souldiers, who having been transfer'd nto another Place, it was designed to shut up he Beggars of Paris. On the South-West of the City, in the Castelny of St. Maur, are the Villages of Isi, where the Goddess Isis was adored; Van∣es, which was heretofore inhabited by the Water-men of the River Seine, and is now enowned for its Fountains, Gardens and Meadows, that furnish Paris with Milk and Butter. Arcueuil, formerly a Pleasure-House of the Romans, whence Julian the Apostate brought Water through Lead-Pipes
into his Palace, that was built whe now is the House of Clugny. Farther to the West, near the Sein is the Village of Meudon, two Leagues fro Paris, with a strong Castle built upon  Rock, in the middle of a pleasant Fore There is a Grotto that affords Water in a¦bundance, and is paved with Porphiry spo¦ted with White, Red, Green, and sever other Colours. The Chambers of this Ca¦stle, built by Cardinal Sanguin under Char IX. are adorned with Marble Statues, fi Pictures of the first Roman Emperors,  Aristotle, Cicero, Demosthenes, &c. and upo one of the Chimneys, is a Marble that re¦flects the Rays of the Light as a Looking Glass. The Town of S. Clou, Head of a Caste¦ny, on the West of Paris, is situated upo the Seine, about two Leagues from the C¦pital. It was formerly a Village calle Nogent, and has gotten its present Na from Cloüaud or Cloud, Son to Clodonir Ki of Orleance. This Cloud, for fear of his cr¦el Uncle Clotaire King of Paris, who h already murthered two of his Nephews, r¦tired to Nogent, where he built a Monast¦ry and ended his Life. There also die King Henry III. being stabb'd by James C¦ment, a Dominican Fryar. The present King Brother has there a very fine House.
Versailles. THIS Royal House, about four Leagues Westward of Paris, is become of late  considerable, that it deserves a particular escription. The present King began to uild or beautifie it in 1661. It consists f the old Castle, built by this Prince's Fa∣er, of other Buildings of the same Syme∣y, which he has added for Lodgings, and f a very stately Pile of Buildings that en∣rons it on the Garden Side. The House  built upon a little height in the middle of  Valley, encompassed with Hills, at the ottom of them; on Paris side begin three e Walks, formed by four delicate Sets of im, the middle Alley being twenty Fa∣oms, and the two side ones ten each wide. hese end at the great Royal Place, envi∣ned with very regular Pavilions, which e Princes and Lords of that Court have ilt there, and with the other Houses that rm the new Town. This Royal Place is  have a Fountain in the middle, with such alks as the former, in the other two A∣enues towards it. Out of this Place you ound into another, in form of a Half-oon; it makes part of the first Court, hich from the beginning of the Half-moon,  the great Court of the Castle is eighty athoms in length, with four great Pavili∣ons
at the four Corners to lodge several O¦ficers in. The great Court is shut in wi iron Ballistres, and two great Apartme that form the Wings, having each a Bal¦ny opposite to it, supported with Pilla and adorned with Statues. These, wi their Pavilions, serve for Offices, and ha Courts, with other separate Buildings b¦hind them. There are other double Apar¦ments that joyn these Wings, and make  Communication between the new and o Castle, and streightning the Top of t great Court, end with much Grace at t Little, which is the higher of the two. As the French King has taken the Sun f his Devise, and that Poets confound it wi Apollo there is nothing in this great Buildi but has some Relation to that God. There¦fore as the two Wings of the great Cou are the Provision Offices; they that had t Care of the Work, have got the four E¦ments represented at the top of the Portiqu of the Wings, because these strive, as  were, to furnish them with what is most e¦quisite for Mans Support; the Earth, wi its Beasts, Fruits, Flowers and Liquors; t Water with its Fish; the Air with its Bird and the Fire with its Help, to dress an make all ready. Each Element has thr Figures or Statues; upon the four Balc¦nies, that represent it as the Earth, Ceres, P¦mona and Flora; the Water, Neptune, The
and Galathea; the Air, Juno, Iris and Ze∣hire; the Fire is represented by Vulcan nd two Cyclops, Sterops and Bronte. Each f these Balconies has fifty foot in length; hich is the breadth of each Pavilion. Out of this Court we ascend by three Steps nto a large Resting-place, and thence, by ive more, all Marble, into the little Court, which is paved with white and black Mar∣le, with Streaks of white and red Marble, nd has a Fountain Basin of white Marble n the middle, with gilt copper Statues. The Front and Wings are built of Brick and Free Stone, with Marble busts upon Pen∣dants or Brackets of the same, for the greater Decoration. Before this Front is a Balcony supported by eight Marble Pillars, with red and white Spots like Jasper, after he Dorique Order, and their Chapters and Bases are of white Marble. In the two Angles of the Wings of the Front, are hang∣ng Bottoms or Tromps, that bear two Ca∣binets, environed with gilt iron Cages and underneath are two Basins of white Mar∣ble, in form of great Shell-works, where young Tritons spout Water. The middle Building has three gilt Iron-Doors, leading into the Vestibule or Porch that has two Apartments on the Right and Left. The two Wings of the little Court, have two Stairs of white and red spotted Marble,
which lead to the upper Apartments; t on the Right-hand, of one side to a H and Gallery, and of the other to seve Chambers, that are the King's Apartme separated from the Queen's by a great H that takes up the whole Body of the m¦dle Building, and has three Doors to a P or Platform that faces the Garden. This  all paved with white, black and r Marble, with a Basin of white Marble  the middle, prepared to be a great Spout. The great Castle, with the new Buil¦ings that this present King has added to t old Versailles, go under the Name of Ne Castle: They have a Sight on the Garde and Courts that part them from the litt Castle, to which they are joyned by gre Stair-Cases, that communicate with the up¦per Apartments. The Building on th Right-hand, and on the Grotto's side, is com¦posed at the lower part of several Pieces o different bigness. Coming out of the great Court, and hav∣ing passed under an open Porch, you find a great Stair-case thirteen Fathoms and a half in length, and five in breadth. Yo may go into the great low Apartment, by a Fort that is beyond this Stair-case, or by a Arch that is at the bottom, and leads into a Porch which looks into the Garden, as all the other Pieces hereafter mentioned. Out of this Porch you enter consecutively into
two painted Halls; the different Pieces of Architecture represented in the last, make the Place appear as environed with several Pillars diversly adorned, and far greater and higher than really it is. Out of this you come into that which seems as a Vesti∣bule, when you enter by the Court into these Apartments; the Cieling is supported by eight Pillars of the Dorick Order, all fine Marble streaked red and white, brought from Dinan in the Country of Liege; the Chapters and Bases being of a greener, that is called little Breche. These Pillars are disposed into two parts, four on each side, that divide the Vestibule into three parts near the Wall, and over against the Pillars are Pilasters of the same Marble, that bear a Corniche which reigns all under the Pla∣fond, and over against the Windows are hollow Standings to place Statues in. Next this Vestibule, is another Hall, whereof the Cornish that bears the Cieling is supported by twelve Pillars of the Ionique Order, with their Pilasters behind them. The four Pillars that are in the Angles with the twelve Pilasters, are of black and white Marble, and the eight other are of a Mar∣ble called Breche, which comes from the Pyrenees, the Ground is white, with red, black, violet, blew and yellow Spots. The Chapters and Bases of the Pillars and Pi∣lasters are of delicate white Marble. Out
of this you enter into another of the sam bigness, whose Cieling is Octogone, wit twelve double Pedestals a side of the Wi¦dows, and with Doors of fine Marble, hav¦ing twelve Figures of young Men wit Wings to their Backs, that represent t twelve Months of the Year. All these F¦gures are Copper gilt with Gold; the Pie¦ces over the Doors, and those that go across i the Windows, are of the Marble of Langue¦dock, Flame-coloured and White. On one sid of this Hall, is the Chamber and Cabinet  the Baths. All the Pieces over the Doors an Windows, the Props, and generally all part that have no Hanging, are laid with differen Marble in equal Divisions, so that all seem solidly built therewith; and this Order is ob∣served to make use of the rarest and most pre∣cious in the Places that lye nighest to the King's Apartment, so that as you go out of one Chamber into another towards it, you will observe them more and more costly, both in Marble Sculpture and Paintings. This Or∣der is also kept in the upper Apartments, for there are eight Chambers or Halls, all of a Flower, that have each their different Mar∣ble and Painting. The first, that is five Fathoms and a half long, and five wide, where it wants Hangings, is laid with e∣qual Divisions of red, white, and a green∣ish Marble, called of Campan, which is brought from the Pyrenées, and with a white
and black from some other Place. The se∣ond, the Guard-Hall, is done with Marble rought out of Burgundy, mixed with white, lack, red and yellow Spots; the fourth has its Doors and Windows done with a green, brown nd red Marble with green Spots and Veins, olour of Emeraulds: the Workmen call it green of Egypt, though its all drawn out of the Pyrenees; the Sides or Wainscots are of white Marble, filled up by Divisions of  reddish of Egypt, of a black and white, and a very fine of Agathe, brought from the Alps. The fifth is a Cabinet of the bigness of the Chamber, done with black Marble hat has yellow Veins, is called Portoro, and s dug in the Pyrenees. The sixth is a little Chamber to lie in, done with Flame co∣loured Marble, that has white Veins, and is called red Marble of Languedoc. The seventh, a small Cabinet that joyns the great Platform, pav'd with the said Marble. The Window and Door-pieces are of a green and red Marble, with white Veins; the Sides or Wainscots of the same, of that of Languedc, and the Marble called of Egypt by equal Divisions upon a white ground. On the other side, towards the Orangery; are other Lodgings like the former; but the Staircase is not quite so big as the King's, because the Chappel takes up part of the Place. The Apartment underneath is the Dolphin's, and is adorned with fine different
Cielings. The Apartment above it, is th Queen's Lodgings, consisting of the sam numbers with the King's, and laid with th same sort of Stones, but otherwise ordere The Paintings that embellish the Cieling represent the Actions of the Hero's of An¦tiquity, with relation to the seven Planets. Having thus far satisfied your Curiosit you may go by the Porch that is against th middle of the little Court, and by the vaul¦ed Galleries to the great Plot in the Gar¦den, which lies against the whole Front  the Palace, and is an hundred Yards i length upon twelve in breadth. But befor we enter farther into the Garden and littl Park, this part of the Building towards th Water-Plot, and the two Sides of this grea Castle, deserve to be considered, as we for the stately Greatness of the whole Mass as for the Beauty and Workmanship of th Stones, and the choice Figures and Orna∣ments that embellish it. The principal Focade or Front toward the Water-Plot, has three Balconies tha shoot out, each supported with four Pilla and a Figure upon every Pillar. These twelve Figures are the twelve Months; The Months of March, April, May and June are upon the Balcony of the Pavilion on the Right; July, August, September and October upon that of the middle of the Plot; and November, December, January and February
upon the Balcony of the Pavilion to the eft. In the imbossed Works that adorn his Front, at the Top are little Children mploy'd in the Exercises that suit each Month and Season. The Balcony on the Side that looks to∣ards the Flower-Pots, has four Figures hat preside over them: As Flora their God∣oss, Zophirus her Sweetheart, that by its ild Breath makes them spring, Hyacinth he Sun's Favourite, and Clytie his Lover, hat were both turned into Flowers. The mbossed Work all underneath these Figures, epresent Children that look after the Gar∣en, plant and cultivate the Flowers, and ake Garlands of them. Upon the Opposite Balcony, which is at he other Extremity, are four Figures that reside over the Fruits: As the Goddess Po∣ona, her Lover Vertumnus, one of the He∣erides, with an Orange-tree charged with olden Fruit guarded by the Dragon, and he Nymph Amalthea, that holds the Horn f Abundance. The embossed Work under∣eath are Children that plant Trees and ather Fruit. On the Balcony in the middle that relates o Comody, are four Figures that represent he Muse Thalia, presiding over Drammatick Poetry, Momus the God of Jests, Terpsicore nother Muse, that pretends to serious Dance, and the God Pan Author of the
Grotesque. The imbossed Works ov them, represent Children that are Marske dance and divert themselves. The several ¦ther ways that belong to Comedy: are repr¦sented on the Side of this Balcony, by t standing Figures, one of which is Music and the other Dancing. The four Figur upon the Balcony near the Grotto, are t Nymph Echo, that was changed into a Ro Narcissus, with whom she was in love, The and Galathea, which represent the Wate The imbossed Works represents Childre that play in the Water. Upon the opposite Balcony, are the F¦gures of two Gods of Rivers, and tw Nymphs of Fountains. In the imbosse Work Sea-Triumphs of all Kind. Upon the middle Balcony are these fo Figures, Ceres and Bacchus, Comus the Go of Feasts and Mirth, and the Genius th presides over Joy, and the Pleasures of goo Cheer. In the imbossed Work are Chil¦dren that make merry, and divert themselve on the Pendals or Key-stones; Heads of S¦lenes, Bacchantes and Satyrs, and on th Side of this Balcony, you may see th Figure of Ganimedes, and the Nymph Heb both imployed to serve the Gods wit Drink.
After having considered the Castle, you may go into the Gardens, and in the little Park; but as there are a great Number of Objects that distract the Sight, on ever side you will find it good to observe this Order. The First thing to be seen, is the Basin of Syrene. 2 The Grotto of Thetis. 3 Reservories. 4 The Basins of the Crown. 5 The Fountain of the Pyramid. 6 The Cascade or Water-fall. 7 The Water Alley. 8 The Dragon Fountain. 9 The Pavilion Fountain. 10 The Walk of the Water-Cradle. 11 The Marshes. 12 The Stage. 13 The Basin of Ceres. 14 The Water-Mountain. 15 The Basin of Flora. 16 The Banqueting-Hall. 17 The Basin of Apollo. 18 The Island. 19 The Basin of Saturn. 20 The Bosquets, or Groves. 21 The Basin of Latona.
22 The Basin of Bacchus. 23 The Labyrinth. This Labyrinth is a Place composed of many small Alleys, so mixed and interwo∣ven one within the other, that it's hard to find the way out of them, and not easie to leave so pleasant a Place: For the great Number of Fountains and Water-works have Subjects drawn out of Thirty eight ancient Fables: But as the Description of each would be tedious, so I will only name the Fables that are represented. At the Entry or Going in, you will find Esops Figure; then that of Love. 1 Fable is that of the Horn Owl, and other Birds. 2 The Cocks and Patridges. 3 The Cock and Fox. 4 The Cock and Diamond. 5 The Cat hung and Rats. 6 The Eagle and Fox. 7 The Gey and Peacocks. 8 The Cock and Turkeycock. 9 The Peacock and Pie. 10 The Dragon, Anvil and File. 11 The Munkey and its little ones. 12 The Fight of Beasts. 13 The Hen and Chickens. 14 The Fox and Crane.
15 The Crane and Fox. 16 The Peacock and Nightingale. 17 The Parot and Monkey. 18 The Monkey Judge. 19 The Rat and Frog. 20 The Hare and Tortoise. 21 The Wolf and Crane. 22 The Kite and Birds. 23 The Monkey King. 24 The Fox and Buck. 25 The Council of Rats. 26 The Monkey and Cat. 27 The Fox and Resins. 28 The Eagle, Rabit, and Beetle. 29 The Wolf and Porcupine. 30 The Serpent with several Heads. 31 The Bath, the Cat, and Cockerel. 32 The Kite and Pigeons. 33 The Dolphin and Monkey. 34 The Fox and Crow. 35 The Monkey and Crane. 36 The Wolf and Head. 37 The Serpent and Porcupine. 38 The Ducks and young Water-Spaniel. From the Labyrinth you may go to the Orangery, thence by the Flower-Garden to the Water-Plot that lies before the Castle; this consists of five great Pieces, and two other, which altogether form extraordinary Figures.
The little Park I have spoken of, is envi∣roned with another far greater, divided by a great many Walks, set with differen Trees. The most remarkable thing in it,  the great Canal, which begins at the en of the little Park, over against the Roya Walk, and is about 200 foot from Apollo's Ba∣sin. It's 32 Fathoms wide, and 800 long and at the Head thereof is a Plot of Wate that is octogone, four of the sides drawn in a circular Line, three in a Right, and the o∣ther joyning it to the Canal. This Piece has sixty Fathoms diameter, of one side se¦parates the little from the great Park, and at the other end joyns the Canal, which at the other Extremity has a Water-Plot 200 Fathoms long, and 100 wide, and is cross'd in the middle by one that is 200 foot wide, and of one side leads to Trianon, and of the other to the Mesnagerie, the Place where rare Fowls and Beasts, brought from foreign Parts are kept. In a great Court on the Left-hand, are the Stables, Sheep-Folds, &c. with all that belongs to a Base-court. The little Palace has its Particular Court at the end of a great Walk set with Trees. The chief Lodging or Apartment is Octo¦gone, consisting only of a Hall, with two little Pavilions before it. In the middle of of it are Stairs that lead into the Vestibule, and thence into this Hall, which is environ∣ed with a Court of an Octogone Figure
too, with Iron Grates or Rails that part it rom seven other Courts. This Hall has also ound Balconies, whence one may look into hese Courts, which are all full of fine and urious Birds, and of an incredible number of foreign wild Beasts of every Kind. I must not forget, that since the present King has chosen Versailles for his ordinary Residence, several private Men have built there Houses, so that it is become a pretty good Brough. Trianon. THis House, opposite to the former, on the other side of the Canal, and at the Right-hand, as you go from Versailles to Paris, is a very fine Piece of Building. The outward Front is 64 fathoms, sinking in form of a half Oval, in the middle of which is the principal Door all of Iron, with two Ballisters at the sides that joyn to small Pa∣vilions, and close the Entry. By this Door you enter into a Court that is almost oval, only squared to the Right and Left by two Buildings, separated from that in the Mid∣dle, whereof one serves the Lords, and the other the Warden of the Castle. These Buildings are each twelve Fathoms square, with their separate Courts and other Pavilions that form the Corners of the whole Front of this House. They that go to see this Castle, enter generally by the Conciergery
or Governour's Court, and thence into t great Oval; for this, besides the princip Entry, has four other Iron Doors to  whereof two open into the side Courts, b¦tween the great Door and great Pavilio and the other two into the Garden betwee the same Pavilions and the principal Buil¦ing. This Court is above an Hundred fo in length, and Seventy five wide, the C¦stle fronts it, and is fourteen Fathoms lon and seven broad, with a Ballister charge with a great many Pots, joyned or mortise at the top, and adorned at the bottom wit young Cupids armed with Darts and A¦rows. Over these are Porcelaine-Vesse disposed by degrees to the very top of th House, with Birds represented to the Life  and the Pavilions that belong to the chi Building, are adorned the same way. Ther is also another little Palace to pass som days in, during the Heat of Summer. Th has but one Story; the Walls of the Ha that has but seven Steps up to it, is covere with White, and polished, stuck with Or∣naments of Azure; the Cornish and Cieling are also adorned with divers Figures of A∣zure upon White, the whole worked aft the China's way; the Floor, Wainscot and Cieling are the same, being all Porcelain. All these Places look, and have Doors into a Plot over against the Chambers, where are Spouts that throw up Water out of four Ba∣sins,
built upon Piedestals. Out of this Plot you go down into another Garden that is al∣ways well stocked with Flowers. Other Towns, Royal Houses, and Pla∣ces of Note in the Parisis. REpassing the Seine, you find, a League west∣wards of Paris, the Royal Castle of Ma∣drid, built near a pleasant Wood by Francis I. upon the Pattern of the Escurial, or the Palace of the King of Spain. It was designed for a very fine House, but the French Kings having since delighted in other places, and little care being taken of it, it decays every day. There is still to be seen a Window, repre∣senting that where the Spaniards shewed King Francis I. to the People before Ma∣drid. Two Leagues higher, on the Southwest; is a Village called Haubert de Villiers, with the famous Church of Nôtre Dame des Ver∣tus, or our Lady of Vertues. Descending to the North, towards Paris, you find, a little Mile off it, the Village of Montmartre, called in Latin, Mons Marty∣rum, because, as 'tis pretended, St. Denis and his Companions were beheaded there, before the Idol of Mercury. And there∣fore when Christianity had got the better of Paganism, a Chappel, and afterwards an
Abby of the Nuns of St. Bennet, were bu on that Mountain. On the Northwest of Montmartre, is th Village of Clichy, where formerly was  Royal House called the Palace of Clich then the Hostel of St. Ouën beyond Par There King John instituted the Order  the Knights of the Star, as du Haillan re¦lates; or rather he renewed it, and setle the Knights in that House, as Favin wi have it, who asserts that it was instituted b King Robert, Son to Hugh Capet. Th Knighthood's Badge was a golden Colla with three Chains interwoven with gol Roses, white and red enameled. The wore, besides a Mantle of white Damask,  short Mantle, with Lining of incarnate Da∣mask, and a Coat of the same Stuff. How∣ever, this Order, so honourable and glori∣ous at the beginning, became in process of time too common, and being despised by Princes and Lords, fell to the share of the Knight of the Watch and his Comrades From the top of this Mountain one may have a full sight of Paris. Vincennes, commonly called Le bois de Vin∣cennes, is a strong Castle in a Wood, not quite a League off Paris; towards the East, it's surrounded with a good Ditch, and eight great square Towers for its Defence. Philip August raised up a Wall about the Wood in 1185. Philip of Valois begun the
Tower or Castle in 1337, which K. John and Charles V. ended. Q Mary of Medicis begun the Gallery that is on the side of Paris in 1614, and Lewis XIV. added new Buildings to it. Its Court is spacious and fair, a side of it is the Holy and Royal Chappel, dedicated to the Blessed Trinity by King Charles V. in 1379. Here are also the Chains of the Streets of Paris, sent thither by Charles VI. to punish that City's Rebellion. This Place is so very pleasant by its fine Walks in the Woods about it, that several Kings have chosen it to end their Lives in, as Philip the Fair, Lewis Hutin, or the Proud, and Charles the Handsome. Farther into the Woods, is a Convent of Minims, surnamed Les bons Hommes, which is one of the pleasantest Mo∣nasteries that can be seen. As for the Ca∣stle, the Inside is every whit as magnificent as what appears without. The Princes of the Blood, who were taken in the beginning of the last Troubles of France were confined here, as had been several others before them. Cardinal Mazarin dy'd at Vincennes in 1661. There is still seen an Oak, under which King Lewis IX. was wont to render Justice; for though he went to Vincennes, as to a retir'd Place; however, that the least Ab∣sence should not prove hurtful to the poor∣est of his Subjects; at certain hours of the day he sate at a Table covered with a Car∣pet,
and ordered his Ushers and Heraulds t cry out, whether there was any that wante Justice. Thence apparently comes the Frenc Proverb, Mettre une chose sur le Tapis, To put  thing upon the Carpet, for to propound a Business. St. Maur is a Castle built upon  Height, joyning a pleasant Forest near th Marn, about three Miles off Paris; but in imperfect, because Francis I. that begu that Building, had not time to finish it; ye its considerable for several Rarities, as Fran¦cis the First's Head very well worked i Copper; his Devise, a Salamander environed with Lillies, and these Words, Non deflorebi∣mus isto Praeside & istis ducibus. Henry IV. gave this House to the Prince of Condé. Returning to Paris, along the Marne, you find, a League from that City, the Village of Charenton, which by some old Ruines, seems to have been formerly a strong and conside∣rable Town. Between this and the Palace of Conflans, was an admirable Echo, which re∣peated Words to ten times, with such a Noise and quickness, as tho' they had been as many Canon-Shots It's great pity that the Cloyster which the Carmelites have built there upon the Ru∣ines of a Church, have deprived the World of so great a Wonder. Some years ago, Cha∣renton was yet more famous for the Temple the Protestants of Paris had there, to which have at one time or other belonged so many
great and learned Men, as Aubertin, Du Moulin, Mestrezat, Daille, le Faucheur, Dre∣ncourt, Gache, Claude. I supersede to name wo late Ministers, one of which was ac∣ounted one of the learnedest Men in France, nd the other one of the Eloquentest, be∣ause they are both living, and in England. The Palace of Conflans, where Jane, Queen f Navarre dy'd in 1349, belongs now to he House of Villeroy. The most considera∣le part of it is a vaulted Gallery, enriched ith a great many Pictures drawn to the ife, as two Sibylles, three Roman Empe∣ors, four Popes, several Sultans and great Commanders, especially the famous Scander∣eg or Castriot. Several Learned Men, as eneca, Scot, Thomas Aquinas, Platina, Guic∣iardini, &c. The Kings of England, of Navarre: The Dukes of Savoy, and of Lor∣ain; the Families of Valois, Bourbon and Nassau, all set in gilt Frames, and brought rom Italy, and 21 among the rest out of he House of Medicis. Three or four Leagues East of Paris, s the Village of Chelles, with a Church found∣ed by Queen Clotilde, Wise to Clovis the Great, and since repaired and erected into an Abby of Nuns by Queen Baudour, Wife to Clo∣vis II. Their Son Clotaire, King of France, was interred in that Abby in 666, and King Robert had a Palace in the Village.
Higher up to the North, four Leagu from Paris, is the Borough of Gonnesse, r¦nowned for its Bread, and Francis the First Answer to Charles the Fifth's Letter, stuffe with ample Titles; for he writ nothing el but Francis King of France, of France, an so to the end of the Page, where he p these Words, Lord of Vanves, and Gonnes A Joke not much unlike to that of Hen IV. who answering a Letter of the Span¦ards, filled up with Bravado's of the sam Nature, called himself King of Gentilly. St. DENIS, a pretty Town, two League from Paris, situated on a Brook called  Crou, in the middle of a fruitful Plain, an full of Game. At the beginning it was b a Country House of the Lady Catulla, wh buried there the Bodies of St. Denis, Bisho of Paris, and of Eleuthere and Rustic, his tw Priests, beheaded in the Persecution of Deci¦us, after the Year 250. For the Fable  St. Denis the Areopagite, coming over in Gaul to preach the Gospel, has been so solid¦ly confuted by Launoy, and other learne Roman Catholicks and French Men too that I need not to disprove it. I shall only observe, that it has been invented by Hildu Abbot of St. Denis, in the Ninth Centu∣ry, and that though in this and subsequent Ages, shrewd and Deceitful Monks gull'd  much as ever the Ignorant and Credulous Vulgar; however this ridiculous Opinion
did not want Opposers; among the rest, e Learned John Scot Erigene, who unde∣eived the Emperour Charles the Bald. The Church was built by Dagobert I. and e Abby founded by the same King, who ave to the Abbot an absolute Authority o∣er all the Inhabitants of St. Denis, and such, hat it extended upon their Lives and For∣unes, and that they were in a manner his laves. Moreover, he instituted a yearly air, of four Weeks length, to be kept in a ield near the Church, during which he orbad the Merchants of Paris to sell any ares or Commodities. Charlemaign or∣ered that all the Kings and Bishops of rance should obey this Abbot; that the ings should neither be crowned, nor the ishops ordained without his Leave, that all is Subjects should pay him a Tax for each f their Houses, that Slaves who should illingly pay it, should be put at Liberty, nd called the Free-men of S. Denis. In 834, ewis the Meek, who had been deposed by is Sons, had his Crown restored to him in his Town by an Assembly of the Clergy, ogether with the Advice and Consent of he French Nation. It seems that part of these Priviledges were either lost or contested in process of ime; for Charles the Bald, Emperour and King of France, who confirmed to these Monks the Grants of Dagobert, and added
to them the Lordship of Ruel near Nanter with its Dependencies, and a Country  nine Leagues extent about the Seine: Th Prince, I say, being buried in S. Denis Church, had these Verses engraven upon h Tomb. Multis ablatis, fuit nobis his reparator, Sequanii fluvii, Ruoliique dator. It's observed that this Church was neve burnt nor plundered, during the Civil Wars nor when the Normans, and then the Engli were Masters of all the Country there¦bouts; but apparently it was fallen to de¦cay in the XII. Century, since Suger, Abb of St. Denis, and first Minister of State  Lewis VIII, was fain to rebuild it; b how rich soever he was, he could not giv it its former Magnificence. The Abbot of St. Denis is born Cou¦sellor in the Parliament of Paris; he is fre from the Subjection to any Bishop; nay, h may bless Church-Ornaments, admit Peo∣ple into inferior Orders, and even commu¦nicate this Power to any of his Monks They are likewise inabled to build Abbies i any place of the Kingdom under his Au¦thority, and to chuse their own Bishop. The Town of St. Denis has been muc bigger than it is now, which appears by the old Ditch, that is at 200 Steps distance
from the present Walls; for it began to di∣inish, and its Fairs to be less frequented, hen the Parliament was made sedentary at aris, and the Inhabitants of St. Denis sub∣itted to the Jurisdiction of the Chastelet in hat City. However, there are still eleven arishes, besides the Abby of St. Remy, the Collegiate Church of St. Paul, the Priory f St. Denis de Lestrée, and the Ruines of an ncient Hermitage, called St. Quentin. In the Plains that are near this Town, as given a famous Battel, between the rotestants under the Prince of Condé and e Admiral of Chastillon, in 1567, and the oman Catholicks under the High Consta∣e of Montmorency. The first were routed, ut the General of the last was killed, which ade the Chance pretty equal, so that a eace ensued two or three years after. The Abbatial Church of St. Denis is oo Foot in length, 200 wide, and 80 in eight. This great Building is supported by o Pillars, and has Copper Doors that were ormerly gilt with Gold. The Quire is di∣ded into three parts, whereof the first, 8 foot long, and 35 wide, is made use of y the Monks; the second is 45 foot wide, nd 35 long, and the third but a little less. s for the Kings Tombs, which are the niefest Beauty of the Place, they are in ree Ranks; in the first whereof is Charles e Bald's Tomb, the Bodies of Lewis and
Dagobert to the Right, Hugh Capet's and O¦do's to the Left, and St. Denis's Relique richly enchased, in the middle. The secon as well as the third, are the Depositaries  several other Monarchs. Charles the Fifth Chappel, wherein he lies buried with all  Posterity: Francis the First's sumptuo Monument, where he and his Children ly with his Wars and Victories represented o fine Marble, deserve to be particularly co¦sidered, as well as Lewis XII. and Ann  Bretaign, his Wife's Tombs of Alabaste The Bodies of Henry II. and Catharine  Medicis, with their Children, Francis  Charles IX. and Henry III. are in the ne round Chappel; those of Lewis XIII. a Henry IV. are in a little Cellar on t Church-yard side; which besides the King has also several other fine Tombs of famo Persons and Officers of Note, as that  Bertrand, du Guesilin, Lord High Constab of France, and of the Marshal of Turen In the so much celebrated Treasure of St. D¦nis, are many things which the Protestan would not overvalue, as a pretended Na of our Saviour's Cross, St. Denis's Hea enchassed in Silver, and adorned with f Pearls, the Finger St. Thomas put into  Saviour's Side, St. Simeon's Arm, St. Ben Head, one of Solomon's Cups, a Pot th served at the Wedding of Cana in Galil Judas's Lanthorn, the Maiden of Orlean
Sword, Charlemaign's Oratory. But this Abbot has in his Custody the Ornaments of the French Kings, as the Crown, the Scep∣er, the Hand of Justice, the Royal Mantle, the Dalmatick, the Golden Spurs, enriched with precious Stones, which he is bound to send to the Place where the Kings are con∣secrated. Besides other Crowns of several Kings, a golden Crucifix, a great many gold and silver Crosses, Images and Books cover∣ed with Jewels and Diamonds, a golden Cup, enriched with Hyacinths, Emeralds, and a Saphir, upon which is engraven the Fi∣gure of Solomon. Some of these Jewels are esteemed 50000 Crowns a piece. There are likewise ancient Medals of the Roman Em∣perors, whose Price can hardly be known, so rare and curious they are. This Abby has, besides a Fountain very considerable, for the ancient Figures of Idols that are round it. Two Leagues higher to the North, is the Town of Montmorency, the ancientest Baro∣ny in the Kingdom, that was considerable enough before the English took and burnt it in 1359, as appears by its Ruines. It had then 600 Mannors depending upon it, and gives yet its Name to a Deanship, and Cha∣stelny, and a pleasant and fertile Valley, in which it's situated. Henry II. erected it into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1551, on behalf of Ann of Montmorency, High Constable of
France. But this ancient Family, who h lasted 600 years, and produced so ma High Constables, Marshals, Admirals, an other great Officers of the Crown, was e¦tinguished in the middle of this Centur there remaining but a Daughter, marrie to Henry of Bourbon, Prince of Condé,  1650, on whose behalf the Lordship  Montmorency was again erected into  Dutchy and Peerdom, in 1633. Dammartin, which Robie puts in the P¦risis, lies in the Diocess of Meaux, accordi to Sampson. It's a good Borough, with the T¦tle of a County, six or seven Leagues Nort East of Paris, and seven Miles from G¦nesse. Three Leagues on the North-West of P¦ris, is Argentueuil, upon the Seine, whi forms there a small Island. Our Saviour Coat without Seam, was found in th Town in 1156, if we believe Lege¦daries. French Brie. LAgny, upon the Marne, six Leagues East∣wards of Paris, has been a considerabl Town, and born the Title of a County; b has been twice ruined, by the Normans i the Ninth Century, and by the Duke o Parma, who took it upon Henry IV. for the Leaguers, in 1590. John, Duke of Bu¦gundy,
stay'd two Months at Lagny, in 1416, ooking for an Occasion to go to Paris, and wait upon Charles VI. but returning with∣out an Answer, his Flemings called him by  Joke, John of Lagny, who makes no Speed, which turned afterwards into a Proverb. Lagny, in Latin Lasiniacum, has an Abby very ancient, as its Walls testifie. Brie Comte Robert, six Leagues South-East of Paris, is esteemed by some Capital of the French Brie; other give that Ho∣nour to Rosoy, which has an Election, and is situated five or six Leagues farther on the same side. Ville-Neuve-S. George, is a new Town, well built, situated in a pleasant Place, where the River Yerre discharges into the Seine, three or four Leagues Southwards of Paris. Hurepoix. GOing up the Seine towards the South, to enter into the Hurepoix, the first consi∣derable Town you meet with, is Corbeil, si∣tuated thirteen Miles off Paris, upon the same River, where the Essonne discharges it self into it. This Town had its particular Counts in the Tenth and Eleventh Centuries, one of whom, called Aimon, built the Col∣legiate Church of St. Spire, and appointed yearly Incomes for its Canons. Lewis the Burly got this small Soveraignty from
Hugh du Puiset, since which time it r¦mained united to the Crown of France, a was the Head of a Provostship and Chaste It's said, that Caesar, who calls this Tow Metiosedum, built the great Tower, name in Latin, Castrum Corvolium, which serv still as a Citadel to Corbeil, and whence t French Name seems to be derived. Quee Isemburg having been divorced from Phi August, built there a Pleasure-house,  which some remains are still to be seen, ne the Essonne, in a place called old Corbe where she lies interred. In 1418, the Du of Burgundy besieged this Town, but w perswaded to raise the Siege by the I¦treagues of Elizabeth of Bavaria, Charles th Sixth's Queen. MELƲN upon the Seine, four League South-East of Corbeil, and ten of Pari Robbe puts it in Hurepoix, but Du Chas makes it the Head of Justice in Gastinois▪ for it has a Presidial, Baylwick, and Electi∣on, upon which the greatest part of Gasti∣nois and Hurepoix, and some part of Bri are depending. Melun is divided into three Parts as Paris, viz. the City, the new Town, and the Isle. This last was already on foo in Caesar's time, who calls it Melodunum, and has now a Castle and two Churches. The Normans destroyed Melun in 845, but since it was repaired, and given by Hugh Capet to Bouchard his Favourite. From about that
time it began to have its Viscounts, whose Family is yet subsisting in the Princes of Espinoy. Eudes, Count of Champaign, took this Town by Money, but King Robert re∣took and restored it to its Viscount, in 999. It seems that Melun became every day stronger, for in 1410, the English could not take it but by Famine, nor the French retake it in 1435, but by Intelligence. Melun is yet strong, big and well Peopled, the Seine runs through it, but the Communication is kept by fine Bridges. It has a Collegiate Church, four Parishes, and several Monasteries. Fifteen Miles North-west of Melun, and welve South of Paris, is the Town of Mont∣lehery, built by one Thibaud File-estoupe, in 1015. There was formerly a strong Castle, but it was all razed (besides the Tower that is yet on foot) by Lewis VI. sirnamed the Burly, because of the Rebellion of Hugh de Crecy, Count of that Place. Guy his Fa∣ther, was Great Seneschal of France, and married his Daughter Luciane to the Son of Philip I. afterwards King Lewis VI. But the young Prince not liking the Match, re∣pudiated Luciane, in 1107; upon which Hugh raised a Civil War, and so caused the Destruction of his Lordship and Family. However, this Town became famous in 1465, for the Battel which was fought near it on a Tuesday, the 6th of July, be∣tween Lewis XI. and Charles Duke of Berry,
his Brother, who had entred a League, call∣ed the Publick Good, with the Duke of Bre∣taign, the Count of Charolois, and several o∣ther French Lords, against that Monarch. The King had some Advantage, though the Confederates remained Masters of the Field; but what was pretty singular, was that a Gentleman fled out of the King's Army a far as Luzignan in Poictou, that is near 150 Miles; and another out of the Allies, to Ques∣noy in Hainaut, about 120, both giving out, that they had lost the Day. Montlehery is built upon a Hill near the River Orge, and has the Title of a County, Provostship and Chastelny. King Lewis XIII. united it to the Dutchy of Chartres, and gave it in part of his Portion to Gaston-John-Baptiste, his Bro∣ther, Duke of Orleans. Upon the same River, two Leagues South of Montlehery, is the Town of Chartres, nea whose Walls are the Gardens of Chantelon, which in King Henry the Fourth's time, had not the like in the whole Kingdom, and were especially admired for their Box and Myr∣tle-Trees, Harbours and Hedges clipt into Figures of the ancient Gods, Heroes, Ro∣man Gladiators, &c. But this fine Place, being fallen into the Hands of some cove∣tous or lazy Nuns of St. Bennet's Order, is extreamly decayed. Rochefort, on the River Remande, is an Earldom, four Leagues West of Châtres, and
almost five North of Dourdan, a pretty good Town, and a County too, on the River Orge ear its Spring, and the Frontiers of Beausse. It was the Patrimonial Estate of Hugh Capet, before he ascended the Throne of France, and has since been alienated, and reunited to that Crown several times. La Forté-Alais, lies twenty Miles South of Paris, and thirteen West of Melun. Be∣tween these two Places, thirteen Leagues South South-East of Paris, in the Forest of Biesvre, is the Borough of Fontaine-Bleau, so called for the great Number of its fine Fountains. It's said the Royal House was built by Francis I. at the Solicitation of his Daughter Claudia, who one day seeing a Hound or Spaniel discover a Spring, desir∣ed her Father to build an House there. This Design was since continued by most of the succeeding Kings, and perfected by Henry the Fourth, and is now one of the finest in France, by reason of the great Number of its Springs, the vast Scope of its Forests, the Beauty of its Gardens, the Length of its Canals, the Richness of its Apartments, Paintings, Statues, and other Curiosities. It would be too tedious to describe all these in particular, there being about 900 Cham∣bers, Cabinets, Halls and Galleries that be∣long to this great Place, therefore I will only hint at the most principal. The First thing to be observed in going in, is the great
Court of the White Horse, round whic are the Apartments of the Officers; henc are fine Steps to the Queens Apartmen in which there is a Garden with a Fountai that represents Diana holding a Deer b the Horn, and followed by four Dogs, an as many Bucks at the bottom. There is al∣so a curious Copper Statue in this Garde that represents a young Man naked, an pulling a Thorn out of his Foot. The Fi∣gure of Laocoon with two of his Childre and Serpents stinging them to Death. The Tennis-Court and Bird-house an sideways, as also the Queens Gallery; after that is the Deer-gallery, which is very long and beautified with fine Paintings and above 46 Bucks-heads. Hence you may go into the Council-Chamber, where is the Picture of the Count of Ombe, Queen Mary of Medi∣cis's Uncle. Thence into that of the Baths which has a St. John the Baptist at the Door, and an Adonis and Venus upon the Chimny. This leads you into the new Chamber, where is represented the Dutchess Gabrielle, under the Form of Diana, holding a Hunt∣ing-Horn in her Hand. Next comes the great Gallery, built by Charles IX. in which are these Emblems that follow. The First, Hunc Ventus sed me spes fouet. 2. Puro a∣det & uno. 3. Nunquam labitur icta fides, with a Man that helps others out of a Ship∣wrack. 4. Perrumpe obstacula lentè, There
is one who removes Brambles, and the like Impediments out of the way. 5. Tutum se∣creta silere, with an Harpocrates. 6. Preti∣osior ipse Lapillis, a Cupid that picks up small Stones. 7. Rex floret ab armis. 8. Vi∣gilantia regna tuetur. 9. Amat Victoria cu∣ram. 10. Plebis amor regis custodia, Under the Figure of a Swarm of Bees. 11. Cor Regis in manu Dei, Under the Figure of a Hand that comes out of the Clouds. 12. Ar∣cani custodia fida. 13. Mens Ardua tendit in altum. 14. Eloquium tot lumina Claudit. 15. Nulla altius ardet. 16. Non frangunt ob∣stacula vires. 17. Animos alligat aequos, Re∣presenting Justice and Religion. 18. Ma∣net victoria constans. 19. Hoc foedere lilia Florent, Representing France in good Union. 20. Ortus occasibus aequat. 21. Obsequium nil impedit umbra. 22. Casus haerebit in omnes. 23. In splendore tuo labor & quies. 24. A∣gitatus cresco, A Fire a blowing. 25. Comi∣tantur furta Dolores, A Boy breaking a Bee's Swarm. 26. Mox toto radiabit in orbe. 27. Mea clauditur hic spes. 28. Innocuo non uritur igni. Then comes the Chamber and Cabinet of Madam Gabrielle, that have each of them an Adonis and Venus. The Gallery of Fran∣cis I. otherwise the little Gallery, has at the going in Bacchus, Venus and Cupid. This Place is remarkable for a Conference upon Matters of Religion, between the Papists
and Reformed; or rather betwixt Du Pless Mornay, and Cardinal Perron. There is a∣nother hard by, that is full of Marble Sta∣tues. The King's Chamber comes next, where∣in Marshal Biron was disarmed by King Henry the Fourth's Order; and the Queen's Anti-chamber, where Lewis XIII. was born. The Guards Hall is enriched with Paint∣ings, and a Tapestry that represents Charles the Seventh's Victories over the English. The the Feasting-hall, where on the Chimny is Henry IV. a Horse-back, the whole of pure Marble, and extraordinary well worked, having at his Side Clemency and Peace, and trampling upon his Enemies. Then the Hall for Balls, which is very big, and has an Arch, or half Round with these Words, D nec totum impleat orbem. Next these, you must see the Gardens, especially the King's, where there is a Cleo∣patra of Brass very well worked by Angel Politian, and brought out of Italy into France by Catharine of Medicis. A Neptune also of Brass, with a She Wolf at his Feet, that gives Suck to Romulus and Remus. There are also three Canals covered with Swans, and well stocked with good and great Fish, among which, that of the Fountain has all the Beauty that Art could give it.
French Gastinois. FIve Miles East of Fontainbleau, is the Bo∣rough of Moret upon the Loing, near the Mouth of the River into the Seine. It has the Title of a County, and gave its Name to one of King Henry the Fourth's na∣tural Sons, Antony of Bourbon, Count of Moret, killed in the Battel of Castelnaudary, in 1632. Nemours, upon the Loing, is five Leagues higher to the South, and eighteen off Paris. It's a good and pleasant Town, which has the Priory of St. John, the Church of St. Pe∣ter, and the Abby of Our Lady of Joy, belong∣ing to the Nuns of Cisteaux. Charles VI. e∣rected Nemours into a Dutchy and Peer∣dom, An. 1404, and exchanged it with Charles the Noble, King of Navarre for, some other Lands. But in 1425, this Dutchy returned to the Crown of France till the Year 1461, that King Lewis XI. gave it to James of Armagnac. This Line was soon ended, and Nemours reunited to the French Domesne, in 1507, and given by Lewis XII. to Gaston of Foix, his Nephew, who died in the Battel at Ravenna, An. 1512. Three years after, the same King invested with this Dutchy, Julian of Medicis, who had espoused Philiberta of Savoy, this Monarch's Aunt. By this Julian was continued the Line of the Dukes of Nemours of the House
of Savoy, during 144 years; Henry II. Duke of Nemours dying without Issue in 1659. Eight Leagues South-East of Nemours, near the River Clary, is the small Town of Courte∣nay, with the Title of Principality, famou for having given its Name to the Royal House of Courtenay, that refers its Original to Peter of France, seventh Son to Lewis the Burly, and has given Emperors to Constanti∣nople, Marquesses to Namur, and Counts to Nevers, Auxerre and Tonnerre. In process of time this Family was divided into seve∣ral Branches, of which that of the Lords of Chevillon is yet subsisting. In King Hen∣ry the Fourth's time, they much insisted up∣on being acknowledged for Princes of the French Blood, as descending directly by Males from that Peter of France. But how eager soever they were, they could never be heard, because they are too low in the World. Between Courtenay and Nemours, seven Leagues North-West of the first, and about five Miles South of Nemours, is Chateau-Lan∣don, on the River Fuzin, and the Road of Paris to Lyons. It's a very ancient Town, if we admit the Conjectures of Vigenaire, who takes it for the Vellaudunum of Caesar. Three Leagues lower to the North, is a Village called St. Mathurin de l'Archamp, si∣tuated in a Sandy and fruitless Plain, whe∣ther superstitious Papists bring Naturals and Fools to be cured.
Pursuing your way to Paris, you find the Town of Milly, which Vigenaire takes for the Agendicum of Caesar. It's situated up∣on the River Escolle, between Melun and Ne∣mours, about five Leagues from each, and has a Royal Seat of Justice. Mantoan. MANTE, which gives its Name to that Tract of Land that is between the Seine and the Vegre lies twelve Leagues North-West of Paris, fourteen North of Chartres, on whose Bishop it depends, and three miles from the Forest of Rosny, on the North-East. It's sirnamed the Pretty, and had formerly the Title of a County, with a strong Citadel, that was demolished by Hen∣ry IV. at the Request of the Parisians. And therefore it had hardly been taken from the English by Charles VII. in 1449, were it not that the Inhabitants sided with him, and by their overgone, got a Confirmation of all their Priviledges, Offices, Freeholds, and E∣states. Philip August died there in 1223, as well as a Daughter of France, called Jane, who built its Collegiate Church, and is in∣terred under the great Altar. Charles V. founded in that Town a Convent of Celestin Monks, who within the Inclosure of their Monastery have a Hill renowned for pro∣ducing the best Wine of Franee. Mante has a
Bailwick, Presidial, Provostship, Salt-Gra¦ry, and Town Hall. Meulan, a good Borough upon the Sei is three Leagues nearer Paris than Man Next to Meulan is a strong Castle in  Island joyned to the Shoar on both sides b a Bridge. During the Wars of the League Henry IV. took easily the Borough, b could not master the Castle. Eleven Miles South-East of Mante, upo the River Eure, is the Borough and Princi∣pality of Anet, belonging now to the Duke of Vendosme. There is a magnificent Castle built by Henry II. on behalf of Diana o Poitiers. Upon the Gate is a Clock th bears a Buck or Stag made of Bell-metall, which strikes the Hours with his Feet, afte which fifteen or twenty Dogs, of the sam Metal, are heard running, and opening i the Chase. The great Hall and Chamber are Glased with Crystal, the Gardens em∣bellished with a great Number of Foun∣tains and artificial Rocks, with a Diana of Marble, adorned with several Branches of Coral, and fine and rare Shells; but what is most curious, is a Marble Statue in the Garden (where the Dwarf, the Citron, and the Orange-Trees are kept) representing a Wo∣man with a white Smock on, so to the Life, that People, though told of it before hand, are deceived at the Sight. Besides these there is a Chappel served by twelve Canons, that
is paved with white Marble, and supported by delicate Pillars, of the Corinthian Order. Passy is along the same River, but six Leagues off Paris. It had its beginning from a Royal House, where the Queens of France were wont to lye in. And there∣fore Lewis IX. called himself Lewis of Poissy, being Born and Baptiz'd there. This Town, though not very big, is nevertheless famous for the Conference held in it between six Cardinals, about forty Bishops, and a great Number of other Roman Catholick Doctors, against twelve or thirteen Reformed Mini∣sters. It was begun the 4th of September, 1561, and broken up the 25th of November next ensuing, by the Jesuit Layner, who ob∣serving the Stress his Party was put upon, concerning Transubstantiation, made use of Injuries instead of Reason, and threatned the Queen Regent, Katharine of Medicis, with the Anger of the Pope, for medling with Ecclesiastical Affairs. This is a Mat∣ter of Fact, confessed even by that partial Scribler, Moreri. Poissy is yet a pretty Town, the Head of a Chastelny, situated in a fine Valley, with a pleasant Wood on the East. The Borough of St. Germain en Laye, at the end of a Wood near the same River, three Miles off Poissy, and nine off Paris, is considerable for its Royal House, built by
Charles V, continued by the English, bea¦tified by Francis I. and finished by Henry I though Lewis XIV. has added some ne Buildings and Ornaments to it, as the Te¦rass, the Valley-House, the Flower-Ga¦den, &c. I would be too tedious, should describe all the Chambers of this Palac with their rich Furniture; but I cannot se bear speaking of a Mall, with square Pa¦lions, built all along, for the Convenien of the Players and Spectators; near whic are Grotto's, and Places where Outland and curious Beasts are kept. In the Castl built by Henry IV. is a Gallery with th Emblem, Duo Protegit unus, meaning, th he governed two Kingdoms, viz. that  France and Navarre. Upon the Gate is see the Castle of Fontain-bleau, and on the Side are the Towns of Venice, Prague, Na¦mur, Mantua, Adem, Sion in Swisser¦land, Tanger, Terracine, Ormus, Bellitri, Wit¦temberg, Nimeguen, Passaw, Mastricht, Flo∣rence, &c. The next thing that deserves to be seen, are the dry and wet Grotto's; the dry are only for Refreshment in the Heat of Summer; the other are more rare and curious. The First of these having a Dragon that raises his Tail, and moves his Wings, spouting up Water in abundance, whilst artificial Nightingales and Cuckows make a charming Noise. On the Sides are two black Marble Statues, that likewise spouts out Water.
The second wet Grotto, has a Serpent pon the Door, that throws up Water, whilst a great many Nightingales that are ll round it, charm the Beholders, who are ore surprized still to see a fair young Maid play upon Organs, and turn her Eyes o pleasantly, that several have been puzled o determine whether it was an Effect of Art or Nature. There is also a fine Table of black Marble, with a Pipe in the middle of it, that throws Water several ways, and nto different Figures. Another Marble Table of different Colours, besides Look∣ng-Glasses, Shell-works, and a Dolphin extraordinary well done. The Third Grotto shews a Neptune, with a crowned Globe, that is carried up on the Water, whose Drops represent Pearls and Diamonds. Here are also Vulcan's Furnace, Paper-Mills, Nightingales singing, with two Angels, that with their Trumpets, open the Doors over against them. Then appears Neptune, armed with his Trident, seated upon a triumphal Chariot, drawn by two white Horses that come out of a Cavern, and after they have stood a while turn back again with a great Noise of Trumpets. There is also a Form that seems to be pla∣ced on purpose for People to sit upon, but they will find themselves much mistaken, if they do not know how to turn the Nail that lies under, for they will be soundly wetted;
but if they understand the Knack, Wate suddenly spouts out of a thousand unpe¦ceptible Holes in the Pavement, that w the Beholders in a moment. The Fourth Grotto, is, without Contra¦diction, the finest of all, but its hard  come into it, the Water, unless stopped hindering the Passage. The most remarkabl thing in it, is an Orpheus, that plays upo his Lute, moving his Hands and Body  keep time with the Instrument, to the grea Admiration of the Beholders, who are n less suprized with the great Number of Beasts and Birds, that charmed with h sweet Melody, follow him; of Rocks, Trees and Plants, that stoop to make him their profound Respect. Besides these, there are the twelve Signs of the Zodiack, that run ac¦cording to their Course in the Firmament: A Bacchus seated on his Throne, that holds a Glass in his Hand. In fine, Heaven, Hell, the Sea, Men of War, the four Elements, the Castle of St. Germain, the King, the Princes and Court are so well represented upon the Waves, that it's hardly possible to believe it. The Dolphin of France also ap∣pears there, with Angels that come dow from Heaven. There are yet a Neptune, a Mercury, a Jupiter, with the Representa∣tion of the four Cardinal Virtues in white Marble, and several other very curious things, that make it one of the finest Places in Europe.
A small League from this Place, towards aris, is a Copse, or Underwood, along he High-way. This Wood has a strange roperty, for the Branches cut on one side, ill swim atop, if thrown into the Water, ut those on the other will sink down; and herefore the Vulgar calls it the Treason∣ood: adding further, that it was in this lace, upon a great Table, which is still to e seen, that Ganelon brewed his horrid erfidies, whereby he betray'd the House f Ardennes, a great many of the French eers and Captains of Charlemaign, and caus∣d the Loss of the Battel of Roncevaux, near he Pyrenean Mountains, in 780. About two Leagues from St. Germain, and hree from Paris, is the Borough of Ruel, hich is considerable for a costly House, ormerly belonging to the Cardinal of Riche∣eu. This House has four great separate partments, surrounded with good Ditches, nd a fine Court in the middle, where are wo great Dogs of Brass, that spout Water hrough their Genitals, and empty the Court o fill the Ditch. A little farther, is a ountain, in form of a Rose, in which tands Hercules with his Club, with Cerbe∣us at his Feet, that Vomits up Water as ear as any Crystal. There are also fine lleys, Gardens, Labyrinths, Aquaducts, nd the like.
A Mile higher to the North, at the sam distance off Paris, is another considerabl Borough, called Nanterre, where 'tis sa that St. Genevieve was born and fed her F¦ther's Cattle, in a Park now walled in,  which the Country People tell you, that  is never covered with Water, though all th neighbouring Fields be overflown. Chateaufort is a good Borough too, fi Leagues South-West of Paris, and two  Versailles. It's the Head of a Chastelny,  which is the fine Town of Limours, eigh Leagues South-West of Paris, and thre West of Montlehery. At the North end of the Forest Liveli nineteen Miles West of Paris, and eleve North-West of Montlehery, lies upon a Hi the Town of Montfort-l'Amaury, with th Title of a County, and an Election. Whe¦ther the Castle of Montfort has been buil and the Town walled in by King Rober Who gave them to its natural Son Amaulr is controverted among the French Histo¦ans, some of whom deny that King Rober ever had any Bastards; but sure it is, tha one Amaulry, Lord of Montfort, lived be¦tween the Years 1053 and 1073, and wa Father to Simon, Count of Montfort-l'Amaur whence is descended the illustrious Famil of these Counts, which has produced seve∣ral great Captains, a High-Constable  France, and nine Soveraign Dukes of Littl
Britain; from John IV. in 1345, to Claude f France, last Dutchess of Britain, who arryed Francis I. and was Mother to Henry II. Kings of France, by which means his Dutchy was for ever united to that Crown. At the South-end of this Forest is the Marquizat of Rambouillet, and Three or our Leagues Eastward upon the Yvette he Burrough of Dompierre, and the Dutchy f Chevreuse: Four Leagues upon the same River is the pleasant Town of Long-junieau. French Vexin. Pont-Oyse, Oesiae Pons, Briva-Isarae vel Bri∣isara, Capital of this Countrey, included betwixt the Rivers Oyse, Seine, Epte, and rosne, is a strong place, which had former∣y its particular Counts. It's scituated Fif∣een Miles North-west of Paris, and Four off he fall of the Oyse, into the Seine. The English signalized themselves in defending his place six Weeks against the French King Charles VII. in 1442. Henry III. took t from the Leaguers in July 1589, but the Duke of Mayenn retook it January next. Pontoyse is seated upon a Hill near the Oyse, and the Town is commanded by a strong, Castle. There are several Churches and
Monasteries, with a Bailiwick, Provostship and Castelny. L'Isle-Adam is an Important Passage up the same River, Two Leagues above Ponto It has given its Name to a Noble Famil whence Two great Masters of St. John Order, John and Philip de Villers L'Isle-Ad were originary. The Isle of Rhodes was ta¦ken under the Government of the last  1522, by Soliman II. Emperor of the Tur at the head of an Army of Four Hundre Sails an near Three Hundred Thousand M after a Siege of 6 Months. The Great Mast would perhaps have defended it longer, b that the Divisions of the Christian Prince gave him no hope of relief, besides that  Jewish Physician, and Amarat a Spaniard Chancellor of the Order, betray'd his Cou¦sels to the Infidels. Beaumont a Town and a County The Miles higher, is another important Key  the Oyse, scituated upon the steepness of Hill. The Counts of Beaumont upon O have been in credit from the beginning  the Eleventh Century, till Lewis IX. boug it of them. This County was erected into  Peerdom by Philip of Valois on behalf  Robert of Artois, in 1328. Charles Duke  Orleance was Master of it in 1416, when  was brought Prisoner into England, and dur his absence, the Burgundians his sworn E¦mies took and plundred it. Since that time t
Dukes of Vendosine have possessed Beaumont under the Title of a Dutchy, which was born by Henry IV. while King Anthony his Father was alive. It has a Royal Seat of Justice. Chaumont scituated upon a Hill near the River Trosne, Thirteen Miles North-East of Beaumont, has the Title of a County, Election, and a Provostship. Magny Seven Miles South of Chaumont, has likewise an Election and Pro∣vostship. The Castle of Rocheguyon near the Seine, Three Leages South-West of Magny, has the Title of Dutchy and Peerdom. Beauvaisis. Beauvaisis upon the Terrain or Therin, Ca∣pital of this County, Sixteen Leagues North-West of Paris, and almost Eight from Beau∣mont, is a very Ancient Town. For Duchesne pretends that it was built by one Belgius XIV. King of the Gauls, long before Troy it self; and Servius calls it Belgae. Whatso∣ever it be, sure it is that in Caesar's time it was very considerable, that its Inhabitants were the most powerful of the Belgae, and those who withstood him the longest, their Jurisdiction was bigger than the Beauvaisis s now, for it extended as far as Vermandois and Soissons on the East, the Norman Vexin, and the Countrey of Caux on the West, the
Parisis on the South, and the Territory o Amiens on the North. Besides Beauvais Ca∣saromagus and Bellovaci, there was another great and strong City which Caesar call Brantuspantium, but no body can certainly tell where it was seated; Oysel, Sanson, and Adrian de Valois pretend that it was Bea∣vais it self. After this first Emperour  subdued Beauvais, it remained under th Romans, till the French became Masters o the Gauls, to whom it was so faithful, tha we do not read that it was ever taken b their Enemies; for which reason it is calle by some Authors the Virgin City. The ¦glish endeavour'd in vain to surprize it i 1433, and Charles the Rash, last Duke o Burgundy was not happier in 1472, for af∣ter Six Weeks, he was forced to Raise th Siege. It's said that this Prince's Ordinan was Extraordinary good, and that upon th account he boasted to carry with him th Keys of all the Towns of France. Henc his Jester not long after the Raising of th Siege took occasion curiously to pry in the Mouth of all the Cannons, and wh the Duke asked him what he did, I loo sais he, for the Key of Beauvais, but I can∣not find it. For this Warlike Resistance, the Inhabitants got several priviledges, as t be free from the Duty of Arrear-ban, wit the liberty of enjoying Noble Mannon without paying any Money to the Crown
But the Women as they shewed a Courage much above their Sex, so they were honou∣red above the rest. For they were allowed to adorn themselves at their Wedding-Day as sumptuously as they would; a Liberty very unusual in those Days: Likewise to precede the Men at a Procession to be made every Year at the Festival of S. Aga∣dresme, and to bring their Offerings to the Altar before them. Beauvais is a very fine City both for its Buildings as the Episcopal Palace, the Ca∣thedral Church of St. Peter, which has Eight Dignitaries, and Forty Canons, Six Collegiate Churches, and Three Abbyes; and likewise for its Territory, which is pleasantly interrupted with Plains, Vallyes, and Hills that are Fertil in Wine, Corn, Hay, and all sorts of Fruits, nay the Meadows are so good that Muttons are here bigger and fatter than in other parts of France: This Town besides is well for∣tified, the Walls being thick and strength∣ned with Bulwarks and Rampiers, the Ditches deep and broad, with Sluces to let the Water in or out. S. Lucian is thought to have been the first Bishop of Beauvais in the Primitive Ages of Christianity; but either of him or his Successors is little certainty, till the VIII, or IX. Century.
Odet of Coligni, Cardinal of Chastill was Bishop of this Town in the last Age and being perswaded of the Truth of the Reformation, refused to say Mass in the Cathedral on Easter-day 1561, and mad bold to Celebrate the Lords Supper in h Private Chappel. The French Kings, and the Counts of Blois and Champaign have en¦dowed this Bishoprick with great Revenue and Priviledges, so that its Prelate is Spiri∣tual and Temporal Lord of this Town and County, and the first among the Eccles¦astical Counts and Peers of France. H Power howsoever is not so great as it w before the Year 1539, that there was  Royal Officer but a Judge of Priviledg Men: Since that time a Bailiwick, Presid Election, and Mayoralship have been foun¦ded there. In 1609 that Duchesne wrote h Antiquities, all the Judges depended ye upon the Bishop. He has Nine Arch-Dea∣cons, and Three Hundred and Seventy Pa∣rishes under him. The Chief Trade of Beauvais consists in Serges, Cloaths, and the like Stuffs; is Earthen Vessels, which are made of an ex∣cellent Potters-Clay, that abounds in this Countrey, in lines which are transported into Holland and Flanders. There are a great many Villages round about the Town, and several Noble Families, whence are issued Four great Masters of St. Johns Order, John
and Philip de Villiers L' Isle-Adam, Claudius de la Sengle, and Vignacourt. But the most Illustrious of all is John of Bechencourt the first King and Discoverer of the Canaries, in 1402. Among the Titles of the Bishop of Beauvais is that of Vidame, or Vicedominus of Gerberoy, because he is Lord Temporal of that Bo∣rough scituated on the Frontiers of Picardy, upon a Mountain which has the Terrain at its foot, Five Leagues North-West of Beau∣vais. It is famous for a Battle between the English and the French fought in 1435, where the Count of Arundel lost his Life. Bulles a Borough Four Leagues East of Beauvais is renown'd for its Lines, and known since the Year 1075: Clermont Ele∣ven Miles South-East of Beauvais, and Six of Bulles is a pretty good Town, seated upon a small Hill. It has the Title of a County, and has given its Name to a Noble Family, known since the Eleventh Century. It was extinguished within Two Ages, and King Lewis the IX. gave it to Robert of France, his Son, about the Year 1291, but in 1327 Charles the fair exchanged it with Lewis, Roberts Son for some other Lands, and erected the Barony of Bourbon into a Dutchy and Peerdom, which made this House change their Sirname, and rake that of Bourbon. It's from this Robert that the present Kings of France are descen∣ded.
Clermont was restored to these Lor by Philip of Valois, who would not keep t Match of his Predecessor, but confiscated b Francis I. upon Charles of Bourbon, Hig Constable of France, because he had revolt from him to the Emperour Charles V. T other Towns or considerable Burroughs o Beauvaisis are Merlou, Bury, Ansac, Ang Mony, Monchy, Tillart, &c. Valois. Going over the Oyse, you enter into th Country of Valois, call'd Pagus Vadensis in th Statute-Books of the Emperour Charles the Bald. Mention is made of it since Philip I Afterwards this County was often given  the Children of the French King for the Portion; whence it came, that the Frenc King Philip VI. Son to Charles Count o Valois, Alencon, &c. and Grandson to Philip the Bold, was surnamed de Valois, and com∣municated this Appellation to Thirteen Kings descended from him, until Henry IV. in whom began the branch of Bourbon Charles VI. Erected this County into  Dutchy and Peerdom in 1402, and it makes yet part of the Portion of Philip of France Lewis XIV. his Brother.
Creil upon the Oyse, with a Fine Bridge, nd a Provostship resorting to the Bailiwick of Senlis is the first Town you meet with coming out of Beauvaisis. Charles V. built there a strong Castle, which fell in the hands of the English under Charles VI. and was retaken by Charles VII. in 1442. Creil is Two Leagues North of Senlis, and Eleven of Paris. Chantilly upon the Nonnette Three Miles South of Creil is a Royal House with fine Gardens and Water-Spouts, belonging now to the Prince of Conde. Verneuil upon the Oyse a League East of Creil, has been Erected first into a Marqui∣zate, and lately into a Dutchy, and Peerdom by Lewis XIV. Anno 1652. Sonlis, Augustomagus Silvanectum, is scituated on a Hill betwixt Two small Rivers, which mix their Waters near it, and bear the Name of Nonnette, with the Forest Halatre on the North, and that off Senlis on the South, Nine or Ten Leagues of Paris. It's the most considerable Town of this Dutchy, having a Bishoprick, Bayliwick, and Presi∣dial, Seven Parochial, and Two Collegiate Churches. St. Proculus was his first Bishop. The whole Diocess is interwoven with woods which has given it its Latin Name. In 873 Charles the Bald assembled there the Bi∣shops of Sens and Rheims, to try his Son Carloman, who was a Deacon, and had re∣volted
against him. The Young Prince wa condemn'd, and his Eyes pull'd out, and wa put close Prisoner in the Abby of Corby  Thence he made his escape to Lewis th Germanick his Unkle, who gave him th Abby of Epternack, where he died someti after. In 1589 the Leaguers besieged th Town, but were forced to raize the Sieg by the Duke of Longueville, and the Lord o la None, King Henry IV's. Generals, leaving Fifteen Hundred Men upon the spot. Crespy Eleven Miles East of Senlis, an Thirteen Leagues North-East of Paris w formerly a considerable City, and the Ca∣pital of Valois. It had the Title of a Coun¦ty, or was the Seat of the Counts of Val, who are indifferently call'd by these Two Names. This Title has likewise been borne by some Children of the French Kings. In Castle which is now almost ruined, is said to have been built by K. Dagobert, and keeps still some remains of its Antiquity, and of the greatness of the Town, that ha not at present above Five Hundred Houses However it is yet the head of a Provostship and Castelny. Francis I. concluded a Peace in this Town with the Emperour Charles V. on the Eighteenth of September 1544. La-Ferte-Milon upon the little River Oe, 4 Leagues South-East off Crespy, and almost 6 North-East of Meaux is another Provostship and Castelity. It is called in Latin Firmita
Milonis, that is the Castle, or Fortress of Milon, having been built by a Count of hat Name, under the Reign of Lewis the Burly. For as the Authors of the middle Age of the Latin Tongue said firmare for mu∣nire, and firmitas for munimentum; So the French who formed their Language upon this corrupted Speech call'd Ferte, such places as were strong by Art and Nature, and di∣stinguished 'em from one another either by the Name of their Founder, or by some particular circumstance of their scituation. As to this it's a pretty good Town with a Castle and Suburbs. Villers-Costé-Res on the West-side on the Forest of Res, Five Miles North of La Ferté Milon, was formerly a Royal House, where the French Kings often dwelt, to take the pleasure of Hunting. Pont St. Maixence is a considerable Bur∣rough upon the Oyse, Three Leagues North-East of Senlis. Bethisy upon the River Ottenete, a Mile Southwest of the Forest of Compiegne, is a good Burrough which had formerly a strong Castle, that is now almost ruined. John of Bethisy Physician to King Philip the Bold, was Famous under his Reign. This Bur∣rough is still the Head of a Provostship and Castelny, as well as Pierrefons, a Mile East of the same Forest.
Compiegne. Compendium, at the meeting  the Rivers, Aisne and Oyse, above Eig Leagues North-East of Senlis, was built  the Romans, or at least before the Fren master'd the Gauls. It's still a considerab Town, and hath often been the Residence o the French Kings; for Clotaire I. died, a was buried there in 564, and the Empero Charles the Bald repaired and increased i and called it after his Name, Carlop Charles VI. took it from the Duke of B¦gundy, in 1415, and Fifteen years after th same Duke besieging this Town, assisted by the English, the Virgin of Orleans was take in a Sally. Besides King Cloatire, Lewis II and V. and Henry III. have been inter in this Town; in which are made sever Manufactures, and whence a great quantity of Wood is carried down to Paris. Soissonnois. The Diocess of Soissons above the River Aifne has the Dutchy of Valois on the West, Laonnois and Champaigne on the West, Brie on the South, and Picardy on the North Soissons its Capital City is a very Antient City, for in Caesars time it was already the Head of the Suessiones, whose Jurisdiction was pretty large: William the Britain, a Latin Poet of France, who lived in the
Thirteenth Age, says that it was built by some banished Sueves, who imposed that Name upon it. Whatever it may be, sure it is, that when Coesar subdued the Gauls, Soissons had Twelve other Towns un∣der it, and could put Fifteen Thousand Men in Arms, which were Smeden in their Ca∣pital. During the Roman Emperors, the Praetors of Belgick Gaule made their ordina∣ry Residence in this City, and under the French Kings of the first Race, it has been some time the Capital of a Kingdom of that Name. It is yet somewhat big, and as a Bayliwick, Presidial and generality, and an Academy of Humane Learning; which was the first that was associated to that of Paris. It's Bishop is the first Suffragan to the Arch-Bishop of Rheims, he has the right of anoin∣ting the French Kings in the absence of his Metropolitan, and has sometimes performed that Office. This Diocess has Seventeen Parochial Churches besides the Cathedral, Six Abbyes in the Town, and Eighteen in the Country thereabouts, and several Mo∣nasteries. It's Territory is fruitful in Corn, with which Paris is chiefly provided. Laonnois. Laon was but at the beginning a Castle seated on the top of a Hill, and called by
the Inhabitants, Laudunum, and Lugdimum Clavatum, in the Territory of Rheims. Clovi the great increased it into a City, and St. Remy, Arch-Bishop of Rheims erected it into a Bishoprick, making his Friend Genebaut, Part∣ner of the Gifts and Possessions he had re∣ceived from that Prince. Hugh Capet made this Bishop the Second of the Six Ecclesiasti∣cal Dukes and Peers of France, because th Prelate had betrayed into his hands Charles of Lorrain his Competitor. This is related by Du Chesne; but if it be true, 'tis a won∣der how this Bishop is not mentioned among the Suffragans of Rheims, in a Notice or Catalogue of Bishops ending at the year 1220, and that in others of latter Date, all quoted by Valesius, he is put in the last rank Whatever it may be, this Prelate assumes still the Title of Duke of Laon, Peer of France, and Count of Anisy, and it appears that he had already some Temporal Jurisdiction in 1112, since Waldric Bishop of Laon was then kill'd, endeavouring to keep his Citizens from entring into an association, they had sworn against the Kings Consent. Another nam'd Roger far'd better in an undertaking of the same Nature; for at the head of some Troops, he routed his Diocesans, who had sworn an Association with the French King Lewis the Burly's leave. This Town was be∣sieged Twice, by Lewis IV. who was taken Prisoner there. This Diocess has Two pla∣ces,
renowned for many pretended Miracles: The first is Nostre-Dame-de-Liesse, or our Lady of Joy; the second is called St. Marcoul, whether the French Kings must needs under∣take a Pilgrimage, immediately after their coming to the Crown, if they will get the power of curing the Kings-Evil. Noyonnois. Noyon is seated betwixt Three small Brooks, called La Versette, La Golle, and La Marguerite, near the River Oyse, Nine Leagues East of Laon, and almost Eight of Scissons: It's an Antient City, called by the Latins, Noviomagus. The Bishoprick of St. Quentin was transferred thither, in 524, after the Town had been ruined by the Vandals. This Prelates Jurisdiction was formerly very great, since all Flanders de∣pended on him, before Tournay was erected into a Bishoprick in 1146. However the Bishop of Noyon is still one of the Antient Counts and Peers of France. This City has had several misfortunes, for it was plunder'd by the Normans in 859, and burned three times, viz. in 1131, 1152, and 1228: Notwithstanding it is yet a considerable Town well built, and has Four Suburbs. King Henry the Great took it from the Leaguers in 1591, but the Duke of Mayen having retaken it, Two years after the King
besieged and took it again in 1594. In 1516. a Treaty of Peace was negotiated there, between Francis I. and Charles of Austria, since Emperour, and Calvin was born in it the 10th. of July 1509. Chauny Contraginnum, and Calniacum upon the River Oyse, Three Leagues East of Noyon, is a Royal Town, and the Head of a Castelny. After the Battle of St. Lawrence in 1557, the Imperialists, having taken se∣veral Towns in Picardy, put a strong Gar∣rison in Chauny, it being a Key of the Oyse. CHAP. V. Of Picardy. THIS Province hath the Isle of France on the South, Champaign, Haynaut, and Flanders on the East, the County of Artoys and the Streights of Dover on the North; the British Sea and Normandy on the West. It is one of the principal parts of the An∣tient Belgae: Though the Name of Picardy be Modern, and its Original contested. The Opinion that seems to me the more reaso∣nable, is that of Adrian de Valois, who de∣rives it from Pique and se Piquer, to have a Pick, or to be passionate. He conjectures that it was first a Nick-Name given by the
Scholars of the University of Paris to their Fellows of that Province. And indeed we see that it was first the Sirname of some Private Men, as of one Clement in 1023, and one William in 1099; and that in process of time it became at last the name of the whole Province, as may be read in Nicolas de Bray, about the year 1215. Besides that the French, especially in those Ages, were wont to end in ard, the words signifying the de∣fects of the mind, as Babillard, Bavard, Musard, Fetard, &c. It was formerly one of the greatest Governments of France, before the Country of Beauvaifis, Noyon, Soissons. Valois, and Laon were taken from it. To make amends, the County of Artois, which by the Peace of Nimeguen in 1677, was wholly yielded to France, has been added to it, together with the old Conquests of Landrecy, Quesnoy, and Avenes, in Hainaut. This Country is extraordinary fruitful in Corn, and has the conveniency to send it away by Sea to Paris, and other places; whence it is esteemed the chief Granary of the Isle of France; but there grows no Wine; either because the Inhabitants neglect to plant Vines, or rather that the Country is too cold. There is a great number of No∣bility, and of the Antientest in the King∣dom, which has propagated in them the Martial Humour of the Antient Belgae: Its Inhabitants are said to be free, civil, gene∣rous,
and good Natur'd, but somewhat  passionate. As to the Seats of Justice, Elizabe Charles VI. Queen, erected a Soveraig Court of Justice, or Parliament at Amie during her Regency; but as the Parliame of Paris had an ill Eye upon this instit∣tion, which restrain'd its Jurisdiction  narrower limits, and that the Supream Po¦wer did not remain long in her hands,  did not this Parliament likewise long subs So that all the Bayliwicks, Presidials, an Justices of this Province are still resor∣ting to the Parliament of Paris. Part  this Country, viz. all that is beyond the Ri¦ver Somme was formerly alienated from  Crown of France, by Charles VII. a yielded for ever to the Duke of Burgundy,  1435. Picardy is divided by some into upper a lower, but the most common and easie Di∣vision is into Seven Precincts or Coun∣tyes, which last shall I follow here, goin from the East to the West, and from the South to the North; their Names are Tierache, Vermandois, Santerre, Amienois, Ponthicu, Boulenois, Pais Reconquis, or the Recovered Countrey. Its Rivers are besides the Oyse, that has already been described: The Serre that comes from the Borders of Champaigne, washes Crecy, and mixes with the Oyse at
La-Fere. The Somme, that takes it source in ermandois, at a place called Fonsomme, washes St. Quintin, Ham, Peronne, orbie, receives the Avregne increased with the Noye, goes through Amitens; ext to it receives the Celle, washes Pequigny, Abbeville; and near its mouth being increa∣ed with the Trie, Damboise, Damerise, falls nto the Ocean at St. Vallery. The Maye omes from Gapennes near the Forest of recy, makes a Lake between Bernay and ue, and discharges it self into the Sea, Six r Seven Leagues from its Source. The Authie rises in the Amienois, at a place called Chasteau d' Authie, goes through Dourlans, ompierre, Douriers, Nempont, and runs into he Sea five Miles North of Crotoy, and Six South-West of Montreuil. The Canche ri∣es in Arroys, near Hermanville, washes Estreé, Hsdin, Montreuil, and discharges it self into he Sea near Estaples. Lianne is a small Ri∣er of the Boulenois, upon which Boulogne is eated. Ostouvre, Veredicque and Souduvre, are Three small Rivers of the Recover'd Country, which joyn together Two or Three Miles above Calice, and then fall into the Sea. Tierache. This Country, the most Easterly of Pi∣cardy is full of Woods, and has taken its
Name from a Forest call'd Teoracia Sy which separates it from Hainaut on the Nort-West. It has several considerable Tow whereof Guise upon the Oyse is accounted t Capital. It was formerly a County, an the ordinary Portion of the youngest So of the House of Lorrain, but erected into  Dutchy and Peerdom by Francis I: on b¦half of Claudius of Lorrain, in 1528. T is that same Family that would have usurp the Crown of France, on pretence of Reli∣gion, for which purpose they raised sever Civil Wars in France, especially that calle the Holy League, to exclude Henry of Bo∣bon, the Lawful Successor. Seven Miles lower, along the Oyse, is th Town of Ribemont, Ribodi Mons. It has a Abby under the Title of St. Nicholas des Pr Ansell of Ribemont was one of the Lords th went to the Holy Land in 1096, and wa kill'd in the Siege of the Castle of Ptolema. Seven Miles still lower in a Marshy place, where the Serre falls into the Oyse is the strong Town of La Fere, with thick Brick-Walls, good Bastions, and Rampiers, and a Castle. It was already a strong hold i 958; so that it seems a Colony of the An∣tient Francs, who call'd Fara such Boroughs as were inhabited by one Family or Race, without mixture of any other. During th Wars of the League, the Marquess of Maignelay, Governour of that place, had:
promised to restore it to the French King Henry IV. but he was murder'd before he could perform his promises. The Duke of Mayenn gave the Government of La Fere to one Colas the Marquess's Murderer. Colas deliver'd it afterwards to the Spaniards, who allowed him to enjoy it under the Title of a County; but Henry IV. got it from his hands in 1597, by a Capitulation, that Colas subscrib'd with the Title of the Count of La Fere. Four Leagues East of La Fere is the Town and Castle of Crecy, upon Serre, Creciacum ad Saram; Seven Miles North-East of Crecy, the Town of Marle; Marna Castrum, which had formerly a strong Castle, and its parti∣cular Lords, Mayor, and Sworn Officers. Seven Miles to the North of Marle lies the Town of Vervins, famous for a Treaty of Peace concluded there, between the French King Henry IV, and Philip III. King of Spain, in 1598. Seven Miles Eastward is the Town of Aubenton, upon a River of that Name, and at the same distance over against Marle, the Town of Moncornet, Mons Cor∣nutus, or the Horn-Mountain, because it is seated upon the Two Tops of a Moun∣tain, that have the shape of a pair of Horns. La Cappelle is a strong Town on the Fron∣tiers of Haynaut, Seven Miles North of Vervins, built in the last Age to stop the
Incursions of the Netherlanders. It has b often taken and re-taken by the Spania and the French. There are some other plac less considerable, as Hierson, Iritio, abo Five Leagues from the Source of the Oy it was ruin'd under the last Reign by  Spaniards. Estree-au-pont Strata ad Pon on the same River, Two Leagues South of L Cappelle. Rosoy, Rosetum 2 Leagues North-E of Moncornet. S. Michael and Foifny, Two A¦byes; the first of St. Bennets, the second  Cisteaux. Fleo Major, le grand Floyon,  Native Countrey of S. Ʋrsmar, Abbot  Lob, Le Petit-Floyon, Autrepe, Altaripa. A this Countrey depends for the Spiritual  the Bishop of Laon, except Ruminiacum,  the Borders of Champaign, Three Mile South-East of Aubenton, which is under th Arch-Bishop of Rheims. Vermandois. This Countrey, which retains still the Name of its Antient Inhabitants, called by Caesar Veromandui, was much larger than  is now, since it comprehended the Dioce of Noyon, Soissons, and Laon, but now it ha not above Six Leagues East and West, and Nine or Ten North and South. I shall not determine whether St. Quentin upon the Somme is the Augusta Veromanduum of th
Antients, or whether it be Vermand upon the ronignon, that is now but an Abby. The urious may consult Cluvier and Sanson, who aintain the last Opinion, and de Valois, ho defends the first. Sure it is that St. Quentin has got its Name from one Quin∣inus, who was Bishop of that Town, and s said to have been beheaded there under he Empire of Dioclesian. Before the Bisho∣prick was transferred to Noyon, the Colle∣late Church of St. Quintin was a Cathe∣dral. This Town was formerly a County belonging to the Counts of Vermandois, but  was re-united to the Crown of France, ome time after the year 1156. In 1557 the Spaniards, knowing that St. Quintin was nprovided with Men, and ill fortified, laid siege before it. The Admiral of Coligny had got into the place with a few Troops, and his Name and Valour were for some time the best ampier of that Town, which saith Morery, as partial as he is against the Protestants, was not able without him to withstand such an Army Four and Twenty Hours. The High Constable of Montmorency, attempting the relieving of this place, was defeated, and taken Prisoner with the Dukes of Monpensier and Longueville, the Marshal of St. Andre, Ten Knights, Three Hundred Gentlemen, and Five Thousand Soldiers. The Num∣ber of the Dead was not less, and because this Bale was fought the 10th. day of
August; it was called the Battle of  Lawrence; in memory of which, Philip I King of Spain, dedicated to that Saint t Palace called the Escurial near Madrid. Th Victory made the Spaniards Masters of a Vermandois, and the Diocess of Noyon. Ho¦ever St. Quentin was restored to the Fren by the Peace of Chateau-Cambresis in 155 though this Treaty was not much otherwi to the Honour of France. Three Leagues South of St. Quentin  the Durchy of St. Simon, and Three Mil farther the Town of Ham, both upon th Somme. This last is strong and well fortifi being built in a Plain, and having the R¦ver on one side, and a Marsh on the other a Citadel with Four Bastions, and a Squa Tower: It was fitst a Burrough built b the Antient French, since Ham in the Ger¦man Tongue signifies a Burrough. Durin the Wars of the League, the Lord of M Gomeron, Governour of the place, dying  1595, his Three Sons went to Bruxels  demand their Arrears; and were detaine Prisoners by the Spaniards till they should de¦liver the Castle into their hands▪ B Dorvilliers their Brother by the Moth side, whom they had intrusted with  Government of the Town in their absen would not consent to it, and having call' the Nobility of Picardy to his help, H was taken by Storm, and the Spanish Garr¦son cut into pieces.
The Castelet is a strong Fortress on the Fron∣ of Cambresis, which was restored to the ch by the Peace of Pyrenees, in 1659. Santerre. Oing Westwards from the Castelet, you en∣ter into the Countrey of Santerre, which e call Seme-terre, because of its fertility. is above twenty two Leagues Northwest, Southeast, and but seven or eight East and st where it is broadest. Peronne, its pital, five leagues South-West of Castelet, al∣st seven West of St. Quintin, and eleven East  Amiens, is a very strong Town, both by son of its scituation upon the River, and a∣ng Marshes, and of its Fortification. It was  a Village wherein Erchinoald, Mayor of the ace built a Monastery 1070, on behalf of  Irish Monk, call'd Furseus, whence it got  name of the Abby of the Scots. King Charles  VII. had yielded Peronne to Philip the good ke of Burgundy, in 1435; however, that ewd Politician King. Lewis the XI. was so sident as to come to Peronne, in order to ferr with Charles the Rash, the then Duke of rgundy, at the same time that he had raised  Liegemen against him. This Prince, tho  otherwise very cunning, made use of so fa∣rable an occasion, kept the King a Prisoner, ced him to yield Champaign and Brie to his other, and brought him before Liege, to be ectator of his Victory, as really he was; for,
that City was taken by Storm, ransack'd burnt the 30th. of October 1468. Eleven miles West of Peronne is the T of Ancre, upon a River of that Name; it  the Title of Marquizate, and is known at  sent under the name of Albert. In 1600, a Florentin, call'd Concino C came out of Italy, under the Quality of Ge¦man Usher to Mary of Medicis, Henry the IV. Queen, and by his shrewdness, or good p came to be Marquess of Ancre, Lord Marsh France, Governour of Normandy, and the ¦tadel of Amiens, and to have the chief ma¦ment of Affairs under the minority of K. L XIII: But at last, either by Envy, misusi his Favour, or the weakness of that Mona who, as Bassompiere expresly observes, con¦ed to his Death; he was murther'd by a Con¦racy of the Great, upon the Drawbridge of ¦vre, the 24th. of April 1617. Moreuil upon the Auregne, is above  leagues Southwest of Peronne, and Mondidier  This last is strong, has a particular Govern and has often repulsed the Spaniards.  Town of Roye is four leagues Northeast of ¦dider. It is a Lordship, which has given  Name to the noble Family of Roye, that sub from the tenth or eleventh Century. Cre is a small Town, with the Title of a Marqui 8 leagues West of Mondidier. Nesle is an small Town, which has given the Title of M¦quess to a noble and Ancient Family in t Countrey, whence are issu'd high Constables France, as Raoul de Nesle, under Philip the b It is scituated upon the little River Igno,
gnon, above four Leagues South of Peronne, and e miles North-east of Roye. It was taken by arles the rash, last Duke of Burgundy, in 1472, d all its Inhabitants were either put to the ord, hang'd, or had their Fists cut off, be∣use they had killed one of the Dukes Heralds, hom he sent to summon them, and withal two his men during a Truce. Chaunes, a Dutchy d Peerdom, erected by Lewis XIII. in 1621. scituated between Nesle and Peronne. Halluin,  Maignelay, is another Dutchy and Peerdom, rdering to Beauvaisis, six leagues South-west  Roye. Amienois. THIS Countrey is otherwise called Proper Picardy, and is extended about ten leagues st and West, where it is broadest, and twen∣ North and South: But formerly it reached uch farther, as appears yet by the Jurisdicti∣ of the Bishop of Amiens, which compre∣ends, besides this Countrey, that of Vimeux nd Ponthieu, and a good part of the County of rtois: It is watered with several Brooks and ivers, and beautified with divers small Woods. he first Town you meet with coming from anterre, is the Town of Corbie upon the Somme, ear its receiving another small River, that kes here the name of Corbie. It has the Title f a County, and was but at the beginning an Abby founded by King Clotaire the III. and his
Queen Bathilde, in 662. The famous Rair who opposed the monstrous Tenet of Tran¦stantiation in its very Birth, was Monk in  Abby. Corby is yet a strong Town, which  Spaniards had surprized in 1636; but so¦time after being besieged in it, and streight by the French, 'tis said that they wrote to Pri Thomas of Savoy their General, in the follow words, O Lord have mercy on us, as we have tr¦ed in thee: Fiat miserecordia tua, Domine, s nos quem ad modum speravimus in te. Four Leagues farther upon the same Ri is the Town and Bishoprick of Amiens, suff ¦gan to Rheims, and Capital of this whole G¦vernment: Its Foundation is uncertain, tho  be very Ancient, since the Ambiani, who dou¦less signifie the Inhabitants of the Ami were already powerful in Caesar's time. Th Capital was then call'd Samarobriva, a Gaul name, that signifies Samara's bridge, for the ¦ver Somme was then call'd Samara, and aft¦wards Sumina; as Samarobriva it self lost  name in process of time, and took that of A¦biani from its Inhabitants. Several Roman E¦peror strove to beautifie it, and some took  for their Residence-place, when they were  the Gauls; but in the fifth, sixth, and follo¦ing Ages, it was much annoy'd and impaire by the Incursion of the Alains, Vandals, a Normans, so far, that it was almost wholly bu¦ed in 925. In 1329, Edward III. King of En¦land, made here homage to King Philip of V¦lois, for the Dukedom of Guyenne, and Coun of Ponthieu, in the presence of the Kings  Aragon, Navarr, Bohem, and Majorque,
were then gathered to undertake a Journey and litary Expedition into the Holy Land. This onarch began to fortifie Amiens in 1347, but  was Lewis XI. who brought this Design to y perfection. In the Month of March 1597, e Spaniards took this City by a War-strata∣m, having caused a Cart full of Nuts to be oken, as by chance, within one of the Gates, d while the Garrison was gathering the nts, and the Gate could not be shut, the Spa∣sh Army that was hard by fell upon them, d master'd the Town. But Henry IV. retook  with plain Force before the end of the Year, d then raised there a Cittadel, which was counted in his time one of the best, and most gulr in Europe: This City has a Bailiwick, residial and Generality: Its Rampiers are a∣orned with great Alleys of Trees. The River omme enters into the Town by three Chan∣ls, and serves for the use of several Manufa∣ures: Its Cathedral is one of the biggest and nest in the Kingdom: There they make a ow of several pretended Reliques, as the Bo∣y of St. Firmin, first Bishop of Amiens in Dio∣esian's time, of St. Dominick, of St. John the aptists head. Amiens had during an Age or wo, its particular Counts, but they were de∣rived of their Sovereignty by Lewis the Burly, bout the year 1109. Pequigni, three leagues almost from Amiens, pon the same River, is remarkable for the Death of William, surnamed Long-sword, Duke f Normandy, whom Baldwin Count of Cambray, r Arnoul Count of Flanders caused to be killed here: And for defeat of the English, who
were known in a Pass from the French, bec they could not pronounce the word Pequi as directly as a Frenchman born. Add to  that the Steward of the Bishoprick of A bears the Title of Vidame of Pequigni. Four leagues South of Amiens, is the Pr¦cipality of Conti upon the River Celle, and ¦miles more Eastwards the Principality of  upon the same River; they are both s but very pleasant, because of the many W and Game with which they abound. Two leagues East of Poix, on the Frontier  Normandy, three miles North-west of A lies the Burrough and Lordship of Ligneres,  famous for having given its name to the Fa of that late Traytor Bartholomew of Grandval,  at the instigation of the French King, and  Councellors, would have murthered His M¦sty William III. King of Great Brittain. Seven leagues almost on the North of A¦ens, lyes the strong Town of Dourlens, or D¦lens, Donincum upon the Authie near the bord of Artoys: It was already a Strong-hold in  when the French K. Raoul took it upon one ¦ribert. It belonged afterwards to the Co of Ponthieu; but was yielded by the Cou Mary to Lewis VIII in 1225, and since ali¦ted from the Crown of France, and given  Philip III. Duke of Burgundy, in 1435, and  united to it in 1463, Antony of Bayencourt e¦joyed Dourlens in the last Age, but the Ki Attorney seized on it, in 1559, and caused it  be reunited to the Royal Demesne. Dourles  divided into high and low Town, both very w fortified.
Vimeux. Amson the Father confounds this Countrey with that of Ponthieu; but more modern Geo∣phers, as Robbe and Samson the Son distinguish em, and the Learned Collections of Adrian  Valois, in his Notitia Galliarum, are agreeable  it. According then to the last Pagus Vine∣cus, the Land of Vimeux is included between nienois and Normandy, from which it is se∣rated by the River Bresle, call'd likewise Au∣, and betwixt the Sea and the River Somme at divides it from the County of Ponthieu: s extended above 14 leagues East and West, om Molien le Vidame in Amienois to Cayeu on e Sea-cost, and 5 North and South from S. lery to Bauchen upon the Bresle. S. Valery e Capital is seated on a Hill, near a Bay made y the mouth of the Somme, and call'd S. Valery r mer, to distinguish it from another Sea-town  Normandy, call'd S. Valery en Caux, or S. Va∣ry les Plains. It's Port is not extreamly good, ecause of the great quantity of Downs that re about it; neither are Cayeu Cadocum, Augst  Augusta better, tho they seem to have formerly een of some Consideration. Notwithstanding he Countrey is fill'd with a vast number of Villages and good Burroughs, whereof the chief re Bauchen, Gamaches, a Marquizate, Anssennes, nd Sennerpont, all upon the Bresle: Arguel, Riencour, Oysemont, Bailleul, whence John de
Bailleul, that became King of Scotland, w¦ther Lord, or Ordinary, or of another ¦leul in the Countrey of Dieppe. Ponthieu. THis County, included between the Ri Somme and Canche on the South and No the Ocean on the West, Amienois and Artoi the East, is about nine leagues East and W and nine or ten North and South: It is wa¦ed with many fine Rivers, as the Somme,  Maye, Authie, &c. It was in former A but thinly inhabited, because of the m Woods that almost took up the whole Co¦trey, but its now very thick peopled, t there be still several Forrests. This County  been often given in Portion to the C¦dren of the French Kings, and has had bef its particular Counts, since the tenth Centu In 1279, Eleanor of Castile, Heiress of Ponth was Married to Edward I. King of England,  brought this County to these Monarchs, wh was the occasion of many bloody Wars. Abbeville, upon the Somme, is the Cap of this County, eight or nine leagues Nort∣west of Amiens. It is one of the biggest a strongest in this Province, and some will  it was never taken, for which reason they  it the Faithful, or the Virgin City of that Co¦trey: It has a Bailiwick, Presidial, five Ga twelve or thirteen great Parishes, and seve
Monasteries. The River Somme, and the small ver Cardon, which discharges it self into it, ake it a great Trading Town, and give it the nveniency of exchanging its Linnen, Cloth, ooll, and Corn for other Commodities, that e brought in Boats from the Sea into the very own. 'Tis uncertain in what time this City as built, for I find no mention made of it be∣re the tenth Century, That Hugh Capet gave  in Portion to his Daughter Giselle. How∣er, it seems by the Original of the Name of bbeville, Abbattis villa, that it was built by me Abbot of St. Riquier, for there is yet a own of that Name two leagues North-east, on the River Cardon, which Opinion Adrian  Valois seems to confirm. Abbeville has lately produced the best Geo∣aphers of France, as Nicolas Sanson, who dy∣ 1667, William Sanson his Son, and Peter du l, who are yet alive for ought I know, and the esuit Philip Briet who died in 1669. It is said, at in 1636. some Women disguised in Mens oaths fought the Spaniards near S. Riquier, d brought away two of their Colours. Nine miles North-west of Abbeville, on the orthside of the mouth of the Somme, is the Sea∣ort Town Le Crotoy. Two leagues South east  Abbeville, is an important passage in an land formed by the same River, called Pont∣-Remi, near to which are to be seen the re∣ains of one of Caesar's Camps. Rue upon the aye, five leagues North-west of Abbeville, is a rong Town by reason of its scituation, being viron'd with Marshes, and having a Pond or ake on the East-side.
Near the source of the same River, is  Burrough of Crecy, which gives its name  Forrest hard by, but is much more famous  a Battel fought there between the English  the French, in 1346, King Edward III. co into Ponthieu, of which he was Lord, enc¦ed at the Village of Crecy: King Philip of V came to encounter him on the 26th. of Ag But the last was totally routed, and left 30 Foot upon the spot, and 1200 Horse; be that, he lost fourscore Colours, and the F¦er of his Nobility, as John of Luxenburg,  of Bohem. Charles Count of Alencon, the Ki Brother, Raoul Duke of Lorrain, the Count  Flanders, Harcourt, and Sanserre, the Dauph Viennois, &c: But the greatest mischief for  French, was, that a Fog having kept them s the sight of the Enemy till nine or ten a Cl in the morning, the English in the mean w planted the Colours they had taken f them upon a height, which the decei French taking for their own, resorted to th and received a greater overthrow than the  day. Their dead Bodies were Interred by K Edward's order, at Monstreuil, and the bur lasted 3 days. Crecy had formerly a Royal House, wh Ebroin Mayor of the Palace besieg'd, when  Warr'd against K. Thierry, and his Mayor L¦sius, and took both the King and the Town, Fredegarius relates. The Town of Monstre scituated upon the Canche, nine leagues  of Abbeville, five North-west of Crecy, and t East of the Sea. It was but at first a Villa which encreased into a Town by the buil
a Castle and of a Monastery, by S. Salvius shop of Amiens, where he would be Intterr'd, d whence it has gotten the name of Monaste∣lum, Monstreuil, or Monstrelet. Besides, there e still two Ancient Abbyes of St. Bennets Or∣r, one of Monks, and the other of Nuns. ng Philip I. having divorced from him his ife Berthe, sent her away to this Town, up∣ which he assigned her Dowry, and where e dyed in 1093. Monstreuil is divided into pper and lower Town, and has a strong Cit∣del and Baillwick: Great Bats can go up he River, by the help of the Tide, to this own. Boulenois. THis County is but 13 or 14 leagues long, North and South, and about 7 broad East and West. It was Anciently inhabited by the Morini: as well as Teronane, if it be true that Boulogne is the Gesoriacum of Pliny and Ptolomy. It is still the most mountainous pat of Picardy, especially along the Coast, which render them almost unaccessible: However, it does not want either Woods or Rivers, and affords such a good race of Horses, that the Inhabitants can furnish 3000 Troopers. It was erected into a County together with St. Paul, Guines and Artois, by Charles the Bald, Emperor and King of France, when he marryed his Daughter Ju∣dith to Baldwin Ironside Count of Flanders, in
863. The County of Boulogne was successi enjoyed by several illustrious Houses, wh allied themselves at one time or other with  Kings of England, France and Portugal, but fi¦ly remained to the Counts of Auvergne. T last of them called Bertrand the second, exch¦ged it with Lewis XI. for the County of La¦gais, in 1477; and that this Agreement mig never be broken, the shrewd King prese our Lady of Boulogne with it. In 1544. H VIII. King of England took Boulogne, fortified  lower Town of it, and built several Forts i the Countrey; but seeing that the keeping  this Town would cost him much more than  was worth, he agreed with the French King Henry II. to restore it to him, for the Summe 80000 Crowns, to be paid in eight Years. Th Treaty was concluded in 1549, but I do not he that is was ever performed as to the paying o the money. Boulogne, Capital of this County, is a Se∣port, formerly Renown'd for being the ordina∣ry passage from Gaul into Great Brittain, b at present not very commodious; some say th it was spoil'd by a Bank that the Emperor Maxi∣minian caus'd to be rais'd before it. It is di∣vided into upper nd lower Town, and seated upon the River Liane, sixteen leagues north of Abbeville. It has a Bishoprick, suffragan to Rheims since the year 1566, nine years after that Teroanne was razed: But De Valois pretends that the Bishoprick was rather restor'd to that City, or fir∣ed in it, than instituted anew, because those Pre∣lates were styl'd Bishops of Boulogne and Teroanne, that the first as well as the last are call'd Givit
Morinorum, and that the name of City is never given by Ancient Authors, but to an Episcopal See. There was formerly near the Haven an Octogone Tower, called in French la Tour d'Ordre, and by the English the Old man; its said to have been built by Caesar. It was eighty foot in Circuit, and Charlemaign looking upon it as a fit place for a Beacon, caused it to be repaired; but his Successors given either to Wars or to Pleasures, suffer'd it to decay so far, that it fell some 20 years ago. The most considera∣ble Buildings of Boulogne are the Cittadel, the Cathedral Church of our Lady, to whom the French Kings at their coming to the Crown, are bound to offer a Heart of pure Gold, weigh∣ing 2000 golden Crowns. There are besides the Parochial Churches of St. Nicholas and St. Joseph, the Abby of St. Willmore, and the Pa∣lace where the Baily keeps his Seat: Some take Boulogne for the Portus Iccius of Caesar; but Adri∣an de proves that it is the Gesoriacum of Pliny, which name about Constantine the Great's time chang'd into that of Bononia. The other Towns and considerable Buroughs are Bournonville, Monthulin upon or near the Liane, four or five leagues East of Boulogne, Am∣bleteuse, a Sea-port two leagues north of the same; its the same that Beda calls Amfleat or Amfleot, which denotes a place where the Sea ebbs and flows. Estaples, Stapulae, upon the mouth of the Canche, almost six leagues south of Boulogne. De Valois believes it to be the Portus Iccius of Caesar, because Ptolomy distinguishes Portus Iccius from Gesoriacum, and puts them in the Countrey of the Morini. 'Tis a small Town
well fortified, famous for being the Native Countrey of James le Fevre, who for his Learn∣ing did deserve the Praises of the Roman Ca∣tholicks, tho he was one of the chief Promoters of the Reformation. The Recover'd Countrey. THat which the French call Pais Reconquis, is a small Tract of Land that has not a∣bove five leagues in length North and South, and as much East and West, where it is broad∣est, coming from Boulogne, you enter into the Principality of Ardres, Arda or Ardea, the chief Town of which is seated upon a Hill, and divi∣ded into upper and lower, both well fortified. Before the year 1067, it was but a Village ere∣cted into a Town out of the Ruines of the Ca∣stle of Selnesse, by one Arnoul Lord of that place, or as others pretend, by one Arnold, Lord of Ardres, with the Consent of Baldwin Count of Guines, by reason of the great num∣ber of Shepherds who resorted to that place for its excellent Pasture-ground. In 1520 Fran∣cis I. and Henry VIII. had an Interview near this Town; their Court was so brisk, and their At∣tendants so richly adorn'd, that the place is yet called, The Field of the Golden Cloth. Cardinal Albert of Austria took this Town in 1596, but restored it to the French King Henry IV. three years after, by the Treaty of Vervins. Guisnes is a small Town 3 miles North-west
of Ardres, and above 3 leagues from the Sea. It has the title of a County, and formerly the Towns and Burroughs of Ardres, Fiennes, Wit∣sant, Andriae, Bredenarde, Sangate and Colemude depended on it. Sifri a Dane took it from the Monks of Sithiu or S. Omer, and made homage of it to Arnoul Count of Flandres, who counte∣nanced him. Before the French took it from the English, it was environ'd with strong Forts as Blanes, and St. Inglevert. It came in the hands of the English under King John of France, the same way that a late Conquerer has usurped so many Towns. The Governour of Guisnes being gone to a Festival of the Knights of the Star, Edward K. of England bought the Town from his Lieutenant. There was then a Truce be∣tween the two Monarchs, and therefore the wronged King John would have resented this match as a breach of it: But Edward answered, That this Assertion was contrary to the doctrine of late Philip of Valois, the French Kings Fa∣ther, for when an English Traytor that would have sold to him the Town of Calice was disco∣vered, this Prince coldly answered, that such Negotiations did not break a Truce. The County of Oy is separated from that of Guisnes by a small River, which Duchesne calls a Channel drawn from the Sea. 'Tis a Coun∣trey of about 4 leagues in length, and 3 in breadth. Modern Geographers speak of some wavering Marshes and swimming Islands between this Countrey, and that of Guisnes. Calice is now one of the strongest Towns, and the very Key of France towards England; for its Fortifications consist in nine great Basti∣ons,
besides those of the Cittadel, and several Out-Works lin'd with stone. It has a double Ditch, very large and deep, that can be filled with the River Hames, that runs along its Walls. There is also a Marsh and several Brooks, that render the approach of this Town very difficult; neither can one go to it, but upon the Causey or madeway, called the Bridge of Nieullay. As to the Haven, its Entry is defended by a Fort call'd the Risban, and it is divided into two; the smaller is called Cadegray, the bigger is shut up by two Moles faced with stone. Five years ago the present French King begun to build a Mole, upon great piles droven into the sand, beneath the low-Water-mark, which will be 30 yards wide, and make an Harbour fit to receive third or fourth Rates Men of War, whereas a good Merchant-man cannot get into the present Havens: This Work, if once finish'd, will be of dangerous consequence to the Trade of England, the rather for that the Port of Do∣ver is not capable of receiving Men of War, at least but at high Spring-Tides. However, it is not yet so far advanc'd, but a stop may be put to it by our Men of War. Calice is not ve∣ry big, but well built, and well Peopled; there is a Town-House, the Palace of the Baily, the Tower of the Watch, and several Churches: Calice was but a Burrough before the Year 1228, that it was Wall'd in by Philip Count of Boulogne. In 1347 King Edward III. besieged Calice, which John of Vienne, its Governour de∣fended 10 or 11 months; but being almost star∣ved, and having no hope of Relief, he proffer∣ed at last to Capitulate, which the King of Eng∣land
refused, unless six of the chief Citizens brought him the Keys bear-headed and bare∣foot, with Ropes about their necks, and upon that condition, that he should have an Abso∣lute power over their Lives. Tho these Con∣ditions seem'd somewhat hard, and that those upon whom the Lot of his Embassy should fall, might scarce hope to escape with their Lives, however there were Men so Zealous for the publick Good as willing to undertake it: but the Generous Monarch of England sent them back without doing them any wrong. The Town was Peopled with English, and remained in their power 200 and ten years. The French had not been Masters of it 38 years, when the Cardinal of Austria took it from them in 1596, but he restored it by the formentioned Peace of Vervins.
CHAP. VI. Of Normandy, especially the High∣er. THo' this Goverment comprehends only the Ancient Dutchy and Peerdom of Norman∣dy, and the French Vexin has been cut off from it, however 'tis still one of the biggest of France, be∣ing extended East and West from Aumale to the Coasts of Coutantine above 62 leagues, and 40 three South and North-east from Alencon on the Frontier of Maine, to the Town of Eu near the Coasts of Picardy. As the Kingdom of France was very large under the first Race of their Kings, since Clovis the great, and that youngest Sons had a share in the Succession to the Soveraignty; so this Realm was divided into two great parts, where∣of the most Easterly, which reached from Pi∣cardy and Champaign to Upper Germany, or from the Meuse to the Rhine, and beyond that River was called Ausstrie, or Austrasie. The other more Westerly extended it self from Nor∣mandy the Isle of France, and Beausse to the Coasts of that Kingdom, and was called Neustra∣sia, Neustria, sometimes Neptricum, and in French Neustrie. It was at first included between the Meuse and the Loire, then between the Seine and the Loire, and at last this name was appropria∣ted
to the second Lyonnoise, considered as a part of the Kingdom of Soissons, until the Year 912, that Raoul, or Rollon, a Swedish or Norwegian Prince, having wholly subdued this Province, embraced the Christian Faith, and setled him∣self there with the consent of Charles the simple, King of France, and then Neustrie took the name of Normandy from its Northern Conque∣rours. The Normans began to shew themselves un∣der Charlemaign, by Privateering in Low-Saxo∣ny, Freeze, and the Northern Coasts of France. Their strength encreas'd through the Weakness of Lewis the meek, for then they began to extort Contributions from the Freezons: But the Ci∣vil Wars of Lewis's Sons made them so bold as to undertake Conquests, which they at last per∣formed under Charles the simple. This Ancient Dukedom has the Isle of France on the East, the Brittish Sea on the North and West, Bretaign and the Government of Orleanois on the South. It is divided into upper and lower: The first contains the Roman Vexin, the Countries of Roumois, Caux, and Bray, and the Bishoprick of Evreux: The second includes the Diocesses of Lizieux, Bayeux, Coutance, Avranches, and Seez. The Soil is every where fruitful enough in Corn, Meadows, Hemp, Apples, Pears, and all sorts of Fruits. There are a great many Forrests, and several Iron-mines, but there grows little or no Wine, except it be on the Southern parts towards the Isle of France and Orleanois. This Province has many Noblemen, but the Countrey people is extraordinary Op∣pressed, because the Tailles, or Impositions are
not real, or upon Lands, but personal; so that a Peasant that has nothing to live upon but his Spade, must pay to the King ten or twelve Crowns yearly for his head, and proportionably if he have a Family, tho' he be not the Richer for that. True it is, that Provisions are cheap enough, especially Fish along the Sea-coast, and every where Cyder, which is the ordinary drink of the Countrey people; their chief Trade consists in Wood, Coals, Linnen and Cattle, and some Herbs fit for Dyers, which the Inha∣bitants call Garence, Guesde, and Pastel. The chief Rivers of Normandy, besides the Seyne, that has been mentioned elsewhere, are the Bresle that comes from the borders of Pi∣cardy, washes Aumale, Blangis, and falls into the Ocean at Eu, the Sart that runs into the Sea at Criel, the Arques that receives the Eaune, and discharges it self into the Sea at Dieppe, the Sye and the Seane running to the Ocean not far from the said Town; then you find the Aubette, the Robec, the Andelle, and the Epte, which run all into the Seyne, on the north-side of it. O the South-side you meet with the Eure, which comes from some Lakes in Beauce, on the Frontier of the Bishoprick of Seez, receives the Vaupillon, the Loupe, washes Chartres; receives the Gas and the Blaise near Dreux; then encrea∣sed with the Vegre and the Iton, that goes thro Evreux, falls into the Seyne at Pont-de-Larche: The Rille comes from a Forrest in the Diocess of Seez, hides it self into the Earth near la Fer∣riere; then coming out, washes Beaumont le Roger, receives the Carenton, and runs into the Sea two leagues North of Ponteau de Mer. The Touques,
receives the Lezon, the Orbec, washes Lisieux, Pont l'Evesque, receives the Calonne, and falls in∣to the Sea near a Town of the same name, call'd Touques. The Dive receives the Ante, the Lesson, the Meance, the Vye, and discharges it self into the Sea near St. Sauveur. The Orne comes like∣wise from the Bishoprick of Seez, and being encreased with the Nereau, and Drance, washes Pont d'Olly, Tury, receives the Oudon near Caen, and falls into the Sea at Estrehan. Along the same Sea-coast you find the Seille, which runs into the Ocean between Gray and Barnieres: Then the Aure and the Drome, or Dronine, which lose themselves into a great Ditch called Fossé du Soucy. The little River of Triviers, the Vire and the Carenten run all three into a Bay of the Ocean called Groin de la Dune; the Vire is the longest of all, washes St. Lo, and receives the Elle; the Carenten is encreased with the Rivers of Baupteys and Ouve: Betwixt la Hogue and Barfleur runs the River Sart, and farther on the North that of Cherbourg. On the West coast you meet with the Souille that receives the He∣rouille, and the Burd, which go by Coutances. The See and the Ardee fall both into the Bay of Avranches. I would begin here the particular descripti∣on of this Province, were it not that I think my self Obliged to say something of the first Dukes of Normandy, from whom our Kings of England are descended, and by the way to show the just claim they may still lay to that Noble Dukedom their Ancient Patrimony. Raoul ha∣ving setled himself in Normandy, not only by Conquest and force of Arms, but also by the
voluntary yielding of Charles the simple, and his Marriage with Gisele, Niece to that King, gave good Laws to his Subjects: Among others, that the Poor might have right done to them without any Expence, he ordered, that any Murderer, Robber, Incendiary, or any one that should pursue another with a naked Sword, should be stop'd, and brought before a Justice, without any other Warrant than the Out-cry of the Wronged Person. This is the Origin of what the Normans call the Clamour of Haro, which they make use of, when they think them∣selves wrong'd or oppress'd, perhaps too often, as they are accus'd to be of a litigious Temper. Howsoever it may be, Haro seems to be an ab∣bridged word for Ha Raoul, as tho' they would still implore the Justice of their first Duke. Raoul took the name of Robert at his Baptism, was succeeded by William I. surnamed Long∣sword in 917, or 920, and was succeeded by three Princes, named Richard, Robert II. Son to the last of them in 1028. was Father to our William the Conquerour, whom he got from Helen, Grand Daughter to Edmond Ironside, one of our Saxon Kings, if we may believe Thomas Rudborn, who quotes several Authors for this History. Thus England and Normandy were qui∣etly enjoyed by our Monarchs, till the French King Philip August taking hold of the Civil War, which the English Barons raised against King John, deprived him of his Dutchy of Norman∣dy, under pretence that he had caused his Ne∣phew Arthur to be murther'd. It was recon∣quered by Henry V. but lost again under Henry VI. during the Civil Wars between the Hou∣ses
of York and Lancaster. However, it remains uncontested, that this Province has been pos∣sess'd successively by fourteen Dukes of the same Race, six of whom were Kings of Eng∣land. I must not forget that the Normans are Witty and Ingenious, especially in making Esta∣blishments, which their Envious Neighbours would find fault with, and on that account stain them with Treachery. Their Countrey is so great and so Populous, that there are reckon'd a hundred Towns, and a hundred and fifty conside∣rable Burroughs: So that the Reader may not expect I should describe them all, but only such as are most Eminent, and of which some Particulars are come to my knowledge. Norman Vexin. THis Countrey was anciently inhabited by the Veliocasses, Velocasses or Belocasses, whose Ter∣ritories reached from the Andelle to the Oys; but after the Normans had conquer'd the best part of Neustrie, it was divided into two parts, where∣of that which obey'd the French King was called the French, and the other the Norman Vexin. De Valois relates a remarkable thing, namely, that the feuds between these two People are yet as great, as if they were still Enemies, and had not the same Master; so that they seldom mar∣ry together, nor will they Trade, or have any
thing common one with another. The Norman Vexin confines upon the Isle of France, from which it is separated by the River Epte. The first consi∣derable Town you meet with is Gisors, scituated upon the same River, fourteen leagues North∣west of Paris, with a Bailiwick resorting to the Parliament of Rouen. Under the Reign of Philip I. King of France, William the red King of England took it from a Knight call'd Payen, and fortified it in 1228. Henry III. King of England had an Interview between this Town and Trie with Philip August King of France, upon the news of the taking of Jerusalem by Saladin: And having consulted about the means to reco∣ver the Holy Land, they resolve to take the Cross, together with many other Princes, in memory of which they erected a Cross in the Field where they had made this Agreement, and promised one another to leave off their differences till their return. Pont de l'rche Pons arcûs, eleven leagues al∣most West of Gisors, and seven miles South of Rouen, is an important passage upon the Seyne, near the fall of the Eure into it, and therefore it has a particular Governour. It was the first Town which surrendred it self to Henry IV. af∣ter his coming to the Crown in 1589. D Chesne esteems that Pont de l'arche is the Castle Pistae, which Charles the bald built to with∣stand the Incursions of the Normans; but most of the other Geographers believe it to be one of these tvvo neighbouring places Pistres or Poses. Rouen, nine leagues South-east of the mouth of the Seyne, and above thirty North-west of
Paris, situated upon the same River, and is one  the biggest, richest, and most populous Ci∣s in that Kingdom, and the Capital of Nor∣dy. Its Archbishop calls himself Primate  that Province, hath the six Bishops of it un∣r him, and does not acknowledge the Me∣opolitan of Lyons since the Year 1457. The athedral Church under the Name of our La∣ has ten Dignitaries, fifty Canons, eight pet∣ Canons, and a great number of Chaplains:  has three great Towers; the first call'd the ower of St. Romain is cover'd with Lead, d has one of the finest Steeples in the World, ith 500 fifty steps; the second is call'd the tter-Tower, built out of that Money which ardinal George of Amboise, the Pope's Legate  France, gather'd from the Inhabitants to give em leave of eating Butter in Lent; the third ower is all made of Wood, and raised upon a orch with great Art. Duchesne speaks of two eat Bells; the first in the Tower of St. Ro∣ain, is one of the biggest in France, and bears e name of George of Amboise, who caus'd it to  made; the other is in the Wooden Tower.  this Church are also to be seen the Mausoleys,  Sepulchres of the Dukes of Normandy, and  the Archbishops of that City, a white Mar∣e Statue of the French King Charles V. and at of the Count of Bedford, who was Prote∣or of France during 13 years, under our Hen∣ VI. He is represented on Horseback, upon s Monument, in the Chappel of the Virgin ary, behind the great Altar. Lewis XI. visit∣g this Church, some body told him, It was  shame that so great an Enemy to his Crown
should have so fine a Tomb, and that he  to be removed from thence: No, answered French King, It is well that he lyes th for if he were alive he would frighten  away. There is likewise a Chappel under the  of the Saints Innocents, where is repres St. Romain, Archbishop of Rouen in the  Century, with a Dragon he is said to have ¦vercome. This History is too remarkable  to be mention'd, and tho it be perhaps rel in a fabulous manner, however there must  be something of truth, because of a C that is still kept to this day. In the Forre Rouvray near the Suburbs of Rouen was a S which much annoyed Men and Beasts:  Pious Prelate resolved to rid his Citizen  this Monster, and as no body was willing to company him, he got two condemned Cr¦nals, a Thief and a Murtherer, to go a with him; as soon as the Serpent perce them, it ran to devour them, whereupon  Thief took the flight, but the Saint not a¦frighted, threw his stole at the Monsters  which so well twisted it self about it, that fettered Monster was forced to follow the ¦derer, who brought him as a tyed Dog  the great market of the Town, where it  burn'd, and its Ashes thrown into the ¦ver. It would be uncivil to ask whether the ¦minal was pardoned: But St. Ouen did  for being Lord Chancellor to King Dag and Successor to St. Romain, he obtained  his Master, that a Fortnight before Asc
, four Canons with their four Chaplains ould have leave to visit the King's Prisons,  supersede all extraordinary proceedings a∣inst them, to hear their Confessions, and  to deliver whomsoever they pleased, hich is performed every year on the said As∣sion day, with a great deal of Ceremony. e released Prisoner is oblig'd to nothing e, but to appear the seven years next fol∣wing, to accompany the new delivered, and  Romains Coffin in a solemn Procession. On the great Gate of this Church, is a Tri∣mphal Arch, representing the French King nry IV. driving Lyons and Wolves out of s Flock: On the other side are the League, nd up in Chains, and gnawing its Fetters, d the King of Spain standing near a Bell, with mournful and Heart-sick Countenance. Besides the Cathedral, Rouen with its Suburbs  35 Parochial Churches, and 24 Monaste∣s, the whole Diocess extending it self thrô e third part of Normandy, and comprehend∣g both Vexins, all Caux, Bray, and Roumois,  Rural Deanships, 1388 Parishes, and 26 131 Abbies, under 6 Archdeacons. The ench King Philip the fair, founded there a ourt of Exchequer, in 1286. which Lewis I. made Sedentary in 1499, and Francis I. dow'd it with the name and priviledge of a rliament. There are other Courts of Ju∣ce besides that, as a Bailiwick and Presidial,  Chamber of Accounts, a Chamber of the nt, which coyns Money with the Letter B. ere is a Bridge built upon Boats, which is k'd upon as a Master-piece of Art, because
it rises and goes down with the Tide, t be paved, and 270 steps long: And there Rouen lyes very conveniently, for the  brings into its Key Vessels of 200 T and makes it one of the Richest and most ¦ding Cities in France. Rouen is not only st by its situation, but also well fortified  Castles, Bulwarks, Bastions, Rampiers, Terr ¦lined with Freestone, large Ditches into w fall the small Rivers of Robec, Aubette and ¦nelle, after they have passed thro' several ¦ter-mills. It's uncertain whether the Latin name  Rouen Rotomagus comes from the Idol R or Rothon, Worshipp'd there, or from the s River Rodobeccus, Robec; so that it should  compounded name, signifying the Town o  God Roth, or of the Red Brook. The tim its foundation, and the name of its Fou are still more uncertain, but sure it is  Rouen was already in Caesar's time the hea the Veloicasses, that is mention'd by P Ammian Marcellin, and the Tables of The the Great, under the name of Rotomagus.  had formerly an Amphitheatre, and thr ¦tifi'd places, viz. the Palace, the Castle,  call'd Mount S. Catherine, or Fort S. Cat and the Bridge. This City has produc'd ¦veral Men of Parts, as that great and inco¦rable Protestant Divine Samuel Bochart,  Learned Emery Bigot, who has publish'd ¦ral Writings of the Fathers, amongst oth the Epistle of S. Chrysostom to Caesarius.  Family of Basnage, renown'd for Lawyers, ¦ter Corneille, the Prince of the Tragick P
among the French, Thomas Corneille his Brother, d Pradon, two other Drammatick Poets of ote, Mr. De Fontenelles one of the Wittiest riters in France, Mrs. Bernard, who has ly carried the Prize of Poetry in the ench Academy. I may well also give a place ong these Ingenious, to Mr. Le Motteux Au∣or of the Gentlemans Journal. Caux. THis Bailiwick North, and North-east of Rou∣ en, is esteemed to be the Land of the An∣ent Caletes, and is included between the Ri∣rs Seyne and Bresle. Caesar, who makes the re the limits of the Celtae, ranks the Velocassi d the Caleti among the Belgae; but by the di∣sion of August they were included in the cond Lyonnoise, with their Capital Rotoma∣s. Adrian de Valois reckons nine Rivers in is Countrey, viz. the Vitefleur, Guitefleda, e Dun Dunus, the Seane or Saane, Sedana, the une, Belnaium, the Sie, or Seye, Seda, the rennes, Guarenna, the River of Dieppe or Ar∣es, Deppa or Arcae, the Eaune, Heldona or na and Alna; the Iere, Eara, which Samson lls the Sart, and the Ou, or Bresle Aucus. Through the whole Countrey of Caux, the ldest Sons both of the Gentry and Common eople are Heirs of all, and there is but a all Portion allow'd for the Sustenance of the
Youngest Sons and Daughters, which C seems to be deriv'd from the Ancient N mans, who used it to maintain the lustre  their Families, and to make their Young Sons look to themselves, and seek their F¦tune with the dint of their Sword: And  perhaps was the Cause they conquer'd N¦stria. Caudebec, Calidum: Beccum, that is, warm ¦vulet, because its built upon a small Brook  mile from the Seyne, and three leagues East  its mouth, is a Town renow'd for several M¦nufactures, especially Hats. Three leagues West  Caudebec, upon another Brook near the Sey is the small Town of Lillebonne, which is ta by Sigebert and Ordericus Vitalis for Jul Caletorum, Capital of the Country of Caux,  De Valois denies it: Howsoever, it gives  its name to a branch of the House of Lorr William the Conqueror call'd thither a Co¦cil of the Prelates of Normandy, in 1080.  mile South of Lillebonne lyes the Lordship  Tancarville upon the Seyne. Tancardi or ra Tancredi Villa, for it seems to have gotten  name from that famous Tancrede Lord of H¦reville, who liv'd in the time of Rollon, or ¦bert I. Duke of Normandy: This Nobleman ¦ving a numerous Family, sent into Italy his t Eldest Sons Dreux and Fierabras, who joyn with Robert Guischard, and some other N man Lords, Warr'd against the Saracens,  expell'd them out of Sicily; their Posten setled themselves in that Island, conquer'd C¦labria and Appulia from the Greeks, and T¦poli from the Barbarians, and made themselv
famous during the Wars of the Holy Land, by e Conquest of Antioch, which they possess'd  long time under the Title of Principality. I find a small Town in this Province call'd auteville, near the Sea-cost, five miles South∣st of Coutance, and eleven Northwest of vranches, but cannot tell whether it was the itle of the Lord Tancrede. Nine leagues West of Caudebec, upon ano∣er small Brook near the mouth of the Seyne es Harfleur, Hareflotum, so call'd, because 'tis ed on a Bay, where the Sea ebbs and flows.  was formerly a considerable Town before  de Grace was renown'd. The English ok it by Storm some time before the Battle  Azincourt. Havre de Grace Franciscopolis, two leagues ell of Harfleur, is now one of the strongest  a Port Towns in France. The French Kings ancis I. and Henry II. fortified it, in 1562. nder Charles IX. the Vidame of Chartres, and eauvoir la Nocle seized upon this Town for the rotestants, and having treated with Queen lizabeth, deliver'd it into her hands. The ench King to recover this place, flattered e Protestants so well, that they themselves elp'd to besiege and retake it. The Count of arwick very couragiously defended the place r some time, but the want of fresh Water, nd the Plague destroy'd 3000 of his Men, for∣ed him to Capitulate on the 28th. of July, in he same Year. Lewis XIII. did since encrease he Fortifications of that place, and built there  Cittadel flank'd with four Royal Bastions: However as the Town is not strong on the
Land-side, it could still be taken that way,  the Cittadel block'd up. Havre de Grace is  pleasant and well Trading Town, with  Buildings and Markets. Seventeen miles North-east of Havre de Gr is the Ancient Burrough of Fescamp, fam for an Abby of Nuns founded by one W¦gen, a French Lord, under Clotaire III. Rich II. Duke of Normandy repaired it, and wo be buried there in a Stone Coffin, which s that time he caused to be filled up every F day with Corn, and to be distributed to  Poor, together with twenty pence: This A by is now possess'd by Benedictine Mo Fescamp would be very fit for a Landing,  great Vessels can run aground very near t Shoar, and then go off with the Tide. Eight leagues almost East of Fescamp is anot Town called St. Valery, by the name of an A¦cient Abbot. It's more considerable than  camp, but not so fit for a Descent, because  the banks that reach above a league into the S▪ Seven leagues East of S. Valery is the famo Sea-port of Dieppe, the Juliobona Caletorum  Ptolomy and Peutinger's Tables, as appears by  distance from other Towns noted in the Iti¦rary or Journey of Aethicus. It is seated  the foot of Mountains, whence flows the ¦ver Arques, that separates the Town from th Suburbs, and forms a long and strait Hav that can harbour a great number of Vessels and those of 500 Tuns too, but is of hard ac∣cess. The Town is pretty big, and well bu has a great Kay, a Fort called Pollet, and a Castle▪ The Inhabitants Trade into the East and We
Indies, England, and the Low-Countries, and re esteem'd good Mariners, and Handicraft∣en also, especially in working Ivory-horn, nd Tortle-shell, and making Bussols and other nstruments of Astrology. Dieppe has been of∣en taken and re-taken during the Wars be∣ween the English and French, since the Year 195. The Protestants have often been Ma∣ters of it in the last Century, and it served or a place of Refuge to King Henry IV. whence t came that the Countrey thereabouts was fil∣ed with Protestants. The Citizens in imitati∣n of Rouen have instituted Floral Games, where hey give Rewards to such Poets and Orators s get the Victory over their Competitors. Rigord, and William the Breton, testifie that this Town was anciently burnt by the French, and we nd among the Subscriptions of the Council of halon in Burgundy, that of Betto Bishop of Ju∣hona; but as there was never a Bishop of Di∣p, nor any other Prelate in the whole Diocess f Rouen, besides that of Rouen, so De Valois believes hat it must either be Angers or Troyes. Two leagues South of Dieppe and the Sea, ies the Town of Arques, upon a River of that ame: In Latin Arcae, or rather Arcus. It was ormerly call'd Hasdans, and had a good Road, ut is now more famous for a Victory that he French King Henry IV. obtained over the Duke of Mayenn, and the Leaguers, the 21st f September 1589. This great Prince had not bove 500 Horse, 1200 Footmen, and 2000 witzers, but he posted himself so well be∣ween two Hills, and the River Bethune, that with this small Army he routed 30000 men.
Dieppe and Arques, together with some Vila¦ges, as Pierre-Pont, Val-le-Roy, Tilly, St. Supli a Criel upon the mouth of the Iere, between th River and Seye, constituted the Countrey  Tellau or Taloui, Tallogus Pagus, which h excellent Salt-pits, but both the Salt-pits, a the name of the Countrey are perished. Seven leagues East of Dieppe, lyes the To of Eu, Aucum or Auga, near the mouth of t Bresle, or Ou, a small league from the S and a Village called Tresport Ulterior Portas th lyes upon it, and has an Abby of St. Bea Order. The scituation of Eu is pleasant be∣cause of the Meadows that encompass it. R¦lon first Duke of Normandy had planted there  Colony, but the French took the Town by Sto and kill'd all the Males. It has the Title of  County and Peerdom erected by Charles VII.  1458. and has been possessed by several Il¦strious Houses, as those of Lusignan, Bri and Guise, since the twelfth Century, till  Year 1664. that it was given to a Daughter  the Royal Blood, the Lady of Orleance: Ral  Brienne, second of that Name was High Co¦stable of France, after Raoul the first his Bro¦ther was taken at the Battle of Cressy in 134 and brought Prisoner into England: But at  return being convicted of High Treason,  favouring the English, he had his Head cut o on the 18th. of November 1581. The Counts  Eu have given another High Constable to Fran under the Name of Philip, who in the time  the French King Charles VI. brought a con¦siderable Succour to Sigismond King of H¦ry, against Bajazet II. Emperour of the
John Count of Nevers, and since Duke of Bur∣undy was with him, followed by 2000 French Gentlemen. The Battle was given near Nico∣olis, a Town of Bulgary on the Danube, in 396. but the Christians totally routed, and 600 French Gentlemen that had been taken Prisoners cut into pieces before the Eyes of the two Counts, whom he kept alive with fourteen other Lords, to get a Ransom of 200000 Duc∣kats. Nine leagues South of Eu, near the source of the Bresle is the Town of Aumale, Alba-marna, or Alga-marla, that is, white Earth, with the Title of Dutchy and Peerdom, erected by the French King Henry II. in 1547. in behalf of Claudius of Lorrain, Youngest Son to the Duke of Guise. Aumale had its particular Counts in the twelfth Century; afterwards it fell to the share of the House of Ponthieu, and then of the House of Lorrain. This Town is Noted for its Woollen Cloth, and an Ancient Abby of St. Bennets Order. Eleven miles South-west of Aumale, near the source of the Epte, is the Village of For∣ges, renown'd for its Medicinal Waters. Lon∣gueville, Longa villa, or Longus vicus, a Bur∣rough upon the River Sie, eight leagues North of Rouen, and four South of Dieppe, was former∣ly a County, and has been enjoyed under that Title by the famous Bertrand du Guesclin High Constable of France. In 1443. Charles VII. gave it to another great Warrior John Count of Dunois, Bastard of the House of Orleans, whence are descended the Dukes of Orleans, Longueville, who enjoy still that Lordship, ere∣cted
into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1505, b Lewis XII. Five leagues West of Longue and ten North-west of Rouen, lyes the B¦rough of Estouteville, Stota villa, with the Ti¦tle of a Dutchy, erected by Francis I. in 153 It has given its Name to an Illustrious Famil ever since the 11th. Century: However, Na Sanson the Father has forgotten it in his Map. Eight leagues Northwest of Rouen, and 5 mile North of Caudebec, lyes the small Village of Yvetot, with the Title of a Principality, and for∣merly with that of a Kingdom, as many French Authors pretend. It was erected by the Frenc King Clotaire I. to make amends for the Death of Walter Lord of Yvetot, whom he had mur∣dered in a Church at Soissons: In consequence of the Law of the mannors that frees the Te∣nant of any subjection to his Liege Lord, if the said Lord breaks any of his Bones, or cuts any of his Members. In an Ancient Record of the Court of Exchequer in Normandy, and Paten∣tees of the French Kings, in the Years 1392, 1401, 1450, 1464, the Lords of Yvetot are en∣tituled Kings, and their Soveraignty and Inde∣pendency is asserted. At the Coronation of Mary of Medicis, Henry IV. Queen: This Prince observing that the Master of the Ceremonies had assigned no place to Martin du Bellay Lord of Yvetot, I will, saith he, that an Honourable Place be given to my little King of Yvetot. Four leagues North-east of Rouen is another Village call'd Ca∣illy, which seems to be some remains of an An∣cient Town ruined by the Romans, that bore the Name of Casletum, if we believe Duchesne.
Bray. BRAY is an ancient Gaulish word, that marks a Marshy and Dirty place, and 'tis the be∣ginning or end of several Towns in France. As to this Countrey, it is included between the Bailiwicks of Gisors, Rouen and Caux, and so very small, that several Geographers forget to mention it. The most considerable places are La Ferté, Fleury, and Gournay, of which I find nothing in my Authors, unless that near Gournay was given a Battle between the English and the French, in 1112, where the last were rout∣ed.
Roumois. BEtwixt the Seyne and the Bishopricks of Li∣zieux and Evreux, is included the small Countrey of Roumois, Rotmensis pagus, which by the Original of its Name, seems to have made part of the Territory of Rouen. It has not above eight leagues in length, and as many in breadth, from Brienne upon the Rille, to Quevilly two leagues off of Rouen, where the French Protestants of that City had their Temple. The other Burroughs are Quillebeus upon the Seyne, which might be extraordinarily fortified, Montfort, Mauny, &c. These four Coun∣tries last describ'd, make up the Archbishop∣prick of Rouen. The Bishoprick of Evreux. THis Diocess is included between the Ri∣vers Seyne and Carenton, the Countrey of Roumois, and the Bishopricks of Seez and Char∣tres: It is above 17 or 18 leagues North and South, and 15 or 16 East and West. It was the habitation of the Aulerci Eburovices. The Capital Evreux Mediolanum Aluercorum, is seat∣ed upon the River Iton, in a fruitful Plain, and has several good Buildings, Churches, Ab∣bies,
and Monasteries, a Bishoprick, Bailiwick, and Presidial. 'Tis said that it was converted to Christianity by St. Taurin, who was the first Bishop of it. The most renowned of his Suc∣cessors was Cardinal Du Perron, that subtle Controversist, who was a Protestant Apostate. In Caesar's time the Senonois, the Parisians, and their Neighbours had a General of Evreux call'd Camalogenus Aulercus, whom they oppos'd to Lia∣bienus. Evreux has had its Particular Counts issued from the Dukes of Normandy. It was erected into a County and Peerdom, by Lewis X, in 1316, thence it came into the hands of the Kings of Navarr, from whom it was re∣deemed by the French King Charles VI. in 1404. erected into a Dutchy in 1569, by Charles IX. and given to his Brother the Duke of Alencon, after whose Death it was reunited to the Crown of France, in 1584, and exchang'd with the Duke of Bouillion for the Principality of Sedan, in 1652. Five leagues West of Evreux, near a place where the Rille hides it self under the Ground, lyes Beaumont le Roger, Bellus mons Rogerii, with the Title of a County: It was built by a Count, call'd Roger, whose Name it bears, and strongly fortified. Raoul of Meulant sold it to the French King Lewis IX, in 1255, and Charles III. King of Navarr, to whom it did belong, s being Count of Evreux, exchanged both Counties with the French King Charles VI. for the Dutchy and Peerdom of Nemours, in 1404. Two leagues North of Beaumont le Roger lyes the Castle of Harcourt, Harecortis, formerly a
good Burrough, which has given its Name and the title of Counts to a Noble Family, that has been renowned since the beginning of the twelfth Century, to the end of the last Age, that it fell to the share of the House of Lorrain, by the Marriage of Renatus of Lorrain, Marquess of Elbeuf with Louise of Rieux Heiress of Har∣court, in 1574. Vernon upon the Seyne, lyes 7 leagues East of Evreux, and ten South-east of Rouen. Some think that it had formerly a Royal Palace or Castle call'd Verno or Vernum, where two Coun∣cils were kept in 755, and 844. but De Valois proves that Verno was the Name of this place, and that the Royal House of Vernum was ei∣ther Ver near Crespi en Valois, between Paris and Compiegne, or Verneuil upon the Oyse. Seven leagues South of Evreux upon the Ri∣ver Aure, lyes the Burrough of Nonancourt, which has given its Name to Cardinal Nicholas of Nonancourt, who was famous about the end of the thirteenth Age, and descended from an Ancient House. Five miles higher to the West, upon the same River is the Town of Tilleres, or Tuilli∣eres; Tegulariae, so call'd from the Stichel-stones that were prepared there: It was built by Ri∣chard Duke of Normandy, but is now almost ruined. Remounting the said River, one meets with the Town of Vernueil, Vernolium, erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom by Lewis XIV. in 1652. The Duke of Alencon took it in 1424. but the English retook it, and gave a great o∣verthrow to the French in the same Year. The French King Charles VII. got it again from the
English by the Treachery of a Miller, who on a Sunday the 19th. of July, 1449. while the Inhabitants were at Mass, introduced the French Soldiers into the Town, by the means of a Ladder laid to the Walls. The English re∣tired into the Castle, which was fortified with Walls and Ditches, but being immediately be∣sieg'd, and without hope of Relief, were forced to surrender. Several Towns in France bear the Name of Verneuil, and De Valois observes that they are all built near Forrests, whence he con∣jectures that Verne or Verneuil had some such signification in the Gaulish Language. Six leagues Westwards is a fine Forrest, and near it the Town of Laigle Aquila upon the Rille, with the title of a Barony. It got this Name from an Eagles Nest that was found up∣on an Oak at the time of its foundation. Ru∣gles, Rugulae, Lyre, Lyra, are lower down to the North upon the same River. Lyre has a fa∣mous Abby of St. Bennets Order, Yvri, Ibreium Castrum is situated upon the Aure, between Passi or rather Paci, Paciacum and Paceium, and Nonancourt, six leagues South-east of E∣vreux, and is renown'd for the Victory which the French King Henry IV. got there over the Leaguers. Breteuil, which seems to preserve the Name of the Brittons its Founder, lyes two leagues North of Verneuil, upon the River Iton near a Pond. Our Henry II. gave it to one Robert of Montfort, whose Sister Amicia sold it to the French King Philip August. Damville is seven miles Eastwards upon the same River: It was erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom by Lewis
XIII. in 1610. but this title is now extinguish'd, thô the Lordship belongs still to the house of Ventadour. Duchesne mentions a place call'd Her∣mein ville, where he says that Robert Count of Normandy routed Thibaud Count of Chartres, but I could not find it, either in Sanson or Du Val's Maps. Conches, Capital of a small Country call'd Ou∣che, Pagus Ebroicus, is seated near the source of a small River four leagues West of Evreux, and has a renowned Abby of Benedictin Monks under the Name of St. Peter, and St. Paul. Lou∣viers upon the Eure, four leagues North of Evreux, and six South of Rouen, is but a small Town, however famous for the noise that some Nuns, who pretended to be possessed by the Devil, made in the beginning of this Age.
CHAP. VII. Of Lower Normandy. The Bishoprick of Lizieux. THis Countrey, called by the Inhabitants Lieuvin, and by Caesar Lexovii, or Lexobii, is above seventeen leagues North and South, and sixteen East and West: It is included be∣tween the Sea and the Bishopricks of Evreux, Seez, and Bayeux, and is one of the most fruit∣ful parts of Normandy, because of the many Ri∣vers that water it. Lizieux, Noviomagus Lexo∣viorum the Capital, is scituated upon the River Lezon Tolca, six leagues South of the Sea. Its Cathedral is dedicated to St. Peter, and the first Bishop of it recorded in History, is one Li∣thare, who assisted to the first Council of Orle∣ance under Clovis the Great, in 511: This Town is renowned for its Fountains, and Earthen Wares. The other Towns or considerable Burroughs are Pont l'Evêque, four leagues North of Lizi∣eux: It is renowned for its Cheese. Honfleur, Haneflotum, a Sea-port Town four leagues North∣east upon the mouth of the Seyne, over against Harfleur. Pont Audemer, Pons Audmari, or as
the Vulgar write Ponteau de Mar, built by a French Nobleman of that Name, is situated upon the Rille eleven leagues West of Rouen; and renown'd for its Saucizes, which are brought down to Paris. The Inhabitants had formerly their Mayor, Sheriffs, and Charters. André of Vil∣lars, since Admiral of France, took it for the League in 1592. But while he was fortifying it, Bosse-rosé one of his Captains got into Fescamp, and deliver∣ed it to King Henry IV. In 1279. a Council was kept there for the Reformation of Manners. Brionne, Brionia, formerly a strong Town with the title of a County, is seated upon the same River six leagues higher to the South. Bernay, Bernacum, upon the Carentone, is four leagues South-east of Brionne, there is an Abby of Be∣nedictin Monks founded by Judith, Richard's of Normandy Dutchess. Montreuil Largille upon the River Ternant lyes five leagues South-east of Bernay. Mongommery upon a small River nine miles South-west of Lizieux, has the title of a County; it belonged first to the House of Pon∣thieu, thence to that of Harcourt, and has been enjoyed by the Dukes of Longueville, since the Year 1485. Cormeilles, Cormeliae, upon the Ri∣ver Callone four leagues North-east of Lizieux, has an Abby of S. Bennets Order, and Orbec up∣on a River of that Name lyes four leagues South of the same Town; there is also Tiberville, Ti∣bertivilla.
The Bishoprick of Seez. THis Diocess, included between the Govern∣ment of Orleanois, the Bishoprick of E∣vreux, Lizieux, and Bayeux, reaches above 25 leagues North-west and South-east, and has not above 10 or 11 leagues extent, where it is broadest. The Capital Seez is an Ancient Bi∣shoprick, since in the Year 540, it had already had ten or twelve Bishops, of whom Sigebold is accounted the first by Duchesne. This Town is not mention'd by the Ancient Geographers, for ought we know, for the Sessavii of Caesar were a Maritime People, whereas the Saji or Sagii, as the French Historian call the Inha∣bitants of Seez are separated from the Sea by the Lexovii. The Town is situated near the source of the River Orne, 13 leagues South of Lizieux, and the Civil Jurisdiction is partly Royal, depending upon Falaise, and partly Du∣kal, resorting to Alencon. There has been of late Years a Contestation between a Jansenist Clergyman, and the Bishop of this Town; this Clergyman is the same who has written the Court's Bishop, and several other Treatises, in which he most cruelly exposes the Prelates, con∣trary to his Party: His Name is Le Noir, as I take it to be, and he was Theologal of Seez. Alencon, Alentio, six leagues South-west of Seez, is a good and fine Town, with a Baili∣wick, and the title of a Dutchy and Peerdom,
erected by the French King Charles VI. in 1413: It lyes in a fruitful Soil between the For∣rests of Escouis and Perseigne, and is seated up∣on the Sarte, where that River receives the Briante, which forms a small Island within the Town. In the Parish of our Lady are to be seen the Tombs of the Dukes of Alencon: There was formerly a Court of Exchequer, but it was suppress'd in 1584. after the Death of Fran∣cis last Duke of Alencon: It is the same that would have Married Queen Elizabeth, and who was Crown'd Duke of Brabant in 1582. This Town and adjacent Territories the Alenconois, have been first possessed by the Posterity of these Normand Lords, who conquer'd the whole Province from the French. Robert, the last of them left but one Sister call'd Helie, that sold this Countrey to the French King Philip August. Lewis IX. gave it to Peter his fourth Son, and since it has often been the Portion of the Chil∣dren of the French Kings. In 1572. the Lord of Matignon hinder'd there the bloody effects of St. Bartholomew's Murder, however, as he kept the Protestants low, the Leaguers took it 3 years after. Four leagues North of Seez, is the Burrough of Hiesmes, which gives its Name to the Coun∣trey thereabouts the Hiesmois, Pagus Oximiensis, or Oxmensis, that was formerly much larger, comprehending the Alenconois and Seois. Hies∣mes Oximus or Oximi seems also to have been a considerable Town, and sometimes the Seat of the Bishops of Seez, who are call'd Oximensis Ecclesiae Episcopi. Argentan, called by the Latin Geographers
Argentomum, or Argentomagus, lyes upon the River Orne, 3 leagues West of Hiesmes, and 5 South-west of Seez. Falaise upon the River Ante, eleven miles North-west of Argentan, is an Ancient Town, built in a Valley between two Hills in the form of a Boat, of which a strong Castle digged up∣on a Rock seems to be the Stern. It is a high, big and round Tower, that was the Palace of the Ancient Dukes of Normandy in time of Peace, and their place of Arms in time of War. It has gotten its Name from the Rocks upon which it is built, or wherewith its encompass'd which in the Franco-German Language are call'd Fales or Fels, and the Normans give still the Name of Falaise to great heaps of Snow. Thô this place was so very strong, yet it was surrendred, upon the first Summons to Philip August in 1203, but having been retaken by the English, it was kept by them one of the longest of all, and defended by the Warlike Talbot till the Year 1450. There is yet a Fort environ'd with Ditches, and said to be built as well as the Castle by Julius Caesar, to be a Bulwok against the Galli, if they chanced to rebell during his Voyage into Great Brittain. Next to this Town is the Burrough of La Guibray, anciently Wibray, renown'd for its free Fair in the Month of August, said to be in∣stituted by our William the Conqueror. A league West of this Town is the Mountain of Airiennes, where Hawks, Faulcons, and o∣ther Birds of Game are caught. About the Year 1570. some Peasants digging near this
Mountain, found several Medals and pieces of Brass money with the stamp of Julius Caesar. In the Territory of this Town is the Village of Arnes, scituated in a Plain, destituted of Brooks and Rivers; and the Sea however, which is ten leagues distant from it, sometimes conveys thither by subterraneal Channels such abundance of Waters, that they form a Lake or Pond, furnished with several sorts of Fishes, and when the water retires, the place drys up again. The Bishoprick of Bayeux. THE Inhabitants Name their own Countrey Pays Bessin. Ausone calls them Biocasses, and Gregory of Tours Baiocassini; they are esteem'd by Adrian de Valois, the Viducasses of Pliny, and the Biducasses of Ptolomy. The chief Town Bayeux, is seated upon the River Aure, which loses it self into a kind of Abyss, or great Ditch, a small league South∣wards. This Town has the title of Viscounty, Bailiwick, Prefidial and Bishoprick: Its first Prelate is accounted to be St. Exupere, whom the Vulgar calls St. Spire: In this Diocess are reckon'd above 200 Parishes under 4 Archdea∣conships, and 16 Deanships: The Cathedral Church has 50 Canons, of whom 17 are Dig∣nitaries: Its Towers, Clock, Gates, Columns,
and the whole Building is sumptuous, and it ear the Name of our Lady. Its Bishop is the st Suffragan to Rouen, has Jurisdiction over en, Flaise, Vire, and above 200 Parishes, nder 4 Archdeaconships and 16 Deanships: It as likewise a Bailiwick resorting to the Presi∣ial of Caen. During the Civil Wars of Reli∣gion, a Protestant Captain, call'd Francis of Bricqueville, Lord of Colombiers, took it from the Roman Catholicks, whose Worship was abolished there for a short while. William Bonnet, call'd there a Synod, about the Year 200, he is the same who founded a Colledge n the University of Paris in 1308, that has the Name of the Colledge of Bayeux. Caen upon the River Orne, six leagues South∣ast of Bayeux, and four leagues North of Estre∣an, on the mouth of that River, is accounted the Capital of Lower Normandy, and has a Bai∣liwick, Presidial, Generality, Election, and Offices for receipt of the King's Money. Some will have it to be a very Ancient Town, and hat it be called Cadomus, for Caji Domus: But he Learned Bochart, one of the greaest Orna∣ments of France, but especially of this Town, wherein he was Minister of the Protestants, thinks not Caen to be of so great Antiquity, and derives its Name from a Saxon word made La∣in, Kadomum, which signifies a pleasant and Godly Habitation. King William the Conque∣n, and Maud of Flanders his Wife are Inter∣ed in two Abbies of S. Bennets Orders, un∣er the Name of St. Stephen, and the Holy nity, which they founded in this Town, the irst of Monks, the other of Nuns. It is a very
Trading place, because great Boats can g from the Sea to the Bridge of St. James's  the help of the Title; and of its three days after Easter, instituted by our K. William.  Town-house is built upon another Bridge o St. Peter: This House is a remarkable  with four Towers, and a Clock, which  only shows the Hours, but also the Ia and Decrease of the Moon. Here the G ¦ceives the Oudon, after it has pass'd thro se Mills. At the upper end of the Town,  strong Castle built upon the Rock, fo with a Platform, having in the middle a  square Tower, flank'd at the four Corners  four other Towers, and encompass'd with a Ditches. Besides the Courts already n¦on'd, there is a Vice-Admiralty, an Ecclesi¦cal Court depending upon the Bishop of ¦eux, an Overseer of Waters and For res Salt Granary, a Mint, and a University ¦ed in the Year 1431. It has three Colle and is governed by a Rector, a Chance the Bishop of Bayeux, and two Conser vn its Priviledges, the Bishops of Lizieux and ¦ance: There is besides an Academy or 8 of Learned Men, erected some 30 years  'Tis said that this Town became conside by the Residence of the English during  Wars in France, and by the many Privile they allow'd it. In 1562. the Protestants  came Masters of the Town, but the French  Charles IX. having gotten it from their  by a sham Declaration of Liberty of C¦ence, the Garrison of the Castle plo Quarrel with the Inhabitants, who were
stts for the most part, the last besieged the t, and expell'd them out of that Nest, with  help of the Admiral of Coligny. The small Countrey of Auge, Algia, towards e South-east, and the borders of the Bishop∣k of Seez, is depending on this Bailiwick  the Temporal and for the Spiritual of Li∣ux. It has gotten its Name from a Forrest rd by, and is remarkable for the fertility of  Meadows, chiefly at a place called Bieux-ville d Sainte Barbe, where Grass grows so quick, pecially in the Spring, that if it be browz'd  the Evening, and one lays there a Stick, he ll find it in the Morning half covered with ass, for which reason a great quantity of black ttel are sent thither to be fatten'd. Nine leagues higher to the South lyes Pont  Olly, an important passage upon the Orne, here it receives the Nereau. Three leagues West∣rds is the Town of Conde, Condate, where e small River Drance falls into the Nereau. 5. leagues farther to the West is the Town  Vire, upon a River of that Name not far om its source: It has a Castle, an Election,  a Bailiwick, resorting to the Presidial of en. It has the Title of a Viscounty, and has en formerly so considerable, that its Inhabi∣ts having stuck to the English till the Year 50, they got Letters of Pardon from the French n Charles VII. Six leagues lower to the North lyes the Town origny, Tauriniacum, formerly very consi∣rable, as appears by the ruines of its Walls  Gates. It has still the Title of a County,
and a Bailiwick depending on the Presidi Caen. I must not forget what is observed by chesne, that the meeting of the Rivers Aure Dromine, a small league North of Bayeux  the Village of Maisons, form a fine Haven o Port Bessin. The Bishoprick of Constance or Coutance. THis Countrey call'd Constantin, and con¦tively Coutantin, is shut up between Sea and the Bishopricks of Bayeux and Avra and is thought to be the habitation of Unelli of Caesar, or the Venelli of Pliny. It ¦bove 20 leagues North and South, but hat 12 East and West, where it is broadest.  is an Ancient County, which Robert Duke Normandy pawn'd to his Brother William red King of England, and soon after his wh Dutchy for the summ of 10000 Marks of Sil that he might undertake a Voyage into the ¦ly Land. Constance, or Contance, Capital of  Countrey, is situated upon the small River ¦ro, 3 leagues East of the Sea, and almost West of Torigny: Some take it for the A¦sta Ramanduorum of the Ancient Geograp Amian Mercellin calls it Castra Constantia,  he seems mistaken as to it's situation. The
ent Notices of the Gauls call it Constantia Ci∣as, Gregory of Tours, and other Ancient Au∣ors of the French History Constantina, or onstantiensis Urbs. It's likely that Constantius lorus encamp'd thereabouts, when he went ver into Great Brittain, and that fm a Mili∣ry Station it became a Town by degrees; or ther that the Emperor Constantius beautify'd with Triumphant Arches, of which he erect∣d a great number in the Gauls, and in Panno∣: For 'tis not probable that these Emperors ould have built a Town, which some Years ter was a City of Note, and an Episcopal See;  that it seems that they only repair'd or en∣rg'd Constance, which thereupon lost its old ame of Crociatonum Venetorum, mentioned by tolomy. St. Ereptiole is taken by Duchesne r the first Bishop of Constance, in the fourth entury; but the first Prelate of it mention'd in uthentick Histories is one Leoncian, who as∣sted to the first Council of Orleance, in 511. he situation of Constance is pleasant, among eadows and Brooks, and not far from a Forrest. he Town is big, and well Peopled, but with∣ut Walls and Ditches, the French King Lewis I. having demolished them because the Inha∣itants had too openly sided with the Prince harles his Brother. In 1562. the Lord of Colom∣iers besieged it, took it, and sent Philip of Cossé o Governor Prisoner to St. Lo. The Cathedral hurch of our Lady is a fine Building, and beauti∣ed with Towers, upon one of which the whole Neighbouring Countrey may be discovered. This Town has a Bailiwick and Presidial, Vis∣ounty, Election, and Ecclesiastical Court.
Seven or eight leagues South-east of ¦stance, on the borders of Avranches, is the B¦rough of Ville-Dieu, with a Commandership  the Knight of St. John's Order, institute  Richard III. Duke of Normandy, and the  King of England of that Name. Near to it is a Parish call'd La Land Her or Airou, which was formerly a good B¦rough of half a league extent, as may be supp¦sed by some Ruines. There was a Castle  of which nothing is remaining, but the b Name, in a Neighbouring Field call'd the C¦stles Meadow. Duchesne relates out of Sige that in the year 1158. there hapned a Wh¦wind, which raised up all that it met wh and rising in the Air, there appeared at  blew red Columns, against which were  Arrows and Darts from several places,  a great number of Birds of several Kinds to about it: He adds farther, that this Pro was followed by a violent Plague, which dep¦pulated whole Towns. Four leagues North-west of Ville-Dieu is  Burrough of Gouray, with the Ruines of an ¦cient Castle, upon a small Hill near the Ri Souille. Five leagues Southwest of Gouray, and  of Constance, is the Sea-port of Granville:  Town is partly seated upon a Rock, and pa in a Plain, where it has its Haven. Nine  ten leagues Eastwards are the Burrough of M¦on, the Barony of Fessy, and the Castle of  Motte l'Euesque, belonging to the Bishop  Constance. Seventeen miles East of Constance, lyes
strong Town of St. Lo, upon the River Vire,  Named from the fifth Bishop of Constance, uo, and in Latin Briovera, or Vire's Bridge, ao and his Successors have for a long time orn the Title of Bishops of St. Lo, because this own belonged to them, and that they kept nto their ordinary Residence. It is now en∣ved by the Lords of Matignon, and has a Bai∣wick, Election and Viscounty, an Abby of St. nnets Order, and a Church under the Name  our Lady, founded as 'tis said, by the Em∣eror Charlemaign, under the Title of the Holy his. Seventeen miles North-west, you meet with e Barony of Hommet, divided into two Ca∣les, the Lords of which entitle themselves ign Constables Hereditary of the ancient Dukes  Normandy. Five leagues North-west of St. Lo. upon the ting of the Rivers On and Carenton, lyes the  of Carentar, or Querentan, Carentonus or onium, which is a well trading Place, be∣use it lyes but three leagues from the Sea, and at the Tie brings up grea Boats to it, be¦des the strength of s situation it has a Ga∣e, Walls, and Ditches fill'd up with Water: he Vulgar believe, that Crus, one of Csts ontains was the Founder of it. Whatever it ay be Carentan is pretty considerable, having wo Suburbs, a Bailiwick, Election, and the itle of a Viscounty. In 1574. the Count of Montgomery took it for the Protestants, but he Lord of Matignor retook it some time after, nd De Lorges Montgomery's Son was made Priso∣er of War.
Five leagues Northwards lyes upon a so Hill the Burrough of Monte-Bourg, Montis Ba¦gus, with an Abby of St. Bennets Or built by our King Henry I. There is  kept every Saturday one of the greatest Marke in the Countrey. Three miles South-west, near the sourse of t Ouve, and a large Forrest, lyes the Town  Valogne. Walonia, built by one Walo, whic word in the Old Language of the French b¦yond the Seyne signify'd a Good man, but is no surnamed La Hogne; a word not quite so o intended to express the litigious and quarr¦some Humour of its Inhabitants. This Tow has a Castle, the title of Viscounty, and Elec¦on, a Bailiwick, and a seat of Justice for Wa and Forrests. Five leagues North-east upon the Sea-co lyes the Burrough of La Hogue, Ogae, and  leagues North-west upon the same Coast  Town of Barfleur, Barhaflot. These two pla were renown'd formerly, because our K used to Land there when they went over in France. The first is yet in some Esteem for  Fishing, and the second for being seated in  Valley most fruitful in Corn, and therefore call'd in Latin Vallis Cereris: But both w be more known to Posterity, for the late Sel fight between the English and French, (in 169 where the latter had 20 of their best Shi burnt or sunk without the loss of one man o War on our side. Seven leagues West of Barfleur, is the strong Town of Cherbourg, in Latin call'd Caro burg, and by more Ancient Authors Caesaris Burg
ome pretend for that reason, that Julius Caesar was the Founder of it; but in nine years which e bestow'd on the Conquest of the Gauls, he ould hardly spare so much time as to employ it n building: so that such Towns as bear his Name, seem rather to be the Work of August, who took the Name of Caesar after his Adopti∣on, or of the Roman Forces quartered in the Countrey. Besides the strength of its situation, n a sandy place overflow'd by the Sea twice a ay, the French have fortified it lately. It is he last Town which remained in the hands of he English, under the French King Charles VII. o whom they were forced to yield it in 1453. Four leagues West of Cherbourg lyes the Town of Beaumont, a league from the Coast. Six leagues Southward is the Sea-port Town of Bar∣neville: Four leagues to the East upon the Ri∣ver Baupteys over against Barneville, is the Ca∣stle and Burrough of St. Sauveur le Viscounte, an Ancient Viscounty erected into a Bailiwick a∣bout the Year 1560. Seven leagues Southward is another Burough called St. Sauueur Landelin, erected into a County by the French King Charles VI. and given for part of his Portion to Lewis of Orleance. It has a Bailiwick and Viscounty, upon which the Burrough of Periers is depending. Three leagues Westwards upon the Sea cost lyes the strong Castle of Pirou, re∣nowned for a vast quantity of wild Swans and Geese.
The Bishoprick of Avranches. THis Countrey called by the Inhabitants A¦ranchin, or Avranchinois, has little Britt and the Mayne on the Sputh and South-east,  Bishopricks of Bayeux and Coutance on the North-east and North, and the Sea on the West:  reaches about 14 leagues East and West,  8 North and South; some take its Inhabitant for the Ambiliates of Caesar, but 'tis more pro¦bable that they are the Abrincatui of Pliny a Ptolomy. The chief Town Avranches, Inge Abrincatuorum, is seated upon the Rivers See a Selune, Seva and Senuna upon a Hill, a goo mile from the Bay of St. Michael. Its not a v∣ry big City, but strengthned with good Wa and Ditches: It was erected into a Bishopric by Clovis the Great, and Nepus its first or s¦cond Prelate appeared in that Quality in th first Council of Orleance in 511. The Episcopi Palace is said to be one of the finest and strong∣est in Normandy. Besides the Cathedral unde the Name of St. Andrew, there are several Pa∣rochial Churches and Monasteries, a Bailiwick, Viscounty and Election. Seven miles West of Avranches lyes in the Sea a Rock formerly, the dwelling place of Anache∣rets. In 708. a Bishop of Avranches, called A∣bert by Duchesne, and Patern by De Valois, con∣secrated
a Church upon the top of it to St. Mi∣hael the Archangel, and placed there 12 Ca∣ons. The Dukes of Normandy having since en∣dowed this Church with good Revenues, and Richard I. repair'd or beautify'd it in the mid∣dle of the tenth Century, People began to build there Houses, and it became in pro∣cess of time a good Burrough, bearing likewise the Name of St. Michael. A wholsome Foun∣tain, which cures several Diseases, and the Conveniency of making Salt by throwing Sea-water upon a Sand that is to be found in this Mountain, did not a little contribute to the en∣crease of this place, which is rugged and un∣accessible all round about, except on a side that is Wall'd. The Soil is a Gravelly Ground that is overflowed by the Tide, which makes the Latin Authors call it Mons S. Michaelis in periculo Maris. Over against it is another Rock called Tombelaine, which had likewise a strong Castle that has been demolished. Both Rocks are Nam'd in Latin Tumbae, but because that of the Abby of St. Michael is the greatest of the two, the other got the Name of Tumbella, whence the French have made Tombelaine. Three miles Southwards near the mouth of the Couesnon, lyes the Town of Pontorson. Pons Urstonis, that bears the Name of its Founder. Mortain, Moretonium, is a small Town seven leagues South-east of Avranches, with the Title of a County, erected in 1041. There is a Bai∣liwick, Election and Viscounty, upon which the Castelny of Tinchebray is depending. Mor∣tain was formerly a place almost impregnable by reason of its situation and Out-works. Two
or 3 leagues Eastwards lyes a famous Wood ca¦led la Forêt des landes pourries. About the same d¦stance towards the North you meet with a H Named Brombalium, la Bute de Brimbal, when spring four Rivers that take each a differe ¦course, viz. the See, Seva, the Vire, Viria, the Egraine, Egrannia, and the Nereau, Nigra A¦qua.
CHAP. VIII. Of Brittanny. LIttle Brittain is a kind of Peninsula, being in∣cluded the Sea on the North, West and South, and having part of Poictou, Anjou, le Maine and Normandy on the South-east. It is one of the biggest Provinces of France, com∣prehending the greatest part of the third Lyon∣noile, and being extended above 70 leagues East and West, and above 45 North and South from the Sea near Normandy to the Borders of Poictou, but its none of the fertilest, having but little Corn, and that black too, little or no Wine, but a great many Meadows, a vast number of Marshes and Forrests, some Iron, Lead and Sil∣ver Mines, and the best Sea-ports in the whole Kingdom. They reap a great quantity of Hemp, of which they make Linnen; their Woods and Meadows give them the convenien∣cy of breeding good Race-Horses, and a vast number of black Cattel and Sheep that furnish them with abundance of Butter and Milk, and their Sea-ports make them the best Fishers and Mariners in France. The Inhabitants appear Clownish, but are really shrewd and cun∣ning.
Tho' Pliny asserts, [l. 4. c. 17, 19.] That the Galli call'd in their own Language Aremorica, the Countrey included between the Garumne, the Sea, and the Pyrenean Mountains, which the Romans nam'd afterwards Aquitain, yet it appears that Caesar, and other Ancient Geogra∣phers understood by Armorica and Armorici, the Nations and Cities bordering upon the Oce∣an, from the mouth of the Seyne, to that of the Loire; so that the Ancient Armorique compre∣hended all Brittany, and a good part of Normandy, that is, all the third Lyonnoise, and about one half of the second, but this Name deriv'd from an old Gaulish word, Armor, Ad mare, or near the Sea, became in process of time proper to Britanny. Beda relates, [l. 1. c. 1.] That in old times some Armoricans came over into our Island, and master'd the Southern parts of it; however 'tis not from them that our Ancestors got the Name of Brittains, since these Gauls were only known by that of Armorici, whereas it cannot be doubted but that our Brittains gave their Name to Brittanny:Annal. Egin. ad An. 786. For Eginhard testifies, that about the Year 441. at the beginning of Valentinian's Empire, the English and Sax∣ons having invaded our Island, a great part of the Inhabitants put to Sea, and Landing on the borders of Vannes and Cornouaille, made them∣selves Masters of the Countrey: Accordingly we find one Mansuetus Bishop of these Brittains subscribing to the Council of Tours, in 461. Our Refugees made not long since a great Fi∣gure in the World, for about the end of the fifth Age their King othimas having made a League
with the Emperor Anthemius against the Goths, was defeated by them on the borders of Berry, before he could joyn with his Confederates, and lost in that Battle the best part of 12000 men. So great a loss however was not able to run them altogether down, for we find that even in the following Century they were a Terror to the French, so that Clovis the Great's Grand-Children, Theodebert and Thierry, were forc'd to keep Counts and Marquesses on the Frontiers, to oppose the Incursions of the Brittains into the Territory of Nants. They being so Warlike, and their Castles and Forts being surrounded with Woods and Marshes, the Captains of Charlemaign were not like to have subdued them as they did a∣bout the end of the eighth Century, had they not divided themselves into several petty prin∣cipalities; notwithstanding they recover'd their liberty under Charles the Bald, by the Valour of Nomenoius and Herispoius his Son, to whom Charles yielded the Territories of Rennes, Nantes and Retz, when he saw that he could not recover them. Others relate the Settlement and Adventures of our Brittains somewhat differently. They say, that about the Year 393. a Brittish Captain, called Conan. Meriadoc, Lieutenant to Maximus, who had been saluted Emperor in England, in 382. obtained leave of his Master to erect a Kingdom in Little Brittain, which his Successors enjoyed independently from any other till a∣bout the Year 570. that Chilpric I. King of France made them Tributary. After the Death
of Judicael about the Year 700: This Kingdom was rent into several petty Principalities, so that Charlemaign had no great trouble to subdue them as he did in 787. Neomenes, or Nomenoius descended from the Ancient Kings of Brittany, was made Lieute∣nant to the Emperor Lewis the Meek, but he revolted against him, took the Title of King, and dyed in 852. Heruspeus, or Herispoius his Successor maintain'd the War against the French King, till 866. that he was kill'd by his Cousin Solomon. This last reigned 12 years, and was murdered in 878. After his Death this Pro∣vince was rent again by several Lords, who made themselves Soveraigns in their respective Countries. This lasted to the Year 930, or 935. that Alain I. subdued the whole Province, and enjoyed it under the Title of County. He was succeeded by twelve or thirteen more, who possesesed it under the same Title, but in all So∣veraignty, till a French Prince, called Peter of Dreux, Grandson to the French King Lewis the Burly, having married Alix Heiress of this County in 1213. consented to acknowledge the French King Lewis IX. for his Liege Lord, who in recompense gave him the Title of a Duke: And for having thus betray'd the Liberties of the Brittains, he was surnamed by them the Duke Mauclerc, that is, The Ignorant or unskil∣ful Duke. Philip the fair King of France made John II. Grand-child to Peter Mauclerc Duke and Peer of France. After the Death of John III. surnamed the Good, in 1341. there hapned a long and bloody War between two preten∣ders to this Dutchy, John IV. surnamed of
Monfort, and Charles of Blois. John was Son to Arthur II. by a second Wife: Charles had Spou∣sed Jane Countess of Ponthievre, Grand Daugh∣ter to the said Arthur. The French King Phi∣lip of Valois maintained Charles, and Edward III. King of England took the part of John. This Quarrel lasted about 14 or 15 Years, till John V. Son to the said John of Montfort, total∣ly routed and killed his Competitor Charles at the Battel of Aury in 1364. This Great Duke, surnamed the Warlike, and the Conqueror, was succeeded by six others, the last of whom Francis H. left but one Daughter Ann, Dutch∣ess and Heiress of Brittain, Married to the French King Charles VIII. and then to Lewis XII. She had a Daughter by the last called Claudia, Married to the French King Francis I. whose Son Henry II. was the first King of France that was Duke of Brittain by Succession, and United that Dutchy inseparably to his Crown. The chief Rivers of Bretagne, besides the Loire, of which we have spoken in the General De∣scription, are the Vilaine, Vicenonia, which comes from a Place in the Maine, called la Croisille, washes Vitrey, receives the Pinelle, mix∣es with the Lille at Rennes; then encreased with the waters of Seiche, Bonau, and Sevonne, St. Aubin, Ouste, Adon, falls into the Sea near the Isle of Mait, six leagues South-west of Vennes, and four North of the mouth of the Loire. The Blavet comes from the Bishoprick of Quimpercorentin, runs thrô the Bishoprick of Vennes, washes Pontivy and Hennebont, and ha∣ving received the Elle at his mouth, discharges it self into the Sea at the bay of Blavet. The Laita
separates the Bishopricks of Vennes and Quim, percorentin; and having received the Isotte at the Abby of St. Croix, runs into the Sea at the Abby of St. Maurice, three or four leagues West of the Bay of Blavet. The Rivers of Oder and Benaudet meet at Quimpercorentin, and run into the Ocean at a Village called Benaude. The River Ausen or Auen washes the greatest part of this Bishoprick, and falls into the Bay of Brest on the South-side, which on the North-side receives the River Eloen. The River of Morlaix washes the Town of that Name, sepa∣rates the Bishopricks of St. Pol and Triguier, and empties it self into the Bay of the Torean. The Trieu, receives the Lier, and falls into the Sea between the Isles of St. Mande and Brehacy The Arguenon separates the Bishoprick of St. Brieux from that of St. Malo, and runs into the Sea at Port of St. Cas. The River Rance comes from the borders of the Bishoprick of St. Bri∣eux, washes Dinant, and empties it self into the Bay of St. Milo. The Couesnon washes Fogu∣res, Romazic, Antraim, where it receives the Aisance, goes through Pont-Orson, and falls into the Sea near Mount St. Michael. Britany is divided into upper and lower, or Eastern and Western. Others divide, it accord∣ing to the Idioms that are spoken in its several Diocesses The Bishoprick of Rennes, Dol and St. Malo speak French, those of Quimpercoren∣tin, St. Pol. and Triguer speak Brittish, and those of Nantes, Vennes and St. Brieux make use of both. These nine Bishopricks are all suffragans to the Archbishop of Tours: There are several Islands round about this Province, but for the
most part inconsiderable and unhabited, except it be the Isles of Wessant and Belle-Isle, of which I shall speak under the Bishopricks on which they depend. Of High Brittany. The Bishoprick of Rennes. RENNES Capital of Britanny is situated up∣on the meeting of the Rivers Vilaine and Lille, eighteen leagues South of the Sea and Mount St. Michael, and was already considera∣ble in Caesars time, who calls its Inhabitants Rhedones, and Ptolomy the City it self Condate Redonum. It remained under the Romans till Conan made himself King of Britany, and esta∣blished there the Seat of his Empire. About the end of the fifth Century part of our Brit∣tish Ancestors went over the Sea, ransack'd and plunder'd this Town: However, it took its former lustre again, and was still the ordi∣nary Residence of the Dukes of Brittany, who bore the Title of Counts of Rennes. The most Ancient Bishop of Rennes is one Artemi∣us, who assisted at the first Council of Tours, in 461. and to that of Vennes, in 465. Before Henry II. instituted a Parliament at Rennes for the whole Dutchy of Brittany, and made it
Sedentary at the same time, viz. in the Year 1553. there was a Senelchalship, to which re∣sorted the Diocesses of Rennes, Dol, St. Malo, Cornouaille, Vennes, St. Brieux, Leon and Triguier. The Parliameat of Rennes was transferr'd to Vennes in 1675. for some discontent the French King had taken against its Citizens, who un∣willingly saw their priviledges invaded, and were loth to pay his Exorbitant Taxes, this Monarch little remembring how faithful this Town had been to his Ancestors during the Civil Wars: Nevertheless he was not in such a Passion, but that he restored them their Par∣liament in 1687. for a Summ of Money. Be∣sides the Cathedral Church of St. Peter, Rennes has several Parochial Churches, and Monaste∣ries, and the Abbies of St. Melaine, St. George, and St. Sulpice. The Palace of its Parliament is built on the modern way, and the Bell of its Clock is esteemed one of the biggest in the Kingdom. The other Towns and considerable Bur∣roughs of this Diocess, are Vitrey, Vitreium, near the source of the Vilaine, ten leagues South-east of Rennes, with the Title of a Baro∣ny. The French Protestants had there a con∣siderable Church, St. Aubin du Cormier, per∣hap Cornutius Vicus. Gregory of Tours testifies, that in 579. the Brittains made an Incursion into the Countrey of Rennes, and penetrated to this Cornutius Vicus. Lewis of La Trimouille K. Charles VIII. his General, defeated here the Duke of Brittany and his Confederates in 1488. July 28. It lyes upon the River Couesnon, four leagues North-west of Vitrey: Fougeres, near
the source of the Couesnon, Coetnus, is about twelve leagues North-east of Rennes. It has given its Name to a Noble Family, and one of this Lords call'd Raoul de Fougeres fortified it, and built there a good Castle. It is so called from the quantity of Fern, Fougere, that grows thereabouts, and this Countrey is so remar∣kable for Health, in French Landes, that two other Burroughs take their Name from thence, viz. S. Sauveur des Landes, and S. Gilles des Landes. Antraim lyes upon the same River five leagues Northwest of Fougeres. The Latins call it Interamnis, because its seated upon the meet∣ing of the Couesnon and Aisance. There was formerly a famous Monastery, and the Empe∣ror Charles the Bald had an Interview with So∣lomon King of the Brittains at this place in 863.
Of the Bishoprick of Dol. THis Diocess, the most Easterly of those that lye on the Sea-coast, is bound on the West and South by that of St. Malo, on the East by those of Rennes and Avranches, and on the North by the Ocean. It is hardly seven leagues North and South, and three or four East and West. Dol its Capital City is only conside∣rable by its Bishoprick: It is situated in a Mar∣shy Plain above ten leagues North of Rennes, four or five Northwest of St. Malo, and seven North-east of Mont St. Michael. The most an∣cient part of this Town is the Castle, near which was founded an Abby by a Bishop called Samson, in remembrance of a Serpent he had forc'd to fly thither. It was erected into a Bi∣shoprick in 566. whereof this Samson was the first Prelate, according to Duchesne, or rather in 844. under Neomenes King of Brittany, ac∣cording to the Jesuit Sirmond, and De Valois. The Dukes of Brittany laboured a long time to have this Church erected into an Archbishop∣rick, and one Baldric Abbot of Bourgueil in Anjou calls John Archbishop of Dol, and Me∣tropolitan, but at last Hugh one of his Prelates yielded of its Pretensions in behalf of the Me∣tropolitan of Tours. Near to this Foundation is an Abby of the Order of Cisteaux call'd Vicuville.
Of the Bishoprick of St. Malo. THis Diocess reaches 20 leagues in length North and South, 9 or 12 leagues East and West where it is broadest, and in some places handly 2 or 3. It is included between the Sea and the Bishoprick of Dol on the North, those of St. Brieux end Vennes on the West and South, and that of Rennes on the East. The Capital St. Malo is one of the best Sea-Port Towns in France, tho' its access be somewhat difficult, and defended by a strong Castle flank'd with great Towers, surrounded with Ditches, and kept by a good Garrison. This Town is one of the Keys of France, and considerable in time of Peace by its Trade into the Northern parts of Europe, but much more in time of War, for being a Nest of Sea-Robbers. It is said that St. Malo is guarded by Dogs, because the Garrison, lest they should be surprized, lets out 12 Dogs that go round about the Walls, which do not fail to bark at the Goers by. This Town was built in an Island, a mile from the Ruines of another more Ancient, called Alet, the remains of whose Walls, Port and Castle are still to be seen. It got this Name of St. Malo, from one of its Prelates Named Maclovi∣us, or Machutes in the tenth Century: It was also called the Isle of Aron. The Cathedral
under the Name of St. Vincent, is said to b very Ancient: but one of its greatest Orna∣ments was James Cartier, who in 1534. made a Voyage to Canada, and at his return publish∣ed an exact Description of the Islands, Capes, Coasts, Sea-ports, Streights, Gulfs and Rivers which he discovered, and to which he gave Names that are yet in use. Three leagues North-east of St. Malo lyes the Burrough and Sea-port of Cancale, renowned for the fishing of Oysters. Dinant, Dinannum, is the most considerable Town of this Diocess after St. Malo, from which it is six leagues distant towards the South. It's built upon the River Rance, and is the head of a small Countrey call'd le Dinanois: It was for∣merly the frequent Residence of the Dukes of Brittany, and the Portion of their Youngest Sons under the Title of a County. Ten leagues Southwards upon the River  lyes the Town of Montfort, with an Abby of St. Augustins Order, and ten or twelve leagues South-west the Towns of Ploermel and Jocelis, near the River Ouste. There are three other Abbies of St. Augustins Order in this Diocess, viz. Plaimpont, St. Mehen, and Beaulieu.
Of the Bishoprick of St. Brieux. THis Diocess lyes in the middle of Brittany, between the Sea and the Diocess of Triguier, Cornaille, Vennes, and St. Malo. It's about twenty or one and twenty leagues North and South, and seventeen or eighteen East and West along the Sea-coast, and has the figure of an ir∣regular Triangle. The Capital St. Brieux, St. Brioci oppidum, is seated on the mouth of a Bay, between two small Rivers, in a pleasant and fruitful Valley. The Town is well built, and well Peopled, but there is a Rock before it which hinders the sight of the Sea to its Inha∣bitants, tho' the Ocean be but at half a leagues distance. Near this Rock is a Church dedica∣ted to St. Michael, and a Castle, which com∣mands the Town and the Port, that is conve∣nient enough for great Boats. This Bishoprick was erected in 552. by Pelagius, or as others pretend more probably in 844. by King Neomo∣nes: 'Tis said of this Town, that it was the on∣ly one in the Dutchy that remained in Peace during the Civil Wars between the Houses of Montfort and Blois. The Buildings of the Ca∣thedral Church under the Name of St. Stephen, the Episcopal House, and the Palace of the Ju∣stice are in some Esteem. The other Towns and considerable Burroughs
of this Diocess, are Beauport on the Sea-coast  leagues Northwest of St. Brieux, with an Abby of the Order of Prémontré. Pontrieux six leagues South-west of Beauport, Busquien, an Abby of St. Bennets Order, eleven miles Southwest  St. Brieux. Quentin, nine miles South of the same, near a Forrest of ten leagues Circu. Lamballe, six leagues North-east of Quentin, is thought to be the habitation of the Ambill of Caesar. It belonged formerly to the House  Clisson, and is yet considerable for its ab¦dance of Cattel, for the Trade of Parchme and for its good Pioneers. Jugon, four leag East of Lamballe, was formerly a considera Town, where the Dukes of Brittany did  times reside, but it is now almost rui Montcontour, Mons Contorius, lyes between Q¦tin and Lamballe, five or six leagues South- of St. Brieux, and has a Priorate dedicated to S Michael. Avaugour has the Title of a Cou and was the Patrimony of an Illustrious F¦ly, descended from the first Dukes of Britt St. Jacut, St. Aubin, and Lantenac, are th Abbies of St. Bennet's Order, along the Conf of the Bishoprick of St. Malo.
Of the Bishoprick of Nants. THis Diocess lyes on the South-east of Brit∣tany, between Poictou, Anjou, and the Bi∣opricks of Rennes and Vennes. It is above 20 agues North and South, and 24 or 28 East d West. The Capital Nants, call'd by Pto∣my Condivicnum, and by other Ancient Geo∣aphers Civitas Namnetum, is seated upon the eeting of the Rivers Ardre and Loire, 17 leagues ast of the Sea, which by the help of the Tide rries the greatest Boats, and small Vessels to ur leagues distance of it, and makes it a great rading Town. It has the Title of a County, ll'd by the Ancient Records and Historians of  French Media, Consulatus Namnetensis, and omitatus Namneticus, which was the ordinary ortion of the Eldest Sons of the Dukes of Brit∣ny during their Fathers Lives; and thô the City of Rennes has been so far preferred to it, s to be the Seat of the Parliament, however he Bishop of Nants enjoys still the Priviledge f Councellor born in that Court, and the own it self has a Presidial, Generality, and Chamber of Accompts, and an University. his County has been some times in the Posses∣on of the Counts of Anjou, as it was in 1080. when it was enjoy'd by one Foulques, and still
distinguished from the rest of Brittany, as  Principality of Wales is from England; wh apparently it comes that it constitutes yet a p¦ticular Government, independent from the ¦neral of Brittany. As to the Capital City, is well fortified, has a good Haven, and a C¦stle, strengthned with big round Towers,  half Moons. Besides the Suburb of St. Cle Nants has three others, and its Cathedral Chu dedicated to St. Peter, is adorned with  high Towers, and some Monuments of  Dukes of Brittany. I pass over the Colle Church of our Lady, founded by Alain, su¦med Twisted-beard. 'Tis observ'd, that the ¦habitants mortally hate the Normans, of wh this may be the Cause. After the bloody ¦tel of Fontenay, between the Sons of the Emp¦ror Lewis the Meek, in 841. Neomenes desc¦ed from the Ancient Dukes of Brittany,  himself Soveraign of this Dutchy. He was th Confederate with Count Lambert, who  this Occasion to avenge himself of his Comp¦titor Renauld, Count of Poitiers, to whom  Emperor Charles the Bald had given Nants  that Lambert with the help of the Brittains  ster'd this City, and kill'd Renauld. In  mean while there arose some Fewds betw Neomenes and Lambert, so that the last went  implore the help of the Normans, retur with great Succours, laid Siege before N took it by Scalado, kill'd most of the Inha¦tants, who thought to shelter themselves in  Church of St. Peter, Murdered even the Bi upon the great Altar, and took away the  of the Men. This hapned in 844. and in
e same Count took Nants again from the rench, who had seized upon it. In 1598. the rench King Henry IV. residing at Nants to take he Oath of Allegiance from the whole Pro∣ince, which had revolted from him to the eague, made that Famous Edict of Nants, in ehalf of his Protestant Subjects. This Edict as Registred in the Parliament-Court of Pa∣is as an Unrepealable Law the 25th. of February, 599. It was since confirmed by Lewis XIII. nd Lewis XIV. himself, who nevertheless, to ew that he is far above the Laws, and even bove his own Promises and Oaths, has made old to Repeal it in the Month of October, 1685. Idre, or l'Isle d' Aindre, Antrum: It was mous for a Monastery founded by one Her∣land of Nimeghen, who from Cup-bearer o K. Thierry, became Monk of the Abby of ontanelles, in the Diocess of Rouen, and then Abbot in this Convent, which was ruined by he Normans in 843. Ancenis is esteemed to be the Ancenisium, or Angenisium of the Latins, Capital of the Am∣ites, a People that liv'd about the mouth of he Loire. There was formerly a strong Ca∣tle built by Aremberg, Wife to Gueree, a Brit∣ish Count: but 'tis now ruin'd as well as the greatest part of the Town, which lyes 7 leagues ast of Nants upon the same River, near ano∣her place 3 miles South-west, call'd Oudon, which makes De Valois take 'em for the Uldo and Andenisium of Rigord. Chasteau-briant, Castrum Brientii or Briani, 13 Miles North of Nants, has taken its Name from its Founder. In 1551. the French King
Henry II. renewed there all the Ancient E against the Hereticks, and gave even power the Judges of Presidials to determine Causes  Heresie without Appeal, ordering farther,  none should be admitted into any Royal O or the publick Profession of any Science wi¦out a right Certificate that he was a Ro Catholick: and withall, that certain Ass¦blies call'd Mercurials should be kept  Wednesday, in all the Soveraign Courts of J¦stice, to examine the Sentiments and Conduc the Judges about Matters of Religion. Clisson, Clichio upon the River Sevre Sep six leagues South-east of Nants, is a Town  a Castle which gives its Name to a small Tr of Land, call'd le Clissonnois, but is much  famous for having been the Title of Oliver  Clisson, High Constable of France, under t French King Charles VI. it is the same w routed the Flemmings, in 1382. and kill'd 400 of their Men upon the spot. Between this Town and Montesgu on the b¦ders of Poictou, is the Forrest of Gralla, wher that famous High-way Robber Guillery  built a strong-hold, wherein with his two Bro∣thers and Companions, they stood out a Siege ∣gainst 17 Provosts, and 5000 Men, but were ta∣ken at last and broken upon the Wheel, in 160. Machecou, Capital of the small Dutchy and Peerdom of Raits, Ratiatensis, or Ratiensis Pa¦gus, erected by the French King Henry III.  1581. This Town lyes near a Forrest 11 leagues South-west of Nants. The Bishops of Potius have sometimes subscribed Episcopi Ratiatenses, or de Civitate Ratiatica, as did Adelphius in the
Synod of Orleance, because they kept in this Countrey their ordinary Residence: It was there lso that the Emperor Charles the Bald invested Herispoius Neomenes's Son with the Kingdom of Brittany, adding the Counties of Nants, Rennes, and Raiz to his Dominions, in 851. Guerande is situated near the mouth of the Loire, between Lakes and large sandy grounds, 18 leagues West of Nants: there are some good Salt-pits. Two leagues North-east is the small Town of Asserac, with the Title of a Marquisate. The Abby's are Meleray of Cisteaux, Blanche-Couronne of St. Bennet, Pornie, and Geneston of St. Augustin, all of Fryars.
CHAP. IX. Of Lower Brittany. The Bishoprick of Vennes. IT's undoubted but this Diocess is the Coun∣trey of the Ancient Veneti, whose Capital was so powerful in Caesar's time, and whose In∣habitants were the most skilful of the Gauls in Sea Affairs, so that some have pretended that the Venetians were descended from this Veneti, as the Ancient Geographer Strabo relates. What were the bounds of their Dominions is un∣certain; but now this Diocess is included be∣tween the Sea, the Bishoprick of Nants, St. Malo, St. Brieux, and Cornoaille, and reaches 25 leagues East and West, and about 13 or 14 North and South. This Countrey was Con∣quer'd from the Romans by our fled Brittains, but Clovis the Great took it from them, and the French kept it 90 Years, till Waroc a Brit∣tish King reconquer'd it. His Successors main∣tain'd themselves against their mighty Neigh∣bours to the time of Pepin and Charlemaign. In remembrance of this Conqueror, this Diocess
was call'd Broguerec, that is, the Land of Gue∣ec, or Waroc. The Capital Vennes, call'd Venetia by Cae∣ar, and in some Notices of the Gauls Civitas Cintium, or Cinesium, is thought to be the Da∣iorigum of Ptolomy by De Valois, it is situated two leagues from the Sea, which Ebbs and Flows there along the Channel of Morbihan, and has a Haven of the same Name. This Town has kept its Ancient lustre long enough, for the Duke John of Montfort built there a Castle na∣med Ermine, where his Successors have often kept their Court. Vennes is by no means so considerable as formerly, however, it has yet some Parochial Churches besides the Cathe∣dral, under the Name of our Lady, and the A∣postles St. Peter and St. Paul. St. Patern, whom the Vulgar calls St. Poix, is thought to have been its first Bishop. Auray, four leagues West of Vennes, is seat∣ed upon the same Channel of Morbihan, and famous for the Victory which John V. got over his Competitor Charles of Blois, the 29th. of September 1364. This Battel left the former in possession of the whole Dutchy, which was con∣firmed to him by the Treaty of Guerande, on the 12th. of April 1365. Blavet, now better known under the Name of Port-Louis, is one of the best and strongest Sea ports of France, situated on the mouth of the River Blavet, so call'd for the blew Co∣lour of its Water. The Leaguers gave it to the Spaniards, who restored it to the French King Henry IV. by the Peace of Vervins, in 1598. The Lord Soubize took this Town for
the Protestants, in 1625. but was forced  leave it, because he could not master the C¦tadel. Some time after the French Prin Confederated against Lewis XIII. seized up this Town and Castle, and when the Peace  made, the French King caused the Fortific¦ons of Blavet to be demolished: but after ¦cond Thoughts he raised them up again,  made them stronger than before. Hennebont, Cosedia, according to Adrian de V¦lois, p. 291. is a small Town 7 leagues No of the Sea upon the River Blavet, with a ¦mous Abby of Nuns, of the Order of Ciste Pontivy lyes upon the same River, betwixt  Forrests, 11 leagues North-east of Hennebont. Rohan, upon the River Ouste, 3 leagues South-east of Pontivy has the Title of a Dutchy a Peerdom, erected by the French King Hen IV. in 1603. and since renew'd by Lewis XIV. In 1645. but much more famous for having g¦ven its Name to a Family issued from the An¦cient Princes of Brittany. Several Dukes o Rohan are Renowned in History, but the mo Illustrious of all is Henry II. Duke of Roh, who dyed in 1638. of the Wounds he had re∣ceived at the Battel of Rhinfeld, or rather of the Poysonous Apparel that a Physician (corrupted by the Jesuits) applied upon them: For th great Warrior had been a long while one of the French Protestants Generals, and had main∣tained them a long time against their Persecu∣tors: He has left us Memoirs so extraordina∣ry well written, that they will make one doubt, whether he could better sway the Sword,  manage the Pen.
Guimené, near the source of the Elle, 15 miles West of Rohan, has the Title of a Princi∣pality. Malestroit lyes upon the River Ouste, 17 miles South-west of Rohan. The Island of Belle-Isle, Calonesus is depend∣ng upon this Diocess, and lyes about 5 leagues from the Coast, and 13 or 14 South-west of Vennes. It is about five or six leagues long East and West, and three or four leagues broad North and South: It has a Port called Sau∣on, and two or three Castles, whereof that which lyes near the Port is somewhat strong. This Island is considerable for its Salt-pits, and for the Vessels that pass often near its Coast. If we were Masters of this Island, 10 or 12 light Frigats, and as many at our Islands of Jersey or Guernsey could keep in awe all the French Privateers from Dunkirk to Bayonne, and then we might really boast our Empire of the Sea.
Of the Bishoprick of Quimper-Corentin. THis Countrey, anciently Inhabited by the Curiosolites, or corruptively Corosopites, reaches 36 leagues East and West, about 16 or 18 North and South, where it is broadest, and but 5 or 6 where it is narrowest. The Capital City Ben, situated where the River Benaudet falls into the Odder, after its gone round about its Walls, is called Quimper-Corentin, or Cor∣uoaille. The last Name seems to come from our fled Brittains, and to have comprehended the Diocess of Treguier. As to the first, it is composed from the Ancient Name of the Town Quimper, or Kemper, and that of Corentin its first Bishop, established by St. Martin of Tours, in the fourth Century. Adrian De Valois (Not. Gall. p. 291.) supposes it to be the Alauna of Aethicus, and p. 166, 167. the Vagorgitum of Pu∣lomy, Capital of the Arvii, by reason that he makes them Neighbours to the Aulerci Diab∣intes, and the Namnetes, and that neither he nor Strabo mention the Curiosolita. The Sea ebbs and flows into the Port of Kemper, and carries thither great Boats. The Cathedral Church is a fine and Ancient Building, with two great Towers. Near the Gate, call'd Tourbic, is a Tower extraordinary big, that formerly was the
Towns-Castle. Cornouaille, called in the Anci∣ent Charters Cornubia, or Cornugallia, had for∣merly its particular Counts, and has now a Presidial. It lyes 4 leagues North of the Sea, and 28 West of Vennes. Concarneau lyes in a Bay 5 leagues East of Cornouaille, and 11 West of Blavet: It has an ex∣traordinary strong Castle. Quimperlay, lyes 7 leagues East of Concarneau, and 2 North of the Sea, on the meeting of the Rivers Laitta, Isotte, and another small River. It was founded by Alain Coignard, Count of Cor∣nouaille. Betwixt this Town and the Sea, on the East-side, are two famous Abbies of St. Bennets Order, St. Croix, and St. Morice, separated by a Forrest. Four leagues South-west of Quimper-Corentin, are the Towns of Pol-David, and Douarnenes near a Bay that bears their Name, and is about 4 or 5 leagues deep, and 2 or 3 broad. Eight leagues North-west of Quimper-Corentin, lyes in a Bay the Sea port of Audierne, and 4 leagues farther the Isle of Sain, Samnis or Sena, remem∣bred by Mella, because of an Oracle of the Gaulish Mercury that was in it. Chasteau-lin is a considerable Burrough upon the River Aufen, 7. leagues North of Quimper-Corentin, and 6 North-east of Douarnenes. The whole Countrey is mighty full of Woods, and well watered with Rivers. Besides the Ab∣bies already mention'd, you have there Langonet of St. Bennets Order. Coetmaloen of Cisteaux, or Cisternian Monks, Bonrepos of Cisteaux too, ac∣cording to Du Val, or of Premontré, a sort of Austin Fryars, according to Sampson.
Of the Bishoprick of Treguier. THe Inhabitants of this Diocess make part of the Ancient Osismii, who took up besides the Diocesses of St. Pol de Leon, and St. Brieux; and 'tis not easie to determine whether of them is Vorganium, accounted by Ptolomy the Capital of that People. This Countrey lyes on the Sea-coast, and is now but 12 leagues broad and long, being included between the Bishopricks of St. Brieux, Quimper-Corentin, and St. Pol de Leon. The Capital Town call'd Treguier, or Lantri∣guet, is situated on the mouth of a Bay, almost 11 leagues North-west of St. Brieux: Its Bishop takes the Title of Count, and the first is e∣steem'd to be an English man, called Tudwal, under whose Name the Cathedral Church is de∣dicated; but this Town having been since ran∣sack'd several times by the Saxons, Danes and Normans, we find no mention of its Prelates in History, till the Year 1175. The famous Law∣yer St. Yves, who lived under the Reign of the French King Philip the Fair, and having been related into the number of the Saints, has been taken by the French Lawyers for their Patron, was a Native of this Town. Guingamp upon the River Trieu, 8 leagues South-east of Treguier, is the Capital of the Dutchy and Peerdom of Ponthievre, erected by
Charles IX. in 1569. and an Ancient Lordship of the House of Estampes, issued by Alliance from the Dukes of Brittany. Lannion lyes upon the small River Loquet, 2 leagues from the Sea, and 5 South-west of Treguier. A mile North-west near the same River, are the Ruines of an Ancient City, call'd in Brittish Cozqueoudet, which is esteem'd by some the Civitas Osismi∣orum of the Latins, and suppos'd to be demolish'd by the Danes. Morlaix, Mons Relaxus, situated upon a Hill between two Vallies, on a River of that Name, is a considerable Town, with two Suburbs, se∣veral Churches, a Town-house, and an Hospi∣tal, that is esteemed one of the finest Buildings in the Province: It has also a good Haven, in∣to which the Tide brings up great Boats and Vessels of a hundred Tuns, great Merchant-men lye at Anchor at the Bull-Fort, or Fort du Tau∣reau, which is built in an Island 3 leagues South∣wards. This Town is renown'd for its Trade in Hemp, Line, and Linnen: On the top of the Hill are to be seen the Ruines of an Ancient Castle. Three miles South of Treguier, lyes a Burrough, call'd La Roche-Derrien, famous for that Oliver of Clisson, Father to the High Consta∣ble of that Name, was Captain of it.
Of the Bishoprick of St. Pol De Leon. THis Countrey was under the Jurisdiction of the Osismii, as I have already observed, tho' Caesar gives to its Inhabitants the distinct Name of Lemovices, which in process of time de∣generated into that of Leonenses. Its the most North∣western part of Brittany, but at present not a∣bove 18 leagues long, and 8 broad. The Capital St. Pol de Leon, or Leondoul, is an Ancient Bi∣shoprick, founded under the French King Chil∣prick I. in the sixth Century, and its first Pre∣late was one Paul, who has left his Name to the Town. The Inhabitants who speak the Brittish more naturally than their Neighbours, call Leondoul Cozque Oudet, or the Ancient Town, and tell us, that its Jurisdiction was at first very large; but that this their Capital having been ruined, its Dependencies were divided in∣to the three Diocesses of St. Pol de Leon, Tre∣guier, and St. Brieux. It is likewise one of the Ancientest Viscounty's of Brittany, which has been possessed by the House of Rohan, issued from the first Christian Counts of this Province, during 700 years, till they sold it to John I. Duke of Brittany, in 1254. This Town is plea∣sant enough, and some of the Dukes of Brittany have made it their Abode. There are some inland Towns, as Lanhouer∣neau, Lesneven, Carvilis, Lenvilis, Landerneau,
of which I find nothing in my Authors, neither of some small Islands on the West of this Diocess; save that Landerneau is seated upon the River Eloene Herium, six leagues North-east of Brest, in the fertilest Soil of Brittany; and that the Isle of Ouessant, or as we pronounce it Ushant, is call'd by the Latin Authors Axantis, Uxantis, Osa, or Ossa; that it is about 4 leagues in com∣pass, defended by the Castle of Lampool, and by several Banks and Rocks. And therefore I shall finish with the Descrip∣tion of Brest, call'd , Brivates Por∣tus by Ptolomy. This famous Sea-port Town, lies 16 leagues South-west of St. Pol de Leon, 11 miles East of Conquests-Bay, and 12 leagues North of Quimper-Corentin. It's seated on the South-side of a Bay of 5 leagues in length, and 3 miles broad, whose depth is in most places from 10 to 15 Fathoms, and no where under 7. The entrance of the Bay is two leagues in length, and half a league broad where it is largest, and but half a mile where it is narrowest. The Town is situated on the steep of a Hill, on the side of the Port, whose Entry is defended by a strong Castle digged in a Rock. This Port is seated in a Gulf, whereinto flows the Sea by four different places, and is esteem'd the best in Europe, because the greatest Men of War may continually float therein. The Town is strongly fortified, inhabited by many Priva∣teers, and is the Store-house of the French Ad∣miralty for the Ocean. On the South-side of this Bay is the Sea-port of Landevenec, which seems to be the Vindana Portus of Ptolomy; it has an Abby of Benedictine Monks.
CHAP. X. Of the Government Orleannois. THis Government is the biggest as well as the Fertilest part of France, for it reaches 110 leagues East and West from Chauteau-Chino in Nivernois, to the Sea or the Isle of Nermou∣slier in Poictou, and 70 North and South from the River Aure in Normandy, to Monbrun in An∣goumois. It has part of the Isle of France and Normandy on the North, Brittany and the Oce∣an on the West, Saintonge, Perigort, Limousin, and Auvergne on the South, la Marche, Bourbonnois, Burgundy and Champaign on the East. In this Government are included 14 or 15 smaller Countries, situated North and South, and along the River Loire, which divides the whole into two parts very near equal. Maine, Perche, High-Beauce, or Land Chartrain, Vende∣mois, and part of Gatinois, lye on the North of that River going from West to East. Nivernois, Orleanois, or lower Beauce, Blaisois, Touraine, and Anjou, lye round about the Loire East and West; Poictou, the Land of Aunis, Augoumois, and Berri are the most Southern parts. All these Countries are fruitful in Corn, Wine, Fruits, Cattle and Game. There are a
great many Woods, especially in upper and lower Beauce, the most considerable of which is the Forrest of Orleans, said to contain 70000 Akers of Land, and to have been of greater extent in Francis I. time, since it then took up 140000. The Forrest of Senonches, in the Countrey of Chartres, is 7 miles long, and 5 broad. That of S. Cyr les Antrain in the Electi∣on of Clamecy, is well near 10 miles in length, but of no considerable breadth: There is no Province in France which has so many paved ways. As to its Rivers, besides the Loire, which is rather a River of France, since it waters 3 of its Governments, than of Orleanois, there are the Loing Lupa, which comes from the Moun∣tains of Auxerre, near Linsec and the borders of Burgundy, goes by S. Sauveur, S. Fergeau, Bles∣neau, Chastillon, and at Conflans receives the Ou∣ane, which rises at a Village of that Name, and waters Thoussy, and Château-renard. The Loing pursuing its course, goes thrô Montargis, and by Cepoy. Here is digg'd a Canal for the Communication of the Seyne and Loire, which intercepting part of the Water of the Loing, and that of several Rivulets, is divided into two branches, both Navigable by small Boats; the Eastern goes through Montargis and Chatil∣lon, ends at Briare upon the Loire, and is call'd the Canal of Briare; the other passes by Che∣villon, runs through the Forest of Orleans, dis∣charges it self into the Loire near St. Denis en Vallée, 3 miles East of Orleans, and is call'd the Canal of Orleans. Down Montargis and Cepoy, the Loing becomes
still more and more Navigable, being encreas'd at Fontenay, with the Clairy that comes from St. Martin-Dordon, and washes Courtenay and Ferrie∣res: It receives another Rivulet near Chateau-Landon, goes by Nemours and Moret, and a mile Northwards discharges it self into the Seine. The Escolle and Essonne, which fall in∣to this last River, are neither of them Navi∣gable. The Eure issues from a Lake near the Forrest of Senouches, washes Bellomer, Pont-gou∣in, Courville, Chartres, Nogent-le-Roy, Dreux, and mixes with the Aure, at Nonancourt. The Huisne rises at some Mountains in the Countrey of Perche, washes Mauves, Condé, N∣gent-le-Rotrou, la Fertè-Bernard, Connarey, and mixes with the Sarte at le Mans. This comes from the borders of Normandy, waters Alensson, Fresnay, Beaumont-le-Vicomte, and having received the Orne near la Guierche, and the Huisne at le Mans, goes by la Suze, Malicorn, Sablé, Pince, Châteauneuf, and mixes with the Loir and the Mayenne at Angers. The Loir Ledus Lidericus takes its source from the Lake of Villebon, in the Province of Perche, waters Illiers and Alluie, receives the Ousanne near Bonneval, the Conie, which is a Marshy River near Marboe, and the Yerre near St. Hilaire below Chateaudun, after it has hidden it self under the ground. Then pur∣suing its course, goes by Cloye, Moree, Freteval, Vendome, Montoire, Chateau du Loir, Durestail, and Angers. The Mayenne, Meduana, rises on the borders of Normandy, waters Domfront, Mayenne, Laval, Chatean-gontier, le Lion-d' Angers, Angers, and here uniting with the other two Rivers, fall together into the Loire near Pont-de-cé.
The Charente, Carantonus, rises at a Village call'd Cheronoc, on the borders of Limosin and Angoumois, goes by Chantrezat, Vieille-Chaize, Bendis, Sivray and Rufec; it is then encreas'd with the Rivers Argent and Or, the Sonne, and the Tardouére. This takes likewise its source in the borders of Limosin, washes la Vauguion, les Salles, Pont Chabrot, Mont-beron, la Rochefoucaud, and mixes with the Charante at Mans-les its Genous. The Charante thus swollen waters Mon∣tignac, Balsac, Angoulemes, Chateau-neuf, Balsac, Vibrac, Jarnac, Cognac, receives in its way the Bandiat, the Touvre, Toluera, the Noere, Notra, the Boueme and the Nay, and at its entrance in∣to Saintonge, the Seugne at Pont-Chauveau. Then it washes Saintes, Taillebourg, St. Savinian du Port, Tonnay-Charante, near which its en∣creas'd with the Boutonne, Vultonna, that washes Secondigny, Chizay, l'Isle, Availle, St. Jean d' An∣gely, Tonay-Boutonne, la Vallèe, and falls into the Charante at a place call'd Port: This pursuing its course, goes by Rochefort, Soubize, and dis∣embogues it self into the Ocean near Port-Lu∣pin. Sevre, Savara, or Separa, is the Name of two Rivers of Poictou; one is now call'd, Sevre Niortoise, and in the ancient Records Marinel, which has its source near a Village call'd Sevre, washes S. Mexant and Niort, goes 6 or 7 leagues through Marshes, where it is increas'd with seve∣ral Rivulets, and then discharges it self into the Bay of Pertuis Breton near Marans, betwixt Lacon and la Rochelle. The Lay rises near la Mallerat, not far from the Sevre Nantoise, wash∣es Mareuil, and falls into the Ocean at St. Benoit,
betwixt Talmond and Lusson. The Sevre Nan∣toise springs near Secondigni, goes by Macon∣tant, Mortaigne, Clisson, Chateau-Thibaus, and discharges its Waters into the Loire, a mile West of Nants: The Rocks that are spread along its Channel, hinder it from being Navigable. The Vye an inconsiderable River, washes Aspremnt and St. Gilles, where it enters into the Sea over against Isle de Dieu. The Vienne, Viane or Vignane, Vincenna or Vingenna, issues from the Mountains of Auverg∣ne, on the borders of Limosin, waters S. Leonard, imoges, S. Junien, Brigueuil, Confoulens, Ava∣ille-Limosine, Lisle-Jourdain, Lussac-le-Chateau, Chauvigny, Chastelleraud, Novastre, L' Isle-Bou∣chard, Chinon and Candes, where it falls into the Loire, four leagues East of Saumur. The Ri∣vers it receives are the Taurion near Limoges, the Clain, Clennum, near Chastelleraud, after it has been encreas'd with the Dive, the Vonne, and the Miossan, Medioximi, and has pass'd thro' Vivonne, Poictiers and Dissay. The Creuse, Crosa, which comes from the Mountains of Auvergne, goes by Aubusson, Ahun, Glenic, Celle, Crozans, in the Countrey of la Marche, Argenton, S. Mar∣cel, S. Gautier, Ruffec-le-Chateau, Blanc en Berry, la Roche-pouzay, la Guierche, la Haye, and Port de Piles, near which it mixes with the Vienne, after it has been increas'd with the small Creuse, the Gartempe, Vartimpa, the Angolin and the Claize. The Indre, Anger, Andria or Endria, waters the Countries of Berry and Touraine, and is not otherwise considerable, but that it divides it self into several Branches, and is interrupted
with divers Marshes that create much difficulty to Travellers. It rises in Berry, and goes by la Chastre, Chasteau-Rou, Castrum Rodulfi, Bourg de Dels, Mehun sur Indre, Buzansais, Estrée, S. Ge∣no, Paluau, Chatillon, Loches, Beaulieu, near which its encreas'd with the Indroise, that goes by Ville-Loin, and Montresor; then waters le Fau, Cormery, Mont-bason, Azay-le-rideau, and dischar∣ges it self into the Loire, 3 leagues East of Can∣des. The Cher, Caris, springs in Bourbonnois, on the borders of Auvergne, washes Auzance, la Marche-Combraille, Mont-Lusson, Ainai le Vieux, S. Amand and Monrond in Bourbonnois, Chateau∣neuss, le Coudray, Villeneuve, Vierzon, Menetou sur Cher, Selle, S. Aignan, Montrichart, Bleré, St. Avertin, and renders it self into the Loire, 3 leagues East of the mouth of the Indre: It receives at Vierzon the Eure or Yeure, that goes through Bourges and Meun, and is encreas'd with the Lovatier, Collin, Soulangis, Mouron and Auron; besides the Arnon that waters Reuilly and Sury, the Naon encreas'd with the Fouzon and Fourion; the Saudre that issues near Sancer∣re in Berry, waters Notre-Dame de Boncard, Vailly, Concressant, Argent, Clement, Pierre-Fitte, la Fer∣te Imbaut, Remorentin, Chatillon sur Saudre, near which it mixes with the Cher, after it hath receiv'd the Nerre that goes by Aubigny, the small Saudre that waters la Chappelle d' Angil∣lon, and Menetreol, and the Raire that washes Nansay. The Amasse runs but 4 or 5 leagues, and is considerable only by that it goes through Amboise, a Town pretty famous, seated on
the banks of the Loire, five leagues East of Tours. The Cisse encreas'd with the Ramberres and Branne fall into the Loire, on the North-side, 5 miles East of Tours The Beuvron on the borders of the Election of Gien, near the Village of Coul∣lons, washes Cerdon, the Isle of Chaon, la Motte Beu∣vron, la Ferte Aurain, Villeneuve, Newvy Brassi∣eux, receives the Boneuvre, the Cenon and the Bi∣evre, and mixes with the Loire between Cande and Onzain, 10 leagues North-east of Tours. The Cousson has its source in the proper Orle∣anois at the Village of Senely, passes between la Fertè-Seneterre and St. Aubin, makes the small Isles of Ligny and St. Aignan, goes through the pleasant Forrest of Chambort, and discharges it self into the Loire, almost two miles East of the mouth of the Beuvron. Going up the Loire to∣wards the East, you meet with several Rivulets falling into that great River, as the Dixme, the Doure, the Loiret, which begins to be Naviga∣ble at Olivet, 3 miles from its mouth, tho' its whole Channel has hardly 3 leagues in length. On the side of Orleance, and the North side of the Loire, you meet with the Rivulets of Meun and the Aisses: And after having passed the Canal of Briare, going Southward up, you'll find the Bonny, the St. Amand, the Rivulet of Cosne, the Argent, the Mazau, the Niere, &c.
Of the Country of Maine, or La Maine. MAine, or Le Maine, Cenomania, or Cenoma∣nicus Pagus, hath Normandy on the North, Perch, Vendomois, and Beauce on the East, Bre∣agne on the West, and a part of Touraine with Anjou on the South. This Province is 20 leagues North and South from Bourg-le Roy near Alen∣on in Normandy to Galerande on the borders of Anjou, and about 34 East and West from la Ferté Bernard to the Frontiers of Brittany. It is ordina∣rily divided into Higher and Lower, abounds with Corn, Wine, Linseed, Cattle, and has some Mines of Iron. It is watered with three prin∣cipal Rivers, viz. the Huisne, the Sarte and the Mayenne, which in their course receive the Yai∣gre, the Jeayu, the Dive, the Veuve, the Graine, and many other little streams. Its principal For∣rests are Bersay, Perfeigne, Longaunay, Sillé, Dan∣daines, &c. The Inhabitants of Maine are ve∣ry Witty and Courteous, and so shrewd in the management of their Affairs, that this has given occasion to a Proverb, Qu' un Mansea aut un Norman & demi, That an Inhabitant of Maine is worth one entire Norman, and the half of another; but others ascribe the Origine of that Proverb to the Money formerly used
in this Province, that was worth once as  as that of Normandy. Caesar, Pliny and Ptolomy speak much to t praise of the Inhabitants of this Countrey, ¦der the Name of Cenomani Aulerci. Tit. Liv Polybius and Leander Alberti talk of their Co¦quests in Italy. In the Year 160, from t building of Rome, Elitovius chief of the Peop of Maine, and their Prince Belovesus made  Eruption into the North-eastern part of Ita whence they drove the Natives, and th built the Cities of Bresse, Verona, Trent, C Bergemo, Mantoua, and many others. Thus is that the Poet John Baptist Ignatius expr¦seth himself in their Favour, Cenomanique acres & non ignobile semen, &c. This Province was subject to the Gauls, t Romans, the Francks, and the English. In t middle of the eighth Century, Pepin, Head  the second Stock of the French Kings, gave th County with 12 others, to his Brother Gris or Grippon: But the Names of the succeedi Counts are not known till Hugh I. in 1020.  fell by Inheritance to our K. Henry II. but  confiscated by the French Monarchs upon o K. John, under pretence of the Murther of A¦thur of Brittany. Since that time it has bee several times detatched from, and reunited ¦gain to the Crown of France. In 1674. Le XIV. made bold to give it as an Appanage, o Portion to one of his Bastards call'd Lin whom he had got on the Wife of the Mar of Montespan; bestowing upon him the Tie
Duke du Maine, and the Charge of Colonel Ge∣eral of the Switzers. The City of Mans or le Mans, in Latin Ci∣tas Cenomanorum, Suindinum, or Subdinnum, is tituted upon the Confluence of the Sarte, and e Huisne, having the Title of a Bishoprick ffragan of Tours. It is said that this City was uilt by Sarrhon, Grandson of Samothes, K. of the auls, and being afterwards ruined by the Druides nd the Sarrhonides, whilst they contested for it,  was rebuilt by Lemant King of the Gauls, who ive to it his Name. However it be, for this ccount is look'd upon as fabulous, le Mans is  very Ancient City: And in Charlemaign's time as one of the most flourishing in the Celtick Saul, but the incursions of the Normans, and he War with the English have much abated of s former Grandure. It is now built upon a ountain, which is raised up high beyond the irte, between the North and the West, and as a Bailiwick and a Presidial Seat, with a Ca∣edral Church under the Name of St. Julian, ho is esteem'd the first Bishop of it. The rench Kings by a Prerogative of their Crown, e Canons born in this Church. It's observed at the English, during the Siege they laid to is City, in 1425, were the first who made use f great Artillery in France. Mayenne-la Juhel, Meduana, has its Name om the River Mayenne, upon which it is seat∣d, and from the Lord Juhel, who liv'd under he Reign of Philip August: It lyes not far from  Frontiers of Normandy, being distant from le s about 18 leagues towards the North-west.  a Town very agreeable with the Title of a
Dutchy, under which Charles of Guise beca so famous during the Wars of the Leag whereof he was Head. In 1661. Cardinal M¦zarin bought this Dutchy from the Heirs o that House, to give it in Portion to his N Hortensia Mancini, Marry'd with Armand Char de la Porte Duke of Mazarin; it had before the Title of a Marquizate. Laval, or Laval-Guion, Vallis-Guidonis, is up¦on the River Mayenne in lower Maine, about  or 7 leagues from Mayenne towards the South It has the Title of a County, and belongeth t the House of la Trimouille: it is famous fo the fine Cloth which is made there, as als for a Council which was held there, A 1242. La Ferté Bernard, Firmitas Bernardi, a Bar¦ny, is situated upon the River Huisne, bei distant from le Mans about 9 or 10 leagues to¦wards the East, and the Frontiers of Perc there is a seat of Justice, which resorts im¦mediately to the Parliament of Paris. It ga Birth to Robert Garnier, who at the end of th last Age, before Tristan, Mairet, and P. Corneil arose, was accounted the Prince of the Tragi Poets amongst the French. The Territory ¦bout this Town is call'd by the Latin Autho of the French Affairs Ager Firmitatensis. Sablé a Marquizate, is situated near the S between the little Rivers of Vergete and Er about 10 or 11 leagues from Mans towards  South-west. Beaumont le Vicomte is a fine Tow with the Title of a Dutchy, it lyes upon  Sarte, 6 leagues North of Mans, and 5 South  Alencon. Raoul, who was Lord of it, Ass
Anno 1093. at the Translation of the Reliques of St. Julian, the first Bishop of Mans. Chateau du Loir, a Barony, is situated upon the River Loir in the Frontiers of Vendomois, distant from le Mans about 8 or 9 leagues to wards the South-east. There are other places of some Note, as La∣vardin, Villaine-la-Juhel, Gesvres, Vibray, Vassé, Ballon and Galerande that are Marquizats, Brulon, Suze, and Belin, are Counties, Bresseau is a Vis∣county, and S. Suzanne is a Barony.
Of the Country of Perche, or Le Perche. LE Perche hath Normandy on the North,  Maine to the West, Vendomois and Blais on the South, and towards the East it hath Beauce. This Country seems not to have bee known to the Ancients, the reason of which I imagine to be, that the middle-part of it was all cover'd with Woods, and the borders be∣longed to the Neighbouring Nations: And therefore it was that an Anchoret, whom Po∣sterity has since venerated under the Name of St. Avy, S. Avitus, retsred into these Forrests as into a wide and impenetrable Solitude. The Country was yet for the most part Woody, at the beginning of the third Race of the French Kings, about 700 years ago, and call'd for that reason Perticus Saltus, the Forrest of Pearches, perhaps because it consisted in great part of Fir-trees, or other long and even Wood. And you may observe by the reading of the Latin Au∣thors of the French History, how they were fell'd down, and the Country peopled by de∣grees; which however is still Woody enough: Its therefore labour lost to look for its Anci∣ent Inhabitants, since there were none, for the
Ilnelli and the Aulerci Diablintes were an Armo∣ick Nation, who seem'd to have dwell'd the irst in the Western Coasts of Normandy, and the ast on the Southern of Brittany. Le Perche is divided into higher and lower; he higher part is the County, and the lower s call'd Perche-Gouet, or rather it's divided in∣o Grand Perche, Perche-Gouet, (from the Name of its Ancient Lords) Terre Françoise, or French Country, and Terres Démembrées, or Dismem∣ber'd Lands. 1. Grand-Perche contains Nogent-le Rotrou, Mortaigne, Bellesme, Perriere, the Barronies of Loupe, Illiers, Courville and Pontgoin. Nogent le Rotrou, Novigentum Rotroci, or Rotroldi, so call'd from Rotrou its Founder, Count of Perche, is seated upon the Huisne, where it receives the Ronne, and is the Capital of Upper Perche, tho' it be commonly accounted a Burrough, but one of the finest and richest in France, by reason of its Manufactures of Ser∣ges, Linnen and Leather, and of its excellent Knives, call'd also by the Name of the Country Coutaux Pergois. The Inhabitants having rebell'd against the English, the Count of Salisbury took it, and caus'd many of them to be hang'd; but the French King Charles VII. retook it in 1449. It lyes 30 leagues South-west of Paris, and al∣most 22 North-west of Orleance. Mortagne, Moritolium, or Moritonium, near the source of the Huisne, 8 leagues North-west of Nogent le Rotrou, is a goodly Town, well peopled, and adorned with several Churches. It has a Castle, and had formerly the Title of a County. Perriere is now of little considera∣tion,
having been ruin'd by the Wars. e¦me, Bellismum, or Bellissimum, (sup. Castru is seated on a Brook that encreases the Huif la Ferte-Bernard, and has near it a Mines Fountain as much esteem'd as those of Poug and Forges. The States of the Province use  be kept in this Town, which has the first Vo and is distant 6 leagues from Nogent le Rotrou  the South-west. The Barony of Pontgouin belongs to the B¦shop of Chartres, and has several Lordships de∣pending on it, Conde sur Huisne, Condate ad Eg∣nam, is of some Consideration, and lyes 2 leagu North of Nogent le Rotrou. 2. Perche-Gouet hath 5 Ancient Barronies, t wit, Auton, Monmirail, Alluye, Basoche, and Brou. 3. La Terre-Françoise consists in the Bailiwick of La Tour-Grise, upon the River Aure, over a∣gainst Verneuil in Normandy. 4. Les Terres ¦membrées, have the small Countrey of Timera, the Town of Château-neuf, and the Principality and Town of Senonches. This little Province is about 18 leagues in length, and almost as much in breadth: It's very fertile in Corn, and well furnisht with Meadows and Pasture-ground, which together with their Forrests, and the Manufactures for∣merly mention'd, make the Inhabitants subsist. Remy Belleau, a Lyrick Poet, famous in the last Age, was Originary of this Province. Perche hath a dependance upon the Generall∣ty's of Orleans and Alençon as to the Court of Exchequer, on the Parliament of Paris for secu∣lar Justice, and for the Spiritual; it resorts to
the Bishops of Chartres and Seez. It had its articular Counts, the most Ancient of whom s named Agombert, or Albert, in the time of Louis le Debonnaire, in the IX. Century: But hey were call'd Counts of Bellesme, Alençon or Mortagne, and the first who took the Title of Count du Perche was Rotrou II. in 1149, that Country having been before of too little Consi∣deration, to give Title to a great Lord.
Of Beauce. DU Val, and several other Geographers com∣prehend under the Name of Beauce, Belsa, or Belsia, several small Countries, as the Ter∣ritory of Chartres, le pais Chartrain, that part of Gastinois which is annexed to the Govern∣ment Orleanois, besides Vendosmois, Dunois, Pui∣saye, proper Orleanois, Sologne, and the Southern part of Blaisois, which make up an extent of 35 leagues North and South, from Dreux to Re∣morentin, and above 50 leagues East and West, from the borders of Champaign and Burgundy, to the Frontiers of Maine, being included with Berri and Nivernois on the South, Perche on the North, Maine and Touraine on the West, and Champaign and Burgundy on the East. These Countries taken together, consist in large and fruitful Plains, so very abundant in Corn, that they are call'd the Granary of France. The Learned Adrian de Valois, following An∣cient Authors, gives to this Province an extent of 15 leagues, and divides it into three parts, Belsa Carnutensis le pais Chartrain, Belsa Dunensis, or Dunois, Belsa Pitiverensis, the Election of Pithiviers. To avoid confusion, I shall speak first of the County of Chartres, or Pays Char∣train, which is call'd by some.
Proper Beauce. THis Country is situated between the Isle of France, Perche, Blaisois and Orleanois. The City of Chartres, call'd in Latin Autricum Car∣nutum, from the River Autura, Eure on which it lyes, has a Presidial Seat and Bishoprick, for∣merly suffragan of Sens, and now of Paris, since the Year 1622. This City is so Ancient, that some Authors believed that the Issue of Gomer having pass'd into the Gauls, some time after Noah, did lay the Foundation of it. Others maintain, that the Druides and Sarrho∣nides, the Ancient Priests of the Gauls, did build it, and foretold, that a Virgin should one day grow big with Child without the Compa∣ny of a Man. It was this which obliged Pris∣ns, Governour for the Romans, to erect a Temple to that Blessed Virgin, with this Inscrip∣tion,Virgini Pariturae, or to the Virgin who is to bring forth. Thus it was that they ador'd at Athens an unknown God. But whatever be of it, the People of this Countrey made a long and bold Resistance to the Romans, kill'd one Tasgetus, tho' he was of the Royal Blood of their own King's, because Caesar had set him over them, and after that great Conqueror had subdued them, he was glad that they would accept of
the Alliance of the Romans, and keep their Peace. The Bishops of this City are thought to be of very Ancient Institution, for Solemnis, who informed K. Clovis in the Christian Religion is, reckon'd its 14 Prelate by Duchesne. At least 'tis probable, that under the French Kings of the first and second Race they were Lords Tem∣poral as well as Spiritual of it, if what the same Author relates be true, that one Elias the 40th. Bishop gave the Revenues of the Abby of S. Pere en Vallée to the Nobility of Chartres, and that Hardwin the 50th. Prelate was the first who Dismember'd the County from the Bishoprick, to enrich a Nephew of his call'd Odo, or Eu∣des. I know not whether his Posterity forfeit∣ed their Estates; but Hugh the Great, Father to Hugh Capet, the first French King of the 3d. Race, being then very powerful in that King∣dom, gave this Country together with those of Blois and Tours to a Kinsman of his call'd Theo∣bald the Old, or the Tricker. His issue in pro∣cess of time, viz. in 1037. acquired the Coun∣ty of Champaign, and had been the greatest Lords in France, had they not weak'ned themselves by the Portions they gave to Youngest Sons. In 1286. Lewis IX. bought the County of Char∣tres from Jane of Chatillon, the Heiress of it. It has been since united to the French Crown, and separated from it several times, and now it makes part of the Portion of Monsieur, Lewis XIV.'s Brother; his Eldest Son bearing the Title of Duke of Chartres. This City and Country have under gone seve∣ral Revolutions, for at the end of the sixth Age
Thierry K. of Burgundy, took it by Storm from his Brother Clotaire. In 743. Hunold Duke of Aquitain took Chartres and burn'd it. Francis I. erected it into a Dutchy, in Favour of Madam Rene of France, Dutchess of Ferrara. Anno 911. Rollon chief of the Normans besieged it, and Anno 1019. it was almost quite burnt down, Anno 1568. the Protestants laid Seige to it under the Reign of Charles IX. and would certainly have taken it, the Admiral of Chatil∣lon having defeated la Valette, who came to re∣lieve it, and the Duke of Anjou not daring to ventue a Battle against that great Captain: But the Protestant Nobility lured with the fair promises of Liberty of Conseience, by that entreaguing Princess Katherine of Medicis, rais'd voluntarily the Siege, whereupon ensued the short Edict of Pacification at Longjumeau. Ever since Chartres followed the party of the League, till Anno 1591. Henry he Great took it, and was there Crown'd and Anointed King of France, the City of Rheims still persisting in its Rebel∣lion. If you ask, whether they took Conse∣crated Oyl to perform that Ceremony, Du Kerer will answer you, that there is another holy Ampull, or Vial kept at Marmoutier, an Abby near Tours for that purpose, and that the Oyl of that Vial is no less Sacred than that of Rheims. The River Eure divides Chartres into two inequal parts, which lye partly on a Valley of difficult Access, and partly at the end of a large Plain, the Streets are generally narrow, as t uses to be in Ancient Towns; the Houses hoeve are fine, the Walks pleasant, and the
Churches Magnificent. The Cathedral dedica∣ted to the Holy Virgin is very considerable, its Quire, the Church under ground, and its 2 Steeples, are the Admiration of all Strangers. The Chapter hath 72 Canons, 17 whereof are Dignitaries, among whom are 6 Archdeacons, viz. of Chartres, Blois, Dunois, Vendome, Dreux, and Pincerais, 4 Provosts, namely, those of Ingre, Normandy, Mesange and Anet. In this Diocess are reckon'd 30 Abbies, 257 Priories, and more than 1300 Parishes, the Churches of St. Julien and St. Agnan are very fine. In a word, 'tis one of the biggest and rich∣est Diocesses of France, comprehending four other Cities, the heads of so many Countries, each of which might conveniently enough be made the Seat of a Bishop, viz. Blois, Chateau∣dun, Vendome and Dreux, if we believe De Valos. In the City it self are 3 Abbies, viz. those of St. Josaphat, St. Pere en Vallée, and St. Cheron, besides many other Religious Houses. Several considerable Manufactures are made at Char∣tres, by reason of the waters of the River Eure, which are esteemed very proper for that pur∣pose. This City lyes 14 leagues North-west of Orleance, and 16 South-west of Paris. Nogent le Roi is situated upon the Eue, 5 miles South of Dreux, and 9 North of Chartres. It's call'd Novigentum Regis, because, as some say, King Philip VI. dyed here, or as others pretend, because it was given by one Isaselle to K. Philip August. Dreux, Durocassae Carnutum, and corruptive∣ly Drocae, and Drocum, lyes also upon the Eure, 13 miles North of Chartres, on whose Bishop
it depends, as likewise on the Governour of Orleanois, tho' as to the Exchequer, its Election resorts to the Generality of Paris. It has the Title of a County, and the precedency of Char∣tres in the Assembly of the General States, it being one of the Ancientest Cities in the King∣dom. Nay, if we believe the suppositious Be∣rose, it was built Anno 410. or thereabouts, af∣ter the Deluge, by Drius IV. King of the Gauls, and Founder of the Druides. So much at least is sure, that these Druides, who were together the Priests, the Teachers, the Judges and the Physicians of that Nation, kept here their Assemblies, as esteeming this Place bles∣sed and holy, and the middle or Center of Gaul. Here also it was that they gather'd the Misletoe from the Oaks, with many Ceremo∣nies, after the solemn Sacrifice of two young white Bulls, on the sixth day of the Moon, the Priests cutting the Shrub with a Gold Sickle, and the People receiving it on white Cloath: For those crafty fellows made the Vulgar be∣lieve that the Misletoe was an heavenly Gift, a Soveraign Remedy and preservative against all Diseases. Robert Son of Lewis the Burly, had the County of Dreux given him Anno 1137. when he marry∣ed the Widdow of Rotrou Count of Perche: He is the Stock of the Counts of that Name, and the Dukes of Brittany descended from him. His Grandson Peter of Dreux having married Guy Alix, Heiress of that Sovereignty in 1250. About the end of the twelfth Century, our K. Hen∣ry II. and his Son Richard burn'd this Town and Vendome, because Count Robert of Meular, their
Kinsman and Vassal, had made Homage of his Lands to the French K. Philip August. This Town is likewise famous for the Battle which the Roman Catholicks gained over the Prote∣stants Anno 1562. in which the Generals of both Parties, the Duke of Monmorency, Lord high Constable of France, and the Admiral of Coligny were made Prisoners. Gaillardon, Galardo, is scitu∣ted upon a little River, which emptieth it self into that of Eure, 3 leagues and a half from Chartres to the North-East: It's remarkable for the Birth of St. Hildeburg, whose Life has been not many years since published by Don Luke d' Achery. Espernon Sparno lyes 5 leagues North-East of Chartres and 5 Miles East of Nogent le Roy. It has a Priory under the Name of St. Thomas, but is much more famous for having been erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1582. by the French King Henry III. on behalf of John Lewis of la Valette Nogaret, whom he rais'd to the highest Dignities in that Kingdom, and mad him his chief Favourite. Bonneval is scituated on the Frontiers of Blai∣sois, in a fruitful Soil, where the Loir receives the Mesuve, 6 Leagues and a half South of Char∣tres: There is a famous Abby of Benedictines, of which one Arnauld an intimate Friend of St. Bernard was Abbot in the 13th. Century. Maintenon, Mesteno, 7 Miles North-East of Chartres, and 3 South-East of Nogent le Roy, up∣on the River Eure, is now famous for giving the Title of Dutchess to the Widdow of the Poet Scarron Fransoise d' Aubigne, the principal She-minister of State, and Cabinet Counsellor of Lewis XIV.
There are some other Towns or considerable Burroughs in this County, as Auneau, Ouerville, Voves, Viabon, &c. In 1682. the Duke of Guise defeated the Germans near Auneau. Of Vendomois. VEndomois, Vindocinensis, or Vindusnensis Pa∣gus, hath Perche on the North, Maine on the West, Touraine on the South, and Blai∣fois on the East. Here is especially remarkable Vendome, Vindocinum Castrum, situated upon the Loir, and the Capital of Vendomois, with the Title of Dutchy and Peerdom, erected by Francis I. in 1514. on behalf of Charles of Bourbon, Father of Antony of Bourbon, and this of Henry IV. Du∣ring the first Race of the French Kings, this Country made part of the Kingdom of Orleance, and was since possest by the Counts of Anjou. In 1342. Godfrey Martel, one of them built here the Abby of the Holy Trinity, after he had overcome William Count of Poictiers, and Con∣quer'd from him the City of Saintes: He fill'd it with Benedictine Monks, and presented it with a pretended Tear of our Saviour, said to have been wept on the Grave of Lazarus. The Popes, who never fail'd of gratifying the Monks at the Expences of the Secular Clergy, freed these from all Episcopal Jurisdiction, and Innocent III. granted them this vain Priviledge, that their Abbot might take upon him the Title of Cardinal of St. Priscus.
In 1563. the Protestants being Masters of this Town, broke down the Images, and it having since followed the League the French King Henry IV. took it by Storm in 1569. and caus'd Maillé Benehard, the Governour, and a Franciscan Fryer to be Executed, forgiving the rest of the People. In this Town there is a very ancient Castle, a Colledge of the Fathers of the Oratory, and some Religious Houses. It is distant from Pa∣ris about thirty two Leagues to the South-West. Peter Ronsard, a Poet famous in the last Age, was Originary of Vendomois, in which I find no other considerable Places but Mntoire and Ville aux Cleres.
Of Anjou. ANjou, Ducatus Andegavensis hath Maine on the North, Brittany on the West, Poictou on the South, and Touraine on the East. This Province is about 30 Leagues in length, & 20 in breadth. It aboundeth with great Quarries of Slate, wherewith most of their Houses are co∣vered, and even oft employed by Masons in∣stead of Stones. There are reckoned about 36 or 40 Rivers, whereof the principal are the Loire, the Sarte, the Loir, the Mayenne, the Dive, the Vienne, the Couesnon, the Oudon, the Authion, the Tonay, the Layion, the Eure, the Guinate; and such a number of Lakes, Ponds, Brooks and Fountains, that several believe the Name of Anjou to be derived from that of Aiguade. Du Chesne rejects this Conjecture as impertinent; but when I consider that most of the Names of Countries have a reference to their situation, that the Gascons, who in their vulgar Language have preserv'd many ancient Gaulish Words, call a River Gave; that the Romans named the In∣habitants of Anjou, Andicavi or Andegavi; and that the Celtick Speech had a great affinity with the Teutonish, I am apt to look on the Name An∣degavi as a word compounded of three, An-de∣gaven,
In the Brooks, to denote Men inhabiting a Country wash'd with many Rivers. However it be, this abundance of Water makes the Rich∣es of Anjou, both by a vast quantity of sweet Fish, and the great number of Gardens and Mea∣dows they make therewith fruitful. This Pro∣vince is partly Champian, and has many Woods and Forrests, where abound Stags, Hinds, Bucks, Does, Hares, and all sorts of great and small Game; and partly mountainous and cover'd with Vineyards, that produce as delicate Wine as any in France, most of which together with their Brandies and those of Orleanois are trans∣ported along the Loire to Nantes, and thence into Forreign Country; for Brittany has none, or but very little of its own. This Country is divided into higher and low∣er, following the Course of the River Loire. An∣gers is in the lower, and Saumur in the higher. The other most considerable Towns are la Fleche, Montreuil-Belley, Chateau-Gontier, Beau∣fort en valée, the Dutchies of Brissac, Beaupreau, Brezé, Vaujour & le Lude; the Marquisates of Jarzay, Bellay, Touarcé; the Counties of Mon∣soreau, Maulevrier; the Barrony of Craon, &c. the Abbies of Fontevraut and Borguéil; the Ca∣stle and Convent of Verger, &c. The ancient In∣habitants of Anjou, call'd in French Angevins, and in Latin Andes, Andi, Andecavi or Andega∣vi, had their own Commanders; afterwards the Romans, and since them the Kings of France and those of England enjoy'd it. In 861. the French King and Emperor Charles the Bald be∣stow'd the Countries included betwixt the Sein and Loire upon Robert the Strong, Duke and Mar∣quess
of France, on Condition that he should de∣fend them against the Incursions of the Normans: But the Posterity of Robert having obtain'd the very French Crown, (for his two Sons were Crown'd Kings, viz. Eudes in 898. and Robert in 922. and his great Grand-son Hugh Capet be∣gan the third Race of the French Kings) the Issue of Tertulle or Terculf, to whom the same Charles had given some part of Anjou, were accounted sole Counts of it, during part of the Ninth, the Tenth and the Eleventh Century. They grew so potent and famous, that Fulk V. became King of Jerusalem in 1131. and Henry Plantagenet, Son to Godfrey III. Count of Anjou and le Mayne, succeeded in the right of his Mother Mathilda to the Crown of England, under the Name of Henry II. His Son Richard I. surnam'd Lions Heart, enjoy'd likewise these Counties; but they were Confiscated upon his Brother K. John by Philip August, whose Successors gave them since seve∣ral times in Portion to their Sons. The French K. John erected Anjou into a Dutchy in 1360. in behalf of his second Son Lewis, who became afterwards King of Naples and Sicily, Count of Provence, and Titular King of Jerusalem. Charles the last of that Family instituted K. Lewis XI. his Universal Heir, and ever since this Province has been an Apannage, or part of the Portion of the second Son of the French Kings, as it is now enjoy'd by Philip Duke of Orleance, Lewis XIV's Brother. The City of Angers, or Juliomagus Ande∣gavorum, Andegavae, or Andegavi, is situated on the River Mayenne, after it hath receiv'd the Sarte and the Loire. It's the Capital of this
Province, having divers Seats of Justice, Pre∣sidial, Seneschalship, Bailiwick, Election, a Mint where Money is coyn'd at the Letter, an University and a Bishoprick suffragan to Tours. It is seated in a Plain very fertil, pro∣ducing delicate Fruits, and very good Wine; the River Mayenne divides it into 2 parts, where∣of the greatest which is call'd the City, lyes on the steep of a little Hill, where the Church of St. Maurice, and the Castle of Angers are to be seen. This Church (which is the Cathe∣dral) is distinguished from all others by 3 high Steeples raised up on the body of the Church, the middle of which, being built on an Arch, and underpropt only by the two others, is ac∣counted a Marvel. On solemn Days are shewn the Relicks, as the Sword of St. Maurice, one of the pretended Pitchers wherein our Lord chang'd Water into Wine, said to be brought from Jerusalem by Renatus K. of Sicily, and re∣sembling a Jasper. Here is the Tomb of this Prince, whose Body was brought hither from Aix in Provence, as also his Picture drawn by himself. The Chapter of the Cathedral is com∣posed of 29 Canons, a Dean, a great Arch∣deacon, a Treasurer, an Arch-deacon beyond the Mayenne, an Archdeacon beyond the Loire, a Singer, two other Treasurers, and a Peniten∣ciary. This City has been beautify'd and encreas'd from time to time by its Counts, but especial∣ly by our King John, who built that part which lyes now beyond the Mayenne; some surname it the Black City, because its all covered with Slates.
Angers is much resorted unto, at a Festival, which the Roman Catholicks call La-Fete-Dieu, the Feast of God. Then you may see all the Priests and Monks, and 4000 Inhabitants, bear∣ing as many kindled Torches; and withall as many engraven Histories of the Holy Scrip∣ture, as there are Wards in the City. This Ceremony has been instituted to attone for the pretended Crime of the Archdeacon Berenger, who opposed Transubstantiation in its birth. At the solicitation of some studious Persons, Lewis XIV. instituted lately a Royal Academy at Angers, with the same prerogatives as that of Pa∣ris, save the right of Committimus, that is, the Pri∣viledge of bringing the Suits wherein its Mem∣bers are concern'd before his Masters of Re∣quests, at the first motion. This Academy is compos'd of 30 Members, who must all be An∣gevin Men born, or at least settled Inhabitants of Anjou. They are not to meddle with Mat∣ters of Religion and Divinity, nor with Poli∣ticks, unless it be by the King's Directions, nor to judge of any Composures besides their own: They have four Officers, a Director, a Chancellor, and two Secretaries. The Bishop, the King's Lieutenant in the City and Castle of Angers, the President, Lieutenant General, and King's Attorney in the Presidial, and the Mayor of the City may assist at their Assemblies, thô not at the time of the Elections. Going out of the Suburbs towards Saumur, you meet at a place call'd Grehan with some re∣mains of a Roman Amphitheatre, and several Medals have been extracted thence. The French Kings are Canons of this Church by their very
Title to the Crown. The most Ancient Bishop of this Church was one Defensor, who has bee since related into the number of Saints, and lived in the fourth Century. Here are likewise many Collegiate Churches, divers Parishes, 3 Ab∣bies, viz. those of St. Aubin, St. Nicholas, and St. Sergius, as also Monasteries and Seminaries, and the Chappel of St. Saviour, built in re∣membrance of a Victory gotten by the Inhabi∣tants of Anjou on one Lord of St. Sauveur, who together with the Normans had laid Siege to that City. The Castle is flanked with 1 great round Towers, and a half Moon, and built upon a Rock, with a large Ditch at the foot of it. There is a rare Engine by which they may lift up such things as they stand in need of: However, in 1585. the Protestants ma∣ster'd this Castle, but were soon expell'd by the Inhabitants. By reason of the strength of this place, Prisoners of State are oft sent thi∣ther. This City of Angers is governed by a Mayor and 24 Sheriffs. The University founded in the Year 198. by Louis II. is famous for the Ci∣vil and Canon Law, and has had famous Pro∣fessors, and bred up many Learned Scholars. Angers lyes 17 leagues East N. E. of Nants, 25 West of Tours, and 66 South-west of Paris. The Fathers of the Oratory have here a Col∣ledge for Divinity and Philosophy. Saumur is situated upon the River Loire, a∣bout 10 leagues from Angers to the South-east: it is as pleasant a place as can be seen, and Strangers are mightily taken with it, for the Town is seated at the foot of a Hill, Wall'd i
and defended with Towers, but commanded by a Castle fortify'd with three Bastions, lin'd with large square Stones. The prospect of the Castle on the Loire, and the neighbouring Plains, is very delightful. The strength of this p ace gives occasion to the Learned De Valois to de∣rive its name from the Latin Salvari, becaue its Fortifications preserve its Inhabitants from the attempts of their Enemies, so that Saumur should have been said for Sauf-mur, and Salmu∣rus for Salvus murus. Saumur is a new Town, being not much above six hundred years standing. There is a Chappel under the Name of Our Lady des Ar∣dillers, which has been much frequented by reason of pretended Miracles; but since the Reformation, that Trade being much decay'd, Saumur, which was then but a small place, would not have grown considerable, had it not been given to the Protestants for one of their Towns of Security. It's in that Quality that Phillip du Pessis Mornay was Governour there in Henry IV's time, that famous Assertor of the Christian and Protestant Religion, whose Works are still the admiration of the Learned, and did so puzzle the Roman Catholicks of his time, that they would needs have all the Mini∣sters of France to have contributed to their Per∣fection. But what drew most People to Sau∣mur, was a Protestant University for Divinity and humane Learning. Here have flourished about the end of the last Age and the beginning of this, that renown'd Scotch Divine J. Cameron, who was succeeded by 3 Professors, the like neither France, nor perhaps Europe, ever saw read by turns in one
Chair, viz. Lewis Cappel, Moses Amyrauld, and John de la Place, as famous for their Learning, as for their mutual Friendship. At the same time liv'd that great Critick Tanneguy le Fevre, who has left a Daughter yet living, Heiress of his knowledge in the Greek and Roman Anti∣quities and Tongues, as appears by her Tran∣slations and Commentaries. Stephen Gaussen liv'd not long enough to shew his Parts, but by four small Treatises we have of his, it may be judg'd what great man he would have been, had God been pleased to grant him longer to the French Protestants. In 1684 Lewis XIV. pull'd down this University, which, together with the fol∣lowing Persecution, depopulated Saumur at that rate, that it looks now as a Solitude to what it was be ore. The Fathers of the Ora∣tory have here a fine Colledg, and the Church of St. Peter, newly built, is considerable. A Mile from the Town are subterraneous Vaults, reaching half a League in length. La Fleche, Flecchia or Fixa is situated up∣on the Loir, towards the Frontiers of Maine, being twelve Leagues from Angers to the North-East. There is a very fine Colledg of Je∣suits founded by Henry the IVth. Anno 1603. It consists of three bodies of Lodgings capabl to ldge the King with all his Court. The Heart of Henry the Fourth is buried in one of the Chappels under the Steps whereby they ascend the Altar, according to his desire, hav∣ing order'd that the most noble Part of him after his death, should be put in that Castle where he was conceived. The Jesuits have another Colledg at Dole in
the Franche-Conty, at a place called Arc, which gave occasion to this ingenious Distich, allud∣ing to the signification of Arc a Bow, and la Fleche, an Arrow: Arcum Dola dedit Patribus, dedit Alma sagittam Gallia, quis funem quem meruere dabit. Dole to the Fathers gave a Bow Kind France an Arrow gave, Will none a String on them bestow, They long deserv'd to have Lude Lusdum is situated on the River Loir, about 14 Leagues from Angers to the North-East, having the Title of a County since 600 years. Pont de Se, or Ponts de Ce, Pons Sai, or Pon∣tes Caesaris, is a Town and a Castle seated in an Island of the River Loire. The Town consists of a long Street with a Bridge of half a Mile in length, at each end towards Brissac and An∣gers, from which it is at two Leagues distance. Some pretend that these Bridges have been built by Caesar, who kept here a Garrison, but since the Latin Authors of the French History call the place Saium or Seium, it seems not na∣tural, to fetch from so far, and without War∣rant too, the original of that Name. Brissac, Braccum Saccum, or Brisiacum, in old French Brachesec, or Brochesac lies on the River Aubance, Albantia. It's a little Town with the Title of a Dutchy, erected in favour of Charles of Cosse, Mareschal of France. It
is situated in a very fine Country, nigh to Pont de Ce, seven Miles South-East of Angers. There are at Brisac a very fine Castle, a great Park, and a large Pond of about a League in length. Doue, Theotuadum Castellum, Doadum or Doeum, lies seven Leagues South-East of Angers, near the source of the Touay Toedum, which dis∣charges it self into the Loire, after it has re∣ceiv'd three other Rivulets, the Toeret, the Ar∣genton, and the Dive. It's the Tradition of the Vulgar, that this Town has been considerable in the Romans time; and that they built there an Amphitheater, which, tho' it had but 1600 foot in Circuit, was able to contain 15000 Spe∣ctators. The remains of this Building are still made use of by the Inhabitants to act Come∣dies every Year; there are twenty two steps cut for the most part in the Rock, and the Walls are rais'd without Mortar. Besides this Monument there are vestigies of an old way from Doue to Pont de Ce, several subterra∣neous Vaults, and a Wall of an extraordinary depth. Nevertheless the Learned De Valois pretends that Doue was not a Roman work, but one of the four Palaces or Country-Houses of the Kings of Aquitain, and grounds his opini∣on on several passages of the old Historians of the French; besides that the Frame of this Amphitheater was not adapted to Publick Shews. The French King keeps a Garrison here. Bauge, Balgeium or Balgiacum, had yet in D Chesne's time a Presidial-Seat, which has been since transfer'd to la Fleche. However it has still an Electon as well as Angers, Saumur, la
Fleche, Monstreuil-Bellay and Chateau-gontier, which depend all six on the Generality of Tours. Beauge has been built by Fulk Nerra, Count of Anjou, near the source of the Couesnon, seven Leagues South-East of Angers. In 1286. the French King, Philip the Bold, assign'd a Portion of 2000 Livres to Queen Margaret his Mother upon the Chastellenies of Bauge, and Beaufort en Vallee, which I observe, to shew how scarce money was at that time. Du Val speaks of a Victory, obtain'd by the French over the English at Bauge in 1420, which should then be the very year of Charles the VI's Death, when the English and Burgundians were most powerful, and the affairs of the Dau∣phin Charles VII at the lowest ebb. Beaufort en Vallee, Bellum forte in Valle, is a pretty Town and Castle, as its name signifies, lying betwixt the Rivers Couesnon and Authion, five Leagues East of Angers. It has the Title of a County, and being of the antient Demesne of the French Crown, has been oft separated from and reunited to it. Now it belongs to the House of Beaumanoir-Lavardin. Monsoreau, Mons Sorelli, near the Confluence of the Vienne and Loire, and the borders of Touraine, thirteen Leagues East South-East of Angers, has the Title of a County, and is noted for a Battel fought there against the Normans in 879. Brese lies three Leagues Westwards upon the Loire, has the Tile of a Marquisate, and a Ca∣stle fortify'd with deep Motes and subterraneous Vaults. There are a fine Garden and a Wood of Cypresses belonging to it.
Monte-jan, Mons Johannis, upon the River Loire, five Leagues South-West of Angers, is noted for having given name under the Reign of Francis I. to a Vain-glorious Marshal of France, who to mimick Kings, sent and receiv'd Embassadors, and was much laughed at the Courts of France and Spain. Ingrande on the same River, a League farther to the West, is a good Trading Town. Font-evraud, Fons Everardi, a famous Abby of Nuns, Chief of an Order of that Name, founded by Robert of Arbrissel, in 1100, lies on the borders of Poictou, fourteen Leagues South-East of Angers. It's said that the Ser∣mons of Arbrissel drawing great number of People after him, he built them Cells or Ca∣bins in the Forest of Fontevraud, and after∣wards shut up the Women in a separate place. Whether it was to make a Serrail or a Cloister, I know not, but 'tis reported of this H. Man that he lay in Bed with them to mortifie the flesh. However it be, this Monastery has been successively governed by fourteen Prin∣cesses. Craon, Credo, is a little Town seated on the Oudon, towards the Frontiers of Maine and Bretaign, twelve Leagues North-West of An∣gers. It hath given Name to the Illustrious Family of the Barons of Craon, known since the XIV Century. This Barony fell Ann 1586, to the House of la Trimouille, by the Mar∣riage of Guy the VI. Lord of la Trimouille, with Mary of Sulli, only Daughter and Heiress of Louis of Sulli, and Isabella of Craon. This Town suffer'd much during the Civil Wars, Anno 1562.
Chateau Gontier, Castellum Guntherii, is on the River Mayenne, ten Leagues North of Angers. It was rais'd from a Country-House to a Castle and a Town by Fulk 111th. Count of Anjou, who gave it the name of his Tenant there. The other Towns or Burroughs of any consideration in this Province are Cande Condate, le Lyon d' Angers, Segre Secretum, Poiiancey, Chateauneuf, Durestail, &c. Of Touraine. TOƲRAINE, or Turonus, Ager, is situated between Blaisois, Vendomois, Maine, An∣jou, Poictou and Berri; it hath the Title of a Dutchy; is twenty four Leagues in its greatest length, and as much in breadth. Be∣cause of its fertility in all things, especially in Fruit, many term it the Garden of France. The chief Rivers which water it are the Loire, the Indre, the Cher, the Indroise, the Vienne, &c. whose course may be seen in the general de∣scription of this Government. The Inhabi∣tants of Touraine, called in French, Touran∣geaux, and in Latin, Turones and Turoni, were already powerful in Caesar's time, since their Cotta, for the relief of Alesia, besieged by that General, amounted to six thousand Men. In the fourth Century, when Gaul was divided by the Romans into seventeen Provinces, Tours be∣came the Capital of the third Lyonnoise, and
consequently, a Metropolitan; tho' the City it self, and a great part of its dependencies, ly∣ing on the South of the Loire, seem more pro∣perly to belong to Aquitain. And therefore when Charlemaigne divided his Dominions be∣tween his Sons, 'tis expresly noted, that he gave all Aquitain and Gascony, excepting Touraine, to his beloved Son Louis. The City and Arch-Bishoprick of Tours Tu∣ronum, or rather Caesarodunum Turonum, is situ∣ated upon the Loire, and much frequented by Merchants, because of the conveniency of that great River, and the Cher, but especially, be∣cause of their Brocards, and other Silk Manu∣factures. The Metropolitan Church of St. Gra∣tian is worth the curiosity of Strangers. This Saint was the first Bishop of it at the end of the second Century: he had for his successors, many famous Prelates, particularly St. Lidoire, St. Martin, St. Grgory of Tours. Since I have made mention of St. Martin, I cannot forbear this History, related by Du Chesne. King Clovis, soon after his Conversion to Christianity, made an Offering of his own Horse, to the Tomb of this Saint, sending immediately an hundred pieces of Gold to redeem it; but when he would mount it, the Horse could not go until he had sent five-fold the Mony. It seem'd, says my su∣perstitious Author, as tho' its feet had been fastened to the Ground. And so I believe they were, or something very like it; for I never read in the H. Scripture, that God wrought Miracles, only on purpose to enrich his Pro∣phets or Apostles, at the expences of Kings or People. The French Papists have still an ex∣traordinary
veneration for this H. Man. It were to be wish'd they would imitate his Christian moderation; for this good Bishop would never communicate with Idacius and Ithacius, who had procur'd the death of the He∣resiarch Priscillian. The Diocess of Tours is very large, being di∣stributed under three Arch-Deacons, one of Tours, another beyond the Loire, and the third beyond the Vienne, comprehending twenty great Abbies, above an hundred Monasteries, twenty Collegiate Churches fill'd up with Pre∣bendaries, four hundred Parochial Churches, whereof sixteen are within the City. Besides the famous Abby of Marmoutier, and the fine Church of St. Ma tin, on which six Abbot∣ships depend, viz. Beauieu, Cormeri, Villeloin, Pruilly, Noyers and Chinon. But the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan is far much larger, for the Bishops of Angers and le Mans, and the nine Prelates of Brittany are his Suffragans. Thre is a Gate called corruptively, la porte Fourgon, whose right name is la porte du Roi Hugon, King Hugon's Gate. Some derive from thence the Nick-Name of Hugonots, given to the French Protestants, because they us'd to as∣semble at Night in subterraneous Vaults, near the Gates of this City, to avoid the rage of their Persecutors, and therefore were called Hugo∣noti, Hugonots, as tho' they had been Disciples of King Hugon or Huguet. This Hugon seems to have been an antient Count of Touraine, who repair'd this Gate, but it is now look'd upon by the superstitious Inhabitants, as a kind of Hob∣goblin that goes about the City Walls, and
beats the Night-Walkers he meets with. Others feign a more illustrious original of this name, pretending that it was imposed on the French Protestants, when the League was most powerful. And that as the House of Guise gave pivately out to have a better Title to the Crown than the Kings that then were, as being descended from Charlemaign; so the Leaguers nick-nam d the abettors of the Reformation Hugonots, as favourers of the Posterity of Hugh Capet, the head of the third Race of the Fr nch Kings. However it be, the Protestant Religi∣on made at first great Progresses in this City; and for this reason it was that it stood firm by the French Kings, Henry III. and Henry IV. So that when the Parliament of Paris declar'd for the League, the Loyalists that could make their escape, rtir d to Tours, and erected there ano∣ther Court of Justice, which cashier'd all the Edicts of the Parliament of Paris, tending to promte the Rebellion. Near St. Martin the Fair, is still shewn the Plain, whee Charles Martel Duke or Genera∣lissimus of the French, defeated the Saracens in 726, kiling 375000 of their Men with their King Abderame, tho' he lost but 1500. But some mderate and very accurate Authors pretend that there is a mistake, or overplus of 300000 in that Calculation. Tours has a Bayliwick and Presidial-Seat, an Election and a Generality, to which those of Am∣boise, Chinon and Loches, all those of le Mayne and Anjou, and some of Poictou, do resort. Here was formerly Mony coyn'd, that went throughout all the Kingdom, whence come still
the names of Deniers, Sous and Livres Tournois. The form of Tours is somewhat oval, the streets being long and clean, and the Houses cover'd with Slates, as well as the Walls of the City. Near a Village called Columbiers, two Leagues East of Tours, is a subterraneous Vault called la Cave Gouttiere, or the dropping Cave, where the drops of Water freeze and petrifie as they fall along the Walls. The cold is here extraordi∣nary in Summer, tho' this seems not to be the sole cause of it. There is also the House and Castle of Plessis, worthy to be seen for the fine Orchards and Gardens belonging to it. But as to the Castle of Tours, it is old and ruin'd. Tours lies twenty five Leagues West of Angers, and 46 South-East of Paris. Amboise or Ambacia, situated on the con∣fluence of the Loire and Amasse, having a Royal Castle built by Charles the Eighth to distin∣guish the place of his Birth, which was also that of his Death. This Town is pretty antient, for Gregory of Tours says, That Clovis and Alaric had an Interview in the Island nigh Amboise, which Island is now within the Town. The Normans afterwards ruined it, but it was soon repair'd by Fulk III. Count of Anjou, and is now a very fine Town, tho' not very big. The Healthfulness of the Air has oft drawn the French Kings hither; and at such a time it was that some French Protestants design∣ing to rid themselves of the Guisards, who kept K. Francis II. in a manner Prisoner, were discovered in their Attempt, and paid for it with their Lives, in 1560, Amboise belong'd a long time to the Counts of Anjou, as to its Founders
or Repairers then it had particular Lords. Charles VI. seiz'd it from Lewis Viscount of Thouars, &c. because he took part with the English. Lewis XI. Instituted here the Order of St. Michael, August 1. 1469. Amboise lies 5 Leagues West of Turs, and 9 East of Orleance. It seems to owe its first Original to a Bridge of Boats, which the Romans made here. The Town of Loches, Luccae or Lociae, is sci∣tuated upon the River Indre, Nine Leagues South-East of Tours. Eustochius fifth Bishop of Tours founded here a Monastery, whereof he constituted one Ʋrsus the first Abbot, under the Reign of Alaric, King of the Goths Lches was already a strong Place, under the first Race of the Kings of France; but Carloman and Pepin, Brothers and Generals of the French took, and rais'd it in 742. It was since repair'd, and forti∣fied with a Castle built on the top of an unac∣cessible Rock, defended with Towers and Bul∣warks, and being 12000 Steps in Circuit; so that it could not be taken by the English. This Country was the Patrimony of the first Counts of Anjou; there they kept their Prison∣ers of State: But Charles the VII. did make his ordinary Residence in it. Louis the XI. did add divers Appartments to the Castle, particularly a dark Dungeon, where he kept Cardinal de Bal∣ue Prisoner a long time. Here it was that Louis the XII. imprisoned Ludovic Storce, where that Duke died, and was buried in the Church of Notre-Dame. Here also is to be seen the Tomb of Agnes Surelle, or Sorel, Mistress of Charles the VII. the fairest Woman of her time; with her Statue of white Marble, done to the Life.
Hard by is a fine Forrest, where the Counts of Anjou, and the French Kings used to Hunt. Du Chesuc relates, that in this Castle there was an Iron-Gate, which through a long Lane cut in the Rock, lead to a square Room, where was found a Man 8 Foot long, sitting on a great Stone, and leaning his Head on his Hands, as tho' he had slept; but it went all to Dust, as soon as it felt the Air, excepting the biggest Bones, and the Cranion, which were long pre∣served in our Ladies Church. On the South-side of the River lies the Abby of Beaulieu, founded on behalf of the Benedi∣ctines by Fulk Nerra, Count of Anjou. There is a Pyramide 10 or 12 Fathoms long, in the hollowness of which are some Characters, that could never be Uncifer'd; so that it is still dou∣bted, whether this is a Monument of the Goths, or of the antient Gauls? Loches has a Bailyff, and a Royal Seat of Justice, resorting to the Presidial of Tours. The City Chinon, or Caino, almost 10 Leagues South West of Tours, is situated upon the Vien∣ne, with a Castle, having a Governour, and Reg∣al Seat of Justice. Gregory of Tours relates, that the Romans besieging this Town under the Con∣duct of Aegidius or Gilln, turn'd off the Course of the Vienne, and stopt a Well whence the Be∣sieg'd drew their Water; so that they would have been forced to surrender, had not a violent Rain fallen on a sudden, which fill'd up their Ditches, and terrified the Romans so, as to make them raise the Siege.
Here Charles the VII. made his Rereat, and here it was that Jeanne d' Arc, since call'd the Maid of Orleans came to find him, Anno 1426. Francis the first Duke of Bretagne, did Ho∣mage to the same King in that place, Anno 1443. Here are the Canons of the College of St. Mesme are immediately subject to the Pope. This also was the Country of Fr. Rabelais, famous for his Comical Tales. Cande, Condate, lies on the Confluence of the Vienne and Loire, 7 Miles North West of Chinon. L' Isle-Bouchard lies in an Island of the River Vienne, 9 Miles South East of Chinon, with a Castle and fine Meadows. La Haye, a∣ga Turonum, 9 Leagues South of Tours, and 6 South-East of L'Isle-Bouchard is seaed on the Ri∣ver Claise, with the Title of a Barony, and is now famous for being the Native Country of that great Philosopher Descartes. Prully, Prulli∣acum, 6 Leagues higher to the East on the same River, has been sometime the Residence of the Learned Joseph Scaliger, who taught the Chil∣dren of the Lord of Prully. Paumy, betwixt La Haye and Prully, has an antient Castle, and the Title of Viscounty. Maizieres on the Claise, near the Borders of Berry, is the Capital of the small Country of Brenne, abounding with Game and Fishes, be∣cause of its many Ponds. Chatillon, on the River Indre, has a Royal Seat of Justice resorting to the Presidial of Tours, but its Election depends on the Generality of Bourges. Langest, near the Loire, 11 Miles West of Tours, produces excellent Melons. Chenon∣ceaux, upon the Cher, 8 Leagues South East of
Tours is renowned for a Royal House and Castle belonging now to the Duke of Vendome. It was built by Q. Katherine of Medicis, and adorn'd with fine Marbles and Statues, brought from Italy, among which, that of Scipio Africanus is much esteem'd. Mont-Louis a Burrough, near the Loire, betwixt Amboise and Tours, has all its Houses cut in the Rock, nothing appearing on the ground, but the top of some Chimneys a∣mongst the green Turf. The other places of note in Touraine, are Mont∣bazon and Maille or Luynes two Dutchies. St. Maure a County. La Roche-Pozay. a considera∣ble Lordship, seated on the Creuse, near the Borders of Berri. St. Christopher, Chateau-Re∣naud, near the River Bransle, and the Frontiers of Maine. Montrichard, on the Cher, Montresor on the Indroise, &c. Of Blaisois. BLaisois lieth between Berry, Orleanois, properly so called Vnd mois and Touraine. It cmprehends 3 small Countries, Dunois, Blaisois and Soulgue, which are as many Elections depending on the Gerality of Orleans, and reaching together to an extent of twenty five Leagues in length North and South; but of a very inequal breadth, as six or seven Leagues in Blaisois, ten or twelve in Soulogue, and even sixteen in Dunois.
The soil in Blaisois is very fertile, agree∣ably interrupted with Mountains and Hillocks, cover'd with Vineyards, with Forests full of Game, and with Plains abounding with Gar∣dens, Orchards, Meadows and Cornfields, be∣sides that it is watered with many Rivers and Brooks. It has had its particular Counts, since the year 920, that Charles the simple, King of of France, to gain the Normans, whom he could not subdue, was forced to divide in a manner his Kingdom with them. Thus he gave the Dutchy of Normandy to Raoul their General, and the County of Blois to Gellon, Raoul's Cou∣sin, and one of his chief Captains. His Poste∣rity were for a time the most powerful Lords in France, having acquir'd the Counties of Chartres and Champaign. And even after that Thibaud the IV. Cunt of Champaign had be∣stow'd the Counties of Blois and Chartres on one of his youngest Sons Thibaud or Theobald the good; these Counts made yet a great figure in France, till the year 1391, that Guy of Cha∣tillon, IId. of that name, having no hopes of an Issue, sold his Estates to Lewis Duke of Or∣leance, Grandfather to the French King Lewis XII. since which time they were united to the Crown, and the County of Blois became often an appanage, or part of the portion of the youngest Brethren of the French Kings, as it is now of Philip Duke of Orleance. Dunois, Dunensis Pagus, is almost as fruitful as Blaisois, tho' the Air be not so much esteem'd, nor the Country so Trading. Before the French Monarchy was fully settled, they were oft at variance with their Neighbours the Blaisois,
and the Orleannois, for Gregory of Tours relates that after the death of Chilperic, the fiirst King of France, the latter made an Irruption into the Country of the former. Dunois had after∣wards its own Viscounts, since Rotrou I. Count of Mortague, &c. till it was sold to Lewis Duke of Orleans, whose Son Charles gave or exchang'd it in 1430. for some other Lands with his Ba∣stard Brother, that famous Warriour John of Orleans, to whom the present French Kings owe the best part of their Kingdom, reconquer'd from the English. The Issue of this great Ge∣neral, bears now the name of Longueville, and enjoys still the County of Dunois, that was erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1525, by Louis of Savoy, Mother to K. Francis I. then Re∣gent of the Kingdom. Soulogne or Sologne, Secalaunia or Segalonia, is another small Country on the South of Blai∣sois, between the Loire and the Cher. Some de∣rive its Latin name Secalaunia, from the abun∣dance of Ry Secale, that grows in the Country; but de Valois takes it for a proper name, just such another as the Segalauni of Dauphine, the Inhabitants of Valence. However it be, Sologne depends for the Spiritual on the Bishop of Char∣tres, and is the fourth in number among his six Archdeaconships, and as for the Temporal, it resorts to the Bayliwick of Blois, as well as Du∣nois. It abounds with Fruits and Corn, and espe∣cially with Millet. The City of Blois, Blesum, Blesae, or Castrum Blesense, is situated upon the Loire, with the Title of County, Bailiwick, and Chamber of Accounts. It is almost equally distant from
Orleans and Tours, being near thirteen Leagues from the former to the East, and twelve from the latter to the West. This Town has some Antiquity; for tho' Caesar does not mention it, and that there be no great reason to take it for the Corbilo of Strabo; yet it appears by Gregory of Tours, that the Inhabitants were al∣ready in some consideration in the V. & VI. Centuries; since in conjunction with the Orlea∣nois, they invaded the Dun is, and Anno 584, kept Prisoner Eberulf in the Church of St. Mar∣tin at Tours. The sight of Blois is very plea∣sant on the steep of a Hill on the North-side of the Loire, the River running through the Town and Suburb Vienne, that are joyn'd by a Stone-Bridge, whereon is a Pyramid, erected in 1598. With an Inscription to shew that Henry IV. re∣buil'd it. There is a sumptuous Castle, begun by the Kings Lewis XII. and Francis I. beau∣tified by Queen Katharine of Medicis, by the French King Henry IV. and by several Dukes of Orleans. As also a curious Garden adorn'd with Water-spouts and antick Statues. Henry III. call'd here twice the States of his Kingdom in 1577 and 1588, and during the last of these Assemblies, caus'd Henry Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal Francis his Brother, to be mur∣ther'd. The excellency of the Air, and fertility of the Ground have given to Blois the Sir-name of, The City of Kings, or perhaps, it was because in this Country, they brought up the Children of the Fr. Kings, and that some of the Kings themselves have resided there. To which may be added, That the first Counts of Blois were the Fore-fathers
of Hugh Capet, from whom the present Kings are lineally descended, These Counts were as Sovereign as are now the Electors and other Princes of Germany; for they coyn'd Mony with an Hebraick Letter, a Flower de luce, and their own Name on one side; and on the backside a cross, with a B. and these two words Castro Ble∣sis. Besides what has been alledged for the anti∣quity of Blois, there are remains of an Aqueduc, wherein three Men can ride on Horseback a∣breast, and 'tis the common Tradition of the In∣habitants that at a Village call'd Orchese, almost 5 Miles West of the Town, Julius Caesar kept his Magazines; which they endeavour to con∣firm by the Ruins of some great Buildings, Arches strong, and thick Walls, and the like Antiqui∣ties; but have no other ground that I know of. As to new VVorks, besides the Castle and Gardens, there is a Tennis Court esteemed the biggest in France, being 57 Foot in length, and 20 in breadth. Between Blois and Orchese, not far from that Village was discovered, about a hundred Years since, a Mine of Terra Sigillata, or seal'd Earth, which is pretended to be as good as that of Lemnos. The Pasture Ground in the Valley of Loire, and the Exhalations that come out of the Vaults of St. Gervais are so wholesome, that the Milk of the Cattle that feeds thereabouts is excellent, especially the Cream that is esteemed one of the Dainties of the Country: The Boon-Christian-Pears, and Perdigron Plums are also rare Fruits,
and amongst Handy-works, the VVatches of Blois have got a Name through the whole King∣dom; but that which is most taking with Strangers, is the Purity of the French Tongue that is spoken here with a good Accent, as well by Country Men as by Gentlemen; and with all the charming Humour, and singular Honesty of the Inhabitants. I had almost for∣gotten that Peter l'Hermite, the first Preacher of the Crusado's, was a Native of Blois. Tho' the Royal House and Park of Chambort or Chambourg, be not antient Mo∣numents, yet they deserve a particular descrip∣tion. The House lies almost seven Miles West of Blois, on the South side of the Loire, in the midst of the Park, and of a pleasant Forest. It was begun by King Francis I. at his coming out of the Prison, at the same time that he built Madrid-Castle near Paris; but tho' he employ'd eighteen hundred Workmen at the building of Chambort, during twelve years, yet it was not perfectly finished in his life time. A small Brook abounding with Fish, surrounds the Palace, which is adorn'd with many little Towers and Chimneys, that give a very fine prospect from far off, and the Forest is so pier∣ced through, that it hinders not the view of the adjacent Meadows, nor even of the Town of Blois, from the top of the Towers. The most remarkable thing is a Winding Stair-Case of 274 Steps, so large that several persons can go abreast, and so contriv'd that those who go up on one side and come down on the other, cannot see each other, tho' they can talk together. Add to this, that one may throw
a Ball perpendicularly through the Newel, from the top of the Stairs to the bottom. At the end of the Queens Garden, which takes up five hundred acres of Land, towards the Forest of Blois, is a Lane of six thousand great Elms, a Mile in length, and six Fathoms in breadth. I pass over the other Curiosities to observe, that the Park is encompass'd with a square-Wall, lying as a Parallelogramm inclin'd along the Loire, and cut through the River Cousson, being three Italian Miles East and West, two Miles North and South-West, and one and two thirds North and South-East. There are 6 other Towns of some considerati∣on in the little extent of Blaisois, Mer or Menars the Town and the Castle, Suevre-cour-sur Loire and Die; these two lie over against Chambort, the former on the North, the latter on the South-side of the Loire; Onzain, mid-way be∣tween Amboise and Blois, Landes on the bor∣ders of Vendomois, and Contres on the Frontiers of Soulogne. Chateau-Dun, Castellodunum, is the Capital City of the little Country of Dunois, 11 Leagues North of Blois. It has its Name from the Hill, on which it's seated on the East-side of the Loir, Dun in old Gaulish, signifying a Hill; but I know not where Duchesne has found that it was antiently call'd Rubeclara, for Ʋrbs Clara; be∣cause it may be seen from far off. There is a Castle strong by its Scituation and Works; but the Suburbs are larger, and better built than the Town, which has been ruined by the Wars. It seems to have been considerable in the sixth Century, since Sigebert, first King of Austrasia
erected it into a Bishopprick; but Papole Bishop of Chartres, form'd such a Powerful Opposition to it in the fourth Council of Paris in 573, that Promotus the new Prelate was forc'd to stand off his Right, and to lead a private Life. Another Mak of the former Greatness of this Town, are its Arms, three Half Moons, with these Words, Extincta revivisco, besides many Ruins. There is an antient Abby of Cisternians, founded by Charlemaign, and several Collegiate and Parochial Churches. Chateaudun has an Election and Royal Seat of Justice, on which depend the Chastellenies of Montigny le Guanleon Courtalin, Monlitard, Lesclers and Rubetan, according to du Chesne, but I find none of them in the most accurate Maps. The other Towns of Dunois are Alluye, Bon∣neval, Cloye, Moree, Freteval, all upon the Loire; Oucques, Marchenoir, Pathay, Bagnolet on the East, Dangeau, Brou-St. Romain, Anthen, la Bazoche-Gouet on the West side of that Ri∣ver. Romorantin, or Remorentin, Rivus Morentini, a Town and a Castle seated on the River Saudre Salera, eight Leagues South-West of Blois, is the Capital of Sologne, has the Title of a County, and is the Seat of the Election for that little Country. In 1597. the Monks, who suspected Henry IV. all his life, for having been once a Protestant, taught a young Maid called Martha Brossier, to counterfeit one that is pos∣sest of the Devil, and under that pretence, spread many things to the King's disadvantage. The Cheat succeeded in many places of the Di∣ocess
of Orleans, whither they carry'd her, but making bold to bring her to Paris, the Parlia∣ment took notice of it, and the pretended Devil was confin'd to her own Country. In 1560. Francis the XI. published here an Edict a∣gainst the Protestants, under the Name of He∣reticks. Du Chesne derives the Name of Romo∣rentin from Roma Minor; and pretends it to be a Work of the Romans, because of some old Ruins. The learned Mr. Pajon, Minister of Orleans, who so ingeniously defended the Re∣formation in his Answer to the Prejugez legiti∣mes of that famous Jansenist Mr. Nicole, was a Native of Romrantin. Millansay, a Burrough, and a Castle, call'd by Duchesne, Militia Caesa∣ris, lies 2 Leagues Northwards. The other pla∣ces of Sologne are la Ferte-Aurain, on the Beu∣vron, Chatillon, and la Ferte-Imbaut on the Sau∣dre, St. Aignan and Menetou on the Cher, and Nansay on the Raire.
Of Proper Orleannois. ORleannois, properly so call'd, is situated be∣tween Berri, Gatinois, the Country of Chartres and Blaisois. Orleans is the antient City of Genabum, or Cenabum, mentioned by Cesar, Strabo, Ptolomy, and other antient Geo∣graphers. It's true, that the Description he makes of it, may in some manner be applied to Gien, Beaugency and Gergeau, because of the Proximity of those places to Orleans, and their Scituation on the Loire. But he who shall con∣sider that the Chartrains Carnutes had two con∣siderable Cities in their Country, viz. Autricum and Genabum, whereof the first is incontestably Chartres, shall not doubt but Genabum is Orleans. This may be prov'd; First, From a continued Tradition of the antient Historians of the French, who all agree in taking Genabum for Orleans; And secondly, From that there never was any other Town so considerable as Orleans under the Jurisdiction of the Char∣trains. In this Town then it was that Cesar took his Winter Quarters, and made it one of his chief Magazines for his Army. In 450. that barbar∣ous Prince Attila, King of the Huns, so deserv∣edly call'd the Scourge of God, as well as Lewis XIV, laid Siege to it: and the Inhabitants afraid of his Threatnings and Cruelties, would
have surrendred themselves, had they not been ncouraged by St. Aignau their Bishop with he hope of an unexpected Succours. And so  really fell out; for Thierry or Theodoric King f the Goths fearing lest, Orleans being taken, ttila should pass the River Loire and enter nto his Dominions, came to the Relief of the Besieged, and charg'd the Huns in the Rear so ffectually; that he forc'd them to raise the iege and to withdraw into the Plains of Sologne, Secalaunicis Campis (and not Cata∣aunicis, for Chalons in Burgundy lies sixty eagues from thence) where Aetius the Roman eneral assisted with the Goths and Burgundi∣us under Thierry, and the Francs under Me∣veus lever'd them Battle, defeated Attila, nd kill'd 180000 of his men. Childeric ourth King of the French and Successor to Meroveus, having defeated Gillon or Aegidius, he last General the Romans had in Gaule, took Angers, Orleans, and whatsoever remain'd in heir Possession on this side the Loire: But Clovis his Son pushed his Conquests so far into Aquitain by the defeat of Alaric King of the Goths, that after his death Orleans became the Head and Title of a new Kingdom, the Portion f his second Son Clodomir. This Prince eigned but thirteen years, having been kill'd n his Pursuit of the Burgundians in 524. In im began and ended the Kingdom of Orleans, or Clotarius his Brother, who had spoused his Widow, made away his Issue. And tho' after otarius's death, France was again divided to four parts, yet Orleans was no more the ead of a Kingdom, for Gontran to whom it
fell to share, chose Chalons for the Seat of hi Empire, and most of his Estates having for¦merly belong'd to the Burgundians, he took hi Title from thence. And thence undoubtely i comes that Fredegarius reckons Orleans i Burgundy. During the weakness of Charlemaign's Suc¦cessors, this Town with several other Estate became the Property of Hugh the Great Duk of France and Burgundy, Count of Paris, &c Father to Hugh Capet the Head of the thir Race of the French Kings. This was appa¦rently the cause that Robert Son, and Henr Grandson to Capet made oft their residence i Orleans, and that their Successors did neve separate it from the Crown, till Philip of Valoi gave it in Portion to Philip his fifth Son, dea without Issue in 1375. Lewis second Son t Charles the V. got it afterwards, and wa Grandfather to Lewis the XII. who ascende the Throne after Charles VIII. since that it ha been several times the Portion of the younges Sons of those Kings, as 'tis now enjoy'd b Philip of France, Lewis the XIV's Brother. As to the Ecclesiastical State, St. Altin i reckoned the first Bishop of Orleans, and in th sixth Century five National Councils were kep here in less than forty years, viz. in 511, 533 538, 541, and 549. for settling the Ecclesiasti∣cal Discipline, the Election, Rights and Limit of the Metropolitans. The Prelates of thi Church on the day of their inthronizatio have the Priviledge of delivering a Prisone and of being carry'd to the Cathedral on th Shoulders of the five ancientest Barons o
their Diocess, viz. those of Yevre-le Chastel, Sulli, Cheray, Acheres and Rougemont. Gregory of Tours relates that when King Gon∣tran made his solemn Entrance into this City, Latins, Syrians and Jews proclaim'd his Praises each in his Tongue; whether these different Nations were learned Men, or foreign Merchants, who inhabited or frequented this Town for the sake of Trade, I shall not peremptorily de∣termine; tho' the latter seems to me the most probable. However it be, King Phillip the Fair sounded here an University for the Civil Law in 1312. to which Pope Clement the V. added the Cannon Law, in thirteen hundred sixty se∣ven. The Scholars are divided into four Nations, French, Germans, Normands and Pic∣cards, each of which has its particular Officers. There are two common and well furnish'd Li∣braries. This City has also undergone the various fate of War. We have already seen how it was rid from the hands of the barbarous Attila. In 1417. it stood out a long Siege against the English, on behalf of the French King Charles VII. The besieg'd were so weak'ned and fa∣mish'd that they had resolv'd to surrender them∣selves to the Duke of Burgundy, but the English would not allow of it, tho' this Prince was their Ally, and then in their Army. This re∣fusal may be reck'ned one of the chief causes of the Expulsion of the English out of France, as it was the fatal period of the progress of their Arms. For as on the one hand it gave a mighty disgust to this Duke, one of the most potent Princes in Europe; so on the other, the
French were not loath to make an advantage of it. They set up a young Maid, a Shepher∣dess of about eighteen years, who pretending a Revelation to raise the Siege of Orleans, and bring the King triumphing into Rheims, in or∣der to his Coronation, so encourag'd their dis∣spirited Army, and fright'nd the Enemies, that she perform'd her promises; assisted by the Valour and Conduct of the famous Count of Dunois, but perhaps more by the jealousies rais'd between the English and the Burgundians, and then by the Civil Wars of the English. The Day of the Raising of this Siege, which was the Eighth of May 1418. is still kept as a Solemn Festival in Orleans, and a Monument of this Victory has been erected on the Bridge of the City. It represents the Bl. Virgin with our Saviour in her Arms as ready to be buried; on one side lies King Charles VII. upon his Knees, and on the other the Virgin of Orleans, (as they call her now) Booted and Spurr'd as a Trooper. This Maid was call'd Jeanne d' Arc, she was a Native of Vaucouleurs in Lor∣rain, but her Family being Nobilitated by the French Kings, had their Name chang'd into that of Lys, Flower de Luce, in memorial of her Ser∣vices to that Crown. During the Reign of Francis II. in 1560. the Duke of Guise, under the pretence of the con∣spiracy of Amboise, disarm'd the Inhabitants of Orleans, fill'd the suspected Houses with Soldiers, and then brought the young King, as triumphing, into the City. And well he might triumph, for he had gain'd his point so far, as to cause the Prince of Conde to be sentenc'd to
lose his Head. But the Death of Francis II. forc'd him to alter his Politicks. In 1562. the Protestants under the Command of the same Prince of Conde, seiz'd upon this place, and the Duke of Guise himself was kill'd besieging it. However the Roman Catholicks retook it, but La Noue, one of the stoutest Commanders the Protestants ever had, master'd it again, five years after. In 1588. it declar'd for the Leaguers by the Intreagues of one Rossieux, Se∣cretary to the Duke of Mayenn, but it submit∣ed to the French King Henry IV. in one thousand five hundred ninety four. The Name of Orleans comes undoubtedly from the Latin Aureliani, by which the Roman Historians after the second Century do call this City. There is still however some remains of the antient appellation of Genabum, in a nick∣name given to such Inhabitants as have not Travelled abroad, viz. Guepin, which I am apt to take for an abbreviation of Guenapin, Ge∣nabinus. This City is seated on the steep of an Hill on the Northern side of the Loire, that washes its Walls, and represents almost the figure of a stretched Bow. In sight of the Town, and the middle of the River is a pleasant Island cover'd with great Trees and Buildings. This Island is joyn'd with a Bridge on one side to the Town, and on the other, to the Suburb of Pontereau. This Bridge has 16 Arches, and 'tis upon it that the Monument of Jeane d' Arc is erected. Orleans is large and well built, the Streets are broad, strait and neat, being pav'd with a small square-stone. Some of the Markets are fine,
spacious, and overshadow'd with Trees. The most Magnificent Churches are the Cathedral of Sainte Croix, and the Collegiate of S. Aig∣nan. The body of the former is an hundred foot in length, sixty in breadth, and one hun∣dred and two in depth. It has fifty nine Ca∣nons and nine Dignitaries; the latter has but thirty one Prebendaries, whereof eight are dig∣nify d. Both have been much defac'd during the Civil Wars of Religion, but the Cathedral was repair'd by Henry IV. There are twenty two Parochial Churches. The Town-House has a very high Tower, whence the whole City and Suburbs may be discover'd. The Chastelet or Pallace of the Justice, is also a remarkable Building, seated on the River. The Town has eight Gates, and is fortify'd with a Terrass, and surrounded with a Wall defended by 40 round Towers fill'd with Earth. Orleans has a Bailywick, to which the Royal Seats of Bois-common, Chateau-renard, Yanville, Yevre-le-Chastel, La Neufvill-auxe Loges, Gien, Montargis. Clery, Meun, Baugency, Gergeau, and Pluviers are resorting, that is all Proper Orleanois, and a great part of Gastinois. But the Generality of Orleans, reaches yet farther, com∣prehending all Beauce, in its greatest extent, that is the Country Chartrain, Dunois, Vendomois, Blaisois, Proper Orleanois, Gastinois, Puisaie and Sologne, and having under it the Elections of Chartres, Chateau-dun, Vendome, Blois, Baujenci, Orleans, Pithiviers, Dourdan, Montargis, Gien and Romorantin. The Diocess has six Arch-Deaconships, whose Titles are Orleans, Pithi∣viers, Beausse, Sologne, Baugenci and Sulli. Or∣leans
lies twenty six Leagues North of Paris, wenty nine West of Auxerre, and twenty four East of Tours, almost in the middle of the Course of the Loire, with a Haven very con∣venient for Trade; which is the cause that the delicate Wines its Soil produces, and the ex∣cellent Brandies that are made here, are easily carry'd to Nants, and thence Transported into Foreign Countries. Gergeau or Jargeau, Gargogilum or Jargo∣ilum, was an antient and noble Castle, and is still a pretty good Town, on the South side of the Loire, with a Bridge to pass that River, be∣longing to the Bishop of Orleans, four Leagues East of that City. In 1420. the Count of Sa∣lisbury took it for the English; but the year following it was retaken by John II. Duke of Alenson, and the Virgin of Orleans, who made the Count of Suffolk and several other Priso∣ners, to the number of four hundred, most of whom they had the Barbarity to kill. Next to Jargeau, is the Castle and Garden of Jenaille, with an artificial Rock made up of Shells and little glistering Stones of different colours, whence spring Water-spouts, that represent va∣rious figures. Sully, Solliacum, four Leagues South-East of Jargeau, on the same side of the River Loire, is an antient Castle and Town with the Title of a Barony, that has produced two famous Bishops of Paris in the Twelfth Century, Maurice and Odon of Sully, It was erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom by Henry IV. in 1606, to gra∣tifie the Marquis of Rosny, who had done him so many services. This Lord was a Protestant,
and continu'd so all his life, notwithstanding the Apostacy of his Master. He has left Me∣moirs of what happen'd most considerable du∣ring his life, that are much esteem'd. The Lords of Sully have there a fine Castle, Park and Gar∣den. Clery upon the Doure, seven Miles South-East of Orleans, is a Village noted for a Church un∣der the name of our Lady. The English plun∣der'd it, after the taking of Meun, in 1428. but the French King Lewis XI. repair'd it, and richly endow'd a Colledg of Canons, which he fouded there, chusing it for his Grave. The other places in the Election of Orleans, are Chateau-Neuf, Ascheres, Bazoches, Artenay, La Ferte-Seneterre, a Barony with a fine Castle, St. Aubin, Ouzouer on the Loire, and St. Be∣noit. Baugency or Bois-jenci, Balgentiacum, a Town on the River Loire, almost six Leagues South-West of Orleans, with an Election and an Arch-Deaconship. It's seated in a most pleasant Soil, fertil in Corn, Wine and Fruits, and a∣bounding with Game. It's here that Lewis VII. assembled the Prelates and Barons of his Kingdom to be divorc'd from Q. Eleanor his Wife, says Du Chesne; to which Mezeray adds, That the King pursu'd the Separation vigorously. I cannot but admire the blind zeal of the French Historians, who to save the honour of this Prince, turn him into the greatest Blockhead that ever sate upon a Throne; when they make him divorce upon pretence of Consangui∣nity the rich Heiress of Guyenn, and to restore her Dowry, which did so mightily weaken him
tho' he could not ignore she would deliver it into the hands of a ptent Neigbour. The truth is, this was a trick of the C urt of Rome to put a stop to the growth of the French Mo∣narchy; lest those Kings should keep the Popes within the due limits of a Spiritual Jurisdiction, as the first Emperors of France and Germany had done. To compass their End, those crafty Priests made use of the love of Queen Eleanor for young Henry Plantagenet, Duke of Norman∣dy, Count of Anjou, Maine, &c. and future King of England. For it was the Queen, who pro∣pos'd and pursu'd the Divorce at Rome, as Tho. Wikes, an English Historian tells us. Agitata, says he, diutius lite inter Alienoram Reginam Fran∣corum &. virum suum Regem, ipsa Regina acri∣ter petente Divortium, ratione consanguinitatis quam proposuit inter se & virum suum; Auctori∣tate Apostolica celebratum est Divortium inter eos. Instantius autem laborabat ad Divortium, eo quod ad Nuptias Henrici Ducis Normaniae, & futuri Regis Angliae ferventius aspirabat. Erat & ipsa filia Ʋnica & Haeres Ducis Aquitaniae, quam nos Vasconiam nuncupamus. Soluto quoque Matrimonio inter ipsam & Regem, ad Nuptias Ducis quas concupierat illico convolavit. Haec secundum Historiae veritatem huic opusculo dig∣num inserenda judicavi. Histor. Angl. script. Tom. II. p. 29. Here then it was that the sentence of that Di∣vorce, so fatal to France was pronounc'd, on Tuesday before Palm Sunday 1152. Forty eight years before another National Synod had been held at Baugenci, on occasion of King Philip I. Marrying Bertrade of Montfort against
the advice of the Barons of his Realm. In 1428. Baugenci was taken by the Count of Sa∣lisbury, but retaken by the French after they had master'd Meun. This Town has had its own Lords since the middle of the Thirteenth Century, till 1544. that it was reunited to the Fr. Crown. Meun or Mehun was an antient Castle, built on a Hillock near the confluence of the Maue and Loire, on the North-side, to oppose the ir∣ruptions of the Vandals. Meun, Magdunum, Maidunum or Maudunum, is now an indifferent good Town, four Leagues South-West of Orleans, and two North-East of Baugenci. One St. Lifard, accompanied with Ʋrbicius, laid here the Foundation of a Monastery, since turn'd into a Collegiate Church. After the taking of Yanville, Meun surrender'd to the Count of Salisbury, who put a strong Garrison in it; notwithstanding which, it was soon after retaken by the French. This Town was one of the Country-Houses most frequented by Charles V. and the Inhabitants have a Proverb to sig∣nifie that he dy'd there in 1381, tho' Historians relate, that it was in another Country-House, call'd Beauty, upon the Marne. Whatever be of that, Meun gave its name to a famous Poet, a Dominican Frier, call'd John Clopinel, or John of Meun, who flourished about the end of the XIII. Century, and the beginning of the XIV. and finish'd the renown'd Roman of La Rose, be∣gun by William of Lorris. There are two other notable Burroughs in the Election of Baugenci, viz. Chaumont and Ou∣zouer le Marche.
Pluviers, or rather, Pithiviers, is the Head o another Election and Archdeaconship. The Latin Authors call it diversly Petiveris, Pive∣rum, &c. It's a Town and a Castle seated with a Bridge on the small River Pituere, nine Leagues North-East of Orleans, near to a Village call'd Pithiviers le Vieil. It has an antient Priory de∣pending on the Abby of Cluny, and founded in the Seventh Century; besides a Kings Court of Regal Justice, resorting to the Presidial of Orleans. Yanville six Leagues West of Pithiviers, is another Regal Court of the Bailiwick of Orleans. The Fr. King Henry IV. took it after Estampes, on a Sunday, November 11. 1589. and Garrison'd the Castle. Yeure le Chastel, a League East of Pithiviers, and Neufville, four Leagues South-West, are two other Regal Seats of Justice. The other Towns or Burroughs in this Election, are Thoury, Autruy, Sermaizes, Soizi-Males-herbes, Bri∣ares and Puizeaux. This last is call'd so from the abundance of Wells, that are otherwise very rare in this Election, and the Country of Ga∣stinois.
Of Gastinois. GASTINOIS, Wastinensis, or Vastinen∣sis Pagus, has the Isle of France on the North and North-East, Bourgogne on the East, Nivernois and Berry on the South, and Proper Orleanois on the West, reaching thirty Leagues North and South from Mont le hery in the Isle of France, to Pouilly in Nivernois, and about sixteen Leagues East and West, where 'tis broadest, as from Chastenay in the Country of Chartres to Moret, in the Isle of France. But 'tis to be observ'd, that that which now bears the name of Gastinois, is made up of two Countries, viz. Pagus, or Comitatus Milidunen∣sis, the County of Melun, that has been united to the Government of the Isle of France, and Pagus Wastinensis, or Gastinois properly so call'd, that still depends on the Government of Orleanois. Gastinois is a Franco-German name, deriv'd from the Teutonish WASTE, that is yet in use in English; for we call Commons, Heaths, wild and desart Places Wastes, and the French having no W, do ordinarily change it into G, as Guerre for War. Thence it comes that they call so other Wildernesses, as le Pais de la Gastie in Berry. St. Laurent en Gastine, a Village in Vendomois, &c.
The Election of Dourdan is accounted by some in Hurepoix, and by others in Gastinois. It lies on the borders of the Isle of France, in which some place it, but it resorts to the Gene∣rality of Orleans, confining the Election of that City on the South, that of Pithiviers on the South-East, the Isle of France, on the North and North-East, and the Country of Chartres on the West. Dourdan, Dordingum, was the Patrimony of Hugh Capet, belonging to his Grand-Father Hugh the great, Duke of France, Count of Paris, &c. who died here in 956. And there∣fore it was not separated from the Crown, till the time of the French King Henry II. who pawn'd it to the Duke of Guise. In 1596. it was sold to a Switzer Gentleman, Imbert of Dutsbach, a Native of Berne. Then it was acquir'd by the House of Rosny, and redeemed by Lewis XIII, in 1610. Dourdan lies upon the River Orge, fifteen Leagues North North-East of Orleans. It was formerly a pretty good Town, but has been almost ruin'd dur∣ing the Civil Was, under pretence of Religion, in 1562, and 1567. Estampes, Stampae, seated on the River Ju∣ine, Junna, near its mixing with the Loe (which takes afterwads the name of Essonne, from a Village it goes by, and discharges it self into the Seine) was formerly a considerable Town, for it had a Royal Palace under the Reign of Robert King of France. The Protestants took this Town by Scalado, in 1567, and the Castle by composition. This Castle founded by the said King Robert was since ruin'd in 1652, dur∣ing
the civil War of the Princes; tho' their Army had the worst in a Battel fought near it. Estampes has an Election resorting to the Ge∣nerality of Paris, yet is reck'ned in Beauce, and part of the Government Orleanois. It lies three Leagues South-East of Dourdan, and thir∣teen North East of Orleans. It was antiently a Viscounty, and of the Demesne of the French Crown. Charles IV. erected it into a County and Peerdom in 1327, for Charles of Evreux his Cousin, Then having been re-united to the Crown, Charles VII. gave it to Richard Duke of Britany, and Lewis XII. to John of Foix, in 1478. Francis I. rais'd it to a Dutchy in 1536, on behalf of Ann of Pisseleu, one of his Mistresses, whom he Marry'd to John of la Brosse; and Henry IV. to his Natural Son Cae∣sar Duke of Vendome. There are other places of some note in the Election of Durdan, as Rochefort on the bor∣ders of the Isle of France, towards the North, which has given name to Gui, and William of Rochefort Chancellors of France, under Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. St. Arnoul, Monnervil∣le, &c. Montargis, Mons Argisus seems to have been built by Angegisus, Archbishop of Sens, and Vicar of the Roman See throughout Germany and France, in 876. for Argisus may be deri∣ved from Angegisus, by a Syncop, and the change of N into R, very familiar to the French, as they have made Pampre from Pam∣pinus, Diacre from Diaconus, &c. In 1418. the Count of Warwick block'd up this Town, seated upon the Loing, fifteen Leagues North-East
of Orleans, but the Count of Dunois com∣ing to its Relief, forc'd the Trenches of the Besiegers, and kill'd fifteen hundred of them. In 1528. Montargis was burnt, and since re∣built, and given by Francis I. to the Lady Renee, Lewis XII's Daughter, in part of her Portion, together with the Dutchy of Chartres. Montargis has an Election resorting to the Ge∣nerality of Orleans. For the Spiritual it de∣pends on the Archbishop of Sens, and for the Temporal on the Presidial of Orleans; if we believe Du Chesne; for Morery places a Baily∣wick and Provostship in it. The Canal of Briare, that joins the Seine, and the Loire, by means of the Loing, was begun here by Henry IV. and is of twelve Leagues extent. There has been since digg'd another, from Montargis to Orleans, of eighteen Leagues in length, making together with the Loire an ir∣regular Polygone. Chastillon sur-Loing, Castellio ad Lupam; is a place of some consideration and antiquity. It lies upon the River Loing, and the Canal of Briare, nine Miles South of Montargis, and five South-West of Chateau-renard upon the Ouane. In 1569, both these places were taken from the Admiral of Coligny, to whom they be∣long'd. Lorris, Lauriacum and Lorriacum, is the head of a small Country, near the Forest of Orle∣ans, call'd Pagus Lauriacensis, le pais de Lorris. It's known how the Goths, Franks, Vandals, and other Nothern Nations brought into the West and Southern Parts of Europe, the cu∣stom of deciding their Quarrels by Duels, or
single Fights, and that the Magistrates not being able to overule entirely this inclina∣tion, were foc'd to turn it into a Law, or∣dering that none should fight but before the Provost, or an appointed Judge; and in these publick and lawful Duels, the vanquish'd lost his Suit as well as the Day, and was forc'd to make reparation to the Victorious, either in Mony, or otherwise. But there was a custom in the Country of Lorris, which obtain'd throughout all Gastinois; That if two Men came rashly to challenge one another, and then to agree with the consent of the Provost, they were fin'd 2 s. 6 d. but if they fought, the Bayls of the Vanquish'd were fined 112 Shillings. And therefore 'tis still said in com∣mon Proverb, of a man too severely dealt with by the Judges: Qu'il est des gens de Lorris, ou le battu paye l'amende. That He is a Lorris man, beaten and fin'd. Lorris is ten Leagues distant from Orleans to the West, and six from Montargis to the South-East. In the XIII. Century, under the Reign of Lewis IX, it gave name to a famous Poet and Lawyer, William of Lorris, who began the Romance of la Roze, highly esteem'd in those days. The other Towns or consideable Burroughs depending on the Election of Montargis, are Ferrieres, Beaune, Boiscommun, Choisi-Bellegarde, and Noyan. Gien, Giemum or Gemiacum, thirteen Leagues South-East of Orleans, and fourteen West of Auxerre, on whose Bishop it depends for the Spiritual. It's a pretty good Town seated on the River Loire, with an Election, and the Ti∣tle
of a County; for it has had, time out of mind, it's own Lords, till Mathilda or Maud, Countess of Nevers and Tonnerre, yielded it to the French King Philip August. Since it's fall'n again into the hands of particular Lords, and has been enjoy'd by the House of Seguier, which has given several eminent Magistrates to France; amongst others, Peter Seguier, made Lord Keeper by Lewis XIII. in 1633 and then Lord Chancellor in 1635. There is a Stone-Bridge to pass the Loire, but it was broken in 1650. to hinder the passage of the Army of the Princes. Biare, Brivodurum, Briobodorum or Briodorum, is so call'd from a Gaulish word Briva, a Bridge, over which the Loire is past. Here ends the Canal of Montargis, that keeps the communi∣cation between the Seine and the Loire. Near this place it was that the Royal Army, and that of the Princes fought, in sixteen hundred and fifty. It lies two Leagues South-East of Gien. Cosne, Cona, Conada, or rather Condate, this last being a Gaulish word, that signifies Con∣fluence; because the Lore receives here the small River of Nozaim, after it has water'd Antrain and Donzi. Some Geographers place Cosne in Nivernois, but it belongs more properly to Beauce, since it resorts to the Election of Gien, and the Presidial of Orleans, from which, it's twenty Leagues distant to the South-East. Cosne is renown'd for good Knives. St. Fargeau is a Dutchy and Peerdom, E∣rected by Charles the Ninth, in 1569. This Town is the Capital of the little Country of
Puisaye, and lies upon the Loing, near a Forest, seven leagues North of Cosne, and twenty East of Orleans. Between Cosne and Briare, seven Miles from each lies upon the Loire, the Burrough of Neu∣vi, which seems to have been formerly a considerable Town, since Caesar, who gives it the Name of Noviodunum, design'd to have be∣sieg'd it, had he not been prevented by the Surrender of the Inhabitants. Aimoin calls it Novus Vicus, upon which the French name of Neuvi has undoubtedly been fram'd. The other places of Note resorting to this Election, are Blesneau, Ozouer on the Tre∣zee, Chatillon on the Loire, Bonny, St. Amand in Puisaye; all depending on the Bishop of Auxerre, for the Spiritual, and the Genera∣lity and Bayliwick of Orleans for the Tem∣poral.
Of Nivernois NIVERNOIS, Nivernensis Pagus, has Gastinois, Puisaye, and Auxerrois on the North, the Dutchy of Burgundy on th'East, Bourbonnois on the South, and Berry on the West. It's Figure resembles a round, some∣what flatted, and irregularly bent, being of the same length and breadth, viz. above twenty leagues North and South from Tizy, upon the Loire to Clamecy on the Yonne, and as many East and West from Chateau-Chinon to La Guierche. It's subdivided into eight smaller Countries, namely, the Valley of Nevers upon the Loire, the Amognes on the Nieure, the Val∣leys of Montenoison, the Vallies of Yonne, the Moruan, the Bazois, the County between the Loire and Allier, and the Donizois: The whole abounding with Wood, Pasture-Ground and Cattle, being water'd with many Rivers besides the Loire, the Allier, the Yonne and the Cure, and comprehending thirty good Towns. Here are found some Silver-Mines, many more of Iron, and the best Free-Stone in France. Before the Romans, these Countries belong'd to the Autunois Aedui, whose Territories extend∣ed from the Saone to the Allier, and compre∣hended also the greatest part of Bourbonnois. So that Samson mistakes, when he pretends that the Vadicasses dwelt in Nivernois, for they
were the Inhabitants of Chalons, as we shall shew in its due place. Thence it came that during the decay of the French Monarchy, Ni∣vernois pass'd into the hands of the Dukes of Burgundy; the third of whom, call'd Richard le Justicier, gave it to one Ratier in 890, whose Posterity has kept it till Cardinal Mazarin bought it together with the Dutchy of Rethel for Philip Mancini Mazarin, his Nephew, from Charles of Gonzague III. Duke of Mantoue, &c. This County having been, in the mean while, suc∣cessively enjoy'd by many illustrious Houses, as Burgundy, Courtenay, France, Flanders, Cleves, Gonzague, into which the Heiresses of Nivernois Married. Nevers Noviodunum Aeduorum, lies between the confluence of the Nieure and Allier, into the Loire, 30 Leagues South-East of Orleans, and to of Cosne. Caesar had made it his Store-House, keeping there his Corn and Mony, and the Horses he had bought in Spain▪ and Italy, but Eporedorix and Virodomarus, two Commanders Autunois, having surpriz'd and kill'd the Garri∣son, took away the Mony and Horses, and put the Town into Flames. This dependance upon Autun is the cause that the Bishoprick is not an∣tient, nor mention'd in any Notices of the Gauls, before the VI. or VII. Century. The name of Nevers Nivernum is also new, and most proba∣bly deriv'd from the Rivulet Nieure Niveris. Gregory of Tours calls Nevers Nivernum, but gives it only the Title of Oppidum a Town, so that it seems not to have been a City or Bishop's Seat, in his time, that is in the VI. Age. Ne∣vers is a pretty strong place, having no manner
of Suburbs and both the City and Town being included within the Walls, that are defended with many thick and high Towers, and sur∣rounded with deep Motes, fill'd up with Water. The most considerable Buildings are, 1. The Palace of the Dukes, where amongst other Goods is a great Marble-Table, upon which is another of less size, that appears transparent at the light of the Sun or a Candle, and shews most delicate Pictures. 2. The Bridge upon the Loire, consisting of twenty Arches, and as many Pillars all of Free-Stone, with a Draw∣ing-Bridge on each side, and Towers to defend them. 3. The Cathedral, dedicated first under the name of St. Gervais, and St. Protais, and then under the name of St. Cyr, hath a Steeple enrich'd on the outward side, with many em∣boss'd figures of Stone. Nevers has besides Eleven Parishes, an Abby of Augustinian Monks, another of Nuns, and several Religious Houses. It has a Bayliwick resorting to the Presidial of St. Pierre le Moustier, a Chamber of Accounts, and an Election depending on the Generality of Moulins. Nevers was Erected into a Peerdom in 1459. by Charles VII. which Erection was confirm'd by Lewis XI. in 1464. by Lewis XII. in 1505, by Francis I. in 1521. That King rais'd it to the Dignity of Dutchy and Peerdom in 1538. which Cardinal Mazarin got ratifi'd by Lewis XIV. in 1660. Abundance of Earthen wares, but especially Glass-works are made in this City, because most of the Inhabitants meddle with those Trades, the last being no disparage∣ment to a Gentleman in France.
Decize, Decetia, lies in a rocky and rugged Island of the River Loire, where it receives the Airon, seven Leagues South-East of Nevers, and is the Capital of the Country of Bazois. That learned Lawyer and Antiquary Gui Co∣quille, who flourish'd from the middle of the last Age to the beginning of this, was a Native of this Town. He pretends, in the History of Nivernois, that this Island was cut off from the Continent, and call'd Decize from Decisus: But Aethicus in his Itinerary calls it Dececia, that seems to be its antient name, and Decize a corruption of it. Whatever be of that, Decize is a Town of some Antiquity, as appears by the Roman Medals that have been found here. It has a Bridge on the Loire, being an important passage of that River, and therefore fortify'd with a Castle, lying on a Hill, with part of the Town surrounded with old Walls. La Charite, Caritas, six Leagues North-West of Nevers, is also situated on the Loire, on the same side of this City and Decize, that is look∣ing towards the North-East, with two Bridges on that River, one of Stone, and the other of Wood. It has a Hall, or cover'd Market-place of an extraordinary length; several Churches, and one of the chief Priories of the Abby of Cluny, call'd St Marie de la Charite. This Mo∣nastery gave name and rise to the Town, which depends for the Spiritual on the Bishop of Auxerre, and resorts for the Temporal to the Bailiwick of Nevers, and the Election of Gien. It suffer'd much during the Wars with the En∣glish, and the Civil Wars for Religion, but es∣pecially in 1569, when it was taken and plun∣der'd
by the German Auxiliary Forces of William Duke of Deux-ponts. Pougues is but a Village near the Loire, three Miles North of Nevers, and nine South of La Charite, on the same side of that River; but is extreamly famous for its Mineral Waters, said to be a specifick remedy against Hydropisie. They consist in two Fontains, that are but at a Foot distance from one another; and yet there is observ'd some difference in the taste. The Inhabitants use them for common drink, and testifie that they are more strengthning than ordinary Spring-water. St. Pierre le Moutier, Monasterium St. Petri, lies in the Country between the Allier and Loire, five Leagues North of Nevers. It has been di∣vided from the Jurisdiction of Nevers, and made a Bailiwick, Presidial and Provostship, to which the Towns of Donzi, Szincoins, Cusset and Bourg-St. Ettienne, are resorting. Donzi, Donziacum, four Leagues North, North-East of la Charite, lies upon the little River Nozaim, which discharges it self into the Loire at Cosne. It has the Title of a Dutchy, and is the head of a small Country call'd le Donziois, Pa∣gus Donziacensis, which has besides Antraim, Dreve, &c. Clamecy, Climiciacum, or Clamiceium, lies al∣most six Leagues East of Donzi, upon the Ri∣ver Yonne, that receives here three other Ri∣vulets which begin to render it navigable. Clamecy is the Seat of an Election under the Generality of Orleans, to which resort Dornecy, or Dommecy Domitiacum, Cunfy Metz le Comte, Tannay, Anant, Champlemy and Varzy.
After the Expulsion of the Christians out of the H. Land, Rainold Bishop of Bethlehem, fol∣low'd into France, Gui Count of Nevers, in 1223. who gave him the Government of an Hospital here; and that he might still keep a shadow of his former Dignity, this Hospital was erected into a Bishoprick, and call'd Beth∣lehem, but no Territory annex'd to it. How∣ever these Titular Prelates have had Successors hitherto. All the Northern part of Nivernois, from La Charite to this Town, is of the Diocess of Auxerre. Vezelay, Viceliacum, upon the River Cure, Chora, five Leagues East of Clamecy, has an Election, and an antient Abby of Benedictins, founded by Gerard Count of Nevers, under the French King, and Emperor Charles the Bald. It's now a Collegiate Church of Pre∣bendaries, under the Title of St. Mary Mag∣dalene, resorting to the Bishoprick of Autun, as does all the Valley of Yonne, and the Coun∣try of Moruan. In 1145. Pope Eugenius III. celebrated a Council here in presence of the Fr. K. Lewis VII. Morvant, or rather Moruan, Moruinus Pagus, reaches from thence to the Source of the Yonne, or very near it. It's a wild, Wooddy and Mountanous Country, into which Heptadi∣us a holy Priest fled, to avoid his being made Bishop of Auxerre. It has its name from a Vil∣lage that is no more extant, viz. Moruin, menti∣on'd by the antient Historians of the French. How∣ever there are yet other places of some Note, as Champagne, Campaniacum, Cussi, Cussiacum, Cervon Cervedo, L' Orme, Corbigny—S. Leonard
Corbiniacum, Auroux, Chasteau-Chinon, Castrum Caninum. This last is a Lordship surrounded with pleasant Forests, and seems to have gotten that name from the Grey-hounds, or Hunting-Dogs, which the Counts of Nevers kept here. The chief Trade of the Country consists in Wood, that is carry'd on the Yonne, and the Seine down to Paris. Arquien and Langeron, are two Marquisates on the two extremities of Nivernois, Arquien on the North-East, near the River Cure, and Lan∣geron on the South-West near the Allier. La Ferté Chauderon, two Leagues South-East of Langeron, has the Title of a Barony, whose Lord entitles himself Marshal and Seneschal of Nivernois, and pretends to the right of Coin∣ng Mony. At La Roche-Milet another Barony, 15 Leagues Eastwards, are considerable Fairs. Mentenoison, which gives name to a Valley, has  strong Castle built on a Mountain, almost in he middle of this Dutchy. The other places re Luzy, Cercy-la Tour, Molins-Engilbert, Anlezy, hatillon-en-Bazois, S. Sauge, Premery, Champ-Allemand, &c.
CHAP. XI. Of Orleanois on the South of the Loire. Of Berry. BERRY has Sologne on the North, from which it is separated by the Fuzou, on the East the Loire and the Allier di∣vide it from Puisaie, Nivernois and Bourbonnois. It consines La-Marche on the South, and Poictou and Touraine on the West. It's modern name has still some affinity with the Latin Bituriges, by which the Roman Historians call the Berru∣yers, the Inhabitants of this Country, who were once Masters of all Celtick Gaul. It was so at least, in the time of Tarquin the antient King of Rome. For Ambigat King of the Celtes, either to extend his Dominions, or to discharge his Realm of the multitude of People it was crowded with, resolv'd to make two Plantati∣ons under the Conduct of two Sons of his, Se∣govese
and Bellovese. The former lead his Co∣lony through the Hercynian, now the Black Forrest, into Germany, where they settled them∣selves, partly in Bohemia, partly on the Da∣nube, and partly in Friesland and Westphaly: These last were the Ancestors of the Franks or French, who, a thousand years after, pass'd the Rhine under Pharamond and Clodion, and began to conquer the Gauls, their antient ha∣bitation. As to Bellovese, he took his Way through Dauphine, Savoy, and the Alps, fol∣lowed by vast numbers of Berruyers, Auvergnats, Senonois, Autunois, Chartrains, Manseaux, &c. who conquer'd the Northern Part of Italy, and gave it the name of Cisalpine Gaul. It's the same that was since call'd Lombardy, and com∣prehends Piedmont, the Dutchy of Milan, the States of Genoa, Mantua, and part of the Do∣minions of Venice, and of Tuscany. I know not whether these Colonies weak'ning the Berruyers, caus'd the ruine of their Em∣pire; but in Caesar's time they were no longer their own Masters, being under the protection, or rather dependance of the Autunois. How∣ever, they were still so powerful, as to have above twenty good Towns in their Country, which they all burnt except the Capital, to fa∣mish the Roman Army, tho' this hinder'd not their being subdu'd by this great General. In the Division of Augustus Berry, was made a part of Aquitain, and continu'd so under the French. During the weakness of Charlemaigne's Succes∣sors, the Governors of this Province made themselves Sovereigns, and had the Title of Counts of Bourges, till Harpin, undertaking a
Journey into the Holy Land, sold his Estate to the French King Philip I. for sixty thousand golden Pence. This Lord turning a Monk at his return, this County was united to the Crown, till the year 1360, that the French King John erected it into a Dutchy and Peer∣dom for his youngest Son John, who dying without Male Issue, Berry return'd to the Crown. King Charles VI. gave it in portion to his fifth Son Charles, since the VII. of that name, King of France, and because, during the Wars with the English, this Province stood firm to his Int'rest, his Enemies call'd him con∣temptuously, King of Bourges. Since that time, Berry has often been the portion of youngest Sons, Daughters, and Queen Dowagers of France. This Province is about 28 Leagues North and South, and as many East and West, being di∣vided into two Parts, almost equal by the Cher, and water'd by a vast number of other Rivers, which make this Country very pleasant and fer∣tile in all the necessary Conveniencies of Life. It especially abounds in Corn, and the Pasture-Ground is so excellent, that the Wooll and Cloth of Berry out-do all the others in France. The Name of Berry is derived from a Latin word us'd in the decay of that Tongue, Biturium. More antient Authors call the Ber∣ruyers Bituriges Cubi, to distinguish them from the Inhabitants of Bourdeaux Bituriges Vivisci, who seem to be a Colony of the former. Bourges, Avaricum Biturigum, and in latter Ages Biturigae, Bituricae, & Betoricae, lies 19 Leagues South South-East of Orleans, upon the
River Eure, or Yeure, Avara, or Avera, whence the Latin Name of this City Avaricum seems to come. It's seated in a Soil fertile in Fruits and Wine, that is not so delicate, but more health∣ful than that of Orleans. The River Eure di∣vides it self into three Branches, one of which serves to cleanse the Town, and withal to Dy∣ers, Tanners, and the like; the other refreshes the Ditches that surround the Walls, and the third runs along the Suburb of St. Peter. These three Branches being joined, and the Eure en∣creased with the Waters of the Oron Ʋtrio; the Aurette Avara Minor, and the Moulon Molo, near the Monastery of St. Sulpice, this River begins to be Navigable. The Situation of Bourges is not only con∣venient, but also very strong; for besides these Rivers and Ditches, it is defended by broad and deep Marshes, surrounded with good Walls, fortified with eighty Towers; so that three Camps would needs be required to besiege it on all sides; as one at Bourbon's Gate, the other at Oron's Gate, and the other at the Gate of St. Pri∣vatus. Cesaer observes that he could not shut it up with Trenches, and laid siege to it only on that side that was between the River and the Marsh. Nevertheless, he took it partly by Storm, and partly by Stratagem, having raised two high Towers, whence his Soldiers leaped on the Wall, which so frighted the Garison and Inhabitants, that they retir'd to the great Market, and thence endeavoured to make their escape thorough the Gates; but the Romans having master'd them, spar'd neither Sex nor Age; they were so in∣cens'd at the Murther of their Fellow Soldiers
in Gien. This was the Cause, that of 40000 People that were in this City, 800 hardly could save their Lives, by retiring into the Army of Vercingentorix, General of the Gauls. In the V. Century, Bourges was taken from the Romans by the Visigots, and from them by Clovis, and made part of the Kingdom of Or∣leans under Clodomir, and of that of Burgundy under Gontran his Nephews. Desiderius, or Di∣dier, General of Chilperic the first King of Paris or France, took it from the last in 583, and burnt it almost intirely; Charlemaign repair'd it, and Phillip August fortified and adorn'd it with a Castle, call'd the Great Tower, which was almost quite ruined in 1651. It was cut Diamond wise on the outside, and rais'd so high, that from the top, the Country might be viewed four Leagues round about. There has been seen a long time a Wood or Iron-Cage, where the jea∣lous King Charles the VIII. kept Lewis of Or∣leans Prisoner, who, nevertheless succeeded him. In 1412, the Duke of Burgundy brought the French King, Charles the VI. before Bourges, whither the Duke of Orleans, and his Confede∣rates had retir'd, and laid siege to it with an Army of 100000 Men, but in vain; for at last both Parties were glad to accept of the Medi∣ation of the Duke of Guyenn, then Dauphin of France. In 1562, The Count of Montgommery. Commander of the Protestants under the Prince of Conde, seiz'd on this Town May 27; but left Governour therein one Yvoy, a Man of no great Courage and Trust, who surrendered it the same Year to the Duke of Guise; and there∣fore it remained in the Power of the Leaguers,
till 1594, that it was reduced by the French King, Henry the IV. Notwithstanding these various Changes, Bour∣ges is still a considerable City, being of an Oval Figure, with seven Gates, and as many Suburbs. Its Walls seem to be a Roman Work, being still almost intire, and so strongly built, that it re∣quires a great deal of Labour, to pluck some few Stones out of them. It has seventeen Pa∣rochial, and seven Collegiate Churches, three Abbies, a College of Jesuites, and a vast num∣ber of Monasteries, besides the Cathedral of St. Stephen, said to be buit in 254, and the St. Chappel, founded by John Duke of Berry, Brother to the French King, Charles the V. and therefore depending immediately on the See of Rome, That Duke was buried there in 1417, and there is still his Crown, with several Ves∣sels of Gold and Silver curiously wrought. There are likewise shewn the pretended Bones of a certain Giant call'd Briat, said to have been 15 Cubits high. The Romans had here a Pallace, which K. Pepin repair'd, and called there an Assembly of his Barons in 767; but I know not whether it be the same which the Dukes of Berry made afterward use of, and is now the Seat of the Presidial. Besides the Bai∣liwick Bourges has a Generality, to which the Elections of Chateau-Roux, and la Chastre in Berry, and St. Amand in Bourbonnois are resor∣ting; as also a Chamber of Acompts for all the lands depending on this Dutchy, erected by the said Duke in 1379. Its University is famous for the Civil and Canon Law; the best Lawyers in France having taught here in the last Age,
and the beginning of this; such as Alciat, Baro Duarenus, Baldwin, Conti, Hortomun, Cujus, &c. It was founded by the French King, Lewis the IX, re-establisht by Charles Duke of Berry, Brother to Lewis the XI. and endow'd with many Priviledges by Pope Paul II. in 1464. But now I am speaking of Priviledges, I must not forget four very rare and considerable Prerogatives, granted by the French King to the Inhabitants of Bourges, perhaps in reward of their Fidelity to Charles the VII.Du Chesne. 1. Their Goods cannot be confiscated. 2. They are free from Garisons and Winter Quarters. 3. Those that posses Lordships or noble Ma∣nors, are not subject to the Duty of Ban and Areerban. 4. Those that buy or inherit them pay nothing to the King. The City is govern'd by a Mayor and Sheriffs, who take care of it in time of Peace and War, and judge in first in∣stance of the differences between the Citizens, which may be brought by Appeal only before the Parliament of Paris; but the Suits of the Country People resort to the Presidial, as well as the Appeals from the Royal Seats of Issoudun, Dun∣le-Roy, Meun sur Yeure, Concressaut, Sancerre, &c. Amongst the Buildings of Bourges the Town-House, and the House of Jaques Coeur are worthy to be seen. This Man was Treasurer to Charles the VII. and one of the first that ventured to send Merchant Ships into the East. By that unknown Trade, he gather'd in a short time such vast Sums of Mony, that he bought the Lordships of St. Fergeau, Menetou, Boisi, S. Geran de Vaux, la aliPsse, &c. and built a most
sumptuous Palace, that is yet partly subsisting, i which are said to be as many Windows, as there are Days in the Yoar, besides other publick Buildings, and whole Streets, wherewith he adorn'd this City. But his great Riches prov'd his Ruin; for the envious Courtiers took thence occasion to accuse him of keeping unlawful Correspondences with the Turks, of sending them Arms, Weapons▪ and Amunitions; and even Smiths and Gunners, to smeed, melt and point them after the Christian manner; Of discovering the Secrets of the State, make∣ing away the King's Mony, and drawing un∣lawful Taxes from Languedoc: for which true or pretended Crimes, he was put close Prison∣er, condemned to excessive Fines, and then banish'd for ever from France. As to the Ecclesiastical State, Christianity, together with Episcopacy was as it's said, plant∣ed here by one Ʋrsinus, Disciple to the Apo∣stles, who was the first Prelate of it, in the se∣cond Century. And as by the Division of the Em∣perours, August and Constantine, Aquitain be∣came the fourth Part of the Gauls, and was subdivided into three other Provinces; the First, the Second, and the Third Aquitain; Bourges being the Capital of all, its Bishop took the Title of Patriarch or Primate of A∣quitain, and had the Precedency of the Me∣tropolitans of Bourdeaux, Narbonne, and Ach. This Honour having been conferr'd, or confirmed to him by Charlemaign, who rested Aquitain into a particular Kingdom, he enjoy'd it undisturbed till the Dutchy of Guyenn, and the Estates of the Counts of Toulouse were
torn off from the Kingdom of France; for then the Arch-Bishops of Bourdeaux, Narbonne and Auch, endeavoured to free themselves from their subordination to the Primate of Bourges, as their Masters had done from their Subjection to the French Kings. Divers National Councils were kept upon this account; but the Arch-Bishops of Bourdeaux maintained by the Kings of England, would never yield. The most fa∣mous Assembly of Prelates, that was ever call'd to Bourges was in 1438, where the French Cler∣gy acknowledged the Council ot Basil; and ap∣proved of the Pragmatique Sanction, as did also the Parliament of Paris in 1459. This Consti∣tution first drawn up by Lewis the IX, correct∣ed and enlarged by the Council of Basil, con∣sisted of 23 Statutes, of which 21 had been ratified by Pope Eugenius IV, Their Principal aim was; 1. To cause the Elected Bishops to be acknowledged for such before, or without their going to Rome. 2. To make the Elections of Bishops, Abbots, &c. free and independant from either King or Pope. 3. To pre∣fer the Authority of a General Council before that of the Pope. 4. To abolish expectative Graces, so that the Pope might not give the Survivance of a Living to any of his Favourites, Eugenius repented soon after to have yielded so s nuch, broke with the Council of Basil, and sent Ambassadours to the French King, Charles the VII. to hinder the Reception of the Prag∣matique, but all in vain; for it subsisted till 1516. that it was suppressed by an Agreement between Francis I. and Leo X. call'd the Concor∣dat; the French King allowing the Pope to in∣slave
his Clergy again, that he might abolish the free Elections and Name to the great Livings. The Diocess of Bourges contains 900 Parishes under 12 Arch-Deacons, and 20 Arch-Priests, besides 34 Collegiate Churches, and 35 Abbies. Before the Year 1676. it had Eleven Suffragans; but Albi that was then Erected into a Metropoli∣tan took away five with it self, so that Bourges had but five left, viz. Clermons, Let, St. Flour, Tulles and Limoges. Just now I hear that the H. Chappel, and many Houses was burnt down, July 1693. Sancerre lies 8 Leagues North-East of Bourges, upon a Mountain wash'd by the River Loire. The Latin Name of this Town is a proof of its Antiquity; for Authors call it either Sacrum Cereris, because in the Time of Heathenism; Ceres the Goddess of Corn was ador'd there; Or Sacrum Caesaris, because Cesar sacrific'd in this Place, after his Victory over the Berruyers. Others pretend that this great General built here a Fort, to keep in the Statues or Images of his Lares or Hous-Gods; but this has little pro∣bability, since the Romans did not use to carry their domestick Gods with them in their Armies; besides that, considering the swiftness of Cesar's Conquest, 'tis most likely he did not lose Time in building Fortresses. Another mark of the Antiquity of Sancerre is its Title of County, which it got by being given in Portion to a youngest Son of the House of Champaign. Ste∣phen, Brother to Thibauld, or Theobald the Groat, under the Reign of Lewis the IX. Ste∣phen's Posterity enjoy'd it to the Year 1451. that it passed to the House of Du Bucil. During that time, the Counts of Sancerre were famous,
and their Family produc'd many brave Men; as amongst others Lewis of Sancerre, High-Con∣stable of France in 1397. The Neighbour∣hood of Orleans made this Town take part with the Dukes of that Name, during their Quarrels against the Burgundians, who for this reason besieg'd it. In the last Century, San∣cerre held for the Protestants, and was twice attempted in vain by the Roman Catholick Commanders, viz. in 1568 and 1572, at which time he serv'd as a place of Refuge to those In∣habitants of Orleans and Bourges, that could es∣cape the barbarous Murther of St. Bartholomew; but the following Year, it was taken by Famine, after a Siege of 8 Months. This County has 31 Chastelnies, and 500 Parishes depending on it. Issoudun, Ʋsellodunum, or Exoldunum, lies on the small River Thiol, seven Leagues West of Bourges. Its Gaulish termination intimates that it is an antient Town; and Du Chesne confi∣dently relates it was one of the 20, which the Gauls themselves put to Ashes to starve Cesar's Army. What authority he has for this, I know not; but 'tis more certain that Issoudun was al∣ready a strong Place, under the French King, Philip August; and of such consideration, that Hugh of Die, the Pope's Legate, call'd a Synod thither in 1081. It's now a pretty large Town, the Second in this Province, surrounded with Walls, Ditches and Suburbs; defended with a Castle, and a great Tower, having several Pa∣rochial and Collegiate Churches and Monaste∣ries; a Seat of Regal Justice, or an inferior Bailiwick, resorting to the Presidial of Bourges;
together with many Chastelnies and Baronies its dependances. Besides that, the Wines of its Territory are said to be of good keeping, and its Trade of Wooll is considerable. Dun le Roy, Regio-Dunum, or Dunum Regis, is accounted the third Town of Berry, because of its Seat of Regal Justice. It lies 6 Leagues South South-East of Bourges, on the River Or∣ron, or Auron, Ʋtrio. It has had particular Lords of the Family of Astier, but was re-uni∣ted to the French Crown in 1430. under Charles the VII. and 1465. under Lewis the XI. Chasteau Neuf, upon the Cher, 6 Leagues South of Bourges, is a good Borrough and Castle▪ Chasteau Melan, Castrum Meliand, is six Leagues more to the South, near the River Indre. It was formerly a wall'd Town, but is now only a simple Borough; though the Castle is yet Wall'd, and has had a Tower, said to be built by the Romans. La Chastre, Castra is two Leagues Westwards on the River Indre, a little Town, but well fortified with Walls and Ditches, and defended with a good Castle. Its Church of St. Germain is together Paro∣chial and Collegiate, being serv'd with Canons, founded by the Lords of Chavigny. Chateau-Roux lies on the same River, ten Leagues West South-west of Bourges. The beginning of this Town was a Castle, built in 952, by one Radulphus Largus, Raoul the large, or the Liberal, second Lord of Deolz, who presented with it the Monks of the Abby of St. Gildas. The Latin Authors call it Castrum Radulfi, and therefore it had ought to be nam'd in French Chasteau-Raoul, or Chasteau-Roul, and not Chasteau Roux, which signifies Castrum
Rufum. This Town is pretty large, having 4 Parishes, a Collegiate Church, a fine Castle, and a Park belonging to the Prince of Conde, who is Lord of it; for it was erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1616, by Lewis XIII. Here was born Odo, or Eudes of Chasteau-Roux, who became Cardinal, and made a great figure under the Reign of Lewis the IX. Bourg-de-Deolz, or Bourg-Dieux, Dolensis Vi∣cus is also seated on the Indre, over against Chasteau-Roux. Its Territory is extraordinary fruitful in Wine and Wooll, because of the goodness of its Pasture-Ground; besides, that it reaches twenty Leagues in Circuit, and has above 1200 Fees, or Rear-fees depending on it; for which Reason Charles the IX. erected it into a County for the Baron of Aumont, Knight of his Order. Moreover Deolz is remarkable for an Abby of Benedictins, founded by Ebo, or Abo, a mighty Prince or Lord in Berry, Father to the forementioned Raoul; and for a Victory, which the Goths got from Riothimus, King of the Armorican Britains. Vierzon, seven Leagues North-West of Bour∣ges, on the confluence of the River Eure and Cher. It's call'd in Latin Virsio, and seated in a very fruitful Soil, amongst Rivers, Vines, green Fields and Meadows, as it is expressed in this Monkish distich. Virsio Villa virens, aliunde pauca requirens, Vitibus ornata, pratis, campis decorata. It was taken, and burnt by the English in 1197. Wirtzburg a City of Franceny, is call'd
in Latin Herbipolis, or the Green Town, from its Situation. Some derive the Name of Vierzon from the same Original, and take it for a Franco-German Colony. Selles, or rather Celles, Cellasti Eusicii, lies 14 Leagues West North-West of Bourges, and 15 South-West of Orleans, It's grown to an indifferent good Town, from an Anchoret's Seat: For Eusicius was an Hermit, who lived at the beginning of the 6th Century under the French King Childebert the I. and had some∣times the boldness to wait upon, and advise this Prince. St. Aignan upon the same River, 3 Leagues West of Celles, has the Title of a Dutchy, and bears the Name of St. Aignan, Bishop of Or∣leans, who is worshipped there, and for whom it has lost its antient Name of Chasteau Hagar. Meun Sur Yeure, Mediolanum, or Magdunum, midway betwixt Bourges and Vierzon, has an in∣ferior Bailiwick, and a Collegiate Church un∣der the Title of our Lady. It belong'd former∣ly to Count Robert of Artois, and the Ruins of an old Castle testify, that it was taken and de∣molished by the English. Aubigny Albiniacum, lies upon the River Nerre, nine Leagues North of Bourges. It be∣long'd once to the Canons of St. Gratian's of Tours, from whom John Duke of Berry redeem∣ed it. Lewis XI. placed here a Royal Seat of Justice; but Charles the VIII. transfer'd it to Concressaut, Concurcallum, or Concorcellum (and not Concordiae Saltus, as Du Chesne feigns) having given Aubigny to Berault Steward, Capt. of his Guards, whose Issue took their Sirname
from thence. As to Concressant, it lies on the River Saudre, four Leagues East of Aubigny, and is only a Burrough, but fortified and adorn'd with a very fine Castle. Henrichemont, and Bois-Belle, Boscabellum, are two adjacent Places, situated betwixt two Forrests, near the Source of the Saudre, six Leagues North-East of Bourges. The last has a very fine Castle, and the Title of a Principality belonging to the House of Bethune-Sulli. Its Name compos'd of Henri-Richmont, seems to in∣timate an English Foundation. Neuvi on the River Baranion, is but an incon∣siderable Village: However it seems to be the Noviodunum, mention'd by Cesar, Lib. 7. ra∣ther than Neuvy upon the Loire, since the for∣mer is in the right way from Avaricum Bourges, to Genabum Orleans. Argenton, Argentomagus, is a Town and Chastelny upon the River Creuse, 16 Leagues South-East of Bourges. It has a Castle forti∣fied with ten Towers, upon one of which call∣ed the Tower of Heraclius, are Ingraven these two words, Veni vici, with such uncounterfeit Vestiges of Antiquity, and Ruins of old Build∣ings, that it cannot be doubted but that it's a Roman Work. Besides, that one Heraclius was Governour there under the Empire of Decius, and is said to have put to Death the 2 Martyrs St. Marcel, and St. Anastase, in the inclos'd Yard, that bears yet the Name of the latter Saint. The other Places of Note in this Province are Monasteriolum ad Carem Menetou Sur Cher; Crazzacum Gracay, renown'd for its Manufacto∣ry
of Cloaths; Levroux Leprosium, so call'd from the Leprousness to which this place was once obnoxious: Wherefore it was commend∣ed to the Patronage of St. Silvain Blanc-en Berri Oblincum, an indifferent good Town, on the Borders of Touraine and Poictou, Buzancais, Bosentiacae, or Busentiacum. Ruffiniacum Ca∣stellum, Ruffec le Chateau. Castelio ad Angerim, Chastillon Sur Indre-Igorandis, Aigurande. Mont∣faucon, Monsfalconis, towards Nivernois, has one of the finest Ponds in the Country. Nancey, Pelluau, Charrox Corrocium, have the Title of Counties. Ligneres, Lineriae, and St. Severe are Buronies. Valansay, Vatan, Vastinum, & Culant, Cullencum, are considerable Lrdships. La Cheze-al-Benoit, is an Abby, the chief of St. Benet's Order.
Of Poictou. THis Province is the biggest of those that are comprehended in the Government Orleanois; for it reaches 48 Leagues East and West from Port de Piles in Tourain to the Isle of Nermoutier, and 20 North and South from Loudun to Aunay, or 26 from Champigni on the Vienne, to Marsillai on the Charante, and the Borders of Angoumois. It's included betwixt Britany, Anjou and Tourain on the North. Berri and La Marche on the East, Angoumois, Saintonge, and Aunis on the South, and the Sea on the West. It's divided into up∣per and lower, the latter extending along the Ocean from Fontenay le Comte to Mortaigne, and the former taking up the rest of the Province. The whole Country is fruitful in Corn, Wine and Pasture-Grounds, and feeds great num∣bers of Sheep, and Herds of Cattle; besides, that there is good Fishing on the Sea-Coast, and a vast quantity of Game in the Forrests and Warrens. The Inhabitants of POICTOƲ are mentioned by Cesar, Strabo, Ptol my, and other antient Geo∣graphers under the Name of Poictones. But there is little appearance they should have got∣ten that Name from a Scythian Nation, call'd properly Agathyrses, and sirnam'd Picti, be∣cause they used to Paint their Hair and Faces,
to make themselves the more terrible to their Enemies. That these Pictes having possest themselves of the Northern Parts of great Bri∣tain, should have Shipp'd over a Colony, that made a Descent on the Coasts of POICTOƲ; Conquered the Country, and gave their Sirname to it. All this is grounded upon a bare Resem∣blance of Words without any Foundation on History; for theses Pictes began to appear in the Year 87. of our Lord, under the Empire a Domitian; and we have quoted Cesar, who call'd the Inhabitants of POICTOƲ, Pictones, an hun∣dred Years before: So that this must needs be a Gaulish Name, whose original is unknown, that Tongue being almost altogether lost. The swiftness of Cesars Conquests in the Gauls will not surprise those who shall consider the Constitution of that Country, separated into a vast number of petty States, inde∣pending from one another. That Great Captain us'd the methods that have ever prov'd so successful to Conquerors, to sow dis∣sension among their Enemies, make Alliances with some, profer Neutrality to others, and use the Forces of the vanquished to subdue the unconquered. Thus Cesar having submitted the Inhabitants of the Country of POICTOƲ and Saintonge, imbark'd his Troops in their Vessels to Land Men into the Country of Vennes, and by those means subdued the most potent Nation that liv'd on the Sea-Coast of Gaul. Neither could the League which Vercingentorix, a young Gentleman of Auvergne, endeavoured to make among several Nations of the Celtick Gaul, restore their broken Power. The Quota
of the Pictones came then to 8000 Men, which shews how considerable they were in those days. Notwithstanding Alesia, whose relief was in∣tended by this League, was taken and destroyed by the Romans; the Pictones with all their Con∣federates, being likewise subdu'd. Ever since the Pictones remained under the Romans, and not long after the Emperour Claudius, going over into England, was accompanied with the Flow∣er of their Nobility, whom at his Return, he allow'd to rebuild their Capital City, in Re∣compence of their good Services. But in 410, the Vandals plundered and destroyed it in part, and two Years after, it fell with all POICTOƲ, Guienn and Languedoc, in the Power of the Wi∣sigoths, who maintained themselves in the Pos∣sesion of all those Provinces 84 Years, under six Kings, that is, till 509; that Clovis, King of the French, won the Battel of Civaux, near Poictiers, kill'd Alaric, King of the Wisigoths, and drove them out of POICTOƲ, and a great part of Guienn and Languedoc. Under the French King, and Emperour Charles the Bald, this Province began to have Counts of its own, who in process of Time beeame Dukes of Guienn. William the X. the last of them, Married Alienor, his only Daughter and Heires to the French King, Lewis the VII, but the crafty Policy of the Popes procuring a Divorce betwixt them, this rich Princess spous'd Henri Plantagenet, afterwards King of England, which was the Source of continual Wars betwixt the two Kingdoms, during two or three Centuries.
Pictones is the true Latin Name of the Inha∣bitants; that has been since corrupted into Pi∣ctavi, Pictavenses and Pictavini, whence comes the French Poitevins, and likewise the Name of Petaux, given to some part of the French Foot, by Froissard and Thibaud de Maroiles, as most probably the Name of Bidaux, in the same Hi∣storians, signifies the Foot-Soldiers levied in the Province of Berry, Bituriges. As there are great Numbers of Gentry in this Province, and the Inhabitants of Towns are well bred, and live at Ease; the Reformation made great progresses in POICTOƲ, and was oft therefore the Seat of War in the last Age. But nothing can be compar'd to the Cruelties, which the Intendant of Marillac and his Officers exercised upon the Protestants of this Province, in the Years 1680. and 1681, by Lewis the XIV's Order. The waste of their Goods, and the plunder of their Houses were tolerable Vexations, in comparison of the Racks and Tortures, which they put those poor Men upon, without any other Cause, than that they were pretended Hereticks. The Reader may consult two Books. Erat des Re∣formez en France, Par. 1. Chap. 8, to 14. but es∣pecially Pag. 141, 142. and Les derniers efforts de l'innocence affligee. Pag. 82.-123 Besides the general Division of POICTOƲ into Upper and Lower, 'tis subdivided into ten smaller Countries; as le Chastelleraudois, le Loudunois, le Miaelois, le Torcois, la Gastine, Arbauge, le Lussonois  oois, les Mauges, and le Pais de Tifa  I shall describe under the Towns, whom they hve their name.
Poictiers, Capital of the whole Province, lies forty Leagues from Orleans, and sixty five from Paris, to the South East. Its antient Name is Augustoritum, according to Ptolomy, who also mentions another City under the name of , Limonum, which Sanson takes for Poictiers; but that antient Geographer distin∣guishes them so plainly, that I had rather to confess I know not what place Limonum is, than to contradict him. In process of Time Au∣gustoritum was call'd Pictavi, by the Name of the People of which it was the Head; as Pari∣sii, Remi, and many other Cities in the Gauls, and afterwards Pictava, Pictavorum Ʋrbs, and Pictavium. It seems to have formerly stood lower to the North, at a place call'd le Vieux Poictiers, not far from Chastelleraud, because of the name of old Poictiers, and of some Ruins of old Walls, that are yet to be seen there: Unless it were the Limonum, whereof I just now spake. For Poictiers it self has several other Monuments of Antiquity; as an old de∣molish'd Castle, thought to be the Palace of the Emperour Gullienas; some remains of an Am∣phitheatre, call'd les Arenes, behind the Church of the Jesuits, and without the Town, the Ru∣ins of divers Aquaeducts, which the common People names les Arceaux de Parigne, the Arch∣es of Parigne. I have mentioned the several Changes, through which Poictiers passed, speaking of POICTOƲ, and likewise the Battel of Ci∣vaux, but I must not so get that famous Vi∣ctory obtained by our Black Prince, that Mar∣tial Son of a Warlike Father, Edward the III.
over the French King John, September 19. 1336. within two Leagues of Poictiers. The King having an Army of above 30000 Men, and the Prince hardly 12000; the latter pro∣fered to go back, and to repay all the Damage he had done, from Bourdeaux thitherto: But the French meaning that a handful of Enemies ought to Surrender at discretion, and could not avoid being cut into pieces, would not hearken to any Proposals; which so exaspera∣ted the English, that they fought like Lions, gave a total Overthrow to the French, and took their King Prisoner. The Church of Poictiers is said to have been founded by St. Martial, a Kinsman to the first Christian Martyr St. Stephen, and he from whom our Saviour took the five Loaves, and the two Fishes, which his Blessing so miracu∣lously multiplied in the Wilderness. St. Peter, add the Roman Legendaries, sent him into A∣quitain, where he converted a great many Heathens, especially in POICTOƲ, and even laid the Foundation of the Cathedral of St. Peter, on that very Day that H. Apostle was Martyr'd. What ever be of this (for the Monks have so mixed with Fables the antient Accounts, that it is a hard matter to distinguish Truth from Falshood) This is more certain, that about the Year 279, Nectarius, or Victorius, a learned Man, mentioned by St. Jerome, was Bishop of Poictiers. He was succeeded by se∣veral other great Men, amongst whom Hilarius, that famous Defensor of the Orthodox Faith against the Arians, was the tenth in Order, un∣der whose Name a Collegiate Church has been
since built. At the end of the 5th Century, that See was fill'd with one of the best Poets of that Age. Venantius Fortunatus, who had belong'd to the Houshold of Radegund, Queen of France. This Diocess has been bigger than it's now, and extended through the whole Province of POICTOƲ: For Lusson and Maillezais have been separated from it, and erected from Mo∣nasteries into Bishoppricks. However it con∣tains yet 22 Parishes, 21 of which are inclu∣ded in the City, besides 30 Abbies, 25 Chap∣ters of Canons, and a vast number of Religious Houses, the Parishes being under the Inspection of four Arch-Priests. The Cathedral of St. Peter was begun by our King Henry the II. and finished 200 Years after. It's a sumptuous Building, all of a hard Square-Stone. In the Church of our Lady, sirnam'd the Great; the Mayor's Lady uses to offer, eve∣ry Year, the day after Easter, a Cloak of con∣siderable value. On the outside of the Wall, that looks on the great Market, is the Statue of the Emperour Constantine on Horse-back, with a Sword in his Hand. The Collegiate Church of St. Hilary, immediately subject to the Pope, lies on the upper end of the Town. The French King is Abbot of it, as Count of Poictiers. There is shewn a Stone which consumes Dead Bodies within 24 Hours; together with the Tomb of Godfrey the Great-Tooth, pretended Son to the Famous Melusine of Luzignan, and the hollow Stump of a Tree, where Mad-men are put in, in hopes that they shall recover their Senses; whence comes a jearing Proverb amongst 'em, to Send one to St. Hilary-Cradle.
Poictiers is the biggest City in France next Paris, as to the compass of its Walls, though the not ear so thick Inhabited as Rouen, Tou∣se or Lyons, there being a great many Gardens, and even Meadows, Vines, and Corn-fields with∣n its inclosure; for which reason Charles V. he Emperour, call'd, it a great Village. It's built partly in a Plain on the West-side, and partly n a Hill, shut up betwixt the River Clain, and another that stagnates there into small Rivulets, Marshes and Ponds; so that it could hardly be taken, were it not that the lower Town is com∣manded by high Rocks, nam'd by the Inhabi∣tants Dubes instea of Dunes or Downs. The greatest inconveniency of Poictiers, is its lack of Water; for there are no Fountains, and very few Ci∣sterns; and therefore the Citizens are forc'd to by Water, that is carried into the Town, from a Fountain springing near the Clain, at a place call'd Platteforme. All the inferior Seats of Justice in the Pro∣vince of Poictou, resort to the Presidial and Se∣eschaship of Poictiers, and in 1415, whil'st the English were Masters of Paris, and Charles the VII. Dauphin of France, was disputing the Crown against 'em, Poictiers had the Honour to be the Seat of a Parliament; which, when the English were expell'd that Kingdom, was resto∣red to Paris. The Palace, where the Judges eep their sitting was formerly a Castle, that  still a very fine Hall, whose Wainscotted iking is not underpropt by Pillars. Next to this Palace is the antient Tower of bergeron, built by an Earl of POICTOƲ, therein the seven Viscounties of this Province e represented.
Next to the Gate of St. Lazarus was another Castle, built in a Triangular Form, but ther are no Remains of it; besides, the place when it stood, and some strong Towers against the Walls. La Pierre Levée, The Stone rais'd up, is one of the Curiosities of Poictiers, which Stranger do not fail to see, it being but a Mile from the City. It's a large Square-stone, 25 Foot in length, 17 in Breadth, and 60 in Circuit, having these two Verses ingraven upon it. Hic Lapis ingentem superat gravitate Colossum Ponderis, & grandi sidera mole petit. The University of Poictiers was founded by Charles the VII. in 1431, and has been former¦ly more famous than it's now, especially fo the Civil Law. The Auditory or the Ha wherein the Law is read, is very large and sum∣ptuous, and was built, in the French K. Henry the IV's Time, by the Duke of Sully, whil's he was Governour of POICTOƲ. Poictiers has likewise a Mint, where Mony i Coyned at the Letter G. as also an Excheque and a Generality, to which nine Elections ar resorting, that is, all those of POICTOƲ except Loudun and Mirebeau, that depend o the Generality of Tours. As to the Government of the Town, it is i the Hands of a Mayor, twelve Sheriffs or E¦chevins, twelve sworn Counsellors, besides se¦venty five Burgesses. The Mayor is not  Lord, but even the first Baron of POICTOƲ and takes the Title of Captain and Governo
Poictiers during his Charge, which is but eatly; for a new one is elected every Year,  St. Cyprian's Day, but afterwards, both he d his Posterity are Nobilitated for ever. l the Briars and Thorns round about this City,  found great numbers of Vipers, that are carried ough all Parts of France, and even transport∣ into foreign Countries; the Trochisque of per, made in Poictiers it self, is of great re∣wn. Dissay, three Leagues North-East of Poictiers,  a small Lordship betwixt the Clain and the ne, where the Bishop of Poictiers makes his esidence. Bonnivet with the Title of Marquizate, lies  the other side of the Clain, two Leagues rth-West of Dissay, and almost four North  Poictiers. It has a very fine Castle, begun  William Gouffier, Admiral of France, under rancis the I. to whom it gave Name. Chastelleraud, Castellum Heraldi, or Airaldi,  fifteen Miles North-East of Poictiers. It  formerly a Viscounty, but erected into a chy and Peerdom, by Francis the I. on be∣ of Francis of Bourbon, Count of Montpen∣, in 1514. Some Years after, the French g took it from Charles of Bourbon, Brother  Successor to the latter, and Lord High-Con∣ble of France, as being forfeited by Rebel∣. But Henry the III. restor'd it by way of gement to Francis of Bourbon, Duke of pensier, in 1584. Chastelleraud is pleasant-ated, having a prospect Westwards upon al Warren, and being wash'd with the  Vienne, which increased with the Clain,
begins here to be navigable. The Town is b meanly built, however renown'd for the goo Knives that are made there, tho' much mor for its sumptuous Bridge, that has 230 Paces i Length, 66 in Breadth, and stands upon  Arches. It was begun by Catherine of Medici but finished by the Duke of Sully, Governor of POICTOƲ under Henry the IV. League from this Bridge, a Hind is said to hav shewn a Ford to K. Clovis's Army, when he wa in pursuit of Alaric, King of the Wisigoths. I the Ruins of an old Castle, near this Town a found little Stones, which the vulgar call'd D¦amonds of Chastelleraud; for being cut and p¦lish'd, they look'd almost as well, and glist as much as true Diamonds. The Country d¦pending on the Election, Dutchy and Roy Justice of Chastelleraud, is nam'd Pagus Castr Heraldensis le Chastelleraudis, and compre¦hends many Lordships and Villages. The Pr¦testants were Masters of this Town during th Civil Wars, and repulsed the Duke of An attempting to take it by Storm, so that he w forc'd to rase the Siege: Even till of late the had free exercise of their Religion and a co¦siderable Church at Chastelleraud. Port de Piles, Portus Pilae, is an importa Passage upon the Creuse, near its mixing  the Vienne, seven Miles North North-East Chastelleraud. It seems to be a Place of some An¦quity, because 'tis mention'd in the Records  the Consuls or Antient Counts of Anjou.  name is derived from a Pile or Tower of Eric that stands there. Thirteen Miles West of Port de Piles, bey the Vienne, six Leagues North-West of Chaste¦lerad,
and Ten North of Poictiers lies near  Source of the small River Amable, the fine Town of Richelieu, in the midst of pleasant ins, abounding in Fruit, Wine, Corn, and ame of all sorts. It bears the name of its lder Armand du Plessis Cardinal of Richelieu, e famous Minister of State, who under Lewis III. brought France to that point of Grandure,  which it stands as yet. He built it on the attern of Manheim, the prettiest Town in ermany, before the Barbarity of Lewis XIV. ried it in its ruins. Its Figure is Square, ring four Markets at the four Corners, and  great one in the Middle, in which stands  Church, that is a very sumptuous Building, orn'd with many Marble Pillars, enrich'd ith a great quantity of Plate, and serv'd by  Fathers of the Oratory. The Streets are cious, as straight as a Line, and meet all  the five Markets; and the Houses are so well pon the Level, that there is nothing on one de, but has its Parallel on the other: Which gether with its Halls, Fountains, Walks and urdens, its fine Walls and Towers, its great  deep Ditches cover'd with Swans: The  of the Duke, that is as regular a Build∣ is any in Europe, its Rooms, Halls, Gal∣ and other Apartments being beautified th all the Ornaments that Tapistry, Painting  Statuary can afford, and surrounded with  Alleys, charming Parks, Orchards, Gar∣ loce, Springs and Grotto's: All this, I , contribute to render Richelieu an indiffe∣ stng Place, and one of the finest in France.  XIII. erected it into a Dutchy and Peer∣dom
for Males and Females, in 1631. establi¦shed a Seneschalship in it, and gave great Pri¦viledges to its Inhabitants. Champigny upon the same River Amable,  League only from its fall into the Vienne, an five Miles North of Richelieu, had formerly  Castle belonging to the Duke of Montpensu together with a H. Chappel, where in they us' to be Burie'd; but this Noble Family havin exchang'd this Lordship with Cardinal de R¦chelieu, that Castle and Chappel were demo¦lished to Build and Beautify the foremention' new Town. However Champigny is still a goo Burrough and has a very fine Park. Loudun, Lausdunum Castrum, as the anciet Records call it, or Lodunum, as 'tis nam'd b William the Brittain, lies four Leagues West  Richelieu, and eleven North-West of Poictier Macrinus and Scevole de Ste Marthe make it ver ancient, and call it Juliodunum, pretending  was Built by Julius Cesar or some of his Suc¦cessors, but there are no footsteps of so grea Antiquity. It's an indifferent good Tow with an Election and inferior Bayliwick resor¦ing to the Generality and Presidial of Tour tho' for the Spiritual it depends on the Bisho of Poictiers. It has a great Parochial Churc under the name of S. Peter, a Collegla Church surnam'd the H. Cross, with sever Monasterios; amongst others a Convent  Carmelites, whether Superstitious People com in Pilgrimage to a Statue, call'd our Lady  Recovery Nostre-Dame de Recouvrance. It w to underprop the decaying repute of this Ido as well as of the whole trade, that the Men
up some Nuns to counterfeit those that are Possest with the Devil. The cheat was disco∣vered and oppos'd by a Secular Priest, who suffer'd very much for it, but at last it was stopp'd by the Parliament of Paris. The history of this Imposture has been lately Written  French by a very good Pen, and deserves to be read, by such as desire to know the Spirit of the Church of Rome. Loudun is the head of a small Country called le Loudunois, on which many other Boroughs and Villages are depending. William III Duke of Aquitain gave it to Godfrey Grise-Gonellè Count of Anjou, to keep it in Fealty of him, der the Reign of Hugh-Capet. The French King Philip August increas'd his Dominions with it, Charles V. separated it from his Domes∣, but Lewis XI. reunited it to the French own Henry III. erected the Loudunois into  chy, for the sake of a Lady of the House , but after her Death the Patent Let∣ were suppress'd. In 1569. the Protestants re Masters of Loudun, under the conduct  Prince of Conde.Du Chesne. The Duke of  came to besiege it, and did expect no re∣stned, the Town being not strongly forti∣ But he was very much surmiz'd when  the Enemies draw out in Battalla to re∣ him and the ways so Freez'd that there was incoming at 'em; so that after several Skirmishes, therein he had still the worst, he was forc'd . The last National Synod of the Re∣'d Churches, kept with the leave of the .
French King, was assembled at Loudun, in 1659. if my memory does not fail me. Moncontour for Mnt-Contourné, Mons Contori for Mons Contornatus, because 'tis seated upon a round Mountain, that appears as tho' it were turn'd upon the Wheel, is wash'd by the Rive Dive, which, tho' very small, is not very for∣dable, It lies 9 Leagues North-west of Poictier and 3 South-west of Loudun. It was built by Fulk III. sirnamed Norra, Consul or Count o Anjou, and therefore call'd Mons Consularis o Mons Gomitis. The same Count built also Mire∣beau Mirebellum, 5 Leagues South-East, and Faye-la-vineuse, 6 Leagues North-East of Mo∣contour. But this last place is the most consi∣derable, and especially famous for two Battel gotten by Godfrey Martel, Son and Successor, to the said Fulk, one over the Poictevins, in which he took William Count of Poictou Prisoner wor the other over the Manseaux, wherein He Bacon Count of Maine fell likewise into  hands. In 1569, on Monday October 3. the Protestants under the Admiral of Coligny lost also the day, near Moncontour, against the Roma Catholicks, headed by the Duke of Anjou, finde Henry III. King of France. Notwithstand  which, Charles IX. was fain to grant an honour∣able Peace to the Reformed in 1571. The ∣miral was so great a Captain, that he will  great many shifts after his Defeats. Luzignan or Lesignar, Liciniacuni Cast or Licineium, is an ancient Castle founded  one Licinus, upon the small Rier Vonbeust Leagues South-west of Poictiers. It is called corruptively Liziniacum, and Lesino by Lti
Authors of the middle Age, because the French use to change c in s. and to pronounce s be∣tween two Vowels as a z. Thus they have made from racemus, raisin, Sarracenus, Sarrasin, pla∣tere, plaisir, &c. One John of Artois, who writ the History of Luzignan in 1383. ascribes the foundation of this Castle and of the Noble Family, to which it gives Name, to a Fairy, call'd Melusine, half Woman and half Snake. What has giv'n occasion to this fabulous ac∣count is uncertain. Aimery of Luzignan, King of Cyprus and titular King of Jerusalem, had a wise and beautiful Daughter, call'd Melisinde, ma ry'd to Boemond IV. Prince of Antioch: but I cannot tell whether 'tis she whom that ro∣mantick Author has taken for the Subject of his fables. Whatever be of that, the House of Luzignan is very illustrious and known in France since the Tenth Century, having possest there the Counties of la Marche and Angouleme, till the Year 1203, and reign'd in the Island Cy∣ from 1192 till 1473. The Castle of Lu∣zignan, was esteem'd impregnable; however the brave Teligni seiz'd on it for the Protestants  1569. The Duke of Montpensier lay four Months before it in 1574, and having taken it at last demolish'd it; so that it is now but an in∣considerable place. or Melle, Metullum Castrum or Melle, is  Burrough of some consideration, that had  the right of coining Mony. It lies  the soe of a small River that falls into  Charene, 12 Leagues from Poictiers and  from Lusignan to the South-west. Some pre∣d, that the famous Melusine got that Name
because she was Lady of Melle and Luzig∣nan. S. Maixant, Cellula S. Maxentii or S. Maxen∣tii oppidum, owes its Rise as well as its Name to Maxentius a holy Solitary, who retir'd thi∣ther in the sixth Century. It's said, that he miraculously preserv'd his Monastery from be∣ing plunder'd by King Clovis's Soldiers. The famous S. Leger Bishop of Autun, who was Mi∣nister of State under Clotaire III. and Childe∣ric II. had been Abbot of S. Maixant. This Town had then two fine Collegiate Churches. The Abby has been repair'd and beautifi'd by the Emperour Lewis the Meek, and by Eubulus Bishop of Limoges. S. Maixant is renown'd for the Manufactory and Trade of Serges. It lies on the Sevre Niortoise, 7 Leagues West of Luzignan, and 12 South-west of Poictiers. Partenay, Partiniacum or Pertinaculum, ha the Title of a Barony, and is the Capital of the small Country of Gastine, so call'd from the Heaths and Wastes wherewith it is fill'd. It lies 10 Leagues West-north-west of Poictiers. About the end of the ninth Century, there was an Assembly call'd, to procure the Peace of the Churches of Aquitain, where William Count of Poictou, the Bishop of Chartres and S. Bernard, Abbot of Clairvaux were present. Thouars, Toarcis Castrum, 6 Leagues West of Loudun and 15 North-west of Poictiers, has the Title of a Dutchy and Peerdom erected by Hen∣ry IV, in 1595. It's an indifferent good T and of a long standing; since in the eight Cen∣tury, it was already one of the strongest Pla∣ces in Aquaitain. Historians mention the cal∣ling
of the Castle of Thouars by King Pepin as a very remarkable conquest, for this Fortresse had then its particular Count or Governour, whom Pepin carry'd prisoner into France. The Country and dependencies of Touars, Ager Toar∣sit, le Touarsois had afterwards Viscounts under the Counts of Poictou since the Reign of al in the X Century. Their Estate passed by Marriage first to the House of Ainboise and then to the House of La Trimeuille. Niort, Niortum seated in a fruitful soyl, on the banks of the River Sevre, Separis, to which it gives the sirname of Niortoise, is a considerable Town and accounted the second in upper Poictou. It has a Seat of Royal Justice resorting to the Presidial of Poictiers, from which it lies 16 Leagues to the South-West, and four from St. Maixant. The Country round about call'd Niortois breeds the best race of Mules in the whole Kingdom, and the Town is rich and trading, because of its Fairs. Maillezais lies five Leagues West of Niort and 20 South-West of Poictiers. It's seated on the River Autise, Altisa, that surrounds it on all sides, for which reason the Latin Chronicles of the French ordinarily call it Insula Malliacum. In 1003. under the Reign of King Robert. William V. Count of Poictiers, Son to William IV. sirnam'd Fierabras and Grand-son to William III. sirnam'd Tete-d Etoupe, founded here an Abby, whether he retir'd. In process of time, this onastery made this place a Town of some ote, so that either for this consideration, or rather to lessen the Jurisdiction of the Prelate of Poictiers, Pope John XXII. erected Mail∣lezais
into a Bishoprick in 1317. and Godfrey of Pouvrelle the Abbot was the first Bishop of it; but the Seat has been transfer'd to Rochel in 1648. Lusson, Lucio was another Ancient Monastery of St. Bennet's order, whose Abbot Peter de la Voirie, Pope John XXII. rais'd likewise to the Dignity of a Bishop, in 1317. Lusson is situated in a Maishy Place, 8 Leagues West of Maillezais, and two North of the Sea, whence it draws many conveniencies; so that it belongs to Lower Poictou. Fontenay-le-Comte, Fontenaium, or rather Rontanetum Comitis, is seated upon the Venace, that begins there to be Navigable, and dischar∣ges it self into the Sevre Niortoise at Port-Marans. Fontenay-le-Comte is an indifferent good Town and well-Built. It has a Seat of Royal Justice and is accounted the Capital of Lower Poictou. Pluviaut, a Protestant Captain took it in 1568. but having quitted it the next year, the Fa∣mous Francis de la Noue lay Siege to it in 1570, and had there his left Arm broken. They fitted to him an Arm of Iron at Rochel. But as this accident did not abate his Courage, and he still made a shift to keep the Bridle of his Horse, with his artificial Arm, he got from thence the sirname of Bras de Fer, or Iron Arm. In the mean while the Siege of Fontenay went on, and Soubize, who succeeded rhe Wounded la Noue, had the honour of taking the Place. This Town is 6 or 7 Leagues distant from the Sea, 6 Leagues East North-East of Lusson and four North-West of Maillezais. La Roche-sur-Yon, Rupes ad Yonnem is a
Burough with the Tittle of Principality, seated near the source of the small River Yon, twelve Leagues from Fontenay and 8 from Lusson. Elizabeth of Beauveau Lady of Champigny and la Roche-sur-Yon brought these two Lordships into the House of Bourbon by her Marriage with John II. Count of Vendome, in 1454. Since that time, this Principality has oft been the Portion of Youngest Sons of that Family, as it was in 1684. the title of the second Son to the Prince of Conde, whose eldest Brother dying in 1685. he took the name of Prince de Conti. Tiffauges, Taifalia lies on the South side of the Sevre Nantoise, near the borders of Brita∣in. 13 Leagues North North-West of Fonte∣nay-le-Coute, This place is a Colony of the Teitali, a Scythian People, who apparently came into the Gauls with Adolph King of the Goths, under the Empi e of Honorius, or with Goar King of the Alains, under the Emperor Valentinian Honorius's successor; and settled themselves in Poictou and Anjou, along the River Lore; But as they were Heathens and addicted to a vice against Nature, they incurr'd the hatred of the Natives, as well as the Romans and the French, who ioyned toge∣ther, it seems, to exterminate 'em. So that there is no remainder of them; besides the name of this place and the Country about it. Gregory of Tours, in the life of the Abbot Se∣nochus, says that he was a Teifalian by Race, whence it may be inferr'd, that in process of time, the remaining Teifalians imbrac'd Christianity and were confounded with the Natives.
Talmond or Talemond, Turris Talemundi, lies on the Sea-coast of Poictou, 12 Leagues West of Fontenay-le-Comte. The Franco-german name of Talemond, like to that of Phara∣mond, Theudemond, Sigismond, &c. shews that it had some of the Ancient French Lords for its founder. Under Lewis VII. it was still of the French King's Domeshes. Then it was seiz'd upon by the Lords of Mauleon, and at last fell to the share of the House of La Trimouille, which enjoys it as yet under the Title of Prin∣cipality. Olonne, Olona lies upon the same Coast, two Miles West of Talmond. It has the title of a County with an indifferent good Haven; but there are dangerous Sands too hard by, call'd les Sables d'Olonne. Its territory bears abun∣dance of Wine and has likewise some Salt-Pits. The other places of some note in Poictou are la Garnache Gasnapia, Aspremont Aspermons, Bellus Visus Beauvoir sur Mer, Tremosia Tri∣mouille, Castanetum Chastaigneraye, Luciacum Castrum, Lussac-le-Chasteau, Fontenay-le-Battu, Marsillae a Principality, Roche-Chouart, Ru∣pes Cauardi, which gives name to an Illu∣strious Family, &c.
Of Aunis. I Would have gone on in the same method, as I have describ'd the other Governments, especially the Isle of France, Picardy, Normandy, Britanny, and the several Provin∣ces of Orleanois hitherto, and have divided this Description into two Volumes: But the Book-Seller, who only design'd to have a Book of a lesser bulk, has so strongly oppos'd it, that I have been forc'd to comply with him; what ever reasons I could alledge, or resistance I could make, during several Months: So that I am compell'd to cut short with the remain∣ing Provinces and Governments, and leaving out the remotest and most curious Antiquities and Histories, to content my self with a Geographical Description of the Principal Ci∣ties and Towns, and some hints here or there of History. By this unwelcome accident, all the observations I had made or collected in the space of many, years are altogether useless, either to me or to the Publick, than which nothing can be more intolerable to an Author. Howe∣ver I shall enlarge somewhat more upon Lan∣guedoc and Dauphine, then upon other Pro∣vinces. Aunis is a small Country of 9 or 10 Leagues extent North and South, and 4, 5, 6, 7, or 9 East and West, having the Figure of a Triangle,
whereof the Sevre Niortoise and the Sea make the right Angle, and the Charante with a line drawn from Tonnay-Charante in Saintonge to Fontenay-le-battu in Poictou make the basis or subtending. Vulgar Latin Authors call it Alne∣tum and Alnetensis Pagus, as tho one should say a Grove of Alders, or the Land of Al∣der-trees. But 'tis more probable and agreeing with Antiquity to derive this appellations from Aunay, a place in Poictou, that is now incon∣siderable, but was formerly the Capital of the County of Aunis, and is mention'd in the Tables of the Emperor Theodosius, publish'd by the Brothers Peutingers, under the name of Ave∣donacum and by Aethicus, under that of Aune∣donacum Thence comes Pagus Avedonacensis or Aunedonacensis, le Pays d'Aunis, which in time past made part of Saintonge, then of Poictou, and is now one of the Provinces of the Gover∣nement Orleanois. Rochel or la Rochelle, Rupella for Repecula, so call'd from the Rocks, that are near its Haven, is now the head of the Country of Aunis. It formerly depended on the Counts of Poictiers for the Temporal, and the Prelate of Saintes for the Spiritual, but has now a Bishop of its own, Suffragan to the Archbishop of Bour∣deaux. It has been a very considerable and well traded City, especially since its Inhabitants did put themselves in a condition to resist the Normans. It was subjected to the English, by the treaty of Bretigny against the will of the In∣habitants; Afterwards it returned to the Do∣minion of France. In the XVI Age, the Inha∣bitants of Rochelle embrac'd the Reformation,
and Anno 1567 they put the City in the hands of those of their own party. Henry of France Duke of Anjou, Brother of Charles the IX laid Seige to it during the Civil Wars, and had perhaps carry'd it by force, had not the Ambassadors of Poland brought him a Crown, which made him change his design, having resolv'd, by the advice of Cardinal de Rhiche∣lieu to weaken the Protestants. Lewis the XIII having resolv'd to Weaken the Protestants, and to re-Establish the Roman Religion in Bearn, demanded from them their Towns of security, whereat the Re∣form'd were affray'd and assembled for that and at Rochelle, Anno 1620. They being beat Anno 1622, did implore the mercy of the French King: But having risen again this Prince besieged Rochelle and obliged it to surrender the 29 October Anno 1628. He demolished the Fortifications, and depriv'd the Inhabitants of their Priviledges; He suffer'd nothing to re∣main, but two Towers which Charles the V had built for the defence of the Harbour, and for its better security an Iron Chain is tied cross the entry of the Port, every night. Lewis XIV. did fortify it very strongly Anno 1689. by a good Citadel, and a great many other workes to prevent a Descent of the English and Dutch, and to keep the pretended new Converts under his Tyranny. This City was erected into a Bishoprick Anno 1648. The Episcopal Seat of Maillezais being transferr'd thither. Besides these, there is a Presidial Seat, a Court Soveraign, a Chamber of Mint, and a Haven very much frequented.
Rochel lies about 92 Leagues West of Paris, 25 West of Angouleme and 32 North North-West of Bourdeaux. Rochefort is a Port in the Country of Aunis, near the mouth of the Charante, 6 Leagues South of Rochel. Formerly it was only a little Village, but now it's a considerable Town, being adorn'd with fine Building, and pleasant Gardens, Sea Magazins and Store Houses, and a Hospital for Old Wounded Souldiers, who have serv'd at Sea. Marans is a Village on the Sevre Niortoise, situated in a Marish ground, 7 Miles North North-East of Rochel, having a Castle about two Leagues from the Sea. This place suffer'd much during the Civil Wars of Religion, being often taken and retaken. Chatelaillon is a little Village situated nigh the Sea, about two Leagues from Rochelle. The other places are Surgere, Benon, Moze, Courson, Port-Lupin, le Plomb, Angoulin, Tves, &c.
Of Angoumois. ANGOƲMOIS Pagus Ecolismensis hath Sain∣tonge on the West, and South-West Perigord on the South, Limosin and la Marche on the East, and Poictou on the North. It is about 22 Leagues in length East and West, and 16 in breadth North and South. Its great Fertility doth sufficienlty recompence its small extent: For this little Province abounds in Corn, Vine, Pasture-ground, Safron, &c. It's watred with several Rivers, namely the Charante, the Tardouere, the Bandiat, the Boueme, the Sonne, the Argent, the Anguien∣e. It's the Country of Andrew Thevet, Bal∣sac, and other Ingenious and Learn'd Men. Angouleme, Iculisna or Ecolisma, the Capital City, is situated upon the Charante, 60 Leagues South-West of Orleans, and 28 North-East of Bourdeaux, with the Title of a Dutchy, a Presidial-Seat, a Seneschals Court, an Election, and a Bishoprick suffragan of Bourdeaux. It's a very Antient Town situated upon the top of a Mountain between the two Rivers of Cha∣rante and Anguienne, who join at the end of the Town. It has very fine Castle, which is accessible but at one side, being strongly fortify'd.
Cognac Conniacum, is upon the Charante towards the Frontiers of Saintonge between Jarnac and Saintes, 10 Leagues West of An∣gouleme, in a Country extraordinary fertile, especially in delicate Wine. La Rochefoucaut is a Town upon the River Tardouere, four Leagues from Angoulesme to the North-East. It bears the name of its founder one Foucaut, being call'd in Latin Rupes Fulcal∣di or Fulcaudi, and has giv'n its own to I one of the most Antient and Illustrious Houses of that Kingdom, which hath produced divers Great Men. Jarnac is a Borough with the Title of County situated upon the Charante, between Chateau∣neuf and Cognac; It's famous for the Battle which the Duke of Anjou, afterwards King Henry III did gain over the Protestants in the Month of May Anno 1569. they being commanded by the Prince of Condé, who was treacherously killed there by Montesquiou; whence come the Pro∣verb, Ʋn coup de Jarnac, To say a Perfidy. The name of Jarnac is also famous for the me∣rite of its Lords of the House of Chabot. Bouteville is a Town situated near the Fron∣tiers of Saintonge, about seven Leagues from Angouleme, towards the South. Rufec or Rufiacum aut Rofiacum, is a little Town, 10 Leagues North of Angouleme with the Title of Marquisate; It's situated in a very plea∣sant part of the Country. The other places of note are Cbateau-neuf, Blansac, la Valette, Montberon, la Vauguion, &c.
Of the Islands depending of the Government Orleanois. THose Islands lie on the Coasts of Poictou and Aunis, and are nam'd Oleron, Ré, Oye, Isle-Dieu, and Nermoutier. Oleron Ʋliarus or Olario, is an Island upon the Coasts of Aunis, nigh the Mouth of the Charante, about two short Leagues from Land. It hath five Leagues in Diameter and about 12 in Circuit: It's fertile in Corn, and abounds with Rabbits. It was fortify'd in 1689. to hinder the Descent of the English. The Isle of Ré, Radis insula, Vulgarly call'd Reacus, is nigh unto Rochel and belongs to the Government of the Country of Aunis and Brouage. Here is great Store of Salt, and such aboundance of Wine that the Inhabitants would be forc'd to give the old to Poor People for Tun∣ning of the New; if the English, Dutch and Normand Fleets came not every year to receive their Loading of it. This Island hath several Villages, the Cheif of which are St. Martin and Oye call'd the Isle, because of a Canal which must be pass'd as they enter into it. The most considerable Fort is that of la Prée pointed towards Pertuis Breton. In it are two
pieces of Artillery, which carry even to the Continent from the Island. It is Flanked with four Bastions, with Half Moons and other outworks. Anno 1689. they added some new Fortifications to it, on the side that lookes on the main Sea. Here is a high Tower, where in the night time, they set up a Beacon, because of the Rocks call'd Baleines which are adjacent, and for this cause the Tower is call'd la Tour des Baleines, or the Tower of Wales. L'Isle-Dieu, or rather, l'Isle-d'Ieu, Oia or Ogia, is near St. Gilles in Poictou, about three Leagues from the Continent. Nermontier lies not far from Britanny, near Beauvoir in Poictou, distant from the Conti∣nent about a League. In it is a rich Abby of Benedictins, resorting to the Bishoprick of Lusson, whence is deriv'd the name of Nermou∣tier, Nigrum Monasterium.
CHAP. XII. Of the Government of Guienne. IN the time of Julius Caesar, Aquitain reach'd not farther than from the Garonne to the Pyrenées, that is, it only comprehended what was since call'd Novempopulana, and now Gascony. But August extended it, Limits to the Loire, so that it contain'd besides the present Government of Guienne, the Provinces of Poictou, Touraine, Berry, la Marche, Bour∣bonnois and Auvergne, and made the fourth part of the Gauls. Charlemaign and Lewis the Meek follow'd this division when they ere∣cted it into a Kingdom for their youngest Sons. Most of those Provinces were since possest by the Dukes of Guienne, fell to the English by the Marriage of the Dutchess Eleonor with Henry II. and were Conquered from them by Charles VII. The Dukes of Guienne had the third rank among the twelve Ancient Peers of France. The name of Guienne is a maimed Word from the Latin Aquitaniae, that is it self deriv'd from Aquae, because there are many Springs of Warm
Water, whence many Cities in this Government are still call'd to this day, as we shall see here∣after. This Government borders to the North upon Poictou, Angoumois and la Marche; to the East upon Auvergne and Languedoc; on the South to the Pyrenean Hills, by which it is divided from Spain; and the West to the Ocean. It lies be∣tween 42 D. 30 Min. and 46 D. 20 Min. of Latitude, and between 18 D. and 24 D. of Longitude, which amount from the South to the North to 100 Leagues, from Aragnoet, in the Pyrenées to Niort in Poictou, and to about 112 from St. John de Luz beyond Bayo∣ne to Saint Geniez in Rouergue near Gevaudan. The Soil is pretty Fruitful in Corn, Wines, Fruits, Pastures, &c. except the Lands (or Sandy-grounds) near the Pyrenées, where is nothing but Heaths and Pastures that feed abundance of Cattle: The Air is there sweet and wholesom. This Government is Water'd by many Ri∣vers, of which the Chiefest are the Garomne, and the Charante that have been already descri∣bed the Dordonne, the Lot and the Adur, of which are after. The Garomne above all facili∣tates the Trade of Wine, Corn, Oyls, Brandy, Plums, Wooll. One may say for this Country that it has given to France brave Soldiers, and great Schollars; for it is certain, that Guienne and Languedoc get as much honour in the Armies, and the Republick of Letters, at the rest of the Kingdom besides. The Inhabi∣tants of this Province are generally Ingeniou, Valiant, Cunning, but much derided for their
Pride, which has even passed into a Proverb. As to the Rivers of Guienne, the chief are the Garonne, which has been describ'd p. 8. the Charente p. 263. the Seudre, that waters part of Saintonge, and falls into the Bay of per∣tuis de Maumusson, South-East of the Isle of Oleron and South of Brouage. The Dordonne, that rises in Auvergne near a place call'd Murat, re∣ceives the Chavanoy near its source; then the Rue, the Sumene, the Auze, the Louesse, the Somene, the Estarreau, the Sere increas'd with the Jordane and Autre, the Bave, the Nea, the Ser: then goes through Bergerac, Saincte Foy, Libourne, where 'tis increa'd shith the Lisle. This springs up in Limosin, at a place called Meisse, receives, near its source, the Loulour and the high Vezere, goes by Perigueux, Montpont, Lussac, where it receives the Larrey increased with the Palais, and a little higher the Droune increased with the Coles, Boulon, Janade, Em∣ere, Voutrou, Les Fontaines, Tude and Rissonne, and then the Save, three Miles North of Li∣urne. The Dordonne thus swoln and able to bear great Boats, pursues its way to the West, receives the Moron, not far from St. Andreas, and mixing with the Garonne at a place call'd Bourg; they run together into the Ocean, ma∣ing up a Bay of 2 or 3 Leagues in breadth, nd 20 in length, under the name of Gironde. The Drot rises in Perigord near a place call'd , washes Villereal, Castillonnes, Monsegur, lls into the Garonne at Caudrot, and carries no ats. The Lot springs from the Mountains f Gevaudan, waters Mende, Entraygues, where  receives the Truyere, increased with the Bes,
Lander and Epic, goes by La Vinzelle, Cade, and Cayrac, is increased with the Seze, the Co∣le and Iboly that water Figeac; then runs through Cahors, where it begins to be naviga∣ble, receives the Masse and the Lede, with se∣veral other Rivulets, and discharges it self in∣to the Garonne, betwixt Clerac and Esguillon. The Aveyrou issues in Rouergue near the Fron∣teers of Gevaudan, washes Rhodez, receives the Biaur, and together with this River makes the separation betwixt Albigeois and Rouergue; then is increased with the Cerdu and Ceret, the Bonnette, the Vere, and the Conde, mixes with the Tarn, 5 Miles East of Moissac, where hav∣ing received the Lute and Lemboulas; they run both into the Garonne. The Seune and some other Rivulets of less note fall also into the Ga∣ronne, betwixt the Lot and the Averrou. Then come the Tarn, the Agout, and the Lers, which I now go by, because they belong to Languedoc, to speak only of the Rivers of this Government, which fall into the Garonne on the South-side of it; as the Touche near Mu∣ret, the Save increased with the Gesse at Gre∣nade; the Nadesse betwixt this Village and Verdun; the Gimone increased with the Faram∣pionor over against Castel-sarasin. The Corre, the Ayroux, the Camesan, inconsiderable Brooks; the Ratz, the Giers that goes through Aux, Le∣ctoure, and discharges it self into the Garonne over against Agen. The Baise that comes from Armagnac, washes Condom and Nerac, receives the Losse, the Lausou, the Lante, the Gelise, and falls into the Garonne over against Esguil∣lon. Lower down to the West this great Ri∣ver
is increas'd with many other Rivulets as the lizos, the Lavassane, the Loubens, &c. The Leyre or Erre rises in that barren Coun∣ry call'd Landes, and falls into the Bay nam'd Cape de Buchs in the Country of Medoc. The Adour issues from the Pyrenees, goes hrough Tarbe, receives the Leschez, and the arrez increased with the Bouez, waters Ayre Grenade and Dax, receives the Gabas, the Leus, the Luy, the Gave of Pau, which waters Pau d Lescar, and is increased with the Vedan, he Gaves of Cauteres and Azun, the Lazon, the es, the Baisse, the Gaves of Ossau, Aspe, Ole∣, and Salies, the Rivulets of Lou-vert and essas. Then the Adour receives the Bidouse, he Ayguette and the Nive at Bayonne, 3 Miles rom its Mouth. On the North-side it is in∣reased with the Midou, that goes through Ville∣ve, Mont de Marsan and Tartas, and carries long with it the Waters of the Ladon, Douze, stampen, Ganeire, Lestrigon, and Gelouse. Guienne is now divided into 19 Provinces, hereof the first 8 belong to Guienne, and the  others to Gascony: Proper Guienne, Basadois, genois, Querci, Rouergue, Limosin, Perigord, intonge, Armagnac, Chalosse, Condomois, Lan∣, Terre de Labour, Lower Navarre, Viscounty Soule, Bearn, Bigorre, Comminge, Conserans. eir Capital Cities are, Bourdeaux Archbishop∣▪ Bazas Bishoprick, Agen Bish. Cahors Bish. des Bish. Limoges Bish. Perigueux Bish. tes Bish. Auch Archbish. S. Sever, Condom h. Dax Bish. Bayonne Bish. S. Palais, Mau∣, Pau, Tarbe Bish. S. Bertrand Bish. S. Lizer.
Of Proper Guienne. GƲienne Proper, Burdigalensis Ager, lies be∣tween the Ocean on the West, Gascogne and Bazadois on the South, Agenois and Perigord on the East, and Xaintonge on the North. This Country is less plentiful in Corn then VVine, amongst which that of Grave is remarkable, and is transported every where by Sea; the Soil is not toward the Coasts like, in the little Counties of Medoc and Buch. There are chiefly to be taken notice of Bour∣deaux, Libourne, Blaye, Lespares, Rions, Cadil∣lac, &c. The City of Bourdeaux, Burdigala, or Bur∣digala Biturigum Viviscorum, who seem to be a Colony of the Bituriges Cubi or Berruyers, lies upon the Garonne. It has an University, a Par∣liament and an Archbishop, who entitles him∣self Primate of Guienne. Clement V. decided the priority in his behalf against that of Bourges, be∣cause he had been Archbishop of the former, though the right of Primacy belongs to the lat∣ter. It is one of the finest, greatest, and most trading Cities of the Kingdom, seated in a fruit∣ful ground; Ausonius speaks thus of it.
Burdigala est natale solum, clementia Coeli Mitis, ubi & rigua larga indulgentia Terrae, Ver longum, Brumaeque breves, juga frondea subsunt, &c. Its Haven is very famous, it is called the Ha∣ven of the Moon, because it has the Figure of a Crescent: Bourdeaux is likened to a Bow, of which the Garonne is the String; they reckon 15 Leagues from this City to the Sea, and the Fare called La Tour de Cordouan, which is ve∣ry remarkable, and is the Work of Lewis of Foix an able Engineer: The University has been very flourishing; King Charles VII. re∣stored it to its luster; the Pope Eugene IV. gave it great Privileges, and Lewis XI. increa∣sed them: S. Jerome and Ausonius speak of the great Men it has brought forth, both for Learn∣ing and Piety. Libourne, is upon the Dordonne at its con∣junction with the River Lisle, 7 Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North-East. Near this Town rises a Mountain of Water, which the Inhabi∣tants call the Mascaret of Bourdeaux; at the very time that the Waters are most calm, it is formed in a trice, and runs a great way a∣long the River, overthrowing all the Boats it meets with. It's said that the River Pegu in the Kingdom of Martaban now depending on the Emperour of Siam has still more violent fs. Blaie, Blavia or Blavutum, lies upon the Gironde 7 Leagues down from Bourdeaux North∣ward, and 4 Leagues from the Bec d'Arnbés,
where is the confluence of the Garonne and Dor∣donne: The Country about Blaye is called le Blaiguez, Blaviensis pagus. Of Bazadois. Bazadois, Ager Vasatensis, lies between Prope Guienne on the North and West, the Lan¦des on the South, and Agenois on the East, 'tis a Country pretty fruitful in Corn, VVines, and Fruits. There are chiefly Bazas Bish. the Capital La Reole, whether the Parliament of Bourdeaux was once transferr'd 12 or 14 years ago; Ca∣stelgeloux, Nerac, Genissac, Caudrot, Buzet, Ca∣stelnau de Mames, &c. BAZAS Cossio Vasatum or Vasatae, is a City near the Source of the Lavassane or Vas∣sanne, with a Seneschal's Court, and a Bishop∣rick Suffragan of Auch. It is seated upon a Rock, whose bottom is watered by that little River, in a Country full of Woods and sandy Grounds, almost 4 Leagues North of the Ga∣ronne, and 11 North-East of Bourdeaux under 44 Deg. 24 Min. of Lat. and 19 Deg. 54 Min. of Long. St. John the Baptist has the Ca∣thedral Church dedicated to his Name, and Sextilius is accounted its first Bishop.
Of Agenois. AGenois Borders upon Armagnac to the South, to Querci to the East, on Perigord to the North, and Bazadois to the West: This is the most plentiful Country of Guienne, and supplies many Provinces with Corn, Wine, and Oyl of Nuts: Its call'd in Latin Pagus Aginnensis. The Places of more note are Agen Bish. Villeneuve, Aiguillon, Tonneins, Clerac, S. Foy, &c. The City of Agen, Aginnum Nitiobrigum, lies upon the Garonne with a Presidial and Se∣neschalship, and a Bishoprick Suffragan of Bour∣deaux; It was the chief City of those ancient Nitiobriges that were so considerable among the Gouls, and the true Founders of this City, with∣out ascribing to it any fabulous original. This City is great and populous.
Of Quercy. QƲERCY Pagus Cadurcinus, lies betwixt Languedoc on the South, Rouergue and Auvergne on the East, Limosin on the North, and Perigord and Agenois on the VVest; its ex∣tent from South to North is above 30 Leagues, from Montauban in Languedoc to Turenne in Li∣mosin; 20 East and West, from Mont-murat near Cadenac to Pestillac near Villefranche in Peri∣gord, which are its greatest length and breadth. This Country is pretty fruitful in Corn, Wines, Fruits, and Pastures: There is a great Trade of Plums, Saffron, and good VVool. Its Inha∣bitants brought in formerly about 12000 Men in the League of the Gauls against the Romans. Querci is divided into upper and lower, the up∣per called Causse contains the Valleys that are along the River Lot, the lower or Villes basses is extended along the Aveirou. This Province belongs to the Government of Guienne, though it depends on the Parliament of Toulouse, and the generality of Montauban, which has under it 3 Elections, viz. Cahors, Montauban, and Fi∣geac. Querci was annexed to the Crown in the beginning of the Reign of Philip the Bold, as being the Inheritance of the Counts of Tou∣louse. In 1306. Philip the Fair did covenant with Raimond Paucholi Bishop of Cahors for the
right of Peerage, allowing him to take the title of Count. The most remarkable Places of Quercy are Cahors, Bishop. The Capital; Gourdon, Moissac, Figeae, Lauserte, Montratier, Montpesat, Souil∣lae, Martel, Cadenac, &c. CAHORS, Cadurcum or Divona Cadur∣corum has an University, a Seneschal's Court, and a Bishoprick Suffragan of Bourges: It lies upon the Lot in a Demi-Island, which is formed by that River, which has three Bridges of Stone, and is very useful to the Inhabitants for seve∣ral Manufactures: It is rais'd upon a steep Rock, where was formerly a Cittadel. James Ossa Bishop of Frejus, afterwards a Cardinal, and Pope under the name of John XXII. was born in this Town, where he Founded in 1331. an University, to shew his Love to∣wards his own Country; which has had fa∣mous Professors. Its Cathedral Church is de∣dicated to S. Stephens, and if we believe fabulous Authors it was consecrated by S. Martial himself; there are many other Churches and Monaste∣ries, with a College of Jesuits since 1605. Ca∣hors lies 42 Leagues East of Bourdeaux. Gourdon is 8 Leagues from Cahors North∣ward. Moissac lies on the River Tarn (which soon after looses it self into the Garonne) with a Seneschal's Jurisdiction, 17 Leagues from Ca∣hors to the South, and 6 Leagues from Montau∣ban to the West: It is a very ancient Town, that has often been ruined; for the Goths took it from the Romans; and King Clovis took it again from the Goths; afterwards it was seiz'd by Gaiges Duke of Aquitain, and retaken by
King Pepin, in 1212. Raimond Count of Tou∣louse made it side with the Albigenses; Simon Count of Montfort storm'd and plunder'd it; the English did utterly destroy it; and it suf∣fered much during the Wars against the Pro∣testants; so that this Town is very different from what it has formerly been; though it has yet a very famous Abbey of St. Bennets Order, where, as 'tis said, have been near 1000. Monks at once: The Abbot is Joynt-Lord of it with the King, which was regulated by a Sentence in 1229. &c.
Of Rouergue. ROƲERGƲE, Rutenicus Ager, Borders to the East upon the Cevennes, to the North upon Auvergne, to the West upon Quercy, and to the South upon Languedoc: It lies between 43 Deg. 30 Min. and 44 Deg. 46 Min. of Lat. and betwixt 22 Deg. 22 Min. and 24 Deg. 15 Min. of Long. So that it takes up 37 Leagues East and West from S. Jean de Breuil to S. An∣tonin in its greatest length; and 28 North and South from Mur de Barrez to Brusquez. This Province is divided into three Parts, viz. the County, the Upper and Lower Marche; the chiefest City of the first is Rodez, of the se∣cond Milhau, of the third Villefranche. The Country is very plentiful in some places, but barren in others. There are Mines of Iron, Antimony, Copper, Brimstone, Alum, Silver, and as Strabon says of Gold too. The greatest revenue of Rouergue consists in Cattel, Wools, Fruits, Cheeses, Hemps, and Lines; the only Trade of Mules that are bought there, for Spain brings in every Year above 200000 Crowns. Its Principal Rivers are the Tarn, the Lot, and the Aveirou; It depends on the Par∣liament of Toulouse, and boasts of 25 Towns, and 50 great Burroughs; 2 Bishopricks, and a Elections, under the Generality of Montauban.
There are ordinarily commended Rodez for his People, Conques for its Gate; Milhau for plenty of Almonds, Nerac for Vitriol, St. An∣tonin for Plunis, Roquefort for Cheeses, Mon∣salvi for its delicate blew and green Peases, Vouse and Espaliou for excellent good Bread, the Abbey of Aubrac for its Hospital and Alms, Severac for its Castle, Marcillac a Principalty for the Cave or den call'd Bouche-Roland, that is near it and reaches four Leagues under ground. The Inhabitants are both Couragious and Honest; The Nobility there is very Ge∣nerous and much respected by the Common People. The City of Rhodez Segodunum or Ruteni, is seated on the Aveirou, 24 Leagues South East of Cahors, and has the title of a County, a Seneschalship and Bishoprick Suffragan of Albi. It is very Ancient; but it has lost its former Ancient greatness, having been often ruin'd by the Goths, Saracens, French, &c. The Cathedral is under the name of our Lady; there are many others Churches and Monasteries, and a fine Colledge of Jesuits. Its first Bistop was, as 'tis believ'd, St. Amand. The Counts of this City were of the House of Carlat, and possessed that part, which is called the Borrough, and the Bishops were Master of the other that bears the name of the City. The County belonged to the Counts of Toulouse. Alfonsius the I. having resolv'd to take the Cross, and to make a Journy into the Holy Land, sold it in 1147. to Richard Son of Raimond. Viscount of Carlat, Richard left it to his Son Hughes I. Count of Rodez, &c. It was afterwards an∣nexed
to the County of Armagnac, by a Mar∣riage and a Judgment in the year 1312. John I. Count of Armagnac, had a Grant of the French King Charles V. in 1375. that the four Juri∣dictions of Rouergue should be Annexed to the County of Rodez, which are St. Geniez, la Ro∣que-Valsergue, Castagnes, Begonimez and la Guiole. After that, all the Estates of the House of Armagnac came into that of Albret, and the French King Henry the IV. carried to the Crown the County of Rodez, as being the Pa∣trimony of the House of Armagnac. There is near that City, the Mountain of Cansac, which burns in the rain. There are Mines of Copper, Arsenick, Azur and Silver. Two Leagues from that Place, is an Abyss called Tindoul, 60 Paces broad and 200 deep; On the side of that Abyss is to be seen a hole without Bottom. The City of VABRES Castrum Vabrense, is a Bishoprick and County Suffragan of Alby. It was formerly a Famous Abby of St. Benets, Order, which Pope John XXII. in 1317. Erected to a Cathedral Church. The Abbot Peter Orlageo was its first Bishop. It is 12 Leagues South of Rodez. MILHAƲ, Amilianum or Aemilianum, is the Chief Town of the Upper Marche, being upon the Tarn toward the Frontiers of Gevaudan, 14. Leagues South-East of Rodez. There are a great many Almond-Trees. This Town has been famous during the Wars of Religion; it being a strong hol'd, but is Fortifications were razed, in 1629. The Country depending on it is call'd Aemilianus-Pagus.
VILLEFRANCHE, is the Chief Town of the Lower March, with a Seneschalship and Presidial, 12 Leagues West of Rodez. The People is there very Civil, and serviceable, and provisions plentiful and cheap. Saint Antonin lies upon the Confluence of the Aveirou and Bonnete, 18 Leagues West, South-West of Rodez, with high Walls round it. In the year 1226. Guy of Montfort yielded to the French King the Right he had on that Town, Raimond Count of Toulouse protested against that Gift; but in 1229. he approved, by an Act, of the Arbitrators Sentence pronounced by the Popes Legate, and the Count of Cham∣pagne upon the Matter; So that St. Antonin was adjuged to the Crown in 1245, Besnard Hu∣gonis, Son to Frocard Viscount of St. Antonin having sold to the French King Lewis IX. what ever Right he had upon it. The Protestants had Fortified themselves there, but Lewis XIII. turned them out of it, in 1622. This Town is famous for its Plums. There are besides others considerables Places, as St. Just, Estain, Entraigues, St. Come, St. Geniez, the Town and County of Espaliou, Severac le Castel, la Guiole, the Abby of Anbrac, &c.
Of Limosin. LIMOSIN, Lemovicinus Pagus, Borders upon Auvergne to the East, upon la Mar∣che to the North, part of Poictou Angoumois and Perigord to the West, and Quercy to the South. It lies between 44 Deg. 52 Min. and 45 Deg. 45 Min. of Latitude, and between 21 Deg. 40 Min. and 23 Deg. 20 Min. of Lon∣gitude, which make from South-East to North-West about 38 Leagues from Port-Dieu on the Frontiers of Auvergne to la Roche-chouart in An∣goumois, in its greatest length and 24 North and South from S. Priech on the Confluence of the Vienne and Taurion, and the Borders of la Mar∣che, to Beaulieu on the Dordonne near the Pro∣vince of Quercy. This Country is generally cold and barren; there is scarce any good Wine, Save in the Lower Limosin, and little Wheat, but plenty of Rye, Barley, and Chestnuts, of which the poorer sort make bread; and because when they first go out of that Country, and meet with good bread, they eat it most greedi∣ly, thence bread-gluttons have gotten in French the Sirname of Limosins. In Caesar's time the Limosins brought in 10000 Men for the Confederacy of the Gauls against the Ro∣mans: This People is now adays ingenious, pru∣dent, laborious and saving; they have given 5 or
6 Popes to the Church. Limosin is divided in∣to Upper and Lower; the chief City of the first is Limoges, of the second Tulle. The Principal Rivers are the Dordonne, the Vienne, the Vezere, and the Upper Vezere, &c. The City of Limoges, Ratiastum, and Le Movicae, is seated partly on the top of a little Hill, and partly in a Valley upon the River Vienne, sur∣rounded with good strong Walls, and deep ditches; a Gaulish Prince, as 'tis pretended, built it and gave it his name; it has much suf∣fer'd in divers times by the Goths, French, and English: Under King Charles V. the Lord High Constable du Guesclin took it from the English in 1371, and the Prince of Wales retook it a little while after by storm, where 4000 People fell a Sacrifice to his wrath, but the French King got it again soon after. The Cathedral is under the name of St. Stephen, whose first Bishop St. Martial is accounted to be, tho with little proofs. There are three considerable Abbeys of St. Au∣stin, S. Martial, and S. Martin, and several o∣ther Monasteries with a Presidial and a Gene∣rality. This Town has had its Hereditary Vis∣counts, who were Sovereigns of the whole Pro∣vince: Many Councils have been held there: Limoges lies near the borders of la Marche 34 Leagues North of Cahors and 19 North-East of Perigueux. TƲLLE Tutela Castrum, is watered by two Rivers Courreze and Soulane, 15 Leagues South-East Limeges; the Abbey of St. Martin was ere∣cted here to a Bishoprick by Pope John XXII. in 1318. of which Arnold of St. Astier was the last Abbot, and the first Bishop: Its Prelates
are Viscounts and Lords of the Town. There is a Presidial and an Election; this is the Coun∣try of the ancient Family of Gardia. There are also to be noted the Viscounty of Turenne, Brive la Gaillarde, Ʋserche, a strong Town; the Dukedom of Ventadour, Roche-Abeille, fa∣mous for a Fight in the year 1569. St. Hivier, S. Junian, Chalus, considerable for its Markets of Horses. Aix renowned in that Country for the excellent Bread that is bak'd there Preige-buffiere the first Barony of Limosin. Of Perigord. PERIGORD Pagus Petrocoricus, Borders to the East on part of Quercy and Limosin, to the North, Angoumois to the West on part of Xaintonge and Guienne, properly so called to the South, on Agenois and part of Quercy; it lies betwixt 44 Deg. 38 Min. and 45 Deg. 30 Min. of Latitude; and betwixt 20 Deg. 30 Min. and 22 Deg. of Longitude, which makes 24 Leagues North and South from the Source of the Droune to the Barony of Biron, near the Source of the Drt, and 26 East and West from Sarlat to Roche-Chalais. 'Tis a rough, stony, and mountainous Country; but for all that pret∣ty fruitful: There are many Medicinal Springs, and some Mines of Iron and Steel; it is divi∣ded into Upper and Lower Perigord; the first
called Blanc or White, because of its Mountains 'tis North-West betwixt the two Venzeres, and the other that was South-East along the Rivers l'Iles, and Dordonne, is called Noii, or Black, because of its Woods. There are abundance of Wall-nuts, Chest-nuts, several sorts of Sim∣ples, and Wine in some places, this Province since the declining of the Monarchy had parti∣cular Counts till Lewis XII. who gave them o∣ther Lands in exchange, and which the French King Henry IV. annexed to the Crown. The City of Perigueux, call'd at first Vesunnae Petrocoriorum, and afterwards Petrocorii or Pe∣trocori, by the name of its ancient Inhabitants, is the chief of the Upper Perigord, and of the whole Province, lies upon the River l'Isle with a Bishoprick, Suffragan of Bourdeaux, of which it's distant 28. Leagues to the North-East. It is a very ancient City, yet not so ancient as to have been founded by one of Noah's Sons, as some would have it; it has often been ruined by the incursions of Barbarians. In 768. Pepin le Bref (or the Short) got near that Town a famous Victory over Gaifer Duke of Aquitain: St. Front was its first Bishop; its Cathedral, un∣der the Name of St. Stephen, was much defaced during the Civil Wars. The most considerable places are, besides Perigueux and Sarlat; Beaumont, Bergerac, Ro∣che-chalais, Brantosme, Ville-Franche de Perigord, Montignac, on the Vezere, in whose Castle the ancient Counts of Perigord used to reside. Mont∣pont the Head of a small Country call'd the Con∣quest, betwixt the Rivers L'Isle and Double, and the Village of Mucidan. Castillon on the Dordonne,
9 Miles East of Libourne, and 25 North-East of Bourdeaux, where our English General Talbot, who had maintained the Wars many years, with a handful of Men, against all the Power of Charles VII. was at length routed in 1451. At Miremont is to be seen a subterraneous Cavern or Den, that reaches very far under the Ground. At la Douzé a Burrough, and Marquizate, betwixt Montignae and Miremont, is made the best Pa∣per in the Country. Hautefort, Bourdeilles, and Exidueil have also the Titles of Marquizates, Ri∣berac that of a County, Mareuil, Bainac, and Biron are ancient Baronies, and La Force, which gives the name of Dukes to an illustrious Prote∣stant family, is the finest House in Perigord. Of Saintonge. SAINTONGE and corruptively Xaintonge, Pa∣gus, Santonicus, &c. Sarlat, Sarlatum, and Sarlatium, Capital of Lower Perigord, and more especially of a small Country thereabouts call'd Pagus Sarla∣ticus Le Sariadois, lies on the source of the Nea, 2 Leagues North of the Dordonne, and but one from the Borders of Quercy. There was an ancient Abbey of Benedictins, chang'd by Pope John XXII. in 1317, into a Cathedral Church, of which Raimond of Roquecor was the first Bi∣shop.
This Town has a Seneschal's Court, and is strong by its situation, for it maintained two Sieges during the Civil Wars of the Princes in 1652. Santonicus Borders upon Angoumois and Pe∣rigord to the East, on Poictou and the Coun∣try of Aunis to the North, on the Ocean to the West, and on proper Guienne to the South; it lies between 19 Deg. 5 Min. and 20 Deg. 53 Min. of Longitude, and between 45 Deg. 5 Min. and 46 Deg. 20 Min. of Latitude, which makes about 34 Leagues East and West from Roche Beaucourt and les Fontaines to the Bay call'd Pertuis of Maumusson, and 32 North and South from the Sevre Niortoise to very near the Save in proper Guienne. This Country is very plentiful in Corn, Wine, Pastures, Saffron, good Fish, and above all in Wormwood, and Rose∣mary that have particular Virtues. A great quantity of good Salt is made upon the Coast; and it is a common saying, that were France an Egg, Xaintonge would be the Yolk of it; its principal Rivers are the Garonne, the Cha∣rante, the Seudre, &c. which are very conve∣nient for the Carriage and Transportation of Commodities. The City of SAINTES or Xaintes Me∣diolanum Santonum, and in latter Ages Santoni, lies upon the Charante, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Bourdeaux, from which it is di∣stant 22 Leagues to the North, and almost 10 from the Sea to the East: It has had particu∣lar Counts as well as the whole Province, and is very ancient; there are still to be seen the
remains of an Amphitheatre and Aqueducts, of a triumphant Arch upon the Charante, and many Inscriptions of the Romans S. Eutropius is accounted its first Bishop, and its Cathedral Church is dedicated to St. Peter, but it was al∣most ruin'd during the Wars of Religion. Brouage, Santonum portus, lies on a narrow Bay over against the Isle of Oleron, 8 Leagues West of Saintes. It is called in vulgar Latin Broagium, from the mildness of its Soyl, and is the head of the Country thereabouts called le Brouageois, that constitutes a particular Govern∣ment, in which are two of the finest Burroughs in France, Marennes, and la Tremblade, where the French King has a Store-house for his Vessels. And tho the Country be but small, yet because of the customs, it yields 14 Millions of Livers, which amount near to 1100000 pound Ster∣ling, to the French King. This together with the conveniency of the Havens and Salt-pits makes Brouage an important Town, for which reason it is strongly fortified. The other places of note are S. Jean d' An∣geli, Engeriacum or Ingeriacum, on the River Boutonne, 8 Leagues North of Saintes: It was for∣merly very strong, and given to the Protestants as one of their Towns of security; but Lewis XIII. who took it from them by storm in 1621, pull'd its Walls down: Taillebourg has a Bridge on the Charante, and is famous for a Battel fought there in 1242. by Lewis the IXth's. Forces, with the Count of La Marche that had revolted against him. Soubize, and Royan are two Sea-ports, the first who gave the name of Duke to a famous
Protestant Commander, lies on the Mouth of the Charante, and the other on the Bay of the Gironde, Mortaigne, and Chalais have titles of Principalities Posnac and Matha of Counties, Au∣beterre of a Viscounty. Montausier was erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1665. Pons is a Sirauté or ancient Lordship, on which 250 fees are depending. Barbezieux gives now Title of a Marquess to one of Louvoys Sons, Secretary of State to Lewis XIV. Jonsac and Mirembeau are also considerable Lordships. Of Armagnac. ARMAGNAC, Armaniacum, is a Coun∣ty in Gascogne, between Languedoc on the East, the Garonne and Condo∣mois on the North, Chalosse and Bigorre on the West, and Cominges on the South: There is a great plenty of Corn, excellent Wines, Cattel, and Fowls. This Country in Caesar's time was inhabited by the Elusates, whose Capital Euse or Eause, Elusa or Aceluso was then a Metropolitan, and Aux a Bishoprick only; but the two Dioceses having been melted in one, and the Archiepiscopal Seat transferr'd to Aux; Eause became an inconsiderable place, and retains nothing of its former grandeur,
but an Archiepiscopal Palace: Eause is seated on the River Gelise, and the Borders of Con∣domus almost 14 Leagues South of Bazas, so that from Serignac on the Garonne, and Arag∣mer in the Pyrenees, Armagnac is extended 43 Leagues North and South in its greatest length, and 30 East and West from Verdun on the Ga∣ronne, to Aire or Barcelone on the Adour. Thus this County, together with the Countries of Riviere and Verdun are included betwixt 42 Deg. 40 Min. and 44 Deg. 10 Min. of Lati∣tude, 19 Deg. 50 Min. and 21 Deg. 40 Min. of Longitude. It has had famous Counts, and has above 1800 Fees subject to the Ban and Rear∣ban. The most remarkable places are Ausch Archbishoprick Lectoure, a Bishoprick and strong City with a Cittadel; Vic d'Armagnac, where the Counts of Fosensac us'd to re∣side, who receiv'd homage of 300 Gentlemen; Vic de Lomagne Capital of the Country of that Name: There is also Miradou which stopp'd the designs of the Prince of Conde in 1652. Mirande Capital of the Country of Estrac. Ver∣dun Capital of the Country of that Name. La Bastide, Jegun, Naugaro, Trie, &c. The City of Aux or Ausch, Augusta Auscorum and Ausci, lies upon the Giers, with a Presidial and Archbishoprick: 'Tis said to have been a Roman Colony, which is confirmed by its An∣tiquities; it has some remains of the magnifi∣cence of the Counts of Armagnac: Clovis the Great is thought the Founder of the Cathedral, which is one of the most magnificent and rich∣est Churches in the Kingdom; its first Bishop
is thought to be Aufronius, its Chapter consists of 15 Dignitaries, and 20 Prebendaries, of which 5 are Lay-men, who sit in the Quire, and have a share in the Distributions: These are, the Count of Armagnac, and the four Barons of Montaut, Pardillan, Montesquiou, and l'Ile: The 15 Dig∣nitaries are the Provost, 3 Abbots of Faget, I∣drac, and Cere; 7 Archdeacons of Angles, Sa∣banes, Sos, Vic d'Armagnac, Magnoac, Astarac, and Pardillan; two Priors of Montesquiou, and S. Mary of Snow; a Sexton who is withal a Par∣son, and a Theolocal (or Professor of Divi∣nity.) There are also 36 Incumbents, eight Chaplains of the Holy Ghost, and St. Denys, 37 Chaplains in ordinary, and divers Clerks for the Divine Service. The Archbishop has the Moiety of the Lordship of the City; there are many other Churches and Monasteries, &c.
Of Chalosse. CHALOSSE or Gascony properly so called, lies between Armagnac on the East, Condomois on the North, the Lan∣ on the West, and Bearn on the South. This Country bordering too much on the andes, or wasts of Gascony, produces nothing t Rye, Millet, and some Pastures. It reaches 3 Leagues North and South, from the Source  the Gelouse to the Burrough of Mant upon e Luy, and 13 East and VVest from Aire to eyond Gaviac, &c. The chiefest Places are, ires Bish. Cap. S. Sever, Meugron, Arsac, muy. The City of Aires, Vicus Juli, Aturensium nitatis, or Aturae, is a Bishoprick Suffragan of sch, seated on the Adour in a plentiful Country, most 27 Leagues South of Bourdeaux. It de∣ends on the Seneschal of Bazas, and the Par∣iament of Guienne without further appeal: The Kings of the Visigoths made their Residence here; there is still to be seen on the River de, the Ruins of Alaric's Palace, he that made publick in 506, the Theodosian Code, hich had been revised by Anian his Chancel∣or: Since that time this Town has often been in'd by the Saracens, Normans, &c. it suffer∣d much during the late Civil VVars. There
is an Abbey of S. Quiterne, which is celebrate for the Martyrdom of that Saint; it is con¦thedral with that of Aires, which has the Blesse Virgin for Patron. The ancientest Bishop  St. Marcel, who sent in 506. one of his Pries to the Council of Agde; the Chapter has tw Archdeacons, and the whole Dioceses is divide under 6 Arch-priests, &c. Of Condomois. CONDOMOIS Pagus Condomiensis, is small Country betwixt Armagnac an Agenois on the East, Basadois on th North, the Landes and Chalosse on the VVes and part of Chalosse and Armagnac on the Sout It reaches 30 Leagues East and West from ¦staffort on the Giers to beyond the Gelouse; b its greatest extent North and South is hard 12 Leagues, and in some places only 2, 4, 6  7. However 'tis subdivided in other small Countries, as Mursan, Gavardan, Fesensague &c. They say that Condomois yields all the n¦cessaries for life, and borrows nothing of i Neighbours. The most considerable Places a Condom Bish. Gondrin, Corrensan Mezin, S Rimbes, Montreal, Gabaret Cap. of Gavarda Mauvesin Capital of Fesen saguet, Mont de Ma¦san with Roquefort and St. Justin, &c.
The City of Condom, Condomium Vasconum, is ted upon the Baise, Balisa, with a Bishop∣er Suffragan of Bourdeaux, three Leagues om Nerac; it has a Presidial and Election, e it was separated from the Bishoprick and schalship of Agen. The Pope John XXII. ere∣ed it into a Bishoprick in 1327. and gave it e revenues of an Abbey of St. Benedict, con∣crated to St. Peter, which is now the Cathe∣al. Raimond Gontard last Abbot of that Ab∣ey, was the first Bishop of Condom, and the anons were secularized in 1549. There are any other Churches, and several Monasteries. This City was taken in 1569. by Gabriel of tmorency Commander of the Protestants.
Of the Landes. THE LANDES are along the Sea, be∣tween the Country of Labourd on th South, Chalosse on the VVest, and Bourdelois o the North. This is a barren Country, that ha in some places nothing but Heaths and Pastures where abundance of Cattel is feeding; in som other places it yields a little Corn, and a grea deal of Rye by the means of burnt Earth, whic mixed with the sandy Soyl, fattens it and make it fruitful. It's extended 33 Leagues North East and South-West from Belin to Bayonne. Bu only 12, in its largest breadth from Tartas o the Adour to the Sea. It was the Habitation o the ancient Tarbelli, whom Caesar and Strab describe as living on the Sea-Coast of Aquita from Bourdeaux to the Pyrenees. The Places t be noted are, Dax Bish. Tartas, Belin, le M¦ret, Magese, Albret, &c. The City of Dax or Aqs, Aquae August or Aquae Tarbellicae, lies upon the Adou with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Ausch, and a S¦neschal's Court, 13 Leagues North-East of Ba¦onne. It is a trading City, rich and well buil with a Castle flank'd by many big roun Towers, with a Garrison in it; it is famou for its warm and healthful Bathes, which wer in great consideration in the times of the R¦mans;
whence comes its name of Aquae, and that of Aquitain. Of Labourd. THE Land or Country of LABOƲRD, or rather Lapord, Lapurdensis pagus, lies on the Frontiers of Spain, between Bearn on the East, the Landes on the North, and the Ocean on the West. This Country has in most tees little Corn and Wine, but is plentiful in Fruits, especially Pears and Apples, of which they make excellent Syder. It yields a great deal of Millet, and Physical Herbs of great Vir∣tue; Whales have been taken upon its Coasts; and there are Mineral Waters good for several Distempers. This Country reaches 17 Leagues East and West from Bidache to Fontarabie, but his extent North and South, is not above six or seven Leagues. The chief Places are, Bayonne Bish. St. J hn de Luz, Luisium, that is muddy places; Bidache, Siboule, &c. The City of Bayonne, Lapurdum, Boatium Ci∣itos, and vulgarly Baiona, lies on the Conflu∣ence of the Adour and Nive, which three Miles after disburthen themselves into the Sea. It has a Bishoprick Suffragan of Ausch, and is one of the Keys of the French Kingdom toward Spain; it is very rich because of its Trading and very strong. The word Bayonne comes from
Baie a Port, and from Juna which signifies goo in the Bask or Country Language, so that it as much as to say Good Port. 'Tis in the Cast of this City, called Lapurdum, that the Trib of the Novem Populan Cohort made his Re¦sidence; it is under the Seneschal's Jurisdictio of Dax. Near this City is a Hill on the top  which one may see part of three Kingdoms, vi of France, Castile, and Navarre. The Cathe¦dral is dedicated to the blessed Virgin, an St. Leon: There are many other Churches an several Monasteries: This Bishoprick was on extended into three Kingdoms, viz. France, N¦varre, and Castile; but in 1565. Philip II.  of Spain, obtained from the Court of Ro the dismemb ing of it, on behalf of Pampelu This Country had formerly its own Viscounts Ships of any rate come up the River which  very deep, as far as the middle of the City.
Of Lower Navarre. THE LOWER NAVARRE Borders on the Country of Labourd to the North-West, and West, on the Pyrenees to the South, and the Viscounty of Soule to the East. It is a Moun∣inous Country; which produces little Corn or Wine, and yields only Millet, Oates, Pears and Apples, of which they make Syder, that is the usual drink of the Inhabitants. Pasture ground is very good here, the flesh of Cattel very delicate, and the Wool very fine; Game both small and great is likewise very com∣mon. The most remarkable places are, St. Palais the Capital, St. John pie de Port, S. Johannes pyrenaei, Garris Garrucium, la Bastide de Cla∣rences. S. Palais, Fanum Sancti Pelagii is seated on the Rivers Bidouse, almost 12 Leagues South-East of Bayonne. It was the Seat of Chancery and Sovereign Justice before the Institution of the Parliament of Pau in 1620. it has still a Court of Mint, &c.
Of Soule. THE Viscounty of SOƲLE, Subola, is  little Country that makes part of Navarre and lies betwixt it and Bearn. There is no re∣markable place but Mauleon of Soule, which i its chief Town; called by the Latins Malle Oppidum, or Castrum, and is seated in the hear of it: It's the birth place of Henry Sponde Bi¦shop of Pamiez, who has continued the Annal of Baronius.
Of Bearn. BEARN, or Benearnensis pagus, with the Title of Principality, lies near the Pyrenees, bordering on the County of Bigorre to the East, Lower Armagnac to the North, the Precincts of the Provost of Acqs, Lower Navarre, and the Viscounty of Soule to the West, and the Moun∣tains of Arragon and Ronçal to the South. The chief Town of this Province is Pau; the other most remarkable are Benearnum, now Lescar Lascurris, Oleron Iluro, Nay, Ourtes, or Ortez, Navarreins, Morrane, Sauveterre, Pontac, San∣bege, Salies, and 434 Burroughs or Villages, 2 Bishopricks and 3 Abbeys. It lies betwixt 42 Deg. 50 Min. and 43 Deg. 40 Min. Latitude, and between 18 Deg. 50 Min. and 20 Deg. of Longitude; its greatest strength East and West being about 22 Leagues, and 20 North and South. There are two Principal Rivers called Gave, one has its source in the Mountains of Bareges in Bigorre, and is called the Gave of Bearn, and the other is that of Oleron, which is a com∣pound of the Gave of Alpe and Ossau, it has its source in the highest part of the Pyrenees, where Bearn is divided from Spain; these Rivers are not navigable, but the plenty of Fish they af∣ford, makes amends for it; from the highest Mountain of Ossau, one may see both the Seas and
the Mountains of Castile. The Soil is rendred fruitful, only by the labour and industry of the Inhabitants. By the care and piety of Ja Queen of Navarre, this Province and her other Countries embrac'd the Reformation; So tha after the reconciliation of Henry the Great her Son to the Church of Rome, the Sovereign Court of Pau petition'd the King, who would re-establish the exercise of the Roman Religion in their Country, that the Jesuits might be ex∣cluded from it, which was granted to them, and observed from the year 1599 to 1620, tha Lewis XIII. repealed this Edict against his Fa∣thers Murtherers. In 1684. Lewis XIV. for∣ced the Bearnois with Dragoons to abjure tha Holy Religion they had profest almost an Age. The City of PAƲ upon the Gave of Pau, or Bearn, with a Parliament, is pretty large and well built, and the native Place of Henry the Great; there is also a Court of Accounts, and a College of Jesuits: Pau lies 27 Leagues South East of Bayonne.
Of the County of Bigorre. THE County of BIGORRE, Bigerrones, or Bigerri, borders upon Armagnac to the North and East, on Bearn to the West, and part of Arragon to the South. Its length North and South from the Pyrenees to Marbouquet is above 22 Leagues, its largest breadth East-West 14, and in some places but 3 or 4 Leagues. It is divided into three parts, viz. the Mountains, the Plain, and the Rustan: The first contains two Principal Valleys, that of Lavedan, the o∣ther of Barege; the Plain is 5 Leagues long, and 1 broad: The Rustan has some little Hills along the River Arroz. The Mountains are like a rail betwixt France and Spain; there are four narrow and difficult passages, viz. Azun, Cau∣teres, Barege, and Campan, which the Inhabi∣tants are obliged to keep. This Country yields a great deal of Jasp and Slate; the Mountains have Silver, Iron, Copper, and Lead Mines, but they are not digg'd out. There are 3 Lakes, and 4 Principal Rivers, viz. Adour, Eschez, Ar∣roz, and Lavedan, which is composed of the Gaves of Barege, Cauteres, and Azun. Ene∣co Arista was in possession of this County in 828. before he founded the Kingdom of Na∣varre, and after many changes and revolutions
Henry IV. annexed it to the Crown by an Edict in the Month October 1607. The most remarkable places are, Tarbe Bish, Vic de Bigorre, Lourde, Campan, Rabasteins, Bagneres, Luz, Cauteres, &c. The City of TARBE, or Turba, or Tarvia, lies upon the Adour, 10 Leagues East of Pau, it's a plentiful Country with a Bishop Suf∣fragan of Ausch, and a Seneschal, the Cathe∣dral is under the name of our Lady. Lourde, has a good strong Castle; Benac is a Dutchy; Ba∣rege is famous for its Waters.
Of Comminge. COMMINGE, Pagus Convenicus, lies be∣tween Languedoc and Conserans on the East, Armagnac on the North, the County of Bigorre on the West, and the Pyrenees on the South. It is divided into upper, properly Comminge; and into Lower, or the Diocese of Lombez. This Country has had its own particular Counts be∣fore, it was annexed to the French Crown: It is pretty plentiful in Wheat, Oates, Wines, Pa∣stures, Fruits, and especially Walnuts, which yield great quantity of Oyl; it also abounds in all sorts of Fowl. The most remarkable places are, S. Bertrand of Comminge Bish. Lombez Bish. Montpezat, Rieume, Muret, S. Beat, Bagneres, S. Gaudens, L'Ile Dodon, &c. The City of S. BERTRAND of Comminge, or Convene, or Lugdunum Convenarum, lies upon the Garonne, 14 Leagues South-East of Tarbe, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Ausch, and a Royal Court of Justice, under the Seneschal and Parliament of Touluse, the Bishop Seat is in the States of Languedoc. Lombez, is one of the Bishopricks erected by Pope John XXII. in 1317. It's Suffragan to Toulouse, from which it is distant above 12 Leagues to the South-West, and 12 North of
S. Bertrand de Comminge. It's seated upon the Save, in a very fruitful Soil, bounded on one side with Hills, covered with Vineyards, and on the other with Plains, abundant in Corn and Hay. Of Conserans. COSERANS or Conserans, Pagus Consaran∣nensis, lies on the South of Comminge, pro∣perly so called, between Languedoc and the Py∣renees; 'tis a Viscounty, which is thought to have been possessed by Arnold of Spain, under the Title of a County, whence the House of Montespan, derives its Original. After that it went over to the Counts of Carcassonne, and from thence to the Kings of Navarre. The chief place is, S. LIZER of Conserans upon the Ri∣ver Salat, 13 Miles East of S. Bertrand de Com∣minge, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Ausch, and a Royal Court of Justice, under the Parliament of Toulouses. It is divided in two, viz. City and Town; the first is properly Coserans, with the Concathedral Notre-Dame; and the other is S. Lizier, where is also the other Concathedral of the same name; the Chapter consists of 12 Canons, of which the first is Archdeacon; of two Sextons, two Precentors, and one Almo∣ner, of 24 Priests Prebendaries, with a Parson in each of these two Churches, where the Ser∣vice
is perform'd at the same time. Conserans is said to be properly the Episcopal See, and that Valerius was its first Bishop, and S. Lizier Glycerius the Fifth. The other places of some note are S. Julian, Cazeres, Bonpaux, S. Girons, La Cour, Castillon.
CHAP. XIII. Of Languedoc. THis Government is separated from Pro∣vence and Dauphiné by the River Rhone on the East; it borders upon Auvergne, Rovergue and Quercy on the North; on the West and South-West the Garonne, and some Moun∣tains divide it from Gascony and Catalogne, and on the South it has the Mediterranean Sea. It is the first Province which the Romans con∣quered after Provence, and the Allobroges. In Caesar's time, Narbonne, one of the Capital Cities of this Government gave its name to Langue∣doc, Provence, Dauphiné and Savoy; but Augu∣stus divided it into two Provinces, the Viennoise and Narbonnoise, and this last was again subdivi∣ded into two, whereof the first is our Langue∣doc. Before Caesar, the Inhabitants were called Volcae, and subdivided into two powerful Na∣tions, viz. The Volcae Tectosages, who possest the Western or Upper Languedoc, from the Ga∣ronne, and the Pyrenees to the Cevennes and the Mediterranean Sea; and the Volcae Arecomici,
who enjoy'd Eastern or Lower Languedoc, from these Mountains and Sea to the Rhone. About the end of the 6th. Century, it began to be called Septimania from its 7 Capital Cities, viz. Tolosa, Toulouse, Biterrae, Beziers, Nemausus, Ni∣mes, Agatha, Agde, Magalona, Maguelonne, Leu∣teva, Lodeve, Ʋcecia, Ʋzès. By the Treason of Stilicon, the Romans were forced to yield to the Goths, all the first Narbonnoise, Catalogne, and a good part of Navarre and Aragon, where they settled themselves, and established the Kingdom of the Visigoths. It seems it is they who gave to the first Narbonnoise, the name of Septimania; and so jealous they were of that Title, that having lost by the Battel of Vouillé (where their King Alaric was killed by Clovis in 507. the Towns of Toulouse and Ʋzès, they supplied that number by the addition of Nar∣bonne and Careassonne. The Visigoths enjoyed Septimania above 250 years, which is the cause that it is sometimes call'd by the Latin Authors of the middle Age Gothia: Thence some derive the modern name of Languedoc, as tho it were said for Langue de Goth, or Langue-Goth, but this Etymology does neither agree with the spelling of Languedoc, nor with the appellation of Occitania and Lin∣gua Occitana, which the said Authors give it: And therefore I more approve of those, who observe that the French have been distinguished, time out of mind into Langue D'Ouy and Langue D' Oc, that is in such as say Ouy, and such as say Oc for Yes, the first living on this side, and the second on that side of the Loire. In process of time the Sirname of Langue D'Oc
was appropriated to Septimania, wherein it is more general to say Oc for Yes, than any where else. The French having expell'd the Goths beyond the Pyrenees, Charlemaign established Gover∣nors in Languedoc with the Title of Counts of Toulouse; of whom the first was one Corson in 778. The second was St. William du Court-Nez, or Aux Cornets, whence the Princes of Orange derive their pedigree, as may be infered from the hunting horn they bear in their Arms. This William, who lived about the year 790, foun∣ded the Abbey of St. William the Desart, in the Dioceses of Lodeve; wherein he took the Habit of Monk: After his death or retirement the State of Languedoc was very much troubled by the quarrels of the several pretenders, who ma∣king use of the weakness of the French Kings, endeavour'd to erect their Governments into Sovereign Principalities. Raimond-Pons Count of Toulouse in 907. made himself Proprietary of the Dutchy of Septimania, or Marquisate of Gothia; but not being able to subdue some particular Governours, as the Counts of Car∣cassonne, Melgueil and Foix; the Viscounts of Narbonne, Besiers, Agde, Nismes, Lodeve, Ʋzès, &c. who formerly depended on the Dukes of Septimania; and would now become Sovereigns as well as themselves; the Counts of Toulouse allow'd them to enjoy their Usurpations. In the mean while they acquired by Marriage, In∣heritance, or War, the Counties of Querei, Perigord, Albi, the Agenois, the Milhaud, the Gevaudan, the County Venaissin, Melgueil, Aste∣rac; nay they were sometime Marquesses of
Provence,Godefrid. Annal. as in 1235, and in that quality made homage to the Emperor. These Lords being so powerful, the French Kings were glad to make them the first Counts and Peers of their Kingdom, that by this Title of honour, they should be drawn to stick the closer to the French Interest. However this House remain'd not long in its lustre, for Raimond the 6th. sirnamed the Old, maintaining the persecuted Albigeois, as his Subjects, the fourth Council of Lateran excommunicated him, and gave his Estate to Simon Count of Montfort, in 1215. Amauri Son to Simon, dead in 1218, not being able to keep the unlawful Conquests of his Father, yielded them to the French K. Lewis the VIIIth. in 1224. Raimond the 6th. was dead two years before in 1222, and his Son Raimond the 7th. or the Young, perceiving that he could not withstand the whole power of Popery, thought best to re∣concile himself to the Church of Rome, as he did in 1228. At the same time he made a Treaty with K. Lewis the VIIIth, by which he betrothed Jane his only Daughter to Alfonse of Poictiers the King's Brother, upon condition that if they happened to dye without Issue; the States of the Counts of Toulouse should fall to the Crown of France; they both died without Children in the Month of August 1271, upon which, King Philip the Bold took possession of their Dominions; and in 1361. King John re∣united this Country to the Crown of France by his Patent Letters, which were confirmed in
in an Assembly of the General States of that Province. These States, the only ones that have yet any shadow of power, are made up of the 3 Orders of a Kingdom, namely the Clergy, the Nobility and the People; the Clergy is repre∣sented by the 22 Prelates of that Province, whereof 3 are Archbishops, and 19 Bishops; the Nobility Votes there by the Mouth of 22 Barons of the following Families, 1. Rieux, 2. Mirepoix, 3. Florensac, 4. Vauvert, 5. Castel∣nau d' Estrete Fons, 6. Capendu, 7. Haute-rive, 8. Confoulens, 9. St. Felix, 10. Ville, Neuve 11. la' Gardiole, 12. Lanta, 13. Alais, 14. Polignac, 15. Clermont, 16. Arques, 17. Cauvisson, 18. Gan∣ges, 19. Castries, 20. Castelnau de Bonnefons, 21. Ambres, 22. Ferrals. The People speaks in the Persons of 22 Consuls or Sheriffs, deputed out of the 22 Bishopricks. The Archbishop of Nar∣bonne is President born of that Assembly, which is seldom called for any thing else, but to give the King money, by laying besides the ordinary Taxes an extraordinary and heavy imposition, under the name of Don-gratuit, or free Gift. Languedoc, lies between 21 Deg. 16 Min. and 26 Deg. 10 Min. of Longitude, 41 Deg. 45 Min. and 45 Deg. of Latitude: It reaches 23 Leagues East and West from Beaucaire upon the Rhone to Rieux upon the Garonne, or 79 from Crussol upon the Rhone over against Valence in Dauphine to Castel-Sarasin on the Garonne, in the Diocese of Montauban. It's extent North and South is still more unequal from Moissac in Quercy to Lavet Coronat in the County of Foix, it is of 40 Leagues, of 53 from La Garde Biaur on the
Borders of Rouergue to beyond Prat de Mollo in Roussillon, and 50 from Serrieres in Vivarais to beyond Fort de Peccais near Aigues-mortes in the Diocese of Nismes. It is one of the most fruitful and healthful Provinces of France, divi∣ded into Upper and Lower Languedoc, and the Cevennes. The first comprehends the Toulousan, the Albigeois, the Lauragais and the County of Foix: The second is distinguish'd into 3 Pre∣cincts or Quartiers, that of Narbonne, of Beziers and of Nimes; the Cevennes are subdivided in∣to 3 Countries, Gevaudan, Vivarais, and Ve∣lay. Both parts of Languedoc produce great quan∣tity of Corn, that they use to carry into Spain and Italy; their Wines are delicious, and their Fruits most esteem'd, especially pickled Olives and Raisins. Their Salt-pits and Dyers-wood make up a considerable Trade, besides Azure, Saffron, Verdigrease, Vermilion or artificial Cinoper, Sope, Glasses, Box-trees, and seve∣ral Simples and Plants that are transported thence. The Air is so wholsome, that it is thought a specifick remedy against consumptions, chiefly about Montpellier, which temperature of the Heavens contributes not a little to make Women comely, and Men ingenious, as ap∣pears by the great number of Poets, either in French, Latin, or the Country-Language, and by some good Historians Languedoc has produc'd. Women, tho as honest here as in any other part of France, use a freedom of accosting Strangers (especially in Montpellier and Nismes) which would be thought immodesty elsewhere, but goes here under the name of gentleness, and
good manners. This Province feeds abundance of Sheeps, Goats, and Herds of Cattle, of Fowls and Beasts of Game; for though there be few Forrests in the Plains, yet besides, that all the North, North-East, and South-West is cover'd with Mountains, there is a Chain of them that crosses the Country from the Pyrenees to the Cevennes. What conduces most to the fertility of Lan∣guedoc are the many Rivers that water it; for besides the Rhone on the East, and the Garonne on the West, it has the Douine, that rises near Bourg-Argental in the Velay, washes Annonay, and falls into the Rhone between Andance and S. Val∣lier. The Douz rises in the Cevennes, and mixes with the Rhone at Tournon. The Eyrieu comes from the same Mountains, receives the Dorie at le Cheylars, the Gleure and the Orene, at les Oul∣lieres, goes by S. Fortunat, and discharges it self into the Rhone, between Beauchastel and la Voulte. The Scoutay runs into the same Ri∣ver at Viviers. The Ardesche is more conside∣rable than the former; it rises likewise in the Cevennes near Montpezat, receives the Volane and Bruens near Vals, washes Aubenas and Vauguel, then increas'd with the Leude, Beaune and Chas∣sezat goes by Salavas, Ayguese, and runs into the Rhone between Bourg S. Andiol and Pont S. Esprit. The Ceze takes its source from Mount Lozere, washes Ambroise, Monceus, Cornillon, Bag∣nols, and falls into the Rhone at Condoules, 5 Miles West of Orange. A mile lower is the Mouth of the Tave, that goes by Couvillargues and La∣dun. The Gardon or Guard, Vardo is made up of two Brooks both rising in the same Moun∣tains;
the most easterly is call'd le Gardon d' A∣luis, and the most westerly le Gardon d' Anduse from two Towns of that name which they go by; then uniting at Cassagnole and increas'd with some small Brooks, as the Droude, the Braume, the Aysene that comes from Ʋzès and receives the Alzon, they pass under the famous Pont du Guard, and fall into the Rhone, near the Island Valabregue, and the Town of Beaucaire. The Vistre or the River Nimes Nemausus as Au∣sone calls it, rises at the foot of a Hill near the Walls of that City, and increas'd with a Rivu∣let coming from some Mountains near Ledenon 3 Leagues Northwards, washes Bernis, Vauvert, Aymargues, La Caila, and discharges its Waters into the Pond call'd Laterna or Taurus Palus l'Etang du Tau, between Aigues-mortes and the Island Maguelonne. The same Pond, which reaches 18 Leagues East and West along the Mediterranean Coast, and has communication with that Sea by Grau du Roy and Grau de Pala∣vas, receives 8 or 9 other Rivers, among which the most considerable is the Vidourle, that rises in the Cevennes, goes by S. Hippolite, Sauve, Quissas, Ville-vieille, Sommieres, Marsiliargues, and has its mouth but a League West of that of the Vistre. The Berenge, the Cadoule, the Sa∣lonon, the Lez, or the River of Montpellier, the Caulazon increas'd with the Lamousson, the La∣verne, and the Palas deserve hardly to be nam'd. The Eraut, Arauris or Cyrta, rises in the Moun∣tains of Gevaudan, where it is increas'd with the Arré, washes Ganges, S. Bauzely, receives the Vis near Brisac, and the Buege near Pont S. Esteve, goes by S. Guillem le Desert, S. Jean de Foz and
Canet, where it mixes with the Lergue, increas'd by the Solondre, receives the Peyne at Pezenas, the Touque at S. Tubery, lets out a branch to Florensac, and another above Agde, below which its greatest Mouth mixes with the Mediterranean Sea. A League Westwards is that of the River Lerron, and 2 Leagues farther that of Orbe, which rises in the Diocese of Castres near a Village call'd Cellies de Languedoc, receives the Vicousan and the Mare at Bec de Rioux, washes Colom∣biers, la Voute, where it is increas'd with the Jaur, and the Vezenobre at Cessenox, goes by Beziers, Ville-neuve-la-Cremade, and falls into the same Sea near Serignan. The Aude, Atax, comes from the Pyrenees, washes Alet, Limoux, and Carcassonne, where it is increas'd with seve∣ral Rivulets join'd together as the Fresquel, the Vernassone, the Alzon, and having received the Ʋrviel and the Orbieu, separates into two Bran∣ches, three Miles above Narbonne, whereof the least being increas'd with the River Cesse runs into the Grau of Vendres, and the biggest pur∣suing its course towards Narbonne falls into the Pond of La Robine, Rubresus or Rubrensis Lacus. The Ariege or Auriege, Areia and Aregia rises in the Pyrenees, washes Aqs, Tarascon, S. Paul, Foix, Barilles, Pamiers, Sabaudin, where it re∣ceives the Lers, that comes from the same Mountains, goes through the Town and Dioceses of Mirepoix, and is increas'd in his way with the Lambroue at Chalabre, the Doudbuire at Rieu∣croix, and the Bosegue at Belpuech, then joyn'd with the Gabelle, they go by Cintegabelle, Haure∣rive, Lezat, where they receive the Leze, and unite with the Garonne at Portet, 5 Miles South
Toulouse. The Little or Petit Lers issues om a Mountain near Castelnaudary, goes by ardoux, Montesquiou, Baziegue, Mongiscar, re∣eives the Marquessone, the Sone, the Seillonre, he Girou; and falls into the Garonne near S. Jo∣ 7 Miles North of Toulouse. The Agout, Ago∣ rises in the Diocese of S. Pons de Tomieres, nd being increased with the Gigeou, and some ther Rivulets, washes Castres, receives the Du∣quc and the Thoret near it, goes by S. Pol, vaur, and somewhat lower the Agros, increas'd h the Denat, Oubus and Dadou, discharges its aters into it; then they mix together with e Tarn, Tarnis at S. Sulpice. The Tarn de∣ends from Mount Losere, in Gevaudan, passes y Montwert, Espagnac, Quessas, S. Eremie, S. bely du Tarn, Peyrebeau, where it receives the ate, and the Trevezel, with the Dourbie at lbaud, the Cernon between S. George and Com∣eignac, the Sergue, that goes through S. Fric∣e and Vabres at Brougnies, the Dordon hard by, he Alrance at Trebas, then washes Alby, Gaillac Rabastens, Villemur, Montauban, mixes with the veyrou near l'Isle-made, with the Lute and Lem∣ulas near Moissac, and runs into the Garonne, etween this Town and S. Nicolas. Here is, methinks, the proper place to speak f that Master-piece of Work, the Canal of Languedoc. The design was to convey Mer∣handizes from one Sea into another, a very seful undertaking, if it might be compleatly performed. It was begun in 1666 by Mr. Ri∣et, and the first Essay was made by his Sons n 1681. One would think, that it was not a very hard task, since the source of the little Lers, is
not above two Leagues from the Fresquel, that mixes with the Aude 3 or 4 Miles farther, and that there are Torrents and Rivers round about, whose course might easily be turn'd, to in∣crease, the Aude with them, and render it naviga∣ble; besides the Snow-water of the neighbour∣ing Mountains, that might be spar'd in Reser∣vers, Ponds, and Sluces. None of these things has been forgotten, for a canal has been digg'd of 127600 Toises, which make above 63 com∣mon Leagues of France, in length, upon 30 foot or 5 Toises in breadth every where. There are several surprising works, as the Reserver of S. Ferreol, which has above 2000 Toises in Circuit, and is 90 Foot deep in some places. It's used to receive, and to keep the Waters of the black Mountain, which are detain'd there, by a Causey and 3 strong Walls. These Waters fall into the Bason of Naurouse, which is 200 Toises long, and 150 broad, and lin'd all over with Free-stone. This Bason is digg'd in the high∣est place of the Canal, so that the included Wa∣ters may be let loose on both sides, and go each a contrary way. The Bridge of the Torrent Repudre is also considerable by the novelty of its use, for while Boats somewhat large row over this Bridge, which is 70 Toises long, built with Free-stone, and cover'd every where with 7 Foot of Water, the Rivulet runs under the Bridge: The Vault of Malpas is yet more sur∣prising, for it is a Rock pierced through, to give way to the Waters, that has eighty Toises in length, four in breadth and four and a half in heigth, and on both sides is a rais'd way to draw on the Boats.
Of Toulousan. THis Country included between the Rivers Aveyrou, Garonne, and Arriege, the County  Foix and Albigeois is 26 Leagues North and outh, but hardly 10 or 12 East and West: It ontains the Diocese of Toulouse, Montauban, La ur and S. Papoul, or the Country of L' Aura∣, of which I shall speak in the same or∣der.
Of the Diocese of Toulouse. THE ancient Inhabitants of Toulouse, the Volcae Tectosages filled up a far greater Coun∣try than this Diocese, and even the Toulousan; for their Dominions reached as far as the Nor∣thern end of the Cevennes; they confin'd to the very Santones or Saintonge, if we believe Caesar, and had the Mediterranean Sea, and the Pyre∣nees on the South. Their Territory abounded with Gold, which having raised a sedition a∣mongst 'em, such as prov'd the weakest went in search of a new Land under the Conduct of Brennus, and having landed in Phrygia, conque∣red the best part of it, which afterwards was call'd from them Galatia and Gallograecia. But a difference arising about the division of their Conquests; 20000 parted from Brennus, and went back to Thracia now Romania, headed by two of their Kings Lomnorius and Lutatius. These were as successful as their Confederates, for they overcame such as withstood them, made the others their Tributaries, and took Byzanice now Constantinople, the chief Town of that Country. Some time after, hearing of the riches of Asia, they past the Hellespont or Streights of Gallipoli; and taking hold of a Civil War, be∣twixt Tit. Liv. l. 38.
Nicomedes and Zybaen, who disputed the Kingdom of Bithynia, they assisted the first, who remained victorious by their help, then pursu∣ing their Conquests farther into Asia, tho from 20000 they were reduced to 10000, yet they brought such a terrour upon the neighbouring Nations, even beyond Mount Taurus, that they all submitted to their Empire. As they were issued from three Gaulish Nations,The two first are unknown: it seems they were neighbours or a branch of the Tectosagi, who per∣haps after their departure seiz'd upon their Coun∣try, and thus came the name of both to be lost. It may be that they liv'd in the Diocese of Alby, for the Albigeois, Albienses, are not mention'd by any ancient Geographer. Trocmi, Tosistobogii and Tectosagi; so they divided Less Asia into 3 parts, the Trocmi had the Borders of the Hellespont, the Tolistobogii Aeolis & Ionia, and the Tectosagi the inland Country, taking Acyra for the Seat of their Kingdom. These became so powerful, that they put even the Kings of Syria under contribution, and remain'd in that State, till they were overcome by a Ro∣man Consul Cneus Manlius Vulso in 565. of Rome. Ptolomy ascribes eight Capital Cities to the Gaulish Tectosages, viz. Toulouse, Collioure or Il∣liberis, Roussillon or Ruscino, Narbonne, Carcas∣sonne, Beziers, Cessero, esteem'd by some Castres, and by other S. Tubery, and Agde or Agatha. Speaking of Languedoc, I have observed the several changes of Masters and Governments, which Toulouse as the head of this Province has
undergone, so that I have but to mention, that even long after the French had conquer'd all Septimania, as under the Reign of Lewis the Meek, the Toulousan, Pagus Tolosanus, made up a distinct Country, as having been in the French hands long before the rest of Septimania. Toulouse, and its Latin name Tolosa are very ancient, for Caesar makes mention of the Tolo∣sates; but the time of its foundation is altoge∣ther uncertain: for those who ascribe it to one Tolus, Grand-child to Japhet are fabulous Au∣thors. As it came early under the domination of the Romans; so they pleased themselves in beautifying it with several stately Buildings, as a Palace, an Amphitheater, and a Capitole, which last honour they made common with Rome to two other Towns only, viz. Narbonne, and new Carthage or Carthagena; but there are no re∣mains of any of 'em. All what we know of that of Toulouse, is, that it was dedicated to Jupiter, built in a very high place, and still in being in the middle of the XIII Century, but made use of as a Town-house; for the Senators or Magistrates assembled there in Council, as Pe∣ter Maurice Abbot of Cluny relates in a Letter against the Petrobrusians. Thence probably it is, that the Sheriffs of this City are yet call'd Capitouls. Anciently they were 24 in number, who were reduced to 12 under Alfonse of Poi∣ctiers, last Count of Toulouse 6 for the City, and as many for the Burrough, and again to 4, and then to 6 in 1390. by an Edict of the French King Charles VI. to which two others were ad∣ded 1392, 5 for the City, and 3 for the Bur∣rough. In 1401, they were increased to 12,
8 for the City, and 4 for the Burrough, but in the very same year they were again reduc'd to 8, and 2 only left to the Burrough, which di∣ision has ever since subsisted. Aulu-Gellius relates, that Q. Servilius Cepio a Roman Consul, having taken and plunder'd Tou∣louse in 648 of Rome, found a great quantity of Gold in its Temples, but that all those who were partakers of this Booty, came to a Tra∣gical end. For Orosius says, that he sent this Treasure to Marseille, but caus'd all the Leaders to be put to death in the way, that he alone might enjoy it; which perfidious cruelty so meens'd the Romans against him; already in∣rag'd at his having been defeated by the Cim∣bres, that they confiscated his Goods, and bought Lands of it for the People. As for him he dy'd most miserably in Exile, whence came the Proverb habet aurum Tolosanum; he has of Toulouse's Gold, said of such whose riches did not prosper. Valerius Maximus assures, that this Booty was found in Marshes, and consisted in Wedges of Gold and Silver 15000 Talents worth; Orosius fixes it to the value of 100000 Found in Gold, and 110000 in Silver; but Ju∣stin increases it to 110000 Pound of Gold, and 5000000 of Silver; and adds, that it was the plunder which the Tectosages brought home from the expedition of Delphos; which last ac∣count is altogether fabulous, since such of the Tectosages, who went into Greece and Asia, ne∣ver returned back to their own Country, having either been kill'd or settled themselves there, as Polybius, Pausanias, Livy, and all the ancient Authors testifie. So that the matter of fact is
true, viz. that there was a vast quantity o Gold and Silver, in, or about Toulouse, which was taken away by Cepio, but it remains doubt∣ful whence it came; whether it had been ex∣tracted out of Mines they had in their Country, or gathered up through the course of many years by this industrious and warlike People, averse to Luxury and Expences, as Valerius Maximus qualifies them. Toulouse has twice had the honour to be the head of a Kingdom, under the Wisigoths before Clovis, and under Charibert, to whom Dagobert his Brother King of France, yielded the Tolosa, Quercy, Agenois, Perigord, Saintonge and Gas∣cony. As to the State of the Church, though the Cathedral be dedicated under the name of S. Stephen; yet S. Saturnin is thought to have been the first Bishop of it in the second Age, and to have been precipitated by the Heathens headlong the Capitole. Pope John XXII. ere∣cted this City into an Archbishoprick in 1317. and submitted to it the Bishoprick of Pamiez, with six Monasteries that he chang'd into Epis∣copal Sees, viz. Montauban, Rieux, Mirepoix, la Vaur, Lombez, and S. Papoul, of which the 5 last were formerly included within this Dio∣cese. The Parliament of Toulouse was instituted by the French King Philip the Fair, in 1302, and made sedentary by Charles VII. in 1442, or 1443, who subjected to it, all Upper and Lower Languedoc, and the 3 Countries of the Cevennes, besides some part of Guyenne and Gascony, as Quercy, Rouergue, Cominges, Gaure, Armagnac, Estrac, Lomaigne, Magnoac and Bigorre. This,
if we believe Du Chesne, was occasioned by a difference between the King and Matthew of Fix, Count of Chastelbon, Husband to Jane Daughter to the Earl of Cominges and Boulogne. The French Monarch pretended to be Heir to that Lady, and on that account he summoned them both to appear before his Parliament of Toulouse in 1442, and at the same time fixed there the Seat of that Sovereign Court. Besides the Parliament, there is an Office of Chancery, a Seneschalship and Presidial, whose Chief justice is call'd Juge-Mage, a Viguery, that is the same Court, which on this side the Loire is call'd Prevoté or Provostship; General Trea∣surers, and a Receiver General of the King's Dnesne. Add to this the Court of the Capi∣touls; who judg of all such things as belong to Police or the City Government; as appears by that they have lately condemnedSee the Journal des Savans Dec. 22. 1692. This happen'd on the 21 of July 1691. a pretended Hermaphrodite, but a real Woman, born in 1669, and call'd Margaret Mallaure, to be from hence∣forth cloath'd as a Man, and to bear the name of Antony Mallaure; because when she became 14 years of Age, it was given out, that she had more of the Man than of the Woman. This young Maid thus disguised against her will, came to Paris last Winter 1693, where the Physicians of that great City, more learn'd than those of Toulouse, discovered that it was but a sort of broken Belly, and having cur'd her of that Di∣sease: She presented a Petition to the French King, in order to reverse the Sentence of the
Capitouls against her, and to restore her to he natural Cloaths and Fame; which was granted The University for Civil and Canon Law wa instituted by Raimond VII. Count of Toulouse and endow'd with many fine Privileges by Pop John XXII. and by Innocent VI. who founded the College of S. Martial; the others as tha of Foix, Narbonne, Maguelonne, Pampelune, Pe∣rigord, Ste. Catherine, and Mirepoix have been founded by several Prelates and Noblemen. Toulouse will not yield to any City in France for bigness, magnificence or the number of In∣habitants, and 'tis not of late that it is grown so considerable, for in the fourth Century, Au∣sonius bestows on it the following Elogy. Non unquam altricem nostri reticebo Tolosam, Coctilibus Muris, quam circuit ambitus ingens, Perque latus pulchro perlabitur amne Ga∣rumna Innumeris cultam populis, confinia propter Ninguida Pyrenes & pinea Coebennarum, Inter Aquitanas Gentes & nomen Iberum: Quae modo quadruplices ex se cum effuderit urbes, Non ulla exhauste sentit dispendia plebis Quos genuit cunctos gremio complexa colonos. I shall never forget Toulouse, wherein I have been educated, whose large circuit is surroun∣ded with Brick-walls, and wash'd with the fine River Garonne; which is inhabited by a numberless People, whose Borders reach near the Snow of the Pyrenees, and the Pine-trees of the Cevennes, being seated between Aqui∣tain
and Spain; which, when four Cities shall flock out of it, it shall not feel the loss, nor be exhausted of People, if it but keep such Inhabitants as are born within its bo∣som. If this be the true sense, as it seems the most natural to me, Toulouse was doubtless one of the greatest Cities in the Gaules. Adrian de Valois pretends that these quadruplices Ʋrbes are four Countries, which had newly modo been added to the Toulousan, but he neither names them, nor gives any proof for it. Besides that, the Poet does not speak, as he supposes, in an absolute sense, or say that Toulouse has but late∣ly set out four Cities; on the contrary, his ex∣pressions are hypothetical, cum essuderit, that though it should happen so, however it would hardly feel the loss, provided it should keep do complexa fuerit, its native Inhabitants. The Romans used to solemnize Floral Games, at the beginning of May, in honour of the God∣dess Flora, but accompany'd with very disho∣nest shews: Those that the Toulousaans still ce∣lebrate, under that name, and at the same time, are only attended with such circumstances as are most proper to stir up vertue and ingenuity. A President and 4 Counsellors of the High Court of Parliament, with the eight Capitouls, and the other Magistrates of the City, come in their Nobes on the 1. of May, into the Council-hall, to hear the Poets recite their Verses; and on the 3d. day after a sumptuous Treat, and a Sonnet to be made immediately by the preten∣ders to the Prizes, who are included to that effect in a great Hall, these Prizes are distributed
by the plurality of Votes. They are three in num∣ber, and consist in so many golden Flowers each of the value of about 14 Pound; the first is a Columbine, call'd by the French Ancolie, and by the Languedocians, Eglantine; the second i a Mary-gold, and the third a Violet. The in∣stitution of those Games is variously reported  some ascribe it to a great Lady call'd Clemence Isaure, who bequeathed the greatest pat of her Estate to the Town-house upon that account, and whose Statue of white Marble is yet to be seen in the great Hall; but the Registers of Tou∣louse attribute it to seven Noble-men in 1324. Howsoever it be, this Solemnity is not only lau∣dable, but even worthy to be imitated by Prin∣ces, Commonwealths, and great Cities; for be∣sides that it would give an honest diversion and emulation to the ingenious; it would be as a Touch-stone to know the several degrees and abilities of understanding Men; for extraordi∣nary Poets are for the most part uncommon Genius's, and might successfully be employ'd in weightier undertakings. Toulouse is divided into two parts by the Ri∣ver Garonne, and into 8 Wards in reference to its 8 Capitouls. The first is the Daurade, so call'd from a very ancient Church under the name of our Lady, that was formerly a Tem∣ple of the Sun. This Precinct comprehends several Churches, Monasteries and Colleges, the Pest-house, and the Suburb of S. Cyprian with the great Hospital of S. James. The second Ward bears the name of S. Ste∣phen the Metropolitan Church, built in a great Market, adorn'd with a fountain, upon which is
rais'd a fine Obelisque. In 1609. this Church was all burn'd except that part, which is call'd the Cloyster, and has 'till some Gothick Sta∣tues of half emboss'd work. It has since been rebuilt statelier than before, with a great and high Tower, wherein hangs the Bell Ardaillac, which is so very big that they dare not ring it, lest the Belfrey should fall; besides 14 vaulted Chappels round about the Quire: There are al∣so the Archbishop's Palace, the Town-house or Capitole, adorn'd with the Pictures of the En∣tries of the French Kings within Toulouse, and of the Capitouls in their Robes, the Arsenal, the Chappels of the white and blew Penitents, with several Churches, Convents, and Colleges. The Old-Bridge gives its name to the third Ward, and is but a course piece of Building, worthier of the Goths than of the Romans. The New-bridge which is far finer, doth hardly yield to that of Paris; and no wonder since it was begun in 1544, and but ended about the middle of this Age. In this Precinct are the Exchange, the Court of the Provost, and Consuls of Merchants, and the Cage wherein Blasphemers are included to be drown'd into the Garonne. The fourth Ward, call'd La Pierre, or the Stone, has nothing considerable. The fifth takes its name from the Church Dalbade, en∣joy'd by the Fathers of the Oratory, since the year 1620. There are besides the Inquisition; a place well known by the cruelties against the Albigeois, near which is a round Castle, esteem'd by Du Chesne to be a remainder of the ancient
Capitole; the Island S. Antony form'd by the Garonne, and inhabited by Handicraft-men. The sixth Ward call'd S. Pierre des Cuisines, has among other Churches and Monasteries, that of the Franciscans, sirnamed Observantins, which exceeds all the rest in bigness and sum∣ptuosity, but is especially renowned for a Cave, which consumes Dead-bodies, without anointing the Skin, and displacing the Joynts. Here is the University, with the College of Foix, founded by Peter Cardinal of Foix, and endow'd with two Libraries, one of Mss. and the other of Printed Books, that of Narbonne, founded by Gambert Archbishop of Arles and Narbonne in 1342, that of L'Equille, begun in 1561, and ended 1608 at the expences of the Town, for teaching the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Tongues. Here are also the Mills of the Basacle, whose Workmanship is esteem'd one of the greatest curiosities of Toulouse. This place, in Latin Vadaculum, that is small foord, gives likewise its name to a Bridge and a gate, hard by the Castle. The seventh Ward call'd S. Bartholomew, has the Castle Narbonnoise, which was the ordi∣nary Residence of the Counts of Toulouse, and a very strong place before K. Charles VII. Now it is the Palace of the Parliament, with the Hall of the Pleas, the Marble-Table, the Pri∣sons call'd Hauts-murats, the Court of the Ex∣chemier and the Mint, where Money is coyn'd and mark'd at the Letter M. The eighth Ward, under the name of S. Ser∣nin or Saturnin, an ancient Collegiate Church, defended by Guns at the top of it, so plac'd,
that none of the many Pillars, which under∣prop the Building, can cover a Man from their Shot. This they do because of the great Treasure, that is included in this Church, for there are above 50 Silver-skreens wash'd over with Gold, besides the Jewels and Church-orna∣ments. Here are the Tombs of the ancient Counts of Toulouse, of its Prelates and Nobility. Five Miles North-West of this City lies the Village or Lordship of Pibrac, which I mention here, for having giv'n its name to a Toulousan Gentleman, Gui du Faur Lord of Pibrac, Presi∣dent of the Parliament of Paris, and Ambassa∣dor of France to the Council of Trent, and then to Poland, under Charles IX. and Hen. III. He has left, several loose Discourses and pieces of Poetry, but the most renown'd are his Mo∣ral Quatrains, which for their brevity, majesty, and if I may so speak, sententiousness, may still challenge the first place, among all which has been written in this kind by uninspired Men. It appears by several passages of this golden Book, that the Author was not at all addicted to the Superstitions of Rome, though he never publickly embraced the Reformation, no more than divers other Great and Learned Men of his time, who seem'd to approve of the Doctrine, but did not like the manner of propogating it. Seven Miles South-west of Toulouse lies the Village of Plaisance, so call'd from the goodness of its Air, Soyl, and Situation. Adrian de Va∣lois supposes it to be the Vernus Sol of Aethicus, but I rather take it for a place call'd Vernouse,
which lies just 15 Italian Miles South-west of Toulouse, as the Vernus Sol of that Geographer. I find nothing considerable of the other pla∣ces of this Diocese, as Montoriol, Vieille Toulouse, S. Jori, Columiers, Castel-moron, Ville-Longue, Ville-neuve, Montagut, Montgaillard, Verseuil, Lenta, Carmain, with the title of a County. Of the Diocese of Montauban. MOntauban, Mons Albanus, is one of the 6 Bishopricks of Pope John XXII's erection. It was formerly a Monastery founded by Theo∣dard Archbishop of Narbonne, and when it was made a Cathedral, the Abbot Bertrand du Puy was the first Bishop of it. As to the Town, it was but at the beginning a very strong Ca∣stle, which in process of time increas'd into a considerable City by the fertility of its Soyl, and the conveniency of its Situation upon a Hill, and the Rivers Tescounot and Tarn, on the high way from Toulouse to Limoges, and thence to Paris. It was built or repair'd in 1144, and united to the French King's Domesne in 1171▪ to whom Amaury Count of Montfort yielded since his pretensions. Montauban is divided into three parts, the old Town along the Tarn, Ville-Bourbon on the other side of that River in Languedoc, which is joyn'd to the old Town by a brick Bridge. The new Town
is towards Cahors: Thus both the Old and New Town are in the Querci, but the rest of the Diocese in Languedoc; whence it comes, that its Bishops has right to sit in the Estates of both Provinces. The Protestants were Masters of Montauban, from 1562 to 1621, that it was taken from them by Lew. XIII. They had here an Aca∣demy or College for Languages and Divinity, and it was one of the surety's Towns, which Henry IV. yielded to them. But Cardinal de Richelieu designing to run down all the orders of the Realm, began by asking from the Pro∣testants, to deliver their Towns of surety, which they justly denying; Montauban was twice be∣sieg'd in vain; but at last discord creeping a∣mongst 'em, and being betray'd by some great ones; as the Duke of Lesdiguieres, it was taken at the third Siege, and its strong Fortifications raz'd in 1629. Montauban has an Election and a generality of Treasurers, on which the Ele∣ctions of Cahors and Figeac are depending. Be∣tween the City and the Suburb of S. Antony is a fine Fountain call'd Griphon, that has 10 Pipes, and furnishes all the Inhabitants with water. This Town prov'd the death of two of the most renowned Captains of the French K. Char. VII. during his Wars with the English. The other places of some note in this Dio∣cese, are Castel-Sarrazin, built in the time of Charles Martel to oppose the incursions of the Sarracens, Montech, Frignan, Villemur, where the French King Henry the Great's Forces got a signal Victory over the Leaguers, headed by the Duke of Joeuse, who was drown'd in the Tarn, in 1592.
Of the Diocese of La Vaur. LA Vaur, which some spelt Lavaur, and others l'Avaur, Vaurum Castrum, is one of the new Suffragans of Toulouse, and lies six Leagues of Languedoc, or 8 of France Eastward of it, upon the River Agout. It was already a considerable Castle in the time of the Albi∣geois, and depended upon the Bishops of Tou∣louse, one of whom, nam'd Isrne gave it to Florard, Abbot of S. Pons de Tomieres, on condi∣tion that he should found there a Priory of re∣gular Canons of S. Austin, under the name of S. Alain, as also he did. This Monastery was afterwards erected into a Bishoprick in 1318, and Roger of Armagnac was its first Prelate. It contains 69 Parishes. In 1213, the Papists held there a Synod against Peter of Arragon, who maintain'd the Albigeois. Puy-Laurens, Podium Laurentii, that is the Mountain of Laurence is situated upon a Hill 9 Miles South-East of La Vaur, and 11 Leagues of Toulouse. It had formerly the Title of a Dutchy, and some years before the last Perse∣cution of the Protestants, their Academy of Montauban had been transferr'd thither, both to make 'em uneasie, and to depress the luster of Montauban. However they had here of late
a famous Professor of Divinity — Martel, who answer'd the method of Cardinal de Ri∣chelieu. William of Puy-Laurens, Chaplain to Raymond the young Count of Toulouse, who has written a Chronicle, wherein he makes the Hi∣story of the Albigeois, was a Native of this Town. But this Chronicle is now extraordina∣ry rare, the Papists having us'd all endeavours to suppress it, because he is too sincere in rela∣ting the Opinions and behaviour of these pre∣tended Hereticks. Soreze, Soricinium, or Saricinium, seems to have its name from the multitude of Mice Sori∣ces, that infested the Country, according to Adrian de Valois, or rather from the small Ri∣ver Sr, upon which it lies 7 Leagues South of La Vaur. It has a very ancient Abbey of S. Bennet's Order, mention'd in a Decree of Lewis the Meek, as one of them that were bound to say Prayers for the Emperour's welfare. The other most remarkable places in this Diocese are, Viterbe Viterbium, S. Pol separated from Lamiate another Town in Albigeois, by the Agout, Rocque-Vidal, Semalens, Vuviers, So∣uarz, la Bruguere, Massagnet, Arsons, S. Alby, Mazamet, Aupoutz Altus-pullus.
Of Lauragais. THE Country of Lauragais, Lauriacensis, or Lauracensis Pagus, takes its name from the Village Laurac Lauriacum, near the source of the Little Lers, or accord∣ing to others, who spell it l'Auraguais from the Town and Barony of Auriac, which is said to have been its Capital, and lies 8 Leagues South-East of Toulouse. In 1258, this Country be∣long'd to James King of Arragon, who yielded it to the French King Lewis IX. but in 1478, Lewis XI. erected it into a County, and gave it to Bertrand of La Tour Count of Auvergne. Afterwards it fell by Inheritance to Catherine of Medicis Wife to the French King Henry II. and then to Queen Margaret their Daughter, who made a gift of it to Lewis XIII. Dauphin of France, on condition that it should for ever remain united to the Crown. Lauraguais abounds in Pastel or Dyers-Wood, which is the chief Trade of the Country; as likewise in quails better than those of Italy, in July, August, and September. Castelnaudary, Castrum novum Arii, upon the Fresquel, 12 Leagues South-East of Toulouse is accounted the Capital. It's situated in a fruitful Soyl, and the Manufacture of Woolen-Cloaths contributes
much to its Riches. It has a Presidial erected by Henry II. in 1553, in behalf of his Queen Countess of Lauraguais. Some twenty years ago, Lewis XIV. to vex the Protestants trans∣ferr'd thither from Castres, their Chamber of the Edict. It was in the Plains of Castelnaudary that the Mareschal of Schomberg defeated the Troops of the Duke of Orleance, on the 1. of September 1632, and took Prisoner the Duke of Montmorency, who was since Beheaded at Tou∣louse. S. Papoul, S. Pappulus, or S. Pappolus, on the source of the small River Lampt, 3 Miles North-East of Castelnaudary, and 13 Leagues South-East of Toulouse. It was formerly a famous Monastery, mention'd in the Constitution of the Emperour Lewis the Meek in 817, and since erected into a Bishoprick Suffragan to Toulouse, by Pope John XXII. The Town is not very large, and the whole Diocese has but 45 Pa∣rishes. The other places of this Diocese are, Ville-Franche de l'Auraguais, which Sanson puts in the Diocese of Toulouse, but De Valois under this Bishoprick, le Mas Saintes Puelles, Mansum S. uellarum, Vignonet, Avenio Castrum, Ville∣peinte. Fagnaux is reck'ned in Lauraguais, but depends on the Bishop of Mirepoix. It's call'd in Latin Fanum Jovis, Fan-jaux from a renown'd Temple of Jupiter that was built there.
Of Albigeois. THis Country comprehending the Diocese of Alby and Castres, has those of S. Pons, Car∣cassonne, and La vaur on the South and South-West, those of Montauban, Cahors and Rodez on the North and North-West, and those of Vabres, Lodeve and Beziers on the East, and reaches 17 or 18 Leagues East and West, and 21 North and South. Du Chesne takes its an∣cient Inhabitants for the Helvii of Caesar, who are rather those of Vivarais, and Sanson for the Fleutheres or Heleutheres, subject to the Au∣vergnats, as well as those of Quercy, Gevaudan and Velay; adding withal that the Cambolectri, whom Pliny places in Aquitania, inhabited the Diocese of Alby, and the Cambolectri Atlantici the Diocese of Castres. But as he grounds his conjectures upon no certain foundation, so they are rejected by De Valois. We have already seen that the Tectosages fill'd up all the We∣stern part of Languedoc to the very Cevennes and the Mediterranean Sea, and consequently that the Albigeois might well be the ancient Tolistobo∣gii or Trocmi, Neighbours, Allies, or Subjects to the Tectosages. I have observ'd in the first part of this Book, how the Disciples of Vigilantius, spread in
Guyenne and Languedoc, were for a long time as a Bank, that stopp'd the overflowing supersti∣tion. But when this Torrent grew so strong, that this Barrier prov'd too weak, God rais'd, new Defensors to his Church. At the begin∣ning of the XII. Century, Peter of Bruys, a Na∣tive of Dauphiné, Preached and writ success∣fully against the prevailing Errors, and was hap∣pily seconded by Henry, a Monk of Toulouse. The Papists had recourse to their usual Arms, Fire and Sword, by which means they both got the Crown of Martyrdom. But their Blood prov'd, as well as that of the first Christians, the Seed of the true Church; so that after the Dispersion of Valdo's Disciples about 1160, some ofem retiring in those parts, they were kind∣ly receiv'd. The vulgar had so good an Opi∣nion of them, that they commonly call'd them les Bons Hommes; the Good Men, and even Ray∣md the old Count of Toulouse, Peter King of Arragon, the Counts of Foix, Comminges and the Viscounts of Bearn spoused their Cause. And as Error and Vice are always timorous, so the Popes began to fear that their fatal day was come, and publish'd a Croisade against those pretended Hereticks, as though they had been Heathens or Mahometans. The Albigeois, under the Wings of their Lords and Protectors defended themselves almost an Age, but at last they were over-pow'red by the number, the French King's catching hold of that opportunity, to deprive those petty Soveraigns of their Principalities. Then it was that such as had escap'd the Sword in the Field of Battel, fell in the bloody hands of the Inquisitors, who at long run made an
end of them; however not so, as wholly to root the seeds of the truth out of their heart, which sprouted out again, when our first Reformers appear'd in the last Age; for then the Provinces of Languedoc and Guienne, the ancient Seat of the Albigeois, produced more Converts than all the others of France taken together. We have hardly any Account of the Albi∣geois, then by such as were their sworn Enemies, Accusers, or rather Executioners; so that upon the plain confession of Popish Authors, that the Albigeois held almost all the same Doctrines with the Protestants, and that they rejected the same Superstitions, for which the last are still divided from the Church of Rome, we might look as Calumnies some Manichean Tenets as∣crib'd to them, as to deny the Divinity of the Old Testament, to admit a good and a bad Principle, &c. But to clear these Christian Hero's for ever, we have but to observe that the Manicheans having been banish'd the East by the Greek Emperours, they first spread them∣selves into Germany; thence they passed into Italy and France, where meeting with a People averse from Persecution, they▪ readily crept and skulk'd amongst them; and the malicious Inquisitors catching some of these Hereticks, took hold of this occasion to defame the true Albigeois. The R. D. Allix has given such in∣contestable proofs of these Matters of Fact, that I cannot imagine that a Roman Catholick of any sincerity will ever renew such notorious Calumnies. ALBY, Albia or Albiga Capital of this Coun∣try lies upon the River Tan, 17 Leagues North-East
of Toulouse, and 14 South-East of Montau∣ban. Its Foundation and Antiquity are un∣known, for no antient Geographer remembers it, and the first mention of it that De Valois could find is in an old Notice of the Gaules, which puts Civitus Albiensum in the fourth place among the 8 Cities of the first Aquitain, though some of latter date name it but the seventh in Order. Gregory of Tours testifies that one Salvius was Bishop of Alby, under the Chil∣dren of Clovis, and another call'd Sabinus sub∣scrib'd to the Council of Agde in 506. but whe∣ther S. Clair a Martyr planted there Christia∣nity▪ and was the first Bishop of that Town is uncertain. Charlemaign having erected Aqui∣ into a Kingdom, on behalf of Lewis the Meek his Son, establish'd Counts in the Prin∣cipal Cities, who together with the Bishops were to be the young Prince's Counsellours, and Aimoin was nam'd the first Count of Alby. All these Counts having made themselves Sove∣raigns, during the decay of the French Monar∣chy; the Estate of the Counts of Alby pass'd by marriage into the House of Toulouse, and then both returned to the French Kings, by the  I have hinted speaking of Languedoc. Alby has been a long time a Suffragan to Bour∣ and one of the richest Bishopricks in France▪ being about 50000 Crowns worth; but  it was made a Metropolitan by Pope cent XI. in behalf of Hyacinthe Serroni, a Roman Gentleman, and the Dioceses of Rodez, Castrer, Cahors, Vabres and Mende, detached from Bourges, to whose Prelate has been given a recompence of some additional Revenues.
The Archbishop of Alby is still Lord temporal of that City, and the King has but there a Vi∣guier for his Chief Justice. The Cathedral un∣der the name of S. Cecile has one of the finest Quires in that Kingdom. The other Towns or considerable Burroughs of this Diocese, are Pennes upon the Aveyrou, Cordes, Monestier, and Caramous upon the Ce∣ron, Pampelone upon the Biaur, Gaulene, and Valence near the source of the Ceron; Tais, Ma∣illat, Ville-neuve, Cajousac, Castelnau de Montmi∣rail, and Peucelsy upon the Vere; Rabasteins, l'Isle, Gaillac, la Bastide de Lenis, Lescure and Trebas upon the Tarn on the North side; Gri∣oussens, Cadelens, Denat, Albain on the South of that River, Lombers on the Assou, Realmont on the Dadou, &c. Gaillac is famous for its white Wines, whose Drunkenness is not felt but an hour after the Debauch. At Rabasteins was fought a memorable Battel between the Duke of Berri, and the Count of Foix, in 1381. Castres, the second Bishoprick contain'd in Albigeois, is seated on the Agout nine Leagues South of Alby, and 16 East of Toulouse. Both the Town and the Bishoprick are new, for we find no mention of the Town in ancient Geo∣graphers; only the Historians of the Albigen∣ses, as Peter the Monk mention it as an illu∣strious Castle, under the name of Castra, and as the head of the Country of Albigeois. As to the Bishoprick it was erected by Pope John XXII. in 1317, instead of the Abby of S. Vincent, whose body was secretly convey'd from Valence in Spain hitherto, by Audald a
Monk of Gascony in 858, if we believe Aimoin-Castres has still the name of a County, and has been possest under that Title by the Counts of Mountfort, and then by those of Armagnac; the last of whom James of Armagnac was behead∣d under Lewis XI. in 1417. This King gave t to one Bouffil of Juges his Lieutenant in Rus∣n, but under Francis I. it was re-united to the French Crown. In the time of its Counts, Castres had a Seneschal Comtal, and a Judg of Appeals, but now all its Officers of Justice are resorting to the Seneschalship of Carcassonne. The French King Henry IV. had establish'd there  Chamber of the Edict or a Sovereign Court, consisting of Counsellors, one half Protestants nd the other half Roman Catholicks; but ewis XIV. transferr'd it to Castelnaudary, and then abolish'd it with all the others in 1679. un∣der pretence of uniting it to the Parliament of Toulouse. This Town divided into two parts by he River Agout, was taken by the Reformed  1567, and is very much known by the Ma∣factory of Crapes. It has several Churches nd Monasteries, especially a Chartreuse, or Convent of Carthusians hard by the City. The Bishop's Palace is a very sumptuous Building. There is a great huge Rock call'd the Rock of Lu∣el, two Leagues from Castres, that is worth ta∣ing notice of, if it be true what I am assured y Mr. Boyer a Gentleman of parts, and a N∣re of that Country, viz. that it may b  y any ones Hand or Finger, though it st movable, when Carts and Coaches go  it,  it lies under a Bridge.
I shall here subjoyn another observation communicated to me, by that ingenious pro∣moter of Learning Sir Theodore de Vaux, Physi∣cian to the Late King Charles II. Fellow of the Royal Society, concerning the Mountain of the Priapes as they call it, that lies betwixt Castre and Carcassone, much out of the road: It is  little Hill amongst other Hills, where th Stones are shap'd like Mens Yards, with two Stones perfectly made; some great like those o big Men, some like Boys, and some like Children We gathered, said he, amongst us above 40 o them, some of which I gave during my Tra∣vels in sundry places, to the curious to pu them into their Closet of Rarities. Amongs others I presented Caualier del Puzzo a Virtuos of Rome, with one very much resembling the na¦tural parts of a Man of middle Age. Thes Stones being broken, there is a vein of Crist in the midst. I gave one to King Charles I not so big as that at Rome, but of as exact shape. I had many of them at Padoa, bu our Maid that found them on a Shelf flu some of them away, and others she broke thinking we had put them there to laugh a her; one broken I gave to the Royal Society with one that is made like a Womans thin the earth round about this place is a Sand lik blood almost. The reason of this I leave to Ph¦losophers; observing only that the Inhabitan use to ascribe it to a Celestial Influence, fo want of a more proper cause. So far my wo¦thy Friend, whose relation I have inserte here the rather, that I never saw nor hear before of any thing like it.
Three Leagues North-West of Castres lies the small Town of Lautrec, with a ruined Castle, and the Title of a Viscounty, that has been born by the Counts of Foix, and since by se∣veral illustrious Families in Languedoc. This Town is seated upon a Mountain that produ∣ces excellent Wines, and the Chapter of S. Pe∣ter of Burlas has been transferred thither. The other places are, Briateste, Graulhet, and Mondragon upon the Dadou, Venais, S. Germier, and Roque-courbe near Castres, Brassac, and Ca∣stelnau de Brassac; Pierre-Seguade, Viannes and La Caune upon the Gigeou, La Salvetat, Boisses∣son de Murviez, and S. Gervais.
Of the County of Foix. THis County comprehending the Dioceses of Rieux, Pamiez, and Mirepoix, has that of Toulouse on the North, those of S. Papoul, Car∣cassonne, and Alet on the East, part of Cata∣logne on the South, and the Counties of Con∣serans and Comminges on the West. It reaches 20 Leagues South and North from Lavet Coro∣nat, near the source of the Arriegue, to its mix∣ing with the Lers, between Sabaudun and Cal∣mont, and 14 or 16 East and West. This Country has had its particular Counts issued from the Earls of Carcassonne during six Ages. Bernard I. if we believe the Learned De Mar∣ca, was the first Count of Foix in 1012. Rai∣mond Roger the Sixth, in order took the part of the Albigeois, about the beginning of the XIII. Century. It's reported that as in a con∣ference, betwixt the Roman and these true Ca∣tholicks, the Sister of the Count would speak in behalf of the last, a rough Monk Stephen of Minia told her most uncivilly, that She ought to go and spin from her distaff, and not to meddle with Religious Matters, whereupon the ingenious Princess reply'd that the very Stones will speak where Men keep an unworthy silence, and that she must needs discharge a Duty, which
he was either unable or unwilling to perform. The zealous Count lost a great part of his Estate in this quarrel; but his Son Roger Bernard II. to preserve the rest, reconcil'd himself to the Church of Rome, and made Peace with the French King Lewis IX. in 1246. The Counts of Foix became afterwards more powerful, and acquired either by Marriage or Inheritance the Viscounties of Bearn and Chastelbon, the Lord∣ships of Grailly and Albret, and even the King∣dom of Navarr, till all these Dominions and Estates past into the House of France, by the coming of Henry IV. to that Crown. This County has several Quarries of fine Marble and some Silver Mines. FOIX upon the Arriegue, Fuxum has the Title of a County and Peerdom, erected by Charles VII. in behalf of Gaston of Foix, in 1458. It has an election, and is the Seat of a Seneschal, and of the Estates of the Province. It lies near the Pyrenean Mountains, 17 Leagues South of Toulouse, and resorts for the spiritual to the Bishop of Pamiers. Pamiers, Apamia, upon the same River, 4 Leagues North of Foix, and 13 South of Tou∣louse, was anciently a Town called Fredelac, where the Counts of Carcassonne, foundd in the 8 Age an Abby of Regular Canons of S. Au∣stin, under the name of S. Antonia. De Valois esteems him to be the same who has written an Itinerary, or a Journal of his Travels from France to the Holy Land through Italy; but at the same time he quotes an ancient Martyrolo∣gy, wherein this S. Antonin is said to have suf∣fer'd Martyrdom at Pamiers by the Heathens,
V. Nonas Sept. or the 2. of September, but the Year is not mention'd; so that the whole re∣mains uncertain. Sure it is, that this Towr had already a considerable Castle, in the time of the Albigeois, whose Historians call it Apa∣mia and Apamiae, that in 1149, Roger Bernard Count of Foix, presented the Abbots of S. An∣tonin, with the Town and Castle of Pamiers, and that in 1296 Pope Boniface VIII. erected this Abby into a Bishoprick, in behalf of Ber∣nard Saisseti the Abbot. The French King Phi∣lip the Fair did not like this election, and gave the Bishoprick to one Lewis of Provence, who dy'd in 1298: After his death he consented to the reinstallation of Saisseti; but was so in∣cens'd at a Speech this Prelate made to him, that he caus'd him to be arrested in 1301, and put under the guard of its Metropolitan the Archbishop of Narbonne, who was then at Court. Pope Boniface took fire at it, sent John of Nor∣mandy Archdeacon of Narbonne to get Saisseti at Liberty; but he was deny'd it, and the Holy Father's Thunderbolts despis'd; so that after Boniface's death the imprison'd Prelate was fain to beg the King's pardon, upon which he was releas'd. Some years ago, a late Bishop of Pamiers has been a great Confessor of Jan∣senism, and of free Elections, maintaining the Rights of his Church under the Protection of Pope Innocent XI. against Lewis XIV. and the Jesuits. This Town was submitted to the new Archbishop of Toulouse, by Pope John XXII. and in the last Age fell under the Power of the Protestants. It is divided into 6 Wards, each of which has his Consul or Sheriff.
You have besides in this Diocese the Towns of Mazeres, upon the Lers, Maceriae, so call'd from the slight Buildings they were made of at first, as well as Maizieres in Rhetelois, Maziers or Mazerocles in Ponthieu and Mezieres en Brenne. It has a ruin'd Castle which has been sometime the Residence of the Counts of Foix. Montaut lies 3 Miles South of Mazeres, and 5 North of Pamiers. Sabaudun or Saverdun, is made up of 4 little Towns, most of them ruined; its si∣tuation is pleasant, and the Earls of Foix have oft dwelt in it. Barilles Vatillae, S. Paul, Ta∣rascon, Castrum Tarasco, different from Taras∣con upon the Rhone, and Acqs from Dax or Acqs upon the Adour, are seated upon the Ar∣riegue. On the South-side of that River you meet with Chateau-verdun, vic de Soz, whence the best Iron in France is extracted. Saurac, Ca∣stelnau, le Mas d' Azil, Azilium, or Mansum Azili, with an ancient Abby of Benedictins, which Du Val puts in the Diocese of Rieux: Then you find Serberat, les Bordes, Carlac and S. Ibar. Mirepoix, Castrum Mirapicis, or de Mirapice, one of the new Bishopricks, lies upon the Lers 11 Miles South-East of Pamiers, 12 North-East of Foix, and almost 15 South-West of Castel-naudary. In 1210, Simon Count of Montfort took this Town from the Albigeois, and be∣stow'd it upon Guy Lord of Levi, with the Title of Marshal of the Faith, whose posterity has ever since enjoy'd Mirepoix, and its Territory, erected first into a Barony, and then into a Marquisate. In 1390. Roger Bernard of Levis yielded to the King of France, one half of the
Jurisdiction he had upon the Castle of this Town and some of its dependencies, for which he got some other Lands. These Gentlemen pretend to be a kin to the Blessed Virgin, as issued from the Tribe of Levi; but I do not know how they prove it. On this Diocese are farther depending Bel∣puech, that is Fair Hill, for Puy, Puech and Pit, signifie as much as Mountain or Hill, Laurac, Le Carlat, Fagnaux Fanum Jovis, Rieucros, Liber∣tat, Leyran, Chalabre, le Peyrat, Mirabel. Bel∣lestat near the source of the Lers has a Foun∣tain, which ebbs and flows. Rieux, Rivi, has taken its name from its Si∣tuation, on the fall of the Rize into the Ga∣ronne. It is one of the Bishopricks of Pope John XXII's Foundation, of which Pilefort of Rabastens Cardinal was the first Prelate in 1318. This Diocese has besides the Town of Fueillans upon the River Touche, with an Abby Chief of the Order of Cisteaux, Calers another Abby of Cisternian Monks, Lezat of Benedictins, Salan∣gues of Cisternian Nuns. Carbonne, Montesquiou de Volvestre, S. Sulpice, &c.
CHAP. XIV. Of LOWER LANGUEDOC. Of the Precinct of Narbonne. NARBONNOIS, as comprehending the Dioceses of Alet, Narbonne, Carcassonne, and S. Pons de Tomieres, has Albigeois on the North, the Precinct of Beziers on the East, the Mediterranean Sea on the South; the County of Foix, and Lauragais on the West. Alet, Electa, or Alecta upon the Aude, is both a new Town, and a new Bishoprick, as are most of the others erected to that Dignity by Pope John XXII. This Pope establish d the See of the Prelate to Limoux, in 1317. but it was transferr'd hither two years after. Petrar∣cha seem'd not to like these foundations, when speaking of this Pontise, he says that France still complains of his dividing many Dioceses, and lodg∣ing the new Prelates in unfit places, whereas before none but great and wealthy Cities enjoy'd the Privilege of being Bishopricks. (Rerum me∣morand. Lib. II.) Alet lies above 9 Leagues
South-East of Mirepoix, and 15 South-West of Narbonne. Limoux, two Leagues North-West of Alet upon the same River, is renown'd for its White Wines: It is call'd Limosum Castrum, because seated in a muddy Soyl, and is often mention'd in the Wars of the Albigeois. As this Diocese Borders on the Pyrenees, and the County of Foix, so it is most mountainous. De Valois rec∣kons in it Tonnens, Mazerolles, Ville-Longue, and Montferrand, famous for its Bathes; but I find none of 'em in Sanson's Maps, and I doubt whe∣ther those this Learned Man perus'd, were of the best sort. Sanson only mentions Coustaussa, Quilla, and Bugarach, with two Villages Cauvissan and Arques. As to Sault Pagus Saltus, which the said De Valois places in this Diocese, it is a separate Country lying on the South-West, ac∣cording to Sanson. NARBONNE, Narbo Martius Decumanorum or Atacinorum, so call'd, because the Romans sent thither a Colony out of the tenth Legion, that bore the Sirname of Martial, and that this City is built near the Mouth of the River Aude, Atax. The first Plantation was made by Lici∣nius Cassus that famous Orator, under the Con∣sulate of Q. Martius, and M. Porcius Cato in 636 of Rome; wherefore some Antiquaries de∣rive from the first Consul the Sirname of Mar∣tius given to Narbonne; though Ausonius calls it Martie in the Vocative Case, and not Marci, as he ought to have done, if it came from a Man's name. Julius Caesar sent thither another Colony, under the conduct of Tiberius Claudius Nero, Father to the Emperour Tibere, whence
this City got the names of Colonia Julia Pater∣na Narbo Martius, exprest by these five Letters C. I. P. N. M. in an ancient Monument. The Roman Proconsuls, Senate, and Emperors took a particular delight in beautifying Narbonne, and endowing it with fine Privileges. They built there an Amphitheatre, and a Capitole all of Marble, which subsisted yet in Ausonius and Si∣donius Apollinaris's time, that is in the IV and V Centuries; nay we find yet mention of it in the XIIIth. Age, though not so precise that we can just tell in what State it then was: Now it is but a heap of ruines near the King's Gate, call'd by the Inhabitants Capdueil. One may judge of the former magnificence of this City, by the following Verses of Si∣donius Apollinaris. Salve Narbo potens salubritate, Qui urbe & rure simul bonus videris, Muris, Civibus, ambitu, tabernis, Portis, porticibus, foro, Theatro, Delubris, Capitoliis, Monetis, Thermis, Arcubus, Horreis, Macellis, Pratis, fontibus, insulis, salinis, Stagnis, flumine, merce, ponte, ponto, Ʋnus qui jure venerere Divos. Lenaeum, Cererem, Palem, Minervam, Spicis, palmite, pascuis, tapetis. Well met, mighty healthful Narbonne, thou that art renown'd both for thy Town and Terri∣tory, for thy Walls, Citizens, Circuit, Taverns, Gates, Galleries, Palace, Amphitheatre, Temples, Capitole, Mint, Bathes, Arches, Granaries, Shambles, Meadows, Fountains, Islands, Salt-pits,
Ponds, River, Merchandizes, Bridges and Sea. Thou art the only City that may by right present those Gods with offrands, Bacchus, Ceres, Pales, Minerve, with Vine-branches, Ears of Corn, Hay, Tapestries, &c. Du Chesne adds, that the Romans had built there Aqueducts besides, and erected publick Schools much like to our Universities. We are apt to imagine that the only design of these Conquerors of the World was to shew their Magnificence, and withal the Greatness and Power of their Empire: But, if I am not mi∣staken, these shrewd Politicians had a farther insight. Cicero says, that they had planted that Colony, as a Watch-Town, and a Rampier, or a Fence of the Roman People against the Na∣tives: Specula Populi Romani ac propugnacu∣lum istis ipsis Nationibus oppositum & objectum. And lest the new Inhabitants should contract too great a familiarity with the ancient, care was taken to raise those of Roman Original so far above the Gauls, that they should endea∣vour to keep up their grandure by a constant Union with the head of the Empire. Since they had began to follow this method; we read but of few Rebellions in their new and yearly conquests, and of a fewer in their Fo∣reign Plantations. Contrariwise they erected on their side publick Monuments of their gra∣titude to their Benefactors; such was the Al∣tar our Narbonenses built to Cesar August, after his Death, and Apotheosis, and the sacrifices they instituted in his honour, whose Laws were in∣graven in Capital Letters, on a Marble-table, that is yet subsisting. The chief of them were
that on the 23. of September, the day that August was proclaim'd Emperor, as also on the first of January, and the 7 of June, three Roman Plebeian Knights, and three Freemen,Libertini Sons to Slaves made free. should each of them offer Sacrifices, and furnish the Plantation, and other Inhabitants with Wine and Frankincense of their own. Some fabulous Authors pretend that Narbonne was built by a Gaulish King, call'd Narbon; but it appears that this name is not much older than the Romans time; since this Country was an∣ciently inhabited by the Bebryces, a Nation con∣fining on the Iberians or Spaniards, as Stepha∣nus has it, whose testimony is confirmed by that of Marcianus,In Pe∣riplo Galliae. who speaks of the Maritime Bebryces, Neighbours to the Ligurians, and the Grecian Cities of Gaul, that is, to the Coasts of Marseille and Genoa. Rufus Festus Avienus, de∣scribing the Southern Coast of Languedoc, says, that it was all possest by the Bebryces, and that Narbonne was then the head of a powerful King∣dom, which reach'd according to AusoniusDescr. Ill. Civit. from Franche-Comté to the Pyrenées, North and South, and from the Cevennes to Aquitain East, and West. Tzetses in his Commentaries on Lyco∣phron relates out of Dion, that those who are now call'd Narbonnesians, had formerly the name of Bebryces, and that the Pyrenean Mountains, which separate Spain from Gaul belong'd to them; whereupon the Poet Silius Italicus has grounded this Fable, that Pyrene Daughter to King Bebryx, whom Hercules got with Child, going to Spain through Gaul, gave her name to
these Mountains. It seems that the Bebryces, who inhabited part of Bithynia were issued from this Gaulish People, whom this Plantation weak∣ned so much, that the Tectosages master'd their Country, or made it Tributary, whence it came that in process of time they lost their ancient Name as well as their Empire; for in Pliny's Age, they were only known as a part of the Tectosages. Narbonne remained faithful to the Romans till the utmost decay of the Western Empire, in 435, that it was besieg'd by the Goths, under their King Theodoric. It then made a conside∣rable resistance; but in 462. Count Agrippin its Governour, envying the prosperous successes of Aegidius, or Gillon Chief Commander of the Ro∣man Militia in the Gauls, delivered this City in∣to the Enemies hands. The Goths were con∣tent with the demolishing of its Walls, and preserv'd its other Monuments of Antiquity; but the barbarous Huns, who took it some time after, destroy'd them all. Notwithstanding, it recover'd still part of its former lustre, and when the Saracens took and plunder'd it, in 732, it was become again the finest, the most famous, and the Capital of that Country, if we may believe Aimoin; but Charles Martel, who retook it not long after, made a greater havock in all Lower Languedoc than the Enemies them∣selves. However of all the mischiefs Narbonne has been expos'd to, the most sensible seems to be the unworthy treatment it receiv'd from Simon of Montfort, who by the help of numerous Croi∣sades, having at last got the better of Raimond
Count of Toulouse, and his Vassals and Confede∣rates, ordered the Inhabitants of Narbnne to throw down their own Walls, which they were forc'd to do for fear of the worst. As to the Civil Government, we have hinted how this City was at first the head of a King∣dom under the Bebryces, then subject to the Tectosages, and afterwards to the Romans, who made it the Capital of, and gave its name to the fourth part of Gaule, call'd from hence Gallia Narbonnensis, and since subdivided into 5. Provinces, the 1 and 2 Narbonnoise, the Vi∣ennoise, the Greek Alps, and the Maritini Alps, that is, all Savoy, Dauphiné, Provence, Lower Languedoc, Roussillon, the Toulousan, and the County of Foix. During the decay of the French Monarchy, under the second race of their Kings, the Dukes of Septimania, took upon them the Title of Dukes of Narbonne, as did likewise the Counts of Toulouse their Successors; but the following Lords of this Town and ad∣jacent Territories, contented themselves with the Name of Viscounts, which they bore from 1134 to 1507. that Gaston of Foix last Viscount of Narbonne exchang'd it for other Lands with the French King Lewis XII. his Uncle. If we believe the Tradition of the most cre∣dulous of Roman Catholick Authors, the Pro∣consul Sergius Paulus converted by the Apostle of that name, was the first Preacher of Christia∣nity at Narbonne, and consequently its first Bi∣shop. But though this Tradition be uncertain, this Church is however of a great antiquity; and there are plausible proofs, that it has been a Metropolitan from the time of Constantine the
Great in 309. and though the erection of Tou∣louse into an Archbishoprick, has restrain'd its Jurisdiction into narrower Limits; yet it has still ten Suffragans, viz. Beziers, Agde, Lodeve, Maguelonne, now at Montpellier, Nismes, Ʋsez, Carcassonne, Elne, now at Perpignan, S. Pons de Tomieres, and Alet. This City has been much bigger and larger than it is now, as appears by the ruins of the Palace of the Gaulish Kings, that are with∣out the Town. However it is still considerable, especially for its Fortifications, which render it one of the Keys of France, on this side the Pyrenees. In Pliny's time, it was seated upon the River Aude, twelve Italian Miles South of the Sea, but is now nine or ten Miles only distant from it, which shews, that either the Sea has not gain'd upon the Land, or that this City has been rebuilt near the Shore. It is properly the Aude, that goes through Narhonne, and divides it into two Parts, the City and the Burough, but a Channel drawn from it, call'd La Robine. The Cathedral Church under the Name of St. Just, and St. Saviour is renowned for it's Or∣gans, and the Picture of Lazarus rising from the dead. There are 5 Parishes besides, of which the most famous is the Collegiate of St. Paul. The whole Diocese contains 4 Archdeaconships, that of Narbonne, Corbieres, Le Razès and Fe∣nouillet, an Abby of Augustinians, call'd Our Lady of forty Notre-Dame de quarante, another of O∣sternians, under the name of Notre-Dame de la Fon-frede, Our Lady of the cold Fountain, and several Monasteries. The Palace of the Arch∣bishop is not that of the Kings of the Wisigoths
or Westgoths, which was demolish'd in 1451. Hard by, at a place call'd Pontsorme, are the re∣mains of an ancient Bridge built by the Ro∣mans. The Air hereabouts is not extraordinary wholsom. Leucate, Leucata, keeps still its ancient name that was given it, as it seems, by the Inhabi∣tants of Marseille a Colony of the Phoceans, be∣cause of the whiteness of the steep and naked Rocks wherewith it is environ'd, for  signifies white and glistering. Round about the Hill, which is the Seat of Leucate, lies a Pond in the form of a Peninsule; so that this Town is very strong by Nature. Francis I. built there a Fort to which other Fortifications having been since added; Serbellon General of the Spa∣niards besieg'd it in vain, and was defeated by the Governor of Lnguedoc, Charles of Schom∣berg Duke of Halluyn, September 29 1637. The other Towns or considerable Burroughs of this Diocese are, Capestan, Caput-stagni so call'd, because it's seated at the head of a Pond, wherein the Aude discharges it self, Colombier, Puy-serguier Podium Sericarium, North-East of Narbonne; Rieux, Azillac and Lesignan on the North-West; Bages, Peyriac, Ville-Salce and Sigean on the South, the second and last of these have Salt-pits; four Leagues and a half North of Narbonne, and five West of Bezuil, lies a Village nam'd Quarante, at the foot of a Moun∣tain, whence both Towns may be discover'd; which has given occasion to this pleasant equi∣vocation, the one may see quarante & deux Villes, forty and two Towns. Quarante the name of that Village signifying forty.
Carcassonne, Carcasso or Carcassum Volcarum Tectosagum, above 13 Leagues West of Nar∣bonne, and almost 20 South-East of Toulouse. It's seated upon the River Aude, which divides into two parts, the Town and the City, both wall'd in, and joyn'd by a Stone-bridge, but having each their particular Magistrates and Government. The City is higher than the Town, and incompassed with a double Wall, Towers, and deep Moats. It has a Castle with a Garrison kept by the King in ordinary pay, a Presidial-seat, and the first Seneschalship of the Province. Both parts of Carcassonne make together a pretty big City, which seems some∣what ancient, by reason of the old Mss. Acts that are found there, written on the bark of Trees, on fine Linnen and the like stuff; be∣sides the great many old weapons, Harnesses, and other Warlike Engines that are in its Ar∣senal. That part which is called the Town is built along the River, and though most of the Houses he made of Wood, yet they give a fine prospect, because the Streets are strait-right, and end at a Square, whence the 4 Gates of the Town may be discover'd. It is surrounded with Bastions and Rampiers, that make it capable of some defence. The Chief Trade of the Inha∣bitants consists in Box-combs, Serges, and Cloaths, whereof there are several Manufactures. The Bishoprick is not so ancient as the City, for the old Notices of the Gauls do not mention it; and the first Prelate of Carcassonne that we find upon record, is one Sergius, who subscrib'd in that quality to a Council held at Narbonne, in 590, the 4th year of Recarede King of the
Westgoths: Whereas Pliny, Ptolomy, and the Tables of the Emperour Theodosius speak of the City, whose Cathedral is dedicated to S. Nazaire. The Gottish Monarchs had extraordinary fortify'd this Town, in which they kept their treasure, and as 'tis pretended the spoils of Rome. The French besieg'd it in vain, after they had routed Ala∣ric in 507, but Gontran King of Orleance, ha∣ving taken it by intelligence, was forced to re∣tire and leave it, having received a notable o∣verthrow from King Recarede in 587 or 588. However the French having at last expell'd the Wisigoths beyond the Pyrenees, became absolute Masters of Carcassonne. The Emperor Charles the Bald gave it to Bernard II. Count of Tou∣louse in 871, but 'tis not certain who were his Successors till the year 974. that Arnauld Count of Carcassonne was succeeded by several other during above two Centuries. The extinction of that family, or the loss of their Soveraignty came from the protection Raymond Roger, the last Count gave to the Albigeois; for the Croi∣sado's Army incens'd at it, besieg'd and took Carcassonne in 1209, the Council of Latran ap∣prov'd of, and confirm'd this Usurpation in 1215, and invested Simon of Montfort with the Estates of the depriv'd Count. However Amau∣ry his Son not being able to keep his Father's Conquests, yielded them to the French King Lewis VIII. in 1222, and in 1247 Raimond Trin∣cavel the true Heir and Lord of Carcassonne, as only Son to Raymond Roger, yielded likewise his lawful pretensions to Lewis IX. Round about Carcassonne are some other Towns and Burroughs, that make up his Diocese call'd
le Carcassez, as Montreal, Alzone, Montolieu, Seys∣sac, Mas de Cabardes, Penaultier, Trebes, Mar∣seillettes, Montlaur Coffosens, &c. S. Pons de Tomieres, was but an inconsiderable Village, where Raimond III. Count of Toulouse founded an Abby of Benedictins in 937, under the name of S. Pons, Martyr and Bishop of Cimele or Nice. Thence it was that Raimond took the Sirname of Pons, and that Latin Authors call this Town Pontiopolis as well as Tomeriae. Pope John XXII. turn'd this Mona∣stery into a Bishoprick, Suffragan to Narbonne in 1318, and the Monks were made Secular Canons in 1625. Its Prelate is Lord of the Town, which is neither big nor thick inhabi∣ted; but has this considerable, that it lies near the Spring of a River call'd La jaur, which at its very source is so great as to move several Mills, and having wash'd divers Villages dis∣charges it self into the Orbe. S. Pons de Tomie∣res stands almost 11 Leagues North-West of Narbonne, and 12 of Carcassonne. Its Diocese comprehends the Towns or Burroughs of La Bastide, S. Amant de Valtoret, Angles, Olargues, La Voute, Cessenon, S. Chignan de la Corne, Creuzy, Aygues-vives, La Caumelle, Menerbe, Ferralz, &c.
Of the Precinct of Beziers. THE Bezarès considered as comprehending the Dioceses of Beziers, Agde and Lodeve, has those of Montpellier and Nismes on the East, those of Castres, St. Pons and Narbonne on the West, the Mediteranean Sea on the South, and the Mountains of Cevennes and Rouergue on the North. It reaches about 15 Leagues East and West, and 17 North and South. BEZIERS, Beterae, Biterae or Bliterae Septumano∣rum, five Miles North of the Sea, and six Leagues North-East of Narbonne, is one of the biggest and best peopl'd Cities in Languedoc, seated up∣on a Hill of difficult access, whose foot is wash'd by the River Orbe. This City is very ancient, and mention'd by Strabo, Pliny, Ptolomy and others, but the time of his foundation is uncertain: Only we know that it was a Roman Colony in Julius Caesar's time, since repair'd and increas'd by Tiberius, who built there two Temples, one to Augustus, and the other to Livia. It kept its lustre under the Romans, and even under the Goths, tho they ruin'd its most sumptuous Build∣ings; but in 736, the Saracens having taken it, Charles Martel, who retook it the follwing year, raz'd it to the Ground, lest it should serve for a Nest to these Mahumetans. The Inhabi∣tants repair'd it soon after, and it began to
flourish again under Pepin, Charlemaign, and their Successors, and had Viscounts of its own du∣ring the decay of the French Monarchy, whose Estate being united by Marriage to that of the Counts of Carcassonne fell under the power of the Croisado in 1209, who took the Town, and kill'd 10000 of its Citizens: Some years after, in 1222 and 1247, it fell to the share of the French Kings, by the means I have observ'd, speaking of Carcassonne. The learned Holstenius, in his Notes on Ortelius, and on Stephanus pre∣tends, that Beterrae is the true name of Beziers, because of an ancient Medal or piece of Mony found in 1629. at Murvieil, three Leagues North West of Beziers, with this Inscription BHTHPPATON. Beziers is the first Suffragan of Narbonne, since the erection of Toulouse into an Archbishoprick, and Aphrodisius is accounted its first Prelate, under whose Name was an Abby, that has been turned into Secular Prebends. There is still ano∣ther of Augustinians, bearing the Name of St. James, and the Cathedral Church that of S. Na∣zaire. The Arians held here a Council in 356, whose Acts are now lost, and the only notice we have of them is by the Works of S. Hilaire, who making bold to accuse the Heads of that Party, they prevailed with the Emperour Constantius to have him banished. There are likewise some remains of an Amphitheatre, and a Cittadel, that was demolish'd in 1636. The Streets of Beziers are fine and broad; the Bishop's Palace has a very fine Prospect upon the neighbouring Campaign, and the Town-house a high Tower. The Jesuit's Colledge is esteem'd for a sumptuous Gate; but much more for a Picture, so natural∣ly
representing a bursting Wall, that several of he most curious observers have mistaken it for eal Cracks. The Trade of Beziers is somewhat considerable, but the roughness of the Sea, and the Banks that lie all along the Coast do not al∣ow great Merchant-men to approach the Shore, nd they are only small Boats, which can enter nto the Graus. The Diocess of Beziers contains besides the Capital, the following Towns or Burroughs; Ville-neuve la Cremade, Murvieil, Magalaz, St. Laurent, Fougeres, Colombiers, Bec-de-Rioux, St. Gervais, Lunaz, &c. AGDE, Agatha Massiliensium, built by the hoceans of Marseille, as Strabo, and its Name f Greek Original testify, lies on the mouth of the Eraut Arauris, a League South of the Sea, nother West of the Bull's Pond, Etang de Thau, nd six South-East of Beziers. Stephanus calls  a Town or a Colony of the Ligurians, that is the Genoese, or of the Celtes, that is the Tran∣lpine Gauls. It's first name was , that is Good-fortune, if we believe Timost∣enes a Greek Author, perhaps because of some advantage the Phoceans got over the Inhabitants, when they were planting this Colony. It was subject to its founders, till Julius Caesar de∣priv'd the Massilians of all their Dominions, leav∣ng them nothing but their own Liberty. Agde, as well as Beziers are reckon'd by the ancient eographers in the Country of the Tectosages. Ptolomy speaks of two Islands near Agde, the st of which, he calls Agathe, as well as the wn, and the second Blasco. As to the last,  undoubtedly Brescou, a small Isle in the Sea
near Cape d' Agde, two Leagues South of that City, and the first may be another form'd by the two Arms of the Eraut, falling into Grau d' Agde, West over against it. In 506, Alari King of the West-Goths allow'd the Catholick Bishops of his Dominions to assemble in Coun∣cil at Agde, as they did in the Church o S. Andrews, where they made 71 Canons con∣cerning Ecclesiastical Discipline, to which So∣phronius subscribed as Bishop of Agde. The Foundation of this Bishoprick seems not to be much elder; for in a Notice of the Gauls unde the Empire of Honorius, there is no mention o Agde. Its Cathedral under the name of S. Ste∣phen has 12 Canons, whereof 4 are dignify'd with the Titles of Archdeacon, Sexton, Pre∣centor, and Chamberlain. The Town is no very big, but Rich and Trading; especially since the Haven of Brescou has been repair'd, s that Merchant-men can now come pretty nea Agde, and Boats somewhat large enter into th Mouth of the River, where they exchange se∣veral Commodities for the Wines of the Coun∣try. Agde has had its own Viscounts, whos Estate fell to the share of those of Nismes and Carcassonne. In 1187, Bernard-Atton, Son to  Viscount of Nismes, presented the Bishop o Agde with the Viscounty of it. Five Miles North of Agde, near the fall o the River Touque into the Eraut, lies the Tow of S. Tiberi, or S. Tubery, call'd Araura or C¦sero, in the Itinerary of Antonin, with an an¦tient Abby of Benedictins. It has its nam from one Tiberius, who together with Modestu
and Florentia, got here the Crown of Martyr∣dom, under Diocletian and Maximian. Two Leagues more Northwards upon the Eraut, lies the Town of Pesenas, Piscenae, so call'd from the many Fish-ponds, that were round about it in the Romans time. This. Town is renown'd for its Fairs, and for its Women that are said to yield to none of that Country in well breeding and comeliness, but to those of Montpellier. The late Governours of Languedoc, as the Duke of Montmorency, and the Prince of Conti, have kept here their ordi∣nary Residence, and the States of the Province have been consequently held here, which has much contributed to the enriching and beauti∣fying of this Town. The other places of this Diocese are, Mar∣seillan, Florensac, Castelnau, Montagnac, Le Pouget, Gignac, Ville-Magne, Loupian, and Me∣e the Mesua of Pomponius Mela; tho the Island he speaks of, seems rather to be Lates. Lodeve, seated between Mountains near the meeting of the Rivers Solondre and Lergue, not far from the Cevennes, and the Borders of Ro∣rgue and Gevaudan, lies almost 9 Leagues North of Pesenas, and 13 of Agde. Its antient name in Latin is Forum-Neronis, and then Leu∣eva both known to Pliny, and its Bishop kept already the 4th or 5th rank among the Suffra∣gans of Narbonne, at the beginning of the 5th Century. Lodeve is not now very big, for it has suffer'd several devastations during the Wars of the Goths, then of the Albigeois, and lastly during the Civil Wars between the Prtestants d Roman Catholicks, and the Duke of Mont∣morency
took it in 1585. This Town had for∣merly the Title of a Viscounty; which one of its Prelates Raimond Guilhen Brother to the Lord of Montpellier bought off from Viscount Geldin, whence it comes that the Bishops of Lo∣deve are Lords of it; appoint the Magistrates and take the Title of Counts of Montbrun, a Castle near it. And 'tis asserted that 800 No∣blemen depended on, and made homage of their Lands to this Prelate, who on this account was Sirnam'd the Noble. Bernard Gui and John Plantavit de la Pause Bishops of Lodeve, have published Chronicles of their Church, Denis Bri∣connet and Francis Bosquet are likewise in the number of Authors. The Diocese of Lodeve comprehends besides, the Towns or Burroughs of Las Ribbes, S. Mi∣chel, Ganges, Brisac, S. Jean de Buege, S. Guillem ley Desert, with a famous Abby of Benedictins founded by one of the Ancestors of the Princes of Orange, Mont-Peyroux, S. Jean de Foz, S. An∣dré, Clermont de Lodeve and Canet.
Of the Precinct of Nismes. THis Precinct is not near so great as the an∣cient Territories of the Volcae Arecomici, who extended themselves through the Dioceses of Montpellier, Nismes, Ʋzès and Lodeve, en∣joyed the Town of Pezenas, and even some Lands beyond the Rhone. Now it is restrained within the Episcopal Jurisdiction of Montpellier and Nismes, and has the district of Beziers on the West, Gevaudan and Vivarais on the North and North-East, the Rhone on the East, and the Sea on the South. Its greatest length from Frontignan on the Pond of Maguelonne to the source of the Eraut, is 17 Leagues North and South, and its greatest breadth from Beaucaire on the Rhone to Anagne on the Eraut 22 Leagues East and West; but in some places it is so very tarrow, that it has hardly 4 or 5 Leagues. Montpellier, 3 Leagues South of the Sea, 13 East of Pesenas, and 14 North-East of Agde, is call'd in Latin Mons-pessulus, Mons-pessulanus, Mons-peslerius, and Mons-puellaris; but every one may see that these are not old Latin names; and likewise this Town is hardly known in Hi∣story, since 600 years, though it be now the biggest and richest in Languedoc after Toulouse. It is seated upon a Hill, whose foot is wash'd by
the small River Lez, which receives there ano∣ther Rivulet called Merdanson, after it has serv'd to the uses of the Town. The original of Mont∣pellier is related thus. There was formerly a strong and considerable City call'd Maguelonne, Magalo, in a Gulph, nam'd by Pliny, Laterna, and by the French, l'Etang du Tau, de Lates, or de Perraut. The foundation of Maguelonne is uncer∣tain, for tho the Coast of Lower Languedoc has been sometime in the power of the Marseillois, and Stephanus mentions Alonis as an Island belonging to them, whose Inhabitants were call'd Alonites, yet having no other testimony, a small and far fetched resemblance of names can scarce prove them to be one and the same. However it be, sure it is, that Maguelonne was an Episcopal City in the 5th and 6th Centuries, and a famous Sea∣port too, which was the cause of its ruin: For after the Saracens had conquered Spain, they spread themselves in Lower Languedoc, in 730, and threatned the whole Kingdom of France, with a Barbarian Invasion, when they were ut∣terly routed by Charles Martel near Tours. As this great Captain had observ'd that they com∣monly landed at Maguelonne; when it had reta∣ken this Town in 736, he raz'd it to the very ground, and transferred the Episcopal See to Soustancion, Sextatio, almost a Mile East of Mont∣pellier. Soustancion is mention'd in the Geogra∣phical Tables of the Emperor Theodose, and in the Travels of Aethicus; but the Inhabi∣tants finding the Situation of the place, where now Montpellier lies more convenient, and the Air sweeter, began to build there. Thus the new Village increas'd by degrees, during 300
Years, that the B. of Maguelonne kept their Seat at Soustancion. But in 1060, Arnauld Julian, one of these Prelates, rais'd up the Walls of Mague∣lnne, fortify'd them with Towers, and the Haven, where the Saracens us'd to land being stop'd, built another in a more convenient place. Before this the Governour of Maguelonne had retir'd to a place call'd now Mauguio, where he built a Castle under the name of Melgueil, and having usurp'd the Sovereignty of his Go∣vernment during the troubles of the French Mo∣narchy, he took upon him the Title of Count of Melgueil and Soustancion, and coyn'd a kind of small Money call'd the Melgoris pence. The Estates of these Counts pass'd in 1172 into the House of Toulouse, by the Marriage of Ermes∣sende their Heiress with Raymond VI. Sirnamed the Old, and was confiscated upon his Son by Pope Innocent III. and the Council of Latran, in 1215. In the mean while, Montpellier increas'd apace; for it appears by a passage of S. Bernard Abbot of Clairvaux, that there was already a School or Seminary of Physicians, in 1155; and in 1156, we find mention of its Baths, which were farm'd by the Lords of that Town, as be∣ing of a considerable Revenue. However the first Institution of its University is commonly ascrib'd to the Disciples of Averroes ad Avi∣cenne in 1196, and its perfect establishment is said to have been made but in 1220. About this time the Lords of Montpellier were in great esteem. This Lordship was first detached from the Patrimony of the Counts of Melgueil to be the Portion of Eustorgia, a Daughter of that
House: She had a Son call'd Fulcran, who be∣came Bishop of Lodeve, and two Daughters, who bequeathed their Estates to the Church of Ma∣guelonne in 975. These Prelates sold Montpellier to a Gentleman nam'd Gui, on condition that he should keep it as a Fee of the Church, and defend it against the Saracens. The French Kings, and the succeeding Bishops of Mague∣lonne confirm'd this gift or sale, so that Mont∣pellier remain'd to his Posterity; who because of the increase of their Town, and the conside∣ration it came to be in, allied themselves with very illustrious Houses, as the Kings of Jerusa∣lem and of Aragon, the Dukes of Burgundy, and the Counts of Foix, and became at last Kings of Majorca. But this small Kingdom was the ruine of their Patrimonial Estate; for James III. King of Majorca, and Lord of Montpellier, having been depriv'd of his Realm by Peter of Arragon his Brother in Law, was compell'd by want and misery, to sell his Lordship to the French King Philip of Valois in 1349. Physick has the precedency in the Uni∣versity of Montpellier, yet both parts of the Law are taught in one of its Colleges, by four Royal Professors, with power of making Licen∣tiates and Doctors. There are besides a gene∣rality of the King's Treasurers, a Court of Ai∣des, a Chamber of Accounts, a Mint, and a Pre∣sidial-seat. Montpellier was one of the Towns of security, which Henry IV. had granted to the Protstants; but Lewis XIII. designing the ruin of this part of his Subjects, forc'd them by Arms to surrender this pledge of his protection, and took this City after a long Siege and a vi∣gorous
defence, in the Month of October 1622. Then it was that the Roman Catholicks got again into their hands the Cathedral of S. Peter, for the Bishoprick of Maguelonne had been transfer∣red thither in 1536, with the consent of Pope Paul III. Soustancion being now but a ruin'd Village. However they were still fewer in num∣ber, and have been so till this last Persecution. Montpellier is govern'd by six Consuls or She∣riffs, who are also Viguiers or Baylies of the Town, and have a great attendance. The Mer∣chants have likewise their Consuls, under the came of Consuls of the Sea, to distinguish 'em from the Sheriffs, call'd Consuls Majours. There is a particular Court for Debts, whose Judge, sirnamed of the little Seal, has jurisdiction over them, who submit to him by contract. Besides the University, the Churches, and the Palace of the Justice; there are other Buildings wor∣thy to be taken notice of; as the Royal College for Humane Learning, the Cittadel, rais'd since the taking of Montpellier from the Protestants, and flank'd with four Bastions, two within and two without the Town: Near to its Wall is the Royal Garden of Simpes, extraordinary well kept and furnished. The Ceremonies us'd in taking the degree of Doctor in Physick is worth seeing, were it only for their putting seven times on and off the Back of the new Do∣ctor, the old Gown of Rabelais. The Confe∣ction of Alkermès is likewise made in a solemn manner, before the Magistrate, and one of the Professors of Physick. Their Triacle is in as great esteem as that of Venice, and their Pow∣ders of Cypre, Queen of Hungary's Waters, Es∣sences,
and Scent-waters are vended through al Europe. The Inhabitants of Montpellier are al∣so famous for making Verdegreese, whitening Wax, working upon Silk with Mills and severa other Manufactures. Add to this, that thei Soyl is one of the best, and the Air one of the wholsomest in France. Lates, mention'd by Pomponius Mela, unde the name of Castellum Latara, and by more modern Authors under those of Castrum de La∣tis, and Castrum de Palude, is seated in an Island made by the Mouth of the Lez, Ledum, which discharges it self into a great Pond call'd by Pliny Laterna, and by Mela Stagnum Volca∣rum. This Island lies but a Mile South of Mont∣pellier, and is reck'ned its Haven. A League more Westwards on the Mouth of the Caula∣zon, lies the Town of Ville-neuve, over against Magueloune, and 4 Leagues South-West, upon the same Lake or Pond of Lates, the Town of Frontignan so famous for its Muscadine Wines. De Valois takes it for the Forum Domitii of the Antients, so called from Cn. Domitius Aenobar∣ly, who having vanquished the Allobroges and Auvergnats, was carry'd in triumph upon an Elephant, through the whole Province. Three Miles North-West you meet with the small Town of Balaruc renown'd for its Bathes. Lu∣nel, Lunate 5 Leagues East of Montpellier gives its Name to a Bridge upon the Vidourle, over against the Town. It has a Monastery under the Name of S. Peter, but is more renown'd for being the Birth-place of a Learned Jew Rabbi Salomon, who took from thence the Sirname of Jarchi. The other places of this Diocese
are, Montferrand, Murvieil, Pignan, Fabregues Sanson mentions a great many other, but he marks them all for Villages. NISMES, Nemausus Volcarum Arecomicorum, lies seven Leagues North-East of Arles, and ten and a half North-West of Montpellier, in a fertil Plain, overshadowed with Fruit-trees, and at the foot of Hills cover'd with Vineyards. It's a very ancient City, though the time of its foundation be uncertain. Stephanus and Sui∣das after him ascribe it to one Nemausus of Hercules's posterity; whence Du Chesne infers, that it is a Greek Colony of the Marseillois; but as there have been many Hero's of that name, and that the Descendants of the Greek Hercules have been long in repute; this does not pre∣cisely determine the time of its first Building. De Valois derives it from a Fountain springing hereabouts, which Ausonius calls Nemausus; but it will still be doubtful, whether the City has given its name to the Fountain, or the Foun∣tain to the City, and whence both have got this appellation. It will be more useful and diver∣ting to consider the rise and various fortunes of Nismes, and withal the precious remains of its Antiquities. It owes its first increase to a Co∣lony of Roman Soldiers, who return'd with August from the Conquest of Egypt, as appears by an ancient Inscription, which this City has taken for its Arms, COL. NEM. Colonia Nemau∣sensis, the Colony of Nismes. Before that, Ju∣lius Caesar had put a Garrison in this Town, to defend it against the incursions of those of Reuergue and Querci. The Volcae Arecomici were already one of the most powerful Nations of
the Gauls, in the time of Hannibal, according to Livy; and under the Empire of August and Tibere, StraboL. 21. L. 4. testifies that Nismes was the Metropolis of the Volcae Arecomici, and that tho it was not to be compar'd to Narbonne, as to the number of Strangers and Merchants; yet it exceeded this Capital of the Province, as to the State of its Government, for it had 24 Villages or Commonalties , under it, inhabited by considerable Persons; , who enjoy'd the privileges of the Latins, so that one might find at Nismes, Rom. Citizens, who had discharged the Offices of Edile, or City Surveyor  and of Quaestor or Trea∣surer. , And therefore this Plantation did not answer before the Tribunal of the Go∣vernors that were sent thither from Rome. But though they were so favoured by the Senate and Emperors, a particular hatred they had against Tiberius,Suetonius. made 'em throw down his Statues, while he was at Rhodes, and before he ascen∣ded the Imperial Throne. AdrianAel. Spartian. rais'd here a famous Basilique, in honour of Pltina, Wife to the Emperor Traian, who had much contri∣buted to his Adoption,Jul. Capitolin. Antoninus Pius was originary from thence by his Father's side. In the decay of the Western Empire, the Goths conquered Nismes, with the rest of Septimania; and it then lost a great part of its lustre, but suffer'd much more by the devastations of Atti∣la, of the Saracens, and afterwards of Charles Martel, who though he put it in Flames, was
not able wholly to destroy all the Monuments of the Roman magnificence. Notwithstanding these misfortunes,Adrian. Vales. Nismes was so soon repair'd, that under Lewis the Meek, it was again a rich and wealthy City, thick inhabited, wall'd in, and fortify'd with Towers; so that during the weakness of the French Monarchy, in 1129, the Governors of Nismes usurp'd the Sovereignty of it, under the Title of Viscounts, whose Estate was at the end of that Century, devolv'd to the Counts of Toulouse, and from them returned to the Crown of France. In 1569, the Protestants seiz'd upon this City, by the courage of a shrewd and venturesom Soldier, who, during the Night, fil'd at several times the Bars of the Grate, by which the Fountain of Nismes enters into the Town. Since it was yielded to them by Henry IV. as one of their Towns of security, which they enjoyed till Lewis XIII. depived them of it. However they still kept some of their privileges, as to have one half of the Con∣suls, and of the Regents or School-masters of the Royal College, Founded by Henry II. of their Religion; but Lewis XIV. has by degrees taken from them, not only the small remains of their Liberties, but even their Temples, and the free exercise of their Religion. The most remarkable remains of Antiquity in Nismes are its Amphitheatre, the Square-house, or Maison quarrée, the great Tower or Tourre-magne, the Fountain Nemausus, and the Temple near this Fountain.
The Amphitheatre call'd by the Inhabitants Les Arenes is now but an Oval-Wall of 470 Steps, with 63 Arches, built up of very lage Stones without Mortar or Plaister, which, how∣ever has not only withstood the ransackings of the Goths and Saracens; but even the Flames of Attila and Charles Martel, as appears by the black colour they are tainted with. Notwith∣standing one may still discern the Figures of Remus and Romulus suckling a She-wolf, the Vultures that appeared to these Founders of Rome, two Bull-heads upon the ancient Gate of this Building, and two Towers upon the new Gate. The Seats whence the Spectators saw the Shews have been remov'd from thence, and the Caves where the wild Beasts were kept are now fill'd up with Earth. Nay the whole capacity of the Amphitheatre is taken up with Houses, at least since the year 1179; as may be prov'd by Patentees granted by the Viscount Bernard Atten, where the Inhabitants of Nismes and those of the Arenes are distinguish'd; which shews, that this City has not been rebuilt where it formerly stood; for anciently the Amphi∣theatre was without the Town, and Warriors have oft made use of it, as of a Fort or Cit∣tadel. The Square-house, La Maison quarrée, is a kind of Parellelogramme, or long Square, be∣ing 74 Foot in length, and 41 Foot 6 Inches in breadth. Its front is adorned with 6 Co∣lumns, and each side with ten. The top is flat and cover'd with square Free-stones extra∣ordinary large, so that one may walk upon it without any danger. As we do not know who
rais'd the Amphitheatre, we are not better ac∣quainted with the Founder of this House, nor to what use it was fitted. For its form which has no likeness at all with the antient Basilicks, does not allow us to take it for that magnificent Building rais'd up by Adrian; neither is the vulgar name of Cap-dueil sufficient to make a Capitole of it, since no antient Author speaks of a Capitole of Nismes. But as its front has a great resemblance with those of the antient Temples; one may believe with the Learned Spon in his curious inquiries of Antiquity, that it was a Temple dedicated to Jupiter Capi∣toline. Without the Walls of the City upon the top of a high Hill, rises an antient Building, call'd by the Inhabitants Tourre-Magne, the great Tower, because of its prodigious height, or that it exceeded by far all the Towers round about. For by the remains it seems to have been a Watch or Tower, built in the form of a Pyra∣mide at one of the Corners of its antient Walls. One may still distinguish the Stairs, whereupon they ascended to the top, and the Niches or Case-frames, wherein they plac'd the Statues of their Gods. The whole Fabrick is of small square Stones, so well cemented together, that the most industrious Mason should not throw down two Foot of it in a day. At the Foot of that Hill springs a most clear and pleasant Fountain, in the form of a Pond, with a Whirl-pool in the middle, wherein, if any Creature chance to fall, it is never to be seen again. This spring is the Source of the Vistre, so call'd from the brittle and transparent
colour of its Water, an Epithete given it by Au∣sonius, Vitrea non luce Nemausus. A branch of this Fountain runs through a Channel pur∣posely drawn into the City. As to the course of the Vistre, you may see it in the Rivers of Languedoc. Near this Fountain is an old Square-Temple, under-propt by two rows of Columns with their Bars, Chapters, Architraves, Frizes, Cor∣nishes and Mouldings, all in a just proportion, together with Niches or Case-frames, and round Windows in the Walls, for the Statues of their Gods, and Eagles of emboss'd Work, whose Heads have been broken off by the barbarous Goths, Huns, or Saracens in contempt of the Romans. This Temple has been turned into a Monastery of Nuns; and because of the Eagles and other marks of its former magnificence, I should be apt to take it for the Basilick of A∣drien, rather than the Square-house, or any o∣ther antient Building. To avoid length, I shall not mention the many Statues and Inscriptions that are found in this City, nor insist upon the Monuments of newer date, as the Wine-Tower, La Tour Vina∣tiere, so call'd Because built out of an excise up∣on Wine. Mont-pouzieu, in the inclosure of the Monastery of S. Bauzille is a Hill of Clay, that formerly was the burying-place of the Jews, for which, they us'd to pay a certain quantity of Pepper to the Monks. The King's Castle, the Column erected at the entry of Francis I. with a Salamandre upon it, the Clock-Tower, the Crown-gate with its Bulwark, and the Pa∣lace
of the Presidial are considerable Build∣ings. Sulpice Severe, mentions a Council held at Nismes in 389, but does not name the Bishop of it. The first of whose subscription we read is Gilbert of Nismes, who assisted at a Synod, call'd in his Diocese by his Metropolitan in 886, and the old Notices of the Gauls name Nismes; but in the 4th. or 5th. place among the 8 Suf∣fragans of Narbonne; so that the erection of this Bishoprick seems not to have preceded the 4th. or 5th. Age. Four Leagues North-East of Nismes, lies the Village of St. Privat, renown'd for a most plea∣sant House belonging to a Gentleman, who bears the name of it, and adorn'd with delicious Gar∣dens, Fountains, Grotto's, Water-spouts, Alleys, Green-closets, and the like. Over against it are the remains of the famous Pont du Gard, one of the Master-pieces of the Romans. It was inten∣ded to conduct the Waters of the Mountains of Remoulins to those of Ledenon, and thence into Nismes, for the uses of that City, but especial∣ly to represent Sea-fights in its Amphitheatre. It may be too, that the course of the River Gard or Gardon, which now runs under these Bridges was turn'd off thorough a Channel, that is yet partly in being, has six Foot in heigth, three in breadth, and is covered with large Stones. But more of it in the Diocese of Ʋzès. Four Leagues South of Pont du Gard, and as many East of Nismes, lies the Town of Beau∣caire, Belliquadrum or Bellum quadrum, that is
fine Square, undoubtedly so call'd from its Square form and pleasant Situation; for its seated upon the Rhone, next to the small Island Valabregue, and over against Tarascon in Pro∣vence, from which it's only separated by the River. It is the Seat of a Seneschal, but is much more renown'd for its Fair on the 22. of July, or S. Magdalen's day, whether come Merchants from most parts of the World, even from Asia and Africa. This Town belonged formerly to the Counts of Provence; but Rai∣mond Berenger I. yielded it to Alphonse Jour∣dain Count of Toulouse, September 16. 1125. The Papists took it during the Wars of the Albigeois, but the Inhabitants revolted from them to Raimond the Young their lawful Ma∣ster. In 1251, Charles of France Count of Pro∣vence, holding a conference at Beaucaire with his Brother Alphonse, Count of Toulouse, the Ci∣tizens of Avignon forc'd them to take the Oath of Allegiance to their Government. After Al∣phonse's death Beaucaire return'd to the French Crown with the other Estates of those Counts. In 1561 the Protestants took this Town, and put Garrison in it under one Hardwin of Por∣celles, and the Roman Catholicks having reta∣ken it, they were expell'd the same day with the loss of 1200 Men. Beaucaire had then a Castle upon the Rock, on the Rivers side, which has been since demolish'd in 1632, on occasion of new Civil Wars. Three Miles South-West of Beaucaire, lies betwixt Mountains the Town of Belle-garde, and 3 Miles South-East of Belle-garde the Village of Fourques Furcae, so called because the Rhone di∣vides
here it self into three branches, much like to a Fork: 4 Leagues South-West of Beaucaire, and above two West of Fourques, lies upon a Rivulet the small Town of S. Gilles Sti. Aegidii Fanum. It has its name from an Anachoret, who retir'd thither in the 6th. Century, and a famous Abby that was built there under his name, which has been since given to secular Priests. It's said that the Gottish Kings had there a Palace, and that this Town is to be understood by the name of Palatium Gothorum, which is found in the Authors of those times. At least it is sure that the Counts of Toulouse took the Title of Counts of S. Gilles, and that sometimes the whole Pro∣vince was understood by that name. This Town belongs now to the Knights of Malta, under the Title of great Priory, and it was near it that the Protestants got a signal Victory over the Roman Catholicks, headed by the Count of Somme-rive in 1562. In a Neighbouring Forrest call'd E∣stagel, is a Chair of Stone, which is thought to have serv'd the Druides, who us'd to render ju∣stice or to pronounce their Oracles in the Woods. Four Leagues East of S. Gilles, lies upon the Vistre the Town of Amargues Armasanicae, to which Vauvert Vallis viridis, Le Cayla and Ai∣gues-mortes are resorting. This last situated be∣twixt the Pond of Maguelonne, and the Western Mouth of the Rhone has been a famous Sea-port, where the French Kings us'd to imbark, when they went to the Holy Land; but the Haven has been stopp'd by the Sands, and the Town lies now two or three Miles from the Sea. The Pond Laterna and the Rhone have communication to∣gether
by a Channel, upon which this Town is seated, and which because of the little motion of its Water has given it the name of Aigues-mortes, Aquae-mortuae. Before one enters into it, it meets with a Tower call'd la Tour Carbon∣niere, that was taken by the Protestants in 1562. The Town is of a square figure, surrounded with good Walls, and 16 strong Towers, among which that of Constance is the most considerable, as having a Phare or Beacon to direct the course of the Ships. Three Miles Westwards upon the Western Mouth of the Rhone, lies the Fort of Pecais, built to defend the Salt-pits, which are here so abundant, that they suffice to furnish with it, not only Languedoc and the Neighbouring Pro∣vinces, but even Foreign Countries, if we believe Du Verdier, so that all the other Salt-pits, ex∣cepting those of Peyriac and Sigean; in the Dio∣cese of Narbonne have been spoiled and drown∣ed, not to make Salt too common. Marsiliar∣gues is a little fine Town, 5 Miles South of Ai∣gues-mortes, and 2 North-West of Lunel, that has the Title of a Viguery. Higher up you meet with Gaillargues, Aubais, Aigues-vives, Cau∣visson, Sommieres upon the Vidourle Sumerium a Viguery, Ville-vieille, Clarensac, Cour-Couronne Quessas, Sauve Salvia, a Viguery, Pompignan, Ledignan, Cassagnolle. Anduse Andusia another Viguery, upon the Southern branch of the Gar∣don, 21 Miles North of Montpellier, and 17 North-West of Nismes, was formerly a strong Town, and one of them who declar'd for the Prote∣stants under the D. of Rohan, but Lewis XIII. ha∣ving taken it, caus'd its Walls to be demolish'd.
St. Hippolite lies betwixt Mountains near the source of the Vidourle, 5 Miles East of Anduse, and though it be none of the biggest, yet its Inhabitants had of late years the courage to Preach upon the ruins of their Temple, think∣ing that their example would be follow'd by their Neighbours; but they found themselves mistaken, and expos'd almost alone to the French King's rage, who caus'd the most part to be murthered or sent to the Gallies. Alais Alestum, upon the Northern Branch of the Gardon, three Leagues North-East of Anduse follow'd the same fate, submitting to Lewis XIII. after the taking of Privas in 1629. It has the Title of a County, and formerly belong'd to the Counts of Melgueil now Mauguio, issued from the Viscounts of Narbonne. The Diocese of Nismes extends it self still more North-West to Mount Lesperou in the Cevennes, and contains besides the Towns or Burroughs of Vezenobre, Toirax, Monsargues, La Sale, Sume∣re, S. Romans, Mondarchier, Le Vigan Vicanum a Viguery, Vissec, Arrey, Alzou Aumezas, &c.
Of the CEVENNES. THis Country the most North-Eastern and Mountainous part of Languedoc, has the Dioceses of Nismes and Lodeve on the South, Rouergue on the West, Auvergne and Forez on the North, and the Rhone of the East. These Mountains reach a great way through Auvergne and Languedoc, but their extent is commonly reckon'd from Lodeve to Montpezat, near the source of the Loire about 30 Leagues, and the name of CEVENNES more properly given to the Country about Anduse, Alais, St. Ambroise, and St. Hippolite. The Greek Authors call these Mountains , and the Latin Cemmeni Mon∣tes or Cebenna. Caesar says, that the Auvergnats were separated from the Helvians or Inhabitants of Vivarais by the CEVENNES; but other La∣tin Authors, as Pliny, Mela and Ausonius give that name to all that long ridg of Mountains, from the Rhone to the Pyrenées, and the Garonne, which formerly divided the Celtes from the Nar∣bonnoise Gaul. Nay some Geographers, as Oli∣varius, pretend that the Ancients comprehen∣ded, even the Mountains of Auvergne, under the general name of CEVENNES. Whatever be of that, here are several Lead and Tin Mines, and of Gold and Silver too, as De Valois be∣lieves,
which are not digg'd out and improved for want of Slaves. The Protestants were ve∣ry strong in this Country, and the convenien∣cy of the Mountains enabled them to resist Lewis XIII. but no Foreign Power taking their part, and even their Brethren of other Provin∣ces leaving them in the lurch they were soon forced to yield. In 1683, the Protestants be∣yond the Loire, or of the Southern parts of France, drew up a project, which had it been made sooner, or even then constantly and vigorously follow'd, would most probably have stopp'd the Persecution. (For Lewis XIV. how cruel soever he is, would have been loth to exterminate two Millions of Men.) Name∣ly they agreed amongst them, as many as could come together from several parts in those troublesome times, not to comply willingly any longer, with the Edicts and Declarations given against 'em, in order to pull down their Chur∣ches, to forbid their Assemblies, to put their Pastors into Prison, &c. but to obey God rather than Men, and generously to encounter Death and Martyrdom, still keeping themselves in a passive and defensive way. But the Inhabitants of the Wealthiest Cities; especially of such where the number of Roman Catholicks prevail'd, could not assent to, nor put this project into Execution. They being thus divided, having no Head to command 'em, nor any settled union and correspondence amongst themselves; this Brave and Christian resolution came to nothing, being only perform'd in some parts of the CE∣VENNES, and of the Valleys of Dauphiné, where it serv'd for a pretence to the Ministers of the
Popish barbarities, to represent 'em in Foreign Parts, as a set of seditious Men. However they never attacked any body; but because the King's Dragons pursued them into Forests and Desarts, whether soever they might retire themselves, the Men went arm'd with the Women and Children to keep them harmless. But the King's Officers took their time so well, that they seiz'd on the most couragious, and got 'em broken upon the Wheel. Those that remained united had the better fate, for many obtain'd passes to go out of the Kingdom. I have seen a young Man in Holland, who was one of the Heads of the Vivarois, that forc'd the Intendant or the King's Overseer in the Province, to grant him a Pass, and to 500 of his Camerades, and safely to conduct 'em on the Territories of Spain; whence, after they had suffered much by the blind and barbarous zeal of the Spaniards, and the cruelty of the Inquisitors, some at last made their escape into Protestant Countries. The Precincts of CEVENNES comprehends three small Countries, each of which keeps its separate States after the Assembly of the Gene∣ral States of Languedoc, viz. Vivarais on the East, Gevaudan on the West, and Velay on the North.
Of VIVARAIS. VIVARAIS comprehending the Dioceses of Viviers and Ʋzès, according to the division of some modern Geographers eaches 36 or 37 Leagues North and South om Mount Pilate, and the small River Limo∣, on the Borders of Lionois to the River ardon, that separates it from the Diocese of ismes, and 12, 14, or 17 East and West from e Rhone to the Mountains Cevennes. But VI∣ARAIS, properly so called, contains only the Diocese of Viviers, which is large enough to ve been the Inhabitation of the ancient Hel∣, being still 22 Leagues North and South. This People were comprised, as well as the In∣bitants of Ʋsès, under the Volcae Arecomici, de part of the Roman Province, or Galliae Narbonensis; and were so faithful to their Ma∣ers, that in the times of the conspiracy of e Gauls to recover their liberty, they made,  their own accord, incursions into Gevaudan d Velay; but were repuls'd. Cn. Pompeius de the VIVAROIS Subjects to the Mar∣ois. VIVARAIS is divided into Upper and Lower y the River Eryeu, each having a Bayliwick, e at Annonay for the Upper, and th' other
at Ville-neuve de Berg for the Lower. Tho parts that Border on the Mountains feed va numbers of Sheeps and Herds of Cattel, b produce only Rye and a little Wine, where¦in the Plains, especially along the Rhone, the grows abundance of Hemp, Corn, and Frui of all sorts, and such excellent Wines th Pliny makes mention of them. There are  ancient Barons, who by turns assist at the g¦neral States of Languedoc, and preside to t particular States of Vivarais, viz. 1. Joyeuse, S. Remaize, 3. Montlor, 4. Crussol, 5. La Vou 6. Annonay, 7. Largentiere, 8, Tournon, 9. Bo¦logne, 10. Aps, 11. Brion, 12. Chalencon annex to Privas. The Protestants were so numero in this Province, that in many places, the P¦pish Priest said Mass only for his Clerk and hi¦self. VIVIERS lies 500 paces West of the Rho upon the small River Scoutay, above 3 Leagu South-West of Montelimar, almost 3 Nort West of S. Paul-Trois-Chateaux, on the oth side of the Rhone in Dauphine, and 18 Nort East of Nismes. The Latin Authors call it ¦varium, since the 5th. Century. The origin of that modern name is unknown, for the C¦pital of the Helvians was call'd Alba Helvioru or Alba Augusta, and even gave the name Albenses to the Inhabitants of the whole Cou¦try. Neither is it a firmly grounded conj¦cture, that the old Barony of Aps, seated b¦twixt Mountains, near the source of the Sco¦ray, should be the ancient Alba Augusta, whi having been destroy'd by Crocus, King of t Alamanni, the Episcopal See should have be
ransferr'd to Viviers; because that Translation  mention'd no where. The most ancient Prelate f it, spoken of in History, is one Venantius, who bscribed to the Council of Epaone or Ponay,  Bishop of Albe and Viviers, at the beginning  the 6th. Century. This Diocese contains 155 Parishes, and depends on the Metropolitan  Vienne. The Bishop takes the Title of Count  Viviers, and Prince of Donzere and Chateau∣f. Annonay Annonaeum, a Marquisate upon the all River Deume, lies 3 Leagues West of the Rome, and almost 19 North of Viviers, in a very fruitful Soyl. It's the Capital of Upper VIVARAIS, and the Seat of a Bayliwick. Some pretend that it was formerly a Store-house of he Roman Armies. Most of the Inhabitants mbraced the Reformation in the last Age; so hat it remain'd under the Protestants, during he Civil Wars, notwithstanding the attempts he Leaguers made against it, in 1562 and 1563. Tournon, Turno Castrum, because it was for∣merly but a Castle seated on a neighbouring Hill, lies upon the Rhone, over against Thain i Dauphine, has the Title of a County, and has given name to an Illustrious Family, that has produc'd several Cardinals, and many Prelates. It's one of the ancientest Baronies in that Coun∣try, but is grown more famous and flourishing of late by a College of Jesuits, that draws thi∣her great numbers of Scholars. It was Foun∣ded by Francis Cardinal of Tournon, Archbishop of Lyons, under Charles IX. This Town has besides a Collegiate Church and several Mona∣steries,
and the County extends its Jurisdiction over 72 Parishes. Aubenas, Albenacum, is an indifferent goo Town, upon the steep of a Mountain wash'd b the River Ardesche, almost 8 Leagues North West of Viviers: Most of the Inhabitants wer Reform'd. Villeneuve de Berg, lies near th source of the Rivulet Hibie, 11 Miles West o Viviers. But though it be the Capital of th little Country of Les Botieres; yet 'tis only co¦siderable for its being the Seat of an inferio Judge or Baily. The other places of some note are, Serriere Andance, Chasteaubourg, Cornaz, Crussol, a Cou¦ty, Soyons a principality belonging to the Bisho of Valence in Dauphiné, Charmes, Beau-Chaste La Voulte, Poussin, Bays sur Bays, Meisse. Roche Maurette, Le Teil, Le Bourg St. Andiol; all sea¦ed along the Rhone, from North to South. I the middle of the Country, or near the Moun¦tains, you find upon the River Beaune Joyeus a Dutchy and Peerdom erected by Henry II in 1581, I.' Argentiere near the small Country o Borne, Vauguel, Mirabel, S. Laurent, Boulog l'Estrange, Meyras, Montpezat, Rioutort, nea the Borders of Velay, 3 Leagues down the sourc of the Loire, where that River is yet so narrow that a Lady having leap'd it over by putting foot on a Silver Plate, she laid in the middle o the Channel, made the Italians believe, she ha past over the Loire on a Silver-bridge. The you meet with Pierre-ville, Chalençon, Le Che¦lars, S. Agreve, &c.
Of the Diocese of Uzès. THis Diocese is included betwixt the Rivers Ardesche, Rhone, and Garden, and the ountains Cevennes; having the County Venais∣, the Principality of Orange, and the Trica∣is to the East, Vivarais to the North, and vaudan with the Diocese of Nismes to the West and South-West. Its length and breadth e almost equal, being about 12 or 14 Leagues. t drawing a diagonal North-West and South-ast from Villefort, near the Source of the Ar∣he, on the Borders of Gevaudan to Monfrain  the Gardon near its fall into the Rhone, the reguoi reaches above 18 Leagues. ƲZES, Vindomagus Volcarum Arecomicorum, d in latter Ages Ʋcetia or Castrum Ʋeciense,  near the Spring of the small River Aysene, uch after a course of 5 or 6 Miles dicharges  self into the Gardon. Magus is an old Gau∣ word, that signifies Habitation; and because is oft chang'd into r, and V into G, as Ca∣elus for Carantonus la Charante; so Vindo y have been said for Virdo, or Vardo the Gar∣. In the ancient Notices of the Gauls, this thedral Church is put in the last place, or  one before the last; but since the erection  the new Bishopricks, S. Pons de Tomiere's and
Alet, it is the 7th. in order. ƲZES had  first the Title of a Barony, then it was erecte into a Dutchy, and at last into a Dutchy a Peerdom in 1572, for Antony of Crussol. B¦sides this the Bishop is Count of the Town, an the King is also Conseigneur or Lord Partner, an has his Seat of Justice, and his Viguier or Bayly so that the King, the Bishop and the Duke, hav each their Castle, and their Jurisdiction, whic oft causes many disputes. ƲZES is pretty bi rich and trading, because of the Manufactory Cloaths, the Serges of ƲZES being renown throughout all the Kingdom. Most of the I¦habitants had embrac'd the Reformation, fo¦lowing the example of their Bishop John of Gelais, who turn'd Protestant with all his Cha¦ter, and ent for Ministers to Geneva in the la age; and there has been still a considerable R¦form'd Church, even till these latter times, Th City lies 4 Leagues of Languedoc, or eleven E¦glish Miles South of Nismes, and almost 8 co¦mon Leagues of France, North-West of Av¦non. Five Miles South-East of ƲZES, upon t River Gardon is to be seen the most sumptuo remainder of Roman Antiquities, that is exta perhaps in all the World. It's called Pont Guard pons Vardonis, and consists of three Bri¦ges built upon one another. The underm has 6 Arches, and is the common road of M and Beasts; the middlemost has eleven A¦ches, and the uppermost 30, the whole reac¦ing to the height of 82 Foot. Under these Bri¦ges is a Canal 6 Foot deep, and 3 broad c¦ver'd with large Stones, through which t
Water of the Gardon was made to pass, and to cend to the highest of those Bridges, whence  through an Aqueduct it was brought into smes, to serve for their Arens, Mills, and other . For Nismes being not seated on the bank  a River, and having but a small Fountain, as s been observ'd in its proper place, wants Water the most part of the Summer. These ridges, tho not so entire as to be of use, are ll however a glorious Monument of the Roman andure. On the North-East, above 9 Leagues from ZES, lies Pnt S. Esprit, a pretty strong own, and an important passage upon the Rhone; Wherefore it has a Cittadel and a par∣cular Governor. The Town has its name rom a Bridge, that is a curious piece of Work∣anship, being under-propt by 22 Arches, 1206 rench Toises, or 7236 Foot long, and 90 Foot ord. The other places of note in this Diocese, are amon, Ville-neuve-lez-Avignon, S. André, Roc∣emaure, Condoules, all upon the Rhone from South to North. Villefort and Chamhonas upon he Chassezat; Salavas and Ayguese upon the desche, S. Ambroise, Monclus, Cornillon, Bagnols pon the Ceze: Les Vens, Bane, Bezas, Bargeac, agnas, La Bastide de Virac, betwixt those two Rivers: Genouillas and Chambourigaud near the vennes; Couvillargues and Lodun upon the ve: Lussan betwixt the Ceze and Tave: Blan∣u near the Gardon, St. Laurens des Aubres near the Rhone, &c.
Of GEVAUDAN. THis Mountainous Country is separated from Velay and Vivarais by the Allier to th East; to the North it has Upper Auvergne, t the West Rouergue, and to the South the Dio¦cese of Nismes; reaching 22 Leagues North and South, from beyond Sialgues to Val Francesque and 18 East and West from Lambrusche to S Laurens de Revidol. It's the habitation of th ancient Gabales or Gabali, who were subjec to the Auvergnats. Though this Country lies betwixt 43 Deg 40 M. of Latitude, yet the Mountains are cover'd with Snow all the Winter, but the Plains na∣med Lower GEVAUDAN are indifferent fruit∣ful. The Inhabitants of the Mountains call'd Ʋpper GEVAUDAN or GIVAUDAN, as wel as their Neighbours of Ʋpper Vivarais, Ʋpper Velay, and Ʋpper Limosin, use to go into Spain every year before the beginning of the Winter, where they suffer themselves to be employ'd in the vilest Services to get their livelyhood. Wherefore the Spaniards use to call Gavaches from Gavali, poor, dirty, low-spirited Fel∣lows. Pepin, Head of the second race of the French Kings, Conquer'd this Country from Gaifer Duke
of Aquitain. In the IX Century the Governors of GEVAUDAN usurp'd the Soveraignty of it, rder the name of Counts. It fell afterwards to the share of the House of Rouergue, then to the Counts of Toulouse, and with their other E∣states was re-united to the French Crown in 1271. It was for the most part in the power of the Protestants during the Civil Wars. Mende, Memmas, Memmate or Mimmate, is ted at the foot of a Mountain, hard by the River Lot Olita, 26 Leagues East of Viviers, and almost 20 East of Rodez. Mende is an indiffe∣ent good Town, but is of no long standing, for s Original is related thus.Gregor. Turon. L. 1. c. 32. In the third Cen∣ry, under the Empire of Valerian and Gallien, he Alamanni, a German Nation, made an irru∣tion into the Gauls, and overflow'd like a Tor∣t most of the Southern Provinces of France, der their King Crocus. They took, plunder'd, nd ruin'd the City of the Gabales or Gevau∣an, which is now but a poor Village call'd avaux or Javoux, a word nearer to the La∣ia Gabali, than the very name of GEVAU∣DAN. Those that could make their escape re∣d into the Fortress of Gredo, now Greze, ted amongst Mountains, 3 Leagues South  Javaux, and almost four West of Mende;  the Bishop S. Privat fled into the Caverns  Memmate or Mende, whether the Germans low'd, and kill'd him with blows. The Holy elate was interr'd in the neighbouring Vil∣ge, that bore the name of the Cavern, and  veneration People had for his memory in∣creas'd
it by degrees to a considerable place. However it does not appear that the Episcopal Seat was transferr'd thither immediately after; for until the middle of the 10th. Century the Bishops of GEVAUDAN are call'd by no other name, but Gabalitani Episcopi, or Episcopi Civi∣tatis Gabalum or Gabalorum; neither was Ja∣vaux ever rebuilt; so that I am apt to believe that two neighbouring Towns, Marenge or Marveiois two Leagues South, and Mende eleven Miles South-West of Javaux, increas'd by it ruins; though the City of the Gabales still ob¦tain'd the seventh rank among the 8 Episcopa Sees of the first Aquitain, but that the Prelates of GEVAUDAN fix'd at last their Seat at Men∣de; great numbers of People resorting thithe by reason of the Sepulchre of S. Privat. The Bishop of Mende has a fine Palace there, he in∣titules himself Count of the Country by vir¦tue of an Agreement made with the French King Philip the Fair, in 1306. He also pretend to be Lord Partner of the Town with the King and to have right of coyning Money. The other places of some consideration in thi Country, are Sialgues, S. Lazier de Malzion Serverette, Chanac, La Canourgue, S. Chely d Tarn, S. Eremie, Quessas, where during the Civi Wars the Protestants made a Booty of Relick valued to 280 Marks; Espagnac, Bagnols, Bar∣res des Cevennes known by its fairs, and Mont∣wert. Chateau neuf de Randon is only a Village but famous by the death of that brave War∣rior Bertrand du Guesclin Lord High Constable o France. There are besides 8 Lordships tha give the Title of Barons to those Lords that assist
by turns at the General States of Languedoc, and eside at the particular of GEVAUDAN, viz. rceaur, Canillac Apcher, Peyre, Senaret, Tour∣, Randon and Florac. Of VELAY. VELAY, Vellavus Pagus, is included be∣twixt Vivarais on the East and South East, Gevaudan on the West and South West, Auvergne on the North West, and Fo∣retz on the North, reaching 18 Leagues North and South from Aurech in Foretz to Jonchieres on the Borders of Gevaudan, and above 16 East and West from Claas to Prades, in its greatest length and breadth. The Mountains of Mezi∣es, Pertuis and Meigal, which are cover'd with Woods, and run across the Country from North West to South East, divide it into Ve∣lay on this side, and Velay on that side the Woods. The Inhabitants are call'd by ancient Authors Vellavi, Vallavi and Velauni, and in Caesar's time were Tributaries to the Auvergnats; wherefore their Capital is named indifferently Podium Avernorum, and Podium Vellavorum, le Fay en Auvergne, and le Puy en Velay. Le Puy, so call'd from the Mountain, on which it's seated, (Puy in old Gaulish signifying a Hill) lies 16 Leagues South West of Annonay, and al∣most
14 North East of Mende. It seems not to have been always the Capital of Velay; for Pto∣lomy names it Rovesio, and the Maps of the Em∣peror Theodosius, publish'd by the Brothers Peu∣tingers, Revessio, which is taken by some mo∣dern Authors for S. Paulian, a small Town, two Leagues off Languedoc North, North West of Le Puy; whence, say they, S. Evodius, or as the vulgar call him S. Vosy, translated the Episco∣pal See to Mont-Anis, Montem Anicium; where∣upon Le Puy has been since built. And accord∣ingly Gregory of YoursL. x. c. 25. speaks of the City of the Velauni, and of Anicium, as of two diffe∣rent places. However, the time of this Tran∣slation is uncertain, and seems not to have pre∣ceded the sixth or seventh Century; for 'tis on∣ly since that time that the Volains are call'd in∣differently Velauni and Puates or Buates. Le Puy is now the biggest City in Languedoc after Toulouse, to whose Parliament its Bayliwick and Presidial-seat resort. The Bishop intitles himself Count of Velay, pretends to the Right of Fallium, to be free from the Jurisdiction of his Metropolitan the Archbishop of Bourges, and to be immediately Suffragan to the Pope. He boasts to have in his Cathedral, dedicated to our Lady the PraeputiumDu Chesne. of our Saviour, or that Flesh that was cut off when he was circumcis'd, together with the mitre of Aaron, the first High-priest of the Jews; and such fine Relicks can∣not fail of producing strange wonders, and drawing great numbers of People in order to present them with Oblations, which is the prin∣cipal
aim. The Chapter is made up of a Dean, a Provost, a Singer, a Treasurer, a Sexton, the Abbot of S. Peter, the Abbot of S. Evodius, and 24 Prebendaries. The other places worth taking notice of are, Montfaucon, Tence, Duniere, S. Didier, Monistrol en Velay, Craponne, Chalencon, Issignaux on the North East side of the Woods, S. Paulian, La Volte, Solignac, S. Privat, Chapteys, Le Mona∣stier, S. Chastie, on the South West.
CHAP. XVI. Of PROVENCE. IT's known that 60 or 70 years before the intire Conquest of the Gauls by Julius Cae∣sar, the Romans having vanquish'd the Sa∣lians, and the Allobroges in 631 and 632 of Rome, reduc'd into a Province the South-Eastern part of the Gauls, included betwixt the Cevennes, Mount-Jura, the Alps and the Mediterranean Sea, and call'd Gallia Braccata, or the Gauls wear∣ing Breaches. They pleased themselves more in this Country, than in any other of their Con∣quests, for which reason they us'd to name it Our Province, or absolutely the Province. In process of time several Changes, Divisions and Subdivisions having been made, that part near∣est to the Sea, and Italy carried alone the name of Provincia, or Provence in the Country Lan∣guage; probably because of the strict relation it kept with Italy, in the midst of all those Re∣volutions.
Gallia Narbonensis was subdivided into five Provinces, the first and second Narbonnoise, the Viennoise, the Greek, the Apennin, and the Ma∣ritim Alps. PROVENCE is made of the second Narbonnoise, except Gap, the Maritim Alps, ex∣cept Embrun, together with the Dioceses of Vaison, Orange, Caraillon, Avignon, Carpentras, Arles, and Marseille taken from the Viennoise. And therefore it borders to the North on the Tricastinois, Diois, Gapencois and Embrunois, which make part of Dauphiné, to the East the Alps, and the Rivers Var and Tence separate it from the County of Nice and Marquisate of Saluces, to the South and South East it has the Mediter∣ranean Sea, and to the West the Rhone divides it from the Dioceses of Nismes and Ʋzès in Lan∣guedoc; so that it reaches above 42 Leagues North and South, from La Breoulz on the fron∣teers of Embrunois to Cape de Dormes in the Isle of Porquerolles, and above 53 East and West, from the Confluence of the Tence and Var to the Rhone, betwixt Condoules in Languedoc, and Caderousse in the Principality of Orange. In the decay of the Roman Empire, the Wisi∣goths and Burgundians conquer'd this Province. Theodoric an Ostrogoth King having master'd Ita∣ly, seiz'd upon PROVENCE under pretence of Guardianship to Atalaric King of the Wisigoths his great Grandson. The French King Clovis, and his four Sons expell'd the Goths out of PROVENCE; and when, that famous General of the Emperor Justinian, Belisarius had recon∣quer'd Italy by the defeat of Theodat and Viti∣ges Kings of the Goths, he thought fit to yield PROVENCE to the French, lest he should draw
such powerful Enemies upon him. In the di∣vision the Sons of the Emperor Lewis the Meek made of his Dominions, PROVENCE together with Italy fell to the share of Lotharius the el∣dest of 'em. And though during the weakness of the French Monarchy, Counts usurp'd the So∣vereign Power in PROVENCE, as did one Ro∣baud or Rtbld about the year 900, which was continued almost six Centuries through several Families; yet these Counts were sometimes Kings in Italy, as Boson, his Son Hugh, and the Dukes of Anjou, who were Counts of PRO∣VENCE, and Kings of Naples and Sicily, from Charles II. call'd the Lamb in 1285 to Charles IV. Sirnamed du Maine, that bequeathed by his Will the County of PROVENCE to Lewis XI. and the French King's Successors in 1481. The Rivers of PROVENCE, besides the Buech and the Durance, that are describ'd in Dauphiné, are the Rivulets of Sosse, Jabron, Bleone, Targue, Laro and Asse, falling into the Durance from Sisteron to Manosque. The Verdon rises in the Mountains of the Diocese of Digne, washes Col∣mars, Castellane, Montpezat, receives the Issolet, the Nartabre, and the Auvestre, and mixes with the Durance at S. Paol. The Rocks and steep downfalls of the Durance hinder it from being navigable, till about this place; however it's yet increas'd with the Tese, the Durancole, the Calevon, that goes through Apt, and some other Rivulets before it discharges it self into the Rhone, betwixt Avignon and Barbentane. The Louveze springs in the Baronies, at a place call'd Montauban, goes through le Buys, Molans, Val∣zon, receives the Russe that waters Carpentras,
and the Sorgues at Pont de Sorgues, that falls in∣to the Rhone, a Leagues North of Avignon. The Tolobre and the Arc and Lionne fall into the Gulph of Martegue: The Veaune into the Bay of Mar∣seille near Chateau d'if; the Aran discharges it self into the Sea near La Ciutat; the Gapcau near Hyeres, the Batailler into Cape negre, the Gisole into Gulf de Grimaut. Then you meet with the Alla, the Candune, the Caranne, the Caujou or Chalilan, the Pis, the Tendole, which joyn together betwixt Roquebrune and Frejus, and mix with the Sea near Cape S. Vincent. Far∣ther Eastwards are the Rairan or River d' Agan, the Bencon, the Siagne, and the Loup. At last you find the Var, that takes its source in Em∣brunois, receives the Tuebie, the Coremp, the Vaine, goes through Glandeves, and La Pene, is increased with the Tence, the Vesubie, and the Estern, and disembogues its Waters into the Sea, betwixt Nice and S. Laurens. PROVENCE view'd in a Map affords but an unpleasant prospect, for it seems as though the greatest part of it were cover'd with barren Mountains. However it is not so, for except in some few places of the Bayliwick of Seyne, bordering upon Embrunois, all the other Moun∣tains are fruitful Hills or Hillocks, which not only produce the best Corn, and the most deli∣cious Wine in France, but sometimes one and the same Mountain will yield such Fruits as re∣quire a different Climate; being cover'd on the South side with Vines, Plume, and Olive-trees, Pomegranates, Oranges, Citrons, Limons, and on the North side with Cherries, Apples, Pears, Almonds, and Walnuts. Neither does the Coun∣try
want Pastures and Woods, especially in the Northern parts, though the latter be not in great quantity, because of the industry of the Inhabitants. The Air is as temperate as the Soyl is fruitful, for the Sky is clear most part of the year, and rain falls very seldom. The Sou∣thern parts along the Sea-coast would be very hot, were it not for the Bize or North Wind, that refreshes and purifies the Air, but creates a severe cold when it blows in Winter. Those that keep there Sheep and Herds of Cattel send them in Summer to Devolui and other Moun∣tains of Dauphiné, having Pastures of their own, the greatest part of the Winter. They make vast quantity of Silk, by feeding Silk-worms with leaves of Mulberry-trees, as also Salt upon the Sea-coasts. Thence are transported into Foreign Countries the Salicor a kind of Ashes fit to make Glasses and Soap of; together with Saffron, Vermilion, Cork, and Rosin, an oily juice running out of the Male Pine-trees. The few heaths and wastes that are there; are cover∣ed with Thyme, Hysop, Lavander, Rosemary, Sage, Juniper, and Myrtle-trees. The Provencaux, or Inhabitants of PRO∣VENCE ae ingenious and industrious, Dante and Petrarcha, two famous Italian Poets, ascribe to their Troubados or Trouveres the invention of Rythm'd Poetry, and they make still indifferent good Rythms in their Country Language. The Protestants have not been vey many in PRO∣VENCE, since the barbarous Murther commit∣ted on the Vaudois of Merindol and Cabrieres. When I liv'd there, that is 15 years ago, they had but 7 or 8 Churches, which are since de∣stroy'd
with all the others of France. In those days they already complain'd of their exorbi∣tant Taxes, with a very expressive Proverb, Lou Languedoc is ruinad, La Prouvence es accou∣mencade. The ruin of Languedoc is finished, and that of PROVENCE is begun; but now I be∣lieve they have but little reproach one another. PROVENCE is divided into Upper and Lower: The Upper lies on the North side of the River Durance, Verdon, and Esteron, nearer to Dauphiné, and the Lower on the South side, along the Sea-coast; but lest I should forget some part of it, I shall treat of each Diocese af∣ter one another, and begin with Aix the Ca∣pital.
Of the Diocese of AIX. THis Diocese is included betwixt those of Marseille, Arles, Apt, Riez, Frejuls and Toulon, and is the biggest of all, reach∣ing 26 Leagues East and West from beyond Cotignac near the Diocese of Frejus to the Plains of la Crau, and about 10 North and South. This Country was anciently inhabited by the Salians, Salyes, Salyi, or Saluvii, and 'tis in this Territory that C. Marius gave a total over∣throw to the Cimbres killing 150000 of them. The City of AIX, Aquae Sextiae, or Aquensis Civitas, is within a Musket-shot of the little River Arc, 5 Leagues of Provence North a Mar∣seilles. It is very Ancient. Caius Sextus a Pro∣consul carried thither a Roman Colony, in 632, of Rome, and made the warm Bathes from which it draws its name, though the Bathes be not longer in being. It is graced with an Archbi∣shoprick, a Parliament, a Court of Accounts, a Court of Aydes; the first Seat of the Senes∣chal of Provence, a Generality, a Chamber of Mint, a Lieutenant General of the great Senes∣chal of the Province, an Ordinary Judge for the Town, and another for the King called Viguier; besides an University for the Law and Physick; it has been plunder'd by the Longo∣bardi
and Saracens, in the 4th. and 7th. Centu∣ries. The Counts of Provence, who lived there did inlarge it; but 'tis much altered for the better upon all accounts since that time, and is one of the pleasantest, and best built Cities in France. S. Saviour is the Metropolis, where is a high Hexagon Tower to be seen; the Font is of an admirable Structure, and all of white Marble, supported by fufile Columns round a∣bout like a Dome: The Chappel of our Lady of Grace is very rich, and that of S. Maximin very Ancient and Holy. The Chapter consists of a Provost, an Archdeacon, a Capiscol, a Sex∣ton, a Penitentiary, and 15 Canons; there are also some Incumbents or Prebendaries, and a most delicate Musick, two other Parishes, viz. S. Magdalen, and the Holy Ghost, divers Mona∣steries, and a College of Jesuits. S. Maximin above 9 Leagues East of AIX, is the Seat of a Baily, but much more famous for a pretended S. Ampulla, and the Body of S. Ma∣ry Magdalen said to be kept here in a Collegiate Church, serv'd by Dominican Fryers. Many a∣mongst us would rather chuse the Case than the Relick, for the Case is all of pure Gold, being the figure of a Woman, held up by two Angels, and Crown'd with a golden Crown enriched with Diamonds; whereas the Relick may be, for ought I know, the Skeleton of some old Bawd. Nine Miles South West of S. Maximin, lies in the midst of a thick wood the Cavern of la S. Baume, where the Legendaries say, that S. Mary Magdalen passed 33 years in a retir'd and penitent life; after she was arriv'd thither from
Palestina in a rotten Ship, without any Pilot, in company of Lazarus, S. Martha, and Cesido∣nius, pretended to be that young Man Born blind, whom our Saviour cur'd. This Cavern is spacious being near 500 Foot high, and the Rock wherein 'tis digg'd is all of white Marble. The place belongs to the Diocese of Marseille. Brignole, Brinonia, so famous for its Pluims, is likewise the head of a Bayliwick; as also Bar∣jols or Barjoux. The other places of note are, Esparonde de Pallieres, Rians, Tonques, S. Paol, Sambuc, Peyroles, Lambese, Pelissane, Alencon, Aguiles, Fuveaux, Peinies, Trets, Porrteres, Tor∣revez, La Val, Carces a County, Cotignac and Foz.
Of the Diocese of Riez. THis mountainous and small Country, borders upon the Dioceses of Aix, Apt, Sisteron, Senez, and Frejus, and is water'd by the Ver∣don. It was the habitation of the ancient Al∣bici, Reii, Segoregii, or rather Segoreii, who from the Worship of Apollo were sirnam'd Apol∣linares. Their Capital Alebece Reiorum, Apol∣linarium is ancienter than Aix, which as it has been observ'd was a Roman Colony, whereas this City seems to have been built by the Na∣tives, who before that time did often wage War with the Salians and Massilienses. It is a little Town well built, seated on the Source of the Auvestre, almost 16 Leagues North East of Aix. The Bishop is Lord Temporal of it, and the se∣cond Suffragan of Aix. The Cathedral is de∣dicated to our Lady. The famous Semipelagian Faustus Rejensis was Bishop of it. There have been found many ancient Inscriptions. The most considerable places are La-Palu, where is the famous Hermitage of S. Maurin Monstiers a Bayliwick, Pymoisson, Valencole, Al∣lemagne, Montpezat.
Of the Diocese of SENEZ. THis Country is also very mountainous and small, and water'd by the Verdon. It's in∣cluded betwixt the Dioceses of Riez, Sisteron, Digne, Glanderez, Vence, Grace and Frejus. This Diocese made part of the Province call'd Mari∣tim Alps, and was anciently inhabited by a Peo∣ple nam'd Vesdiantii by Ptolomy, and Vendiantii Cemenelii by Pliny; so that there was another Bishoprick Cemenelium, which is perhaps Ca∣stellane. The City of SENEZ, Sanitium Vesdiantiorum Civitas Sanitiensium, or Sanitio, is very small and little inhabited; its Bishop is Suffragan of Ambrun; it is seated betwixt Mountains, on the source of the Asse. Its Prelate resides now at Castellane, upon the Verdon. The Chapter that was of the Order of S. Austin, was made Secular by Innocent X. in 1647. it is composed of a Provost, an Archdeacon, a Sexton and 5 Ca∣nons, of which one is Chamberlain. The Ca∣thedral is consecrated under the name of the Assumption of the B. Virgin. The places of some note are, Castellane a Bailywick, Colmars, Mevoiles, Clumeng, Lem∣brusche and Barremes.
Of the Diocese of DIGNE. THis Diocese is one of the smallest, and of the least revenue in France, bringing hard∣y 3 or 400 l. to its Prelate, and having not bove 27 Baptismal Churches. It lies betwixt hose of Senez, Sisteron, and Ambrun. It is ve∣y mountainous, and water'd by two small Ri∣ers, the Issolet, and the Bleone. It was formerly in∣abited by the Bodiontii and Sentii, who had DIGNE, Dinia, or Dina for their Capital, that 00 years ago was a considerable place being ivided into City and Burrough. The City has till three Gates, is surrounded with Walls, and efended by square Towers; and the ruin'd alls of the Burrough shew it to have been 600 ces in Circuit. Its first decay came from at King Renatus, Count of Provence, transfer∣ed to the City the Fairs that were in the Bur∣ugh, An. 1437, and during the Civil Wars of e last Age, the Inhabitants retiring to the y, as to the strongest place, left the Bur∣ugh almost Desart. DIGNE is seated at the Foot of a Mountain, sh'd by the River Bleone, which receives there e Mardaric, a Rivulet of warm Water, that akes this City famous for its Bathes. It has a meschal Seat, a Bailywick, and a Bishoprick
Suffragan of Ambrun. Our Lady is the Cathe∣dral Church, whose Chapter which was once Regular, of the Order of S. Austin, is now com∣posed of a Provost, a Capiscol, a Sexton▪ and 9 Canons, of which one is an Incumbent, with 8 Prebendaies more, and 2 Parsons. The most considerable places are, Mirabel Aiglun, Corbons, Brusquet-Toart-Collobrioux, and Verdache. As to Seyne, which Robbe and hi transcriber Dela Croix put in this Diocese, it de¦pends upon Embrun. Of the Diocese of ARLES. THis Diocese extends 18 Leagues East an West, from Salon on the Brders of th Diocese of Aix to Peccais in Languedoc, and i North and South, from beyond Tarascon to th Mediterranean Sea. The City of ARLES, Arels, Arelatae, Arel¦te, or Arelatum, lies upon the Rhone with a Archbishoprick, a Seneschal's Seat, and an Ac¦demy of Humane Learning associated to th of Paris. It was formerly the Chief of th Kingdom of Burgundy and Arles: The Roma settled there their Sixth Colony, and there a still to be seen the remains of an Amphith¦atre, of an Obelisque, a great many Mausole (or stately Tombs) of the Ancients witho
the City, and many other considerable Monu∣ents of Antiquity. The Original of ARLES s uncertain because too ancient; 'tis sure that t is of Gaulish Foundation. At first there were only Houses on the East de of the Rhone; but the Emperor Constantine the Great, built a new Town on the West side, nd joyn'd it to the old with a fine Bridge. He leas'd himself extremely in this City: Here  was, that his youngest Son Constantine was Born, that he call'd a Council against the Do∣tists, that he established the Seat of the Cap∣ain General or Governor of the Gauls; and besides that, he would it to bear his name, and o be call'd Constantina for the future, though is orders as to that, have not been obey'd. The Church of Arles is said to have been ounded by S. Trophime, Disciple of S. Paul. The Secular Power of this City has contributed uch to that of the Church. It was at first Suffragan to Vienne, but erected to a Metropo∣is, under the Empire of Hnorius. Then it had  Suffragans, viz. Marseille, Orange, S. Paul∣uis-Chasteaux, Toulon, Avignon, Vaison, Carpen∣tas, Cavaillon. But Avignon having been made  Primate, has carried away the 3 last with it elf: To compensate this loss, the Popes made e Archbishops of ARLES. Vicars of the Ro∣an See in the Gauls; with power to declare aster, to ordain Bishops, and to celebrate Councils. The Chapter of the Cathedral con∣ists of 20 Canons, among which there is a Pro∣st, an Archdeacon, a Sexton, an Arch-priest,  Capiscol, a Treasurer, a Primicier, and a Theologal; there are also 20 Prebendaries, or
Incumbents: It was made Secular in 1497, un¦der Nicolas Cibo. The Territory of this City  50 Leagues in Circuit, consisting in two Islands called Great and Little Carmargue, formed b two Branches of the Rhone, and in the Crau the latter is a large extent of Land covere with Flint Stones; on which Aeschylus says that Jupiter rain'd Stones to destroy the Lig¦rians, that were fighting against his Son Hercu¦les. This stony Champaign produces little Win and Corn, but there are vast quantities of Sim¦ples and Vermilion. As to the Camargue, whic has its name from Caius Marius, vanquisher  the Cimbers; the Pastures that these Island bring forth are so good, that the Cattel tha feeds upon them, grows extraordinary fierce an strong. Tarascon, Tarasco Salyorum was the Capital  the Salyies before the building of Aix. It lie 3 Leagues North of ARLES, and above 5 Sou West of Avignon, upon the River Rhone, ov against Beaucaire, next to a little Island, whic as it increases every day, so it will at last ma the Proverb prove a lye. That, Betwixt Thain and Tournon. Betwixt Beaucaire and Tarascon, There feeds neither Cow nor Mutton. This I observe to shew that new Islands m be form'd by the Rivers and Sea, washing a carrying away the ground, and letting it su¦side when they meet with a stop. Tarascon h an indifferent good Castle, built by Renatus of Sicily, and Count of Provence; a Collegia
Church, wherein they boast to have the Relicks of S. Martha, and several Monasteries. Besides his, 'tis the head of many Villages resorting to s Viguier. There happen'd of late a pretty Story: A Man digging in his Cellar, met with  Wall and an Iron-gate, which he caused to e open'd, and found it led into a vaulted way, ut there he heard such a frightful noise, that e durst not proceed farther. The Magistrate was advis'd of it, and with much ado got a Man condemn'd to dye to go through, who at the end of that way met with another Iron-gate, which was likewise shut, and at which he nock'd in vain. He related that the noise in∣creas'd whilst he went along, but that as he came nearer to the other Gate, it seem'd as though he left that noise behind him. This relation kindled the stronger the Magistrate's cu∣riosity, who still big with the hopes of undis∣cover'd Treasures, got some Masons to go and open the Gate, by promising them the 25th part of whatever should be found: They perform'd it accordingly, and found that this Gate led in∣to Beaucaire. Since what time the Masons of Tarascon use to say in a jearing way, that the 25th. part of Beaucaire belongs to them. The other places of note are, Salon, a pret∣ty good Town with a Principality, depending pon the Archbishop of ARLES, but more known for being the Birth and burying Place of that famous Astrologer Michael Nostradamus. Les Baux, a Marquisate belonging to the Prince of Monaco, and formerly a Principality belong∣ing to the Princes of Orange. S. Martin in the Crau, Notre-Dame de Dormet, and les Trois Ma∣ries
in the great Camargue; S. Remi, S. Ga∣briel, Orgon, Senas, S. Chamas, Berre that ha good Salt-pits, Vitrolles, Istres, Marignane, Fer∣riere, the Isle of Martegue, Jonquieres, &c. Bu I conclude, because the remarkable things tha are in the Diocese of ARLES would require a whole Volume. Of the Diocese of Marseille. THis Diocese that lies on the Sea-coast is ve∣ry narrow, having the Gulf and Island of Martegue on the West, the Archbishoprick of Aix on the North, the Bishoprick of Toulo on the East, and the Sea on the South. The City of MARSEILLE, Massilia, or Mas∣salia, is upon the Mediterranean Sea, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Arles, an Admirality a Seneschal's Court, a Bayliwick, and other Jurisdictions; its Port is sheltered from Winds, and so good, that it has never been heard a Ship has perished in it. And therefore it's the usual abode of the Gallies, and where most Merchant-men of the Levant do resort; which render it very Populous and Trading. The Phoceans or Phocenses, who came from Phocea, a Colony of Athens in that part of Asia called Ionia, were its Founders. In Caesar's time this City was flourishing, was a kind of Repub∣lick,
and had a famous University. The Ro∣mans had a great esteem for it, and made an Alliance with it. It has undergone many revo∣lutions, and sustained many Wars; it has had its Viscounts, and divers other Sovereign Lords, and was at last united to the Crown at the same time, as the rest of Provence, viz. in 1481. This City has been the Mother of many great Men, and is now one of the biggest, finest, and best built of the Kingdom; since it has been inlar∣ged by the French King's order. The Port, the Arcenal, the Cittadel, the Gallies; many other Buildings, the South Walk or Race, the New Streets, the Markets, the neat and stately Hou∣ses, Churches, Monasteries, Seminaries, Hospi∣tals, the College of the Fathers of the Oratory, the Fountains, &c. are worth the curiosity of Strangers. I would have spoken here of the Original of MARSEILLE, of its Foundation by the Pho∣ceans and Cenomani, of its Government, Laws, Academy of Humane Learning, of its Manufa∣ctories, Trade, Wars, Conquests, Colonies, of its Alliance with the Romans, of the Changes, and Revolutions it has undergone under the Goths, Sarracens, the French Kings, the Counts of Provence, and its own Viscounts. The other places of note in this Diocese are, Aubagnes, Roquevayre, Oriols, Cassis, La Ciou∣tat, famous for its Muscadie Wines, and for the Fabrick of Polacres, a kind of Vessels us'd on the Mediteranean Sea, Olliols, La Cadiere, le Castelet, &c.
Of the Diocese of TOULON. THE Diocese of TOƲLON, lies also upon the Sea-coasts to the East of that o Marseille, to the South of that of Aix and to the West of that of Frejus. The City of TOƲLON, Telo Martius, lies upon the Mediterranean Sea, almost 15 Leagues Eas of Marseille, with a very fine Port and Road a great Arcenal, a Bailywick, and a Bishoprick Suffragan of Arles. It is very ancient; Hen. IV fortified it with good strong Walls, and buil there two great Moles of 700 Paces each, which do almost cover all the Port. This present King has finish'd this Work, begun by his Grandfa∣ther, whose description would require a grea Volume; there are fine Houses, a great many Churches and Monasteries, the Cathedral has many Relicks, its first Bishop is esteem'd to be S. Honoratus, and Hyeres is a little Town, four Leagues East of TOƲLON on the Sea, over a∣gainst the Isles Hyeres. It has a Viguery, and many Burroughs and Villages depending on it. The other places are Sifours, Cenari, Solyes, La Valette, Turris, Cuers, Le Puget, Pierrefuec, Bor∣mes, &c.
Of the Diocese of FREJUS. THis Diocese lies also upon the Sea-Coast, be∣twixt those of Toulon, Aix, Riez, Senez, and Grace, reaching 15 Leagues East and West, and 17 North and South. This Country was anciently inhabited by the Suelteri or Selteri. The Capital Frejus, Forum Julii, or Civitas Foro-Juliensis, is a Colony of the Romans, and had formerly so good a Haven, that the Emperor August kept there his Fleet for the defence and security of the Gauls. This City lies now in a Fen, half a League from the Sea, on the River Argens with an in∣different Port, and a Bishoprick the 4th. Suf∣fragan of Aix; there are some remains of Anti∣quity to be seen: for this City is very ancient, and was very considerable heretofore, as may be seen in many famous Authors. The other places of note are, S. Tropès, a good Sea-port Town, seated on Golfe de Grimaut Si∣nis, or Plagia Samblacitana. Draguignan ano∣ther good Town, upon the River Pis 6 Leagues and a half North West of FREJƲS, the Seat of the Viguier of this Diocese, Callian, Fayence, Seillans, Bargemes, Comps, Bargamon, Caillas, Eigueniere, Taurene, Flayose, Lorgues, Trans,
Les-Arqs, Le-Muy, Le-Luc, Cogolin, Grimaut, Roquebrune, La-Napole. Of the Diocese of GRACE. THE Diocese of GRACE lies on the East of that of Frejus, on the West of that of Vence, and the South of that of Senez: It was anciently inhabited by the Deciates, one of the Ligurian Nations, that liv'd on this side of the Alps. The City of GRACE, Grassa, lies on a small River, two Country Leagues North of the Sea, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Ambrun; a Vi∣guery or a Court of Justice. The Episcopal See was transferr'd thither from Antibes, by Pope Innocent IV. in 1250. by reason of the bad Air, and the Incursions of Pyrates; it is a pretty Town, fortify'd with a good Cittadel, &c. The most considerable places are, Antibe, An∣tipolis a good Sea-port Town, and a Colony of the Marseillois, Canes upon Cape de la Croix, Mogins, Cesari, Cipieres, Le Bar, Chateau-neuf.
Of the Diocese of VENCE. THis Maritim Country, the ancient habitation of the Nerusii, has the Diocese of Grace to the West, that of Glandeve to the North, and the County of Nice to the East. The Dioceses of Grace and VENCE are very small, and afford but little Revenue. The City of VENCE, Vintium, lies five Leagues North East from Grace, and two North of the Sea. It has a Bayliwick and a Bishop∣rick Suffragan of Ambrun. It is very ancient; the temporal Dominion is divided between the Bishop and the Baron of VENCE. The Cathe∣dral is dedicated to our Blessed Lady. The famous Poet Godeau, who has made a Pa∣raphrastical Translation in French Rythms of the Psalms, and the Canticle of Solomon, writ∣ten a Church History, &c. was Bishop of Grace and VENCE; for these two Dioceses are oft joyn'd, because of their nearness and smal∣ness. There are but four places of note in the Dio∣cese of VENCE, viz. Cagne and S. Laurens near
the Sea; S. Paol on the South side of VENCE, and Le Broc near the Var. Of the Diocese of GLANDEVE. BEfore the Romans and French, this Country was inhabited by a Ligurian Nation call'd Velauni. It lies now about the Var and Vaine, having the Bishopricks of Grace and Vence to the South, the County of Beuil to the East, part of Embrunois to the Noth, and the Dio∣ceses of Digne and Senez to the West. The City of GLANDEVE or Glannateva, on the South side of the Var with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Ambrun, is now almost ruin'd; for the Bishop makes his residence at a Burrough called Entrevaux, which has been built on the other side of the River, with the Ruins of the City, &c. The other places of note are, Guilleumes the Seat of the Viguier for this Diocese. It lies at the foot of a Mountain on the North side of the Var, Colmars upon the Verdon, Annot upon the Vaine, these three are accounted Towns; the others are but Burroughs or good Villages, viz. Toramenes, Le Poget, La Pene, &c.
Of the Diocese of SISTERON. THis Diocese seems to have had no particular Inhabitants, but to have made part of the Country of the Cavares; however it be, it bor∣ders on the Bishoprick of Digne to the East, on Gapencois and the Baronnies to the North, on the County Venaissin to the West, and on the Dio∣ceses of Apt and Riez to the South. The City of Sisteron Secustero, or perhaps Acu∣sio Colonia, lies extended in length upon the confluence of the Buech and Durance, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Aix, in the Upper Pro∣vince, it has a Bayliwick, a small Cittadel, and a Castle. The most considerable places are, Forcalquier Forum Calcarium, or Fons Calcarius. This Town was the Portion of the youngest Sons of the Counts of Provence. It has a good Cit∣tadel, a Viguier and several Privileges. The French King is call'd in the publick Acts issued from the Parliament of Aix, Count of Pro∣vence and Forcalquier. Manosque is another pretty Town, lying on the Durance 11 Leagues South of Sisteron, and belonging to the Knights of Maltha. The other are but Burroughs or Villages, as Rosset, Castelet, Puy-michel, Orezon, La Brelhane, Luiz, les Meez, Peyruis; Mont∣fort was formerly a Barony belonging to the Counts of Provence, and had then a very strong
Castle; but it has been demolished, and the place is now an inconsiderable Village. How∣ever its Territory is still very large, and it has a Forest of 6 Leagues in circuit depending on it, and call'd La Combe de S. Donat. In the Viguery of Forcalquier are S. Michel, Manne, Si∣miane, &c. Of the Diocese of APT. IT was anciently inhabited by the Vulgientes, and is now included betwixt the Viguery of Forcalquier, the County Venaissin, and the Archbishoprick of Aix. The City of APT, Apta Julia Vulgientium, is a little Town on the River of Calevon, with a Bishoprick Suffragan of Aix, and a Bayliwick; It is very ancient, for it was one of the biggest and most famous Towns of the Celtes, and the chief of the Vulgientians under the Romans: Julius Caesar, or rather some of his Successors liked it so well, that he encreas d it, made it a Roman Colony, and gave it the name of the Conqueror of the Gauls. The Bishop of APT is the first Suffragan of Aix, and its first Pre∣late is S. Auspicius a Martyr. The Bishops of this City call themselves Princes of APT, and had heretofore the privilege of coyning Money. There is to be seen a vast Treasure of Relicks, especially of S. Auspicius, and S. Mark the Ab∣bot in the Cathedral of S. Anne: And of Count
Eleazar, of S. Delphine his Wife both Virgins, and of S. Margaret their Maid-servant, in the Church of the Franciscans. Saut is an ancient County near the source of the River Sorgues belonging to the Dukes of Lesdiguieres. The other places are, Lambez, S. Savornin Gordes, Reilhane, Beaumont, Mirabeau, Tour d'Ay∣gues a strong hold with one of the finest Hou∣ses in the Province; Lourmarin, Merindol, Me∣nerbe, Aupede and Cabrieres, were good Bur∣roughs, whilst inhabited by the Vaudois, but since their barbarous Murther, they are but in∣considerable places. I shall give here a more faithful account of it than that partial Scribler Morery, who says enough, however to make appear the unheard Cruelties of the Roman Church. It must b observed before all, that time out of mind the Lords of France were not properly Sub∣jects, but only Vassals to the King, and Sovereigns under him; and that their Fees, Castles & Mannors could not be ransack'd or pull'd down, nor their Subjects abused or kill'd, unless it were for Crime of High Treason. Now the places of Merindol, Cabrireres, La Coste, &c. whether the Vaudois resorted, belong'd to a Lord, who prote∣cted them, and all the Crimes they were found guilty of was to profess the same Religion, that was persecuted in other Parts of France, and to give retreat to such as escaped the bloody Hands of their Murderers. The French King Francis the I. prevailed upon by the Monks, gave out a severe Edict against all the Protestants, in 1535, and the Parliament of Aix condemned
to be burned 19 Inhabitants of Merindol, and the neighbouring places, most of whom were Mi∣nisters; but the first President Chassanée, a learned Lawyer superseded the Execution of it. He was suceeded by a most cruel Man, John Meynier, Baron of Oppede, or Auppede who making use of the ab∣sence of the King's Lieutenant, the Count of Grig∣nan, put himself at the head of the Troops, that were in that Province, accompanied by a Capt. called the Baron of La Garde, the second Pre∣sident, two Counsellors, and William Guerin, Advocate General of that Parliament. Thus they went on to Merindol, and were reinforced in their way by the Troops of the Pope's Legate from Avignon. The poor Vaudois retired into Woods and Mountains; so that the Persecutor's Army found nothing in their Villages and Bur∣oughs; but old and sick Men, Women and Chil∣dren, however they had the Barbarity of Mur∣dering every one of them, and burning and razing all their Habitations, nay even of hang∣ing 30 of them, who had surrendred themselves upon Terms. Maimburg confesses, that there were 3000 murdered, 600 sent to the Gallies, 24 Villages, and 900 Houses burnt; but others make it amount to a far greater number. This hapned in 1546, when Francis the first had Notice of it, he was sensible of the injustice they had done; saying, that they had made use of his Name, to destroy the most honest Men in his Kingdom, and therefore ordered at his Death, which happened some Months after, to his Son and Successor, Henry the Second, that he should not leave those Barbarities unpunished. Ac∣cordingly this Prince immediately after his
coming to the Crown, named Commissaries to judge of this Affair; but the Mony, and power of the Clergy, stopped their Mouths; so that the King was forced to remove the Suit before the Parliament of Paris by his Patents of 1551. Then the Persecutors not being able to avoid Justice any longer, threw the hatred of all this horrid and unlawful Executions, upon some Soldiers who were dead, or whom they had caused to make their escape, and upon the Ad∣vocate General Guerin, who was beheaded in the place of Greve. As to the Baron of Oppede, tho his Credit sav'd him from the hands of Hu∣mane Justice; yet it could not deliver him from the hands of God, who called him before his Tribunal in 1558, by the most painful Death that ever was, as you may see in Thuanus, Du∣pleix, and other Roman Catholick Historians. Of the County Venaissin. THE County Venaissin, that is now a dependen∣cy of the Papal See, borders on Provence to the East; on Dauphiné to the North; on the Durance to the South; and on Languedoc to the West. It is about 13 or 14 Leagues from South to North, and from West to East; it is the first of the Pope's Legateships, a fruitful and pleasant Country; there are an Archbishoprick, 3 Bishopricks, 4 Baronies, and 78 Towns, Bur∣roughs or Villages. In the Romans time, it was inhabited by the Cavares and Memini, since it pass'd under the French, and from them to the Marquesses and
the Counts of Provence. In 1228 the Estates of Raimond Count of Toulouse, having been seiz'd from him, because of his protecting the Albi∣geois, it was agreed amongst the Usurpers, that the Lands which Raimond had possest on the East of the Rhone should be settled in trust, only for a time, to Gregory IX. as appears by the Letters of this Pope to the French K. Lewis IX. and Queen Blanche his Mother, in 1230, and 1233. Its modern name Venaissin comes from Venatione, because of the vast quantity of Game that is in this Country. Avignon and its Territory made up a separate Dominion; which still belong'd to the Counts of Provence; but in 1348 Jane Queen of Naples and Sicily▪ Countess of Provence, sold this City with its Suburbs and Territory, for the Summ of 80000 Golden Florens, that is 48000 French Livres, to Pope Clement VI. and lest it should be said that this summ came not near the value of so considerable a City, it was inserted in the Agreement, that the Queen made a free gift of the over-plus to the Pope. Hereupon the French Historians observe, 1. That this Princess being born in 1328. was not yet out of Age, no more than her second Husband Lewis of Taran∣te. 2dly. That the sale was made without the consent of the Guardians given her by K. Ro∣bert her Grandfather, when he instituted her his Universal Heir against his express will. 3. That some years after the same Pope to hinder Queen Jane of selling others of her Countries, gave out a Bull declaring void all the aliena∣tions made, or to be made by the said Queen, both in the Kingdom of Naples, and in the
County of Provence, against the will of the said K. Robert her Grandfather. 4thly. That in 1365 Queen Jane declar'd void the sale of Avig∣non, and all the others she had made to that very time. These are the Chief reasons on which the French Kings ground their pretensions over A∣vignon and County Venaissin, and for which they never fail of seizing upon this City and County, as soon as they are at variance with the Court of Rome, as did Lewis XIV. in 1663. and 1688. I leave the Reader to judge of them, as he may do very impartially, since they are both our Enemies; only with this difference, that the one, viz. the Pope is irreconcilable to us as long as we are Protestants, whereas within some years we may be at peace with the other. The City of AVIGNON, Avenio, Cavarum, is upon the Rhone, 8 Leagues North of Arles, almost as many South East of Ʋzès, and 10 North East of Nismes, with an University and an Archbishoprick, only since the year 1475. under Sixtus V. It was before that time a Bi∣shoprick Suffragan of Arles. Pope Clement IV. removed the Pontifical See to Avignon in 1305. Clement VI. bought that City 37 years after, his Successors lived there quietly till the year 1380. as also during the Schism, that is to the Council of Pise, in 1409. It has a Court of In∣quisition; a Mint where Money is coyned with the Pope's Arms; its Walls are fine, its Churches magnificent, its Avenues pleasant. The justice is administred by the Consuls and their As∣sessor, who is the Judge of the City; the Vi∣guier, who is like the Provost of Merchants in
Paris, or the Lord Mayor in London, judges without farther appeal, all Causes and Suits not exceeding four gold Duckets; but in other Causes one may appeal to the Vice-Legate, who commits the matter to the Rote, which consists of five Auditors, and from thence one may still appeal to Rome. All the Canons of the Cathe∣dral Church of our Blessed Lady, are clothed in Red, and the Chaplains in Purple; seven Popes have seated there during 70 years, from 1307. till 1377. viz. Clement V. John XXII. Bene∣dict XII. Clement VI. Innocent VI. Ʋrban V. and Gregory XI. who by the persuasion of St. Catherine of Sienne remov'd to Rome again; to∣gether with three Antipopes, Clement VII. Bo∣niface IX. and Benedict XIII. from 1378 till 1409. This is called by the Italians, The Baby∣lonian Captivity of the Church. And well may they compare their Church to Babylon; for 'tis as like to the Mystical Babylon of the Revelation, as two drops of Water are to each other. A∣mongst other resemblances the following will not be unpleasant, viz. that the number of Seven, the number of the Heads of the Beast, seems to be affected in the publick buildings of Avignon, which is the Master-piece of the Popes, for there are 7 Parishes, 7 Monasteries, 7 Hospi∣tals, 7 Colleges, 7 Palaces, 7 Markets, and 7 Gates, which make up 7 times 7. The City of Carpentras, Carpentoracte Memi∣norum, lies upon the Russe 5 or 6 Leagues from Antignon, with a Judge in Ordinary, an Office of the Pope's Exchequer, and a Bishoprick Sus∣fragan of Avignon. It is seated on the foot of Mount Ventoux, which is four Leagues high, and
on the ruins of Venasque or Vindausca, in a fruit∣ful Soil, with good Walls about it. This is pro∣perly the Chief City of the County Venaissin. Cavaillon, Cabellio Colonia, lies upon the Du∣rance, in an Island form'd by that River, the Calevon and the Durancole, 9 Miles South West of Avignon. It was formerly seated on a Hill, where are still some remains of old Buildings, but now it lies in a very fruitful Plain, though for the rest it is small and ill built; the Cathe∣dral is dedicated under the name of S. Veran, one of its Bishops in the 6th. Century. It be∣long'd to the Cavares. Vaison, Vasio, is seated upon a Hill washed by the Louveze. It's mention'd by Pliny, Ptolomy, and other ancient Geographers, as one of the Cities of the Vocontii, and seems to have been pretty considerable. But it has been so oft ran∣sack'd and plunder'd by the Goths, Vandales, and Sarracens, that there is but a heap of ruins, where it formerly laid, viz. in the plain, about the Church of our Lady. The other places of note are, Mrnas, Cha∣teau-neuf-du-Pape, Barbentanes, and Boulbon upon or near the Rhone; Graveson, Chateau-renard, Noves, Caumont, and Valorges, about the Durance, Chateau-neuf, L' Isle, Pernes, Pont de Sorgues, near the River Sorgues; Bedarides, Sarrian, Caron, Flassan, Mazan, Venasque, S. Didier, about Carpentras; Miolans, Queyrane, and Cameret about Vaison.
Of the Principality of Orange. I Put here this Principality, because it can∣not be describ'd any where else, since it's included by the County Venaissin on all sides, save on the West by the Rhone. It is very small, though its Territory be extraordi∣nary fertil in Wine, Corn, Fruits, &c. for its greatest length East and West, is but 5 Leagues, and not quite 4 North and South. That it be∣longs by right to His Majesty William III. as part of his Patrimonial Estate is undeniable; though to put an affront, if it were possible, upon that great Prince, the Parliament of Paris have adjudg'd it to Charles Paris of Or∣leans last Duke of Longueville, kill'd in the Dutch War of 1672; and tho Lewis XIV. pre∣tending to be his Heir, lords now over it, as though it were his own. But to determine whe∣ther the French Kings, as Counts and Marquesses of Provence, are Lords Paramount of this Prin∣cipality, would require too long a discussion. I shall only observe, 1st. That in 793 William au Cornet or au Court-nez, High Constable of France, having conquered Orange from a Sarracen King called Theobard, took the Title of Count by the Grace of Go which was then proper to Sove∣reigns. 2dly. That since the Right Prince of
Orange is now King of England, he may in com∣pensation, justly lay his claim to those vast and rich Dutchies and Counties of Normandy, Gui∣enne, Poictou, Maine, Touraine, Anjou, that were the undisputable inheritance of his Predecessors; besides his right to the whole Kingdom of France. The City of ORANGE, Aurasio Cavarum, or Secundanorum Colonia, lies a League West of the Rhone, and 6 North of Avignon, with the Title of Principality, and a Bishoprick Suffagan of Arles: This was formerly a Roman Colony of the second Legion; there are still to be seen the remains of a Cinque, and a Triumphal Arch al∣most whole. There was a kind f little Parlia∣ment, whose Members were one half Roman Catholicks, and the other Protestants, but it was cashier'd by the French King in 1687, and changed into a Viguiers Jurisdiction, under the Parliament of Aix. It has still a Mint, and an University. Its strong Cittadel, and other For∣tifications were razed in 1660. against the A∣greement made some Months before with Count Dhona Governour of the Town. The Prote∣stant Religion was forbidden there; though there are 12 or 15 Jewish Families offered in the City, and above as many in the dependen∣cies of it. The other places of note are, Caderousse, Courtezon, Jonquieres, Vaqueyras, and Gigondas; but formerly this Principality extended much farther within Tricastinois, Diois, Valentinois, Ga∣pencois, Sisteronnois, the County of Nice, the County Venaissin, and even beyond the Rhone
into the Dioceses of Montpellier, Nismes and Lo∣deve in Languedoc. Of the Islands of Provence. THE Isles of Martegues, Maritimae Avaticorum, which are called by some, Venice of France, are made of a Triple Town with the Title of Principality, belonging to the Duke of Vendome. For they are divided into 3 Parts Ferriere, l'Isle and Jonquieres, and seated on the Pond of Berre, from whence they have digg'd great Ditches for a Communication with the Sea, di∣stant about an English Mile; so that the great∣est Boats come up to the Town from the Sea, and go through the Pond for the conveniency of Trade; and they may easily go from one Town to the other upon Bridges. There are all sorts of good Fish caught in certain high Sea-rushes called, Bourdigaux; the Inhabitants are great Lovers of Dancing and Mirth, whence comes the common Proverb to dance the Martingale. This Town has had several Masters; for it be∣long'd once to the Viscounts of Marseille, then to the Counts of Provence. Francis of Lorrain Dutchess of Mercoeur, Estampes, Ponthievre, Princess of Martegues brought all her Estate in∣to the House of Vendome, by her Marriage with Caesar Duke of Vendome, a Legitimated Son to
Henry IV. These Islands lye 8 Leagues West of Marseille, 10 South East of Arles, and 12 South West of Aix. The Islands Stacades, call'd also the Golden ands, or Hyeres, Olbia and Areae, because ey lie over against the Town of that name, e 3 in number, call'd by the Latins, Sturium, henice, Phila, and in French, Island of Le∣ant, or of Tilan, Porte-Cross, which has a Gar∣ison, and Porquerolles, all three in the Diocese f Toulon. In Cassian's time, these Islands were nhabited by Monks; some of whom under ope Innocent the III. were Cisternians. They re so fertile, that after the loss of Rhodes the nights of S. John designed to settle there with he French King's leave. The Islands of Lerins, Lero, Planasia, or Le∣ius, are but two in number, ove against the Town of Cannes towards Antibes, which are call'd Islands of S. Margaret or Lero, and of S. Hnorat, Planasiae, or Lerinus. The first draws ts name from a Chappel dedicated to that Saint, t is three quarters of a League long, and one quarter broad; there are five Ports, and a Cittadel newly fortified to defend it. The o∣ther draws it from S. Honorat, who founded there a Monastery in 375. driving away as 'tis said, the Serpents that made it desart, and cau∣ing a Fountain of fresh-water to spring there, which is still in being. He was afterwards Bi∣hop of Arles. This Solitude has been for any Ages together the Nursery of the Pre∣ates of Provence, and of the neighbouring Churches. For thence are issued 12 Archbi∣hops, as many Bishops, 10 Abbots, 4 Monks
numbred among the Holy Confessors and 105 Martyrs. The Air is very temperate, the So fertile. The Spaniards surpriz'd these Islan in the beginning of this Age, laid waste th holy place, pull'd down those fine Forests o Pine-trees, which formed many covered Walks adorned by a vast number of Oratories; but i 1637. they were turned out of them. Ther are in the Island of S. Honorat 3 Walls, and  Chappels: they Fish there a great deal of Cor¦ral. As for Chateau-d'if, it is a little Island, tw Leagues South of Marseille, with a good stron hold, where the biggest Ships stop, becaus they cannot get in the Port of that City fo want of Water. There are some Islands o the Mouth of the Rhone, but cover'd only wit Grass and Mountains.
CHAP. XVII. Of Dauphiné. THis Province the nearest to Italy, confines on the North to that of Bresse, and the Dukedom of Savoy is separted from Pi∣edmont by the Alps, on the East; from the County of Nice, Provence, the County Venaissin, and the Principality of Orange, by the sam Moun∣tains, tho' interrupted in some places, towards the South; and from Languedoe on the West by the Rhone. It reaches above fifty common Leagues of France, or 38 of DAƲPHINE, East and West, from Pignerol to the Rhone, and above forty North and South from Fort de Ba∣raux on the Borders of Savoy to Cisteron in Pro∣vence. The Country is Mountainous all over, except in the North-West of Low Dauphine; however it produces excellent Wine, and abun∣dance of Corn of all sorts; as Wheat, Rye, Barly, Oats, Spelt, Lentil, Beans, Pease, and other kind of Pulse. There are also many Woods, and some of them are pretty large, and full of Bucks, Deers, Shamoys, and other Beasts of Game; but the greatest part of their
Woods are Warrens, that abound with Hares, Conies, Pheasants, red and gray Pratridges, &c. Neither does it want Pasture-Ground, especial∣ly about the middle, and the foot of some Mountains, whether the Provencals, and the Inhabitants of Low Dauphine send their Cattel to feed in Summer time. In a word, this Country which, by the bare looking on the Map, seems fitter for a Nest of Birds and wild Deers, than for the Habitation of Men, sup∣plies its Inhabitants with all the Conveniencies of Life: For as the Mountains and Vallies of High Dauphine, furnish them with Corn, Hay, Apples, Pears, Nuts, Chesnuts, Cherries, and all sorts of Northern Fruits; so the lower Part, gives them abundance of the best Wines, and even some Manna, Olives, Oranges and Cittrons. They have likewise Salt-Springs and Iron-Mines; but what is most valuable of all, its Mountains are the Seminaries of Gardens, bringing forth abundance of wild Thyme, Daffodils, Tulips, Ambrets, Lilies, Roses, Pinks, &c. besides that, they produce such Simples as are hardly to be met with any where else; as the Scorzonera or Vipers-Grass; the Angelick, the Satyrion, &c. There are also the seven Wonders of DAƲ∣PHINE, of which I shall speak in their pro∣per places. Its chief Rivers are the Pin that rises in the South of Viennois, and waters a good part of that Country, passing thorough the Marquisate of Virieu; the Barony of La Tour da Pin, the Town of Bourgoin, and a Lake of that Name, and falling into the Rhone, between Anton and St. Marie, seven Leagues East of Lyons. The
Ozon, the Gere, the Vareze, the Dolon increased with the Ambre, and the Sane, the Galaure, are other Rivers of the Viennois that discharge them∣selves into the Rhone. The Isere that comes from Mount Iseron, in the Vally of Auste, washes a good part of Savoy, where it receives the Plen, and the Arly at Constans; the Arc at Mi∣nis, goes by Montmelian, and through Gre∣ble, where it mixes with the Drac, that rises in the Ambrunois, and is increased with the Ra∣anche and Grosse, near Port de Champ, two Leagues South of Grenoble; then it receives the Vence at Sassenage, the Bourne, and Eschevits t La Baume washes Romans, and falls into the Rhone, five Miles North of Valence. The small River of Veour runs likewise into the Rhone, in∣creas'd with two other Rivulets, over against yons, a League South of Valence. The Drome rises in the Vally of Valdrome in he Gapencois, goes thorough the Lake of Beau∣nt, receives the Bese at St Feriol, and the Me∣ce at Die: Then increased with the Sure, the Rouanne, and the Gervane, washes Crest, and ixes with the Rhone, between Livron and L'Au∣iol, eleven Miles South of Valence. The Achas∣ rises at Montmorin, three or four Miles South of the Source of the Drome, runs thorough the Vally of Bourdeaux, and by Mntelimar, near which it receives the Jabron, and the Vebre, takes the Name of Rouvion, and discharges it self into he Rhone. The Durance proceeds from two Fountains; that spring from Col de La-Roue, and oin at Brianon, receives the River of Guille∣re, at a Burough of that Name, goes by Am∣run, receives the Bene at Vaulserre, and the Bu∣ech,
which is a pretty large River, bearing Float-Boats of Timber during ten or twelve Leagues, at Cisteron, and pursuing its cours thorough Provence, goes by Manosque, Cavail∣lon, and falls into the Rhone, near Avignon. This Province is made up of some part o four Roman Provinces; for Vienne, Valance, Die and Grenoble, were of the first Viennoise, Am∣brun was the Capital of the Maritim Alps, Ga belong'd to the second Narbonnoise; and S. Pau Trois-Chasteaux, to the Province of Arles. The Burgundians conquered these Provinces from th Romans, and enjoy'd them about 90 or 130 from 404, or 408, till 532, or 534, that they were subdued by the French, who were Master of their Dominions, till 879, that one Boson caused himself to be crowned King of Arles This Boson possest only that part of the Burgun¦dian Kingdom, which is included between th Saone, the Alps and the Sea; but one Rodolph having invaded the other Part in 888, and hi Son, Rodolphe the Second, having gotten by cession that part which had been usurped by Boson, it passed to his Successors, and from them to the Emperours of Germany, till tha under the Reign of Henry the IV. Gui, or Gui¦gue the VI. sirnam'd the Old, or the Fat, takin hold of the Quarrel between this Emperour an the Popes, made himself Sovereign of the Coun¦ty of Grenoble. His Successor Gui the VII. ac¦quired the Lordship or Country of Vienne, fro Berthold of Zeringhen, and was the fiIst tha call'd himself DAƲPHIN of Viennois. Adr¦an de Valois pretends, that this Title was th Sirname of that Prince, and quotes Beda; an
William of Malmsbury, who remembers one auphin Bishop of Lyons, that was kill'd above 000 Years ago; but Monsieur Chorier, in his earned History of DAƲPHINE, tells us out of n Author, that has written the Life of this Prince's Wife; that her Husband having taken n a Turnaments the Dolphin for his Arms and Device; and having been admir'd there, for his rowess and Valour; he thence got the Name of unt of the Dolphin, or Count Dolphin. The st Prince of that Family, Humbert the Second, aving had his eldest Son kill'd in the Battel of iecy, against the English, and having unhappi∣y let fall the Second out of a Window as he laid with him, and being often provok'd and disturb'd by Amedeus of Savoy his mortal Enemy, o pass the rest of his Life more quietly, he yielded his Estates to the French King Philip of alois, upon these Conditions; That the eldest son of France, should bear the Name of Dauphin, and the Arms of that Province quar∣red with those of France,Du Chesne. that the Clergy, Nobility and Commons, should still enjoy their Privileges; and that the whole Province should ever be annexed to to the Kingdom of France, less the Empire were united to it. The ancient Dauphins entitled themselves Princes of Briancon, Dukes of Champsor, Mar∣qesses of Cesane, Counts Palatines of Vi∣ne, Albon, Grenoble, Ambrun and Gap; Barons of La Tour du-Pin, Meuillon and Mountaubon; o which Titles were added those of Counts of Valantinois and Diois, after the Year 1419, that Lewis of Poictiers left his Estates to Charles the . Dauphin, and 7th of that Name, King of rance.
Tho' this Province and Savoy be the ancie Allobroges, and this name in our vulgar Tongu proverbially, signify a dull and heavy sort of Man: yet the Dauphinois are not altogether so for Countrymen are skilful and industrious, an know as well as any Tenants in the World, ho to cheat their Lords; those of the Mountain are extraordinary strong, and go in Winter time to Provence, and the lower Parts of Dau¦phiné, where they get their Livelihood by Dres¦sing Hemp, and doing other hard works and to put to use the little Mony they earn they buy at their return some Pedling-ware fo their Countrymen. The Gentry are couragious and well bred, but poor for the most part, be∣cause too numerous; those that have travell'd are of a sweet conversation, but the others are too tedious in their civilities. The Country-Language is a mixture of corrupted Latin, Ita∣lian and French, broader towards Provence, and more languishing towards Savoy, but the Gen∣try speaks good French every where, especially at Grenoble; however you may distinguish them from the Parisians, not so much by their Accent as by some particular Idiotisms. For instance, they say, beaucoup du vin, bien de pain, la chose que j'ai fait, par chemin, instead of beaucoup de vin, bien du pain, la chose que j'ay faite, par le che∣min. During the civil Wars the Protestants have been Masters of the best part of this Province, but ever since the Popish Religion hath been prevalent. The whole Province is divided into several small Countries which, because Authors much vary there∣upon, I shall follow the new Division of Robbe
and Samson, as I have hitherto done, and begin with Ʋpper DAƲPHINE. Of High-Dauphiné. Of Gresivaudan. BY the Name of GRESIVAƲDAN, is understood the Bayliwick resorting to Gre∣able, which comprehends the Mountains of GRESIVAƲDAN, properly so called; the Val∣y of Trieves Royanez, and a small Tract of land beyond the Isere, bordering on Savoy and Viennois, making in all an extent of 24 Leagues North and South, and 18 or 20, East and West. Some take it for the Habitation of the antient Iricollores; and that afterwards it was call'd GRESIVAƲDAN, as if one should say Vallis-Gracorum, The Vally of the Greeks; which E∣timology seems more reasonable, than to derive  from Gratianopolitana Vallis. GRENOBLE, Capital of this Country, and of the whole Province, is seated on the River Isere, which separates it into 2 Parts, the Town, and the
long Suburbs of St. Laurence; 12 or 13 League South-West of Montmelian. The Town is situ∣ated in a fertil Plain, and the Suburb at th foot of a Mountain, that produces excellen Wine; both taken together are of the bignes of London, from Temple-Bar to the Bridge. It Parliament is the third of France, for 'twas e¦rected by Lewis the XI. in 1453. There ar also a Chamber of Accompts, Generality, Ele∣ction, Presidial, Bayliwick, and a Spiritual Cour for the Bishop, who takes the Title of Prince o Grenoble, and is suffragan to the Archbishop o Vienne, tho' he precedes his Metropolitan at the Assembly of the States. In what time thi Town was converted to Christianity is uncer∣tain; for the most ancient Bishop we know of is one Domnin, who assisted at the Council o Aquileia in 381. These Prelates have the Pri∣viledge of presiding to the States of that Pro∣vince, which was granted to them, to reward the Fidelity of one, who stuck firm with the Nobility to the French King's Interest, while the rest of the Clergy and the People, resolved to submit to the Pope. There was of late a Cham∣ber of the Edict, made up of a President, and six Counsellors Roman Catholicks, and as many Protestants; but it was abolished in 1679. To this Chamber resorted the Reformed of Dauphi∣né and Provence, and those of Burgundy had the choice of this or that of Paris; besides that of the four Consuls or Sheriffs, the Second was to be a Protestant. The most considerable Build∣ings are the Cathedral-Church of our Lady, and that of S. Andrew, both of which have Canons, and the last is considerable by a Pyramidical
Tower. The other Buildings are the Pallace of the Parliament, that of the Governour, with its costly Gardens; the House formerly belonging to the Lord Constable of Lesdiguieres, &c. In 1562. the Protestants master'd that Town, with the Castles of La Bussiere and Mirebel. Grenoble was already considerable in Cicero's Time, and bore the Name of Cularo. The Emperor's Diocletian and Maximinian repair'd it, and gave a name to two of its Gates, as appears by an ancient Inscription; but it is not so certain whether it was rebuilt by the Emperour Gratian, tho it be now call'd Greatianopolis. Baudrand says, that it is also called Granopolis, whence comes the French word Grenoble; but De Valois observes, that Granopolis is but an abbreviation in writing of Grationopolis; which maim'd word some ig∣norant Transcriber has taken for the true name of that Town. The Inhabitants of Grenoble ae more polite than the rest of their Countrymen, and the Residence of the Governour, and of the Parliament makes it a pretty rich Town. It has produced several learned Men, especially Lawyers; as Du Perier, Chorier, Allard; the two last of whom are yet alive, for ought I know, the one being famous for his History of that Province, and the other for that of its Nobility. Formerly some Branches of the River Drac, dis∣charged into the Isere to e'n near Grenoble; so that Rains and melted Snow swelling up this Torrent, often drown'd the neighbouring Campaign, and even a good part of the Town; but now they have removed them farther to the West.
Almost two Leagues West of Grenoble, upon the meeting of the Rivers, Vence and Isere, is the Barony of Sassenage, famous not only for its Lords, who are the most ancient and considera∣ble in that Province, but especially for two rare things that are reckon'd among the Wonders of DAPHINE, namely, some Stones which are said to be very serviceable to cure sore Eyes; and two Hollownesses digg'd in the Rock, and called by the Inhabitants Cuves or Tubs, which are pretended to be empty the whole year round, execept on the Day of Epiphany, tho' no body knows whence it comes, nor whether it retires after that Day. They add further, that there is more or less Water in several years, accord∣ing as the Harvest is to be more or less abun∣dant, which is signified in respect to Corn by one of these Tubs, and in regard of VVine by the other. Divers Authors mention these Tubs, and I have often heard of them, but I never had occasion to examin this pretended wonder, nor did I ever speak▪ with any Man of Repute, who had been an Eye-witness of it, or who gave any credit to this relation. Half-way between Grenoble and Sassenage, is La Tour Sans Venin, another wonder of Dauphine, where 'tis said, that no Venemous Creature can live no more than in Ireand. Seven Miles North of Grenoble, is La Grand, Chartreuse, the chief Habitation of the Cartusian Monks, and the ordinary Residence of the Ge∣neral. It's a magnificent Building in a fine De∣sart, in the middle of steep and rugged Rocks. It was founded in the 11th Century, by one Bruno, who weary of the VVorld, retired thi∣ther,
and had leave given him, by Hugh, Bishop of Grenoble, to build there a Chappel, and since a Monastery, which in process of time increased to that height, that it became the Head of the Cartusian Order, and these Solita∣ries, the richest of all the Fryars, as they are still, unless the Jesuits do exceed them. All those who go to pay these Monks a Visit, are kindly received, and entertained by the Dire∣ctors of the House; for the Monks themselves speak to no body, unless it be at cettain Hours, and that in very few words, which is a fair pretence to conceal the gross Ignorance wherein they are kept. They will shew you all the Curiosities thereabouts, without enquiring what Religion you are of, at least it was so, some time before the last Persecution. Remounting the Ifere, nine Leagues North of Grenoble, 11 Miles from the Grand Chartreuse, and five South of Montmelian, lies Fort de Ba∣raux, situated on a Mountain near that River. It is not quite so strong as Montmelian was of late; however 'tis the Key of France on that side. In 1528, March 13. the Duke of Lesdiguieres took it by Storm from the Leaguers in two hours time. On the South of the Isere, two Leagues East of Grenoble, lies the Village of Giere, which I mention here for a natural Curiosity, the like I never met with else where; namely, a Cascade, or VVater-Fall, that precipitates it self down from a steep Rock, almost as high as the Steeple of Bow-Church, and as thick as two Men; and after it has run some steps into a small Rivulet, is brought thorough Lead Pipes into a Garden,
where it spouts with an incredible Violence, as high as any Tree; so that if this Place were not neglected, but Art were joined to Nature, it would make the finest VVater-fall and Spout in the VVorld. The Gardens, and Park of Vizille, three Leagues South-west of Grenoble are much better kept, because they belong'd to the Dukes of Lesdiguieres, which during three Generations, and almost an Age, have enjoy'd the Govern∣ment of Dauphiné. The Park is encompassed with Walls of almost three Leagues in circuit. There are small Hills and Vallies, and abun∣dance of all Beasts of Game. There is like∣wise a Mesnagerie, where they keep Foreign Birds. But the most considerable piece is what they call, tho somewhat improperly the Casca∣de. for 'tis rather the Bed of a small Brook of a Mile or two in length, pav'd with Free large Stone, and divided into Squares of 5 or 6 Fa∣thoms; so that the Water falls by degrees from the Duke's Pallace to the end of the Park. The Vally of Trieves is considerable for the abundance of its Gentry, and the three Towns of La mure, Mens and Corps. The resemblance of the Names makes Holstenius take the second for the habitation of the ancient Mimenii, and the third for that of the Tricorii. This Vally is yet famous for a place call'd the Burning-Fountain, which was indeed so in Caesar's time, and even about 50 Years ago; but whether that the Sulphureal Steams were then spent, or by some other accident unknown to me, the small Rivulet, that ran over the Burning-place, lies now some steps farther. However, 'tis still
admirable enough to see a low place vomit Smoak and Flames, without any appearance of Hollowness or combustible Matter; and that the Minerals, that are the source of those Steams should have lasted Time out of Mind, without any sensible dimunition. And therefore this place is still accounted one of the seven Wonders of Dauphine. At night, especially in cold Weather, or when it rains but slowly, the Flames are very sensible; but in the heat of the Day, or after a violent Rain, there appears but a Smoak, which, being put on Fire by kindled Straw, draws out other Vapours; so that the Flame lasteth a considerable time. The small Country of Royanez, the most West∣erly of GRESIVAƲDAN, along the Isere, has two Marquisates, La Baume and Pont de Royan, which last is a large Burough, where the Pro∣testants had a Church, and a Minister that made himself known of late, several ways.
Of the County of DIOIS. THis Country anciently inhabited by the Vocontii, seems to have been much larger than it is now, since Vasio or Vaison, a City of Provence, near the County Venaissin was its Ca∣pital. Now 'tis extended about 18 Leagues North and South from St. Julien to S. Ferriol, and about 16 East and West from La Croix Haute to Crest, where it is broadest. Besides Vasio, the Vocontii had 21 Towns more, among which, Lucus Augusti, and Dea Vocontiorum, were the most considerable; the first is now but a Village, call'd Luc, near a Lake of that Name, almost six Leagues South-East of Die. All the ancient Historians agree, that Hanni∣bal went thorough the Land of the Vocontii, towards Pignerol, in order to pass the Alps, and descend into Italy. But this Country is much more considerable, for having produced one of the best Historians Rome ever saw, and whose loss is most deplorable, viz. Trogus Pom∣peius. This County is Mountainous all over, tho' fruitful in Wine and Corn, and aboundant with Pasture-ground. The most remarkable is Mont-Aiguille,
or the unaccessible Mountain, five Leagues North-East of Die, near a Village cal∣led Chessiliane. One can go up to the height of a quarter of a Mile, but then it rises so steep for almost a Mile, that no sort of Animal was ever able to go to the top of it, which appears by the Grass and Weeds that are overgrown there. Near this Mountain is the Vally of Vercors, which keeps yet something of the Name of the Vocontii, or rather of a small Tract of Land be∣longing to them, and called Vertacomicoros. Die, upon the Drome, lies 16 Leagues South of Grenoble, and 11 South-west of Valence, is the Dea Vocontiorum, and a Colony of the Romans, built or repair'd in honour of Livia, Augustus's Wife; and therefore sometimes called Dea Au∣gusta. It has a Bayliwick, and a Bishoprick, which was united to that of Valence in 1275, but was again separated from it in 1687. This Town was full of Protestants before the the last Persecution, because they had there a Colledge and University proper to them, for Philosophy and Divinity. The Lombards be∣came Masters of Die in 1514; and after the last dismembring of the Kingdom of Arles or Bur∣gundy, the Sovereignty of it was usurped by the Bishops, or some Lords under them. They bore the Title of Counts, and were issued from the House of Forcalquier, who possessed it du∣ring the 11 and 12th Century; at the end of which it passed to the House of Poictiers, who already enjoyed the County of Valentimois, but Lewis of Poictiers sold them both to the French King Charles the VI. in 1404; and so they were united to the rest of the Province.
The Protestants took this Town twice during the civil Wars in 1577 and 1585; and the last time raz'd the Cittadel. The most ancient Bishop of Die remembred in History is one Martius; for St. Nicaise, who was the sole Prelate of the Gauls, that assisted to the first Council of Nice was but the 5th in Order. Three Miles North-west of Die is the Village of Quint on the meeting of the Rivers Sure and Drome. It gives name to a Mountain whence it rises, three Leagues North-west of the Vil∣lage of Saillans, which Ortelius and Holstein, sup∣pose to be some remains of the ancient Sega∣launi; but Adrian de Valois proves that accord∣ing to the genis of the French Tongue, Sail∣lans cannot be derived from thence. The Village of Bourdeaux gives it name to a Vally on the South of the River Achasse.
Of the BARONNIES. THis Counary the most Southerly of Dau∣phine produces not only good Wine, but also some Olives, Figs, Oranges and Pomegranates. It seems to be so named from the several Lordships it comprehends in its little extent of 16 Leagues East and West, and six or seven North and South. It is like∣wise called the Bailiwick of le Buys, from its Capital, seated on the River Ouveze, on the Bor∣ders of Provence, six Leagues North East of Vaison. It is but a small Town, tho it be the Seat of a Baily, and that the Protestants and Ro∣man Catholicks thought it worth their trouble to fight for it; the Lord of St. Auban having taken it for the former in 1561. Here and at Ni∣ons, another pretty Town, five Leagues North West upon the River Eygues were a great num- of Protestants. Near the last is a large Rock with a Hole, that emits a wind almost insensible hard by, but very violent at 20 or 30 Steps distance. I shall not insist upon the several Lordships of this Country, as Condouret, Gou∣vernet, Menouillon, Montbrun, which have given their Names to as many noble Families.
Of Gapencois. THis Bayliwick extended about 18 Leagues North and South, and 14 East and West, tho' it be for the most part Mountainous, does not want any of the conveniencies of Life. Its ancient Inhabitants were called Tricorii; as ap∣pears by the Description that Livy makes of Hannibal's Journy thorough Dauphine. In this Territory is the trembling Meadow, le pré qui tremble accounted one of the seven Wonders of Dauphine. Horses and Carts dare not go over it, for fear of sinking down. The Capital City is called in Latin Vapincum; but tho it has been along time so considerable, that it was the 5th in Order among the Cities of Nar∣onnoise Gaule, yet it is not mentioned by ancient Geographers. Its modern name is Gap now somewhat famous by the late expedition of the Duke of Savoy. It formerly belong'd to the Counts of Forcalquier, till William the VI. gave it for her Portion to his Grand-Daughter Bea∣trix of Claustrail married to Guy Andrew, Dau∣phin of Vienne, in 1202, whence perhaps it is that the Bishop intitles himself Count of Gap. This Town is not very big nor very strong neither, being commanded by Mountains round about, and having no other River but a small
Book, called Bene. During the civil Wars the Papists proved the strongest in this Town, and having driven out the Protestants 1561, declared afterwards for the League. The Duke of Les∣deguieres, the French King's Lieutenant, to keep these Rebels in awe, built a Fort upon a Hill, nam'd Puymore, a Mile West of the Town in 1588. Last year 1692. The Duke of Savoy having tak∣en Ambrun, Gap surrendred to him, but he abandoned both soon after. The Inhabitants of Gap, hold St. Demetrius a Martyr for their first Bishop, but their first Prelate remembred in History is one Constance, who assisted at the Council of Paunas in 1509. Veynes, 6 Leagues South-West of Gap, is the habitation of many Gentlemen, who divide amongst them the jurisdiction of the place. It's seated between fruitful Mountains and Meadows, but is not accounted a Town, because not wall'd in. However it would be as big as Gap, if the 7 or 8 Hamlets depending on it were joyn'd. Serres upon the River Buech, 10 Leagues South West of Gap, is a small Town that has its name from the Hills whereupon it is built, and wherewith it is encompassed; that are cal∣led in the Country Language Serres. The place is capable of good Fortification; and therefore in the late civil Wars the Duke of Lesdiguieres built there a strong Castle, whose Ruins are still to be seen. Orpierre, three or four Leagues South of Serres, is a considerable Burough, with the Title of Barony belonging to the House of O∣range. La Roche has the Title of County, Tallart of Viscounty, Sauze and Esparron of Marquisates. Montmaur and Arzilliers of Baronies, &c. St. Bon∣net,
five Leagues North of Gap, is the Birth-place of Francois de Bonne, who from a simple Gentle∣man rais'd by his Valor to the Dignities of Duke, and Peer, Mareschal, and Lord High Constable of France. It's observ'd, that on the first of April 1543, that this great Captain came into the World; and the 28 of September 1624, that he departed from it, two memorable In∣cendies happen'd at St. Bonnet. Lesdiguieres has a fine, but not strong Castle. It was erect∣ed into a Dutchy and Peerdom, on behalf of the forementioned Francois de Bonne, in 1611. It lies 5 Leagues West of St. Bonnet, and nine North-west of Gap. Of Ambrunois. THis Country reaches not above ten or eleven Leagues on all sides, and a great part of it is barren Mountains and Desarts. It was the dwelling-place of the Caturigae, whereof there are still some remains in the name of the Village of Chrges, Catorigomagus, 4 Leagues West of Ambrun, and as many East of Gp. AMBRƲN or Embrun, the Capital was the chief Habitation of the Ambruareti, Allies to the Romans, according to Du Chesne; but the name of their City was Ebredunum or Ebrodunum, Caturigum, to distinguish it from Ebredunum Helvetiorum, which is Iverdun in Switzerland.
This City is now small, but seems formerly to have been considerable, since Caesar makes mention of it; and that in the Dauphin's time it was the Title of their eldest Son. The Arch-Bishop has for Suffragans 6 Cities of Provence, Digne, Grasse, Vence, Glandeve Senez and Nice, and takes the Title of Prince of Ambrun, and Count of Seyne and Guillestre. Ambrun was for∣merly an Imperial Town, but the Founders of the second Kingdom of Burgundy gave the Sove∣reignty of it to its Prelates, who in process of time yielded part of their Right to the French King's, as that of Coyning Mony, &c. How∣ever they have still part of the Towns Juris∣diction, and the other is Royal, under the Ti∣tle of Bailiwick and Presidial. Ambrun is seated on the Platform of a rugged Rock, washed by the River Durance. 'Tis said, that about the end of the first Century, one of St. Nazare planted there Christi∣anity; but if so be, it had been almost extin∣guished after his decease or departure, since we do not read of any Bishop there before St. Mar∣cellin about the Year 340. In 1583, Lesdigui∣eres the French King's Lieutenant took this Town from the League, and the Inhabitants re∣deemed themselves from Plunder by a free Con∣tribution, as they have done the same way from the Duke of Savoy's Arms, in 1692. The Cittadel, which had been built during the civil Wars has been since demolished. Seyne has the Title of a County depending on the Archbishop of Ambrun, as we have already hinted, however Sanson puts it in Provence, and some will have it to be a remainder of the an∣cient Sentii.
Guillestre is a good Village, not otherwise considerable than that it gives its name to a River, and is one of the Passes of Dauphine in∣to the Marquisate of Saluces, and so farther in∣to Piemont. Of Brianconois. THis Mountainous Country reaches 18 or 20 Leagues East and West from Pignerol to the Mountains call'd Produissen, and 16 North and South from Chateau-Dauphin to Col de La Roue. It was formerly of a narrower extent, before Pignerol, and the adjacent Vallies were yielded to the French King. In this Territory falls a sweet and purging Dew, called La Manne de BRIANCON, and accounted one of the seven Wonders of this Province. The Capital BRIANCON is now the head of that Bailiwick, and the Seat of a Presidial, but was never a Bishoprick, tho Robbe calls it so. Under the Dauphins it had the Title of a Principality, of which they bore the name, but under the Romans it was at first one of the places where they used to incamp; but by little and little it became a Place of some note. Both this Town and Country made part of the Kingdom of Cottius, that famous Gaulish Prince, whom Augustus not being able to subdue, persented
with the Alliance of the Roman Empire. His whole Realm consisted in 12 Towns, of which Suse was the Capital; but he knew so well how to in∣ench himself, that both his Subjects, and his Enemies concurr'd to give his name to the Mountains whereon he reign'd, calling them Cottian Alps, during the extent of 14 Leagues rom Mount Viso to Mount Cenis. This Town n Latin Brigantio or Brigantium, depended for  long time upon the Segusiones, or the Princes f Suze. BRIANCON is now built on the foot of  Rock, near Mount Genevre, on the meeting f two small Brooks, one of which bears the me of Dure, viz. the most Easterly, and the ther that of Ance; but after their junction, he common name of Durance. BRIAN∣CON is esteemed by reason of its Situation the ighest Town in Europe, tho it be commanded y a Castle, built upon the Rock, at the bottom f which the Town lies. Two Leagues South  BRIANCON, is a pierced Rock, call'd tuis Rostan; some believe that Caesar caused is Passage to be made thorough this Rock for is Troops, at his entrance into the Gaules. Others e of opinion, that it is the same Rock, which nnibal caused to be pierced with Fire and inegar, that his Elephants might pass thorough; thers again think that it is a Work of King tius, in honour of Augustus, whose Statue he ected upon it. Whatsoever it may be, BRI∣NCON has not been considerable before  13th Century. In the last Age the Leaguers zed upon it; but the Duke of Lesdiguieres ok it from them in 1590. This Town has
produced one of the learnedest Mathematicians of France, called Oronce Finé, who was pro∣fessor Royal at Paris, and died in 1555. Pignerol is properly a City of Piedmnt, and formerly was the Title and Portion of the Dukes of Savoy's youngest Sons. It is seated upon the small River Cluson or Chisson, which falls into the Po near Moncallier, two Leagues South of Turin. It had formerly a good Cittadel only; but since the French have it in their possession, they have fortified it so as to make it almost an impregna∣ble place. The Cittadel is built on a Rock, and the Town between the last Mountains of the Alps, seven Leagues South-East of Turin, and 12 North West of BRIANCON. Theres is a Fort call'd St. Bridge, which has communi∣cation with the Cittadel by a cover'd way, and subterraneous passages. The Duke of Savoy at the head of the Confederate Forces, took it this year 1693. But instead of going on vigorously with the Siege of the Town and Cittadel, they left them block'd up, and went to sight Catinat the French General, who lay incamp'd with 12 or 14000 Men betwixt the Mountains of Col de Fenestrelles, and Col de Rossa, seven or eight Leagues North West of Pignerol. But when they were gone so far, they perceived they could not come at him: So that after much time lost they went back, and open'd the Trenches before Pig∣nerol in September, rais'd the Siege, and were de∣seated, October the 4th 1693. 'Tis a pleasure to read the cunning fetches of that shrewd Politician, Cardinal Rihelieu, to get this Strong-hold into his Master's Hands. There arose a Civil War in Piedmont (perhaps by this
subtle Minister's Devices) The Uncles of the young Duke, pretending to the Regency against the Dutchess Dowager, who had been left in possession of it by her Husband. As she was a Princess of the French Blood, she presently im∣plor'd the assistance of her Cousin, especially seeing that her Competitors were assisted by the Spaniards. It had been an easy matter for the French Monarch, to maintain the Dutchess in the quiet possession of her Right: But the Policy of his chief Minister suffered her to come to that extremity, that she kept nothing else be∣yond the Alps, besides Turin and its Cittadel. Whilst she was in those Fears, she was pro∣mised a sufficient Succor to restore her into all her Dominions, provided she would yield to the French King Pignerol. and all the Vallies, of Pi∣edmont. She was very loath to part with such a large Portion of her Territories; but at last, for fear of loosing all, she consented to yield Pig∣nerol, with the Vallies on the East-side of the River Cluson; whereupon the Treaty was secret∣ly concluded in the Town of Queyras, the 31th of March 1631; so that ever since, the impor∣tant Vallies of Perouse and Pragelas belong'd to the French King. There are some other places, that give their Name to Vallies; as the Burough of Bardonan∣che; the Town of Queyras, with a strong Ca∣stle and a Mountain washed by the River Guil∣lestre, the Burough of Chasteau-Dauphin, which seems to have been built by the Princes of that Country, against the Incursions of the Piemon∣tois; for it lies on the utmost Borders of Dau∣phine, ten Leagues South East of BRIANCON.
The Fort of Exilles is another considerable passage from France into Italy, 13 Miles North-West of Brianon and but 3 East of Suze: Cae∣sar makes mention of it in the first Book of his Commentaries, under the name of Ocelum. The Country about it is called by the Inhabi∣tants the Valley of Duren. CHAP. XVIII. Of Low DAUPHINE. Of VIENNOIS. THis Country that now comprehends the Bayliwicks of Vienne, and St. Marcellin was formerly called the Isle of the Al∣lobroges; it being included between the Rivers Rhosne on the North and West; the Isere on the South, and the Giare on the East, and reaching 24 Leagues North and South, and 18 East and West; it is the best and most inhabi∣ted part of Dauphiné, being water'd with seve∣ral Rivers, and less interrupted with Mountains than the others. The Capital Vienne built upon the Rhone, where it receives the small River
Gere, lies 8 Leagues South of Lyons. 18 Norli- of Valence, and as many North-West of Gren∣ble: It is accounted one of the antientest Towns in the Gauls, and even in all Europe, and therefore its original is very uncertain, for 'tis not likely that it should have been built by Vennerius an African Exile, and called Bienna, because it was raised in two years; for the La∣tin Tongue was not yet so far spread, as to de∣rive the Etymology of such an antient Town, from one of its compounded Words. Neither is the Original related by Stephanus less fabu∣lous: for he pretends that the Inhabitants of Biennus a Town of Crete, or Candie, which no body mentions but himself, being driven out of their Country by a great drought, came by the direction of the Oracle to a marshy place along the Rhone, where they built this Town and call'd it Bienna from the name of one of their Virgins, who had been swallowed up by the ground, whilst she was dancing. But as this Town is named Vienna Allobrogum by the antient Geographers, who used to give to Ci∣ties the name of their Founders; so it is appa∣rent, that it has been built by the Natives of the Country, the Allobroges. However 'tis stil very difficult to determine the time of its Foun∣dation; only we know that about the year 366 of Rome, when the Senenois passed over Italy, they built two Temples at Vienna, one dedica∣ted to Mars, and the other to the Victory. This Town has flourished a long time under tho Romans. Tiberius Grachus built there a Bridge in 566 of Rome, and fortified the two ends of it with a strong Castle. Caesar made it
his Store-house for Arms. Tiberius built there that high Tower which the People call the Tower of Pilate, as though he had died in this place. There is another antient Building now named Notre Dame de La Vic. Our Lady of Life, which was formerly a Heathen Temple, where the Ro∣mans used to render Justice; for which reason the People calls it the Pretory or the Palace of Pilate, as though he had sate there as Judge during his Banishment. They add, that he was a Native of Vienne, but there is no proof of his being born or ever exil'd thither, and this fa∣bulous Tradition seems to take its Original from Humbert Pilati, Secretary to the last Dauphin, who had a Country-House near St. Vallier, which the vulgar also calls the House of Pilate. The Emperor Galba granted many Privileges to this Town, in requital of the affection of its Citizens, who had declared for him against Nero, whilst those of Lyons held still for that Tyrant, wherefore he also confiscated their Goods. During the Civil Wars of Otho and Vitellius a Captain of the last took Vienne in his possession; and while this Emperor was sitting on the Tribunal Seat, a Cock light'd on his shoul∣ders, and then on his head, signifying as the Augures explain'd it, that he should fall into the hands of a Gaulish Man; and so it happened, for the first who defeated him was one Antony of Tolosa Nickname Becco, or Cock-beak. Dio∣cletian and Maximian, who strove to perpe∣tuate their memory, through the most famous Cities called one of this Town-Gates Her∣culia.
Besides all this Vienne is remarkable for the Banishment of Archelaus, Herode the Great's Son and Successor; for being the Native Country of Valerius Asiaticus, who was twice Consul, which shews that the Viennois were a Roman Citizens born, and might become Senators in that Capital of the World. There also it was that Julianus Caesar began his Consulship by the Celebration of solemn Games; that the Empe∣ror Valentinian the young was kill'd by Count Arbogast; Constant the Usurper by Gerontius, and Godegile Prince of Burgundy, by his Bro∣ther Gondebaud. The Romans had adorned Vienne, in which they much delighted, with several Magnificent Buildings, as an Amphitheatre, an Aqueduct, a Palace, &c. whereof there are still consider∣able remains, and this is not at all strange, since Vienne was the Capital of the Narbonnoise, which they first conquered and beautified above the rest. The Burgundians were the first, who took this Town from the Romans, and made it the head of their Kingdoms, but after they had been subdued by the French, Vienne remained united to that Monarchy, till it became part of a second Kingdom of the Burgundians in Charles the Simple's time. At the dismem∣bring of this new Realm, it passed under the Power of the Dauphins, who intitled themselves Dauphins of Viennois and Counts of Albon, a Ca∣stle along the Rhone between Vienne and Va∣lance. It will be worth our enquiry to see how this great Town is by degrees fallen to the low State it is now in, for 'tis hardly extended a
Mile in length from Lyons Gate to that o Avignon, and its breath comes not near it. Vi∣enne was then at first the Capital City of the Narbonnoise, that is of Savoy, Dauphine, Pro∣vence and Languedoc; and when it was conver∣ted to Christianity its Metropolitan, had under him the Bishops of all their Provinces. And indeed the first Christians of Vienne, besides the Dignity of their Town, seem'd to desrve that honour; for they not only confessed the name of our Saviour in the middle of a cruel Perse∣cution, under the Emperor Decius, but also en∣couraged the other faithful by their Writings and Examples, as may be seen by a Letter, which Eusebius has inserted in his Ecclesiastical History. Soon after the Narbonnoise was subdi∣vided into 5 Provinces, of which the Viennoise had the honour to be the first, and had 13 Epis∣copal Cities depending on it. In process of time Arles, one of its Suffragans growing in Wealth and bigness, was erected into an Arch∣bishoprick, and deprived its Metropolitan of seven of its Suffragans, of which however it kept but 4, viz. St. Paul Trois Chasteaux, Orange, Marseille and Toulon; the Popes making after∣wards their dear Avignon an Archbishoprick, and subjecting to it the Cities of Vaison, Cava∣illon, and Carpentras; so that the Metropolitan of Vienne, has now but 5 real Suffragans, viz. Valence, Die, Viviers, Grenoble, and St. John de Maurienne, to which may be added the Titular Bishop of Geneve. But the greatest unhappiness of Vienne came from that which was designed to keep the lu∣stre of its Metropolitans, namely, the Gift which
the Emperors made to them of the Sovereignty of the Town; for this caused several broils be∣twixt these Prelates and the Dauphins, which by succession of time much depopulated this ancient City, so that in 1448, the Archbishops were forced at last to yield up their Right to Lewis the XIth. then Dauphin, and afterwards King of France. The name of this easie Pre∣late was John of Poictiers, whose Successors have been ever since in a little esteem, whereas his Predecessors made a great figure in the World. Vienne has had the Privilege of coyn∣ing Money, as appears by several pieces, bear∣ing its name under the first and second race of the French Kings. Thirteen Miles North East of Vienne, lies upon a Mountain, the Village of Ponay, which Mr. Chorier esteems to be the place where the Epanense, or Ponense Concilium was held, after the Conversion of Sigismund King of Burgundy, in 517. Adrian de Valois mentions a Village call'd Ebao or Tortillane, which 800 years ago belong'd to the Archbishops of Vienne, and con∣sequently did not lye far off; and thence in∣fers that Ebao and Epaone are the same name; but I find no such place, as Ebao or Tortillane in my Maps. The first considerable Town after Vienne in this Diocese, is Romans upon the Isere, fifteen Leagues South East of Vienne, and 14 West of Grenoble. It was originally an Abby founded by one Bernard Archbishop of Vienne, and call'd Romanis or Romanum Monasterium; either be∣cause the Romans were yet Masters of the Coun∣try, or that he put in Monks and Clerks coming
out of Rome. Whatever be of that, the Juris∣diction of the Town, formerly belonged to the Collegiate Church of St. Bernard, but in 1344. Pope Clement the VI. made a gift of another Mans property, by transferring it to the Dau∣phin Humbert, who yielded him up Avisan. 'Tis observed hat the Situation of this Town, has some  with that of Jerusalem, and espe∣cially a small Hill within its Walls to Mount Calvaire; which was the reason that one Ro∣manet Bossi, who had travelled into the Holy Land, erected there a Building representing the St. Sepulchre, with a Monastery for Franciscan Fryers, in 1520. In 1562, the Pro∣testants becoming Masters of the Town, plun∣der'd the said Convent and Church. St. Marcellin 7 Leagues North East of Ro∣mans, and 8 West of Grenoble is the head of a small Bayliwick, that takes up 6 or 7 Leagues of the North end of the Diocese of Vienne. On the Borders of this Bayliwick, 8 Leagues North East of St. Marcellin, and 6 North of Greno∣ble is the Burrough of Voyron, where was a fa∣mous Abby, and a goodly Town called in the old Chartres Visorontia or Veserontia, if we be∣lieve the Jesuit Labbe; for Adrian de Valois conjectures more probably, that it is a place still called Veseronce, 4 Leagues North East of the Town of Bourgoin, one South of the Coun∣ty of Bouchage, and 2 West of the Rhone. In the same Bayliwick, lies the small Town of Thin or Thain, 7 Miles West of Romans; it is seated upon the Rhone, over against Tournon, from which it is separated by nothing but this River. It must have been of some considera∣tion
in the 4th. or 5th. Century, since the Maps of the Emperor Theodosius published by the Bro∣thers Peutingers, mention it under the name of Tegna; 15 Miles North of Romans lies the Town of Moras, seated upon a Mountain 5 Miles of St. Rambert upon the Rhone. Going out of the Bayliwick of Grenoble, 10 Leagues North of that City, you meet with the Town of Pont de Beauvoisin Pons Bellovi∣cinus, so called, because it is built upon the River Giere; and divided into two parts, uni∣ted by a Bridge. This part of Viennois is all mountainous, as well as Savoy and Bresse upon which it borders. The Inhabitants name it Terres Froides, and made a great Traffick of the Vipers, which abound in their Country. Six leagues West of Pont de Beauvoisin is the fa∣mous Barony of La Tour du Pin, of which the Dauphins bore the Title. On this Barony for∣merly depended the Town of Bourgoin, which lies three Leagues farther to the West, and is renowned for its Trade of Hemp. Five Leagues North of Bourgoin, lies the Burrough of Cremieu, in Latin Stramiacum, where the Emperor Lewis the Meek kept an Assembly in 836. The Bur∣rough of Anton upon the Rhone, 7 Leagues East of Lyons, seems to have been built or beautified by Marc Antony the Triumvir, both by its Latin name Antoniacum, and by these Verses of Sido∣ius Apollinaris. Pocula non heic sunt illustria nomine, pagi, Quod posuit nostris ipse Triumvir agris.
For this Part of Viennoise was in the Territory of Lyons, wherein this Poet was born, so that he will say that the Country thereabouts affor∣ded no better Wine than that of Anton. Six Leagues East of Anton upon the Rhone, and the Borders of Bresse, lies the Town of Quirieu; 3 Leagues North of Vienne, and 5 South of Lyons, lies the Burrough of St. Saphorin, renowned for its Post-asses. These Animals are so well taught, that they go to the Burrough of La Guillotiere, which makes part of Lyons, but shall not ad∣vance a step farther than the place where they are used to be let loose, though you should beat them never so much, and the same they do in their return to St. Saphorin. I supersede to describe the many Lordships that are in this Country, as the Marquisates of Virieu, and Omacieu, the Counties of Diximieu, Serrieres, Bouchage, Roussillon, Anjou, Charms; the Baronies of Baubec, Anton, &c.
Of VALENTINOIS. THis Country, included between the Rhone and Isere, the Bayliwick of Die, and the Tricastinois, reaches 20 Leagues North and South, but hardly 6 or 8 East and West. The Southern part is more mountainous, the Northern more plain, but both abundant with all the conveniencies of life. The Capital Va∣lance, lies upon the Rhone 6 Leagues South West of Romans, and 18 of Grenoble: The La∣tins call it Valentia, or Julia Vallentia; because of its strength, and of the Colony they had transported there. In their time it was Inhabi∣ted by the Segalauni, one of the chief People of the Gauls, and their Dominions extended even beyond the Rhone, since Tournon was in their Jurisdiction. VALENTINOIS was e∣rected into a Sovereign County, at the dismem∣bring of the French Monarchy, under the Suc∣cessors of Charlemaign. The first Count there∣of remember'd in History is one Gontard, who lived in 950, and who by the Sirname of Poi∣ctiers, which he left to his Successors, seems to be descended from the antient Dukes of Aqui∣tain. I have observ'd how Lewis of Poictiers, yielded his Dominions to the French King Lewis the XI. who united them to the rest of
Dauphiné. Lewis the XII. erected this County into a Dukedom, for Caesar Borgia Son to Pope Alexander the VI. but the Lords of Poictiers made a solemn protestation against it, preten∣ding their Father could not deprive them of their Inheritance. The Suit was along time depending before the Parliament of Grenoble; but what their good Right could not get was obtained by the Beauty of a Lady of that House, Diane of Poictiers, Mistress to Francis the I. who easily prevailed upon that King to present her with the contested Dutchy, which after her death was united again to the French Crown. Valence is the head of a Seneschalship, to which the Vice-seneschalships of Crest and Montlimar are resorting. It has likewise a Presidial-seat and Election, and an University for the Civil and Cannon Law, wherein Doctors are made, and the Famous Cujas has taught. Its Bishop is Suffragan to Vienne, and the first is one Emilian. Its Cathedral is dedicated to another of its Prelates, called St. Apollinaire: But I must not forget that famous Nicodemite John of Montluc, Bishop of Valence, who liv'd under the Reign of Francis I. Henry II. and his three Sons, and was one of the most Learned Men of his time. He favoured the Protestant Doctrine openly enough, and often Preached it at Court. But whether he could not as easily resolve to for sake his Kitchin as Transubstan∣tiation, as he himself used to say; or that he thought that his stay at Court would be more serviceable to the good side, than a publick ab∣juration; or that he did not like a Presbyterian Reformation; as 'tis reported that when the
Ministers of Geneve wrote to him, he should come over to them to make a publick Profes∣sion of the Truth; he answer'd they ought ra∣ther to come to, and take orders from him, they having no lawful Mission; whatsoever it may be, he dyed in the Communion of the Ro∣man Church, at Toulouse in 1579. Among the Monasteries of Valence is most eminent, the Abby of St. Ruff chief of the Order of St. Au∣gustin, esteemed one of the most sumptuous Buildings of all Dauphine. The Foundation of this Town is uncertain, but it appears by seve∣ral Inscriptions and Roman Monuments, that it is very antient. It is divided into Town and Burrough, and is defended by a Cittadel; for the other Fortifications which Francis the I. designed to make at Grenoble and Valence were never finished. In the Town are two Fountains, whose Conduits said to have been built by Ju∣lius Caesar, are indeed a Work of the Roman Magnificence; for they are vaulted, and so big that a Man may walk upright in them: the source and the end of one cannot be discovered, and along the other, which waters the Neigh∣bouring Meadows, are the ruins of several an∣tient Buildings. The Country People do not want fabulous Traditions, no more than their Neighbours at Vienne; for they will tell you strange Stories of a Giant called Briard, who was 15 Cubits high, and shew you some mon∣strous remains of his Bones; nay the Domini∣can Fryers assure, that they have still his true Picture, which they do not fail to shew to Strangers.
Duchesne relates, that in the Neighbouring Vineyards was discovered a Grave, at the open∣ing of which was seen a Woman, having a golden Ring at each of her ears, with a Turky-stone and Emerald inchased in them; at her Feet was a Cup of Cristal, and at her Head a Lamp of Glass, but assoon as this dead Body was exposed to the piercing Air, it turned in∣to dust. Between Valence and the fall of the Isere into the Rhone, at a Leagues distance from both is the Village of Confolen, where Fabius Maximus gave a total overthrow to the Gaulish Forces, in the Year 633 of Rome. Thirteen Miles South-East of Valence, upon the River Drome, lies the Town of Crest, for∣merly a dependance of the Segalauni, and a Castle of the Counts of VALENTINOIS. This French name is derived from the Latin Crista; because this Castle being seated between the River and a Neighbouring Mountain, appear'd as the Cap or the Comb of a Cock; and there∣fore it was the place of Arms of the Counts of VALENTINOIS, and the Count of Mont∣fort besieged it in vain, in the 13th. Age. As this Town is conveniently seated between the Diocesses of Valence and Die, so it was the Seat of Justice for the upper part of both Counties. 'Tis observed, that in 1469, one John Rabot made a new Statute-Book divided in a hundred Articles, which were afterwards confirmed by the Parliament of Dauphiné. Crest had declared it self for the League in the last Century, but its Governor Montoison surrender'd it to the French King Henry the Great, in 1589, and since that time its Tower has been demolished.
Six Leagues South of Valence near the Mouth of the Drome is the Burrough of Lauriol or l'Auriol, Laureolum or Aureolum, with a Priorate of S. John's Order. Mutelimar, almost nine Leagues South West of Crest, and 13 South of Valence, is a considerable Town seated upon a Mountain washed by the River Rubion; whence and from its Founders, the Lords of Grignan call'd Adhemar of Monteil, it has taken the name of Montilium Adhemari, and in Frenc Montil∣ly Monteil-Aymar and Montelimar.  it was, that one Milon the Pope's Legate assembled the Bishops of the Neighbouring Provinc against Raymond the VI. Count of Toulo nd the Albigeois, in 1208. One Girard r made Homage of this Town to Pope Gra the XI. and exchanged it with Clement the II. for the Lordship of Grillon, but the Dauphin Lewis the XI. not liking this barter, go the Town of Montelimar again, restored Grillon to the Pope, and gave the Lordship of Marsanne to Adhe∣mar, in 1446. In the last age the Inhabitants of this Town were among the first who decla∣red for the Reformation, which drew several troubles upon them, and was the cause that it was taken and retaken several times. Monte∣limar has a very fine prospect, and is but a League East of the Rhone. It produces excel∣lent Wines, which are almost the sole in that Country that will bear Carriage, and therefore are transported by Land, as far as Grenoble and Chambery. That famous Contoversist Chamier, so much known among the Protestants of France, by his Panstratia, was Minister of Montelimar. In this Dutchy are farther remarkable the Bur∣roughs
of Chabeuil, Estoille, Livron L' Auriol and Diou le Fit renowned for its Ear, then-ware; the County of Monteillez, &c. Of Tricastinois. THis Country, which makes a kind of Trian∣gle, between the County Venaissin on the East, South and South West; the River Rhne on the West, and the Vice-seneschalship of Montelimar on the North, is hardly extended 6 Leagues where it is broadest. The Capital St. Paul Tricastin, or, as the vulgar calls it St. Paul Trois Chateaux bears the name of one of its Bi∣shops, and of its antient Inhabitants the Trica∣stini. Pliny calls it Augusta Tricastinorum, but Ptolomy Noviomagus , which makes Jos. Scaliger and the Learned Jesuit Sirmond take it for 2 different Towns, whereof the last No∣viomagus should denote Nions upon the River Aygues, almost 9 Leagues East of St. Paul, but Adrian de Valois does not think it reasonable to ascribe two Capital Cities to such an inconside∣rable People, as the Tricastins ever were, for all what we find remembred of them, is, that Hannibal went through their Country, in his Journey to the Alpes. The first Bishop of St. Paul mention'd in History is one Florentius, who assisted to the Council of Epaone or Ponay, in
517. In the last Age, the Protestants were Ma∣sters of that Town during near 50 years; but in 1590. Antony Du Cros, who had been named to that Bishoprick, sang Mass again in the Cathe∣dral, after the Popish Worship had been expel∣led from it 44 years. Grignan is a small Burrough, seated upon a Mountain 4 Leagues North East of St. Paul. It has the Title of a Barony; but is much more con∣siderable by the lustre of its Lords, who are known since the 10th. or 12th. Century, and have been intrusted with several important Charges in France, especially the Lieutenancy of Provence. You have yet in this Diocese Don∣zere, Pierre-Latte, La Palu, Suze, Mondragon, &c.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Government Lyonnois. THE most ancient Authors, especially the Greeks us'd to call Gaule, Celtick  and . Then that appellation became proper to that part, that was included betwixt the Rhone, the Seine, and the Marne, the Ocean, and the Garomne; but Augustus took off that which lay betwixt the Garomne and the Loire, to ineease Aquitain, and gave it the name of Lyonnoise from Lyons its Capital City. At this present the Government Lyonnois is far narrower comprehending only 6 Provinces, viz. Lyonnois properly so call'd Forez and Beaujolois, that are very little and make scarce together 25 Leagues North and South, and 35 East and West. The other three are Bourbonnois, La Marche and Auvergne, which reach all together 52 Leagues North and South from Germigny in Bourbonnois over against Dun-le Roy in Berry, to Entraygues in Auvergne on the River Lot; and 76 East and West from Belle-ville on the Rhone
in Beaujolois, to Availle on the Vienne in the Country of La Marche. Most of the Rivers that water this Govern∣ment belong more properly to others, where you will find their course described, as the Vi∣enne, the Creuse, and the Indre in Orleannois, the Dordonne in Languedoc, the Loire and the Rhone in the General Description, and the Saone in Burgundy. Remains then only the Allier, Elaver, which rises in the Cevennes on the Borders of Gevaudan▪ and Velay, waters Les-Chazes, Lan∣geac, Peyrusse, La Voute, Brioude, Auzon, Issoire, Vic-le Comte, Pont du Chateau, Vichis S. Ger∣main des fossez, Varennes, Mulins; receives in its way the Alagnon near Auzon, the Duore or Dore, and the Siolle or Sioulle increas'd with the Bouble near Maringues, betwixt Pont du Cha∣teau and Vichy. Then falls into the Loire, 3 Miles South West of Nevers, after it has separa∣ted Nivernois from Bourbonnois during 10 Leagues.
Of Proper LYONNOIS. LIONNOIS properly so called is about 12 Leagues in length, and 7 in breadth; it is situated between Dauphine, from which 'tis se∣parated on the East by the Rhone; it has Bresse and Beaujolois on the North; Forez on the West, and Vivarais on the South. Its Soil about Lyons is more proper for Wine than Corn; in other things it is abundantly fertil, affording great quantity of excellent Fruits, and some Mines of mixt Mettals. Besides the Rhone and the Saone, which carry abundance of things to Lyons; there are some small Rivers the Azar∣gues, the Mornance, the Brenne, and the Giez, which have not 15 Leagues in their whole Course. Lyons, the chief City of this division, and of the whole Government, is seated on the Con∣fluence of the Rhone and the Saone; Its Situation is very pleasant, its Original antient, and its Trade the greatest in the Kingdom; so that Lyons is generally esteem'd one of the Principal Cities of Europe. Here is an Archbishop, who is Primate of the Celtick Gaulae, the Archbishops of Rouen, Tours and Sens depending by right upon him, as Metropolitans of the second, third, and fourth Lyonnoise; to whom may be now ad∣ded
the Archbishop of Paris, as the head of a 5th. Province. The Diocese of Lyons extends through all Proper LYONNOIS, Forez and Beau∣jolois. Here are also a Count of the Treasury of France; a Presidial Seat; a Seneschals Court; an Election, a Tribunal of Commerce, which is annext to the Consulate, under the Title of the Conservation of Lyons. Authors vary very much about the Founda∣tion of Lyons, and the Original of its Name. Some say that Lugdus King of the Celtes was the Foun∣der of it; so that from Lugdus and Dunum (which signifies a Mountain) did arise Lugdi∣dunum, or Lugdunum; some will have it to come from Lug (which in the Cimbrique Tongue signifieth Fortune) and Dunum a Hill, that is the Hill, or Mountain of Fortune; others from two Gaulish words Lugo-dunum, which they inter∣pret the Mountain of the Raves. And others a∣gain from Lucius Plancus, who by order of the Senate brought thither a Roman Colony from Vienne. It is sure that before that time, that is before the Triumvirate, Lyons was already a considerable City, though not so famous as it be∣came afterwards. In 744 of Rome, 60 Gaulish Cities contribu∣ted towards the erection of an Altar, dedicated to Augustus, and built on the confluence of the Saone and Rhone, at a place call'd Ainay, where is still a famous Abby of Benedictins. Here Caius Caesar celebrated Games, and Prises were given to those that deliver'd the best Discourse in Greek and Latin. Under the Empire of Nero, a great part of this City was burnt down, to whose rebuilding
this Emperor gave out of his Exchequer 400000 Sesterces, as much as they themselves had con∣tributed before in troublesome times. This made the LYONNOIS so faithful to his interest, that they withstood Galba, and stuck to the false Nero, until they were undeceiv'd. In Antonine's time, there was an Amphithe∣atre, which according to an ancient Chronicle, had been built by the Emperor Trajan, at a place call'd now Serviere, where stands the Collegiate Church of S. Thomas. In the Collegiate Church of S. John the Canons have the Title of Counts, and the Dean that of Duke. Pontius Pilate, who condemn'd our Lord, was a Native of Lyons, and confin'd thither for his Concussions, as well as Herod Antipas, and his Miss Herodias, the Murtherers of S. John the Baptist, and starv'd there. Pierre-Cize is an old and strong Castle, where Prisoners of State are kept. It has its name from the Rock in which it is built; there is no Author who speaks of this City without giving it great Elogies. In antient Inscriptions it is term'd Colonia Clau∣dia Copia, or the Colony of Claudius, and the abundance of Gaule, because the Emperor Clau∣dius was born there; he mixt that Colony with that of the Viennois, and order'd that Lyons should be the Granary of the Gauls, as being situated between Bresse, Bourgogne, Auvergne, Velay, Vivarais, Dauphine, Bugey, &c. from whence it receives all sorts of commodities by the means of the two Rivers that water it. He∣rodian call'd it great and happy City: Ptolmy gave it the name of famous Metropolis; Sidonius Apollinaris call'd it Rhodanusia, or the best City
on the Rhone, Scaliger term'd it un Nouveau nde dans le vieux & un vieux dans le Nouveau:  new World in the old, and an old in the new. The Country about that City is extraordinary leasant. The other places of some note in LYON∣NOIS are Chavaney Coindrieu renown'd for its Wine, Vimy, Chasselay, Anse along the Rhone, arare, Chazal, La Bresle, S. Genis-l'Argentier, S. Genis-la-Val, S. Saphorin le Chastel, Mon∣agny, Revirie, S. Andiol, S. Martin en Jarez. ive de Giez, S. Chaumont a Marquisate, known  the Manufactory of Silk, S. Jean de Bonne∣s, &c. Of FOREZ. FOREZ Segusianus Ager, or Pagus Forensis, hath as great an Extent as Lyonnois and Beaujolois together; it hath Burgundy and Bourbonnois on the North, Velay and Vivarais n the South, the Mountains of Auvergne n the West, Lyonnois and Beaujolois on the ast. This Country is very fertil, and fa∣ous for its great number of Noblemens ouses. It's proverbially said, that one may s soon number the Stars in the Firmament, as o count all the Rivulets and Brooks, which rom all quarters of this Country fall into the
Loire. It hath many excellent Medicinal Wa∣ters. It is divided into Upper and Lower▪ The Upper is near the Cevennes, and the Lower all beyond the Loire on the West-side. All this Country is full of Woods and Forests▪ especially the Upper part, whence some derive the name of it, and write it Fo∣rets; but other deny that Original, and spell it Forez, and the Latin favours their Opinion, besides that the Inhabitants are call'd Foresiens, and not Forestiens. They are famous through all the Kingdom, for their Trade of Iron-Wares, and for making all sorts of Iron-Works. This Country has still the Title of a County. It has had its particular Counts (who were also Counts of Lyons) since the year 1070. Some of them have been famous in History, as Charles II. of Bourbon, Lord High Constable of France, under Francis I. Soon after this Coun∣ty was re-united to the French Crown, by the same King. Its Principal Towns are, Montbri∣son, S. Etienne, Roanne, and Feurs. Montbrison Mons Brusonis Capital os Upper Forez, is situa∣ted on the little River Vecize 14 Leagues from Lyons towards the West, it hath a Bailywick an Election, and a Provosship; formerly it was nothing else than a Castle called Brison, after∣wards inclsed with Walls, Anno 428. Here are a Collegiate Church dedicated to our Lady, and divers Religious Houses; with the best Clock-spell of the whole Province. St. Etienne de Furens, Fanum Sancti Stephani, is a Town 2 Leagues E. of the P. ver Loire, and to South-west of Lyons, it's situated at the foot of a Mountain on the Rivlet of Furens, whse Wa∣ters
are very proper for the tempering of Iron, which occasioneth a vast quantity of Iron-Works to be made in that Country, from whence any places of Europe are furnished. In a Mountain hard by, is a Mine of Stone-Coals, hat burns since several Years. Roanne, Rodumna, is the Capital City of a little Country, called Roannois in Forez, fifteen Leagues North-west of Lyons, having the Title of Dutchy, ituated on the River Loire, which thereabouts egins to carry considerable Boats, wherein ose that design to go to Orleans by water use  imbark. In it is a Colledge of Jesuits; as lso divers religious Houses. It had anciently its Counts issued from the House of FOREZ. Feurs, Forum Segusianorum, is situated on the iver Loire, where it receiveth the little River ignon, so famous in the Romance of Astrea, etween Lyon, Roanne, and S. Etienne. It lies ne or ten Leagues West of Lyons. St. Galmier upon the Loire, half-way betwixt eurs and S. Etienne de Furens, is renowned for  Fountain, whose Water tastes like Wine; d 'tis said, that if one mixes a fourth part of ine with it, that mixture cannot be distin∣ished from pure Wine. St. Ferreol, a League East of the Loire, and  South-west of S. Etienne de Furens, has a Bay∣ick as well as Bourg-Argental, on the borders  elay, 3 Leagues West of the Rhone. On the West-side of the Loire, you meet th Leignieu, Montarchior, S. Rambert, Bouen,  Germain-la-Val; Ʋrsé, a Marquisate, the small untry of Chevalez, with the Capital S. Just, zet, Chateau-Moran, &c.
Of BEAUJOLOIS. BEAƲJOLOIS, Bell-Jocensis Pa∣gus, having the Title of Barony, is situ∣ated between the Saone and the Loire; it hath Lionnois on the South; the Principality of Dombes, and part of Maconnois on the East; Charolois on the North, and Forez on the West. This Country is very fertil in Wine, Corn▪ Hemp, and depends partly on the Bishop o Macon, viz. the most Northern Parts, but al the rest lies under the Archbishop of Lyons. It chief places are Beaujeu, Ville-Franche and Belle-Ville. Beaujeu, Bellus-Jocus, is now only a Village situated on the Ardiere, having a Castle which gave its name to BEAƲJOLOIS, and the Lord of the House of Beaujeu, which is so famous an ancient, and seems to be a Branch of the Hous of Savoy. It's about 11 Leagues North North West of Lyons, and is famous for some Sculp¦tures, or fine Engraven Works after the Antiqu Fashion. Ville-Franche, Francopolis, or Villa Franca. is seven Leagues from Lyons towards th North, being distant about half a League fro the Saone; now it's esteemed the Capital o BEAƲJOLOIS. It has a Collegiate Church, a Election, a Bayliwick, an Academy, and
Granary of Salt. There is the first Monastery of Franciscans that was ever built in France. Belle-Ville, is distant from Lyons about 10 Leagues, and is very nigh the Saone. The other places, as Pereux, Tizy-Reignie, are but incon∣siderable Buroughs or Villages. Of BOURBONNOIS. BOƲRBONNOIS, Burbonensis Pagus, hath Forez and Bourgogne on the East, Berry on the VVest, from which it is separated by the Cher; Auvergne and Forez on the South, and on the North it hath Nivernois, with part of Berry from East to VVest; it extends it self about 30 Leagues, and about 18 or 20 from South to North. This Country abounds with Fruits, Rye and Pulse; Pastures, VVallnuts, Oil, and Mines of Iron. BOƲRBONNOIS is divided into upper and lower, according to its proximity to the Moun∣tains of Auvergne. Montagar is accounted the Capital of the Upper, and Moulins in the Lower of the whole Cuntry. The ancient Bii, a Celtick Nation, having exhausted themselves, by sending Colonies into Italy and Germany, were af∣terwards extinguished in the Gaules; but some of the German Plantation re-entring their original Country in company of the Switzers; the lat∣ter
were defeated by the Romans, and the for∣mer settled themselves in some part of the Ter∣ritories f the Autunois, with the leave of th Inhabitants, and of the Romans. The place i thought to be Moulin's, because it depends on the Bishop of Autun; whereas the rest o BOƲRBONNOIS resorts either to the Bishop o Nevers, to the Archbishop of Bourges, or to th Bishop of Clermont. The Loire, the Allier, with other little Rivers and many Ponds in this Country afford great va¦riety of Fish to the Indabitants. Its Minera VVaters occasion a great confluence of Strangers The learned Gui Coquille says, that BOƲR¦BONNOIS consisted at first only of Bourbon Lar¦chambaud, and some adjacent Lordships; bu that its Counts encroaching upon their Neigh¦bours made it such a large Country as 'tis now  An Image of what the French Kings of tha Family should do. Robert II. Son to Lewis IX▪ was the first Prince of the Royal Blood o France, who bare the name of Bourbon, having spoused the Heiress of it. Moulins, Molinae, situated on the Allier, in a Plain very large, fertil and pleasant. It ha that name from the many Water-Mills that are about it; and its rise, if we believe Samson  from a Bridge which Caesar rebuilt here. Thi Town has a strong and fine Castle, and is espe¦cially renowned for the good Knives and Cizer that are made in it. Formerly 'twas the ordinary Residing-place of the Dukes of Bourbon. Moulins is divided into four Parts; the City i self, the new Town, the Suburb of the Carme¦lites, and that of the Allier. It's a City pretty
ancient, and its Medicinal Waters render it ve∣ry famous. It hath a Collegiate Church, 3 or 4 Parishes, divers religious Houses, a Colledge of Jesuits, a Presidial-Seat, a Generality, on which the Elections of Montlussn, Ga, and Esvaon, and several others in Nivernis, and Upper Marche are depending. Moulins lies 39 Leagues North-west of Lyons. Bourbon-l'Archambaut, Burbo Erchenbaldi, is a Town and a Castle situated in a fruitful Valley betwixt four Mountains. It is as ancient as King Pepn's time, and was but at first a Barony, which the French King Charles the Fair erected into a Dutchy and Peerdom in 1327. The Castle is seated on a Rock, and surrounded with 24 Towers. The Dukes have founded there an o∣y Chappel, with 12 Canons and a Treasurer. There are also a large Pond, and renown'd Baths. The other places of Bourbonnois are Vich, Cusset, a fortified Town: S. Germain-des-Fossez, Billi, La Palisse, a County where is a fine Ca∣stle, and a large Park. S. Germain-le-Puy, Va∣rennes, Jaligni, Doinpierre, &c. All betwixt the Allier and the Lotre. St. Amand, at the foot of the fortress Montrond, that was raz'd in 1652. Aay-le-Vieux and Montlucon, all three upon the Cher. The last lies in a very good Territory, with Woods, Pastures and Vines. Near it is a Box-Tree Warren, which being green all the year round, goes there for a Wonder. Neris is famous because of its Baths, and has 13 Mills upon a Brook of warm Water. La Marche is the Capital of the little Country of Combraille. Montegut lez Combraille resorts to no inferio
Justice, but depends immediately on the Par∣liament of Paris. Chantelle and Fourrilles, are two Marquisates, the former of which has a very fine House. Bellenave is a considerable Lord∣ship. Ville-Franche, St. Hilaire, Herisson, Sn∣coin, are places of some note, all lying betwix the Allier, and the Cher. Of AUVERGNE. AƲVERGNE, Arvernia, having the Title of a County, hath Forez on the East; Bourbonnois on the North; Limo∣sin, Quercy and La-Marche, on the West; Rou∣rgue, and the Cevennes on the South. Thi Province from North to South is about forty Leagues, and about thirty from West to East▪ It's divided into Higher and Lower. The Low∣er called Limagne, Lemane, lieth along the Ri∣ver Allier in a very fertil Plain, abounding in Corn, Wine, and Mineral Waters. They trade much in Tapestry-Hangings, Laces, Cloaths, Knives, and other Commodities. The Inha∣bitants in general are skilful, industrious, good Soldiers, and understand their Interest very well. The Auvergnats, Arverni, have been one of the Wealthiest and Mightiest Nations in the
Gauls, and are said to have extended their Dominions to the Rhine, and the Mediterranean Sea. They were still powerful enough in the Gauls in Caesar's Time, since the Gevaudans, the Velains, and the Quercinois were their Tributa∣ries, and Vercingentorix, an Auvergnat, had inte∣rest enough in the Gauls to make them rise against the Romans. They had some time be∣fore wag'd War against those Conquerors of the World, having in conjunction with the Allo∣broges attack'd the Autunois, Allies to the Romans; but they had been beaten, and their King Bitui∣tus taken Prisoner. Ʋpper Auvergne, or Le-haut-pays, lies in the Cevennes, which from thence are call'd the Mountains of AƲVERGNE. The Capital S. Flour, S. Flori Oppidum, has its name from one Florus Bishop of the Velains. It lies on the top of a Mountain, which is flat, and is wash'd by the Rivulet Lander, call'd Indiciacum. It was erected from a Priory to a Bishoprick in 1317, by Pope John XXII. and the Chapter of the Cathedral was seculariz'd by Pope Sixtus IV. It is, and has been still an inconsiderable Town, eighteen Leagues North-East of Rodez, and 39 South-west of Lyons. Aurillac, Aureliacum, bears most probably the Name of one Aurelius its Founder, though others derive it from an adjacent Lake, where 'tis pretended that Grains of Gold were found. There is a famous Abby of Benedictins, which has still the name of its Founder, being called l'Abbaye de S. Giraud. Mauriac is considerable for its Fairs, whether are brought vast numbers of Horses; and for a
College of Jesuits. Madic has a Castle, one of the finest Houses in the whole Province, both bordering upon Limosin. The other places are Entraygues, Ghaudes-Aigues, Carlat, Vic en Car∣ladez, Roquebrou, Bleaux, Salers, Murat, La∣stic a Viscounty; Massiat a Lordship, Alanches, Achon, Riom-des-Montagnes, Miramont, Blese &c. The Mountains of AƲVERGNE are not rug∣ged and naked, but full of Grass and excellen Simples, which are much esteem'd by Physici∣ans. The chief of this Country have a grea Name through the whole Kingdom, and Milk is so abundant here, that it surpasses the quantity of the Wine that is made in Lower Auvergne or at least in Limagne the best part of it. Moun Cantal, betwixt S. Flour and Aurillac, is the highest of all, being always cover'd with Snow and has 3 Leagues in length. Lower-Auvergne, is divided again into two Parts by the River Allier, and the East-side i called Limagne, Lemane, Limmane, and Limane since the Time of Gregory of Tours. Clermont Nemetum, Augustonemetum, afterwards Arverni and at last Clarus Mons, the Capital of a AƲVERGNE is seated upon a Mountain, whenc it has its modern Name, betwixt two Rivulets Artier and Bedat, that discharge themselves into the Allier on the West-side. It has the Title o a County, a Court of Aydes, a Presidial, and  Bishoprick Suffragan of Bourges. Caelius Rhodiginus relates, that in Julius Cae¦sar's Time, there was a wooden Tower, tha could never be burnt, because it was of Larix which resists Fire.
In the Time of the Emperor Nero, Zenodorus, a famous Statuary, made there  Colosse  Mer∣cury, 400 foot high, which was the cause that he was called to Rome, to make a Colossean Sta∣tue of that Emperor of an 110 Foot. There was then at Clermont a Temple covered with Lead, pav'd with Marble of inlaid Work, and hav∣ing a double Wall 3 foot thick. The Cathe∣dral Church is still a sumptuous Building, o∣vered with Pewer, or Lead, mix'd with Tin. Mony has formerly been coyn'd here, as appears by a Tower that bears still the Name of the Tower of the Mint. The Records of this Town make also mention of a Capitole, where Weights and Measures were kept. Not far of Clement is a Mountain, call'd Ger∣goye, on which the ancient City of Grgovia was apparently seated. It's this Town which Ver∣cingentorix so b arely defended against Julius Caesar, that he forc'd that great Captain to raise the Siege. There is likewise a Brook, called Tiretaine, whose Waters are thick and slimy like Pitch, and have such a petrifying Vertue, that all running, they form a Bridge, which the In∣habitants are oblig'd to cut, lest he should grow too great. Riom, Ricomagus, lies three Leagues North-East of Clermont, upon a little Hill, which re∣ders both its Situation and Prospect agreeable. It is very well built; the Streets are straight and wide, the Houses fine, the Churches magnifi∣cent, the Monasteries sumptuous, the Fountains pleasant, and the Gardens delicate; they live there both cheap, and with delicacy; so that 'tis call'd the Flower-Garden of AƲVERGNE
And its Latin Name, made up of two aulish words Rico-magus, signifies rich Habitation. Riom honours for its Patron one S. Amable, of whom Gregory of Tours says, that he had the Vertue of putting Serpents to flight. It's the Native Country of James Sirmond, and Amable Bur∣ze, two very learned Men. This Town is the chief of the Dukedom of Auvergne, of which all the Fiefs and Mesne-fiefs of the Province are Vassals, and was erected into a Dukedom, on behalf of John Duke of Berry, Son to the French King, in 1360. It is above 900 Years since the Judge of this Town was call'd the universal Judge of all the Province, because he judged by Appeal all the Law-Suits. It has a Seneschal's Jurisdiction, and a Presidial, which is one of the most considerable of the Realm, as well as a Generality of Finances; an Election, and both a Marshal, and Consular Jurisdiction. The Lieutenant General is also a Provost of the Court of Mint, and udge of all the differences, that may arise in the Convocation of the Ban, and Rear-ban of the Province, which is made at Riom. Justice is administred there in a Ca∣stle or Palace, which John of Berry caused to be built. Aygue-Perse, Aqua Sparsa, is the Capital of a little Country, called the Dauphinè of Auver∣gne, that is now united to the Dutchy of Mont∣pensier, which lies but a League North of it, and both Towns three or four Leagues North of Riom. Brioude Brivas, lies upon the Allier, thirteen Leagues South of Clermont. It's famous for the Grave of S. Julian a Martyr, and for a Colle∣giate
Church of Canons, who are Counts of the Town, and depend immediately upon the Pope. The Bridge of the Burrough, called Old Brioude, has only an Arch, but extraordi∣nary long and high. Issoire, Iciodurum, upon the Allier, almost midway betwixt Clermont and Brioude, is re∣nown'd for its good Race of Horses, and for a bottomless Lake, whence rises a Vapour, which resolves it self into Rain, if you throw a stone into it. Pont-gibaut, 3 Leagues North-west of Cler∣mont, has a Silver Mine in its Neighbourhood. Three Leagues more Northwards lies S. Gervais, where has been, as 'tis said, a Race of Conju∣rers, call'd les Marques, the last of whom cast himself headlong into a Pond. Maringues is much frequented for its Haven upon the Allier, which begins here to be navigable. It lies al∣most seven Leagues North-East of Clermont. La Queulle, is a Castle near the borders of Limosin, six Leagues South-west of Clermont, which has in its Neighbourhood a Fountain that tastes of Wine, and has, say they, as much strength mixt with the sixth part of that Liquor. Hard by is a Mountain, called Le Mont d'or, The golden Mountain, because of some Chaffs like Gold, that are seen glittering in its Ponds, and of a sort of shining, yellow or golden Sand, that is used by Gentlemen to dry their Writings. Here is the source of the River Dordonne, and of several Springs very healthful to those that hath themselves therein.
The other places of note in Lower Auvergne, on the West-side of the Allier, are S. Pourcain near that River, and the Frontiers of Bourbon∣nois, from whence to Langeac, a Marquisate, near the Cevennes, the Allier is continually border'd with Vineyards, Gannat, Esbreule, Menat, Manatense Monastertum; Effiat a Marqui∣sate, Randan a Dutchy, Artonne, Enezat, Mont∣serrand over against Clermont; Pont au mur, Hermene, Orcival, Cournon, le Crest, Pont du Chasteau, Besse, S. Perdoux, La Tour, S. Ger∣main-Lambrun, Mercaeur, Ardes, Blesle, &c. On the East of the Allier (to which part of Lower Auvergne Du val appropriates the name of Limagne, tho other Geographers extend it father to the West) are Vic le Comte upon the Allier, 11 Miles South-East of Clermont. It's the Capital of a tract of Land, called the Coun∣ty of Auvergne, has a fine Palace, and a S. Chap∣pel, pretended to be built by the Dukes of Al∣bany. Billom, Biliomagus, is environed with pleasant Vineyards. Thiers or Tiern, Tigernum Castrum, is renowned for the good Knives and Cizers that are made there: Lezoux, for the goodness of its Air, and its excellent Melons. Arlenc, is the Capital of a small Country, nam'd Livradois, because it was rid or delivered of the overflowing Waters, by digging a Channel a thousand foot in length through a Mountain. The other places are Alegre a Marquisate, S. Paullian, Paulliaguet, la Voute Chillac, la Cheze-Dieu Casa Dei, Auzon Alsona, S. Ger∣main-Lerm, Ambrt, Saucilanges Celsinaniae, S. Amand-de-Roche-Savine, Corpiere Curva Pe∣tra, Oliergues, Puy-Guillaume, Manlieu Magnus us, with an Abby of Benedictins.
Of La MARCHE. MARK in the Teutonic Tongue, signi∣fies Confines or Limits, whence comes Mark-graaf-Marquis, that is Gover∣nour of the Frontiers. This Province having been made up of the Borders of Poictou, Limo∣sin and Auvergne has gotten from thence the name of Marka or Marchia, La MARCHE. It has Berry to the North, Poictou to the West; Limosin to the North, and Auvergne, (that is, the little Territories of Combrailles and Franc-Aleu, which are of its dependencies) to the East. Its extent from West to East is about 30 Leagues, and from South to North fifteen, and in some places twenty. It's divided into Up∣per, whose chief Town is Gueret, and into Low∣er, which has le Dorat. The Lords of Lusig∣nan or Lezignen, were counts of La MAR∣CHE, afterwards of Angoulesme, and those 2. Counties were united to the French Crown, un∣der King Philip the Fair. It has often been the Appannage of younger Brothers in France, especially of the House of Bourbon, and was at last re-annex'd to that Crown in 1331, after many Revolutions. This Country is but indifferent fruitful, and produces only some Pastures, Oats and Rye. There are good Hor∣ses,
and they trade also in Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, and coarse Cloaths. Several considerable Ri∣vers have their Source here; as the Vienne, the Cher, the Creuse, and the Gartempe. This Pro∣vince resorts for the Temporal to the Parliament of Paris, and for the Spiritual to the Bishop of Limoges. Gueret Waractum, Capital of Upper Marche, has a Seneschalship, a Presidial, a Mareshal's Jurisdiction, and an Ecclesiastical Court of the Diocese of Limoges, from which 'tis 12 Leagues distant to the North-East. Its name seems to come from the Latin Vervactum, which signifies an unmanur'd Ground, whence has been made Waractum, Garactum and Gueret. This Town has an Election resorting to the Generality of Moulins. The other places of some Note in Upper Marche, are Bellegarde, Capital of the little Country of Franc-aleu, with an Election under the Generality of Moulins; Aubusson, that gives name to a noble Family, whence is issued a fa∣mous great Master of Maltha, Bonlieu, Chene∣raille, Jarnage, S. Julien, Chastelus, Dunaise, all on the East of the Creuse. On the West of that River are, Celle, Glenic, Sevignac, Gran∣mond an Abby, chief of the Order of that Name; Murat, Ahun, Bourganeuf, Dougnon, Pont-aurion, S. Leonard, Chastain, Feletin, &c. Le Dorat, Dauratum, for Deauratum, Capi∣tal of Lower Marche, lies not far from the Gar∣tempe and Seve, 12 Leagues North-west of Gue∣ret, with an Election resorting to the Generali∣ty of Limoges. Belac, two Leagues Southwards is another pretty Town, with an Election un∣der the same Generality. Crouzan, now an in∣considerable
Village near the borders of Berry, has been the Residence of the ancient Counts of La Marche. The other places are Brosse a Vis∣county, Lussac-les-Eglises, les-Plats, Pont-S. Martin, Mombas a Viscounty; Availle, Confou∣lens, Brigueuil a Viscounty, all near the Borders of Poictou. S. Junien, Embazais, Lesegaux, Oradour, Mortemar a Dutchy, not far from Limo∣sin. Touron, Rencon, Maignac, la Sousterraine, &c. East of le Dorat.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Government of Burgundy. AT the beginning of the 5th Century, un∣der the Empire of Honorius, the Burgun∣dians, Burgundiones, a German Nation entred into the Gaules, and having conquered several Countries from the Romans, their King Gaudisele laid there the Foundation of a Realm in 408, which under his Successor Gaudicare, in 413 took the name of its Conquerors, and was called the Kingdom of Burgundy, whereof Vien∣ne in Dauphiné was the Capital. It was made up of some Provinces of the Narbonnoise and Celtick Gaule, comprehending Switzerland, Sa∣voy, Dauphiné, the Northern part of Provence, Burgundy Dutchy and County. As they were War-like, and of a Stature that frighted the Galli and Romans (for Sidonius Apollinary de∣scribes them, as being 7 Foot high) they would have extended their Dominions farther; but tha the French on the North, and the Wisigoths on the South and West, that were as barbarous, and as great Warriors as they, opposed their Progresses. By the Conquest of Clovis, the
French having brought the Wisigoths very low, his Sons after his Death attack'd the Burgundians, and Childebert, and Clotaire, having kill'd or routed Godomar the IX. and last King of that Nation, in 527, their Empire finished 119 af∣ter its beginning. The Burgundians are esteem∣ed part of the Vandals, and were settled on the South-side of the Danube, in Bavaria and Au∣stria, before their coming into the Gaules. After this defeat, nothing remained of the ancient Kingdom of Burgundy, but the Name; for it was subject to the French during 340 years, until the Divisions of Charlemaign, or Lewis the Meek's Successors gave occasion to one Beuves, or Beuvon, to usurp the Soveraignty of it un∣der Charles the Bald. Boson, Son to Beuves, plotted so well with the Prelates, that he got himself Crown'd King of Burgundy, by the Me∣tropolitans of Lyons, Vienne Tarantaise, Aix, Arles and Besancon, and 17 Bishops, in 879, his Son Lewis, sirnam'd the Blind, succeeded him in 888, but his Grandson Charles Constantin was only Prince of Vienne, and never Crown'd King; one Hugh, Son to Theobald, Count of Arles, having made himself Master of Arles and Italy, in 926. This yielded all the Countries belong∣ing to the Kingdom of Burgundy, to Rodolph, Son of another Rodolph, who in 888 had erected ano∣ther Realm within the Alps, beyond Mont Jura, under the Name of the Transjuran Burgundy. In the mean while the Dutchy of Burgundy, fell again to the share of French Lords, from whom Robert, Son to Hugh Capet, King of France took it, in 1001, and left it, in 1031, to his second Son Robert, who was the head of the
first Race of the Dukes of Burgundy. Philip I. the last of this Stock dying without Issue, in 1361, this Dutchy, with its dependencies was inherited by the French King John, who in 1363 gave it to his second Son Philip II. sir∣nam'd the Bold, he was succeeded by John without fear, Philip III. or the Good, and Charles the Rash, who leaving but a Daughter, call'd Mar∣gueret, in 1477, the French King Lewis XI seiz∣ed upon the Dutchy of Burgundy, as a Male Feet, the Princess Margaret, who had spoused Maximilian of Austria, keeping Franche-County, and the Netherlands, as acquisitions of her Pre∣decessors. The chief Rivers of the Dutchy and County of Burgundy (for I think fit to de∣scribe them together to avoid confusion) be∣sides the Lire, the Rhone, and the Yonne, al∣ready described, are the Serain, that rises near Mont S. Jean in Auxois, washes Noyers, Poilly, Chablys, Ligny-le-Chateau, and falls into the Yonne, betwixt Seignelay and Epoigny. The Ar∣mancon Springs likewise in Auxois near Chateau∣neuf, on the Borders of Dijonnois, washes Se∣meur, receives the Brenne, increas'd with the Ozerain and Loze, goes by Aney-le-Franc, Ton∣nerre, S. Florentin, where it receives the Arman∣ce, and mixes with the Yonne, below Brignon l'Archeveque in Champaign. The Seyne, that has its Source in this Province near Chanceaux, on the Frontiers of Dijonnois, and runs through the Country of La Montagne, until you come to Bar-Sur-Seyne, receives there a vast number of Rivulets, among which the Leigne, the Ource, and the Arce, are the most considerable.
The Saone has its Source in the Mountains of Vauge, Bonville, Attigny, Chastillon, goes through Jussy, and Pont-Sur-Saone, receives the Coney, the Angrogne, and the Laterne, from the Mountains of Vauge, the Mance, and the Ayron, from Champaign, runs through Chemilly, Rey, Gray and Pontraille, receives in its way the Fonvens, the River des Planches, the Salon, the Biez de Citez, the Vigenne, increas'd with the Torelle, and the Lougnon. This is a pretty long River that comes from the Mountains of Vauge, and is increas'd with the Linotte, and several Brooks. As to the Saone, it pursues its way through the Dutchy of Burgundy, waters Aus∣sone, S. Jean de Laune, Verdun, Chalon, Tenare, Mascon, Thoissey, Ville-Franche in Beaujolois, Trevoun in the Principality of Dombes, Vimy in Lyonnois, and Mines with the Rhone at Lyons. The Rivers that fall afterwards on the West∣side of the Saone, are the Dou. This is a Ri∣ver of a strange course, and as long as that of the Saone. It springs from Mount S. Claude, near a place call'd la Motte, in the Bayliwick d' Aval, in Franche-County. Then runs North-East along Mount Jura, till it comes to S. Ʋrsace, near the Borders of Elzas. Here it makes an Angle, whereof S. Hippolite is the point. Near Mont-Beliard it begins to run South-west, waters Besancon and Dole, receives the Louve, and the Orion, with the Glanstine. One meets afterwards with no considerable Rivers; for the Bruyne, the Selle, the Solvan, the Panette, the Dorlande, the Solinan, the Chevron, Sane-la-vive, and Sa∣ne-la-Morte, are but Rivulets, that unite together before their fall into the Saone; the Resouzes goes
through Bourg en Bresse and Pont de vaux; the Vesle receives the Yrance, and the Renon, the Cha∣larine waters Thoissay, and the Froment Amblerieu. On the East-side, the Saone receives the Dehune, increas'd with the Bourgeoise, the Corderin, and the Musin, the Grosne, the Marnaison, the Pan∣set, the Ardiere, and the Yorgon. Here are also several Rivers and Rivulets, that fall into the Loire, as the Reconze, the Bre∣bince, increas'd with the Oudrach and Arrroux, the Paliars, the Cressonne, and the Airon. Some do likewise fall into the Rhone, as the Versoy, the Seran, the Fora; but especially the Dain, an indifferent long River, which receives the Senê, the Serpentin, and the Angelon near its Source, waters Campagnole, Tour de Maye and Pont-Dain, receives the Valouze, the Suzan, the Arbarine, and discharges it self into the Rhone, betwixt Gourdan and Loyette. This Government borders on Champaign to the North, on Gastinois, Nivenois and Bourbon∣nois to the West; on Beaujolois, Lyonnois and Dauphiné to the South, and on Franche-County to the East. It is now divided into 13 Parts, viz. Dijonnois, Autunois, Chalonnois, la Montagne, Auxois, Auxerrois, Charolois, Briennois and Ma∣connois. These 9 constitute the Dutchy of Bur∣gundy; the other four, viz. Bresse, Bugey, Gex and Dombes, were acquir'd in 1601. from Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, by the Frnch King Henry IV. in exchange for the Marquiate of Salusses. They make up in all 59 L. N. and S. from Bar-Sur-Seyne to Trevoux, 50 E. and W. where this Government is broadest, as from Gex to Bourbo-l'Ansi. Long. from 24 d. 15 m. to 27 d. 45 m. Lat. from 45 d. 32 m. to 47 d. 55 m.
Of DIJONNOIS. DIJONNOIS, Divionensis Pagus, included betwixt Auxois, la Montagne, Franche-County, Bresse and Autunois. It's a Coun∣try extraordinary fruitful in Corn and delicate Wines. The City of Dijon, Divio Castrum, is situated upon the Ouche, Oscara, and the Rivulet Suzon, in the Diocese of Langres, with a Parliament, a Chamber of Accompts, and a Mint, where Mony is coyn'd at the Letter P. The Parlia∣ment was instituted by Lewis XI. in 1476, and made Sedentary by Charles the VIII, in 1491. Before Aurelian, it was but an inconsiderable place, which this Emperour wall'd in, and a∣dorn'd with Towers, Gates and Temples. It became afterwards more flourishing, when the Dukes of Burgundy of the Royal Blood of France, chose it for their Habitation, and the Dijonnois were so shrewd, that seeing their Princess mar∣ried with a German Prince, who was not like to come and live amongst 'em, they treated pri∣vately with the French King Lewis XI. to de∣liver themselves and the whole Dutchy of Bur∣gundy into his Hands, upon condition that he should establish among them Sovereign Courts of Justice, and of the Exchequer, which was done accordingly. This made Dijon be resorted unto the
more; so that it is now one of the prettiest Towns in France. It lies 43 Leagues North of Lyons. The name of Dijon, Divio, seems to come from a Gaulish word Div, signifying Foun¦tain, from whence many other Towns have been called, as Divodurum Mediomatricum, Metz. Divona Cadurcorum, Cahors, &c. Here among other things are to be considered the Walls of the Town strengthened with Towers and Bastions; the Castle flank'd with 4 great Towers, 2 Ravelins, and every where well fortified. A very fine Chartreuse, with the mag∣nificent Tombs of several Dukes; the Palace for Justice; the King's House; 16 Churches, 2 Abbies, 5 Hospitals, and the Guild-Hall. The States of that Country us'd to meet here every 3 Years. Beaune, Belnum Castrum, lies 5 Leagues West of the Saone, between Dijon, Autun and Chalon; it hath a Chancellery and a Bayliwick. It is in∣different ancient, and well built, situated in a Country extraordinary fertil, especially in de∣licate Wines, and watered with a pleasant little River, called la Bourgeoise, passing by the Town. It has an Hospital, which is one of the most sumptuous Buildings in France, and its Terri∣tory is called le Beaunois, Pagus Belnensis. The Town of Auxone, or Auxossne, is situated upon the Saone, with a Viscounty and Bayliwick, almost 6 Leagues East of Dijn, and 5 North-west of Dole, towards the Frontiers of the County of Bourgogne. It is considerably strong. S. Jean-de-l'Aune, or Lone, Fanum Sancti Johannis Laudonensis, is a little Town upon the Saone; nigh to the Abby of Cisteaux, between
Auxone and Bellegarde. It has an Abby of its own, founded by King Theodorie, and confirm'd in its Priviledges, by the French King Robert, under the inspection of the Bishop of Chalons. As to Bellegarde, now sirnamed Surde-Belle∣garde; it is seated upon the Saone, nine Leagues South-west of Dijon, and famous for holding out against the Imperial Army, Anno 1636, commanded by the undaunted Galas Charles, Duke of Lorraine, and the Mar∣ques de Grana, with several others, who were forced to raise the Siege, being harrassed by Josias, Count of Rantzeau, by his fre∣quent Sallies cut off a vast Number of Men. The Abby decisteaux, chief of the Order of that Name, depends on the Bp. of Chalon, tho it lies 5 Leagues South of Dijon, and 2 West of St. Jean de Laune. Robert Abbot of Molesme, in the Diocese of Langres founded it, Anno 1098. This Town is properly is Chalonois. St. Bernard, with his Companions were there receiv'd, Anno 1113. Ann. 1115, they founded the Abby of Clairvaux, whereof that Saint was the first Abbot. That Order afterwards became very powerful, and hath produced many noted Men; as Popes, Cardinals and Bishops, and has now 1800 Monasteries under it self. The other places of note in DIJONNOIS are Fontaine-Francoise, near the borders of Cham∣paign and Franche-County, famous for the Victo∣ry of the French King, Henry IV. over the Spa∣niards, in 1595. St. Seyne, Fleury, Belig Mulsau, Bere, Nuys, As to Rouvre and  that were two Country-houses of the  Burgundy, they are but inconsiderabl
Of AUTUNOIS. THis Diocese included betwixt Auxois, Di∣jonnois, Bresse, Charollois and Nivernois, is but a very small part of the Dominions of the ancient Aedui, which reach'd North and South from the Country of the Sennois to the Cevennes, and extended East and West from the Rhone and the Sane to the Loire, and a good way be∣yond it, comprehending besides the Dutchy of Burgundy, Nivernois, Bourbonnois, Bresse, Forez, Beau∣jolois and Lyonnois; for the Segusiani, who in∣habited the three last Countries, and part of Bresse were Tributaries of the Autunois, and even the Senonois were under their Protection. The Autunois being so powerful were easily tempted with the desire of making themselves Masters of all the Gaules; in order to which, they made Alliance with the Romans. But the Auvergnats and Allobroges, who had as much Power, and perhaps no less Ambition than they, opposed their Design, fought, and beat them, and would utterly have destroyed them, had not the Autunois call'd the Romans to their help. This Foreign assistance prov'd too pow∣erful for their Enemies, who were easily subdu∣ed, together with all Narbnnoise Gaule, where∣in the Quarrels of the Marseillois and Salans,
had already given footing to these Conquerors of the World. The Contestations of the Autunois and Se∣quani, or Frano-Countois, were the cause of a second coming of the Romans. The Sequani being too weak for the Aedui, had invited the Germans, and with their Succors, defeated 'em twice. Upon this, Divitiacus, an Autunois Lord, was deputed to Rome, and Prevailed ea∣sily with the Senate, to send an Army into the Gaules. The Great Caesar was chosen for this expedition, who knew to make a good use of the Friendship of the Aedui, and of the Dissen∣sions of the Gaules; so that he overcame them all, one after another. The Autunois perceiv'd, but too late, they had been mistaken in their Politicks, and would feign have been rid of the imperious Master they had given to them∣selves, and their Country-men; but the Gaules were already exhausted in a manner of Men and Mony; neither had they learn'd the War-Stratagems, and Military Discipline of their Conquerors; so that their League with Vercin∣gentorix for the relief of the Alesia, one of their Towns avail'd nothing, but to bring them into the contempt of the Romans, who deprived them insensibly of their Countries and Privi∣ledges, and made Lyons head of the Celtick Gaules. The Autunois rais'd a third time under the Emperor Tiberius, but with as little success as before. They could never since recover their Liberty, and much less their Empire, but were always subject either to the Romans, the Bur∣gundians, or to the French. But the greatest
losses the Autunois suffer'd, were by the rebellion of the Bagaudes, or Gaulish Peasants, who plundered the Country, and all the Towns they could Master, under the Conduct of one Aman and Elian, but were at last defeated by Herculi∣us Maximian, associated to the Empire by Diocletian, The two Emperours at the sollici∣tations of Constantius Chlorus, Caesar, and after∣wards Emperour of the Gaules, England and Spain, began to repair Auun, which Constantius, and Constantine his Son finished. For this reason the Senate of Autun made a Decree, that their City should be called Flavia, and the Inhabi∣tants Flavienses, from the proper Name of these two Emperours Flavius; but this lasted only as long as the Family of the Flavians sat upon the Throne; for they retook afterwards their former Name of Augustodunum. In the mean while, since Augustodunum is compound of a Gaulish and Latin word, signi∣fying the Mountain of Augustus; it remains un∣known what was the name of the Capital of the Aedui, before that Emperour, for Bibracte was a considerable Town, not far from Autun, but not Autun it self. In Constantius and Constantine's times, there was a Capitole dedicated to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, a Temple of Apollo, and a famous School for Rhetorick and Humane Learning. Before the Auntunois were reduced into a Ro∣man Province, they govern'd themselves as a Common-wealth, chusing every Year a Sove∣reign Magistrate, call'd Vergo-brete, who had absolute Power of Life and Death, and over their Goods. They had then a Senate of Druides, an
Accademy for the Nobility of the Gaules, and a School for the younger Sort. Autun lies now on the confluence of the Aoux and Tavernay, 37 Miles South-west of Dijon. St. Lazare, of old, Nazaire, is the Cathedral Church, and very considerable, both for is Structure and Chapter. This City is divided in∣to two Parts, Higher and Lower. The Diocese contains 24 Archpriests, and above 600 Parish∣es. The Bishop presides at the States of Bur∣gundy. Besides the Cathedral, Autun harh a great number of other Churches; as alo many Abbies, and other religious Houses. Bourbon l'Ansi, Burbo Anselli, is a Town, and a Bayliwick, with a Castle, in the Diocese of Autun, about a Mile from the Loire, whih se∣parates it from Bourbonnois. The Territory of Bourbon towards the Frontiers of Burgundy, is encompassed with ferti Mountains; the Town it self is built upon the top of a little Hill; its Castle is guarded with a Ditch, hewen out of the Rock. During the Civil Wars it could ne∣ver be taken, being defended by Sieur d' Amanze. The Mineral Waters of Bourbon were in great esteem, even in the Time of the Romans, and are as much now priz'd, since the Reign of Henry the III. who preferr'd them to all other Wa∣ters. There are few other places worth to be men∣tioned, save Vianges, Blanot, Chissey, Lucenay-l'Eveque, Icy-l'-Eveque, La-Motte-S. Jean, le-Mont-Ceny, Brandons, and Drapy-S. Loup.
Of CHALONOIS. THis Diocese, called also Bresse Chalonoise, was of the dependencies of Autun. It is included betwixt the County of Burgundy, Bresse, Maconnois, Charolois and Autunois. The City of Chalon, Cabillo Aeduorum, or Cabillonum, is situated on the Saone, with the Title of a County, a Bayliwick, and a Bishop∣rick Suffragan to Lyons, between Verdun and Te∣nare, 15 Leagues South of Dijon. The antiqui∣ty of this City appeareth from the great num∣ber of Statues and Inscriptions in the ruins of an Amphitheatre, and of many other publick Buildings. Here it was that the Romans made Magazines of Corn for their Armies, and after∣wards the Emperours appointed the Rendevouze of their Forces at this place. It was almost ruined by Aittila; but soon after repair'd. The French King's Gontran and Thierry made their Residence here. This City is very spacious and fine; the Saone makes here an Isle, which they term Fauxbourg Saint Laurence, between two Bridges, one of Stone, and the other of Wood. The most remarkable things in this City are the Palace of the Prince, the Cathedral Church of St. Vincent (formerly of S. Stephen) consisting 25 Canons, whereof 7 are Dignitaries, the
Dean, the Singer, the Treasurer, and four Arch-Deacons. S. Marcel is esteemed to be the Apostle of Chalon, St. Donatian was Bishop of it in the 4th Century, and was at the Coun∣cil of Cologne, Anno 346. Besides the Cathe∣dral Church there are many Parishes; as St. George, S. Laurence, S. Mary, which is a Com∣mandership of S. Antony, and a fine College of Jesuits. The Cittadel of Chalon is fortified with four Royal Bastions. The Town of Verdun is upon the Doux, nigh its fall into the Saone, about 4 Leagues North-East of Chalon. The other places of some note are Chaigny, Rully, Givry, la Ferte-Sur-Grosne, Tenare, Cuzery, Branges, Sagy, Savigny, Bojana, Beluvre, Paigny, and Seure de Belle-garde a Dutchy. Of the Country of La Montagne. THE Country of la Montagne, is situated to∣ward the North of the Dutchy of Burgundy, about the origin of the Seine, betwixt Franche, County, Champaign, Anxerrois, Auxois and Di∣jonnois, and depends upon the Bishop of Langres, as well as Dijonnois. The Capital is Chatillon, Castellio ad Sequanam, situated on the Seine, between Aisei-le-Duc and Bar-sur-seine, 31 Miles North-west of Dijon. It's a pretty good Town, and the seat of the Baily
of la Montagne; the River divides it into two Parts, one call'd the Bourg, and the other Chau∣mont. Here are to be seen the ruins of an old Castle. It was the Native Country of William Philander, who has made learned Commenta∣ries on the X Books of Vitruvius. Bar-sur-seine, Barrum ad Sequanam, is upon the River Seine, where it receives the Ourse, the Arse, and the Leigne towards the Frontiers of Champaign, about 7 Leagues North of Chatillon. Bar in old Gaulish, signifies a Haven, or the Port of a River. This Town is very pleasant, being well built, and seated in a fertil Soil. Alsey-le-Duc, 3 Leagues South of Chatillon, is nigh the River Seine. The other places are Mussy l'Eveque Espaiily, Val des-Choux an Abby, Aigney le-Duc, Duesme, Baigneux les-Juiss, Villaine-en-Dermois and Ver∣donnet.
Of AUXOIS. THis Country was inhabited by the Mandubii, Allies or Subjects to the Autunois. Their Capital City Alesia, rather than Alexia, was great and powerful, and built by Hercules, at his re∣turn from Spain, if we believe Diodore of Sicily. Caesar laid Siege to it, and took it by Storm, altho 'twas defended by 100000 Men; and that 300000 more were in their March to relieve i, and then raz'd it to the Ground; so that Alesia, Alize, is now but an inconsiderable Village, be∣twixt the Rivers Loze and Ozerain, 14 Leagues North East of Semeur. Whatever might have been the Confines of the Mandubii, at this present. Auxois is situated upon the Frontiers of Ni∣vernois, Autunois, Dijonnois, la Montagne, Cham∣paign and Auxerrois. Semeur the Capital is a little Town, lying on the Armancon, 14 Leagues North of Autun. The Latin Authors call it Sine murum, because at first it was not wall'd up. At this time it is divided into three Parts, whereof the Burough is the biggest. The second Part, call'd Donjon, is seat∣ed on a Rock, wash'd by the Armaneon, defend∣ed with thick and high Walls, and flank'd with great Towers. The third is a round Castle
fortified with Towers, at 15 Paces from each other. This Town is governed by a Mayor, and 6 Sheriffs or Eschevins. It was taken by Charles of Amboise, one of Lewis XI's Gene∣rals, after the Death of Charles the Rash, last Duke of Burgundy. Auxois depends for the Spiritual on the Bishop of Autun. The other places of note in this Country are Avalon Aballo, on the Cousin, which had a Castle so strong, that the French King Robert could hardly take it within three Months, in 1006. It's still a Seat of Regal Ju∣stice, 8 Leagues West of Semeur. Arnay-le-Duc, on the Source of the Arroux, near the Borders of Autunois is another Royal Seat of Justice. Fla∣vigny, Flaviniacum, is esteemed to be founded by some Emperour of the Flavian Family. Moutier S. Jean, has a very fine Castle. Noyers, Montreal, l'Isle-Sous-Montreal, Saulieu, Mont-S. Jean, Viteaux, Saumaize are of some consi∣deration.
Of AUXERROIS. AƲxerreis is situated betwixt Auxois, Chpam∣paign and Nivernois, a Country of very little extent, but that formerly reached as far as does now the Diocese of Auxerre and compre∣hended the Country of Puisaye, with part of Ga∣stinois and Orleannois. Auxerre, Autessiodorum, is situated on the River Yonne, towards the confines of Burgundy, 28 Leagues North West of Dijon. It has a Bayliwick, Presidial, Election, and a Bishoprick Suffragan of Sens. This City is pret∣ty ancient. It's said, that Julian the Apostate did stay here for some time to refresh his Army, ann. 356. The Age following it was taken, and almost ruined by Attila, an 451. The French K. Robert took it from Landri, Count of Nevers, in 1005, but in 1015 he restor'd it to Renald Lan∣dri's Son giving him his Daughter Hadwide in Marriage. Their posterity enjoy'd it, till 1371, that John the IV. Count of Auxerre sold his Estate to the French King Charles the V. Charles the VII. was forc'd to yield this County to Philip III. Duke of Burgundy, but after the Death of Charles the Rash, Lewis XI. united it again to the French Crown. The Cathedral under the the name of St. Stephen has a very fine Quire,
and a Tower extraordinary high. The Chapter is made up of 56 Canons, whereof the Dean is elected by the Chapter; all the others being nam'd by the Bishop, without excepting the Dignicaries, as the Singer, the great Archdeacon of Auxerre, the Archdeacon of Puisaie, the Treasurer, the Penitenciary, and four Arch∣priests. A Martyr call'd S. Peregrin is accounted the first Bishop of Auxerre; but S. Germain, who liv'd in the 5th Century, is the most famous of all. The other Towns of Auxerrois, are Crevant upon the Yonne, known by the Rout of the Lord High Constable Steward, defeated by the English and Burgundians, in 1423. Coulaenge-la-Vineuse and Coulange-Sur-Yonne, Ouayne, Courson, Nitry, Segnelay a Marquisate. Of CHAROLOIS. THe County of Charolois lies towards the South of Burgundy, between Bourbon∣nois, Briennois, Beaujolois, Masconois, Autu∣nois and Nivernois. The Latin Historians of the French name is Cadrellnsis Pagus. It had been bought by Charles, last Duke of Burgundy, from the Counts of Armagnac; and was therefore en∣joyed by Margaret his Daughter, Maximilian of Austria her Husband, and the Kings of Spain
their Successors, till the Peace of Nimeguen, in 1678. CHAROLOIS, Cadrellae, or rather Quadrellae, is situated on the River Reconse; six Leagues North East of the Loire, and eight West of Cgni, and 12 South of Autun. It has a strong Castle, a Collegiate Church, and several Monasteries. Digoin, Digonia, with the title of a Barony, on the confluence of the Arroux and Loire, is the only place mentioned by Latin Authors. The others are Paroy-le-Monial, Toulon, Mont S. Vincent; la-Guiche, Chaumont and Oye. Of BRIENNOIS. BRIENNOIS lies between Charolois and Macconnois, towards the Frontiers of Beaujlois. It is a very small Country, whose chief Towns, Semeur and Anzi-le-Duc, are not considerable. Of MASCONNOIS. MASCONNOIS lies towards the South-East of the Dutchy of Burgundy, betwixt Beaujolois, Bresse, Chalonnois and Cha∣rolois. The City of Mascon, Matisco Aeduorum, is situated on the Saone, above 15 Leagues North of Lyons, with an Election, a Bayliwick, and a Bishoprick Suffragan of Lyons, It's a very an∣cient
Town; for in Caesar's Time 'twas there that the Arrows of the Country were forg'd. It hath been often ruined by Barbarians; but a∣bove all by Attila, the Burgundians and Franks, but since repair'd by several French Kings. It's now built upon the declining side of a Hill, wash'd by the River, that is pass'd by a fine Stone-Bridge, which joins the Town with the Suburb of S. Law∣rence, where are 2 stately Towers, and pleasant Lanes leading into the Meadows. The Cathe∣dral of S. Vincent was formerly dedicated to S. Gervasius and Protasius. Besides this Church there is the Chapter or Collegiate Church of S. Peter, whose Canons are bound to prove their Nobility, in order to their admission. There are also the Church of S. Stephen, a College of Jesuits, and several other Parishes and Monaste∣ries. The Presidial of Mascon resorts to that of Lyons, and in last instance to the Parliament of Paris. Masconnois, Matisconensis-Pagus is a fruitful Country, especially in excellent Wines. It has had particular Counts from Alberie I. in the 10th Century, till it was sold to the French K. Lewis IX. by Countess Alix, in 1238. It keeps its own States separately from those of Burgundy; how∣ever at the same time. There are five Towns wall'd in besides the Cathedral, viz. Tornus upon the Saone, famous for an ancient Abby of Bene∣dictins, under the name of S. Valerin, founded and endowed by the Emperor Charles the Bald. It depends on the Bishoprick of Chalon. Clugni, Cluniacum, chief of the Order of that Name. It was founded according to the rule of S. Benoit, by William I. Duke of Aquitain, Count of Auverg∣ne,
on behalf of Berno, Abbot of Gigniac, in 910. The Monks of this Abby having murther∣ed William III. or IV. Count of Mascon, whilst he was a hunting, made the vulgar believe that he had been carried away by the Devil. The other 3 Towns are S. Gengoux, that has been once the Seat of the Baily; Marsilly les-Nonains and le-Bois-S. Marie. Of BRESSE. LA-BRESSE, Brexia, Brissia, or Saltus Brixius, hath the Dain on the East, which separates it from Bugey; on the South it hath the Rhone, which divides it from Dauphiné: On the West the River Saone parts it from Lyonnois, and the Dutchy of Burgundy and Chalonnois lies on the North. It has about six Leagues extent from South to North, and nine Leagues from E. to W. This little Province a∣boundeth with Corn, Hemp, Pastures and Fishes. It's unwholesome in some parts, because of several Ponds, which send up noisom Vapours, and thereby corrupts the Mass of Air. As BRESSE depends for the most part on the Prelate of Ly∣ons, whose Diocese was inhabited by the Segusi∣ani, and that the rest of this Province is under the Bishops of Chalon and Mascon; so it seems to have been subject to the Autunois. It was con∣quered from the Romans by the Burgundians,
and from them by the French. In latter Ages it made part of the second Kingdom of Burgundy, then came to the Lords of Beauge, who possest the greatest part of it, during near 400 Years. The Lords of Coligny, Villars and Monluel had there also considerable Estates; but they melted all suc∣cessively into the House of Savoy, from 1272, till 1402. At last Charles Emanuel Duke of Sa∣voy, was forc'd to exchange not only this Pro∣vince, but also the Countries of Bugey, Valro∣mey, and the Bayliwick of Gex for the Marquisate of Salusses, that is a rich and plentiful Country, for a barren and mountainous. The Capital Town of this Country Bourg, is si∣tuated on the little River Reissousse, 7 Leagues East of Mascon, having the Title of a Bayliwick, Presidial and Election. It is seated in a Mar∣shy, but fertil Soil, looking to the East on the Mountain S. Claude, and little Hills covered with Vineyards; and Westward it hath a great Plain, which extendeth it self even to the Sane▪ The City Government is in the hands of  Syndics or Sheriffs. Philibert Emanuel Duke of Savoy, built there a Cittadel in 1569; but it was demolished, ann. 1611. There are Halls spacious and well built, next to which is the Church of St. Brou, where several Dukes of ¦voy lie interr'd, Pope Leo X. gave out a Bull to establish here a Bishoprick in 1515 and 1521, but Pope Paul III. suppressed it in 1534. The Presidial was instituted by the French K. Henry IV. in 1601. The Horses of this Country are esteemed. Montluel is a little Village, but an ancient Lordship belonging to Monsieur le Prince, five
Leagues North East of Lyons. The other places are Romenay, S. Trivier, Pont de Vaux a Dutchy, Bauger, Montrevel a County; S. Paul de Varas, Perouges a Barony; the Native Country of the Famous Mr. de Vaugeias; Varambon, Pont-de-Vesle, Chastillon, Goligni, Bouligneux, Villar, &c. Of BUGEY. BƲGEY, is situated between the Rhone, which separates it from Dauphiné and Sa∣vo; the Dain, which distinguisheth it from Bresse, and has the County of Burgundy to the North. Its extent from Pont-Dain, or the Bridge of Dain to Seissel, is almost 10 Leagues, and from Dortans to the Port of Loye∣te, almost 20 Leagues. Although this Country be full of Hills and Mountains, yet it's abun∣dantly fertil; for there are many Lakes and Rivers well stor'd with Fish, and Forests with Game both great and small; as Bears, Wild-Swines, Harts, Hinds, Hares, gray and red; Patridges, Pheasants, Wood-hens, &c.. This Country has ordinarily follow'd the Condition of Bresse, and been subject to the same Lords, as it was in the last Age to the Dukes of Savoy, and is now to the French King. Belley, Belica, a League from the Rhone, and almost 17 East of Lyons, has a Bayliwick,
an Election, and a Bishoprick Suffragan of Be∣sancon; it's generally esteem'd very ancient, and was one of the Cities of the Sequani. It's not known who was the Apostle of BƲGEY; for the first Bishop of Belley mentioned in Hi∣story, is one Vincent, who subscribed to the 2d. Council of Paris, under Childebert, Clovis the Great's Son, and to the 2d. Council of Lyons under Gontran, in 567. This Town was burnt to Ashes, ann. 1385; but Amadaeus VIII. Duke of Savoy rebuilt it, and surrounded it with Walls and Towers. S. John Baptist is the name of the Cathedral Church; whose Chapter is composed of 19 Canons, four Dignities; the Dean, the Archpriest, the Primicier, and the Sin∣er. They were at first regular, following the Rule of S. Austin, but they were made Secular in 1579. The other Towns of BƲGEY are S. Rambert, with an Abby of Benedictins; Nantua, that keeps still the name of the ancient Nanuates, mentioned by Caesar: Seissel, an important pas∣sage on the River Rhone; Chateau-neuf Capital of Valromey, Chatillon of Michaille, Arban, near the borders of Franche-County, Arlon, upon the Rhone, Montreal, Ambournay, Lagnieu, &c.
Of the Bayliwick of GEX. I Am apt to believe that this Bayliwick, and and part of Bugey were the Habitation of the ancient Nantuates, since the Veragri were seated in the Cuntry of Vaux, and the Seduni in the Diocese of Sion. However it be, this Bayliwick is but a little Country, having the County of Burgundy on the North; the Country of Vaux in the Canton of Bern, on the East; on the South it is separated from Savoy, by part of the Lake of Geneva, and the River Rhone; and on the West it has again part of the County of Burgundy and Bugey. The chief Town is GEX, which is the Seat of the Baily. Of the Principality of Dombes. THe Principality of DOMBES, Dombensis-Pa∣gus, lies between Bresse and the Saone, that separates it from Maconnois, Beaujolois and Ly∣onnois. It's a Country very agreeable to live in. This Country contains 11 Chastelnies, whereof the chief is Trevoux, that is also the Capital of the Country. It has a Collegiate Church, a
Bayliwick, and a Mint, where Mony was coyn'd with the Stamp of late Ann Mary Louise of Orle∣ans, Soveraign Princess of Dombes, Daughter to John Baptist of Orleans, youngest Son of the French K. Henry IV. Lewis XIV. has inherited this present year 1693, the Estate of that Lady, whom he would never suffer to marry. This Principaliy has a little Parliament residing at Lyons, and made up of 3 Presidents, 3 Masters of the Requests, a Knight of Honour, that sits with the Sword on his side, 12 Councellors or Judges, an Attorney General, 2 Sollicitors or Advocates General, and 4 Secretaries. This Soveraign Court of Justice nobilitates its Mem∣bers, and has the same Rights and Privileges of other Parliaments of France. The Dean of Trevoux is Counsellor born in it. The other Chastelnies are Beauregard, Mon∣merle, Toissey, Lans, Chalamont, Chatelet, S. Trivier, Ville-Neuve, Amberieu and Lignieu.
CHAP. XX. Of the County of Burgundy. Or Franche-County. THe County of Burgundy, or Upper Burgundy, call'd also Franche-County, hath Switzerland on the East, Bresse, Bugey and Gex on the South, Lorraine on the North; the Dutchy of Burgun∣dy, and part of Champaign on the West. Its extent is from 46 d. 10 m. to 41 d. of Latitude, which take up about 47 Leagues from Dortans to Fontaine le-Chaste, and between 26 d. 20 m. and 28 d. 28 m. of Longitude, which make up about 33 Leagues from the Frontiers of the Bishoprick of Basil to Autrey, beyond Gray. It abounds in Corn, Wine, Cattle, Horses, Woods, and Salt-Springs: Here are to be found several Quarries of black Marble, Jasper of divers Co∣lours, and fine Alabaster, with some Mines of Iron and Silver. This Country is water'd with several considerable Rivers and Brooks; as the Saone, the Dou, the Lougnon, the Soubre, and of ex-the Louve, &c. which abound with various sots cellent Fish, among which, the Carps of Saone, the Pikes of the Du; the Barbel-Fish of the Lougnon, and the Trouts of the Dain, are in great esteem. The course of these Rivers has been already described in the Government of Burgundy. All Criticks and Geographers agree,
that Franche-County was anciently inhabited by the Sequani, who were so powerful as to dispute the Empire of the Gaules with the Autunois, which was the occasional cause of Cae∣sar's Conquests, as may be seen in the Descrip∣tion of Autun. This great Captain and Histo∣rian ranks the Sequani, as well as the Helvetii, or Switzers, among the Celtae or Galli, proper∣ly so called. But Augustus added these two Nations to the Belgick Gaule, as he did also those who dwelt betwixt the Loire and the Garumne to Aquitain, and gave to the Country of the Sequani, the name of Maxima Sequanorum, be∣cause it was one of the greatest Provinces of the Gaules, taking up all that space that is in∣cluded betwixt the Rhone, Mount Jura, the source of the Rhin, and the Saone, from Basil, or rather August Augusta Rauracorum, to Lyons. This Country was conquer'd from the Ro∣mans by the Burgundians, and from them by the French. During the decay of that Monarchy, under the second Race of their Kings, it made for a little while part of the second Kingdom of Burgundy. Then its Counts made themselves Sovereigns, and their Posterity enjoy'd it from the end of the 10th Century to 1369, that Margaret, Heiress of this Country, married Philip the bold, Duke of Burgundy of the Royal Blood of France. And therefore this Province being originally the Portion of a Princess, re∣main'd to Mary, Daughter to Charles the Rash, last Duke of Burgundy, and to her Heis the Kings of Spain, till Lewis XIV. seiz'd upon it in 1674, and kept it by the Peace of Nimeguen.
Franche-County is said to have got this name from one or two of its Counts, Renald I. and III. who refused to make Homage to the Em∣perours, pretending that their Country was al∣together free from that Subjection. Whatever be of that, this County is now divided into three Bayliwicks, bearing the names of Vesoul, Dole and Poligni; or highest, middle-most and low∣est Franche-County. Of the Bayliwick of Vesoul. THe Bayliwick of VESOƲL, or Amont, or Highest Burgundy County, is situated in the North part of this Province, VESOƲL, Vesul∣lum, Capital of this Division, is seated on a ittle River, which emptieth it self into the Saone, 21 Miles North of Besancon, in a Soil fer∣til in excellent Wine. It had formerly a good Cittadel. Gray, Gradicum Castrum, upon the Saone, 9 Leagues North of Dolo, and 10 North-East of Dijon. It was formerly a place of great strength, but Lewis XIV. having surpriz'd it, in 1668, az'd its Cittadel, and all its Fortifications. Beaune les-Nonnes, lies a Mile North of the Dou, and 7 Leagues North-East of Besancon. Luxeuil, Luxovium, is a little Town towards he Frontiers of Lorraine, and Mount Vauge,  Leagues North-East of Vesoul. The Abby of Lure, or Luders, Lutera, is situated on a little
River, which emptieth it self into the Lougeon, towards the Frontiers of Lorraine, 15 League North-East of Besancon. In this Bayliwick towards the borders of Elzas is included the small Country of Mou∣beliard called by the Germans Monpelgart, In Latin Mons-Beliardi, or Mons Peligardi. The Capital of the same name is situated on the river Halle, which emptieth it self into the Dou. It's built at the foot of a rugged Rock on which is a Castle, and a strong Cittadel. This County for∣merly belong'd to the Dukes of Wirtemberg, who were also Lords of the Imperial Abby of Lure and all the Inhabitants professed the Reform'd Religion. The other places of note in this Bailywick are Fougerevil-la-ville and Le Chastel, Faueou∣gney, Jussey, Pont, and Port sur Saone, Chemilly, Mntjustin, Rup, Rey, Montboson, Grammont, Rou∣gemont, Isle S. Loup, Pesme, Cromarcy, &c. Of the Bayliwick of Dole. THE Bayliwick of Dole, call'd also th Middlemost, is situated in the middle o this Province, extending it self from the Frontiers of the Dutchy of Burgundy eve to those of Swisserland, about the River Lagnon Dou Duis and Louve Lupa. Besancon, Vesontio, Visontio, and in latt ages Chrysopolis or the Golden City, lies upo the Dou, 22 Leagues East of Dijon. It wa
formerly the Capital of the Sequani, and a ace of so great strength and consequence that when the Romans had it into their power they planted there a Colony, fortify'd and adorn'd it with several buildings, whereof there remains but some few names in and about he Town. In 274. this plantation rais'd a Triomphal Arch in honour of Aurelian the Em∣perour; but some years after it was plunder'd and ruin'd by the Alamanni under their King Crocus; so that it was in a pitiful condition in 366. It had scarce been repair'd when the Fandals besieg'd it in vain in 406. The Bur∣gundians were more successful in 413. but Attilae destroy'd it a second time, in 451 or 452. it was afterwards rebuilt in the form it has now, somewhat different from what it was in the omans time. The River Dou separates it into two parts, of which the biggest resembles a Peninsula, and is clos'd up by a hill, whereon the Cittadel was built. Besancon has still an Archbishoprik, of which Belay and the titular Bishop of Lausanne and Basil are suffragans. The Chapter is compos'd of a Dean, an Archdeacon a Singer, a Treasurer, two Under-Singers, 43. Canons, and 24 Chaplains. The Churches of St. Stephen and St. John pretend both to the dignity of Cathedral there are eight Pari∣shes besides, the Abbys of St. Vincent and St Faul, several Colegiate Churches and Monasteries and a Coledg of Jesuits. The Palaces of Cante-Croix and Granvelle, and the Town-House de∣serve to be seen. In the last is a Brazen gle bearing the statue of the Emperor Charles V. and throwing Water by its two bills. The
Diocese of Besancon contains 780 Parishes under 15 Deanships, and 5 Arch-deaconships. Since Franche-County is in the power of the French the Parliament and Chamber of Accounts, which had their Seat at Dole, have been transfer'd hither; so that Besancon may now be accounted, the Capital of this Province. DOLE Dola, is situated on the Dou, in a very pleasant and fertil Country and is still the Seat of the Baily of this Division. It's a Town of some Antiquity. Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy did found its University in 1426, and the Dutchess Margaret enlarged its Priviledges and indowments in 1404. The French King Lewis the XI. took that Town Anno 1479 and sack'd it in a lamentable manner, which gave occasion to call it Dola Dolens, Mournfull Dle. Anno 1530. the Emperour Charles the V. did fortity it with seven Bastions, which after∣wards were augmented; but Anno 1668 Lewis the XIV took it with the rest of the Pro∣vince, threw down the Walls, ruined the Fortifications, and then restor'd it to the Spaniards, but afterwards Anno 1674 he retook it with the whole Franche-County. Other Towns in this Division ae Ornans, Quingey, Verceil, la Loye, Rochefort, Chasteau-neuf, Raon, &c. Of the Bayliwick of Poligny. THE BAYLIWICK of Poligny or d'Aval in the South-West of Burgundy County, is situated between Switzer∣land on the East; Bresse on the South the
Dutchy of Burgundy on the West; and the Bayliwick of Dole, on the North. The cheif Towns are Poligny, Salins, and S. Claude. Poligny the Seat of the Baily lies on the Source of the River Glanstine which emptieth it self into the Dou, eight leagues from Dole towards the South-East. Salins, Salinae Sequanorum is situated between two Mountains nigh the River Forica that discharges it self into the Louve, 9 leagues from Besancon, towards the South. It derives its name from Salt-Springs, which, did the French King allow it, would supply most part of the Country with Salt. In the Spaniards time it was extraordinary strong and had a Castle almost impregnable. Saint Claude was also pretty well fortify'd. It's situated towards the Frontiers of Bugey and the Country of Gex, 7 leagues North-West of Geneve: There is a famous Abby, that boasts of the Body of St. Claude Archbi∣shop of Besancon in the 7 Century whence the Town hath its name. The other places Worthy to be mention'd are Lyon-le-Saunier, Arley, Ruffey, Blesterans, Carlau, Mommorot, Monet le Chasteau, Sorlin, Mi∣rheau, Champagnole, Chastel-Chalon, Arbois, St. Lothain, Burgille, Nozeret, Pontarlier; St. Anne, Monthenoit, &c. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS PART I. A General and Particular Description of France. Page 1. CHAP I. Of the ancient and modern Bounds and Divisions of France; Of its Mountains, Ports, Rivers and Forests. p. 2. CHAP. II. Of the Air and Soil of France, and its various Productions. p. 10. CHAP III. Of the Inhabitants of France, and of their Language. p. 15. CHAP IV. Of the Riches, Strength, and Government of France. p. 20. CHAP V. Of the Chief Officers of the Crown and King∣dom. p. 29. CHAP VI. Of the Religion of the French. p. 37.
PART II. A Description of France, wherein each of its great Provinces, smaller Counties, Cities, Royal Houses, Forests, Mountains, Coasts, Rivers and Lakes, are Geographically and Historically de∣scribed. CHAP I. orrain, the three Bishopricks, and the Dut∣chy of Bar. p. 47. CHAP II. The Principality of Sedan, and Dukedom of Bouillon and Rethel. p. 58. CHAP III. Of Champaign. p. 62. 1. Rheims. p. 64. 2. Precinct of Caalons and Troyes. p. 67. 3. Senonois. 4. Langres. 5. Bassigni, Vallage, and Perthois. p. 70, 71, 72. 6. The County of Bri, and more especially Bri Champenoise. p. 74. CHAP IV. Of the Isle of France, and its dependencies. p. 77. Paris. p. 80. Towns and Places of Note in the Parisis, or the Territory of Paris. p. 97. Versailles. Trianon. p. 99. 113. Other Towns, Royal Houses, and Places of Note in the Parisis. p. 115. French Brie. Hurepoix. p. 126. 127. Mantoan. p. 137. rench Vexin. Beauvaisis p. 145. 147.
Soissonuois. Laonnois. p. 156, 157. Noyonnois. p. 159. CHAP V. Of Picardy. p. 160 Tierache. Vermandois. p. 163. 166. Santerre. Amienois. p. 169. 171. Vimeux. Ponthieu. p. 175, 176. Boulenois. p. 179. The Recovered Country. p. 182. CHAP VI. Of Normandy, especially the Higher. p. 186. Norman Vexin. p. 191. Caux. Bray. Roumois. 197, 205, 206. The Bishoprick of Evreux. p. 206. CHAP VII. Of Lower Normandy. The Bishoprick of Li∣zieux. p. 211. The Bishoprick of Seez. p. 213. The Bishoprick of Bayeux. p. 216. The Bishoprick of Constance, or Coutance. p. 220. The Bishoprick of Avranches. p. 226. CHAP VIII. Of Britanny. p. 229. Of High Britanny. The Bishoprick of Rennes. p. 235. Of the Bishoprick of Dol. p. 238. Of the Bishoprick of St. Malo. p. 239. Of the Bishoprick of St. Brieux. p. 241. Of the Bishoprick of Nants. p. 243. CHAP. IX. Of Lower Britanny. The Bishoprick of Ven∣nes. p. 248. Of the Bishoprick of Quimper-Corentin. p. 252 Of the Bishoprick of Treguier. p. 254.
Of the Bishoprick of St. Pol De Leon. p. 256. CHAp. X. Of the Government Orleanois. p. 258 Of the Country of Maine, or Le Maine. p. 265. Of the Country of Perche, or Le Perche. p. 270. Of Beauce. Proper Beauce. p. 274, 275. Of Vendomois. p. 281. Of Anjou. p. 283. Of Touraine. p. 295. Of Blaisois. p. 303. Of Proper Orleanois. p. 312. Of Gastinois. p. 324. Of Nivernois. p. 331. CHAP. XI. Of Orleanois on the South of the Loire. Of Berry. p. 338. Of Poictou. p. 414. Of Aunis p. 435. Of Angoumois. p. 439. Of the Islands depending on the Government Orlenois. p. 441. CHAP. XII. Of the Government of Guienne. p. 443. Of Proper Guienne. p. 448. Of Bazadois. Of Agenois. p. 450, 451. Of Quercy. p. 452. Of Rouergue. p. 455. Of Limosin. p. 459. Of Perigord. p. 461. Of Saintonge. p. 463. Of Armagnac. p. 466 Of Chaloffe. p. 469 Of Condomois. p. 470. Of the Landes. Of Lower Navarre. p. 452, 473 Of Soule. Of Labourd. p. 474, 475
Of Ben. p. 477 Of the County of Bigorre. p. 479 Of Comminge. p. 481 Of Conferans. p. 482 CHAP. XIII. Of Languedoc. p. 484 Of Toulousan. p. 495 Of the Diocese of Toulouse. p. 496 Of the Diocese of Montauban. p. 508 Of the Diocese of La Vur. p. 510 Of Lauragais. p. 512 Of Albigeois. p. 515 Of the County of Foix. p. 522 CHAP. XIV. Of Lower Languedoc. Of the Precinct of Narbonne. p. 527 Of the Precinct of Beziers. p. 539 Of the Precinct of Nismes. p. 545 CHAP. XV. Of the Cevennes. p. 565 Of Vivarais. p. 569 Of the Diocese of Uzès p. 562 Of Gevaudan. p. 572 Of Velay. p. 575 CHAP. XVI. Of Provence. p. 578 Of the Diocese of Aix. p. 584 Of the Diocese of Riez. p. 587 Of the Diocese of Senez. p. 588 Of the Diocese of Digne. p. 589 Of the the Diocese of Arles. p. 500 Of the Diocese of Marseille. p. 594 Of the Diocese of Toulon. Of the Diocese of Frejus. p. 596, 597 Of the Diocese of Grace. Of the Diocese of Vence. p. 598, 599
Of the Diocese of Glandeve. Of the Diocese of Sisteron. p. 600, 601 Of the Diocese of Apt. p. 602 Of the Couny Venaissin. p. 605 Of the Principality of Orange. p. 610 Of the Islands of Provence. p. 612 CHAP. XVII. Of Dauphiné. p. 615 Of High-Dauphiné. Of Gresivaudan. p. 621 Of the County of Dioi. p. 628 Of the Baronnies. p. 631 Of Gapencois. p. 632 Of Ambrunois p. 634 Of Brianconnois. p. 366 CHAP. XVIII. Of Low Dauphine. Of Viennois. p. 640 Of Valentinois p. 649 Of Tricastinois. p. 654 CHAP. XIX. Of the Gouvernment of Lyonnois. p. 656 Of Proper Lyonnois. p. 658 Of Forez. p. 661 Of Beaujolois. Of Bourbonnois. p. 664, 665 Of Auvergne. p. 668 Of La Marche. p. 675 CHAP. XX. Of the Government of Burgundy. p. 678 Of Dijonnois. p. 683 Of Autunois. p. 666 Of Chalonois. Of the Country of La Montagne. p. 670, 671 Of Auxois. p. 673 Of Auxerrois. p. 675 Of Charolois. Of Briennois. Of Mas∣connois. p. 676, 677
Of Brosse. p. 679 Of Bugey. p. 681 Of the Bayliwick of Gex. Of the Principality of Dombes. p. 683 CHAP. XXI. Of the County of Burgundy. p. 685 Of the Bayliwick of Vesoul. p. 687 Of the Bayliwick of Dole. p. 689 Of the Bayliwick of Poligny. p. 671
Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King-Arms next St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet-Street. 3. THe Parson's Vade Mecum: Or, A Treatise containing Choice Observations about the accounts of the year, Moveable Feasts, Ember Week, Ecclesiastical Censures, the memorable Things in the 3 first Centuries, and some after Ages, Archbishops and Bishopricks, their Electi∣on, Consecration, Installment, &c. Patronage, Institution, Induction, Non-residence, Dispensa∣tions, Pluralities, Deprivation, Dilapidation, Privileges of Clergymen, Tithes and Simony; very fit for all Clergymen and Gentlemen, in 12's. bound, price 1 s. 4. The Measurer's Guide, or the whole Art of Measuring made short, plain and easy, shewing how to measure any plain Superficies, all sorts of regular Solids, Artificer's Works, viz. Car∣penters, Jeyners, Plaisterers, Painters, Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers, Tylers, &c. with the Art of Gauging, of singular Use to all Gentlemen Artificers and others. J. Barker, in 12's. bound, price 1 s. 5. Taxilla, or Love preferr'd before Duty; a Novel. By D. W. Gent. 12's. bound, price 1 s. 6. Eachards Gazetteers, or Neesmans Inter∣preters, being a Geographical Inde of all Cities, Towns, &c. in Europe with their distances from each other, & to what Prince they are ow subject to; very necessary for the right understaing of all Forein and Dock News, Letters and Gazetts▪ 12's.  1 s. 6 d. 7. A most compl  of Geography, General and  cibing all the Empires,
Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World, collected according to the latest Discoveries, and agreeing with the choicest and newest Maps, 12's bound, price 2 s. 8. — Exact Description of Ireland, Sur∣veying all its Provinces and Counties; shewing the exact state of that Kingdom, and all the principal Things that are necessary to be known; Illustrated with five Maps, one of the whole Kingdom, the others of each particular Pro∣vince, 12's bound, price 1 s. 6 d. 9.— Flanders, or the Spanish Netherlands most accurately described, shewing the several, Provinces, their Bounds, Dimensions, Rivers, Riches and Strength, with an exact description of the Cities, and who they are at present subject to; very necessary for the understanding of Wars in those Countries, 12's bound, price 1 s. 10. — The Duke of Savoy's Dominions most accurately described, with some adjacent parts, shewing all that is necessary to be known, and very useful for the understanding of the present War in those parts, price 3d. The five last all done by Laurance Eachard, A. B. of Christ's Colledge in Cambridge. 11. Nomo — A Law-Dictionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure Words and Terms as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient and Modern Laws, with References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books, Charters, Ancient Deeds and Manuscripts wherein the words are used, being the very best extant. The Second Edition, By Tho. Blunt of the Inner-Temple, Esq; in Folio bound, price 10. s.
