16776.6 99898854 151063
An abstract of the grieuances of the Maister, VVardens and Commonaltie of the Cutlers, Paynter-stainers, and Book-binders of the Cittie of London, and consequently of all England concerning the Pattent or Charter of sole making of Gold and Siluer Foliat and the Proclamation prohibiting the importation of any into this Kingdome, conteyned likewise in briefe in a Petition exhibited into the Commons house of Parliament. viz. THat Gold and Siluer Foliat hath for the most part beene heretofore imported into this kingdome from the part beyond the Seas, and so free for all men to buy the same where they pleased. About September 1619, certaine persons skilled in the mistery of Gold beating, being in all vnder thirtie in number, and all or most of them incorporated into some, of the Companies of the Citty of London, combyning and confederating themselues toge∣ther, did for their owne priuat lucre and gaine by the meanes and furtherance of one Doctor Eglesham one of his Maiesties Phisitians and Sir Henry Bretton Knight, obtained from the Kings Maiestie a Charter for a Corporation vnto themselues, for the sole making of Gold and Siluer Foliat, and a Proclamation Prohibiting the importation of any into this kingdome. And moreouer, that the said Company of Goldbeaters for procuring the said Charter or Corporation, did promise and couenant to pay and allow out of their said Corporation vnto the said Doctor Eglesham 200 lib. per annum, during life, and to Sir Henry Bretton 50 lib. per annum besides other yearlie charges amounting vnto in all 300 lib. per annum. or there abouts. The grieuances therefore arising thereby doe subsist of these particulars following. First that by this meanes, the Petitioners haue euer since beene inforced to buy, and take the said Foliat of the new erected Corporation of Goldbeaters and no where else. That they are inforced to giue higher rates and prices then heretofore they were wont to pay, viz. they now exact and make your Sup∣pliants the Cutlers pay 15 s. for so much Gold Foliat which before the erecting of the said Corporation they paid but 12 s. and 30 s. for so much Siluer Foliat that they did vsuallie buy for 20 s. & for your suppliants the Painters they make them pay 21 s. for their Gold Foliat, for the which before they did pay but 18 s. and yet the sise lesser, and 11 s. for the Siluer Foliat, the which they bought for 7 s. 6 d. and your Suppliants the Booke Binders pay 9 s. for so much Gold Foliat as heretofore they did vsuallie buy for 8 s. That there are but six of the said Gold beaters which they call Wardens, which haue all set gaines thereof, and they confine the saile of the said Foliat to one place which they call their Hall, whither they tie all the rest of the said Goldbeaters to bring their Foliat, and con∣streynes the petitioners to come and buy, yea they haue so combyned and confederated themselues together, that they haue caused them selues to be bound to each other by obligations in great summes of money, not to vent or sell any to your Suppliants at lower rates. And moreouer haue caused the rest of them being the said Foliat makers, to take seuerall corporall oathes, not to sell any else where or to any of your Suppliants. That sinnce the obteyning of the said Corporation and proclamation, they made the same more thinner and deceiptfuller then the same was made before, so as the same doth sooner decay and fade in wearing, to the great discredit of your Suppliants, the workemen that vse the same. And a damage and displeasing to the Kings Maiestie, the Nobilitie and Gentrie, which needeth or shall need the vse of guilding for adorning of their howses, Armes, Bookes, and other things. Whereas one Spencer a Goldbeater a poore man vsing his trade in secret places for feare of them for the getting of his liuing, The said Goldbeaters did chase him from place to place, and at last came forceably vpon him, tooke away his tooles, caused him to be arrested and cast in prison and there laid 4000 lib. Action vppon him, and when as they did perceiue some of your Suppliants to endeauour to re∣leiue him and helpe him out of Prison, The said company of Goldbeaters together with one Norton the Clarke of their Hall did exhibit a long bill of 46 sheets of paper into his Maiesties Court of Star-chamber in the late Atturnney generall his name for molestation sake onely against some of your Suppliants and their wiues, and put them to almost 20 lib. costs to answere the same, and withall gaue out speeches that they would vndoe your Suppliants. The said Goldbeaters doe spend and consume of the proper Coynes or Bullion of this kingdome, in makeing of the said Foliat 3 or 4 thousand lib per annum. by estimation to the preiudice of the Commō wealth in diminishing so much of his Bullion which would be turn∣ed into Coyne. That if the said Charter and Proclammation were remoued and taken away, there would be sufficient quantities of Gold and Siluer Foliat imported into this Realme, from forraine parts for commodities sent from hence, to serue all his Maiestie Dominions for all kind of vses, for ornaments, without diminishing any the Coynes or Bullions of this Realme whatsoeuer, so as the Common wealth shall not be in this kind damnified, nor the trade of so many thousands of poore artificers of this kingdome that doe get their liuings thereby impaired. Whereas the Goldbeaters doe alledg that the Foliat heretofore imported out of the Low Countries was base Gold, and made deceipt∣fully. Your Suppliaunts which haue vsed the same will maintaine and aver, that the same was as good as any they make now a dayes, and farre better cheape. Whereas your Suppliants haue complained vnto them for selling their said stuffe at such deere rates, and for making the same so thinne, they haue answered that your Suppliaunts, were better be content, for if they did finde fault therewith, they should pay more for the same. Whereas the said Goldbeaters did complaine for want of meanes to liue vppon, by their said trade, before the obtaining of the said Patent it is certainly knowne that they do now allow and pay out of their said Corporation 300 lib. or vpwards per annum, to the said Doctor Eglesham, Sir Henry Bretton, the Clarke, and Beadle of their Hall, and otherwise, all which is meerely exacted and raised out of the prices, & by the falsities of the said stuffe, to the great damage of your Suppliants, and his Maiesties subiects. And yet by reason thereof the said workemens maintenance never a whit bettered. And lastlie the said Charter or Corporation is in the nature of a Monopolie, and is obnoxious to the Common wealth, in consuming his Coyne and Bullion and enhauncing the price of the said Foliat as aforesaid, and doe tend to the vndoing or hurt of many thousand of the poore Artificers in this land, of Cutlers, Painters Stainers, and Booke-binders, and to all others vsing this art of gilding, and is bene∣ficiall to none, but to the said Doctor Eglesham, Sir Henry Breton, the sixe VVardens of the Goldbeaters and the said Norton their Clarke for any thing your petitioners know, perceiue or can discerne. Wherefore they humbly pray the same may be called in and dissolued.
