A848 E1000_23 R1188 99859159 111226
A LETTER FROM General Monck. From Dalkeith, 13 October 1659. Directed as followeth. For the Right Honorable William Lenthal, Esquire, Speaker; To be Communicated to the Parlia∣ment of the Common-wealth of England, at Westminster. London, Printed, An. Dom. 1659.
For the Right Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker; To be Communicated to the Parlia∣ment of the Common-wealth of England, at Westminster. Right Honourable, I Received Yours of the 7th In∣stant, and cannot but with thank∣fulness Acknowledge the Great Grace and Favour the Parliament are pleased to vouchsafe to me, in ta∣king Notice of my weak and worth∣less Endeavours in their Service. I confess such Encouragement is suffi∣cient
to Reward the Highest Merits; I hope I shall make such Use of It, not only to satisfie my self as the best Recompence for my former poor Services, but as a Motive to Future Obedience and Loyalty to them: I bless the Lord I have a Witness in mine own Heart, That my Designs tend not to any other End than my Countries Good, and I shall with more Cheerfulness return the Sword into Your Hands, than ever I re∣ceiv'd it with, and desire to attend Your Pleasure if You shall have no further Use of my Service: I shall give You the best Account I can of the Forces here, and endeavour to keep them in due Obedience to You, (but I cannot undertake for men of some Spirits.) I shal not trouble your
Councils with my Impertinencies any further, but Intreat You to give me leave to mind You (what I know is much upon Your Hearts already) That You would be pleased to ha∣sten the Settlement of the Govern∣ment of these Nations in a Com∣monwealth Way, in Successive Par∣liaments, so to be Regulated in Ele∣ctions as You shall think fit; and that You will increase your Favour to the Ministers of the Gospel, and the Sober Professours thereof, and God will be in the midst of you, and bless you, and you need not doubt but the Hearts and Hands of all good men will be with you, and for my self I desire, That you would be assured that I do not think my life too precious to hazard in the Defence of
The Supream Authority, the Par∣liament of England. The Lord bless your Councils with Peace and Suc∣cess, and make you a Terrour to the Nations round about you, which is the Earnest Prayer of Him, who is, Your Lorpps. most humble and faithful Servant, George Monck. Dalkeith, 13. Octob. 1659.
