B1630 E16_19 99873401 125871
A SPEECH DELIVERED In the Commons House of Parliament, BY That judicious, and worthy Gentleman, THOMAS BEAMOUNT Esquire: AT The presenting of the Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders, of the County of LEICESTER, On Wednesday the 6. of November, 1644. ALSO A true Copie of the Petition it selfe, sub∣scribed with above 2000. Hands. LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. Novemb. 9. 1644.
The Speech of THOMAS BEAMOUNT Es∣quire, to the House of Commons, at the pre∣senting of Leicester-Shire Petition. SIR, THe deepe expressions the whole Kingdom hath received of grace and clemency from this honou∣rable House, hath incouraged us in our great sufferings, to make our retreat hither, our Countrey being almost invironed with destroying Ene∣mies, and our selves continually exposed to losse and danger, these our miseries (as wee humbly apprehend) taking birth especially from two Causes. One is, our want of a chief Commander. For, whilest the Enemy is spoiling our Countrey, the Officers of our Forces, being under no particular Authority, are so long in disputing who shall go out for our defence, that before they appeare, the Enemy hath done the mischief, and is retired.
The other is, our Countreyes disacquaintance with most of those which sit in the Commitee, which in some averts, in many lessens a free and lively adhering to them. For the common people, of which our strength most consists, do only trust, and expect an active care from such, whose residence with them hath begot affection, and estates amongst them, gives them an apprehension that they are involved in the same danger with them. Our present Com∣mittee receive nothing but what they forcibly ex∣tort from the Countrey, wherein they make an unprofitable purchase: for, though they get some money, they lose many hearts; whereas if men that have estates and are well known in their Countrey were joyned with them, the people would generally come in, and offer up all they have for the advancement of the publike good. For, we have men, horses, and money left, good materialls to repair our decayed Countrey, if this honorable Parliament (the great Archite∣ctors of the Commonwealth) will please to de∣pute us good Under-builders to prevent a ruine. In these clouds of trouble that darken our whole Nation, this Parliament is our onely Sun,
that diffuseth light to the severall Committees of every County; and they, like Stars, should im∣part their borrowed shine to us: but if they be unknown Starres, they do not direct, but di∣stract the Pilot in his passage. In these our miseries, as we have many sharers, so (if it had been thought necessary) there had been many more presenters of them to you: but we, in the name of all, do humbly invocate a gracious and speedy redresse, the unhappy di∣stance of our Countrey prohibiting our frequent addresses to this honoured place; where having briefly unbosomed our grievances, we humbly leave them to the wisdome and consideration of this honourable Parliament.
To the honourable House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of the Gentlemen, Freeholders, and best-affected of Leicestershire, Sheweth, THat whereas by the gracious care and wisdome of this ho∣nourable House, in appoint∣ing Gentlemen of Judgments and Estates of this County to sit in a Committee for regulating, and e∣quall disposing of all affaires in it; and by sending unto us the right honourable the Lord GREY of Grooby (who first rescued us out of the hands of Malignants, made the town of Leicester (then ready to be seized on by them) a Garrison, and gave incouragement and life to the actions of all the well-affected) with chiefe Com∣mand of all the Military Forces of this
County, the Officers of the Army, being un∣der the power of one, were kept from emulati∣on and dissention, and the hearts of the Coun∣ty so inclined, that they were quickly able to resist, and almost to suppresse the Enemy: But we are now (by leaving the best men of the County out of the Committee, in a late Or∣dinance for the MILITIA) fallen under the Government of such, whose defects of num∣ber, acquaintance amongst us, and interests in the County, cannot afford us any probable hopes of preservation, nor the Common∣wealth any considerable assistance; and in the unhappy absence of the Lord GREY, most of our horses and Armes are fold, our Souldiers dispersed, and their headlesse Officers in con∣tinuall differences for preheminence, whilest the Enemies are so much strengthened and in∣creased, that the well-affected are daily expo∣sed to the losse of liberty, their goods to plun∣der, and their Rents sequestred and seized on
by the adverse partie that till of late had never the boldnesse or power to attempt it. In this sad condition we have (under God) no refuge but to this honourable House, the effects and influence of whose great prudence and care, the Common-wealth in generall, and our Country in particular, have so largely and fre∣quently tasted. We do again therefore supplicate this honourable and great Councell, in ease of our great sufferings, to send againe speedily to us the Lord GREY, invested with power over the Forces of this County, that under his command the now dishevel'd Souldiers being unanimously collected, we may be againe able to give lymits to the now un∣bounded Enemy, and to command those Gentlemen that are appointed to sit in the Committee and do not ap∣peare, to repaire to the Country and to serve in it, and to add such Gentlemen of knowne integrity and interest in the Country, as may so generally draw the affections of this County that we may the sooner be wholly freed both of these great miseries and their Authours. And we shal have alwaies cause to pray for the contingance of happy successe to this just, and honourable Parliament. FINIS.
