B6251 E334_7 99861307 113439
THis usefull Treatise (Entituled Religions Peace) long since Pre∣sented by a Citizen of London to King JAMES, and the High Court of Parliament then sitting; I allow to be Reprinted. Aprill 1. John Bachiler.
RELIGIONS PEACE: OR, A PLEA for Liberty of Conscience. Long since presented to King James, and the High Court of Parliament then sitting, by Leonard Busher Citizen of London, and Printed in the Yeare 1614. Wherein is contained certain Reasons against Persecution for Religion; Also a designe for a peaceable reconciling of those that differ in opinion. Rom. 14.5, 10. One man esteemeth one day above another, another man esteemeth every day a like, let every man be fully perswaded in his own minde. But why dost thou judge thy brother, or why dost thou despise thy brother? for we shall all appeare before the judgement seat of Christ. LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Popes-head-alley, 1646.
TO THE Presbyterian Reader. THis Treatise, which as a supplication to King James, and the Parliament, was Printed in the yeare 1614. is for your good now againe re-printed, the Author thereof Leonard Busher (an honest and godly Man, as I make no doubt will ap∣peare to you in the perusall of his Booke) intended two things therein. First, to make it appeare that the Bi∣shops were not true Ministers, or successive from the Apostles, but rather a Siens, or branch of the Popish stocke, descended from the Romish Hierarchy, to whom they owned their Instaurati∣on, Ordination, and Function: Had this advice been believed and embraced by the Parliament then, the mischiefes they have since practised much of the blood that hath been shed, and the miseries that by their meanes have been brought upon us, had in great measure been prevented; but his Counsell was then slighted, though by the wisdome of this present Parliament put in executi∣on, whereby we are secured for the future from the domination, compulsion against Conscience, and notorious cruelties of that sort of men.
Whence we may learne, that what to a people at one time seemes strange and absurd, and in no wise to be admitted of, at another time appeares an acceptable truth; the reason is, because wee are not Masters of our owne understandings, but suffer them to bee dull'd and corrupted, till misery, and the sting of oppression opens our eyes, so that we embrace truth more out of necessity then choice. The second thing his Discourse drives at, is to make it appeare by Scriptures and sound Arguments, that the onely way to make a Nation happy, and preserve the People in love, peace and tranquil∣lity, is to give liberty to all to serve God according as they are per∣swaded is most agreeable to his Word; to speake, write, print peace∣ably and without molestation in behalf of their severall Tenets, and wayes of Worship (wholsome and pertinent Laws being made, up∣on penalties, to restrain all kinde of vice or violence, all kinds of reproach, slander, or injury either by word or deed;) And though this advice likewise seemes not the best to some, especially to you my Brethren in the Presbyterian way, yet am I well assured that this Nation will never be happy; but as hitherto it hath been, so for the future it will be distracted with oppression and persecution, and the faces of one sort of men set against another, till liberty of Conscience be allowed. Indeed a man would thinke we had beene school'd and whist long enough to it by our calamities, for went whereof this age, and that age, and the other age, and every age hath been miserable. For want whereof the Apostles suffered mar∣tyrdome, the Saints and godly of all times have been hunted like Patridges by birds of Prey: And yet, good men, in the esteem of a great part of the world, especially of the rich and powerfull they have suffered as evill-doers, disturbers of the World, Heretiques, Schismaticks, seditious Persons; and those that put them to death, have had the reputation of being maintainers of Truth, and sound Doctrine; so apt in all ages have the people been to mistake good for evill, and evill for good. The Plea for liberty of Conscience is no new Doctrine, as old certainly as the blessed Word of God it selfe, which gives us this
unmovable foundation thereof, That every Man should bee fully perswaded of the truth of that way wherein hee serves the Lord: And though there has been struglings in all ages to make good this blessed birthright to all peacefull People, yet through thePotency and subtlety of Popes, Bishops, and Ministers that preferred the ad∣vance of themselves, and their usurped and abused Function, before the good and welfare of the People; we have been deprived of this blessing, next to the manifestation of Gods love and goodnesse to us, the most excellent and desirable in this world: for want wherof, and by means of its contrary, Persecution; this Vniverse, esecial∣ly the Christian part thereof, hath suffered continuall agony and earthquake. Warres, and its miseries have overspread all Lands, States have been shaken and subverted Love, meeknesse, gentle∣nesse, mercy, (the truest badges of Christianity) have been damp∣ned and banished; and in their roomes cruelty, hardheartednesse, respect of Persons, Prisons, tortures, &c. things that our blessed Lord and Master, and his Apostles never prov'd, unlesse upon their own afflicted bodies, have had great sway for these many hundred yeares. Hence is it that in stead of Peace, we have fre∣quently had the Sword, in stead of sweet tranquillity, love and affe∣ction; hatred, contention, disaffection, and the bitter fruits there∣of hath reign'd amongst us, and in all probability will reigne till God shall put it into the heart of the Parliament to make tryall for prevention thereof, of this God-like way, which in the ensuing Treatise is held forth. I hope upon perusall thereof, you that are my Brethren of the Presbyterian way, will abate much of your misguided eagernesse in prosecuting your conscientious Brethren. Consider I beseech you St. Paul before his conversion, he was as zealous I make no questi∣on as any of you, when he persecuted the Saints, and Acts 8.3. made ha∣vock of the Church, (that is, of Gods People congregated together, to worship and serve God) when hee Verse 3. entred into every house, and drew out both men and women to put them to Prison; when he Act. 9.1. breathed out threatnings and slaughter against the disciples
of the Lord; when he Act. 9.2. procured Letters of the High Priest to goe to Damascus, where, if he found any of that way (then the hereticall way in his account) he might bring them downe to Hie∣rusalem; when he Act. 8.1. consented to Stephens death: In all these violent motions he was zealous and hearty, and thought hee did God good service in the suppression of a rising Sect, that were a∣gainst the High Priests, learned Rabbies, and Doctors of the Law, Ceremonies, strict Injunctions, and observations of the Judaicall and Priestly Law. You see how farre mistaken zeale can goe. Consider this I beseech you; I know you are, especially you that are Laymen, zealous as you think for God and his Truth, as Paul was: But I hope there will a time come, and I wish it were now present, when in the midst of your heat and fervency, the glorious and shining brightnesse of Love will appeare in your hearts like the light surrounding Paul going to Damascus; and the scales of ignorance and mistake will fall from your eyes, and then you will lament all the evill, which through weaknesse you have brought upon your Brethren, you will then blame your owne zeale and im∣portunity, and apply your selves more cordially and constantly to observe our Saviours rule of equity, to doe unto others what you would have others doe unto you. Peruse this Treatise I beseech ye, with a single heart, and unpre∣judiced mind, and let it sway you, as the Arguments thereof are efficacious, and the Scriptures therein urged are pertinent and convincing. So wisheth yours, and all other good Mens true Friend, H. B.
To the High and Mighty King James, by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland, and to the Princely and right Honorable Parliament, Leonard Busher wisheth the wisdom of Solomon, the zeal of Joss, and the mercy of Christ,1 Cor. 5.5. with the sal∣vation of your Spirits in the day of the Lord Jesus. FOrasmuch as your Majesty and Parliament, do stand for the maintenance of the Religion wherein you are born, and for the same do most zealously persecute with fire & sword; I have thought it good, and also my duty (most Royall So∣veraign) to inform your Majesty and Parliament thereof. In all humi∣mility therefore I give you to understand, that no Prince or People can possible attaine that one true Religion of the Gospel, which is accepta∣ble to God by Jesus Christ, meerly by birth,John. 3.. for Christ saith, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Also the Apost. Iames saith,Jam. 1.18 Of his own will be begat us by the word of truth: and the Apostle Peter saith,1 Pet. 1.3.23.Matth. 28. Mark 16. Being born anew, not of mortall seed, but of immortall, by the word of God who liveth and endureth for ever. Therefore Christ comman∣ded this word to be preached to all nations, that thereby they may at∣taine the new birth. By which your Majesty and Parliament may per∣ceive that the one true Religion of the Gospel is not attained by naturall birth; for then all Princes and peoples, in all nations, should have that one true Religion of the Gospel, the which you see and grant, they all have not, yet many of them also will defend their Religion (wherein they are born)by fire and sword, as if it were their naturall and earthly inhe∣ritances; or had with fire and sword been gotten, and therefore will with fire and sword maintain and defend it: But your Majesty and Par∣liament may please to understand, that the Scriptures doe teach, that the one true Religion is gotten by a new birth, even by the word and spirit of God, and therewith also it is onely maintained and defended, For the word of God is lively, and mighty in operation,2 Cor. 10.4. Ephe. 6.17. Heb. 4.1. and sharper then any two edged sword, and entereth through, even unto the dividing asunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the joints, and of the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart. Seeing then the one true Religion of the Gospel is thus gotten, and thus defended and maintained, name∣ly, by the word preached onely; let it please your Majesty and Parlia∣ment to be intreated to revoke and repeale those Antichristian, Romish, and cruell laws, that force all in our Land, both Prince & people, to re∣ceive
that Religion wherein the King or Queen were born, or that wth is stablished by the Law of man; and in stead thereof enact and publish that Apostolick,Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. Acts 8.12. Lu. 24.4, 7. Acts 8.12.37. & .41. Christian, gentle and mercifull law of Christ, viz. Goe teach all Nations, preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, Christ will have his mi∣nisters to preach and teach the people of all Nations, the things that concern the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Messiah, repentance and remission of sins, and to baptize in his name, such as doe beleeve. And foras∣much also that the false and Antichristian religion did come by the spi∣rit of error and doctrine of devils,1 Tim. 4.1. Rev. 16.14. and not by fire and sword: therefore by the spirit of Christ, and doctrine of the word of God, must it be driven out of the hearts and consciences, both of Prince and People, and not by fire and sword, as the false Bishops and Ministers have and doe still perswade. Therefore may it please your Majesty and Parliament, to un∣derstand that (by fire and sword) to constrain Princes and peoples, to receive that one true Religion of the Gospel,Mark 9 38, 39. is wholly against the minde and mercifull Law of Christ, dangerous both to King & State, a means to decrease the Kingdom of Christ: and a means to increase the king∣dom of Antichrist, as these reasons following do manifest; The which I humbly beseech your Majesty and Parliament carefully to consider, and that according to the Word of God, which shall judge every man ac∣cording to his deeds:Mat. 16.27. Rev. 16.14. Luke 9.55, 56.Joh. 12.47. & persecution is a work well pleasing to all fals Pro∣phets and Bishops, but it is contrary to the mind of Christ, who came not to judge and destroy mens lives, but to save them. And though some men and women beleeve not at the first houre, yet may they at the Mat. 20.6, 7. eleventh houre, if they be not persecuted to death before: And no King nor Bi∣shops can, or is able to command faith, Eph. 2 8 1 Tim. 1.13. Act. 20.11. That is the gift of God, who worketh in us both the will and the deed of his own good pleasure: set him not a day therefore, in which, if his creature hear not and beleeve not, you will imprison and burn him. Paul was a blasphemer, and also a perse∣cuter, and could not be converted by the Apostles, and Ministers of Christ, yet at last was received to mercy, and converted extraordina∣rily by Christ himself,Jam. 5 11.  Pet. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.19. who is very pitifull and mercifull, and would have no man to perish, but would that all men come to repentance, but not by perse∣cution, but by the word of reconciliation which he hath committed to his mini∣sters: And as Kings and Bishops cannot command the wind, so they can∣not command faith,Joh. 3. and as the winde bloweth where it listeth, so is every man that is born of the spirit. You may force men to Church against their con∣sciences,1 Sam. 15.1, 4. but they will beleev as they did afore, when they com there, for God giveth a blessing onely to his own ordinance, and abhorreth Anti∣christs:
And Kings are to think that they are men as well as Kings,Act. 9.15. 1 Tim. 2.1.2. 1. Cor. 7.2.22. Wise 6.1.8. and that Christ hath ordained that same meanes of faith for Kings which he hath for subjects, and that subjects are Christs freemen, as well as Kings sub∣jects, and Kings that beleeve are Christs Servants, even as subjects are Kings servants, and both are bought with a price, therefore both ought not to bee the servants of men in matter of faith and religion: but Kings shall give a grea∣ter account at the day of judgment, then their subjects: & to judge men now for religion, is to judge afore the time, & also to sit in the judgment seat of Christ, to whom onely it belongeth, yet not before the day ap∣pointed, how much lesse to Kings and Bishops?Rom. 2.16. Act. 10.42. I read that Constantine the Emperor (called the great) wrote to the Bishop of Rome, that he would not force & constraine any man to the faith, but onely admonish & commit the judgment to God. Christs kingdom is not of this world,Ioh. 18 36.10.17. therefore may it not be purchased, nor defended with the weapons of this world, but by his word and spirit: no other weapons hath he given to his Church which is his spirituall kingdom. Therefore Christ saith:Mat. 18.17 He that wil not heare the church, let him he to thee as a heathen and a publicane:Ephes. 6.10.17. he saith not burne, banish or imprison him, that is Antichrists ordi∣nance. And though a man be an heretick, yet ought he not to be burnt, but to be rejected, after once or twice admonition,Tit. 3.10. that is cast out of the Church, but as in the church of Rome people of all sorts are by persecu∣tion forced there into by the Bishops & Ministers thereof, so it is in the Church of England also, which sheweth that the Bishops & Ministers of Rome & England are of one spirit, in gathering people to their faith and church, which is the spirit of Satan, who knoweth welth at his kingdom (the false Church) would greatly decay, if persecution were laid down: seeing himself cannot stand before the word and spirit of God, much lesse his Bishops & Ministers: therefore he wil have them, for a name and shew, to use the word of God, but indeed, if the false interpretation and alledging of the Scriptures wil not help, then (saith he) constrain them with fire and sword: or else (if people have libertie of conscience) they will try the spirits, which of them is of God, as the Apostle John teach∣eth: and then saith he, the Prince as well as people will try all things,1 Ioh. 4.1. and keepe that which is good, and wil also prove themselves (as the Apostle Paul teacheth) whether they are in the Apostolike faith or not:2 Cor. 13. 5 & as the Church of Rome provoketh the Magistrates to persecute to death, such as are ex∣communicated out of her, so doth the Church of England provoke the Magistrats to persecute to death such as she excommunicates: And as the Bishops and Ministers of Rome will perswade the prince and people, to
heare and read none but themselves, so do the Bishops and Ministers of of England also: but the Bishops and Ministers of the Apostolick church doe perswade all men, to prove and try the Spirits whether they are of God, which they cannot doe, except they heare and read other mens doctrines as well as the Bishops and their Ministers; neither can they if they would, so long as the Bishops have power from the King and State to silence and imprison, &c. all Preachers, and to burne all books which teach not their doctrines. Your Majesty and Parliament shall under∣stand that all those that confesse freely without compulsion, that Iesus is the Messiah,1 John 5.1. & 1 Joh. 4.2 1 Cor. 12.13 the Lord, and that he came in flesh, are to be esteemed the children of God and true christians, seeing such are born of God; and no man can say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost, therefore not to be persecuted. And as Abel killed not Cain, but was killed himself; and as Isaac and Ia∣cob did not persecute Ismael and Esau, but was persecuted of Ismael and Esau (who,Gal. 4.29. and Cain were figures of all persecuters) so the beleeving doe not persecute the unbeleeving, nor the true Church the fals, but the be∣leeving and true Church are (as they have been) most often persecuted themselves, of whom Abel, Isaac, and Jacob were figures, whose children are all beleevers and freemen, that stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made them free,Gal. 5.1. and will not be tangled with the yoke of bondage, no not with circumcision, much lesse with the discipline and doctrine of the Church of Rome, whose Bishops are able Ministers of the fire and sword, both to Prince and people, as many Histories doe lamentably witnes, to their utter infamy and overthrow: also, if the beleeving should persecute the unbeleeving to death, who should remaine alive? then none but the beleeving should live in the world, and the unbeleeving should dye in their unbelief, and so perish for ever: the Lord will not that the beleeving should live to the destruction of the unbeleeving, but unto their conversion, edification, and salvation: And by persecuting of Prince and people to death, because they will not heare and beleeve, is no gaining of souls unto God, but unto the devill. And whereas igno∣rant and wicked Bishops may think to win souls by killing Prince and people for Religion, they are deceived greatly, for thereby they lose many souls, viz. their own and the unbeleeving, their own they lose, because they wilfully break the Lords Commandement, that saith, Thou shalt not kill,Luk. 18.20. meaning such as are not corporall malefactors; and the o∣thers which dye in their unbeleef, they confesse themselves are eternally lost, except they (as some of their ministers) hold a redemption after this life. And the Bishops should know that error and heresie cannot
be killed by the fire and sword, but by the word and spirit of God, that is the onely weapons of Christs Bishops and Ministers, and such only Christs ministers do use, whose lives and conversations are so harmles, holy and gentle, that thereby, and by their deaths and sufferings they win many souls unto God; whereby they are known from all false Bi∣shops and ministers, who like wolves and beares, (not like sheepe and lambs) make prey and devour both Prince and people that are not of their kind, if they be able to master them. Besides, may it please your Majesty and Parliament to understand, that the beleeving man that hath an unbeleeving wife,1 Cor. 7.16 and the beleeving woman that hath an unbeleeving husband, cannot live together, as the Scripture teaches, for the salvation of the unbeleeving, if they be perse∣cuted to death; indeed some thereby are forced to confesse with the mouth that which they beleeve not in heart, and so are made true dis∣semblers, in stead of true Chistians, wherby many men and women are deceived with dissembling husbands and wives, as well as the King and State are deceived with dissembling servants and subjects; but the word of God (if permission of conscience might be granted) would procure upright, pure, and unfained husbands and wives, servants and subjects, so that thereby neither Prince nor people should be deceived; for all good shepherds wil divide and separate, & not force, slay, and persecute, for if men and women be found Hereticks, they shall be separated from the Church, but if they be unbeleevers, they shall not be joyned unto it, untill they be converted by the word of God, much lesse forced: which conversion for ought we know, may be at their death, if not afore, see∣ing the Lord calleth some at the eleventh houre, so well as at the first,Mat. 20. 6, 7 and not at the King and Bishops pleasures. Kings and Magistrates are to rule temporall affaires by the swords of their temporall kingdoms: and Bishops and Ministers are to rule spirituall affaires by the word and spirit of God; the sword of Christs spirituall kingdom, and not to intermeddle one with anothers authority, office, and function: and it is a great shame for the Bishops and Ministers not to be able to rule in their Church, without the assistance of the King and Magistrate, yea, it is a great sign they are none of Christs Bishops and Ministers, if they were, they would not be afraid nor ashamed of their faith, nor yet would they perswade Princes and people to persecute and force one a∣nother to beleeve them, but would use only the assistance of Gods word and spirit; and therewith suffer their faith and doctrine to be examined, proved, and disputed both by word and writing.
Tit. 1.7.9.11.And he is a true Bishop who is unreprovable, and that is able to stop the mouths of his adversaries, by Gods word and Spirit onely, & whose faith and discipline agree with the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and maketh no contradiction; but all those Bishops that force Princes and peoples to receive their faith and discipline by persecution, doe (with Iudas) goe against Christ in his members with swords, staves, and halberds, who seeing Gods word will not help them, betake themselves with all haste and hazard unto the authority of the King and Magi∣strate. I read that a Bishop of Rome would have constrained a Turkish Em∣peror to the Christian faith, unto whom the Emperor answered, I be∣leeve that Christ was an excellent Prophet, but he did never (so far as I under∣stand) command that men should with the power of weapons bee constrained to beleeve his law; and verily, I also do force no man to beleeve Mahomets law. Al∣so I read that Iews, Christians, and Turks are tolerated in Constantinople, and yet are peaceable, though so contrary the one to the other. If this he so, how much more ought Christians not to force one another to Religion? and how much more ought Christians to tolerate Christians, when as the Turks do tolerate them? shall we be lesse mercifull then the Turks? or shall we learne the Turks to persecute Christians? It is not onely unmercifull, but unnaturall and abominable, yea, monstrous for one Christian to vex and destroy another for difference and questions of Religion, and though tares have overgrown the wheate, yet Christ will have them let alone till harvest;Mat. 13.29.30, 38. lest while you goe about to pluck up the tares, you pluck up also the wheat with them, as your predecessors have done, who thought they had gathered up the tares and burned them; but you see now that they have burned the wheat in stead of tares. Wherfore in all humility and Christian modesty I doe affirm, that through the unlaw∣full weed-hook of persecution (which your predecessors have used, and by your Majesty and Parliament is stil continued) there is such a quan∣tity of wheat plucked up, and such a multitude of tares left behinde, that the wheat which remain cannot yet appeare in any right visible congregation. Acts 3.17.And now beloved Soveraign and Parliament, I know that through ignorance you doe persecute, as did also your predecessors, Amend your lives therefore and turne, that your sinnes may be put away when the time of re∣freshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; who before hath shewed by the month of his holy servant John,Rev. 12.14. that the woman (meaning the Church) should fly into the wildernesse for a time, times, and half a time, from the pre∣sence
and persecution of the serpent. And that the winepresse should bee troden without the City, untill bloud came out of the winepresse, unto the horse bridles,Rev. 14.20. by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs: and thus he hath fulfilled it. Now therefore I humbly beseech you, suffer not your Bishops and Mi∣nisters any longer to perswade, to force your subjects or any others, to their faith and Church by persecution, neither suffer them therewith to defend their faith and Church against their adversaries: if they have not any thing from Gods word against us, let them yeeld and submit themselves; if they think they have any thing against us, let them betake themselves onely to Gods word, both in word and writing,2 Tim. 3.16 For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God to that purpose, and is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works: with which scrip∣ture (and not with fire and sword) your Majesties Bishops and Mini∣sters ought to be armed and weaponed:Mat. 10.14, 15.Mat. 16.11. and whosoever shall not heare the words of such Bishops and Ministers; then such Bishops & Ministers are commanded by Christ (not to imprison, burn, banish, & hang them) but to shake the dust of their feet against them, for a witnesse when they depart from them;Act. 13.51. affirming that at the day of judgment it shall be easier for Sodome and Gomorrah, then for such persons: and this commandement of Christ, did his Bi∣shops and Ministers obey as you may read. By which, and by that which follow, your gracious Maty., and Princely and honorable Parli∣ament may perceive the will and mind of our Lord and Saviour Christ, unto whose mercy I commend you, and to the word and wisdom of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance a∣mong all them which are sanctified, Amen. Your faithfull and loving subject Leonard Busher: not Furbusher.There is one Furbu∣sher a prea∣cher in this Land. Certain Reasons against Persecution. FIrst, because Christ hath not commanded any King, Bishop, or Mi∣nister to persecute the people, for difference and judgement in mat∣ter of Religion. Secondly, because Christ hath commanded his Bishops and Ministers to perswade Prince and people to heare and beleeve the Gospel, by his word and spirit, and (as Ambassadors for him) to beseech both Prince
and people to be reconciled unto God,2 Cor. 6.20 and not (as Tyrants) to force and constraine them by persecution. At y thou¦sand Am∣bassadors & Martyrs of Christ hath Bi∣shops cau∣sed to bee slaine since Christ as∣cended. Mark 13.9. Persecution destroys Christians but not er∣rors.Thirdly, because through persecution it will come to passe that the Ambassadors of the onely spirituall Lord and King Iesus, may he perse∣cuted and imprisoned, burned, hanged, or banished for delivering the message of their gracious Lord, sincerely and often, both to Prince and people; which to doe, is a more hainous fact then to persecute the Ambassadors of the greatest King and Prince in the world: for in stead of hereticks, they shall (as they have already) burn, banish, and hang the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ; who doth choose out whom he pleaseth, to beare his name before Kings and Rulers, for a testimoniall to them. Fourthly, because then we cannot say, we have the liberty of the Gospel in our Land, seeing where that is, there is no persecution for any difference in Religion, nor forcing of the conscience to beleeve the Gospel, except by the word and spirit of God onely, the which do wound and kill the errors of men, and not their persons. 2 Cor. 10.4 1 Tim. 1.13, 15.Luke 9.53.55.Persecutors rebuked of Christ.Fifthly, because Christ came into the world to save sinners, and not to de∣stroy them, though they be blasphemers, seeing the Lord may convert them as he did Saul (after called Paul) and though they have difference in Religion, or will not heare nor beleeve in Christ, that they may be converted, yet ought you not to persecute them, seeing Christ rebuketh such, & his Father sent him not into the world, to condemn the world, but to save it: be ye followers therefore of Christ, and not of Antichrist, in gathering people to the faith. 1 Cor. 10, 32.Col. 4.5.Sixthly, because then you shall not walke wisely towards them that are with∣out, as the Scripture teacheth, but shall offend also the Iewes, and all other strangers who account it tyranny, to have their consciences forced to religion by persecution. Seventhly, because if persecution bee not laid downe, and liberty of conscience set up, then cannot the Jews, nor any strangers, nor others contrary minded be ever converted in our Land; for so long as they know aforehand, that they shall be forced to beleeve against their con∣sciences, they will never seek to inhabit there: by which means you keep them from the Apostolique faith, if the apostolique faith be only taught where persecution is. Eighthly, because if freedom of conscience be not set up, and persecuti∣on
laid down, then all the Kings subjects, and all strangers inhabiting the Land (that shall beleeve the Apostolique faith) must depart the land to some free country, or else abide the danger of burning, banishing,Persecution does make many stran∣gers. hanging and imprisoning: the first will be a great impoverishing and weakning of our land, besides a losse of the faith fullest subjects and friends. The second will provoke the Lord to wrath, by spilling the blood of his faithfull servants, ambassadors, and witnesses, and also o∣pen the mouths of all strangers, to speake yet more lamentably of the cruel and bloody persecution of our Land. Ninthly, because if persecution continue, then the King and State shall have (against their wils) many dissemblers in authority and office, both in Court, City, and Country: yea, no man of any degree shall know whether they are all faithfull and true Christians that are about him, and with whom he hath to doe: seeing most men will conforme themselves for feare of persecution, although in their hearts they hate and detest the Religion whereto they are forced by law, the which is very dangerous and hurtfull both to King and State in time of tempta∣tion from beyond the seas, and in rebellion at home; for they that are not faithfull to God in their Religion, will never be faithfull to the King and State in their allegiance; specially being tryed by a great re∣ward, or by a mighty rebell: but wil (to encrease their honors & reve∣nues) conform themselves; and some to save their honors, land, goods and lives, will yeeld and submit, though against their wils, even as they have done in case of Religion; for through forcing men to Church by persecution, the true hearted subjects are forced out of the Land, and out of the world, some banished, others burn'd, hang'd and imprisoned to death. Tenthly, because then,Persecution causes many religions in the Church. if there be many religions in the land (as it is well known there are) it will come to passe (through the continuance of persecution) that many religions will be continued in the Church, seeing all are forced to Church, who bring their Religions with them as well as their bodies, whereby all their devotion is against their con∣sciences, and all the Church is a confused Babel,Rev. 18.2.4 full of every uncleane and hatefull bird, even a bold of foule Spirits, as the Scripture speaketh; out of which the people of God are commanded to flee, lest (as of their sins) they be also partakers of their plague. And the Bishops (the authors of persecution) are very ignorant to think that when they have gotten people to their Church by persecution, that then they have gotten them to their faith
and Religion,Better were it to have many religi∣ons in the land, then in the Church. the which is nothing so, for most people (though con∣trary minded) to save life and goods, will dissemble their Religion; as for example the Jews in Spain and Portugal, and the Papists, Reformists and others in England; but when they come hither or to some other free City or Counrry (where praised be God is liberty of the Gospel) then they shew that before they dissembled, to avoid the cruell persecution of our Land. Moreover, the Bishops bewray great ignorance, when they perswade the King and Parliament, to force Prince and people to Church by per∣secution: for if that be the means to come to the Church of Christ; then Christ hath taught us to flee the means of salvation, seeing hee hath taught us to flee persecution:Mat. 10.23. Christ tea∣cheth to flee perse∣cution, ergo it cannot possible be good Mat 7. 13.Note. see 2 Tim. 3.3, 4. the which the Bishops and their Ministers perswade to be a great means to bring men to the Church: Indeed I confesse it is the onely meanes to bring Prince and people to the false church; and therfore Christ teacheth us to flee that means least through persecution (which is a great temptation) we be constrained to goe the broad way (which is the false Church) that leadeth to destruction, and ma∣ny go in thereat: and no marvail, for there men may bee any thing, except good Christians: for (besides Demos the worldling, and Hymeneus the blasphemer, and many other sorts of indifferent Christians, excommu∣nicants, covetous, and profane persons) there are notable Rebels and Traytors; yea most cruell and desperate Traytors and Rebels, as Digby, Catesby, Piercy, &c. whose unread and unheard treachery will never be forgotten; which persons, if they had not bin forced to Church against their consciences, had never enterprized such horrible and hatefull trea∣son. And the Bishops should understand that it is preaching and not per∣secuting that getteth people to the Church of Christ; for the Scripture saith,Rom. 10.17. Faith is by hearing, and bearing by the word of God, and not by the sword of Princes and Magistrates, as they perswade and practice. And therefore the Bishops of our land are truly called Antichrists: for by their beastly and bloody persecution, as well as by their blasphemous titles, erroneous doctrines, and popish government, may they justly be termed Antichrists. Mat. 24. 2 Thes. 2. & 1 Tim. 4. 2 Pet. 2.Eleventhly, because Christ foretold, That many false Christs, and false Prophets should arise, and deceive many; yea, if it were possible, the very elect: and the Apostle Paul did prophecy a departure from the faith: And Peter said, There should be false teachers now among the people: And John said, the
Kings should give their power and authority unto the beast,Rev. 57.13, 17 untill the words of God be fulfilled; therefore if persecution be not laid downe, and liberty of the Gospel set up, you may persecute the true Christians in stead of the false, as your predecessors have done; for they are now (like as they were then) the smallest number: and the false Christians are now (like as they were then) the greatest number: and persecution is a notable mark of the false Church and her Bishops and ministers:Gal. 2.3, 4. & 5.11. & 6.12. and therefore Christ would have us flee from it, who overcame the devill and his Mini∣sters by the word of God, and by a good, meek and gentle life, whose steps his Bishops and Ministers ought to follow. Twelfthly, because persecution of such as do preach and teach Christ is a great hinderance to the liberty of the Gospel:Note. False Bi∣shops reach Turkes and Pagans to persecute Christians. For thereby are the Iews, Turks, and Pagans occasioned and encouraged to persecute like∣wise all such as preach and teach Christ in their Dominions. For if chri∣stian Kings and Magistrates will not suffer Christians to preach, and preach the Gospel of Christ freely and peaceably in their Dominions, how should you expect it of the infidells, unto whom Bishops and chri∣stian Kings and Magistrates ought to give a good example, and not an evill, as to burn, banish, hang and Imprison peaceable and godly christi∣ans, that are no traytors, nor theeves, nor fighters, nor manslayers, nor yet swearers, nor drunkards, nor whoremasters, nor such like. And the King and Parliament may please to permit all sorts of Christians, yea, Jews, Turks, and Pagans, so long as they are peaceable, and no malefa∣ctors, as is above-mentioned: which if they be found to be under two or three witnesses, let them be punished according to Gods word: also if a∣ny be found to be willing lyers, false accusers, false alledgers and quo∣ters of the Scriptures, or other mens writings (as some men willingly do) let them be punished according to right and justice, it is due desert & no persecution, but let Gods word have his ful and free passage among them all, even to the end of their lives, in all bountifulness, long-suffe∣rance and patience, knowing that it is ordained of Gods rich mercy, to lead the infidels, and such as erre unto repentance and amendment,Rom. 2.4. 2 Tit. 2.25. out of the snare of the devil, of whom they are taken and deceived. Thirteenthly, because persecution for Religion is to force the consci∣ence, and to force and constrain men and womens consciences to a Re∣ligion against their wils, is to tyranize over the soul as well as over the body, and herein the Bishops commit a greater sin, then if they force the bodies of women and maids against their wills: yea,2 Cor. 11.2 herein they are
more cruell and greater tyrants then the Turks,False Bi∣shops worse then Turks and Pagans. who though they force the bodies of strangers to slavery and bondage, yet they let the consci∣ence go free, yea to Christians that are so contrary to them in Religions but these Idol-bishops will force the consciences of Christians, their own naturall Countrymen,Note. False Bi∣shops spiri¦tuall forni∣cation.2 Thess. 2.4 1 Cor 6.19, 20. and 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. with Rev. 18.4. & 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Pet. 1.19 even unto spirituall bondage and slavery; and herein they commit fornication both with Prince and people, and have made all, both small and great, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, so that no man may buy or sell, save he that will goe to Church, and submit to the Bishops ordinances, and name and mark of their beastly and bloody persecution, through which as God, they sit in, and reigne over the consciences both of Prince and people, which is the spirituall seat and temple of God bought at a dear price, even with the precious blood of their onely spirituall Lord Jesus Messiah, the true Shepheard and bishop of their soules. And the Bishops in forcing men and womens consciences, doe therein play the Antichrist so well as the Popes: and indeed there is never a Bi∣shop in the land but is a Pope, for Pope in latin is Papa, and Papa signi∣fieth Father in English, all the Bishops in our land are called reverend Fathers; therefore all the Bishops in our land are called reverend Popes, so many Lord Bishops, so many reverend Fathers, so many reverend Popes:If Idolaters ought to be slain, then ought all those that submit and yeeld spiri∣tuall obedi∣ence and reverence unto these Bishops to be slain, who then should re∣main in land alive? Rev. 17.13. and these are all so many Antichrists, so many Idols, and so ma∣ny false Gods of England: how many are thy Gods whom thou dost serve? For whose spirituall adoration, the knee of every man and wo∣man must bow, or else they shall be persecuted: unto whom the King ought not any longer to give his authority and power, lest hee fulfill the Scripture, which saith, that Kings should give their power and au∣thority unto the beast. Fourteenthly, because the burning, banishing, hanging, and impriso∣ning of men and women, by Protestants, for difference of Religion, do justifie the burning, banishing and imprisoning of men and women, by the Papists, for difference of religion, even as the Papists doe justifie the Turks and Pagans in such like cruelty and tyranny; wherein now is the Protestants more mercifull then the Papists, or the Papists then the Turks? Therefore as the Papists (when they complain of the Turks and Pagans, for their bloody persecution) doe therein condemn themselves, because they are found to do the same, yea worse, for it is greater tyranny for one Christian to force & kil another, then for Turks and Pagans to kil a christian, for that is no such great wonder, seeing it is a paganish part, who have no better knowledge, but Christians should have better know∣ledge
and more mercy then to play the pagans against christians:Note. So al∣so the Protestants, when they complain of the Papists for their bloody and beastly persecution, doe therein condemn themselves, seeing they doe the same, for which they blame others, and so are rebuked of the Scripture, which saith, Therefore thou are inexcusable O thou man,Rom 2.1.3. whosoever thou art that blamest another, for in that thou judgest another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judgest doest the same things: and thinkest thou this O thou man (that judgest them which do such things, and thou doest the same) that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? Fifteenthly, because his Majesty and Parliament would not willingly themselves be forc'd against their consciences, by the persecution of the Bishop of Rome and his Princes: so I beseech them (according to the law Christ hath injoyned Christians) not by persecution to force other mens consciences against their wills by the irritation of the Bishops of our land.Luk. 6 31. Or provo∣cation. Sixteenthly, because persecution do cause men and women to make shipwrack of faith and good consciences, by forcing a Religion upon them, even against their minds and consciences, and also do send them quick to the devill in their errors, if that be heresie for which they are hanged and burned; which to do, is a most unchristian, unnaturall,King Ed∣ward was an enemy to persecution Act. & Mon. pag. 1484. The Chri∣stian answer of King Ed∣ward.Rev. 16.14. cru∣ell and tyrannous deed; and I am sure you would not be content to be so dealt withall your selves: but indeed the Popish and Idol-bishops are the authors hereof against the people, as well as of other persecution against the Princes. For antichristian Bishops do draw Kings and Prin∣ces hereto against their mind, as may appear by Edward the sixt, that godly King of famous memory, who being urged by his bloody Bi∣shops to subscribe to the burning of a woman called Joane Butcher, hee answered, will you have me to send her quick to the devill in her error? But when his blood-thirsty Bishops would have no nay, he said againe to Bishop Cranmer, I lay all the charge thereof on you before God; and Cranmer said, he had never so much to do in all his life as to procure it: whereby I doe perceive that godly Kings are drawn to Battail against the Saints, by antichristian Bishops and false Prophets, who otherwise would rule and reigne more agreeable to the mind of Christ. Also, hereby may all men perceive that the Councell and Bishops could not satisfie the Kings conscience by their perswasion, if they could have shewed him the word of God for burning that Christian, it would have prevailed with that godly King, and he might then of faith have
consented, but his answer showeth that he was not of their mind, for all that they had said, and therfore now, if it please you to require of your Bishops, warrant from the word of God for the persecuting of Chri∣stians, or for forcing Prince and people to Church, you shall finde not one Bishop, yea not all of them together, though assisted with their Mi∣nisters, will be able to shew warrant from Gods word, whereby to per∣swade your consciences thereunto:Rom. 14.23 and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and whatsoever is not from Gods word, cannot be of faith. Seventeenthly, because persecution of Christians by Christians doe not onely justifie Papists, and teach the Jewes and Pagans to persecute Christians; but also do teach the Papists and others (that know not the mind of Christ, and once get the upperhand) to persecute those that per∣secuted them;By Digby, Catesby, &c. Mat. 11.29 Luk. 14 27. yea, it is a means (as we have had lamentable experience) to set (such as are forced to Church against their consciences) at deadly hatred against the King and State, and urgeth all them to treason and rebellion, that have not truly learned Christ, who himself was persecu∣ted to death, whose harmles crosse all true Christians must take up, and whose gentle and humble steps they must follow and walk in, or else they cannot be his disciples, nor sheep of his pasture. And neither can the Papists be perswaded that persecution is a sin, so long as they and o∣ther Christians are also persecuted by the protestants: seeing the Papists do build their persecution on the same ground with the protestants: but both sorts of Bishops doe erre grosly, as shall be shewed (God willing) when they make their defence, except herewith their consciences bee convinced to yeeld, as I wish they may for the salvation of their owne souls, the peace both of Prince and people, and the safety of the King and State. In the mean while it is to be observed, that those Bishops, and Ministers which perswade the King and Parliament, to burn, banish, hang and imprison, for difference of Religion, are blood-suckers and manslayers, and such (it cannot be denyed) caused Kings & Magistrates, to be their executioners and tormentors, in burning the Martyrs in former times, even in the days of King Henry the eight, and Qu. Mary, as the books of Acts and Monuments will witnesse if they bee not burned; and I ask the Bishops and their Ministers,Act 4.19. if the martyrs should have o∣beyed the King and Queen, rather then have suffered death. And now I must humbly, and with all reverence do beseech his Maje∣sty and Parliament, advisedly to consider among themselves, whether the Prince or Princesse (differing with the Church now in matter of
conscience and religion,The Bps. as the High priests, force men to o∣bey man ra∣ther then God.Note well. stablished by law in our land (as the right no∣ble Princesse Elizabeth did in Qu. Maries dayes) do not incur the danger and cruelty of the law now, as that worthy Princesse did then, seeing that popish and cruell law standeth still in force in most points of Re∣ligion? and who dare trust the Bishops and their adherents in such a case, the matter lying in their hands? Let it be supposed that the Princes heart should be moved by the Lord to embrace the Apostolick faith and discipline, shall he be forced to beleeve as the Bishops do, against his conscience, shall he be constrained to sub∣mit to their government and discipline against his conscience? shall hee live in vexation and persecution, and in danger of his life by the Bishops and law stablished, as the Princesse Elizabeth did? yea, it must be thus with our right noble Prince, except there be partiality, yea it wil be thus with his princely person, except those popish and cruell laws be repea∣led and extinguished. Wherfore I meekly intreat, seeing death is most certain,Better to∣day, then tarry till to∣morrow. though most uncertain when, that those antichristian and popish laws may bee disa∣nulled and made void in time, lest wee all lament and bewaile it, when it wil be too late. And I pray your Majesty and Honors to consider,Rev. 17.16 Gen. 17.6. Rom. 4 17. that Kings and Princes hearts are in the hands of the Lord (as the rivers of waters) to turn as he will: & the Scripture saith, the ten horns (by which I understand ten Kings) shall hate the whore and make her desolate and naked. Likewise the Scripture saith to Abraham (the father of beleeving Princes as well as be∣leeving people) Also I will make thee exceeding fruitfull, and will make na∣tions of thee: yea, Kings shall proceed of thee: which Scripture doe also over∣throw the judgment of those men that hold a Christian may not bee a King nor Magistrate:Ismael, and Edom ex∣cepted, Gen. 17.8. with Gen. 15.13.18. & 16.10. & 17.18.20. & 26.3. & 21.13.Gen. 14. 14. Let such consider that the Lord here speaketh of Abrahams spirituall seed, and not of his naturall seed; because if it be un∣derstood of his naturall seed, then cannot Abraham be the father of ma∣ny nations, seeing all Abrahams naturall seed are called Jews, and are but one nation of the Iews; so that the covenant of God could not be perfor¦med that said, I wil make nations of thee, yea Kings shal proceed of thee: ther∣fore it must be understood of his spirituall seed, of which may be Kings and Princes that are not naturally descended of him, as well as people that are naturally descended of him; therefore beleeving Kings may safely walk in the steps of their father Abraham, and with their swords defend their subjects against their adversaries, and redeem their bre∣thren out of the jaws of all devouring beasts and bloody persecutors,Rom. 13.4. for they beare not the sword for nought.
And now also I desire those subjects (of what degree soever, that would destroy their Kings and Governours for difference in religion) to consider, that therin they justifie their Kings and Governours, which destroy their subjects for difference of Religion: for as it is sin for Kings and Governours to destroy their subjects for difference of Religion, at the perswasion of their Bishops; so is it sin (but in a higher degree) for subjects to destroy their Kings and Governors for difference of religi∣on at the perswasion of their Bishops and Ministers. Therfore persecution for difference in religion is a monstrous & cru∣ell beast, that destroyeth both Prince and people, hindereth the Gospel of Christ, and scattereth his disciples that witnes and professe his name. But permission of conscience in difference of Religion, saveth both Prince and people, for it is a meek and gentle lambe, which not onely furthereth and advanceth the gospel, but also fostereth and cherisheth those that professe it, as may be seen by the permission of the Princesse Elizabeth, and others that were permitted and fostered in Dutchland at that time.Permission of consci∣ence a fur∣therance to the gospel and a safety both to prince and people. Also permission of conscience is a great and sure band and be∣nefit to the King and State, as may likewise be seen in the same Princess Elizabeth, who if she had not been permitted, but had suffered death, as the bloody Bishops earnestly desired; then had not the kingdom bin so surely, nor yet so purely kept and preserved for his Majesty and his royall Issue, as now it is, the Lord be praised therefore. Further I beseech his right excellent Majesty and Parliament to ob∣serve that persecution was the occasion that the apostolick Church was at first scattered and driven into the wildernesse, that is, desert places of the world; whither she fled to save her self from the rage and tyranny of Antichrist,Rev. 12.6.14 & 13.17.2 Cor. 11.1. and his Apostles and Ministers, the first authors of perse∣cution under the gospel: Therefore his Majesty and Parliament may please to consider, that so long as persecution continue, so long will the apostolick Church continue scattered and persecuted into the secret pla∣ces of this world: and no marvail, for her faith and discipline is as of∣fensive, as odious, and as unwelcome unto Antichrist and his Bishops and Ministers now, as it was then, as their burning, banishing, hanging, and imprisoning do witnesse even unto this day. And it is to be noted, that as the Apostolick faith and discipline (in the Apostles days,2 Thess, 2.6, 7. when through them true signes and wonders were wrought by the extraor∣dinary gift and power of the holy Ghost) did let and hinder the myste∣ry of iniquity wrought by Antichrist his Apostles and Ministers by whom the lying signes and wonders were done, through the extraor∣dinary
spirit of Satan.2 Thess. 2.9 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Tim. 3.1, 4, 5. & 2 Pet. 2.1, 3. 1 Joh. 4.41. 2 John 7. Jud. 4 11.16, 18.Note well. 1 Joh. 4 3. So now the catholick or antichristian faith and discipline (having gotten the upperhand by her lying signs & wonders, and by persecution) do by the same, let and hinder the mystery of god∣linesse, wrought by Christ, his Apostles and Ministers, by whom the true signes and wonders were done without persecution. And it is well worthy to be observed, both of King, Prince, and peo∣ple, that the Bishops, Ministers of Antichrist cannot abide, nor endure the faith and discipline of the apostolick Church, because it will be the overthrow of their blasphemous and spirituall Lordships, and of their Antichristian and bloudy kingdom. And therefore are they so fiery hot and zealous for the Catholick, or antichristian faith and discipline; for by their faith they shew plainly, that they are succeeded and descended from antichrist, Who confessed not that the Messiah came in flesh: and by their discipline or government they plainly shew they are Antichrists Bishops and Ministers who persecute with fire and sword all degrees, both King, Prince and people, that will not confesse their faith, & obey their discipline. And it is very plain and easie both for King, Prince, and people (if they will not take up Religion on credit, and content them with the religion they were born and brought up in (as do the Papists) to discern who they be that teach the apostolick faith and discipline, & who they be that teach the Antichrists faith and discipline, for the holy Apostle sheweth it to all men that will give heed thereto; for he saith, Dearly beloved, beleeve not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world, which confesse not that Jesus Messiah came in flesh. Hereby shall you know the spirit of God,The Syriack saith, Came in flesh. every spirit that confesseth that Iesus Messiah came in flesh is of God; and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Messiah came in flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, whom ye have heard how that he should come, and now already is he in the world. The same is the Antichrist that denyeth the Father and the Son; whosoever denyeth the Son, the same hath not the Father:1 Ioh. 2., 2.Iohn 17.3.5.8.1 Cor. 15.47 Iohn 6.38.4, 62 & 7.26, 27. Iohn 16.2. 3.27, 21. the Apostle meaneth such as deny Jesus to be Messiah, the Lord that came down from heaven, as Christ and they have taught, such have not the Father, but doe deny him also as they have taught him; and therefore Christ saith, The times shall come, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth God good service, but these things they will do unto you, because thay have not known the father nor me, the father loveth such as beleeve that I came out from God, thus saith Christ; but Antichrist and his Ministers beleeve not this doctrine, nei∣ther doe they thus teach Christ Jesus the Messiah.
And you may please to understand that of this Antichrist (or rather as the Syriack) of this false Christ came the Church of Rome: whose Bi∣shops and Ministers teach not this doctrine, and as the mother, so the daughter also, teacheth not this doctrine: but will likewise persecute both Prince and people, that shall confesse that Iesus Messiah came in flesh as John teacheth;1 Ioh. 4 2. Iohn 6.62. and 3.13. Iohn 17 5. 1 Cor. 15.47, 491 Ioh. 4, 3. 2 Cor. 11 12, 15.Rev. 12.6.14. or that the Son of man ascended up, where he was before, or that he was glorified with his father before the world was, as himself saith. Or that he was the second man the Lord from heaven; or that he had, and hath a heavenly body, as Paul teacheth: for these and such like doctrines doe the Church of Rome and her daughters persecute with fire and sword, being indued with the spirit of Antichrist: By which Antichrist his A∣postles and Ministers, the Apostolick Church was scattered and driven into the wildernesse, that is, desert and secret places of this world, even by their bloody persecution, the which still they continue and raise a∣gainst the members and witnesses thereof, who were, and are the mar∣tyrs which in all ages have and doe suffer death, imprisonment and ba∣nishment since the first persecution; and we never, read, nor ever shall read that the Apostolick Church, or such as have derived their faith, and discipline of her, did ever persecute. Therefore I humbly desire his Majesty and Parliament, with all godly carefulnesse to consider that it is not possible that the Church of Rome (called Catholick) or those that are descended of her, and have recei∣ved their Ministry and Ordination from her, ever was, or could be the apostolick Church (called primitive Church) or she that is descended from her: seeing the Scripture saith the Apostolick Church (called in Scripture the woman) hath a place prepared of God in the wildernesse a thousand two hundred and sixty days from the presence of such as did persecute her.Rev. 12 6.13.14. How then, I beseech you consider, may it be possible that the church of Rome (called in Scripture a mystery, great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, the woman that sitteth upon a scarlet coloured beast, ful of names of blasphemy, the woman arrayed in purple & scarlet, and guilded with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a cup of gold in her hand; full of abominations and silibinesse of her fornication, the woman that is drunken with the blood of saints, & with the blood of the martyrs or witnesses of Iesus by her beastly persecution) was, or could be ever the Apostolique Church, or are those that are descended from her seeing the Scripture saith,Rev. 12 6.13.14 she hath a place in the wildernesse prepared of God, where she should be sed a thousand two hundred and sixty dayes, from the presence of her persecutors. If so be, you will have the Church of Rome, and those that are descen∣ded
from her, to be the true Apostolick church:Note. then it wil follow that the church (called the woman, and did fly into the wilderness from her persecutors) was, and is the false Antichristian Church; and also it will follow that those (which we account to be the martyrs and witnesses of Jesus) were not of the true Apostolick Church,2 Thes. 2.3 6.8.1 Tim. 4.1.2. Rev. 12.6. 11, 14. and 17.2, 6, 17. 2 Tim. 3.1.9. & 4.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.1.3 1 Ioh. 2.18, 19 and 4.1. 2 Iohn 7. Iude 4 11, 16.Like mo∣ther, like Daughter. 1 Tim. . . Rev. 2.24. but were obstinate per∣sons and heretiques, even as their adversaries (in Rome, Spain, England, and elswhere) did persecute, adjudge, and execute them for. But if you will have the prophecy of the Apostles to be true, and will beleeve their holy writings, and also will have the martyrs (that have been burned, banished, hanged, imprisoned) to be of the true Apostolick Church, then it wil follow and that justly, according & agreeable to the Scriptures, that the Church of Rome, and those that did and doe perse∣cute, are descended from the false antichristian Church, called a mystery, great Babylon, the mother of whordoms and abominations of the earth, &c. which was and is drunken with the blood of saints and martyrs of Iesus: seeing they have her antichristian faith and lordly discipline, and for the de∣fence and maintenance thereof, will also burn, banish, hang and impri∣son; so hot and fiery zealous that thereby they shew plainly, that they walk so just and even in the steps and paths of the mysticall woman great Babylon, their bloody parent and mother: so even I say, as if they studyed her lying and hypocriticall doctrine, her deep and devilish divinity, her blasphemous princely and dangerous dignity; and her beastly, bloudy and deadly discipline. Through the continuance whereof, not only the Apostolick church is continued still in the wildernes and desert of this world, but also the Iews and others, both in great Britain and all over the world, are kept backe from the knowledge of Gods holy Word, the onely order and ordinance Christ hath appointed for the gathering of his Church together out of all places of the world.1 Joh. 4.1. And so long as persecution con∣tinue, you cannot try the spirits of the many false Prophets that are gone out into the world, as the holy Apostle doth lovingly advise and admonish you. But like the Papists,Fire and sword no e∣quall wea∣pons to the spirit and Word. must be eyed onely to the spirits of your lord∣ly Bishops and their Ministers, who will have all, both King, Prince, & people to receive their spirits, and therefore will not have any others to preach and print within the land, lest their lying doctrine and lord∣ly discipline be discovered and disclaimed. And in stead of disputing and writing by the word and spirit of Christ (against their adversaries) they wil cruelly persecute and fight against them by fire and sword, and spirit of Antichrist, from whom they are descended and succeeded, both lineally, and of great antiquity.Mystically.
Wherefore I humbly beseech the King and Parliament, that you will betimes listen unto the holy spirit in the mouth of the prophet, which saith,Psal. 2.10. Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be learned (or instructed) ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord in feare, and rejoice in trembling, kisse the Son of God lest hee be angry, and ye perish in the way of persecution, when his wrath shall suddenly burn; Let not therefore the Kings of the earth band themselves with the Bishops and Ministers of Antichrist,Psal. 2. 3. 1 Ioh. 2.20. Rev. 17.14. nor Princes assemble themselves toge∣ther against the Lord, and against his amointed, that is, against Christ and his Church; seeing both he and she break your bands, and east your cords from them.Rev. 12.11. Yea, her seed overcommeth you, by the bloud of the lamb, and by the word of their testimony, for they love not their lives unto death. Beware then in time lest you offend any more of these little ones that beleeve in Christ; seeing Christ saith, it were better to have a milstone hanged about the neck,Matth. 18.6.10. and drowned in the depth of the Sea, then so to do. He meaneth that it were better for you to lose your lives, then any way to consent to the offence of such little ones that beleeve in Christ. See then I pray that they be not despised, burned, banished, hanged and imprisoned. For their Angels alwaies behold the face of Christs Father in heaven; and remem∣ber he saith,Matth. 10.38, 39.Matth. 11.35.36 the tree is known by his fruit; but persecuting of Christians, is an evill fruit. And that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brin∣geth forth good things: but persecuting of christians is no good thing: and that for every idle word men shall speake, they shall give accounts at the last day of judge∣ments. How much more for every wicked and cruel deed of persecution, as burning, banishing, hanging and imprisoning of those that confesse with the mouth,Rom. 10.9. and beleeve with the heart the Lord Iesus, and that God raised him from the dead; whose laws and ordinances they are carefull to keepe and obey? Christ saith that such shall be saved; and yet you feare not to burn, banish, hang, and imprison such. But if you beleeve that God will avenge his elect,Luk 18.9. beware of persecuting his servants that cal on his name, specially such as witnesse his truth against the abominations of Antichrist. Suffer not your Bishops to destroy those men and women that strive to serve God according to his will in his word. Be not your Bishops exe∣cutioners in burning, banishing, hanging, and imprisoning of harmlesse and peaceable Christians, but let them enjoy freedom of the gospel, and liberty of conscience; that so the apostolick Church (which is scattered and driven into the wildernesse and desart of this world) may be againe gathe∣red together, both of Jews and Gentiles, into visible and stablished congre∣gations.2 Thes. .8. And that the Catholick and universall Church of Antichrist may bee consumed and abolished by his word and spirit, as the holy Apostle hath foretold,
even the uttermost of his arrivall, which is the Emperiall and triple Crowne,I pray the Lord to give such grace, the Sea of Rome may ebbe apate. through the triple sea of Rome. And again I humbly intreat the King and Parliament to vouchsafe to heare me with patience yet a little further: If freedom of the Gospel, and permission of conscience might be granted, then would not Papists nor any others dissemble their religion, to the dishonor of God, the de∣struction of their souls, and to the great danger both of King and State, seeing they are forced to Church against their consciences: & may not Popish Priests and Jesuites (unawares to the Bishops) become the Bi∣shops Ministers, seeing the change of their Religion, and religious habit differ so little; and so by degrees infect the people with more Popish do∣ctrine, as occasion shall be?Nota. From Popes submission there is great suspi∣tion. And such men will readily embrace the Bi∣shops Orders, and so they shall readily have the Bishops favours: by which means they may more easily and speedily have accesse unto the Court, and presence of the King and Prince, which indeed is very dan∣gerous, howsoever not regarded. Therefore I doe (according to my duty) humbly advise his Majesty not to beutifie his Court and presence with any popish stones, not with one, though it be of Alablaster. But permission of conscience and freedom, and liberty of the Gospel, will no way be dangerous to the King or State, if such like rules as these be observed. 1. That no people tainted with treason doe beare any office. 2. That all sorts of people tainted with treason, do (at all times from home) weare a black hat with two white signs, the one before,1 Kin. 2.36 41, 42.Rom. 13 1. to 5. the other behind in open sight. 3. That no people tainted with treason, approach within ten miles of the Court without licence. 4. That no people tainted with treason, do inhabit the City of Lon∣don, nor yet within ten miles thereof. 5. That none tainted with treason, do make any assembly or congre∣gation. 6. That no person or persons (in whatsoever difference, by reasoning or disputing) do draw any weapon, nor give any blow, stroke, or push, in paine and penalty, as his Majesty and Parliament thinke meet. 7. That (for the more peace and quietnes, and for the satisfying of the weak and simple, among so many persons differing in Religion, it bee lawfull for every person or persons, yea Jewes and Papists, to write,
dispute, confer and reason, print and publish any matter touching. Re∣ligion, either for or against whomsoever, always provided they alledge no Fathers for proof of any point of religion,2 Tim. 2.24, 25Iames 3.17 but only the holy Scrip∣tures, neither yet to reproach or slander one another, nor any other per∣son or persons, but with all love, gentleness, and peaceableness, informe one another to the glory of God honor of the King and State, and to their own good and credit;Note. A true signe of false Bi∣shops and Ministers by which means, both few errors, and few books wil be written and printed, seeing all false Ministers, and most people, have little or nothing else (besides the Fathers) to build their religion and doctrine upon: or if it be once stablished by law, that none shall confirm their religion and doctrine by the Fathers, and by prisons burning and banishing, &c. but by the holy Scriptures, then error will not be written nor disputed, except by obstinate persons, & feared con∣sciences, seeing the word of God will be no shelter for any error. Yea, I know by experience among the people called Brownists, that a Man shal not draw them to write, though they be desired; for one of their prea∣chers called Mast. Rob. hath had a writing of mine in his hands, above six moneths,Now above 12 months. and as yet I can get no answer, it seemes hee knoweth not how better to hide his errors, then by silence, and this will bee the case of all false Bishops and Ministers,Iohn 3.20. Iohn 3.10. who had rather be mute and dumb, then to be drawn into the light with their errors. Therefore permission of conscience, and liberty of the gospel in our land of great Britain, wil mightily further the advancement of the Apo∣stolick faith: and chiefly their bookes, whereout sufficient matter will be drawn for the convincing of every particular Religion which is a∣gainst the Religion stablished by Christ and his Apostles, who by all meanes lawfull, sought the conversion and salvation both of Jewes and Gentiles.1 Cor. 9.20.22. Act. 16.3. And they are unconstant and faith lesse men, or at least very ignorant, that think error will overcome and prevaile against the truth. For the abolishing of such thoughts, I desire such men to consider the mighty victory and prevailing of the truth, in the time of Christ & his Apostles, which (notwithstanding resisted and disputed against: by the most part of the Priests and learned men, both of Jewes and Gentiles) yet overcame and prevailed against all the errors of the high Priests, and great learnedmen, both of the Jews and Gentiles, and the Apostle faith, we cannot do any thing against the truth,2 Cor. 13.8 but for the truth: and seeing it is the same truth wch all good men would embrace, why should wee not hope the same victory by it? Did not King Darius & all the people both Iew
and gentils cry out and say, that truth is great and strongest?1 Esd. 4.38.41. Why then should those that have the truth, and those that would have the truth, be afraid of error? seeing truth discovereth dark and dangerous wayes of error, though abroad in open books, even as light discovereth dark and dangerous places, though abroad in open high wayes: And as the more darke and dangerous the wayes be, the more necessary & need∣full will light be found of all that travel: So the more darke and dange∣rous the errors be, the more needfull and profitable wil truth be found, of al that would travel to heaven. But some may object and say, let all this be granted, yet it is no wisedom we think, to bring dangerous errors into the light, that so many men may stumble at them. Which being not brought to light, would not be so much as known to some. I answer, no more, then a Rock that lyeth hid under water, which (for want of bringing into the light) many men may make Shipwrack there on, and so stumble or fall neverthelesse, though it be not so much as known to them before. Therefore as a Rock in the Seas (though not so much as known to some) yet (for want of being made known) many men stumble and fal thereon, and so perish both men and goods: So an error (though not so much as known to some) yet for want of being made known, many men may stumble and fall thereon, and so perish both bodies and soules, the which is more lamentable. And as Rocks in the Seas, the more they manifest themselves; So errors in the world the more they manifest themselves, the more furtherance in the way to heaven. And you shall understand that errors being brought to the light of the word of God, will vanish as darknes before the light of a torch: even as the chaffe before the winde cannot stand, so error before truth cannot abide: therefore it is no hinderance, but a great furthe∣rance to have all erroneous Rocks in the haven to heaven, made knowen and published. And a great and sure argument it is,Another true signe of false ministers. that those Bishops and Ministers have not the truth, that publikely dare not dispute or write against er∣ror, as may be seene in the Bishops & ministers in Queen Maries dayes, which could not abide to have books written & Printed, of that which they called error and heresie, but caused, that if any such were written, both them and the Authors to be burned, if they could come by them. Therefore if permission of conscience and libertie of the Gospel be not granted, and burning lawes repealed, then the Bishops & ministers now may perswade and cause to be burned, both the Books the & Authors, that have the truth instead of heresy and hereticks, even as their prede∣cessors
have done already,The Word of God the onely de∣fender of the faith of Christ. and so shed more innocent bloud, and also provoke the Lord to further wrath against the King and State. It is not the gallowes, nor the prisons, nor burning, nor banishing, that can de∣fend the Apostolick faith: indeed the King and State may defend Reli∣gions peace by their sword & civil power, but not the faith, otherwise, then by the word and spirit of God. The dutch Princes and Peeres say, that force sword, & gallows, in matter of religion, is a good meanes to spil bloud, and make an uprore in the land, but not to bring any man from one faith to ano∣ther. The Pagans will not persecute one another for religion, though (as I read) there be above three thousand sorts among them. And you know both King Henry & Queen Mary, thought themselves defenders of the faith, and though they burned hereticks and heresy, when they burned Men and their books,Idol Bishops and false Mini∣sters, au∣thors of persecution Rev. 16.14. but now you see and must acknowledge, that they were peesecutors of the faith, instead of defenders therof, and also that they (through the instigation of their bloudy Bishops) burned the word of God, and those that professed and wrought it, instead of heresy and hereticks. And thus it will be now if the Bishops and their Ministers may have their wils: and therein they (as their predecessors) fulfill the word of God, in gathering Kings of the earth to the battell of the great day of God Almighty. For they perswade Kings to force their sub∣jects,Rom. 10.14.17. to receive the faith, and to be of the Church, whereas the word of God teacheth otherwise, saying, Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and not by the Kings sword. And Christ saith: Teach of nations, and not force all nations: and this teaching is to be understood by the word and writing of the Prophets and Apostles of our Lord and Saviour Christ, which is the Word of God For they that wil be of the true Faith and Church, must be called thereunto, out of the World by the Word of God, in every nation, and not forced and constrained in every nation, as the Bishop of Rome, and all other false Bishops and Mi∣nisters have and doe perswade Kings, Emperors and Magistates. And his Majesty and Parliament may please to understand, that so to do,Mat. 16. 16. 1 Thes. 5.19. is to quench the Spirit of God, in Christs Bishops and Ministers, and al∣so to frustrate the precept of Christ which saith: Preach the Gospel to every creature. Besides it maketh their one office & function void, they ought to preach and instruct with al meeknes them that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time wil give them repentance,2 Tim. 2.24, 25. that they may know the truth: for the ministers of the Lord must not strive, but be apt to teach, gentle towards all men, suffering evil men patiently, telling Kings and Princes, that the wea∣pons of Christ Bishops and Ministers are not carnal (as the weapons of all
false & Antichristian Bishops and Ministers are) but Spiritual, and migh∣ty through God, to cast downe holds, casting downe every high thing,2 Cor. 10.3.5. that is exal∣ted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought, to the obedience of Christ. Also, if al within the land be forced to be of the church as the Bishops and their ministers would stil have it, then there would be no world in the land, but al the land would be the Church, which is absurd & con∣trary to the scriptures, and great ignorance do the Bishops,Rev. 11.. Act. 2.41 47.Note. Act. 2.47. & their mi∣nisters shew, when they think the whole nation of people is the church of Christ, for then it cannot be said, out of great Britaine, the Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved: seeing within the land there would be none without to be added: Also within that land,A true Church wil not perse∣cute. Mat. 12.25. Rev. 18.2.8. 1 Cor. 8.11.12.Luc. 10.3. Gen. 32.28. Rom. 13.4. there would be no persecution, seeing the church of Christ doth not persecute at al, much lesse it self, but the Ministers and members of that Church do persecute one another; and therefore it cannot be the spiritual King∣dome & Church of Christ, but of Antichrist, seeing it is divided against it self, and persecuteth one another and wil with her mother, great Babi∣lon be consumed and condemned, seeing (as she) they burne, banish, hang, and imprison one another, which is no Christian, but Antichristian, monstrous, cruel, woolvish & tyranous part and practise, for Christ sent his Ministers as lambs among wolves and not as wolves among Lambs. Againe, I humbly and with al reverence do beseech his right excel∣lent Majesty, to give me leave, to put him in minde, of those things that do concern the glory of God, the assurance of his owne salvation, the stablishment of his throne, & the benefit both of the Church of Christ, and the common wealth of al his Dominions. And though as Josias, he finde (by reading in the booke of the New Testament) a great alteration of the Apostolick faith, & change of the lawes & ordinances of Christ, within his Dominions; Yet not to be dismayed, as Henry Legrand, but be encoura∣ged as Josiah to labour & endeavour the redresse thereof, according to the minde of Christ, in his New Testament. And I doubt not, but as Iacob the Patriarch prevailed with God & men: so shal Iacob the King prevails both with God & men, especially being his chief steward by his new testament. Through the zealous reading whereof will be found, that Antichrist the King of the Catholick faith & discipline (called the mystery of ini∣quity.) doth sit in the Temple of God, even as the Scripture hath foretold.2 Tim. 2. 1 Tim 4. Rev. 7 15. 2 The. 2.8. Rev. 17.16.17. But it is to be noted that the Scripture hath also foretold, of the consum∣mation & abolition, of this antichrist the man of sin, and his mistery of iniquity, with the utmost of his arrival, or highest top of dignity, he is come unto: and this
shall be done by the spirit of the Lord in the much of his servants. For when the words of God be fulfilled, then shal the servants of the Lord prevaile (by his word & spirit) with ten Kings that shal hate,Caled the Temple of God.2 Thes. Rev. 17.1.1.18. Ioh. 16.2 and make the whore desolate, which sitteth in the hearts and consciences of peoples, multitudes & nations, and this whore is the woman called the great City which reigneth over the Kings of the earth, meaning the church of Rome, by her false faith and discipline, which is so fa setled in the hearts & consciences of the Kings of the earth, that they think they do God good service, in killing & burning his servants that do speak against her faith and dicipline, and that wil not buy any of her wars, that is,Rev. 17.13 14. her Antichristian doctrines and ordinances. But as she hath had her exatation and arrival to the height and dignity of the sea Empire of Rome, by the love of kings, who have given their power and authority unto her, and who have fought for her against the Saints & servants of Iesus: So she shal have her consummation & abolition (from that height and dignity) by the hatred of Kings, who againe shall take their power and authority from her, and therewith defend the peace and persons of the Saints and servants of Iesus: and not for religions peace, will use their power and autho∣rity against the bloudy persecution of Antichrist and al his bloudy Bishops and Ministers, and so become nursing fathers unto the Church of Christ. And as it hath pleased God, to give his Majesty peace round about, as he did unto King Cyrus, in whose dayes the material Temple be∣gan to be repaired (which was a figure of the spiritual temple:) So I pray it may please him also (in the peaceable dayes of King James) to begin to repaire the spiritual Temple) the Apostolick church scattered and driven abroad into the wildernes of this world,Esa. 2.4. Ezra 4.7. Ha. 24.10 whose calling and gathering together, must be by the preaching of the word of God, both to Jewes and Gentils, and not by the sword of the Kings of the earth, as Antichrist's and his Ministers have now along time perswaded & prevailed, whereby not onely the Jewes and infidels, but also papists and other false Chri∣stians, are hindred and deprived from the knowledge of the Apostolick faith. And it is to be noted that David might not build Gods Temple, because he had spilt much blood, which sheweth, no blood ought to be spilt for the building of the spirituall temple. 1. Chro. 28.3. Ergo peace in religion is a good meanes to make a unity of religion among so many Christi∣an sects. Exod. 25.2. and 35.5. Act 2.40.41. Mat. 28And it is wel worthy consideration, that as in the time of the old Te∣stament, the lord would not have his offerings by constraint, but of every man whose heart gave it freely: so now in time of the gospel he will not have the people constrain'd, but as many as receive the word gladly, they are to
be added to the church by baptism:Mat. 16.16. Mat. 10.11 14. and therefore Christ commanded his disciples to teach all nations, and baptize them, that is, to preach the word of salvation to e∣very creature of all sorts of nations, that are worthy and willing to receive it: and such as shal willing & gladly receive it, he hath commanded to be bap∣tized in the water, that is, dipped for dead in the water; and therefore the Apostle saith, Else what shall they do, who are baptized for dead,1 Cor. 15.19 Rom. 6.4. Col. 2.12. Luke 8.37. if the dead be not raised, why are they baptized for dead? And therefore he saith, we are buried then with him by baptism, &c. and it is to be wel observed, that when Christ would have preached the word of salvation to the Gada∣rens, he did not compell them when they refused, but finding them un∣willing to receive him and his word,Luk. 9.54.55. he turned from them without hur∣ting them: also when James and John saw that some of the Samaritans re∣fused Christ, they would have commanded fire from heaven to consume them, as Elias did, but Christ rebuked them and said, Ye Know no of what spirit are, for the Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them. By all which it may please his Majesty and Parliament, to take knowledg that Christ will have none consumed with fire and sword, for not hearing and not receiving his Word. And that (howsoever it hath been the mind of Anti∣christ to destroy mens lives for Religion, and therein have not spared neither Prince no people) yet it is not the mind of Christ that Princes should destroy their subjects, nor yet that Subjects should destroy their Princes for difference in Religion. And therefore why should Bishops perswade Princes and people, and why should King, Prince and people be perswaded by their Bishops and Ministers to be contrary minded to Christ? verily it is a notorious and plaine token of a false faith and discipline, that is defended by fire and sword, the power and authority of Princes: And they cannot be Christs Bishops and preachers,Christs Bps. will not bee Lords ever the consci∣ences. that perswade Princes and peoples to such anti∣christian tyranny and cruelty. And it is very evident that those Bishops and Ministers which give over men and women to the Magistrate to be perswaded by persecution, doe shew clearly that their doctrine is not good, and that they want the word and spirit of God, and therefore flee to the Magistrates sword for the forcing of them to their faith and dis∣cipline: and as the wine is not good which we are forced to drink; so those doctrines are not good which we are forced to beleeve. But it may be by this time all those Bishops (who unfainedly fear God, and truly love the King) wil haste and make speed to come unto his Majesty for pardon, acknowledging the truth of this book, confessing their ig∣norance and arrogance, in the knowledge of Gods word, and in com∣pelling
the people to heare the word preached; and for imprisoning, burning, banishing and hanging for Religion, contrary to the mind of Christ, and also for stopping the mouths of men, and burning their books, that preach and write contrary to their minds and wils; yea, it may be they will also confesse and say, Oh most gracious King, we beseech your Majesty to shew us mercy, and to forgive us our spirituall pride and ambi∣tion, in that we have thus long usurped the blasphemous titles of spirituall Lords and Lords graces, the which titles, we now to the glory of God, and honor of the King,The Bi∣shop oe know in their con∣sciences that this is true.Iob. 32.22. Phil 2.9.11 do with unfained hearts confesse to be due, and belong onely to Christ him∣self: and that the name and title of spirituall Lord cannot belong to any earthly creature, no not to the King or Emperor, because it is an heavenly name and ti∣tle, how much lesse can it belong, or be due unto us, your Majesties unworthy subjects and scholars? And for so much as we now understand (the Lord be prai∣sed therefore) that the holy and heavenly name and divine title of spirituall Lord is as much, yea as high and great as the name and title of a spirituall God & also that it is a name above every name, which God the Father hath given unto Christ onely to the end, that every knee should how unto that onely and heavenly name, and that every tongue should confesse that Iesus is the Messiah, the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father, that in all things Christ might have the preheminence; for be alone is the head of the Church,Col. 1.18. which is his body: the which cannot bee, so long as we, or any other Bishops do hold and retain that divine, high, and super∣excellent name and title of spirituall Lord; because then it cannot be said that God hath so highly exalted him, as to give him a name above every name, seeing our names and titles are also spirituall, and are called spirituall Lords so well as the son of God, Iesus the messiah: the remembrance hereof, most gracious soveraign, do make us to tremble before God and the King.The Bps. in titles equall to the sonne of God. And therefore we must earnestly desire your sacred Majesty and the whole Parliament to discharge and release us of these fearfull names and titles that do onely belong to the son of God, Iesus, the onely spirituall Lord that God hath given unto his Church. Note. Gods bles∣sings i ex∣pected, un∣les these i∣dols bee re∣jected, who are exalted above all earthly Gods.Moreover, we do (according to the truth) acknowledge, that if we should any longer retaine these divine and high names of spiritual Lords and Lords graces, we should therein be intituled, not only with a name equall to our Lord Iesus, the onely begotten son of God, but also we should be intituled with a name and title above your right excellent Majesty, yea above all Emperors, Kings, and Princes of the earth, the which alone we doe acknowledge to bee a sufficient cause to put us down, and to deprive us of these usurped names and blasphemous titles. Also we do confesse that our pomp and state wherein we now live, is more like the Bishops of the Catholick church of Antichrist, then any way like the Bishops of the Apo∣stolick Church of Christ, unto whom we acknowledge we ought to be made like,
and also to be qualified with the like gifts and graces of the Spirit, or else in no case we can be meet Bishops for the Church of Christ, as the Apostle plainely tea∣cheth both to Timothy and Titus, &c.1 Tim. 3. Tith. 6.9. And we must further acknowledge and confesse, that our houses, housholds, and revenues, are more fit and meet for Prin∣ces, Dukes, and Earls, then for the Bishops of Christ. Wherfore (being moved and stirred up hereto by the feare of God) we earnestly beseech your Majesty and Par∣liament also to disburden us of this great pomp and state, and of our great and princelike houses, housholds and revenues, that so we may be made equall and conformable to the ministers of Christ, and then we shal have both hope and com∣fort of the world to come, although but little in this, except your Majesty and Par∣liament do grant free liberty of conscience, the which wee now doe also with the poor distressed christians most humbly intreat and desire; and that for these foure reasons: First, because thereby the gospel of Christ will be set free and at liberty, whereby all people both Iews and Gentiles wil be gathered to the apostolick faith, church and discipline. Secondly, because many of your Majesties subjects, both men and women (who now are forced to dissemble their Religion, for fear of our persecution) will be released and set free from their spirituall bondage and slavery, wherein we now doe hold them against their consciences, and so they will become more faitfull Christians to God, and more loyall subjects to your Majesty then ever they were before, to the salvation of their soules, and the safety of the Crown and State. Thirdly, because the poore distressed Christians (how bani∣shed and dispersed out of their Fatherland, over the face of the earth) will bee redeemed from great misery and bondage, wherein now (no doubt) they live and abide, because they will not bee in bondage to any other spirituall Lord or bead, then the Lord Iesus Messiah alone; whose faith and discipline they desire onely to learne and obey. Fourthly, because thereby great benefit and commodity will re∣dound both to your Majesty and to all your subjects within your Highness do∣minions by the great commerce, in trade and trafick both of Iewes and all people, which now for want of liberty of conscience, are forced and driven elswhere: and also from the revenues and livings which we and our Clergy doe possesse, and from the Courts and offices we hold and keep greats profit and commodity will re∣dound, both to your Highnesse, and to all your kingdoms; we say, more profit and commodity then we or any man is able to expresse. And therefore we also desire all his Majesties subjects hath great and small in all love and feare of God, not to be offended, or any way moved or grieved,Too great is the ods to use the sword a∣gainst Gods Word. when they shall see such ad formati∣on of us, as that famous King Henry the eight did make of our lordly brethren the Abbots and their Clergy. For indeed such a reformation ought to come among us and our Clergy, seeing we are no way agreeable to the new Testament, of the onely spirituall Lord Iesus Messiah, but are limbs and fellow members of that
Antichristian and Romish church, which in the scriptures is Prophecyed to be a∣bolished and destroyed Now therefore we pray you all let not King David say, the sons of Zerviah are too strong for him, for that will be unprofitable for you all. And for conclusion, we entreat his Majesty and Parliament to enact, that as our adversaries come against us onely with the word of God, so we go against them onely with the word of God, and nor as we have done by civill authority, for so our selves may be forced to dissemble: Thus it may be the Lord will perswade and work in the hearts of some of the Bishops who will willingly resign their Antichristian titles and Popish pomp and state, with their princelike houses and livings into the hands of the King, without any compulsion or constraint. But if they do not, yet if it please God to open the Kings heart to see their Antichristian and I∣dol estate, & the danger and damage they cause both to the King, Prince, & people, they will be compelled thereto even as their lordly brethren the Abbots in King Henry's days were.The Bps. greater I∣dols then the Abbots, images, or golden calf. And howsoever it be not regar∣ded, or perhaps not discerned, yet in the sight of God and his people they are greater Idols then their lordly brethren the Abbots: yea, grea∣ter Idols then the images of wood and stone (which that famous and godly King Edward did pul down and destroy) for they did not impri∣son, nor burn, nor hang, nor yet cause to bee banished any of the Kings subjects, thus would not worship them as these Idol-bishops do: and out of doubt, these Bishops are greater Idols then the golden Calfe Airon made and offered unto, for the Calf did not persecute nor vex such as did not acknowledge it for their Lord, as the Bishops doe: neither did the Calf reign and rule by force over the consciences of the people, as these Idol-bishops doe. Besides, the Calf was set up in stead of Moses, who brought the people out of Egypt,Ex. 32.1, 7. What grea∣ter idolatry then to o∣bey other spirituall Lords then the Lord Ie∣sus? and shewed them the will of God; but these Bishops are set up in stead of Christ, who have brought us out of the bondage of hel, and who sheweth us his Fathers will in his new Testament, the which these Idol-bishops will not suffer us to obey, but in stead thereof will force us to fal down, worship and obey their father Antichrists wil and old testament, which stinks in the nostrills of all reformed strangers that hear there∣of, as well as in ours that have taken our flight from it. Therefore these spirituall lords and Idol-bishops, ought to be pulled down and suppres∣sed,2 Kings 23 17.20 like the Abbots their lordly brethren, though not sacrificed unto the Lord in Smithfield, as the godly King Josias sacrificed the Idol-priests of the high places on the Altars thereof. And I do verily beleeve, that if free li∣berty of conscience be granted, that the spiritual kingdom of these Idol-bishops,
will in time fall to the ground of it self,1 Sam. 5.3. as the Idol Dagon fell before the Ark: for through the knowledge of Gods word will all god∣ly people withdraw themselves in all peaceable and godly wife, from the spirituall obedience of these spirituall Lords and Idol-bishops, and quietly betake themselves unto the obedience of the only spiritual Lord Iesus Messiah. But howsoever it be, I shall be contented therewith, and so I wish al others, for we all ought to be content if we obtain liberty of conscience; and therefore to give God praise continually, that hath wrought so blessed a work in the hearts of the King and Parliament, for whom, as the Scripture teacheth, wee ought to make supplications,1 Tit. 2.1.2 prayers, and intercessions, that they may come to the knowledge of the truth, and that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godlinesse and honesty. And unto whom we ought to give (by the law of God) all earthly honour,Ro. 13.1.7. fear and reverence, and willingly to pay tribute and custome, tax and toll, so much, and so often as it shall please his Majesty and Parliament to appoint and gather by any officer or officers whatsoever. For whom also, and for the whole common-wealth of all his kingdoms, we ought to be diligent and ready to hazard and lay down not only our goods, but also our lives at all times and occasions. For Christ hath onely set us free from all ecclesiasticall laws and ordinances, which himselfe hath not commanded in his last will and testament: yea, from the ecclesiasti∣call laws and commandments of the old Testament,Col. 2.14. Heb. 8.23. how much more hath he set us free from the ecclesiasticall laws and ordinances of Anti∣christ? but he hath not set us free from the morall and judiciall law of God, for that the King is bound to execute, and we are bound to obey: and for want of the execution thereof,Deut 17.18 20 there are in our land many whores and whorekeepers, and many children murdered, besides the death and undoing of many persons about whores. Wherefore I hum∣bly desire that the morall and judicial law of God may be practised and executed, of all degrees, both high and low, without respect of persons, according to the mind of Christ: for the Lord will have that every man shall love him above all, and his neighbor as himself, and Christ saith,Luk. 6.31. As ye would that men should do to you, so do yet to them likewise. Therfore as the King would not have his subjects to take away his life because he is contrary to them in religion: so let not the King take away his subjects lives, because they are contrary to the king in religion: & as you would not that men should force you to a religion against your consciences, so do not you force men to a religion against their consci∣ences: and as it is the duty of subjects to seek the conversion of their king
& State by the word of God, and not his and their destruction by fire and sword; So it is the duty of the King and State, to seek the conversion of their Subjects by the word of God, and not their destruction by fire and sword as the Pope and his Prelates doe teach:Note whose vassals therein both Emperors and Kings (as well as people) have beene a long time: both to the destruction of themselves & their subjects. For who know∣eth not that Prelates and priests have perswaded Subjects, to destroy their Kings and Princes, as wel as Kings & Princes to destroy their sub∣jects?1 Cor. 3.17 & 6.19.20 but I pray them both to take notice that the Scripture saith he that destroyeth the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Let not therefore Kings, Princes, nor Subjects bee any longer perswaded to destroy one ano∣ther through the subtletie of Bishops and their ministers, who (most of them) onely seeke the security of their owne pompe and glory, and the stablishment of their spiritual thrones therein; for so long as they may confirm that, they passe not who perish, whether King, Prince or people. Again therefore I humbly pray his Majesty and Parliament, to repeale and make void all popish lawes and canons, and to see the moral & Iudiciall law of God,Frederick & Iohn Pals∣graves, said that under pretext of the holy-ghosts office of correction little else was sought then to reigne over the consci∣ences of the Magistrates & subjects like as in the accursed popedom is come to passe &c. both firmly enacted, and carefully practised after the minde of Christ: and them shall Christs spirituall throne be sta∣blished in the hearts and consciences both of King, Prince, and People, so as the Church Christs spirituall Kingdom shall increase in the knowledge of faith, and obedience thereof, with all love, peace and charity, one towards another. And the common wealth of his Majesties Kingdoms will flourish and prosper, and also his throne be constantly stablished both to him and his Heires throughout all his Dominions, in a sure land of peace and love, th'one with and towards another, to the glory of God and the comfort of his Majesty and of all his Subjects, and also to a fa∣mous and excellent glorious pattern of government, to all Kingdoms, Nations, and Countries round about, as in the daies of Salomon King of Israel. For if the holy lawes of Gods word be practised and executed after Christs will, then shall neither King, Prince nor people be de∣stroyed for difference in Religion, then Treason and Rebellion, as well as burning, banishing, hanging, or imprisoning, for difference in religion will cease and be laid down, then shall not men, women, and youth be hanged for theft then shall not the poor same, sick, and weak ones, be stocked and whipped, neither shall the poore, stranger, fatherlesse, and windowes be driven to beg from place to place, neither shall the lame, sick, and weake persons suffer such misery & be forsaken of their kindred, as now they be, then shall not murder, whoredome, and adul∣tery
be bought out for money: then shall not the great defraud and wrong the small, neither the rich oppresse the poore by usury and little wages: then shall not men bring up and inherit others children in∣stead of their owne, neither shall an honest man be forced to live with a whore instead of an honest wife, nor yet an honest woman be for∣ced to live with a whorekeeper in stead of an honest husband. Then shal not servants be forced from marriage by bonds, nor yet be bound to servitude, longer then six yeers, neither shal they be brought up contrary to covenant, nor posted from one quarter or one yeare to another for their freedom and in the end be forced to buy it of their Masters, or else to goe without it too. Then shall neither Prince nor people be disinherited, for not being of the Church:Note wel. neither shall they be held lawlesse persons, though excommunicated: neither shal any man dare kil them as now they may, and be quit by law: neither shall any man feare to have his mouth stopt for preaching the truth: then shall no man need to flee out of his native Countrey and Fatherland, for persecu∣tion sake: then shall all men live in peace under his owne vine,Act. 15.28.29. & 21.25 laud∣ing and praising God, honoring and obeying the King. Then also will no bloud be eaten among Christians, whereby the Jewes should have just cause to stumble or be offended, neither should any reliques of the ceremoniall law, (as Tithes and offerings &c.) be any longer in use, whereby the Jewes should be hardned in their unbeliefe,Jewes kept back from the faith by persecu∣tion. and kept from the faith of the Messiah. Then shall the Jewes inhabit & dwel under his Majesties Dominion, to the great profit of his Realmes, and to their furtherance in the faith: the which we are bound to seeke in all love and peace, so well as others, to our utmost endeavour, for Christ hath commanded to teach all nations &c. and they are the first. Lastly, then shall not so many Men and Women be deceived by false Ministers, neither by their Sermons, nor yet by their bookes, which are full fraighted with false doctrines, and confirmed and countenanced, not onely by the Kings authority and power, but also by wresting and false interpreting of the Scriptures, and by alledging of popish Fathers, which through the great ignorance of the people doe greatly prevaile: btt then shall be abolished through the word and spirit of god (his two witnesses) in the mouth of his servants,Rev. 11.3. and 19.10. who by word and writing shall breed such knowledge, that none of wisedomes children shall be deceived. Another reason, why so many good people are now deceived, is, because we that have most truth are most persecuted; and therefore most poore, whereby we are unable
to write and print as we would against the adversaries of the truth: it is hard to get our daily food with the labors of our weak bodies and feeble hands, how then should we have to defray other charges, and to write and print? I have through the help of god out of his word, made a scourge of small cords,2 Pet. 2.2. wherewith Antichrist and his Ministers might be driven one of the Temple of God. Also a declaration of certain false translations in the new Testament; but I want wherewith to print and publish it, therefore it must rest til the Lord see'th good to supply it.It is the kings honor to search out a thing Prov. 25. Exod 3.6. In mean while, I humbly intreat his Majesty and Parliament to give me leave to prove the Bishops with one question, by which you may perceive the ignorance of your Bishops: 'tis this, how they will bee able to prove a resurrection from these words, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Onely from these words will they prove the resurrection, if they be the Bishops of Christ; for he proved the resurrection from hence.Luk. 20.27. The question is hard I grant, but if their Lord∣ships be not able to interpret it according to the meaning of Christ (as I am sure they are not) then it will be another cause very sufficient, for their deprivation from their Lordly and idol offices, and princely li∣vings. But because most men do wrest and mis-interpret the Scriptures, some of wickednesse, and some of ignorance, for the utterance of their doctrines, and so deceive both Prince and people: I will shew how you shall perceive it, lest thereby you still be deceived Every Scripture ther∣fore mis-interpreted do make a contradiction: As for example M. Iohn∣son (one of the Preachers called Brownists) to prove Rome a true church alledgeth 2 Thes. 2.4. where the Apostle sheweth, That the man of sin, and son of perdition sitteth in the Temple of God; which words, Temple of God, he interpreteth to be the church of God, whereby he doth greatly erre; for then such interpretation will contradict this scripture which saith,1 Tim. 3.15 The Church of God is the pillar and ground of truth. But if the man of sin sitteth there,Rev. 28.2. Rev. 18 4. then it is a hold of foul spirits, a cage of every unclean and hatefull bird, as the Scripture speaketh: yea, the pillar and ground of falshood, and not of truth: Neither would the Lord call his people out of her (as he doth) if it were the true Church.Rev. 12.13, 14. Also, if the temple of God in that place be interpreted the church of God, this foul absurdity and contradiction will follow, viz. that the Church (called the woman) to whom were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the wildernesse from her persecutors, for a time, times, and half a time, was not persecuted neither yet did sly into the wildernesse so long a time. Neither yet was the Church (called both woman and whore,Re. 17.1, 5. also great Babylon, the mother of
whoredoms and abominations of the earth) drunken with the blood of the saints, and of the martyrs of Iesus, as the Scripture testifyeth. Again, if that be the church of God, where the man of sin sitteth, then the winepresse was not troden without, but within the Church; and so it also crosseth this Scripture, which saith,Rev. 14.20. the winepress was troden without the City, so that blood came out unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs, Ergo a false interpretation. Moreover, we are not to understand the word Temple at all times to mean the Church; for when Christ said, destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again, did not mean the church, nor yet the materiall Temple wher∣in he was, but meant his body, yet the Jews understood the word Tem∣ple otherwise, even as Mr. Iohnson, &c doe here understand the word Temple otherwise, then the bodies of peoples, multitudes, nations,Rev. 17.5. and tongues, which they ought not to doe. Likewise Paul, when he said, If any man destroy the Temple of God, him will God destroy; did not mean the Church, but the members of the Church. So when he said, the man of sin sitteth in the Temple of God, he did not mean so much as the members of the church, much lesse the church. Therefore it must be understood, that all those in whom the man of sin sitteth, are called the Temple of God, onely in respect that the Lord hath bought them, for the Lord hath bought all men,2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Joh. 2.2. 1 Cor. 6.19 20. & 7.23. Lev. 18.6. even the false teachers that deny him. Therefore no man is his own in that respect, but the Lords. Also the Bishops themselves (to prove brothers and sisters children may marry) alledge Lev. 18. But that Scripture do not prove such marriages, but the full contrary for it saith, none shall come near to any of his kindred, to uncover shame. But brother and sisters children are kinsfolks:Lev. 18.17. therefore they may not come near to uncover shame, for that were wickednesse. This they must confesse, or else prove that brother and sisters children are not kinsfolks, which they cannot: seeing then, brother and sisters children cannot call cozen, and so all cozenship is blotted out by their doctrine, for uncles and Aunts call their brothers and sisters child, nephew & neece. Thus many Bishops and preachers do deceive Kings, Princes and peo∣ples by wresting and misinterpreting the Scripture.Col. 2.8.1 Therefore I earnest∣ly desire your Majesty and Parliament to beware, lest there be any man that spoyle you, through Philosophy and vaine deceit, through the Traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ.1 Tim. 6. 20, 21. And to avoid pro∣fane and vain bablings and Antithesis, or opposition, falsly called learning; which while some professe, they have erred concerning the faith. And now O King, Prince and Parliament, open your eyes, and listen
your eares unto compassion and mercy:2 Cor. 5.10 Mat. 5.45. Ver. 21, 22. Lu. 18.7, 8. 2 Thes. 14.8 Jam. 1.5, 6. Mat. 12.36. fear God and be like unto him, for he causeth his sun to shine both on just and unjust. Think at last you must give an account of your works: many at the day of judgemnt will bee ever burned for killing and burning innocent Christians: but no man shall be damned for saving their lives; leane then I humbly beseech you, on the right side of mercy, rather then yeeld unto such as perswade to persecute innocent christians: for they cannot help you, when you must give account therof unto Christ, who adviseth you otherwise, although they be such as erre, how much more such as do but seem to err, and for difference in religion ought you to save their lives and I do in all humi∣lity affirm,Ma. 13.29.30, 39 Acts 17.31. that those which advise you to pluck up and burn the tares, (which Christ commands to be let alone till the end) doe advise you to pluck up and burn the commandement of Christ, unto whom assuredly (except amendment you shal give account at the day appointed. Ther∣fore beleeve not such as counsel you to shed blood for judgment in reli∣gion: for if themselves should suffer the pain, they would verily give you other counsell, be not then their executioners any longer, for all that will live godly in Christ,2 Tim. 3.12 shall suffer persecution, though you do your best to hinder it. And I pray to remember, that to preach the gospel (after the mind of Christ) is to bring glad tydings unto the people; but to burn, banish, hang and imprison for religion, is not to bring glad (but woful) tydings unto the people;Luk. 2.10. Rom. 1.16. let it not therefore bee any longer prea∣ched in your Majesties dominions, I meekly intreat, Though Paul plans, and Apollos water,1 Cor. 3.6. yet it as God that giveth the encrease. But your Bishops and Ministers will have an increase whether God will or not, or else they will burn, banish, hang, and imprison. Kings and Magistrates are Gods Ministers and not the Bishops; therefore I humbly beseech you to with∣stand the bloudy minds of your Bishops, that there be no more innocent Christians persecuted to death for Religion.A crying sin I read that in the Nether∣lands above a hundred thousand persons have been put to death for re∣ligion, but now praised be God we have no such wofull tydings preach∣ed among us, the Lord work as much in our land I beseech him, that so you may no longer burn and banish the servants of Christ; for he saith, they that do these things have not known the Father nor me:Joh. 16.3. yet I confesse you have the zeal of God, for you think you do God good service in burning Christians that differ from your Religion. But I also confesse your zeal is not according to knowledge for your Bishops and Ministers be∣ing indued with University and high school learning,Ro. 10.2, 3. divinity and do∣ctrine, but being ignorant of the lowly learning, heavenly di∣vinity
and doctrine of Christ, have and do stil go about to stablish their own and have not yet submitted themselves to the lowly learning, di∣vinity and doctrine of Christ: and therefore like their predecessors, wil perswade you to burn, banish, &c. such Christians as they hold to be in error about doctrines and questions of faith and Religion, right as if they had the power to rule, govern and dispose the hearts and spirits of Kings, Princes and people, even as they list, and also to make them good and righteous when they will, and to cause them to understand and be∣leeve the gospel, even by a day and hour appointed, which to do, belon∣geth to God alone: and therefore Christ saith,Iohn 6.44. no man can come to me ex∣cept the Father draw him, and Christ will have his Ministers to preach to such as are worthy & willing, and not as your Ministers, who come to them whom they hold unworthy, and find unwilling, and say,Mat. 10.11, 24. Will ye not come to church and hear, and will ye not beleeve our doctrine? but we wil make you, or else we will burn you for hereticks. Thus will they taunt meek and holy Christians who are torn like sheep among the wolves; but Christs ministers will with meeknes instruct such as are contrary minded, tolerating the evill men pa∣tiently, proving if God at any time wil give them repentance,2 Tit. 2.25. Ioh. 13.35. that they may know the truth: wherby they shew plainly that they are Christs disciples, and have that true faith which worketh by love, even as the Apostle saith, the which I pray you to consider, that so you may both know and obey the will of Christ. Now (saith he) abideth faith, hope and love,1 Cor. 13. but the chiefest of these is love; for where love is there is no disdaine, it seeketh not her own things, it is not provoked to anger, it suffereth all things, it hopeth all things, it indureth al things. Yea, the love of Christ so loveth, that it will not vex nor persecute any that call on his name: therefore I humbly pray you to remember them that are in bonds, as though ye were bound with them; and them that are in affli∣ction, as if ye were also afflicted in the body; and to shew them mercy,Heb. 13.3. for mercy re∣joyceth against judgment, but judgment mercilesse shall be to them that shew no mercy. If ye be friendly to your brethren onely, what singular thing do you?Iam. 2.13. doe not the sinners the same? be not like unto them,Luk. 6.32, 37. but unto your heavenly father whose wisdom, love and mercy, I beseech him to grant you, that so you may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved: and that we your Majesties faithfull subjects,1 Tim. 2. may lead a peaceable and quiet life (even in our own nation) in all godlinesse and honesty: Amen. Now, them that are persecuted,2 Pet. 4 12. I exhort with the words of the Apo∣stle Peter, Dearly beloved think it nor strange concerning the fiery trial that is among you to prove you, as though some strange thing were come unto you; but rejoyce, in as much as ye are partakers of Christs
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. If ye be railed upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you, Pet. 2.2. which on their parts is evil spo∣ken of, but on your part is glorified; but let no man suffer as an evil does or as a murtherer, or as a busie body in others matters; but if one suffer as a Christian,Acts 24.14 let him not be ashamed, but let him glorifie God in that behalf. For all the martyrs of the Apostolick Church have suffered as evill do∣ers, and as hereticks. For the time is that judgment must must begin at the house of God: if it first begin at us (saith the Apostle) what shal the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God: and if the righteous scarce∣ly be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appeare? wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls unto him in weldoing, as unto a faithfull Creator. Antichrist and his per∣secution shall bee made low.  Thes. 2.4.Read Esay 2.2, 4, 11, 16. He shal judge among the nations, and rebuke many people, they shall break their sword into mattocks, and their spears into sithes: nations shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any more; the high lookes of man shall be humbled, and the loftinesse of man shal be abased, and the Lord only shal be exalted in that day: for the day of the Lord of hosts is upon all the proud and haughty, and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low. Little David overcame great Goliah, yet not brought up in war: un∣learned Peter confuted the learned Priests, yet by calling a Fisherman. Attend and help,Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.7. and you shall see the wonderfull works of God; For the foolishnesse of God is wiser then men, and the weaknes of God is stronger then men: And God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and things that are despised hath God chosen, to bring to nought things that are, 1 Cor. 1.25, 28. Leonard Busher. FINIS.
