B6161 E176_1 99860413 112533
A DIVINE TRAGEDIE LATELY ACTED, OR, A Collection of sundrie memorable ex∣amples of Gods judgements upon Sabbath-breakers, and other like Libertines, in their unlawfull Sports, hap∣ning within the Realme of England, in the compasse one∣ly of few yeers last past, since the Book was published, worthy to be known and considered of all men, especially such, who are guilty of the sin or Arch∣patrons thereof. By that worthy Divine Mr. Henry Burton. Printed in the yeer 1641.
many thousand yeers past, yet they remain still fresh upon record, as done but yesterday, even for this very end, that they might be examples unto us, not to lust after evill things as they lusted, nor to trace the footsteps of their sinfull wayes, lest we should incur the self same exemplarie pu∣nishments as they sustained. 1. Cor. 10. 5. to 12. And as God himself, so holy men of God in all ages, following his example, have carefully obed, and registred to posterity the speciall most remarkable judgements of God upon obstinate sins and sinners of all sorts, (with which not onely Ecclesiastical, but even prophane stories are fully fraught) happened in the ages, and the places wherein they lived: many whereof Mr. Jo. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, near the end. Mr. Raynolds in his Treatise concerning the miraculous discovery and punishments of murthers and Murtherers. Dr. Thomas Beard in his Theatre of Gods, judgements, with sundry others, have collected and digested into intire Tractates, the very reading and serious perusall whereof, would no doubt daunt the most professed Atheist, and reclaim the most incorrigible sin∣ner I therefore desiring to tread in their pious footsteps, having received from good intelligence many memo∣rable presidents of Gods avenging justice upon Sabbath-breakers; and the prophaners of Sacred times devoted to his service, hapning within the compasse of our little Island within two yeers space, (since the publication of the Declaration for Sports and Pastimes after Evening Prayer on the Lords day, in Parish Churches by divers Nullam habet spem sa∣lutis aeger quam ad in∣temperantiam Meditus hor∣tatur. Senec. Ministers hath set open the flood-gates to this pre∣sumptuous sin of Sabbath-breaking; thought it a part of my bounden duty to preserve and propagate their me∣morie both for the honour of Gods truth and justice; the
vindication of the intire sanctification of his sacred day, (which he hath visibly pleaded for from heaven, since men have been audaciously prophane,See the Doctrine of the Sabbath; The History of the Sab∣bath: the Trea∣tise of the Sab∣bath-day, and Discourse of the Sabbath lately printed: which though they con∣demne the very name of Sabbath, as Iewish, yet they are all characterised with that name and title. as to plead, and I would I could not say to write and preach against it upon earth) the clearing of those Ministers innocencie, who now unjustly suffer through the malice of ungodly persecuters, and raging Prelates, for refusing to joyne with others in spurring on the people to the greedy pur∣suit of this crying dangerous sin, to the ruin of their souls, their bodies, and shame of our Religion, and the moni∣tion of this present, and all future ages, to beware of this so dangerous a transgression. How God hath punished this very sin in former ages, in such who have either by dancing, Sports, Pastimes, or unnecessarie Labours and travels prophaned his Sacred day, I mean not to record: he that listeth may read store of such examples registed to his hands in the Councell of Paris, under Lewis and Lo∣tharius, anno 829. lib. 1. ca. 50. (which relates in generall; That many present in this Councell were eye-witnesses, and others of them had it by relation, that some men upon the Lords day being about their husbandry, have been slain with Thunder, some punished with the contraction of their joynts and sins, some even with visible fire have had their bodies and bones burnt up in a moment, and suddenly resolved into ashes, and that many other terrible examples of like nature hath happened and did fall out daily. By which it was declared, that God is much offended with the dishonour of so great a Day;) Petrus Plessensis in Latinia major Sermo 20. In Mathew Paris, Historia Major Anno 1200. p. 194. in Roger Hovenden, anno 1200. p. 122. In Mathew Westmin∣ster. Flores Historiarum: Ann. 1200. In Vincentius Belva∣censis, Speculum Morale li. 3. pr 9. Distinctio 9. of dances,
In the flower of the Commandments, printed in the begin∣ning of King Hen. 8. fol. 159. to 163. In Henricus Gran. Distinct. 9. Exemp. 51. in the Magdeburge Centuries Cen∣turie. 12. ca 6. In Dr. Bownde his doctrine of the Sabbath, Edition 2. p. 252. to 263. the first book: in Mr. John Field his declaration of Gods judgements at Paris garden: in Mr. Philip Stubs his Anatomie of abuses, p. 185. in the Practice of Pietie: 429. to 434. and Dr. Beard his Theatre of Gods Judgements. All which have registred sundrie notable judgements of God upon sundrie Sabbath-brea∣kers (which have presumed to dance, work, or travell, on the Lords holy day) of purpose to shew the danger of prophaning holy times, and to deter men from this com∣mon sin, for which so many have smarted from heaven in an exemplarie manner. I shall therefore confine my self onely to such domestick examples, as have fallen out in sundrie corners of this our Realm within these two yeers, of purpose to refute the2 Pet. 2. 16. madnesse of those Prophets, who in the Presse and Pulpit; and the prophanenesse of those people, who in their dancing-greens, and may-pole ar∣bors, have been so audacious, as to affirm, the Prophana∣tion of the Lords day by Maygames, Dances, Maypoles, Wakes, and common Labour out of time of Divine Service, (especi∣ally after Evening Prayer) to be no sin at all against the fourth Commandement, or any other Law of God or man; but See the History, Trea∣tise, Discourse, and Doctrine of the Sab∣bath accor∣dingly, and Sunday no Sabbath. necessary and commendable point of true Christian Liber∣tie (they should have said of carnall and heathenish licen∣tiousnesse rather) from which the people must not be debar∣red; But let these blinde guides, and Libertines learn from these examples, to correct this their erronious judgement, and practise; for fear the Lord make them the next examples in this kinde, to teach others to keep his Sab∣baths
better, and more intirely for the future. And if these tragicall spectacles of Divine justice will not perswade them, that such prophaning of the Lords most sacred day is a sin, yea and a crying sin too, as all our writers (yea and our Prelates generally, till now of late have unani∣mously defined, and the whole State in Parliament in 1. Car. c 1. 3 Car. c. 1. two late famous Statutes and1. 27. H. 6. 5. 5. & 6. E. 6. c. 3. two more ancient Acts, to omit ourOf the Time and Place of Prayer. part. 1. Of Disobe∣dience and un∣lawfull Rebel∣lion. part. 3. p. 292. 293. Homilies,The Praier after the 4. & 10 Com∣mandment. Common Prayer Book,Canon. 13. 163. Ca∣nons, Article 35. of Ireland 56. Articles, andQueen Eliz. In unr. 20. Injunctions, which conclude the same) I say have adjudged such a presumptuous trans∣gression, as will draw down Gods vengeance on mens heads; Our late Soveraign King James of happy memo∣ry, and our present gracious Soveraign Lord K. Charles with all the Prelates, Clergy, and people of the Realm in the first yeers of both their Reigns, in the severall Books of Common Prayer, and order for the publike fasts set out by their royal authorities, and the Bishops advice, with the consent and hearty desire of the whole Realm for the abating aversion, and ceasing of those dreadfull Plagues which then swallowed up many thousands of people every week will inform them; That among other sins, The prophaning of the Sabbath (so King James his Book styles the Sunday) and not keeping holy the Lords day, was one chief cause why those two great terrible Plagues (and why not also this great Plague which is now begun and spread much abroad) brake in upon us; to the destruction not of some few particular persons, but of many thousands, and the punishment of the whole Realme, and Nation in generall. And because some of these men plead most falsly, that the chiefest writers of the reformed Churches are of their opinion,Homil. 162. in Matth. fol. 308. Hom. 28. in Mar. f. 35. Hom. 56. in Lu. f. 141. Hom. 36. in Joan. f. 77. Hom. 88. in Act. Mr. Kodolphus Gualter, andComment. in Matth. 12. & 14. p. 376. 423. in Joa; 7. f. 293. Wolfgangus Musculus (men of principall note and learning among them) will both assure them,
that the Lords day is not onely wholly, onely, and intirely to be spent in religious publike and private duties of Gods wor∣ship, and that dancing, sports, and pastimes, on it, are sinfull, and execrable; (the constant judgement of all forraigne Protestant Divines whatsoever, as I am able to prove; what everHistory of the Sabbath. . 1. 2. . 6.  9 10. Dr. Helyn orD. Pook∣linton, Sun∣day, no Sab∣bath, p. 8. others have rashly aver∣red to the contrary; But likewise further inform them; That God may justly revenge the great contempt of his Deity in prophaning his Sacred day with dances and such like Re∣vels and disorders: With horrible punishments, neither is it to be doubted (saith Mr. Gualther) that the prophanation of the Lords day, is not the least cause of the evils and calamities of our age. Yea their own most illustrious Cardinall Ro∣bert Bellarmine (whom they almost deifie when they do but name him:) is so far a Puritan in this particular, that he not onely spendsConcio 6. 9 19, 20. 2. foure or five whole Sermons against dancing, mummeries, masks, and such like Bacchanals, (which he simply condemnes at all times, but especially on sacred festivals and Lords dayes as most detestable pro∣phanations of them;) but likewise professeth; that the pra∣ctise of them upon sacred times, was the occasion of all the publike calamities and judgements which they suffered. But by these Dances, Mummeries, Bacchanels, and disor∣ders (saith he) we pollute the holy dayes of the Lord: and yet neverthelesse we do inquire the reasons why God doth punish us? why we are slain in our very houses? do not the Scriptures cry aloud, Sin maketh a people miserable: And there is no evill in the Citie, which the Lord hath not done. There∣fore these our sins of prophaning the holy dayes of the Lord with dances, revels and bacchanals, have procured us famine, and pover, y and pestilence, and sedition, and all plagues and scourges. And verily (saith he) in another Sermon, I ve∣hemently
fear, that if we proceed to celebrate the Bacchanals with mummeries, and masks, and dances, as we do at other times, and to provoke God to wrath, with so many wicked pastimes, our sin will be grown to the full at last, and the anger of the Lord be so far incensed, that he will utterly destroy us, as we see he hath destroyed many nations, for what I pray hath destroyed Grecia, but even that very thing which we do? They were men exceedingly given to drunkennesse, feasting and dancing, (and that upon sacred times) as may be known, by the Orations of Basil, and Chrysostome. But what hath God done? because they were addicted to these things, and especially to Dancing, he hath imposed such a severe tyrant (to wit the Turke) upon their necks, that they now groane un∣der the yoke, and are pressed with so heavy a burthen, that they have neither Time nor Will to Dance or Caper. Thus Bellarmine to his great admirers shame and refutation. If then this sin of prophaning the Lords day, by dancing, Maygames, Ales, Pastimes, or unnecessary travell and labour, draw down Gods Plagues and vengeance upon whole Kingdomes and Churches, as these authors, (to∣gether with Mr. John Field, in his declaration of the judge∣ment of God, at Paris Garden; and Humphrey Robarts in his complaint for the Reformation of divers vain, and wicked abused exercises, practised on the Sabbath day, which tend to the hindrance of the Gospel, and increase of many abominable vices: printed by Richard Jones, London 1580. together with Mr. Philip Stubs, in his Anatomie of abuses, and M. John Northrook in his Treatise where in Dicing, Dancing, vain playes and Enter ludes, with other idle Pastimes and exercises commonly used on the Sabbath day, are by the Word of God, and ancient Writers reproved, printed for George Bishop. London, 1579.) most punctually testifie: and the Practice
of Piety dedicated to his Majestie, and 39. times printed by publike authority resolves: no wonder if it hath lately cau∣sed God to unsheath his sword of exemplarie justice up∣on these particular persons, (that I speak not of the whole kingdome in generall now scourged with a fresh plague and lately a draught) whose tragicall examples I here present unto your view, to deterre all others from this sin. It is a true saying of Cyprian, Praebentur cunctis Exempla, cum fuerint quibusdam irrogata Supplicia. The Divine punishments of a few, are warnings to all: God grant that these may be so to us. He faith the same Father) is over audacious, who strives to passe over there, where he hath seen another to have fallen; he is patragiously head strong, who is not struck with fear, when he beholds another perish in that course, which he is running; he onely is a lover of his own safety, who takes warning by the Deaths of othes: and he alone is a prudent man, who is made wife by the Ruins of other men, God of his mercie vouchsafe that the exemplarie deaths of these few here specified (and of thousands more in this time of mortality, occasioned by this sinne of Sab∣bath-breaking were as the former pests; Together with a Plague in Pope Pelagius the second his time, An. Dom. 591. as Petrus Blessensis in his 20. Sermon de Litania masori, re∣cords:) may prove life to many; and the judgements on some, become remedies to cure all, who are sick of the self same sine. Amen.
Examples of Gods Iudgements VPON SABBATH-BREAKERS. THese Examples of Gods judgements here∣under set down, have fallen out within the space of these few yeers, even since the De∣claration for Sports (tolerated on the Lords day) was published, and read by ma∣ny Ministers in their congregations; for hereupon ill disposed people (being as dry fewell, to which fire be∣ing put, quickly flameth forth; or as waters, pent up and restrained being let loose, break forth more furiously) were so incouraged, if not imaged, as taking liberty dis∣pensed, thereby so provoked God, that his wrath in sundry places, hath broken out to the destruction of ma∣ny, would to God to the instruction of any. And the judgements are so much the more remarkable, that so many in number, as here are observed, (besides many more, no doubt which have not come to our ears) should fall within so narrow a compasse of time, so thick, and that in so many places: as we read not of such a number of judgements in this kinde for this one sin throughout the whole history of time, from the Apostles hitherto:
So many there are of them, as, it were too heathenish to impute them to chance, & too mûch stupidity, and envy of Gods glory, not to acknowledge the speciall hand of God in them, upon such transgressors of his own sacred day; And it were to be wished, that all the examples in this kinde, within this compasse of time; were diligently collected and compiled into one Narration, for the fur∣ther illustration of Gods glory, and for admonition to all Sabbath-breakers, who if they repent not, nor sur∣cease from such their prophanenesse, it may justly be feared, that the number of such examples will be daily increased, till they make a heap for all the world, to stand amazed at. In the mean time, who so is wise, and will ob∣serve these things, even they shall understand the loving kindnesse of the Lord: Psal. 107 43. As for the truth of them, I have good testimony under the hands of men of sufficient credit, for the most of them; and the rest hath come to our eares by credible report. If it shall so fall out, that one or two, or so, should prove otherwise, either for the substance, or circumstance; let not the Reader blame me, who have used my best diligence to enquire out the certain truth of them all, and I am sure the most of the examples are confirmed by witnesses without all exception, and none of them is to me of any suspected credit; So as here are no fained miracles, nor fabulous sto∣ries, nor old Wives tales, for prophane Scoffers to jeare at, and play upon, thereby to disgrace and discredit all truths in this kinde, as some of late have done (History of the Sabbath, part. 2. chap. 7. pag. 223.) but these exam∣ples are such, as will abide the triall and search of this present age, wherein are yet living so many both eare and eye witnesses of them.
Example 1. A woman about Northampton, the same day that she heard the book for sports read, went immediately, and having 3. pence in her purse, hired a fellow to go to the next Town to fetch a Minstrel, who coming, she with others fell a dancing, which continued within night; at which time she was got with childe, which at the birth she murthering, was detected and apprehended, and be∣ing convented before the Justice, she confessed it, and withall told the occasion of it, saying, it was her falling to sport on the Sabbath, upon reading of the book, so as for this treble sinfull act, her presumptuous prophaning of the Sabbath: which brought her adultery and that mur∣ther. She was according to the Law, both of God and man, put to death, much sin and misery followeth upon Sabbath-breaking. Example 2. Also at Northampton, in the last Easter Assises, there was a young man, who formerly by seeing the example of good people, in the due sanctification of the Lords day or Sabbath, had begun to reform his former loose kinde of life, and to frame his conversation according to Gods Word, and that in the well keeping of the Sab∣bath, abstaining therein from sports and pastimes, and spending the whole day in the publike and private duties of it; but when once he heard of the publishing of the book for sports; and pastimes, he fell back again to his former wallowing, and being taken as he was picking a pocket, when the Judges were in the Church, upon ex∣amination confessed what he had formerly been, and how he had been reformed, and that upon the publishing
of the said book, he was incouraged to run riot a fresh, by which means he fell into this impiety and iniquity, for the which he suffered death. Example 3. A Maid at Enfield neer London,1634. hearing of the liber∣tie, which was given by the book, which was published for sports, would needs go daunce, with others on the Lords day, saying she would go daunce, so long as she could stand on her legs; she daunced so long, that there∣of within two or three dayes she died. Example 4. Vpon May day last,1634. being the Lords day, a Maid of the Minister of the Parish, Cripplegate, London, was marri∣ed to a Widower having three children, the youngest being at Nurce in the countrey; upon this day they kept their feast in the Church-house joyning to the Church, where they spent all the afternoon in dauncing: but with∣in one week after, the Plague began in that Parish in the new married mans house, where within a moneth it took away the man and his wife, and his two children that were in the house. And thus was the Plague brought first into that Parish this yeer. To this we will adde another example, because it fell within the same moneth, in the same Citie. A Minister, Rector of a Church in London, on the Saturday would go with two of his neighbours, boon companions, to be joviall the next day, being the Lords day, they conditi∣oning that he should bestow a Sermon upon them. They on the Lords day, being now in the countrey, spent the forenoon idly: in the afternoon they go to visit another
Minister, who had another benefice there in the Coun∣trey; he puts his brother to preach: which done invites him, with his companions, to a bottle of Sack. They drank so long, that the two neighbours tongues began to fail them. Home to their lodging within a few miles they betake them. That night their Minister could not sleep; and rising early to walk abroad, he returned with such a coldnesse upon him, that he looked, and felt like cold pale death; the two neighbours much dismaid, and with much a do get him home to London, where in that case continuing, he dieth before the next Sabbath day. Example 5. On Jan. 25. 1634. being the Lords day, in the time of the last great Frost 14. young men presuming to play at football upon the ice on the river Trent, neer to Ganis∣borow, coming all together in a scuffle, the ice suddenly brake, and they were all drowned. Example 6. At Dover the very same Lords day,1635. that the book was read, one in S. James Parish that played on a kitt, went and plaied, and thereby called together a sort of wenches and young men: But he was thereupon that very day struck by divine hand, so as within two daies he died. Example 7. At Thurlow in Suffolke, one making a Feast to his friends on the Sabbath day, for joy of the publishing of the Book for sports▪ was the next day pressed to death, by the sudden fall or a faggot stack. Example 8. At Hellings by five or six miles from Af in Sussex, the book being read on the Lords day, in the Church by
the Minister, on the next day being Munday, an honest man, one Tomkins being on his way, a neighbour over∣takes him, and scoffingly asks him, if he would go daunce with him the next Sunday; to whom the man answered, Take heed that thou be not dauncing in hell before that day come, or before it be long; By the next week Gods hand fell on this Scoffer, that himself and two more of his family died. Example 9. On February 9. 1634. being the Lords day, an Apo∣thecaries man in Limestreet, London, rid to Barnet with another companion, to make merry, who returning home drunk, neer High-gate, met a Tinker, and offering him some abuse, the Tinker strikes one of their horses, where∣at the one bid the other run him thorow; who drawing his Rapier, ran the Tinker thorow the breast, that he fell down dead: thereupon being by and by apprehended, and confessing the fact, they were both sent to Newgate. Example 10. At Thornton neer Westchester,1634. the people there, up∣on the first publishing of the book prepared for a solemn summer-ale. The bringing in of their Lady flora should have been guarded with a Marshall troop: the lustiest wench, and stoutest young man in the town were chosen to be the purveyors for cakes, and for ribbons for fa∣vours, the solemnity was to be on the Munday, but the preparation on the Lords day, this lusty tall maid, on the Saturday before went to the mill, to fetch home the meal for cakes on her head, she being strong and able for the purpose: but in the way, passing by a hedge, she was suddenly struck by a divine stroke, and fell into the ditch, where she was found dead, she was suffered to lie abroad
in that pickle all the Lords day, till Munday morning, when the Coroner being sent for, she was thence carried to her grave immediately, where all her solemnity was buried with her, and all her vain thoughts in that verie day, wherein the great solemnity should have been. And see what a good effect this wrought in the whole town; First, all their mirth was turned into mourning, no sum∣mer ale kept, and besides that, they being moved by the dreadfull stroke of God, took their May-pole down, which they had before set up, and never after would pre∣sume to set it up again, or to have any more summer-ales, or may-games. God grant they continue in their sober mindes, and that all other would learn to be wise by their example. Example 11. In Yorkshire at a Wake, in the Parish of Otley at Bail∣don,1634. on the Lords day, two of them sitting at drink, late in the night, fell out and being parted, the one a little after finding his fellow, sitting by the fire with his back to∣wards him, comes behinde him, and with a hatchet chines him down the back, so as his bowels fell out; the mur∣therer flying immediately, and being hotly pursued, lept into a river, and so drowned himself. O fearfull fruits of carnall liberty! Example 12. One at Ham neer Kingston, being a scoffer of all good∣nesse,1635. and a common prophaner of the Sabbath, going abroad to see his grounds on the Lords day, and finding some neighbours cattell to have broken in, he runs to drive them out and that with such eagernesse, that he fell down dead instantly upon the place.
Example 13. One Wright at Kingston, being a scoffer of Religion, and rejoycing much at the suspending of his Minister, and others, for not reading the book of Sports in their Churches, saying, he hoped to see them all so served shortly: was within a day or two after struck with a dead Palsey, all over the one side, and with blindnesse and dumbnesse, that he could neither go, nor see, nor speak, and so lay in a miserable manner for a fort-night, and then died. Example 14. In Moorefields neer London,1635. sundry youths playing at Cat on the Lords day, two of them fell out, and the one hitting the other under the eare with his Cat, he therewith fell down for dead in the place, the other was sent to prison: but the dead for the time, by Gods mercy recovering, the prisoner was released; which may be a warning both to them, and all other youth, to take heed how they so prophane the Lords day. Example 15. April 18. 1635. being Saturday, one travelling with three others from London to Maydenhead, he (the rest spending the Sabbath there) would travell on his way, the next day being the Lords day, contrary both to Gods commandment, and also of the Lady whom he served: who had given him strict charge; to observe the Sab∣bath, and not to travell on it. He rode in the morning to Henley, and there heard the Sermon, after that he fell to travell in the afternoon; but as he went in the way, lead∣ing his horse in his hand gently down a plain descent, and even way, his horse suddenly fell, and broke both his fore legs, the man fore agast at this not more sudden, then
strange disaster, which he could not but attribute to the immediate hand of God, and being past all hope of reco∣very was forced himself to knock his horse on the head, and so to leave him, and being the next day overtaken at Abington by his company, whom he had left the day be∣fore, and they asking him how it fell out, he was no fur∣ther on his way, he smote his breast, and told them how it had befallen him in the way, saying that he had heard many a good Sermon, yet none of them or any thing else did so work upon his conscience, as this thing did; and that this example should be a warning unto him for ever travelling on the Sabbath day again. This is testified un∣der the hands of those three which had travelled with him, and overtook him. Example 16. At Dartmouth 1634. upon the coming forth and publishing of the book for sports, a company of youn∣kers on May-day morning before day, went into the countrey, to fetch home a May pole with Drumme and Trumpet, whereat the neighbouring Inhabitants were affrighted, supposing some enemies had landed to sack them, the Pole being thus brought home, and set up, they began to drink healths about it, and to it, till they could not stand so steady as the Pole did, whereupon the Major and Justice bound the ring leaders over to the Ses∣sions, whereupon these complaining to the Archbishops Vicar Generall, then in his visitation he prohibited the Justices to proceed against them in regard of the Kings book. But the Justices acquainted him, they did it for their disorder, in transgressing the bounds of the book, hereupon these libertines scorning at Authority, one of them fell suddenly into aDeut. 28. 22. Consumption, where∣of
he shortly after died; now although this revelling was not on the Lords day, yet being upon any other day and especially May-day, the May-pole set up thereon, giving occasion to the prophanation of the Lords day the whole yeer after it was sufficient to provoke God, to send plagues and judgements among them. Example 17. In the same yeer 1634. and in the same Shire, one Ed∣ward Amerideth a Gentleman, having been pained in his feet, and being upon his recovery, whereupon one said unto him, he was glad to see him so nimble. Amerideth replied, that he doubted not, but to daunce about the May-pole the next Lords day: But behold the hand of the Lord, for before he moved out of that place, he was smitten with such a feeblenesse of heart, and dizsinesse in his head, that desiring help to carry him to an house, he died before the Lords day came, so fearfull it is to fall into the hands of the living God. Example 18. One in Glocestershire being very forward to advance a solemne sommer-meeting, wherein his son was to be a chief stickler, went himself in great jollity to see it, and there beholding it, he fell down suddenly, and so died. Example 19. A Miller at Churchdown, neer Glocester, would needs (contrary to the admonitions both of his Minister in private, and generally in publike, yea and that very day, and of other Christian friends) keep a solemn Whitson ale, for which he had made large preparation and provi∣sion, even of threescore dozen of cheesecakes, with other things proportionable; in the Church-house, half a mile from his Mil, his musicall instruments were set forth on
the side of the Church-house, where the Minister and people were to passe to the Church to Evening Prayer. When Prayer and Sermon were ended, the Drumme is struck up, the peeces discharged, the Musicians play, and the rowt fall a dauncing, till the evening; where they all with the Miller resort to his Mill; where that evening before they had supt, about nine of the clock on Whit∣sunday, a fire took suddenly in his house over their heads, and was so brief and quick, that it burnt down his house and mill, and devoured with all the greatest of all his other provision and housholdstuffe. This is confirmed by sundry good testimonies. Example 20. Richard Benfield an Apparitor in the Parish of Hem∣steed kept an Ale in the Church-house, joyning to the Church-yard with dauncing and revelling night and day without controule: pretending that the Bishop would bear him out, and not unlikely, because at his complaint to the Bishop of his Minister, for preaching against daun∣cing and Maypoles, he was suspended for his labour) It happened that upon the Lords day at even, being the 20. day of April, that his youngest son was accused for steal∣ing a purse, and 20. shillings in it, from a Butcher who lay drunk upon the board or table in the Church-house, for which he was like to be hanged (the purse being found about him.) Vpon the 21. day of the said moneth, Ben∣field his eldest son Richard went down into Hempsteeds Peirse, about some businesse, and his youngest brother with him, where they met with a little boy called Baker that had been a fishing) having some small fishes in his hand. Benfields youngest sonne would have taken these fishes from Baker, whereupon they fell together by the
eares. The eldest brother Rich. Benfield went to help his younger brother, being too weak for Baker. This Baker did swear a great oath that he would stab him, if he did meddle with him; upon which words Benfield fell upon Baker, gave him a box or two, and ran away. Baker fol∣lowed him with his knife in his hand, overtook him, and thrust his knife three inches deep into his body, which wound proved mortall, so that he never spake more words then these; Oh Jack Baker hath killed me, and so fell down. Two men being present there, took him up in their armes, brought him up into the Church-house a∣live, and so soon as they had put him out of their armes upon the table, he groaned, and died. Remarkable it is, that where the Father drew ale upon the Lords day and so prophaned it: In the same place his son the next day drew his last breath: for that the pu∣nishment inflicted was stamped with the resemblance of the sin convicted. Example 21. At Baunton in Dorcetshire some being at bowls on the Lords day,1634. one flinging his bowl at his fellow-bow∣ler, hit him on the eare, so as the blood issued for that the other eare, whereof he shortly died. The murtherer fled. Example 22. One good man Paul neer Stoke in Dorcetshire, rejoy∣cing much at the erection of a summer pole,1634. at a Parish called Simsbury in Dorcetshire, and saying before one of his neighbours, he would go see it, though he went na∣ked through a quickset hedge: which is a common pro∣verbe they use: Going with wood in his armes to cast in∣to the bonfire, where he lived, and using these words:
Heaven and earth are full of thy glory, O Lord: he was presently smitten by the stroke of God, and within two or three daies died, and his wife with him. These two last examples are testified by a Minister in his letter to a brother Minister. Example 23. In the edge of Essex neer Brinkley, two fellows work∣ing in a chalkpit, the one was boasting to his fellow, how he had angred his Mistresse with staying so late at their sports the last sunday night, but he said he would anger her worse the next Sunday. He had no sooner said this, but suddenly the earth fell down upon him, and slew him out right, with the fall whereof his fellows limbe was broken, who had been also partner with him in his jolli∣tie on the Lords day, escaping with his life, that he might tell the truth, that God might be glorified, and that by this warning he might repent of his sin, and re∣form such his prophanenesse, and remain as a pillar of salt, to season others with fear by his example. Example 24. The last Spring a Miller hard by Wootton in Wor∣cestershire, went on the Lords day to a wake, whence re∣turning home again, the same day at night found his Mill and house all on a fire; this was testified by a Minister (in a Reply to another Minister) who was an eye witnesse. Example 25. At Woolston in the same countrey, where the said Ministers father had been Minister fourty yeers, and by Gods blessing upon his labours, had reformed things ve∣ry well▪ yet upon the publication of this book in print, many of the inhabitants the Spring following, were im∣boldned to set up Maypoles, Morrice daunce, and a
Whitson ale, continuing their rude revelling a week to∣gether, with many affronts to their ancient and reverend Pastor: but it pleased God, that not long after, a spark from a Smiths shop, caught in that roome where the ale was brewed, and though means were ready at hand, yet it could not be quenched, but set the house on fire, and presently flew to the barn in which their disorder was, and burnt the same with thirteen dwelling houses more, most of whose Inhabitants were actors or abetters in the fame: This is testified by many. Example 26. Richard Jones son of Widow Jones, July 1634. not far from Dorchester, being severely admonished by his mother, when she understood he had a purpose on Satur∣day night, to go on the Lords day with other compani∣ons to Stoake to play at a sport, called Fives, but persist∣ing in his resolution, and going the next day, accordingly being the Lords day at Stoke, where he played at the said sport, at night returning home with his companions, William Burges, William Hill, John Edwards, after they had there well drunk, they fall first a justling one another in the way, then to boxes, and in the end Edwards stab∣bing Jones under the left side, he died thereof, the Mun∣day night following about 7. of the clock. Behold here a terrible example of disobedience, to Gods holy Com∣mandments, not onely the fourth, but the fifth also. Example 27. At Ovendean in Sussex about nine or ten miles from Alfriston, alias Ason, one John Arcold, of the age of one or two and twenty yeers, eldest son to John Arcold, a Blacksmith dwelling in Ason, with other younkars would needs fall a ringing of the bels on a Sabbath day, presu∣ming
the Book for Sports gave them full libertie so to do. One of the Churchwardens Robert Kenward hindred them from their jangling; whereupon the said Arcold, and his companions fell in some contestation with him, telling him that though he hindred them now, yet they would ring the next Sunday, whether he would or no. But the said John Arcold the ringleader before the next Sunday came, was struck with a sicknesse, in which he continued a fortnight or three weeks til he died, in which time Robert Kenward the Churchwarden, repairing to him, and putting him in minde of his bold affronting of him, he seemed to be sorry for it, and promised, if God would be pleased to restore him again to his health, he would never do the like. God make his surviving com∣panions, and all others, wise by his example. Example 28. At Walton upon Thames in Surrey,1634. not far from Oatlands, in the last great Frost, three young men on the Lords day, after they had been at the Church in the fore∣noon, where the Minister pressing the words of his text, out of 2. Cor. 5. 10. that we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ, &c. they the while whispering one to another, as they fae. In the afternoon they went together over the Thames, upon the ice, unto a house of disorder, and gaming, where they spent the rest of the Lords day, and part of the night also in revelling, one of them in a Tavern merrily discoursing the next day of his Sabbath-acts, and voyage over the Ice; but on Tuesday next after, these three returning homwards, and attemp∣ting to passe againe over the Ice, they all sanke downe to the bottome as stones, whereof one onely of them was miraculously preserved, but the other two were
drowned.Eccl 11. 9. Rejoyce, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart chear thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walk in the wayes of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee unto judgement. Example 29. In the yeer of our Lord 1633. Octob. 26. after the book for sports was known to be published in print, Da∣vid Price a Welshman, servant to one Thomas Hill, a known Grasier of that countrey, coming to Banbury with his drove on Saturday night, declared his purpose of dri∣ving them the next day, early in the morning being the Sabbath or Lords day: his Host where he lodged, dis∣swaded him, because it was the Sabbath day, and told him that he would certainly be stopped, and made to pay for it according to the Statute. He answered that he would drive them, and let mee see (saith he) who will hinder me. So in the morning two other accompaning him, he went to fetch the Cattell out of the ground, one that knew him, mett him at the Townes end (not yet one of the Towne) and admonished him, saying, What, David, to day, to day; he made no answere, but went onward, and though for any thing, that appeared to any other, or that himself complained of, he was then in good health, as ever he was, yet within little more then a stones cast of the Town, he fell down dead sudden∣ly, and was buried in Banbury Church-yard the next day after; None could discern any sensible or evident cause of so sudden a surprizall; and himself gave no signe of any pain, weaknesse, or illnesse, till the instant time he gave up the ghost.
Example 30. At Wicks a Town betwixt Colchester and Harwich in Essex, upon Whit sonday last in the afternoon two fel∣lows meeting at the football, the one killed the other. Example 31. At Oxford this last Summer on the Sabbath day, one Bally Hawks a Butcher, would needs go into his field with an hatchet and shovell to mend his ditch: his wife dis∣swaded him what she could, being the Sabbath day, but he said he would go and make an end of his work, which he did, for suddenly he was struck dead in his ditch, and so made an end of his work, and his life together. Example 32. Also at Oxford a Carpenter undertaking to mend a Stage in S. Johns Colledge on the Saturday night, for the finishing whereof he must of necessity spend some part of the Lords day morning▪ that the Stage might be ready against the Munday following, he that night fell backward from the stage, being not far from the ground, and brake his neck, and so ended his life in a fearfull Tragedie. Example 33. At Ivye Hinckley a mile from Oxford (about the time when May-poles are set up) on the Lords day after Evening Prayer, when most of the Town were at the May-pole, one John Cooper, servant to master Tinmore of the said Town, going along the street, a maid out of a window in John Nicols his house, not far from the May∣pole, called him to come in thither; where also was ano∣ther maid, and a young man named Christopher Young, servant to Master Willis of the said Town; John Cooper
at first refused to come to them, but the maid earnestly intreating him, he yeelded to her, and being come in, sate down by the other two, where having sate awhile, the foresaid Christopher Young spied a Gun over the chimney, which he supposing not to be charged, fondly took down, and fell a tampering with it, and first levelled at the Maids, and after held it up against John Cooper, as he sate, and unwittingly lifting up the cock, it struck fire, and the peece discharged, and shot the said John Cooper thorow the shoulder, so that he died presently, being heard onely to say, O Lord. Example 34. A young man neer Bowe, going to swim in the river on Essex side, on the Lords day in the afternoon, was drowned Example 35. Two boyes of S. Albons, going to Verolanes Ponds, a mile off to swim on the Lords day, July 19. one of them was drowned, and the other hardly escaped. Example 36. At Ramsey in Suffolke, a tall man on the Lords day going with others to swim, and being advertised and warned of a hole in the water; he sware that there was no place there could drowne him, but by and by on a sudden he was missing, being now under water, and so drowned. Example 37. On September 13. 1635. being the Lords day, two young men of the Parish of S. Dunstans in the West, London, going to swim, were both drowned.
Example 38. At Twiford in Buckinghamshire, a fellow playing at cudgels on the Lords day (or as some say, upon a revell day) received a hurt in the face, whereof he died the next week. Example 39. At Lemster, one Master Powel, Januar. 1634. on the Lords day serving a Writ of sub poena (and that of pur∣pose on that day as is credibly reported) upon one Mr. Shuit a Gentleman, this he did in the Church yard, so soon as they were come out of the Church: Mr. Shuit thereupon told him, I thought you had been an honester man then so, to do this upon this day; he replyed, I hope I am never a whit the more dishonest, or lesse holy for that: having spoken this, he suddenly fell down dead, and spake not a word more, his wife seeing this, was suddenly struck with sicknesse. Example 40. A fellow in Sommersetshire being to make a Tent upon the Lords day, for a Faire that was to be kept upon the Munday following, said to one on the Saturday, that they would reare it to morrow, so the next day which was the Lords day, being drunk, he died the same day roaring. Example 41. At Corsham in Wiltshire in the Whitsun week, at a Whitsun-ale, one Mark Hulbert, a lusty young man, un∣dertaking to act the fools part, was so extreamly drunk and hurt with falls taken in the time of his drunkennesse, that shortly he took his bed, where he lay very loath∣somely, in most grievous pain, untill the sixt day of June, being the Lords day, on which he died at 4. of the clock
in the afternoon (the usuall time for youth to take their liberty) and was buried the same day before 9. of the clock, and yet he burst, before he was laid into his grave, See Joh 31. 3. Example 42. At Topudle in Dorcetshire, one John Hooper alias Cole, upon the promulgation of the said Book, was let down into a Well to cleanse it, for to brew beer for a Whitson∣ale, by Francis Laurence, alias Smith, and Stephen Pope Churchwardens, which Well was in the back-side of Richard Laurence alias Smith. Which John Hooper fell from the rope into the Well, where he died. Example 43. At Glassenbury in Sommersetshire, at the setting up of a May-pole, it miscarrying fell upon a child, and slew it, & it is reported that it was the Churchwardens child, who was the chief stickler in the businesse. Also when the May▪ pole in the same Town, was again the second time a setting up, a fire took in the Town, so as all the people about the May-pole were forced to leave it, and to run to the quenching of the fire. Example 44. A May-lord of misrule, not far from thence became mad upon it. Example 45. Also at Battersey neer London, the last yeer a notable example of Gods judgement befell a fidler, the youth of the town of both sexes, being assembled solemnly to set up a garland upon their May-pole and having got a tabor and pipe for the purpose, he with the pipe in his mouth, fell down dead and never spake word.
Example 46. On May 31. 1635. being the Lords day, one Richard Clerk (an apprentise unto Timothy Denorell shoomaker of Sherston in the countrey of Wiltshire, within three miles of Tedbury,) being drunk at the Church-house in the same Parish, told Henry Larrum of the same Parish, that was then in the same place drunk likewise with the Church-house ale, that he the said Richard, would either hang himself, or drown himself, demanding of the said Henry which of the two was best; unto whom he repli∣ed, that he hoped he would do neither; on the day fol∣lowing, being Munday in the morning, the said Richard Clerk was seen to go through the street, without a band, as if he had been going about his masters businesse, and putting on his band without the Town, he got up into the middle of a tree, and there did hang himself. A mi∣serable effect of carnall liberty and prophane meetings on the Lords day. Example 47. The 31. May 1635. the book of recreation was read in the Parish Church of Alvelye in Comit. Salop. in the afternoon; after all divine exercises publike ended, there fell out a bloody fight betwixt 3. of Alvelye above said, and one of Envield of the countrey of Stafford neer ad∣jacent, in so much that the man of Envield was sore wounded, and had his jaw-bone broken, so that he could not eat his meat for the sustaining of nature; In his ex∣tremity he laid his death to the charge of the other 3. The Churchwardens of the parish of Alvelie abovesaid, presented these 4. for prophaning of the Sabbath to my Lord his grace of Canterbury (to use the words of the relation) being the time of his metropoliticall visitation,
since which time two of the parties fled; the third was committed to prison in Shrewsbury, and was the next Assises to come to his answer. Example 48. In March betwixt 1634. and 1635. at Billericay in Essex, one Theophilus Pease, the Ministers son of that Town, went to ring the bels on the Sabbath day, whom the Church wardens for that time hindred; But against the next Sabbath, he gathered a company together, faying he would ring in despite of the Church wardens. While he was a ringing, he was taken with a giddinesse like one drunk, and so sickned, and about three daies after died. Example 49. Anno 1635. Januarie or thereabout in Chichester Diocesse, one Thomas Perkin, a wilfull and usuall propha∣ner of Gods Sabbath in Hailing South, being ringing on a Sabbath day, the rope took him up, and flinging him about eight foot high, he fell down on his head, and was taken up dead, and so remained long, but life at last was gotten into him, yet the bruise in his head is so great and dangerous as death is expected; and little hope of life remaineth. Example 50. At Craies, two miles from Billerikey, a servant of M. Holdsworth, Minister there, ringing on the Sabbath, his Master sent to forbid him: but he would ring still, and before he had done ringing, he was struck sick, and a while after died. This was a little after the book for sports was publikely read in the Church. Example 51. In June 1635. on the Lords day, the Tapster and
Chamberlain of the Queens head in South warke, rid in∣to Kent to be merry, and having drunk liberally, riding homewards, the one of them fell from his horse, and broke his neck. Example 52. Also in June 1635. and as some report the very same Lords day, in Southwarke at the red Lion, neer S. Georges Church, in the afternoon, a man with another sate drink∣ing so long, that the other about six of the clock depart∣ing, fell a sleep so, that he never awaked again. Example 53. In the moneth of July 1634. one Mr. Quince the Chi∣rurgion of the Tower of London, having an horse to sel, and meeting with a chapman, went to Coleman-street, where the horse was kept, to see and contract for him, on the Lords day in the afternoon; the horse being sadled, Mr. Quince gets upon his back, to shew his chapman how well he would pace; which done, as he was a lighting off his back, his foot, which lighted on the ground slipped, the other foot hung in the stirrup, so as he fell to the ground, and with the fall brake his thigh-bone short off, so that he was carried from the place to an house neer ad∣joyning, where he lay in great pain and agonie for eight weeks space or more, almost despairing of his life, and never stirring out of his bed: at last it pleased God, by degrees to recover and restore him to the use of his leg again, he having little use of it (and that with great pain) for half a yeers space and more. His son had disswaded him from riding, because it was the Lords day; and him∣self hath since acknowledged it a just judgement of God upon him for prophaning that sacred time, which hath made him more carefully to frequent the Church, and
to avoid the prophanation of the Lords day ever since. This the party himself, and most of the Tower can te∣stifie. Example 54. Many more examples might here be added, not onely such as have fallen out within these few yeers last past, since the said book was published by the Ministers in their Churches, but also, since the book was first of all printed and published; the very bruit whereof, without being read by Ministers, was enough, and too much to imbolden youth to take their liberty in prophaning the Lords day, but for the present, I will adde but one more. At Chidlington upon the edge of Hertfordshire, not far from Hitchin, a company of fellows upon a holy day be∣ing to play a match at Foot-ball, one of them was tolling the bell, to assemble the rest, some being come into the Church the randevoze of their meeting, suddenly it thundring was seen a black ball come tumbling down a hill neer by: which took its course directly into the Church, there it flew into the Bell-free and first slew him, that tolled the bell, then it flustered about the Church and hurted divers of them, and at last bursting; left a filthy stinke like to that of brimstone, and so left a terror to all such spend thrifts of precious time, and espe∣cially such as is dedicated to sacred uses: Who so is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the leving kindnesse of the Lord. Psal. 107. 43. Example 55. Vpon May Eve Thomas Tree of Glocester, Carpenter in the Parish of S. Michael, some coming unto him, and asking him, whether he would go with them to fetch the May-pole, he swore by the Lords wounds, that he
would, though he never went more. Now whiles he was working on the May-pole on May day morning, be∣fore he had finished his work, the Lord smote him with such a lamenesse and swelling in all his limbs, that he could neither go, nor lift his hands to his mouth, to feed himself, but kept his bed for half a yeer together, and stil goes lame to this day; May 4. 1636. Example 56. About a yeer since 1635. in Ashton under the Hill, in the Parish of Beckford, in the countrey of Glocester, the Minister there Mr. Blackwell, having occasion in his Ser∣mon in the afternoon on the Lords day to reprove the prophaning of that day by sports, &c. as soon as the Ser∣mon was done, a young man of that place used these words, Now Mr. Blackwell hath done, we'le begin; and so taking the cudgels, playes with them; and at the se∣cond or third bout, he received a thrust in one of his eyes, that thrust it quite out, so as it hanged by, and could never recover it again. THese Examples of divine justice, so notorious, so re∣markable both for humber and variety, having fallen out in so narrow a compasse of time, and so dispersed over the whole land, as every particular place, and coun∣trey might take speciall notice thereof if they will not take, and make impression in our stony hearts, to move us to speedy repentance (as for many other enormities, and crying sins, so in speciall) for this our ring leading sin of the heathenish prophanation of the Sabbath, or Lords day: what plea can we make for our selves; why the Lord of the Sabbath should not send some universall, epidemicall sweeping calamity upon the land, sparing
neither small nor great? And now, that the plague and pestilence begins to break forth, and spreads it self much amongst us, the Lord shooting these his terrible vene∣mous arrows, from which not even Princes nor Prelates palaces can secure themselves, from becoming his buts and marks: What can we more impute it unto, as the cause thereof, then to this grand sin, of the prophanation of the Sabbath or Lords day, occasioned so much the more by the publishing of the late book for sports, and that, by the Ministers themselves? For was it not the judgement and confession of King James of famous me∣mory, and of the whole State and Kingdome in an exhor∣tation published in that great plague, beginning with his reign, 1603. where are these words: The Lords Sabbath is not kept holy, but polluted, &c. and therefore the cause is apparant, why the plague is broken in amongst us? And was not the same exhortation afterwards re∣published by our gracious King Charles (whom God long preserve a religious and righteous Governor over us) in the first yeer of his reign, with the approbation of the whole Parliament, where the same is acknowledged of that other great plague, in the beginning of his Reigne 1625. namely, that one principall and speciall cause thereof, was the not keeping holy, but polluting the Lords day? And if this were a principall cause of those great plagues then, why not of this which now we suffer? yea what Plague upon plagues may we not justly expect to break forth upon us in these dayes, wherein we have in∣creased and surpassed our fathers sins, and that in such a height, as they reach up to heaven, to pull down flames and flakes of vengeance upon our heads. And so much the more, sith upon the publishing of the said book, so
manifold mischiefs have attended and followed, as never any age since Christ, much lesse such a Christian state as we professe to be, hath seen, or ever heard the like. For besides the open violation of Gods holy command∣ment, the 4th. Morall, acknowledged in ourHomily of the time and place of Praier. Part. 1. p. 124. 125. 126. Homily to be the ground of our Christian Sabbath day (as it is there, no lesse then 8. severall times distinctly stiled; as also in anotherHom. against Rebellion. par. 3. pag. 292. Homily twice, which by the way makes me wonder at the audacious insolence, & arrogant igno∣rance of some new Masters in these dayes, and in parti∣cular of Dr. Poc. k in his Sunday no Sabbath, who is not ashamed to avouch with open mouth, that the name of Sabbath was never given to the Lords day, untill it was brought in by John Knox, and others of the puritan fa∣ction in the yeer 1554. What saith he then to the Homi∣lies of our Church, which were set forth in K. Edw. 6. his Reign, and so I am sure before 1554. by three or foure yeers; now these (to omit innumerable testimonies more, both out of ancient Fathers, and the Prelates of this land; too large to be comprehended, in a Parenthesis, (being enow to furnish a pretty Treatise) these our Homilies (I say) so frequently and clearly called the Lords day the Sabbath day, before John Knox called it so, 1554. And the same Homilies being set forth afresh by Queen Eli∣zabeth, 1562. will Dr. P. dare to charge the learned and pious compilers of them, a pack of Puritans, or (asDoctor Wh Bp. of Ely. some other) Novell Sabbatarians? But this by the way) by which violation (I say) of the Sabbath or Lords day, God is intolerably dishonoured, and his religion disgra∣ced through outragious libertinisme: What an invention of Antichristian tyranny hath broken in at the opening of this great sluice? What havock is made in our Church
by sundry of the Hierarchy in suspending godly Mini∣sters, depriving them of their liberty, livelihood, and Freeholds, against all Laws of God and man, so as they, their wives and children are exposed to beggery and all misery, and their flocks to be devoured of the Wolves, and to become a pray to the roaring Lion; and all this, because they dare not offer violence to their conscien∣ces, in doing that, which should dishonour God, indanger their own, and their peoples souls, abase before God and man the authority and dignity to their Ministery, con∣demne the innocent people of God, and call the wicked righteous, teach inferiours rebellion to their superiours, and in a word hasten the pulling down of vengeance from heaven upon the Land? O ye heavens, stand amazed at this sight! Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoyce, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. what could the Pope have done more, then some of our Pre∣lates have done in this kinde, for the darkning of the glory of Christs kingdome, and for the setting up of An∣tichrists throne again in this Land? But our Lord saith, Ye shall know them by their fruits. Besides, what impuden∣cie and impiety hath broken out from sundry aierie and ambitious spirits, who have dared in their late published books upon books, to belch out their blasphemies a∣gainst God, and the power, purity, and profession of the Religion established amongst us for so many yeers. Nor onely is the floodgate of all prophanenesse and impiety broken up, in the violation of the fourth commandment, but of the fifth also, when as, by occasion of the publish∣ing of the said book (which inhibits Magistrates and su∣periors, to restrain or punish youth fortaking such liberty
on the Lords day, as the book alloweth, and which all other books, writings, monuments of Fathers, Councels, Kings, Emperors, Divines ancient and modern, Prote∣stants and Papists, have universally with one vote and voice cried down, till now but yesterday a new genera∣tion of Maleferiati hath risen up, outdaring and defining the whole world and God himself) inferiour persons exalt themselves in high contempt against their Supe∣riors, as the common vulgar against the Magistrate and Minister, servants against their masters, children against their parents, and wanton wives against their husbands, which hath caused such outcries and complaints of ma∣sters, for their servants unbridled and uncontrowled out∣rage on the Lords day; which must also in-jure them with pride and presumption of spirit the whole week af∣ter, and so their whole life, while like vntamed colts they have thus learned to take the bit between their teeth, and so to run a gallop into all excesse of riot. So as if the book be not all the sooner called in, and authors of those late books against the sanctification of the Lords day condignly punished; and a speedy refor∣mation hereof set on foot: how can we look for a stay of the plague untill the Land be consumed? Now the Lord make us wise, to lay these things to heart, lest he teare in peeces, and there be none to deliver. For as never any Chri∣stian Church hath produced such monstrous impieties: so never any Church hath been the theatre of such tragi∣call examples of divine wrath, as our Land is like to be, if we speedily repent not. Vnlesse therefore we repent, we shall all likewise perish, as these examples have done before us. Now for these so many, so markable examples of
Gods judgements inflicted upon the violaters and pro∣phaners of the Lords day, and that in so short a time, even since the book for such sports was published, we may thus argue and conclude. That, for which the Lord inflicteth and executeth so many notorious and severe judgements, must needs be a notorious and hainous sin, and so a breach of his holy commandment. But for the violation and prophanation of the Lords day by sports and pastimes, or by servile works, the Lord inflicteth and executeth many notorious and severe judgements, as of late we have seen. Erg. the violation and prophanation of the Lords day is a notorious and hainous sin, and so a breach of Gods holy command∣ment. The major Proposition is a Maxime in Divinity. God punisheth no man, but for sin: and sin is a transgression of Gods law: 1. Joh. 3. 4. For the Minor proposition, it is so clear, as it cannot be denied, except men will be sense∣lesse and blinde Atheists. But they that fear God, shall de∣clare the work of God, for they shall wisely consider of his doing; as Psal. 64. 9. Now if the violation or propha∣nation of the Lords day be a sin, and so a transgression of Gods holy commandment: then of what holy com∣mandment, but of the fourth. And if of the fourth, then the holy keeping of the Lords day for the Christian Sab∣bath, is grounded upon the fourth Commandment, and commanded in it, as God hath abundantly testified by his many remarkable judgements, even within these two yeers, as hath been shewed. Ob. But here some may object: God may punish men for the breach of humane ordinances, which are out of the
expresse commandments of God. So in this instance, God may punish the violation or prophanation of the Lords day by such sports, or wakes, as being a breach of a humane ordinance, or Ecclesiasticall institution. Answ. I answer it is true, all humane ordinances, being not against Gods word, are to be observed for conscience sake of Gods commandment, commanding subjection to all ordinances of men for the Lords sake. Aud if it were a humane ordinance, to dedicate this day of holy rest to God by a perpetuall vow and De∣cree: then the greater is their sin, that devoure that which is sanctified, and after the vow make inquirie, how it may be violated. So as they are liable to the like judgements, for so doing, without repentance. THE EPILOGVE. THus have I presented you with a large Scene of late seve∣rall examples of Gods judgements upon Sabbath-break∣ers, and suchSo the Sta∣tute of 1. Ca∣roli c. 1. stiles them. disorderly people, who have been so pre∣sumptuous as to prophane the Lords own sacred day, against the monitions of Gods faithfull Ministers, with unnecessarie labour, vain sports and idle pastimes. To which I might annex many ancient Precedents of like nature which I pretermit, onely one excepted, which is remarkable. In the yeer of our Lord 1583. in the famous Metropolis of this our Land, the City of London, two Citizens, the one leaving his wife, the other her husband, and committing adulterie together on the Lords day, it pleased God to strike them dead with fire from heaven, whilest they were in the very act of uncleannesse, their bodies being left dead in the place half burnt up, sending out a most loath∣some
savour, for a spectacle of Gods avenging Justice unto others, to teach them both to shun the sin of adul∣tery and of Sabbath-breaking too, and to take heed how they commit any fin or wickednesse at any time, and especially on Gods sacred day, or how they follow dauncing, may-games, Morisdaunces, Ales, and such lascivious pastimes,Vincenti∣us Volnacensis Spec. moral. li. 3. Ps. 9. Dist. 6. Mr. North∣brook, Stubs, Brant, Lovel, and others in their Treatises against daun∣cing. which commonly end in whoredome, adultery, as being strong allurements thereunto, this judgement was so famous and remarkable, that Laurentius Bayenlinke, a forrain Histori∣an, in his Opus Chronologicum orbis universi Antwerp. 1611. p. 110. hath thought good to register it to posterity, if any deem those judgements strange, or that God should iustice such punishments on this sin, which some now justifie, as a part of Christian liberty, both in the Pulpit and inThe late Treatise, Hi∣story and Dis∣course of the Sabbath, Sun∣day No Sab∣bath, Doctor Pri. and a so∣veraigne Anti∣dote against Sabbatarian Novelties. printed works. I shall onely intreat such to remember, that the whole Convocation house, all the Arcbbishops, Bishops, Arch∣deacons, and greatest Clerks of England in their book intituled, The Institution of a Christian Man, subscribed with all their names, and dedicated to King Hen. 8. an. 1537. and King Hen. 8. himself in his own book inscri∣bed A necessarie doctrine and erudition for any Christi∣an man set forth by the Kings Majestie of England, with the advise and approbation of the Lords spirituall and temporall, and Nether house of Parliament, ann. 1543. and by the King himself, dedicated under his name and title to all his faithfull and loving Subjects, and publish∣ed by vertue of the Statute, of 30. H. 8. c. 26. in the expo∣sition of the fourth Commandment, have in the very dawning of Reformation injoyned all Bishops and Preach∣ers diligently to instruct and teach the people, commit∣ted to their spirituall charge (and I wish that some Bishops would now do it) that against this commandment gene∣rally
do offend all they, which having no lawfull impe∣diment, do not give themselves upon the holy day to hear the Word of God, to remember the benefits of God, to give thanks for the same, to pray, to exercise such holy works both publikely in the Church, and pri∣vately in their houses, as be appointed for such holy dayes: but (as commonly is used) passe the time either in idlenesse, in gluttony, in riot, or other vain and idle pastime, DoErgo it is in force, and the prophaning of the Lords day a sin against it. break this Commandment. For surely such keeping of holy day, is not according to the intent and meaning of this Commandment, (as some newAs the Trea∣tise, History, Discourse of the Sabbath. Doctors now dogmatize) but after the usage and custome of the Jews, (though some late Rabbies would make the world be∣leeve that the strict sanctification of the Lords day, and the restraining of vain sports and pastimes on it, is Jewish, whenEpist. 6. ad magnefianos. Ignatius,Tract 3. in Iob. de 10. chordis. c. 3. In Ps. 32. 91. De consensu E∣vang. li. 2. c. 77 Augustine,In Iob. Evang li. 8. c. 5. Cirillus Alexandri∣nus, Homily de festis diebus. Ephraim Syrus,Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 13. Socrates, Scholasticus,Codicis Theodosit l. 15. tit. 5. lex. 5. Theo∣dosius the Emperour,Enare in Ps 91. Beda, Vincentius Belvacensis, and generally al Authors since, have branded dauncing, sports, and recreations on the Lords day both as Jewish and hea∣thenish; andEdit. 5. Lon. 1624. Sect. 38. n. 1. p. 110. Se. 43. digr. 46. n. 6. p. 165. 186. Dr. John White in his way to the true Church defended and published by his elder brother, Dr. Fr. White now Bishop of Ely,In 4. preceptum. Mr. Zanchie,In Iohn Eu. c. 7. fol. 273. Wolfg. Musculus,Proposition for the Christian Sabbath, p. 4. Mr. John Sprint, as Popish and licentious; tending to the overthrow of piety, and desolation of publike Government) and doth not please God, but doth much more offend him, and provoke his indignation and wrath towards us. For asIn Iohan. tract. 3. in Ps 32. & 91. de 10. chordl c 3. St. Augustine saith of the Jews, they should be better occupied, labouring in the Speculum morale li. 3. part. 9. c. 6.
fields, and to be at plough, then to be idle at home. And women should better bestow their time in spinning of wooll, then on the Sabbath day to loose their time in leaping or dauncing, and other idle wantonnesse. Now if the whole Clergy, King, State, and Parliament were so quick∣sighted as in those times of darknesse to see a Lords day Sab∣bath in the fourth Commandment, to be Wholly, onely and intirely dedicated to God and his true worship, as they there teach; and so pious as to beleeve, that the exercise of vain idle sports, pastimes, and dauncing on it, did much more offend God, then ploughing or spinning, and pro∣voke his wrath and indignation towards us; no wonder if we in the clear sunshine of the Gospel behold so many sad spe∣ctacles of his wrath, and indignation against the offenders of this commandment in this kinde, to teach these blinde Seers and seducing guides (asIn his Sermons. Bishop Latimer long since na∣med them) that God is now as jealous for the sanctification of his day, and as much offended with the prophanenesse of it, and infringers of the fourth Commandment, by unnecessarie labours, travell, or idle pastimes, as he had been in any age, if not rather much more, in regard of the great light of the Go∣spel, that hath for these many yeers so clearly shined amongst us, which if they will not yet beleeve, I shall at once close up their mouthes with the resolution of our Homilies ratified by 13. Eliz. c. 12. which ra∣tifies the 39. Articles. Act of Parliament, and the 35. Article of our Church, to which these Novellers have subscribed, and whose Patro∣nage they pretend against allThe trea∣tise and histo∣ry of the Sab∣bath. novell Sabatarians: But alas (saithPart. 1. of the time and place of praier. p. 126. the Homily) all these notwithstanding (and I pray God I may not still say notwithstanding all these fresh examples) it is lamentable to see the wicked bold∣nesse of those, that will be counted Gods people who passe nothing at all of keeping and hallowing the Sun∣day.
And these people are of two sorts; the one sort, if they have businesse to do, though there be no extreme need, they must not spare for the Sunday, they must ride journeys on the Sunday, they must drive and carry on the Sunday, they must come and ferry on the Sunday, they must buy and sell on the Sunday, they must keep Markets and Fairs on the Sunday; finally they use all dayes alike, work dayes and holy dayes are all one. The other sort is Worse (so the Homily against theseTreatise of the Sabbath day, p. 231. new masters, who make labour in mens callings on the Lords day Worse and more unlawfull then dauncing and Pa∣stimes, contrary to the judgement ofTract. 3. in Ioh. In Ps. 32. & 91. de 10. chordis c. 3. Saint Augustine, Gregory the great,Apud Alex. Alensis summ. Theologiae part. 4. q. 11. m. 2. Art. 11. Alensis, and allMedia villa Peraldus Ni∣der Volaterra∣nus, F. Martyr, Musculus, Stuckius, A∣retius, Hype∣rius, Szegedi∣ne, Angel. de Clavasio. Dr Bound, Dr. Criffith, Williams Practise of Piety, Osmund Lake, and infi∣nite others. Writers since, who una voce resolve, that it is better and more lawfull to plough and spin on the Sabbath day, then to daunce:) for although they will not travell and labour on the Sunday, as they do on the work day, yet they will not rest in holinesse as God commandeth; but they rest in un∣godlinesse and filthinesse, prauncing in their pride, prank∣ing and pricking, pointing and painting themselves to be gorgeous and gay, they rest in excesse and superflui∣tie in gluttony and drunkennesse (as they do at Wakes, Ales, and May-poles) like rats and swine, they rest in braw∣ling and rayling, in quarrelling and fighting, they rest in wantonnesse (and what else is dauncing, Moris dauncing, may gaming, &c.) in toyish talking, in filthy fleshlinesse, so that it doth too evidently appear, that God is more dishonoured, and the devill better served on Sunday, then upon all the dayes of the week besides. And I assure you, that the beasts that are command∣ed to rest on the Sunday, honour God better then this kinde of people, for they offend not God, they
break not their holy dayes. Wherefore, O ye people of God, lay your hands upon your hearts, repent and amend this grievous and dangerous wickednesse, stand in awe of the commandment of God, gladly follow the example of God himself, be not disobedient to the godly order of Christs Church used and kept from the Apostles times untill this day, fear the displeasure and just plagues of Almighty God if ye be negligent, and forbear not la∣bouring and travelling on theSee the Ho∣mily . times stiles the Lords day, and the 3. Homily of re∣bellion twice. Sabbath day, and do not resort together to celebrate and magnifie Gods blessed name in quiet holinesse and godly reverence. I shall con∣clude all with the words of the Councell of Paris under Lewis and Lotharius. Ann. 829. li. . c. 50. & li. 3. c. 5. & 19. Multa alia terribilia judicia. &c. Many other terrible judgements have been, and hitherto are, whereby is de∣clared how much God is offended with the dishonour of this day. Wherefore the Imperiall highnesse is specially to be implored of theNote. Priests, that this power ordained of God for the honour and reverence of so great a day, may put a fear into all men, lest none of what condition soever presume on this holy and venerable day to use these and the like sports, dauncings and leapings hereaf∣ter, because while they do these things, they both darken the glory of Christianity, and give occasion to the blas∣phemers of Christs name the more to dishonour him. We require also, and earnestly intreat, that in the ob∣servation of the Lords day, as we have a long time be∣seeched you, you use due care that unlesse great necessity constrain you, free your selves on that day, as much as may be from worldly cares and sollicitousnesse. And that which becometh the honour of so great a day, that both you your selves do it, and by your example do
teach and compell yours to do it. We wholsomely admonish all faithfull people, that they give due honour and reverence to the Lords day, because the dishonour of this day doth both much swarve and abhor from Christian religion, and doth without doubt procure the perill of souls to the violaters thereof; And with that of the Councell of Burges, an. 1582. Apud Bachllum Decretae Ecclesiae Gall. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 21. Although Lords dayes and holy dayes are instituted onely for this purpose, that faithfull Christians abstaining from exter∣nall and gainfull works, might more freely and with greater piety give themselves to divine worship, and to the meditation of the infinite benefits of Gods goodnes towards mankinde, and so being wholly taken up with the wholsome duties of religion, should diligently beware as Ignatius admonisheth the Philippians, that they should not abuse holy dayes with any disgrace or injuries, yet notwithstanding in our times, it preposterously and usu∣ally comes to passe, that both solemne and religious dayes are not onely spent in transacting, unlawfull and secular businesse, but likewise in luxury, lasciviousnesse, prohibited sports, and pastimes, Revels, and the exerci∣sing of other wickednesses, whereupon it is not to be doubted, that for the greatest part, so many calamities wherewith we were so long since confirm justly in∣flicted on us by God, who is incensed against us by so great wickednesse. To appease whose present anger, and likewise to avert his greater indignation hanging over our heads: we command all Parish Priests of our Pro∣vince, that they frequently and seriously admonish the people, that on Lords dayes they not onely keep them∣selves from all prohibited works, but likewise that they
be ex animo cordially and religiously, present at all sacred mysteries of the Church, and at the preaching of Gods Word, and that they preterm it not the works of piety in relieving the poore, comforting the afflicted, and in doing other pious things, wherein Christian profession and charitie do most of all shine forth. And we exhort all Magistrates according to their and our duty, as far as possibly we may, that they would take care, that those holy and solemne dayes should be holily and piously ce∣lebrated, this being principally in their power, and be∣longing to their charge. Neither verily can any manner of Governing the Common-wealth, be better or more praise-worthie then that which gives the first place and care to divine worship and religion. FINIS. LONDON: Printed for John Wright junior, and for Tho. Bates, and are to be sold at their shops in the Old Baylie. 1642.
