B987 E549_19 99868030 165014
OR, Soveraigne Balsome, Gently applied in a few weighty Considerations (by way of Quaerie) for hea∣ling the distempers of such Professors of Religi∣on as Satan hath wounded and drawn aside (under the Notion of living in God) to the utter renouncing and casting off the use of Divine Ordinances, and Gospel-Institutions of Worship. With an Apendix by way of Postscript to such Professors, wherein the most principall grounds upon which they build their practise, are fully answered and removed. And a Catalogue of the errors that many of them hold since they left the Ordinances, discovered. As also a true Relation of Gods extra∣ordinary working upon one of this way very lately in Plimouth, to the sight of his error, for the good of others published. By Will. Bartlet, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel, and Lecturer at Bytheford in Devonshire. Even from the dayes of your Fathers yee are gone away from my Ordinances, and have not kept them: Return unto me, and I will return unto you, saith the Lord of Hosts, &c. MAL. 3.7. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physitian there? Why there is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? JER. 8.22. Brethren, if any of you doe erre from the truth, and one convert him; let him know that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soule from death, and shall hide a multitude of sinnes. IAM. 5.19, 20. Imprinted at London by G. Dawson, for Elizabeth Overton in Popes∣head Alley, neere the Royall Exchange. 1649.
TO ALL THE CORDIALL Friends, and sincere lovers of the Lord IESUS and his SYON. PRETIOUS SOULES, YEE cannot be ignorant how the prophesies of old,2 Tim. 3.1 ad 10. 2 Pet. 2. per tot. 1 Joh. 2.18.22. Jude 4. ad fi∣nem. Matth. 24, 24, 25, &c. men∣tioned by the holy Apo∣stles of our Lord and Savi∣our Jesus Christ; yea by Christ himself, concerning the perilousnesse of the last dayes, in respect of the evils both of opinion and pra∣ctice, that should bee broached and embraced by all sorts of people in them; are now in our times abun∣dantly fulfilled; wherein there is as much difference, and as great variety, (if not greater) betweene men in their opinions, as there is between them in
their fashions, which I finde to beSic etiam in cunctis Angli∣genis, tanta ve∣stium varietas & asperitatis multiformitas inolevit ut neu∣trius generis paenè quilibes censcatur, ex qua re bene pro∣phetavit tem∣pore Regis E∣theldredi, &c. Anony. prophesied of al∣so, many hundred years since, touching England: and like as mens fashions in their apparrell, diet, and be∣haviour, are some of them more monstrous, odious and loathsome then others; so are their opinions in Religion, and matters of Doctrine and Worship: and so blasphemous, abominable, and damnable, are some opinions and practices now in England, as that nothing but the patience of an infinite God could possibly suffer them to have any longer a Being a∣mongst us. How were the Churches of Christ weak∣ned and endangered by such Pests in the Primitive times? What a many. Antichrists were there then? 1 Iohn 2.18. What a many false Christs, false A∣postles, false Prophets and Teachers, selfe-lovers. Sin-lovers, and lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, going up and down deceiving poore souls, especially poore silly women, that were alwayes learning, but never came to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Tim 3.6. who were not onely resisters, but subverters of the faith delivered once to the Saints, Jude 3.4. And is it not so at this day? Are nor the Churches of Christ as much posered and en∣dangered now through such false Christs, false Apo∣stles, false Teachers, &c. meere Antichrists, that have a forme of godlinesse, but deny the power thereof. The Lord Jesus (the great Shepheard of his sheep, Hebr. 13.20.) hath but newly recovered his poore afflicted weather-beaten Lambes, from bloody Ca∣valerisme, tyranny and oppression, but forthwith their souls are assaulted withBeza trans∣lates it Spiritu∣all malices, the words are , the spiritualnesse of evill and wickednesse; carnall wicked∣nesses are inferiour to spirituall, which ocupieth the highest part of the Soule, &c. and are not laid out in carnall passions and concupiscences, &c. Lawr. Com. and Warre with Angels. p. 5. spiritual wickednesses
in high places, Eph. 6.12. Some read it, In high pla∣ces; but I suppose it may be read better, in heavenly places, or things, asThe word is  in sublimi, saith Beza, but it sig∣nifies heavenly, as in the Mar∣gent of your Bi∣bles, which may have relation to things as pla∣ces, and then it shews the things about which his malicious stu∣dies are conver∣sant, that is, to take all heaven∣ly things from us, and to de∣prive us of whatsoever is heavenly. id. ib. some observe on the place. If the differences amongst us, touching mens opinions and practises, were onely about such things as are not much materiall, or were not at all determined in the Scripture, or after such a manner as is dubious not onely to particular persons, but whole Churches of Christ, the matter were not great; for God is in∣finitly wise herein, and in my weake apprehension, hath left these things so, that thereby there might be occasion given the more to exercise our Charity, Pa∣tience and Humility one towards another. But when they shall grow to such a height, as to call into que∣stion fundamentall truths, and not so much to questi∣on them, as flatly to deny them, and to pluck up the foundation it self; then 'tis high time for us to look about, & not only to hold fast, that no man take our Crown, but to. i. ut fitis propugnatores fidei. uti Hen. Steph. in verb. contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. And is it not thus with us at thisWho can num∣ber the dust of Atheists, Pa∣pists, Hereticks, Hypocrites, or measure the spa∣cious Globe of meere Forma∣lists, or self-con∣demned Apo∣states? Barl. day? Don't we see that men are not ashamed to write and speake against the Divinity of Christ, and the Scriptures, against the Deity of the Holy Ghost; yea, how they deny the Trinity, and plead for these very abominations that are (without con∣troversie) odious and loathsome both to God and good MenA catalogue of some of which abominable er∣rors held by such as cast off the use of ordināces you shall find set down in the end of the Book.. Now concerning errors in Doctrine, I have not so directly to deale with, in the following Discourse (though my soule bleeds to consider the dishonour comes to the Lord Jesus by them,) but those which more especially concerne Worship, and not every petty error here neither, but the grand and capitall one, and that wherein I judge all error of Doctrine and Apostasie at last to terminate, viz. the
Renouncing and casting off, of all Duties and Ordi∣nances, or Institutions of Divine Worship, ordai∣ned by Christ himselfe to be observed in the dayes of the New Testament; unchurching the right consti∣tuted Congregations and Assemblies of Syon, dna plucking up the publick Ministery of the Gospel by the roots, and this not so much in some respect (as those that are called Seekers, who deny publick Churches, Ministery, &c. for want of Apostles, and other like extraordinary gifted men to administer, &c.) but absolutely looking on the performance of Duties, and use of Ordinances, Ministery and Chur∣ches, as poore, low, weake Dispensations, Chil∣dish things, not fit for such as live in God to stoop so low, as to make use of. And so under a pretence of living in God, they teach poore, weake soules, that there is a life to be attained unto, wherein they may liveThat there is a life to be obtai∣ned by Belee∣vers here on earth, that is a∣bove ordinan∣ces, is not deny∣ed. But that this life is without ordinances alto∣gether, when they may enjoy the use of them, and that puts them necessarily upon the renoun∣cing and casting them off, is that which we flatly deny, as being contrary not on∣ly to the sacred Scriptures, but experience of the soundest Christians, as I have shewed in the following Discourse. without the use of Ordinances, or perfor∣mance of Duties, without observation of the Lords day, or Sabbath, without Church-fellowship, with∣out instructing their children in the knowledge of the Scriptures, without craving a blessing on the Crea∣ture when they make use of it, or returning thankes for it. And that which is most abominable, that they may attain and enjoy such a liberty, as to be under no law, but that of the Spirit, as they say, and so may perpetrate any impiety, without controll, or check of God or Man; for they live in God alone, and so are above all things here below: & so would make a persons living in God, & living in the practice of sin, to consist & stand together. These are the men that the following Discourse concernes, and whom I can∣not but look on (especially those of them that out of a professed judgement, and fixed selfe-will, doe in a
high and peremptory manner proceed in their way) as the dangerous pests that can be, both to the State, as well as to Religion; for take away true Christian Religion, or the true worship of God, and power of godlinesse out of a State, or Common-wealth, and what do you therein but as it were take the soul from the body: For what is the sincere practise of sound Religion and godlinesse in a State, butThere is no∣thing in a true Christian Com∣mon-wealth that can onely direct it self to the benefit of State onely, but that Religi∣on must bee also respected, the care of State being but the By, and Religi∣on the main of every Christian intendment. And ther fore oftentimes even in those things which seem most properly to con∣cern the State, is Religion in them most regarded; the care of State in respect of Re∣ligion, being like the care of our bodies, for which holy men care, but so only as for the houses of their soules. &c. Levers History of the Defend of the Cath Faith. the life and soule of it? Let that be once neglected, corrupted, or extirpated, and the other cannot long stand after; and when is Religion destroyed, but when we make it to patronize impiety. And hence it is that such as are guilty of the forementioned abomination, in re∣nouncing Ordinances, &c. are so frequently descri∣bed by such Epithites as shew nothing but confusion and destruction to betide those places and persons where they are entertained and countenanced. It is sufficient in this place, (having spoken more largely hereof in the cōclusion of the Appendix) to shew you that the Apostle Peter calls them2 Pet. 3.17. Lest ye be led away with the error . so in chap. 2.7, &c,  dicuntur homines qui volunt esse fine lege, qui emnia legum repagula perfringunt, ab  & , quod legem praesertim drvinam significat, homines qui nec jus nec fas curant &c. Ger in loc. vocat  quos prius  &  ostendit, hos, nullo jure, nullis ne legibus posse in ordine retineri, sed perumpunt omnia jura: quid vis enim sibi licere putant, Scripturasque sibi subjiciunt. Horum exemplum valdè est perniciosum etiam piis, ideo cavendum, ne horum erro∣ribus abrepti, veritatem fidei amittant. Aret. in loc. ut supra. , which Lori∣nus, and other more sound Interpreters doe translate, ex-leges, or lawlesse Libertines, such as under a pretence of Christian liberty, allow themselves in the pra∣ctice of all manner of sensuall lusts, to the disgrace and scandall of the Gospel; for through their occasi¦on the way of truth is evill spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. Yet whiles I am opposing the opinion and practice of such New, though no True Gospellers, &c. I would not have ye
(the pretious servants of God, that keep his Comman∣dements, and the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17.) to conceive that I doe in the least goe about to plead for any ordinances or worship of mans invention, or ma∣king; for false ordinances and worship that are for∣ged in Antichrists shop, and beare no other stamp upon them then the Image of humane Authority: For I know as it's all one toLever ut su∣pra, p. 366. deny God and to deny his Service; so I do latry is as wel in false worship as in no worship: & I am assured that Ordinances of divine worship that are of mans making though never so wise or great, are no plants of Gods. planting, neither doth he accept of them, or of those that make use of them, butMatth. 15.8, 9-13. Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Ezek. 20.39. lookes on them as vain worshippers and will∣worshipers, polluters & prophaners of his glorious & reverend Name. Or (2.) that I allowed of theuse of true ordinances and worship that Christ himselfe hath instituted and commanded, in a false way, or contrary to the right order which Christ hath pre∣scribed to his people in the Gospel, and was in use in the primitive and Apostolicall times for our exam∣ple, viz. a Society and Combination of Saints in which (for the most part) they subsist properly, and are to be performed, as I have at large shewed in anotherModell of the Congregational way, where this matter is fully handled and cleared in the two first Chap∣ters. place: For I know that the same God that hath called his people to worship him, doth require them to take the same way and order he hathAs God hath not left it in∣different whe∣ther he be ser∣ved and worshipped, or not, so he hath not left people at their own liberty to worship him how and in what manner they please, or as it seemeth good in their own eyes, but hath given forth a Rule and or∣der to be observed by his people under the new Testament, as be did under the Old; which order of Gods worship is best discerned in the practice of the Saints in the Primitive and Apostolical times, set forth in the new Testament. That men might not prevaricate or alter the form of Gods service, hath God himselfe prescribed us a precise form, how and in what form (or manner) we should serve him, damning all diversity to this his own order, wherewith he is onely pleased, and wherewith he is alwayes pleased. Levers History of the Defend of the Cath. Faith. prescribed
them, or else they may not expect acceptation with him, but rather reproofe from him, Ezek. 20.29, 40. especially after he hath made known his mnde here∣in unto us and given us pretious helps for discovery that way, according to Acts 17 30. Neither is it suf∣ficient for us to say, that much good is done to poore soules by the use of Gods ordinances, though not performed in that way God hath appointed: For doubtlesse however God is all sufficient to worke good from our evill, yet we our selves can have but little credit or cōfort in it, seeing we take not Gods way to do his work. And if David, and other of the servants of God under the Law, apprehended wrath from God, and occasion of humiliation to themselves, for not seeking or serving of him after the due order hee had prescribed them, 1 Chron. 15.13. how much more may such expect displeasure from God, that now in this cleare Sunshine of the Gospel neglect or refuse to seek and serve him as he hath required them by Iesus Christ; but continue to administer the holy things of Gods house (whether out of prejudice to the Congregational way, or from looking so much to the examples of men like themselves or out of sla∣vish feare what will become of them, I know not) in a most confused and disorderly way and manner, to and amongst drunkards, swearers, persecuters, scof∣fers, and most prophane ignorant people, that ought to be driven from, not admitted to Church-privi∣ledges, never making a separation between the clean and unclean, the holy and prophane: like those Priests in Ezekiels dayes, for which the Lord was so muchVide the god∣ly and learned Lectures of Mr. W. Green∣nill on the five first chapters of Ezekiel, where he abundantly holds this forth, but especially p. 453, 454. displeased, Ezek. 22.26. Or 3dly, that I would have those that enjoy the ordinances of Christ in a right way and order of the Gospel, to make a
God or Saviour of them, to place their happinesse in them, and make them the resting place of their hearts, or the center into which the lines of their pretious af∣fections should run, or ascribe to them any ver∣tue or power of their own to conferre grace; for this were to idolize ordinances with the Papists, and give them the honour is due toIt's not our stirring up our graces, opening our hearts, put∣ting forth our selves to the ut∣most, that will make an Ordi∣nance effectuall without Christ, it's he must doe the deed, as Ioh. 15.5 &c. Paul may plant, but there is no rooting of those plants but by Christ, Apollos may water, but no growth nor increase but by Christ, 1 Cor. 3.6. Id. ut su∣pra. p 294. When the hand of the Lord is upon an Ordi∣nance, & upon a man in that or∣dinance, then there is good gotten, and then doth the soule gain, 2 Cor. 10.4 our wea∣pons are mighty through God. p. 60. Christ alone; as if ordinances had died for us, and redeemed us from hell, and purchased life and salvation at the hands of God for us, & were now a pleading our cause for us in heaven, and making inte cession to the Father in our behalfes, & had received power to conquer our corruptions, ease our burthens, supply our wants, perfect our graces, &c. when the contrary is most cleare and evident; and therefore as those that cast off the use of ordinances altogether, do run into the extream on the left hand, so doe those people run into the other extream on the right hand, of trusting in ordinances, and placing their righteousnesse in the meere observing of them. And thus the Lord Iesus Christ (our alone pretious Redeemer) is to this day, as of old, crucified between these two Thieves, of de∣nying him in his ordinances, by a totall renouncing them, or dwn-right idolizing them, by placing their righteousnesse in them. And therefore (prei∣ous soules) while I am condemning the one my desire is, you would not conceive me in the least to plead for, or countenance the other. But my desire and scope in what is done in the following discourse, is to presse them that professe Christ, and subjection to his Gospel, to keep the Golden Mean, and to avoyd both these Rockes, of lifting too high, or casting down too low, the sacred Institutions & Ordinances of worship, which the Lord Iesus Christ, the Head
and King of Syon, hath appointed his Churches in all ages to make use of: And hee who is the great Sear∣cher of hearts, and discerner of the reines, knowes, I have had nothing else in my eye, in order to his glo∣ry and his peoples welfare, but this alone. Now for the Work it selfe, I could have wisht it in the hands of some of the Lords Worthies, that are farre my superiours every way, and might possibly have done it more fully and accuratly then I have; however, seeing it is the Lords pleasure to call me, and goe be∣fore me in it, I cannot but follow him; and who knowes what the Strong God may doe byVide Mr. Marshals Ser∣mon on Psalm. 8.2. called, A two edged Sword out of the mouth of Babes. weak means? Poore David whose heart was upright with God, and sought his glory in what he enterprised, did more with a Sling and a Stone in the Name of the Lord, against Goliah, that defied the Heast of the living God, 1 Sam. 17. then Saul with all his valiant warriours possibly could. 'Twas not Sauls Armour could procure Da∣vid the Conquest, and therefore he throwes it from him, and goes to the work of God in Gods way. Happy soules that have learn'd that Art, and know how to set about the Lords work with the Lords Tooles; such may be sure with David, to find a pros∣perous gale to attend them, & much blessed successe to follow their honest endeavours. Wherfore to trouble you no longer (dearly beloved) but craving your candid Interpretation of, and earnest supplication for a blessing on the present work, and that in order to the establishing of your own souls, and the recovering those that are gone astray from the paths of peace and righteous∣nesse, I leave your pretious souls in the arms of him, who never leaveth his, even the God of all grace,1 Pet. 5.0. who hath called us into his glory by Christ Jesus, who (after yee
have suffered a while) make you perfect, stablish, streng∣then, settle you. In whom I desire and trust for ever to be found Your and the Churches unfained Friend and Servant, W. BARTLET. March 1. 1648 Courteous Reader, you are desired, in respect of the Authors absence, and great distance from the Presse, to mend with your Pen, or in love to passe by such faults as these which have e∣scaped. For the Title, Balm for the Bruised, read A Soveraigne Bal∣some for the wounded. Pag. 2. marg.d r. observandum. P. 3. marg.n. r. in nova Ecclesia, &c. p. 4. marg.s for Apostolis r. Apostolos. p. 9. margh for Mr. r. Mistresse Avery. p. 9. marg. for Id. ibid. r. Musc. in loc. p. 9. l, 17. r. inexpressible. p. 33. mar. for worship r. walking,
BALM for the BRVISED. Quaerie I. LET it be considered in the feare of God, whether the sacred Scriptures, commonly called the Word of God, consisting of the writings of the Pro∣phets, and Apostles, in the old and new Testa∣ment, that were holy men of God, and vulg. red. iu∣spirati, vel , sed Graecum pro∣priè sig. acti & impulsi. Spiritus san∣ctus erat Scri∣ba, Prophetae e∣rant ejus cala∣mi, quibus Spir. S. scribenda dictabat. Cypr. Ergo Script. sac. est , ac in∣fallibile Dei verbum. Gro. inspired infallibly by the Holy Ghost, in the composing of them, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. be not the onely visible Rule and. The Greek word  is taken from Architects, who in building Houses, doe use a Rule, or Square, by which all the parts are carried ou with a due proportion: so those that Christ im∣ployeth to build his Church, are to measure all matters of doctrine and worship by the Rule and Square of the Scriptures. Canon, so called, Gal. 6.16. by which persons (professing the know∣ledge of God, and faith in Christ) are to square and regulate themselves in all matters of Doctrine and Worship? and whe∣ther the best and next way to come to the right knowledge of the minde of Christ in these things, be not toNihil in Ecclesia sonare debet nisi eloquia Dei, juxta 1 Pet. 4.11. . vid. Ger. in loc. Omne quod loquimur debemus affirmare de sacris Scripturis, Hier. in Psal. 98. Necesse est nobis Scripturas sacras in testimonium vocare, sensus enim nostri & enarrationes sine iis, non habent fidem. . See Justin. Martyr in Dial. cum Tryphone. Sancta Scriptura sic fidei nosirae fundamenta proponit, & doctrinae nostrae regulam figit, ut fides Christianorum iis solum revelatio∣nibus nitatur, quae in Canonicis libris continentur. Dar. de fratcrna Comm. inter Eccles. Evang. p. 76. Sicut verbum Dei scriptum in practicis vitae Christianae unicae est rectitudinis norma: sic idem verbume seu scriptura sacra, unica est veritatis norma in Theoreticis fidei Christianae. See Par. in Gal. 5. keep close to this sacred and unerring Rule and Canon of the Scriptures? 1 Pet. 4.11. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Tim. 3.15.16. Esay 8.20. Prov. 6.23. & 30.5.6.
2. Whether among many other pretious truths, which the Scriptures hold forth unto us, this be not a speciall one, viz. That Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Saviour, (who having purged away our sinnes, and is sate down on the right hand of the Majesty on High, Heb. 1.30) hath a spiritual Kingdom or Church∣state,Observan∣um est, quod Christus non dicit, Regnum meum non est in hoc mundo, sed non est de hoc mundo. Et infra, non dieit, Regmon meum non est HIC, sed non est HINC. Nam Regnum (sc. Christi) est hic, & in hoc mundo, Coetus credentium, &c. vide Heming. Aret. & Musc. in loc. distinct from all the Kingdomes of the world? Iohn 18.36. Iesus answered, My kingdome is not of this world. 'Tis in this world, but not of this world. 3. Whether this Kingdome of Christ here on earth, so di∣stinct from the World, is not usually distingnished intoEcclesiae visi∣bilis & invisi∣bilis distinctio, fundatur in scripturis. Pa∣reus in c. 2. ad Rom The Church is visible or in∣visible. A di∣stinction not of Genus into se∣verall species, but of the subject into severall adjuncts. For the same Church may be and is visible and invisible. Sedg. Script. a perfect Rule for Church Government. Irvifibilis autem nomi∣natur non quod homines ad eam pertinentes non videantur qua homines, sed quod non cernantur qua electi solus euim Deus novit qui sunt sui. Wolleb. Compend. Theolog. vid. Tilen. Syntag. de Eccles. Ellis vind. Cathol. p. 4. c. 2. Vi∣sible and Invisible, Mysticall and Ministeriall, or Politicall, considered as the object of Faith, or of sight, and sense, con∣sisting of all the elect, dispersed through the whole world, called (by some) the Universall Church, or of particular Churches collected and gathered together of visible Beleevers, in this or that place, Towne, Citie, Countrey or Kingdome, Ephes. 3.15. Heb. 12.23. Mat. 22.14. Gal. 1.2. 1 Cor. 16.19. 2 Cor. 8.1. 1 Thess. 2.14. 4. Whether the visible Kingdome of Christ, consisting of such particular Churches, and Congregations of Beleevers, gathe∣red together according to the order of the Gospel,Vid. My Model of the Primitive Congregationall wayes. hath not a vi∣sible Government, Order, and Ordinances of visible Worship necessarily belonging and appertaining thereunto, according toFunctiones quas enumerat omnes sunt Ecclesiasticae, quibus tunc Apostolica authoritate sic distinctis, Ministerium Ecclesiae con∣stabat, & quae nunc etiam in Ecclesiis constitutis vigere debent. Par. in loc. ad Rom. c. 12. Rom. 12.6, 7 8. 1 Cor. 5. & 11, 12, & 14. Chapters, Ephes 4.11, 12. Matth. 28.19. 5. Whether this Government and externall ordinances of Worship, appertaining to this visible Church state and King∣dome
of Christ under the new Testament, doe not by Gods or∣der and appointment succeed and come in the roome of those Ordinances and Lawes of Worship which the Jewes did enjoy under the old Testament, according to the prophesie of the Pro∣phet Malachi, chap. 1. verse 11. For from the rising of the Sun to, &c. myBy the Name of GOD is meant his wor∣ship, as appears from verse 6. and verse 12. of the same chapter, and so it's often used in the Scrip∣tures. Vid. Bernard. The∣saur. Biblic. and Flac. Il∣lir. cla Som. Name is great (or shall be great) among the Gen∣iiles, and in every place incense shall be offered to my Name, and a pure offering for my Name is (or shall be great) among the Hea∣then. And whether the words of Christ to the Samaritan Wo∣man inNam de a∣brogatione & cessatione tam Iudaici quam Samaritani, deinde de inductione veri & siuceri cultus mulierculam instruxit. Musc. in loc. John 4.22, 23, 24. doe not very much hold forth the truth hereof; as also the scope of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, in that the Apostle makes it a great part of his work to disswade the Jewes from their former Legall Ordinances and Services, and to stirre them up to embrace the Ordinances of the Gospel, shew∣ing how the government of Christ in his Church under the Gos∣pel isThe government of Christs Church under the Gospel, in respect of externall Worship and Ordinances, is said to be a better Testament in a threefold respect. 1. In respect of their use, because they present Christ to the soule more lively and clearly, more feelingly and spiritually, more fully and abundantly. 2. In respect of their end, because they are to end in heaven, at the comming of Christ to glory, whereas those of the Law had their period in the grave of Christ. 3. In respect of themselves: for this is a more perfect testimony, the rites being fewer, the questions and controversies are not so many as did a∣rise concerning the Legall ceremonies. Sedgw. Script. A perfect Rule for Church government p. 14. a better Testament and Covenant then that of the Law. And whether the visible Churches of Christ under the Gospel, be not every wayAs the Jewes had circumcision for them and their seed under the Law; so now Beleevers in right constituted Churches, have Baptisme for them and their seed. As the Iewes had the Passover, so Beleevert now have the Supper of the Lord. As the Iewes had Officers to lead them; so Beleevers now have Pastors and Teachers, &c. As the Iewes had the ministery of the Law read and preached; so Beleevers now have the ministery of the Gospel. As the Iewes had a Temple and an Altar; so now Beleevers have Iesus Christ and the Saints in fellowship, which are living Temples. And as the Iewes had sacrifices; so now Beleevers have the spirituall sacrifices of Prayer and Praises, which they offer to God by Iesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.5. as compleat in point of Ordinances, as the Nationall Church of the Jewes was under the Law, according to Coloss. 2.10. 6. Whether Jesus Christ the alone Head and King of this vi∣sible Church-state, and Kingdome, did notNova Ec∣clesia sonare debere ca quae Christus credenda & servanda praecepit Discipulis. Facessere igitur debent traditiones humanae, neque misceri cum Evangelio Christi. Idem in Matth. 28.20. Himselfe institute and ordain those Holy Ordinances of Worship for Beleevers to
make use of in all Ages till his comming again, Ephes. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 11.Non dicit, Ego enim ve∣ster Apostolus Apostolica vobis authoritate sic tradidi, sed ego enim accopt à Domino, quod & tradidi vobis. Ad eandem & nobis respiciendum est hodie, videndum que ne à uorma illius quolibet deelinemus. Non sunt audiendi qui praetexunt Patres, Concilia, Magiste∣rium spiritus, potestatem Ecclesiae, Catholicam confuetudinem, &c. omnia haec posterius sunt inducta. Nobis regula veritatis esse dobet quae veniat à Christo, per illius Apostolos transmissa. Mc. in loc. 23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 12.28. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. And whether these Ordinances of worship being Jure Divino, it be in theWhat is made a Law, no authority can pull down, but that which sets it up. power of any publique or privat person on earth, to eause an alteration or cessation of them. 7. Whether Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who (I suppose without controversie) lived more highly in God, then any now doe or can, did not in their first ordaining and gathering of this visible Church-state and Kingdome, make use of Gospel-ordinan∣ces of worshipOur Lord Iesus himselfe did not only in∣stitute holy or∣dinances and duties of wor∣ship for his Churches to ob∣serve, but was in the use of them himself. He made use of Baptisme, of the Lords Supper, of publishing and preaching the Gospel, of Prayer, of singing Hymnes, or Psalmes, of pri∣vate conserence, of giving thankes before meat, of praying amongst and for the wicked, of society with the Disciples, and that after his resurrection in their meeting together at times of worship, &c. And thus it was with the Apostles also, as is evident to such as are but meanly acquainted with the Histo∣ries in the Scriptures. themselves, and intend that the Saints that fol∣lowed them should do so also; yea whether they did not by their own use, and practise of these Gospel-ordinances of Worship, leave to the Saints in succeeding ages, a pretiousThere are three sorts of workes which Christ wrought: 1. Some, Qua Deus, i. as he was God, as working of miracles, pardoning of sinnes, &c. In these we cannot imi∣tate him. 2. Some, Qua mediator Dei & hominum, i as he was mediator between God and Man, and satisfying Gods justice for our sinnes, and reconciling the world to God: And in these nei∣ther can we imitate him. 3. Some, Qua homo privatus, i. as he was a private person: and these are all such duties as God required in his word to be performed. And herein Christ hath given us an example to follow and imitate him. Vide Zanch. in 1 John 2.6. Apostolos Domini habemus au∣thores, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio, quod inducerent, eligerunt: sed acceptam à Christo disci∣plinam fideliter Nationtbus adsignaverunt. Tertul. de praescript. advers. Haeres. c. 6. example, and ground of encouragement to walk in the same way of practising and using joyntly or apart, those ordinances of worship, accor∣ding to their conditions and relations private or publique, 1 John 2.6. 1 Cor 11.1. And whether the practise of the primitive Saints and Churches, be not also a pattern and copie for belee∣vers now to write after. Rom. 15.4,Non vult ergo ut quosvis temerè imitemur: sed qui sunt fimiles Apostotis. Nequc etiam Apostolis sim∣pliciter, sed quatenus Christum imitantur. Zanch. in loc. Phil. 3.17, 18, 19. & 4.9. 8. Whether the things of Christs Church and Kingdome, which we call Gospel-ordinances, and divine Institutions of vi∣sible
worship under the new Testament, as the preaching of the Gospel, administration of the Seales, finging of Psalmes, or Hymnes, Prayer, Conference, &c. bee not in their nature and use spirituall,The Church is called a spi∣rituall House, , as in 1 Pet. 2.5. The worship called spirituall Sacrifices. , 1 Pet. 2.5. . Col. 3.16. The worshipers called holy and Spirituall, , Phil. 3.3. 2 Pet. 2.. So Christ, the substance of the Ordinances, is called spirituall meat and drinke, 1 Cor. 12.3.4. . We may read the nature of many things in their offects. All the Ordinances of worship bear this In∣scription. Holinesse to the LORD, and are appointed to work holinesse in man. Caryls duty and endeavour of the Saints. p. 28. 1 Pet. 2.5. Col. 3.16. &c. And whether there may not bee abundance of sweet delight, and soule-satisfying comfort and content found, if holy and spirituall hearts meet with them, and are acted on Christ in the use of them. 9. Whether those Divine and Spirituall Offices, Officers, and Ordinances instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, are not his from , rota, Chariots using to run on wheeles. Chariot, in which he rides gloriously in his Church and King∣dome, and by which (through his Spirit) he not onely subdues his enemies, and conquers the hearts of Sinners to himselfe, (that his father hath given to him from all eternity) but more and more workes over the hearts of the Saints themselves, to a further de∣gree of subjection to his Scepter, Cant.Ainsworth by this Chariot, understands more especially the Church and Ministers of the Gospel, holding forth the word of Truth, and Christ in the midst of them sitting, teaching, go∣verning, and triumphing. So Merc. in loc. 3.9, 10. Psal. 45.4. Rev. 6.2. And I saw and behold, aBy white Horse, Paraens on the place understands the Church puritate doctrinae & disciplinae nitidam: and by him that sate on it, Christ, who is car∣ried or born (as it were) in the Ordinances with great triumph, according to Acts 9.15. white horse, and hee that sate on him had a Bow, and a Crown was given to him, and hee went forth conquering and to conquer. 10. Whether there be not many singular & choyce1. Promises of salvation to worship in ge∣nerall. Rom. 10.12, 13. 2. Promises in particular, and so 1. to the du∣ty of prayer, 1. Of Preparation and assistance, Psa. 10.17. Rom. 8.26. 2. Of Acceptation, Esa. 60.7. Ezek. 43 17. 1 Pet. 2.5. 3. Of consolation, Esa. 56.7. 4. Of answering and recompensing, Psal. 86.5. & 145.18. & Ephes. 6.8. Matth. 6.6. Jam. 5.15, 16. Joh. 14.13. & 15.16. & 16.23. 2. To preaching and hearing of theword, and administring the Seales, Matth. 28.20. Prov. 8.34, 35. Esa. 55.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.16. Esa. 25.6. Psal. 36.8. Cant. 2.3, 4. & 5. 1. Esa. 12.3. 3. To conference, Mal. 3.16; 17. 4 To sanctifying the Sabbath, or Lords day, Esa. 58.13, 14. Esa. 56.2.5, 6, 7. Jer. 17.24, 25. 5. To praising of God, Psal. 50 23. Psal. 7.5, 6. 6. To the Assemblies and Church-meetings of the Saints to worship God: 1. Of Christs presence with it, Mat. 18.20. 2. Protection over it, Mat. 16.18. Psal. 84.11. Esa. 33.20, 21. Esa. 4.5. 3 Blessings of all sorts upon it, Temporall, spirituall, eternall, Psa. 84.11. 1, 2.15.128.56.92.13, 14. and 94.14.65.4. Promises made by Christ to beleevers, whiles they abide and continue in the right & pure use of those Ordinances and duties of Worship, and many sad and direfull threatnings and comminations to those that neglect, leave and forsake the use and practise of them, Psalm 97.7. Ier. 10.25. Heb. 10.38, 39. Luke 10, 11, 12. Heb. 12.25.
11. Whether to cast off the use of Gospel-ordinances, & to pre∣tend onely to live in God, be not to make Christ and his Spirit to act contrary to their own Sacred Lawes, Institutions, and In∣junctions of Worship, given to beleevers in the Scriptures to fol∣low: and when or where it was or is to be found in all the Scrip∣tures, that Jesus Christ hath, or doth so lead the Saints out of, or take themVid. Quaest. 39. off from the duties of his worship, and bid them to cease calling upon the Name of the Lord, seeing the Scrip∣tures hold forth the contrary. 1 Thess. 5.17. Pray without cea∣sing. 12. Whether a beleevers living in God, or in the Spirit, and bosome of the Father, and using of Gospel-ordinances, may not very well standThe nearer we are to God, the more in love we shall be with spirituall exer∣cises, and with all meanes to draw nigh to him, as Bookes, Sermons, good company, &c. Dr Sibbs in his Saints Happinesse, p. 65. together: And whether the right use of thoseTherefore the Lord converghes himselfe to the poore soule by an ordinance; which is such a thing as consists of a spiritual and yet an external and sensible nature. An Ordinance is the subject by which God communicateth himselfe and his goodnesse with a power of his Spirit to carry them to the soule, as by preaching of the word to the care, through the sound of a mortall voyce: by prayer, consisting outwardly of sentences and order: by the Sacrament also, standing of outward weak Elements. The Lord car∣ries to the soule by these, most inward and spirituall things. Rog. Treat. de Sacram. p. 247. Ordinances which Christ hath commanded, will not very much further, and advance a persons living in the God of those Ordi∣nances, considering, that through the presence of Christ with them, and the blessing of Christ upon them, the heart of a belee∣ver is made the more spirituall and heavenly. 13. Whether the Scriptures doe not joyn the greatest enjoy∣ments of God, with the greatest performance of duty towards God, and the greatest faith with the greatest obedience, and the greatest sense of love with the greatest care of service, as Psal.
119.32. 2 Cor. 5.15. 1 Thess. 5.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Luke 12.48.The Apostles meaning is, that we not one∣ly try, approve, and practise those things which possibly may be pleasing to God in some low degree, such things as set us a step beyond his displeasure; but we must search and doe those things which give him highest content, and carry us furthest into his favour. Things which come up to the exactest Rule, and beare truest proportion to the standards of Truth and Holinesse. Car. present duty and endea∣vours of the Saints. p. 9. Eph. 5.10. Luke 7.47. 14. Whether to live in God, and neglect the use of Ordi∣nances, be not a dividing between the end and the meanes, Christ having sanctified Ordinances as pretiousExperience teacheth, that the fellowship of the Word, Prayer, and the like, is the life, strength, blood and marrow of communion. Hence it is that they are called the Banners, Ensignes, Standards of Christ, and the Ministers the hearers thereof. For as Souldiers flock to the Standard and Ensigne, so doe the Doves of Christ to these windowes, &c. Rog. pract. Chat. p. 01. helps and furtherances to the Saints in their fellowship with God and one another, 1 Ioh. 1.3, 4. Acts 20.32. 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Pet. 2.2. And whether to divide between the end and the meanes, which God hath decreed and Christ instituted, bee not to make (in this respect) the will and minde of God, and Jesus Christ, voyd and of none ef∣fect. 15. Whether those that are true beleevers, should in the least refuse to own and to act in the use of those duties and Ordinances of worship which the eternall God himselfe doth not refuse to own, and to act in and work by to the end of the world,The word is , rendred by Hen. Stepb. Consummatio. Matth. 13.39.49. Matth. 28. 0 And whether that place of our Saviour inExhortatio hinc sumatur ut nos verae Ecclesiae adjungamus sententia, voluntate, confessione, cultut , & sejungamus nos ab illis coetibue, qui vel in totam doctrinam. Ecclesiae abjiciunt, u Mahometistae; vel fundamentum, hoc est doctrinam, articulos fidei, & verum Dei cultum subruunt quovis modo ut Papistae. Heming. in loc. Iohn 4, 22, 23, 24. doth not hold forth thus much unto us, in that he saith to the Woman of Samaria, that the Father seeketh after such to worship him, as worship him in Spirit and in Truth. 16. Whether the clearest demonstration that can possibly be given of a persons living in God, be not his holy walking with God, and living to and for God, as the Saints have done in former ages, and as the Scripture is cleare for, Gen. 17.1. Rom. 14.8. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 2.19. And whether to walk with God, and live to God, be not to deny our selves, and all that is ours, (in opi∣nion
or practise) and to subject our selves to the obedience of all that is his, that in all things he may be honoured by us, according as he is worthy. And whether the subjecting of our selves to all that the Lord hath made known to be His, in his Word, touch∣ing matters of Doctrine and Worship, be not the next way to honour and exalt his great Name before the world, Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.9. 17. Whether a person, as he is a Beleever, and a Christian, hath not a generall calling to walk in, in which he is in a more im∣mediate and speciall manner1 Cor. 7.24 to walk with God, and doe him service in the duties of his worship publickly and privatly, as well as a particular calling, as they are men, in which they have more immediate commerse with the creature: And whether the duties of their generall callings, as they are beleevers, are not of as great a consequence, and as much to be lookt after in order to the honour and glory of God, and their own spirituall welfare, as the duties of their particular callings for the good of the Com∣mon-wealth in which they live, and their own temporall, welfare; and if that a persons living so highly in God, (as the casters off of holy duties and Ordinances speak so much of) doe not take us from, nor destroy the performance of the duties of our particular callings, as we are men, which are the lesse; how can they, or why should they take us from or destroy the performance of the duties of our generall callings, which are the greater? 18. Whether there be not sinnes of omission as well as sins of commission, mentioned in the Scriptures, which Christians may become guilty of: And whether the rejecting and casting off the duties of Gods Worship, either in publique or private, or both, be not a sinne of this Nature in a high degree: And whether such a sinne of omission reigning in a person that pre∣tends to godlinesse, doth not declare him to beThe wicked in Scripture are characteriz'd by such kindes of sinnes as the sinne of o∣mission, Jerem. 10.25. Psalm 10.4. Hosea 4.1. Eccles. 9.2. Malach. 3.18. Matth. 25.41, 42, 43. Vide Reig. vol. 2. p. 297. Vid. Quaest. 26. out of Christ, and the state of grace, seeing that no reigning sinne can possibly stand with a persons being in Christ, according to Rom. 6.6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14. 19. Whether there be not a marvellous slighting and under∣valuing
of thePro. 9. , 2, 3. Wisdome bath built her House: i. Christ who is the wis∣dome of the Fa∣ther, in whom are hid : i. All the trea∣sures of wis∣dome and know∣ledge, Coloss. 2.3. wisdome and faithfulnesse of Jesus Christ, to cast his holyHeb. 3.2, 5, 6. If Moses the servant was no couseuing Merchant, but faithfull to him that intrusted him, in ap∣pointing the ordinances of legall service, how much more faithfull was Christ the Sonne in appointing the ordinances of Evangelicall service? Ordinances of divine worship, which he himselfe hath instituted, and given a Being unto in his kingdome behind our backes: And whether it be little lesse then blasphemy to speake disgracefully of the sacred things of his House,The word signifieth to speake disgracefully, or to take away the fame, credit, or good name of another, from , famam alterius laedere. Vide the workes of Mr. Sedgwick, Mr. Saltmarsh, Mr. Wilk, Mr. Avery, &c. and the Scriptures in which they are recorded, calling them poore, low dispensations, childish things, gold and silver Idols, empty formes, and such like ignominious speechs, if not a great deale worse (though the least of them doth not become any, much lesse those that pretend to live in God, to utter and make use of.) And yet further, whether such practises of casting off, and reviling the Ordinances and Churches of Christ (if willingly and knowingly done) be not a high step to thatCom∣mendat igitur nobis, &c. He therefore commendeth to us love and reverence to the Ministery of the Church, and the study of frequenting Church-Assemblies, from the danger of those who neglecting them, doe wander away and tempt God. Paraeus in loc. And then sheweth what the particular steps to the unpardonable sinne are: 1. A defection from the Assemblies of the Saints, or Church-communion. 2. A voluntary abnegation of the truth formerly acknowledged. 3. A malicious opposing and persecuting it. 4. A defection joyned with scorning and deriding. 5. A finall persist∣ing and persevering in such a defection, &c. id. ibid. unpardonable sinne against the Holy Ghost, according to Heb. 10.25, 26. 20. Whether such persons as cast off, and contend against the use of divine Ordinances, doe not ex diametro, i. directly crosse, and goe against (not onely others) but their own former experien∣ces, (if ever they had any) of those inexpressable Incomes of the Spirit, and discoveries of Divine love, and favour, which they have enjoyed both in publique ordinances, and private duties of worship, which time was, they would not have given, nor parted with for all the treasure and pleasure of the whole world, though now they judge lightly of them, and look upon as delusions of their own hearts, or things of no account, or value. 21. Whether casting off of Divine Ordinances, and forsaking the Assemblies of the Saints, that have fellowship together in the worship of God, be not so farre from living in God, as 'tis ra∣ther in the Scripture sence, a living2 Cron. 15.3. Eph. 2.12. without God, yea a depar∣ting from him, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 3.12.
which place is to be understood of Gospel-worship, as is evi∣dent by comparing it with the 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 verses of the same chapter, where the Apostle makes comparison between Christ and Moses, and shewes how farre the Lord Jesus Christ excells Moses in building and ordering the House of God with all the Ordinances of worship belonging thereunto under the Gospel, And thus Cain is said to goe out from the presence of the Lord, Gen. 4.16. or from Gods i. e. à facie Domini. face. Now what is signified by this, but his being removed from the wayes and meanes of enjoying the favour of God, which are hisSo the face of God is fre∣quently taken in Scripture, Psal. 24.6. Psal. 27.8. Psal. 105.4. Jonah 1.3. Quare non dubito sub hac voce notari adminicula quibus Deus nos ad se tollit, ex sua immensa gloria ad nos descendens, atque in terra nobis proponens imaginem elestis suae gloriae caeterum quia in unius Dei arbitrio est se nobis conspiciendum praebere (quod facit in verbo & sacramentis) in hoc intuitu oculos retineri decet ne nobis contingat quod Papistis, &c. Calv. in Psal. 27.8. Vide Sal. Glass. Philalog. sac. in verb. p. 104. Ordinances, and therefore cal∣led his Face, because in these he useth to manifest himselfe to his people, as two friends are said to doe when they speak face to face to each other. 22. Whether the promises of the Gospel (excepting onely that great and absolutePsal. 2; 8. Ioh. 6.37.39. Isai. 49.8.9 first promise of calling the elect to Christ) do not carry and contain in the bowels of them the matter of Re∣wards, and those rewards stand inThe promises are free in fie∣ri, being made onely out of grace, but con∣ditionall in fa∣cto esse, being performed and accomplished with dependance on duties in us, Reign. Synf. of Sin. p. 337. & 364. Vide Stock on Mal. cap. 2. Relation to presupposed ser∣vices and duties to be performed by beleevers in order to their enjoying those Rewards, as Matth. 7.7, 8. Ask and it shall be given to you. 2 Thess 3.4, Gal. 6.9 Heb. 3.14. 2 Pet. 1.5.8. & 10, 11 And whether a person can expect the performance of the Reward on Gods part, that neglects the duty required on his own part. 23. Whether one main end of the new Covenant of grace, mentioned Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.9, 10. wherein God promiseth to give his Spirit, be not to enable Beleevers, and cause them to walk in all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, accor∣ding to The roat  is very empha∣ticall, and fignifies, ad certum usum aptare vel disponere: i. To dispose & fit a person for employment, taken from dressing and making ready of meats and sacrifices under the Law. Vide Sheind. Lexic. penta Hutt. Heb. Bib. cum Cub. Leigh erit sac. Heb. in Radie. Ezek. 36.27. And whether a departing from Ordi∣nances, and ceasing to walk in a right observation of them, be
not a terrible shaking, if not a making of this glorious new Cove∣nant of grace (in this respect) void to the Saints: For to what purpose is there a Covenant made with the elect in Christ, to en∣able them to walk with God in all the righteous Statutes and or∣dinances of God, if there be none to be observed by them? 24. Whether a persons ceasing to perform the duty of prayer, and other duties of Gods worship, and to live onely in God (as such say that are against Ordinances) be not destructive to the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ, and all his glorious offices belong∣ing thereunto, especially that of his Priestly office, whereby hee makes continuall Intercession for true Beleevers, and by which we are made acceptable to God, Rom 8.34 Heb. 7.25. Ephes. 1.6. And whether (in this respect) it be not to raze the very foun∣dation of all our faith and hope in God for justification and accep∣tation alone by Christ; yea, a razing of the very foundation of all true Christian Religion, and according to the Apostle, to preach another Gospel, Gal. 1 8 9. For if there be no more need of the performance of the duties of Gods worship, in which (through Christ) we draw nigh to God (but the soule is to bee caught and swallowed up wholly into God, as these men speake that deny the use of Ordinances) then to what purpose is Christs Priestly office now on foot, to make our persons and Gospel spirituall sacrifices and services of prayer and praises acceptable to the Father, Heb. 13.15. 1 Pet. 2.5. 25 Whether to leave off, and altogether to cease the use of Gospel-ordinances and duties of Gods worship, be not directly against the revealed will and minde of God, and Jesus Christ contained in the Scriptures, thatIsa. 29.18. Ier. 29.12, 13 Zech. .17. Ioh. 10.16. Ephes. 6.18. 2 Tim. 2.22. 1 Cor. 11.26. Heb. 3.7, 11. Heb. 10.25. Jam. 1.18, 19, ad finem. expresly command & require the continuall performance of these duties, as hearing the Word, Prayer, administration of the Seales, Church-communion, &c. And whether this practice doth not proceed from a Popish, Pre∣laticall, and Antichristian Spirit, to make, and bring persons (in a great measure) to forsake the holy Scriptures (which ought to be theAll Writers both ancient & modern, that are sound and Or∣thodox, averre so much, as may be seen abun∣dantly in their works against the Papists and Hereticks, in all ages from the Apostles to to this day. only and sole Rule in all matters of faith) & prefer mens private thoughts, opinions, inventions, and unwritten Traditi∣ons above them, as is the practice of idolatrous and Antichristi∣an Papists to doe; yea whether such a principle as this, to cast off the duties of Gods worship, so expresly commanded in the Scrip∣tures to be performed, be not with the Papists, (the great ene∣mies
of Christ and his Gospel-institutions, to call for an Index Expurgatorius, to correct and cancell those many pretious Texts and places in the Scripture, that are point blank against this dan∣gerous opinion of forsaking Church-Assemblies, and use of Or∣dinances, as they doe many places of Paul in his Epistles, that hold forth justification E sola fide, i. by Faith alone without works. 26. Whether the Scriptures doe not number and reckon such persons as cast off Ordinances amongst the vilest of men, as pro∣phaneThe children of God by no∣thing are better known, then by calling upon him. Barlow on 2 Tim. 2.2. Let them goe branded like Satans slaves, sounes of Belial, who omit this duty. Id. ibid. Atheists, and Hypocrites, that make not conscience of the observing of them, but cast his Lawes behinde their backes, and count them grievous, and doe what in them lies to make them void, as Nehem 9.26. Psal. 10.5. Psal. 119.126. Psal. 53.4. Mal. 3.13, 14. and in especiall that of prayer, as Psal. 14.4. Job 27.10.Est emm hoc mortalium ani∣mis insitum, ut Deo offerendū. &c. Musc. in Joh. the law of Nature teaching men to worship and serve that God whom they acknowledge, (as we see in the practice of the meere Heathens, Rom. 1. and 2. chap.) and the law of Grace teaching men to delight in that God and his worship, whom they so draw nigh unto by faith in Jesus Christ, Psal. 119.97.103. 1 John 5.3. Acts 2 46, 47. And whether that place inThis is evident from the Apostles quoting this Text in Acts 4.25, 26, 27. against the Rulers, Elders, Scribes, &c that sate in counsell against them, and made open opposition against Christ in them, refusing to bow to his Scepter and Government held forth both in the Doctrine and practice of the Apostles. And to this agree Expositors generally. Psal. 2.1, 2, 3. be not meant of those wicked men (more especially) that cast off all Divine Ordinances and Lawes of Christs Kingdome and Government under the Gospel. 27. Whether the Face of Christ, in which the Glory of God the Father doth shine forthNon loquitur autem de corpo∣rea Christi fa∣cie; sed de ea quae salutis no∣strae dispensa∣tionem spectan∣dam proponit. Musc. in loc. 2 Cor. 4.6. be not to be understood of Gospel-ordinances and Institutions, Christ himselfe personally being now sate down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3. In which Face, or Ministery and Ordinances of Christ, the admirable and illustrious beauty of the eternall God, his infi∣nite wisdome, power and love, (which is hid from the world) doth so shine forth oftentimes, through the Spirit of Christ to the hearts of the Saints, that they seem to be out of the body, and in heaven, before they are in heaven, and in glory on this side glory, as it was with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.1, 2. And whether a Beleever be not bound to be in the use of these Gospel-ordi∣nances
and administrations, where he mayPsal. 27.4. behold this beauty and glory of the Lord, it being the Lords own way he hath ap∣pointed to reveale himselfe by, and not trust to other wayes of our own making, for the sight of this glory, having not a warrant for it in the Scriptures. 28. Whether a Beleever in this life, whiles he is cloathed with his earthly Tabernacle, can see Spirituall things, especially God Himselfe, who is an infinite and incomprehensible Spirit, so as to have fellowship and communion with him, and to live in him, otherwise then by an eye of faith, in theWe cannot see Divine things othewise then in a glasse: that sight of God which wee shall have immediat∣ly in heaven without the Word and Sa∣craments, is of a higher na∣ture, when we shall be perfect; but while we live here, we cannot see God but in Christ; and we can∣not see Christ but in the Word and Sacraments, such is the imperfection of our fight. Dr. Sibs Excel. of the Gospel above the Law, p. 280, 281, 286, 287, &c. glasse of Gospel-ordi∣nances, as the works of God, and the word of God; but especial∣ly Iesus Christ, who is God incarnate, God manifest in the flesh, and this Jesus in the mystery of the Gospel, and Seales, accor∣ding to 2 Cor. 3. ult. And whether the Lord doth not, (as a great testimony of his love to us in Christ) very much condescend and stoop to the weake and imperfect condition of his people, while they are here below, to make known the glory of his Wisdome, Mercy, Power, and Love to their soules by his Spirit in the Or∣dinances. 29. Whether the Commandements of Christ, so much spo∣ken of and mentioned in the Scriptures, doe not extend to the o∣bedience of the outward man, as well as the inward, and to the externals of worship as well as the internals of faith: And whe∣ther a person can upon Iust grounds, number himselfe among the friends of Christ, that doth not make conscience ofNota igi∣tur verae ami∣citiae est ob∣servantia vo∣luntatis amici∣voluntas Chri∣sti est in illius praeceptis; illis obedtre est vo∣luntati Christi este conformem. Amici Christi non sunt, qui Christi praecepta susque de{que} facientes doctrinis & mandatis hominum sub∣jiciuntur, Musc. in loc. keeping those commandements of Christ, according to that of our Saviour, Iohn 15.14. Yea, whether any one can say upon just grounds that he loves or knowes Christ, that doth not keep his comman∣dements, seeing the Scriptures speak directly against it, and ren∣ders such for lyers that pretend to know Christ, and love him, but yet keep not his commandements,Necessario igitur consequi quicunque jactant sidem sen studium pietatis, et interim studium servandae legis Dei negligunt, eos impudentissimc mentiri, Zanch in loc. 1 Iohn 3, 4. Iohn 14, 15. 30. Whether the end of Christs comming into the world,
were not rather to fulfill and confirme, then to disanull and make void the law of God ingraven in our hearts, and revealed in the Scriptures, whereby he calls for the obedience of the whole man, inward and outward, in the service of Christ. And whether such as break the least of these lawes, and shall teach others to doe so likewise, doe not bring themselves under that penalty of Matth. 5.15. to be counted: i. e, minimi fi∣et, imò nihili fiet, vult e∣nim dicere, illos exclusum iri è regno coe∣lorum. Piscat. in loc. least in the Kingdome of heaven, that is, to have no part nor portion in the Church of Christ here on earth, or the Kingdome of glory hereafter. 31. Whether those that enter on the actions and workes of their particular callings, or upon the use of the creature, especial∣ly at the accustomed times of refreshing Nature, as at Dinner, Sup∣per, &c. without seeking to God by prayer for, & praises through faith in Christ, can expect a blessing upon them, or a sanctified and comfortable use of them. And whether they doe not transgresse the revealed will of God expresly manisested herein, and discover a loose,Let us never come to the ta∣ble without cal∣ling upon Gods name, let us ne∣ver rise from the table without giving thāks; for it is certain, that all they that eat so, and doe not pray to God, are for the most part worse then bruit beasts. Calv Serm. in 1 Tim. 4.3, 4. brutish, and prophane frame of Spirit herein, Phil. 4.6. Be carefull for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplica∣tion with thankesgiving, let your requests bee made knowne to God. So 1 Thess. 5.17. Pray without ceasing, and the 18. verse, In every thing give thankes, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you So 1 Tim. 4.3, 4.5 speaking of meats that seducing Teachers should in the latter times endeavour in aAs on Fri∣dayes, in Lent, in Embring dayes, and fast∣ing dayes, &c. Calv. Id ibid. superstitious manner to cause people to abstain from, he saith, that God hath created them to be received withSic passim Do∣minus cibum sumpturus sur∣sum aspiciens et coelum invens, benedicit patri, et gratias agit. Mat. 14.15, 26. Marc. 6.. Sic Paulus Acts 27. 1 Cor. 10.31, ad hunc inquam usum cibos Deus fecit, Claud. Espenc. in loc. thankesgiving; so that a chiefe end of Gods creating every creature for mans use is, that they should be used with thankesgiving, and that they are not san∣ctified and blessed to us, without the Word and Prayer: i.e. with∣out actingThe Sun is a noble creature of it self, and yet the brightnes of it cannot come to us but to our condemnation, unlesse it be sanctified to us. By what, means? By faith. So fareth it with meat and drink, and all the rest. Calv. ut supra. faith and Christ a promise, and desiring God wee may so receive it, and have it blessed to us; so that to neglect pray∣er, and the exercise of faith in the promise, and giving thankes for all by Christ, we doe not onely frustrate and make void the end for which at first the Lord created them for our use, but we are deprived of that comfort that doth attend them, to those that are in Christ, and are at no better passe under the enjoyments of them, then those are that are out of Christ, who are wicked, prophane, and brutish, like the swine that feeds on the Acornes, that are under the tree, but never looks up from whence they fall.
32. Whether the Scriptures do not hold forth unto us, that the greatest and highest enjoyments of God in the Spirit, which the Saints have attained unto in this life, have been in their diligent use and improvement of Divine Gospel-ordinances, and duties of worship, Acts 4.21, & 9.11, 12. & 10.9.44. 2 Cor. 12.6, 7, 8, 9 And whether the Scriptures shew unto us any other way, wherein the Lord of glory hath ordinarily appeared unto his peo∣ple, besides that of his ordinances, to the helping of them upon all occasions, as their necessities have required. 33. Whether departing from Gospel-ordinances, and Societies of the Saints in the pure worship of God, bee not a notable trick (if not a strong delusion) of the Devill, which he makes use of, the better to further his cursed designe, upon the Lords people, by ta∣king them off from theirRev. 2.4. first love, and cooling (if not quench∣ing) that sacred heat, and fervour of the Spirit, that they formerly manifested in the service and worship of God, prescribed by Je∣sus Christ: And whether sad and lamentable experience doth not evidence so much, in some that are now changed in their walking, from what they were formerly, being as barren and empty in spiritual actions and assections as those that never knew what it was to be exercised in them, and as much to seek of their tendernesse, that once they manifested in respect of sinne,Contrary to Mat. 5.4. Mat. 26.75. 1 Cor. 5.2. with 2 Cor. 7.7, 9, 11. 1 Cor. 11.30, 31. Iam. 4.9, 10. 1 Ioh. 1.9. Zech. 12.10. , fig: luxum et delitias. Inde verbum , delicate vi∣vere, deliciari, voluptatibus indulgere. . In deceptionibus suis. Cum meudaciis et imposturis suis deceperint fimplives Christianos et pecunia eosdem eerint, postea ean∣dem in splendida et lauta convivia in aleam structuras magnisicas et scorta profundunt. Osiand. vide Gerrard. in loc. as that they judge it no other then a Spirit of bondage to been humbled for it, making no scruple at all to have fellowship with the un∣fruitfull workes (and workers) of darknesse, which the Saints are commanded to reprove and flye from, Ephes. 5.11. yea, be∣ing found in the number of those thato sport themselves with their own deceivings, 2 Pet. 2, 13. 34. Whether it be not a principall part of that great my∣stery of Heart-deceitfulnesse is within us, to conceive, that li∣ving in God will dead a Christian to the use and practise of or∣dinances, and performance of holy duties, when the chiefe end of a persons living in God is to dead the heart to sinne, and take it off from carnall and wordly things, that obstruct and hinder his communion with God, and to quicken it to Ordinances, and
spirituall duties; by the use of which (through the mighty work∣ing of the Spirit of Christ) his communion with, & communicati∣ons from God, are increased, and perfected day by day. And whether (to speak properly) the more a person lives in the Spirit, the more that person be notGal. 5.16. Vide Par. in loc. lifted off from Sin and Selfe, and worldld carnall delights, to walk closely with God in the du∣ties of his generall and particular callings; the contrary to which we too much finde and now meet with in those that cast off Or∣dinances. 35. Whether Jesus Christ be not infinitely delighted in, and affected with the assemblings of the Saints and exercisings of their gifts and graces in the duties of his worship, as appeares every where in theCant. 2.14. The Hebrew root  sig∣nisies prayers, praises, songs, thankesgivings, &c. as Psal. 5.3.26.7.28.2. vide Ainsworth in loc. Placet Domino vox Ecclesiae in discrimine ad cum consugient sicut de Israelitis ad marc interceptis dicitur. Exod. 14.15. Vox Ecclesiae eum confi∣tentis et celebrantis, et ejus totus aspectus, species, forma ac facies Ecclesiae. Merc. in loc. Scriptures, by his drawing nigh to them at such times, as to the Eunuch when he was reading the Scriptures, Acts 8.26. to the two Disciples when they were in conference going to Emmaus, to Cornelius and his friends when they were hea∣ring Peter, to Paul when he was in prayer, and Peter also in the same duty, Acts 9. & Acts 10. 36. Whether it be not the greatest unkindnesse that can be of∣fered to the Lord Jesus, to cast away, and speak evill of, yea to contend against those wayes and meanes in which hee hath most of all appeared to them, and spoken peace to their soules: And whether it be not a grieving of the spirit toThe word  properly signi∣fies basely to account of a thing, and esteem it nothing worth. This reproves those who pretend the Spirit, and despise prophesy, they have the Spirit to guide them, and therefore need no preaching. Tayl. in his Saints progresse to full Holinesse. p. 46. And then a little after, Many who have Jacobs voyce (saith he) professe in word better things, yet prize the preaching of Christ as a thing of nought: they think it better to be casting up some account, or reading some History, or walking in the fields, or visiting some friends, or perhaps going to a Play, then to a Sermon. Are these the sonnes of Abraham, or the sonnes of God, and not ra∣ther the sounes of prophane Esau? Id. ibid. despise prophesying, cease praying, and to forsake the Assemblies of the Saints, that meet together to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, 1 Thess. 5, 17, 18, 19, 20. 37. Whether the Father hath not commanded us to honour the Sonne as we are to honour himselfe, as in Iohn 5.22, 23. And whether a person may be said truly to honour the Father, thatQuia ut una est essentia, sapi∣entia, potentia, voluntas utrius∣que, ita etiam honor idem est utriusque, adeo ut qui alterum non honorat, aut ignominia fficit, is & alterum non bonoret, aut igno∣miuia afficiat: cum propter identitatem essentiae, omnia ipsis sint communia, adeo ut qui video filium videat patrem, Ioh. 14.9. qui confitetur aut negat filium, consiteatur aut neget & non habe at patrem. 1 Ioh. 2.23. Tarnov. in loc.
neglects the honour of Christ the Sonne: And whether the casting off those duties and ordinances of Worship Christ hath in∣stituted and ordained, yea commanded to be made use of, as King of his Church, be not rather a dishonouring then an honouring of him. 38. Whether there be any such way for Beleevers ordinarily to promote the honour and glory of Jesus Christ, and proclaime and beare out his Name before the world, then this their holy and conscientious observing the duties of his Worship at all times, and on all occasions, especially in times of persecution: And whether Jesus Christ hath not taken it well at the hands of his Churches, when they have done so, as Rev. 2.9, 10, 13. 39. Whether the Saints in the most purest Gospel times, that are yet to come, when the fulnesse of the Gentiles shal be brought in, and the Iewes called, shall not then make use of Ordinances, and duties of Worship,In most or all these places of Scripture is mention made of visible wor∣ship, officers and ordinances, and they are under∣stood by the most godliest Interpreters of the purity of those Gospel dayes and times which shall succeed the over∣throw of Antichrist, and the calling of the Iewes, as could easily be shewed, and doubtlesse some of those Texts, if not all of them, are yet to be fulfilled. So that the purest Gospel times shall not null, or make void the use of Divine Ordinances. Ezek. 37.21. to the end of the chap. Jer. 3.15, 16, 17. Esay 2.2, 3, Esa. 66, 18. to the end of the Chap. Mich. 41, 2. Zeph. 3.9, 10. to the end, Zech. 8.11, 22. Mal. 3.4. with many more. And whether the overthrow of Antichrist, and dis∣covery and removing of all false Worship at this day in the world, shall not be in order to the introducing and erecting or setting up the true worship of Christ in this Kingdome among the Saints. 40. Whether at this present juncture of time, when God is appearing in his glory, and setting up his King (the Lord Jesus Christ) upon his holy Hill of Syon, as he hath promised and pur∣posed of old to doe, Psal. 2.6. there be any thing more obstructive, if not destructive to the carrying on of this blessed work, accor∣ding as men may judge to outward appearance, then for those that presend to so much of God in them, openly to contest against the use of Divine Ordinances and Institutions of worship, wherein a principall part of Christs Kingdome on earth confisteth: And whether many of those that thus reject and despise the holy In∣stitutions
and Commands of Jesus Christ laid forth in the Scrip∣tures for all beleevers to observe in the worshipping of God, (af∣ter they have known and profest the same) be not like to prove the fittest instruments in the hands of Satan and Antichrist (if the Lord of glory prevent not) to trouble the peace of the Churches of Christ afresh, after the raging waves of the late tribulations be a little more asswaged. 41. Whether the Scriptures, when they speake of the Saints drawing nigh to God, be not meant of performing the duties of his worship, and drawing nigh to him in Ordinances, as in that ofEvery Ordi∣nance brings us neare to God, Levit. 10. The originall is  in propinquis mels. The Priests under the ceremoniall worship had the speciall honour of that Title, to be called Gods nigh ones, Numb. 16.9. he caused them to come neere him in holy services. Now all the Saints are a holy Priesthood, to offer up spirituall sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2.5. Caryl Serm. in Iames 4. See abundance more to this purpose in that pretious Sermon. If any desire further and fuller satisfaction in this particular, let him diligently peruse that excellent Treatise of that late emi∣nent and pretious servant of Christ Mr. Jer. Bur. called, Gospel-worship. Levit. 10.3. Psal. 73. ult. Iames 4.8. 42. Whether those that now cast off Ordinances, and contend against the use of them, doe not goe against the judgement, pra∣ctice, and profession of all the true Churches of Christ, that ever were, or are, from the beginning of the world to this day, and not only since but before the defection of Antichrist: And whether those that did first lead the dance in this unhappy course of deny∣ing the use of Ordinances, were not tainted and corrupted with the foulest Errors, and greatest Apostasie from the Truth, that may be, denying the authority of the Scriptures, denying the Trinity, denying the Divinity of Christ, & of the Holy Ghost, denying the Resurrection, the Being of Sin, or else making God the author of it, &c. in whose dreadfull steps many of late begin to tread, that cast off the use of Gods worship and ordinances, as lamentable experience witnesseth 43. Whether such as wilfully cast away the use of Ordinances, and duties of worship, and contend against them, have not just cause to question the truth of their Spirituall estates, and to doubt whether ever Jesus Christ were rightly formed in their hearts, seeing the truth of the work depends ordinarily upon the same means to build and perfect it, that first of all instrumentally begat it, which is the publique ordinance of the Ministery of the Gos∣pel, as 1. of Pet. 2.2. compared with Iames 1.18. Acts 20.21. Acts 26.18. 44. Whether departing from the ordinances of God, be not
one of thoseThese are times wherein a spirit of error is gone out into the world. That prophesie of Christ seems (in a great mea∣sure) to be ful∣filled in our dayes. Matth. 24, &c. Vide Car. Present Duty and En∣deavour of the Saints. p, 36, 37. deceivable wayes that false Prophets, and false Christs shall make use of in these latter dayes of the world, that are come upon us, to deceive if it were possible, the very elect, as Christ himselfe hath forewarned and fore-told, Matth. 24.24. And whether an elect person may not possibly be carried away with the error of the wicked (against which the Apostle Peter exhorts, 2 Pet, 3.17) for some time, Esay 29.24. And whether such may not come to see their error this way of leaving Ordinances, and casting off duties, before they are out of this world, especially on their Death-beds, when they may bewaile it with teares of blood, if it were possible, so sad may their condition be, as I heard a gracious woman in London once to speake of one of her Sex, whom she knew well, that was brought into such a dreadfull condition when she was on her Death-bed, for her wilfull slighting and casting off Ordinances and Duties of Gods worship, and pretending onely to Christs doing of all for her, and she to do nothing but look to him,Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. that she was brought to the very gates of hell and desperation. Those happy are that others harmes Against like evils strongly armes. 45. Whether Apostasie and falling away of Professors from the holy wayes of Gods worship, which once they profest and practised, be not a grievous judgement in it selfe, that God justly inflicts upon persons for their unthankfulnesse, and for unfruit∣fulnesse under Gospel-dispensations and Administration, receiving not the truth in the love of it, 2 Thess. 2.11, 12. And whether this evill be not a cause of many other evils to the Kingdome, provo∣king the Lord to lengthen out the miseries of this Nation. 46. Whether Anarchy, or the rejecting of all Civill govern∣ment in a State, be not eminently destructive to that State and Common-wealth where it once prevails: And whether rejecting of Christs spirituall Government, Ordinances, and Lawes of wor∣ship, be not to introduce a spirituall Anarchy into his Church∣state, and Kingdome, which he hath in the world, and is daily more and more advancing, and consequently an endeavouring (according to what lies in the power of creatures) to subvert and overthrow the glorious Kingdome of Jesus Christ, and to lay his honour in the dust: And whether those that shall persist and
persevere in such ondeavours, deserve not to be branded for ene∣mies to the glory and dignity of him whom the Eternall God hath exalted to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and to whom whosoever shall refuse to yeeld subjection (be he Prince or Peasant) shall be broken in peeces as a Potters vessell, accor∣ding as the mouth of the Lord hath spoken, Psal. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. 47. Lastly, to adde no more, Whether the Kingdom of Glory hereafter to be enjoyed in Heaven, be not the proper State in which God hath appointed the Saints to live immediatly in Him∣selfe without the use of Ordinances, and not the Kingdome of Grace here on earth, in which the Saints are imperfect, and see the Lord (for the most part) through a glasse darkly, knowing but in part, and prophesying but in part, till that which is perfect be come, according to 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. and the Apostles owne judgement of himselfe, Phil 3.13, 14. And whether to hold the contrary, be not to confound those two States of Grace and Glo∣ry, which the Scriptures doe distinguish, so that the casting off the use of Divine Institutions, and Gospel-ordinances, and Duties of Worship appointed for beleevers to walk in the practise of, till the Lord Jesus Christs comming again, must of necessity be lookt upon as having no bottome on the sacred Scriptures, but a vision of mens own brains, and deceitfull hearts, directly contrary to the Faith once delivered to the Saints,Epist. Jude, v. 3, 4. and therefore of all those that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, justly to be condemned and ex∣ploded.
AN APPENDIX By way of Post-script, To all those whom the former Considerations doe more especially concerne. SIRS, YOU have seen, (or may see) what that Balm is, which I have (as a weak instrument in the hands of Christ the great Physitian of Souls) en∣deavoured to powre forth in the former Consi∣derations, for the healing of your wounded soules: And you have also seen (or may see) in my Epistle to the Reader, what my grounds and ends have been in so doing; so that (I doubt not) but you will look upon me as one that hath had nothing in my eye, but the honour of Christ, and welfare of your soules. If the busines I have undertaken, had not been of great importance and concernment, I had not (I assure you) put pen to paper, but when I saw the sad effects were like to attend this opinion and practice of yours, by intro∣ducing a spirituall Anarchy and Confusion in the Kingdome of Christ, and threatning Ruine to all the true and right constituted Churches in the world, I could not butPrincipiis obsta, serò me∣dicina paratur, Cum mala per longa conva∣luere moras. make haste (according to theEphes. 4.7. measure of the gift of Christ vouchsafed to me) towards the preventing of them. If I have spoken or written none other then the words of Truth and Sobernesse, I shall desire you in the name of him, who is Truth it selfe (our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ) to subscribe thereunto: If otherwise, I trust by the same
grace received, I shall be ready to see it, and acknowledge it whensoever it shall be made out unto me: onely I shall desire, that the sameApud Eccle∣siae Alumnos non ad humanas rationes & co∣gitationes diri∣gendae sunt res divinae; sed ad sensum & vo∣luntatem do∣ctrinae spiritus, oratio inter∣pretatio{que} ac∣commodanda. Just. Mart. Neque te quo{que} disserentem su∣stinuissemus, nisi cuncta ad seripturas re∣fcrres; inde e∣nim demonstra∣tiones adducere studio tibi est. id. ibid. Dial. cum Triphon. medium, viz. the holy Scriptures of God, contai∣ned in the old and new Testament, which I have endeavoured to use in the former considerations, may be used by such as shall at∣tempt such a work. But because I may save that labour in order to your further and greater satisfaction, I have thought it requi∣site to doe something by way of answering those objections, or removing those grounds, upon which (I suppose) all of you, (or at least) many of you, doe build your practice of renouncing and casting off the use of Ordinances and religious Duties. Now I suppose the grounds upon which you build the cast∣ing off the use of Ordinances, may be reduced to these eight Heads. 1. That a person may doe well enough, and comfortably enjoy himselfe without the use of Ordinances, as hearing the Word, Prayer, breaking of bread in a communion of Saints, &c. 2. That the successe of things doth not depend upon the per∣formance of Duties and Ordinances, but on Gods eternall purpose and decree. 3. That God knowes our wants, and stands not in need of any of our performances, to move him to the helping and satisfying of us. 4. That many have used Ordinances, and performed Duties, but to small purpose, and those that doe use them, are little the better. 5. That Ordinances are but poore low Dispensations, and not so consistent with a Beleevers living in God, that is altogether above Ordinances, and that God doth use to lead his people from Gospel-formes, to a more immediate enjoyment of himselfe in the Spirit. 6. That none are to pray or perform Duties at any time, fur∣ther then they are moved thereunto by the Spirit. 7. That the use of Ordinances is more Legall then Evangeli∣call, and engenders to bondage rather then liberty, looking more to a covenant of works then grace, the Gospel requiring beleeving not working. 8 Another ground upon which people build their casting off the use of Word and Ordinances, is this, Because the Word and Ordinances are nothing without the Spirit. They can never work
any impression upon the soule, or acquaint the Spirit of a man or woman, that the Lord is his God, or that Christ is his Saviour, &c. but this belongs to the office of the Spirit of God; the Word and Ordinances of themselves are never able to work such an im∣pression in the soule. 9. That there are many places in the new Testament, which hodl forth the non-performance of duties, and laying aside the use of Ordinances, as Heb. 8.11. 1 Iohn 2.27. Rev. 21.22, 23. 2 Pet. 1. ult. These are the grounds upon which people build their leaving and casting off of Ordinances, some of them respect those that are meere Atheists, and others respect such as pretend to the greatest perfection of holinesse attainable in this life, I shall (by the help of Christ) make answer to them all, as they are laid downe, in order to the discoverie of the unsoundnesse of them. 1. Touching the first of the former grounds, upon which peo∣ple build the casting off the use of the holy Ordinances of Christ, and duties of religion, it was this, That a person may doe well e∣nough, &c. without the use of them. Now in answer to this, for the discovery of the unsoundnesse of it, I utterly deny it, and affirme the contrary, that such as cast off the use of Ordinances,1 Cor. 3.22. or live in the neglect of them, cannot possibly doe so well, nor so comfor∣tably enjoy themselves in the neglect, as they might if they did conscionably performe them, and my reason for it is this (which I conceive is ungainsayable) Because whatsoever such doe enjoy in order to their welfare and prosperity here in this world, though in the greatest fulnesse, they doe not enjoy it with the blessing and favour of God, they may enjoy them, but not comfortably, be∣cause not through a promise, nor by vertue of having interest in Christ, through whom all our enjoyments become blessed to us, and without whom all good things become evill and accursed to us. Now such cannot possibly enjoy their good things through Christ & a promise, that neglect prayer, &c (& so by consequence not enjoy them nor themselvs comfortably) because those mercies that come to us through a promise, and by vertue of our interest in Christ, they come in the way of Prayer, and the use of Ordinan∣ces; for the same God that hath made a promise to be our God, and to make us blessed in the enjoyment of himselfe and his mer∣cies,
hath also said, that he will be sought unto for all those mer∣cies, before we shall enjoy them, as Ezek, 36.37. And when a person is once in Christ, his being in Christ doth not take him off from duties, but rather puts him upon the diligent performance of them. And hence it is, that the Spirit of Christ that dwells in beleevers, is called a Spirit of prayer and supplication, Rom 8.15.26. Gal 4.6. Zech. 12, 10. And Christ hath promised beleevers to grant them their desires upon their asking his Father in his name John 14. and 15. and 16. chapters, Matth. 7.7. with many o∣ther places to the same purpose, and hereupon he enjoynes belee∣vers to watch and pray, and ask necessaries daily at the hands of God their Father, for the good both of their bodies and soules, their temporall and eternall welfare, Matth 6.11, 12. So that 'tis not faith in Christ, and a promise, that in it selfe simply conside∣red, makes us partakers and possessors of the good things of God with comfort, but faith exercised, and put forth in prayer, and use of holy Duties and Ordinances of worship. Faith in Christ, and the covenant of Grace, layes claime to the good things of God, yea God himselfe (blessed for ever) is his Portion, but Prayer fetcheth them in to the soule, through Jesus Christs mediation. And therefore as persons living in the neglect of duties, discover themselves to be destitute of the Spirit of Christ, and consequent∣ly of true faith in Christ, so they manifest themselves to have no true right to what they enjoy as men and women in Christ, nor to have them in mercy from God, or in a capacity to enjoy a holy and sanctified use of them, but are under all with the curse of God upon them, so that as the wise man saith, the very prosperity of such fooles destroyeth them, Prov. 1.32. The second ground upon which people build their neglect of duties, and casting off ordinances, is the Eternall purposes and decrees of God, who hath by them appointed how things shall be, and there is no altering of them, by our fasting, praying, &c. or performing any duties of worship whatsoever. Shall wee think (say some) that the judgement of the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine that walked up and down the Kingdome, as the Exe∣cutioners of divine Justice in an uncontrollable manner have been (in so great and wonderfull measure) removed from the prayers and supplications of any or all the Saints in England, and not ra∣ther from the predeterminate Councell and decrees of God. To which I answer, That the Decrees of God doe not exclude
in the least, the use of the means towards the effecting & bringing about of them, but as God hath determined in his eternall coun∣sels what he will doe for the good of any of his people, so he hath also determined that the means shall be used for the obtaining it: Yea, we finde in Scripture, that this is made a certain signe that God hath determined to do us some great good, when he stirreth up our hearts to be earnest with him in prayer, and the use of o∣ther lawfull meanes for the obtaining it, as we may see in Daniel 9.2, compared with Jer. 29.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. where we finde in these two Scriptures, two things to our present purpose, 1. That God had purposed the deliverance of his people from their Ba∣bylonish captivity, after 70. yeares were expired. 2. That he pur∣posed also, and foretold by Jeremy, that neare about the expira∣tion of those 70. yeares, a Spirit of Prayer should bee given to them, and they should goe and pray unto the Lord for their deli∣verance; and hereupon Daniel is stirred up about the end of those 70. yeares, to a more then ordinary seeking to God by fast∣ing and prayer, for the accomplishing of his promise, as is cleare from Dan. 2.3. and how much is the Lord taken with it, verse 20, 21, 22, 23. so that we may from hence easily see, that the de∣crees and purposes of God, doe not exclude the performance of prayer, and use of holy ordinances, but rather include them: not that they are deserving causes of our mercies, but onely such wayes and means as God hath in his wisdome appointed (in or∣der to the manifestation of our duty towards him) without which he will not vouchsafe us our desires. And hence it is also, that we find the practice of the Saints hath been manifested this way, by seeking to God in the way and use of his ordinances, for their enjoyment both of mercies Spirituall and Temporal, as the Scrip∣tures abundantly declare and testifie. And whereas many think, that the use of second causes, and or∣dinary meanes naturally, are sufficient to attain their desires with∣out the use of prayer, &c. because God hath given a power, or naturall force to second causes to doe us good, as fire to heat us, meat to nourish us, cloathes to warm us, reason to guide us, Phy∣sick to keep us in health, and cure us of diseases, &c. I wil evident∣ly prove from the Scriptures, that the Lord hath put his servants upon the practice of prayer to seek his blessing and directions in the use of all these, yea, in such naturall, civill, and morall things and actions, wherein all men have freedome of will, and want nei∣ther
ordinary meanes to help themselves, nor wisdome and un∣derstanding naturally to guide them. As for instance, 1. in the use of food, though there be therein a naturall vertue put and placed by God to nourish us, yet we finde how the servants of God have used prayer to desire the Lord to blesse that unto them, as Christ himselfe frequently, when he took bread he looked up to heaven and prayed for a blessing on it, and so the Apostle Paul and many others, according to 1 Tim. 4.5, 6. 2. In the undertaking of Journeyes, how was the Apostle Paul carried out by prayer to the Lord, for his direction, as in 1 Thess. 3.11. Now God himself, and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you. and Rom. 1.10. And thus Ezra in his journey towards Jerusalem with the children of Is∣rael that came out of Babylon, earnestly sought the Lord for a right way Ezra 8.21, 22, 23. 3. In the making of marriages, how did Eleazer, Abrahams servant, (though he were an understanding man, and very able to manage his businesse he went about) earnestly supplicate God for direction and successe, Gen. 24.12. where we finde, that be∣fore he attempted his work, he sought the Lord to give him good speed, as knowing that such in businesses as these, though but of lesser importance, the way to become prosperous was to seeke to the Lord for direction and good successe. 4. In the actions of our common Tradings and ordinary em∣ployments, the Lords people have desired God to blesse and pros∣per them, as knowing that it is not so much their naturall actions, and diligent endeavours that makes them rich and prosperous, as the blessing of God. And if there were no instances at all to be given, yet the command of God is so cleare for it, that it may a∣bundantly satisfie those that are ingenuous, as that of Prov. 3.6. In all thy wayes acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths And Phil. 4.6, 7. Be carefull for nothing, that is, in respect of the e∣vent, or issue, or successe of things, but in every thing, mark in every thing , by prayer and supplication with thankesgi∣ving let your requests be made known unto God. And then this will follow, that the peace of God shall keep our hearts and mindes through Christ Jesus, as if there were no true peace to be enjoyed where there is a neglect of a persons duty this way. 3. The third ground upon which people build their casting off
the use of religious duties and ordinances, is taken from Gods knowing of all our wants, and his readinesse to supply them with∣out our seeking to him: for say they, God hath no need of our prayers and performances to move him to doe us good. To which I answer, that though this be a truth, yet the infe∣rence men make from it in casting off the performance of duties, is not good, but weake and idle; for first of all, though God know our wants better then we our selves doe, yet he hath made it known to us in the Scriptures, that it is his will wee should spread them before him in prayer, &c. as Phil. 4.6. In every thing let your requests be made. known, saith the Apostle, and that by prayer and supplication, now this cannot be meant of making known these requests to any other then unto God, be∣cause he alone is able to supply us, to heare and help us. So Mat. 6.11, 12. & 7.7. Ezek. 36.37. 2. Though God stand not in need of our prayers and suppli∣cations, yet he will have us to perform them that wee may the better know our duties, and how much we are beholding to him who is the alone Author and Donor of all our enjoyments. And hence it is that he would have his people of old to put him in re∣membrance, and declare that they might be justified, Esay 43.26. not that Jehovah is forgetful, or stands in need of a Monitor, as it is too too frequently with poor creatures like our selves. No; but that we might know our duties, and consider from whom all our mercies flow, and to whom all our Returnes of praise ought to be made. 3. Although the blessed Nature of God in Jesus Christ be infinitly carried out with readinesse & for wardnesse towards the helping of poore creatures in and under all their wants and weak∣nesses, yet our seeking for this help, doth not in the least derogate from the glory of his goodnesse, but rather advance it. My rea∣sons for it, are these: 1. Because it is a most evident Demonstra∣tion to Heaven and Earth, that he is gentle and easie to be intrea∣ted, full of bowels of compassion, rich to all that call upon him, even to the young Ravens when they cry, as the Psalmist spea∣keth, Psal. 147.9. And me thinks there is a great Emphasis in the word [Cry,] as thereby noting to us, how gracious and full of compassion the Nature of God is, which could not be so well discerned, if there were not such Cryes put up from poore crea∣tures to him: So that the drawings forth of those tender mer∣cies
which are in God, by the cryes of his poore creatures to him, doe exceedingly speak: out and commend to men and Angels, the unconceivable goodnesse of his Nature. 2. Because the Lords pleasure, that we should first seek him, before we en∣joy mercies from him, is a great Argument of this singular love to us. And this is evident from hence: 1. In that it is from the great delight he hath to behold and heare the work of his owne Spirit in us, making intercession with sighes and groanes that are un∣utterable, Rom. 8.26. Cant. 2.14. 2. because he knowes that his mercies and blessings will be a great deale the sweeter to us, when we have got them in the way of prayer, as we finde they were to David, Daniel, and other of the Saints. And this the Saints find by experience, that those mercies which are gotten in a way of faith and prayer, (through much wrestling with God, and endea∣vour to honour him by beleeving) are farre sweeter to us then those that come to us in a common and ordinary way of generall Providence, and cost us nothing. 4. The fourth ground upon which people build their leaving the use of Ordinances, is this, that they themselves have used Or∣dinances, and performed duties, but to small purpose, and those that doe use them, are little the better by using of them. To which I answer, 1. As concerning themselves, whether they have not oftentimes discovered the contrary, beleeving that they have enjoyed very much of God at such times, when they have been in the use of Ordinance, as in Prayer, hearing the word, communion with the Saints, &c. saying with David, O how a∣miable are thy Tabernacles! my soule longeth, yea even fainteth for the Courts of thy House, Psal. 84.1, 2. And with Peter when he was with Christ in Mount Tabor, It is good to be here, let us build here three Tabernacles Matth. 17.4. This, I say, and much more, have those said and spoken, that now cast off Ordi∣nances. If they plaid the Hypocrites, and were not reall in what they did, but suffered their tongues to speake more then their hearts felt, they must blame themselves, and not finde fault with the Ordinances. Besides, doth the grace of God (wrought in any soule) teach them to lay the fault of their unfruitfulnesse and bar∣rennesse on the meanes, Christ hath instituted to make them fruit∣full? Are not such reasonings carnall and fleshly, and not from the Spirit, which such persons pretend to be wholly caught up to live and walk in. Why may not a sicke and diseased person,
that lies under the predominancy of corrupt humours in his sto∣mach, complain as well, that the ground of his distemper pro∣ceeds from his food which he eates (which is excellent good, and full of sweet nourishment in it selfe) and not from the super fluity of corrupt humours in his stomack. Therefore I should advice such persons as blame the sacred ordinances of Christ, to reflect back on themselves, & see the ground of all their unprofitablenesse in their own hearts. And whereas some say, that they have often prayed, but to small purpose; for they have seen it hath been all one to them and with them, when they have, or have not prayed, I would fain know whether this be not the very garb and lan∣guage of the Wicked, as the Scripture abundantly mentioneth, E∣say 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest it not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soule, and thou takest no know∣ledge of it? And therefore it seemes in the Prophet Malachies dayes, they resolve to leave praying, Malach. 3.14. It is in vain, say they, to serve God, and what profit is it unto us? Hippoctitas cannot endure to wait on the Lord, but like the King of Sama∣ria, What should I wait on the Lord any longer? 2 Kings 6. ult. whereas those that are true worshippers of God, (though they may at some times through temptation be shaken in their confi∣dence, and consequently be taken off from drawing nigh to God in duties for a season, yet) their hearts fall not foule with the duty, but rather with their own corruption, and are still pressing on af∣ter further communion with God, and greater enjoyment of him in the duties of his worship, and are resolved to wait on the Lord in a way of seeking his face, through the strength of Christ, and not to give him rest till hee hath returned to them, and spoken peace to their soules. The Saints know that the Lord hath graci∣ous ends in deferring to answer and help them when they cry un∣to him, and that they shall be no losers by their waiting on God, and therefore keep on seeking and waiting, though the Lord doe not forthwith heare and answer them. 2. As for that concernes others, that such as use Ordinances, and are daily in the practice of prayer, &c. are (for ought they can see) little the better for them: I answer, if they mean Forma∣lists, and carnall Gospellers, that have a meere form of godlinesse onely, but want the power of it in their hearts and lives, it can∣not bee denied but so it is, yet no reason in the least, why the blame should be laid on the Ordinances, or that any that are up∣right
in their walking wth God, should cease the using of them: for the abuse of what is lawfull by some, is no sufficient reason why others should bee taken off from the use of it. Meat and drink, and recreations, with other things that are lawfull and good in themselves, may be abused oftentimes by some that seeke after nothing more then the satisfying of their carnall lusts; yet that may not take off others from the moderate use of them. And so 'tis here in the poynt of Ordinances; we may as well reason, be∣cause Judas and Demas, with others, abused their profession of Christ, therefore none are to make profession of him. But secondly, if it be spoken of all in the generall, those that are upright before God in their performances and use of Ordi∣nances, as well as those that are meere formalists, then I demand of such, whether living in God (who is Love it selfe) can possi∣bly lead them forth to such wayes of uncharitable judging their brethren. It's true, that the best of the Saints may not live and walk up so exactly to those performances of duties and enjoy∣ments of holy Ordinances as were to be wished; I plead not for the unprofitablenesse of any under the meanes of grace: but, that none of them are fruitful, nor growing up to fuller enjoyments of God in Christ, through the Spirit, in the use of Ordinances and holy Duties, this I deny, as a grosse and foule untruth, having ex∣perience to the contrary in many of the servants of God through rich mercie. And I am confident of it, if those that now cast off Ordinances, could look with a clearer & stronger eye of love and charity in those that make use of them, and could beleeve that they live in the use of Ordinances (not formally and customarily, as the men of the world that place their greatest religion in the en∣joyment of them, but out of pure conscience, and obedience to the commands of Christ, and from higher and more noble principles and ends, then Hypocrites or carnall Gospellers can possibly put forth and manifest) they would not cry down the use of Gospel-ordinances, nor judge those for poore, low, weake Christians, that use them as now they doe. But (through an un∣grounded and unchristian jealousie that is entertained by them touching others, together with an high and over-weening con∣ceit of themselves) it is to be feared they are so offended with or∣dinances, and speak so contemptibly and undervaluingly of those that use them, I shall say no more to such, on this particular, but wish them to be cloathed with humility, and better to study the
grounds of their own leaving ordinances, before they call into question their brethrens, in the use of them. 5. The fifth ground upon which people build their neglect of Duties, and casting off Ordinances, is this: That they look upon Ordinances, and Duties of worship, as Prayer, Preaching, admi∣string the Seales, Church-fellowship, &c. as poore, low dispensati∣ons, weake formes, childish things, and such as be not so consist∣ent with a persons living in God, &c. but out of which God doth lead his people to a more immediate enjoyment of himselfe in the Spirit. Now for answer to this, First, I desire it may bee seriously considered, Whether the Ordinances and Institutions of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, are low things, poore, weake, childish dispensations; Are those low and childish things, in which the glory of Christs Wisdome, Power, and Faithfulnesse doth shine forth? And are not the Scriptures, & divine Institu∣tions and Ordinances of Christ held forth in them, such Dispen∣sations? How then darepoore sinfull dust and ashes thus reason and argue? Is it not rather a cleare Demonstration, that such men and women as thus speak, have low and base thoughts of Christ in the managing of that great busines his Father hath intrusted him with, about the ordering and governing his House & Kingdome. Let that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8.9, 10, 11. be seriously weighed, and then tell me whether the Dispensations of Christ under the New Testament, be low things and childish. The A∣postle in the former place shewes clearly that the very dispensa∣tion of the Legall Covenant ministery and ordinances, was. glo∣rious, but how much more then (saith he) must the Evangeli∣call Covenant ministery and ordinances under the New Testa∣ment be glorious? If the ministration or dispensation of Death and Condemnation under the Law, and that which was to be done away, was glorious, how much more the Ministration and Dispensation of the Spirit under the Gospel, which is perpetuall, & to remain, so that we see that the Dispensations of Christ under the New Testament, are all glorious things: and if so, how dare any speak so disgraeefully of them, as to call them poore, low, weake childish things? Doubtlesse the Lord Jesus will give men and women but little thankes for those * hard speeches of theirs they have uttered against him,. at his comming to execute judge∣ment upon all ungodly ones, Jude Epist. v. 15.
Besides, I desire such persons as speak so ignominiously of the Lord Jesus, ordinances, and Gospel-institutions, would but an∣swer mee, or rather the Lord Jesus Christ, to these few de∣mands. 1. Is the Name of the great and glorious Jehovah a low and meane, a poore and childish thing, and is not his Worship his name? 2. Is the publishing and bearing forth his Name before the world, a low and childish thing, and is not the Ministery of the Gospel so much? Acts 9.15. 3 Is the sanctifying this great & glorious Name of Iehovah, a low & childish thing? And do not the Saints do so much, when they drw nigh to God in the performance of the duties of his wor∣ship? Lev. 10.3. 4. Is Glory a low thing, and not worth the looking after, and is not Mount Syon and all the holy Assemblies so stiled? Esay 4.5. & 60.7. In a word, are not all the Vessels of the Lords spirituall Temple and House under the New Testament, clean and holy? And shall we call that common and unclean that the eternall God, the King of Sion hath cleansed and sanctified? As Christ said to Peter, Act. 10.15. so may I say to such men, Cal not those things common and unclean that the Lord Jesus (the great Judge of quicke and dead) hath cleansed and sanctified, and set apart for his use and ser∣vice, call not the ordinances and institutions with the holy Saints and servants of Christ (that are called out of the world to make use of them, in order to the lifting up of the glory of their Lord and Master, their Head and Husband) poore, low, weak things. If Christ will own them, and honour them, let men take heed how they despise and dishonour them. 2. Whereas it is said, that the use of such Gospel-ordinances and Institutions of worship, are not consistent with a persons li∣ving in God, I utterly deny it; & my reason for it is this, because those things that are subordinate in their nature one to another, may very well stand together without confounding and destroy∣ing one another: And so is it here, Divine ordinances of Wor∣ship, as Prayer, Preaching, hearing, communion with the Saints at the Lords Supper, &c. are subordinate wayes and meanes which Christ hath appointed to further (not hinder) a beleevers living in God. And the more the Saints are in the use of those
meanes, with upright and spirituall hearts, the more they are fur∣thered therein. Indeed living in God, and living in ordinances, cannot stand together, because a person cannot give his heart to two lovers at once; but living in God, and using of Ordinan∣ces as meanes in order to the enjoyment of the end, may very well stand together. As for example, A person that depends on God for his naturall life, eats and drinkes, and sleeps, and mar∣ries, and takes physick, and useth these and other like meanes, in order to the preservation of that life, and the use of these meanes doth not null or make void his faith in, or dependance on God. Indeed placing our life, joy, comfort, excellency in these, and putting our confidence in them, cannot stand with a persons living in, or depending on God, because it is to make them our gods, & not the Lord; but where there is only a conscientious use of them in obedience to the will of God, and in order to the furthering of his providence, there a person may bee said to live in God, and depend on him, very well notwithstanding his use of these. And thus it is in respect of a Christians spirituall life, he lives in God a∣lone through Christ, and makes him alone the Rest and Center of his Soule, and yet makes use of Prayer, Preaching, rea∣ding the Scriptures, fellowship with the Saints, &c. as the meanes which Christ hath appointed in order thereunto. And therefore what can be plainer then this that we affirme, viz. that living in God, and using of Ordinances, are consistent, and may well stand together. And what horrible wickednesse and Hypocrisie is it inI charge not all, but some more especially, that are  of this opinion and practice, who are grown very loose and pro∣phane in their worship. many of those that deny the use of Ordinances, and af∣firm that living in God, and using of ordinances and duties, are not so consistent, when they can grant, that living in God, and dicing, drinking, dancing, drabbing, &c. (with divers other a∣bominations that are done of them in secret, and too too openly, that a man may be a shamed to mention, Eph. 5.12.) are consi∣stent, and may very well stand together. But, ô tempora! ô mores! Oh the desperate wickednesse of men and women in this Age! Can the wayes and workes of darknesse that the Lord hath for∣bidden, stand with a persons living in God (which is such a blas∣phemous abomination, as hell it selfe can hardly afford a fouler) and cannot the wayes and works of righteousnesse and godlinesse, the serving and worshipping of God, stand with living in God? O quintessence of impiety. thou child of the Devill, thou enemy of all righteousnesse, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right wayes
of the Lord? Acts 13.10. What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? Sharp Arrowes of the mighty, with coales of Iuniper, Psal. 120.2, 3. 3. Whereas they say, That God doth use to lead his people out of those low and childish dispensations, to a more high enjoyment of Himselfe: I answer briefly, Is it not a childish reasoning to say, God leads children from their childish words and actions they manifest whiles they are children, therefore hee leads them from speaking, and reasoning, and discoursing, and studying, and other actions that belong to a rationall creature when they grow old: So here, what weaknesse doe men discover to the world, when they say, God leads his people out of the use of ordinances, and wayes of worshiping and serving of him, by prayer, &c. when he leads them out from their ignorance, darknesse, fleshli∣nesse, filthinesse, carnalnesse, that was wont to cleave to, and bee mixed with their performances. Because God leads his people out of living in, and trusting to their meat and drink, and other creature-comforts and enjoyments, to which their hearts are apt and prone to bow down; therefore he leads them out, and takes them off from eating and drinking, and use of creature-com∣forts: what madnesse would it be in any man to affirme this? So here, because God is pleased to take off his people more and more from their unbeliefe, pride, selfe-seekng, &c, and other weaknesses and sinnes, in the performance of the duties of his worship, therefore hee leades them out of, and from the duties themselves; Is not this handsome reasoning. Besides, how can it possibly be, that God should lead the Saints from the use of Or∣dinances, when he hath ordained the perpetuall use of them to his Saints in all ages, as I have shewed in the Quaeries. Hee leads his people indeed to live above them, but not to live without them. 6. The sixth ground on which people build their neglect of Duties, &c. is this, That none are bound to pray, or performe Duties,, &c. further then the Spirit moves them thereunto. Answ. To which I answer in the first place, That though this be a Truth in somesense, yet we should take heed how weThough wee are to goe when Gods Spirit moves us, yet are we not to neglect when wee doe not perceive such sensible moti∣ons of the Spi∣rit. &c. Bolt. Bounds of Christian freedome, v. 202. We must doe duty sometime out of obedi∣ence, although we want both a heart to it, and a heart in it. Id. ibid. a∣buse it, and make a wrong use of it, to bring about those ends for which it was never intended, as this in particular for one, viz. The willing omission, and witting neglect of the duties of Gods worship both publick and secret, which he calls us daily to the performance of. It is true, as the Spirit of Christ is the efficient
cause of spirituall life in beleevers (without whom we can doe no∣thing, Iohn 15.5.) and works the grace of Sanctification in their hearts, so there is no performing of holy duties without him: But whether a beleever so sanctified and enlivened by the Holy Ghost, is not toThough wee cannot bring the Spirit to us, yet let us set our selves in the way for him, to meet with us. Hold up the performance of duty, &c. Id. ibid. enter upon religious duties, before the Spirit put forth a new act of spirituall life in him, I suppose can hardly be made out: For I suppose after Regeneration, or the new Birth, when a person is implanted, or incorporated into Christ, he is not to be lookt upon as a meere passive in the performance of holy duties, as Prayer, Mortification of sinne, &c. but as a worker together with God. And so much those eminently anoynted and qualified servants of Christ, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, and Mr. Ieremy Burronghes, and Mr. W. Greenhill affirme. Mr. Tho. Goodwin in hisTreatise of the tryall of a Christians growth, p. 82, 83. & 138, 139. Treatise quoted in the Margent touching a beleevers Morti∣fying sinne, saith, We are purged from sin as the body is by Physick from humours; though the Physick work, yet Nature joynes with the Physick, being quickned and helped by it, to cast out the humours: so as the meanes whereby God purgeth us, are not to bee imagined to doe it, as meere Physicall A∣gents, like as the pruning-hook cuts off branches from the Tree, or as when a Chyrurgion cuts out dead flesh; but these meanes doe it by stirring up our graces, and quickning them, and by setting our thoughts, and faith, and affections a-worke, and so God assisting with the power of Christs death, he doth purge us daily, by making his word, afflictions, &c. for to set our thoughts on work against sinn. It is certain, that unlesse our thoughts work on the meanes, as well as the meanes work up∣on us, and so mingle themselves with them; unlesse Faith and Christs death bee mingled in the heart, it purgeth not: And therefore it is said, we purge our selves, as 2 Tim. 2.20. and 1 Iohn 3.3. and Rom. 8.13. Wee by the Spirit mortifie the deeds of the flesh, this is said (saith hee) as well as that God purgeth us, because God still in going on to purge us, doth it by stirring up our graces, and useth therein acts of our faith, and love, and many motives and considerations to doe it. Thus this pretious servant of Christ holds forth, with much more to this purpose, taking off the grand objection is made against it in the same Treatisa, p. 138, 139. Mr. Burroughes on Hosea speaking against wanton Professors in this Age, saith, We finde revealed in the Gospel, that it is
God that must work the will and the deed; the Covenant of grace is such, as that God doth not onely require, but work all for us. How is this goodnesse (saith he) mis-interpreted and abused? Therefore (say they) what need wee doe any thing? Why doe Ministers urge people to duties? Your principle is good, the truth is good, that it is God that workes all in the Covenant of Grace, but this deduction is very absurd and vile, and an abuse of Gods goodnesse, that therefore you must not work together with God, as rationall creatures, &c. p 743. So Mr Greenhill, in his elaborate Lectures on Ezekiel, Chap. 3. verse 1, 2, 3. p. 293. Observ; 1. hath these words, The god∣ly must act and put forth their graces towards further reception of spirituall things; When Christ will give Ezekiel Donum Prophetiae, a Roll to eat, he opens his mouth, he sets a-work his faith to receive this gift of prophesie; Faith in the habit is like the mouth shut up, nothing enters; but in exercise it's like the mouth open, and ready to receive. It's infinite mercy that God at any time will offer us spirituall favours and excellencies; we should therefore beforward, and stirre up our soules and graces to the receit of such mercies. It's a lazy and ill excuse for godly ones to say they can do nothing: Grace is an active &an enabling thing, and where there is a principle of life (as all godly men have) there is a specificall difference between that man and a∣nother that hath it not; a man without it cannot act nor stirre up himselfe to a further reception of spirituall things, because he is dead, but a man that hath it, can & ought to quicken up his own soule to spirituall things. The Prophet had received the Spirit that entred into him, and he opened his mouth, exerci∣sed his Faith, to take what the Lord should give: The Apostle Paul bids Timothy stirre up the gift of God that was in him,. 2 Tim. 1.6. He would have men deal with their gifts and gra∣ces, as they doe with fire vnder the ashes, they blow them off. and blow the fire up, and there is a flame fit for service. Sloth, feare, infirmity, carnall reason, are ashes that doe oft cover divine fire, that it seems dead; but we must stirre up our selves, blow off those ashes, and blow up the fire of grace, that it may burn and shine, be usefull to our selves and others. The Prophet com∣plains in Esay 64.7. There is no man that stirreth up himselfe to take hold of me: they are like men asleep, that sit still and doe nothing. The vulgar is, Non est qui consurgat.
So that I conceive as it is in the great businesse of a Beleevers mor∣tification of sin, so it is in the performance of prayer, and other religious duties; the Rule by which a true beleever is to walk in the performance of those duties, is not to sit still and doe nothing till hee is wrought upon by the Spirit, but hee is through the strength of grace received, to act hisThey that speake against performance of duty, might as well speake a∣gainst the act∣ings of faith & exercise of grace: for pray∣er is nothing else but the com∣munication of the soule with God, the act∣ings of faith, & exercise of grace. Bolt. ut supra. faith on the truth and faith∣fulnesse of God in the promise, who hath undertaken to give in as∣sistance to us, and ability to goe through that worke hee calleth us unto, and requireth at our hands. For the same God that calls us to duty, hath promised to give in strength by his Spirit, to dis∣charge it; and this faith is to rely on, and make use of for its en∣couragement in all the workes the Lord calls a beleever to the performance of; not but that faith and all other graces are the Spirits, but because the Spirit doth not act without them in a true beleever. For doubtlesse such as are truly incorporated into Christ, and made one Spirit with the Lord, are not acted as dead stockes, as if every time and moment of their acting Godward, they received new life from the Spirit of Christ. And I am con∣fident, for want of the knowledge of this, it comes to passe, that many formall easie Professors, take such liberty to themselves to live in the neglect of holy duties, because they say, they can doe nothing of themselves further then the Spirit moves and quickens them, as if one that is in Christ, were altogether without spiritul life and motion longer then the Holy Ghost falls upon him, as in the first act of conversion. From whence it must needs follow: 1. That there are no habits of grace, nor inherent workes of holinesse wrought in beleevers at their first Conversion and Rege∣neration, when Christ is formed in them, which is contrary to theIohn 1.16. 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephes. 2.10. Ephes. 4.24. Scripture, and all found Writers. 2. That whensoever a beleever is without the motions of the Spirit, as in times of sleep, and bodily rest, or times of temptation, yea falling into sin, as the best are subject to doe James 3.2. then he is not to be lookt upon as one in Christ, which is as absurd as unsound. 3. That all those1 Tim. 4.14, 25. 2 Tim. 1.6. Luke 21.26. Ephes 6.18. Iam. 1.19, 21. Phil. 2.12. 1 Cor. 15. ult. exhortations to beleevers, that concern the stirring up their grace, their watchfulnesse to the performance of religious duties, their working out their salvation with feare and trembling, Their giving all diligence to make their calling and election sure, their fruitfulnesse in good workes, and abounding in the work of the Lord, &c. are void and of none effect, making
beleevers under the Gospel and new Covenant of grace, to be in no better condition then those that were under the Law, & a Co∣venant of works, who had their duties discovered, but had not grace and power given to them to enable them to the discharge of them, which is contrary to the Tenor of the new Covenant, which all those have a share in, that are in Christ, and can say in some measure, as Christ their Head did, Psalm 40.7, 8, 9. compa∣red with Heb 10.7, 8. I delight to doe thy will, O. my God, yea thy Law is within my heart. 4. That there are no just grounds for Christ and his Apostles in the Scriptures toMat. 26.40. Mark 16.14 Luke 24.45. Mat. 25.26. Heb. 5.11, 12. 1 Cor. 5.2. Rev. 2.4. Rev. 3.15, 16, 17. charge home the guilt of sinnes of omis∣sion and neglect of prayer, repentance, mortification of sin, &c. nor the guilt of carelesnesse, slothfulnesse, negligence, luke-warmnesse in the service of God, upon such as are beleevers, which is fre∣quently done by them, as we may read in the New Testament: for if they can act no longer nor no further then the Holy Ghost acts them, as t their first conversion, then why should they bee char∣ged with such faults, and commanded to amend, threatned if they doe not, as Rev. 2 4, 5. seeing God deales not with belee∣vers in Christ under the Gospel any longer by a Covenant of works, but of grace, though the Covenant of Grace bee full of justice, and in the hands of him who orders it in righteousnesse, whosePsal. 89.32, 33. Scepter is a righteous Scepter, and will correct his sub∣jects in righteousnesse yet still in greatest love and mercy. 2. Besides secondly I answer, Doth not this ground upon which people build the neglect of duties, &c. as it is propounded, expose them to great danger of being acted byVid. Boltons Bounds of Christian freedom, p. 199. where hee shewes how Sa∣tan may move a person to the performance of religious duties many wayes. a Spirit of Delusi∣on: For suppose (they staying till the Spirit move them (as they speak in the former ground) to pray, &c.) that the motion to the performance of the duty be irregular, and unseasonable, yea alto∣gether unsuitable to the calling and condition of the party that is moved to the duty, shall they forthwith conclude, that this mo∣tion is from the Spirit of God? Nay, are they not rather to con∣clude, that it is from Satan, who is a lying and deceiving Spirit, whose depths and wiles are numerous, and who knowes how to advantage himselfe against us as well by ill performing of duties, as by Non-performing them: and is it not the generall opinion and judgement of the godly that are taught of God, that one speciall differencing character between the motions of the Spirit of God and Satan, is this, that the one moves orderly, seasonably, and
suitably to the word, and a persons calling and condition, but the other disorderly, unseasonably, and contrary to, or at least without the word. And therefore without question, those that build their performing of duties upon this ground onely, may as well (especially if they be not experienced Christians) bee delu∣ded by Satan as led by the Spirit of God. 3. Lastly, to say no more; are not the Scriptures altogether si∣lent herein, and doe not in the least hold forth such a Rule as this to beleevers, that none should not enter on the performance of duties, till the Spirit move them: nay, is it not as cleare as the Sunne at Noon day, that the Scriptures doe expresly hold forth to the contrary,Luk. 21.36. Rom. 12.12. Ephel. 6.18. Col. 4.2. 1 Thess. 5.17. enjoyning beleevers to pray alwayes, to pray continually, to pray without ceasing, to watch unto prayer, with sundry the like expressions, not (take heed) as if beleevers were to doe nothing else but pray and perform religious duties; for then there would be no place left for their civill employments in their particular Callings, which in their place and order are to be done also, but that they should endeavour to preserve in them∣selves a holy and spirituall disposition towards that duty, and all other duties of the like nature, that so they may be ready upon all occasions, ordinary and extraordinary, publique and privat, to draw nigh to God in the performance of them. Object. But doth not this derogate from the honour of the Spirit? Ans. No more then the working of particular & next causes do from the universall cause, which seldom or never produceth parti∣cular effects without a concurrence of particular causes. e. g. The Sunne is the universall cause of all the fruitfulnesse of the Earth,Vide Bridge Overflowings of Christs ful∣nesse, p. 31, 32. yet it doth not produce that fruitfulnesse without the help of man: So here, the Spirit of God is the universall cause of all the spirituall actings of the Saints, yet he doth not ordinarily produce those actings without the concurrence of those gracious habits are wrought in their hearts in their conversion. Nay, the con∣currence of such particular causes with the universall cause, can be no dishonour to it, in regard that they doe not act by them∣selves properly, but together with and from the influence and vertue of the universall, without which they could doe no∣thing, John 15.5. The seventh Ground on which people build their neglect of duties, is this, That the performance of duties and use of Ordinan∣ces,
is more legall then Evangelicall, looking more to a Covenant of workes then a Covenant of Grace; engendring to bondage, where as the Gospel gives more grace, and affords more liberty, looking more to beleeving then working. Ans. The whole frame of this Argument is carnall, and sa∣vours too much of the flesh, and very much nnbeseeming those that would have the world to look upon them as more then ordi∣narily spirituall, and such as have attained to greater enjoyments of God then others. My Reason is this, Because those persons that enjoy most of God, and live highest in the Spirit, have their hearts most enlarged and carried out in communion with God in Ordi∣nances, and especially that of prayer, so that I may truly affirme it, A man of most grace is a man of most prayer, but a man of least grace is a man of least prayer. And wee have a singular evidence of it in the Apostle Paul, who was as Evangelicall a Christian, and lived as highly in God (I suppose) as any that now cast off Ordinances, how exceedingly was he given to prayer, how much was he in that duty as well as in other duties; but in this of pray∣er he was more then ordinary, so frequent, as if he had leasure for no other employment, and tooke delight in nothing else. And hence it is, that he saith oftentimes, that he prayed withoutRom. 1.9. Col. 1.3.9. 2 Tim. 1.3. Phil. 1.4. Philem. v. 4. 2 Thess. 1.11. 1 Thess. 3.10. cea∣sing, that he prayed alwayes, that he prayed exceedingly night and day, with divers! such like expressions. And as it was with this pretious servant of Christ, so it hath been with the most eminentst beleevers in all Ages, so far have they been from looking on per∣formance of holy Duties, as Legall Services, and engendring to Bondage. 2. But secondly, if wee diligently observe the Tenor of the Gospel, and new Covenant of Grace, shall we not finde that they call upon beleevers for the strictest and most exactest performan∣ees of the duties of Gods worship, not allowing beleevers to live in the willing neglect of any known duty towards God, or man, or themselves; if wee are not convinced of it, let that notable place of Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. be considered, where the Apo∣stle shewes, that the Grace of God that bringeth salvation, viz. the Ministery of the Gospel and new Covenant, that worketh grace instrumentally in mens hearts, and revealeth the freelove of God through Jesus Christ, to sinners, hath appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: i. e. so∣berly
in respect of our selves, righteously or justly in respect of men, and godly or holily and religiously in respect of God. In which words I conceive are wrapt up the whole duty of a Chri∣stian as it respects the first and second Table. This is the Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, or new Covenant of grace, not of the Law, or Covenant of workes: And the Apostle in the 14. verse goes on to amplifie it, by shewing one chiefe end of Christs comming into the world was, to redeem them from iniquity, and to sancti∣fie to himselfe a people zealous of good workes; where he gives us also a character of those that are the peculiar redeemed ones of Christ, that they are such as are not onely freed from the power and thraldome of their lusts, but are made zealous of good works. To this place many more might be added, as Luke 1.74 75. Jam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ezek. 11.14 & 6.27.37. But thirdly, it's considerable to examine and enquire what this Liberty is which the Gospel brings with it to beleevets; now without question it cannot be meant of a lawlesse liberty, a car∣nall, sensuall, sinfull liberty, a liberty and freedome to dishonour Christ, to cast his Lawes and Ordinances behind our backes, and to live as we list. It's as cleare as the Sunne at noon day, that the Gospel brings no such liberty with it to the world: indeed the Devils Gospel doth, and Antichrists, and Mahumets, they give to people elbow-roome enough, as we use to say, in the wayes of sinne, but not so with the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ,Tit. 2.14. Rom. 6 14. 2 Tim. 2.19. 1 Ioh. 3.3. Rom. 6.1, 2. for this saith, Christ came to redeem us from iniquity, this sayth, sin shall have no Dominion over us, this saith, whosoever names the Name of Christ, must depart from iniquity, this saith, hee that hath true hope in Christ, purifies himselfe as Christ is pure; this saith, we are not to continue in sinne that grace may abound, nay it demands a reason how men can imagine that those that are dead to sinne (through interest in Christ) should live any longer therein;1 Pet. 1.14, 15. 1 Cor: 15. ult. Phil . 11. Tit 3.8. 2 Cor. 7.1. Phil 3.13, 14. and doth not the Gospel of Christ say also, that wee should be holy as Christ is holy, that we should abound in the work of the Lord, that we should be filled with all the fruits of righteousnesse, that we should bee zealous of good works, and maintain good workes, and perfect holines in the feare of the Lord, forgetting what is behinde, and pressing after what is before, &c. 4 Besides fourthly, the use of Ordinances, and performance of duties under the Gospel, is to bee lookt upon as a Beleevers
priviledge, not as his burthen: and if the commands and service of Christ be called a Yoke and a Burthen, and Bonds and Cords, in the judgement of men, yet it's an easie yoke, and a light bur∣then, such cords and bonds as are gentle, so that as the Apostle saith, his commandements are not grievous, 1 Joh. 5 3. The pe∣dagogy of Moses indeed was burdensome and grievous, so that our fore-fathers could not beare it; but not so with the service of Christ under the Gospel, when heavenly and spirituall soules are in it. Indeed when carnall hearts enter upon, or tarry any time in and under the service of Christ, they are as under a burthen, and the worke they are about is a burthen to them; and what's the reason but this, that there is an unsuitablenesse between the work and their hearts, neither come they to enjoy communion with Christ in Duty, but come to the very duty as men do to their task or daily labour:Vide Bolt. true Bounds of Christians Freedom, p. 213, 214. now that person that hath to doe with no∣thing but duty in duty, cannot chuse but finde that duty tedious and irksome to him, as the ordinances under the Law were to the carnall Jewes that did not eye Christ in them. But now on the other side, when a gracious spirituall heart comes to a spirituall duty, & not to the duty so much as to God and Christ in the duty, to converse with the Father and the Sonne in the Spirit, how sweet and delightfull then are times of duty unto such soules, so that the performance of duties in a right manner, is no Legall thing, nor matter of burthen and griefe to the Saints; but that which affords them the greatest sweetnesse, content and satisfacti∣on that is to be enjoyed on this side glory, and so is to bee lookt on as matter of priviledge, not of bondage. 5. To say no more; whereas it is said, that the Gospel requires be∣leeving, not working; if by working you understād the purchasing of life and salvation at the hands of God by our performances, the justification of a sinner before God, &c. it's granted, the Gospel requires it not at the hands of sinners, because it offers more grace, that is, it shewes us the work is done to our hands by Je∣sus Christ, he hath procured our ransome, satisfied his Fathers Ju∣stice, appeased his wrath, procured peace and reconciliation, and that firmly through his own blood, and wrought all our workes for us this way, Esay 26.12. And our duty is primarily, and a∣bove all, to beleeve this, and accept this as it is held forth in the Gospel,Iohn 6.29. 1 Iohn 3.23. because the great work of God, and commandement of the Gospel, is to beleeve in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that we
may be saved. But if by working wee understand the fruit that flowes from our beleeving in Christ, and taking hold of him to justification and salvation, viz. a holy study in all our wayes to please God, and doe his will, to walk in a childlike fear and reve∣rence before God, and have respect to all his commandements, that in all things we may be found to the honour and praise of him that hath loved us, and called us out of darknesse into his marvellous light, &c. then I suppose there is none whatsoever that pretends to Christianity (especially if he have in an experimentall manner felt the love of Christ shed abroad in his heart) but will acknow∣ledge the Gospel requires such working. And the whole scope of the New Testament is so cleare and plain for this, as that none but such to whom the Gospel is hid, can be ignorant of it. If any desire further satisfaction herein, (for it would be too large for me to produce all that might be spoken to this particular) let him read those GospelDownam of Iustification, l. 7. c. 1. p. 434, 435, 436, 437, 438. Bisco's golri∣ous mystery of Gods mercy, p. 298, 299. Eatons Hony∣comb. Boltons bounds of Chri∣stians freedom. Burges Vindi∣diciae legis, p. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. with many other. &c. Treatises that are abroad concerning this poynt. 8. Another ground upon which people build their casting off the use of Word and Ordinances, is this, Because the Word and Ordinances are nothing without the Spirit. They can never work any impression upon the soule, or acquaint the Spirit of a man or woman, that the Lord is his God, or that Christ is his Saviour, &c. but this belongs to the office of the Spirit of God; the Word and Ordinances of themselves are never able to work such an im∣pression in the soule. Answ. I find an answer to this objection in Doctor Crisp, vol. 3. p. 93. 94. 95. which because his workes have been of great esteeme amongst such people not long since, and because he speakes fully to the point in hand, I will here transcribe, as they are in the book set downe; the words are these, p. 94. What serve all the Ordinances for, will you say? Is not here a crying down of Ordinances? There will be still this scandall cast upon us: But let me tell you, there is a most comfortable use of Ordi∣nances, though they serve not to such high purposes as these are: I say, though they are not efficient to beget, and finde out, and re∣veale to the spirits of men the things that concern God, yet beside the efficient revelation of God to be out God from the Spi∣rit alone, there is a passive Instrument, by which the Lord doth make himselfe known to be the God of his people, but that way is meerly passive, not active.
1. Passively God makes himselfe known to be the God of his people by the word of his grace, and faith laying hold on the word of grace revealed, and more subordinately in prayer, fast∣ing, receiving the Lords, Supper, and such ordinances, so farre as they are mixed with faith. Now give me leave to communicate to you the full use and utmost extent of Gods thoughts concer∣ning the ordinances that he hath propounded, how farre forth he would have the creature look upon the ordinances, and as much as may be put upon the use of them, so farre forth as they are use∣full. Know therefore, as I said before, that all these ordinances are but passive wayes of conveying this great gift, the knowledge of God to be our God, I mean more plainly thus: These ordi∣nances are onely of, and in themselves, empty, dry Channels, or Pipes, through which the Spirit of the Lord brings from God himselfe the Spring, those riches, and conveyes the same into the Spirit of a man. Look as a channell digged in a dry ground, is the way through which the Spring conveyes his water unto a cistern, the channell it selfe communicates none of its own, onely it is a passage through which the Spring conveyes his water: So are all the ordinances, even faith it selfe, prayer, and all other Services, they are but channels through which the Spirit of the Lord passeth and bringeth from the Lord himselfe (the Spring and Fountaine) the revelation of God to be our God. In all the rest of the gifts of God, which he hath so freely bestowed, never a gift of Gods Spirit procures any thing of its own, our faith hath nothing of its own, fasting and prayer have nothing of their own, but as the Lord hath been pleased to make these ordinances to bee passages to convey himselfe to the sonnes of men, and so they are to bee made use of by the sonnes of men: Faith as it apprehendeth the Lord Jesus, and other Ordinances, as therein true faith is exerci∣sed, and no otherwise. And indeed beloved, this is the loadstone to provoke persons to the use of all ordinances, God hath ranked them together, that the Lord hath so much and so often promised through them, to convey himselfe. You are kept through the pow∣er of God through faith (saith the Apostle) unto salvation. As if he should have said, The Lord doth convey himselfe, and the ma∣nifestation of his own salvation through our beleeving. The Spirit of the Lord passing through the Ministery of the Gospel, as the breath of man passeth through a Trumpet; the Trumpet is the instrument, the breath is the Spirit of the Lord: the Trumpet
adds nothing to the breath. Now know beloved, so far as you wil attend the Ordinances, because God calls out to Ordinances, and because you have heard the Lord to promise to bestow such things upon you in the ordinances, so farre you shall attend the ordi∣nances according to his pleasure; but when you ascend so high, that the ordinance doth get things, then you rob the Lord, and give more to ordinances then God hath given. Now though the ordinances have no efficiency of their own, in the nature I have spoken, yet there is good cause for all Gods own people to esteem very highly of ordinances, and to be joyfull of ordi∣nances, and to long much after ordinances, to make much of them, for why the Lord hath made his promises to be found of them, & to be with them in ordinances. In the day of adversitie call thou upon me and I will deliver thee. And here by the way know from hence what is the expectation of beleevers them∣selves, which they ought to have of the Lord for such things, when they come to such ordinances, that so, when we attend the Lord in his ordinances, we may find him in them, &c. Therefore as the poore man lay at the Beautifull Gate, not be∣cause the Gate would relieve him, but because it was a place of concourse where honorable men resorted, from whom he might have Almes; so in the Ministery, in fasting and prayer, and all other services, there is the gate of the Temple of the Lord, there is the place the Lord makes usually his concourse and resort, there is the place God appoints to give the meeting; therefore in expectation of the Word of his grace, that we may find him in Ordinances, we doe resort to them. Now what derogati∣on is there all this while from the Ordinances, while we make the but thus passive? The richest treasure in the world may come to a man through the poorest vessell; the treasure is never the fur∣ther off, nor never the worse, because the vessell is poore. It is no matter of what price the meanes of conveyance is, so that the thing we desire be conveyed to us by it, onely we must not give it that which is above its due, &c. And this shal be encouragement sufficient to wait upon all or∣dinances of all sorts, where the Lord appoints, that he will for his owne sake give you a gracious answer, and bestow all good things upon you that you stand in need of, in ordinances, This is motive sufficient, I say, to stirre you up to attend upon ordinances, and yet not to make Gods of them, to ascribe that to them which be∣longs
alone to God (who doth all ordinarily through ordinances) which is the only way to disappoint you of your hope, when you expect help from them. 9. The 9. ground upon which people build their casting off the use of Ordinances, is the severall Texts of Scripture which seem to plead for the Non-performance of duties, and laying aside of all ordinances in the ties of the Gospel; As, They shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: For all shall know me from the least to the greatest. Heb. 8.11. We have also a more sure word of Prophesie, whereunto yee doe well that yee take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, untill the day dawn, and the Day-starre arise in your hearts. 2 Pet. 1.19. But the anointing which yee have received of him, abideth in you: and yee need not that any man teach you: but as the same a∣nointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him, 1 John 2.27. And I saw no Temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it, Rev. 21, 22. And the Citie had no need of the Sunne, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Vers. 23. Ans. Much might be spoken in answer to such as produce these and the like Scriptures for the cessation of Gospel-ordinances; but I shall study brevity, and referre all to two heads. 1. Show what I conceive to be the proper meaning of these texts of Scripture. 2. Give in the joynt consent of the most judicious and godly Au∣thors with it, that have written on these Scriptures. Touching the first, I suppose that the holy Ghost in the fore∣mentioned Scriptures, doth not in the least, mean or intend, that the Word, Ordinances, and Ministery, appointed and instituted by Jesus Christ in the dayes of the New Testament for the Saints to make use of, should be laid aside, and not at all made use of, be∣cause I have shewed in my Quaeries, that in the purest Gospel∣times, Christ will have Ordinances, and Officers to administer them, and Saints to enjoy them, though in a purer manner then they have been, or possibly now are; but I conceive he meanes, that Christ himselfe will be their Teacher in the new state of his
Church, in the use of these his own meanes he hath institured and appointed. And this teaching of Christ, the King and Head of his Church, will be, I conceive, divers wayes. 1. By giving the Saints a greater measure of the Spirit, and a more nearer communion and fellowship with himselfe then for∣merly, the fulnesse of God shall be more brought into their hearts by the ministery of the Spirit; and then Christ shall be all in all indeed: not all without all, but all in all, that is, all in all Saints, and all in all Ordinances, and all in all duties, and all in all mercies; so that nothing shal be lifted up, acknowledged and exal∣ted, but Christ alone, and the Father in him. 2. By making the Saints to be so wise and understanding to salvation, that they shall not hang or pin their faith upon the Au∣thority of men, the Authority of Parliaments, Councels, Synods, Conventions, Dictates, Decrees, Iudgements of men, though never so wise, learned godly, but they shall cleave to the Autho∣rity of the Scriptures , and rest upon the teachings of the Spirit in the Word, who is alone the infallible teacher and revea∣ler of the mind of Christ. 3. By clearing tho truth made known by outward instruments, after so sure a tain a manner by the Spirit inwardly, that the outward teaching shall be as no teaching in comparison of the inward operation and concurrence of the holy Ghost perswa∣ding of them, as the Samaritans when they came to Christ him∣selfe upon the report of the woman that had been with him, they got such satisfaction from him, that they said, Now we beleeve, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed that Christ, Joh 4.42. Even thus doubt∣lesse, will the Lord Jesus deale with the Saints when those glori∣rious times come, he will by his Spirit inwardly so make known the mystery of the Gospel preached outwardly, that they shall say to those that are his instruments, Now we beleeve and understand, not so much because of your saying, as that we have heard him ourselves teaching us inwardly by his Spirit. This I take to be the scope and sense of those Texts of Scriptures, not a taking away the use of ordinances, but a more spirituall and fuller enjoyment of God and Jesus Christ in them. 2. Touching the judgement of the godly agreeing with me herein, take a few in stead of many that might be alledged. 1. Pareus, that famous and judicious. Writer, in his Commen∣tary
on Heb. 8.11. hath these words: Non itaque hinc recta conficiunt fanatici, ministerio Ecclesiae opus non esse in novo Te∣stamento, quo am ad complement um tanta luck Deus in huc vitae per ministerium Evangelii nos preparat. Fides enim est  audi∣tu, auditus per verbum Dei; Ideo dedit Christrs alios Apostolos, alios Doctores, ut Ecclesia exedificetur ad perfectionem futioram. Ʋtrumque docet Scriptura, omnes docert à Deo, & omnes debere audire, legere, meditare scriptur as & verbum Dei. Itaque pro∣missiones non evertunt praecepta; neque positae causa prima tollun∣tur mediae. Ut enim non sequitur, Deus omnes pascit, ergo non opus est pane & agricultura, per haec enim media Deus pascit. Ita non sequitur Deus omnes docet, ergo non opus est verbe. Per verbum enim auditum & praedicaetum omnes doret. The interpre∣tation is this; Therefore those brain-sick men doe not rightly ga∣ther that there is no need of the ministry to the Church in the times of the new Testament, because God to the compleating of so great light in this life, doth prepare us by the Ministery of the Gospel; for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word, Rom. 10.17. Therefore Christ gave some to be Apostles, others to be Teachers, that the Church might be built up to future per∣fection. And the Scripture doth teach both, viz. all to be taught of God, and all ought to heare, read, meditate on the Scriptures and word of God. Therefore the promises doe not overthrow the commands and precepts, nor the first prime cause take away the meanes: For as it doth not follow, that because God feedeth us, therefore there is no need of bread nor husbandry, or tilling and sowing the earth; for by these very meanes God feedeth us; so it doth not follow, because God reacheth all, therefore there is no need of the Word: for by the Word heard and preached he teacheth all. Thus we see by a little, how the judgement of this famous Writer joynes with us in what was formerly delivered touching the true and genuine sense of those Scriptures; he hath much more in the same place upon his solution of divers questions to this purpose. So learned Hyperius in his Commentary on this place of the Hebrewes, is so full and copious, that I hardly know any have written more largely on this subject (unlesse it hath been in a Treatise by it selfe) answering all objections against it, which would be too much to transcribe in this place.
2. For that place of 2 Pet. 1.19. many of the Ancients have understood it of the state of glory: but learned Gerard in his Exposition of the words, shewes it to be understood of Gospel∣times here. Sed per diem illucescentem & Phosphorum orientem rectiùs intelligitur uberior, perfectior, clarior, & magis expli∣cata Christi & mysteriorum divinorum cognitio. And this hee proves by five Arguments, but yet reproves those that would hereby lay aside the Scriptures, and look upon them as unusefull to them, when the Day-starre is risen in their hearts; considering the whole state of the New Testament-light, is no other to that of glory, then the midnight is to the noon-day; and especially because that the dawning of the day, and the arising of the Day∣starre in our hearts, spoken of here, is meant of the Ministery and Doctrine of the Apostles, who were the best interpreters of the Prophets, Christ himselfe having (before his ascension) opened their understandings to that end, Luke 24.44, 45. Sic ergo ser∣monem Propheticum comparat Apostólus lucernae tempore noctis lucenti; Apostolicum vero sermonem, seu Evangelii in N. T. praedicationem comparat Lucifero & diei plenam lucem adferenti, & hac ratione majorem doctrinae claritatem N. T. tribuit. And thus Piscator, Beza, and others understand the place; so that be∣leevers are to have respect to the Scriptures alwayes, both of the old and new Testament, and not to cast off the use of them, as soon as the Day-starre begins to rise in their hearts, that is, so soon as they come to understand or attaine a more cleare know∣ledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, or salvation by faith alone in Christ crucified, by the ministery and teaching of the Spirit. 3. Concerning that Text of 1 John 2 27. in my judgement Calvin and Beza speake out the proper sense of the place,Vide Bee. Annot. Calv. in loc. say∣ing, That the Apostle in these words, onely signifieth to those he wrote, that they were not so ignorant as to be taught such things as were unknown to them, or that hee propounded such things to them, as the Spirit of Christ which they had received in∣to their hearts, did not readily prompt and make known unto them. And therefore faith Calvin, Frantick men doe rashly from hence seek to shut out of the Church the use of the publique Mi∣nistery. For in that the Apostle saith, that they are taught in all things by the Spirit, it must not be generally taken, but restrai∣ned to the circumstance of the present place, &c. 4. As for that of Revel. 21.22, 23. though the most (both
Ancient and Modern) Writers, doe understand it of the Church Triumphant hereafter in glory; yet Mr Brightman and others, take it to be meant of the glorious times of the Church here on earth, when the Jewes shall be called, and come to their full glory in Gospel-enjoyments. At which time the worship that shall then be in use, shall be most simple, and most pure, &c. Let the Jewes (therefore saith he) hearken to this, and let them not expect the re-edifying of a new materiall Temple amongst them any longer, as they have done to this day foolishly and perversty, but let them breathe and bray with their hearts & hearty wishes ter the right manner of worshipping God, which shall not stand in need of any Temple: Let them long with hopefull hearts to see Al∣mighty God himselfe, and the Lamb conversing among them; in respect of which glory, they shall judge whatsoever can be fra∣med by the policie of men, are but vile and nothing worth. And then afterward upon the 23. verse. Now these things (saith Mr Brightman) are not spoken to this purpose, as if there should be no use at all of the Scriptures, but because all men shall be so able to understand the will of God at this time, as if they had no need to be brought to knowledge by the reading and studying of the Scriptures, or any other holy bookes which help to open them. To this agree Mr Bernard on the Revelations, with Mr Bur∣roughes on Hosea, and divers other late Writers. 10. Lastly, though some of those that renounce Ordinances, will make use of Scriptures, so farre as they conceive will advan∣tage their cause, (as is the property of all Heretickes to doe) yet for the most part such persons wholly renounce them, calling it a dead letter, a common writing, of no more value, truth and au∣thority, then the writings and sayings of other Saints, containing in them many weake, silly, vain, grosse, and contrary things, and therefore not to be made use of, especially by grown Christians, as a Rule to guide them; but the Saints are to follow the dictates and teachings of the Spirit within them. Answ. 1. It seemes then that the Scriptures, or the word of God which was written by the holy Prophets and Apostles, (who were infallibly led and guided by the holy Ghost in the penning of the Old and New Testament, as I shall shew in the following Answers) will serve young Christians turnes, and may bea help to such as are poore, weake, low beleevers, Babes in Christ. Well then, they are some way usefull: but why not as
usefull and serviceable toS. Seripturae usū sui et neces∣sitatem non tā∣tion rudibus & Alphabetarils in Christianis∣mo, sed & per∣fectioribus ac regenitis pas∣sim commendat, nec tantum in vetere, sed eti∣am in novo Te∣stamento quem∣admodum ex multis Scriptu∣rae locis & ex∣emplis liquet. Synops. pur. Theolog. old men in Christ, to strong and well grown Christians, as to them that are weak? Nay, is it not evi∣dent, that not onely the most eminentest Saints before Christ came into the world, as David, Daniel, &c. but after Christ was come, made use of the Scriptures, as their rule and guide in knowing and doing the mind and will of God. Let us make a tryall. 1. The Apostles, though they had such a fulnesse of the Spirit powred out upon them, Acts 2. yet they made use of the Scrip∣tures, Peter did, 1. Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. and chap. 2.6. and 2 Pet. 1, 20, 21. and chap. 3.16. And the Apostle Paul, who was caught up into the third heaven, (whose divine enjoyments were so great, that few could match him) he made use of the Scriptures, Acts 17.2. Rom. 1.2.4.3.9.17.10.11.11.2. Gal. 3.8, 22.4 30. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. 1 Tim. 5.18. So the Apostle James he made use of them, Jam. 2.8, 23, 4.5. So the Evangelists, we read how of∣ten they quoted the Scriptures. So Apollos was mighty in the Scripture, Acts 18 24.28. So the Bereans, they searched daily the Scriptures, and were highly commended for it, Acts 17.11. Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ himselfe, (our alone blessed Saviour) made use of the Scriptures often, as we finde Iohn 7.38. Luke 4.18. Luke 20.37. Matth. 21.42.22.29. Luke 24.27, 32, 45. Neither did Christ and his Apostles make use onely of the Scrip∣tures for their own use, but charged others to make use of the Scriptures, and those also that were no mean Christians, but such as had attained a great measure of the Spirit. That they gave the Saints in charge to make use of the Scriptures, is evident from Iohn 5.39. Col. 3.12. Rom. 15.3, 4. 2 Tim. 3.14, 15, 16, 2 Pet. 1.19. That they were no mean, but well grown Saints, and such as had attained to a great measure of the Spirit, is also evident from the Epithites the Apostles give them. 1. For first, they stile them such, whose faith is spoken of throughout the whole world, Rom. 1.8. . 2. Such as were wise men, 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak , that is, sapientibus, to wise men. 3. Such as were perfect, Phil. 3.15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, . 4. Such as had received , i. e. Like pretious faith. 2 Pet. 1.1.
5. Such as were strong men in Christ, , 1 Iohn 2 14. 6. Such whose faith did grow exceedingly, , 2 Thes. 13. So that by all this it plainly appeares, that the Scriptures are use∣full to all the Saints, high as well as low, strong as well as weake, wife as wel as simple, yea every way able to furnish , the man of God himselfe, or instruct him perfectly, as the word. signifies. 2 Tim. 3.17. to every good worke; and there∣fore it's a fond and idle thing in any to say, that any of the Saints, while they are here in via, are above the use of the Scriptures. 2. Whereas they say, the Scriptures are not to be a Rule for the Saints to walk by, in matters of faith & practice, because they are a dead letter, common writings, containing in them many weak, filly, yea grosse contradictions, &c. I answer, This is blasphemy against the holy Ghost, (that was the Author of them, 2 Pet. 1.21.) in a high degree: For it's as cleare as the Sunne, to any but those whose eyes are shut up, that the Scriptures are without im∣perfection, without weaknesse, vanity orVid. Roberts Keye of the Bible, p. 38. to 49. excellently clearing and freeing the Scriptures frō contradictions in themselves. contrariety, being in∣spired by him who is Perfection it selfe, 2 Tom. 3.16. Now if they be inspired of God; then they must needs be the most excel∣lent of all other writings, both for verity, purity, certainty, efficacy, perfection & perpetuity, as were easie toRead Master Traps Theolo∣gia Theologiae, or the true Treasury. demonstrate, which made one to call the Scriptures, Liber Librorum, the Book of Books; in comparison of which all other are butSibyllae folia, Luciani libri, imò ipsae Ae∣sopi Fabulae, vanitas vanita∣tum. leaves, fables, trifles, va∣nity of vanities, &c. which drew this saying fromAuferantur de medio char∣tae nostrae, pro∣cedat in mediū codex Dei. In Psal. 57. Austine of old, Away with our writings, that room may be made for the book of God: and that of renownedEgo odi me è libros, & saepe opto eos interire &c. In Gen. Luther, I heartily hate mine own bookes, and could wish them out of the world, be∣cause I feare they keep men from spending so much time from rea∣ding in Gods book, the onely fountain of all the wisdome. Now if the Scriptures are so excellent, so perfect,, why should they not then serve to us as a Cauon or rule to walk by, in things that are both to be beleeved and practised? Object. But they are a dead letter. Ans. And why so? Are the words of theWe must ne∣ver abstract the Scripture from that Spirit of God which is alwayes in it, and with it, as a clear and suf∣ficient wit∣nesse of it, and as the very life and soul of it; whereas you with the Papists take the Scripture for no other but as a bare letter, or bark of a tree, or dead corps without any divine spirit in it. Mr. Burious Reply to a Relation of the Con∣ference between the last Archbishop of Cant. and Fisher the Iesuite. For even as the veines in a natural body, do carry and convey in them the life blood; and as the arteries do contain in them those animall spirits conveyed from the head to all the members, whereby they are vegetated and moved: so the Scriptures, and every part of them have in them the Spirit whereby they are quick∣ned, and which is in them, as the light in the body of the Sun, their proper light, &c. p. 151. living God dead
words? Are they not spirit and life? Iohn 6.63. Are they not quick and powerfull, sharper then a two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soule and Spirit, and of the joynts and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart, Hebr. 4.12. How are they then a dead letter? Obj. But they are full of contradictions, leaving men still in the dark, and under uncertainties. Answ. If we apprehend any darknesse or contradictions in the Scriptures, the fault is ours, and not theirs, 'tis defectus vasis, non fontis: There is a sufficiency of light that accompanies and shines forth in the Scriptures continually; but that we cannot see it, is because we come to it with blind eyes, Not habemus non limpidos, sed lippos oculos, as Aquinas notes on Coloss. 2.3. There are unsearchable treasures of wisdome and knowledge in the Scriptures, as there is light in the Sunne beaming forth to the world; but that men cannot discerne it, is from their own dark∣nesse and not the Scriptures. How mach the blinde Papists have urged the obseurity of the Scriptures against our Writers (the bet∣ter to keep up Antichrist on his throne by keeping the vulgar peo∣ple in ignorance, through prohibiting and forbidding them to read the Scriptures) and how abundantly they have been confu∣ted, isIt is true, the Scriptures are obscure and dif∣ficult, but not all, nor to all, nor alwayes. 1. All the Scriptures are not difficult and obscure, every part of them is not invold in obscunity, 2 Pet. 3.16. these things thas arenecessary to salvation, are plainly set down. 2. Those places in the Scripture that are obscure, are not so to all persons, but as the same Apostle saith, they are so to the unlearned and unstable, that is, to them that are meere Naturals, or Animals, 1 Cor. 2.14. Such as want the assistance of the Spirit to give them understanding. 3. Neither are they ob∣scure alwayes: For those that are dark to day, and cannot understand the mind of God, may have it revealed and made known to them to morrow. Vide Langfords Enquiry after verity. plain to those that have any acquaintance with their con∣troverfies. Admirable things have been done in this Age this way, both in Latine and English, so that people are left without excuse herein. And as for contradictions in the Scriptures, it is from the same spirit of falshood that acts and workes in men to speak so disgrace∣fully as they do of them. For how can the most High, who is the Author of the Scriptures, and in whom is no darknes at all, Iohn 1.5. be the God of truth and falshood together; and it, must of nececessity follow, if the Scriptures speak plain contradictions that either Jehovah could not, or that he would not speake so ex∣presly
as to have his minde knowne by his creatures, though he call upon them to look after it, which is blasphemy in a high de∣gree. It were to be wished that Christians would come to the Scriptures with lesseCum corde nostro nos con∣cordemus: Et Scriptura sancta an nulla parte discordat. Aug. discord in their own hearts, and a greater sense of their own personall darknesse, weaknesse and infirmity, that they may crave the divine assistance of Christ, to open their understandings, and take more paines to find out the mind of God by comparing one text with another, those that are more obscure with those that are cleare, and weigh circumstances, Anteceden∣tia & Consequentia. i. e. what goes before, and what followes after the text, which would very much help them to know what the mind of God is in it, and not presently fallDeus bone! in veritds ipsa quae est Author Scripturae, an spiritus sanctus à quo acti fue∣runt sancti Dei illi homines lo∣quentes & scri∣bentes, ansacra scriptura tota divinitus inspi∣rata sibi contra∣dicere potest. Tum enim Deus cjusque spiritus simul veritatis & mendacii spiritus esset, et divinae hujus veritatis pars une necessariò vera, era necessariò falsa esset, cum coniradicentium unum uecessa∣riò vervm alte∣rum falsum sit. Vid. Sharph. Symphon. in Epist. foule on the Scriptures themselves, as affirming and denying one and the same thing. But this is the misery of this age, that as Austine once spake of the Manichees, so may I of people now, that they wil not subject their opinions and judgements to the Scriptures, but would subject the Scriptures to their opinions. Such places as have but the least outward appearance or shew to make for them, those they will cleave firmly to, but such as directly speak against them, they throw away and cry out of contradictions, when the difference all the while is in themselves, and not in the Scrip∣tures. 3. Lastly, whereas they say the Saints are to follow the pri∣vate and secret Dictates and Teachings of the Spirit within them, and conforme to them as the onely guide and Cynosura of all they beleeve and practise, and therefore are to take no notice of the Scriptures. I answer in the first place, that such that so reason, cannot free themselves of horrible slighting the sacred word of God, and derogating in a high degree from the excellency and authority of it: and I feare the guilt of this evill will one day lye heavy on their soules and consciences, though now they make nothing of it. For if the contempt of Civill Lawes, and Statutes of earthly Princes and States, when they are printed and published for the better regulating of Common-wealths, and to which all are bound to yeeld submission and subjection, that there may be no Tyranny nor Anarchy; I say, if the casting off of such Lawes, and refusing to square their outward actions in civill af∣faires, to make our own wills our lawes to guide us, bee lookt upon as a matter so heynous, and deservedly punisht, what shall
we conceive then will be the condition of those that cast off the Book of the Scriptures, wherein God hath set down his Lawes and Statutes to order all States and Common-wealths in gene∣rall, and men and women in particular, in their walking before God, as the Apostle faith, in Heb. 12.25. If they escaped not, who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not wee escape, if we turne away from him that speaketh from heaven. And where is the voyce of God now from heaven, but in the sacred Scriptures? 2. To lay aside the Scriptures, and trust meerly to the Spi∣rit, is not this a down-right separating and dividing what GOD hath joyned together and made one? The Scriptures which are the very Word and Minde of God, have in every part of them, the Spirit, whereby they are quickned, and the Spirit is in them as light in the Sunne, and we may as easily separate the light from the Sunne, as the Spirit from the Scriptures. For as the Sunne would soon cease to be, if the light and heat were gone, or taken from it: so here, if the Spirit should cease from the Scrip∣tures, they should cease to be the Word of God, which cannot be, in regard that Gods Word endureth for ever, Psal. 119.89. and Mark 13.31. 3. If the Scriptures must be laid aside, and men trust to the private Dictates of the Spirit, as they say, which way and how will they be able to confute those that are unsound in the Faith? now will they stoneLapidandi sunt haeretici sacrarum literarum ar∣gumentis. A∣than. cont. Ari. or. 2. Heretickes but by Arguments from the Scriptures? For others will as strongly pretend to the en∣joyment of the Spirit, and to receive from the Spirit what they hold, as those that are found. e.g. If one should come and preach salvation by the workes of the Law, or a mans own righ∣teousuesse, and not by the righteousnesse of Christ, or of faith in Christ, and say, The Spirit perswades him hereunto; who can contradict him, if there be no Scriptures or word of God writ∣ten, to shew him the minde of God to the contrary, but onely the secret and inward teaching of the Spirit? And so I might instance in many other particulars. 4. Besides, what if you be deceived, (as nothing is more cer∣tain) and in stead of the teachings of Gods Spirit, it be the teach∣ings of your own deceitfull and corrupt heart, or the actings of that foule Spirit the Devill, that oftentimes changeth or trans∣formes himselfe into an Angel of light, on purpose to deceive?
What then? Now how will you distinguish between the Dictates of the one and the other, except by this,Hincotiam apparet impie∣tas sententiae Libertinorum nostri temporis qui se zelotas spiritus appel∣lant. Quorum aliqui Scriptu∣rae sacrae Grāmaticum & ge∣nuinum sensum zanquam literam oc∣cidentem ecclrs. Nov. Test. in∣utilem conten∣dunt, & nescio quae pbanatica sui cerebri somniasub spiritus titulo bominibus conantur obtrudere. Haec senteneia falsa & pernitiosa est, quia S. Script: neglecta nihil certi in religione Chri liana constitui potest, quum nullum  aut norma extra eam dari possit, quae à falsa persuasione, & erroris efficacia, quam De∣us Evangelit contemptôribus tanquam justus Iudex saepe immittit, divinam veritatem distinguat; & quia spiritus sanctus non nist per verbam extermon & sacram Scripturam in cordibus hominum ad salu∣tem est efficax: nude & Paulus suitm ministerium, Ministerium Spiritus appellat, 2 Cor. 3. Vide Synop. pur. Theolog. p. 11. de S. Script. necess. that the Spi∣rit of God never dictates any thing but what is agreeable unto, & may be resolved into the Scriptures, or t written word of God, but the other not. e.g. When a man is perswaded that Christ is not God, as well as Man, that there is no resurrection of the bo∣dy, nor reward nor punishment after this life, that sin and grace are both equally of God, &c. with a thousand such like abomina∣tions; how shall a person discern that the perswasions he hath of these things, are not from the Spirit of God, but from Satan and his owne wicked heart, but this, because they are directly against what is revealed to us in the Scripturesl, the Spirit of God never per swading any to such things as he hath himself spoken against in the Word written. 5. Moreover, to what purpose did the holy Ghost make use of those holy men of God (as the Prophets and Apostles are stiled) to be his Amanuenses, or Scribes to write down and commit to paper, what the minde of the eternall God was, which he would have made known to the children of men, concerning their faith and obedience, if the Scriptures are of no more use to beleevers? Doubtlesse the workes of God are not in vain, he made the two great lights in Heaven, the Sunne and Moon, the one to rule the Day, and the other the Night; now would it not be a weake, if nota wicked thing, for any to say, what need we any more the use of the Sunne or Moone, is not God himselfe sufficient? so here, is it not as weake, if not as wicked a thing to soy? What need is there of the Scriptures, when wee have the Spirit himselfe to teach us? Besides, doth not the Apostle affirme in the first to Timothy, that the Scriptures are exceeding usefull and profitable for Do∣ctrine, for reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteous∣nesse, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished
unto all good workes, 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. And then to the Ro∣mans. That whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction, that we through patience and comfore of the Scriptures might have hope, Rom. 15.4. And doth not Christ himself say, that one chiefe cause why men erre from the truth, is, because they are ig∣norant of the Scriptures? Matth. 22.29. And doth he not al∣so requite men to search the Scriptures upon this ground, because they testifie of him. Mark that well, They testifie, not simply the Spirit, but the Scriptures also, they beare witnesse to Christs be∣ing the true and onely Messiah that should come into the world, with many other pretious ends and uses, to which the sacred Scri∣ptures are usefull and profitable, as were easie to produce, if need were. 7. But lastly, to say no more, how doth this open a doore to all manner of abominations both in opinion and practice: for if every man must be left to the private teachings of the Spirit, and have no recourse at all any longer to the sacred Canon of the Scri∣ptures, what abominations will men and women stick to admit of, and beare off all with this. The Spirit leads me hereunto, I am taught by the Spirit, and perswaded by the Spirit: so that if a man should be stirred up to lay violent hands upon his neighbour (as I have heard a drunkard once did on one that was of this opi∣nion, and basted him to some tune; and being demanded by the party why he did so, he answered him (in his own language) hee could not help it, the Spirit moved him thereunto) and take away his purse or his life from him; or a vile wretch should attempt the deflouring of a virgin, or committing of any other abomination, and put all off with this, that the Spirit dictates such things to him, & he is under no law but that of the Spirit, would not this be dreadfull both to God and Man: and so for any damnable errors in judgement, that the Scriptures condemne to the pit of hell, and warn us to take heed of, as we defire to escape damnation, doth not this opinion make way to the entertaining of them, when people shall be perswaded there is no use of the Scriptures to bee as a Rule to them to walk by, but they are to trust onely to the inward dictates of the Spirit. Besides, if this should be allowed of, that the Scriptures are of no luse, but we must, trust to the Spirit in all, what certainty then can there be in any point of Religion and faith, for every one will be∣leeve as the Spint dictates to him, and as many men, so there will
be almost as many mindes. Nay further, what bottome will men and women have to build the foundnesse of their opinions upon, and that it's not their meere fancie if they cast away the Scrip∣tures, seeing what they conceive to day to be the right, to mor∣row they may be perswaded to be otherwise, if they trust to what is spoken and dictated secretly to them: and where will your soules end, and fix a period in matters of opinion, when they once begin to take this course of casting off the Scriptures? Doubtlesse they cannot tell themselves, there being a fathomlesse depth in the pit of error, out of which poore creatures can never extricate themselves, being once shut up in it. Blessed are those soules, that are so taught of God in the Ministery of his Word and Spirit, as to feare comming nigh the brink of that pit. THus (Sirs) I have dispatcht the Answers to the forementio∣ned grounds, what remaineth in the close of all (leaving the successe and issue of all to the Lord Jesus) but that I adde one word to perswade you, in the bowels of Christ, to consider from whence you are fallen, and repent and doe your first workes, Rev. 2.4. before the Lord Jesus be revealed from heaven against you. I cannot but apprehend your condition as very sad, not only in respect of your sin, but of your sorrow that is like to over∣take you: For as sure as the Lord liveth, all those that refuse to kisse the Sonne, and will not have him to rule over them, but doe what in them lies to break hisBy bonds and cords is meant the discipline and government of Christ in his Church & king∣dome, as the words  &  signify, Psal. 2.3. Now the lawes and ordinances of Christ, or his discipliue and government, are called bonds & cords, not that they are so in themselves, but because the wic∣ked so judge of them, looking upon them as so many fetters & manacles that keep them from the enjoyment of their lusts and carnall li∣berty, which is the main cause of their enmitie against them, and rejecting of them. bonds, and cast his cords from them, shall perish in the way of their rebellion, Psal. 2.12. and be brought forth and slain before him, Luke 19.27. You cannot be ignorant how jealous the eternall. God is of the honour of his Christ, and that he is now dealing with the great and migh∣ty ones of the earth, for their slighting of him, and rebellion a∣gainst him: And why should you be found in the number of them? you (I say) that have made profession of him, and sworne fealty to him? If such shall have stripes that have not done their Masters will, though they have been ignorant of it, what will be∣come of those then that have known it and yet have not done it, nay, wilfully neglected the doing of it? O consider it betimes, for it's a fearfull thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. If those that despised Moses law died without mercy, &c. of how much sorer punishment suppose yee shall they be thought worthy that trample under their feet the Sonne
of God? &c. Can you think that your profession of holinesse, and pretence of living in God, can beare you out while your pra∣ctice is clean contrary, using your liberty as an occasion to the flesh? O consider whether you be not within the number of those which are prophesied shall come in these latter days of the world in which we live. 1. Men that shall have a form of godlinesse,The prophesie of the Apostle Paul. but denying the power thereof, 2 Tim. 3.5. that creep into houses, and lead cap∣tive silly women, laden with sinnes, led away with divers lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, verse 6.7. resisters of the truth, as Jannes and Jambres, men of corrupt mindes, reprobate concerning the faith, who shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, v. 8, 9. 2. Men that deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1.The prophesie of the Apostle Peter. that walke after the flesh in the lust of uncleannesse, that despise Go∣vernment, presumptuous, selfe-willed, and who are not afraid to speak evill of dignities, verse 10. that count it pleasure to ryot in the day time, and sport themselves with their own deceivings, v. 13. that have eyes full of adultery, not being able to cease from sinne, beguiling unstable soules, whose hearts are exercised with covetous practices, vers. 14. that have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, following the wayes of Baalam the sonne of Bo∣sor, who loved the wages of unrighteousnesse, verse 15. that speake great swelling words of vanity, and allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonnesse, those that were cleane escaped from them that live in error, v. 18. that promise them liberty, but in the meane while are themselves servants of corruption, being overcome and brought into bondage, v. 19. 3. Men that have a Spirit of Antichrist in them,The prophesie of the Apostle Iohn. that goe out from the Affemblies, and communions of the Saints, 1 John 2. 18, 19. that deny that Jesus is the Christ, that deny the Father and the Sonne, v. 22, 23. that will not acknowledge J. Christ. to be come in the flesh, 1 John 4.3. that are of the world, that speak of the world, and the world heareth them, v. 5. that are not of God, and therefore will not heare those that are sent of God, being led by the Spirit of error, v 6. 4. Men that turn the grace of God into lascivious∣nesse,The prophesie of the Apostle Iude. Jude 4. that are filthy dreamers, defilers of the flesh, despi∣sers of dominion, and speake evill of dignities, verse. 8. that
corrupt themselves as bruit beasts in what they know naturally, v. 10. That goe in the way of Cain, and runne greedily after the error of Baalam for reward, and perish in the gainsaying of Core. v. 11. That are spots in feasts of charity, feeding without feare, that are cloudt without water, carried about of winds, trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, v. 12 That are raging waves of the sea, foaming out their owne shame, wandring starres, to whom is reserved the blacknesse of darknesse for ever, v. 13. with much more to this purpose, in v. 15, 16, 18. concluding all with this, that they are such asThis place hath formerly been much a∣bused by the Prelates and their crea∣tures, and still is by those that have changed the Name, but not the Nature of them, applying it to such as come out of Babylon, and from the mixtures and corruptions of man in the wor∣ship of God, to serve the Lord after his own minde and will, made known to them in the word, when the place is clean contrary to be understood and applied. separate themselves, viz. from the true ordinances, & from the comunion of the godly in the use of them, as may be gathered from the follo∣wing verses, 20, 21. being sensuall, having not the Spirit, v. 19. Now whether such as to this day (under a pretence of living in God, and enjoying Gospel-liberty, doe cast off the use of or∣dinances, deny Churches ministery, &c. and walk after the flesh to the fulfilling of the lusts thereof, as they were wont to doe before they were first enlightned) be not such as are before mentioned, I leave to any that are unprejudiced men to consider. Wherefore to draw to a conclusion of all, in regard that the will of Christ is, that we should have compassion on some, making a difference,Iude 22. thereby teaching us, that some may erre out of infir∣mity, and others out of wilfulnesse, and so are not to be dealt with in the same way and manner: I therefore in the last place humbly desire in the greatest meeknesse, and bowels of compassi∣on, that such who have been carried away with this error of the wicked (to renounce and cast off the use of ordinances, and per∣formance of duties which Jesus Christ hath commanded to be performed) out of weaknesse and infirmity, would be intreated timely to consider the evil of such a course and practise, how much it derogates from the honour of Christ, and happinesse of their own souls, Deare souls for whom Christ died, and to whom Christ hath (possibly) many times made known the kindnesse of his heart, I beseech you weigh the former Considerations without prejudice, and then tell me whether you are not out of the way. Consider the answers to the severall grounds, upon which you
build the leaving off the practice of duties and ordinances, and then see whether you have not cause to sit down with Ephraim, and smite on the thigh, and say every one to himselfe, What have I done? what an evill and bitter thing is this, that I have cast off the wayes and meanes in which I formerly enjoyed such soule-sa∣tisfying, ravishing, melting communion with the Lord Jesus, and the Father through him. Pray give me leave to demand seri∣ously of you, whether it was not farre better with your soules, when you kept close with God in the use of ordinances, and were strict in closet converses with your beloved, whether sin were not more irksome, tedious, grievous, but then some to your souls, then now it is? whether the Saints were not more amiable in your eyes then now they are, & comunion wth them in pray∣er &c. a little corner of heaven in your apprehension? & the soci∣ety of the wicked more loathsome? whether you were not more tender in your consciences concerning the commission of sin, and more afraid of dishonoring God, then now you be? whe∣ther you were not more carried out and enlarged in doing of good, more spirituall in your walking, talking, affecting, acting, then now you are, more humble in your own eyes, and watch∣full over your owne hearts, making conscience of all your thoughts, words and wayes; whereas now you thinke there is no necessity of such strictnesse, though the holy Ghost tells us, that as he that hath called us is holy, so ought we to be holy, and that in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. Now I beseech you, deare soules consider, can that possibly be the way of truth, the way to glory, that renders you worse then you have been, more unholy, unspirituall, uncircumspect, un∣profitable to Christ, then you were wont to be? I beseech you deale plainly and impartially with your own soules; Don't you begin to find a change in your selves, in respect of the former par∣ticulars? & you can now dispense with the duties of your relations both towards God and man, which formerly you could not in the least doe. Now I pray consider, can these things stand with a per∣sons living in God? Can living in God and living in sin stand to∣gether? Can the Ark and Dagon stand together? O that ever Sa∣tan should thus beguile any of your pretious soules. In my weake apprehension, the higher a person lives in God, the more holy he is the more like to God, the more crucified to sin and the world, the lesse desirous of liberty to the flesh, the more studious of do∣ing
those things that are pleasing & acceptable unto God, through Jesus Christ. And whereas many talk of their liberty which they have above others, when they have cast off all duties and ordi∣nances to live in God: I would fain know whether that liberty be not a lawlesse liberty, and whether the excellency of a Christi∣an can possibly lie in it, or wheter living in God can stand with such a liberty. If to live in God be to take liberty to thinke, and speak, and doe as we our selves list, and to be without all check and controll in our way, both of God and Man; then wee may cast away the Scriptures in deed, and all religion, and every one walk after the imagination of his own heart. But, deare soules, be no longer led away with such deceivings and deceivers, that pro∣mise you liberty, but in the mean time are servants to corruption themselves, and are overcome and brought into bondage, and seek to doe the same by you. O hearken no longer to their Syren-like Songs, but bow your eares to the voyce of Jesus Christ, crying to you, Return, return, repent, repent, and doe your first workes, for I am married to you, I am loath the death of sinners; why will you wilfully cast away your pretious soules? Though you have dealt unkindly with me, and forgotten those sweet embracings you formerly enjoyed from me, when you made conscience of the duties of my service and worship, yet return, return, for I am a God that delighteth to shew mercy, and whom mercy pleaseth: though you have in some measure denied my Name; and been ashamed to own it before the Heathen, yet repent and doe your first works, and I will take you and bring you to my holy mountain, and you shall goe no more out and I will write upon you the Name of my God, and the name of the citie of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which commeth down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon you my new Name. Now the same blessed God, and our Saviour, that spake these words, set home these things upon your hearts, and make them effectuall for that end for which they were writ∣ten. Amen. FINIS.
A Catalogue of those (never enough to be abhorred opinions) that some of those more especially that cast off and renounce the use of Gospel-ordinances, doe professedly hold and maintain. FIrst, There's no God nor Devill, Heaven nor Hell, but what is within us. 2 There is no truth nor power in the Word, but as it is made out so to my Spirit: i. the Spirit speakes it so within me. 3 The sayings and wrtings of the Prophets and Apostles in the Scriptures, and of other Saints, are of equal value and truth, because by the same Spirit. 4 There are many silly, vain, grosse, and contrary things in the Scriptures; poore men they speake according to the present temper of their Spirits. 5 There may be, and some are, above the profiting power of the ministery of the Word, and use of the Scriptures. 6 There is no sin in the Saints, they are under no law but that of the Spirit, which is freedome. 7 There is no sinne against GOD, For wee cannot reach him. 8 That Gods dealings with all, good and bad, are in love, for God is love. 9 There is no state after this life, but (at that which is called Death) all good and bad are swallowed up of God. 10 That sinne and grace are equally of God, and agreeth to his will. 11 That all persons and things, act and are acted as God will have them.
12 That whatsoever men can that they doe, and in all according to Gods will. 13 That there is no resurrection of the body, nor reward or pu∣nishment after this life. 14 That there may be as much of God seen and enjoyed in any ser∣vile labour, as in the Ministery of the Word, Prayer, &c. and that they have more. 15 As for that men call worship of God, conscience, &c. they know not what it meanes. 16 That solemne Religious duties in publick or private, are but formes, bodily exercises, meerly Legall. 17 That men may as well work or play on the Lords day, as on a∣ny other; And as for them (to whom God is departed out of Ordinances, and abundantly answers another way) it is better. 18 That the soule is the breath of God. 19 That it is the Saints priviledge to be one Spirit, and therefore see no reason why there may not bee a community in all things. 20 That none can be certain whether he be in the truth or error, but themselves; because depending upon the teaching of the Spirit, yet they themselvs soes not knowing what they shall hold for the future. 21 That they cannot joyn in prayer with others, because of con∣fession of wants, sinnes, drawing neere to GOD, and Pe∣titions for the Lords presence, giving out of help, &c. with which they cannot close, because denying the first, and en∣joying the latter. 22 That as for wantonnesse, licentiousnesse, Libertinisme, and turning grace into wantonnesse, taking occasions from mercy to sin, &c. they know not what you mean, they are not incident to Saints. 23 That they will, and think they ought to follow their light, though they are to lose heaven and gain hell presently for it (if there be such things.) 24 That such as are one in the Spirit of love, it is a great wrong for any to hinder their union and communion in any thing. 25 That what men call Bastardy, is onely upon the account of the
men of the world, who marry and are called Bastards, Heb. 12. not with God, with whom Saints are as Angels in community, Luke 20.34, 35, 36. 26 That they have already for Spirituals what they expect, and lack nothing, and act Faith onely for Corporall subsi∣stence. 27 That what the Saints (because of others basenesse and wic∣kednesse doe now in secret, they shall doe openly, Matth. 20.26, 27. 28 That there is nothing fleshly or carnall in the Saints persons or actings, but all spirituall and holy. 29 That there is no Trinity of Persons in the Godhead. 30 That there is no distinction between God ana Christ. 31 That all are born without sin, and Saints live without sin. 32 That a Saint may out-live all his religion, all ties upon his conscience, and yet remain a Saint.
A true Copy of a Letter from Pli∣mouth, February the 12. Relating the manner of Gods working upon one that had cast off the use of Duties and Ordinances, sent by an approved and known godly man that was an Eye-witnesse. I Have onely one thing to tell you, and 'tis a re∣markable passage of Divine Providence: There is one Nicholas Earle, a Shoomaker, sometimes of Tot∣ns, and now a Souldier in the Fort, who having with∣in this moneth given way to the studying of estranging himselfe from God, conceiving that there was no need of Ministers, but that they must down; Sacraments but Ceremonies, Sabbaths not to be kept, and thereupon was resolved to open his windowes the last Sabbath, and to that end disputed and argued with some about it the Saturday, and then charged his wife not to teach his children prayers, or Duties, or Commandements; and my man George being present, saw him in his hot contestation fall to the ground roaring and crying, and taking deep detestation against those that bare the I∣mage of God, commending himselfe onely a Saint, and others out of the way. He was against singing, inso∣much that when the Souldiers in their daily duties in the Fort sang, he spake to them and said, they did lye like Devils. The man that Saturday night was under deep temptations, strange apparitions, the Devill see∣ming to appeare to him, with strange roaring. The Sabbath day he sent for me; and when I came, at first
sight I was welcome, but suddenly I was loathsome, and he spat in defiance of me. I saw him in that temper and fit, I left him: But the munday about Noone the man came to himselfe, hath a strange conviction of his error; whereas before he left giving of thankes, before and after the receiving of the creatures, now he is trou∣bled at the thoughts of it, acknowledging his error. I have had conference with him, and he cannot be thank∣full enough that God hath so soone returned him: He desires the Ministers to blesse God for his return, and pray that he may be stedfast. This I write as certaine, and that you may acquaint others to take heed how professedly they keep out of Gods way: he wisheth all his friends to take warning by it. M. P.
