d698 e83_6 99860590 112713
THE DECLARATION OF THE KNIGHTS, GENTRY, AND Trained Bands of the County of KENT, Presented to the Honourable House of COMMONS. Wherein thy declare their Resolution to march against the Kings Army with all the power and strength they can raise, and to rescue His Majesty out of the Cavaleers hands. Likewise the Answer of the House of Parliament to the said Declaration and Propositions. Dccember 22. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in parli∣ment, that this Declaration and Answer be printed and published. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. Decemb. 22. printed for J. Barks, 1642.
THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS Of the Lords, Knights, Gentry, and Com∣monalty of the county of Kent. Presented to the House of Commons, De∣cember the 21. WE your humble and faithfull Petitio∣ners, the Knights, Gentry, and Commo∣nalty of the County of Kent, being deeply sen∣sible of the many miseries which these calami∣tous times (notwithstanding your great care and vigilence to prevent the same) are likely to produce.
Wherein His Gracious Maiesty seduced by the malevolent counsell of an ill-affected par∣ty of Malignants and Cavaleirs, the protestant Religion, His Royall person, and Honour, the priviledge of Parliament, and the Subiects Li∣berty, are thratned with too too apparent haz∣zard and Ruine. Towards the support of which, Wee the Knights, Gentry, and Commonalty of the County of Kent, according to the Duty of Loy∣all Subiects, and good Christians, are not onely willing to contribue our best wishes and Votes, but even the utmost of their endeavours, both with their lives and fortunes, for the redee∣ming of his Maiesty from such hands, and Our Religion and Liberty from such perill and danger: But may it please this Honourable House to consider that we do apprehend themselves in a condition and posture nothing sutable to this their Resolution being deprived, and left naked by the taking our Arms from us: And there∣fore beseech your provident care to impower us with such a proportion of Arms and Ammu∣nition to be magazined in these parts, whereby
wee may be inabled to manifest our Affections and obedience to the Command of King and Parliament, both for the pursuance of the afore∣said Intentions, and opposition of all illegall Infingemens of our Laws and Liberties, such as the Commission of Array, wherwith we are at this time threatned, and what other of the like Natue and condition soever shall be hereafter obtruded upon us. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this be printed and published, Hen. El. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
THE ANSWER OF THE House of Commons to the aforesaid De∣claration. THE House of Commons have taken your Deelara∣tion into serious conside∣ration, & cannot but with great content observe the constancie of your good affection to the King and Parliament, whic as well formerly as at this present yo have expressed by your Declaration and Propositions to this House, and disclay∣ming and opposing with so much indu∣stry
and fidelity, the sedicious Designs and Endeavours of some Malignant and ill-af∣fected persons within your County, to sup∣presse those malitious practises, and to preserve that County in peace; care hath already bin taken by the House of Com∣mons with good successe, and as they in∣tended it, and do believe to your safety and satisfaction. And the House of Commons do further declare and assure you, that they will al∣wayes continue the like care, as for the good, safety, and peace of the whole King∣dome, so in particular of that County, be∣ing incouraged thereunto by this seasona∣ble Declaration, of your Resolutions and good affections, for the manifestation wherof, of the whole Kingdome, and of their kind acceptation, and thanks for the same. The House of Commons have comman∣ded your Declaration, and their Answer, to be forthwith printed. They do also most earnestly desire, that
all other Counties would take the same Resolution for the upholding of GODS true Religion, and that every man would lay his hand upon his heart, and seriously consider with himself, what danger the Go∣spell is in, it that the Papists grow Con∣querors and Masters of the field. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assem∣bed in Parliament, that this Declaration and Answer shalbe forthwith printed and pub∣lished, and read in all Churches and Chappels within the Kingdome of England and Domi∣nion of Wales, by the Parsons, Vicars, or Curates of the same. Hen. Elsing Cler. parl. Dom. Com. FINIS.
