D790 E128_34 99872541 156259
A DECLARATION Scnt from Severall Officers of His Majesties ARMY, To the Lord Generall of the same. VVherein is declared their great want of Money, they being not able to maintaine the Field any longer, without present supply. Also the Copie of a Letter, sent from John Wiat, one of his Majesties souldiers to his Wife, dated November 26. VVherein he declareth, the great mi∣sery that they are in for want of meanes so that they dare not sleepe, for feare of ha∣ving their throates cut, by certaine Welch, and Irish women which follow the Army. LONDON. Decemb. 1. Printed by T. F. for L. W. 1642.
French fleur-de-lis flanked by the Scottish thistle on one side and the Tudor rose on the other A Copie of a Declaration sent to the Lord Generall of the Kings Ar∣my, from severall Officers thereof. &c. May it please your Excellence, WEE are extreamely sorry to trou∣ble your Excellency with more complaints, but this grievance so much concernes all in Ho∣nour, that we most humbly beseech your Excellency to releeve it, and on the be∣halfe of your poore servants, to represent it to his Majesty, for his opinion of our force, and number, and his distrust of our integrity in our Musters, we presume by his owne course he now takes, will sudden∣ly shew him how reports hav abused, and injured us. But first we complaine as we are Gentlemen, that by the long neglect of
sending our Pay, we have beene inforced contrary to our former lives, to oppresse a poore Country, and live up on the discre∣tion of Strangers, which both they and we are weary of; Next as we ate Souldiers, the season puts us in mind of drawing out of the Fields, and we know that some of his Majesties Army hath already removed, though in pretence of inlarging their quar∣ters, yet Jealousie is no species in our pro∣fession, of feare but wisdome, and though we want neither courage nor will to op∣pose our Enemy, if they advance, but ra∣ther desire to seeke and find them, yet the long want of pay, hath so distressed both Officers and Souldiers, that for that reason onely, we are very unable to march, and to subsist in the field farre worse, but our chief∣est discontent is, that our humble addresse formerly by Petition, hath neither brought remedy to our sufferings. We are very sen∣sible, that we were unfortunately foyled in the first part of this Action, but we hope so to mannage what is left, that our future
proceedings shall neither deserve blame nor reproaches, and we are confident that if the resolution of his Majesty, with his Excellency the Earle of Newcastle, please to comply with our endeavours, and restore our Armies to their former height of glory, in all our progresses we shall both with willingnesse and humility, imbrace the pleasure of his Majesties Councell, either to adde or take from us that which we have received, and are also sworne unto, but upon a serious deliberation, we find that many of our Officers are unexperiencd, which must needs produce great inconvenience in this Service, for these and many other Reasons, we humbly beseech his Majesties Councell to prevent these endeavours that would impose such confusions upon us, as must necessarily deprive us of the chiefe priviledges and right of our command, thus we humbly take leave, and remaine, Your Excellencies obedient Servants, Fryer, &c.
Venner, Mills, Hill, Smith, Forster, Hodson, Johnson, Vaughan, White, Jackson, Eaton, West, Morgan, Gorge, Fleetwood; Fitzjames, Gifford, Cum multis aliis▪ &c. A Copie of a Letter sent from the Towne of Redding, by James Wyat, a souldier in his Majesties Army, to his wife, dated the 26. of November. LOving Wife, my love remembred, I pray let my Cozen William Watson peruse these few Lines, and I doubt not but that all my Friends doe marvell at my long absence, neverthe∣lesse wheresoever my person may be, my heart is with you, and my Friends, I make no question but there hath bene scandalous reports of some of our Actions, and that we are branded with the name of Cowards, it makes no great matter, for I have well feathered my nest, if I can keepe it, I could wish
my Money, Rings, and other good things with you, for I feare I shall hardly keepe them, though I take as great care as any man can, and refraine tipling, because I would be sencible of what I doe dayly undertake. Here is great disorders, Theeving, and pilfering, one another, we can hardly take our rest, nay durst not over sleepe our selves for feare of being ransackt or stript of all we have, our Officers have authori∣zed any to pilfer and steale if they find one the o∣ther sleeping, that thereby to keepe us in readinesse to prevent danger, there were three or foure of our owne company supposed to have money and other Treasure, in their sleepe their throats were cut and their Legs cut cleane off, supposing their monies to be in their Bootes as it so happened, others lost their Coats and Cloakes, and complaint was made to Collonell Pinder who caused a privie search to bee made amongst the Welsh and Irish Quarters, and there was tenne Irish apprehended who were found with store of Gold and Silver, and for certaine they▪ have thus massacred those Soul∣diers, and wee imagine they shall be hanged in the way the next March, for they are already adjudged; so there is another of our Souldiers to be Harque∣bushierd, for pillaging and striking his Captaine, I hope I shall not long remaine with this Cruell and murderous people, if I can finde any opportu∣nity I will give my Captaine the bagge, there bee many of our Foot souldiers almost famished for
want of food, especially our English; for th Irish and Wlsh they have their Trulls following them and doth more spoyle then the whole Army be∣sides. There was since the 18. of November that I came into the Kings Army at Redding, divers complaints made to our Generall of our Officers, wherby some are imprisoned, other some he fined a Moneths pay; His Majesty at this present is at Oxford, and with∣in two dayes hee goeth for Theobalds, for One thou∣sand Horse and fifteene hundred Foot are gathered together for his Majesties Convoy to Theobalds. There was sixe Captaines stript and sent to Red∣ding, my Captaines name is Sir Iohn Wagstaffe, so J leave you untill I shall see you, and rest Redding, the 26.th of November, 1642. Your loving Husband, JAMES WYOT. FINI
