e2679 E181_43 99873274 125739
THE COMMONS PETITJON TO THE KING In Defence of Mr. PYM. ANSWERING Those Seuen Articles whereof hee was Impeached. Being a Commendable Ʋindication of those Seven Articles, wherein Mr. Pym was lately Accused. Shewing how his good Endeavours for the benefit and safety of this Kingdome, and his affectionate Zeale for the publique Prosperity of this Realme have bin misconstrued. Expressing the great Love, and singular Affection of the Commons to him, who have petitioned to the King, in Answer of those Ar∣ticles against him, beseeching His Majesty to remit, and excuse him, being not guilty of the same. London, Printed for William Bond, 1641.
An Ansvver to the 1. Article against Mr. Pym, &c. The 1 Article was to this effect, that M. Pym (a∣mongst the other scilicet) hath traiterously endea∣voured to subvert the fundamentall lawes, and go∣vernment of England: this seemes contrary, in re∣gard that hee solely did alwayes oppose any man, whom hee either found or could suspect guilty of the same crime, and hath laboured rather to ratifie, and confirme the fundamentall lawes, the either subvert or confound the same. For in his Diurnall Speeches in the Parliament was alwayes specified his reall intent, in the institution, and not diminuti∣on or subversion of any law: which was not detri∣mentall to the safety, and prosperity of this King∣dome, In the same Article it is mentioned, that with all he hath indeavoured to deprive the King of His Royall power, and to place in subjects in arbitrary power over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of His Majesties liege people. To this your Petitioners an¦swer, that we have found him so diligent to advance your Majesties royall Dignity and Crowne, that he hath seemed rather to ad, then in any wise to de∣prive your Majesty of any power, appertaining to your royall Selfe: and for the subsequent conclusi∣on we find, that otherwise; for hee hath given his vote in the House of Commons against the same. We proceed now to the 2. Article, viz. that he hath en∣deavoured to lay many foule aspersions upon His Majesty, and his government to alienate the affecti∣ons of his people, and to make his Majesty odious unto them.
The Answer to the second Article. To this your Petitioners presume to answer thus: as in the former Article we have specified the inte∣grity of his mind, free from entertaining the least thought of casting aspersions either on your Maje∣sties person or government: so likewise we do sig∣nifie his innocuous intent herein, that we could ne∣ver heare, know, or perceive him at any time min∣ded to alienate the affections of any of his people, & if any person, or persons will maintaine, or prove the same against him, or them, that he did indeavour to divert their affections from your Majesty, hewill acknowledge himselfe guilty thereof, and justly ac∣cvsed for the same. But that he should indeavour to make your Majesty odious vnto any, it seems incre∣dible; for your Petitioners know, that the hearts & affectionss of your subjects, are so unitely fixed on you both in their prayers, hopes, and wishes, that we impartially beleeve, that no man would become so disloyall, as to substract any respective obedience from your Majesty, much lesse that your owne roy∣all person should become odious unto them. We now arrive at the 3. Articles, viz. That hee hath endeavoured to draw your Majesties late Army into disobedience to your Majesties Commands, and to side with them in their trayterous designes. The Ansvver to the third Article. Your Petitioners have found him alwayes very solicitous, and carefull of your Majesties Army, striving rather to bring them unto a regular obedi∣ence, then to side with them in any trayterous de∣signe.
And wee are confident hereof, that none of your Majesties Army can prove, that he did ever seduce a∣ny of them or suggest them unto any disobedient disorder, or agree to any designe whatsoever. The Ansvver to the fourth Article. We come now to the 4. Article, wherein is decla∣red, that he hath traytorously invited, & incouraged a forreine power to invade his Majesties kingdome of England. To this your Petitioners dare boldly say, that this nefarious invitation, and incouragment of a forreine power was never undertooke by him; for he hath bin very vigilant to preserve, and defend this Kingdome in as great fortification as possibly might be, to the florishing prosperity of this whole Realme. And therefore he hath oftentimes expres∣sed his affection towards the safety of this Nation, and of stronger forces that should be raised to keep out any forreine enemy or power, least peradven∣ture they steale upon us vnawares. In the Fifth Article he is impeached thus: that hee hath trayterously indeavoured to subvert the Rights, and very Being of Parliaments. To this wee may answer with great facility: hee was the chiefe cause that this Parliament was assembled, & it seems very incongruous, that he should subvert the same. Moreover he is the sole man that stands for the an∣tient Rights, and Liberties of the Parliaments, and it seemes a stupendious thing, that hee should con∣found the same. In this respect your Petitioners dare speak with confidence, that there was not one man in the Par∣liament
house, who did stand more strongly for the Rights of Parliaments, then Mr. Pym was. In their Article there is demonstrated his arraignment, that for compleating of his trecherous designs, he hath indeavoured as far as in him lay by force, & terrour to compell the Parliament, to joyn with him in his trayterous designs, and to that end hath actually rai∣sed, and countenanced tumults against the King, and Parliament. The Ansvver to the 6. Article. To this it is answered, that no man in the Parliament can by coertion be compelled by any man to joyne with him in his assertion. And withall we suppose Mr. Pym is more judicious, then to urge and mans vote, or assent unto his design (if I may so speake.) But for the tumultuous vp rotes made in the City, and Westminster, o one particular man can be suspe∣cted to have bin the Author thereof, for the tumult was promiscuous. And moreover Mr. Pym was the sole cause that did sup∣presse them, therefore he co in no regard countenance the ind ult. The 7. and l Article is this, that he hath trayterously conspired to ley, and fifth actually leavied power against the King. To this wee can answer nothing to  awl  ly per that hee was a man of greater fidelity, and greater Loyry to your Maje∣sty. Your Petitioners will not presume to trespasse too far on your element lenity: but doe with all humility, and re∣spective loyalty present their Petition unto your Majestie, building our hopes on your judicious clemencie, that your Majesty hath maturely considered of the perfect integrity of Mr. Pym, you will remit all: which will give great, and plenary satisfaction to the whole Commons. And your Petitioners shall be bound for ever to pray. FINIS.
