f494 e829_5 99873531 168067
The Pure LANGUAGE Of the Spirit of Truth, Set forth for the confounding false Languages, act∣ed out of pride, ambition, and deceit. OR Thee and Thou, In its place is the proper Language to any single person whatsoever. Proved by several Examples, that is herein laid down by plain Scripture, for the convinceing, and stopping the mouths of gainsayers: many more Examples might have been laid down, but what is herein men∣tioned and proved by Scriptures are sufficient for the same. THe Word of the Lord God, to all you who cannot bear the pure language of the Scriptures, and to all who are in the Spirit, and the language they were in that gave forth the Scriptures. First, Ye that have professed the Scriptures to be your rule, Priests, People, Judges, Nobles, and Kings, Fathers, Professors and Rulers, who, thee and thou the Lord God, and Christ in your prayers, and when any thee & thou you as aforesaid, you are them who are ready to murder, here you do manifest to be them that are out of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and such as seeks honours one of another, John
5.44. and you are such who exalts your selves above all that is called God, 2 Thes. 2, 4. who your selves Thee and Thou God, and cannot take that your selves, which you give unto God, and Christ, here that which must be abased is exalted, which the hand of the Lord is against. God said Thee and Thou to Adam, and Adam said Thee and Thou to God again, and God said Thee and Thou to Moses, and Moses said Thee and Thou to God again: Jacob said Thee and Thou to Laban, and Laban said Thee and Thou to Jacob again, Thee and Thou is the proper language throughout the Scripture to any single person of what degree or account soever, search and see. Secondly, You who professe the Scriptures to be your rule, all who are offended at the proper, and also the plain language of the Spirit of truth: and Thee and Thou, to any single person whatsoever, either King, Lord, Duke, Judge, Captain or Officer, you are ignorant of the life of the Scripture, and also ignorant of the language of the Spirit of truth, and knowes not the life of the holy men of God; that said, Thee, and Thou to all sorts of people in the single person, where and whatsoever, as you may read at large in the books of Moses, Samuel, and the books of Kings, Chronicles, and the writings of the Prophets and holy Apo∣stles: they all, upon any occasion whatsoever, spoke Thee and Thou, the words in their place are proper to any single person, as the Scripture largely witnesseth. I instance some examples for the better information of the simple ones sake, who desire to walk blamelesly before the Lord, and also to stop the mouth of the deceipt therein: silence all flesh, and stand still subtilty. First Example. In the beginning God spake to Adam in paradise, and said Thou to him there, as you may read Gen. 2.7, 8. & 16, 17. Verses: and Adam in the paradise there said Thou to God again, read Gen. 3.9, 10, 11, to the end of the chapter. The second Example. The Lord God of heaven and earth, Creator and Governour thereof, he spoke to his servant Moses, as a man speaks to his friend, and in his word said Thee and Thou to him, and Moses the servant of the Lord spake of God again, and said Thee and Thou to him, and God was not offended at him for it, neither did he say it was un∣mannerly or uncivill, as proud flesh doth now, neither did he say, take him away, I am in authority, and what a base word is this to Thou me, as exalted proud flesh doth in these dayes: Gods presence, power and authority hath union with Thee and Thou, then that power and authori∣ty that cannot beare Thee and Thou is not of God, but judged with the highest power, even that which is of God, When Moses did thou the powerfull God, and in his presence when he spake face to face with him, as a man speaks to his friend, God was not offended at him for it, but loved him dearly, and said, his presence should go with him, and his goodnesse should passe before him. Read ye the sweet and pure language between God and Moses, who friendly did Thee and Thou each other, and the love stood firm; and with God and his friends it is the same
same now as it was, Exod. 33.11, 12, 13, 14. to the end of the chapter. But they that are the servants of the Devil cannot beare the language be∣twixt God and his servants, but shewes another language, and so mani∣fests whose servants they be, of the Devill. The third Example. When God spake to Jacob, he said Thee and Thou to him, and Jacob at that time when he spake with God and saw his face, he then in the presence of the Lord did say Thee and Thou to him again, and the Lord God was not offended at Jacob, for saying thou to him, as proud flesh and the servants of the Devil are offended at the word Thou, spoken by the servants of the Lord in this generation, the living God, he was so well pleased with Jacob, who said Thou, to him, that he blessed him, and gave him power, and said, As a Prince hast thou power with God, and with men, and hast prevailed, Gen. 32.26, 27, 28. read that sweet language betwixt God and Jacob, which is now betwixt God and his seed, which language is called uncivill or unman∣nerly now with the Serpent and his seed, to say Thee and Thou, but God did not tell Jacob that it was uncivill, neither did he say it was un∣mannerly, to say Thou to him. And in his presence, when he saw Gods face, and was preserved, and received the blessing from the Lord, Gen. 32.28, 29, 30. A fourth Example. Between godly parents and their children. For, godly parents did Thou their children, and children did Thou their pa∣rents again, and they were not offended at them for it (as pride is now) when Jacobs Sons did Thou their godly father,Gen. 43.1, 2, 3, &c. Gen. 47.29, 30 Jacob did not say to his sons that it was an uncivill and unmannerly word, (as proud and ungod∣godly parents are ready to say now to such children as fear and obey the Lord) but read the passages betwixt Jacob and his sons, who said thee and thou to each other; as words came in their places; and let their pra∣ctice judge your pride and deceipt, who are of the Serpent and his seed, that are at enmity with the seed of God, and are offended at thee and thou, which they were not, nor are not now who are of Jacob and his seed, blessed for ever, but the Serpent and his seed are accurst, and cast out from God, therefore are they offended at the children of God, for speaking the language of the Spirit of truth, witnessed before amongst the holy men of God. Read Gen. 43.1, 3, 4, 5. Gen. 47.29, 30. and Gen. the 48. & 49. chapters. The fifth Example. Jeptha, who was a Judge in Israel, he did thee and thou his daughter; and the Judges daughter did thee and thou the Judge her Father again; and though he were a Judge, he was not offen∣ded at his daughter for saying, Thou to him, being one that feared God,Iudg. 11.34, 35, &c. and served him, neither did he call it uncivill or unmanerly: as proud flesh doth now, and such parents as are untaught the fear and obedi∣ence to the Lord, which cannot bear the language of the Spirit of truth, either from their children or others that are in the truth, witnessed in the holy Scriptures, for that example Read Judges 11.34.35.36. Verses.
The sixth Example. Naomi did Thou Ruth her daughter in Law, and Ruth did Thou Naomi her mother in Law again,Ruth 1.16.17. &c. and it were nei∣ther uncivill nor unmannerly, as pride and ambition saith it is now, that is offended at the pure proper language, who cannot bear thee and thou, read that example of Ruth and Naomi, to judge your pride who are out of their practice, and offended at plainnesse of speech, Ruth 1.16. &c. Ruth 3.5.6. The seventh Example. Between masters and servants: Masters did thee and thou their servants, and servants did thee and thou their Ma∣sters again, and were not offended at them for it. Abraham did thee and thou his servant, Gen. 14.2. & 4. and Abrahams servant did thee and thou his master again, and he were not offended at him for it, Gen. 24.5.6, &c. though he was great and rich, Gen. 24.34.35.36. to the 43. &c. he were not offended at his eldest servant for saying thou to him and to his kindred,Gen. 24.1.2.3.4. as proud flesh, and such as are great and rich, who are of the serpents seed, are offended now at thee and thou, either from their servants, or such as truly fear the Lord and serve him, therefore do they not follow Abraham the father of the faithfull, judge your selves with the life of his words; and for your better information in that, read the 24. chapter of Genesis. The eighth Example. Read those other Seripures also, where servants did thou their masters, though great and rich, even Kings, &c. 1. Sam. 29.8.9.10. 1. Sam. 16.15.16.17. verses. 1 Kings 20.31.32.33.34. The nineth Example. Abrahams servant did thou the damsell, Gen. 24.47. Rebecha, when he went to take her to be his masters sons wife, he did thou the damsell Rebecha and her parents, and they were not offended at him for it, but Rebecha's brother shewed great kindnesse to him, as the rest did, and he called him the blessed of the Lord, Gen. 24.31. &c. The tenth Example. When Daniel and the three Children were exa∣mined before the King, they said thou to him, even to the King, in an∣swer to their examination before him, Dan. 3.16.17.18. The eleventh Example. The Chaldeans did thou the King, and he were not offended at them for it, read Dan. 3.8.9.10. The twelfth Example. Jeremiah the true Prophet of the Lord did thou the Priest and the Governour, when the Priest smote Jeremiah on the face, out of the pride of his wicked heart, and caused the servant of the Lord to be set in the stocks in the high gate of Benjamin: Read Ier. 20.1.2.3. to the 9. verse. The thirteenth Example. Christ Jesus the dear Son of God, in an∣swer to his examination before the judgment-seat did thou the Judge, as in his examination and answer may be seen more fully. Read the Scriptures for proof to that Example, John 18.21.22.23. Matth. 26.60.61.62.63.64.65. Matth. 27, 11. Mark 15.1.2. John 1 31.32.33.34.
The 14. Example. When Paul was before the King, and Gover∣nours, and Officers, he did Thou the King, and Thou the chief Priest, and thou the Governours, and Officers, when he spake to any one in particular, in answer to his examination before them, or other∣wise, as he was moved to speake to any one of them in the particular, and he was not put in prison for saying thou to the King, though the high Priest smote him on the face, as Priest Pashur smote Jeremiah, shewing forth the pride and wickednesse of their hearts, and here the Priests and proud flesh may read their figures & such as are like Priests like people. Hosea 4.9. Hosea 6.9. Silence proud flesh, of what sort soever, that cannot bear thou the word of the Lord, from his ser∣vants that do his Commands also: Read the example of Paul in an∣swer to his examination before the Judgment-seat, who did thou the King, and thou the Judge,Acts 6.1.2.3. &c. and thou the Governours and Officers that he had to speak to, and with them one by one or in partitulars, for proof of that example see Acts 24.10.11. &c. Acts 25.9.10. &c. at large, Acts 23.24.25, 26. Chapters. I is a particular, thee is a particular, and Thou is a particular, Single pure proper and plain unto one. Wee is many, Ye is many, they is many, and You more then one. That which cannot bear thee and thou, to a single person what sort so∣ever, is exalted proud flesh and is accursed with a curse, and cast out from God, but such are the serpent and his seed, therefore silence deceipt, pride and ambition, who art of that seed and under that curse stop thy mouth, who professeth the Scriptures to be thy rule, and takes them to talk of as the Serpent did, Matth. 23.33. but works contrary to them as such e∣ver did, and when any sayes thee or thou to thee, thou snuffs like the wilde Asse: Read thy selfe, Jer. 2.23.24. with the life of the Scriptures art thou judged, 1 Cor. 2.15. And with the Scripture art thou also cast out from the people of God, who hath not yet learned their Language, who lives in the lust, hypocrisie, pride and ambition,Matth. 23.27.28, 29. to the 34. who hast profes∣sed the Scripture to be thy rule, but now thy hypocrisie is discovered, who cannot endure the language and life that gave forth the Scripture, there∣fore art thou manifest to be the Serpent, and the painted harlot, which was ever judged with the Sprit of truth, in which is the pure language, which is the Judge of all false languages, and the Judge of unclean spi∣rits, which uncleane sprits now themselves do manifest, which gnaw their tongues, and gnash their teeth,Rev. 16.10.11. Isa. 8.21.22. fret themselves at the pure language of the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures. Matth. 23.31.32.33. Zeph. 3.8.9. &c. R. F. Many other examples might be instanced, but these are sufficient to convince and stop the mouthes of gainsayers, about that which in the Examples before mentioned. Written from us, whom the world calls Quakers; who witnesse and
practise the pure, proper, and single plain Language, as the holy men and people of God of old time did, which the Scriptures bears testimony unto, &c. Written in Leicester-shire the beginning of the 11. moneth by one known to the world by R. Forneworth. Nakednesse a signe or figure. When the Lord spake to Isay, in the year that Tartan came to Ash∣dod, at the same time spake the Lord by Isay the son of Amos, saying, go and loose thy sackcloth from off thy loynes, and put off thy shoes from off thy feet: And he did so, walking naked and barefoot, and the Lord sayd, like as my servant Isay hath walked, naked and barefoot three years for a signe and a wonder upon Egypt and Ethiopia, Isay. 20.1.2.3. So shal the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians Captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt, and they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory, 4, 5. Verses. Now if the Lord in this generation speak to any to put off their gaw∣dy attire, and to go in sackcloth, and to be a figure to the people, that so should all the pride and glory of the world and of the pomp and Egyp∣tian craft be cast off and layd aside: That would be a wonder to this generation, to them that trust in flesh and go down to Egypt for help, and if the Lord should in this generati∣on cause one to put off his garments and his shoes, and go naked and barefoot, three dayes, to shew to all, that as he is naked and barefoot three dayes before them, without covering, so must they be all uncovered, and their shame & nakednesse appear before the Lord, and before all, it would make them startle, & they would wonder at it, in this Egyptian proud lustful generation, as they wondered at Esay, when he went naked and barefoot 3. years for a signe. The Lord saith, strip, go make you bare, cast off all your cloaths of dishonesty, and do not cover you with a profes∣sion, and pretence of godlinesse, and still walk in craftinesse, guile and deccit, for your shame shall appear, and all your covers will be too nar∣row to hide you, for the vail is renting away that hath been spread over all nations, Woe to the crown of pride, behold ye despisers, wonder and perish, for I will work a work in your dayes, which you will in no wise believe, though a man declare it to you, beware least that come upon you which is spoken of in the Prophets. Read and understand, shame and confusion is coming upon all Egypt, Ethiopia and Idumea, and the people of Gods curse, one woe is past and behold a second woe is coming.
Dwell in the light, which is the condemnation of the ungodly, for all they that are contrary to the light, are without the cloathing of God, a∣mong such doth the Lord send some of his Children, to go naked and put off their cloaths; a figure and a signe of their nakednesse, who are naked from god, and cloathed with the filthy garments, so ye all dwel∣ling in the light, which never changeth, ye stumble not but are led out of darknesse, and from among the unbeleivers, where the signes are sent, and such as are from God, which light leads up to God, in which is the unity, so in the light all dwell. FINIS. Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread Eagle neer the West end of Pauls. 1655.
