H3631 R229622 99899242 152675
The Humble REPRESENTATION AND PETITION Of divers VVel-affected Gentlemen, Free Holders, and others of the County of OXON. Presented to the supream Authority of the Nation, the Commons in Parliament Assembled, April 6. 1649. VVith the Speeh of Mr. Butler at the delivery of the said Petition, and the Speakers Answer thereunto. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spred-Eagle at the West-end of Pauls,
Die Veneris April 6 1649. ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parlia∣ment, that the humble Representation and Petiti∣on of divers wel-affected Gentlemen, Free-holders, and others of the County of Oxon, be referred unto Sir Arthur Haslerig. Sir Iames Harrington. Sir Iohn Danvers. Mr. Whitlock. Mr. Humphrey Edwards. Mr. Dove. Mr. Whitacre. Mr. Say. Mr. Hypsly. Mr. Smyth. Mr. Lemmon. Mr. Iames Challenor. Mr. Thomas Challenor. Sir Thomas Wroth. Mr. Ashe. Mr. Allen. Mr. Salway. Sir G. Northon. Alderman Wilson. Mr. Millington. Mr. Oldsworth. Colonel Ven. Colonel Moor Lord Gray. Mr. Fenwick. Mr. Scot. Mr. Garland. Mr. Love. Mr. Masham. Mr. Boon. Mr. Bryssoil. Mr. Blachstone. Mr. Pury. Mr. Weaver. Mr. Geardon. Or any three of them, to hear what shall be further presented to them by the Petitioners, and such as are authorised by them, and this Committee are to meet this afternoon at two of the clock in the Dutchy Chamber, and this Committe have power to look on the former Votes, and to present some way to the House for reception of Ministers to supply the places that are unsupplied, and to have the same power with the Committee for Itinerary Ministers, Mr. & Garland is to have special care hereof.
To the Supream Authority of the Nation, the Commons in Par∣liament assembled. The humble Representation and Petition of divers wel-affected Gentlemen, Free∣houlders, and others of the County of Oxon. Humbly Sheweth, THat our Spirits are much revived, and our hearts raised up in the sensible apprehension of the good hand of God upon you, in your late and pre∣sent actings, in referrence to Com∣mon Right and freedom, and for as much as your work tends to the wel-being of this
Common-wealth, we as members thereof, from our present sence of some grievances in the County, City, and University of Oxford, Yet unremoved, do conceive our selves in duty obliged to acquaint you therewith; As namely the obstruction and delay of Justice, through the corruption, and disaffection of divers now in Commission, the countenancing of, and conniving at Delinquents by some of our Committee men, and their Officers, the irregular proceedings of the visitors in the University, the vio∣lent endeavours of the parochiall Ministers, to im∣bitter and stirre up the Spirits of the people, in op∣position to your present actings, and under pretence of breach of Covenant; the great & intolerable bur∣then of the Chancellors Arbitrary Court, in the University; the manifest evil of keeping many of our Laws in an unknown tongue, the great increase and necessity of the poor, the great quantity of ground of Forrests and Parks (now belonging to the State) which lie wast, without benefit to the publique the exemption of Colledge lands from Taxes, the want of faithfull representatives for this County, to sit in your house, and to represent these and other our grievances for our good; the consideration of all which makes us to represent these our humble re∣quests and desires, as followeth, viz. 1. That all our disaffected Justices may be forth∣with removed, and such only impowred as have and still do approve themselves faithfull to the pub∣lique interest. 2. That all our disaffected Commissioners and
Committee men, with their officers, may also be re∣moved, and such only be intrusted as are of known fidelity, and honesty amongst us, and all called to an account. 3. That such of the visitors appointed by Parlia∣ment, as have not appeared, and acted in the late vi∣sitation of the said University, according to the trust reposed in them, may be disabled to sit or act as vi∣sitors for the future, and that such others as are a∣ble and wel-affected, may be added to the remaining number, and that the persons so to be added; may have power to review and rectifie (if there be cause) the procedure of the said visitors, and from time to time to act to all intents and purposes, as the other visitors may or might have done. 4. That such Ministers, or others, that shall in Preaching, Praying, or otherwise endeavor to dis∣content, and disaffect the people of the Nation, in rendring your proceedings, (as to the Tryal of the late King, nulling the house of Lords, and others) to be a breach of Covenant, by their misrepresenta∣tion thereof, thereby stirring up the people to new Engagements and Insurrections, may by strict Or∣der from you, be apprehended and punished as de∣ceivers of the people, and disturbers of the publike peace; and also that a competent number of Itine∣rary Ministers may be appointed in this County, and paid out of the publike Treasury.
5. That all Arbitrary and Tyrannical Courts in this University, or elsewhere, may be wholly taken away and abolished. 6. That as many of our Laws as are in an un∣known tongue, may be translated into English: That what are corrupt may be corrected, the evil rpealed, the obscure explained, and the good revi∣ved. 7. That all the good Laws for relief of the poor, may be duly put in execution by the several Justi∣ces, setting them to work, or otherwise providing for them, that no common begger be found amongst us. 8. That all those Forests, Lands, and Parkes that now lie wast, may be speedily put to the best improvement for the use of the publique. 9. That the wel-affected of this County, who have been always faithful to your proceedings (and none else) may have liberty to make choice of so many representatives, as are wanting in this Coun∣ty to sit in the House, and none but such ca∣pable of being chosen, that have faithfully adhered to you in all your Engagements from first to last. 10. That all Colledge Lands may be taxed, and pay equally with other Lands, in all Charges and Contributions whatsoever.
11. Lastly, That you will be pleased to appoint some of your own Members to receive information from those that shall present these our humble de∣sires, what persons we conceive fit to be imployed and intrusted in the severall places and offices before mentioned. All which we refer to the wisdom and Judgement of this Honourable House, not doubting your speedy and serious considera∣tion thereof, and answer thereunto, being (as we conceive) of most necessary and pre∣sent concernment, which will be a further testimony to us, and others, of your real in∣tentions and endeavors to act in all things for our publique good.
Die Veneris April. 6. 1649. THe House being informed that divers Gent. of the County of Oxford were at the dore they were called in, and after a short preamble made by Mr. Butler to this effect, viz. VVE are desired from divers Gent. and wel-affected Per∣sons of the County of Oxon, to present both our grie∣vances, and divers Requests unto this Honourable House; Truly they are not a little sensible of the great blessing of God on them, in you & your unwearied labors, love and pains, and many good fruits of your impartial Justice, by that remnant that God hath pleased to reser to this day; And we may say, had not there been a rem∣nant we had been as Sodom, and we had been as Gomorah: And we hope, as God hath preserved you, so he wil still preserve and continue you faithful, and we desire these grievances and requests may be read, and such a speedy and effectual Answer thereto, as to your wisdom shall seem meet. He delivered a Petition, which after the Petitioners were withdrawn, was read, and was intituled, The humble Representati∣on, and Petition of divers wel affected Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others of the County of Oxon. Resolved &c. That Mr Speaker do returne the Thanks of this House unto the Petitioners. The Petitioners being again called in, Master Speaker by Command of the house, gave them this answer. Gentlemen, you of the County of Oxford, the House hath read your Petition, and do likewise take notice of the discreet and moderate expressions of it, the fair and modest delivery of it, which they conceive did proceed from a good intention, and the matters themselves shew it, and they have appointed a Committee to meet this afternoone in the Dutchy Chamber, to consider thereof, and to heare what you shall farther present to them; many of the par∣ticulars of your Petition are taken into consideration already, o∣thers will be taken into consideration by this Committee, and the expressions & explanations you made to me, the House hath ta∣ken notice of, and have commanded me to returne you hearty thanks for your good affections, and I do returne you the hearty thanks of this House accordingly. Hen: Scobel Cleric. Parliamenti. FINIS.
