J1150 E550_20 R205648 99864967 117200
JOYFULL NEVVES FROM The Princes Fleet at Sea; containing a Narrative of the several Fights and Ingagements, between the two Navies, the Bristoll Men of War, and the London and Yarmouth Marchants, since the first of Aprill 1649. With the Resolution of the Princes Sea-men touching the Parliament and Army and two of them adjudged to die, and to be hang'd up at the main Masts, for de∣claring against the proceedings of prince Rupert. As also the manner how they were rescued from him by the rest of the Mariners. Likewise, a great Victory obtained by Col. Jones in Ireland, against the Marquesse of Ormond. And the proposals of the Lord Inchiquins Army, to be sent to the parliament of England. Published by Authority. woodcut of ships at sea Aprill 2. London Printed for R. Williamson, 1649.
JOYFULL NEWES From the Fleet at SEA, And a Narrative of the severall Fights and Ingage∣ments between the two Navies, since the first of Aprill, 1649. SIR, SInce my last of the second of this instant, we have received certain information of the further proceedings of the Prin∣ces Fleet, and that they have  the Navy into three Squadrons; the first commanded by Prince Rupert, who is to guard the Irish Seas, and to attend the motion of Col. Jones Governor of the City of Dublin for the Parliament of England; the second, by Prince Maurice, who with 20 Sayle is
to attend the motion of Captain Moulton in the We∣stern Riding; the third by Captain Jerden, designed for the Lands-End, to attend the motion and coming out of the parliaments Summers Fleet; all which, though numerous in shipping, yet weakly man'd, and dare not engage, unlesse with great advantage, the Sea∣men begin to moulter in their affections, and shew a great dislike of the proceedings of their Officers; for divers who have escaped at their coming into Creekes, do declare, That they begin to languish for their late perfidious Revolt, and would fain make a recantation, and that if once they could have the opportunity to come ashore, are unanimously resolved to desert the princes service: however, if they cannot purchase their liberty one way, they are resolved to faciliate it ano∣the; and that upon a neer Engagement with the Parlia∣ments Fleet, it is believed they will take the same reso∣lution as the Land Souldiers have formerly done, and (upon good articles and conditions) deliver up their Officers to mercy, &c. Some action hath lately hapned between divers Mar∣chants, and prince Manrice his ships, and much hurt done on both sides; but after some dispute, and severall boardings, the Victory fell to the Marchant Men of War, who sunk two of the revolted ships, wherin was 50 piece of Ordnance, and chased the rest above seven Leagues, but by reason of a storm, they were forced to desist from further pursuit, and to leave them to the mercy of the raging Billowes. These ships are said to be bound for London, Lyn, and Yarmouth, who hold conjunction together for the safety and preservation of their Marchandize.
Since which time we have received other joyfull in∣telligence from the Maurician Fleet, and it is likewise confirmed by two men of War who last night cast anchor in this Harbour: they purport, that upon their crossing the Western Channell, they were set upon by six of the princes ships, who gave them 12. broad sides, but were answered again with another Volley from the Sons of Mars, and after a hot conflict, be∣came victiorious, killing many of their men, chasing the rest, some taking their pursuit without a Mast, o∣thers without a stern, and their Sayls all rent and torn. But by reason of the distempers of the Sea, and the dangerous breaches they had received from the Ene∣mies round shot, were forced to strike in here for re∣fuge, for the repairing and new rigging of their ships. Those who have been in action with them, report them to be as cowardly an Enemy, as ever engaged upon the Neptune Seas, and that 30 of the parliaments ships wel man'd, will (in all probability) soon expell the fury of 60 of theirs. We heare that Capt. Moulton is in a defensive po∣sture, and that he sayles sometimes within sight of the princes Fleet, but declines engagement at present. We likewise hear of a great insurrection arising in prince Ruperts Squadron, the manner thus: two Sea∣man speaking some words touching the unjustnesse of their cause, and the unlawfulnesse of their engagement, being over-heard, were brought before the prince, and (according to Martial Law) were adjudged to die, and to be hang'd up at the main Mast, but the Seamen hea∣ring thereof, unanimously rescued him from the po∣wer of the Marshal; other Captains were summoned, to see the princes tyranny performed, but their Mariners likewise joyntly resolved not to execute the same. Bristoll 7. Aprill, 1649.
The COMMONS of England assembled in parlament taking into their serious consideration, the great prejudice & apparent danger that might be∣fall this City and Nation, if the four Aldermen for∣merly committed to the Tower, viz. Alderman Bunch Alderman Langham, and — and the late Lord Ma∣jor should be continued any Office, or publique em∣ployment, after mature deliberation in reference ther∣unto, Ordered, that the said four Aldermen, and the late Lord Major Reynaldson should be disabled Aldermen of the City of London, or bear any Office or Employ∣ment in this Common-wealth, and that the Common-councell do proceed to the election of new Aldermen in their steads. And upon information given, that there was matter of proof sufficient for convicting Major Gen. Browne, now prisoner to the parl. the House spent some time in debate thereof, and at the last came to this Result: Resolved by the Commons of England assembled in par∣liament, That the said Major Gen. Brown shal be forth∣with brought to his Tryall. Resolved. &c. That a Charge be drawn up against him, for the convicting him of such crimes and misde∣meanours, as shall be exhibited and made good upon matter of proof; it appearing that there is sufficient testimony and witnesse, viz. 1 That he hath beene a great Instrument in abetting and promoting the last Rebellion in Kent, Essex, and severall other parts of this Nation. 2 That there had been severall levyes of mo∣ney, and that he had received the sum of 10000, li. for the better faciliating and carrying on of that trayterus work and design, against the Parl. and people of Eng∣land, &c. For these, and many other crimes and misde∣meanours, he is adjudged (in the name of the Comons
of England) to be brought to a fair and legal tryal, but the time and place not yet prefixed. The honorable Court of parl. have also taken into their serious consideration, the manifold hardens and oppressures of the people of this Nation, and have de∣bated a way for the prevention thereof for the future and have ordered a Declaration to be brought in con∣sisting of severall particulars touching Religion, the composing of all differences, the redressing of grievan∣ces, the easing of the people from all burdens and hea∣vy oppressures, and the setling of this distracted church and common-wealth, as it shall stand enacted and con∣firmed for the future; and to the end that the people of this Nation may receive a little glimpse of their future freedom, I shall here insert the chief heads of the groundwork of their Declaration, viz. 1 That the Ministery of the Gospel shal not have their Tythes ta∣ken away, until another way be provided for them as a sufficient maintenance. 2 That the Government to bee established in England, shal be the presbyterian govern¦ment, and to be erected in such a manner, that the pu∣rity and splendor of the Gospel may shine forth tho∣row out all corners of this Nation. 4 That a way shall be provided for admission of all such churches as tend to godlinesse, and the advancement of the sacred Word of Jesus Christ, and to be without disturbance. 4 That all such Ministers, or other persons whatsoever, who shal endeavour to promote sinne, and dishonour the truth, shall bee supprest, and proceeded against accor∣ding to the penalty of their Crime or Fact. These, and other particulars, are now in debate, which will sud∣denly be of maturity for the publike view. The com∣mons have also ordered that the committee of the Ar∣my
be required to bring in an Act, with certain Rules how to take off the Monster of Nature Eree quarter, & all other charges from the people, and therefore resol∣ved, that a committee should be nominated to advise with his Excellency, and the Officers of the Army, in relation thereunto. Letters from Chester say, That renowned Col. Jones is marched forth into the field with 3000 Horse and Foot, and hath fallen upon some of the Enemies quar∣ters within 20 miles of Dublin, put many to the sword relieved two castles, who were in great distresse, and even at the last gasp of being devoured by the barba∣rous and bloud-thirsty Rebels; After which he mar∣ched up further into the Country, whose endeavours and motion being crowned with prosperous successe, returned again to the City, with some provisions and necessaries for the relief of his Souldiery, and the di∣stressed Inhabitants thereof: From whence wee also hear, that the Lord Inchiquins Briggade, consisting of 4000 Foot, and 2500. Horse, decline engagement with Ormond against the English, and that there are divers proposals in a preparative way to be presented to the parliament of England, consisting of severall Branches touching a Act of Oblivion, their joyning with Colonell Jones, and their reception into future pay; All which will prove Instrumentall motives, for reducing that Kingdom from tyranny and oppression, and restoring of it, to its just liberty and freedom. FINIS. Imprimatur, THO: JENNINGS.
