L2852 E435_22 R202790 99862967 161590
AN Act and Declaration OF THE COMMON COƲNCEL Of the City of LONDON, Touching the late INSURRECTION: WITH An ORDER of the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament, For a Publique Thanksgiving to be made on the next Lords-day, within the late Lines of Communication, for the great Mercy of God in delivering the City of of London from the late horrid Outrage and Tumult. Die Jovis, 13 April, 1648. ORdered by the Commans assembled in Parliament, That the Act of the Common Councel upon the late Insur∣rection, be printed, and read on the next Lords-day, when Thanks is appointed to be given to Almighty God, the Author of this great Deliverance from the said late Insurrection. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons. April 14. 1648.
Die Jovis, 13. April, 1648. Resolved, &c. THat this House doth approve of the Act of the Common Councel, touching the late Insurrection. Ordered, THat the Act of the Common Councel upon the late In∣surrection, be printed, and read on the nexts Lord Day, when thanks is appointed to be given to Almighty God, the Author of this great deliverance from the said late Insur∣rection. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Die Jovis, 13. April, 1648. ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That a publique Thanksgiving be made by the several Ministers within the late Lines of Communi∣cation, on the next Lords Day, for the great mercy of God, in delivering the City of London from the late horrid Out∣rage and Tumult; And that the Lord Major of the said City do give notice thereof to the several Ministers with∣in the said Lines of Communication. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guihald Civitatis London undecimo die Aprilis, 1648. Anno{que} regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc re∣gis Angliae, &c. vicesimo quarto coram Jo∣hanne Warner Majore civit' London, &c. AT this Common Councel, Mr. Alder∣man Fowk and Mr. Alderman Gibs, by the directions of the Committee of the Militia of London, did make a large Relation of the great Tumult, Insurrection and Mutiny which hapned in this City on the last Lords day, and on Munday last, by many evil disposed persons, which first began on the Lords-day in the afternoon in the County of Middlesex, where they seized the Colours of one of the Trained-Bands of the said County, who were there imployed for the suppressing of such per∣sons as did profane the Lords-day; and being dispersed by some of the Generals Forces, did ga∣ther together within the City of London and Li∣berties thereof, and in a Riotous maner did break open divers houses and Magazines of Arms and Ammunition, and took away Arms, Plate, Mo∣ney and other things, and did seize upon the Drums of the Trained-Bands of this City, which were beating to raise their Companies, and armed themselves, and beat up Drums, and put them∣selves
in a warlike posture, and seized upon the Gates, Chains and Watches of this City, and then marched to the Lord Majors house, and there assaulted the Lord Major, Sheriffs, Com∣mittee of the Militia of London, and other Magi∣strates of e same; and did shoot into the Lord Majors house, beat back his Guards, killed one of them, wounded divers others, and seized and took away a piece of Ordnance from thence, with which they did afterwards slay and wound divers persons, and committed many other Outrages: All which matters being largely debated, and many particulars insisted upon, both for the Dis∣covery and Punishment of the said Misdemeanors and Outrages; and also for the preventing of the like for time to come, It was at the last conclu∣ded and agreed by this Common Councel as followeth: First, This Common Councel doth generally conceive that this City was in great danger, by reason of the said Outrages and Misdemeanors, and that if the same had not so timely been pre∣vented and stayed, the whole City would have been exposed to the fury and rage of the said Ma∣lefactors. And this Common Councel doth De∣clare, That the same Misdemeanor and Outrage was a horrid and detestable act, tending to the de∣struction of the City, and that they do disavow the same, and with an utter detestation do Declare their dislike thereof. And this Common Coun∣cel do appoint the Committee of the Militia of London to make the same known to the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, and also to make an hum∣ble Request unto them, That an Order may be issued forth from them to the several Ministers of this City and the places adjacent, that they may be directed to give publique Thanks  Almighty God, the Author of this great and wonderfu de∣liverance from that imminent danger wherein this City and parts adjacent were involved. And fur∣ther, the said Committee are appointed by this Court, to apply themselves to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the obtaining of a spe∣cial Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for the try∣ing and punishing of all the Malefactors that had a hand in this detestable action, according to the known Laws of this Land. And this Court with thankful hearts do acknowledge the instruments under God, by which they obtained this De∣liverance, to be by the Forces raised and con∣tinued by the Parliament, under the command of his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax; and to manifest the same, this Common Councel do also Order, That the said Committee of the Mi∣litia, in the Name of the City, as a thing agreed upon by an unanimous consent, shall return their hearty Thanks to his Excellency, for his speedy and seasonable Ayd afforded unto the City in this their great straight and danger. And this Court with a general consent, do well approve of the Endeavors of the said Committee of the Mi∣litia for London, for the raising of the Forces of the City, and in their procuring of the said ayd and help from his Excellency in this Extremity,
and what else they have done for the appeasing and suppressing of the said Tumults. And this Court do give Thanks to the said Committee of the Militia, for their care and pains by them taken upon this sad occasion: And they do ap∣point Mr. Alderman Fowk to declare the same their Thanks to such of the said Committee as are not of this Court. And this Court doth also with all thankfulness acknowledge the pains and care of the Right Honorable the Lord Major, and the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs of this City therein. And this Court do generally De∣clare, That it is the duty of every Citizen of this City, by himself and all that do belong unto him, or is under his command, to be ready upon all occasions to be ayding and assisting unto the Lord Major, and the rest of the Magistrates of this City, for the suppressing of all Tumults and Dis∣orders within the same. And the several persons now present at this Common Councel, by the holding up of their hands have promised, That for the time to come they will use their utmost endeavor, and be ready upon all occasions to do the same. MICHEL. FINIS.
