m103-1 e281_9 99860844 112969
A COPIE OF COLLNEL MASSEYS LETTER: Of all the particulars of the great Fight betweene him, and Prince RVPERT, at Ledbury on Wednesday the 22.th of Aprill, 1645. With the number and Names of the Chiefe of those that were Killed, and taken on both sides. AS ALSO The taking of to Peece of Ordnance by Collonel MASSEY at Lydney. Die Jovis Maii, 1. 1645. Commanded to be Printed, and is published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by THO: FORCET, 1645.
A Copie of Collonel MASSEY'S Letter. SIR: ON Tuesday last the 21th. of this instant Aprill, an Dom. 1645. Prince Ru∣pert marching all that Night came the next Morning, Wednesday the 22th. before Ludbury; where J then was, but the Enemy intercep∣ting 8. Scouts, we had no Intelligence, till they were neere at hand. The Enemy advan∣ced,
and charged into the Towne upon us; and my selfe (with divers Gentlemen. viz. Major Harlow, Lieutenant Collonel Kerle, Major Bacchus, Captaine Gifford, Captaine Moe, and Captaine Baily, with some others and some common Souldiers, with the assi∣stance of 200 Musketiers out of the County forces received them; And so soone as we received the Alarme, we drew out upon them, and marching close up to them, fell on them, beat them to a retreat, and made it good a∣gainst them, so long till my Foot might re∣treat a secure way to Glocester. After the foot we marched off, and out of the towne we had two or three hot Charges upon them, where we slew neere 40 of the Enemies men, and the most of them that were killed were Officers, at which Charge (as it seemes) the Lord Hastings with some others of quality were slaine. On our part wee had very few killed not above 6 or 7. But J was inforced my self still to Charge in the head of all my troopes to encourage all the Warwicke and
Northampton horse; J and my Officers berring the heate of the day. At length, intending to retreat to our place of advantage (some horse of those fent to me not standing to it, as they should have done) the Eneme got in amongst our Foot; but we redeemed that againe, and marched off into the field. The Enemy have sent us a list of the Priso∣ners which they tooke from us: the number by their own list is 110 Prisoners, but above 80 of those were none of my men, only such Country people as they swept away with them in their retreats, that did never beare Armes, only they carried them away to cause them by money, or making friends for ex∣change to redeeme themselves: my Major, Serjeant major Bacchus is desperatly woun∣ded in the head, and was carried away Pri∣soner by the Enemy to Hereford. Major. Har∣low had a sleight wound in the head, and an∣other in the arme, but came bravely off; Captain Baily and Captain Foster, with some
other common men of ours are taken Priso∣ners by them. J have sent for their freedome by exchange of some of those Prisoners J tooke from them, many of them being of quality, enow to redeeme them all if they were thrice as many. Prince Rupert sent me word by my Trum∣petter that J sent, that in the fight he sought me out, but knew not till after, no more then J knew him. But it seemes we charged each other, and he shot my horse under me, and J did as much for him. At that Charge many Commanders of theirs fell. Prince Rupert is (J heare) very much enra∣ged to undertake so great and toilesome a march, and so much to misse his end. J had by Gods blessing my intentment, and stopt his present march Northward, to God be the glory. Prince Ruperts Army by the report of the Countrey, is noised about to be 6 or 7000 Horse and Foot: who are now upon their march againe towards Ludlow, and so, as J
heare, intend for Salop, if they bee not pre∣vented againe, which must be by a more considerable strength then J have. The forces that were with me, were in all about 5000 Foot, and 350 Horse, nor were these all with me at Lydbury, for my Guards were not come up. The Enemy brag little of their getting, but lament much; the Names of the Comman∣ders and Officers that were slaine by us, J shall send you by the next. Aprill the 25. 1645. Your humble Servant, E. MASSEY. Postscript. MY last letter told you that Lydney house was stred and Sir Iohn Winter ran away by the light of the flames, and for hast over-ran 2 of his great Gunnes, one demy Culverin one Sakre, and three brases of Iron mur∣derers, which he left behind at Lydney to do a curtesy. Sir Iohn fired all the way he went, till our forces drove them to Chester pursuing him over the bridge. VVHereas some Malignants have noysed abroad that a great defeat hath been given to Collo∣nel Massey; and have been so bold as to report it to have come from Collonel Masseyes own mouth, and
that he having lost 150 Prisoners retreated to Gloce∣ster, that himselfe was wounded; flying away with  horse which is so false; and full of poyson and Ma∣lignancy, to desparage the proceedings of that glant Gentleman that I dare warrant you it hath been draw∣en out from Oxford, onely to lesson the honourable Victories Collonel Massey hath obtained with but, an handfull of men. It is therefore thought fit that this letter (comming from Collonel Massey himself the same being also confirmed by divers other let∣ters) should be Printed and published to make those Malignants ashamed, who have formented such abo∣minable, and filthy lies; which however those viners seeke to poyson us by being permitted in the bosome of the City, yet a sudden course will be taken with them. The Malignants have not onely done so in this bu∣sinesse of Collonel Massey but in divers other things, and when we have notice of some Victory obtained by any of the Parliaments forces, then presently they rayse some lye or other of a second charge or something they will have to lesson or extennate the former. I wonder how any impudent Malignant that hath stood so stiffe in charging so great a losse (as hath been reported upon Collonel Massey,) can for shame shew their faces to those they reported it. But hereafter other manner of course wi be aen with the broachers and fomenters of such Malignant lies. FINIS.
