M1454 E105_4 99871579 155953
The Copy of A LETTER ADDRESSED To the Father Rector at Brussels, found amongst some Iesuites taken at London, about the third yeere of His MAjESTIES Raigne. Wherein is manifested, that the Iesuites from time to time have been the only Incendiaries and contrivers of the miseries and distractions of this Kingdome. And how their designes are, by a perpetuall motion, carried on by the same Counsels at this time, as formerly they have been. June 5th LONDON, Printed for Ralph Rounthwait, 1643.
A Copy of a Letter which was found amongst some Jesuits that were taken lately at London, and addressed to the Father Rector at Brussels. Shewing there is a perpetuall mischievous motion of the Jesuits for Englands ruine. FAther Rector, let not the dump of astonish∣ment seize upon your most ardent and zealous soul in apprehending this sudden and unexpected calling of a Parliament, we have not opposed but rather furthered it, so that we hope as much in this Parlia∣ment, as ever we feared any in Qu. Eliza∣beths daies; You must know the Councel is engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative, in case the Parliamentary way should faile; you shall see this Parliament will resemble the Pelican which takes pleasure to digge out with her owne beake, her owne bowels. The election of the Knights and Burgesses have been in such confusion and such apparent fractions (that which we were wont to procure here∣tofore with much art and industry when the Spanish match was in Treaty) that it now works out naturally, as a botch or boyle, and spits and spewes out its owne rancour and venome; you may remember how that famous & immortall Statsman the Count Gondamore led King James's fancy, and rocked him asleepe with the soft and sweet sound of peace, to keepe up the Spanish Treaty; likewise we were much bound to some
imminent Statesmen of our owne Country to regaine time in procuring those advantaging cessations of Armes in the Par∣liament, and in admiring the worth and honour of the Spa∣nish Nation, vilifying the Hollanders, remonstrating to King James the State was most ungratefull both to his Predecessor Qu. Elizabeth, and his sacred Majestie; That the States were more obnoxious then the Turke, and perpetually injured his Majesties loving Subjects in the East-Indies; And likewise they had usurped from His Majesty the regality of the nar∣row Seas, in fishing upon the English coast. Had the Spanish match taken effect, (that which was broken by the heat and violence of our furious enemy the Duke of Buckingham,) cer∣tainely King James had deserted the Hollanders. These great Statesmen had but one meanes to further their great and good designes which was to seize on King Iames, that none but the Puritan faction which plotted nothing but Anarchy and his confusion, were averse to this most happy union. We steered on the same course, and have made great use of this Anarchi∣call election and have prejudicated and anticipated the great one, that none but the Kings enemies and his are chosen of the Parliament, and that the Parliament vowes to begin where they left, and will never give over untill they have extirpated him and his posterity. On the other side the same parties are to be admired for their indefatigable industry, incessantly some out revenge, and jealousie in most of the Parliament-men, and especially they worke upon the pride and vaine-glory of such who have been imprisoned, acknowledging that they are the onely Martyrs and Worthies of their Coun∣try. London is as much distempered as ever Florence vvas, for the Companies are at odds, and the Common-councell have opposed the Magistrates, against their old customes in the electin of Knights, which hath bred a great heart-burning in the City, that twice we can divulge vvhat we list in Pauls, and upon the Exchange, and vve have already rendered our
irrecoverable enemy the Duke of Buckingham as odious as a Toade, so that the people are apt to beleeve any thing against him; vve hope to be revenged of that ball of Wildfire the Duke, and shortly to quench his fury; you shall see the same Sword that hath vvounded us, drawn upon the vvound vvith an Oyle that vve anointed, it shall make us vvhole, and this shall be done, The Parliament as a great ship hath dashed twice against the same Rocke, and vve have so vvrought up∣on the severall complexions of Parliament men in charging the most temperate and vviser sort; that the best vvay to over∣throw the Duke is by humble Petition to his Majestie, vvith the violent sort vve have taken a contrary course by vvorking upon their passions, and inebriating their fancies vvith pro∣babilities and precedents that vvere never heard of, that Fa∣vourites have not been Parliament proofe; they may vvrestle for a time, but at last the Parliament hath overthrowne them upon their backs. We doe encourage them vvith all the vvit vve have to fall upon the Duke, and perswade them, now is the time or never, the King being in such apparent necessity, insomuch as vve assure our selves God hath forsaken and in∣fatuated them, that they shall not onely strike and dash upon the rocke againe, but split and vvracke in the bottomlesse Sea of distraction: vve have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our faction and have added two bul∣warkes more: for vvhen K. Iames lived, you know he was very vehement against Arminianism, & interrupted vvith his pesti∣lent wit, and deep learning, our strong designes in Holland, and was a great friend to that old rebel & heretick the P. of Orange. Now we have planted that soveraigne drug Arminianisme, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their Heresie, and that flourisheth and bears fruits in due season; The ma∣terials which builds upon other Bulwarks are the Projectors and Beggerers of all ranks and qualities whatsoever; both these factions cooperate to destroy the Parliament, and intro∣duce
a new species and form of government which is elegant. These factions serve as direct Medicines and Instruments to our end, which is the universall Catholique Monarchie; our foundation is mutation, this mutation will cause a relaxation, and many violent diseases in the body, as the Stone, Gout, &c. And to the speedy distraction or perpetuall and insufferable anguish of the body, which is worse then death it selfe, we proceed with Counsell and mature deliberation when and how to worke upon the Dukes jealousie and revenge, and in this we give the honour to those which merit it, which are the Church Catholiques. There is another matter of consequence, which wee take much in our consideration and tender care, which is, The Puritans, that they hang not upon the Dukes ears; they are impudent subtill people, and that is to be feared, lest they should negotiate a reconciliation between the Duke and the Parliament; that is certain, the Duke would gladly have re∣conciled himselfe at the Parliament at Oxford and Westmin∣ster: But now we assure our selves we have handled the mat∣ter, that both Duke & Parliament are irreconcileable. For the better preventing of the Protestants, the Arminians have al∣ready blocked up the Dukes ears, and we have those of our Religion which stand continually Sentinels at the Dukes Chamber to see who goes in and out: we cannot be too care∣full and circumspect in this regard. I cannot chuse but laugh to see how some of our coat have accoutered themselves; you would scarce know them if you saw them, and that is ad∣mirable, how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans. The Cambridge Schollers, to their wofull experience, shall see we can act the Puritans a little better then they can act the Iesuites: They abused our Patron, Saint Ignatius, in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my digression, for I confesse unto you, I am at this instant transported with joy to see how happily all in∣struments
and means, as well great as lesse, cooperate to our purpose. But to return to the main fabrick, our foundation is Armi∣nianisme: The Arminians and Projectors, as it appeareth in the Premisses affect mutation; this wee second and enforce by all probable Arguments we can: In the first place we take into our consideration the Kings honour and present necessi∣ty, and we shew how the King may free himselfe of his ward∣ship, as Lewis the eleventh did, and for his greater splendor and lustre, he may raise a vast revenue, and not be behold∣ing to his Subjects, which is by way of imposition and excise; we instance in the Low Countries, and shew what a masse of Money they raised to pay the Armies by Sea and Land, meer∣ly out of excise. Then our Church Catholikes proceed to shew the means how to settle this excise, which must be by a mercenary Army of Horse and Foot; for the Horse we have made it sure they shall be Forraigners and Germans, who will eat up the Kings revenues and spoile the Countrey whereso∣ever they come, though they should be well paid; what ha∣vocke will they then make when they get no pay, for when they are not duly paid, surely they will doe much more in mischiefe then we of the Catholike Armie will doe. We are provident and carefull that this mercenary Armie of 2000. Horse and 20000. Foot shall bee taken out and in pay before the Excise be setled, inforcing the Excise. The Countrey is most ready to rise; if the mercenary Armie subjugate the Countrey, then the Souldiers and Projectors shall be paid out of the Confiscations: If the Countrey bee too hard for the Souldiers, then they must consequently mutinie, which is equally advantagious to us. Our superlative designe is, to worke the Protestants as well as the Catholikes to welcome in the Conquerour; that is, by this meanes we hope instantly to dissolve Trade, and hinder the building of the Shipping, in propounding probable de∣signes,
and put the State upon Expeditions, as that of Coals, in taking away the Merchants Ships, and feeding them with hopes to take the West-India Fleet, which is to seek a nee∣dle in a bottle of Hay. His Catholike Majestie shall not want our best intelligence; besides he hath Pistacheos and Caravils, which are still abroad to discover, so you cannot be surprised in any Harbour. When Trade is ruined, and Shipping de∣cayed, what will become of Excise? What will become of Nobles and Gentlemens Revenues? the Yeomen and Far∣mers, in which consisteth the glory of the Infanterie of this Kingdom, they will turn Rogues, and resemble the Peasants in France, who are little better then slaves. Trade and Ship∣ping is also much decayed abroad, that London is at it were besieged for want of fuell, for Sea-coale are at three pound a Chaldron. When things are brought to this perfection, which we hope will be by that time his sacred Majesty hath setled his affairs in Germany, all the people in generall will long for a conquest, missing their means and revenues which should maintaine and support them according to their seve∣rall ranks and qualities. Then we assure our selves that the Lands which were rent and torne from the Church by that ruinous monster Henry the eighth, shall be re-assumed by our mighty Protector, his Catholike Majestie, to the recalling of those which are exiled, and delivering thousands of souls which suffer persecution at home for the testimony of a good conscience. Joyn your prayers with ours, imploring the bles∣sed Virgin, and all the host of Angels and holy Martyrs, to intercede for us. Thus hoping to see Count Tilly, and Mar∣quesse Spinola here about July come twelve moneths, I rest: In the meane time we pray for all the happy successe in Ger∣many and the Low-Countries. From the County of  Your friend J. M. FINIS.
