M1914 E467_28 99864707 162318
Die 16. Octob. 1648. A MESSENGER Sent to the City of LONDON WITH A Packet of Letters from the ISLE of WIGHT, to be communicated to all His MAIESTIES Loyall and true-hearted Subjects in His Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales. Concer∣ing his Maiesties answer to the Proposition of Ireland, Also, several new Proposolls by his Majesty to the Commissioners, with their mutuall compliance for Peace, being joyfull tydings for all his Majesties Loyall Subjects in his Realms and Dominions. Whereunto is annexed, the last and truest Intelligence from Scotland, Pefract Scarbor∣rough, and other parts of the KINGDOM. Examined by the Originall Papers, and Published by authority for Generall satisfaction. LONDON Printed for R. M. 1648.
A message sent from Newport to be Com∣municated to all his Majesties Loyall Subjects in the Cities of London. and VVestminster. SIR HAving so conveinent an opportunity to send unto you, and so faithfull a Messenger to send by, I have in an∣swer to your last dated the 10. of this instant, sent you here inclosed a brief Narrative of the procee∣dings between the Kings Majesty and the Commissioners; which followeth in order, viz. The Kings Majesty and the Commissioners of both Houses are like to come to an agreement and (in proba∣bility) will speedily compose the distracted difference of this distressed Nation. His Maj. hath had a great dis∣pute about the point of Church-Government. But still refuses and offers Episcopacy, and yet so, as to make as many Bishops as they please, and for the sale of Bishops Lands, he will not consent to any other then a lease for
99. years. As for the Militia his Majesty hath granted it already. And some dispute hath been about the busi∣nesse of Ireland. His Maj. hath received the papers from the Commissioners touching the same, and hath promi∣sed a speedy answer, so that there is great hopes of a hap∣py complyance, there being so faire a probability of an agreement between the King and his people in all things, in relation to the Treaty, without which his Majesty de∣clares nothing to be of force. His Maj. doth further de∣clare, that for his part, nothing shall be wanting for the setling of a safe and wel-grounded peace. That so the great distractions of his liege people might be removed, So till the next return I remain. From Newport 13. of Octob. 1648. Your affectionate Friend R. S. Newport Octob.13. For a further and finall Answer to you, as to your 2. Proposition, concerning the Church, & to your Paper of the 30. of Sept. wherein you alledge there are many omissions, alterations, and some denyall of severall particulars in his Maj former answer, his Maj. saith as followeth. 1. As to the exceptions, that his Maj. said nothing to the consenting to a Bill, for the utter a∣bolishing of Archbishops, Bishops, &c. Nor that the Or∣dinance for abolishing them be confirmed by Act of Parl. his Maj. saith, that in his former answer he did con∣ent to confirm for 3. years by Act of Parl. the form of Church Government, and Directorie for worship, which you presented to him, and thereby hath established the actuall possession and publike exercise of the Forms, and hath suspended the present Government, and form of Worship established by Law, but desired a Consultation with Divines in the mean time, for a future settlement, as
in that paper is expressed: yet finding by your said paper of the 30. of Sept. that not to be satisfactory, his Maj. with all clearnesse will acquaint you what was his aym therein: His Maj. therefore declares, That the reason why he did not answer to that part of your Proposition, in terms as is proposed, was, because he was not satisfied in his Conscience; He can be content to the utter abolish∣ing of Episcopacy, the substance whereof he conceives to consist in the power of Ordination, and jurisdiction, as they were exercised by the Apostles themselves, and others, by Authority derived from them, supeior to Presbyters and Deacons in the primitive times; but be∣cause he acknowledgeth that Bishops were to have Councell, and assistance of Presbyters in Ordination & jurisdiction, & in the last were and are limitable by the Civill power his Maj. desired the consultation with the Devines to the end that he, and his two Houses might determine in what manner Ordination and jurisdiction might be moderated and regulated, for the future Go∣vernment of the Church, his Maj. resolution to comply with s 2. Houses for the alteration and regulating of his present Hierarchy. And if his two Houses shall so ad∣vise, his Majestie will be content to lessen the extent, and multiply the number of Diocesses. 2. As to the excepti∣on, That his Maj. hath not expressed his consent for set∣ling of Bishops Lands upon Trustees, and for the sale of those Lands, its true he hath not, to alienate the Inheri∣tance of those Lands, & herein he believes he hath con∣current opinions of many Divines, that in other points differ much among themselves, but his former answer containing a large offer of satisfaction to all those that have purchased, or disbursed monies upon those Lands.
Thirdly, As to that part of the Proposition for the calling and siting of the Assembly of Divines His Maj saith that he will by Act of Parliament confirm the cal∣ling and siting of the said Assembly of Divines, since the first of July 1643. And that they shall have such powers as is mentioned in the said Ordinance, and that they shall continue their meeting and siting, and be dissolved in such manner as both houses of Parl. shall direct. Fourthly, His Maj. will confirm the publick use of the Directory, in all Churches and Chappels, as is desired in the Proposition. And will consent to the repeale of so much of all Statutes, as only concerns the Liturgy, and also the taking away out of all Churches and Chappels provided that the use thereof may be continued in his Majesties Chappel, for himselfe and for his own house∣hold. His Maj. will likewise consent that the form of church Government presented to him, be confirmed by Act of Parl. for 3 yeares, provided onely that a consultation in the mean time be had with the Assembly of Divines, in such a manner and for the purposes as are in his former answer expressed. Touching the Articles of Religion his Maj. professeth he hath not had time since they were delivered unto him, to looke into them with that deliberation which is requisite, before he bind up himself and his subjects in matter of faith and Doctrin and therfore desires that part of your propositions may be respited by his two Houses. Fifthly, And whereas you desire to know whither his Maj. by saying in his paper of the 13 of Sept, that he
will give his Royall assent to an Act for the better obser∣vation of the Lords day, intends the confirming of the Ordinance presented unto him. His Majesty thereunto answers, that the Bill for sup∣pressing of innovations to which you desire his consent which he is willing to give, contains in it full provision for the Lords day, and if that be not sufficient his Maj. will consent to passe an Act to confirm the matter of the Ordinance for so much as concerns the observation of that day. Sixtly, His Maj. conceived that he had fully answer∣ed all your desires, that their might be a speedy course taken to prevent the saying and hearing of Masse in the Court, or any other place of this Kingdom or the King∣dom of Ireland. It is well known of what profession his Royall Con∣sort is, and what provision is made by the two Crowns in the Articles of Marriage for her exercise thereof, and his Maj. never did nor will consent to restrain her. Seaventhly and lastly, concerning the Covenant and the Ordinance concerning the same his Majesties An∣swer being, That he was not yet satisfied to take it, or impose it one others, He conceives his two Houses will not insist upon it at this time, and the rather, because the ends thereof will be obtained by the agreement if hap∣pyly concluded. Which God grant. And for the great busines of the Militia of the King∣dom his Majesty doth consent thereto as is set down in the Proposition. Subscribed, CHARLES R. Sir, by my next I shall send you severall passages of great consequence which questionlesse will be effected.
Sir, For the Castle of Pontefract it is near surrender, I am confident in regard of a muiny that is amongst them so is Scarborough Castle also, only they prevent a few daies by perswading their Souldiers within, that the Personall Treaty will work some way whereby they may have honourable conditions both for them and their selves. Sir, being at this time necessitated to be brief, by reason of my hast till next return I remain Yours T. E. Octob. 13. From the North came Intelligence, that 500. Scots out of Barwick those in Carlisse also, and the rest Malignants are disbanded. The rest English in these Towns are at mercy, 10. more with Sir Phil. Musgrave in Westmerland are scattered, and Col. Marling and Mr. Errington and others taken, some killed, 70. Barrells of powder taken in Barwick, some Guus, and at Carlisse such a quantity. L. G. Crumwell hath been feasted at Edenburgh, and great joy there by the godly party, for his coming and conjunction. Octob. 14. Came from the Isle of Wyght that his Maj. and the Com: have made some progresse into the busi∣nesse of Ireland, and that his Maj. is very willing to come to an agreement, and doth much grieve at the sad condi∣tion of that Kingdom, so that it is hoped he will very suddenly give a satisfactory Answer to that Proposition which will be joyfull tydings to all those that desire a happy peace and union between his Majesties three Kingdoms. FINIS.
