M2193 E1475_2 99868393 170005
The Way to Thrive: OR THE HEAVENLY THRIFT. Teaching a man so to THRIVE heere, that he may Thrive for ever hereafter. By Alexander Mingʒeis, Minister of Gods Word. He that is greedy of gaine, troubleth his owne house; but hee that hateth gifts shall live. Prov. 15.27. For the desire of money is the root of all evill, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced them∣selves through with many sorrowes. 1. Tim. 6.10. But godlinesse is great gaine, if a man be con∣tent with that he hath. 1. Tim. 6.6. LONDON, Printed in the Yeare, MDCLIII.
The Way to Thrive, &c. THere is no end (saith the Preacher) of making many Bookes, Eccles. 12.12. espe∣cially in these times wher∣in English men have gotten Athenian eares; that is, either to tell or heare some newes, Acts 17.21. and what more welcome newes, then both heaven∣ly and earthly thrift? Thrift I know cannot chuse but be a welcome guest unto all: this is it that all men (now adayes) do look and long for, that the blinde world most hunts after, high and low, rich and poore, one with another. But divers, divers manner of wayes: the Covetous, hee thinkes that thrift doth consist in heaping up riches, the licentious in his pleasure, the proud in his ambition; but this is not the right way of thriving.
The right way therefore of thriving is to learn so to thrive in Grace here, that we may thrive in glory hereafter. First, I say, we must learne to thrive in Grace. And the reason is two-fold: first, be∣cause Grace doth not only bring to glory, but also because it hath the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. The first step therefore to the Heaven∣ly thrift, is, to learne to be holy, and to walke close with God, as Enoch did, Gen. 5.24. Now the way to be holy, is not only to live the life of Grace, but also to improve it; that is, to put our talent to use, to the end, that when the Lord commeth, hee may receive his owne with advantage, Mat. 25.27. Tradesmen and Shop-keepers doe not hoord up their ware, to have it lying by them, but all their care is to put it off, with the most gain; and look with how many more they trade, by so much grea∣ter
is their profit. It is a fine thing to have some ware in every mans shop, an Oare in every mans boat, and some traf∣ficque in every Countrey; for if one faile, yet all seldome or never faile. It is a rich thing to have a stock of prayers going in this Towne, in that Countrey, in that house, Village, or Family: for if the prayers of one righteous man availeth much, Jam. 5.16. what doth the prayer of a hundred, or a thousand? the godly man therefore must needs be a rich and a thri∣ving man, that hath not onely his owne stock, but also the riches and treasure of Heaven and Earth; for in Heaven he hath Christ and his Saints, and all the ho∣ly Angels for his Advocate and friends: upon earth hee hath the Godly all the world over. As for the wicked, he needs not heed them, for they shall be as chaffe which the winde driveth away, Psal. 1.4. for as they minde onely earthly things, so shall they come short of heaven, and though God fil their bellies with his hid treasure
yet they are no better then filthy swine, alwayes wallowing in the mire of sin, and rooking in the dunghill of the earth, be∣ing kept for the day of slaughter. But for the godly man, though his por∣tion (for the most part) is the least in this world, yet his is the greatest in the King∣dome of Heaven; and though he seeme to be most subject to the losses and crosses of this life, yet he knowes that all things doe worke for his good, Rom. 8.28. and greater comfort in the Heavens, because there he hath stored up his treasure, Mat. 6.20. And albeit it doth not appear here what he is, because his life is hid with Christ in God, Coll. 3.3. yet when he which is his life shall appeare, then shall he also appear with him in glory, 1. John 3.2. and shall shine as a star in the midst of the firmament of Hea∣ven, Dan. 12.3. all things working for his good, all things furthering his salvation, and sending him heaven-ward. The godly man therefore must needs be a rich man, who gaineth in death, tri∣umpheth in sorrows, groweth rich in ad∣versity,
and thriveth then most when hee loseth most; for look by how much lesse he enjoyeth of this world, by so much more he getteth of Heaven; he in a gai∣ner, I say, in death, in life, in prosperity, in adversity; for so long as he hath God on his side, so long hee hath Heaven upon Earth, comfort in dispaire, joy in griefe, pleasure in paine, health in sicknesse, free∣dome in bondage, life in death, and all maner of comfort in the extreamest pangs of misery, Christ being unto him all in all things, Col. 3.11. He is greater then any calamity can overcome, being more then a Conquerour, through him that loved him, and washed him from his sins in his bloud, Rom. 8.37, Rev. 1.5. Who now would not but bee a godly man, and desire (with Balaam) to die the death of the righteous, to the end, that his last end might be like his? Numb. 23.10. Who would not but (with the Apo∣stle) count all things loss and dung to gain Christ? Phil. 3.8. And think godlinesse to be great gaine, 1 Tim. 6.6. Seeing it is it,
that not onely giveth a man right to the things of this life, and of that which is to come, but also it procureth a blessing in and upon all he enjoyeth; and therefore if a man would thrive, let him learne to be godly, for that is only the true thriving way, the blinde world therefore is mista∣ken, that counteth gaine to be godlinesse, and the worldly thrift to be the only thrift which placeth its chiefe felicity in the things of this life, and so that people be but rich to the world, they care not how poore they are to God, and how barren in grace. Heaven is but dung to them, and Mammon is their God; and yet it is a wonder to see how these empty vessels do jet it upon earth! how they take upon themselves to be the onely people of the world! and that we can easily grant them, while we looke Heaven-ward, and lay hold upon eternall life, 1 Tim. 6.12. I cannot but wonder (I say) to see how they dispise the poore, of whom God hath made many rich in faith, Jam. 2.3. when as they doe not see themselves, how they
are not only poore, but also blinde, wret∣ched, miserable, and naked, Rev. 3.17. But it is no wonder, that they which despise God, should dispise man, that those whose hearts are glewed to the world should contemne Heaven: for it is just with God, that those for whom sorrow is ordained hereafter, that they should have their portion in this life; and they that thrive not heaven-ward, should thrive hell-ward; yea, but give them riches, and let them injoy the Earth, they care not what becomes of Heaven; they are content to set all at sinque and sice, and let them go at hazzards Oh fooles, and unwise! what have they gained, when they have gotten the whole world and lost their owne soules? Mat. 16.26. do they not well deserve to be shut out of Heaven, that will goe wilfully to Hell? or do they not know that one soule is more precious then a thousand worlds? But what doe I talke of soules, of hea∣ven, and hell, or of the world to come, seeing all is denied in this age, and peo∣ple
live as if they never should see death? I answer, it were well for them if they never should so doe; but though the wic∣ked do flourish like a green Bay-tree, Ps. 37.35. yet I know that there is a reward for the righteous, and a God that judgeth the earth, Psal. 58.11. They are counted the wisest men now a dayes, that are thrivingest men; if then we desire to be wise and thrive, let us learn to be godly; for thereby, we see, we shal graspe Heaven and Earth at one span: we shall thrive in Heaven, and wee shall thrive upon earth; we shall thrive here and hereafter. This is to play the part of wise men indeed, to be rich in grace, and rich in glory; rich in life, and rich in death; rich in heaven, and rich upon earth. I do not say here, that men may be la∣zy and thrive; neither that this heavenly thrift consists without labour and paines; but as the worldling cannot thrive with∣out industry, no more can the godly with∣out some indeavour: yet as the Race is
not to the swift, nor the Battell to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor rich∣es to men of understanding, Eccles. 9.11. so the most laborious man, is not alwaies the most thriving man; because it is not to him that riseth up early, and lieth downe late, and eateth the bread of care∣fulnesse, but to whom God giveth the blessing Psal. 127.2. Not that therefore we should not take paines, but by reason hereof strive the more earnestly, Luke 13.24. especially for the Kingdome of heaven, Mat. 6.33. which suffereth violence, Mat. 11.12. and for all other things they shall be cast upon us. Seeing therefore that godlinesse is the most gainfull life, and a holy life the most thriving life. Wee are heere in the second place to learne, how to lead a true and godly life. I answer, God hath divers wayes and meanes to bring us to this: sometimes for the hope of worldly gaine he brings us to heavenly treasure: sometimes by ta∣king that from us which wee have, hee
gives us that which wee have not, and brings us to everlasting comfort: some∣times he imbitters the world unto us, to make us relish Heaven: sometimes hee brings us in love with Heaven, that wee might learne to dispise and contemne the world. But in sum and all, the onely way to thrive Heaven-ward, is, with Christ, to learn to deny our selves, and to take up our Crosse, and follow him dayly Luk. 7.23. we must learne to abandon the world, and to bid all worldly comforts adiew. And while our faces are Zion-ward (Jer. 50.5.) we must forget the flesh pots, the Onions and Garleek of Egypt, Exod. 16.3. Levit. 11.5. We must learne to forget our owne people and our Fathers house, if we would have the King to delight in our beauty, Psal. 45.10.11. or be true Israelites of the Heavenly Canaan, or Citizens of the Coelestiall Jerusalem. But may we not keepe correspondency with the world and Heaven too? be rich upon earth, and rich in Heaven; take our
pleasure here, and have it hereafter? I answer, no; for first the Apostle ad∣viseth us not to bee conformable to this world, but to be transformed by the re∣newing of our mindes, Rom. 12.2. Secondly, concerning riches; first, So∣lomon adviseth us not to labour to bee rich; Prov. 23.4. Againe, Christ tells us, that it is as hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdome of God, as for a Camell to go through the eye of a needle, Mat. 19.24. and therefore in Luke 6.24. hee pro∣nounces a woe unto them that are rich; adding the reason, because they have re∣ceived their consolation. And S. James bids them weep and howle, for the mise∣ries that shall come upon them, James 5.1. As for those that live in pleasure, they are but dead, whilest they seem to live, 1. Tim. 5.6. They spend their years in plea∣sure, and in a moment goe downe into Hell. And therefore wee must learne to im∣prove ourthoughts, our words, and acti∣ons;
our state, our health, our wealth, our treasures, to Gods glory, our owne comfort, and the good of others: Wee must learne to order our wayes aright, so that no occasion or opportunity of time bee let goe, without doing of some good, without drawing nearer unto God Jam. 4.8. and having a sweet union and commu∣nion with him, in being at peace with him, having joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom. 14.17. and walking in the strength and power of God: yea, and that though no eye did see us, God did not seem to regard us, nor the world to take notice of us, be∣cause we know where our reward is. We looke at eternitie, and an eternall well∣being with our God, in whose presence is fulnesse of joy, and at his right hand plea∣sures for evermore, Psal. 16.11. His love doth constraine us to doe what wee doe, to suffer & undergo all things for his sake, because we do know, that the sufferings of this life are not comparable with the joyes that shall bee revealed, Rom. 8.18. and the rather because we do know, that
this life is short enough, if not too short, to fit and prepare us for eternity, and therefore wee make so much the more speed to hasten our journey homeward, which is Heaven. The world we passe by with scorn, not heeding it; for though wee buy, yet wee seem not to possesse; and though we use the world, yet we seeme not to enjoy it, 1 Cor. 7.31. by honour and dishonour, by evill report and good report; as deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet known; as dying, & behold we live; as chastened, and yet not killed; as sorrowing, and yet alwayes rejoycing; as poor, and yet ma∣king many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 1 Cor. 6.8.9.10. And as the worldling lets no occasion passe by him, without bringing some of his enterprizes to passe: so the godly slips no opportunitie of time, without accom∣plishing his designe: the time past he re∣deems with fervent prayes, the time pre∣sent he bestows in all holinesse and hone∣sty; the time to come, hee is carefull to
spend it to Gods glory, his owne, and a∣nothers good: hee is diligent in reading, in hearing, and holy meditations; the godly is all his delight, and the Saints are his chiefest treasure; he is at all times, up∣on all occasions, and in all places, exerci∣sed in holy duties, and in devotion both publicke and private: the distressed (by him) is relieved, the sicke is visited, the captive is redeemed, the poor is comfor∣ted: he is eyes to the blinde, feet to the lame, and counsell and strength to the weake and ignorant: he hath the prayers of others, & his own prayers do good to o∣thers, & his exāple reacheth all the world over: hee is painfull in travell, patient in affliction; the world he contemns, and all the glory of it; Heaven onely is his aime, God is his comfort, Christ his treasure, and the blessed Saints and Angels his on∣ly Companions; and when the world leaves him, Heaven receives him: there is not a Grace, but he puts it to use, and gets interest upon it, yea Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. as hee walketh from faith to faith,
till hee appeare before the living God in Zion, Psal. 84.7. Now as there is a thriving in godli∣nesse, which I call the Heavenly Thrift; so there is (in the third and last place) a worldly thrift, which is our thriving in earthly affaires; but because there are but few, but seeme to bee instructed in this way, I will onely briefly set downe a two-fold Rule. The first is, that we have a care to a∣void idlenesse. 2. That we get nothing by false wayes, or meanes. First therefore, I say, that if we desire to thrive upon earth, we must avoid idle∣nesse; because it is not only an enemy to thrift, but also the very mother, or nurse of all evill: therefore an idle man cannot be said to be a thriving man; because it is onely the diligent hand that maketh rich, Prov. 10.4. Secondly, wee must have a care that wee get nothing by false wayes, or meanes.
Wee must have a care of false weights, and measures, of adulterate ware, of bribes, coveteousnesse, cruelty, and oppression, of fraud, deceit, and extor∣tion, and that wee preach not the word for filthy lucre sake, whereby wee make merchandise of it, and set God, our owne Consciences, and peoples Soules to sale. We must have a care of swearing, and forswearing of our selves, lest the flying curse take place amongst us, and consume the very stones and timber of out houses, Zach. 5.4. Wee must have a care that the cry of the poore, fatherlesse, and wid∣dows, come not into the ears on the Lord, and root us and our posterity for ever out of the Land of the living. Wee must have a care that wee intangle not our selves with the cares of this life, that wee meddle not with the times, nor with Power and Authority, nor with them that are given to change, Psal. 24.21. But because the worldling will be care∣full enough in this behalfe, viz. to study
his owne welfare and happinesse upon Earth; I leave his worldly care to bring him to a true and spirituall care of his e∣verlasting happinesse and welfare in the world to come, seeing that for this hee was borne and brought into the world; and that this is the onely thrift, if there bee any true thriving way under Heaven: Which way and meanes, God grant us, for Christ his sake. Amen. FINIS.
