M1964 E393_14 99862096 160303
THE LAST NEVVES FROM THE ARMIE: JƲNE the Twentieth, 1647. Wherein is set forth, Their further Resolution and procee∣dings about Windsor Castle, and their sending of a Party of Horse and Dragoones into KENT. As also, their seizing of the Magazine in Ox∣ford, and bringing of it to the Army; together with above forty Piece of Canon. Likewise, the present proceedings of the Army about the Golden Butter-Firkins taken at Graves-end, and a further discoverie therein. LONDON, Printed for James Neale, June 21. 1647.
A Declaration of the Army under com∣mand of his Excelleney Sir Thomas Fairfax. Honoured Sir, ACcording to your desire, expressed in the last, I shall here give you a just account of the Armies procee∣dings at this instant, (which I believe are contrary many mens expectation) they behave themselves very gallantly, injuring no man, they preserve much, but spoyleth little,
their deportment is so fair, to the In∣habitants hereabouts, that they embrace them as bosome friends, more liker then strangers. SIR, It hath been rumoured abroad, that the Army intends to advance neerer London within few dayes, and some talk there is of a surrounding; but I will wave my pen in this, because it sounds to me with a contra∣ry eccho, for I never heard it from any, but only some few private Souldiers. The Ar∣my is said to bee about twenty thousand (besides the additionall Forces which are lately joyned with them) and indeed I can not conceive how they can amount to lesse, but rather more; for the whole Body of the Army is drawn into 20 Regiments, 8 of horse, and 12 of Foot, each Regiment of foot consisting of 1200 hundred, and each Company belonging to every Collo∣nel amounts to eightscore, a Lieutenant∣colonels company sevenscore, a Majors company sixescore, and every Captaines company one hundred, containing seven in number, throughout every Regiment in the Army.
The horse are supposed to be about seven thousand, and (as I suppose) as brave a Bri∣gade as Europe can afford, being indued with many excellent and divine gifts, both for valour, prudence, and pious actions, injuring no man, but planting peace and unity where they discern the springing up of discord and contention. They have de∣clared to the countries adjoyning their candid intentions and resolutions in this their present design, shewing that all their endeavours and actions are onely for the setling of a safe and well-grounded peace within this his Majesties Realme & Dominion. We hear that there is a party of horse & Dragoones advanced into Kent, and that divers Regiments of horse and foote are quartered about Reading, Windsor, and those parts; some reports also of a Rande∣vouz appointed by the whole Army upon Hounslo-heath, towards the latter end of this instant Moneth: the Committee of the Army sits very close, having (as they say) some weighty particulars to commu∣nicate
to the house touching the eleven Members impeached. Colonell Rainsboroughes Regiment, who by order of both houses of Parlia∣ment, were appointed for the Western ser∣vice, are returned from Portsmouth, and come again to the Army, leaving all their Commanders behind them, except some few inferiour Officers, what their intenti∣ons are, time wil make manifest. There are also divers other parties which were ap∣pointed for Ireland, come back to the Ar∣my; saying, they will not engage for that service, untill this Kingdome bee setled in peace. We hear of the Trayn of Artillery being drawn out of Oxford to the Generals head∣quarters at St. Albanes, together with sixe∣teen Demy Culverans, ten Sakers, fifteene Drakes, fifteen smal Field-pieces, with great store of Ammunition, all which (is said) was conducted to St. Albans by a party of horse appointed for that purpose; what the issue of this will be, I cannot as yet discover; but my prayers shall bee, that peace and
unity may flourish, and strife and discord abandoned, and that a happy con∣currence may be had betwixt the Parlirment, City and Army, that so all things may be composed in love, without any more bloud-shed. Here is much talk in the Army of the Golden Butter-firkins, that were lately stayed at Graves-end, and of the politick designes of those famous Chermers, which are said to be men of eminency: the army is very inqui∣sitive to to find out the actors, it will fall heavie upon some, it is to be fea∣red. But time gives an allarm now to with draw, therefore for further par∣ticulars, I referre you to the ensuing List, only in the close, humbly take my leave, and remain Your most affectionate friend and Kinsman, THO. MICHEL. Wallingford, June 20.
A List of the Army, containing the just number of Horse and Foote, together with their Ordinance and Trayne of Artillery. 12. Regiments of Foote con∣sisting of about 13000. 7. Regiments of Horse and Dragoones, consisting of about 7000. Reformadoes, consisting of about 200. 16. Brasse Demy-Culverins. 10. Sakers. 15. Drakes. 15. small Field Peeces to play betwixt Files, at a pitcht Field, or otherwise as occasion shall require. 4. Morter Peeces, great store of Hand-Granadoes, with plenty of Powder Shot, and other Warlike Provision. FINIS.
