M714 E668_20 99866085 118345
THE ENGLISH MOUNTEBANK: Or, a Physical DISPENSATORY, Wherein is prescribed, Many strange and excellent Receits of Mr MARRIOT, the great Eater of Grays-Inn: With the manner how he makes his Cor∣dial Broaths, Pills, Purgatious, Julips, and Vomits, to keep his Body in temper, and free from SURFEITS. With sundry Directions, 1 How to make his Cordial Broath. 2 His Pills to appease Hunger. 3 His strange Purgation; never before practised by any Doct∣or in England. 4 The manner and reason, why he swallows Bullets & Stones. 5 How he orders his bak'd meat, or rare Dsh on Sundays. 6 How to make his new fashion Fish-broath. 7 How to make his Sallet, for cooling of the Bloud. 8 How to make his new Dish, called a Frigazee: the operation whereof, expells all sadness and melancholy. By J. MARRIOT, of Grays-Inn, Gent. London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.
The English Mountebank: OR, A new Physical Dispensatory: By J. Mar∣riot of Grayes-Inn, Gent. Wherein is prescribed his rare Conceits, never before practis'd or admi∣nistred by any Doctor: Also, the manner how he makes his Cordial Broaths, Pills, Purgations, Julips, and Vomits, to keep his body in temper, and free from surfeits, &c. How to make his Cordiall Broath. TAke three sheeps hinges with the wool on their heads: three dozen of sheep Trotters: two Bullocks Livers, with half a peck of Oatmeal; boyl all these in a Cal∣dron two hours; then strain the broath through a hair sackcloath, and let it cool: The use of it is to appease grumbling in the Guts, or a wambling stomack, by drinking one Gallon at a time, and eating the meat after it: This will preserve you from hunger and wind in the stomack, using it but once in two hours. How to make his Pills to appease hunger, ordinarily carryed about him. TAke of Rye-tueal 9 pound, of Chandlers Graves 3 pound, of the skimmings of Honey one pound, warm water as much as will
make it into a Paste: then roul them up into a dozen balks: then put them into some boyling broath, till they be through boiled: then set them to cool; but beware that the dogs do not deceive you of them, as they have done him oftentimes. The chief use of these Pills are for travelling; for Mr Marriot carryed always a dozen to Westminster in the Term time for fear of fainting: his ordinary place for eating them, was in the dark place neer the Common∣pleas Treasury, where one might see him swallow these Pillt, as ea∣sily as an ordinary man would do a guilt pill in the pap of an Ap∣ple. How he makes a Purgation. MR Marriot would often folow the Fariars Rule for Drenches, which Receit best agreed with his body: for he would take Milk and Oyl with Aquvitae, Pepper, and Brimstone, all mingled together: a pottle at one time is nothing with him to scour his Maw. Why he swallowes Bullets and Stones. THe heat of his stomack is such, that without such a Remedy he could not subsist; for when he hath gormondized himself at some great Feast, strait way he swallows bullets of almost 4 Ounces weight, which causes a present digestion: also round pebble stones he often swallows, which cools his Maw. These kind of tricks he hath, by which he puts down many of our new Juglers now a days, who will be an hour eating of a Cheese-cake; he vanquisheth all that dare oppose him in his Art. How he orders his baked meat, or his rare Dish on Sundays. MR. Marriot out of niceness, because he would not have womens fingers in his meat, dresses his meat himself, having an earthen pot which holds half a bushel; he fills it in this manner as follow∣eth. Take a Bullocks head, the bones being chopped small, and good store of Onions, and other course Hearbs which are easily to be get, with an ounce of pepper, and as many Turnups as will fill the pot: when he had laid all these in his pot, he put thereto a Gal∣lon of pump-water, because it should not want moisture: then with his own paws he carries it to the Bakehouse, staying still by it, fear∣ing least he should be deprived of some of it in his absence. He never goes to Church on a Sunday, but gives much attention to the Ba∣ker when he sayes it is his time to draw; which time being come, he
caries his pot home, and to dinner he goes without laying a cloath; first he cuts slices of stale bread, and sops them in this Rstorativ: he is a right English-man, for he eats his broath first; which being done, he sends the meat to be boiled once more in his hot maw, that hath so quick a digestion, that three Cooks are not able to provide him meat at all the motions of his stomack: This being an absolute Remedy for the present, I have here set it down for those stomacks that dare keep him company. How to make his rare Fish-broath. LIke a good Doctor he makes his broath, onely in May or June, when Mackrel are 16 a groat; and then he hath great skill in choosing them, for none but the broken bellyed ones will serve his turn: but because he would not be cheated in them, he will go to Billingsgate himself, and will sit on the stairs half a day, rather then be disappointed: but seeing fish for his turn, presently buyes twelve peny worth, and away he comes home, getting water, and setting them on in his large Caldron: many hearbs he uses, as Fennel, Byes, Rosemary, and a few Leeks; but when it is boiling he skims it, because it is to make broath: having so done, he lets them boil a little, and then takes up his fish and his hearbs: then he puts half a peck of Malt in, and boiles it again; his fish he sets to cool, yet like a good Cook, he licks his fingers as he is a dressing them: having now boil'd his broath sufficiently, he falls on it, and the fish, making no more of it then the Welshman did of his three peny Ordinary, who was ready for another, before he had done that he was about. The use he made of this broath and fish, was onely to get him a stomack; for he would often say, That fish was of a light digestion: therefore good for those that have but a slight stomack at present, but desire a greater. How to make his cooling Sallet, to cool the bloud. I Am of opinion that he hath read Gerards Herball, or the History of Plants, wherein partly he found this Receit; and being in∣larged by himself, I thought fit to set it down amongst the rest: he being a man of a hot stomack, did use this Sallet following very of∣ten, wherein he found great benefit. The way to make it is thus: Take as many Water-Cresses as a large Flasket will hold, as ma∣ny Radish tops, and half so many Colworts; boil all these together
for the space of two hours: then take them up without much , and put them in all  Tub, putting thereto a Gallon of sowr Ale, and a quantity of Goose-grease, sufficient to give it a taste, with a pound of Pepper strewed upon it: This Sallet is excellent good to purge the bloud, and loosen the belly, this quantity being taken three several mornings in the week. How to make Mr. Marriots Dish, called a Frigazee. THis Mr Marriot hearing of a new Dish that was much used at Oxford Cates, and in other places about the City amongst gal∣lants, thought in his fansie to make one that should resemble it, be∣cause the materials that were used in it, were too deer for him; but being a man of a rare stomack, quickly guessed at something that was eatable, though dressed in a strange way: When he had thought upon all the materials of this Dish, he began to put it in practice, having gotten all the Ingredients together, to try this rare conclu∣sion. And thus he made it; He took three great Pomcitrons, and pulled out the Kernels that were within them: then he pared the outside rinde off, and then sli∣ced them into thin slices: then he had many Apples which he sliced also: then he took two Bullocks Livers and sliced them very thin and broad: then he laid a row of the former slices in the bottome of his Oxe-cheek pot; he pepper'd his Liver well, and laid a laying of one, and a laying of another, till he had filled his pot, strewing many fine herbs on the top of it: Then he carryed it to the Bake∣house, where he staid till it was baked; being come home, he invited his Landlord to taste of his new Dish, who I dare swear never faw the like before; but his Landlord knowing his stomack, and that a — was as good for a Sow as a pancake, praised his dish highly, saying, It is very good, but I have newly supped; therefore I desire you to excuse me to night: I shall leave none for to morrow, qd. he, and so fell on, as if it had been a Chicken roasted: so excellent is his stomack for digestion. FINIS.
