N607 E416_35 99864000 116218
A NEW DECLARATION FROM Eight Regiments in the ARMY, viz. The Generals Life-Guard, Lieutenant Gen. Cromwels Regiment. Commissary Gen. Iretons Regiment. Col. Rainsboroughs Reg. Collonel Whaleyes Regiment. Colonell Bark eeds Regiment. Colonell Overttons Regiment. AND Colonell Hewsons Regiment. PRESENTED, To his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX neere Kingston, at his advance towards Windsor; Concerning their loyalty to his Majesty, their due respect to his Excellency, and their Desires touching the Publique Weale of the Kingdome. Also the Copy of a Letter from the Army, disco∣vering a further Conspiraci against the Parliament, Army, and Kingdome, neer Mile-Inne, London. With divers particulars touching the same. Imprimatur, GILB. MABBOTT. LONDON, Printed by J. C. for G. Horton, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley, and neere the Royall Exchange in Cornhill, 1647.
The Copy of a Letter from the Army, touching a further discovery of the late Plot and Engagement, both a∣gainst King, Parliament, Army and Kingdome. Worthy Sir, SInce the withdrawing of the Army from the la Randezvouz ear Ware, the Ge∣nerall, and the Councell of the Army hath taken into consideration the intollerable Op∣pression of the Counties adjacent, and the great burthen which they have a long time under goe, and after some result thereupon, re∣solved to withdrew the Army at a further di∣stance from your City, leaving onely one Re∣giment of Foot  to quarter with you for the better levying of the arreares so long
due to the army, which Regiment (I am con∣fident) will deport themselves with so much civility, that you will have no occasion to mur∣mure at their residence with you. Yet (I con∣fesse) it may prove very prejudiciall, and de∣structive to the proceedings of the obnoxious Party, who have sought both Army and King∣domes ruine, and endeavoured to beget divisi∣on among the Souldiery, and dis-unite this u∣naimous Army, &c. as appeareth by their late actions at severall meetings within the city, but especially at the Grand Councell held neare Mile-Inne, adjoyning to your city, where a great number of the chiefe Head-pieces did re∣sort, as it is credibly reported by a friend of ours, who were sometimes conversant with them for the better accomplishing of their de∣signes, and withdrawing others from their for∣mor obedience, till at the last they were disco∣vered, their councels and debates frustrated, and the chiefe Actors (both in City and Ar∣my) secured. For their consultations did tend much to division and discord, and very destructive to Government, and had got neare upon twenty
thousand Weavers (under pretence of redress) to appeare at the late Randevouze, had not their design been most happily and timely pre∣vented. And it is further advertized, that divers e∣minent persons within the Tower of London were very active in the said Engagement, which will in time appear vifible, and a further disco∣very be made thereof. Wee have also received the copy of a Paper dispiersed upon and down the city, for the ga∣thering together of the said Weavers, their place of meeting being Mile-Inne Green, and from thence to advance to the randezvouze, to pre∣sent a Petition (as it is said) to the Generall, for redresse of Grievances, &c. The common Souldiery are much incensed against the Adjutators, and are resolved to com∣ply no longer with them, by reason of the great expence they are now at, as also the many ob∣structions that doth now arise, through out di∣vers regiments in the army occasioned by the sid party, insomuch, that they are now like to practise their formerpostures, and bee no more our Maste.
Divers Regiments in the Army have decla∣red their ardent affection to the Generall, upon his Excellencies advance towards Winsor, viz. the Generals Life Guard, Lieutenant Gene∣rall Cromwels Regiment, Commissary Gene∣rall Iretons Regiment, Col. Whaleyes, colonell Rainsboroughs, colonell Barksteeds, colonell Overtons, and colonell Hewsons Regiments; the substance of which Declaration followes in these words: THat whereas there hath many divi∣sions lately arose and sprung up in the body of the Army, occasioned by the late distractions, therefore they humbly desire, that all discontents might be removed, the Souldiers not put to shifts, or the Countrey so grievously oppressed, declaring, That if not timely prevented and remedied, will doubtlesse render this Army which God hath often honoured with remak able testi∣monies of his presence, under the prospe∣rous conduct of your Excellency, no better
then an hend lesse and confused multitude; wherefore sensibly apprehending the wofull effect of dis-unity and disorder, we presume it absolutely necessary ut of our duty to God most obedient loyalty to his Maiestie, due respct to your Excellencie, and tender re∣gard to the weale both of Army and King∣dome, to improve our utmust endeavours to prevent the miser able consequences, which inevitably ensue Divisu and the mon∣strous confusion which unavoidably attends disorder, Therefore, we do hereby eertifie and de∣clare, that we acknowledge  seles obli∣ged to subilt unto your Excellencies Com∣mands; Withall professing, that our hearts desires to preserve the band of unity, and re∣all intentions to continue our accustomed o∣bedience,
All which they presented to the Gene∣ral, at the last Randezvouz of the Army eer Kingston. Thus have I imparted unto you, that which (for present) is most considerable, onely this, that some Agents in the late Designe have fell from their dissenting party, and are very submissive and obe∣dient to the Generals Orders, which that they may all doe, is the desire of Windsor, Novem. 22. 1647. Your faithfull servart, Robert Hall. FINIS.
