P3378A E1113_2 99868991 170638
A NEW DISPUTATION Betweene the two Lordly Bishops, YORKE and CANTERBVRY. With a Discourse of many passages which have happened to them, before and since that they were committed to the Tower of LONDON. Being very necessary for observation and well worth the Reading. Written English PROSE by L. P. February the second, 1642. The simple sort lives most at rest, Whilst Lordly Bishops are distrest. London Printed for J. Wright. 1642
A New DISPVTATION Betweene the two Lordly Bishops, YORKE and CANTERBURY. Yorke. FEllow and friend as a man may say, you'r well overtaken; who would have thought to have seene you here at this time of the day? Cant. Prethée York be modling with some others matters, and talke not to me. I am not thy fellow yet; and thou knowest I was never thy friend, tis wel for you that you are so light-hearted, I tell you truly I am heavy. Yor. Why Canterbury, if I may not be so bold as to call you fellow nor friend, yet I am sure we are neighbours; how long ever 'twill last I cannot tell: and whereas you say you are very heavy (if I am not much mistaken)
you will be made lighter by the head before three moneths come to an end, I am sure you have well enough deserved for it. Cant. Neighbour Yorke, if you will be so cal'd, here we are bothforth comming though not comming forth, if thou hast any thing to charge me with, speake thy mind and spare not, I feare thée not. Yor. And shall I speake my mind freely? Cant. Ah, say what thou canst. Yor. I am in doubt I shall make you angry? Cant. Feare not that, nor spare no spéech. Yor. Then Canterbury marke what I shall say to thee, I verily thinke if thou were re∣warded answerable to thy deeds, thou shoul∣dest be served as the two Romish Priests were in January, which were benefactors for the Pope. Cant. Why how were they served? Yor. Thus, first they tooke shipping at Newgate, afterwards sayled up Holborne, and came a shore at Tyburne. Cant. And have I deserved to be drawne hang'd and quartered? Yor. If thou were as sure to have it as thou hast deserv'd for it, thy turne would be the next. Cant. I wonder Yorke why thou shouldest
be so ambitious, and to passe rash iudgment against me? thou art like him that can dis∣cerne a little mote in another mans eye; but thou canst not sée a beame in thine own eye: for any thing I can perceive, our cases are both a like, I am in the Tower of London, so are you, I am here kept a Prisoner, so are you, I am like to suffer death for my mis∣deeds, and so are you. Wherefore then should you not rather study to cure your own disea∣ses, then to apply a playster to my wound. Yor. Stay, stay, a little my little Lord, you put me in mind of wounds and grievances, I pray you tell me one thing if you can remem∣ber it, how hath your body fared since your Doctor gave you the purge, which made you vomit up the Crosse-keyes and the Miter? me thinkes you looke very costive upon the mat∣ters? Cant. Now you speake of my lookes, have you forgot my Lord, how the Devill made two lookes over Lincolne? I would wish you to beware the third, least you come home by wéeping crosse. Yor. De'e heare me Canterbury, since your mind runs so much upon crosses, I can tell such strange newes of a Crosse which I think will crosse your humour to heare it. It is for
certaine spoken, that Cheape-side Crosse is quite defunct, and stands like one forsaken of her former Soliciters. Cant. Why what have they done to Cheape-side Crosse? I thought that had not offended any body? Yor. It seemes it hath offended some bo∣dy, For I am sure they have torne downe part of the portraiture of the body of Christ, and the Cardinals Crosier staffe, and the Crowne that was placed upon the Virgin Ma∣ries head. Cant. Now by my Holy dame, I thinke that they were some Round-heads that did it, but how can you approve this to be true, I am sure that you were not there to sée it? Yor. Are you so hard of beliefe, that you cannot beleeve any thing to be true unlesse you see it? Then you will not beleeve that the two Popish Priests were drawne hang'd and quartered for offending the Kings Laws; whose heads were no sooner set upon London Bridge, but Bensteed your young watch-man turn'd his towards the Tower, expecting a third man. Then you will not beleeve that the Lord Digby is gone beyond Sea? Then you will not beleeve that Colonell Lunsford is ta∣ken? If you will beleeve nothing but what
you see, it is in vaine to tell you any newes at all. Cant. But are you in mind that the dis∣figuring of Cheape-side Crosse, is a greater distaste to me then it is to your selfe? Yor. If't please your gracelesse grace my little Lord, you know that I ever hated Pa∣pistry from the beginning; for which cause you caused me to suffer a long time imprison∣ment. Moreover you thought to have seene an end of my life, but now I may chance to live to see your end. Cant. You talke like one that is over∣ioy'd, but tell me one thing at your leisure, have you given in your answer to the charge, which was the other day layd in against you at the Parliament? or have you never seene the Welch-mans Protestation? Yor. 1. I would have you answer me to this question, and then I shall answer you the bet∣ter? What newes doe you heare from Rome? hath your ghostly father the Pope ever a par∣don in store for you? are you sure that when you dye you shall be Canonized for a Saint? resolve me that question Canterbury. Cant. Me thinks your tongue runs a little too fast York, have you any more questions to aske me?
Yor. Yes, Yes, more I thinke then you will be willing to answer to. Cant. Let me heare your excellent wits; tis very well knowne that I have answered too many great matters in my time, there∣fore I make no doubt but I shall be ready to give you satisfaction to the full. Yor. Then I would have you tell me what you heare from the Cardinals, Monks, Fryers, Nuns, Popish Priests, Jesuites, Seminaries, and Seducers in Rome, and other Countries, are they all friends with you? Is your grace in such high favour with them, that they will send some of their Agents privily to convey you out of this strong Tower. They intend sure a practice, let them take heed of the Lon∣don Prentices, for Bensteeds death is not forgot∣ten. Cant. Fye Yorke forbeare, thou talkest to me in such a rayling manner, that although I can, I will not answer thée; therefore rest thy selfe content for this, I am perswaded to that, if all thy faults were written in thy fore-head, thou wouldest appeare to be as bad, as who s worst. Yor. Canterbury, if you are weary of my talking, I would also have you to be weary of your wicked deeds, and labour to serve
your Maker as a true Protestant ought to doe, and to be faithfull to the Kings Majesty, and the Honourable Houses of Parliament; in so doing, you may have peace of Conscience in this life, and after death, your sins may be remitted, through the merits of our Savi∣our. Cant. Harke, harke, there is Messenger comes, which hath brought me tydings that my dinner is ready, so Yorke adieu for this time. Yor. Canterbury farewell, remember the last counsell that I gave you, and as for my part I conclude, Hony soit qui mal I pence.
Here beginneth the Song, to the tune of, Banks his Bill of Fare. 1. I Am a poore man and scarce worth a shilling, As unto my neighbours is too too well knowne, Yet to live upright in the world I am willing, I covet for nothing but what is mine owne: 2. And now in the first place to tell you my mind, For false-hearted people I care not a straw, This is my conceit by experience I find, There's none but offenders that feareth the Law.
3. I am not in question cal'd for my Religion, From every vile Sect I my selfe can with-hold, Both Papist and Atheist I hold in derision, Ile not wrong my conscience for lucre of gold: 4. My tongue I will governe by the line of reason, From every dissembler my selfe Ile with∣draw, I hate all such Rebels that dares to speake Treason, There's none but offenders that feareth the Law. 5. I marvalle what harme hath old Cheape-side Crosse done, That some meer mechanicks hath wrought it a spight, To disfigure the Picture of Mary and her Son; And dare not to shew forth their heads by day-light: 6. They also have puld down the Crosier Staffe,
Which once was fast plac'tin the Cardinals claw, This sport cannot chuse but make Lucifer laugh, There's none but offenders that feareth the Law. 7. One thing above all the rest I doe admire Why so many vulgars are in an uproare? To put downe the Bishops is that they desire. Although they can shew no good reason wherefore: 8. But now to conclude least I should you offend, And you for my Song would no money me draw, Ile shut up my Pipes and so make an end, There's none but offenders' that feareth the Law. Yor. Why there's no hurt at all in this Song upon my word. Cant. If all that reads Pamphlets, and sings Ballads about the City of London and in the Country, did no worse then this, I should bee
a great deale better pleased with them: Hold there is something for thy reward. My Lords I thanke you both, although your lives stands in jeopardy. The Fidler hopes to live so long, to see your heeles at liberty. L. P. FINIS.
