P574 E481_2 99863215 115404
A TREATISE Concerning the BROKEN SUCCESSION OF THE CROWN OF ENGLAND: Inculcated, about the later end of the Reign of Queen Elisabeth. Not impertinent for the better Compleating of the General Information intended. LONDON: Printed Anno Dom. 1655.
OUT OF THE PREFACE. The Purpose of the Book. THE Purpose of this Treatise is to prove, That the next Succes∣sor of England must needs be very doubtful. The First Part of the Book. The Civil Lawyer declareth, That
albeit the Titles by Succession were clear, yet that as things stand now in England, and other Countries neer ad∣joyning, there may be a great Doubt which of them shall prevail. The Second Part. The Temporal Lawyer sheweth that the Titles and Pretensions of all the Ten or Eleven Families of the English Blood Royal, which remain at this day, are Ambiguous and Doubtful, according to the Common Laws of England.
That Succession by Nearness of Blood is not by Law of Nature, or Divine; but onely by Humane and Positive Laws of every particular Countrie, and consequently may be altered by the same. CAP. I. Such are not to be admitted, of whom no good is to be expected. THE Government is Ordained for the bene∣fit of the Common-wealth; therefore no Reason or Law, Religion or Wisdom in the World can admit such Persons to the Government of the same, by whom no Good, but Destruction may be expected; as for example, by a natural Fool, or one that were a Turk, or Moor in Religion.
Other Conditions, besides Prioritie, are re∣quisite, which are assigned by the Common-wealth. Ergò, Some other Conditions also must needs be requisite, besides the meer Prioritie in Blood; and these Conditions are not prescribed by anie Law of Nature or Divine, but as∣signed and limited out by the Authoritie of every particular Countrie and Common-wealth, to the which the Prince is bound. To live in Companie cometh of Nature; but the Form thereof by the Laws of everie Countrie. The Sociabilitie, or inclination to live together in Com∣panie, man with man (whereof ensueth both Citie and Com∣mon-wealth, as Aristotle gathereth) and in like manner, Government and Jurisdiction of Magistrates, which is ne∣cessarie for the maintaining of that Societie, is of Nature, and consequently of God, that is Author of Nature; But the particular Form or manner of this or that Government, in this or that fashion, is not by Law either Natural or Di∣vine, but ordained by particular positive Laws of everie Countrie; for if it were by the Law of Nature or Divine, it should be all one in all Countries, seeing God and Nature is one to all. To live in Company is Natural to man, and the ground of all Common wealths. All ground of Realms and Common-wealths dependeth of this Point, as of their first Principle, For that a Common∣wealth is nothing els but the good Government of a Multitude ga∣thered together, to live in one: And therefore all old Philoso∣phers,
Law-makers,Plato de Repub. Cic. de Re∣pub. Arist. Pol. and wise men, that have treated of Go∣vernment or Common-wealths, as Plato, Cicero, Aristotle, &c. do make their entrance from this first Principle, to wit, That man by Nature is sociable, and inclined to live in Companie, where∣of do proceed first, all private Houses, then Villages, then Towns, then Cities, then Kingdoms and Common-wealths. 1. Proof. Inclination Universal. In all Nations, never so wilde or barbarous, we see by ex∣perience that by one way or other,Pompon. Mela. lib. 3. cap. 3. 4. Tacit. l. 8. they endeavor to live to∣gether, either in Towns, Caves, Woods, Tents, or other like manner, according to the custome of each Countrie; which universal instinct could never be but by impression of Nature it self. 2. Speech. The use of Speech is given to man for this end and pur∣pose, otherwise little available were it,Arist. l. 1. Polit. c. 12. 3, 4. if men should live a∣lone, and converse with none. 3. Imbecillitie and Nakedness of Man. Man is born more infirm and naked, than all other Crea∣tures, not able to provide and defend himself,Theoph l. de Plant. Plutarch. cō de for∣tuna; & l. de pietare in paren∣tes. but by the help of others; which is a token that he is born to live in compa∣ny, both for his necessitie to be holpen by others, and also for his own commodious living, seeing no man of himself is sufficient for himself; wherefore wittily said Aristotle, That ho which flieth to live in Societie, is either Deus aut Bellua; a God, or a Beast: for that either he doth it, because he hath no need of any, which is proper to God; or else for that he will do good to none, and feeleth not that natural instinct, which man hath to live in conversation; which is a sign rather of a Beast, than of a Man.
4. The use of Justice and Friendship. If man should not live in companie of others, Justice and Friendship should be utterly in vain; Justice, whose office is, To distribute to every one his own: and Friendship, which is so ne∣cessary and equal,Cic. lib. de Ami citia. Ʋt nec aquâ, saith Cicero, nec igne, nec ipso sole pluribus in locis utamur quàm amicitiâ. 5. By the Holie Scripture. Dixit quoque Dominus Deus,Genes. 2. v. 18. non est bonum hominem esse solum, faciamus ei adjutorium simile sibi. Of which words is deduced, That as this first Societie of our first Parents was of God, and for so great purpose, the one to be holpen by th' other; so all other Societies, which grow of this first, stand upon the same ground of God's Ordination, for the self same end of man's utilitie. Government and Superioritie is also of Nature. 1. Necessitie. Without Government, Superioritie and Jurisdiction of Magistrates, the aforesaid Societie can in no wise subsist: it followeth therefore that Government is of Nature, aswel as the Societie it self. For except there be some Order kept among men, to reward Virtue, chasten Vice, and relieve the Afflicted,Job 10. v. 22. there is nothing to be hoped for, but horror and con∣fusion; for that one would devour and consume the other. 2. Consent of Nations. There was never yet Nation found, among whom men living together had not some kind of Magistrates or Superi∣ors to Govern them;Cic. lib. 1. de natura Deorum. which general Consent, Cicero calleth Ipsius vocem naturae.
3. Civil Law. The Civil Law proveth also this point in the beginning of our Digests, where the second title of the First Book is, De originie juris & omnium Magistratuum,Lib. 1. Digest. Tit. 2. of the beginning of the Civil Law, and of all Magistrates; which beginning is referred to the Principle of natural instinct, and God's in∣stitution. 4. Holie Scripture. God concurreth also expresly with this instinct of Na∣ture, as when he saith to Solomon,Prov. 8. Rom. 13. By me Kings do Reign; And S. Paul to the Romans avoucheth, That Authoritie is not but of God, and therefore he which resisteth Authoritie, resisteth God. Viz. Authoritie in it self according to the first insti∣tution, as also lawfully laid upon any persons, but not wrongfully. Particular Form of Government is not of God, or Nature, but free to every Country. So those two aforesaid Points, to wit, The Common-wealth, and Government of the same, are of Nature; But the particular Forms of Government are left unto every Nation and Country to chuse, either Democratia, Aristocra∣tia, or Monarchia, according as they shall like best; for if they were determined by God or Nature, they should be all one in all Nations; which they are not: seeing we see that every Nation almost hath her particular Form, or manner of Government:Aristotle lib. 2. Polit. And the cause of these Differences Aristotle attributeth to the diversity of men's Natures, Customs, Edu∣cations, and other such causes, that make them make choice of such, or such Forms of Government.
Diversitie of Government in divers Countries and Times. And this Difference of Government is not in divers Countries only, but also at divers times in one and the same Countrie: For the Romans first had Kings, & after rejecting them for their evil Government, they chose Consuls annual, whose Authoritie was limited by a multitude of Senators, and these mens Power by the Tribunes of the People, and somtime Dictators; and finally, they came to be Governed by Emperors. The like may be said of many Common-wealths both of Asia and Greece; and at this day of Europe. In Italie, now divided into so many Common-wealths, every one of them almost keepeth a different Form of Go∣vernment: Millan, as also Burgundie, Lorayne, Bavire, Gasconie, and Brittanie the lesser, were once distinct King∣doms, now Dukedoms. Whole Germanie, many yeers to∣gether a Kingdom, now is divided into so many Dukedoms, Earldoms, and other Titles of Supreme Princes. Castile, Arragon, Portugal, Barcelona, which were first Earldoms only, aud after Dukedoms, and then Kingdoms, are now all united under one Monarch: Boëme and Po∣lonia, Dukedoms once, now Kingdoms. France first a Mo∣narchie, under Pharamond, Clodion, Merouye, Childerick, and Clodovaeus, was after divided into Four Kingdoms, to wit, one of Paris, another of Soissons, the third of Orleans, and the fourth of Metz: and afterwards made one Monarchie again. England first a Monarchie under the Britaines, and then a Province under the Romans, and after divided into Seven Kingdoms at once under the Saxons,The Jews. lib. Gen. Lib. Exod. Lib. Job. Lib. Judg. and now a Mo∣narchie again under the English. The People of Israël also were under divers manners of Government, in divers times; first under Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: then under Captains, as Moses, Josue, &c. then under Judges, as Othoniel,
Acod,Lib. 1 Reg. Lib. Machab. Gedeon, &c. then under High Priests, as Hely and Samuel: then under Kings, as Saul, David, &c. then under Captains and High Priests again, as Zorobabel, Judas, &c. until they were brought under the power of the Romans. So as there can be no doubt, but that the Common-wealth hath power to chuse their own fashion of Government, as also to change it upon reasonable causes; and God no doubt doth approve it. The Common-wealth limiteth the Governors Authoritie. And as the Common-wealth hath this Authoritie to chuse and change her Government, so hath she also to limit the same with Laws and Conditions: Therefore the Con∣suls of Rome were but for one year, other Officers and Ma∣gistrates for more, as their Common-wealth did allot them. The Dukes of Venice at this day are for their Lives; those of Genoa for two years. The Dukedoms of Ferrata, Urbin, and Parma, are limited only to Heirs Male; & for defect ther∣of, to return to the Sea of Rome; as Florence, and Mantua, for like defects to the Empire. How a Natural Prince is to be understood. When men talk of a Natural Prince, and Natural Succes∣sor; if it be understood of one that is born within the same Realm or Countrie, and so of our own natural blood, it hath some sence; but if it be meant as though any Prince had his particular Government or Interest to Succeed by In∣stitution of Nature, it is ridiculous; for that Nature giveth it not, as hath been declared, but the particular Constitution of every Common-wealth.
Of the Form of Monarchies and Kingdoms in particular, and the dif∣ferent Laws, whereby they are to be Obtained, Holden, and Governed in divers Countries. CAP. II. A Monarchie the best Government. ARistotle, Seneca, and Plutarch do hold a Kingdom to be the most perfect Common-wealth among all o∣ther, and the very first. His Antiquity. Of all other it is the most ancient; for we read that a∣mong the Syrians, Medes and Persians, their first Governors were Kings.1 Reg 8. And when the Children of Israël did ask a King at the hands of Samuel (1000. years before the coming
of Christ) they alleged for one Reason,Dionys. Halic. lib. 5. That all Nations round about them had Kings for their Governors; and at the very same time the chiefest Cities and Common-wealths of Greece,Cornel. Tacit. lib 3. as the Lacedemonians, Athenians, Corinthians, and others,Cie. lib. 1. offic. were governed by Kings. The Romans also be∣gan with Kings. It resembleth the Government of God, and Nature. This kind of Government (as do gather S.Hierom. lib. 2. Epist 12. Hierom and S. Chrysostom) resembleth most of all the Government of God,Chrysost. ho. 23. that is but one: representeth the excellencie of one Son, of one Soul in the Bodie: it is also most conformable unto Nature, by example of the Bees which do chuse unto themselves a King, and do live under a Monarchie. St. Peter's Authoritie. Subjecti estote omni humanae Creaturae propter Deum,1 Pet. 2. sive Regi quasi precellenti, sive Ducibus ab eo missis, &c. saith S. Peter, where he seemeth to signifie that a King's Government is the best among all others; seeing at this time when he wrote this Epistle, the chief Governor of the world was not called King, but Emperor; though indeed between the title of King and Emperor there is little or no difference in sub∣stance, but only in name. Utilities of a Kingdom. This Government, not only in it self, but also by his Effects and Utilitie, is the most excellent: For in the Mo∣narchie of one King there is more Unitie, Agreement, and Conformity, and thereby also Celerity commonly in di∣spatching of business, and in defending the Common-wealth, than where many Heads be: less Passions also in one man, than in many.
Inconvenieneies of other Governments, as of DEMOCRATIA. In Democratia, especially where Cunning men are ad∣mitted, such as were the Orators in Athens, and the Tri∣bunes in Rome, who could move the Waves, raise up the Winds, and kindle the Fire of the vulgar peoples Affections, Passions, and Furies at their pleasure; there is nothing but Sedition, Trouble, Tumults, Outrages, and Injustice com∣mitted upon every little occasion: By which we see that of all Common-wealths, these of Popular Government have soonest come to ruine; as do witness not only the old ex∣amples of Greece, Asia, and Africa, but also many Cities in Italie, who upon the Fall of the Roman Empire, took up unto themselves Popular Governments, wherein they could never rest, until they came under the Monarchie of one Prince or other, as at this day they do remain. Of ARISTOCRATIA. For Aristocratia, as it doth participate of Monarchia and Democratia, or rather tempereth them both: so hath it both good and evil in it; but yet inclineth more to the evil, for the dis-union that commonly by mans infirmitie and malice is among those heads: For which cause the States of Venice and Genoa, which were wont to have simply this Government of Aristocratia, were inforced in the end to chuse Dukes. The Division and Factions among the Sena∣tors of Carthage, was the cause why Aid was not sent to Hannibal their Captain in Italie after his so great and im∣portant Victorie at Canna;Tit. Liv. l. 30. which was the very cause of the saving of the Romane Empire,Eutrop. l. 3. Oros. l. 5. & 6. and the loss of their own. As also afterwards the Emulations and Discord of the Ro∣mane
Senators in the Affairs and Contentions of Marius and Sylla; and of Pompey and Caesar, was the occasion of all their Destruction, and of their Common-wealth with them. Why Helps are given to Kings. Therefore it appeareth that of all other Governments Monarchie is the best: But for that a King is a Man as o∣thers be, and thereby not only subject to Errors in Judg∣ment, but also to passionate Affections in his Will; It was necessarie, That the Common-wealth should assign him the best Helps that might be for Directing and Rectifying both his Will and Judgment. Lawes the first Help, why given. The first Help is the Law,Arist. l. 3. which Aristotle saith, Est mens quaedam nullo perturbata affectu:Pol. cap. ult. and in the same place addeth, That he which joyneth a Law to Govern with the Prince,Lib. 3. pol. c. 12 joyneth God to the Prince; but he that joyneth to the Prince his Affection to Govern, joyneth a Beast: So that a Prince Ruling by Law, is more than a man, or a man Deified; and a Prince Ruling by Affections, is less than a man, or a man Brutified. In a∣nother place also the same Philosopher saith, That a Prince that Ruleth hemself, and others, by his own Appetite and Affections,Lib. 1. pol. c. 2. of all Creatures is the worst, and of all Beasts is the most furious and dangerous; for that nothing is so outragious as Injustice armed, and no Armor is so strong, as Wit and Authority.
Councils the second Help, why given. The Monarchie of ENGLAND tempered. The second Help that Common-wealths do assign to their Kings and Princes, be certain Councils, as we see the Par∣lament of England and France, the Courts in Spain, and Diets in Germanie, without which no matter of great Mo∣ment can be concluded: And besides this commonly every King hath his Privie Council, whom he is bound to hear; and this was done to temper somwhat the absolute Form of a Monarchie, whose danger is, by reason of his sole Au∣thoritie, to fall into Tyrannie,Arist. lib. 4. pol. cap. 10. as Aristotle noteth. [In the Monarchie of England all the Three Forms of Government do enter more or less; In that there is one King or Queen, it is a Monarchie: In that it hath certain Councils which must be heard, it participateth of Aristocratia; And in that the Commonaltie have their Voices and Burgesses in Parla∣ment, it taketh part also of Democratia.] All which limi∣tations come from the Common-wealth, as having Autho∣ritie above their Princes, for the good of the Realm. Restraint of Kings among the Romans. Why Kinglie Government left in Rome. This Restraint hath been in all Times and Countries;Tit. Liv. lib. 1. Dec. 1. as for example, The Romans that began with Kings, gave their Kings as great and absolute Authoritie as ours have now a∣daies, but yet their next in Blood Succeeded them not of ne∣cessitie, but new Kings were Chosen partlie by the Senate, and partlie by the People. So as of ThreeNuma Pom∣pilius. Tullius Hosti∣lius. Tarquinus Priscus. most excellent Kings that ensued immediatelie after Romulus, none were of
the Blood, nor yet Romans born, but rather Strangers Chosen for their Virtue and Valor:Tit. Liv. lib. 1. Dec. 1. So for the neglecting of their Laws the Senators slew Romulus their first King, and cut him in pieces; and for the same reason, expelled Tarqui∣nius Superbus their last, and all his Posteritie, and with them the Name and Government of Kings, which was changed in the Regiment of Consuls. Restraint of Kings among the Grecians. In Greece, and namely among the Lacedemonians,Arist. lib. 2. Pol. Cap. 8. Plut. in Lycur. their Kings Authoritie was so restrained by certain Officers of the People, called Ephori (which commonly were five in num∣ber) as they were not only chastened by them, but also De∣prived, and somtimes put to death. Restraint of Kings in Christendom. In Germanie. The Emperor can neither make War, nor exact any Con∣tribution of men, or Money thereunto, but by the free leave and Consent of all the States of the Germane Dyet or Par∣lament; And for his Children or next in Kinn, they have no action, interest, or pretence to Succeed, but only by free Election, if they shall be thought worthie: Nay one of the chiefest Points that the Emperor must Swear at his entrance is this,Sleidan, lib. 8. Anno 1532. Blond Decad. 2. l. 3. Crant. l. c. 25. That he shall never go about to make the Dignitie of the Emperor Peculiar or Hereditarie to his Familie, but leave it unto the Seven Electors, free in their power to Chuse his Successor, ac∣cording to the Law made by the Pope Gregory the Fift, and the Emperor Charles the Fourth, in this behalf.
In Polonia and Bohemia. The Kings of Polonia and Bohemia can neither do any thing of great Moment,Herbert. lib. 9. hist. Polon. Cromerus l. 3. hist Polon. without the consent of certain principal men called Palatines or Castellans; neither may their Children of next Blood Succeed except they be Cho∣sen, as in the Empire. In Spain, France, and England. In Spain, France, and England, the Privileges of Kings are far more eminent, both in the Power and Succession; for their Authoritie is much more absolute, and their next in Blood do ordinarily Succeed: for as touching Authori∣tie, it seemeth that the Kings of France and Spain have greater than the King of England; for that everie Ordina∣tion of these Two Kings is Law in it self, without further Approbation of the Common-wealth, which holdeth not in England, where no general Law can be made without Consent of Parlament. But in the other Point of Succes∣sion, the restraint is far greater in those other Two Coun∣tries than in England. For in Spain the next in Blood can∣not Succeed be he never so lawfully Discended, but by a new Approbation of the Nobilitie, Bishops, and States of the Realm, as it is expresly set down in the Two ancient Councils of Toledo the Fourth and Fifth. Nor can the King of Spain's own Son at this day be called Prince,Council Plet. 4. c. 74. & Council s. c. 3. ex∣cept he be first Sworn by the said Nobilitie and Estates, as we have seen it practiced in the King Philip's Children. In France, Women, neither any of their Issue, though Male, are admitted to Succeed in the Crown: And therefore was Edward 3d. of England, though Son and Heir unto a Daughter of France,Anno 1340. which was left by her Three Brethren Sole Heir to King Phillipthe Fourth. Anil. hist. France lib. 2. the fair her Father, put by the Crown; As also was the King of Navar at the same time,
Son and Heir unto this Womans eldest Brothers Daughter named Lewis Huttin;Gerard du Haillan. lib. 14. hist. France. notwithstanding all their allegations: And Philip de Valois, a Brothers Son of Philip the fair's, pre∣ferred to it by General Decree of the States of France,Franc. Bellef. lib. 5. c. 1. and by Verdict of the whole Parlament of Paris.Anno 1327. And albeit the Law Salica, by virtue whereof the French-men pretend to exclude the Succession of Women,Gerard du Haillan, lib. 13. hist. France. & Anno 1317. & lib. 14 Anno 1328. & lib. 3. del estat. de France. be no very ancient Law, as the French themselves do confess, and much less made by Pharamond their first King; yet do we see that it is sufficient to bind all Princes and Subjects of that Realm to observe the same, and to alter the Course of Natural Dis∣cent; and that the King of Navar only by virtue therof doth at this day pretend to be the next in Succession to this good∣lie Crown, and to exclude both the Infanta of Spain, and the Prince of Lorrayn that now is, who are Children of the last King's Sisters. Propinquitie of Blood, not Sufficient. By which we see, That it is not enough for a man to al∣lege bare Propinquitie of Blood, thereby to prevail; for that he may be excluded, or put back by divers other cir∣cumstances, and for sundry other reasons. Kings lawfully Possessed, may be Deprived. Yea, The Common-wealth hath not only the Authoritie to put back the next Inheritors upon just Considerations, but also to Dispossess them that have been lawfully put in Possession, if they keep not the Laws; As by examples of all Nations it might be proved. And God for the most part hath wonderfully prospered the same.
Titles of Princes once Settled, not to be Ex∣amined by private men. Not that it be lawful to Subjects for every mislike to band against their Princes: Nay if a Prince be once settled in the Crown and admitted by the Common-wealth, every man is bound to settle his Conscience to obey the same, In that he may lawfully command. without examination of his Title or Interest, because God disposeth of Kingdoms, and worketh his will in Prin∣ces affairs. Yielding too much to Princes bringeth a Tyrannie. But to make Princes subject to no Law or limitation at all, and to free them from all Obligation unto the whole Bodie whereof they are the Heads, as though they had been created Kings from the beginning of the world, or as though the Common-wealth had been made for them, and not they for the Common-wealth, were to bring all to such absolute Tyrannie as no Realm ever did or could suffer among civil People. The mean which is to be kept. The Argument of the next Chapter. So as all Dutie, Reverence, Love, and Obedience is to be yielded to the Prince which the Common-wealth hath once established: So yet retaineth still the Common-wealth
her Authoritie not only to restrain him, if he be ex∣orbitant, but also to chasten and remove him upon due and weightie considerations: And hath the same been done and practiced at manie times in most Nations with right good success to the weal-publick.
Of Kings lawfully Chastised by their Common-wealths for their Mis∣government: And of the good and prosperous success that God commonly hath given to the same. CAP. III. EXAMPLES. The Ordination of God in the Common-wealth of the Jews, doth authorise the same doings in other Common-wealths. FOr Examples out of the Scripture, though some man may chance to say, That the things recounted there of the Jews, were not so much to be reputed for Acts of the Common-wealth, as for particular Ordinances
of God himself; yet it doth make rather for, than against this purpose; because other Common-wealths may the sooner practice that wherein they have God his own autho∣ritie and approbation. Examples out of the Jews. SAUL. First then Saul, though he was elected by God to that Royal Throne, yet was he by his order slain by the Philisti∣ans, for his disobedience, and not fulfilling the Laws and limits prescribed unto him: And David was chosen in his room, which proved such a King, as he was a most perfect patern for all Kings to follow; and so lived, and so died, as never Prince (I think) before him, nor perhaps after him so joyned together both Valor and Virtue, Courage and Humilitie, Wisdom and Pietie, Government and Devotion, Nobilitie and Religion. AMON. Amon was lawful King also, and that by natural Discent and Succession, for he was Son and Heir to King Manasses; yet he was slain by his own people, quia non ambulavit in via Domini; and Josias was brought in his room; of whom it is written, Fecit quod erat rectum in conspectu Domini, & non de∣clinavit neque ad dextram neque ad sinistram.
Examples of the Romans. ROMULUS. Romulus the first King of the Romans,Halic. lib. 7. as hath been said before, having by little and little declined into Tyrannie, was slain and cut in pieces by the Senators; and in his place was chosen Numa Pompilius, the notablest King that ever they had,Tertul. lib. de Praescrip. con∣tra haeres. Justin Martyr. Apol. who prescribed all their Order of Religion, and manner of Sacrifices, imitating therein the Ceremonies of the Jews; as Tertullian and others do note; began the buil∣ding of the Capitol; and added the two Months of Janu∣ary and February to the year. TARQUINIUS SUPERBUS. The expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus their seventh and last King,Tit. Liv. lib. 1. Dec. 1. Eutrop. lib. 1. for his evil Government; and the alteration thereby of the whole Government by the establishing of Consuls, had so prosperous a success, that whereas at the end of their King's Government they had but fifteen miles Territory without the Citie; it is known that when their Consuls Government ended, and was changed by Julius Caesar, their Territory reached more than fifteen thousand miles in compass. JULIUS CAESAR. When Julius Caesar upon particular ambition had broken all Law both Humane and Divine,Dyon. in Caes. and taken all Govern∣ment into his own hands alone, he was in revenge thereof,
slain, as the world knoweth, by Senators in the Senate-house; and Octavianus Augustus preferred in his room,Suet. in Caes. who proved afterwards the most famous Emperor that ever was. NERO. After Nero 6th. Emperor which succeeded lawfully his Uncle Claudius, and was afterward deposed and sentenced Which was the first judi∣cial Sentence that ever the Senate gave a∣gainst Empe∣rors. to death by the Senate for his wicked Government; albeit Peace ensued not presently, yet within few months the whole Empire fell upon Vespasian, and his Son Titus, two of the best Governors that those times ever saw.Corn. Tac. lib. 20. & 21. Egesip. lib. 5. DOMITIAN. To cruel Domitian, (whose death the Senate is thought in secret to have procured, being not able to perform it open∣ly by Justice; for that he did presently by publick Decree al∣low of the same, disanulled all his barbarous acts and pul∣led down every where his Arms and Memories) did succeed five excellent good Emperors;Eutrop. in vita Caes. to wit, Nerva, whom the Se∣nate chose in his room, Trajan, Adrian, Antonius Pius, and Marcus Aurelius. HELIOGABALUS. Heliogabalus for his most beastlie life and foul actions, was deprived and put to death by the Souldiers of Rome,Anno 124. at the request and publick Approbation of the Senate and People;Aelius Lamp. vita Heliog. who Ordained in his detestation, That never Emperor after him should be called more Antoninus (and so it was observed.) and preferred to the Empire in his room his Cousen named Alexander Severus,Herod in vita seven. who proved one of the most rarest Prin∣ces for his Valor and Virtue, that ever the Romane Empire hath had.
MAXENTIUS. Maxentius was drowned in the River of Tiber, and he, sirnamed afterward Constantine the great, succeeded in the Em∣pire, and was the man that all men know, and the first Em∣peror that publickly professed himself a Christian, and plan∣ted our Faith over all the world. CONSTANTINE SIXTH, And IRENE. Constantine the Sixth, was for his evil Government first de∣posed, Wherby fol∣lowed the change of the Empire from the East to the West. and his eyes put out by his own Mother Irene, who usurped the Empire; but being not able to Rule it in such Order as it was needful for so great a Monarchie, she was deprived thereof by the Sentence of Leo. the third, and by consent of all the People and Senate of Rome; and Charles the Great, King of France, and of Germanie, was crowned Emperor of the West, and so hath that Succession remained unto this day, and many worthy men have succeeded there∣in, and infinite acts of Jurisdiction have been exercised by this authoritie; which were all unjust and Tyrannical, if this change of the Empire, and deposition of Irene and her Son for their evil Government had not been lawful.
Examples out of France. CHILDERICK. 3d. Childerick 3d. King of France, for his evil Government and Faineantise, was deposed by Zacharie the Pope, at the re∣quest of the whole Nobilitie and Clergie of France, Who alleaged,Bels. lib. 1. Gerard. lib. 3. Aemil. lib. 2. Clem. That their Oath to Childrick was to honor, serve, obey, maintain, and defend him against all men; as long as he was just, religious, valiant, clement, and would resist the enemies of the Crown,Baudin. En la chronique des Roys de Fran. punish the wicked, and conserve the good, and defend the Christian Faith; Which being not observed on his part, they ought not be bound to him any longer, nor would not be any longer his Subjects: and so chose and Crowned Pepin in his place, whose Posteritie reigned for many years after him, and were such noble Kings as all the world can testifie. CHARLES of Lorrayne. Charles of Lorrayne, last of the race of Pepin, for the e∣vil satisfaction that the French Nation had of him, was by the Authoritie of the Common-wealth put by the Crown; and Hugo Capetus preferred to it;Anno 988. whose Line hath remained and possessed it unto this day. Examples out of Spain. FLAVEO SUINTILA. Flavius Suintila King of Spain, was, both he and his Po∣steritie
put down and deprived,Isid. in hist. Hispan. in the fourth Council Na∣tional of Toledo, and one Lissinando confirmed in his place. ALONSO, 11th. Don Alonso 11th. King of Castile and Leon, Son to Fer∣dinand the Saint,Estevan. de Garibay. l. 13. de la hist. de Espan. cap. 15. for his evil Government, and especially for Tyrannie used towards two Nephews of his, was deposed of his Kingdom by a publick Act of Parliament in the town of Valliodolid, after he had reigned 30 years; and his own Son, Don Sancho 4th. was Crowned in his place; who for his valiant acts was sirnamed Elbravo, and it turned to great commoditie to the Common-wealth. PEDRO. Don Pedro the Cruel, Son to Alonso 12th. having reign∣ed 18. years, was for his injurious Government, dispossessed of his Crown by King Henry his bastard Brother,Garibay. l. 14. cap. 40. 41. whom the States of the Country had called out of France, and Crowned: and though Pedro was restored again by the black Prince of Wales, yet God shewed to favor more Henry, be∣cause he returned and deprived Pedro the second time, and slew him in fight hand to hand; and being set up in his place (which his Progenie hath enjoyed to this day) he proved so excellent a King, as he was called el Cavallero, and el delas mercees, the knightlie and bountiful King. Don SANCHO, 2d. Don Sancho Gapelo, lawful King of Portugal, having reigned 34.Garibay. l. 4 de hist. Portug. cap. 19. years, was deprived for his defects in Govern∣ment by the universal Consent of all Portugal, and appro∣bation of a General Council at Lyons, Pope Innocentius the
Fourth, being there present, who did authorise the said State of Portugal, at their Petition, to put in Supreme Go∣vernment, Don Alonso,Garib. in hist. de Portug. lib. 34. c. 20, & 21. Brother to the said Sancho, who was Earl of Boulongne in Picardie by the right of his Wife: which among other great exploits, was the first that set Por∣tugal free from all Subjection and Homage to the Kingdom of Castile, which unto his time it had acknowledged. Greece. MICHAEL CALAPHATES, and NICEPHORUS BOTONIATES. Michael Calaphates,Glicas in An∣nal. part 4. Zon. Annal. co. 3. invita Mick. Calaph. Emperor of Greece, for having tro∣den the Cross of Christ under his feet, and being otherwise also a wicked man, was deprived: As was also the Emperor Nicephorus Botoniates for his dissolute life, and preferring wicked men to authoritie. Polonia. HENRY. 3d. In our dayes Henry 3d. King of France,In Liceus Rep. Polon. ad Henricum Va∣lessum. p. 182. 184. was deprived of the Crown of Polonia, (wherof he had also been Crowned King before) by publick Act of Parliament, for his depar∣ting thence without license, and not returning at the day denounced by publick Letters of peremptory command∣ment.Gagneus, part 1. de rebus Po∣lon.
Suetia. HENRY. Henry late King of Suëtia, was put down and deprived by that Common-wealth,Poilin. lib. 32. hist de France Anno 1568. and his Brother made King in his place, whose Son reigneth at this day, and is also King of Polonia: And this Fact was allowed by the Emperor, the King of Denmark, and all the Princes of Germanie, neer about that Realm. Denmark. CISTERNE. Cisterne King of Denmark,Sleydan. lib. 4. hist. An. 1532. Munst. lib. 3. Cosmogr. in descript. Da∣vid. Paulus Jovius in viris Illust. for his intollerable crueltie, was deprived and driven into banishment, together with his Wife and three Children; and his Uncle Frederick Prince of Holsatia, was chosen King, whose Progenie yet remain∣eth in the Crown. England. King JOHN. King John of England, for his evil Government, and for having lost Normandie, Gasconie, Guyenne, and all the rest which the Crown of England had in France, made himself so odious and contemptible, as first he was both Excommu∣nicated
and Deposed by the Pope at the sute of his own People; and, to make his Peace, was enforced to resign his Crown in the hands of Pandulfe the Pope's Legat;Polid. hist. Angl. lib. 15. Anno 1212. and af∣terwards falling back again to his old defects, though by making his Kingdom tributarie in perpetuum to the See of Rome, he had made the Pope of his side for a time; the People notwithstanding did effectuate his Deprivation the 18th.Anno 1216. year of his reign, first at Canterbury, and after at London; And called Lewis Prince of France, Son to Phillip 2d. and Father to Saint Lewis, and chose him for their King, and did swear him Fealtie with General Consent in London.Anno 1216. Anno 1216. But King John's death following presentlie after, made them turn their purposes, and accept of his Son Henry, before matters were fully established for Lewis; And this Henry, which was 3d. of that Name, proved a very worthie King; and reigned 53. years, which is more than ever King in Eng∣land did, leaving Edward 1. his Son Heir, not inferior to himself in manhood and virtue. EDWARD, 2d. But this Edward 1. had a Son Edward 2d. who falling into the same or worse defects than King John had done, was after 19. years reign deposed also by Act of Parliament holden at London the year 1326.Polyd. lib. 18. hist. Angl. Anno 1326. appointed to be called Edward of Carnarvam from that hour forward, and his bodie adjudged to perpetual prison, where at length his life was taken away from him in the Castle of Barkley: and his Son Edward 3d. was chosen in his place; who either for Valor, Prowess, length of Reign, acts of Chivalrie, or the multitude of fa∣mous Princes his Children left behind him, was one of the noblest Kings that ever England had.
RICHARD, 2d. Richard the 2d. Son to the black Prince of Wales, for ha∣ving suffered himself to be misled by evil Counsellers, to the great hurt and disquietness of the Realm, was deposed also, after 22. years reign by a Parliament holden at London the year,Polyd. lib. 20. hist. Aug. 1399 1399. and condemned to perpetual Prison in the Castle of Pomfret, where he was soon after put to death: and in his place was by free Election chosen the noble Knight, Henry Henry 4. Duke of Lancaster, who proved afterwards so notable a King, as the world knoweth. HENRY, 6th. Henry 6th. after almost 40. years reign, was deposed, im∣prisoned, and put to death also,Polyd. lib. 23. hist. Angl. together with his Son the Prince of Wales, by Edward 4th. of the House of York: And this was confirmed by theSpecially of London. Commons, and afterwards also by publick Act of Parliament, because the said Henry did suffer himself to be over-ruled by the Queen his Wife, and had broken the Articles of Agreement made by the Par∣lament between him and the Duke of York, and solemnly sworn on both sides the 8th. of Octob. 1459. (though other∣wise for his particular life he were a good man) and King Edward 4th. was put in place, who was one of the renowned∣est for Martial Acts and Justice, that hath worn the English Crown. RICHARD, 3d. This man having left two Sons, his Brother Richard Duke of Glocester put them to death, and being the next Heir Male, was authorised in the Crown, but Deposed again afterwards by the Common-wealth,Anno 1487. which called out of France, Henry
Earle of Richmond, who took from him both life and Kingdom in the Field, and was King himself by the name of Henry 7. And no man, I suppose, will say, but that he was lawfully King also; which yet cannot be, except the other might lawfully be deposed. If the said Deprivations were unjust, the now Pretences are unlawful. Moreover is to be noted in all these Mutations what good hath succeeded therein to the Common-wealth; which was unjust, and is void at this day, if the Changes and Depri∣vations of the former Princes could not be made, and con∣sequently none of these that do pretend the Crown of Eng∣land at this day, can have any Title at all for that from those men they discend, who were put in place of the de∣prived. If Kings established may be Deprived, much sooner Pretenders. And if this might be so in Kings lawfully set in Possession, then much more hath the said Common-wealth power and authoritie to alter the succession of such as do pretend Dig∣nitie, if there be due reason and causes to the same.
Wherein consisteth principally the law∣fulness of Proceedings against Princes, which in the former Chap∣ter is mentioned: What interest Princes have in their Subjects Goods or Lives; How Oaths do Binde or may be Broken by Subjests towards Princes; And finally the difference between a good King and a Tyrant. CAP. IV. 1. Objection against the Assertions in the last Chapter. BUt although by Nature the Common-wealth hath au∣thoritie over the Prince to chuse and appoint him at the beginning;Du Belay. A∣pol. Cath. part 2. paragr. 9. & Apol pro Reg. cap. 9. yet having once made him, and gi∣ven up all their authoritie unto him, he is no more subject to their correction; but remaineth absolute of himself. As
every particular man hath authorised to make his Master or Prince of his inferior, but not afterwards to put him down again, howsoever he beareth himself towards him. 2. Objection. When the Children of Israël, being under the Govern∣ment of the High Priest, demanded a King of Samuel; he protesting unto them,1 Reg. 8. Well, quoth he, you will have a King, hearken then to this that I will say, Hoc erit jus Regis qui im∣peraturus est vobis; He shall take away from you your Children, both Sons aud Daughters, your Fields and Vineyards, &c. and shall give them to his servants, and you shall cry unto God in that day from the face of this your King; and God shall not hear you, for that you have demanded a King to Govern over you. Assertions of Bellay. Yea Bellay, and some other that wrote in flatterie of Prin∣ces in these our days, do not only affirm, That Princes are lawless and subject to no accompt or correction whatsoever they do;1. Bellay apol. part 2. parag. 7 & apol. pro Rege cap. 6. & 24. & 26. But also, That all goods, chattels, possessions, and whatsoever else commodities temporal of the Common wealth, are properly the Kings, and that their Subjects have only the use thereof; so as when the King will, he may take it from them by right. Answer to Bellay his First Assertion. But for the first,1. That Kings are subject to no Law, Is a∣gainst the very Institution of a Common-wealth, which is to live together in Justice and Order: for if it holdeth so, insteed of Kings and Governors to defend us, we may set up publick murtherers, ravishers, theeves, and spoylers to devour us: Then were all those Kings before mentioned both of the Jewes,2. Gentiles, and Christians, unlawfully deprived, and
their Successors unlawfully put up in their places; and con∣sequentlie all Princes living at this day are intruders, and no lawful Princes. Answer to Bellay his Second Assertion. Of the second saying also, That all temporalities are pro∣perly the Princes, and that Subjects have only the use there∣of, no less absurdities do follow:1. First it is against the ve∣ry first principle and foundation of the Civil Law, which at the first entrance maketh this division of Goods, That some are common by Nature to all men, as the Aër, the Sea, &c. Others are publick to all of one Citie or Countrie, but yet not common to all in general, as Rivers, Ports, &c. Some are of the Communitie of a Citie or Common-wealth, but yet not common to every particular person of that Citie, as common Rents, Theaters, the publick hous, and the like: Some are of none, nor properly of any man's Goods, as Churches and Sacred things: And some are proper to particular men, as those which every man possesseth of his own.2. Besides it over∣throweth the whole nature of a Common-wealth, maketh all Subject to be but very slaves: for that slaves and bond∣men in this do differ from freemen,Arist. lib. 1. pol. cap. 4. 5. that slaves have only the use of things without property or interest, and cannot ac∣quire or get to themselves any dominion or true right in any thing,3. but it accreweth all to their Master. Lastly, If all Goods be properly the King's, why was Achab and Jezabel so reprehended and punished by God,3 Reg. 28. for taking away Na∣both's vineyard? Why do the Kings of England, France and Spain ask Money of their Subjects in Parlament, and that termed by the names of Subsidies, Helps, Benevolences, Loans, Prests, Contributions, &c? How have the Parlament oftentimes denied them the same? Why are there Judges ap∣pointed for matter of Suits and Pleas between the Prince and the People?Cap. innovam. 10. de casibus, & cap. super quibusdam 26 §. de verborū. signif. Why doth the Canon Law inhibit all Princes upon pain of Excommunication, to impose new Impositions upon their People without great necessitie, and free Consent of the givers? Nay, why be all Princes at this day prohibi∣ted
to alienate any thing of their own Crown without con∣sent of their People, if they be Lords of all, and the People have interest in nothing? Answer to the Allegations out of the Prophet SAMUEL. Touching the words of Samuel, they are not to allow or authorise Injustice or Wickedness in any King. But to threaten the Jews with the disorders of Kings, for that they rejected the moderate Government of their High Priests, and had demanded as a matter of more Pomp and Glorie to be ruled by Kings, as other Heathen Nations about them were; which did suffer great extortions and tyrannies of their said Kings. For the principal points recorded to all Princes throughout the whole course of Scripture are, Diligere Ju∣dicium & Justitiam, apprehendere Disciplinam, & facere verita∣tem. And for not observing them, many Princes have been punished by God himself. By what Law Princes are punished. Now to know by what Law the Common-wealths do punish their Kings; It is by all Law both Divine and Hu∣mane: Divine, for that God doth approve that form, con∣ditions, and limitations which every Common-wealth doth chuse unto it self: Humane, for that all Law both natural, national, and positive doth teach us, That Princes are sub∣ject to Law and Order. And it is not so of a Common-wealth, as it is of a private man, because a private man's voice being but one, doth not make the Prince wholly, as the Common-wealth doth; Besides, having once given his voice, to make his Prince, he remaineth subject and inferior to the same: But the whole Bodie superior, who giving his autho∣ritie
up to the Prince, doth not deprive her self of it, but may use it, when need shall require, for his own defence, for which he gave it. Where one of the Contractants breaketh, the other is no more bound. And then that power which the Prince hath from the Common-wealth, is in very truth but potestas vicaria or dele∣gata, given with such restrictions, cautels, conditions, and oaths on both parts (the Prince and the Common-wealth) as if the same be not kept on either part, the other is not bound to observe his promise neither: And this is among the very rules of both the Civil and Canon Law;In Regulis u∣trius{que} Juris. Vide in finem sent. Decret. Reg. 75. 69. Frustrà fidem sibi quis postulat servari ab eo, cui fidem à se praestitam servare recusat. And again, Non abstringitur quis juramento ad implen∣dum quod juravit, si ab aliâ parte non impletur cujus respectu prae∣buit juramentum. In things evil promised, Oath bindeth not. Moreover, where the fulfilling of our Oath, doth con∣tain any notable hurt, or inconvenience against Religion, Pietie, Justice, Honestie, or the Weal-publick, or against the partie himself to whom it was made; it is both lawful, ho∣nest, and convenient, to leave the performance thereof. As for example, In that Herod commanded St. John Baptists head to be cut off,Matth. 24. which he did for his Oaths sake to the Daugh∣ter of Herodias; no man will deny but that the thing had been far better left unperformed,Reg. 68. in fine 6. Decret. and the Oath better broken than fulfilled; according to another rule of the Law, In malis promissis fidem non expedit observari.
Two principal Cases when Oaths hold not towards a Prince. So in these two Cases Subjects Oaths may be left unper∣formed towards the Prince; First, when the Prince obser∣veth not at all his promise made to the Common-wealth at his admission: And then, when the performing of their oath should turn to the notable damage of the Weal-publick. These Two Cases touched in the Deprivation of Childerick of France. These Two Cases were touched in the Deposition of Chil∣derick, when the Bishop of Woitsburg, in the Name of all the Nobilitie and Common-wealth of France,Aemil. l. 2. hist. France. Belf. in vita Child. Gerard. lib. 3. made this Speech to Zacharie the Pope, Truth it is that the French have sworn Fidelitie to Childerick, as to their natural King, but yet with Condition that he on his part should also perform the Points that are incident to his Office; as to defend the Common-wealth, protect the Church of Christ, &c. which if he doth, the French are ready to continue their obedience and allegiance unto him; But if he be apt for none of these things, and nothing else may be expected whilest he is King, but detriment to the State, ignominie to the Nation, danger to Christian Religion, and destruction to the Weal-publick; Then it is lawful for you, no doubt (most holy Father) to deliver the French from this band of their Oath, &c. The difference between a King and a Tyrant. When a King declineth once from his Dutie, he becometh a Tyrant;Plato. Dial. 1. de Repub. Arist. lib. 2. Pol. cap. 3. And as a good King's end and Office is to make happie his Common-wealth; so the Butt of a Tyrant is to destroy the same: A King ruleth according to equitie, oath, conscience, justice, and law prescribed unto him; and a Ty∣rant
is enemy to all these conditions:Cic. lib 3. de Legibus. Ʋt populo Magistratus, ità Magistratui praesunt leges, saith Cicero, Theodosius, and Va∣lentinianus, two worthie Emperors;Cod. l. 1. Tit. 14. §. digna. Digna vox est (said they) Majestate Regnantis legibus se alligatum fateri: But the Ty∣rant Caligula is justly detested,Suet. cap. 23. in Caligula. who said, Memento mihi omnia, & in omnes licere. And the Emperor Trajan certainly is to be immortally commended, who delivering the Sword to a Praetor,Zon. Tom. 2. in Trajan. or Governor in Rome, Take this Sword (said he) and if I do reign justly, use it for me; and if not, then use it against me.The Occasion of the next Chapter. Which in effect and substance are the same words that our Christian Princes use at this day at their enterance when they promise to rule justly, and according to the Laws of their Country, and upon that Condition take the Oaths of their Subjects Obedience, Protesting, That if they perform not this, that then their Subjects are free, as before, from all Allegeance.
Of the Coronation of Princes and man∣ner of their Admission to their Au∣thoritie, and the Oaths which they do make in the same unto the Com∣mon-wealth, for their good Govern∣ment. CAP. V. Since the People made the Prince, it is likely he did it with Conditions for his own good. FOrasmuch as not Nature, but the Election and Consent of the People hath made the first Princes from the be∣ginning of the world; It appeareth most certain and conform to all reason, That they were not admitted to that Power and Dignity without some Conditions and Promises also on their parts, for using it well; because it is not likely
that any people would ever put their lives, goods, and liber∣ties in the hands of another, without some assurance of ju∣stice and equity: And hereof came to pass that both the Ro∣mans and Greecians prescribed to their Kings those limits before mentioned. More Religiously observed among Christians, than other Nations. And the more orderly the Prince cometh to his Crown, the more express and certain are their Conditions between him and the People; As on the other side, the more violent he getteth his authority; as those ancient Tyrants of As∣syria, Nemrod and Belus did, and at this day is done among the Turks, the less Conditions of just dealing may be ex∣pected: Therefore among the Christians this point of Mu∣tual Oaths between Prince and Subjects, hath been much more established, made clear, and reduced to a more sacred and Religious kinde of Union, than before: for that the whole action hath been done by Bishops and Prelats, and the astipulation on both sides, hath passed and been Regestred in sacred places, and with great solemnitie of Religious Ce∣remonies. The manner of Admitting Greek Emperors. Anastatius. The East, or Greek Emperors of Constantinople (after the Empire was translated from Rome thither by Constantine the great, first Christian Emperor) though their coming to the Crown were nothing so orderly, as at this day it is used;
yet they were wont, above a thousand years agone, to have an Oath exacted at their hands by the Patriarch of Constan∣tinople.Zon. com. 3. Annal. in vita Anast. As of Anastatius the first, writeth Zonaras, Ante∣quam coronaretur, inquit, fidei confessionem scriptam, quâ pollicea∣tur se in dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis nihil esse novaturum,Niceph. l. ib. cap. 29. Evagr. l. 2. c. 3 ab eo exegit Patriarcha Euphemius vir Sanctus & Orthodoxus. And divers other Conditions also did he promise, before he could be Crowned, as the taking away of some Tributes, the giving of Offices without Money, and other like points appertain∣ting to reformation and good government. Michaël. Of Michael the first, writeth the same Author in these words,Zon Tom. 3 in vita Michaelis. Anno 820. Michaël ubi diluxit, magnam Ecclesiam ingressus, à Pa∣triarcha Nicephoro Imperatorio diademate est ornatus, postulato priùs scripto quo promitteret, se nulla Ecclesiae instituta violaturum, ne{que} Christianorum sanguine manus contaminaturum. The Latine Emperors. Otho. 1. In the West Empire (given to Charles the great and his po∣steritie) this Point is yet more settled, and more inviolably kept: For albeit it went by succession for the most part at the beginning, yet were they never admitted to the same with∣out this circumstance of swearing to Conditions of righte∣ous Government: As Otho 1. who being Son and Heir to Emperor Henry 1. Duke of Saxonie, sirnamed the Faulkner, and named by him to the inheritance of the said Crown of Germanie, did nevertheless make his Oath, and received his new approbation of the People: for the Archbishop of Mo∣guntia (chief Primate of all Germanie) bringing him to the
Altar where he must swear, said these words unto the people, Behold, I bring you here Otho, chosen by God, and appointed out by his Father Henry our Lord,Anno 940. and now made King by all the Princes of this Empire;Witichindus gest. Saxon. lib. 1. if this Election please you, do you signifie the same by holding up your hands to heaven. Which being done, he there∣upon tooke the Ornaments and Ensigns of the Empire, and put them upon the Emperor, telling him the signification of each thing, and what it did binde him unto, and taking his promise to perform all. And after all, includeth the sto∣rie, Rex perfusus oleo Sancto, coronatur Diademate aureo ab Epis∣copis, & ab eisdem ad solium Regale ducitur, & in eo collocatur. Institution and manner of the Em∣peror's Creation, used at this day. In the year 996. Pope Grerory 5. in a Synod holden in Rome, did by the consent of Otho 3. Emperor and Nephew unto this other Otho, appoint this form of Election for the time to come of the Germane Emperors, That he should be chosen by six Princes of Germanie; Three Ecclesiastical, which are the Archbishops of Moguntia, Colen, and Tre∣vires; and Three Temporal,Blend. Decad. 2. lib. 3. Crant. l. 4. c. 25 to wit, the Duke of Saxonie, the Count Palatine of the Rhene, and the Marquess of Brandeburge: and when these six voices should happen to be equally divided, that then the Duke of Bohemia (for then it was no Kingdom) should have place also to deter∣mine the Election: which was approved by all the Princes of Germanie, and other Christian Princes and Estates of the world.Sleydan lib. 1. hist. And Sleydan writeth the manner and conditions of the said Election to be these▪ First of all, that after any man is chosen Emperor,Anno 1519. he is to be called only Caesar, and the King of the Romans, and not Emperor until he be Crowned; and presently after his Election, he sweareth these Conditi∣ons,
To defend the Christian and Catholick Religion; to defend the Pope and Church of Rome, whose Advocate he is; to minister ju∣stice equally to all; to follow peace, to keep all Laws, rights and pri∣viledges of the Empire; not to alienate or engage the Possessions of the Empire; to condemne no man without hearing his Cause, but to suffer the course of law to have his place; In all and whatsoever he shall do otherwise, that it be void, and of no validitie at all. Where∣unto he sweareth first by his Legates, and then giveth a coppie of his Oath in writing to every one of the six Electors, and after this goeth to the Citie of Aquis-gran to be Crowned in the great Church, where, about the middle of the Mass, the Archbishop of Colen goeth unto him in the presence of all the People, and asketh Whether he be ready to swear and promise to observe the Catholick Religion, defend the Church, minister ju∣stice, protect the Widdows and Fatherless, and yield dutiful honor and obedience to the Pope of Rome. Whereunto he answering, That he is ready to do all this; the Archbishop leadeth him to the high Altar, where he sweareth in express all these Articles; which being done, the said Archbishop turning himself to the Princes of the Empire and People there present, doth ask them, Whether they be content to swear Obedience and Fealtie unto him, who answering, Yea; he is anointed by the said Arch∣bishop before the Altar; and then do come the other two Archbishops of Moguntia and Treveris, and lead him into the Vesterie, where certain Deacons apparel him in his robes, and do set him in a Chair, upon whom the Archbishop of Colen saith certain Prayers, and then delivereth him a Sword drawn, and putteth a Ring upon his finger, and giveth him a Scepter in his hand, and then all the three Archbishops together do put on the Crown upon his head, and leading him so Crowned and Apparelled unto the high Altar again, he sweareth the second time, That he will do the part of a good Christian and Ca∣tholick Emperor. Which being ended, he is brought back and placed in the Imperial Seat and Throne, where all the Princes of the Empire do swear Obedience and Faith unto him, be∣ginning with the Electors, and so to all the rest in order. And it is to be marked, That the Emperor sweareth three times, once by his Deputies, and twice by himself, before his sub∣jects swear once unto him.
The manner used in Polonia. In Polonia, which being first a Dukedom, was made a Kingdom about the year 1000, the manner of the Coronati∣on of their Kings, is in substance the same, as that of the Emperor: for the Archbishop of Guesna, Metropolitan of all Polonia, declareth to the King before the high Altar, the End and Condition of his Office and Dignitie, unto what Points he must Swear, and what do signifie the Sword, the Ring, the Scepter, and the Crown: And the King's Oath thereupon being taken, the Marshal General of the whole Kingdom, doth ask with a loud voice of all the Nobilitie and People there present, Whether they be content to submit them∣selves unto this King, or no? Who answering, Yea; the Arch∣bishop doth end the residue of the Ceremonies, and doth place him in the Royal Throne, where all his Subjects do Homage unto him. The manner used in Spain before the entring of the Moors. Sisinandus. When Spain remained yet one General Monarchie under the Gothes, before the entring of the Moors, Sissinandus (who had expelled King Suintila for his cruel Government) in the Fourth National Council of Toledo,Ambros Mor. lib. 11. cap. 17. hist. Hisp. praef. ejusdem Con∣cilii. holden the year 633. prayed with submission the Prelats there gathered to∣gether, to determine that which should be needful for the maintaining both of Religion and State: and so after mat∣ters of Religion▪Conc. Tol. 4. cap. 74. they first confirm the Deposition of King Suintila, together with his Wife, Brother, and Children; and
then authorise the Title of Sissinandus: but yet with this insinuation; We do require you that are our present King, and all other our Princes that shall follow hereafter with the humilitie which is meek and moderate towards your Subjects,Cap. 74. and that you Govern your People in Justice and Pietie, and that none of you do give sen∣tence alone against any man in case of Life and Death, but with the consent of your publick Council, and with those that be Governors in matters of Judgment: And against all Kings that are to come, we do promulgate this sentence, That if any of them shall against the re∣verence of our Laws▪ exercise cruel Authoritie with proud dominati∣on and Kinglie pomp, following only their own concupisence in wicked∣ness, that they are condemned by Christ with the sentence of Excom∣munication, and have their separation both from him and us to ever∣lasting judgment. Chintilla. Sissinandus being dead, one Chintilla was made King in his place; under whom were gathered two other Councils, the 5th. and 6th. of Toledo, in which matters were determined a∣bout the Succession to the Crown,Conc. 5. c. 2, 3, 4, 5. & Con. 6. cap. 16, 17, 18. Safetie of the Prince, Pro∣vision for his Children, Friends, Officers, and Favorites af∣ter his death, against such, as without the approbation of the Common-wealth, did aspire to the same. And among other Points a severe Decree was made in the 6th. Council, concerning the King's Oath at his admission,Conc. Tol. 6. cap. 9. That he should not be placed in the Royal seat, until among other Conditions he had promised by the Sacrament of an Oath, That he would suffer no man to break the Catholick Faith, &c.
After the entring of the Moors. Don Pelago. After the coming in of the Moors, one Don Pelago, a yong Prince of the Royal Blood of the Gothes being fled among the rest to the Mountains, was found and made King; and having began the recovery of Spain,Amb. Morales lib. 13. cap. 2. by the getting of Leön, left a certain Law written in the Gotish tongue touching the manner of making their King in Spain, and how he must Swear to their Liberties and Priviledges: whereof the first Article saith, Before all things it is established for a Law, Libertie, and Priviledge of Spain, That the King is to be placed by Voices, and Consent perpetually; and this to the intent no evil King may enter without consent of the People, seeing they are to give to him that which with their blood and labors they have gained of the Moors. For the fashion of making their Kings in that old time, it remaineth still in substance at this day, but the man∣ner thereof is somwhat altered; for now the Spanish Kings be not Crowned, but have another Ceremonie for their ad∣mission equal to Coronation, which is performed by the Archbishop of Toledo, Primate of all Spain. Manner used in France. Two Manners thereof. In France have been two manners used of that Action; the one more antient hath endured 600. years, from Clodoveus, (that was Christned, and Anointed also and Crowned at Rheims by S. Remigius) unto the time of Henry 1. and Phi∣lip
1. his Son, before the 12. Peers of France were appointed to assist the Coronation,Lib. 3. de lib. estat. fol. 238. which now is the chiefest part of that Solemnitie. In the old fashion, as saith du Haillan, the Kings were lifted up and carried about upon a Target by the chief Subjects there present, according to the manner of the Spaniards. But for the substance of the admission it was not much different from that which is now. The Old Manner. Philip, 1. For example,Belf. hist. Fran. lib. 3. c. 20. in vita Phil. 1. the Coronation of Philip 1. Henry 1. his fa∣ther desiring for his old age to establish him in the Crown before his death, did ask the consent and approbation both generally, and in particular of the Nobility and People, for his admission: Whom finding all willing, he brought him to Rheims, where in the great Church, the Mass being be∣gan, upon the reading of the Epistle,Memoures du Fillet c. du Sacre des Roys. the Archbishop turn∣ing about the Prince, declared unto him what was the Ca∣tholick Faith, and asked him, Whether he did beleeve it, and would defend it against all persons; who affirming that he would, his Oath was brought unto him, whereunto he must Swear; which he took, and holding his hands between the hands of the Archbishop, read it with a loud voice, and signed it with his own hand: The substance of the Oath was, That he would preserve unto the Clergie all Canonical priviledges, and all Law and Justice unto them; as every King was bound to do; and furthermore administer Justice unto all People given him in charge. Then the Archbishop taking his Cross, after he had shewed unto all the audience the authoritie that the Archbishop of Rheims had to anoint and Crown the King of France, and asked license of King Henry the Father,Belf. l. 3. c. 20. Il esleut Philippe son
fili pour & en Roy de France? Which the Popes Legats, and the Nobility, and People did approve, crying out three times, Nous l'approvvons, nous le voalons, soit fait nôtre Roy. Institution of the newest Manner. This Manner was altered specially byNephew to Philip 1. Louysle Jeune, who, leaving still the substance of the action, added thereunto di∣vers external Ceremonies of Honor and Majestie; and a∣mongst other ordeined the offices of Twelve Peers of France, Six Ecclesiastical, and Six Temporal; who ever since have had the chiefest Places and Offices in this great action. First, THe Archbishop and Duke of Rheims anointeth and Crowneth the King. The Bishop and Duke of Laon, beareth the Glass of Sacred Oyl. The Bishop and Duke of Langres, the Cross. The Bishop and Earle of Beauvais, the Mantle Royal. The Bishop and Earle of Koyon, the King's Girdle. The Bishop and Earle of Chaalons, the Ring. The Duke of Burgundie, Dean of the Order, hold∣eth the Crown.
The Duke of Gasconie and Guyenne, the First Banner quartered. The Duke of Normandie, the Second Banner quartered. The Earle of Tholosa, the Golden Spurs. The Earle of Champanie, the Banner Royal, or Standard of War. The Earle of Flanders, the Sword Royal. And this day the King is apparrelled three times, and in several sorts; 1. As a Priest; 2. As a King, and a Warrier; 3. As a Judge. Philip, 2d. This day Lewis, specially for the Coronation of his Son Philip Agustus,Anno 1179. whom he caused also to be Crowned in his dayes:Belf. in vita Augusti. In this Coronation (whereunto Henry 2. of Eng∣land, as Duke of Normandie, who held the Crown, and one of his Sons, as Duke of Gasconie, were present) the King being summoned by the Archbishop to keep all Privi∣ledges of the Church, Law and Justice; answered, I do pro∣mise and avow to every one of you, and to every Church to you com∣mitted, That I will keep and maintain all Canonical priviledges, law and justice due to every man, to the uttermost of my power, and by God's help shall defend you as a good King is bound to do in his Realm. And then laying his hands upon the Gospel, made his Oath, in these words, Au nom de Jesus Christ, re jure & pro∣mets au peuple Chrestien à moy Subject ces choses, &c. First that all my subjects be kept in the union of the Church, and I will defend them from all excess, rapine, extortion, and iniquitie; Secondly, I will take order that in all judgments justice shall be kept with equitie
and mercie, to the end that God of his mercy may conserve unto me with yo my people, his holy grace and mercie; Thirdly, I shall en∣deavor as much as possibly shall lie in me, To chase and drive out of my Realm, and all my Dominions, all such as the Church hath or shall declare for Hereticks, as God shall help me and his holy Gospels: Then he kissed the Gospels, and after Te Deum sung, and other particular Prayers said by the Archbishop, he was Vested, and the Ring, Scepter, Crown, &c. were put upon him, with declaration what they signified: After all that the Archbi∣shop and Bishops did bless him; and then by the said Arch∣bishop, and the other Peers, was led unto the Seat Royal, where the Crown was put upon his head, &c. France Author of this manner of Coronation. Albeit the substance of the Ceremonie of Sacring and Anointing Kings be much elder than the Christian King∣dom of France; yet is this particular and Majestical man∣ner of doing it by way of Coronation, the most antient in France above all other Kingdoms, round about: And it is probable that most of them have taken their forms of anoint∣ing and Crowning from her, for the affinitie and likeness of the one to the other:Estev. Garibay lib. 22. c. 1. as may be seen by that of Germanie and Polonia before recited; by that of Navarra, brought in by certain Earles of Champanie, according to the use of France; and others: But among all, England seemeth to have taken it most particularly from them, not only for that divers English Kings have come out of France, but also for that in very deed the thing it self is all one in both Na∣tions.
The Manner of Admission in England. First, As the Archbishop of Rheims doth this Ceremony in France, so in England the Archbishop of Canterbury; And the first thing the said Archbishop requireth at the King's hands, is about Religion, Church matters, and the Clergie; whereupon the King sweareth, and giveth up his Oath in writing,Holinsh. in his Chron. page 476 & 1005. which he laieth down with his own hands upon the Altar: the words are these; That he will, during his life, have reverence and honor unto almightie God, and to his Ca∣tholick Church, and unto his Ministers, and that he will admini∣ster Law and Justice equally to all, and take away all unjust Laws. Which after he hath sworn, the Archbishop turning about to the People, declareth what the King hath promised, and asketh, Whether they be content to submit themselves unto this man as unto their King or no, under the Conditions proposed? Where∣unto having yielded, he put's upon him the Royal Orna∣ments, as the Sword, the Ring, the Scepter, and Crown; and namely he giveth him the Scepter of St. Edward the Con∣fessor, and then addeth this exhortation, Stand and hold thy place, and Keep thy Oath; with a great commination on the behalf of almightie God, if he taketh the place, and break∣eth his Oath. Henry, 4th. In the admission of Henry 4.Stow in vira Richard 2. in fine. the People were demanded thrice, Whether they were content to admit him for their King? And the Archbishop of Canterbury having read unto them what this new King was bound by Oath unto,13. Oct. 1359. he took the Ring, wherewith to wedd him to the Common-wealth, (which wedding importeth a mutual Obligation) which was
shewed to the People by the High Constable, and then put upon the King's finger, who kissed the Constable in sign of acceptance, &c. Edward, 4th. Edw. 6th. Mary. Elisab. In the admission of Edward 4th. the Peoples Consent was asked at two several times very solemnly,Stow in vita H. 6. pag. 709. notwithstanding that he had proved his Title by Succession before in Parlia∣ment. And in the Coronation of Edward 6. Queen Mary, and Queen Elisabeth's, the Peoples consent and their accepta∣tion was not only demanded, but the Princes corporal oath also taken upon the Evangelists.
What is due to only Succession by Birth, and what interest or right an Heir apparent hath to the Crown, before he be Crowned or Admitted by the Common-wealth; and how justly he may be put back, if he have not the other parts requisite also. CAP. VI. Belloy's Assertions upon this Matter. Assertion, First. BElloy's Assertions about this matter are plain and gross flatteries,Written (as it is thought) in the favor of the King of Navarra. Bell. Apol. Bell. Apol. cath. par. 2. §. 7. and opposite to all reason of State, and practise of the World. First he saith. That all Families which enjoy Kingdoms in the world were placed therein by God only, and that he alone can change the
same. Which indeed if he refer unto God's universal providence, it is true that all is from God either by his Or∣dinance or permission; but speaking of the next and imme∣diate causes; clear it is that men do also concur therein, and that God hath left them lawful authoritie so to do for the publick benefit. Assertion, Second. His Second Assertion is, That where such Princes be once placed in Government, and the Law of Succession by Birth established,Apol. cath. par. 1. §. 7. there the Princes Children, or next of Kinn, do necessarily succeed, by only Birth, without any new choice or approbation of the People, Nobilitie, or Clergie, or of the whole Common-wealth together. Assertion, Third. Whereunto he joyneth, That a King never dieth, for that whensoever,Apol. pro. Re∣ge. c. 6. &. 34. or howsoever, he ceaseth by any means to Govern, then entereth the Successor by Birth, not as Heir to the former, but as lawful Governor of the Realm, without any admission at all, having his authoritie only by the condition of his Birth, and not by adoption or choice of any. Assertion, Fourth. The Fourth which hath been touched before, is, That a Prince once entered to Government,Apol. cath. par. 2. §. 7. and so placed,Et pro Rege Cap. 9. as hath been said, is under no Law or Restraint at all of his authoritie, but that himself only is the quiek and living Law, and that no limitation can be given unto him by any power under heaven, except it be by his own will, and that no Nation or Common-wealth can appoint or prescribe
how they will Obey, or how their Prince shall Govern them; but must leave his authoritie free from all bands of Law; and this either willingly, or by violence, is to be procured. Assertion, Fifth. The Fifth, That albeit the Heir apparent which is next by Birth to any Crown,Apol. pro. Re∣ge cap. 20. should be never so impotent, or unfit to Govern; as if (for examples sake) he should be deprived of his Senses, Madd, Furious, Lunatick, a Fool, or the like; or that he should be known on the o∣ther side to be most Malicious, Wicked, Vitious, or abhominable, or should degenerate into a very Beast; yea if it were known that he should go about to destroy the Common-wealth, and drown the Ship which he had to guide; yet (saith this man) he must be Sacred and Holie unto us, and admitted without contradiction to his inhe∣ritance, which God and Nature hath laid upon him, and his direction, restraint, or punishment must only be remit∣ted to God alone, for that no man, or Common-wealth, may reform, or restrain him. Succession by Birth, better than meer Election. Indeed Succession is much to be preferred to Election, for that, as hath been shewed before of the Government of a Monarchie in respect of other Forms, Succession hath com∣monly far fewer, and lesser inconveniences.
Reason, First. First, Election is subject to great and continual dangers of Ambition, Emulation, Division, Sedition, and Conten∣tion, which bring with them evident peril of universal de∣struction; whereas by Succession these occasions of strife are cut off. Reason, Second. Besides, The Prince is in present possession, knowing that his Son, or next of Kinn, is to be his Heir, hath more care to leave the Realm in good order. Reason, Third. Succession also bringeth less Mutations in the Common-wealth; for that the Son following his Father, doth com∣monly retain the same Friends, Counsellors, and Servants; pursueth the same actions and intentions, and for the most part with the same manner; whereas he which entereth by Election, being an Alien, and never likely friend to his pre∣decessor, doth alter and turn up-side-down all things. Reason, Fourth. Fourthly, He that cometh by Succession, having been much respected still for his Title to the Crown, bringeth with him less Passions of Hatred, Emulation, Anger, En∣vie, or Revenge against particular men, than he that entreth by Election, who having been equal to others before his ad∣vancement, and holden contention with many, must needs
have matter of quarrel with them; which he will seek to revenge when he is in authoritie: and they on the other side will bear him less respect, and more unwillingly be under him. Reason, Fifth. Whereunto may be added the preeminence and priviledge of Premogeniture and ancestrie of Birth so much respected and commanded by holy writ;Gen. 15. & 49. so that although Jacob were ordained by God to inherit the Benediction,Deut. 21. & 15 yet would God have him to procure the said Priviledge of Eldership from Esau his elder Brother.2 Paral. 21. & 3. Wherein may also be noted,Exod. 3. & 2. That yet this priviledg is not so inviolable,Rom. 9. & 13. but that upon just causes it may be broken:Gen. 28. & 27. and so in matters of State it was often practiced by God himself; as when Juda, the 4th Tribe, and not Ruben the first, was appointed to enjoy the Scepter of the Jews; and when Solomon tenth Son of David was ap∣pointed to be his Successor, not his first or second. Election and Succession do help one another. And so, where in Succession, there are inconveniencies, as some be or may fall, the remedie is, First to assist the Prince with Directions, and wise Counsel, if he be capable there∣unto; if not to remove him, and take in another of the same Blood, in his place. And by this means Election and Suc∣cession do help and moderate one another, and remedie one anothers inconveniencies.
Answer to the first Question pro∣pounded at the beginning. Now to the first Question made at the beginning of this Chapter, What is due to Succession or Prioritie of Blood alone? Great honor and respect is to be born unto the same, for that it is the principal Condition that leadeth infallibly to the next Succession of the Crown; If in the same Person do concur also other necessary circumstances and conditions, which were appointed at the same time, and by the same au∣thoritie that the Law of Succession was established. Answer to the Second. To the Second, What Interest an Heir apparent hath to the Crown before he be Crowned; If he have the Conditi∣ons before required, he hath the same Interest to the King∣dom, which the King of the Romans, or Caesar hath to the Germane Empire after his Election; who yet is not Emperor before he be Crowned. Or as in a Contract of Marriage there is Betrothing made between the parties by words de futuro, and is not properly Marriage, but espousal only; and the Wedding, made by words de praesenti, or by mutual present consent of both Parties. So an Heir appa∣rent, before he be Crowned and admitted, is but Betrothed to the Common▪ wealth for the time to come; and is mar∣ried afterwards by present mutual Consent and Oaths of both Parties.
What Respect is due to an Heir Apparent. Wherefore the Common-wealth in rigor of Justice oweth no Alleageance to the Heir apparent (though his Predeces∣sor be dead) until he be Crowned; because indeed till then he is not their true King and Sovereign; els it were in vain to ask the Realm again three times at their Coronation,Ger. du Hail∣lan lib. 3. de l'Estat. p. 241. Whether they will have such a King or no? And in the old time they were accustomed to reckon the years of their reign only from the day of their Coronation. But in the latter ages, for avoiding of Tumults, and bet∣ter keeping of Order, it hath been ordained, That from the death of the former Princes all matters of Government shall pass in the Name of his next Successor. And for better ac∣compt of years, That the beginning of his Reign should be reckoned from the day of the Death of his Predeces∣sor. A Rare Example of HENRY the Fifth, who had Fealtie done unto Him before He was Crowned. Again, By that in all Countries the Subjects take their Oaths only after the Princes hath Sworn, it appeareth that before they were not bound unto him by Alleageance. And for the Princes of England, it is expresly noted by English Historiographers, That no Allegeance is due unto them be∣fore
they be Crowned;Polyd. lib. 22. hist. Angl. in vita Henr. 5. Stow in the beginning of the life of K. Henry 5. and that this Priviledge happened only to Henry the Fifth, for his exceeding towardliness, and for the great affection of the People towards him; to have Homage done unto him before his Coronation and Oath ta∣ken. Which, both Polydore and Stow do affirm never to have been offered before to any Prince of England. Admission is of more importance, and hath prevailed against Right of succes∣sion. Whence it is gathered, That the Title of Succession with∣out the Admission of the Common-wealth, cannot make a lawful King: and that of the two, the second is of far more importance; which may be proved by many examples: As of William Rufus that Succeeded the Conqueror; King Henry the first his Brother: King Stephen's, King John's, and o∣thers, who by only Admission of the Realm, were Kings a∣gainst the Order of Succession.Sir Tho. Moor and Stow. Henry and Edward the 4th. did found the best part, and most surest of their Titles and the defence thereof, upon the Election, Consent, and good will of the People. And for this cause the most Politick Princes, that had any least suspicion of Troubles about the Title after their deaths,Du Hail. l. 6. H. Anno 1001 Anno 1032. have caused their Sons to be Crown∣ed in their own days. As Hugh Capetus Robert his eldest Son, and Robert Henry the first his second Son, excluding his el∣der. Henry also procured the same to Philip the first his el∣dest Son:Anno 1061. And Louys le Gros unto two Sons of his, first to Philip,Anno 1131 and after his death to Louys the yonger: And this Louys again unto Philip 2. his Son. The Prince of Spain is Sworn alwaies and admitted by the Realm during his Fa∣ther'sAnno 1180.
Reign. The same Consideration also moved King Da∣vid to Crown his Son Solomon in his own days.3 Reg. 1. And in England King Henry 2. considering the alteration that the Realm had made in admitting King Stephen before him, a∣gainst the Order of Lineal Succession,Pol. & Stow in vita Hen. 2. Anno 1170 and fearing that the like might happen also after him, caused his eldest Son Henry the third to be Crowned in his life time; So as England had two Kings Henry's living at one time with equal Autho∣ritie.
How the next in succession by Propin∣quitie of Blood, hath oftentimes been put back by the Common-wealth, and others further off admitted in their Places, even in these Kingdoms where Succession prevaileth; with many Examples of the Kingdoms of Israël and Spain. CAP. VII. Examples of the Jews. SAUL. David Elected to the prejudice of Saul's Sons. ALbeit God made Saul a true and lawful King over the Jews, and consequently also gave him all Kinglie
Prerogatives; whereof one Principle is, To have his Chil∣dren succeed after him in the Crown: yet he suffered not any of his Generation to succeed him, but elected David, who was a stranger by birth, and no kinn at all to the de∣ceased King, Rejecting thereby from the Crown, not only Isboseth,2 Reg. 2. & 22. Saul's elder Son, though followed for a time by Ab∣ner Capt. General of that Nation, with eleven Tribes; but also Jonathan his other Son, who was so good a man, and so much praised in holy Scripture. Whereby it is evident that the fault of the Father may prejudicate the Son's Right to the Crown, albeit the Son have no part in the fault. DAVID. Solomon, to the prejudice of Adonias, and his Brethren. David being placed in the Crown by Election, free Con∣sent,2 Reg. 2. & 5. and Admission of the People of Israël (though by mo∣tion and direction of God himself) no man will deny, but that he had given him all Kinglie Priviledges and Regalities, as among other the Scripture testifieth that it was assured him by God,Psal. 131. That his Seed should Reign after him; yea, and that for ever: Yet this was not performed to any of his el∣der Sons,2 Paral. 6. 3 Reg. 1. but only to Solomon, his yonger and tenth Son, who by the means and perswasions of Queen Bersabé his Mo∣ther, and Nathan the Prophet, was chosen and made King by his Father, to the prejudice of his elder, Adonias, and the rest of his Brethren:Which though it seemeth to be wrought by humane means and policy, yet was it princi∣pally by the special instinct of God him∣self. Whereby we are taught that these, and like determinations of the People, Magistrates, and Common-wealths, when their designments are to good ends, and for just respects and causes, are allowed also by God, and oftentimes are his own special drifts and dispensations, though they seem to come from man.
Jeroboam to the prejudice of Roboam, So∣lomon's Son and Heir. After Solomon's death, Rehoboam his Son and Heir coming to Sichem, where all the people of Israël were gathered, for his Admission; and having refused to yield to certain Con∣ditions for taking away of some hard and heavie Impositions laid upon them by Solomon his Father, which the People had proposed unto him; ten Tribes of the twelve refused to ad∣mit him for their King,3 Reg. 12. but chose one Jeroboam his Servant, a meer stranger, and of poor Parentage, and God allowed thereof for the Sins of Solomon, leaving Rehoboam over two Tribes, and Jeroboam over ten. God's dealing in his Common-wealth, a presi∣dent for all others. Although we may say that in the Jewish Common-wealth God almightie did deal and dispose of things against the or∣dinary course of man's Law, as best liked himself, whose Will is more than Law, and is to be limitted by no Rule or Law of man; and therefore that these Examples are not pro∣perly the act of a Common-wealth, as our Question de∣mandeth; yet are they well brought in, because they may give light to all the rest. For if God permitted and allowed this in his own Common-wealth, that was to be the Exam∣ple and Pattern of all others: no doubt but he approveth also the same in other Realms, when just occasions are offer∣ed, either for his service, the good of the People and Realm, or else for punishment of the sins and wickedness of some Princes.
Examples of SPAIN. Four Races of Spanish Kings. Spain, since the expulsion of the Romans, hath had Three or Four Races of Kings.Ambr. Morales l. 11. hist. c. 12. The first is from the Gothes, which began to reign about the year 416, and endured by the space of 300. years, until Spain was lost to the Moors; And to them the Spaniard referreth all his old Nobility. The se∣cond from Don Pelago, who after the Invasion of the Moors, was chosen King of Austurias about the year 717.Ambr. Morales lib. 3. cap. 2. and his Race continued adding Kingdom to Kingdom for the space of 300. years, until the year 1034. The third, from Don Sancho Mayor, King of Navarra,Moral. lib. 37. cap. 42, 43, 44. who having gotten into his Power the Earldoms of Arragon and Castilia, made them Kingdoms, and divided them among his Children; And Don Fernando, his second Son, King of Castilia, sirnamed after∣ward the Great, by marrying of the Sister of Don Dermudo, King of Leon and Asturias, joyned all those Kingdoms to∣gether; and this Race endured for 500. years, until the year 1549;Garibay lib. 20 cap. 1. When, for the Fourth, the House of Austria came in by Marriage of the Daughter and Heir of Don Ferdinando, sirnamed the Catholick; which endureth until this day. The First Race. For the First Race,Concil. Tol. 5. cap. 5. because it had express Election joyn∣ed with Succession,Concil. Tol. 4. cap. 74. as by the Councils of Toledo it appear∣eth, it can yield no valuable examples for this place.
The Second Race. Don Alonso, to the prejudice of Don Favila his Children. In the Second, Though the Law of Succession by Propin∣quitie of Blood,Episc. Tuyens lib. 1. hist. Lud. de Molin lib. du Hared. was established; yet many examples do te∣stifie, That the next in Blood was oftentimes put back by the Common-wealth upon just causes. Don Pelago's Son Favila. Amb. Mor. l. 23 cap. 6. 9. & 10. Sebast. Episc. Salam. in hist. Hisp. being dead after two years Reign only, none of his Chil∣dren, though he left divers, were admitted, (because they were yong, and unable to Govern) But Don Alonso the Ca∣tholick, his Son in Law, who for his valiant acts was sir∣named the Great. Don Aurelio, and Don Silo, to the prejudice of Don Fruela and his Children. To Don Alonso succeeded his Son Don Fruela, who was first a noble King; But for that he declined to Tyrannie, and put to death wrongfully his own Brother Don Vimerano, rarely beloved of the Spaniards, he was himself put to death by them.Anno 768. Moral. lib. 13. cap. 17. And albeit he left two goodly lawful Children, yet in hatred of the Father, neither of them was admitted by the Realm to succeed him; but his Cozen German Don Au∣relio, brothers Son to Don Alonso the Catholick,Moral. cap. 21. who after six years Reign dying without issue, a brother in Law of his named Don Silo was admitted.
Don Vermudo, to the prejudice of Don Alonso the Chaste; who nevertheless come's in again afterwards very happily. This Don Silo being also dead without issue, and the Spaniards anger against Don Fruela being now wel asswaged, they admitted his aforesaid Son Don Alonso the yonger, sir∣named the Chaste; though his Reign for this time endured very little; being put out by a bastard Uncle of his Don Alu∣regado, with help of the Moors; who after six years Reign dying also without issue, the matter came in deliberation a∣gain, Whether Don Alonso the Chaste, that lived hidden in a Monasterie, should be admitted again, or rather his Cozen German Don Vermudo, Son to his Uncle the Prince Vimerano, (whom his Father had slain) The Realm determined Don Who was of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Order, ha∣ving been made Deacon. Vermudo, though he were much farther off by Propinquity of Blood; for that he was judged for the more valiant and able Prince, than the other, who seemed to be made more acquainted with the life of Monks, than of a King: Neither do the Historiographers of Spain reprehend this Fact of the Realm. But King Vermudo, after three years Reign, being weary of a Kingly life, and feeling some scruple of Consci∣ence that he had forsaken the life Ecclesiastical,Mor. cap. 21. & 29. he Resigned willingly the Government unto his said Cozen Don Alonso the Chast,Anno 791. who after all his affliction, having been deprived four times, Reigned yet 51. years, and proved the most va∣liant and excellent King that ever that Nation had, both for his valor and other vertuous deeds; and had great friendship with King Charles the Great of France, who lived in that time.
Don Fruela, to the prejudice of Don Ordonio's Children. Don Ordonio the Second dying,Anno 924. left four Sons and one Daughter, and yet the State of Spain displaced them all, and gave their Kingdom to their Uncle Don Fruela, second Bro∣ther to their Father;Mor. lib. ib. c. 1 And Morales saith, That there appear∣eth no other reason hereof,Anno 924. but only for that these Sons of the King deceased were yong, and not so apt to Govern well the Realm as their Uncle was, [And this notwithstanding that the said Morales writeth, That at that time and before, the Law of Succession by Propinquitie of Blood, was so strongly confirmed, that the Kingdom of Spain was made an inheritance so intayled and tyed only to the next in Blood as there was no possibility to alter the same.] Don Alonso 4th. Son to Ordonio, to the prejudice of Don Fruela his Children: And Don Ramiro, to the pre∣judice of the Children of Don Alonso. And after a years Reign, this King Fruela being dead, and having left divers Children at mans state, they were all put by the Crown, and the eldest Son of the aforesaid Don Or∣donio the second, named Don Alonso the fourth, was chosen for King: Who leaving afterward his Kingdom, and be∣taking himself to a Religious habit, offered to the Com∣mon-wealth of Spain his eldest Son, named Don Ordonio, to be their King; but they refused him, and took his Brother, Uncle to the yong Prince,Mor. l. 19. c. 20. Anno 930. named Don Ramiro, who reigned 19. years, and was a most excellent King, and gained Madrid from the Moors.
Don Sancho el Gordo, to the prejudice of the yong Son of Ordonio the Third. To Ramiro the second,Anno 954. succeeded his elder Son Don Ordo∣nio the third, who after 7. years reign, albeit he left a Son named, el Enfante Don Vermudo, yet he was not admitted; but his Brother Don Sancho 1. sirnamed el Gordo, Uncle to the yong Prince:Mor. l. 16. c. 24. And the reason of this Alteration Morales giveth, First that the said Enfante was a little Child, and not sufficient for Government, and defence of the Country. But yet after Don Sancho had reigned,Moral. lib. 17. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4. and his Son Don Ramiro the third, after him; he was called and made King by the Realm under the name of Vermudo 2. who left after him Don Alonso 5. and he again his Son Don Vermudo 3. who Marrying his Sister Dona Sancha (that was his Heir) unto Don Feri∣nando, first Earle and then King of Castile, (who was second Son to Don SanchoSuprà. Mayor King of Navar) he joyned by these means the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile together, which were separated before: And so ended the Line of Don Pelago, and entered the Blood of Navar. The Third Race. Dona Berenguela, to the prejudice of her elder Sister Dona Blancha, and her Son St. Lewis of France. For the Third Race.Anno 1201. Garib. lib. 11. cap. 12. & 37. Prince Lewis of France, who af∣terwards was King Lewis 8. Son to Philip Augustus having
married Dona Blancha of Spain, that was Neece to King John of England by her Mother-side; [upon these Conditions on the part of King John, thereby to make Peace with the French, that she should have for her Dowry all those Towns and Countries which the said King Philip had taken upon the English in Normandie and Gasconie; And on the part of Spain, That if the Prince Henry, (only Brother to the said Lady Blanch) should die without issue, then she should Suc∣ceed in the Crown of Spain] got Lewis 9. by her: And yet Prince Henry her Brother dying without issue, both she and her Son were put by, and excluded by the State of Spain, against the evident Right of succession, and Propinquitie of Blood; And her yonger SisterMarried to the Prince of Leon, by whom he had Fernando the St. of Castile. Gar. l. 13. c. 10. Anno 1207. Dona Berenguela was admit∣ted. And the only Reason they yielded thereof, was, not to admit Strangers to the Crown. Don Sancho el Bravo, to the prejudice of his Nephews Don Alonso, and Hernando de la Cerda. The Prince of SpainSirnamed, De la Cerda, for that he was born with a great Gristle Hair on his Breast. Don Alonso, Nephew to St. Fernan∣do, dying before the King his Father, left twoBy Blancha, St. Lewis of France his Daughter. Sons, Don Alonso, and Hernando de la Cerda, whom the Grand-father left Commended to the Realm, as lawful Heirs apparent to the Crown: Yet for that one Uncle of theirs, yonger Brother to their Father, named Don Sancho elFor his Va∣lor. Bravo was like to man∣age the matters of War better than they; he was, by a ge∣neral Parlament, Holden at Segovia, 1276. made Heir appa∣rent of Spain, and they put back, in their Grand-father's time, and by his, and the Realms consent. And this Don Sancho coming to the Crown in the year 1284. the two Prin∣ces were put in Prison,Anno 1276. Anno 1284. but afterwards at the suit of Philip 3. of France, their Uncle, they were let out, and endued with certain Lands, and also they remain unto this day: And of these do come the Dukes of Medina, Celi, and all the rest of
the House of Cerda, which are of much Nobilitie in Spain at this time; and King Philip that Reigneth, cometh of Don Sancho, the yonger Brother. Henry the Bastard, and his Race, to the prejudice of King Petro, and his Heirs. When Don Pedro the Cruel, King of Castile, was driven and his Bastard Brother Henry 2. set up in his place, John of Gant,Garibay lib. 15 cap. 1. Anno 1363. Duke of Lancaster, having Married Dona Constancia, the said King Peter's Daughter and Heir, pretended by succes∣sion the said Crown of Castile, as indeed it appertained unto him; But yet the State of Spain denied it flatly, and defend∣ed it by Arms, and prevailed against John of Gand, as did also the Race of Henry the Bastard against his lawful Brother. And though in this Third and principal Discent of the Kings of Spain, when these Changes happened, the matter of Succession were most assuredly and perfectly established, yet no man will deny but that the Kings of Spain who hold by the latter Titles at this day, be true and lawful Kings. This King Henry the Bastard had a Son named John the first, who succeeded him in the Crown of Spain, and Mar∣ried Dona Beatrix, Daughter and Heir of King Ferdinando the first of Portugal. But yet after the death of the said Ferdi∣nando, the States of Portugal would never agree to admit the said Juan for their King,Garibay lib. 15 cap. 22. & l. 34 cap. 39. for not subjecting themselves by that means to the Castilians: And took rather a Bastard Brother of the said Don Ferdinando, named Don Juan, a
youth of twenty years old; whom they Married afterward to the Lady Philippe, Daughter of John of Gand, by his first Wife Blancha, Duchess and Heir of Lancaster, in whose Right the Kings of Portugal and their Discendents do pre∣tend unto this day a certain interest to the House of Lan∣caster.
Divers other Examples out of the States of France, and England, for proof that the next in Blood are somtimes put back from succession; And how God hath approved the same with good success. CAP. VIII. Though the Crown of France never come to any Stranger; yet it Changed twice in it self, and had Three Rancks. COncerning the State of France, albeit since the en∣trance of their first King Pharamond, they have never had any stranger come to wear their Crown; yet a∣mong themselves have they changed twice their whole Line∣age
of Kings, and have had three Discents and Races as well as the Spaniards;1 Anno 419. The first of Pharamond,2 Anno 751. the second of Pepin, and the third of Capitus,3 Anno 988. which endureth unto this present. The First Ranck. The First Ranck shall be let pass, for that some perhaps may say that the Common-wealth and Law of Succession was not then so well setled, as it hath been since, and also because it were too tedious to peruse all the Three Rancks, for the store that they may yield. Examples of the second Ranck. Carloman against the Law of Succession, and the Order of his Father, parted equally the Realm with his elder Brother Charles. Pepin le Bref, first King of the second Race, left two Sons, Charles and Carloman, and his States and Kingdoms by Suc∣cession unto the eldest; Charles the Great. And albeit by that Law of Succession the whole Kingdom of France appertained unto him alone; yet the Realm by his authoritie did part it equally between them two;Ger. du Hail. l. 3 Anno 768. as Gerard du Haillan setteth down in these words, Estant Pepin decedé, les François eslurent Roy, Charles & Carloman ses fils, à la charge qu'ils partagerrient entr'evor egalement le Roy.Belf. lib. 2. c. 5. And the very same citeth Bel∣forest out of Egenart, an ancient French Writer.
Charlemayne preferred to his nephews against succession. After three years reign Carloman dying, left many sons; the elder whereof was named Adalgise; but Belforest saith, That the Lords Ecclesiastical and temporal of France swore fidelitie and obedience to Charles, without any respect or re∣gard at all of the children of Carloman, who yet by right of succession should have been preferred;Paulus Aemil. hist. Franc. And Paulus Emilius a Latine-writer saith, Proceres regni ad Carolum ultrà venien∣tes, regem eum totius Galliae salutârunt: whereby is shewed, that exclusion of the children of Carloman was not by force or tyrannie, but by free deliberation of the Realm. Lewis 1. deposed Charles le Chauve, his fourth son admitted to the prejudice of his elder brothers. To Charles the Great succeeded Lewis le Debonnaire his on∣ly son;An. 814. who afterward, at the pursuit principally of his own three sons by his first wife,Gerard lib. 5. An. 834. (Lothaire, Pepin and Lewis) was deposed, and put into a Monasterie. But coming afterward to reign again,An. 840. his fourth son by his second wife, named, Charles le Chauve, succeeded him, against the right of succes∣sion due to his elder brother Lothaire. Louys 2. to the prejudice of his elder brethren; and his bastards to the prejudice of his lawful sons. After Charles le Chauve came in Louis le Begue,An. 678. his third son, the second beeing dead. and the eldest for his evil de∣meanure
put by his succession. This Lewis left by his wife Adel trude daughter to King Alfred of England, a little infant new∣ly born; and two bastard-sons of a Concubine, LouysLouys the 3d and Carloman the first. and Carloman; who, for that the nobles of France said, That they had need of a man to bee King, and not a childe, were, to the prejudice of the lawful successor, by the State chosen jointly for Kings, and the whole Realm was divided be∣tween them.An. 881. And Q. Adeltrude with her childe fled into Eng∣land, Charles 4. to the prejudice of Louys 5. And Odo to the prejudice of Charles 4. Of these two Bastards,An. 886. Carloman left a son, Louis le Faine∣ant, which succeded unto him; But for his slothful life and vicious behaviour was deprived, and made a Monk in the Abbey of St Denis, where hee died. And in his place was chosen for King of France Charles leNephew to Charls le Chauve. An. 88. Gros, Emperor of Rome, who likewise afterward was for his evil government by them deposed, and deprived not onely of the Kingdom, but also of his Empire, and was brought into such misera∣ble penurie, as divers write hee perished for want. In his place was chosen Odo Earl of Paris, and Duke of Angers, of whom came Hugh Capet. Charles the simple to the prejudice of Odo. But beeing soon wearie of this man's government, they deposed him as hee was absent in Gasconie, and called Charles Son to Lou∣ys le Begue. (named afterward the Simple) out of England to Paris, and restored him to the Kingdom of France; leaving onely to Odo for recompence the State of Aquitaine, with title of a Duke.
Ralph 1. in the place of Charles the simple. This Charles through his simplicitie beeing allured to go to the Castle of Peronne in Picardie, was made there pri∣soner, and forced to resign his Kingdom unto Ralph King of Burgundie.An. 927. And his Queen Algina, or Ogen, daughter of King Edward the elder, of England, fled with her little son Lewis that shee had by him, into England unto her Uncle K. Adelstan. And Charles through miserie died soon after, in the said Castle of Peronne. Lewis d'Outremer son to Charles the Simple established. But this Ralph dying also three years after,Son to Charls le simple. the States of France called out of England Lewis (therefore named d'Ou∣tremor), and crowned him; And hee was a good King, and reigned 27 years. Hugh Capet to the prejudice of Charles of Lorrayne. Louys d'Outremer left two sons, Lothaire, who succeeded him, and Charles whom hee made Duke of Lorrayne: Lo∣thaire had a son named Louys, who was King after him, but died without issue. And so the crown was to have gon by succession to his Uncle Charles. Notwithstanding the States of France, for mislike they had of his person did put him by, and choseThat sir∣name was gi∣ven him when hee was a boy, for that hee was wont to snatch away his fellows caps from their heads. Hugo Capetus Earl of Paris, who by approbation of the Common-wealth was crowned, and his race endureth until this day.
Hugh Capet his title not by usurpation. And all the French Chronicles do justifie this title of Hu∣go Capetus against Charles.Belf. lib. 3. cap. 1. Anno 988. Nangis an ancient and diligent wri∣ter of the Abbey of S. Denis, defendeth it in these words: Wee may not grant in any case that Hugh Capet may bee estee∣med an Invador or Usurper of the Crown of France, seeing the Lords, Prelates, Princes and Governors of the Realm did call him to this dignitie, and chose him for their King and Sovereign Lord. Upon which words Belforest saith: For in very truth wee cannot by any other means defend the title of Hugh Capet from usurpation and felonie, then to ju∣stifie his coming to the Crown by the consent and will of the Common-wealth. A speech used by the Ambassador sent from the States of France to Charles of Lorrayne, after his exclusion. Here is to bee noted somwhat out of the speech, which the Ambassador sent by the States of France, after their electi∣on of Hugh Capet,Gerard. lib. 6. Anno 988. to Charles of Lorrayne, did use unto him as followeth: Every man knoweth (Lord Charles) that the Succession of the Crown and Realm of France, according to the ordina∣rie Laws and Rights of the same, belongeth unto you, and not unto Hugh Capet now our King; but yet the very same Laws which do give unto you this right of Succession, do judg you also unworthie of the same, for that you have not endeavored hitherto to frame your life and manners accord∣ing to the prescript of those Laws, nor according to the use and custom of your Countrey of France; but rather have allied your self with the Germane Nation, our old enemies, and have acquainted your self with their vile and base man∣ners.
Wherefore seeing you have forsaken and abandoned the ancient virtue, sweetness and amitie of the French, wee have also abandoned and left you; and have chosen Hugh Capet for our king, and have put you back; and this with∣out any scruple or prejudice of our consciences at all; estee∣ming it far better and more just to live under Hugh Capet the present possessor of the Crown, with enjoying the antient use of our Laws, Customs, Privileges and Liberties, than under you, the inheritor by nearness of blood, in oppressi∣on, strange customs, and crueltie. For even as those which are to make a voiage in a ship upon a dangerous sea, do not so much repent, whether the Pilot which is to guide the stern bee owner of the ship or no, but rather whether hee bee skil∣ful, valiant, and like to bring them in safetie to their way's end, or to drown them among the waves: even so our prin∣cipal care is, that wee have a good Prince to lead and guide us happily in the way of Civil and politick life, which is the end why Princes were appointed. For that this man is fitter to bee our King. And so Charles was excluded, and the Frenchmen thought themselvs secure in conscience for do∣ing the same; which God also hath seemed to confirm with the succession and happie success of so many noble and most Christian Kings as have issued out of this Line of Hugo Ca∣petus unto this day. Examples of the Third Rank. Henry 1. to the prejudice of his elder Brother Robert. In this Third Line, Robert, Hugh▪ Capet his son, who suc∣ceeded him,Gerard lib. 6. Anno 1032 & 1037. had two sons, Robert and Henry; whereof the younger was admitted, and Robert put back; partly becaus hee was but a simple man in respect of Henry, and partly for
that Henry was greatly favored and assisted in this pretence by Robert Duke of Normandie. Lewis 6. like to bee dis-inherited for the hatred of his father K. Philip 1. When Philip 1.Gerard lib. 7. Anno 1110. son to this Henry was deceased, the peo∣ple of France were so offended with his evil life and Govern∣ment,Belf. lib. 4. cap. 1. & lib. 5. as that his son Louis le Gros was like to bee dis-inhe∣rited for his sake; if som of his partie had not caused him to bee crowned in hast, and out of order at Orleans, for pre∣venting the matter. Charles 8. for his father Lewis xi. So the State of France had once determined,Comineus in Comment. l. 1. in vita Lud. XI. to put back Charles (afterwards the Eight) from his succession, for the hatred they bare to his father Lewis the XI. if the said fa∣ther had not died while the other was very young. Examples of England. Divers changes of Races in England. For England, it hath had as great varietie and changes in the race of their Kings, as any Realm in the world. For first, after the Britains it had the Romans; of whose, and their own blood, they had Kings again of their own: After this they had them of the Saxon and English blood; and after them of the Danes; and then of the Normans; and after them again of the French; and last of all, it seemeth to have returned to the Britains again in K. Henry 7. for that his fa∣ther came of that race.
Examples before the Conquest. Egbert 1. before his nearer in blood. To pass over the ancient ranks of the British, Roman and Saxon races, until Egbert King of the West-Saxons, and al∣most of the rest of England besides (who therefore is said to bee properly the first monarch of the Saxon blood, and first commanded that Realm to bee called England, as ever since hath been observed) this man Egbert beeing for his prowess in jealousie to his King Britricus, was by him banished into France, where he lived a Captain under the famous King Pepin, till that Britricus dying, hee returned into England; where,Polyd. lib. 4. Hist. Angl. in fine An. 802. though hee were not the next by propinquitie of blood, yet, as Polydor saieth, omnium consensu Rex creatur; and proved the most excellent King that ever before the Saxons had. Adelstan, bastard-brother, to the prejudice of his his lawful Edmond, and Aldred. This Egbert left a son, named Elthelwolfe, or Adelwulfe, or Edolf, who succeeded him; and had four sons, Ethelbald, E∣thelbert, Ethelred, and Alfred; who were all Kings one after another; and for the most part most excellent Princes, spe∣cially Alfred the last of all,872. whose acts bee wonderful: Hee left a son as famous as himself, which was Edward the elder: who dying, left two lawful sons, Edmond and Aldred, and one illegitimate,Hee erected the Universi∣tie of Oxford Polyd. lib. 5. Hist. Angl. Stone pag. 130 Anno 924. named Adelstan; which being esteemed to bee of more valor then the other two, was preferred to the Crown before them; and was a Prince of worthie memorie. Hee brought England into one perfit Monarchie, having ex∣pelled utterly the Danes, and quieted the Welchmen: Con∣quered
Scotland, and brought their K. Constantine to do him homage. Restored also Luys d'Outremer his nephew to the kingdom of France. Aldred to the prejudice of his Nephews Edwin and Edgar. This Adelstan dying without issue, his lawful brother Edmond was admitted,Polyd. l. 6. who left two sons Edwin and Edgar; but for that they were yong,An. 946. they were put back, and their Uncle Aldred preferred, who reigned with the good will and prais of all men. Edgar to the prejudice of his elder brother Edwin. Aldred dying without issue, his elder Nephew Edwin was admitted to the Crown; but yet four years after hee was deposed again for his leud and vitious life, and his younger brother Edgar admitted in his place,An. 959. who was one of the rarest Princes that the world had in his time. Stow saith hee kept 3600 ships in this Realm. Canutus Dane, to the prejudice of Edmond and Edward, Englishmen. This Edgar had by his first Wife (Egilfred) Edward, called the Martyr; and by his second (Alfred) Etheldred: Which Alfred,An. 978. to the end that her Son might Reign, caused Edward to be slain; and so Etheldred came to the Crown, though with much contradiction moved in hatred specially of the murther of his Brother. This Etheldred was driven out of this
Kingdom by Sweno King of the Danes,By his first Wife. who possessed the Realm; and dying left a Son, Canutus; with whom, Ethel∣dred returning after the death of Sweno, made an Agreement and Division of the Realm; And so died, leaving his eldest He had two more, and one Daughter, wch died all with∣out issue. By his second Wife, Imma, sister to Rich. Pake of Nor∣mandie, she had Edw. the Confessor and Alured, who at the coming of Sweno, fled with their Fa∣ther into Normandie. Anno 1018. Son Edmund Iron-side to succeed him; who soon after dy∣ing also, left two Sons, Edmund and Edward, but the whole Realm to Canutus, who pretended it to be his by a Cove∣nant made between Iron-side and him, That the longest liver should have all: and so with the Realm took the two Chil∣dren, and sent them over into Swethland. And was ad∣mitted not only by the consent of the Realm, but allowed also by the Sea of Rome. And he lived and proved an ex∣cellent good King, and after twenty years Reign died much mourned by the Englishmen. Harald Bastard, preferred to his lawful Bro∣ther Hardicanutus. This Canutus left a base Son,Anno 1038. named Harald, and a law∣ful one, named Hardicanutus. But Harald was by the more part of Voices chosen before his lawful Brother. Hardicanutus preferred before his neerer in Blood. After the death of Harald,Anno 1041. Hardicarnutus was chosen, with∣out any respect, either to Edward the Confessor & Alured, Sons to Etheldred, that were in Normandy; or to Edmond and Edward, Sons to his Son Iron-side, that were in Sweathland, though in proximitie of Blood they were before him.
Alured and Edward the Confessor, before Edmond and Edward, their eldest Brother's Sons. But this Hardicanutus dying without issue, Alured second son to Etheldred by his second Wife, against the priority both of his Brother, and his Nephews, that were in Swethland, was called to be King; but being murthered by the way by Goodwin the Earl of Kent, his elder brother Edward the Con∣fessor was admitted yet before Edmond and Edward sons to his elder brother Iron-side; And the said Edward the Con∣fessor was a most excellent Prince, and Reigned in Peace, al∣most twenty years. Harald 2. to the prejudice of Edgar. Edward being dead without issue, The States made a great Consultation, whom they should make King; and first of all excluded him that was only next by Propinquitie of blood, which was Edgar, eldest son to Edward the Out-law, son to Edmond Iron-side,Polid. lib. 8. Anno 1066. because he was a Child, not able to Govern the Realm; And Harald, son to the Earle Goodwin by the Daughter of Canutus, was admitted. William Duke of Normandie, his Title by Election. But William Duke of Normandie pretended to be chosenAnno 1066. before byand the same testified by his last Will. Ger. du Hail. l. 6 Anno 1065. Edward the Confessor with the consent of the Realm; which, though no English Authors do avow it cleer∣ly, seemeth notwithstanding very probable: Because the said William had at his Entrance many in England that did
favor his pretence; and that, as Gerard saith, At his coming to London he punished divers by name, for that they had broken their Oaths and Promises in that behalf: Moreover, by alleging his Title of Election, he moved divers Princes abroad to favor him in that action as in a just quarrel; which it is not like they should have done, if he had pretended on∣ly a Conquest,Ger. Chron. Cassin lib. 3. cap. 34. or his Title of Consanguinity, which could be of no importance in the world. Among others, Pope Alexander 2. (whose Holiness was greatly esteemed in those dayes) did send him his Benediction,Anton. part. 2. Chron. tit. 16. cap §. 2. and a precious Ring of Gold, with a Hallowed Banner. St. Anthoninus Archbishop of Florence commended his enterprise. But howsoever he got the Victory, and God prospered his Pretence, and hath confirmed his off-spring in the Crown more than these Five hundred years. Examples after the Conquest. William Rufus and Henry 1. to the prejudice of their elder brother Robert. William the Conqueror left three sons, Robert, William and Henry, and by his Will the Kingdom to William, named Rufus, forsom particular displeasure against his elder son; who being at his fathers death absent in the war of Jerusalem,Polyd. in vita Gal. Conq. was put back, although the most part of the Realm was inclined unto him;An. 1087. and William Rufus, by the persuasion of Lanfrake Archbishop of Canterbury, was established in the Crown: And hee dying without issue,An. 1100. his younger brother Henry, against the right also of his elder brother Robert, absent a∣gain in the war of Jerusalem, did by fair promises to the people, and the help of Henry Newborow Earl of Warwick, and Maurice Bishop of London, get the Crown; wherein God did so prosper him, that his said brother Robert coming afterwards to depose him of it, hee took him prisoner, and kept the Crown.
King Stephen preferred to Henry 2. his nearer in blood, and Henry again to Stephen his issue. This King Henry left a daughter, which had of Jeffrey Plantagenet Duke of Anera a son named Henry, whom Hen∣ry his Grandfather caused to bee declared Heir apparent in his daies. But yet after his deceas, becaus Prince Henry was but a childe;1135. the State of England did choos Stephen Earl of Boulongue, and son to Adela, the Conqueror's daughter, putting back both Henry and his Mother. But again for that this Reign drew all England into factions and divisions; the States in a Parlament at Wallingford made an agreement that Stephen should bee lawful during his life onely,An. 1153. and that Henry and his off spring should succeed him; and Prince William, King Stephen's son, was deprived, and made onely Earl of Norfolke. King John to the prejudice of his Nephew Arthur. This Henry 2 left Richard, Jeffrey and John: Richard, sir∣named Coeur de Lyon, succeeded him; and dying without is∣sue, Called com∣monly, by the Frenchmen Jean sans terre. John was admitted by the States, and Arthur Duke of Britaine, son and heir to Jeffrey,Together with two daughters of his. excluded, who coming afterward to get the Crown by war, was taken by his Uncle John, who murthered him in prison. Louys Prince of France to the prejudice of King John, and King John's son afterward to the prejudice again of Louys. But som years after, the Barons and States of England misliking the government of this King John, rejected him a∣gain,
and chose Louys the Prince of France to bee their King, and did swear fealtie to him in London:1216. depriving also the young Prince Henry John's son, of 8 years old; but upon the death of King John, that ensued shortly after, they recal∣led again that sentence, disannulled the Oath and Allegiance made unto Louys Prince of France, and admitted this Hen∣ry Henry 3. to the Crown, who reigned 53 years. The Princes of York and Lancaster had their best Titles of the autoritie of the Common-wealth. From this Henry 3. take their first begining the two bran∣ches of York and Lancaster. In whose contentions the best of their titles did depend upon the autoritie of the Common-wealth. For as the people were affected, and the greatest part prevailed, so were they confirmed or disannulled by Par∣lament. And wee may not well affirm, but that when they are in possession, and confirmed therein by these Parlaments, they are lawful Kings, and that God concur∣reth with them; For if wee should deny this point, wee should shake the states of most Princes in the world at this day. The Common-wealth may dispose of the Crown for her own good. And so to conclude, As propinquitie of blood is a great preheminencie towards the atteining of the Crown, so doth it not ever binde the Common∣wealth to yield thereunto, and to shut up her eies, or admit at hap-hazard, or of necessitie, any one
that is next by succession; but rather to take such an one, as may perform the dutie and charge com∣mitted. For that otherwise to admit him that is an enemie, or unfit, is but to destroy the Common-wealth and him together.
What are the principal points which a Common-wealth ought to respect in admitting or excluding of any Prince that pretendeth to succeed; wherein is handled largely also of the diver∣sitie of Religions, and other such causes. CAP. IX. Seeing the Common-wealth is to know and judg of the matter, no doubt but God doth allow of her judgment. HEe who is to judg and give the sentence in the things, is also to judg of the caus; for thereof is hee cal∣led Judg: So, if the Common-wealth hath power to admit or put back the Prince or pretender to the Crown, shee hath also autoritie to judg of the lawfulness of the cau∣ses, considering specially that it is in their own affair; and
and in a matter that depend's wholly upon them, for that no man is King or Prince by institution of Nature, but on∣ly by authoritie of the Common-wealth. Who can then af∣firm the contrary but that God doth allow for a just and suf∣ficient cause in this behalf, the only Will and Judgment of the Weal-publick it self; supposing alwaies that a whole Realm will never agree, by orderly way of Judgement, to exclude the next Heir in Blood without a reasonable Cause in the sight and censure. The Pope is to obey the Determination of the Common-wealth, without further inquisi∣tion; except it be in Cases of in∣justice, and Tyranny. And seeing that they only are the Judges of this Case, and are properly Lords and Owners of the whole business, we are to presume that what they Determine is just and lawful, though at one time they should Determine one thing, and the contrary at another (as they did often in England, being led at different times by different motions) and it is enough for every particular man to subject himself, and obey simply their Determination, without further inquisition; except he should see that Open Injustice were done therein, or God manifestly offended, and the Realm endangered. Open In∣justice; if not the true Common-wealth, but some Faction of wicked men should offer to Determine the matter without lawful authoritie. God offended, and the Realm endanger∣ed; where it is evident that he that is preferred will do what lieth in him to the prejudice both of God's glory, and of the Common-wealth; as if a Turke, or some notorious wick∣ed man and Tyrant, should be offred to Govern among Chri∣stians.
Whence the Reasons of Admitting or Receiving a Prince, are to be taken. Now to know the true Causes and principal Points, which ought to be chiefly regarded, as well by the Common-wealth, as by every particular man in the furthering or hin∣dering any Prince; we must return to the End wherefore Government was appointed; which is to defend, preserve, and benefit the Common-wealth; because from this Consi∣deration are to be deduced all other Considerations for dis∣cerning a good or evil Prince. For that whosoever is most likely to defend &c. his Realm and Subjects, he is most to be allowed and desired, as most conform to the end for which Government was ordained. And on the contrary side, he that is least like to do this, deserveth least to be preferred: And this is the Consideration that divers Common-wealths had in putting back oftentimes Children and impotent Peo∣ple (though next in blood) from succession. Three Chief Points to be regarded in every Prince. And here shall be fitly remembred what Gerard recounteth of the King of France;Ger. lib. 3. de l'Estat. p. 242. that in his Coronation he is new apparrelled three times in one day; once as a Priest, and then as a Judge, and last as a King armed; thereby to signi∣fie three things committed to his charge; first Religion, then Justice, then Manhood and Chivalrie; which division see∣meth very good and fit, and to comprehend all that a Weal∣Publick hath need of for her happie State and Felicity both in soul and bodie, and for her end both supernatural and na∣tural.
And therefore these seem to be the three Points which most are to be regarded in every Prince. Why it is here principally treated of Re∣ligion. For the latter two, because they have been often had in Consideration in the Changes aforesaid; and Religion, whereof then scarce ever any question or doubt did fall in these actions, rarely or never: And because in these our dayes it is the principal Difference and chiefest Difficultie of all other; and that also it is of it self the first and highest, and most necessarie Point to be considered in the Admission of a Prince; therefore it shall principally be treated of in this place. The Felicitie of the Soul, is the chiefest End appointed to every Common-wealth. First we are to suppose, That the first and chiefest End that God and Nature appointed to every Common-wealth, was not so much the temporal Felicitie of the Body, as the ever∣lasting of the Soul: And consequently that all other things of this transitory life are ordained to serve and be directed to that higher End. And this was not only revealed to the Jewes by holy Scripture; but also unto the Gentiles and Heathens by the instinct and light of Nature it self.
What End Pagan Philosophers and Law-makers had in their doings. For there was never yet Pagan Philosopher that wrote of framing a good Common-wealth, neither Law-maker a∣mong them that left Ordinances for the same purpose; Which besides the temporal end of directing things for the bodie, had not special care also of matters appertaining to the minde; to wit, of nourishing and rewarding virtue▪ and for restraining and punishing of vice and wickedness. Institution of Sacrifices by Nature. Examples of Noah, and Job. And Nature did not only teach man that he should serve God; but also how he should serve him: to wit, That the chiefest and supremest honor that could be done unto him in this life, was the honor of Sacrifice and Oblations; which we see was practiced even in those first beginnings of the Law of Nature, before the Levitical Law. For so we read in Genesis of Noah,Gen. 8. That he made an Altar and offered Sa∣crifices to God upon the same, of all the Beasts and Birds that he had in the Ark, Odoratúsque est Dominus odorem suavi∣tatis. And the like of Job that was a Gentile,Job. 1. and lived be∣fore Moses, Sanctificabat filios, consurgénsque diluculo offerebat holocausta per dies singulos.
Example of the Indians. Religion the chief End of a Common-wealth and Magistrates. Among the Indians also, where never any notice of Moses Law came, there was never any Nation sound that acknow∣ledged not some kind of God, and offered not some kinde of Sacrifice unto him. And though both in distinguishing be∣tween false gods and the true God, and in the means of ho∣noring him, they have fallen into most gross and infinite er∣rors: as also the Gentiles of Europe, Asia, and Africa; yet it is evident hereby that by God and Nature the highest and chiefest End of a Common-wealth is Cultus Dei. And con∣sequently that the principal care and charge of a Prince and Magistrate even by Nature it self,Geneb. lib. 1. Cronal. de 1. Aetate. is to look thereunto. As among the Antients, both Jews and Gentiles, their Kings and chief Magistrates, for many ages, were also Princes; And divers learned men do hold that the Privilege and pre∣eminence of Primogeniture,Gen. 25. & 29. Deut. 21. 2 Parel. 21. consisted principally in this, That the eldest Sons were Priests. The same proved by Authorities. Nulla est gens,Cic. l. 1. quaest. Tuscul. & De Natura Deorum. lib. 1. Plut. adversus Colotem. saith Cicero, tam fera, nulla tam immanis, cujus mentem non imbuerit deorum colendorum Religio. And Plu∣tarch writing against a certain Atheist of his time, saith thus, If you travel far Countries, you may chance to finde some Cities without Learning, without Kings, without Riches, without Money; But a Citie without Temples, and without gods and Sacrifices, no man yet hath ever seen. And finally, Aristotle having numbred
divers things necessary to a Common-wealth, addeth these words,Arist. lib. 7. Polit. cap. 8. Quintum & Primum. Circa rem Divinam cultus, quod sa∣cerdotium Sacrificiúmque vocant. The absurd Atheism of our time in Politicks. And therefore we see how false and impious is the opinion of divers Atheists of our time, who affirm, That Religion ought not to be so greatly respected in a Prince, as though it were his chiefest care, or the matter of most importance in his Government: False and impious opinion, specially a∣mong Christians, who have so much the greater obligation to take to heart this matter of Religion, by how much grea∣ter light and knowledge they have of God. And for this cause also in all the Princes Oaths taken at their Admission (as before hath beenin the fourth Chapt. recited) the first and principal point of all other is about Religion and maintenance thereof; not only by themselves, but also by their Lievtenants, &c. The Oath given by the Emperor Justinian, to all his Governors to take at their Reception. And the Civil Law yieldeth a very solemn Form of an Oath which the Emperor Justinian was wont to give to all his Governors, &c. of Countries, &c. before they could be admitted to their Charges:An. 560. Collat. 2. Novel. Constit. Justin. 8. tit. 3. which is as followeth, Juro per Deum omnipotentem & filium ejus unigenitum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum & Spiritum Sanctum; & per Sanctam gloriosam Dei genitricem & semper-virginem Mariam, & per quatuor Evan∣gelia quae in manibus meos teneo, & per Sanctos Archangelos Mi∣chaëlem & Gabriëlem, puram conscientiam, germanúmque ser∣vitium me servaturum sacratissimis nostris Dominis Justiniano & Theodosiae conjugi ejus, occasione traditae mihi ab eorum pietate administrationis. Et quod communicator sum sanctissimae Dei Ca∣tholicae
& Apostolicae Ecclesiae, & nullo modo vel tempore adversa∣bor ei, nec alium quocunque permittam quantum possibilitatem ha∣beam: Et si verò non haec omnia servàvero, recipiam omnia incom∣moda hìc & in futuro seculo in terribili judicio magni Domini Dei & salvatoris nostris Jesu Christi, & habebo partem cum Juda, & cum lepra Geizi, & cum tremore Cain, in & super poenis quae lege eorum pietatis continentur, ero Subjectus. Why Princes should be endued with Religion. This Oath did all the Governors of Christian Countries take in old time: By which Oath, and the other Oaths which Emperors and Kings did make themselves at their admission about this point; we may see that it is their chiefest and highest end, and office, to assist their Subjects to the attain∣ing of their supernatural end, by knowing and serving God in this life; For that otherwise God should draw no other fruit or commodity out of humane Common-wealths, than of an assembly of brutish creatures. He that wanteth it, is guilty of high Treason against God. And therefore whatsoever Prince or Magistrate doth not help his Subjects to this end, omitteth the first and princi∣pal part of his charge, and committeth high Treason a∣gainst his Lord and Master, in whose place he is; and con∣sequently is not fit for that place and dignitie, though he should perform the other two parts of Justice and Valor ne∣ver so well.
Lack of Religion the chiefest Cause and justest to exclude a Prince. Whereof it ensueth, That nothing in the world can so justly exclude an Heir apparent from his Succession, as want of Religion; nor any cause whatsoever justifie and clear the conscience of the Common-wealth, or of particular men, that in this cause should resist his entrance, as if they judge him faultie in this point. If a Marriage may be dissolved, much more a bare Betrothing, such as is between an Heir apparent and a Com∣mon-wealth. St.1 Cor. 7. Paul determineth plainly, That if two Gentiles mar∣ried together in their Gentilitie (which none denieth to be true marriage, for so much as concerneth the Civil Con∣tract) and afterward the one of them being made a Christi∣an, the other would not live with his partie, or if he do, yet not without blaspheming of God, and tempting him to sin; In this case he teacheth, That it is sufficient to break and dis∣solve utterly this heathen marriage; and that the Christian may marrie again; and this only for the want of Religion in the other party:Dig. l. 23. tit. 1 lib. 8. & 10. Which being so in actual marriage al∣ready made & consummate; how much more may it serve to undo a bare betrothing, which is the case of a Pretender only to a Crown, as before hath been shewed.
Whether Difference in Religion be In∣fidelitie. But some may say that St. Paul speaketh of an Infidel or Heathen, that denieth Christ plainly; which is not the case of a Christian Prince, though he be somwhat different in Religion. To which is answered, That supposing there is but one only Religion that can be true among Christians, as both Reason and Athanasius his Creed doth plainly teach us; and moreover seeing, that to me there can be no other Faith or Religion available for my salvation, than only that which I my self do believe,Act. 23. for that mine own Conscience must testifie for me,1 Cor. 8. or against me:2 Cor. 5. certain it is,1 Pet. 3. that unto me and my Conscience he which in any Point believeth o∣therwise than I do, and standeth wilfully in the same, is an Infidel; for that he believeth not that which in my Faith and Conscience is the only and sole truth, whereby he must be saved. And so long as I have this opinion of him, albeit his Religion were never so true, I shall do against my Con∣science, and sin damnably in the sight of God, to prefer him to a Charge, where he may draw many other to his own Er∣rors and Perdition, wherein I do perswade my self that he remaineth. How he that doth against his Conscience sinneth. And this Point is founded upon that which St. Paul saith against such Christians,Rom. 4. as being invited to the Banquets of the Gentiles,1 Cor. 8. & 10. did eat the meats offered to Idols, (which themselves do judge to be unlawful to eat) which he saith was a damnable sin; not for that the thing in it self was un∣lawful, but for that they did judge it so, and yet did the
contrary;S. Chryst. hom. 36. in h. Epist. Orig. l. 10. And the reason he yieldeth presently, Quia non ex fide; omne autem quod non est ex fide est peccatum: Doing a thing (though in it self indifferent) against their own Conscience,Theod. in hunc locum. which must be their witness at the latter day. How dangerous a sin, to favor a Pretender of a contrary Religion. Now to apply this to the matter of England, I affirm and hold, That for any man to give his Help or Consent to∣wards the making of a King, whom he judgeth or believeth to be faultie in Religion, how good or bad soever he be, or of what side soever the truth be, it is a most grievous and damnable sin. And is guilty of all the evils, miseries, and calamities which may ensue by his Government, whether they do so or no; Because knowing in his belief that he is like or in disposition to bring all those evils: yet he doth further, or not resist him. How far it is also against Wisdom and Policie to prefer a Prince of a con∣trary Religion. Moreover, besides the matter of Conscience, It cannot in Policie, but be great folly and over-sight for a man to promote to a Kingdom, wherein himself must live, one of a contrary Religion to himself: For let the bargains, agree∣ments, and promises be never so great, yet seeing the Prince once settled, must needs proceed according to the principles of his own Religion: it followeth also that he must come quickly to break with the other Partie: And so many Jea∣lousies, Suspitions, Accusations, &c. will light upon him, as not only he shall not be capable of such Preferments, Ho∣nors,
and Charges, which men may deserve and desire in their Common-wealths; but also he shall be in continual danger, and subject to a thousand molestations and injuries: and so, before he beware, will become to be accompted an e∣nemy, or backward man: Which to remedy, he must either dissemble deeply, and against his own Conscience make shew to favor and set forward that which in his heart he doth de∣test (which is the greatest calamity and miserie of all other) or else to avoid this everlasting perdition, he must break with all the temporal commodities of this life, and leave the benefits which his Country might yield him: And this is the ordinary end of all such men, how soft and sweet soëver the beginnings be. The Conclusion of the whole Speech. That the next Heir after the Queen, must needs be verie Doubt∣ful. And therefore to conclude all this Speech, Seeing there be so great inconveniencies and dangers, in respect both of God and man, body and Soul, to advance to the Crown a Prince of contrary Religion; And considering that in Eng∣land there is so great diversitie of Religions, as the world knoweth, between these Parties and Factions that have to Pretend or admit the next Prince after Her Majestie that now is: Calling to mind also the great Libertie, Scope, and Au∣thoritie which the Common-wealth hath to determine, even against the clear right of Succession: And laying finally be∣fore our eies the manifold and different Acts of Christian
Realms, before mentioned, in this affair. It appeareth (as it was propounded in the beginning) That it is a very doubtful case who shall be the next Prince after the Queen: And much more, if above all this it be proved also, (as it shall be in the Second Book) that among such as do or may pretend of the Blood Royal at this day, their true Successi∣on, and next Propinquitie by birth is also incertain and dis∣putable. FINIS. CAP. I. BOOKS WRITTEN 1. BY one Hales,1. sirnamed Clubfoot, Clerk of the Hamp. in which the Lord Keeper Bacon was thought to have a hand; and Sir William Cecil a privitie. 2. In favor of the Lady Katharine Gray, daughter of the Lady Frances, Dutchess of Suffolk, the daughter of Marie, yonger daughter of Henry 7. to prefer her before the Scot discended of Margaret the elder daughter. 3. Because he was a Stranger or Alien;1. therefore not to in∣herit by Law.
4. Henry 8.2. had authority given him by two Parlaments of 28. and 36. to dispose of the Succession by his last Will; and ordained, (his own issue failing) that the off-spring of Mary should be preferred before that of Margaret. 5. Against this one Morgan a Divine of Oxford (with the advice of Judge Brown,II. as it was thought) wrote, first to clear the Queen of Scots from her Husbands death: 2 hand∣led her Title to our Crown: 3 against the Book of Knox, of the Monstrous Government of Women. 6. And John Leisley,III. Bishop of Ross in Scotland, confuteth the first point: 1 That the Statute that beareth the inheri∣tance of Aliens (made 25 Edw. 3.) is only to be understood of particular men's inheritance: 2 There is express excepti∣on of the King's Children, and Off-spring, in the Statute: 3 The Practice both before and since the Conquest to the contrary. 7. The second: If Henry 8. made such a Testament, it could not hold in Law; But that he made it not, besides many pro∣babilities, the testimonies of the Lord Paget, Sir Edw. Mon∣tague, Lord Chief Justice; and William Clark, who set the King's stamp to the Writing, avowed before the Council and Parlament in Queen Maries time, That the testament was signed after the King was past sens and memory.
8. Robert Heghington,IV. Secretary to the Earle of North. writeth in favor of the King of Spain, as next Heir to the House of Lancaster. Another writeth in the behalf of the Dukes of Parma,V. as next Heir of Portugal;VI. another for the Infanta of Spain as the Heir of Brittanie. CAP. II. Of the Succession of the Crown from the Conquest, unto Edward the Third's time. The issue of VVilliam the Conquerer. WILLIAM the Conqueror had four Sons, and five Daughters. Sons, 1. Robert, Duke of Normandie: 2. Richard died in his youth: 3. William Rufus: 4. Henry the first. Daughters, 1. Sicilie, a Nun: 2. Constantia, wife of Alain Fergant, Duke of Britanie: 3, Adela, or Alice, wife of Stephen, Earle of Bloys, &c. The other two died yong. Robert, Duke of Normandie. Robert of Normandie, and his Son William, were ruined
by Henry 1. Robert pined away in the Castle of Cardiff; William slain before Alost in Flanders, whereof he was Earl, by an arrow. Henry 1. Of all the Children of Henry 1. Mande first married to Henry 5. Emperor, had issue Henry 2. by Geoffrey Plantagenet, Duke of Anjou, &c. her second Husband; he Reigned after King Stephen. The beginning of the House of Britanie. Constantia, the Conquerors second Daughter, had issue Conan 2. le Gros; who had issue Hoel, and Bettha, wife of Eudo Earle of Porrhet in Normandie (her Father made her his Heir on his death bed, disadvowing Howel) she had issue Co∣nan 3. He, Constantia wife to Geoffrey third Son to Henry 2. by whom she had Arthur, whom King John his Uncle put from the Crown of England, and murthered. After which Con∣stantia married Guy Vicount of Touars, a Britan: and their issue have continued till this, in the infanta of Spain, and the Dutchess of Savoy her sister; whose Mother was sister unto the last King of France. Anna the Heir of Britanie, had by Lewis the 12. of France, one Daughter, Claudia; of whom and Francis the first, came Henry 2. whose Daughter was Mother to the Infanta, &c.
King Stephen. Adela, or Alice, the Conquerors third Daughter, had is∣sue Stephen Earle of Bouloyne, chosen King after Henry 1. before Mande his Daughter, because a Woman; and before her Son Henry 2. because he was but a Child, and a degree further off from the Conqueros, but especially by force and friends; whereby he prevented also the Duke of Britain, Son to his Mothers eldest sister. He had two sons, who left no issue; and Mary, wife to the Earle of Flanders, whose right, if any, is discended to the Spaniard. Henry 2. his Sons. Henry 2. had issue by Eleonora, the Heir of Aquitaine, Wil∣liam, who died yong. Henry Crowned in his Fathers time, and died without issue: 3. Richard Coeur de Lyon, who died without issue: 4. Geoffrey who married Constance the Heir of Britain, as aforesaid: 5. John, the King, who had issue Henry the third. Henry 2. his Daughters. His Daughters were, 1. Eleonora married to Alphonso 9. of Castile: 2. to Alexis the Emperor: 3. to the Duke of Sax∣onie: 4. to the Earle of Tholouse. Eleonora had Henry of Castile, who died without issue; and Blanche, married to Lewis of France, of the Race of Valois, whose issue continueth: and Berenguela married to the Prince of Leon; whose Son Ferdinando, by the death of his Uncle
Henry without issue was chosen King of Castile, before Saint Lewis the son of Blanche aforesaid, because a stran∣ger. 16. The right which France had to Aquitain, Poictiers and Normandie, came to them by the aforesaid Blanche; who was married thither, on condition to have for her dower all that John had lost in France, which was almost all hee had. Henry 3. his Issue. Henry 3. had Edward 1; hee Edw. 2. hee Edw. 3. and Ed∣mund Crook-back Earl or Duke of Lancaster; whose heir, Lady Blanch, married John of Gant the third son of Edw. 3. from whom came the hous of Lancaster. Also Beatrix mar∣ried to John 2. Duke of Britain, from whom descended the Infantas Mother. That Edward Crook-back was not elder then Edward 1. Edward Crook-back was not Edw. 1. elder brother, and put by onely for his deformitie; 2. hee was born 18 Junii, 1245; and Edward 16 Junii, 1239. (Matth. West. who lived at the same time;) 2. hee was a wise Prince, and much imploied by his father and brother in their wars; 3. his father advan∣ced him in England, and would have made him King of Na∣ples and Sicilie; 4. having the charge of the Realm at his father's death, and his brother absent; hee attempted no in∣novation; nor hee, nor any of his children made any claim to the Crown after that; 5. If hee had been elder, the title
of Lancaster in John of Gant his Issue, whose mother was heir unto Edmund, had been without contradiction; nor could the house of York have had any pretence of right. The Issue of Edward Crook-back. Henry the second, Earl of Lancaster and grand-childe to the aforesaid Edmund, was created Duke of Lancaster by Ed∣ward 3. Hee had but one childe, the Ladie Blanch, wife of John of Gant, by whom hee became also Duke of Lancaster. His three sisters were matched, one to the Lord Maubery, of whom the Howards of Norfolk; Joane 2. Mary married to the Earl of Northumberland; from whom the now-Earl: 3. Eleonor, married to the Earl of Arundel, of whom the late Earle descended. CAP. III. The Succession from Edward 3. The houses of Lancaster and York. Edward 3. his Issue. EDward the third had five sons; 1. the Black Prince (hee Richard second, in whom his line ceased) 2 Lionel Duke of Clarence; 3. John of Gant, Duke of Lancaster by his wife Blanche; 4 Edward of Langley Duke of York; 5. Tho∣mas of Woodstock Duke of Glocester.
The Title of the Hous of York. Lionel of Clarence had one onely daughter and heir, Phi∣lippe, married to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March; they Ro∣ger; hee Anne Mortimer, married to Richard Earl of Cam∣bridg, second son of Edmund L. of York: His son Ri∣chard, by the death of his Uncle (slain at Agincourt) came to bee Duke of York (his father of Cambridg, beeing exe∣cuted for a Conspiracie against Henry 5.) And was the first of the hous of York that challenged the Crown, and died in the quarrel: His son was Edward the 4. The Issue of the Duke of Glocester. Thomas of Woodstock had onely one childe, Anne, married to the Lord Stafford; whose issue came after, in regard of this marriage (for Thomas was Earl of Buckingham too) to bee Duke of Buckingham, som of whose blood are yet in England. The Issue of John of Gant by his first Wife. John of Gant had three Wives; 1, Blanch the heir of Lan∣caster aforesaid, by whom hee had Henry 4. and Philippe, married to John King of Portingal; from whom are lineal∣ly descended such as at this day claim interest in that Crown; and Elisabeth, married to John Holland Duk of Exceter; whose grand-childe Henry, left onely Anne, married to Sir Thomas Nevil Knight, from whom the Earl of Westmerland is lineal∣ly descended.
By his second Wife. By his second, Ladie Constance, daughter of Peter King of Castile, hee had onely one daughter Katharine, married to Henry the third, King of Castile; of whom the King of Spain that now is, is lineally desended. By his third Wife. Henry 7. his Title. His third, Katharine Swinford, daughter to a Knight of Henault; and attending on his wife Blanch, hee used as his Concubine in his wife Constance's time, and begat of her three sons and one daughter; and after married her to Swinford an English Knight; who dead, and his wife Constance also, hee married her, Anno 1396, and caused his said children by her to bee legitimated by Parlament, Anno 1397. Henry 7. his Title from Lancaster. His sons were, 1. John Duke of Somerset; 2. Thomas Duke of Excester; 3. Henry Bishop and Cardinal of Win∣chester: His daughter Jane married to the Earl of Westmer∣land. The Issues of all these were soon spent, except of John of Somerset, who had two sons, John and Edmund: John one onely daughter, Margaret, married to Edmund Tid∣der Earl of Richmond, by whom hee had Henry 7. Edmund and his three sons all died in the quarrel of the Hous of Lan∣caster without Issue.
The line of Clarence, and Title of the Earl of Huntington. George Duke of Clarence, second brother of Edw. 4. had Issue Edw. Earl of Warwick, put to death by Henry 7. and Margaret Countess of Salisbury, married to Sir Richard Poole of Wales, by whom hee had Henry, Arthur, Geoffroy, and Reynald (after Cardinal) Henry Lo. of Montague (put to death, with his mother, by H. 8.) had Katharine married to the Earl of Huntington, they the now Earl, &c. and Wene∣fred married to Sir Tho. Barrington. Arthur, Marie, married to Sir John Stanny; and Margaret to Sir Tho. Fitzherbert. Geoffrey, Geoffrey Poole; hee Arthur and Geoffrey, which yet live in Italie. Henry 7. his Issue. The Title of Scotland, and of the Ladie Arbella. Henry 7. had by the eldest daughter of Edw. 4. (for of all the other three remaineth no issue) besides Hen. 8. Marga∣ret, first married to the K. of Scots; they James 5. who Ma∣ry, mother to the now King. After married to the Earl of Anguis; they Margaret, married to the Earl of Lenox; they Henry married to the last Queen, and murthered 1566. and Charles married to Elisa. Ca4dish, by whom the Ladie Arbella. The Title of the Lord Beacham, and his brother. Marie the second daughter, first married to Lewis 12. of France, without issue; then to Charles Brandon Duke of Suf∣folk;
they Francis, married to Henry Gray Marquis Dorset, after Duke of Suffolk, beheaded by Q. Mary; they Jane, mar∣ried to Dudley, (both beheaded) Katharine, first married to the Earl of Pembroke; and left by him to the Earl of Hart∣fort (as themselves affirmed) in the Tower: from whom descendeth the Lord Beacham, and Edward Seymer his bro∣ther. The Title of the Hous of Derbie. Eleonor second daughter to Ch. Brandon and the Queen of France, was married to Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland: they had issue Margaret, married to Henry Earl of Derbie: who had issue the last and the now Earl. CAP. IV. The Controversie between the Houses of Lancaster and York. The Pretence of the Hous of York. BY Richard Duke of York, son of Richard Earl of Cam∣bridg aforesaid, &c. That considering hee had by de∣scent joined in him the right aswell of Lionel Duke of Cla∣rence, second son to Edw. 3. as of Edward Duke of York, the fourth son of Edw. 3. hee was to bee preferred before the Hous of Lancaster, claiming onely from John of Gant the third son of Edward 3.
Richard 2. Deposed. Edward 3. in his old age for the love hee bare to the black Prince, confirmed the Succession by Parlament to Richard 2. his son; and caused the rest of his sons to swear there∣unto. Richard 2. for his misgovernment was deposed by common consent, and Henry 4. chosen in his place; which himself and his issue possessed about 60 years. The question is, Whether King Richard were rightfully deposed or no. That a King may bee deposed on just causes. First that a King on just causes may bee deposed, is proved by Reason: becaus the rule beeing given by the Common-wealth, on condition of just government; that much vio∣lated, the condition is broken, and the same Common-wealth may take the forfeiture. This proved by the auto∣ritie of all Law-makers, Philosophers, Divines and Gover∣nors of Common-wealths; and by example of divers Depo∣sitions, which God himself hath blessed with good suc∣cess. Proved by reasons and examples of Divinitie. An ill Prince is an armed enemie, with his feet set on the Realm's head; whence hee cannot bee plucked but by force of Arms, Object. God may cut him off by sickness, or other∣wise; and therefore wee are to attend his good pleasure. Answ. God alwaies bindeth not himself to work miracles, nor often with extraordinary means; but hath left upon earth, unto men and Common-wealths, power to do justice
in his Name upon offendors. Examples hereof are Ehud stirr'd up by God to kill Eglon, King of the Moabites by a stratageme, Judg. 3. and the Philistins to kill, David to per∣secute Saul; Jeroboam to rebell against Roboam the son of So∣lomon, 2 Reg. 11. & 12. Jehu to depose Joram and Q. Jezabel his mother, 4. Reg. 9. The Captains of Jerusalem at the persuasion of Jehoiada the high-Priest, to conjure against Q. Athalia, whom they deposed, and Joash chosen in her room, 4. Reg. 11. All which hee might have removed with∣out blood-shed, if hee would: But hee appointed men to work his Will by these violent means, to deliver that Com∣mon-wealth from oppression, and for the greater terror of all bad Princes. Allegations of the Lancastrians that King Ri∣chard 2. was justly Deposed. Just causes of Deposing Richard 2. were; Hee murthered his Uncle the Duke of Glocester without form of Law or process. Hee put to death the Earl of Arundel, banished Warwick, Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster (and after King) whose goods and inheritance descending to the said Henry from his Father, hee wrongfully seized on. Hee suffered the Earl of Oxford, his minion, to put away his wife, a goodly young Ladie, daughter of Isabell his father's sister, and to marrie another openly to her disgrace. And in the last (evil) Parlament hee made, would needs have all abso∣lute autoritie granted to 6 or 7 his favorites to determine of all matters. Grieved with these exorbitant indignities, the more or better part of the Realm called home by their Let∣ters Henry 4. deposed Richard 2. by Act of Parlament, by his own confession of unworthie Government, and his vo∣luntarie resignation of the Crown to the said Henry by pub∣lick instrument. All this without blood-shed: And in al∣most all this, Edmund L. D. of York, (the head of that fa∣milie,
together with Edward Duke of Aumale his eldest son, and Richard Earle of Cambridge his yonger (the Grand-fa∣ther of Edward 4.) assisted the said Henry. That Henry 4. had more right to Succeed unto Richard 2. than Edmond Mor∣timer heir of Clarence; much more any other. King Richard 2. deposed, the question is, Whether Ed∣mond Mortimer then alive (his Father Roger being slain in Ire∣land a little before) Nephew removed of Lionel Duke of Clarence; or Henry Duke of Lancaster, son of John of Gant should have Succeeded in right. For Henry is alleged; his being neerer to the former King by two degrees, and proxi∣mitie of Blood (though not of the elder Line) is to be, (or hath been) preferred in these cases. 2. His Title came by a Man, the others by a Woman (not so much favored by Law nor Reason.) 3. The said Edmond being offered the Crown by Richard Earle of Cambridge (who had married his Sister Anne) and other Noblemen, at Southampton; he judged it against equitie, discovered the Treason to Henry the fifth, by whose command those Noblemen were execu∣ted, 1415. Thirty years after which; Richard Duke of York, son of the aforesaid Earle, and Anne (for Edmond her bro∣ther died without issue) set his Title on foot. And whereas Roger Mortimer, Father of this Edmond was declared Heir ap∣parent by a Parlament 1382, that was done by Richard 2. from the hatred he bore to John of Gant, and his son Henry; (rather than for the goodness of the others Title:) the cause whereof was, Because immediately after the death of the Black Prince, divers learned and wise men held opinion, That John of Gant, eldest son of Edward 3. then living should rather succeed, than Richard, jure Propinquitatis. This made
the old King Edward 3. confirm the Succession to Richard 2. by Parlament, and the Oaths of his Uncles, and made the yong King Richard 2. hold first, and his son in jealousie, and hatred ever after, as distrusting the likelihoods of their Title. Declaration of the Heir Apparent in the Princes life, being Partial, no sure president. Partial establishing of Succession by Parlament, is no ex∣traordinary thing with Princes, which yet most commonly have been to little purpose. So did Ricbard 3. cause John de la Pole, Earle of Lincoln, and Son to his sister Elisabeth, Dutchess of Suffolk, to be declared Heir apparent; thereby excluding his Brother Edward's four Daughters, &c. So did Henry 8. prefer the issue of his yonger sister, before that of his elder. So did Edward 6. declare the Lady Jane Gray, his cozen Germain removed, to be his Heir and Successor; ex∣cluding his own two sisters: Such, say they, was the afore∣said Declaration of Roger Mortimer by Richard 2. to as little purpose, as from little equity. Uncle preferred before the Nephew divers times. Contra. Sect. 83. That John of Gant should have in right succeeded his fa∣ther, rather than Richard himself, as neerer to his father, is proved by the course of divers Kingdoms, where the Uncle was preferred before the Nephew. 1. In Naples (much a∣bout the same time) Robert before Charles the son of Martel
his elder Brother. 2. In Spain, Don Sancho Bravo before the Children of Prince Don Alonso de la Cerda (from whom the House of Medina Celi is discended) by sentence of Don Alon∣so the wise, and of all the Realm and Nobility, Anno 1276. 3. In the Earldom of Arthois, Mande, before Robert, son to her Brother Philip, by sentence of Philip le Bel of France, confirmed by the Parlament of Paris, and by his Successor Philippes de Valois, whom he the said Robert had much assisted in the recovery of France from the English. 4. In Britanie, John Breno Earle of Montfort, before Jane Countess of Bloys, Daughter and Heir of Guy his elder brother, by sentence of Edward 3. and the State of England, who put him in posses∣sion of that Dukedom. 5. In Scotland, where albeit Ed∣ward 1. of England gave sentence for John Baliol, Nephew to the elder Daughter, excluding thereby Robert Bruse, son to the yonger; yet that sentence was held to be unjust in Scot∣land, and the Crown restored to Robert Bruse his son, whose posterity holds it to this day. 6. The like whereof in Na∣ples, Lewis Prince of Taranto, son to Philip, prevailed be∣fore Joan the Neece of Robert aforesaid, who was Philip's el∣der brother (though Philip died before Robert) because he was a man, and a degree neerer to his Grand-father than Joan. 7. And in England it self, Henry 1. preferred before William, son and Heir of Robert of Normandie, his elder bro∣ther. And King John preferred before Arthur, D. of Britanie, the son and Heir of his elder brother Geoffrey, because he was neerer to Richard his brother, then dead, than was Arthur: Which Right of his the English inclined still to acknow∣ledge and admit, and thereupon proclaimed him King; not∣withstanding that the French, and other Forrein Princes of stomach, opposed themselves against it.
King John rightfully preferred before his Bro∣ther Arthur. Against this last: King Richard when he was to go to the Holy Land, caused his Nephew Arthur to be declared Heir apparent to the Crown, thereby shewing his Title to be the better. Answ. 1. It was not by Act of Parlament of Eng∣land, for Richard was in Normandie, when he made it. 2. Richard did it rather to repress the amhitious Humor of John in his absence. 3. This Declaration was never admit∣ted in England, but renounced by consent of the Nobility in his absence. 4. Richard himself at his return disadvow∣ed it, appointing John to be his Successor, by his last Will, and caused the Nobles to swear Fealtie unto him, as to his next in blood. The Opinion of Civil Lawyers touching the Right of the Uncle and Nephew. Contra. Sect. 83. This Controversie divided all the Lawyers in Christen∣dom; Baldus, Oldratus, Panormitanus, &c. for the Nephew: Bartolus, Alexander, Decius, Alciatus, Cujatius, &c. for the Uncle: Baldus himself at length concludeth, That seeing rigor of Law runneth only with the Uncle, being properly neerest in blood by one degree, and that only indulgence and custom permitteth the Nephew to represent his Father's place; whensoëver the Uncle is born before the Nephew, and his elder brother dieth before his Father (as in the case of John of Gant and Richard 2.) he may be preferred: for
the elder brother cannot give or transmit that thing to his Son, which is not in himself before his Father die; nor can his son represent what the Father never had. The Common-Law dealeth not with the Point of Succession to the Crown. Touching the Common Law; the right and interest to the Crown is not expresly decided in it, nor is it a Plea sub∣ject to the rules thereof, but superior, and more eminent; nor are the Maxims thereof alwayes of force in this, as in others. As in the case of Dower, Copercenars, and Tenan∣cie by the courtesie. No more ought they to be in this case of inheritance; as by the former eight Presidents hath been shewed. The Common Lawyers then refer this point of the Crown to Custom, nothing being in effect written by them touching it. Only the best of our old ones favored that title of Lancaster: and Chancelor Fortescue, and Sir Tho. Thorope, chief Baron of the Exchequer in Henry 6. his time, were much afflicted for it by the contrary faction. The Princes of York often Attainted. The Princes of York forfeited their Right by their Con∣spiracies, and Attainder thereupon; as R. Earle of Cam∣bridge, put to death therefore by the Judgment of his Peers, his elder brother, the Duke of York, being one of the Jury that condemned him. His son Richard, Duke of York, was also attainted of treason (after many oaths to Henry 6. sworn and broken by him) and his son Ed. 4. with the rest of his off-spring to the ninth degree, at a Parlament at Coventry, Anno 1459. But the House of Lancaster was never attainted of any such crime.
The Hous of York came to the Crown by Violence and Crueltie. Edward 4. entred by violence, wilfully murthering, be∣sides divers of the Nobilitie, Henry 6. a good and holy King, and his son Prince Edward, dispossessing the Hous that had held the Crown about 60 years together; in which time their Title had been confirmed by many Parlaments, Oaths, Ap∣probations, and publick Acts of the Common-wealth, and the consent of all forreign Nations. All which had been enough to have autorized a bad Title. Those of Lancaster better Princes than those of York. The 4 Henries of the hous of Lancaster were far more worthie Princes, then the 4 Princes of the Houses of York; as Edw. 4. Rich. 3. Hen. 8. Edw. 6. And if the affairs of any the former, especially the 3d, succeeded not, the chief caus thereof was the sedition, rebellion and troubles raised by those of York, and their contention against the Princes of the Houses of Lancaster. The Cruelty of the Princes of York, one to the other. The Princes of York have not been onely cruel to their enemies, but to themselvs too; embrewing their hands in their own blood: Then when they had ruined th'other,
George Duke of Clarence conspired against Edw. 4. his own brother; with whom reconciled, Edw. caused him after∣wards to bee murthered at Calis. Rich. 3. murthered his two young Nephews; and Henry 8. a great number of that Hous, as Edmund de la Poole his Cousin German; Henry Duke of Buckingham, his great Ant's son: extinguishing that, and ruining this familie. Also Henry Courtney Marquis of Exceter, his own Cousin german, the Ladie Margaret Countess of Salisbury, and daughter to George D. of Cla∣rence; and her son the L. Montague, &c. The kindness of the Princes of Lancaster. But the Love, Union, Confidence, Faithfulness, Kinde∣ness and Loialtie of the Princes of Lancaster towards th'other was very notable, as in the 2 brothers of Henry 4; and the 3 brothers of Henry 5. and in five or six Dukes of Somerset, their near Cosens; which argueth both a marvellous con∣fidence those Princes had in that quarrel, and a great bles∣sing of God unto the whole familie that agree'd so well. The Successes of such noble Houses as fol∣lowed either partie. Another blessing seemeth to bee bestowed on them; That no antient great Houses are remaining at this day in Eng∣land, but such as chiefly took their parts; as, Arundel, Ox∣ford, Northumberland, Westmerland and Shrewsbury: whereas the chief partakers of the other Faction are all de∣stroied; as, Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, De la Poole Duke of Suffolk, th' Earl of Salisbury, th' Earl of Warwick, and many others.
CAP. III. Examination of the Title of the Hous of Scotland. Sect. 28. Allegations for the K. of Scots. 1. THat hee is descended of the eldest daughter of Hen∣ry 7. without bastardie, or other lawful impediment; and therefore hath the right of prioritie. 2. The benefit would accrew unto the Common-wealth, by the uniting of England and Scotland, a point long sought for. 3. The establishing of true Religion in England. Hee is not of the Hous of Lancaster, but rather of York. Hee is not descended truly of the Hous of Lancaster, be∣caus not of the Ladie Blanch, the true heir thereof: but of Kathathine Swinford, whose children were unlawfully be∣gotten; (though afterwards legitimated by Parlament) so that his best Title is by York, inferior to that of Lancaster, and therefore is to com in after them of that Hous.
Forrein birth not just impediment in Succession to the Crown of England. Hee is Forrein born, and therefore excluded by the Laws of England from inheriting within the land. Answ. 1. This Assertion in an universal sens is fals; for a stranger may pur∣chase, and inherit by the right of his wife: 7 & 9 Edw. 4. 11 & 14 Henrie. 7. 2. The Statute of 25 Edw. 3. is to bee restrained unto proper inheritance onely: viz. That no per∣son born out of the Allegiance of England (whose father and mother were not of the same Allegiance at the time of his birth) shall not demand inheritance within the same Al∣legiance. 3. This Statute toucheth not the Crown, nor any, except express mention bee made thereof. 4. The Crown cannot properly bee called an inheritance of Allegi∣ance, or within Allegiance; beeing held immediately from God. 5. The Statute meaneth inheritance by descent one∣ly; but the Crown is a thing incorporate, and therefore go∣eth as by Succession. Now if a Prior, Dean, &c. or other head incorparate, though an alien, may inherit or demand Lands in England, notwithstanding the Statute, much more may the Inheritor to the Crown. 6. Express exception is made in the Statues of Enfants du Roi; which word cannot but include all the King's off-spring, and blood-Roial. 7. King Stephen and Henry 2. born out of the Realm, and of parents that were not of the Allegiance of England when they were born, were yet admitted to the Crown without contra∣diction: which argueth, that by the cours of the Common Law there was no such stop against Aliens; and that if the Statute would have abridged the antient libertie in this case of Succession, it would have made special mention there, which it doth not.
The King of Scots excluded by the last Will of Henry 8. Henry 8. his Will, whereby he excludeth the off-spring of Margaret S. 4. Which though somwhat infringed by the testimony of two or three. S 7. yet 'tis plain it was his own Will, because he commanded it to be drawn, written, and sealed, and never revoked it: Besides it is subscribed by many witnesses, and inrolled in the Chancery by his own com∣mand; enough to make it good against the assertion of those few, who to please the time wherein they spake, (in Queen Maries time) might say and ghess the King was past memory when his stamp was put to it. Now to make good what he did, two Acts of Parlaments, 28, & 35. of his Reign, gave him full authoritie to dispose of this Point of Succession, as he and his learned Council should think best for the Com∣mon-wealth. By a Statute made in the 27th. of Elisabeth. 27. Elisah. a Statute was made, That whosoever shall be convinced to conspire, attempt, or procure the Queens death, or is privie, or accessary to the same, shall loose all right, title, pretence, claim, or action, that they, or their heirs have, or may have to the Crown of England. Now the late Queen of Scots being attainted and executed by the authoritie of the said Parlament, and for breach of the said Statute, 'tis easie to determine what Title her Son hath, claiming only by her.
The Uniting of Scotland with England, dan∣gerous to the English, or like to be. 1. Only the increase of Subjects: but those rather to par∣ticipate the Commodities of England, than to impart any from Scotland. 2. The natural hatred of that People unto us, and their ancient inclination to joyn with our enemies the French, and Irish against us, are Arguments of great mis∣chiefs likely to ensue by that conjunction. 3. The Scot must needs hold in jealousie so many Englishmen, competitors of the Blood Royal, and therefore will fortifie himself against them by those Forrein Nations, of whom he is discended, with whom he is allyed, as the Scots, French, Danes, and uncivil Irish, which will prove intolerable to the English. 4. The King, both for his own safety, and for the love he beareth to his own Nation, will advance them, and plant them about him in chief Places of credit; which must needs breed Emulations and Controversies between them and the English: Then must he of Force secretly begin to favor and fortifie his own, to the incredible calamitie of the other, as Canutus did his Danes, and William the Conqueror his Nor∣mans, neither of them enemies to the English blood, nor e∣vil Kings, but careful of their own safeties; for herein it is impossible to be neutral. 5. The Romans with all their Power and Policie could never unite the hearts of England and Scotland in peace, nor hold the Scots and North-Irish in obedience of any authority residing in England: What then are we to hope for of this King herein?
The Religion of Scotland unpleasing to our State. His Religion is neither fit for our State, wherein Arch∣bishops, &c. and Officers of Cathedral Churches are of much dignitie; and there suppressed: nor will be pleasing to our Nobilitie, to be subject to the exorbitant and popular au∣thoritie of a few ordinary Ministers; which the King him∣self is there content to yield unto. And therefore it is like∣ly, that few will be forward to entertain that King for the reforming of Religion here, that hath no better Order in his own at home. For the Ladie Arabella. For the Ladie Arabella, is alleged, her being an equal de∣gree of Discent with the King of Scots: Her being above him, in all hopes for herself, or benefit to the English, that can be expected in an English Prince, and a Prince born in England. Against Her. Neither she, nor the Scot are properly of the House of Lancaster: and the Title of Lancaster is before the Pretence of York, ut suprà. 2. The testament of King Henry 8. bar∣reth her as well as the Scot. 3. Her Discent is not free from Bastardie, for Queen Margaret soon after the death of her first Husband married Steward Lord of Annerdale, who was a∣live long after her marriage with Anguis: and it is most cer∣tain
also, That Anguis had another Wife alive when he mar∣ried the said Queen. All this confirmed by the Lord William Howard (Father to the now Admiral) sent into Scotland by Henry 8. of purpose to enquire thereof; who reported it to King Henry, Queen Mary, and divers others. For this cause King Henry would have letted the marriage between Anguis and his Sister; and chiefly caused him to exclude her issue. 4. She is a Woman, and it were perhaps a great inconveni∣ence, that three of the weak sex should succeed one the other. 5. All her Kindred by her Father is meer Scotish. In Eng∣land she hath none but by her Mother, the Candishes: a mean Familie and Kindred for a Princess. CAP. VI. Examination of the Title of the House of Suffolk: being Darby and Hart∣ford. Sect. 29. 30. The Earle of Hartford's Children, illegitimate. THe Children of the Earle of Hartford Discending of Ladie Frances, the eldest Daughter of Charles Brandon, are proved illigitimate. 1. Because the Ladie Katharine Gray their Mother was lawful Wife to the Earle of Pembroke, (when they were born) not separated from him by lawful authority, or for any just cause; but abandoned by him, be∣cause her House was come into misery and disgrace. 2. It could never be lawfully proved that the said Earle and Ladie Katharine were married, but only by their own Assertions; not sufficient in Law: Therefore was the marriage disan∣nulled
in the Arches, by publick and definitive sentence of Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, not long after the Birth of the said Children. 3. When the Marquess of Dorset married their Grandmother the Ladie Frances, he had ano∣ther lawful Wife, sister to H. Fitz-allen, Earle of Arundel, whom he put away to obtain so great a marriage as was the Lady Frances: This bred much hate between the Marquess and Earle ever after: but the Marquess favor with K. Henry, deprived the other of all remedy. And therefore may their Mother the Lady Katharine seem illegitimate too. Bastardie in the issue of Charles Brandon. Charles Brandon had a wife alive, when he married the Queen of France, by which wife he had issue the Ladie Powyse, wife of the Lord Powyse: and this wife of his lived some time after his marriage with the Queen. Darby's Evasion. This Wife (say the Friends of Darby) died before the birth of the Lady Eleonor the yonger daughter, their an∣cestor; though after the Birth of the Lady Francis, Hart∣ford's ancestor. Hartford's Confutation of the first Bastardie. To the first Bastardy of Hartford, their Friends affirm, That the Contract between the Lady Katharine, and the Earl of Pembrook was dissolved lawfully, and judicially in the time of Queen Mary.
Hartford's evasion of the second Bastardie, in the behalf of his Second born, Edward Seymore. The Lady Katharine being found with Child, affirmed the Earle of Hartford to be the Father: Hereupon he being sent for out of France (where he was with Sir N. Throgmorton, and had got leave to travel into Italie) confessed it at his re∣turn; and both of them affirmed they were man and wife: but because they could not prove it by witnesses, and for at∣tempting such a matter with one of the Blood Royal with∣out privitie, and license of the Prince, they were both com∣mitted to the Tower: where they used means to meet after∣wards, and had the second Son Ed. Seymore. Now the first Son may be ligitimate before God, yet illegitimate before men, and therefore incapable of Succession. For the se∣cond, to be legitimate, whereas there wanteth nothing but witnesses, (for the presence of Minister is not absolutely ne∣cessary) to justifie their marriages by Law; The Queen her∣self, her Counsel, and as many as had the Examination of these parties, upon their first act, or Child-birth, are wit∣nesses unto them; besides their resolution to continue man and wife protested before them and confirmed by this effect of their second carnal meeting in the Tower.
CAP. VII. Examination of the Title of the Houses of Clarence and Britanie. Against the House of Clarence in general. THeir Claim is founded only upon the Daughter of George Duke of Clarence, yonger Brother of Ed. 4. So that as long as any lawful issue remaineth of the Daugh∣ters of the elder brother, no claim or pretence of theirs can be admitted. 2. If the pretence of Lancast. be better than that of York (as before it seemeth to be proved, S. 36. 38. 40. 42. &c.) then holdeth not this of Clarence, which is meerly of York. 3. The House of Clarence hath been of∣ten attainted; 1. In George himself. 2. In the Countess of Salisbury his Daughter, and Heir. 3. In the Lord Monta∣gue her Son and Heir: whereby their whole interests were cut off. For albeit since those attainders it hath been resto∣red in Blood, yet hath not that been sufficient to recover un∣to that House the ancient Lands and Titles of Honor there∣unto belonging: for they were forfeited to the Crown, as is also to the next in Blood unattainted, the prerogative of succeeding to the Crown: unless special mention had been made thereof in their restauration.
Against the Earle of Huntington, in favor of the Pooles. Upon the attainder of the Lord Montague with his Mo∣ther of Salisbury, all such right as they had, or might had being cut off in them, fell upon Geoffrey, brother of the said Lord. 1. Because he was not attainted. 2. He was a degree neerer unto the Duke of Clarence, (and thereby hath the Priviledge of an Uncle before the Neece, (S. 34. 40.) than the Lady Katharine. 3. He was a man, she a woman (and neither of their Fathers in possession of the thing pretended) which priviledge of Sex got the last King of Spain the King∣dom of Portugal. 4. Inconvenience of Religion; (this point altered by the death of the last Earle). First Title of the Infant; as Heir unto the House of Britain, from William the Conqueror. (Sect. 12.) She is discended of the antient Royal Blood of England: from the eldest Daughter of the Conqueror, Constance: whereof her friends infer two Consequences. 1. When the Conqueror's sons died without issue, or were made incapable of the Crown (as Henry 1. seemed to be for the violence used to his elder brother Robert, and his son William, Sect. 11.) then should the elder sister have entred before King Stephen, who was born of Alice or Adela her yonger sister.
The coming of a Woman no bar to inher: in England. Though the Salick Law seemeth to exclude her from the Crown of France; yet from the inheritance of England, Britanie, Aquitayne, &c. coming to her by Women, and fal∣ling ordinarily in Women, nor that, nor other Law exclu∣deth her. Second Title of the Infant by France, whereof she is Heir general, from Henry 2. She is Lineally descended from Eleonor the eldest daughter of Henry 2. (Sect. 15.) by whom she is Heir general of France, and thereby of England (Sect. 15.) for three reasons. 1. King John by the murther of his Nephew Arthur of Britanie, for∣feited all his states whatsoever: Now this happened four years before his son Henry 3. was born; and therefore the Crown by right should have come to the said Eleonor his el∣der sister. 2. Arthur being prisoner in the Castle of Roan, and suspecting that he should be murthered by his Uncle John, nominated the Lady Blanche, daughter and heir to Eleo∣nor to be his Heir; which were it not good, yet when he and his sister was put to death, she and her Mother were next of kinn unto them, for any more of England, (S. 12.) 3. John was actually deposed by the Barons and States of the Realm, 16 Regni sui, and Lewis of France the Husband of Blanche elected and admitted, with their whole consent: to whom they swore Fealtie and Obedience in Lon∣don, for him and his heirs, and posteritie, 1217. giving him possession of London, and the Tower, and many other im∣portant
places. Now ableit that they chose after his John's son Henry 3; Yet Titles and Interests to Kingdoms once rightly gotten, never die, but remain ever for the posterity to set a foot: so came Hugo Capetus to the Crown of France, Odo Earle of Paris his ancester, being once elected, admitted, and sworn King, though after deposed, and Charles the simple chosen. Third Title of the Infanta, from Henry 3. She is Lineally discended of Beatrix, daughter of Henry 3. (S. 17.) Now seeing that the posterity of both her brothers Edward and Edmond, (the heads of the two Houses of Lan∣caster and York) have oftentimes been attainted, and ex∣cluded from the Succession by sundry Acts of Parliament, and at this day are at contention among themselves; why may not the right of both Houses, by Composition, Peace, and Comprimise, at least, be passed over to their Sisters issue? Objections against the Infanta. 1. These her Claims are very old and worn out. 2. Her claims are but collateral by sisters. 3. She is a stranger, and Alien born. 4. Her Religion is contrary to the State. Answered by those that favor her Title. Antiquity hurteth not the goodness of Titles to King∣doms (when occasion is offered to advance them) which commonly are never presumed to die, & nullum tempus occur∣rit Regi. 2. Collateral Lines may lawfully be admitted to enter, when the direct either fail, or are to be excluded for
other just respect. 3. The point of forrein birth is suffici∣ently answered before. (Sect. 50.) 4. The impediment of other Religion is not universal, nor admitted in the judg∣ment of all men, but onely of such English as differ in Reli∣gion from her: to the rest (and those many) it will rather bee a motive to favor then hinder her title. CAP. VIII. Examination of the Houses of Spain and Portugal. The Dutchie of Lancaster belong's to Portugal. THe King of Spain is lineally descended from the two daughters of John of Gant, by his two first wives: (Sect. 23, 24.) the former whereof, (the Ladie Blanche) beeing heir of the Duchie (Sect. 19.) when the posteritie of his issue male by her came to bee exstinct (as it was in the children of H. 6.) there is no reason, but the issue of his daughters (those that claim by Portugal (Sect. 23) should succeed; at least in the inheritance of that Duchie. The Crown of England to John of Somerset, son to John of Gant. But for the right and title to the Crown of England, which came by John of Gant himself (third son of Edw. 3:
and eldest that lived when hee died) John Earl of Somerset, though begotten out of matrimonie, yet afterwards legiti∣mated (Sect. 25.) his eldest son by Katharine Swinford was to inherit before the Ladie Philippe his sister, by the Ladie Blanche. The first reason of Portugal against Somerset. Against which the favorites, of Portugal allege divers rea∣sons. 1. Beeing born out of Wedlock, and in Adulterie, (Sect. 25.) and continuing a bastard many years, hee could not bee made legitimate afterwards by Parlament, to that ef∣fect of Succession to the Crown, before Q. Philippe of Portu∣gall, and her children born before his legitimation; who thereby had vim acquisitam (as the Law saith) which could not bee taken away by any posterior Act of Parlament, without consent of the parties interessed. Second Reason. John King of Portugal married the Ladie Philippe, with condition to enjoy all prerogatives that at day were due un∣to her; which was six or seven years before his legitimati∣on. For Don Alonso and Don Edwardo, the two sons of the said John and Philippe were born in the years 1390, and 1391. And John of Gant married Katharine Swinford, and le∣gitimated her children in the years 1396, & 1397. Third Reason. The marriage of John of Gant with Katharine Swinford helpeth litle to better this legitimation; (which by the rules
of the Common and Civil Laws is but a bare deposition:) for their children were Spurii, begotten in plain Adulterie, not in fornication onely; and consequently the Privilege that the Law giveth to the subsequent mariage of the Parties, by legitimating such children as are born in simple fornication (where the parties are single) cannot take place here; nor can any legitimation equal, much less prefer the legitimated, before the lawful and legitimate by birth. The Fourth Reason alleged by the Favorers of Portugal against the Issue of John of Somerset. When Henry 6. and his son were extinguished, and Edw. 4. usurped the Crown, there remained of the Ladie Philippe, Al∣fonse the Fift, King of Portugal her Nephew; of John of So∣merset, Margaret Countess of Richmond his Neece. The Que∣stion is, which of these two Competitors of the Hous of Lancaster, and in equal degree from John of Gant, and Henry 6. should have Succession by right immediately after the death of Henry 6. Alfonso (say they) for three Reasons. First, hee was a man, and Margaret but a woman (though shee came of the man, and hee of the woman.) 2. Hee descen∣ded of the lawful and eldest daughter; shee of the younger brother legitimated. 3. Hee was of the whole blood to H. 6. and shee but of the half: In which regard hee was to bee pre∣ferred, at least, in all the interests of Succession which were to bee had from Henry 4. onely, and were never in his father John of Gant, which were many; as his right gotten by arms, upon the evil government of the former King; his Election by Parlament, and Coronation by the Realm, &c. (see for the rest Sect. 35. 43.) Besides when King Richard 2. was dead, hee was next in degree of propinquitie unto him of any man living; as hath before been proved, Sect. 36.
CAP. IX. The Genealogie, and Controversies of Portugal. 76. The Genealogie of Portugal. Emanuel had by one wife six children. 1. John 3. hee John, that died in his father's time; hee Sebastian, slain by the Moors in Barbarie. 2. Isabel Grandmother to the present King of Spain. 3. Beatrix, Grandmother to the Duke of Savoy. 4. Lewis, father of Don Antonio, lately deceased in England. 5. Henry Cardinal, and after King. 6. Edw. father of Mary Duchess of Parma, who hath two sons, Ra∣nuntius Duke of Parma, and Edward a Cardinal, and father of Katharine, Duchess of Bragança yet living; whose Issue is, Theodosius Duke of Bragança, Edward, Alexander and Phi∣lippe, young Princes of great exspectation. Five pretenders unto the Crown of Portugal. Sebastian beeing dead, Henry son of Emanuel succeeded; who beeing old, unmarried, unlikely to have issue; before him was debated the right of five Pretenders to the Succession of that Crown; vid. Philippe of Spain, Philibert Duke of Sa∣voy, the Duke of Parma (his mother beeing then deceased) Don Antonio, and the Duchess of Bragança: the three first by their Deputies, the fourth (Anthonio) by himself, and for
himself; the fift by her husband the Duke and his learned Council. Of these, the Duke of Savoy was soon excluded, becaus his mother was younger sister to K. Philip's mother, and himself younger then Philippe. Don Antonio a Bastard, and excluded. Don Antonio was also rejected and pronounced a bastard by the said King Henry, for many reasons. 1. Hee was taken to bee so all his father's life time, and that without question. 2. Certain Decrees coming out from Rome, in the time of Julius 3. against the promotion of bastards; hee sued to the said Pope to bee dispensed withall. 3 His father Don Lewis hath oftentimes testified by word and writing that hee was his Bastard, and signified asmuch in his last will. 4. It is likely that if Lewis had married his mother, who was base in birth, and of the Jewish (as som stories affirm) hee would have made som of his friends and kindred acquainted there∣with, as a matter so much important to them to know; which hee never did: though the King avowed himself was present with him at his death. 5. If hee had been legitimate, why did hee not pretend the Succession before the said King, next after the death of Sebastian, beeing son to his elder brother, as well as was Sebastian. 6. Whereas hee had produced wit∣nesses (vid. his mother, sister, with her husband, and two others) to prove, that his father before his death had mar∣ried with his mother in secret: the said K. Cardinal affirmed, that upon their examination hee had found they were sub∣orned by Anthonio: becaus they agreed not in their reports, and becaus som of them confessed they were suborned: where∣upon hee hath caused them to be punished.
If not, why not Duke of Lanc. Seeing that in England wee hold the said Don Anthonio for true King of Portugal, I see not how wee can deny his chil∣dren their right, at least to the Duchie of Lancaster: whereof whosoëver is right heir of Portugal, should bee rightest heir, (Sect. 70.). Allegations to prove the Duke of Parm's right. That hee represented his mother, and shee her father, Lo. Edward, who, had hee been alive, had carried it from his elder sister Elisa. K. Philip's 2. mother: consequently his issue to bee preferred before hers. 2. Against the Duchess of Bra∣gança, that his mother was the elder sister, therefore hee who represented her person, was to bee preferred before her. For the Duchess of Bragança, and against the point of Representation. Shee was born and bred in Portugal: Philip and Parma were forrein. 2. Shee was nearer by a degree unto Emanuel, and Henry the Cardinal, then the Duke of Parma. 3. A∣gainst the representation urged by Parma, that no representa∣tion was admitten in the Succession to the Crown of Portu∣gal; but that every pretender was to bee taken and prefer∣red according to the Prerogatives onely of his Person, as the next in propinquitie of blood, or the man before the woman, and the elder before the younger, if they bee in equal degree of propinquitie to the former Kings.
Touching Representations. (Contra Sect. 40.) The last King Sebastian entred the Crown by way of Re∣presentation, not by propinquitie of blood, the Cardinal beeing brother, and hee but Nephew unto the former King John 3. (Sect. 82.) Answ. Hee was of the right descendant line of K. John 3. and the Cardinal but of the Collateral; and all Law alloweth the right line to bee served and prefer∣red before the Collateral bee admitted: This was the caus of his coming to the Crown, and not representation. Allegations of King Philip's right to Portugal. Seeing then that Representation was not admitted, but every Pretendor considered in his own person onely (Sect. 82.) King Philip beeing in equal degree of propinquitie of blood with the Duchesses, alleged hee was to bee preferred before them both: becaus a man, and born before them. 2. The inheritance of Portugal (besides that it belonged to the Crown of Castile, of old evidently belonged to John, King of Castile, by the marriage of Beatrix, daugh∣ter and heir of Ferdinand King of Portugal: after whose death it was conferred by election of the People on John, M. of Avis, bastard-brother of the foresaid Ferdinand: & by him the said Beatrix, and her posteritie wrongfully debarred and excluded. King Philip his own carver in Spain. When these contentions were at the hottest, died the K. Cardinal, before he could decide them. Whereupon the K.
of Spain taking his right to bee best; and (becaus a Monarch, and under no temporal Judg) thinking hee was not bound to attend any other, or further judgment in the matter, but might by force put himself in possession of his own (as hee took it,) if otherwise hee might not have it; hee entered upon Portugal by force of Arms, and at this day holdeth it peaceably. The end of the controversie. An Objection in behalf of Representation in the Succession of England. Representation taketh place in England: So as the chil∣dren of the son, though women, shall ever bee preferred be∣fore those of the daughter, though men. Therefore seeing the Ladie Philippes right to the Dukedom of Lancaster, and Crown of England (mentioned Sect. 70, 72, &c.) is to bee preferred according to the Laws of England; onely it fol∣loweth, that the right of Succession pretended by the Prin∣ces of Portugal from the said Ladie Philippe, should bee deter∣mined onely by the Laws of England, which admit of Re∣presentation. Answer to the former Objection. The question is not here, by what Law this pretence by Portugal to the Crown of England is to bee tried: but ra∣ther who is the true and next heir of John of Portugal, and the Ladie Philippe, heir of Lancaster: which once known, it little importeth by what Law hee pretendeth his right unto England; whether of Portugal, or England: though to de∣termine this first and chief point of the Succession of Portu∣gal, the Laws of Portugal must needs bee the onely Judges, and not those of England.
CAP. X. Whether it bee better to live under a Forrein or a Home-born Prince, a great Monarch, or a little King. Against Forrein-Government the opinion of Law-makers. ARistotle,Answered (S. 112). in all the different Forms of Common-wealths which hee prescribeth in his 8 books of Politicks, ever presupposeth, that the Government shall bee by people of the self-same Nation: the same also do presume all the Law-ma∣kers therein mentioned; as, Minos, Solon, Lycurgus, Numa Pompilius, and the rest. Of Orators and Writerr. Demosthenes his famous invectives against Philip of Mace∣donia, that desired to encroach upon the State of Greece;Answered (S. 113). and his Orations against Eschines, who was thought secretly to favor the pretences of the said forrein Princes. The books of the Italians, when they speak of their former subjection to the Lombardes, Germanes, French, and their present to the Spaniard. The late writings of the French against the power of the hous of Guise and Lorrain, whom they hold for strangers.
Of Nations by their Proceedings and Designs. The desperate and bloodie executions of divers Nations,Answ. (S. 111) to th'end they might rid themselvs from stranger's dominion, are arguments of the very impression of nature herself in this matter: for examples whereof, see Q. Curtius, lib. 5. & 6. And the Sicilians, who at one Evensong-tide slew all the French within their Iland, whom themselvs had called and invited thither not long before. And the English, who mur∣thered all the Danes at one time: and would have don as much for the Normans, if themselvs had been strong enough, or the advers partie less vigilant. And the French in the time of Charles the 7. when nothing could repress them from revolting every where against the English Government, of which at length by hook and crook they wholly free'd them∣selvs. Of Holy Scripture. The autoritie of holy Scriptures is evident in this behalf;Answ (S. 114.) Deut. 17. 16. Thou shalt make them King over thee whom the LORD thy GOD shall choos out of the number of thy brethren: thou mai'st not set a stranger over thee, which is not of thy brethren. In the behalf of Forrein Government. This hatred of Stranger's Government, is but a vulgar aversion of passionate, or foolish men; Passionate by corru∣ption of nature, whereby men are inclined to think evil of others; especially their Governors; and the more the far∣ther
they are from us in kindred or acquaintance; foolish, as those that weigh not the true reasons, causes, or effects of things; but onely the outward shew, and popular apprehen∣sion, grounded for the most part in the imagination, or in∣citation of others, who endeavor onely to procure tu∣mults. It importeth not what Countrimam the Prince bee, so his Goverement bee good. All passion against stranger, or unto others laid aside, wee are onely to respect the fruits of good and profitable Govern∣ment; the peace and proprietie of the Subject: which what Prince (bee hee native or forreign) soëver procureth us, is fittest for ours or any other Government: for after a Prince is established, the common subject hath no more conversation with him, nor receiveth further personal benefits of him, than of a meer stranger. Then if hee govern ill, what is the Sub∣ject the better by his beeing Home-born. Home-born Princes and Tyrants. As in the like case the children of Israël said of Rehoboam, Quae nobis pars in David, vel quae haereditas in filio Jesse? 3 King. 12. 16. whom they abandoned, and chose Jeroboam his ser∣vant, and a stranger. And what availed it the Duke of Glo∣cester, Tho. of Woodstock, that hee lived under his Nephew Ric. 2. or the Duke of Clarence the right of his brother (Sect. 4.) or the De la Pooles, Staffords, Plantagenets, their beeing under their near kinsman Henry 8. by whom they lost both their lives, possessions and kindred. Many other exam∣ples might bee drawn from the Romans, Sicilians, Spanish, English, &c. who have been much the wors for their home∣born Princes.
Opinion, and the beeing under several Governors, make's strangers, or no strangers. Who bee strangers, and who not, dependeth much of the opinion and affection of each people, and nation the one to∣wards the other: but chiefly their being under the same, or several Governments. The hous of Guise, and their kin∣dred, were held for strangers in France; yet came they but out of Lorrain, a Province bordering upon France; and of the same nation, language, and manners; onely under ano∣ther Prince. The Florentines are hated and held strangers in Siena, where they govern: albeit the one State bee not 30 miles from the other; and both of one nation, language, and education. On the contrarie, the Biscayns hold not the Castillians for strangers; nor the Normans and Britains the French; nor the Welsh the the English; a different peo∣ple, and of different language. Three means of coming under forreign Government. One Nation may becom subject to another, either by Con∣quest, as the Welsh were to the English; the English to the Normans and Danes, Sicilia and Naples to the Spaniards, &c. Or inheritance, as Aquitaine and Normandie to England; the 17 Provinces to Spain; Britanie to France. Or by mixt means of force and composition, as Milan to Spain; Ireland to England; and Portugal in our daies to Spain.
The Condition of Conquest, and the wisest Conquerors. Conquest is of these three the hardest for the Subject, all standing at the Will and Humor of the Conqueror, whom either anger, fear, or jealousie of his assurance may often drive to hold a hard hand over the Conquered; at least for a time, until his State be settled: Yet have these ever (at least the wisest) dealt like Physitians, who after a vehement Purgation minister Lenitives, and soft Medicines, to calm and appease the good Humors left, and to strengthen the whole bodie again, that it may hold out. Commendation of the Romane Government, best to their Forrein Subjects. The carriage of the Romans was so just, considerate, sweet, and modest towards all Forrein Nations they had con∣quered, that it allured divers Nations to desire to be under them, and to be rid of their natural Kings; as the Subjects of Antiochus, and Mithridates. Other Kings to gratifie their subjects, nominated the Romane Empire for their suc∣cessor, as Attalus of Pergamus, and Ptolomie of Egypt, and others. Their manner was to do most favors, and give most priviledges unto the most remote Nations, they having the best ability to Rebel against them: wherein this circum∣stance of being most strangers, most helped them.
So are the French to the Britans, &c. The like rule of Police have all great Monarchs used ever since. As in France the States of Gasconie and Guyen (conquered from the English) pay far less tribute to the King, than those of the isle of France it self. The Britains which were old enemies, and came to the Crown by marriage, pay much less than they. The Normans somwhat more than either, because they lie somwhat neerer to Paris; yet less than the natural Frenchmen. Venetians to Candia. The Candians pay not the third part of the Impositions (unto the State of Venice, whereto they are subject) that do the natural subjects of Venice, in Italie: because it is an island a part, and standeth further off. Spaniards to their Subjects of Italie. The Subjects of Naples, Scicilie, and Milan, pay not the Aloavalla; viz. the tenth penie of all that is bought and sold, and imposed upon the natural Spaniards; nor are they subject to the Inquisition of Spain (especially not Naples and Milan) nor doth any Law, or Edict made in Spain hold in those Countries, except it be allowed by the States there∣of; Nor may any of their old Priviledges be infringed, but by their own consents: Nor are they charged with any part of the extraordinary Subsidies, which the King requireth of Spain.
And of the Low-Countries. The Flemings enjoyed great tranquility under the Do∣minion of Spain, before they revolted: having a Governor of another Nation over them: but his time being but short, he strove principally to get, and hold the Peoples good will, thereby to be grateful to his King at his return home: and if he attempted ought against them, they complained by their Chancellor residing for them in the Spanish Court (for all Forrein Nations have their particular Counsel there a∣bout the King) and by his mediation, obtained many Privi∣ledges. Now in the space of 28. (in all which time they have been suffered to traffick freely into Spain) years of their Re∣volt, there hath not a quarter so many been punished by order of justice, as Conte Lewis their natural Prince caused to be exe∣cuted in one day in Bruxells, which were 500. Nor had Alva any thank of the King, for putting to death Count Egmont, and Horne; whereas in Arragon, a neerer State, there were many heads chopt off upon a late insurrection. So that the Circumstance of being strangers, and dwelling far off, doth them great pleasure, and giveth them many Priviledges above the home-born, or neer limitting subjects.
The States of Italie better Governed by their late Vice-Roys, than their former home-born Princes. In Italie, if you compare the number of the afflicted, and executed by Justice, or otherwise, under their home-born Kings, with that which hath been since, you shall finde twenty for one, especially of the Nobilitie: the reason is, their Kings were absolute, and acomptant to no man; and being but men, and having their passions and emulations with the Nobilitie, which they might satisfie without con∣troule; they pulled down and set up at pleasure, and often∣times made but a jeast of Noblemens lives and deaths. But Viceroys have no authority, nor commission to touch prin∣cipal persons lives, without relation given thereof to your King and Council, and their order touching it. Then knowing that after their three years Government is ended, they must stay forty dayes as private men, under the succeed∣ing Governor, to answer their former proceedings against all that shall accuse them; they take heed what they do, and whom they offend. The late Kings of England extreamly cruel to their Nobilitie. To come neerer home, and to omit those which in the time of Wars, Rebellions, and Commotions (occasions somwhat justifiable) have been cut off, within the space of one five years of Henry 4. there were executed in peace by Justice, and the Princes Command, 2 Dukes, 1 Archbishop,
5 Earles, the Baron of Kinderton, and four Knights. Within almost as little a space of Ed. 4. his time, 2 Dukes, 3 Earles, 2 Barons, 3 Knights, and many other afterwards (for this was but in the beginning of his Reign) But when all doubt of Contention about Succession (which moved those two Kings, the more excusably, to these cruelties) was taken away, in Henry 8. his time, were either cut off, or clean put down, 2 Queens his wives, 3 Cardinals, 3 Dukes, 1 Marquess, 2 Earles, 2 Countesses, 6 Lords, 6 or 7 Ab∣bots, Knights in great number, Gentlemen infinite; What Spaniard could, or durst have done so much? Better to live under a Great, than a little Monarch. 1 He is best able to defend, and protect his subjects. 2 He hath ordinarily least need to Pill, and Pole them; (for a little King, though never so mean, will keep the State of a King, which his subjects must maintain) 3 He hath more to bestow upon his subjects, for reward of Virtue, or Va∣lor. A great Prerogative unto every subject, to be born un∣der one that hath much to give; whereas he that is born in the Cities of Geneva, or Genoa (let him be of what abili∣tie, or worth soëver) can hope for no more preferment than those Common-wealths can give, which is all too little; what then would it be, were there many worthie men born there at one time? A Forrein Prince living among us without For∣rein Forces. Another manner of living under Forrein Princes, is when
the Prince cometh to dwel among us without Forces; As did King Stephen and Henry 2. who were natural Frenchmen, and as King Philip in Queen Maries time here in England; and the last King of France in Polonia; so should his Bro∣ther Monsieur have done here if the marriage between him and the Queen had gone forward. Fit for our present State, and beneficial to any. No danger, nor inconvenience can justly be feared from such a King: The benefits are, 1 He subjecteth himself ra∣ther to the Realm and Nation, than they to him, and if he live, and marrie in England, both he and his Children will quickly become English: 2 For his assurance, he must be in∣forced to cheerish the English, thereby to gain, and perpetu∣ate to himself their good-will and friendship; 3 He enter∣eth with indifferent mind towards all men, having no kin∣dred, or alliance within the Land, to whom he is bound, nor enemie against whom he may be incensed; so as only merit and demerit of each man must move him to favor or dis-fa∣vor, a great foundation of good and equal Government. 4 He might be admitted upon such Compositions and Agree∣ment, as both the Realm should enjoy her antient Liberties, and perhaps more (for Forrein Princes upon such occasi∣ons of their preferment commonly yield to much more than the Domestical) and the home-born Pretenders should re∣main with more security, than they can well hope for under an English Competitor. A Forrein Prince, with Forrein Support. A third manner is, when the Prince bringeth Forces with him for his own assurance, and these either present; as the Danish Kings, and after them the three first Norman Princes
(who either by the help of their first subjects already in England, or by others brought in by them afterwardes, wrought their evil) Or that his Forces be so neer, as he may call them in when he listeth, and that without resi∣stance, as may the Scot, whom no Sea divideth from us. Insupportable to our, or any State whatsoever. All danger and inconveniences may justly be feared from such a King; yea all the mischiefs, either of Domestical or Forrein Governments. For those of a Domestical Prince are, Pride, Crueltie, Partialitie, pursuing of Factions, par∣ticular Hatred, extraordinary advancing of his own Kin∣dred, extreme pinching and punishing of the Subject, being sure of his own partie within the Realm, by reason of his presence, and therefore the less respective of others. These vices such a Forrein Prince is the more subject too, than the Domestical, as having both external Counsel of a People that hate us, to incense him, and their external Force to effect his and their Designs. The mischiefs of Forrein Go∣vernment are, Tyrannie of the Prince, the servitude of the People; filling and planting the Realm with strangers, and dividing among them the Honors, Dignities, Riches, and Preferment thereof. All which are incident (in all proba∣bilitie) to the third kind of Government, and to be feared in the succession of the King of Scots, whose case is within the second Branch thereof, and may hereafter be within the first. Forrein Princes affected by some Countries. Best Romane Emperors, strangers. Where Kings go by Election, commonly they take Strangers (in the second kinde Sect. 105.) so did the La∣cedemonians and Romans in their first Monarchie; and of
late the Polonians in the Succession of their three last Kings; and the Venecians by way of good Policie, have made a per∣petual Law, That when they are to War, and must needs chuse a General, he be a stranger; to wit, some Prince of Italie, who is out of their own States; thereby to have him the more indifferent, and equal to them all. Among the latter Romans, their best, and most famous Emperors were strangers, as Trajan and Adrian, Spaniards: Septimius Se∣verus, an African; Constantine, English: Their worst Ro∣mans, as Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, Commodus. Forrein Government: which best, which worst. This Second then▪ (S. 105.) is the best: In the first kinde, of being under Forrein Government, and as a Pro∣vince to be ruled by Deputies, Viceroy's, &c. as the States mentioned (S. 19.) and as all the Provinces of the old Roman's States were, all things considered▪ and one taken with another, the Commodities and Securities are more, and the damages and danger less, than in the Government of Domestical Princes: And all the mischiefs of Forrein Government are only incident to the third and last (S. 105.) Other imputations to the other two proceeded, from the blindness and passion of the vulgar, and some private men most likely to be interessed therein. (S. 91.) An Answer to the former Objection (S. 89.) against Forrein Government. Upon other occasions and humors, the vulgar will do as much against their own Country-men and Princes, as the Sicilians did against the French, &c. (S. 89.) and often have, both in England and else where, when they have been of∣fended, or that seditious heads have offered themselves to lead them into tumults.
Aristotle Answered, (S. 89.) Aristotle in his Politicks never handled expresly this our Question, and consequently weighed not the reasons on both sides, and so left it neither decided nor impugned; and he that was Alexander's Master, the Master of so many For∣rein Countries, could not well condemn it. Demosthenes Answered, (S. 88.) Demosthenes was well feed by the King of Asia, to the end he should set Athens, and other Grecian Cities at ods with Philip. On the other side, if Athens a Popular Govern∣ment wherein the force of his tongue made him have grea∣test sway and authoritie, were to have come under a Mo∣narch, he should have been in like credit: as he fell out to be: for all the time that Alexander lived, he continued in banishment. Answer to the Objection out of Deut. (S. 90.) When the Command was given in Deut. no Nation be∣sides the Jews had true Religion among them; the chiefest and highest think to be expected in the admission of any Ma∣gistrate; for that it concerneth the true and highest end of a Common-wealth, and of all humane society: but Christ's coming into the world took away this restraint: So that all Christian Nations are alike, for so much as belongeth un∣to Government.
CAP. XI. Examination of the likelihood of each Pretender to the Crown of England. Whereby a Pretender may soonest prevail. THe prevailing, or not prevailing consisteth either in the Religion of the Pretender, or in the Strength of his particular Familie, Friends and Allies, both at home and abroad. Every one will prefer a Prince of his own Religion. Religion (being at this day threefold, viz. Protestancy, Puritanism, and Papistrie) is likely to be of much respect in the Advancement or Depression of each Pretender. And albeit in the entrance of King Ed. 6. Queen Mary and her Majestie, divers men of different Religions, for other re∣spects concurred together in those Princes Advancement, (which many of them repented after at better leisure) yet tis now likely to be otherwise. 1 Because the Titles of Pretenders are now more doubtful. 2 Men are become more resolute in matters of Religion, and by long contend∣ing, the greater enemies. 3▪ Men of a good Conscience will hold it a point of little zeal at least, if not of Atheism, to set their hands to the Advancing of a Prince of contrary Religion to themselves. 4 Men of discretion hold it to be against all Rules of Policie, to promote to a Kingdom in
which themselves must live, one of a contrary Religion: for let what bargains, agreements, vain hopes, promises soever be made before hand; yet the Princes once settled, they are sure to be opprest by degrees: So that they must either dis∣semble, or suffer persecution. The likelihoods of the Protestant partie. The Protestant, that hath the power and authority of the State in his hands, is likely to do much; especially if he can conceal for a time the decease of her Majestie, until he may put his Affairs in order: but this is held to be either impossible, or very hard; so ardent are men's minds in such occasions, and so capable of new designments, impressions, and desires are all kinde of subjects upon such great changes. The most wealthy, and strong Member of this Bodie is the Clergie, as Bishops, &c. and their followers: the Nobili∣tie and Privie Council are uncertain. The House of Hert∣ford was wont to be in their favor, but of late they are the more devoted to Arabella, and the House of Derby. Privie Council out of office during the vacan∣cie of Princes. Though the authority of the Privie Council be supreme during the Prince's life; yet it is not so afterwards: nor have they any publick authority at all, but according to their several former callings of Noblemen and Gentlemen. Then is every man free, until a new Prince be established by the Common-wealth, which establishment dependeth not upon the appointment or will of any few, or upon any man's proclaiming of himself (for divers are like to do so) but upon a general Consent of the whole bodie of the Realm.
The Strength and Affection of the Puritans. The Puritans, whose profession seemeth to be the more perfect, are more generally favored throughout the Realm, (if not of Papists) than the Protestant; which make's even all those Protestants, who are less interessed in Ecclesiastical livings, or other preferments depending on the State, very much affected to them. Their side is held to be the most ardent, quick, bold, resolute of any other: as those which have a great part of the best Captains, and Souldiers, and great Towns (where Preachers have made the more impressi∣on in the Artificers, and Burgesses) much devoted to them: Nor want they probabilities of having the City of London, the Tower, and most part of the Navie much enclined to them: Their Forrein partie will be the reformed Churches of France (now not many) and of the Low▪ Countries. The Earle of Huntington was the Lord Beacham (by reason of his marriage) is most affected by them. The King of Scots, if not a stranger) would also be for his Religion very plausible. The Strength and Affection of the Papists. The Papists, least in shew, because held under, yet are of small consideration in respect of their home and forrein partie. At home they are either Recusants, or such as ac∣commodate themselves, for wordlie respects, unto all exter∣nal proceedings of the time and State; of which sort are the most part of the Countrie People, of whom the contra∣rie Preachers are not so frequent. To them such as are dis∣contented do easily joyn also, & omnes qui amaro animo sunt cum illis se conjungunt. 1 Reg. 22. 2. as the most afflicted by the present state. Besides, there is ever likely a certain na∣tural compassion in most men towards those that suffer, and
of compassion cometh affection, of affection desire to help. Moreover the persecution against the Papists hath much stir∣red them up to far more eager defence of their Cause, and hath wrought a great impression in their hearts. Their af∣fection is thought indifferent towards any one, be he Stran∣ger or Domestical, who is likest to restore their religion; not much inclined to any one of the pretenders in particular: a point of great Consequence, by reason of the incertainty, and likely to give them great sway, wheresoever they shall bend at that day. The Forrein Strength of the Papists very great and important. The Forrein Helps are (besides the exiled English, who have both Friends and Kindred at home) the affections of Forrein Princes, & States Favorers of their Religion; whose Ports, Towns, and Provinces be near upon England round about; and for such a time and purpose cannot want com∣moditie to give succor; which thing weighed together with the known inclination that way of Ireland, and the late de∣claration made by many of the Scottish Nobilitie and Gen∣trie, to favor that Cause, are arguments that this Bodie is also great and strong, and likely to bear no small sway in the deciding of this Countroversie. For, and Against the King of Scots. Likelihoods of the Scot, besides the Prioritie of his Title in vulgar opinion, are his Youth, his being a King, his mo∣derate Nature, having shed little blood hitherto, his affecti∣on in Religion to such as like thereof: On the other-side, the Reasons of State before alleged against him, especially his
Alliance with the Danes, and dependance of the Scottish Nation seem to weigh much with Englishmen (S. 53.) For, and Against the Lady Arabella. For Arabella is alleged her being a yong Ladie, and there∣by fit to procure affections; and that by her marriage she may joyn some other title with her own, and therby friends. Against her, her being nothing at all Allied with the Nobi∣litie of England; her Title as doubtful as the rest, if not more (S. 56.) Her Religion can be no great motive either for, or against her: for by all likelihood it is as tender yet, green and flaxible, as is her age, and sex. The Kindred and power of Beacham and Derbie. The Lord Beacham and Earle of Derbie have had their Titles examined before, (Cap. 6.) Their difference in mean and Kindred is great: For Derbie far exceedeth the other in both: For the Kindred of Hertford are but few, his father being the first raiser of his House: But Derbie hath, besides the Stanleys (which are many, and of good power) the Lords Sturton, Monteagle, Morley, Dacres of the North, the Earle of Cumberland, some of the Arundels, Poynes of Glocester, and many others; besides Lancaster, Cheshire, and North-Wales; which for the most part depend upon him.
The Likelihoods of the Earle of Huntington. The Earle of Huntington his Alliance is not great; in the last Earl it was, the Earle of Leicester, and Warwick, and Sir Philip Sidney living; besides he was like to have the whole power of London (a matter of great importance and which advanced Ed. 4. two several times) by which means, and by all the forces and affection of the Puritan, and much of the Protestant, he was thought to be in great forwardness. But now these great Pillers failing, no man can assure himself what the success of this Earle or his issue will be. A Short Survey of all Forrein Pretenders. The Infanta Pretendent of the House of Britain is a Princess of rare parts, both for beautie, wisdom, and Piety. The two yong Princes of Parma were imps of great expecta∣tion, and divers waies neer of Kin to the Spaniard; As near to whom are the Children of the Duchess of Bragança, who are all Princes of rare Virtue and Valor; and of singular affection to the English nation; which divers of them, tra∣velling Portugal, have tasted. What the means of the Spa∣niard is, all the world may see; what his, or any of their success will be in this matter, no man can determine. That there will be Wars about the Succession. This Affair will not be ended by any possibilitie moral
without some War, at least wise, for some time at the be∣ginning; and that for divers Reasons. The First Reason. The matter cannot be Disputed and determined during Her Majesties life without evident danger of her person, for many Causes in the like case, and especially now, that she groweth to be old, and without hope of issue. The Second Reason. The Declaration of an Heir arparent now made, would move infinite Humors and Affections within the Realm, and stir coals, and cast firebrands over all the Kingdom (perhaps further) which now lie raked up and hidden in the Embers. The Third Reason. The Declaration, though it were now made by Parla∣ment or Authoritie of her Majestie, would not fully end the Controversie: For albeit some Pretenders that should be passed over or put back, would perhaps be silent for the present; yet afterwards 'tis certain they would both speak and spurn when occasion were offered.
The Fourth Reason. This Declaration would be dangerous to him were de∣clared: for on the one side it would make her Majestie very jealous of him; On the other side, unite and arm all other Pretenders, and their followers, against him: And of all recounted by our Histories, to be declared in this manner none (being not Kings Children) ever came to Reign. The Fifth Reason. The Pretenders being so many, and their Pretences so ambiguous as they be, it is to be thought, That none, or few will presently at the beginning abandon their Hopes and Titles, but prove at least what Friends will stand to them, and how matters will go for, or against them; especially see∣ing they may do it without danger of Law, their Rights and Pretences being manifest: and for this first Assay arms are necessary. The Sixth Reason. If any would in process of time forgo their Titles (as divers will at length, and many must, for one only can speed) yet that they be not seased or oppressed on a suddain, and at first by the adverse partie, as the course is in such cases, tis likely each one will arm himself and friends at the
beginning: for better Conditions will be granted them be∣ing armed, than being naked; and the more that stand to∣gether on their guard, the easier and sooner Peace may they procure of him that Prevaileth: for a displeasure is sooner pardoned to a multitude, or potent adversary, than to one, or a weak one. Now the Common peril of the not pre∣vailers, knitting them together for their own defence, be∣sides their own safegard, will be the ground of much securi∣tie to him also that Reigneth: they being not likely to con∣spire against him, because they are many, and by consequent not easily drawn to agree among themselve, whom to prefer, where he pulled down. No main Battel, but rather a Composition. This matter is not like to come easily to any great or main Battel, but rather to be ended at length by some Com∣position and general Agraement: and that for this Reason. The Reason. The Pretenders are many, and their Power and Friends lying in divers and different parts of the Realm; they will one fear the other, and seek to fortifie themselves where their strength lieth, especially towards the Ports and Sea∣fide, for receiving of Succor. Therefore will they not much urge nor press one the other in the beginning, but every part attended rather to strengthen it self for the time.
Which of the Pretenders are likeliest to bear it. There be two sorts of Pretenders, the one Forrein, the other English: Of Forrein, the Infanta it likest to bear it, or some other by her Title, laid upon him by her friends good-will. Of Domestical, the Earle of Hartford's second Son. Of Forrein, the Infanta, and why. 1 She is a Woman, and may easilie joyn (if her Father will) the Titles of Britanie and Portugal together. 2 She is unmarried, and by her marriage may make some other Composition, either at home or abroad, that may fa∣cilitate the matter. 3 She is a great Princess, and fit for some great State; and other Princes of Christendom would perhaps more willingly concur in such a composition of matters by her, and by casting all Forrein Titles on her, than that the King of Spain should add this Kingdom unto his Monarchie: A thing which those Princes his neighbors in reason of State, would not so well allow of. 4 Some such moderation would take away much of the aversion of the English from Forrein Government: For hereby no sub∣jection would be feared to any Forrein Realm, but rather divers benefits to the Realm of England. (S. 106.) Of Domestical, the Earle of Hartford's second Son, and why. He seemeth to be cleared of the Bastardie that lieth nearest of all upon those Children; and therefore to be preferred
before his elder Brother (S. 62.) 2 He is unmarried, a point of no small moment for the joyning or fortifying of titles, and for making of Compositions of Peace and Union with the opposite parties. 3 His Religion is not , and consequently every partie may hope to draw him to their sides; being free to follow what he shall think most expe∣dient for his own advancement, without Knot or Obligati∣on to follow other men's affections or judgements; as he would be presumed to be, were he married, or much obliged to any other Familie. FINIS. THIS Manuscript Treatise of Broken successions of the Crown of England, coming from the hands of a Popish Priest, and comprehending the substance of what was written and pub∣lished by Father Parson's the Jesuit, under the name of Doleman, for ends best known to themselves; but justly su∣spected, to be no way for the Freedom of the English Nation, may give the
greater occasion for the wisdom of latter times, to prevent those Commotions to∣wards confusion, as might seem to threa∣ten a second Part of that horrid De∣sign of the Gun-power Treason, No∣vemb. 5. 1604.
