P448C 99899382 153256
An ADMONITION To all Such as Shall intend hereafter to enter the STATE of MATRIMONY GODLY and AGREEABLY to LAWES. London Printed for Will: Lee at if Turks head in Fleetstreet over against Fetter-lane FIrst, that they contract not with such persons as be hereafter expres∣sed, nor with any of like degree, against the Law of God, and the Laws of the Realm. Secondly, that they make no secret contracts, without consent or counsel of their Parents or Elders, under whose authority they be, contrary to Gods Laws and mans Ordinances. Thirdly, that they contract not anew with any other upon divorce and separation made by the Iudge for a time, the Laws yet standing to the contrary. MArriage is honourable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But whore∣mongers and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13. 4. To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her hus∣band. He that cannot contain, let him mar∣ry: For better it is to marry then to burn. 1 Cor. 7. 2, 9. Unto the married I command, not I, but the Lord: Let not the wife depart from her husband. But if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband. And let not the Husband put away his Wife. 1 Cor. 7. 10, 11. None shall come near to anv of the kindred of his flesh to uncover her shame: I am the Lord. Levit. 18. 6. Con. Secundus gradus in linea recta ascendente. af. Avia af. Avi relicta Prosocrus, vel socrus magna. Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea trans∣versa ascendente. Con. Amita Con. Matertera af. Patrui relicta af. Avunculi relicta af. Amita uxoris af. Matertera uxoris. Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente. Con. Mater af. Noverca af. Socrus. Primus gradus in linea recta descendente. Con. Filia af. Privigna af. Nurus. Primus gradus aequalis in linea transver∣sali. Con. Soror af. Soror uxoris af. Fratris relicta. Secundus gradus in linea recta descendente. Con. Neptis ex filio Con. Neptis ex filia af. Pronurus, i. relicta nepotis ex filio af. Pronurus, i. relicta nepotis ex filia af. Privigni filia af. Privignae filia. Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea trans∣versali descendente. Con. Neptis ex fratre Con. Neptis ex sorore af. Nepotis ex fratre relicta af. Nepotis ex sorore relicta af. Neptis uxoris ex fratre. af. Neptis uxoris ex sorore. 1 Grandmother 2 Grandfathers wife 3 Wives grandmother. 4 Fathers sister 5 Mothers sister 6 Fathers brothers wife 7 Mothers brothers wife 8 Wives fathers sister 9 Wives mothers sister. 10 Mother 11 Stepmother 12 Wives mother. 13 Daughter 14 Wives daughter 15 Sonnes wife. 16 Sister 17 Wives sister 18 Brothers wife. 19 Sons daughter 20 Daughters daughter 21 Sons sons wife 22 Daughters sons wife 23 Wives sons daughter 24 Wives daughters daughter. 25 Brothers daughter 26 Sisters daughter 27 Brothers sons wife 28 Sisters sons wife 29 Wives brothers daughter. 30 Wives sisters daughter. 1 Grandfather 2 Grandmothers husband 3 Husbands grandfather. 4 Fathers brother 5 Mothers brother 6 Fathers sisters husband 7 Mothers sisters husband 8 Husbands fathers brother 9 Husbands mothers brother. 10 Father 11 Stepfather 12 Husbands father. 13 Son 14 Husbands son 15 Daughters husband. 16 Brother 17 Husbands brother 18 Sisters husband. 19 Sons son 20 Daughters son 21 Sons daughters husband 22 Daughters daughters husband 23 Husbands sons son 24 Husbands daughters son. 25 Brothers son 26 Sisters son 27 Brothers daughters husband 28 Sisters daughters husband 29 Husbands brothers son 30 Husbands sisters son. a recta ascendente. Con. Av af. Aviae relictus af. Prosocer, vel socer magnus. Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea trans∣versali ascendente. Con. Patruus Con. Avunculus af. Amitae relictus af. Materterae relictus af. Patruus mariti af. Avunculus mariti. Primus gradus in linea recta ascendente. Con. Pater. af. Vitricus af. Socer. Primus gradus in linea recta descendente. Con. Filius af. Privignus af. Gener. Primus gradus aequalis in linea transver∣sali. Con. Frater af. Levir af. Sororis relictus. Secundus gradus in linea recta descendente. Con. Nepos ex filio Con. Nepos ex filia af. Progener, i. relictus neptis ex filio af. Progener, i. relictus neptis ex filia af. Privigni filius af. Privignae filius. Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea trans∣versali descendente. Con. Nepos ex fratre Con. Nepos ex sorore af. Neptis ex fratre relictus af. Neptis ex sorore relictus af. Leviri filius, i. nepos mariti ex fratre af. Gloris filius, i. nepos mariti ex sorore. 1. IT is to be noted, that those persons which be in the direct line ascendent and descendent, cannot marry together, although they be never so farre asun∣der in degrée. 2. It is also to be noted, that consanguinity and affinity (letting and dissolving Matrimony) is contracted as well in them and by them which be of kindred by the one side, as in and by them which be of kindred by both sides. 3. Item, that by the Laws, consanguinity and affinity (letting and dissolving Matrimony) is contracted as well by unlawful company of man and woman, as by lawful marriage. 4. Item, in contracting betwixt persons doubtful, which be not expressed in this Table, it is most sure, first to consult with men learned in the Laws, to understand what is lawful, what is honest and expedient, before the finishing of their contracts. 5. Item, that no Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall solemnize Matrimony out of his or their Cure, or Parish-Church or Chappel, and shall not solemnize the same in private houses, nor lawless or exempt Churches, under the pains of the Law forbidding the same. And that the Curate have their Certificates, when the par∣ties dwell in diverse Parishes. 6. Item, the banns of Matrimony ought to be openly denounced in the Church by the Minister, thrée several Sundaies or Festival daies, to the end that who will and can alledge any impediment, may be heard, and that stay may be made till fur∣ther trial, if any exception be made there against it upon sufficient caution. 7. Item, who shall maliciously object a frivolous impediment against a lawful Matrimony to disturb the same, is subject to the 8. Item, who shall presume to contract in the degrees prohibited (though he doe it ignorantly) besides that the fruit of such copulation may be judged unlawful, is also punishable at the Ordinaries discretion. 9. Item, if any Minister shall conjoyn any such, or shall be present at such con∣tracts making, he ought to be suspended from his Ministery for thrée years: and otherwise to be punished according to the Laws. 10. Item, it is further ordained, that no Parson, Vicar or Curate do preach, treat, or expound, of his own voluntary invention, any matter of controversie in the Scri∣ptures, if he be under the degrée of a Master of Art, except he be licensed by his Ordinary thereunto, but only for the instruction of the people, reade the Homilies already set forth, and such other form of doctrine as shall be hereafter by authority published: and shall not innovate or alter any thing in the Church, or use any old Rite or Ceremony, which be not set forth by publick authority. Set forth at first by the most Reverend Father in God, Matthew Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitane. This is the truest Impression with the Picture, two other Impressions have been dispersed and sold without consent of the owner of the Copy. LONDON, Printed for W. Lee at the Turks head in Fleet-street. 1662.
