R1626 E1088_6 99867503 169382
ROBIN HOOD AND HIS Crew of SOULDIERS. A COMEDY Acted at Nottingham on the day of His saCRed Majesties Corronation. Vivat Rex. The Actors names. Robin Hood, Commander. Souldiers. Little John. William. Scadlocke. Messenger from the Shieriffe. LONDON, Printed for James Davis. 1661.
Robbin Hood and his crew of Souldiers. A shout without the Bower. Enter Hobin Hood, little John, William, Scadlocke, &c. WHence springs this general joy? What means this noise that makes Hea∣vens Arch'd vault eccho? and the neighb'ring woods Return a dreadfull answer? With what uneven Measures the amaz'd Birds cut through the Trembling ayr? How the whole Forrest shakes, As if with us 'twas sensible of wonder, and Astonishment. Shout again. Still the glad noise encreases And with it our fear and wonder; Thus when Unruly tempests force the weak banks, Rolling the foamy billows o're the yielding Strand, fear and amazement, confusion and Distracting cares seize the neighbring villages, And thus it is with us; the guilty breast
Still pants and throbs, when others are at rest. Look out and learn the cause, and in the mean while Each man betake himself to's armes. Exit little John No danger unexpected to a mind Prepar'd to meet the worst that it can finde. Enter little John and Shierifs Messenger. Rob. Speak, what's the news? Little Jo. Gives and Fetters, Hatchets and Halters, stincking prisons, and the death of dogs is all we can expect. Rob. Why, what's the matter? Jo. Tis the Kings Coronation; and now the Shieriffe with a band of armed men, are march∣ing to reduce us to loyalty, and the miseries of an honest life; this Messenger here can tell you a rufull tale of obedience, that is expected. Rob. Peace, and let him declare his errand. Messen. From my Master I am come to require and command your armes, and a chearfull and ready submission to his Majesties Laws, with a promise of future obedience; and that forth∣with you joyn with us to solemnize his happy Coronation, which is this day to be celebrated; this done, and the rest of your lives running in
a swooth stream of loyalty and honest allegi∣ance, I here bring pardon of all past misdemea∣nors; but otherwise, expect the miseries of a sudden destruction: this told you, I wait your answer. John. Did not I tell you this? he talks of sub∣mission to government, and good Laws, as if we were the sons of peace and idleness, or had bin such Whay-blooded fools to live thus long honestly. And hath thy Master so little braine to think that we who know the sweets of theft and rogery, to whom dangers are as pleasant as dried suckets, who have been nurs'd & fed fat with blood and slaughter, can be content to bear part of your generall joy, for that which takes from us the means of our beloved mirth. Will. Shall I change Venison for salt Cats, and make a bounteous meal, with the reversion of a puddings skin? Or shall I bid adieu to Pheasant and Partrige, and such pleasing Cates, and perswade my hungry maw to satisfaction with the bruis of an Egge-shell? Or shall it be said that thou O famous little John becomes the Attendant of a Tripe-woman? John. The very thought of it is dangerous, I have got the gout only with the apprehension,
I was born for action, but yet I cannot plow nor thresh, except it be mine enemy; and after all my fam'd exploits to hang for stealing sheep 'twould grieve me. I hope our worthy Master will not credit the gingling words of pardon, and acts of grace, and fully all his former glories with a surviving repentance; for my part I had rather trust my self then any other with my life. Will. If this geare takes then we may turn our Bows into Fiddle-sticks, or strangle our selves in the strings, for the daies of warre and wan∣tonness will be done. Now must I whimper like a breecht School-boy, and make a face as soure as an Apes when he eates Crabs; and then learn manners, and to make legs with the patience of a setting-dog; and cry, I forsooth, and no for∣sooth, like a Country wench at a Churching; Wakes and Bear-baitings, and a little Cudgel-play must be all our comfort, and then in some smoaky corner recount our past adventures, whilst the good wives blesse themselves at the relation. We must not dream of Venison, but be content like the Kings liege-people with crusts and mouldy Cheese. John. Every brave soule is born a King; rule
and command o're the fearfull rabble, is natures stamp; courage and lofty thoughts are not ever confin'd to Thrones, nor still th' appendages of an illustrious birth, but the thatcht Hovell or the simple Wood oft times turns forth a mind as fully fraught with Gallantry and true worthy as doth the marble Pallace; bounteous nature ties not her selfe to rules of State, or the hard Laws that cruell men impose; shee's free in all her gifts, as the Suns generall light, which when it first peepes o're the Eastern hills, and glads the widdow'd earth with its fresh beams, is not straight snatcht into a Monarchs Court, and there imprisoned to guild his private luxu∣rie, but spreads his welcome rayes, and cheares the poor Orphan and dejected Widdow, with the same heat it doth the Persian Prince. Rob. Why then should the severities of obe∣dience, and the strait niceties of Law shackle this Noble soul, whom nature meant not onely free but soeveraigne, those ties that now by a boundless spreading force doe equally concern the brave and base; first chiefly toucht the vul∣gar herd and throng of men, that masse of feare and folly, who therefore closed together, and with an easie fondnesse suffered themselves to be manacled by Lawes, because distrustful of
their own free strength, and since being nur'st in idlenesse and soft intemperance, have grown inamoured of their Chaines, and caressed their slavery, and doat upon their hateful Bondage. But the bold daring Spirit hath in all times dis∣own'd this sneaking lownesse, and with a com∣mendable brav'ry challeng'd their darling Li∣berty; and from th' insulting Lawes rescu'd their enslaved honour: Those famous Heroes in this gallant attempt wee've boldly followed, and should we now sit down, and whine a vain repentance; or tamely and coldly yield our hands and legs to fetters, and necks to the mercy of the haltar, the world might well esteem us rash and heady Men, but never bold or truly Valiant. No we have Swords, and Arms, and Lives equally engaged in our past account, and whilest these Armes can wield our Swords, or our uncurdl'd blood give vigor to those Arms, hopes of submission are as vain as is the strange request. Mess. Doubtless were the quality of actions the justice or injustice to be measured by the boldnesse or fear of the undertakers, what now is your shame, would be your greatest glory, and your Rebellion would be worthy of an
honourable memory to eternal Ages; for none have begun and manag'd such wild designs with more unshaken confidence, but since Laws were not made as you formerly imagine, to enslave the Generous, but Curb the Proud and Vio∣lent, th' ambitious and unruly nature, your dis∣obedience betrayes aboundlesse pride, and de∣sires unfix'd as mad-mens thoughts, and restless as the Seas watry motion. That by the Laws which careful Princes make, we are commanded to do well and live vertuously, free both from giving and receiving injuries, is not to be e∣steemed slav'ry but priviledge. And since we know the power of doing wrong is seldome un∣uncompanyed with a will someway answerable, it's our perfection to have that fairly chekt that so virtue and justice, the top and complement of our natures may have their due regard, which is the end of Lawes. Nor can a good or just Man, one who dares be virteous or honest (which is the truest gallantry) think it a loss of freedom to wait and obey the commands of his Prince, especially, when with his regality and Kingly power, are joyn'd the true embellish∣ments of piety and real goodnesse. A Prince of such an influential sweetnesse, that every ac∣count
teaches a vertue, and the meanest Subject by his great example grows up into an Heroe, as if his Princely Soul was grown his peoples Genious. A King so dear to Heaven as if he was it's onely care; His birth usher'd in by a bright Star, and each minute of his Life link'd to the former by a miracle, whose preservation was the amazement of his Enemies: and though the prayer, yet scarce the hope of his most hear∣ty Subjects; One who hath suffer'd injuries be∣yond example, yet of such an unparalleld cha∣rity, he pardons them beyond hope. Whose Virtue is as great as his Birth and his Goodness unlimitted as his Power, To whom the illustri∣ous persons former Ages brag'd of were no more comparable then the Nights Glimmering to the Noon-dayes Splendor. This Great, this Gracious Prince is this day Crown'd, and offers Life, and Peace, and Ho∣nour, if you will quit your wilde rebellions, and become what your birth challenges of you, nay what ever your boasted gallantry expects of you that is) loyall subjects. Rob. Ha! whence is this sudden change? That resolution which but now was remoseless as a Rock of Diamonds, and unyielding as the
hardned Steel, is now soft and flexible as a weak womans passions. I am quite another man; thaw'd into conscience of my Crime & Duty; melted into loyalty & respect to vertue. What an harsh savage beast I was before, not differing from the fery Lyon or the cruell Bear, but in my knowledge to doe greater ill, my strength and eager rashness vvas all my boast. How all my pride now is undermin'd? How am I dwarfd in mine own sight? remov'd from that advan∣tage ground my fancy set me on, and shrunk to mine own low pitch? How am I torn now from my selfe? sure some power great and uncom∣mon hath quite transform'd me, and consum'd all that vvas bad and vicious in me. Methinks these men, companions in former ills, look like those Grecians, th' enchanted cup transform'd: they've shapes of beasts, rude, uncomely and very affrightfull; yet doe I see remorese bud in their blushing brows, as if with me they felt shame and true penitence for their fore-past Crimes. Let us all then joyne in the present sence of our duty, accept the profer'd pardon,—and with one voice sing, With hearty Wishes, health unto our King.
3. Voc. Since Heaven with a liberal hand Doth choicest blessings fling, And hath (not only to our Land Restor'd but) Crown'd our KING. Let us to joy and generall mirth This glad day set aside, Let the Neighb'ring Woods now Eccho forth Our shouts and Loyal Pride. May Halters that Mans fate attend That envies this dayes Glee And's name meet a perpetual brand For his Disloyalty. Exeunt. FINIS.
