T2789 E899_6 99864284 116509
A True NARRATIVE OF The Examination, Tryall, and Sufferings of James Nayler in the Cities of London and Westminister, and his deportment under them. With the Copies of sundry Peti∣tions and other Papers, delivered by severall Persons to the Lord Protector, the Parliament, and many particular Members thereof, in his behalf. With divers remarkable Passages (relating thereto) before his Journey to Bristol, whither he is now gone to∣wards the filling up the measure of his Sufferings. Esth. 3. 8. And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom; And their Lawes are divers from all people; neither keep they the Kings Laws. Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them. Printed in the Year, 1657.
To the truly Christian Readers. GReat is the enmitie between the two Seeds, that of the Woman, and that of the Serpent. A Truth, which though every Christian doth experiment in himself, in his measure and degree; yet it is then rendred most remarka∣ble, when the appearances of Christ are most signal, and carry a greater disagreement with flesh and blood, and the glories of the first Creation. The reason is this, the natural man having escaped the grosser pollutions of the World, and decking himself with the knowledge of Christ Jesus after the Flesh, and the litterall understanding of the Scripture, is whetted thereby with greater zeale and fury to oppose the ministration of Christ in the Spirit, and his exsertions of himself in that simplicity, innocencie, and selfdenyall, which are proper only to this dispensation. The legall Spirit is filled with indignation to be fo farr left behind, yea to be in danger of losing all, by this spirituall birth of the Child Jesus in the Heart, as Herod was at the apprehension of his losse in the outward, upon the relation of the naturall birth. This was the ground of the sufferings of the Prophets, of Christ himself, and many of the Saints since that time; whe∣ther this consideration obtaine not in the present case of James Nayler, upon the perusall of this ensuing Trea∣tise, no doubt you will receive full satisfaction. 'Tis an acquiescence to some Spirits, that they bore their Testimonie against it, and though their endeavours did not produce their desired effect, yet having discharged their con∣sciences, as in the sight of the Lord, and resting in his will, they shall not lose their reward. Who knows how necessary sufferings are for the Saints? yea how great a measure of them is yet behind? Gird up
therefore the loyns of your minds, and receive an alarum from the hand of the Lord to that self denyal, and patience in which you are to prssesse your souls untill the Lord come. It is not denyed, but a Saint may be subject to many Temptations; 'twas the priviledge of Christ alone not to bee overcome by them; yet when the True Judge appeares, he will embrace his own seed; and passe sentence, not according to occasional diversions, but according to the constant te∣nour of the integrity and uprightnesse of our spirits in his fight.
A REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE, TO WHOM The Examination of James Nayler, Blasphemer, and other Misdemeanors were referr'd. Resolv'd, THat the matter of Fact, together with the parti∣cular Resolutions of this Committee thereupon, bee reported to the House. First, I shall give you the short History of his Life, as the Committee had it from his owne mouth: He saith he was born in the Parish of Ardisloe, neer Wakefield in Yorkshire, where he lived 22, or 23. yeers, till he was mar∣ried (according to the world) as he expressed it. Then he removed into the Parish of Wazefield, where he continued
till the last Wars began; during which time he was under several Commands, and at last was Quartermaster in Major General Lamberts Troop; in which Service he continued till disabled by sickness in Scotland, and so retired to his own home; about which time he was a Member of an Inde∣pendant Church at Horbery in Yorkshire, of which Church Mr. Christopher Marshal was Pastor; & by the same Church since cast out If he was cast out, it was not till some yeers after he had withdrawn from them, for their wanton and unchristi∣an carriage, es∣pecially of Christopher Marshal their Pastor; which things he had charged upon them, and gi∣ven them in writing under nine particu∣lars, proving their practice contrary to Scripture, but never yet recei∣ved a line from them of any crime, as he declared before the Committe; and how doth this prove him an Imposture, &c. (as himself confesseth he hath heard) From others, but nor from them. by which Church he was charged as guilty of Blasphe∣my, Which Blas∣phemy was, That he had affirmed in a book, Justification by the gift of Gods Righ∣teousness, which he proved from Rom. 5. which stopt their mouthes. and uncivil and wanton carriage But nothing proved further then common salutations, which then were not accounted evil, being about seven yeers since, and before he saw the vanity of those customes. with one Mrs. Ropr a married Woman, as that she should sit on his knee, and kiss him before divers other persons; So it seems it was not done in a corne. and that it was his Opinion, He might lye with any Woman that was of his Judgement. Which he denyed before the Committee, as utterly false, be∣ing never his Judgement. And then after some time, Which time was this last Summer, being so many yeers after. went to visit the quakers in Cornwall, and by his way was by Major Saunders This is false, for Major Saunders gave him liberty to go on his journey; but he was brought back about 20. miles from thence, and committed by a Judge, and fi∣ned 20. marks for not putting off his hat. committed to the Common-Goal in Exon, as a Vagrant. Of which company few had bin Prisoners, as is intimated. And thence he and his Companie being delivered Must it be taken for granted because alledged, when nothing is made appear that is evil? by an Order from the Council. They travelling to Bristol, in the way Nayler took upon him What? as was alledged And four men, & whats the reason they are not mentioned as wel as the women? against him. And as he passed through Chewstoke in the County of Sommerset, towards Bristol, it is informed upon oath, certified by three Justices to the Committee, That staying in that Towne one night, he was there in a Chamber with three Women But was there not fourmen, and two women more in the room? of his Company, leaning upon the bed with one of them
at night when the servant of the house left them. And in the morning the servant found Nayer on the bed with one of the Women, and the Curtaines drawn; and some of the Company What evil was in this? if while he was on the bed, some of the rest also were leaning upon some part of the bed, there being but one bed in the room, and they having sit up all night. wished the servant to make no noise to a∣wake them. The way taken in this Report, will be, First, to give you the Articles charged against him. Secondly, The Evidence, wherein there will be a little mention of the Examinations and Informations upon Oath taken at Bristol; against which, because there lies a seeming Objection, I shall first clear that upon the matter of Fact. The Objection was, That they were not read again to the parties as is usual in such Cases. Answer: That two Witnesses, both of more then ordi∣nary good Repute, in that place were both put, and took Characters of the questions and answers there, and comparing their Notes, did both of them publikely avow to the Committee, as that which they were ready to depose, That every material passage was read unto the parties once or twice I hats utter∣ly false, for the Prisoners did not hear them read. after they writ it down; and that they were the same which were offered to the Committee, attested under the Mayor of Bristols hand to every of the said Examinati∣ons and Informations, and the City-Seal annexed to the whole. And besides there is nothing in the said Examinati∣ons and Informations taken there, but what is generally more clearly made out upon their Examinations before the Committee. Other Evidence will be from Naylers Examination, wherein is most of this whole matter, which was taken in Characters You had done well to have given in his full An∣swers in your Report, and not to pick what ye thought good, and to conceal the rest. by five of the Committee, who were appoin∣ted to, and did compare their Notes. Thirdly, the opinion of the Committee. The whole Fact will fall under one of these two Arti∣cles. First, James Nayler did assume How assume! because he was silent, and sub∣mitted to the will of his Fa∣ther? the gesture, words, ho∣nour, worship, and miracles of our blessed The Phari∣sees who perse∣cuted the Pro∣phets life, yet garnished their Sepulchress so do many garn∣ish the name of Christ with titles, but per∣secure his na∣ture. Saviour.
Secondly, The names and incommunicable attributes and titles Sec his last Answer to the Committee, & how false this Charge is, may appear thorow∣out the whole Report. of our blessed Saviour. As to part of the first Article, That James Nayler riding through a Town in Summeres, his company spread their garments, and sang Holy, Holy, before him; and also sang the like at his entrance into Bristol, Is this his blasphemy, to hear others praise the Lord? or that others in obe∣dience to God go bare-head∣ed? Is not this thing usually practised a∣mongst, and to your selves? but what evil hath he done. one going bare∣headed before his horse. The evidence was, That Dorcas Erbury in her examina∣tion before the Committee in the Painted Chamber confes∣ed, That she did spread garments before him; And Mar∣tha Simmons in her examination at the same time saith, That those garments that she did spread, she spread in obe∣dience to the Lord. But where's his blasphemy, must be suffer because they o∣bey'd the Lord? And Hanna Stranger being then also examined, Said she threw two Handkerchiefs before him, which she did because he that is Lord of all command∣ded But Iames Nay∣ler never com∣manded her to do this thing, then where's his blasphemy? is obedience to him that is Lord of all, yeelded by an∣other, imputed to him for bla∣sphemy? her so to do. And Jh Stranger confesseth, That he saw others spread gar∣ments before him in the way from Exon to Bristol Its not deny∣ed; but where is the blasphemy of the sufferer? And James Nayler himself confesseth Is it blasphemy to confess what hee saw others do? (upon the questi∣on, whether garments were spread before him) that some clothes were cast down, and afterwards that some gloves and other things. The evidence for singing holy, holy, was thus. Dorcas Erbury in her Examination at Bristol, being then asked why she passed along singing, Said she did not do it, but they that did it, was commanded to do it; How doth this evidence prove the sufferer a blasphemer? and the Lord hath made it manifest that they were moved of the Lord to it; and being asked to whom they sang? and whom they called the Holy one of Israil? she said, him tht rode upon the horse, Suppose she said so, doth this make him a blasphemer? what hath he done? and she would maintain it with her blood. And being examined by the Committee as to this part of the Examination, and advised to deny if it were false, yet did not deny it, though she did some other part of that Examination.
Martha Simmon being examined in the Painted Cham∣ber, whether she did sing the words holy, holy, before the said James Nayler, answered, It is my life to praise the Lord, whether he be before me, or from me, it is my life to praise the Lord. Then this was not James Nayler. And being asked whether she heard any per∣sons sing holy, holy, before the said James Nayler, she an∣swered, It is our life to praise the Lord. How is this become an of∣fence to you? Or, how doth this prove him a blasphemer. Hanna Stranger being examined in the painted Cham∣ber, whether she sang the words holy, holy, answered, She could not well remember the words, but if she did not sing holy, holy, she witnesseth the holy of holies was risen, which moved her so to do; How doth her confession of Christs Re∣surrection, prove him a blasphemer? but said further, She did not stand there to accuse her self. And was this a crime to say so? Is not here the spirit of the persecuting Courts got up again, that seeks matter from the accused to judge them by. James Nayler being examined by the Committee, whe∣ther any sang holy, holy, before him as he rode; answered, There were praises sung to the Lord; Doth not hee here acknow∣ledg the prai∣ses sung to the Lord? And is this blasphemy that he did not forbid praises to be sung to the Lord? and being asked whether those words holy, holy were sung, answerd, that he heard those words; and being asked as to the singing before him when he rode into Bristol, answered, That there was a Psalm sung, such a one as the Lord was pleased to give into the Take notice. hearts of them that sang; and being asked as to the words of the Psalm, whether they were not holy, holy, said, It may be it was, very like it might be so. And in his Examination at Bristol, being asked why he came in there in such an unusual manner, two women lead∣ing his horse, And what Law of God or man is here broken, or doth say that this is blasphemy, to have his horse led, and one to go barehead be∣fore him, or to be accompani∣ed with sing∣ing? and singing, with one bare before him; said, It was for the praises of his father, and that he may not refuse any thing that is moved of the Lord; And that he did think Did believe. the father did command them to do it; and being there asked whom they meant by the word Holy, that they sang, he answered, That they that sang were all of age to answer for themselves.
And this speaks something for the proving of another part of the first Article, vindicating one going bare-headed before him, and women leading his horse, which is more fully proved by the Informations upon oath of George Wi∣therly and Richard Hart, taken at Bristol, before the Maior there, and certified as aforesaid; and upon the confession of one Thomas Wdlock before the said Maior, who went bare headed before James Nayler, and said he was moved by the spirit so to do. And James Nayler himself upon his examination by the Committee, when he was asked whether any went bare-headed before him as he went into Bristol. answered, He did not know, he took little notice of it, but heard some say it was so; and being asked whether any women led his horse, answered, There was a woman took hold of the Bridle of the horse. Resolution of the Committee upon this whole evidence. The Committe were of opinion A strange o∣pinion to take the thing to be proved that he assumed such things, seeing he himself was silent, passing on his journey, acting no evil either against God or man, neither did re∣quire any of these things to be done, only durst not forbid what God mo∣ved others to do. that the first Article was proved. One thing also being part of the matter of fact, wee think worthy your knowledge, though much stress It seems you will pass by no∣thing you think hath any thing in it that might raise up evil thoughts; you had done justly had all been writ was said by the Sufferer, to prove his inno∣cencie. will not be lain on it; And that is, that the description of our Saviour by Pubaus Lemuus to the Senate of Rome in wri∣ting, (which is also imprinted) was taken upon one of James Naylers Attendance, which is also certified by the said Major; And for Nayler, hair both colour and manner of wearing it, as also the fashion of his beard, and feature, and person did much agree with that description, which al∣so was taken notice of by many of the Committee, how much he resembled (as they apprehended with some affec∣tation) the Picture usually drawn for our Saviour And to whom do you impute this fault, see∣ing there was no art used either to the head, beard or feature, but was the work of the Creator. How do you here love your example, who count him the greatest offender that God hath made most like him. Neither was the Letter forementioned known by the Suf∣ferer to be amongst any of his Company, till after it was taken from them, and so he told the Speaker when before them.
That in divers answers he imitated our Saviour Jesus Christ, using the same expressions Are not his Expressions good, and fit to be used, where they are spoken in truth that he did in one place; he saith, That he lived some weeks fifteen or sixteen days, without any food or other sustenance This may be testified by di∣vers witnesses, yet is it no blas∣phemy. How are your hearts hardned against the power of God? Had you known that Scripture, Mat. 4. 4 or the pow∣er of God, it would not have bin counted an offence to see it fulfilled. Is not here that Scripture fulfil∣led upon the Sufferer, Joh. 6 13. that faith, These things will they do unto you, because they know not the Father nor me.; and being asked, Wherewithall God fed him, if not with food; answered, Man liveth not by bread alone, but by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord. I shal here mention one remarkable one in his examina∣tion at Bristol; his expression was, If they had known the Father, they should know him also: And Nayler being examined by the Committee to this, whether that were his answer at Bristol, he answered in these words, Truly I can say little of that, whether I did say it or no; but if I did say it there, it is true; for if any one do know the Father they shal know what I am, and where I live; and none can know my life further then they know the Father; for the Father is my life: none can know my life but they that know my Father Is it become an offence to live the life of God? Had not the children of God their life hid with Christ in God? Read Coll. 3. 3.; for he is my life. This I particularly mention, being commanded And why not the rest of his Answers, wherein his innocency might more fully have appeared; and yet here is nothing in this, or any other, that proves him either a blasphemer or an offender. by the Committee, who re∣solved, Resolution of the Committee. That this whole Answer And why should not his other Answers have been reported also, seeing you thought fit to que∣stion him; and they that were to judge ought to have known the whole truth? of James Nayler be reported to the House. Another part of this Article was, That he received the outward worship of being kneeled unto This he denies to receive as to the outward man, though you required that from him to you in the House at the Bar. Thus you condemn him who denies it as to himself, and gives it to the Lord, & yet take it to your selves; Is this righteous judgment, or to do as you would be done by? and having his feet kissed. VVhat blas∣phemy is in this, to kiss the foot more then the hand, or any other part of the body? we have learnt greater love then this, who can lay down our lives for the brethren. And for this the evidence was, Martha Simmons in her examination at Bristol said, She ought to worship him, but here denied. If she deny it, why is it reported as evidence? and if she had confessed such a thing, how doth that make him guilty of blasphemy.
And further the evidence went, that after his imprison∣ment at Bristol, it appeared by the Information upon oath at Bristol, to wit, of Thomas Terkins and Thomas Cols. Thomas ergan informeth, that Dorcas Erbery fel down at Nayler's feet, and kissed his feet If these things were true, what of∣fence is com∣mitted, did not the Saints do and suffer the same things Read 1 Sam. 25. 23, &c. 2 Kings 4. 27, 37 & Dan. 2. 46 Esth. 8. 3. Mat. 18 29. Luke 17. 16. Job 11. 32. Luke 8 41. Luke 7. 38, &c. Iohn 13, 14, 15. And why should any be offend∣ed that the Saints life and practice be made manifest again in the world. and the same even∣ing one Alice Brock felton her knees before the said Nayler, and Nayler put his hands upon her head, and said, Stand fast, &c. Thomas Cole informeth, That the 25 of October Martha Simmons and Hanna Stranger being called out of Naylers room into their own lodging, they one after another knee∣led before Nayler, and laid their heads on his knees, and he laid his hands on their heads, making a groaning noyse within himself, and before they rose from their knees he Laying on of hands was ow∣ned before the house; but crossing of hands is denied crossed his hands over their heads. And Hanna Stranger at her examination before the Committee confessed, That she kneeled at James Naylers feet and kissed them; and o∣thers being demanded concerning these actions would give no answer. And James Nayler being examined whether any kneeled and kissed his feet, answered, that there might be such things though he did not mind it, being things that he did not glo∣ry in Mark.. As for his doing of miracles particularly, Dorcas Erbery saith, that she was dead Is it blasphe∣my to raise from the dead? in Exeter Goal two days, and that Nayler laid his hands upon her, and raised her, which she affirmed in her examination at Bristol, and did not de∣ny when examined as to this by the Committee.
To which Naylor being examined whether Dorcas Er∣bury was dead in Exon Goal, as in her examination, an∣swered, If you speak of such a death as you may under∣stand, she was dead. Being further asked, how she was dead in his understanding, answered, I shall say little of my self in that thing. And being further asked, whether he raised her from the dead, answered, I can do nothing of my self. Being asked, whether any other did raise her by his hands, and if he laid his hands upon her, answered. There is a power in me from above. And being demanded, whether he had such a power as to raise from the dead, an∣swered, I have said before, I cannot bear witness of my self in the thing. And being asked, who bore witness of him, answered, The Scriptures If the Scriptures or any just Law of this Nation had been har∣kned to, the Innocent would not thus have suf∣fered cruel torments. do bear witness to the power which is in me, which is everlasting. And being de∣manded, whether he raised from the dead by vertue of that power, answered, I can do nothing but what the power doth in me; and it is the same power whereof you reade in the Scriptures Mark and take notice of this. that hath raised the dead according to the measure of the power manifest. And being asked, whether that power were manifest in such a manner in him as to raise Dorcas Erbery from the dead, answered, I have said, I shall not satisfie in words concerning the thing further, than onely this, That you may clearly understand that wherein Dorcas Erbery, or any else do attribute unto me, as to a Creature that hath beginning and ending, that I utterly deny Mark what blasphemy are in these words.; but that that any see of God in me by the same spirit that revealed any thing to them, that I do not deny. This may serve at one word, for there cannot be a more abominable thing than to take from the Creator, and give to the Creature Mark a∣gain. the same power which did raise from the dead, which you reade in the Scripture, the same Christ Take no∣tice he speaks not of another Christ, but the some that was yesterday, Heb. 13. 8. the same anointing ac∣cording to the measure of him is manifest in me, and not another. And being asked, if any prayed to Christian him,
whether he did dis-own it, answered, As a Creature I do disown it Take no∣tice. These things, What mat∣ter of fact is in these things that is in the least evil? or what the Scri∣ptures do not own? and divers others we have reported, as part of the matter of fact. Second Article. That the said James Nayler assumed How assu∣med, because others write and spoke  what the Lord commanded them. the name and the incommunicable attributes and titles of our blessed Sa∣viour; as first, The fairest of ten thousand. As for this, the evidence was in a Letter of Hanna Stran∣ger, found about him at Bristoll, the giving him the title of the fairest of ten thousand; which upon her examination at Bristoll, and before the Committee, she confessed she wrote to him in her Letter. And James Naylor being ask∣ed by the Committee, whether any such title as the fairest of ten thousand had been given to him in any Writing or Letter, he answered, To what they did in the Letter, if they gave it to me as to the visible, then I do deny it Mark what is confessed, and what de∣nied, and let the wise judge if the Scri∣ptures speak not the same things, 12 Cor. 4. 7. 10. and 2 Cor. 6 18. and 13. chap. and 15. 1 Cor. 6. 19. and ought not Christ to speak, or be worshipped in his Temple.; but if they speak it to that begotten of the Father in me, then I dare not deny it. And being willed to repeat that answer again, he said, If they speak it as to the visible, as to that which is earthly, then I deny Mark, his yea is amen. any such thing be∣longing to me in that sense: but if they speak it to that which the Father hath begotten in me, then I dare nor de∣ny it, because that (as he said) is beautifull Where the most of that beauty is revealed by God amongst ten thousand, there is the fairest of ten thousand. This was his testimony before the House., wherever it is begotten. And in his second examination before the Committee, his answer was to the same effect So he changeth not..
Resolution of the Committee. Ʋpon this evidence the Committee were of opinion, that James Naylor You should not spend your opinion of things you know not; for he denies that James Naylor, (which is the visible) to take these things upon him. had assumed the title of The fairest of ten thousand. 2. The only begotten Son of God. And for that the evidence was, that Hanna Stranger in the said Letter gave him that title. And being demanded whether he did assume that title, answered in these words; That there are many sons Mark this also you that are of an un∣derstanding heart. besides, yet the son of God I must witness, and dare not deny; Was not this a direct answer, and sufficient to all them that de∣sired to hear the truth. the son of God I am, and dare not deny. And being often pressed to give a di∣rect answer whether he were the onely begotten He that is a son o God, is he not the onely begot∣ten of God? Doth any help God to beget his children, save himself alone? Reade Jam. 1. 5. Were you not wholly ignorant of the Scriptures, and power of God, you would not stumble at these things. son of God, answered thus, I am the son of God, but I have many brethren. And again said, I have many brethren, though some of them do not yet know me. And being ur∣ged to confess or deny it, answered in these words, I have answered that I have given of my Father to speak for the present unto that thing. Being asked, whether he were the onely begotten son of God, he answered Hath he not well spoken? let him that is spiritual, judge., Thou hast said it. Which question and answer being repeated to him as his answer, he answered, Do not ensnare Saw he not their hearts? the Inno∣cent. And upon his examination, taken, certified, and at∣tested, as aforesaid, being asked whether he be the onely begotten son of God, answered, That he was the son of God, and that the son of God was but one Mark this. But being examined by the Committee as to this part of his examination at Bristoll Why did not they then at Bristoll write down his true answer, and afterwards cause it to be read to them., he affirmed, that this was not his answer.
Resolution of the Committee: Ʋpon this evidence the Committee were of opinion, that the title of the onely begotten son of God was given to James Naylor To that which was vi∣sible he hath denied again and again: How is it that you cannot re∣ceive the truth? And being demanded whether he assirmed that title, he did not deny it. The Prophet of the most High: This title we finde given him in a Letter to Naylor from one Jane Woodcock found about him at Bristoll. And be∣ing examined there upon that clause in the Letter, he an∣swered, That he was the Prophet of the most high God. And Martha Symmons upon her examination at Bri∣stoll said, There was a time when James Naylor was a true Prophet of the most high God, but now he is gone beyond, and is in the administration of Peace, and is the beloved of the Lord. James Naylor being examined by the Committee, whe∣ther he owned this title of the Prophet of the most high God, he answered, Yea, I am a Prophet of the most high God. And being pressed to answer whether he were the Prophet, he answered, There be other Prophets Mark this. be∣sides me. And being pressed again with the same question, answered, I have said what I may as to that thing in the counsel of my Father. Upon this his confession at Bristoll, and answer as a fore∣said. Resolution of the Committee: The Committee were of opinion, that James Naylor had assumed Why? be∣cause he con∣fesses the truth. the title of the Prophet. Therefore you should not have done him harm, Ps. 105. 15. of the most high God.
The King of Israel. And for this the evidence was, we find in a letter from one Thomas Symmons this title given to James Naylor, and in the examination of Dorcas Erbery taken at Bristoll aforesaid, we find something to this purpose, who being asked why she pulled off his stockings, she answered, be∣cause he is the holy one of Israel, and deserves and is wor∣thy of it. And Martha Symmons, upon her examination at Bri∣stoll, saith that James Naylors name is now buried, & that he is anoninted King He witnessed before his Judges, that he was a King over the powers of darkness, and so reigns ac∣cording to Scripture, Rev. 5. 10. of Israel; to which being examined by the Committee, expresly owned the examination as to that to be true, and the thing it self, but because this va∣ries a little from the charge and fastens Where is any thing that is evill proved that he hath said or done. it not altogether upon James Naylor, they had this further proof, James Naylor in his examination at Bristoll being asked whether he were the King of Israel, answered, thou hast said. To this James Naylor being examined by the Committee, whe∣ther this question were so demanded as aforesaid, he an∣swered; that it was not asked by way of a question, whe∣ther he were the King of Israel, but that the examiner did positively affirm, thou art the King of Israel, to which he answered, thou hast said it. And being particularly examined by the Committee whether he did own the title of the King of Israel, he answered in these words, I have no Kingdome in this World, yet a Kingdome I have, and he that hath redeemed me  hath redeemed me to be a King Read Rev. 5. 9. 10. for ever. And being examined again to the same question, whether he owned the title of the King of Israel, he answered, as a creature, I deny any such thing further, then as God manifested in the flesh. And if they gave that title to Christ Would you not have him to ein? Read Luk. 19. 27. in me, then I do own it.
Resolution of the Committee. Ʋpon this evidence the Committee were of opinion, that James Naylor assumed Doth he not all along deny it to the visible, how comes it you bear false wit∣nesse against him, in saying that Iames Naylor assumes it? the title of the King of Is∣rael. The everlasting Son of Righ∣teousnesse. This we find given to him in a letter by Hanna Stranger in these words, thou everlasting Son of Righteousnesse. And Martha Symmons in her examination at Bristoll calls him Lord of Righteousnesse, which she also affirmed be∣fore the Committee. And James Naylor himself being examined by the Committee whether any person had gi∣ven him that title of the everlasting Son of Righteousness, he answered, where God Take no∣tice of his an∣swers all a∣long, whether there be any blasphemy in them. is manifested in the flesh, there is the everlasting Son of Righteousnesse. And being asked twice The be∣gotten of God cannot lye. whether God was manifested in the flesh in him, answered both times, God manifest in the flesh I witnesse, and may not deny. Prince of peace. This we find given to him in a letter by the said Han∣na Stranger, and in her examination at Bristoll she owned him to be the Prince of peace; the same title was also gi∣ven him by Martha Symmons, as it appeared by her exa∣mination at Bristoll, which was confessed by her before the Committee. And being particularly asked what she called the man whom we call James Naylor, answered, I call him a perfect man. And being further demanded whether she did not call him the Prince of peace, answered,
he that is a perfect Read, James 3. 2. man, he is the Prince of peace, and Naylor being examined by the Committee whether he owned the title of the Prince of peace, answered, the Prince of peace I own, the everlasting peace Blessed is he that can truly witnesse this. is begot∣ten in me. Sent to judge and try the Cause of Israel. The evidence of this was in the same letter of Jane Woodcocks, we find it given to him, and in his examination at Bristoll whether that title was given to him, he would make no answer. And being examined by the Committee, whether he assumed to be sent to judge and try the cause of Israel, answered in these words, the Judge of Israel is but one, and that Judge I witnesse in me, which is the Christ. Mark his answers all a∣long, and see what blasphe∣my you find. And further answered, if thou speak of him, whom the Father hath sent into the World and begotten in me, the holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Father, and the Son in me, which is in me, it thou speak of it, this I own. And being asked in what respect he was sent, he answered no otherwise, but as God manife& s;t in the flesh, though not as mortall. And being asked by whom he was sent to trie the cause of Israel, answered, by him who hath made all creatures, and hath sent his Spirit into me, his Son into me, to try the cause, though he said, he was no Judge in carnall matters. And being asked whether he were more sent to judge and trye the cause of Israel than another, answered in these words, as to my saying I am sent, mind that, no otherwise then as the Father and the Son is in me, and to that I say further, that no other man is sent in that sence, but he that knoweth the indwelling of that God, and according to the measure of his knowledge of the li∣ving God, so far is Judgement Let his answers be wyed in the right Bal∣lance, Job 31. 6. and those that dwell in love will see no llin them. committed to him, and no further.
And being urged to answer, whether any other had the same measure of Judgement, to judge the cause of Israel as he had, he answered, that he dot at present any thing given him of his Father to answer unto that. Resolution of the Committee:Resolution of the Committee. That James Naylor Learn to speak truth. hath assumed to be sent to judge, and trye the Cause of Israel. Iesus. And for this the evidence was. Iohn Stranger in a postscript in his wifes letter directed to, and found upon Iames Naylor, used these words, thy name is no more to be called Iames, but Iesus; which postscript being shewed to Stranger by the Committee, he owned it written by him, and being asked wherefore he called him Jesus answered in these words, I was moved Be not of∣fended at the movings of the Lord, lest he break you in pieces. Read, Mat. 21. 44. of the Lord, and afterwards by the Spirit of the Lord, and being asked whether by Jesus he meant the Saviour of the World, he would give no answer. And Martha Sym∣mons in her examination at Bristoll saith, that she hath heard some call him Jesus, which examinaion being read unto her, she denied not that, though she denied another part of that examination. And James Naylor being exa∣minated whether any person had called him by the name of Jesus, answered in these words, as I am visible Take no∣tice of this. here before you, I believe they have not, but that the name of the Lord is in me, that I dare not deny; and further said, that they have given that name to him who is the Jesus. Read and understand, 2. Cor. 13. 5. But if they have given it to any other then to the Son of God that is in me, I do deny what they have spoken. Mark. And being asked whether he denyed, that they gave him the name of Jesus, answered, as I am a creature Mark a∣gain, where is the blasphe∣my. I be∣lieve
they did not, & afterwards confessed that the name of Jesus was given him in a letter, & if he had understood it of any other than the Iesus, he should have denied it: being demanded whether they gave the name of Jesus to him, he answered in these words no otherwise than as to the Son of God, Take no∣tice of this also. being demanded whether any had given him the name of Jesus; answered, not as to the visible, and being demanded to what then they gave the name of Je∣sus, answered in these words, I understand they gave that name to the Jesus, to the Christ Let those that know what Christ Jesus is, judge if this be bla∣spemy, and let the Scriptures bear witness Read Col. 1. 27. 2. Cor. 13. 5. that is in me. Vpon his second examination being asked whether he owned the name of Jesus, and if that title belonged to him, as to Christ within him, he answered, that name was ne∣ver published to be called by me, neither do I call my self Mark a∣gain. by that name, but what my Father hath published, is another thing. Resolution of the Committee. Ʋpon this evidence the Committee were of opinion, that James Naylor assumed the name of Jesus. What ground is there for such an opinion, seeing they often Feard him deny it, as to self. He in whom the hope of Israel standeth. And for this the evidence was in the letter of Martha Symmons found upon James Naylor were these words, thou well beloved Lamb of God, in whom the hope of Is∣rael stands. And James Naylor in his examination at Bri∣stoll being asked, whether he were the Lamb of God in whom the hope of Israel stands, answered, that if I were not his Lamb, I should not be so sought to be devoured, Is it a true saying. and that the hope of Israel stands in the Righteousnesse of the Father in whomsoever it is, and being asked whe∣ther Israels hope were in any measure in him, be an∣swered,
yea, which examination of his at Bristoll being read to him by the Committee, he denyed not this part of it, and being examinated by the Committee, whether their hope of Israel did stand in him, answered in these words, it stands only in Christ Jesus, Take no∣tice he cannot deny Christ Jesus, but him∣self doth he deny. and as Christ Jesus is known in me, and being asked again whether he were in whom the hope of Israel stands, answered in these words, no way but as Christ is in me, Mark. and being then asked whether as Christ is in you, so are you he in whom the hope of Israel stands, answered, nay, doe not adde to my words: I speak as plain as I can, that all the glory may be given to God, Take no∣tice of this mans blasphe∣my, who would have all the glory given to God, and what is there proved that he hath taken to himself. and none to the creature, that the whole glory may be given to my Father. And none to me, as you look upon me as a creature, and the next question was whether as Christ is in you, are you he in whom the hope of Israel stands, to which he answered Christ in me the hope of glory, Search the Scripture Col. 1. 27. and being examined what hopes Israel had in him beyond any other person, answered, none can know but they that are of Israel, Let him that reads un∣derstand, but he that will be ignorant, may be ignorant still. they can give an account of their hopes, Israel must give an account of their hopes themselves. Resolution of the Committee. That James Naylor assumed Why be∣cause he saith the hope of Israel stands only in Christ Jesus. to beseem whom the hope of Israel stands. The Committee being desirous to informe themselves how far the said Naylor was consenting unto that worship and those titles before given unto him, besides tho former evidence they did find in his examination at Bristoll, where being asked why he came into the City in so unu∣suall a manner, as the woman leading his horse and sing∣ing before him, he answered that he might not refuse any thing that's moved Is this blasphemy for to own the movings of the Lord, and who made you Judges in this matter. of the Lord, which being read un∣to him at the Committee, he denied not, and for the bet∣ter clearing of this, the Committee examined Hanna
Stranger whether Naylor reproved her, for casting her garments before him, or for kneeling or kissing his feet, from whom they could get no other answer then this, she would not accuse or justify any. The Committee did al∣so find in their examination of Naylor being asked by them, whether he reproved the women for spreading their garments and singing before him, ansvvered in these vvords, nay, only I said unto them take heed that they did nothing but vvhat they vvere really moved of the Lord. Is not this good counsell where appears that which proves blasphemy. And being also examined by the Committee, vvhether he reproved those that gave him the title before men∣tioned, ansvvered, that he had not at all spoken unto them, concerning that thing, only the letters he had vvherein the titles vvere given, and did not think at all that any should have seen So he in∣tended not the publishing of those titles, as one assu∣ming glory to himself. them, because he knevv there vvas things in them that many could not bear, but now he saw his Father purposed they should not be hid. Naylor at his second examination before the Committee, being demanded whether he had reproved the persons that gave him those titles and attributes, he would not say he had reproved them; being demanded whether he owned them or disclaimed them, answered in these words, if they had it from the Lord what am I that I should judge it; Is not this rightly spoken Read Rom. 14. 4. 10. and being pressed again with the same question, answered thus, if the Father move them by his Spirit to give them to Christ I may not deny, if they give that to any other but Christ I disowne it; Is this assuming. and being asked again whether he reproved them, or not, answered, if at∣tributed to the creature, then it is reproveable, Or is this assuming. if they did it to the Lord, then I dare not reprove it; and being asked, whether he thought not Christ robbed Nay, they would rob him of his ho∣nour, that would not have him to have it where he is. of his honour, by that honour of worship given unto him, an∣swered that he looked upon it to be really to the true ho∣nour of Christ, or else he would utterly have denied it; and being asked whether he had at any time what∣soever
reproved those persons, he answered, I never un∣derstood that they gave that honour, but to God. Or is this blasphemy. Here we have thought to have concluded this report, but the Committee meeting with some further evidence, There is need of fur∣ther evidence to satisfie the wife-hearted. they were willing you should be partakers of it, and it is this. John Baynam Deputy to the Srgeant of the house, to whose custody Naylor and his company are com∣mitted, informeth that the usuall posture of James Naylor is sitting in a chair, and his company both men and wo∣do sometimes kneel, & when they are weary of kneeling, they sit upon the ground They have been sound in the same po∣stures dayly since Iames Naylor hath been removed from them And is this your further evidence. before him, singing these and divers other words to the like purpose (viz.) holy, holy, to the Almighty, to the true God and great God, and glory to the Almighty, And is hs further evidence of Iames Naylors blasphemy, that others sing prayses to the true God, and glo∣ry to the Al∣mighty. &c. And thus they do usually all the day long, but the informer never heard Naylor sing as aforesaid, and saith there is great resort to the said Naylor by divers persons, who most of them do kneel And doe they not still the same, as when Iames Naylor was with them. before him in the manner aforesaid. And Martha Symmons in the posture aforesaid sung, this is the joyfull day, behold the King of Righteousnesse is come, It is likely she knew what she sung, and well is it for them, that can witness the Son of Righteousnesse come with healing, &c. Read Mala. 4. 2. and further the informer saith, that he never knew the said Naylor shew any dislike, either by reproof or otherwise of that honour or worship which John Stranger and his wife Martha Symmons, and Dorcas Erbery and the rest gave him How can he say they gave it to him, since he himself saith that he never understood they did it to him as a creature, and this informer hath said a lit∣tie before that their prayses were directed to the great God, and to the Almighty. as aforesaid. And a Member of the house being lately at the place, where Naylor is now a prisoner, informes the Committee, that he saw Naylor and his company in the posture aforesaid, and heard John Stran∣ger, and one of the women sing, holy, holy, holy Lord God, Are you angry that others should sing prayses to the Lord God, and is this your further evidence of Iames Naylors blasphemy. and holy, holy, holy to thee, thee, thee Lord
God▪ And whil'st John Stranger sung these words, he did sometimes look upwards Is looking upon J. N. any further evi∣dence? It seems a▪ small thing will serve turn for further evi∣dence., and sometimes upon James Naylor. Another Member Ought his Accusers to have been his Judges? it was not likely that such could see his innocency. informed us, as upon his own view, to the same purpose. And at Naylor's last examina∣tion before the Committee, being Wednesday the third in∣stant, one William Piggot did inform, that Naylor sitting in a Chair where he is now a Prisoner, one Sarah Black∣bery came to him, and took him by the hand, and said, Rise up my love, my doye, my fair one, and come away; why sittest thou among the pots? And presently put her mouth upon his hand, and sunk down upon the ground be∣fore him. To which Naylor himself being examined by the Com∣mittee, confessed she took him by the hand, and spoke the words aforesaid, but denies the putting her mouth upon his hand, and such bowing down, but saith, that he sate low, and that he was not free to go with her. And Naylor be∣ing asked to whom she directed that speech, answered, to the Lord, and to him that raiseth from the dust, and casteth them down that are exalted. And being asked whether he reproved her for that expression, he answered, he reproved her not. And further, William Piggot informed the Com∣mittee▪ that the last week he was at the place aforesaid where Naylor is now a prisoner, and that one Stranger and Martha Symmons were with others sitting upon their heels before and about Naylor, and that Stranger rose up, and stood and sung just before Naylor, according to their usual manner Hath it not been their manner since he was remo∣ved as before? Ask their Kee∣per John Bay∣nam, whom you cite as further evi∣dence. of singing; when and where a man Quaker (being present) asked Naylor, Dost thou own that voyce? Naylor answered, Yea, I do. And Naylor being asked by the Committee, if this were so, answered, If I tell you the truth, you will not believe me. And Naylor being pressed to answer whether he owned the voyce afore∣said, answered, That voyce I will not deny.
To sum up all; the Committee asked Naylor, what he had more to say, (that being likely to be the last time of hearing him before the Committee reported the whole fact to the House) he thus answered. I do abhor that any of that honour which is due to Take good notice of his answers from first to last, and see if in any of them you can finde blasphemy, or any thing that is contrary to the Scriptures, and the Saints practice God, should be given to me as I am a Creature; but it pleased the Lord to set me up as a sign of the coming of the righteous one; and what hath been done in my passing through the Towns, I was commanded by the power of the Lord to suffer such things to be done to the outward as a sign, I abhorr any honour as a Creature.
Dec. 5. The Report The first time the whole House sate a∣bout J. N. concerning James Naylor, received and read in the House this day from the Committee. Dec. 6. THE House this day resumed the debate upon the re∣port The se∣cond time the whole House sate about J. N. touching James Naylor. Resolved, That James Naylor be brought forthwith to the Bar, and that the report of the Committee be read to him; and that it be then demanded of him what he saith hereunto by confession or denial. He was sent for accor∣dingly; and being brought to the Bar, was spoken to to kneel You should not be offend∣ed with others if they do what you re∣quire your selves. Herein you walk not charitably to∣wards your brethren, more and chap. 13. which he did not; and keeping his Hat on, the Sergeant by command of the Speaker took off his Hat. And being asked whether his name were James Naylor, he answered, he is so called. Being asked, how long he hath been so called, he answered, ever since he can remember. The Report that the Committee had drawn up was read to him, and he was demanded to every particular, especially when it is done to God in Man. Reade 2 Cor. 6. 18. 15.
whether that were his answer to the Committee: To which he answered particularly, acknowledging them to be so, or to that effect But there was much wanting of what he had spoken to the Committee, which in some things the truth might have more ful∣ly appeared. and so withdrew. Resolved, that James Naylor be called in to the Bar, and demanded several questions. He was accordingly called in, and these But what these questions were, is not yet certainly known, for there is no re∣cord kept of them. questions demanded of him. Resolved, That the House doth agree with the Com∣mittee in the report of the matter touching James Nay∣lor. Resolved, That this debate be adjourned till Monday morning, and nothing to intervene. Resolved, That James Naylor be kept private. Monday, 8. The House according to former order resumed The third time the whole House spent about J. N. the debate upon the business of James Naylor. Resolved, That this debate be adjourned till three of the clock. Resolved, That Candles be brought in. The question being propounded The fourth time the whole House sate a∣bout J. N., That James Nay∣lor upon the whole matter of fact What was his fact that he committed made him guilty of Blasphemy? is guilty of Blasphe∣my; and the question being put, that the word Horrid What hor∣rid, thing did he? Let it be declared; few wise men are not satisfied as yet. be inserted in the question next before the word Blasphe∣my, it passed in the affirmative. And the question being propounded, That James Naylor upon the whole matter in fact, is guilty of horrid Bla∣sphemy. And the question being put, that the question be now put, it passed in the affirmative It is much such a vote should pass, and so little ground for it as yet appears. And the main question being put, it was Resolved, That James Naylor upon the whole matter of fact is guilty of Horrid Blasphemy. Resolved, That James Naylor is a grand Impostor It were well if cause were shewed why this was added. and seducer of the people.
Resolved, that the debate upon this report touching James Naylor be adjourned till to morrow morning You do your business with great leisure, and take time e∣nough; if you do it well, you'l have the more peace with God. Tuesday 9. The House according to former order did resume The fifth time the whole House sate a∣bout J. N. the debate upon the report touching James Naylor. Resolved, that the debate be adjourned two hours. The House adjourned till three of the clock. The House resumed The sixth time the whole House sate a∣bout J. N. the debate upon the report touch∣ing James Naylor. Resolved, that this debate touching James Naylor be ad∣journed till to morrow morning. Wednesday 10. Resolved The se∣venth time the House sate a∣bout J. N. that this debate be adjourned till to morrow morning eight of the clock, and nothing to inter∣vene. Thursday 11. The House resolved The eighth time the whole House spent a∣bout J. N. &c. The question being put, that the House adjourn two hours What is the reason you are so earnest? you have spent time enough already to end such a business as this, had not there been a Lion in the way; and you had done well to have taken notice of the sword of the Lord drawn against you in this thing. the House was divided. Yeas went forth 84. Noes 87. So it passed in the negative. Resolved, that the debate touching James Naylor be ad∣journed till to morrow morning and nothing to intervene.
Friday 12. The House according to former order resumed The ninth time the whole House spent a∣bout J. N. the debate upon the business of James Naylor. Resolved, that this debate, &c. till to morrow morning, and nothing to intervene. Saturday 13. The House this day according to former order assu∣med The tenth time the whole House assumed J. N. business. &c. The question being propounded, that the debate touch∣ing James Naylor be adjourned till Monday morning Why, did you intend to spend your Sabbath about J. N. had you not dayes e∣nough besides to labour in? and nothing to intervene, the House was divided. Noes went out 65. Yeas 108. So it was resolved, that the debate touching James Nay∣lor should be adjourned till Monday morning eight of the clock, and nothing to intervene. Monday 15. The House according to former order assumed The ele∣venth time the whole House assumed J. N. business. the debate about James Naylor, and adjourned till to morrow morning. Tuesday 16. The House according to former order The 12. time the whole House assumed the debate about J. N. It is wondred at by many what the cause should be that this foolish business should hold so many wise men so long. Is not the Lord a confounding the wisdome of this world with things that are foolish? resumed, &c.
The question being propounded, that the punishment of James Naylor for his crimes shall be death What you desire to him, will be your own end, but you cannot kill the soul. and that a Bill be prepared and brought in for that purpose; and the question being put that the question be now put, the House was divided It seems you cannot have your will in this neither. The Noes went forth 96. The Yeas 82. So it passed in the negative. The question being put, that this be part of the punish∣ment of James Naylor, to have his hair cut off Why, do you think his stength lyes in his hair? Must you not have your will in this neither. it passed in the negative. Resolved, that this be part of the punishment of James Naylor, that his tongue be bored through This was that the Scri∣pture might be fulfilled, Rev. 1. 7. with a hot iron. That the further punishment of James Naylor shall be, that he shall be stigmatized in the forehead This was also that the Scriptures might be ful∣filld, Is. 52. 14. with the letter B. The question being propounded, that James Naylor be set on the Pillory This was also that the Scripture might be ful∣filled, Mar. 15. 17. in the new Palace Westminster the space of two hours, and then shall be whipped This was likewise done that the Scri∣pture might be fulfilled, Joh. 19. 1. Heo. 11. 36. by the Hangman through the streets from Westminster to Cheap∣side, and there likewise be set upon the Pillory for the space of two hours in each of the said places, wearing a Paper containing an inscription of his crimes This was likewise done that the Scri∣pture might be fulfilled, Mar. 27. 37.; that his tongue shall be bored through with a hot iron, and that he be stigmatized in the forehead with the letter B. Resolved, that instead of the word Cheapside in this question, the old Exchange be inserted Why, had not Cheapside been far enough? What hath he done to deserve such cruel punishments? Resolved, that these words be added in the question, With his head in Otherwise the crown had not been about his head, Mar. 15. 17. the Pillory. Resolved, that the place for boring his tongue, and stig∣matizing, be near the old Exchange. The question being propounded, that the prison he shall be committed to be Bridewell in Bristoll; and the question being put, it passed in the negative.
Resolved, he be committed to Prison to Bridewell Lon∣don. Resolved, that in stead of the words, from the society of all men, these be inserted, from the society of all Why, whom hath he harmed? may he not have food and rai∣ment? His fact had need be great that deserves this punishment. Is this the way to pay him some hundreds of pounds still in arrears, and for his nine years faithfull service in the Army? people. Resolved, that he have no pen, ink, or paper. Resolved, that he shall have no relief but what he earns by his daily labour Suppose you make him uncapable of labour by your punishment, or he be at any time sick that he cannot labour, must he then starve: Surely the spirit of Christ you did not consult with when you pass'd this judgement.. Wednesday 17. Resolved, that James Naylor be set on the Pillory, with his head in the Pillory, in the Palace-yard Westminster, during the space of two hours on Thursday You were long e're you could agree on your sentence, but quick in the execution, the next day. next, and shall be whipt by the Hangman through the streets from Westminster to the old Exchange London, and there like∣wise be set on the Pillory, with his head in the Pillory, for the space of two hours, between the hours of eleven and one, on Saturday But one dayes respite between such cruel suffer∣ing? your sen∣tence had been more mercifull had it been present death; for the Exe∣cutitioner confessed, that he gave him 310. stripes, and should have given him one more, (there being 311. kennels) but his foot slipped, and the stroke fell upon his own hand, which hurt him much: this he confessed to the Sheriff. next, in each place wearing a paper containing an inscription of his crimes; and that at the old Exchange his tongue be bored through with a hot iron, and that he be there also stigmatized in the forehead with the letter B. and that he be afterwards sent to Bristol, and be conveyed into and through the said City on Horse∣back bare ridged, with his face backward What, more sufferings yet?, and there also publickly whipt The world may think this man a great sinner, if they judge by outward appearance, according to his sufferings: but what evil hath he done? the next Market-day
after he comes thither & that from thence he be commit∣ted to prison in Breedwell London, & there restrained from the society of all people, Though the Devill had power to cast some into pri∣son, yet the Lords work will go on to the confounding of all his enemies, this assuredly will come to passe, and remember that a prophet hath been amongst you. and there to labour hard till he shall be released by Parliament, and during that time be debarred the use of pen, inck, and paper, See whether in Queen Maries days, or in the late Bishops time, they were ever so cruell, but this is come to passe for to try those that dwell on the earth, which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. Read Rev. 2 9. and Rev. 3. 9, 10. and shall have no relief, but what he earns by his daily labours. Resolved that the said James Naylor be brought to the Bar, to morrow by ten of the clock to receive this judge∣ment. Resolved that the Speaker be authorized to issue his warrants It is a que∣stion whether this be suffi∣cient warrant (unless the Protector con∣curre with them in the thing,) if the instrument of Government be yet in force. to the Sheriffs of London, and Middlesex, the Sheriff of Bristoll and Governour of Bridewell, to see this judgement put in execution respectively in the said places. Resolved that the Speaker be authorized to make his warrant to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, to convey the said Nailor to Bristoll. Resolved that the Speaker do issue the like warrant to the Sheriff of Bristoll, to convey him up to London, after the execution of this judgement there. Resolved that to morrow after the sentence is pro∣nounced against James Naylor, the severall petitions now offered be read. Were not these peti∣tions for the destruction of the whole seed of the Jews, let that in your conscience answer. Resolved that then the house do likewise take into con∣sideration
It were well if you did them speedy Justice, they have been a long time kept by you from their homes, and fami∣lies, you use to say they are worse than infidels, provides not for their families, who now hinders these and many more that are innocent, which lye in prisons, dungeons and holes in this Nation, that have broken no Law. the persons brought up with James Nay∣lor. The House being informed that James Naylor was brought to the Door, according to the former order made yesterday, that he should be brought to the Bar, receive the judgement, and the resolution made yesterday touch∣ing the said James Naylor for his punishment. Resolved that these words be added to the said reso∣lution, viz. and the Parliament doe declare and judge the same accordingly. The question being propounded that James Naylor be had in, and before judgement pronounced he be demanded whether he have anything to say, why judgement should not be pronounced This had been just and legall, but it is likely, you were afraid he would then have cleared his Innocency. upon him, and the question being put, that the question be now put, the House was di∣vided. The Noes went forth 107 The yeas 87 So it past in the Negative. It is pity too illegal a thing should stand on record against you, it is hoped and desired by all good men, that no Court of Judicature in these Nations will follow the example, if they should, what will become of the good and wholsome Laws, made by our ancestors. The said James Naylor was by order of the House brought in to the Bar, where the Speaker acquainted him with the hainousnesse of the crime, of which the Parlia∣ment found him guilty, Of what? This the 13. time the whole House sate about I. N. and accordingly did pro∣nounce the judgement against him, and upon which he withdrew. Resolved that the petitions from the Counties, and the
businesse about the women which were apprehended with James Naylor be taken into consideration to morrow morning, nothing to intervene. You are very zealous, take heed the hand of the Lord be not against you in this, as in the other, and that you be made to feel it. 18. December (the day James Naylor first suffered.) Was severall petitions presented to the House contain∣ing complaints against the growth and exorbitances of the people called Quakers, You name only these, but it is against the whole seed that cannot bow to Ha∣man, or that denyes the teachers made by the will of man. were this day read one from the County of Devon, and of Exeter, One other from the Ministers Whose Ministers are those that persecute, or that will not give liberty of conscience to serve the Lord as he requires? in the County of Nor∣thumberland, Durham, and Newcastle upon Tine. One other from the Justices of Peace, Gentry, Mini∣sters of the Gospell, These rulers, Gentry, and Ministers must be such we read of. Mark. 14 55. &c. and Luk. 19. 47. 48. and others within the County Palatine of Chester, and the Attestation of the same peti∣tion by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Ministers of the City of Chester. Another from the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Councell of the City of Bristoll, and the Ministers of the Gospell there, and other chief inhabitants there. And also the humble petition of divers well affected persons, Gentlemen, Ministers & others in the County of Cornwall, which were all referred to a Committee to con∣sider of them, and to collect such heads as may be fittest for a Bill for suppressing It were well that you first heard both parties speak, and see if their complaints be true, for fear the Justice that is amongst the heathen condemne you not in the day of the Lord, which is not far from every one of you. of the mischiefs, and inconve∣niences complained of therein. The House likewise referred to a Committee, the Facts and Crymes They desire to receive Justice from you, and as speedy as you please. of the rest of the persons, apprechended with James Naylor to state the matter of fact and report it.
Wednesday the 24. of De∣cember. Came five Ministers to Newgate to J. N. namely M. Caryl, Mr Manton, Mr. Nye Mr. Griffith, and Mr. Re∣nolds and it is said they did it by order from the Par∣liament but they did not deal with him faithfully, or as Ministers of Christ Jesus, for they would not permit neither friend or other to be present in the room that might bear witnesse of their discourse, and like∣wise when they had promised him to write down both their questions, and his answers and to leave with him a copy of the same, which after they had written they took and burnt, and performed not their promise with him, which thing was not honestly done; and they doing such evill things, how can they teach good to their people, or profit them at all, seeing they preach more by example then by precept. Saturday 27. December. This day James Naylor received a second part of the sentence of Parliament, before the old Exchange, where he stood full two hours with his head in the pil∣lory, after which he was bored through the tongue with an hot iron, and burnt on the forehead with let∣ter B. this is observable that Robert Rich, a Merchant being at the Parliament door, and there about this
morning from eight of the clock till about eleven, cry∣ing to the Parliament-men as they passed by; to one, where he saw innocency, said, He that dwelleth in love dwelleth with God, for God is love. And to another, where he saw envy reign, He that hateth his brother is a manslayer, and he that hates his brother is a mur∣therer; and several other the like speeches, dividing the good from the bad. And although was then thought that James Naylor would not have suffered any further punishment, by reason that there were many honou∣rable persons then attending the Parliament and Pro∣tector on behalf of the said James Naylor; and like∣wise the Protector had sent to the Parliament a Letter, &c. yet the said Kich then told the People, that the Innocent was going to suffer; and crying to the Par∣liament, that he was clear from the blood of all men; and desiring them to be so too, departed, and came be∣fore the Exchange, where with James Naylor he went on the Pillory where he stood, and sate by him with two other women that sate on each side by him, till after a good space Robert Rich took a Paper out of his pocket, and placed over his head, whereon was writ∣ten, It is written, Luk. 23. 38. This is the King of the Jews. But presently an Officer stept up, and pull'd it down, and turned Robert Rich and the two women off the
Pillory; but after a while they lifted up Robert Rich again on the Pillory, where he staid till James Naylor had finished his sufferings for that time, and held him by the hand whil'st he was burning, and afterwards licked his wounds, and lead him by the hand from off the Pillory. This was also very remarkable, that notwithstanding there might be many thousands of people, yet they were very quiet, few heard to revile him, or seen to throw any one thing at him; and when he was a burn∣ing, all the people both before him and behind him, and on both sides of him, with one consent stood bare∣headed. This was done that the Scripture might be fulfilled, Mar. 15. 38.
COPIES OF SEVERAL of the PAPERS given into the House of PARLIAMENT in the time of IAMES NAYLERS Tryal & sufferings, which be∣gan the fifth of December, 1656. To the SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND, these to be read. FRIENDS, ACt nothing cōtrary to that which doth cōvinceyou, though bound with an Oath, although you bring your selves in never so much disgrace in breaking your Agreement; for in such a case you may reject the Counsel of God against your own Knowledge, and so appearing to please the world that looks upon you, the unjust acts against the Just; herein you'l do despite to the Spirit of Grace, wilfully acting that which he knows he should not: So here comes mans condemnation just from God; therefore before you do act consider; and be∣fore you do give Sentence fear; for Blasphemy proceeds from the root of Transgression; and see that you be first out of it before you of it do judge: There is no Blasphemy in the Light which is truth. And to witness the light is not Blasphemy. And to witness the Prophets Life, and the Apostles Life that had the Life of Jesus made manifest in his mortal flesh. And to witnesse the Life of God, and God dwelling in man, is not Blasphemy. And to witnesse the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, and as he is, so to be in this world, is not Blasphemy; but not to witnesse this, and to be in the transgression, he is in the Root that will blaspheme; and for a man to say he witnesses these things, and himself in the transgression, he blasphemes, and is the Synagogue for Satan, who did transgresse, and not abide in the truth, who is in the transgression. Now it is not because men can speak the Scriptures of truth, therefore they are able to judge of Blasphemy; for the Jews could speak the Scriptures of truth, but judged the Truth Blasphemy; Now if you would know what's Blasphemy, this is blasphemy, and these were out of the life of the truth that judged the life blasphemy; and you do not read that any that was in the life of Christ, did whip, banish, prison, put to death any for blasphemy▪ Alas! here is blasphemy heard all up and down the streets, men professing what they are not: Now the Jews which had the Scriptures, and out of the spirit of Christ, did put to death for blasphemy: Now with this examine and judge your selves, that you may not be judged of the Lord: Although Darius could not change after seal∣ed, yet 'twas much grief to him: consider what Act that was, and Law that
was not to be changed after sealed. And consider Herods Oath against Iohn Baptist, and the counsel and chief Priests against Christ for a blasphe∣mer. Is Christ in you? Now where is this councel and chief Priests against him? It is better to judge of things which you truly understand, pertaining to this life (but that you cannot) till you come to the Light that enlightens every man that comes into the world, and so leads into the Kingdom of God and Christ that is not of this world; for there is a Kingdom of the world which is not become the Kingdom of Christ, which is in the transgression; and there are the blasphemers in the transgression of the life which the Scriptures of truth is given forth from, which judges the truth blasphemy. Now wait in the Light that you may receive the wisdom of God which comes from Christ, by which all things was created, that with it you may come to use the creatures with the wisdom by which they were created to the Glory of God. I know the Lord is striving, that innocent blood you bring not upon your heads, and hath opened your understandings for to see more then at the first; and in many of you hath he wrought a noble Principle of tendernesse and moderation, in which if you abide faithful to act what it requires, the arm of the Lord you will see revealed, and great things brought to pass; and so will you be clear (whatever becomes of the Innocent) in the day of Gods visitation when he makes Inquisition for blood; you whose understandings the Lord hath opened and moved to plead the cause of the Innocent; be faithful to God; be your talent never so small, take heed of hiding it, least your sin become greater then you will be able to bear. If I may have Liberty of those that sit in the Parliament, I do here at their door attend, and am ready out of the Scriptures of truth, to shew, that not any thing James Nayler hath said or done is blasphemy, or worthy either of death or bond. It concerns no man farther to judge then he is judged, and is in the truth. This in tender love to all who are of an upright heart that sits in Parlia∣ment, from Robert Rich. There was several copies of the Letter given to particular Members, be∣sides this little paper given to many that had not the Letter. In a Letter of mine given to the Speaker this morning (which I desire may be read amongst you) is written at the latter end thereof these words, viz. If I may have Liberty of those that sit in the Parliament, I do here at their doore attend, and am ready out of the Scriptures of Truth, to shew, That not anything James Nayler hath said or done is blasphemy, or worthy either of death or bonds. These were delivered the 15. of December, being the eleventh time the whole House had set about this businesse; so when I had given the Speaker the Letter, I waited at their door from the time they first sate till they arose, and then I departed in peace. ROBERT RICH.
To you that sit in Parliament, who own the Scriputres, are these for, what is writ∣ten aforetime is written for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10. 11. Quaery 1. WHether those that said God was their Father, and crucified him for blasphemy that spoke the truth, were not lyars, and of their Father the Devil, yea or nay? read Ioh. 8. 41. & 44. 2. Whether lyars, covetous or proud men are not the Synagogue of Sa∣tan▪ And if such say they are the children of God, or Christians, whether (by the Scripture) that be not blasphemy? Read Rev. 2. 9. 3. Whether the lyar doth not hate him that abides in the truth? Read 1 Ioh. 3. 12 and there see why Cain slew Abel. And as it was then, is it not so now? Doth not he that is born after the flesh persecute him that is born after the spirit? Read Gal. 4. 29. 4. Whether they that have the spirit of Christ Jesus in them, punisheth the body, or puts any to death for words true or false? And did not Christ come to save life and not to destroy it? Read Mark 34. Matt. 13. 29, 3 Iohn 8. 11. 5. Whether Christ Jesus hath not been a stumbling stone, and a Rock of offence throughout all Generations? Read and see Isa. 8. 14. & 18. Luke 2. 34. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Luke 20. 17, 18, 19. Matt. 13. 55, 56. Luke 5. 30. & 33. (read these Scriptures over And did not the very Disciples of Christ oft stum∣ble and were offended at him? Read over these Scriptures and consider them well, Matt. 26. 8. to the 14. ver. & the 31. ver. Matt. 28. 17. Ioh. 6. 60. Luke 24. 11, 15, 16, & 37. ver. Ioh. 11. 39, 40. Joh. 20. 15. Lu. 24. 32. And did not the Prophets do many things that the wisdom of the flesh might count fool∣ishness, and to be rediculous? Read Isa. 20. 2, 3. Ier. 13. 3, 4, 5, &c. Ezek. 4. 1, 2, 3, &c. & Ezek. 12. 5, 6. Acts 21. 12, 13. Ios. 6. 6 6. VVhether the Lord in all ages hath not tried the children of men? Read Psal. 11. 4, 5. Rev. 3. 9, 10. And whether the day be not approaching that will try every mans work? 1 Cor. 3. 13. And whether all men be not either the children of God or of the Devil? And whether by their fruits they are not made manifest? And whether those that are the Children of God be not lead into moderation, Gentlenesse, patience, mercifulnesse, meeknesse, love, &c. And whether the Devil leads not his into wrath, envy, hatred, emulation, varience, strife, &c? So in this thing you will make your selves manifest which spirit leads you, and whose children you are. Search the Scriptures, and see if these things be not so. Robert Rich.
To the Parliament of England, &c The humble Petition of Robert Rich, (sirnamed, Mordicai) on the behalf of himself, and all the Seed of the Jews, which wait for the consolation of Israel, that are of an upright heart, scat∣tered throughout these three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, whether in Forms or in Professions, or out of them. Humbly sheweth, THat ever since the yeer 1648. it was hoped that Opression and all Persecution for conscience sake, would utterly have ceased, according to what hath often been declared; and instead thereof that Truth and Mercy would have taken place. But con∣trary thereto within these three yeers last past, have many hun∣dreds (even in this one Nation of England, in all pars there∣of) been cast into Prisons, Dungeons and Holes, and some have perished therein; and others have endured cruel whippings, stonings, and other bodily punishments, besides the spoiling of their goods, for no other cause save for matters concerning the Law of their God, and that for conscience sake they could not bow to Hamans nature; not so much as one known Law of this Nation proved that they had transgressed. The Premises being considered, My humble request is, That the Innocent in all Prisons through∣out these Nations may be set at Liberty (that onely for eonscience sake suffer) And more particularly, in case there be yet behinde of the sufferings of James Nayler to be file'd up, that it may be acted in my body. And I shall ever pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and for all them that love her proferity, ROBERT RICH. Blessed is he that considereth the poor and needy, the Lord will de∣liver him in he time of trouble, and cover his head in the day of Battel. Let none become Judges of evil thoughts. Jam. 2. 4. Rob. Rich.
Quaeries given to the Speaker of the House, and several other Members of Parliament. 1. WHether the anointing of the Father be not the Christ? (Exod. 40. 15. Psal. 89. 20. &c. Psal. 45. 7. Heb. 1. 9. Is. 61. 1. sal. 104. 6. to the 16. 1 Joh. 2. 27. 2 . 1. 21) and whether he was not compleat Christ the Son of God before he took upon him that flesh in which he suffered at Jerusalem, yea, before the soul or body of man or the world was (Prov. 8. 22. to the 32. o. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Jo. 8. 58. Joh. 17. 5. Eph. 4. 10.) And whether the Name Christ reach not over the whole body, anoin∣ted from the beginning of the world to the end? (1 Cor. 1. 12) 2. Did not Christ Jesus speak in other Vessels? and was he not persecuted in other Vessels besides that wherein he was lift∣ed up at Jerusalem? and if he had said in those Vessels, he was not the Christ, whether he had lyed or no? (Acts 9. 4. 2 Co. 13. 3. 1 Cor. 7. 10, 12. Phil. 1. 20. Rom. 8, 9, 10. Rom 10. 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 24.) 3. Doth not the Scripture say, God will write his Name on him that overcomes? Rev. 3. 12. which Name he is to beare before Kings and Rulers, Acts 9. 15. which if he deny, shal he not be denyed before the Father in Heaven? Matth. 10. 33. And if God doth reveal what he hath written to any other of his chil∣dren, and command him to confesse it, whether his obedience be blasphemy, yea or nay? 4. Did Christ ever appear in the world, and had not a body prepared? Heb. 10. 5: And did he ever come into the world and not in a vail? Heb. 10. 20. 2 Co. 3. 13, 14. And whether those that judged the Christ by looking on the outward vaile, could ever see the Christ, but became his persecutors? Read Matth: 13. 55, 56. Joh. 5. 18. Jo. 10 33, to 38. 5 Whether that which God begetteth in any creature be not the Seed of Abraham, which is the Christ? Gen. 22. 18. Heb. 2. 16. Gal. 3. 16. & 29. 1 Joh 5. 18. the first-born amongst many brethren, Rom 8. 29. And doth he not require the growth there∣of to the measure, stature and fulness? Eph 4 12, 13. And whe∣ther any can judg of that measure in another, to which he is not
grown in himself, without erring▪ Rom. 12. 3. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 14, 15. And whether this hath not been the cause of all the inno∣cent blood that hath been spilt from righteous Abel to this day; let the wise in heart judge. 6. VVhether this begotten be not the onely begotten of the Father? Joh. 3 16. Jom. 1. 18 And whether this begotten be not the eternal Son of God? Heb. 1. 2, 3. Isa. 2. 7. 1 Joh. 5. 11. The Rock of Ages, Isa. 51. 1. Deut. 32. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 4 The Anoynt∣ing; the Emanuel, Matth. 1. 23. The Saviour, Isa. 63. 8 9. Obed. 21. The Lamb of God, Rev. 13. 8 Joh. 1. 29. The Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. and the great Mystery, hid from Ages and Generations, Christ in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1. 26, 27. The stumbling∣stone, and a Rock of offence laid in Sion. Isa. 8. 14. 1  2. 7, 8. and the Christ Jesus this day, he was yesterday, and will be for ever, Heb. 13. 8. 7. Whether Christ Jesus be not our example? Joh. 13. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22. James 5. 10 And if any of his brethren or mem∣qers do, or suffer to be done, the same he, or the Prophets of God did, whether this be blasphemy? 1 Sam. 25. 23, to 33. 2 Kings 4. 27, 37. Dan. 2. 46. Matth. 26. 7, 8. Luke 17 16. Heb. 1. 6. And whether Christ Jesus where he is now made manifest, may not have the same love & honour he formerly had? And if any be moved of the Lord to give it him, whether that be blasphe∣my? 8. If any Prophet in these our dayes suffer to be done to him what the Prophet Elisha did, 2 Kings 4. 27, & 37. who permitted a woman to fall down at his feet, and did not reprove her, but did reprove Gehaz, who would have put her from him; or should any now do as Damel did, Dar. 2 46. who permitted Ni∣buchadnozer to fall down at his feet. and worship him? Whe∣ther this in Daniel or Elisha were blasphemy? 9. Whether to call any one Christ (in a spiritual sense) that is annointed with the Spirit of God, or to call any Jesus that is saved from their sin, or saveth others, as Joshua, &c. Obad 21. be blasyphemy? and if it be, Whether all manner of blas∣phemy against the Son of Man ought not to be forgiven in this world, Matt▪ 12. 31, 32.
10. Whether this be not true blasphemy according to the Scripture for one to say that he is a christian, or member of Christ, that is a lyar, a covetous or proud man, or that worship∣peth the creature more then the creator; or that hateth his bro∣ther? (Read and understand, Rev. 2. 9. & 3. 9.) And if such be blasphemers yet whether the Law of God, or of this Nation, doth allow they should dy, or suffer any other bodily punishment as bad, or worse then death for the same. 11 If any should worship an Angel, (Rev. 22. 9.) whether that be blasphemy, or deserve cruel tortures, as bad or worse then death? Or is to be seen throughout the Scriptures, that any Magistrate had power from God to punish for sin only a∣gainst him till such time as the mind and will of the Lord be first known, and a command given; and is it not written, Vengeance is min, and I will repay it, Rom: 12. 19. These eleven queries I present to you who sit in Parliament, and such as are spiritual to udge and consider of them; and for those that are sensual, not having the spirit, my desire is, that they would not judge of the things they know not, lest they con∣demn the Members of Christ as blasphemers, and so bring upon themselves all the innocent blood spilt since the foundation of the world to this day. Friends, Let it not be forgotten, how that often the Lord hath sent me amongst you, for to advise and warn both by word of mouth and writing, that you might▪ keep your hands clear from the blood of all mer; and there is few amongst you that hath not seen the sword of the Lord drawn against your proceedings since you ctred on the bu∣siness of James Nayler: And now in the sight of the Lord my God (ha∣ving warn dyou) am I justified; and for those that have cursed where the Lord would not curse, the blood will be upon their own heads; & for such amongst you as have had their ear opened to discipline, that have not condemned the Just, and have pleaded the cause of the poor and needy▪ lift up your head, & be faithful to the Lord in what he makes manifest, and you shall finde his salvation neere, and promise ful∣filled; That he will deliver you in the time of trouble, and cover your heads in the day of Battel. Rob: Rich.
To you that are honourable in this house, who are of sober minds, and loves the thing that is right and just, am I of the Lord made willing to offer (in case it be thought by you fit) to discourse of the things in particular, and at large, that hath been either said or done by Iames Nayler, with those five Ministers that were sent to him into the prison a little before his last suf∣ferings at London; and doubt not but by the help of my God, to prove him by the Scriptures clear (both in his judgement and practice) of Blasphemy. And the rather do I desire to have to do with those five Ministers herein, for that they did not deal with him (and doubt whether they have not done the like by you) as men of integrity and faithfulness ought to have done; for they would not permit any one person, friend, or other, to be present to bear witness of what passed between them; which Iames Nayler perceiving, said to them, that unless they would write down their questions and his answers thereto, and after∣wards leave a copy thereof with him he would make no answer to them; so they promised they would; But wheu they had as∣ked what questions they thought good, aud he having answered the same, they took what they had writ, and cast into the fire and burnt it, leaving no copy with him as they had promised. Let the wise in heart judge whether this were done like Ministers of Christ, or like the chief Priests that sought to catch him in his words: This thing is offered by me. That if there be found wic∣kedness with James Nayler, either in Judgement or Practice, that it may be published and made known to the Nation; or if the Ministers be found ignorant of the Scriptures and Power of God, they likewise may be made manifest, that no longer they may de∣ceive the Nations: And one of these five Ministers (namely Mr: Ny) hath de∣clared (as was affirmed in Westminster-Hall by one Mr: Smith, a Parliament man, That the said Mr: Nye told him, That coming where some quakers were met together, he found amongst them a Jesuit which he knew, and of what colledge he was of beyond the Seas, and that they spake Latine to each other: So I asked Mr: Smith what was become of the Jesuit; he answered he knew not, but supposed he was gone; so I desired the Parliament men then present for to take notice who were the favourers or con∣concealers
of the Jesuits, the quakers or Mr. Nye: The Mem∣bers of Parliament then present, whose Names I knevv, vvere captain Bains, Judge Advocate Margeret, Serjeant Berkhead, be∣sides others vvhose Names I knevv not. This is vvritten, that the Parliament may examine and finde out vvho are the Jusuits friends: Robert Rich: AFter the tares appeared, then came the servants of the housholder and said unto him, Wilt thou that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay, lest while ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck up also with them the Wheat: Let both grow together until the Harvest, Matth. 13. 26. &c. This is the Doctrine of Christ Iesus our Lord. Such care hath Christ Jesus of the Wheat, that he will not that his Ser∣vants pluck up the tares until the Harvest, the end of the world, lest they pluck up the Wheat with them; this is his wisdom, But some men pretend such care for the wheat, that they will have the tares pluck up before the Harvest; this is their wisdom. Now minde whose wisdom you follow, and whose Doctrine you obey; for you can do Christ Iesus no service in going contrary to his own Do∣ctrine, though some may think they do, Ioh. 16. 2, 3. They shall think they do God service when they are killing his servants, mistaking them for his great Enemies, for else they would not kill them to do him service. My desire is, that you may be found in the counsel and Doctrine of Christ Iesus, which is safe, and keeps from that danger of shedding inno∣cent blood. Will. Tomlinson. You have called him a blasphemer, we desire that you would publish what his blasphemy is, that we may know it and take heed of it. Christ Ie∣sus himself was called a blasphemer, because he said, I am the Son of God; and saith Iohn, 1 Ioh. 3. 2. Now are we the Sons of God. W. T. THE neer relation between Christ Jesus and his Father being owned by him, was counted in him blasphemy, because he said, I am the Son of God. Take heed lest the neer relation between Christ and his Members whom he calls Brethren, be not now counted blasphemy where it is owned. And consider these Scriptures. Now are we the sons of God through Christ, saith Iohn, 1 Ioh. 3. 2. If a son then an heir of God, saith Paul, Gal. 4. 7. If sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, Rom. 8. 17. Him that overcometh will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and I will write upon him my new Name, saith Christ Jesus, Rev. 3. 12, 13. He that hath an ear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches.
If you be able to see these things, do; but if not, take heed what you do, lest you bring innocent blood upon your own heads. There's none able to judge of these things before the lusts of the flesh, land the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life be judged and overcome in them, and the love of the world. That's blasphemy for a man to say he is a Jew or a Christian, and is not, but still is in the old nature, that was a murderer from the begining; he blas∣phems the Name of God, Rev. 2. 9. for God hath no such children in the New Covenant. As it was then, he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the spirit, so it is now, Gal. 4. 29. But he that is born after the spirit never persecutes him that is born after the flesh. W. T. FRiends, your hands have hitherto been held from shedding of blood; consider what it is that hath withstood you, and kept you from it, and do not go on to strive any longer against the Lord; but remember David how glad he was that he was prevented from blood, when he was going with a full resolution, and the thing was gone out of his mouth to destroy the House of Nabal, 1 Sam. 25. 22, 32, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel (saith he) which hath sent thee this day to meet me, and hath kept me this day from com∣ing to shed blood, and this was, but the blood of a wicked man. So Friends consider, and strive not against the goodnesse of the Lord, which hath hi∣therto withstood you, and kept you off from shedding of blood, and that with little force. It will be no grief of heart to you that you have not shed blood, but to shed it may lie heavier upon you then yet you are a∣ware. To let the tares (if tares) alone with the wheat, according to Christs own Doctrine; this will not repent you, because it is his own command; but under pretence of plucking them up, to puil up one of the least of his Lambs, this will be a burthen too heavy for you to bear; and though you may think you do God service therein, yet he accepts it not. To seek the harm of one that would not hurt an hair of your heads, consider whence this is, and what acceptance this would have with God, seeing he saith, He that toucheth you (the innocent lambs) toucheth the apple of mine eye; herefore touch not mine anointed, do my Prophets no harm, saith the Lord; and blessed be their work who are made tender of them, for what's done to one of the least of those that belong to Christ, is done to him. William Tomlinson. They are very confident, who kill Christs Lambs, to do God service, that those they kill are not his Lambs, but his Enemies, else they would not kill them to do Him service; for they could not think it service to God to kill his children: yet see how far their confident zeal is mistaken, while they think they kill his enemies, they kill the children of the Kingdom. Thus it happened to Christ, the zealous Jews were very confident he was a Blas∣phemer, and Seducer of the people, and therefore they durst say, His blood be on us, and on our children; upon the same account the members also of
Christ alwayes suffer, as Blasphemers, as Hereticks, as Seducers of the peo∣ple. You are now up on this danger, and trial of your spirits. Now why is it that in this confident zeal they kil his Children, taking them for ene∣mies? It is (saith Christ Iesus) because they know not the Father nor me, Ioh. 16. 2, 3. Now examine your selves you that are for killing, or hurting; Do you know the Father? Do you know the Son? Have you communion and fel∣lowship with them? Is the Son begot in you? Is He formed in you? Are you come into His innocent nature? if not, your confidence and zeal will deceive you, and you stand in that nature that will kil children for enemies; for you cannot know them til you know his nature brought forth in you. And if His Nature be once brought forth in you, you wil sinde a saving spirit raised up in you, not a destroying spirit; for Christ and every measure of Him is a Saviour, not a Destroyer; and so from Christ the Saviour spiring up many Saviours, Obad. v. 21. He that is the destroyer and persecutor, is yet in the old Covenant, Hagar, He is but the son of the bond-woman, which is yet in bondage with her children, and is to be cast out, Gal. 4. 22. to the end. And if ever you come to witness the new Covenant, and the Law of God writ in your hearts, and the nature of Christ formed in you, you will sinde the persecutor in you cast out, and that it enters not the King∣dome; for there's nothing hurts nor destroyes in all Gods Holy Mountain, Isa. 11. 9. Wil. Tomlinson. You who are for killing, or otherwise harming, I appeal to that of God in your own consciences, which will witnesse faithfully, Do you sinde the Spirit of God witnessing in you, that you are the Sons of God? Do you finde that hope in you, that purifies you as the Son of God is pure? 1 Joh. 3. 3. that faith that purifies the heart? Acts 15. 9. Are you become dead to the world? are you dead to the lusts of the flesh, to the lusts of the eyes, and pride of life? Have you mortified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof? Is your conversation in heaven? Or, are you not yet among those that think these things impossible, not knowing the power of God? Are you not yet in the reprobate state, not knowing Christ in you? Are not some of you such as will deride, and scorn, and are full of bitterness? Are not some of self∣ish, covetous, high-minded, far from little children? Now if you be such, how can you be able to see the high things of the Kingdom of God, who cannot yet see the low things, the beginnings, the entrances; for till you be∣come as little children, you cannot see them, Matth. 18. 18. 3. Joh. 3. 3. and while you are in your natural condition you cannot see them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them. How then should he that's such be able to judg of them? How can you that are judg such of the high things of God, and not count them blasphe∣my? How can you hear one speak of Saviours and not count it blasphemy, though the Scripture hath spoke it, Obad, ver. 11. How can you hear it that a feeble one shall be as David, and the house of David as God? as the An∣gel
of the Lord, Zech. 12. 8. How can you hear it, that we should be Co-heirs with Christ Jesus, if you consider what a Co-heir is? How can you hear it that any should sit in the Throne of Christ with him, and have power over the Nations, Rev. 3. 21. & 2. 26, 27. and have the Name of Christ put upon him; yea, though Christ put it upon him, Rev. 3. 12. How can you that are such hear these things & such like, and not count them blasphemy (though the Scri∣pture hath spoken them) any more then the zealous devout Jews could hear that Christ should be called the Son of God without counting it blasphemy? Therefore learn this counsel that Christ hath given, First judge your selves, lest you be judged for judging things above your measure. VVill. Tomlinson. VVhat shall be done to the man whom the King will honor? Let the Royal Appa∣rel be brought which the King useth to wear, and the horse that the King ridethou, and the Crown royal which is set upon his head; and let his apparel and horse be deli∣vered to the hand of one of the Kings most noble Princes, that they may array the man withal whom the King delighteth to honor, and bring him on horseback through the streers of the City, and proclaim before him. Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honor. And thus by the command of the King it was done to Mordicai, a Type of that Spirit that cannot how to proud Haman, Esth. 6. Hath an earthly King this Power to impart of his own honour to his Servants? and hath Christ Iesus, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, no power to impart of his honor to his servants whom he makes Kings? Was it no Treason or Blasphemy against the King for Mordicai to receive this honor and not to rebuke it? And must such a thing be blasphemy (if so done) among the Lambs of Christ, to give and receive of Christs. Honors at his command in sigue of his approaching and coming again? Hath not Christ Iesus our Lord power to put his own Honors, Names, Titles, Ho∣sannahs upon his servants, as well as King Ahasuerus, to put his Crown and Appa∣rel Royal upon one of his who was found faithful? Hath not Christ said, He that overcometh shall sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne? Hath he Power to impart his throne which is greater, and which he received after he departed; and hath he no Power to impart his Hosannahs (if he please) which is less, and which he had here on earth among and from babes and sucklings? And how know you that he did not command this thing to be done (if done)? Hath not Christ Iesus said, He that overcometh, him will I make a Pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name of the City of my God, New Ierusalem, which cometh down out of Heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my New name. He that hath an ear let him hear. Can this be but it will be accounted blasphemy by the blind world who live in continual blasphemy, calling themselves Christians and are not. There∣fore consider what you are doing, you whose mouths are opened against that ye under stand not, Will: Tomlinson:
To the Protector, and TO you who are chosen by these Nations to be the Parliament of Eugland, to divide, rule and govern things, this is the Word of the Lord God to you; Take heed of acting against Christ where he is made manifest; take heed of acting or doing any thing against them that be in the pure Religion, or acting any thing against Reli∣gion; how know you but this thing is fallen out to try you whether or no you act against Christ where he is manifest in his Members; for it is said, Christ in you; and if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; and if Christ be within, may not he speak in Righteousness, and be confessed there? Now if Jesus Christ be not in you (mark) Jesus Christ be not in you, ye are reprobates; and if Christ be within must he not speak (mark) Iesus Christ the Emanuel, the same; is it offence for Christ to speak, and Jesus to speak where he is within? Now ex∣amine your selves; know not you your selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? And if Je∣sus Christ be in you must he not speak in you; Is it not he that must speak? for the natural man receives not the things of God, because they are spiritually discorned, & they are foolishness unto him; and did not the Apostle say, He did not live, but Christ, it was Christ that lived in him (mark again) it was Christ that lived in him; if it was Christ that lived in him, it was Christ that spake in him, & the life that he lived it was by the faith of the Son of God (mark) what a life was this; and did he not say that the Son of God was revealed in him? and if the Son be revealed in any, must it not be he that must speak and declare of the Father? but people have had the form of godliness since the dayes of the Apostles, but have want∣ed
the thing, & wants the thing that the Apostles were in, who had the Son of God, Christ Iesus, and therefore it is by them that have the form wondred and stranged at, and not the power of God wondred, estranged, where Christ Jesus is manifested, and speaks, and acts, and rules, was it not the Apostles Doctrine to preach Christ in them? and told them the hope of the Glory, which was in them, which was the Mystery hid from ages and ge∣nerations: And is not this Christ the hope of Glory a Mystery in this age as it was in the days of the Apostles, to the world, and had been to generations before? and hath it not been a mystery in the ages past amongst them that have had the form of godliness since the Apostles? But where Christ within, this Mystery, this hope of glo∣ry is witnessed, may he not speak without offence? And did not Christ say he would come again to his Disciples, and make his abode with them? And did he not say, I in you, and the spirit of the Father which speaketh in you? They were not to take thought when they were brought before Rulers and Magistrates; and is not the spirit of the Father the spirit of Christ? And are not they that have not the spirit of Christ none of his? Therefore take heed, I am moved to warn and charge you in the presence of the Lord God (ye Rulers and Magistrates of this Nation) lest ye be found acting a∣gainst the spirit of the Father where he speaks in such as are brought before you who have the form of godliness, such as witness Christ in them, and the spirit of the Fa∣ther to speak, and the Son of God come according to his promise, which doth witness that fulfilled; doth not John say in his Epistle, That the Son of God was tome, and they were in him; and this was the true God and E∣ternal life; and do not the Apostles in their several Epi∣stles, which have been read amongst you long, speake
that Christ is in you, and of their being the sons of God and the son of God revealed in them, and the spirit of the father in them, and Christ the mystery in them? Have ye not heard these things read, and amongst you? and have not these things long been hid amongst them that have had the form of godliness; and Christ in the male and the female, and God will dwell in you, and walk in you; and the Word is in thy heart, and is not Christs Name called the Word of God? Now thik you not it strange to finde any to witness these things, and that these things should be possessed; you that have had the form of godliness long, the night of the apostacie hath been long since these words were spoken forth, and the thing enjoyed that these words spake of; but now com∣eth to be possessed the things that they did enjoy which spoke the words, which long they have had the form of in the night of the apostacie since the dayes of the Apo∣stles: Now if it be not the spirit of God, nor the voice of the father, nor the spirit of Christ that speaks in man, it is natural and devilish, and that is it that stands against the voice of Christ and the spirit of God; but if any meer creature by him made, saith that he is Christ, that is false, and is not so; for all creatures that were created were by him, and for him; and all things that were made were created for his service, Christ Iesus the Power of God, by which all things were made and created; and where the Power of God is, there is Christ, and Christ is the Power of God (take notice of that) the Power of God is everlasting; where the Power of God is received and felt, Christ is received and felt; and where the Power of God speaks, Christ speaks; and ye that feel the Power of God, ye feel Christ, and will not be offended at the Pow∣er of God where it speaks, which is Christ, and so Christ is one in all who are in the povver; and vvhere the povver
of God doth not rule and speak, the power of the devil that speaks, and that is it which is tormented at the pow∣er of God, which is Christ that speaks; if the truth speak, is it not Christ? Doth he not say, I am the Truth; and if the life speak, is it not that I which is the Life? If the un∣righteous speak, it is a false thing; but is the power of God speaks, it is the truth: If it be the power of God that speaks, which is the true Christ, it is the power of the Devil, which is the false christ: So examine your selves, if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin, and there the sin is dead: And is not Christ Iesus, which exept he be in you ye are reprobates, is not he the Ema∣nuel and the Saviour, and the Prince of peace? and is not he the prince of Life and the Hosannah? and is not this witnessed within where he is made manifest? or is he di∣vided from these? and is not he the Lamb of God? and are not they against him where he is manifest with him that would not have him to speak, & such as would not have him to raigne? Here you may see what hathbeen lost since the Apostles, that they were in and rejoiced, this night of apostacie, which time had the form but not the power; but now is coming again to be made manifest which have been lost, the Truth, the power of the form, and the life of Christ, and Christ himself the Emanuel: Therefore take heed of persecuting that which is created and made by his power, where the power is received and dwelt in, for the powers sake, which power is Christ, and which the power speakes through, and where the power of God rules; where there is a fault the fault is judged; but where the seed is, that is to be owned; and it is not just that the mouth of the séed should be stopped; in the fear of God and meekness vveigh and consider these things before you act, and consider what vvas in the Apostles that caused them to suffer.
POSTSCRIPT. IF the seed speake, which is Christ, he hath no other Name, for the seed is Jesus Christ, and it is not blas∣phemy, but truth; but if the seed of the serpent speak, and say he is Christ, that is the Lyer and the Blasphemer, and the ground of all Blasphemy; and is not the seed which is Christ; but the head of the serpent is to be brui∣sed, which is the cause of all enmity, strife and debate, with the seed of the Woman, which is Ghrift. George Fox.
Was not the appearance of Christ when He was born glorious, when that the voyce was cryed Hosanna to the Highest? Was not this to the asto∣nishing of the beholders, and amazement of the world? did it not stir up all chief Priests, and Herod, was not He puzled about His Birth, and they troubled at his coming? did not the Chief Priests and Rulers gather against Him who was full of grace and truth? did not the glory of Him shew it self forth when He went up unto Jerusalem, when the high voice was spoken, and the songs to him sung, the strength ordained out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings? and was not Jerusalem the highest place of Worship? and did not the strength which was ordained for the Babes and Sucklings, set the Priests and Rulers on rage against Christ, that they crucified and slew him? and did not that make Herod and Pilate friends in the highest place of Worship? did not He say, and tell his Disciples, Hee would come again, the Hosanna, Him that was cryed Glory to the Highest? And did not He come again to his Apostles accordino his promise, and make his abode with them, and sup with them? Did not the Apostles say to the Saints that Christ was in them the mysterie, the hope of glory; and if He was in them, the body was dead because of sin? did not the Apostle say, Examine your selves, prove your selves, Know you not that Iesus Christ is in you except you be Reprobates, [mark] Iesus Christ in you, the Emmanuel, the Saviour, the Lamb of God, the Hosanna; Is not his appearance in the Spirit as glorious in his second coming, as it was at his first? is it not as much to be admired in the world as it was ever? Answer these things, and satisfie yourselves: To the Light wherewith Christ Jesus hath enlightned you all, I speak, that with it you may see when you act against him where he is manifested. To prison them contrary to the Just is to make them to grow, and to ba∣nish them is to shame your Religion, and not to own the thing the scrip∣ture speakes of, and to put them to death, is to destroy your selves. George Fox. Whether or no you will suffer Christ to have as much honor in the earth, and the world, as the Devil hath? Where Christ is manifested, whether or no he shall not have more honour, or as much, where he is manifested? And whether or no it is offence to bow to man, or to kneel before a Indgein the world? Whether this be offensive to the world, amongst the world, to bow before such, and among such the truth is not in? And whether or no it would not be offence to such, to bow to Christ where he is manifested, and persecute such as do bow where the thing is in the truth; whether or no such a thing may not be done in the truth, and bee a figure to all the bowings of the earthly Powers which be out of truth, which hath reigned above the seed of God? An example to you all: Therefore take heed and consider, before you act any thing or judge, lest God judge you after∣ward, for be assured He will. Whether bowing in the Truth may not bee a fi∣gure, that the seed of God shall rise, and reign above the Earthly Powers, and they shall bow to it? And how know you but such things as these may bee tryalls
to you, whether you will persecute another, for taking that which is acted among you to your selves, in another way different from this? Now come to do as you would be done by, and do not persecute that in another that is acted in the world, though it be professed otherwayes in the intent, and come to the true measure and weight: and act nothing in your own wils, nor out of the counsel of God, to judge the just upon earth in this world, the just you'l be judged by, that is of the world to come, without end. I receive not Honor of man; Whether or no if any do persecute the seed, which doth take the honor of God, which is over the world and it They themselves do take the honor of the world, that persecutes the contrary. Are these things judged with a just measure, and weighed with an equall ballance, yea or nay? George Fox. DID not Christ wash the Disciples feet? Did he not do that as a pattern and example to those that came after him, that they should do to one another? Have you washed one anothers feet? Have ye anointed one ano∣ther with oyle that stumble at these where they are acted? Are not these the expressions of love to one another? And are not these things to be acted amongst the Disciples of Christ? Are not these things wonders amongst you that do not wash one anothers feet, that be out of the example of the Lord? did not the Disciples wash one anothers feet according to Christs example? Were not the Prophets feet washed? Did not Peter desire his head o be washed? Do not wonder and strange at these things where they are practi∣sed: Were not the Saints to salute one another with a holy kisse? and was not Peter to be carried whither he would not? Was there not a time that he girded himself? And is it not the Prince of the air that rules in the chil∣dren of disobedience, if it be not the Prince of Peace and the Lamb of God? And is it not an expression of love and honor where there is the washing of one anothers feet? And for the washing or kissing of feet, it is but an ex∣pression of love and humility? And is not this a patern and example to all you to judge you all how far short ye are of washing one anothers feet, or kissing one anothers feet; and do not wrong one another about these out∣ward things, but to come to know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the Ser∣pents head, which would destroy and set one at enmity with another; that crusheth down these outward things, and reigns over these outward things; which seed of God comprehands all strife, and comprehends the world; which seed the promise and blessing of God is to; in which seed is the unity, and not the enmity, for that is it which is bruised with it. Therefore do not shew your selves in enmity against these actions, where they are acted in the seed of God in righteousnesse, not in the world, out of the enmity; not as justifying the wicked in these things, nor condemning the righteous. Minde consideration before you do judge of such as are moved to act these things, whether or no they be not examples to you all, to try you all, whether or no you will persecute, or lift up your hands against such; and an act whereby
you may search your selves, and see how far short ye come of a Disciple: And come to that good in you all, that is of God, that with it you may over∣come, if there be any thing that is evil, and the heaping the coles of fire upon that which is the adversary: And whether or no there be not such things to be acted in righteosnesse and simplicity, as washing the seet of the Disciples, or that some may be carried whether they would not go; and if any should kisse the feet, or wash the feet of another in love and simplicity, is that such a crime? And for Jesus and Christ, and the prince of life and peace; if Jesus Christ be within, the second Adam is witnessed, God with us, which is Jesus; and be not offended with this, if any do witnesse the State reconciled to God, who hath witnessed the State drove from God, the first Adams state, who witnesses the second Adams state, the Emanuel, God with us. Again, Now be not ye offended at this, least you do manifest your selves to be in the first Adams state, driven from God, not witness Jesus Christ, God with you reconciled to God again. But if you stand against this, it shews your selves to be in the transgression, standing against the Emanuel, which is God with us: Be not hasty in acting these things, but examine and consider before you do act. George Fox: Except ye see signes and wonders ye will not believe: but this is come to pass that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, that saith, the time will come, that they shall think they do God good service when they kill you. Remember the Scripture which saith, His face is more marr'd then any mans, Isa. 52. 14. And whether this be not the same that gave his Checks to the Smiter, and opened not his mouth? And see now who they are that have spit upon him; but what evil hath he done. Notwithstanding all these warnings, yet on the 17. day of the tenth moneth, the major part of the House pronounced Sentence on him.
A brief Account of the Grounds of the Petitioners that appeared for James Nayler. With the Copies of their Petitions, for satisfaction of all mode∣rate spirits. GOd who worketh all things, according to the Coun∣sell of his own Will, is oft times pleased to make use of extremities, and by them to point out unto his people their duty; Thus did he Order, that the encreased tyrannies and oppressions of Israel in the Land of Egypt, should presse forth their cries and tears unto the Lord, that he might thence take his rise to appear for them: So in the daies of the Bishops of late years, the tryals and suffe∣rings of the people of God, have come to some head and ripe∣nesse, before He hath bin provoked to deliver them, as we might instance both in Scotland and our own Nation. Even so fareth it with the poor people of God at this day, who ha∣ving been for some time asleep and in a pleasing dream, as if the storms were over, and the Winter were past and gone, are awakened by a fresh Alarm, to consider and behold the same spirit of persecution and blood, revived again in the bosome of that worldly peace and glory, wherein we have delighted to stand forth in the Image of the Nations. How much bet∣ter and safer had it been for us, to have stood by the Lord in his founding of Zion, waiting for his Counsel (who stood by us in our destroying the grosser Babylon) and to have been of the poor of his people that trust in it, and not of those that exercise dominion over it. There is a poor contemptible peo∣ple whom God hath pleased to call forth out of all the Sects and Divisions in this Nation, both Professors and Non-pro∣fessors, whose principles and waies have bin fitted and pre∣pared, to give check or confront at least, to that Spirit of Lord∣linesse and formality, that after the throwing down of the old
Fabrick of a painted and pompous Church and State, was but too apt to spring up again among us; which is the best account we can at present give, why God should suffer so ma∣ny upright souls, to be snatcht from their former communi∣on and walking, into so exasperating a way. There was some∣thing of the measure of the sufferings of Christ yet behind; and of the Spirit of Antichrist, yet to be vented and acted upon our English Theatre. And truly, not without some regret in our selves, have we heard & observed the long & oft repeated suf∣ferings of that poor people who have bin whipt & imprisoned As Eve∣sham can witnesse. in many parts of this Nation, thrust into holes and dungeons, where they have scarce had the liberty to breathe; and all this for nothing as far as we understand, but what peaceable people may do without any disturbance to the civil peace and quiet of the Nation. We hope what we have writ is clear, and we may easily be understood herein, not to approve their scheme of doctrine, as absolutely clear and Evangelical; but who knows what sufferings may do, to the purifying and refining thereof? But thus have we stood gazing upon them, not pleading their Cause, because disgusting some of their Princi∣ples, till the Wisdom of God saw good, to give us a fresh and louder Alarm (not in our Ears only, but before our Eyes) in the bitter usage of James Nayler one of the very chief of that people, (though now dis-owned by the generallity of them, whose case therefore is the more respected by us▪) So that we could no longer, as persons unconcern'd keep silence, but we must appear for him in a Petition to the Parliament. And this we could not refuse, unlesse we would renounce that Love, that Light, that Cause, and those Principles, we have all along for some years professed and avowed. But how low and tender these first buddings of our charity were, the Petitions themselves will shew, which yet were as high as we could well go, or the Parliament bear. And we were not so modest, but some thought us too bold and daring, to appear in such a Cause, for such a person so obnoxious in their account; for which we could offer many, and those very great considerations. As I, and principally, the honour of that Cause, for which
we have suffered the losse of a thousand other things, we mean Conscience-liberty, which we conceive to stand in nothing more, than in these two points (or indeed we may say, bears it self up on them as two main pillars) viz. First, That the Civil Magistrate is not the proper Judge of Error or blasphe∣my. And secondly, That corporal punishment is not a proper punishment for offences of a spiritual nature, though it was used to the Jews for divers special Reasons, peculiar to that Legal dispensation only. 2. The safety of the Government, which is in danger of wrath from the Almighty, for nothing so much or so soon, as for inva∣ding the spiritual jurisdiction of our Lord Jesus. 3. The Consequence to our selves, who by this Rule may be pull'd out, and judged without a Law; yea judged and sen∣tenced in the highest condemnation as, blasphemers, for which the present temper of the civil Magistrate shall censure to be blasphemy. These with other Reasons were in our eye, which we shall not insist upon, but desire it may satisfie others, that we are exceeding well satisfied our selves in bearing our testimony. We cannot, we dare not cry Blasphemy with all that do so; We dare not throw men out of Heaven and out of our hearts, (out of all love and pity there) so fast as some can. It is a dark and disguising time, and scarce any one wears his own cloaths. Temptations are abroad, and there is not a Spirit to judge and discern them a right. They many times are accoun∣ted Orthodox, who have least right to it. Old Jacob must crosse his hands again; but this is the snare in which God will take the world. And look to it, the worst of blasphemies is to make profession of the Gospel, and have no love. The series of our Petitions, and addresses in the behalf of the said James Naylor, hereafter followeth.
To the Parliament of the Com∣mon-wealth of England, Scot∣land, and Ireland. The Humble Petition of the Persons whose names are underwritten. Humbly sheweth, THat we are credibly informed, (from those eyes that have seen it) that James Naylor is in a very ill and dangerous condition of body, not fit to undergo that part of your Sentence he is adjudged unto, this day; and were desired to acquaint this Honourable House so much, and to begg the respite of a week, or some small time, as to your Wisdom and Goodnesse shall seem meet; That he may recover a little strength before he be called forth again: Which office of cha∣rity we could not refuse, though we are not partakers with him, nor abettors of him in any thing that hath occasioned this sentence. Therefore since we believe, it is not your intent to de∣stroy that Life, which you spared in your Sentence, we humbly pray an Order of Reprieve, may be granted for a few days; And it will be accepted as an Act of your Christian moderation and clemency And we shall pray, &c. T. Z. J. W. J. S. C. H.
The substance of the foresaid Petition was certified to the Subscribers by divers credible persons; and it may further appear by a Certificate from the woman that first washed his stripes; a Copy whereof is here∣unto annexed. The Testimony of Rebeckah Travers, who washed James Naylers stripes, after he was whipt, as followeth. TO my best discerning there was not a space big∣ger then the breadth of a mans nail free from stripes and blood, from his shoulders near his waste. And his right Arm was sorely striped. His hands al∣so were sorely hurt with the Cords, that they bled, and were swell'd. The blood and wounds of his back did very little appear at first sight, by reason of the abundance of Dirt that covered them, till it was washed off. This I saw coming to him above an hour after his whipping, in all which time none had been with him, or sent to him to look after his wounds. Rebeckah Travers. And others saw that he was much abused with horses tread∣ing on him, for the print of the nails were seen on his feet. Upon reading the aforesaid Petition, the Parliament respi∣ted the further Execution of their Sentence upon James Nay∣lor for one week, as by their Order may appear, which was, Saturday 20 Decemb. Ordered, THat the further punishment of James Naylor which should have been on this Day, shall be suspended till this Day seven night, and be executed on him then; and that the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, do observe this Order ac∣cordingly.
During which Interval, several peaceable and well-affected persons, being sadly sensible of the Consequence of such pro∣ceedings, did addresse themselves by Petition to the Parlia∣ment, for the remitting the remaining part of the said James Naylers punishment; a Copy whereof is under written: To the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. The Humble Petition of divers peaceable and well-affected persons in the Cities of London and Westminster, in behalf of themselves and many others. Sheweth, THat your Moderation and Clemency in respiting the punishment of James Naylor, in consideration of his Illnesse of body, hath refreshed the hearts of many thousands in these Cities, altogether unconcerned in his practice; and hath opened their eyes to see something more then the terrors of Mount Sinai, to dwell upon your Honourable House; and hath likewise given them some hopes to see you come forth in the Spirit of our Lord Jesus, yet more and more, to the Con∣vincement of those that Erre, and are out of the way. Wherefore we most humbly beg your pardon, that are constrai∣ned to appear before you in such a suit, (not daring to do otherwise) that you would remit the remaining part of your Sentence against the said James Naylor, leaving him to the Lord, and to such Gospel Remedies as he hath sancti∣fied: And we are perswaded you will find such a Course of love and for bearance more effectuall to reclaim, and will leave a seal of your love and tendernesse upon our spirits. And we shall pray, &c. This Petition, being presented at the Barre of the House by about one hundred persons in the behalf of the whole, was accordingly read and debated by them: but being not likely to produce the desired effect, the Petitioners thought themselves bound in Duty and Conscience to make this following addresse to the Lord Protector also,
To his Highnesse Oliver, Lord Protector of the Common∣wealth of England Scotland and Ireland, and the Domi∣nions thereunto belonging. The humble Petition of, &c. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners having, out of tenderness to the good cause of our spiritual and Civil Liberties, concerned in some late proceedings of the house of Parliament, and to the good of these Nations and the Government thereof, appeared in a petition to the Parliament (a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed) for the remitting the remaining punishment of James Naylor, which Petition is received into the house and resteth there; We humbly conceive it our duty also, in consideration of the Joynt Interest which your Highnesse with the Parliament, hath, by the Instrument of Government, in the Legislative pow∣er, to make our humble addresse and request to your Highness, That you will be pleased according to all former De∣clarations, and the Experience we have had of your Highnesse care of this tender Interest of Liberty of conscience, to weigh the consequence of these late proceedings. And according to the 37th Article of the Instrument aforesaid, and one of the grounds you de∣clare upon in the war with Spain, your Highnesse will stand up for the poor people of God in this day, wherein your Highnesse will not do more right to your Petitioners, then to your self and these Nations. And we shall pray, &c: The Product of which addresse was only sending the fol∣lowing Letter, by his Highnesse, to the Parliament. Oliver P. RIght Trusty and Right Wellbeloved, We greet you well. Having ta∣ken notice of a Judgment lately given against one James Naylor, Al∣though We detest and abhorre the giving or occasioning the least counte∣hance to Persons of such opinions or practices, or who are under the guilt of such Crimes as are commonly imputed to the said Person; Yet we being interessed in the present Government on behalf of the people of these Na∣tions, and not knowing how farr such a proceeding (wholly without us) may extend in the Consequence of it. We desire that the House will let us know the grounds and reasons whereupon they have proceeded. Gi∣ven at White: Hall the 25th. day of Decemb. 1656. To our Right trusty and Right Wellbeloved Sir▪ Thomas Widdrington, Speaker.
Which Letter ocasioning some debate in the House, and the day for Execution of the remaining part of the Sentence drawing near, the Petitioners made a second Addresse to his Highnesse, in manner following. To his Highnesse, &c. The humble Petition, &c. Sheweth, THat with great thankfulnesse we acknowledge your Highnesse Love to the Cause and People of God and their Liberties, and particularly your appearing at their request by your Letter to the Parliament on their and the Nations be∣behalf, as they seem to be concerned in the proceedings against James Naylor. And we desire we may not forget, nor be unmindfull to blesse God that hath raised up your Highnesse a Bullwark between us and oppression and persecution. And hath given you to be faithfull on all occasions when we have applyed our selves unto you; that expecting the fruit of your Highnesse Letter to the Parliament, to our grief we find no∣thing is done, nor like to be done timely, but the Execution of the remaining part of the Sentence will take place, unlesse presented by your Highnesse. Wherefore your Petitioners are constrained again to make their humble Addresse to your Highnesse, that in regard the businesse will admit of no longer delay; Your Highnesse will be pleased in pursuance of that claim you may justly make to a joynt-Interest, and Concern, in such proceedings, to take such course, that the intend∣ed Execution to morrow, may be prevented. And your Petitioners shall as in duty bound, pray, &c. Notwithstanding all which, the Sentence of Parliament took place, and was Executed upon James Nayler.
It is very remarkable, that these great sufferings have hi∣therto been endured by him with much patience and meek∣nesse; as a Lamb led to the slaughter he opened not his mouth. He never murmured at the heavy sentence pronounced against him; nor complained against his adversaries, nor of the seve∣rity of his sufferings; but endured them with so much pati∣ence and quietness of spirit, as that it hath astonished the minds of many who were eye-witnesses thereof. When he was before the House, and they asked him con∣cerning particulars of his examination before the Commit∣tee, which were passed out of his mind, He in simplicity of heart, referred himself to his Examiners, saying, he thought they would not do him wrong; though divers of the House were hoth his accusers and Judges. When they were about to pronounce the sentence, He said, He did not know his offence. The Speaker amongst ma∣ny others, gave forth these words, That he should know his offence by his punishment. And when his sentence was pronounced against him, he shewed not the least dislike; but being denyed to have liberty to speak, as he passed away, he uttered these words with meeknesse: He that hath prepared the body, will enable me to suffer; and I pray, that He may not lay it to your charge. Here followeth the Relation of W. H. touching the five Ministers, that were with James Naylor, a little before his last suffering on the Pillory in Lon∣don. VVEdnesday the 24. of Decemb. 1656. my self with others being at the Prison with James Naylor and understanding that divers Ministers were come  Order of Parliament to conserr with him, to hi e things for▪ which he was there aine : and being s to know the Truth of what is e oe concerning e ∣phemies of which he is accused, and or which  also the frame and temper of his Spirit ner such g∣dings, I desired to be present at the said Conference. But
being denyed that Liberty by the Keeper, who told us, he was appointed by the Ministers, to let none be present whilst they were with him, one of us addrest to the ministers them∣selves, who also denyed us, or so much as one of us, to be present. So we could not be admitted: but were turned forth. And my self having businesse in the City, went about the same. And about eight of the Clock the same night, go∣ing through New-Gate Market, I met those Ministers in the Street; and judging they came then from James Naylor, I went directly to the prison to know the issue of their meeting: and asking him concerning it (so near as I can remember) he told me, as followeth, viz. That he told those Ministers, he saw they had an intent to make him suffer (though innocent) as an evill doer; and therefore denyed any to be present that might be indifferent Judges betwixt them and him, (or words to that purpose.) And therefore he should not say any thing, unlesse, what passed, might be writ down, and a Coppy therefore given him to keep, or left with the Goaler, signed by them. Which (he said) was, after some words, assented unto. And so they propounded severall Questions unto him, and took his An∣swers in writing. And I asking him if he could remember any of the Questions propounded to him, he told me as followeth, (viz.) That they asked him if he was sorry for those Blasphemies that he was guilty of; and whether he did recant, and re∣nounce the same? To which he answered, What Blasphe∣mies? name them. But they not able to instance in any par∣ticular, He replyed; Would you have me recant, and re∣nounce you know not what? They asked him, Whether he did believe there was a Je∣sus Christ? To which he answered, He did believe there was: for he had tasted of him; and that Jesus had taken up his dwelling in his heart and spirit; and, for the Testimony of him, he now suffered. One of them replyed. But I believe in a Jesus that never was in any mans heart. To which he answered, He knew no such Christ; for the Christ he witnessed, fills Heaven and Earth, and dwells in the Hearts of Believ∣ers.
Again, they demanded of him why he suffered those Wo∣men &c. to worship and adore him. To which he replyed, Bowing to the Creature, I deny: But if they behold the pow∣er of Christ wherever it is, and bow to it, he had nothing by which he might resist that, or gainsay it. And withall said to the Ministers, Have you thus long professed the Scriptures, and do you now stumble at what they hold forth? Where∣upon they desired one instance of Scripture, wherein such a practice was held forth. To which he answered. What think you of the Shunamite, in falling down at the feet of Eli∣sha, and bowing before him? Whether was the Prophet guil∣ty of Blasphemy, in not reproving her when shee did so? 2 King. 4. 27, 37. as also divers others in Scripture spoken of. Upon which they pawsing for a while, answered, That was but a civill act, or acknowledgment. So (said he) might you in∣terpret theirs also, if your eye were not evill, seeing the out∣ward action is one and the same. But after a while, he seeing them not contented with plain answers, but seeking to wrest words out of him to their own purpose, in meeknesse uttered these words, How soon have you forgot the work of the Bishops, who are now found in the same, seeking to ensnare the innocent? Whereupon they rose up, and with bitterness of spirit burnt all that they had before written. And so left him with some bemoaning expressions, rather discovering a prejudiced spirit, then real affection to the good of his soul. So when they were departing he desired of them, (as he had also done before) that the Parliament would send him such Questions in writing, as they desired satisfaction in; and give him leave to return his Answers in writing also. These (as near as I can remember) he told me, with some other passages, which I do not well remember. And hoping the whole passages of that meeting will be publisht by the parties themselves, upon consideration of what is before men∣tioned, I humbly premise these Queries following, touch∣ing the Case of the said Naylor. 1. Whether rationally those men in that their proceeding, can be adjudged lovers of his Soul: or that act tending to the
good thereof? or not rather wholly prejudiced, and inten∣ding to say snares before him? 2. Whether any Nation afford the like President, that four or five persons (a mans enemies) should be his exami∣ners, and solely impower'd to report his Case to his Judges, not admitting, any to be present but themselves, as indiffe∣rent witnesses betwixt them? If four or five of those Silver∣smiths, that made shrines for Diana, whose gain Pauls do∣ctrine destroyed, If they had been sent to Paul to examine him and report his Case to his Judges; how unequal a thing would this be accounted? 3. Whether the verbal report of those persons (or if writ∣ten it being done after they departed from him) ought to be received or credited as a true testimony; when they have burnt their Examinations▪ & his Answers written while they were together not admitting them to be seen as they were first signed. 4. Whether it were not a very reasonable desire of James Naylor's (as the case ood) that Questions might be sent him in writing from the Parliament, and he might have liberty to return his Answers in writing; for the avoiding of misin∣terpretation of his adversaries. FINIS.
